




















What kind of corpus is a web corpus? 

 
 

Janne Bondi Johannessen 
Tektslab, ILN, University of Oslo 

jannebj@iln.uio.no 

Emiliano Raul Guevara 
Tektslab, ILN, University of Oslo 
e.r.guevara@iln.uio.no 

 
 

Abstract 

 

This paper discusses an investigation into the 
Norwegian NoWaC corpus. We have com-
pared this web corpus with one corpus of spo-
ken language and one of written language.  
For nearly all variables that we look at, the 
web corpus sides with the written corpus, not 
the spoken one. Thus, despite including lan-
guage samples from blogs and web forums, 
NoWaC does not appear to be more speech-
like. One exception is interjections, which it 
does have to some larger extent than the writ-
ten corpus. It also has taboo words, lacking in 
the other two. The comparisons have been 
made purely on the basis of frequency lists, 
showing that this is a possible and simple way 
of comparing corpora. We use both a qualita-
tive and quantitative method. In the latter, 
(log) relative frequency plots show an almost 
linear relation between NoWaC and the writ-
ten corpus. 

1 Credits 

This work depends on the existence of four Nor-
wegian corpora. We are grateful to those who 
have been central in compiling and developing 
them. These are: Anne Marit Bødal, Kristin 
Hagen, Signe Laake, Anders Nøklestad, Joel 
Priestley (all are former or present staff at the 
Text Laboratory), Øystein Alexander Vangsnes 
and Tor Anders Åfarli (central in the compilation 
of the Nordic Dialect Corpus, and in the network 
ScanDiaSyn), and the VD group at USIT, UiO, 
for computing assistance. Finally we want to ac-
knowledge the Keywords for Language Learning 
for Young and adults alike, KELLY, with project 
leader Sofie Johansson Kokkinakis, which pro-
vided the funding for the compilation and proc-
essing of the NoWaC lemma frequency list. 

 

2 Introduction 

It is well known that spoken and written lan-
guage differ from each other in a variety of ways. 
This has been discussed and shown in, e.g. Ak-
innaso (1982), Chafe and Tannen (1987), 
McCarthy (1998), Miller and Weinert (1998), 
Biber et al. (1999), a special issue of Studia Lin-
guistica for spoken language (Johannessen 
2008), for Swedish, Allwood (1998) and for 
Norwegian, Johannessen and Hagen (2008). For 
the same reason corpora based on written and on 
spoken language also differ from each other, and 
are thereby useful for different purposes.  

Since the web started to be used as a cor-
pus, and now when there are actual corpora built 
by mining it (cf. Baroni and Bernardini 2006, 
Baroni and Kilgariff 2006, Kilgariff 2007, and 
the workshop series Web as a Corpus), it is 
interesting to investigate what kind of language 
the web actually contains. No doubt this will dif-
fer from language to language, so we stress here 
that our investigation is based on Norwegian. 
 Our aim is two-fold. On the one hand we 
want to investigate the Norwegian web corpus 
NoWaC to try to uncover what kind of a corpus 
it is w.r.t. the spoken/written dimension. The 
other is to see whether using frequency lists is a 
useful method in order to determine the differ-
ences in genre/register between different corpora. 
 We will compare NoWaC with one writ-
ten and one spoken language corpus. Our hy-
pothesis is that NoWaC will be somewhat closer 
to the spoken language corpus than the written 
corpus. This is due to the fact that Internet is 
widely available (88 % of people aged 16/79 
used Internet at home in 2010, according to Sta-
tistics Norway). In fact Norway was the first 
country after the USA to have Internet. One 
would therefore assume that a lot of the contents 
on the Norwegian web pages would be informal 
forums and blogs that are by hypothesis speech-
like.  

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 122–129



However, as we shall see, surprisingly, 
NoWaC is not like a spoken corpus, in fact it is 
in many ways even more formal linguistically 
than the written corpus. 
 

3 Three corpora – three frequency lists 
In order to investigate what kind of texts NoWaC 
contains, we will compare it with two other cor-
pora, which we will describe in turn. But first, let 
us start with NoWaC. 

NoWaC (for details about the methodological 
steps taken during the contruction of the corpus, 
see Guevara 2010) is a corpus mined from the 
web using the bootstrapping guidelines as de-
scribed in Baroni and Bernardini (2006). It con-
tains about 700 million words of Bokmål Nor-
wegian. With the strict legislation in Norway (the 
Personal Data Act) and its implementation by the 
Privacy Ombudsman for Research, mining the 
web and keeping the data is not legal without 
special permission, which this corpus obtained 
from the Ministry of Culture. The version we 
have used here was tagged with a statistical tag-
ger (Treetagger), trained on a small manually 
annotated corpus available at the Text Labora-
tory, UiO.  

In addition we have used what we here choose 
to call the Written Language Corpus, although its 
official name is the Oslo Corpus of Written 
Norwegian Bokmål Texts (Johannessen et al. 
2000). It has 18 million words, is tagged with the 
rule-based Oslo Bergen Tagger, and contains 
about 10 % fiction (in addition to 50 % newspa-
per and magazine texts and 40 % non-fiction).  

Finally we use a combination of two speech 
corpora, here called the Spoken Language Cor-
pus. These are the Nordic Dialect Corpus (Jo-
hannessen et al. 2009) and the NoTa-Oslo: Nor-
wegian Speech Corpus - Oslo part (Johannessen 
et al. 2007). These contain approximately 2.2 
million words from recordings of spontaneous 
speech in dialogue. They have been transcribed 
orthographically, and are thus immediately com-
parable with the written language corpus, and 
have been grammatically tagged with a statistical 
tagger.  

From these corpora we have compiled fre-
quency lists. Each list contains the 6000 most 
frequent lemmas of that corpus. It is these lists 
that we will use in the corpus comparisons in this 
paper. 

Comparing corpora has been a common con-
cern in computational linguistics and in corpus 

linguistics since the advent of large electronic 
corpora in the 1990’s (see, among others, 
Hofland and Johansson 1982, Kilgarriff 1997, 
Rayson and Garside 2000). However, all the 
measures and methods proposed in the literature 
concentrate on one of the following two cases: 

 
• comparing a sample (specialistic) corpus 

to a large(r) reference corpus 
• comparing two corpora of roughly the 

same size 
 
Our situation is different. We have a very large 
corpus of which we want to determine the lin-
guistic variety, and two smaller reference cor-
pora. In addition, some of the previous methods 
(e.g. Kilgarriff’s 1997 “Known Similarity Cor-
pora”) cannot be applied to our data without 
leaving out a substantial part of NoWaC. In what 
follows we will present a combination of qualita-
tive and quantitative methods addressing our re-
search question. 
 

4 Comparing corpora through fre-
quency lists: a qualitative point of 
view 

Biber et al. (1999) use corpus analysis to distin-
guish the styles of spoken and written language. 
They focus on syntactic structures and colloca-
tions, which we will not do in this task. How-
ever, some syntactic constructions are accompa-
nied by certain words. Biber et al. (op.cit, p.691) 
find that clauses introduced by whether are typi-
cally less common in spoken language than if. 

Incidentally, Norwegian, too, has two words 
for the introduction of interrogative subordinate 
clauses, om and hvorvidt. The results from our 
three corpora are given in table 1. (Throughout 
this section, the number represents relative fre-
quency, obtained by dividing the frequency 
count by corpus size, figures rounded for con-
venience.) 

 
 Spoken Written NoWaC 
om ‘if’ 0.00198 0.00718 0.00495 
hvorvidt 
‘whether’ 

– 0.00006 0.00003 

 Table 1: Two subordinating conjunctions meaning 
‘whether’. 

 
Hvorvidt has a more bookish feel to it, and this 
intuition is confirmed by the frequency lists, 
where it is absent in the spoken language corpus. 

123

What kind of corpus is a web corpus?

123



But notice that in NoWaC its frequency is rela-
tively lower than in the written text corpus. Om 
confirms this point, showing a strong difference 
between the spoken corpus on one side, and the 
written corpus and NoWaC on the other side, but 
with NoWaC closer to the speech corpus. 

Bick (2010) compares five English corpora 
going from chat, e-mail, to one formal and one 
informal speech corpus, plus a written text cor-
pus, and shows that many features expected to be 
more typically informal are indeed so. For exam-
ple, there is relatively little subordination in the 
chat corpus. Looking at the subordinator at 
('that') our results again show that NoWaC is 
closer to the spoken corpus by a small margin. 
The written corpus is the most formal of all. 

  
 Spoken Written NoWaC 
At (‘that’) 0.00461 0.01463 0.00887 

Table 2: The subjunction at ‘that’. 
 

A very interesting finding by Bick (2010:727) 
regards the distribution of pronouns. He finds 
that the chat corpus, with live (written) dialogue, 
has nearly three times as many 3p pronouns as 
1p ones, and that the spoken corpus also scores 
high here, with about twice as many. This is also 
true of his written corpus, which contains a lot of 
fiction. The monologues that the e-mails consist 
of and the formal speeches in his formal speech 
corpus have very different figures, where the 1p 
pronouns are more frequent than the 3p ones.  

We have tested our three corpora for the 
singular pronouns of all three grammatical per-
sons. From Bick’s paper we would expect our 
spoken corpus to show the same distribution as 
the chat corpus, and possibly the written corpus 
to be quite different, given what we have seen for 
the other categories above. For NoWaC we 
would expect it to be closer to the written corpus, 
on the basis of what we have seen above. The 
results are given in table 3. 

 
 Spoken Written NoWaC 
jeg (‘I) 0.02193 0.01130 0.00875 
du (‘you’) 0.01147 0.00429 0.00507 
han (‘he’) 0.00409 0.01300 0.00290 
hun (‘she’) 0.00214 0.00717 0.00144 

Table 3: Personal pronouns 
 
For ease of exposition we illustrate the numbers 
in the following chart, with the 3p shown cumu-
latively.  
 

 
Fig 1: Personal pronouns as chart 

 
However, we do not find quite the same as Bick. 
The spoken corpus, as expected, has very a high 
frequency for 1p and a relatively high frequency 
for 2p. On the contrary, the written corpus that 
has a relatively high number of 3p pronouns 
w.r.t. 1p and a lower frequency for 2p. NoWaC 
shows a mixed picture: it seems to pattern with 
the spoken corpus regarding 3p, but with the 
written corpus regarding 1p and 2p. 

Why would this be the case? For the spoken 
corpus the answer has to be found in the way it 
was recorded. The informants were instructed 
carefully at the beginning of each session: they 
were told to avoid (for reasons to do with legal 
protection of individuals) talking about other 
people they knew – although they were for the 
most part also told that it would be acceptable to 
talk about people who were already in the public 
eye. This would be the reason that 3p pronouns 
are not as frequent as they would otherwise have 
been.  

Several researchers look at the difference 
between spoken and written Norwegian language 
in Johannessen and Hagen (2008). Both Svein 
Lie’s paper and Søfteland and Nøklestad’s paper 
focus on the particular word sånn ‘such’, which 
is very typical of spoken language. Vangsnes 
argues that there is a systematic difference be-
tween the status of questions words, with åssen 
‘how’ as the most colloquial. Fjeld’s paper dis-
cusses the many lexical items that are hard to 
find in dictionaries, which often have a written 
bias, however implicit. In the table below we 
investigate words from these papers. 

 
 Spoken Written NoWaC 
sånn (‘such’) 0.00781 0.00037 0.00024 
åssen (‘how’) 0.00049 0.00002 0.000004 
do (‘loo’) 0.00003 0.00002 0.00004 
dass (‘loo’) 0.000004 - 0.000003 

Table 4: Norwegian words typical of spoken language 
 

124

Janne Bondi Johannessen and Emiliano Raúl Guevara

124



The first two words in table 4, which are gram-
matical words, show the same as we have seen 
earlier, too. NoWaC tends to pair off with the 
written corpus, while the spoken language corpus 
is in a different league. The last two words are 
typical words used in the spoken domain. It is 
surprising that they occur in the written corpus 
and NoWaC. We had to further investigate this, 
and found that both were mixed with other other 
lemmas that happened to be nouns according to 
our tags. For do 'loo', the less offensive of the 
two, about half the occurrences in the written 
corpus are parts of Vietnamese names (Tranh Thi 
Le Do), English phrases (back/ so I gotta do 
now), names of sports (Tae Kwon Do), which 
means that it really should have a much lower 
relative frequency.  

 The word dass 'loo' is very colloquial and it 
is not among the 6000 most frequent words in 
the written corpus. A closer look at the hits in 
NoWaC reveals that some of the occurrences 
refer to the surname of the hymn writer Petter 
Dass, which should of course have been ex-
cluded from the lists. It also has many examples 
of dass used in a metaphoric sense (in expres-
sions like 'go down the drain'). To conclude, we 
find NoWaC to have a bit in common with spo-
ken language w.r.t. dass, which is the most col-
loquial word, although the relative frequencies 
are rather low. For the other typical spoken 
words, it sides more with the written corpus. 

Interjections are a category that obviously 
belongs to the spoken domain, so this a category 
worth looking into. 

 
 Spoken Written NoWaC 
Ja (‘yes’) 0.02701 0.00056 0.00025 
Nei (‘no’) 0.00737 0.00042 0.00021 
Oi (‘oh’) 0.00019 - - 
Uff (‘oh’) 0.0001 - 0.000004 
Nja (‘well’) 0.00007 - - 
Jøss (‘Jesus’) 0.00005 - - 
Fy (‘bad’) 0.00004 - - 
Æsj (‘yuck’) 0.00003 - - 
Au (‘auch’) 0.00003 - - 

Table 5: Interjections 
 

The interjections show that NoWaC does have 
some speech-like contents, w.r.t. ‘yes’ and ‘no’, 
but so does the written corpus, both with low 
figures, as does NoWaC for the one additional 
internjection it has: uff ‘oh’. However, NoWaC 
does contain a lot of different interjections which 
did not make it into our list of the 6000 most fre-
quent words in the corpus. Looking at the con-

cordances, it is obvious that it is without a doubt 
blogs and forums, i.e. kinds of dialogue, which 
are the text types where these interjections are 
found. An example is given in (1). 
 
(1) anonym : æsj , det suger 
 anonymous: yuck, it sucks 

 
Swearing and taboo words are very rare in 

serious, written texts, so this is an interesting test 
for NoWaC. The results are given in table 6. 

 
 Spoken Written NoWaC 
Faen (‘devil’) 0.00004 0.00006 0.00003 
Herregud 
(‘Lord God’) 

0.00007 0.00002 0.000009 

Fitte (‘female 
sexual organ’) 

- - 0.000007 

Pikk (‘male 
sexual organ) 

- - 0.000019 

Table 6: Swearing and taboo words 
  

Unexpectedly, the first swear word has a rela-
tively high position in the written material and in 
NoWaC, while the second one is much more 
common in the spoken corpus. 

However, for taboo words – the last two rows 
in the table – the NoWaC corpus really differs 
from both corpora. It is the only corpus contain-
ing them, which makes it more informal than 
even the spoken language corpus. 

One must ask why that is. For the spoken cor-
pus the answer is easy: All recordings were done 
under controlled circumstances. All informants 
knew that they were being recorded and had a 
camera directed towards them. While it may be 
somewhat ‘cool’ to use swear words by some 
people (notably young men), swear words and 
taboo words are still embarrassing. For NoWaC, 
we had to investigate a bit further. Although we 
have not looked at all the examples, we have 
checked some, including googled them for their 
original context, and found that although clearly 
the taboo words sometimes occur on informal 
forums they very often are from porn sites.  

To conclude: For typically written language 
variables, such as formal subordinators, NoWaC 
is like a written corpus. Looking at variables that 
will say something about the extent to which 
spoken topics are concerned, such as subordina-
tion, NoWaC is still like a written corpus, al-
though by a small margin. Checking for spoken 
version words of those that have several variants, 
NoWaC is still also like a written corpus. 

125

What kind of corpus is a web corpus?

125



Typically colloquial elements like interjec-
tions, swear words and taboo words do not pro-
vide us with clear ways to distinguish the corpora 
and, actually, point out issues with the reliability 
and “naturalness” of the spoken corpus. 

However, we should add that there are also 
many other interjections among the hundred 
most frequent words in the spoken corpus, which 
are not in NoWaC or the written corpus. These 
are typical discourse markers, especially OCMs 
(own communication management) used with 
turn-taking, which do not have a regular spelling, 
but they have to be regarded as words, indeed 
interjections, since they have a clearly identifi-
able phonology and semantics. One example is 
mm (disyllabic, with toneme 2), meaning: ‘yes, I 
agree’, which is the 30th most frequent word in 
the spoken corpus. 

The relatively high proportion of taboo words 
does not necessarily show a speech-like quality 
of the corpus, but does show that the corpus con-
tains some material not usually contained in 
carefully compiled corpora.  

 

5 Comparing corpora through fre-
quency lists: a quantitative point of 
view 

As we pointed out in the introductory section, 
previous methods to compare linguistic corpora 
rely on the assumption that the comparison is 
made with corpora of at least the same size. In 
our case, however, the target of the study is over 
300 times larger than the spoken reference cor-
pus. We instead propose to systematically extend 
the kind of comparison that was presented in the 
previous section, that is, a correlation analysis 
between the relative frequencies of words in the 
different corpora. 

In order to accomplish this, we first apply a 
logarithmic transformation to the frequency 
counts in the various corpora and create a data 
frame containing only the lemmas which are pre-
sent in all the lists with the same POS tag (1810 
items). Let us start by simply plotting the ob-
tained data (see Fig. 2 and 3). 

 

 
Fig. 2: A plot of corresponding frequencies in the 

spoken and web-based corpora 

 
Fig. 3: A plot of corresponding frequencies in the 

written and web-based corpora 
 
These simple plots already show that the fre-
quencies from the NoWaC and the written cor-
pus have an almost linear relation, while the 
comparison between web-data and the spoken 
corpus is much sparser. For an even more strik-
ing difference, compare the sparseness of the 
first cloud of data points with respect to the indi-
cated regression line (simple linear regression). 

In addition, the relation of the spoken data 
with our reference written corpus resembles very 
closely the cloud that we can see in the first fig-
ure above: 
 

126

Janne Bondi Johannessen and Emiliano Raúl Guevara

126



 
Fig. 4: A plot of corresponding frequencies in the 

spoken and written corpora 
 
In other words, the spoken corpus seems to bear 
the same type of loosely linear relation to both 
the written corpus and NoWaC. On the other 
hand, NoWaC and the written corpus show a 
much tighter, linear correspondence which actu-
ally approximates quite closely a linear regres-
sion line. 

To study these relations in depth we calcu-
lated Kendall’s tau coefficient of correlation be-
tween the log frequencies obtained from NoWaC 
and each of the reference corpora. Kendall’s tau 
is a robust non-parametric hypothesis test for 
statistical dependence that does not make any 
assumption about the distribution of the data. 
The test is a measure of rank correlation (related 
to Spearman’s rho) that is able to deal with tied 
ranks in the data. We summarize the results in 
the following table: 
 
Data Correlation p-value 
NoWaC ~ Spoken 0.4098755 < 0.001 
NoWaC ~ Written 0.705881 < 0.001 
Spoken ~ Written 0.3955764 < 0.001 

Table 7: Rank correlation 
 
Clearly, the frequencies from all the used corpora 
are statistically correlated: this comes as no sur-
prise, given that they share the same language 
and a great part of the vocabulary. However, the 
kind of language that was sampled in NoWaC is 
more closely correlated to the written corpus 
than to the spoken corpus (differences between 
the correlation coefficients statistically signifi-
cant, two tailed p-value < 0.001). 

In addition, we also calculated the correla-
tion between the two reference corpora, whose 
result shows that there is less correlation between 
them than for each with NoWaC. 

We interpret these results as indicating that 
our web corpus contains primarily a kind of lan-
guage that is typical of the written register. How-
ever, some of its traits are in common with data 
from the spoken corpus. 

In other words, if we consider the spoken 
and written reference corpora as two endpoints, 
NoWaC stands between them but not exactly 
half-way: it is significantly closer to the written 
end of language. 
 

6 Conclusion 
From a purely qualitative point of view, NoWaC 
is a written language corpus when it comes to 
proportions of typically written variables. Wher-
ever a word exists in a formal and informal style, 
the formal style is by far the most common.  
 However, NoWaC does have interjec-
tions that are typical of dialogue, revealing this 
way that it does have some qualities shared with 
the spoken corpus. They are also considerably 
less frequent than in the spoken corpus. NoWaC 
also has a share of informal words and taboo 
words, showing that it contains texts that are not 
common in manually and carefully crafted writ-
ten corpora, i.e. those that are based on texts 
from established publishing houses, legal docu-
ments etc. 
 These findings were further corroborated 
by a test of correlation between the frequencies 
from all three corpora. NoWaC shows a rela-
tively stronger correlation to the written refer-
ence corpus, although it is also correlated signifi-
cantly to spoken data. 
 The simple ideas and methods put for-
ward in this paper provide us with plenty of 
novel insight. The web is the largest source of 
linguistic data, mostly text. We must be prepared 
to deal with the intricacies and peculiarities of 
this source. Although the web’s register is pri-
marily written (at least as it has been sampled in 
NoWaC), we might be witnessing the birth of a 
distinct register which contains elements of col-
loquiality and vocabulary from the spoken lan-
guage. 
 
 
 
 

127

What kind of corpus is a web corpus?

127



References  
Allwood, Jens. 1998. Some Frequency based Differ-

ences between Spoken and Written Swedish. In 
Proceedings from the XVI:th Scandinavian Confer-
ence of Linguistics, Department of Linguistics, 
University of Turku, Finland.  

Akinnaso, F. 1982. On the differences between spo-
ken and written language. Language and Speech, 
25, 2, 97–125. 

Baayen, R. Harald. 2008. Analyzing Linguistic Data. 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 

Baroni, Marco and Silvia Bernardini (eds.) 2006. 
Wacky! Working papers on the Web as Corpus. 
Bologna: GEDIT. 

Baroni, Marco and Adam Kilgarriff. 2006. Large lin-
guistically-processed web corpora for multiple lan-
guages. In Proceedings of European ACL, Trento, 
Italy. 

Biber, Douglas, Stig Johansson, Geoffrey Leech, Su-
san Conrad, and Edward Finegan. 1999. Longman 
Grammar of Spoken and Written English. Pearson 
Education Ltd, Harlow, Essex, UK. 

Bick, Eckhard. 2010. Degrees of Orality in Speech-
like Corpora: Comparative Annonatio of Chat and 
E-mail Corpora. In Otoguro, Ryo; Ishikawa, Kiyo-
shi; Umemoto, Hiroshi; Yoshimoto, Kei; Harada, 
Yasunari (eds.): Proceedings of the 24th Pacific 
Asia Conference on Language, Information and 
Computation. Waseda University, Sendai, Japan: 
721–729. 

Chafe, William and Deborah Tannen. 1987. The rela-
tion between written and spoken language. Annual 
Review of Anthropology 16, 383–407. 

Fjeld, Ruth E. Vatvedt. 2008. Talespråksforskningens 
betydning for leksikografien. In Johannessen and 
Hagen (eds.), 15–28. 

Guevara, Emiliano. 2010. NoWaC: a large web-based 
corpus for Norwegian. In Proceedings of the 
NAACL HLT 2010 Sixth Web as Corpus Workshop, 
Los Angeles, California, 1–7. 

Hofland, Knut and Stig Johansson. 1982. Word Fre-
quencies in British and American English. The 
Norwegian Computing Centre for the Humanities, 
Bergen, Norway. 

Johannessen, Janne Bondi, Anders Nøklestad and 
Kristin Hagen. 2000. A Web-Based Advanced and 
User Friendly System: The Oslo Corpus of Tagged 
Norwegian Texts. In Gavrilidou, M., G. Carayan-
nis, S. Markantonatou, S. Piperidis and G. Stain-
haouer (red.) Proceedings, Second International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion (LREC 2000), Aten, 1725-1729. 

Johannessen, Janne Bondi; Hagen, Kristin; Priestley, 
Joel; Nygaard, Lars. 2007. An Advanced Speech 
Corpus for Norwegian. In: NODALIDA 2007 
PROCEEDINGS. Tartu: University of Tartu 2007. 
s. 29-36. 

Johannessen, Janne Bondi. 2008. Studia Linguistica: 
Special issue on spoken language. Vol. 62, issue 1. 

Johannessen, Janne Bondi and Kristin Hagen (eds.). 
2008. Språk i Oslo. Ny forskning om talespråk. 
[Language in Oslo. New Research on Spoken Lan-
guage] Novus forlag, Oslo, Norway. 

Johannessen, Janne Bondi, Joel Priestley, Kristin 
Hagen, Tor Anders Åfarli, and Øystein Alexander 
Vangsnes. 2009. The Nordic Dialect Corpus - an 
Advanced Research Tool. In Jokinen, Kristiina and 
Eckhard Bick (eds.): Proceedings of the 17th Nor-
dic Conference of Computational Linguistics 
NODALIDA 2009. NEALT Proceedings Series 
Volume 4. 

Kilgarriff, Adam. 1997. Using Word Frequency Lists 
to Measure Corpus Homogeneity and Similarity 
between Corpora. In “Proceedings of the Fifth 
Workshop on Very Large Corpora”, Beijing and 
Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 

Kilgariff, Adam. 2007. Googleology is Bad Science. 
Computational Linguistics 33 (1): 147-151. 

Lie, Svein. 2008. Veldig sånn festejente. In Johannes-
sen and Hagen (eds.), 78–95. 

McCarthy, Michael. 1998. Spoken language and ap-
plied linguistics. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 

Miller, Jim and Regina Weinert. 1998. Spontaneous 
Spoken Language. Syntax and Discourse. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, UK. 

Norway Statistics: http://www.ssb.no/ 

Rayson, Paul and Roger Garside. 2000. Comparing 
Corpora using Frequency Profiling. In Adam Kil-
garriff and Tony Berber Sardinha (eds.) “Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Comparing Corpora”, 
Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 

Søfteland, Åshild and Anders Nøklestad. 2008. 
Manuell morfologisk tagging av NoTa-materialet 
med støtte fra en statistisk tagger. In Johannessen 
and Hagen (eds), 226–234. 

Vangsnes, Øystein Alexander Vangsnes. 2008. Om-
kring adnominalt åssen/hvordan i Oslo-målet. In 
Johannessen and Hagen (eds), 50–62. 

 

 

 

128

Janne Bondi Johannessen and Emiliano Raúl Guevara

128



Corpora 
Nordic Dialect Corpus: 

http://www.tekstlab.uio.no/nota/scandiasyn/index.h
tml Read about it in Johannessen et al. (2009). 

NoWaC: 
http://www.hf.uio.no/iln/tjenester/sprak/korpus/skri
ftsprakskorpus/nowac/ Read about it in Guevara 
(2010). 

NoTa-Oslo: Norwegian Speech Corpus - Oslo part: 
http://www.tekstlab.uio.no/nota/oslo/english.html 
Read about it in Johannessen et al. (2007). 

The Oslo Corpus of Tagged Norwegian Texts: 
http://www.tekstlab.uio.no/norsk/bokmaal/english.
html Read about it in Johannessen et al. (2000). 

129

What kind of corpus is a web corpus?

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


