




















Toponym Disambiguation in an English-Lithuanian SMT System

 with Spatial Knowledge 

 

 

Raivis Skadiņš 

Tilde SIA 

Vienibas gatve 75a, 

Riga, Latvia 

raiviss@tilde.lv 

Tatiana Gornostay 

Tilde SIA 

Vienibas gatve 75a, 

Riga, Latvia 

Tatiana.Gornostay@tilde.lv 

Valters Šics 

Tilde SIA 

Vienibas gatve 75a, 

Riga, Latvia 

Valters.Sics@tilde.lv 

 

 

Abstract 

This paper presents an innovative research 

resulting in the English-Lithuanian statistical 

factored phrase-based machine translation 

system with a spatial ontology. The system is 

based on the Moses toolkit and is enriched 

with semantic knowledge inferred from the 

spatial ontology. The ontology was devel-

oped on the basis of the GeoNames database 

(more than 15 000 toponyms), implemented 

in the web ontology language (OWL), and in-

tegrated into the machine translation process. 

Spatial knowledge was added as an additional 

factor in the statistical translation model and 

used for toponym disambiguation during ma-

chine translation. The implemented machine 

translation approach was evaluated against 

the baseline system without spatial 

knowledge. A multifaceted evaluation strate-

gy including automatic metrics, human eval-

uation and linguistic analysis, was imple-

mented to perform evaluation experiments. 

The results of the evaluation have shown a 

slight improvement in the output quality of 

machine translation with spatial knowledge. 

1 Introduction and Background 

During recent decades the corpus-based strategy 

has become dominant for machine translation, as 

it has proven to be more effective both from the 

point of view of time and labour resources and 

the quality of the output. The statistical approach 

has occupied the leading position with the first 

research results performed in the late 1980s. 

Since then statistical machine translation (SMT) 

has become the major focus for many research 

efforts due to its cost effectiveness doubled with 

the availability of such open source tools as GI-

ZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) and Moses 

(Koehn et al., 2007), as well as parallel text re-

sources on the Internet. 

Pure SMT methods (Brown et al., 1993; 

Koehn et al., 2003) do not use any linguistic 

knowledge (e.g. morphological information). 

As a result, they perform better for analytical 

languages, such as English, with little inflection. 

Although English and Lithuanian are Indo-

European languages and share some grammatical 

features, they have a wealth of differences. Eng-

lish belongs to the Germanic language group 

while Lithuanian belongs to the group of Baltic 

languages. Also, in the morphological typology 

English is an analytical language in contrast to a 

synthetic Lithuanian with a rich set of inflec-

tions. SMT for synthetic languages with high 

inflection (e.g. Lithuanian, Latvian, Russian and 

others) requires larger amounts of training data 

and additional knowledge to get the same level 

of performance. 

Modern SMT methods use different kinds of 

additional knowledge (e.g. morphological or syn-

tactical) to build more sophisticated statistical 

models and improve the output quality of ma-

chine translation (see, for example, factored 

SMT (Koehn et al., 2007), tree-based SMT 

(Chiang 2007; Marcu et al., 2006; Li et al., 

2009); treelet SMT (Quirk et al., 2005). This pa-

per presents an innovative research resulting in 

an English-Lithuanian statistical factored phrase-

based machine translation system based on the 

Moses toolkit and enriched with semantic 

knowledge inferred from the spatial ontology. 

Using semantic knowledge in rule-based ma-

chine translation is not new in the field. In SMT, 

however, there has been little research in this 

area
1
. The implemented SMT system that is de-

                                                 
1 See, for example, the research on extracting phrasal corre-

spondences that are approximately semantically equivalent 

for building a full-sentence paraphrasing model that then is 

applied to a single good reference translation for each sen-

tence in a statistical machine translation development set 

(Madnani et al., 2008). 

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 191–197



scribed in this paper uses semantic knowledge to 

improve the quality of translation, in particular 

with regard to the disambiguation of geograph-

ical names, or toponyms. Spatial knowledge is 

added to toponyms in the source text as addition-

al semantic tags, or factors. By adding factors 

into the source text, the translation accuracy is 

improved. This is the result of resolving semantic 

ambiguities in the source language. 

The first part of the paper overviews the sys-

tem design including a description of its func-

tionality and implementation with spatial 

knowledge. In the second part we focus on the 

system multifaceted evaluation and its results, as 

well as potential limitations of the system. Final-

ly, we present conclusions and future plans. 

2 System Design 

2.1 Functionality 

In the overall machine translation theory and in 

practice English-Lithuanian toponym translation 

problems have not been researched before. The 

core functionality of the presented system is a 

disambiguation of toponyms during the machine 

translation process. Toponyms are geographical 

names, or names of places (hydronyms, oro-

nyms, geonyms, oeconyms, etc.). A natural lan-

guage is ambiguous and toponyms are not excep-

tions. This fact makes toponyms difficult for 

processing (e.g. resolution, cross-language in-

formation retrieval, human translation and espe-

cially machine translation), and due to their lin-

guistic and extra-linguistic nature toponyms re-

quire special treatment (Gornostay and Skadiņa, 

2009). 

There are cases when real-world geographical 

knowledge is required for the resolution of am-

biguous toponyms. The implemented SMT sys-

tem deals with two types of ambiguity (see 

Leidner (2007) for the description of possible 

types of toponym ambiguity). The first type is a 

referential ambiguity, where a toponym may re-

fer to more than one location of the same type, 

for example: 

 Georgia as the US state and the country 
in Caucasus (English); 

 Riga as the populated place and the capi-
tal of Latvia and as the populated place in 

the USA, state Michigan (Latvian); 

 Šveicarija as the village in Lithuania and 
as the country in Europe (Lithuanian). 

The second type of ambiguity is a feature type 

ambiguity, where a toponym may refer to more 

than one place of a different type, for example: 

 Tanfield refers to the populated place as 
well as the castle in the United Kingdom 

(English); 

 Gauja refers to the populated place as 
well as the river in Latvia (Latvian); 

 Šventoji as the town near the Baltic Sea 
as well as the name of 3 different rivers in 

Lithuania (Lithuanian). 

In the implemented system the two described 

types of toponym ambiguity are resolved using 

semantic knowledge inferred from the spatial 

ontology. 

2.2 Baseline SMT System 

The baseline system was a statistical phrase-

based machine translation system based on the 

Moses toolkit and trained on the following pub-

licly available and proprietary corpora: 

 DGT-TM parallel corpus2 – a publicly 
available collection of legislative texts in 

22 languages of the European Union; 

 OPUS parallel corpus – a publicly avail-
able collection of texts from the web in 

different domains
3 

(Tiedemann, 2004; 

Tiedemann, 2009). 

 Localization parallel corpus obtained 
from translation memories that have been 

created during the localization of software, 

user manuals and helps. 

We also included word and phrase translations 

from bilingual dictionaries and term translations 

from EuroTermBank
4
 to increase word coverage. 

Monolingual corpora for the training of lan-

guage models were prepared from corresponding 

monolingual parts of parallel corpora, as well as 

Lithuanian news articles collected from the web. 

Bilingual and monolingual resources prepared 

and used for the baseline SMT system develop-

ment are represented in Table 1. 

 

Monolingual corpus Units 

Lithuanian side 

of parallel corpora 

~4,04 mil. 

                                                 
2 http://langtech.jrc.it/DGT-TM.html 
3 We chose the EMEA (medical domain) and KDE4 (IT 

domain) sentence-aligned corpora. 
4 www.eurotermbank.com 

192

Raivis Skadiņš, Tatiana Gornostay and Valters Šics

192



Web news ~5,22 mil. 

Total ~9,26 mil. 

(filtered) 

Bilingual corpus Parallel 

units 

Localization TM ~5,21 mil. 

DGT-TM ~1,08 mil. 

OPUS EMEA ~1,04 mil. 

Dictionary data ~0,27 mil. 

EuroTermBank data ~0,1 mil. 

KDE4 ~0,05 mil. 

Fiction ~0,01 mil. 

Total 
(used for the baseline system) 

~7,76 mil. 
(filtered) 

Table 1. Training corpora. 

2.3 Spatial Ontology 

The spatial ontology to be integrated into the 

machine translation process was developed using 

the ontology language, designed and implement-

ed in the web ontology language (OWL) using 

RCC-8 properties (Region Connection Calculus) 

(Randell et al., 1992), and tools developed in the 

SOLIM project
5
. RCC-8 properties are as fol-

lows: externally connected (EC), disconnected 

(DC), covered by/tangential proper part (TPP), 

inside/non-tangential proper part (NTPP), equal 

(EQ), partial overlap (PO), covers/tangential 

proper part inverse (TPPi), and contains/non-

tangential proper part inverse (NTPPi). 

The spatial ontology consisted of three sub-

ontologies: basic and two language ontologies. 

The basic ontology contained concepts and spa-

tial properties. The two language ontologies con-

tained English and Lithuanian toponyms. Words 

in language ontologies were matched with con-

cepts in the basic ontology (e.g. United States, 

US and USA represent the same concept USA). 

All locations in language ontologies were repre-

sented by a geo‐info.owl code and lexically rep-
resented by a hasLexrep relation. 

A list of instances was created on the basis of 

the GeoNames database
6
 (7 continents, 193 

countries, 51 USA states, 6359 USA cities, 6955 

Lithuanian place names, 1869 cities from top 10 

cities of other countries). The GeoNames data-

base contains information about continents, 

countries and cities and it contains information 

about spatial relations between these objects. 

RCC-8 relations were extracted from the 

GeoNames database.  

                                                 
5 www.solim.eu 
6 www.geonames.org 

To query the spatial ontology we used the 

function GetSpatialRelations(A,B) to get spatial 

knowledge about relations between A and B. 

This information can be inferred from the spatial 

ontology, whereas we cannot get false or un-

known information, for example: 

 GetSpatialRelations(Georgia,Armenia)= 
”EC” only if there is enough information 

in the ontology to infer this relation; 

 GetSpatialRelations(Georgia,Latvia)= 
”DC” if this relation can be inferred; 

 GetSpatialRelations(Georgia, Latvia)= 
”“, if there is not enough information in 

the ontology to infer the DC relation. 

2.4 Implemented SMT System              
with Spatial Knowledge 

For the implemented system with spatial 

knowledge we used the same training corpora as 

for the baseline system, as well as prepared two 

more corpora from the ontology – a translation 

dictionary (~0,02 mil. units) and spatial relation 

dictionary (~0,42 mil. units). 

The developed baseline SMT system was a 

pure phrase-based SMT system which dealt only 

with surface forms of words. Its translation mod-

el contained simple probabilities like: 

 P(Georgia|Gruzija) – a probability that 
Georgia is the English translation of the 

Lithuanian word Gruzija; 

 P(Georgia|Džordžija) – a probability 
that Georgia is the English translation of 

the Lithuanian word Džordžija. 

It also contained probabilities for all morpho-

logical variants of Lithuanian words and phrases. 

However, it was difficult to choose the correct 

Lithuanian translation of a given ambiguous 

English toponym since both probabilities were 

similar: 

P(Georgia|Gruzija) ≅ P(Georgia|Džordžija). 

The factored phrase-based SMT (Koehn and 

Hoang, 2007) is an extension of the phrase-based 

approach. It contains an additional annotation at 

a lexical unit level. The lexical unit is no longer 

just a token, but a vector of factors that represent 

different levels of annotation. The training data 

(a parallel corpus) has to be annotated with addi-

tional factors. For instance, it is possible to add 

lemma or part-of-speech information on source 

and target sides. 

193

Toponym Disambiguation in English-Lithuanian SMT System with Spatial Knowledge

193



The implemented SMT system was based on 

the Moses toolkit that features factored transla-

tion models allowing the integration of additional 

layers of data directly into the process of transla-

tion. Spatial knowledge was used during training 

and translation processes as additional semantic 

factors integrated with the source language data. 

All toponyms in the source text were analysed 

and tagged (annotated) with semantic factors 

(spatial knowledge) inferred from the spatial on-

tology with a reasoner. For example, a toponym 

Georgia is ambiguous: it can refer to the USA 

state or the Caucasian country. See the example 

sentences: 

 There are Lithuanians living in Georgia, 
Florida and other states. 

 Experts have failed to travel to Georgia 
at the Tbilisi airport. 

In the first sentence Georgia refers to the USA 

state, while in the second one it refers to the 

Caucasian country. To resolve this type of ambi-

guity, spatial knowledge was used to determine 

spatial relations between corresponding topo-

nyms within one sentence. For example, in the 

first sentence Georgia was annotated with 

EC.Florida since that information had been in-

ferred from the spatial ontology (Georgia is ex-

ternally connected to Florida). In the second sen-

tence Georgia was annotated with NTPPi.Tbilisi 

(Tbilisi is a city in Georgia). We searched a sen-

tence for toponyms and queried the spatial ontol-

ogy for their relations. If there were more than 

two toponyms in a sentence we used just one (the 

first found, but not DC) annotation to each topo-

nym. Compared with a simple unfactored trans-

lation model, that kind of factored translation 

model contained more useful information for 

toponym disambiguation since it might contain 

probabilities like: 

 P(Georgia/EC.Florida|Džordžija) –  
a probability that Georgia is the English 

translation of a Lithuanian word Džordžija 

given that Georgia is externally connected 

to Florida; 

 P(Georgia/NTPPi.Tbilisi|Gruzija) –  
a probability that Georgia is the English 

translation of Lithuanian word Gruzija 

given that Georgia encloses Tbilisi. 

The translation model with probabilities about 

words and phrases with spatial knowledge helped 

to perform more accurate toponym disambigua-

tion, because spatial context was included in the 

translation model. For example, if we have al-

most equal probabilities for Georgia, being a 

translation of both Gruzija and Džordžija in the 

translation model of the baseline system, proba-

bilities with spatial knowledge are significantly 

different: 

P(Georgia/EC.Armenia|Gruzija) ≫ 
P(Georgia/EC.Armenia|Džordžija) 

P(Georgia/EC.Florida|Džordžija) ≫ 
P(Georgia/EC.Florida|Gruzija) 

Thus, during the machine translation process 

semantic factors inferred from the spatial ontolo-

gy provide additional information for the Moses 

decoder. As a result, it helps in choosing the ap-

propriate translation equivalent. Therefore, SMT 

training data annotated with the proposed kind of 

spatial knowledge leads to a better machine 

translation quality. 

It should also be mentioned that two SMT sys-

tems with spatial knowledge were trained. The 

first system (later referred as Spatial-8) was 

trained using corpora annotated with all eight 

RCC-8 spatial relations. The second system (lat-

er referred as Spatial-7) was trained using only 

seven RCC-8 relations since initial experiments, 

proved with the linguistic analysis, showed that 

using the DC:disconnected relation did not help 

in toponym disambiguation. 

3 Evaluation and Limitations 

A multifaceted strategy with three procedures 

was applied to the evaluation of the output quali-

ty of machine translation performed by the im-

plemented system with spatial knowledge: 

 automatic (black-box) evaluation; 

 human evaluation; 

 linguistic analysis. 

3.1 Automatic Evaluation 

For the automatic evaluation the two most popu-

lar and widely used metrics BLEU (Pap-

ineni et al., 2002) and NIST (Doddington, 2002) 

were used. Automatic metrics are cost-effective 

and do not require much human intervention. 

They allow comparisons of two and more sys-

tems, as well as different versions of one system 

in the process of its implementation and im-

provement as many times as necessary. 

A balanced test set of 500 English sentences 

was developed for the automatic evaluation pur-

poses. Sentences were manually collected from 

194

Raivis Skadiņš, Tatiana Gornostay and Valters Šics

194



the web and translated into Lithuanian by a pro-

fessional translator (a reference set to be com-

pared with). The breakdown of topics in the cor-

pus is presented in Table 2. 

Domain Percentage 

General information 

about the EU 

12% 

Specification and manuals 12% 

Popular scientific 

and educational 

12% 

Official and legal documents 12% 

News and magazine articles 24% 

Information technology 18% 

Letters 5% 

Fiction 5% 

Table 2. Testing set. 

 

The procedure of the automatic evaluation 

consists of several sub-processes and the main 

idea, in general, is in the comparison of machine 

translation and reference sets. The higher the au-

tomatic scores are, the better the machine transla-

tion output quality is. BLEU and NIST scores for 

the baseline system were 27,35 and 5,90 corre-

spondingly. BLEU and NIST scores for the im-

plemented system with spatial knowledge were 

27,97 (BLEU) and 5,97 (NIST) for the system 

“Spatial-8” and 27,47 (BLEU) and 5,91 (NIST) 

for the system “Spatial-7” (see Table 3). 

 

System BLEU NIST 

Baseline 27,35 5,90 

Spatial-8 27,97 5,97 

Spatial-7 27,47 5,91 

Table 3. Results of the automatic evaluation. 

 

As a result, a slight improvement in the output 

quality of machine translation with spatial 

knowledge can be observed. In general, this im-

provement is not high and is not sufficient for the 

objective and an integrated evaluation procedure. 

Results of the automatic evaluation can be ex-

plained so that general-purpose development and 

evaluation corpora used for the evaluation did 

not contain many ambiguous geographical 

names. Therefore, the evaluation with the task-

specific evaluation corpus was performed during 

the human evaluation. Nevertheless, automatic 

scores were set as a threshold for further experi-

ments. 

3.2 Human Evaluation 

A test set of 464 English sentences containing 

ambiguous toponyms was developed for human 

evaluation purposes. A ranking of translated sen-

tences relative to each other was used for the 

manual evaluation of systems. This was the offi-

cial determinant of translation quality used in the 

2009 Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-

tion shared tasks (Callison-Burch et al., 2009). 

A web-based human evaluation environment 

(Skadiņš et al., 2010) was used where source 

sentences and translation outputs of the two SMT 

systems could be uploaded as simple txt files. 

Once the evaluation of the two systems was set 

up, a link to the evaluation survey was sent to 

evaluators. Evaluators were evaluating the sys-

tems sentence by sentence. Evaluators saw the 

source sentence and the translation output of the 

two SMT systems – baseline and the one imple-

mented with spatial knowledge. The frequency 

of preferring each system based on evaluators’ 

answers and a comparison of the sentences was 

calculated. About 20 evaluators participated, 

each comparing translations of 50 sentences. 

The manual comparison of the two systems 

(Baseline vs. Spatial-8)
7
 has shown that the im-

plemented SMT system with spatial knowledge 

is slightly better than the baseline system: in 

50,66% of cases evaluators judged its output to 

be better than the output of the baseline system. 

Results of the human evaluation do not allow us 

to say with certainty either the spatial SMT sys-

tem is significantly better or it is disambiguating 

toponyms better, since the difference is not con-

vincing and evaluators have been comparing sen-

tences using subjective criteria and not paying a 

special attention to the translation of toponyms. 

3.3 Linguistic Evaluation of Toponym 
Disambiguation 

A detailed linguistic analysis of toponym disam-

biguation during the machine translation process 

was performed. The same corpus as for the hu-

man evaluation was used and the accuracy of the 

toponym translation was evaluated. The accuracy 

of the baseline system was 84,09%. The accura-

cy of the Spatial-8 system was 83,87%. Since 

results for the baseline system were better, it was 

decided to analyse the impact of each spatial re-

lation to toponym disambiguation. It was discov-

ered that the accuracy could be increased to 

88.00% if the DC:disconnected relation was ig-

nored (system Spatial-7). 

                                                 
7 The human evaluation of the system Spatial-7 is in pro-

gress at the moment and will be presented in the final versi-

on of the paper. 

195

Toponym Disambiguation in English-Lithuanian SMT System with Spatial Knowledge

195



4 Conclusions and Future works 

In the paper we have presented how toponyms 

can be disambiguated in the process of statistical 

machine translation using spatial knowledge by 

the example of the English-Lithuanian system. 

We have overviewed the system design including 

the description of its functionality, baseline and 

implementation with spatial knowledge, as well 

as focused on the system multifaceted evaluation 

and its results. 

We can see that the quality of machine transla-

tion can be improved by using the semantic in-

formation from the spatial ontology. Neverthe-

less improvement is not big and further more 

detailed evaluation would be necessary to assess 

whether this improvement is statistically signifi-

cant. 

It was noticed during linguistic evaluation that 

some RCC-8 properties seem to be much more 

useful than others (e.g. EC:externally connected 

and EQ:equal). But a detailed evaluation of the 

impact of each relation has not been done yet. 

The EQ property can be used for machine trans-

lation of toponyms which are synonyms, for ex-

ample, a full name and an abbreviation – the 

United States of America and USA. The same 

property can be used for the so-called exonyms 

(names of places used by other groups, not lo-

cals) as Praha for its inhabitants and Prague for 

the English (for other examples, see Leidner 

(2007)). 

It should be also noted, that the best version of 

the implemented system with the spatial ontolo-

gy is not dealing with DC:disconnected relations, 

e.g. Georgia is disconnected from California or 

Hawaii. In this case, other types of information 

in the spatial ontology may be used in further 

experiments, e.g. the ontology class State and its 

instances. 

Moreover, the spatial ontology was not used 

for disambiguation of common nouns since they 

were not represented in the ontology. However, a 

morpho-syntactic type of toponym ambiguity, 

when a word itself can be a toponym or a com-

mon noun in a language) and its resolution can 

be performed with the help of the spatial ontolo-

gy, for example: 

 Hook refers to the populated place in the 
UK and hook is a common noun (English); 

 Liepa refers to the populated place in 
Latvia and liepa (lime-tree) is a common 

noun (Latvian); 

 Batą refers to the populated place in 
Lithuania and batą (shoe) is a common 

noun (Lithuanian). 

The proposed approach to toponym disambig-

uation is not limited to: 

 machine translation per se and can be re-
garded as generic, i.e. it can be also ap-

plied to other fields of natural language 

processing, e.g. information retrieval; 

 use of spatial knowledge only: other 
types of implicit or inferred knowledge 

can be used in a similar way. 

References 

Brown P., Della Pietra S., Della Pietra V., Mercer R. 

1993. The mathematics of statistical machine trans-

lation: Parameter estimation. Computational Lin-

guistics, 19(2), pp. 263–311. 

Callison-Burch C., Koehn P., Monz C., Schroeder J. 

2009. Findings of the 2009 Workshop on Statistical 

Machine Translation. Proceedings of the Fourth 

Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, 1-

28, Athens, Greece. 

Chiang D. 2007. Hierarchical Phrase-Based Transla-

tion. Computational Linguistics, 33(2), pp. 201-

228. 

Koehn P., Och F. J., Marcu D. 2003. Statistical phrase 

based translation. Proceedings of the Joint Confer-

ence on Human Language Technologies and the 

Annual Meeting of the North American Chapter of 

the Association of Computational Linguistics 

(HLT/NAACL). 

Koehn P. and Hoang H. 2007. Factored Translation 

Models. Proceedings of EMNLP’07. 

Li Z., Callison-Burch C., Dyer C., Ganitkevitch J., 

Khudanpur S., Schwartz L., Thornton W., 

Weese J., Zaidan O. 2009. Joshua: An Open 

Source Toolkit for Parsing-based Machine Transla-

tion. Proceedings of the Workshop on Statistical 

Machine Translation (WMT09). 

Marcu D., Wang W., Echihabi A., Knight K.. 2006. 

SPMT: statistical machine translation with syn-

tactified target language phrases. Proceedings of 

the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in 

Natural Language Processing, Sydney, Australia, 

July 22-23. ACL Workshops. Association for 

Computational Linguistics, pp. 44-52. 

Quirk C., Menezes A., Cherry C. 2005. Dependency 

Treelet Translation: Syntactically Informed Phrasal 

SMT. Proceedings of ACL 2005. 

Papineni K., Roukos S., Ward T. et al. 2002. BLEU: a 

Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine 

196

Raivis Skadiņš, Tatiana Gornostay and Valters Šics

196



Translation. ACL’02: Proceedings of the 40th An-

nual Meeting on Association for Computational 

Linguistics, Philadelphia, Pensilvania. Morristown, 

NJ: Association for Computational Linguistics, 

pp. 311-318. 

Doddington G. 2002. Automatic Evaluation of Ma-

chine Translation Quality Using N-gram Co-

Occurrence Statistics. HLT 2002: Human Lan-

guage Technology Conference: Proceedings of the 

Second International Conference on Human Lan-

guage Technology Research, San Diego, Califor-

nia. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 

pp. 138-145. 

Tiedemann J. and Nygaard L. 2004. The OPUS cor-

pus – parallel & free. Proceedings of the Fourth In-

ternational Conference on Language Resources 

and Evaluation (LREC'04), Lisbon, Portugal, May 

26-28. 

Tiedemann J. 2009. News from OPUS – A Collection 

of Multilingual Parallel Corpora with Tools and In-

terfaces. Recent Advances in Natural Language 

Processing, vol. V, John Benjamins, Amster-

dam/Philadelphia, pp. 237-248. 

Randell D. A., Cui Z., Cohn A. G. 1992. A spatial 

logic based on regions and connection. Proceed-

ings of the 3
rd

 International Conference on 

Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, Mor-

gan Kaufmann, San Mateo, pp. 165–176. 

Skadiņš R., Goba K. and Šics V. 2010. Improving 

SMT for Baltic Languages with Factored Models. 

Proceedings of the Fourth International Confer-

ence Baltic HLT 2010, Riga, Latvia, pp. 125-132. 

Och F. J. and Ney H. 2003 A Systematic Comparison 

of Various Statistical Alignment Models. Compu-

tational Linguistics, (29)1, pp. 19-51, 2003. 

Koehn P., Federico M., Cowan B., Zens R., Duer C., 

Bojar O., Constantin A., Herbst E. 2007 Moses: 

Open Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Trans-

lation. Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and 

Poster Sessions, Prague, pp 177-180. 

Madnani Nitin, Resnik Philip, Dorr Bonnie, Schwartz 

Richard. 2008. Applying Automatically Generated 

Semantic Knowledge: A Case Study in Machine 

Translation. Proceedings of the Symposium on Se-

mantic Knowledge Discovery, Organization and 

Use. 

Leidner Jochen L.. 2007. Toponym Resolution in 

Text: Annotation, Evaluation and Applications of 

Spatial Grounding of Place Names. PhD thesis. In-

stitute for Communicating and Collaborative Sys-

tems School of Informatics, University of Edin-

burgh. 

Gornostay T. and Skadiņa I. 2009. English-Latvian 

Toponym Processing: Translation Strategies and 

Linguistic Patterns. EAMT-2009: Proceedings of 

the 13th Annual Conference of the European Asso-

ciation for Machine Translation, May 14-15, Uni-

versitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, 

Spain, pp. 81-87. 

197

Toponym Disambiguation in English-Lithuanian SMT System with Spatial Knowledge

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


