










































Parallel Corpora in Aspectual Studies of Non-Aspect Languages


Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing, pages 39–42,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 12-14 September 2011.

Parallel Corpora in Aspectual Studies of Non-Aspect Languages

Maria Stambolieva
Laboratory for Language Technologies, New Bulgarian University

mstambolieva@nbu.bg

Abstract

The paper  presents  the  first  results,  for  Bul-
garian  and  English,  of  a  multilingual  Trans-
Verba project in progress at the NBU Laborat-
ory  for  Language  Technologies.  The  project 
explores the possibility to use Bulgarian trans-
lation  equivalents  in  parallel  corpora  and 
translation memories as a metalanguage in as-
signing aspectual  values to "non-aspect"  lan-
guage equivalents. The resulting subcorpora of 
Perfective  Aspect  and  Imperfective  Aspect 
units are then quantitatively analysed and con-
cordanced  to  obtain  parameters  of  aspectual 
build-up.

1 Aims of the investigation

At the time of the appearance of the first studies 
on Aspect in the early 20th century, this term (a 
calque from the all-Slavonic "vid"),  was solely 
used for the description of a category typologic-
ally  characterising  Slavonic  languages,  setting 
them apart from "non-aspect" languages. After a 
century of aspectual studies, the term has under-
gone  considerable  widening  of  meaning  and 
forms part,  in modern linguistics,  of  the gram-
matical  description  of  languages  of  different 
groups. Thus, "aspectual classes" are set out for 
Romance and Germanic  languages;  the English 
opposition  "non-progressive-progressive"  is 
called "Aspect"; even the category of Correlation 
is often described as a "Perfect Aspect".

Far from supporting cross-language investiga-
tions, foreign language teaching and translation, 
the shoving of different language phenomena in 
the same Aspect-bag is  nothing but  misleading 
and problem-raising. Bulgarian teachers of Eng-
lish who have tried to draw a parallel between 
Bulgarian and English Aspect to their pupils are 
well aware of the unsatisfactory results. Translat-
ors from Bulgarian to English and back, and their 
editors, point to Aspect as a major pitfall. Aspect 
is,  again, the category where systems for auto-
matic translation seem to offer the least help – 
Cf.  the  translation  equivalents  provided  by 
Google Translate for a few English sentences:

1. He sang the song. – Toy izpya pesenta.(Per-
fective Aspect, Aorist)

2. He sang for an hour – ?Toy peeshe za edin 
chas. (Imperfective Aspect, Imperfect Tense)

3. They ate the sandwich. – *Te yade sandvich.
(Imperfective Aspect, Aorist/Present?)

4. Did you eat the sandwich? – *Znaete li, yade 
sandvich? (???)

In what follows, I will try to:
• define the essence of Slavonic aspect and, in 

particular, aspect as expressed in the Bulgari-
an language – in an attempt to demonstrate 
why,  and with respect  to the expression of 
what semantic oppositions, Bulgarian can be 
used as a metalanguage in aspectual studies;

• contrast  Bulgarian  aspect  to  the  aspectual 
system of English;

• demonstrate the possibilities of using parallel 
corpora  and  translation  memories  in  the 
cross-language  study of  aspect  and  present 
first quantitative results of the computational 
analysis of the data, with parameters of Eng-
lish aspect construal.

2 The Slavonic Category of Aspect

Slavonic  aspect  is  an  equipollent lexico-gram-
matical category covering the entire verbal sys-
tem and unambiguously defined in the Lexicon. 
The semantic basis of the opposition is the pres-
ence  or  absence  of  a  bound  ([+Bound]  /  [-
Bound]) in the topological structure of a situation 
or, in other words, the +Event/-Event nature of 
the situation. Events and non-events in Slavonic 
languages define a small set of Situation Types, 
which, after lexical filling, result in a large num-
ber of 'Action Modes'.

Depending  on  their  situation  type,  eventive 
verbs  may mark  one-bound or two-bound situ-
ations: zapeya ('start to sing') / izpeya ('sing from 
beginning to end'). One-bound verbs mark either 
the  beginning of  a  situation or  its  end phase - 
compare zapeya above:

.......... [..........
Fig. 1. One-bound situations with initial bound

and dopeya ('finish singing'):

39



..........]..........
Fig. 2. One-bound situations with final bound

Two-bound  situations  can  be  minimal  – 
namigna ('wink'),  padna ('fall'),  otlepya 
('unglue'):

..........[X]..........
Fig. 3. Two-bound minimal situations

or  extended:   procheta ('read  through'), 
prepluvam (swim  through),  pospya ('sleep  a 
while'):

...........[XXX..]...........
Fig. 4. Two-bound extended situations

Non-Eventive verbs may mark s i m p l e  non-
bounded situations of the Action Modes Statal: 
haresvam ('like'),   imam ('have'),  izglezhdam 
('seem', 'appear'),  cherveneya ('be red),  mladeya 
('appear  young')  or  Processual  -  ticham ('run'), 
zreya ('ripen'):

..........]XXX..[..........
Fig. 5. Simple noun-bounded situations

or else complex  non-bounded situations: pre-
parative  situations,  i.e.  processes  preceding  an 
event - zapyavam ('be about to start singing'):

..........] [[X(XX..)]..........
Fig. 6. Complex non-bounded situations: Prepar-

atives

and iterative  situations,  i.e.  series  of  similar 
events –  kiham ('sneeze'),  izpyavam ('repeatedly 
sing'):

..........][X] [X] ([X]...)[..........
Fig. 7. Complex non-bounded situations: Iterat-

ives.

Preparative and iterative situations are gener-
ally  expressed  by verbs  which  are  derivatively 
(prefixally or suffixally) formed out of perfective 
verbs marking momentary or extended events.

The grammaticalisation of the opposition Non-
Event/Event is a typological feature of Slavonic 
languages which sets them apart from languages 
of the Germanic and Romance groups. Further, 
in Slavonic languages  the expression of aspectu-
al information is concentrated in the verb. Hence, 
the presence of a perfective or imperfective verb 

defines unambiguously the aspectual value of the 
sentence.

Bulgarian  stands  out  among  Slavonic  lan-
guages in that it manifests the Perfective-Imper-
fective opposition to the highest degree of regu-
larity  and  grammaticalisation  within  the  lan-
guage group. As Yu. Maslov points out (Maslov 
1984, p.97):

'It should not be thought that the principle of 
the positive suffixal expression of the Imperfect-
ive Aspect and the negative, null  expression of 
the Perfective Aspect forms an exclusive feature 
of the Bulgarian language area [...] However, it is 
precisely in the Bulgarian language area that this 
principle has found its fullest and most consistent 
development. The specifics of the Bulgarian sys-
tem in this respect [..] is not in the deviation from 
the Slavonic language type, but in the fullest ex-
pression of the developmental tendencies built in 
the Slavonic grammatical system [...].'

It is the regular, systematic character of the ex-
pression of the eventive/non-eventive nature of a 
situation in  the  verb and the  richess  of  lexical 
verb types that defines the possibility to use Bul-
garian as a metalanguage sui generis in aspectual 
studies.

3 Aspect  Studies  for  the  English  Lan-
guage

Even though Aspect forms part of the verbal cat-
egories claimed by English grammar, little -- if 
any --  of  the  defining features  of  the  Slavonic 
category can be said to be applicable to the Eng-
lish data.

In  harmony  with  the  analysis  of  other  non-
aspect  languages,  aspectual  studies of the Eng-
lish verb start with Verb Classes. A proliferation 
of classifications of these is in circulation, ran-
ging from Aristotle's tripartition through Vendler 
(1957), Kenny (1963), Mourelatos (1981), Smith 
(1997), to name but a notable few. Surprisingly, 
not  one  of  these  classifications  parallels  the 
grammaticalised  Slavonic  opposition  in  distin-
guishing,  first  and  foremost,  events  from non-
events.  Quite the reverse,  the first  line is,  as a 
rule,  drawn between states  and processes.  J.-P. 
Descles (1990) even goes as far as to claim a to-
pological  distinction  between  states  as  non-
bounded situations against processes and events 
as bounded situations. Such verb classifications 
are not very helpful in event construal and cannot 
form the basis  of  cross-language parallels  with 
Aspect languages.

40



Unlike other non-Aspect languages, the gram-
matical system of English does, in fact, incorpor-
ate an opposition of an aspectual type - the so-c-
alled  "Progressive  Aspect'.  This  is  a  privative 
opposition  between  an  unmarked  form  and  a 
marked form expressing non-boundedness, plus a 
large number of other components of meaning of 
a non-topological nature -- such as limited dura-
tion, irritation and other emotional colouring, in-
creasing or decreasing activity, etc. The non-pro-
gressive form in the English "aspectual" opposi-
tion is unmarked with respect to boundedness. In 
other  words,  the  English  non-progressive  verb 
cannot  unambiguously  define  a  situation  as 
eventive or not. Seeing that, on average, English 
non-progressive  forms  occur  approximately  20 
times oftener than progressive ones in an English 
narrative text, this means that English verbs are,  
largely, unmarked for boundedness.

In his 1972 dissertation, Henk Verkuyl tried to 
demonstrated that in non-Aspect languages such 
as English,  events are construed,  i.e. bounded-
ness obtains at VP and Sentence level as a result 
of the combination of verbs belonging to particu-
lar verb classes with quantified or unquantified 
complement  or  subject  NPs.   About  the  same 
time and independently of Verkuyl,  M. Ridjan-
ovic (1969) and A.Danchev, B. Alexieva (1974) 
in their English-Serbo-Croatian and English-Bul-
garian contrastive studies, respectively, arrived at 
similar  results,  namely:  aspect markers in Eng-
lish  occupy  a  large  stretch  of  the  discourse. 
While  Ridjanovic  concentrated  on  the 
articled/non-articled  noun  phrases  as  major 
markers  of  Aspect,  Danchev/Alexieva,  pro-
cessing a large parallel corpus (20 000 file-cards 
of English Simple Past Tense sentences and their 
Bulgarian equivalents!) arrived at a much greater 
variety  of  contextual  markers.  The  authors 
ranked these as follows: adverbial phrases, verb 
semantics, subject phrase semantics, object quan-
tification.

4 Parallel  Corpora  in  the  Aspectual 
Study of English

In view of the abundance of English-Bulgarian 
or  Bulgarian-English  parallel  texts,  (mainly  in 
the  form of  TRADOS  or  Wordfast  translation 
memories,  but  also  simply  aligned  --  whether 
with tools for automatic alignment such as Win-
Align  or  computer-assisted  aligners  such  as 
MIX), the idea of using translation units and the 
aspectual values of the Bulgarian verbs to assign 
aspectual  values to  English sentences  seems to 

make sense. While a wider-scope study based on 
a set of registers from a balanced corpus is the 
ultimate task of this project,  the data presented 
below are drawn from a smaller parallel corpus 
of  fiction  texts.  Even  this  corpus,  however, 
clearly pinpoints lines of investigation and pos-
sibilities for applications of the approach.

The  Bulgarian  verbs  in  the  parallel  corpus 
were aspect-tagged with a choice of PA (perfect-
ive  aspect)  or  IA (imperfective  aspect)  values. 
Translation units containing one or the other tag 
were  asigned  to  one  of  three  sub-corpora:  an 
IAcorpus,  a  PA corpus  and a  "Mixed"  corpus, 
with  sentences  containing  both  perfective  and 
imperfective verbal  forms.  Each of  the  subcor-
pora was processed with the NBU BUILD seg-
mentation  programme,  yielding  quantitative  in-
formation.  At  a  next  stage,  concordancing was 
performed for larger segment identification.

Setting aside some 7%  verbless setences, our 
corpus yielded the following quantitative inform-
ation: appr. 31 % of the Bulgarian sentences con-
tained Imperfective verbs only; appr. 23% of the 
sentences contained perfective verbs only; appr, 
29% of the sentences contained both perfective 
and imperfective verbs, in different patterns.

4.1 Analysing the PA subcorpus

The analysis of the PA corpus quantitative data 
points to the following major PA markers in the 
English sentences:
Adverbial modifiers of time:
- when -  upon  concordancing,  found  to 

present, in about all cases, an instance of the 
relative adverbial, introducing a time clause;

- then,  now,  now  that,  before,  as (=when), 
eventually, finally, in+year (e.g. in 1984), at 
lunch,  to  begin  with, the  moment  
+subject+V.

Coordination:
- and -  as a coordinative link between event 

clauses; 
- commas - Cf. above.
Lexical meaning of the verbs:
- communication  verbs  in  the  simple  past 

tense,  esp.  admitted,  announced,  insisted,  
lied,  mumbled,  prompted,  said,  thought  (to  
myself), urged;

- phrasal  verbs:  drove away,  went  away,  sat  
down, etc.

- process verbs in the simple past tense.

4.2 Analysing the IA subcorpus

The following were  found to  be  the  major  IA 
markers in the corpus:

41



Adverbial modifiers:
- temporal  adverbials,  e.g.   still,  sometimes, 

repeatedly,  when (=  whenever,  closely fol-
lowed by would), as (= while)

- for-phrases: e.g. for a few minutes;
- do  nothing  but,  e.g.  We  did  nothing  but  

quarrel.
- adverbial modifiers of  time containing NPs 

with  attributes  pointing  to  iterative  situ-
ations, e.g. every summer.

Lexical meaning of the verb:
- link verbs, e.g. was, seemed, grew;
- extended state verbs, e.g.  know,  hope,  love, 

remember.
Subject phrase semantics:
- Subjects semantically characterised as [-An-

imate],  and  esp.  'Inalienable  property'  sub-
jects, e.g. the symmetrical limbs, her expres-
sion,  etc.  are  systematically  present  in  IA 
clauses.

4.3 Analysing the Mixed subcorpus

The most frequent patterns were found to be: IP 
(appr.9%), PI (appr. 4,5%), IPP and PPI (appr. 
2.5% for each subtype). Typical factors defining 
the "mixed" status of the sentences are: complex 
verbal  predicates,  V  +  complement  clause 
groups,  presence  of  verbs  of  communication 
(typically Perfective), presence of verbs of think-
ing  (typically  Imperfective),  Frame  and  Event 
situations. Conjunctions and complementizers, as 
markers  of  coordination and subordination,  ap-
pear high in the rank list of most "mixed" sub-
groups.

5 Conclusions

The approach not only yielded results paralleling 
closely those of Danchev and Alexieva's corpus-
based study (op. cit.) and the Stambolieva 2008 
system-based one, but also contributed interest-
ing  additional  information.  Thus, 
coordination/compounding, of which no mention 
has ever been made in previous work, was found 
in the present study to occupy an important posi-
tion in  the  hierarchy of  English contextual  PA 
markers. On the other hand, argument NP quanti-
fication was not found to hold the high-rank pos-
ition predicted by Verkuyl  (op.  cit.  and 1993). 
Concordancing elements of context occurring in 
both corpora - such as when - allows to arrive at 
structures which disambiguate them as PA or IA 
markers. Another important advantage of the ap-
proach is the possibility to obtain reliable quant-
itative information defining the hierarchy of units 

participating  in  IA or  PA-marked  predications. 
Above all,  the specialised corpus thus obtained 
can be used as valuable translation memory or 
teaching aid.

References
J.-P. Descles. 1990. 'State, Event, Process and Topo-

logy'.  In:  General  Linguistics,  vol.  29.  No.3. 
Pennsylvania, pp. 159-200. 

A, Kenny. 1963. Action, Emotion and Will. Routledge 
and Kegan Paul, London and New York.

Maslov  1984.  Ю.  С.  Маслов.  Очерки по 
аспектологии.  Издательство Ленинградского 
университета, Ленинград.

Mourelatos A. Mourelatos.  1981. 'Events,  Processes  
and States'.  In:  Syntax and Semantics. Tense and 
Aspect,  No.14.  Philip  Tedeschi,  Annie  Zaenen  
(eds.). Walter de Gruyter, Berlin and New York, 

pp. 191-212.

M.  Stambolieva.  2008.  Building  Up  Aspect.  Peter 
Lang, Oxford, Bern, New York.

Z. Vendler.  1957. 'Verbs and Times'.  In:  The Philo-
sophical Review 66, 143-160. 

H.  Verkuyl.  1972.  On the Compositional Nature of  
the Aspects. Reidel, Dordrecht.

H.  Verkuyl.  1993. A Theory of  Aspectuality.  Cam-
bridge  Studies  in  Linguistics  1964.  Cambridge 
University Press. 

42


