















































English-Chinese Personal Name Transliteration by Syllable-Based Maximum Matching


Proceedings of the 2011 Named Entities Workshop, IJCNLP 2011, pages 96–100,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 12, 2011.

English-Chinese Personal Name Transliteration by 

Syllable-Based Maximum Matching 

 

Oi Yee Kwong 

Department of Chinese, Translation and Linguistics  

City University of Hong Kong 

Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong 

Olivia.Kwong@cityu.edu.hk 

 

Abstract 

This paper reports on our participation in the 

NEWS 2011 shared task on transliteration 

generation with a syllable-based Backward 

Maximum Matching system.  The system uses 

the Onset First Principle to syllabify English 

names and align them with Chinese names. 

The bilingual lexicon containing aligned seg-

ments of various syllable lengths subsequently 

allows direct transliteration by chunks.  The 

official results suggest that our system could 

potentially be improved with a re-ranking 

module for English-to-Chinese transliteration, 

while its performance on Chinese-to-English 

back transliteration reached the state of the art. 

1 Introduction 

This paper describes our system participating in 

two tracks of the NEWS 2011 shared task on 

transliteration generation, including English-to-

Chinese transliteration (EnCh) and Chinese-to-

English back transliteration (ChEn). 

Our system is essentially a syllable-based 

Backward Maximum Matching (BMM) system, 

which works bi-directionally for EnCh and ChEn.  

The Onset First Principle in phonology was used 

to syllabify English names and align them with 

the Chinese renditions.  A bilingual lexicon con-

taining segment pairs of various syllable lengths 

was then produced from the aligned names.  This 

lexicon was subsequently used in transliteration, 

during which a source name was first syllabified 

and then segmented using BMM with syllables 

as the basic units.  Target candidates were gener-

ated by looking up the bilingual lexicon and 

ranked by unigram probabilities. 

We will briefly review related work in Section 

2, and introduce the datasets used in this study in 

Section 3.  The system will be described and its 

performance reported in Section 4, followed by 

future work and conclusion in Section 5. 

2 Related Work 

The reports of the shared task in NEWS 2009 (Li 

et al., 2009) and NEWS 2010 (Li et al., 2010) 

highlighted two particularly popular approaches 

for transliteration generation among the partici-

pating systems.  One is phrase-based statistical 

machine transliteration (e.g. Song et al., 2010; 

Finch and Sumita, 2010) and the other is Condi-

tional Random Fields which treats the task as one 

of sequence labelling (e.g. Shishtla et al., 2009).  

Besides these popular methods, for instance, 

Huang et al. (2011) used a non-parametric 

Bayesian learning approach in a recent study. 

Regarding the basic unit of transliteration, tra-

ditional systems are mostly phoneme-based (e.g. 

Knight and Graehl, 1998).  Li et al. (2004) sug-

gested a grapheme-based Joint Source-Channel 

Model within the Direct Orthographic Mapping 

framework.  Models based on characters (e.g. 

Shishtla et al., 2009), syllables (e.g. Wutiwi-

watchai and Thangthai, 2010), as well as hybrid 

units (e.g. Oh and Choi, 2005), are also seen.  In 

addition to phonetic features, others like tem-

poral, semantic, and tonal features have also 

been found useful in transliteration (e.g. Tao et 

al., 2006; Li et al., 2007; Kwong, 2009a). 

3 Datasets 

The transliteration data provided by the shared 

task organiser are mostly based on name pairs 

from Xinhua News Agency (1992).  For EnCh, 

there are 37,753 English-Chinese name pairs in 

the training set, 2,802 pairs in the development 

set, and another 2,000 English names in the test 

set. For ChEn, there are 28,678 Chinese-English 

name pairs in the training set, 2,719 pairs in the 

development set, and another 2,266 Chinese 

names in the test set.  The Chinese translitera-

tions basically correspond to Mandarin Chinese 

pronunciations of the English names, as used by 

the media in Mainland China.   

96



In the current study, we focused entirely on 

personal name transliteration.  The small propor-

tion of place names in the data was not handled.  

Most of them contain multiple English words or 

otherwise are not entirely phonemically rendered 

in Chinese (e.g. Africa 非洲, transcribed as fei1 
zhou1 in Hanyu Pinyin).  They are better dealt 

with by a specific lookup table of place names, 

but since we only participated in the standard 

runs and did not use any external resources, 

those cases were practically ignored. 

All English names are in upper case letters, 

and all occurrences of “X” were replaced by 

“KS” before processing to facilitate subsequent 

syllabification, as a single letter “X” in an Eng-

lish word often corresponds to the consonant 

cluster /ks/ when pronounced. 

4 System Description  

Our system is motivated linguistically and for 

practical reasons.  On the one hand, translitera-

tion is to render a source name in a phonemically 

similar way in a target language, and syllable is 

an important concept in pronunciation.  Accord-

ing to Ladefoged (2006), for alphabetic writing 

systems, syllables are systematically split into 

their components.  A syllable is composed of an 

optional onset containing consonants and a man-

datory rhyme.  The rhyme comprises a mandato-

ry nucleus containing vowels and an optional 

coda containing consonants.  English has com-

plex onsets and codas, whereas Mandarin Chi-

nese has simple onsets and only allows nasal 

consonants in the coda.  According to Dobro-

volsky and Katamba (1996), native speakers of 

any language intuitively know that certain words 

that come from other languages sound unusual 

and they often adjust the segment sequences of 

these words to conform to the pronunciation re-

quirements of their own language.  These intui-

tions are based on a tacit knowledge of the per-

missible syllable structures of the speaker’s own 

language.  Hence, the complex onset in the Eng-

lish syllable “STEIN” (as in Figure 1) violates 

the onset constraints in Chinese and is therefore 

resolved into two Chinese syllables as “斯坦” 
(si1 tan3).  Hence syllable is apparently the 

proper basic unit for machine transliteration. 

On the other hand, during transliteration, peo-

ple tend not to re-invent the wheel for a similar 

chunk of syllables in the source name.  The ex-

amples in Table 1 illustrate this observation.  As 

seen, “JACOB” is consistently rendered as “雅各

布” (ya3 ge4 bu4) and “STEIN” as “斯坦” (si1 

tan3) when they appear as part of different 

names.  So based on the concept of translation 

memory, if a larger chunk can be matched, trans-

literation becomes easier and less uncertain.  In 

this way, the context embedding a syllable is in-

corporated, and it might also reduce error propa-

gation in the pipeline during syllabification and 

phoneme mapping. 

With the above linguistic and practical consid-

erations, a syllable-based Maximum Matching 

approach is thus adopted, and the following sub-

sections explain the steps involved. 

 
English Chinese  Hanyu Pinyin 

JACOB 雅各布 ya3 ge4 bu4 

JACOBS 雅各布斯 ya3 ge4 bu4 si1 

JACOBSEN 雅各布森 ya3 ge4 bu4 sen1 

JACOBSTEIN 雅各布斯坦 ya3 ge4 bu4 si1 tan3 

ARENSTEIN 阿伦斯坦 a4 lun2 si1 tan3 

BARTENSTEIN 巴滕斯坦 ba1 teng2 si1 tan3 

DUBERSTEIN 杜伯斯坦 du4 bo2 si1 tan3 

Table 1.  Examples of Transliteration by Chunks 

4.1 Syllabification 

The English names in the training data and de-

velopment data were first syllabified with the 

Onset First Principle.  According to Katamba 

(1989), the principle suggests that syllable-initial 

consonants are first maximised to the extent con-

sistent with the syllable structure conditions of 

the language in question, followed by the maxi-

misation of syllable-final consonants. 

In English, written symbols do not necessarily 

bear a one-to-one relationship with phonological 

segments.  So in practice, with reference to 

common phonics patterns, we drew up a list of 

possible onsets containing graphemic units 

which may correspond to simple phonemes (e.g. 

“CH”, “TH”) or complex onsets (e.g. “PL”, 

“STR”) to be used in syllabification. 

During syllabification, all vowels were first 

marked as nucleus (N).  The longest acceptable 

consonant sequences on the left of the vowels 

were then marked as onset (O), and finally all 

remaining consonants were marked as coda (C).  

From left to right, syllables are marked for each 

longest matching chain of ONC, ON, NC, or N.  

The top half of Figure 1 illustrates these steps. 

Subsequently, the syllable chain was subject to 

sub-syllabification considering the difference in 

phonotactics between English and Chinese.  In 

particular, Chinese syllables have no complex 

onsets and only allow nasal consonants for codas.  

So if the syllabification step produces fewer Eng-

lish syllables than Chinese syllables, the sub-

97



syllabification process will try to expand the 

English syllables, with the number of syllables 

checked after each expansion.  At any point if the 

English syllables outnumber the Chinese ones, 

the sub-syllabification process will try to contract 

the English syllables. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 1.  Syllabification and Alignment 

 

The expansion process will thus follow the or-

der of precedence below: 

(1) From left to right, split up complex onsets.  

For example, “STEIN” is split up into “S/TEIN”. 

(2) From right to left, split up complex codas 

or separate coda from nucleus if the coda is not 

available in the target language.  For example, 

“COB” is sub-syllabified as “CO/B”. 

(3) From right to left, separate liquids and 

glides (“L”, “R”, “W”) from the nucleus if the 

Chinese rendition has “尔” (er3) or “夫” (fu1) in 

it.  For example, with the pair “MINKOWSKI” 

and “明科夫斯基” (ming2 ke1 fu1 si1 ji1), initial 
syllabification produces three syllables, 

“MIN/KOW/SKI”.  During sub-syllabification, 

“SKI” will be split into “S/KI” with (1) above, 

but the English side is still one syllable short.  So 

“KOW” will be split into “KO/W” in the next 

expansion. 

(4) From left to right, expand diphthongs as 

necessary.  For example, diphthongs like “IA” 

will be split up as in “A/ME/LI/A”. 

The contraction process will follow the order 

of precedence below: 

(1) Contract the name-initial “M/C”, if any, 

with the following syllable. 

(2) From right to left, contract nasals, liquids 

and glides followed by “E” with the previous 

syllable.  For example, “AALLIBONE” for “阿

利本” (a4 li4 ben3) will be initially syllabified as 
“AA/LLI/BO/NE”, which will then be contracted 

to “AA/LLI/BONE”. 

The middle part of Figure 1 illustrates the sub-

syllabification process. 

4.2 Alignment 

Upon syllabification and sub-syllabification, if 

the number of English syllables equals the num-

ber of Chinese syllables, alignment can be done 

directly in a one-to-one manner.  Otherwise some 

heuristics would be used to attempt some com-

plex alignments.  As long as Chinese syllables 

still outnumber English syllables, the next Eng-

lish syllable with four or more letters or starting 

with two different consonants will absorb two 

Chinese syllables, assuming such long segments 

are actually pronounced as two syllables.  For 

example, “A/L/THOU/SE” does not have enough 

syllables to align with its Chinese rendition “奥

尔特豪斯” (ao4 er3 te4 hao2 si1), so “THOU” 

will be forced to take up two Chinese syllables 

“特豪” (te4 hao2).  At any point, if the remain-

ing Chinese syllables fall short of English sylla-

bles, the rest will be aligned as a whole without 

further breaking into syllables.  For example, 

“YON/GE” will simply be aligned with the Chi-

nese name “扬” (yang2).  The bottom part of 

Figure 1 shows the alignment step. 

4.3 Lexicon Production 

Based on the aligned names, segment pairs of 

various syllable lengths were extracted to pro-

duce a bilingual lexicon as follows:  

   For i = 1 to n (# of aligned segment pairs) 

      For j = i to n 

         Extract segment-i to segment-j 

      Next j 

   Next i 

Hence for the aligned name in Figure 1, the fol-

lowing segment pairs will enter into the lexicon: 

JA/雅 (ya3), JACO/雅各 (ya3 ge4), JACOB/雅

各布 (ya3 ge4 bu4), JACOBS/雅各布斯 (ya3 

ge4 bu4 si1), JACOBSTEIN/雅各布斯坦 (ya3 

ge4 bu4 si1 tan3), CO/各 (ge4), COB/各布 (ge4 

bu4), COBS/各布斯 (ge4 bu4 si1), COBSTEIN/

各布斯坦 (ge4 bu4 si1 tan3), B/布 (bu4), BS/布

斯 (bu4 si1), BSTEIN/布斯坦 (bu4 si1 tan3), S/

斯 (si1), STEIN/斯坦 (si1 tan3), and TEIN/坦 

(tan3).  Note that we use “segment pairs” instead 

of “syllable pairs” here as the alignment may 

involve one or more syllables on either side. 

4.4 Backward Maximum Matching 

During transliteration, an English source name 

was first syllabified using the syllabification and 

   σ            σ                     σ 

O  N   O   N  C      O       N     C  

J   A   C   O   B   S   T   E   I   N 

   σ         σ      σ    σ           σ 

雅       各    布  斯          坦 

Syllabification 

Sub-syllabification 

Alignment 

98



sub-syllabification procedures described above, 

except the contraction part.  The name was then 

segmented using Backward Maximum Matching 

with the lexicon.  The matching was syllable-

based, unless even the shortest syllable cannot be 

matched with the lexicon.  In that case the sylla-

ble would be matched as a string of characters. 

The same procedures were applied to EnCh 

and ChEn, as the lexicon contains bilingual seg-

ment pairs, and can be looked up bi-directionally.  

Maximum Matching can be done with the Eng-

lish segments or Chinese segments accordingly.  

Chinese source names do not need particular syl-

labification as Chinese characters are syllabic. 

4.5 Candidate Generation and Ranking 

With the segmented source name, target candi-

dates were generated by looking up the lexicon 

for each segment and its rendition(s) in the target 

language.  In the current study, the candidates 

were simply ranked by unigram probabilities.  

Figure 2 shows an example of Maximum Match-

ing and candidate generation. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 2.  Max Matching and Candidate Generation 

4.6 Official Results 

Table 2 and Table 3 show the official results for 

the two standard runs we submitted and the best 

system in EnCh and ChEn respectively.  The first 

run used segment pairs with frequency two or 

above, and the second run used those with fre-

quency five or above.  The evaluation metrics 

follow the definitions in the whitepaper of the 

shared task (Zhang et al., 2011). 

The performance of our system on EnCh is in 

the mid-range, and re-ranking with n-gram fea-

tures is apparently important. For instance, VE/

夫 (fu1) is more frequent than VE/维 (wei2), but 

the former is often restricted to the end of a name.  

This would not be realised for now, unless a 

longer segment can be matched, e.g. “VELO” 

could only be matched on single syllables, so “夫

洛” (fu1 luo4) came before “维洛” (wei2 luo4), 

but “VELASCO” found a longer match with “维

拉斯科” (wei2 la1 si1 ke1) as the first candidate.  

This suggests that Maximum Matching is useful, 

but re-ranking is needed for better performance. 

ChEn is apparently more difficult, and scores 

are lower in general.  Nevertheless, our system 

came in the top three, giving even better Mean F-

score and MRR than the system with the best 

ACC.  The more severe graphemic ambiguity for 

ChEn may make it a more difficult task.  Accord-

ing to Kwong (2009b), on average one English 

segment (syllable) has 1.7 Chinese renditions but 

one Chinese character can be mapped to 10 dif-

ferent English segments.  Another major problem 

for ChEn is unseen characters and the spelling 

conventions of English or other European lan-

guages.  For example, “云” (yun2) was not found 

in the training and development data and there-

fore “云格” (yun2 ge2) could not be properly 

back transliterated.  Also, some candidates end 

up with triple consonants which are obviously 

not acceptable in English and should be avoided. 

Metric Run 1 Run 2 Best 

ACC 0.305 0.285 0.348 

Mean F-score 0.672 0.660 0.700 

MRR 0.378 0.349 0.462 

MAPref 0.297 0.276 0.342 

Table 2. Official EnCh Results on Test Data 
 

Metric Run 1 Run 2 Best 

ACC 0.155 0.154 0.167 

Mean F-score 0.766 0.757 0.765 

MRR 0.215 0.206 0.202 

MAPref 0.155 0.154 0.167 

Table 3. Official ChEn Results on Test Data 

5 Future Work and Conclusion  

Thus the performance of our approach on EnCh 

has room for improvement, possibly with a re-

ranking module, and that on ChEn is close to the 

state of the art.  Forward and Backward Maxi-

mum Matching could potentially be used togeth-

er to better handle overlapping ambiguity so as 

not to miss other possible candidates. 

Acknowledgements 

The work described in this paper was substantial-

ly supported by a grant from City University of 

Hong Kong (Project No. 7008004). 

        σ                          σ 

O   N     C         O       N     C  

M   A   R   K   S   T   E   I   N 

   σ       σ     σ   σ           σ 

马克            斯坦 

马克          施泰因 

马克          恩斯坦 

马克           茨坦 

 

Syllabification 

Sub-syllabification 

Syllable-based MM 

Candidate Generation 

99



References  

Dobrovolsky, M. and Katamba, F. (1996) Pho-

nology: the function and patterning of sounds.  

In W. O’Grady, M. Dobrovolsky and F. 

Katamba (Eds.), Contemporary Linguistics: 

An Introduction. Essex: Addison Wesley 

Longman Limited. 

Finch, A. and Sumita E. (2010) Transliteration 

using a phrase-based statistical machine trans-

lation system to re-score the output of a joint 

multigram model.  In Proceedings of NEWS 

2010, Uppsala, Sweden. 

Huang, Y., Zhang, M. and Tan, C.L. (2011) 

Nonparametric Bayesian Machine Translitera-

tion with Synchronous Adaptor Grammars.  In 

Proceedings of ACL-HLT 2011: Short Papers, 

Portland, Oregon, pp.534-539. 

Katamba, F. (1989) An Introduction to Phonolo-

gy. Essex: Longman Group UK Limited. 

Knight, K. and Graehl, J. (1998)  Machine Trans-

literation.  Computational Linguistics, 

24(4):599-612. 

Kwong, O.Y. (2009a) Homophones and Tonal 

Patterns in English-Chinese Transliteration.  

In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Con-

ference Short Papers, Singapore, pp.21-24. 

Kwong, O.Y. (2009b) Graphemic Approxima-

tion of Phonological Context for English-

Chinese Transliteration.  In Proceedings of 

NEWS 2009, Singapore, pp.186-193. 

Ladefoged, P. (2006) A Course in Phonetics. 

Thomson Wadsworth. 

Li, H., Zhang, M. and Su, J. (2004)  A Joint 

Source-Channel Model for Machine Translit-

eration.  In Proceedings of ACL 2004, Barce-

lona, Spain, pp.159-166. 

Li, H., Sim, K.C., Kuo, J-S. and Dong, M. (2007)  

Semantic Transliteration of Personal Names.  

In Proceedings of ACL 2007, Prague, Czech 

Republic, pp.120-127. 

Li, H., Kumaran, A., Pervouchine, V. and Zhang, 

M. (2009) Report of NEWS 2009 Machine 

Transliteration Shared task.  In Proceedings of 

NEWS 2009, Singapore. 

Li, H., Kumaran, A., Zhang, M. and Pervouchine, 

V. (2010) Report of NEWS 2010 Translitera-

tion Generation Shared Task.  In Proceedings 

of NEWS 2010, Uppsala, Sweden. 

Oh, J-H. and Choi, K-S. (2005)  An Ensemble of 

Grapheme and Phoneme for Machine Translit-

eration.  In R. Dale et al. (Eds.), Natural Lan-

guage Processing – IJCNLP 2005.  Springer, 

LNAI Vol. 3651, pp.451-461. 

Shishtla, P., Ganesh, V.S., Sethuramalingam, S. 

and Varma, V. (2009) A language-

independent transliteration schema using char-

acter aligned models.  In Proceedings of 

NEWS 2009, Singapore. 

Song, Y., Kit, C. and Zhao, H. (2010) Reranking 

with multiple features for better transliteration.  

In Proceedings of NEWS 2010, Uppsala, Swe-

den. 

Tao, T., Yoon, S-Y., Fister, A., Sproat, R. and 

Zhai, C. (2006)  Unsupervised Named Entity 

Transliteration Using Temporal and Phonetic 

Correlation.  In Proceedings of EMNLP 2006, 

Sydney, Australia, pp.250-257. 

Wutiwiwatchai, C. and Thangthai, A. (2010) Syl-

lable-based Thai-English Machine Translitera-

tion.  In Proceedings of NEWS 2010, Uppsala, 

Sweden, pp.66-70. 

Xinhua News Agency. (1992)  Chinese Translit-

eration of Foreign Personal Names.  The 

Commercial Press. 

Zhang, M., Kumaran, A. and Li, H. (2011) 

Whitepaper of NEWS 2011 Shared Task on 

Machine Transliteration.  In Proceedings of 

NEWS 2011, Chiang Mai, Thailand. 

 

 

100


