










































In Search of Protein Locations


Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL-HLT 2011, pages 101–102,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

In Search of Protein Locations 

Catherine Blake
1,2

 

clblake@illinois.edu 

Wu Zheng
1
 

wuzheng2@illinois.edu 
1
 Graduate School of Library and Information Science 

2
 Computer Science and Medical Information Science 

University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign, IL, USA 
 

Abstract 

We present a bootstrapping approach to infer 

new proteins, locations and protein-location 

pairs by combining UniProt seed protein-

location pairs with dependency paths from a 

large collection of text. Of the top 20 system 

proposed protein-location pairs, 18 were in 

UniProt or supported by online evidence. In-

terestingly, 3 of the top 20 locations identified 

by the system were in the UniProt description, 

but missing from the formal ontology.  

1 Introduction 

Identifying subcellular protein locations is an im-

portant problem because the protein location can 

shed light on the protein function. Our goal is to 

identify new proteins, new locations and new pro-

tein-location relationships directly from full-text 

scientific articles. As with many ontological rela-

tions, location relations can be described as a bina-

ry predicate comprising two arguments, 

Location(X, Y) indicates that X is located in Y, 

such as Location (CIC-5, luminal membrane) from 

the sentence: ClC-5 specific signal also appeared 

to be localized close to the luminal membrane of 

the intestinal crypt. 

Identifying protein subcellular locations has 

been framed as a classification task, where features 

include sequences, motifs and amino acid compo-

sition (Höglund, et al, 2006) and protein networks 

(Lee et al., 2008). The SherLoc system (Shatkay et 

al., 2007) includes text features the EpiLoc system 

(Brady & Shatkay, 2008) represents text from 

Medline abstracts as a vector of terms and uses a 

support vector machine to predict the most likely 

location for a new protein. Classification accuracy 

varies between species, locations, and datasets.  

We take an alternative strategy in this paper and 

propose a bootstrapping algorithm similar to 

(Gildea & Jurafsky, 2001). The proposed system 

builds on earlier work (Zheng & Blake, 2010) by 

considering a larger set of seed terms and by re-

moving syntactic path constraints. 

2 Approach 

The proposed bootstrapping algorithm is depicted 

in Figure 1. The system identifies lexico-syntactic 

patterns from sentences that include a given set of 

seed terms. Those the patterns are then used to in-

fer new proteins, new locations, and new protein-

location relationships. The system thus requires (a) 

an existing collection of known entity pairs that 

participate in a location relationship (called the 

seed terms) (b) a corpora of texts that report loca-

tion relationships and (c) a syntactic path represen-

tation.  

Our experiments use seed protein-location rela-

tionships from the UniProt knowledge base 

(www.uniprot.org). The complete knowledge base 

comprises more than 80,000 protein names for a 

range of species. The system uses the location and 

the location synonyms from the UniProt controlled 

vocabulary of subcellular locations and membrane 

topologies and orientations (www.uniprot.org/ 

docs/subcell release 2011_2). The system also used 

a list of protein terms that were created by identify-

ing words that immediately precede the word pro-

tein or proteins in the TREC collection. Two-thirds 

of the top 100 proteins in the TREC collection 

were used as seed terms and the remaining 1/3 

were used to evaluate system performance. 

The system was developed and evaluated using 

different subsets of the Genomics Text Retrieval 

(TREC) collection (Hersh, & Voorhees, 2009). 

Specifically 5533 articles in JBC 2002 were used 

for development and ~11,000 articles in JBC 2004 

and 2005 were used in the evaluation. 

The syntactic paths used the dependency tree 

representation produced by the Stanford Parser 

(Klein & Manning., 2003) (version 1.6.4). 

101



Figure 1 – The Bootstrapping approach used to generate new proteins, subcellular locations and 

protein location pairs. Inferred proteins and locations are depicted with a dashed line. 

3 Results 

The system identified 792 new proteins in the first 

iteration. All but 3 of the most frequent 20 proteins 

were in UniProt. All proteins in the test set were 

identified, but only 10 were in the top 100 proteins.  

The system identified just over 1,200 new pro-

tein-location pairs after the first bootstrapping step. 

We evaluated the twenty most frequent pairs. Two 

erroneous proteins in the previous step caused two 

protein-location pair errors. UniProt reported 13 of 

the remaining 18 protein-location pairs. The five 

remaining pairs, were supported by online sources 

and in sentences within the collection. 

The system identified 493 new locations after 

the second bootstrapping step and we evaluated the 

top 20. Sentences in the collection suggest that 9 of 

the new locations are in fact locations, but that they 

may not be subcellular locations and that 8 pro-

posed locations are too general. Interestingly, 3 of 

the top 20 locations identified by the system are 

mentioned in the UniProt definitions, but are not 

included in the control vocabulary as a synonym, 

which suggests the need for automated approaches 

such as this to supplement  manual efforts.  

Acknowledgments 
This material is based in part upon work sup-

ported by the National Science Foundation under 

Grant IIS-0812522. Any opinions, findings, and 

conclusions or recommendations expressed in this 

material are those of the author(s) and do not nec-

essarily reflect the views of the National Science 

Foundation. 

References 
Brady, S., & Shatkay, H. 2008. EpiLoc: a (working) 

text-based system for predicting protein subcellular 

location., Pac Symp Biocomput (pp. 604-615). 

Gildea, D., & Jurafsky, D. 2001. Automatic labeling of 

semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 99(9): 1-

43. 

Hersh, W., & Voorhees, E. (2009). TREC genomics 

special issue overview. Information Retrieval, 12(1), 

1-15. 

Höglund, A., Dönnes, P., Blum, T., Adolph, H.W., & 

Kohlbacher, O. 2006. MultiLoc: prediction of protein 

subcellular localization using N-terminal targeting 

sequences, sequence motifs and amino acid composi-

tion. Bioinformatics, 22(10):1158-1165. 

Klein, D., & Manning., C.D. 2003. In Accurate Unlexi-

calized Parsing (pp. 423-430). Paper presented at the 

In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the As-

sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL-2003). 

Lee, K., Chuang, H.-Y., Beyer, A., Sung, M.-K., Huh, 

W.-K., Lee, B., et al. 2008. Protein networks marked-

ly improve prediction of subcellular localization in 

multiple eukaryotic species. Nucleic Acids Research, 

36(20), e136. 

Shatkay, H., Höglund, A., Brady, S., Blum, T., Dönnes, 

P., & Kohlbacher, O. 2007. SherLoc: high-accuracy 

prediction of protein subcellular localization by inte-

grating text and protein sequence data Bioinformat-

ics, 23(11), 1410-1417. 

Zheng, W., & Blake, C. 2010. Bootstrapping Location 

Relations from Text. American Society for Infor-

mation Science and Technology, Pittsburgh, PA. 

Protein

Protein-subcellular 
locations

Augmented protein 
subcellular locations

TREC sentences 
with UniProt 

protein-locations Given path and 
locations find 

sentences with 
new proteins Path

Given path and 
new protein find 
sentences with 
new locations

Locations

Path

UniProt

TREC

Location

Protein

Protein 
names

Seed

102


