




















Dialect Classification in the Himalayas: a Computational Approach

Anju Saxena
Department of Linguistics and Philology

Uppsala University, Sweden
anju.saxena@lingfil.uu.se

Lars Borin
Språkbanken, Department of Swedish

University of Gothenburg, Sweden
lars.borin@svenska.gu.se

Abstract

Linguistic fieldwork data – in the form of
basic vocabulary lists – for nine closely re-
lated language varieties are compared us-
ing an automatic procedure with manual
feedback, whose major advantage is its
complete consistency. The results of the
vocabulary comparison turn out to be in
accord with other linguistic features, mak-
ing this methodology a promising addition
to the toolbox of genetic lingusitics.

1 Introduction

The aim of the work presented here is to examine
genetic relationships among nine Tibeto-Burman
varieties spoken in the Kinnaur region in India,
using a semi-automatic computational approach.
The focus in this presentation is on lexical items,
although grammatical features are also taken into
account in our work.

2 Background: Kinnauri varieties and
the language data used

The Tibeto-Burman varieties to be discussed here
are collectively referred to as Kinnauri and are
spoken1 in the Kinnaur region in the Himachal
Pradesh state in India. They belong to the West-
Himalayish sub-branch of the Tibeto-Burman lan-
guage family, which in turn forms one of the
two primary subdivisions of the Sino-Tibetan lan-
guage family. There is brief mention of some Kin-
nauri varieties in some older works (e.g., Ger-
ard 1842; Cunningham 1844). However, to date
there has not been any systematic, comparative
linguistic study of the Kinnauri varieties, and con-
sequently no systematic basis for examining how
the Tibeto-Burman varieties spoken in Kinnaur re-
late to one another.

The fieldwork to collect the data used in this
investigation was conducted in the following vil-
lages in Kinnaur: Nichar (Ni), Sangla (Sa), Chitkul
(Ch), Kalpa (Ka), Kuno (Ku), Labrang (La), Poo

1None of them have a conventional written form.

Figure 1: Villages in Kinnaur where data collec-
tion was conducted

(Po), Ropa (Ro) and Nako (Na). See figure 1. The
main motivation for selecting these villages was to
include data from as diverse geographical regions
as possible. The data comprise (i) a basic vocab-
ulary list (a revised Swadesh list; Swadesh 1955)
for all sites (242 senses); (ii) an extended IDS list
for Sangla and Nako (1884 senses);2 and (iii) se-
lected grammatical constructions.

3 Procedure for word list comparison

The procedure which we have used for comparing
the word lists here is similar to recent work in di-
alectometry (e.g., Nerbonne and Heeringa 2009)
and lexicostatistics (e.g., Holman et al. 2008) in
relying on a completely automatic comparison of
the items in the word lists. However, it differs from
most of this work – a notable exception being the
work reported on by McMahon et al. (2007) – in
its usage of rules tailored to the particular linguis-
tic configuration under investigation, rather than a
general method for string comparison. In this re-
spect, it falls somewhere in between traditional
glottochronology – where expert statements are
required about the cognacy of items – and these
modern approaches – which rely entirely on sur-
face form for determining identity of items – al-
though closer to the latter than the former.

2See <http://lingweb.eva.mpg.de/ids>. For practical
reasons, the IDS list could be collected only for two varieties,
and we chose two varieties spoken at the extreme ends of the
main river valley running through Kinnaur.

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 307–310



(a) Comparison and assignment to equivalence classes of some adjectives

(b) Comparison of all adjectives

(c) Comparison of all nouns

(d) Comparison of all words in the word list

Table 1: Some results of the comparisons

308

Anju Saxena and Lars Borin

308



The main methodological advantage of our ap-
proach is its consistency, and not as claimed for the
work just referred to, that it should be language-
independent. Instead, in our case we try to ap-
ply a principle sometimes formulated in compu-
tational linguistics as “Don’t guess if you know”
(Tapanainen and Voutilainen, 1994, 47), which
leads us to include language-specific knowledge in
the form of correspondence rules among dialects.

The following proceedure was used in this in-
vestigation, developed in collaboration between
a computational linguist (Borin) and the linguist
who collected the language data (Saxena):

• After the data collection and initial process-
ing of the data,

• a list of observations of relationships among
varieties was made by the linguist.

• This list formed the basis for developing a
set of principles for comparing the linguis-
tic correspondences in these Kinnauri vari-
eties. These were formulated by the linguist
and computational linguist together and their
purpose was to determine which segmental
differences to disregard for the purpose of
considering items in different varietes as the
same.

• The principles were encoded by the compu-
tational linguist as context-sensitive phono-
logical segment equivalence rules in a small
computer program for comparing items fully
automatically in order to achieve consistency.

• The equivalence rules were revised after in-
spection of the result, and the program run
again on the data. This process went through
a few iterations until the linguist was satisfied
with the result.

The results are indicative and sometimes subject
to revision, but interesting. They come in the form
of two kinds of tables:

• tables of individual lexical items, where
items considered the same in different vari-
eties get the same numerical index (table 1a);

• summary tables, where similarities among
all lexical items of a particular grammatical
or semantic category (nouns, kinship terms,
etc.) are shown as ratios and percentages (see
tables 1b–1d).

4 Results

The findings of this survey will be illustrated here
by focusing on the following lexical sets: adjec-
tives, nouns, numerals and all words. In table 1a,
all Swadesh list items are further identified by their
Swadesh list number added to the end of the En-

glish word and separated from the word by a slash:
small/32.

Data on adjectives are shown in tables 1a
and 1b. Yellow indicates Kinnauri varieties which
show 50% or more similarity, blue indicates 10%
or less similarity. Sangla, Nichar, Kalpa and Ropa
share a higher degree of similarity with one an-
other. Similarly, there is a higher degree of simi-
larity between Poo, Kuno and Nako. But there is
very little similarity between the varieties of the
Sangla group and the varieties of the Nako group.

Table 1c gives corresponding figures for nouns.
The numerals 1–10 in the Kinnauri varieties are

cognates to a very large extent – consistent with
the Tibeto-Burman numeral forms noted by Hod-
son (1913). For the numerals 1, 4, 7, 8 and 10 these
varieties use two distinct cognate forms: Poo,
Kuno and Nako use the same forms as noted by
Hodson (1913) for Central Tibetan, while Nichar,
Sangla, Kalpa, Ropa, Chitkul and Labrang use an-
other set of forms.3 These data, which lack of
space prevents us from showing, thus support the
pattern emerging from the comparisons that we
show here.

5 Summary and discussion

See table 1d. This comparison suggests that

1. the Kinnauri varieties on the two extremes of
this table form two separate sub-groups, re-
ferred to here as the “Sangla group” at the left
end and the “Nako group” at the right end.

2. The core members of the Sangla group are
Sangla, Nichar and Kalpa, with Ropa as a more
peripheral member. The core members of the
Nako group are Poo, Kuno and Nako. They
show a high degree of mutual similarity (mostly
more than 50%).

3. These tables also display a consistent sharp
distinction between the Sangla group and the
Nako group, where the degree of similarity be-
tween the two groups is less than 10% in most
cases.

4. Concerning the status of the remaining two va-
rieties, Chitkul and Labrang:

a. The degree of similarity between Chitkul
and Labrang is neither very high nor very
low. It is 28%

b. Concerning their relationship to the two
groups, Chitkul – much more than Labrang
– shows a relatively higher degree of simi-
larity with the Sangla group (31–37%) than
with the Nako group (6–8%).

3A similar subgrouping pattern emerges also concerning
the formation of higher numerals in the Kinnauri varieties.

309

Dialect classification in the Himalayas: a computational approach

309



Figure 2: Dialect groups according to our study

c. The status of Labrang is interesting. It shows
the highest affinity with Ropa and Chitkul
(28–29%) – even though not very high.
Labrang does not show much similarity with
either group

The systematic comparison of these linguistic
features has revealed how the various Kinnauri
varieties are similar or dissimilar to one another,
thus providing the linguistic basis for examining
the relationship among them. The results show
that the investigated varieties can be classified
into three (or possibly four) groups, where Sangla,
Nichar, Ropa and Kalpa form one group; Poo,
Kuno and Nako form another group; Chitkul and
Labrang fall somewhere in between, being (sepa-
rately) more to one or the other group concerning
some linguistic features, but distinct with regard to
other linguistic features. See figure 2.

6 Conclusions and future work

Due to restrictions of space, many details con-
cerning the data collection process, language con-
sultants, geography and demography of Kinnaur,
language contact, other investigated linguistic fea-
tures, etc., have been omitted here. These will be
described in future publications from our project.

The automatic vocabulary comparison has
yielded good results which are in accord with
other linguistic evidence for the genetic linguistic
subgrouping of the investigated Kinnauri varieties.
A clear methodological advantage is the complete
consistency of the comparison. The method will be
developed further and its relationship to other sim-
ilar work investigated, e.g., the work at Groningen
on dialectometry (Nerbonne and Heeringa, 2009)
as well as work at MPI Leipzig and elsewhere on
the theory and methodology of automated large-
scale lexicostatistics (Holman et al., 2008; Ringe,

1999; Ringe et al., 2002; Wichmann and Grant,
2010).

Acknowledgements

The research reported on here was supported by
the Swedish Research Council (the project Digital
areal linguistics 2010–2012, VR dnr 2009-1448).

References
Lieutenant J.D Cunningham. 1844. Notes on Moor-

croft’s travels in Ladakh, and on Gerard’s account of
Kunáwar, including a general description of the lat-
ter district. Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,
XIII:172–253.

Alexander Gerard. 1842. A vocabulary of the Ku-
nawar languages. Journal of the Asiatic Society of
Bengal (Calcutta, 11:478–551.

T.C. Hodson. 1913. Note on the numeral systems of
the Tibeto-Burman dialects. Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, pages
315–336, Apr.

Eric W. Holman, Søren Wichmann, Cecil H. Brown,
Viveka Velupillai, André Müller, and Dik Bakker.
2008. Explorations in automated lexicostatistics.
Folia Linguistica, 42(2):331–354.

April McMahon, Paul Heggarty, Robert McMahon, and
Warren Maguire. 2007. The sound patterns of En-
glishes: Representing phonetic similarity. English
Language and Linguistics, 11(1):113–142.

John Nerbonne and Wilbert Heeringa. 2009. Measur-
ing dialect differences. In Jürgen Erich Schmidt and
Peter Auer, editors, Language and space: Theories
and methods, pages 550–567. Mouton De Gruyter,
Berlin.

Don Ringe, Tandy Warnow, and Ann Taylor. 2002.
Indo-European and computational cladistics. Trans-
actions of the Philological Society, 100(1):59–129.

Don Ringe. 1999. How hard is it to match CVC-roots?
Transactions of the Philological Society, 97(2):213–
244.

Morris Swadesh. 1955. Towards greater accuracy
in lexicostatistic dating. International Journal of
American Linguistics, 21(2):121–137.

Pasi Tapanainen and Atro Voutilainen. 1994. Tagging
accurately – don’t guess if you know. In Proceed-
ings of the Fourth Conference on Applied Natural
Language Processing, pages 47–52, Stuttgart. ACL.

Søren Wichmann and Anthony P. Grant, editors.
2010. Quantitative approaches to linguistic diver-
sity. Commemorating the centenary of the birth of
Morris Swadesh. Benjamins. Special issue of Di-
achronica 27:2.

310

Anju Saxena and Lars Borin

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


