










































MAE and MAI: Lightweight Annotation and Adjudication Tools


Proceedings of the Fifth Law Workshop (LAW V), pages 129–133,
Portland, Oregon, 23-24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

MAE and MAI: Lightweight Annotation and Adjudication Tools

Amber Stubbs
Department of Computer Science

Brandeis University MS 018
Waltham, Massachusetts, 02454 USA
astubbs@cs.brandeis.edu

Abstract

MAE and MAI are lightweight annotation and
adjudication tools for corpus creation. DTDs
are used to define the annotation tags and at-
tributes, including extent tags, link tags, and
non-consuming tags. Both programs are writ-
ten in Java and use a stand-alone SQLite
database for storage and retrieval of annota-
tion data. Output is in stand-off XML.

1 Introduction

The use of machine learning for natural language
processing tasks has been steadily increasing over
the years: text processing challenges such as those
associated with the SemEval workshops (Erk and
Strapparava, 2010) and the I2B2 medical informat-
ics shared tasks (i2b2 team, 2011) are well known,
and tools for training and testing algorithms on cor-
pora, such as the Natural Language Tool Kit (Bird
et al., 2009) and the WEKA tools (Hall et al., 2009)
are widely used.

However, a key component for training a machine
for a task is having sufficient data for the computer
to learn from. In order to create these corpora, hu-
man researchers must define the tasks that they wish
to accomplish and find ways to encode the necessary
information, usually in some form of XML, then
have relevant data annotated with XML tags.

The necessity of corpus annotation has led to a
number of useful tools, as well as assessments for
tool usability and standards for linguistic annotation.
A recent survey (Dipper et al., 2004) examined what
attributes an annotation tool should have for it to be

most useful, and the Linguistic Annotation Frame-
work (LAF) describes the desired properties of an
annotation framework to ensure interoperability and
utility (Ide and Romary, 2006).

The Multi-purpose Annotation Environment
(MAE), and the Multi-document Adjudication
Interface (MAI) were designed to be easy to begin
using, but have enough flexibility to provide a
starting point for most annotation tasks. Both
programs are written in Java and use a stand-
alone SQLite database1 for storage and retrieval
of annotation data, and output standoff XML
that is compliant with the abstract LAF model.
Both of these tools are available from http:
//pages.cs.brandeis.edu/˜astubbs/

2 Related Work

As previously mentioned, there are already a num-
ber of annotation tools in use—Dipper et al. exam-
ined five different programs; additionally Knowta-
tor (Ogren, 2006), GATE (Cunningham et al., 2010),
Callisto (MITRE, 2002), and BAT (Verhagen, 2010)
have been used for various annotation tasks; and the
list goes on2. However, as Kaplan et al. noted in
a paper about their own annotation software, SLAT
2.0 (2010), much annotation software is not generic,
either because it was designed for a specific anno-
tation task, or designed to be used in a particular
way. BAT, for example, utilizes a layered anno-
tation framework, which allows for adjudication at
each step of the annotation process, but this makes

1http://www.zentus.com/sqlitejdbc/
2See http://annotation.exmaralda.org/index.php/Tools for a

reasonably up-to-date list of annotation software

129



tasks difficult to modify and is best suited for use
when the schema is not likely to change. GATE was
built primarily as a tool for automated annotation,
and Callisto, while excellent for annotating contigu-
ous portions of texts, cannot easily create links—
it requires the user to create an entire task-specific
plug-in. Knowtator provides links and extent tag-
ging, but comes as a plug-in for Protégé3, a level
of overhead that users may find daunting. Similarly,
the Apache UIMA system (Apache, 2006) is well
developed and supported but presents a very steep
learning curve for task creation.

As for adjudication, while some software has
built-in judgment capabilities (GATE, BAT, Know-
tator, and SLAT, for example), that functionality
does not stand alone, but rather relies on the annota-
tions being done in the same environment.

All of the tools mentioned are well-suited for their
purposes, but it seems that there is room for an anno-
tation tool that allows for reasonably complex anno-
tation tasks without requiring a lot of time for setup.

3 Simple Task Creation

One of the defining factors that Dipper et al. (2004)
identified in evaluating annotation tools is simplic-
ity of use–how long does it take to start annotating?
Upon examining various existing annotation tools,
they found that there was often a trade-off between
simplicity and data quality assurance: tools that have
an open interface and loose restrictions for tag sets
tended to have lower quality data output, while tools
that require a specification could output better data,
but took a little longer to get running.

MAE and MAI attempt to find a middle ground
between the two extremes: they require task defini-
tions in the form of slightly customized Document
Type Definition (DTD) files, which are used to de-
fine the tags and their attributes but are not difficult
to create or modify4.

There are two types of tags that are primarily used
in annotation: extent tags (sometimes called ‘seg-
ments’ (Noguchi et al., 2008)) which are used to
mark a contiguous portion of text as having a spe-
cific characteristic, and link tags, which are used to

3http://protege.stanford.edu/
4In the future, a GUI will be added to MAE that will make

the DTD creation process easier.

create a relationship between two extent tags. MAE
and MAI support both of these tag types, and addi-
tionally support non-consuming extent tags, which
can be useful for having an annotator mark explic-
itly whether or not a particular phenomena appears
in the document being annotated.

DTD creation is quite simple. If, for example, an
annotator wanted to look at nouns and mark their
types, they could define the following:

<!ELEMENT NOUN (#PCDATA)>
<!ATTLIST NOUN type

(person|place|thing|other)>

The “#PCDATA” in the first line informs the soft-
ware that NOUN is an extent tag, and the second
line gives NOUN an attribute called “type”, with the
possible values defined in the list in parenthesis.

Creating a link is equally simple:

<!ELEMENT ACTION EMPTY >
<!ATTLIST ACTION relationship

(performs|performed_by)>

The “EMPTY” marker indicates that the tag is a
link, and the attributes and attribute values work the
same way as for extent tags.

4 MAE

Once the DTD is created and files are preprocessed,
the user loads the DTD and a file into MAE. The
text to be annotated appears in the window, and a
window at the bottom of the screen holds a table
for each tag (see Figure 1). When a user selects
an extent and creates a tag, some information about
the tag is automatically added to the table: the start
and end locations of the tag, and the text of the ex-
tent. Additionally, MAE will automatically generate
a document-unique ID number for that tag so that it
can easily be referenced in links.

The user can then add in any information about
the attributes by filling in the table at the bottom of
the screen. In the text window, the color of the ex-
tent that has been tagged is changed to the color as-
sociated with that tag. If there are multiple tags in a
location, the text is underlined as well. Highlighting
tagged text in the window will also highlight any ta-
ble rows associated with that tag, including link tags.
This makes it easy for the annotator to see what in-
formation has already been added about that text.

130



Figure 1: TimeML annotation in MAE.

Non-consuming tags are created from the menu at
the top of the screen. Links are created by holding
down the control key (or the command key on Macs)
and clicking on the two tags that will be linked. A
window pops up that allows the user to link either
to the tags at the specified locations, or to any non-
consuming tags that have been created in the docu-
ment.

5 Output

Once the user is done annotating, they can save their
work in an XML file. MAE outputs (and takes as in-
put) UTF-8 encoded files, so it can be used to anno-
tate any character set that is representable in UTF-8,
including Chinese. The output is compliant with the
LAF guidelines (Ide and Romary, 2006).

5.1 System testing

MAE is currently being used for a variety of annota-
tion tasks: medical record annotation, eligibility cri-
teria assessment, and for a university course on cor-
pus creation. Annotation tasks in that course range
from opinion annotation to tense and aspect in Chi-
nese verbs. It is currently being used on Windows,
Mac, and Linux.

6 MAI

MAI is built on the same back-end code as MAE,
making them easily compatible. Like MAE, using
MAI begins with loading a DTD. Then the adjudi-
cator can load each annotation of a text that they
would like to create a gold standard for. As each
new document is added, MAI loads the tag informa-
tion for each annotation into the database for quick
reference.

Once all the files are loaded, the adjudicator se-
lects the tag they want to review from the left part
of the screen. The text is then color-coded to reflect
the agreement of the annotators: blue if all the anno-
tators agree that a tag of the selected type should be
at a location, red if only a subset would place a tag
there, and black for locations where no tag is present
(see Figure 2).

When text is highlighted by the adjudicator, the
information about each annotator’s tag and attributes
for that location is filled in on a table to the right of
the screen. From there, the annotator can either fill
in the values for the gold standard by hand, or copy
the values from one annotator directly into the gold
standard column and modifying them as needed.
Once the adjudicator is satisfied with the gold stan-
dard they can add the annotation to the database by

131



Figure 2: The extent adjudication table in MAI

clicking the “accept/modify” button at the bottom of
the gold standard column. At this point, MAI will
generate a new ID for that tag, and the color of the
adjudicated font will become green.

At the time of this writing, the algorithms for link
and non-consuming tag adjudication have not been
fully worked out for use inside of MAI. However,
once the extent tags have been adjudicated, the an-
notator can choose to export the non-consuming tags
and link tags that involve “approved” extent tags
into an XML file, along with the adjudicated ex-
tents. This partially-judged file can then be loaded
into MAE, where it is easier to display and modify
all the relevant information.

6.1 System testing

As with MAE, MAI has been used for the various
annotation projects for a course on corpus creation,
as well as a medical record annotation task. This
program is still under development, but so far adju-
dications tasks with MAI have proved successful.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

While MAE and MAI do not represent a new fron-
tier in annotation software, I believe that their ease
of use, portability, and clean visualization will make
them useful tools for annotation projects that do not
want to invest in the time required to use other exist-

ing software, and for adjudicators that want an easy
way to fix discrepancies between annotators. Admit-
tedly, tasks involving heirarchical annotations would
require one of the more sophisticated tools that are
currently available, but there are still many tasks that
do not require that level of complexity that MAE and
MAI can be used for.

There is room for improvement in both of these
programs: fully implementing link adjudication in
MAI, allowing for more customization in the visu-
alizations would make them more enjoyable to use,
and expanding the functionality to make them more
useful for more tasks (for example, allowing links
with multiple anchors instead of just two). Both
MAE and MAI are under development, and im-
provements to both will be made over the coming
months.

Acknowledgments

Funding for this project development was provided
by NIH grant NIHR21LM009633-02, PI: James
Pustejovsky

Many thanks to the annotators who helped me
identify bugs in the software, particularly Cornelia
Parkes, Cheryl Keenan, BJ Harshfield, and all the
students in the Brandeis University Spring 2011
Computer Science 216 class.

132



References
Apache. 2006. Unstructured information management

architecture. http://uima.apache.org/.
Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009. Nat-

ural Language Processing with Python. O’Reilly Me-
dia Inc, Sebastopol, CA, first edition edition.

Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, Kalina
Bontcheva, Valentin Tablan, Niraj Aswani, and
Ian Roberts, 2010. Developing Language Processing
Components with GATE, 5 edition, July.

Stefanie Dipper, Michael Götze, and Manfred Stede.
2004. Simple annotation tools for complex annota-
tion tasks: an evaluation. In Proceedings of the LREC
Workshop on XML-based Richly Annotated Corpora,
pages 54–62, Lisbon, Portugal.

Katrin Erk and Carlo Strapparava. 2010. Semeval-2.
http://semeval2.fbk.eu/semeval2.php.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: An update.
SIGKDD Explorations, 11(1).

i2b2 team. 2011. i2b2 shared task.
https://www.i2b2.org/NLP/Coreference/Main.php.
accessed Feb. 2011.

Nancy Ide and Laurent Romary. 2006. Representing lin-
guistic corpora and their annotations. In Proceedings
of the Fifth Language Resources and Evaluation Con-
ference (LREC.

Dain Kaplan, Ryu Iida, and Takenobu Tokunaga. 2010.
Slat 2.0: Corpus construction and annotation process
management. In Proceedings of the 16th Annual Meet-
ing of The Association for Natural Language Process-
ing, pages pp.510 – 513.

MITRE. 2002. Callisto website.
http://callisto.mitre.org/index.html. accessed Dec. 17,
2010.

Masaki Noguchi, Kenta Miyoshi, Takenobu Tokunaga,
Ryu Iida, Mamoru Komachi, and Kentaro Inui. 2008.
Multiple purpose annotation using slat - segment and
link-based annotation tool -. In Proceedings of 2nd
Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages pp.61 – 64.

Philip V. Ogren. 2006. Knowtator: a protégé plug-in
for annotated corpus construction. In Proceedings of
the 2006 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics on
Human Language Technology, pages 273–275, Mor-
ristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Marc Verhagen. 2010. The brandeis annotation tool.
In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair), Khalid
Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Jan Odijk,
Stelios Piperidis, Mike Rosner, and Daniel Tapias,
editors, Proceedings of the Seventh conference on

International Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10), Valletta, Malta, may. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).

133


