



















































Sharing Resources in CLARIN-NL


Proceedings of Workshop on Language Resources, Technology and Services in the Sharing Paradigm, pages 98–106,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 12, 2011.

Sharing Resources in CLARIN-NL 

 

 

Jan Odijk 

Utrecht University 

Trans 10, 3512 JK Utrecht,  

The Netherlands 

j.odijk@uu.nl 

Arjan van Hessen 

Twente and Utrecht Universities 

Trans 10, 3512 JK Utrecht,  

The Netherlands 

A.J.vanhessen@uu.nl  

 

  

 

Abstract 

Sharing resources in a systematic way is es-

sential for conducting high quality scientific 

research but it imposes requirements on the 

documentation, visibility, referability, accessi-

bility, and long term preservation of these re-

sources. Sharing resources only makes sense 

when others can actually use them, which im-

poses requirements of interoperability on re-

sources. In this paper we describe how the 

CLARIN-NL project addresses these issues in 

order to maximize sharing of resources. We 

submit that the approach taken in CLARIN-

NL is an exemplary approach that deserves 

adoption by other research communities, pos-

sibly slightly adapted to their own needs and 

requirements. 

1 Introduction 

Sharing resources in a systematic way is essen-

tial for conducting high quality research but im-

poses requirements on the documentation, visi-

bility, referability, accessibility, and long term 

preservation of these resources. Sharing re-

sources only makes sense when others can actu-

ally use them, which imposes requirements of 

interoperability on resources. We understand the 

notion resources here in a broad sense, including 

not only data, but also software, including appli-

cations and web services. In this paper we de-

scribe how the CLARIN-NL project addresses 

these issues in order to maximize sharing of re-

sources. We submit that the approach taken in 

CLARIN-NL is an exemplary approach that de-

serves adoption by other research communities, 

possibly slightly adapted to their own needs and 

requirements. 

This paper is organized as follows. We first 

briefly discuss the CLARIN-NL project (§2) and 

some of the subprojects and activities relevant to 

sharing resources it undertakes. Next we discuss 

each of the requirements for optimal sharing, and 

how they are worked on in the CLARIN-NL pro-

ject: documentation (§3), visibility (§4), refer-

ability (§5), accessibility (§6), long term preser-

vation (§7), and interoperability (§8). We end the 

paper with our conclusions (§9). 

2 The CLARIN-NL Project 

The CLARIN-NL project
1
 (Odijk 2010) is a na-

tional project in the Netherlands that aims to de-

sign, construct, validate, and exploit a research 

infrastructure that is needed to provide a sustain-

able and persistent eScience working environ-

ment for researchers in the Humanities, and Lin-

guistics in particular, who want to make use of 

language resources and technology for their re-

search. The targeted users include researchers 

and developers of Human Language Technology 

(HLT), since they are largely part of the humani-

ties in the Netherlands. The use of HLT will play 

an important role in the CLARIN infrastructure, 

but this infrastructure is not specifically dedi-

cated to research into and development of HLT. 

This is one of the characteristics distinguishing 

the CLARIN infrastructure from e.g. META-

SHARE (Piperidis 2010), the resource exchange 

facility being constructed in the context of the 

META-NET project.
2
 

Since the targeted users are humanities re-

searchers, the character of the resources differs 

widely, but their common denominator is that 

they have a language component. The data re-

sources include dictionaries, text corpora, lin-

guistic databases, audio and video containing 

speech, in a wide variety of languages, images of 

historical manuscripts, their transcriptions and 

annotations. The software resources include lan-

                                                 
1 www.clarin.nl/  
2 www.meta-net.eu/  

98



guage technology software for spelling normali-

zation, morphological analysis, lemmatization, 

PoS-tagging, chunking, parsing, semantic anno-

tation, named entity recognition, sentiment and 

opinion mining. On the speech side they include 

speech recognition software for transcribing 

speech or aligning speech with a transcript, diari-

sation software for isolating speech from non-

speech sounds in an audio file (e.g. as part of an 

tool for annotating audio/video files created dur-

ing linguistic field work). They also include a 

wide range of tools for manually annotating 

texts, audio and video. 

The CLARIN-NL project is part of a Europe-

wide enterprise to set up an infrastructure. This 

was initiated by the just finished CLARIN pre-

paratory project (CLARIN-prep
3
) and is to be 

continued by a consortium of national projects 

united at the European level in the so-called 

CLARIN ERIC
4
 expected to start early 2012. 

The Netherlands played an important role in 

CLARIN-prep, and the CLARIN ERIC is hosted 

by the Netherlands. 

In the remainder of this section we describe 

the activities organized by CLARIN-NL that are 

relevant to the topic of sharing resources.
5
 

2.1 Infrastructure implementation 

CLARIN-NL will build the infrastructure 

through so-called CLARIN-Centres. Five organi-

sations have expressed the ambition and the 

commitment to become such a CLARIN Centre, 

i.e. INL
6

, MPI
7

, MI
8

, Huygens ING
9

 and 

DANS
10

. They are all organizations that include 

making resources accessible in their mission. 

Candidate CLARIN Centres must meet several 

requirements before they will be recognized as 

actual CLARIN Centres. Several of these re-

quirements will be described in this paper. A full 

list can be found in (Roorda et al. 2010). 

The CLARIN Centres in the Netherlands work 

together in a number of projects to implement the 

technical infrastructure. This requires, inter alia, 

setting up authentication and authorizations sys-

tems, several registries, and various other infra-

                                                 
3
 www.clarin.eu  

4 ec.europa.eu/research/infrastructures/index_en.cfm?-

pg=eric  
5 See www.clarin.nl/node/76 for a more detailed overview. 
6 Institute for Dutch Lexicology www.inl.nl  
7 Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics www.mpi.nl  
8 Meertens Institute www.meertens.knaw.nl/  
9 www.huygensinstituut.knaw.nl/  
10 Data Archiving and Networked Services 

www.dans.knaw.nl/  

structure services. Especially relevant for sharing 

resources is the project to implement sophisti-

cated search facilities in metadata and data to 

complement the browsing functionality for 

which a prototype (the Virtual Language Obser-

vatory, VLO
11

) was developed in CLARIN-prep. 

2.2 Data curation projects 

CLARIN-NL has set up a range of data curation 

projects, and will set up more in the course of 

2011. The goal of a data curation project is to 

adapt an existing data set in such a way that it 

becomes properly documented, visible, uniquely 

referable and accessible via the CLARIN infra-

structure. In addition, the format of the resource 

must be adapted to a standard supported in 

CLARIN, and the data categories used must be 

described in a data category registry. In short, 

these projects are aimed at making it optimally 

possible and useful to share the resource with 

other researchers. 

In order to speed up the process of data cura-

tion and in order to include resources where the 

owner/researcher does not wish to submit a pro-

ject proposal or the resource is too small to jus-

tify a data curation project, a Data Curation Ser-

vice is being set up and targeted to start in Sep-

tember 2011.
12

 

2.3 Demonstrator projects 

CLARIN-NL has also set up a range of demon-

strator projects. The goal of a demonstrator pro-

ject is to create a documented web application 

starting from an existing tool or application that 

can be used as a demonstrator and function as a 

showcase of the functionality that CLARIN will 

offer. Though the main goal is to make a demon-

strator, in practice it requires curating the tool or 

application, so that it becomes properly docu-

mented, visible, uniquely referable and accessi-

ble via the CLARIN infrastructure, and adapting 

it to work with CLARIN-supported standards 

both with regard to formats as well as with re-

gard to the meaning of the data categories used. 

In a collaborative project with Flanders the fo-

cus is even more on curating the tools and appli-

cations. In this project, existing language and 

speech technology tools for the Dutch language 

(shared between the Netherlands and Flanders), 

which were largely developed in the STEVIN 

programme
13

, are turned into web services that 

                                                 
11 www.clarin.eu/vlo/  
12 www.clarin.nl/node/147  
13 taalunieversum.org/taal/technologie/stevin/  

99



can be used in a workflow system. This is only 

possible if the web services are properly docu-

mented, visible, uniquely referable and accessi-

ble via the CLARIN infrastructure, and if they 

operate on formats and work with data categories 

that are supported in CLARIN. 

In short, these projects contribute directly to 

optimal sharing of tools and applications with 

other researchers in the CLARIN infrastructure. 

2.4 Education and Training 

Adapting resources so that they become docu-

mented, visible, uniquely referable and accessi-

ble, and comply with CLARIN-supported stan-

dards both on the formal and on the semantic 

level is a non-trivial task. The average humani-

ties researcher does not have the knowledge and 

expertise to carry out such tasks completely in-

dependently. Therefore, education, training and 

support are needed. CLARIN-NL has organized 

various tutorials and workshops on relevant top-

ics such as metadata and the CLARIN metadata 

infrastructure, and data categories and data cate-

gory registries. It has set up a HelpDesk
14

 to deal 

with technical questions on infrastructural mat-

ters, including a Frequently Asked Questions 

section, and appointed infrastructure specialists 

as second-line support. 

3 Documentation 

The first step in making a resource suited for 

sharing is to provide documentation of the re-

source. Even if a resource is not going to be 

shared, documenting it is required to guarantee 

that the resource can still be understood long af-

ter its development. So, documentation is a ne-

cessity for sharing but requires no or only limited 

additional effort. 

Some parts of the documentation will have to 

consist of natural language text that is intended 

for human beings, for example a description of 

the design decisions in developing the resource. 

However, other parts of the documentation can 

be formalized. For example, certain properties of 

a resource can be systematically assigned to a 

fixed label (attribute), the possible values of each 

attribute can be characterized by a type, and in 

some cases the possible values of an attribute can 

even be restricted to a finite set or be constrained 

otherwise (e.g. by a template). In our view, all 

information of the documentation of a resource 

that can be formalized should be formalized, 

                                                 
14 trac.clarin.nl/trac  

since a formalized representation encodes the 

information in the least ambiguous way (natural 

language is notorious for its ambiguity), and 

maximizes the potential for use of this informa-

tion by software processes. Furthermore, this 

formalized documentation should be represented 

in a uniform manner. In CLARIN-NL, we have 

used and further extended the CLARIN Compo-

nent-based Metadata Infrastructure (CMDI) 

originally developed in CLARIN-prep (§3.2). 

3.1 Metadata 

The term metadata is on the one hand very 

broad. Within a dataset usually a part can be 

characterized as the “primary data”, and meta-

data then covers all data except the primary data, 

including annotations, formalized documenta-

tion, unformalized documentation, aggregate sta-

tistics on the resource, etc. That is such a broad 

notion, that it may hamper mutual understanding. 

On the other hand, the name metadata (lit. „data 

about data‟) suggests too narrow an interpreta-

tion, since we also need documentation (formal-

ized and unformalized) for software. We will 

therefore try to avoid the term metadata here. 

We assume that each dataset contains a set of 

“primary data” and a set of additional data with 

information on the primary data (which we will 

call annotations). Certain pieces of primary data 

and annotations form a natural unit (following in 

part from the nature of the data and/or the pur-

poses of the data). We will call such a unit a re-

source. Multiple resources can be organized in 

composite resources recursively. A description of 

a resource is called a resource description. 

CMDI has mainly been developed for the for-

malized parts of resource descriptions. The term 

resource description is also more appropriate 

than the term metadata for resources that consist 

of software (e.g. applications, web services, 

command line tools, etc.) 

3.2 CMDI 

CMDI
15

 is a flexible metadata infrastructure 

which enables the researcher to use a compo-

nent-based approach to resource descriptions. 

Because it is component-based, it does not re-

quire a single rigid scheme, something that is not 

feasible given the wide variety of resources 

CLARIN-NL has to deal with. The meaning of 

the resource description elements and its values 

is encoded by linking the data categories used to 

                                                 
15 www.clarin.eu/cmdi  

100



a data category registry, which will be discussed 

in more detail in §8.2. 

CMDI enables the researcher to make a re-

source description profile for a class of re-

sources. Such a profile is composed of compo-

nents recursively. This makes it possible to de-

fine small components that can be reused easily 

and provides the required flexibility for making 

resource descriptions while at the same time 

maximizing uniformity where this is possible. 

CMDI provides editors for components, profiles 

and resource descriptions, and a registry for stor-

ing new instances of such objects and finding 

existing ones for reuse. 

CMDI has metadata elements that correspond 

to the Dublin Core
16

 metadata elements also in 

use by OLAC
17

 and is therefore fully compatible 

with Dublin Core but it allows for much more 

fine-grained metadata descriptions. 

Providing flexibility entails the danger that 

different researchers will diverge in making re-

source descriptions even when there is no reason 

to do so, e.g. because they are working on re-

source descriptions independently. In order to 

prevent this and to offer maximum opportunities 

for reuse of profiles and components, CLARIN-

NL started a project with a small team of special-

ists to make initial components and profiles for a 

wide variety of resources in the Netherlands. The 

researchers in the data curation and demonstrator 

projects, which started later, could therefore 

maximally reuse components and profiles cre-

ated by this specialist team and optimally profit 

from the knowledge and expertise gained by this 

team. Unfortunately, such components and pro-

files were made only for data, not for software. 

So, a set of components and profiles that can be 

reused for describing software is urgently 

needed, as was clear from several data curation 

and demonstrator projects. A project to do ex-

actly that is therefore planned for 2011. 

Creating resource descriptions in accordance 

with CMDI for each relevant resource was a re-

quirement for data curation and demonstrator 

projects. Therefore, an initial obstacle for sharing 

these resources in the CLARIN infrastructure has 

been overcome. The Data Curation Service will 

increase the number of resources with proper 

resource descriptions, and we already noticed 

that research projects unrelated to CLARIN-NL 

as well as several data providers are willing to 

provide CLARIN compatible resource descrip-

                                                 
16 http://dublincore.org/  
17 http://www.language-archives.org/  

tions for data they produce and/or make avail-

able. 

4 Visibility 

All resources and resource descriptions dealt 

with in a CLARIN-NL project must be stored on 

a server of a CLARIN-centre. CLARIN-centres 

are obliged to make the resource descriptions for 

these resources and for resources they have 

available from other sources available for har-

vesting (using a standardized protocol, OAI-

PMH
18

). In the CLARIN infrastructure all re-

source descriptions are harvested regularly and 

made available via a central CLARIN portal. 

This ensures the visibility of the resources and 

the resource descriptions. Researchers only have 

to visit the CLARIN portal to find the resources 

they are looking for and are not dependent any-

more of knowledge about resources via informal 

contacts, accidental encounters or effort-wasting 

search actions via the web or systematic visits of 

the catalogues of resource distribution centres. 

The CLARIN portal will offer various oppor-

tunities for finding the resources one is interested 

in. This includes browsing facilities with faceted 

browsing, of which a first prototype developed in 

the CLARIN preparatory project is available 

(VLO, see above). It also includes facilities to 

search in the resource descriptions, not only with 

a Google-style string search but also with struc-

tured search that takes into account the resource 

description XML syntax and the semantics of the 

resource description elements and their values. It 

also includes search in the actual resources. 

However, the actual resources will be distributed 

over the various CLARIN-centres. Searching in 

the actual resources will therefore be carried out 

via federated search. Results of search queries 

can be collected and stored as a Virtual Collec-

tion, to which new, possibly more refined search 

queries can be applied. 

Many CLARIN-supported standard formats 

for written resources consist of tagged text (e.g. 

XML). Searching in many (tagged) textual re-

sources is generally not possible with computers 

in a reasonable amount of time. This problem 

will not disappear when computers are increasing 

in capacity every two years (as Moore’s Law
19

 

appears to implicate), since (1) many problems 

are inherently intractable and solutions can only 

be approximated, and (2) the amount of data 

grows at least as fast and very likely orders of 

                                                 
18 www.openarchives.org/OAI/openarchivesprotocol.html  
19 en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore's_law  

101



magnitude faster. So even though Moore‟s Law 

may be true, it is also true and much more rele-

vant that computers are slow
20

 and getting slower 

every two years. 

Fortunately, smart people have found smart 

ways to avoid the computer‟s slowness to a sig-

nificant extent by a range of techniques. How-

ever, this requires storing the information con-

tained in the tagged textual data in special for-

mats in database systems (e.g. relational data-

bases) and/or adding various indexes. In the cen-

tral portal, the resource descriptions harvested 

from the various CLARIN centres will therefore 

also be stored in a way that makes fast searching 

and browsing possible. For the actual resources, 

federated search will issue search queries to local 

search engines for individual resources at the 

CLARIN-centres, where the local search will 

also take place on resources formatted and stored 

in a way that optimizes search. 

In this way, visibility of the resources and 

their resource descriptions will be ensured. 

5 Referability 

There must be a simple way to refer to resources 

and resource descriptions. This is needed for 

humans (so that they know exactly which re-

source or resource description has been used in a 

particular research project), but also for ma-

chines. The search engines mentioned in the pre-

ceding section cannot work properly if they have 

no way of uniquely referring to resources and 

resource descriptions. 

Natural Language One way of referring to a 

resource is by using a name or title for a resource 

in natural language (e.g. the title of a novel, arti-

cle, etc.). This method is not suited for the pur-

poses of CLARIN because it has all the disad-

vantages that natural language has as a means of 

communication. First, such names do not always 

refer to a unique resource (ambiguity). Names 

are often language-specific (e.g. Corpus Gespro-

ken Nederlands), which leads to variants of the 

name in other languages (e.g. Spoken Dutch 

Corpus) (language-dependency). Furthermore, 

names and titles are typically long, which is in-

convenient. But more importantly, names and 

titles are highly redundant. A little bit of redun-

dancy is good for communication, but natural 

language has too much redundancy. This leads to 

                                                 
20 Where a computer is “slow” when the user has to wait an 

unacceptable amount of time for the computer‟s response. 

What is “unacceptable” may differ per application or 

circumstances.  

shorter versions of the name (e.g. acronyms such 

as CGN), and to sloppiness with human users: 

typos (Spken Dutch Cropus) or changes in order 

(Dutch Spoken Corpus) are perhaps sometimes 

intelligible for humans but not (without special 

software) for computers. 

URLs URLs are sometimes used to refer to 

resources and resource descriptions. URLs avoid 

most of the problems with natural language de-

scriptions (though they tend to have too much 

redundancy) and have the additional advantage 

that they immediately specify where to find the 

resource. A big disadvantage of URLs, however, 

is that they are quite unstable and volatile (URLs 

are often changed or disappear completely). 

PIDs What is needed is a means of referring 

that is not based on natural language, is a short as 

possible, has at most very little redundancy, and 

is stable. Persistent Identifiers (PIDs) have been 

proposed for this, accompanied by services to 

map from names/titles and/or URLs to PIDs and 

vice versa (resolution systems). PIDs are usually 

strings of digits and or letters. Familiar examples 

are ISBN numbers
21

 for books and EAN numbers 

for products.
22

 

A CLARIN-Centre must assign PIDs to the re-

sources and resource descriptions it makes avail-

able. In CLARIN (and thus in CLARIN-NL) the 

preferred PID system is the Handle system
23

, 

since it currently offers the most robust and best 

performing PID resolution system. Some centres, 

however, used the URN system
24

 already before 

CLARIN started, and it is being investigated how 

this can be accommodated in the best way. Fur-

thermore, there are also other PID systems
25

 

which may have to be accommodated. 

The fact that CLARIN centres in the Nether-

lands assign a PID to each resource and resource 

description and offer the associated resolution 

services again take a way an obstacle for optimal 

and efficient sharing of resources. 

6 Accessibility 

The CLARIN infrastructure is a virtual web-

based distributed infrastructure. The resources 

and resource descriptions are therefore accessible 

at virtually any time and from any place (with 

                                                 
21 www.isbn-international.org/  
22 en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Article_Num-

ber_(EAN) 
23 /www.handle.net/  
24 www.w3.org/2001/tag/doc/URNsAndRegistries-50  
25 E.g. the DOI system: www.doi.org/  

102



internet access
26

). Accessibility of the resources 

and resource descriptions for this aspect of ac-

cess is therefore taken care of pretty well in 

CLARIN. 

However, there are two other aspects of ac-

cess: (2) intellectual property rights (IPR) and 

ethical issues, and (3) the attitude of researchers 

towards sharing resources. 

IPR CLARIN-NL promotes maximal open 

access of resources. It has issued a declaration on 

this matter
27

 and had discussions about it at vari-

ous occasions.
28

 Important research organizations 

such as the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts 

and Sciences (KNAW) and the Dutch foundation 

for Scientific Research (NWO) also stimulate or 

even require open access to results of scientific 

research, esp. data and tools.
29

 

CLARIN-NL realizes that there are many leg-

acy data with legacy IPR arrangements that also 

need to be accommodated in the CLARIN infra-

structure. This may involve special licenses, in 

some cases even license fees, restrictions on the 

usage of resources, limited periods of inaccessi-

bility of the resource, etc. In all resources, ethical 

issues (e.g. privacy concerns) may play a role as 

well, restricting the usage of certain (parts of) 

resources. Problems of this nature have actually 

been encountered in the data curation projects. In 

one case it has led to a clear separation of the 

resources (and resource descriptions) that are 

freely accessible on the hand, and the resources 

and resource descriptions for which additional 

licenses are required on the other. In a second 

case, the participants in the resource have been 

approached again to clear these matters (success-

fully). CLARIN-NL is working on plans to im-

plement policies and functionality to properly 

handle IPR and ethical restrictions. For some 

centres, these could be extensions of existing 

                                                 
26 This might be an obstacle for certain researchers, e.g. 

descriptive linguists doing field research in remote locations 

with no internet access. Functionality that enables one to 

work off-line and replicate off-line data and tools with the 

on-line CLARIN infrastructure are therefore desirable, and 

some applications in CLARIN already have this 

functionality.  
27 www.clarin.nl/system/files/Call%20Open%20-

Data%20English%20101018.pdf  
28 For example at the Open and Persistent Access Panel 

Discussion at SDH/NEERI 2011, Vienna, see 

ztwweb.trans.univie.ac.at/sdh2010/  
29 See www.knaw.nl/Pages/DEF/29/838.bGFuZz1F-

Tkc.html for the KNAW and www.nwo.nl/nwohome.-

nsf/pages/NWOP_89BBXM_Eng for NWO 

systems (e.g. DANS has the EASY system
30

 and 

soon its successor EASY II
31

). 

Mindset A third aspect related to accessibility 

is the mindset of researchers. Many researchers 

in the humanities are hesitant or even unwilling 

to share their resources with others.
32

 There is 

therefore a big task for CLARIN-NL to discuss 

these matters, listen carefully what arguments are 

adduced against sharing resources, counter these 

arguments where appropriate and promote 

maximal open access, e.g. by illustrating the 

great potential offered by sharing resources. In 

some cases, arguments against sharing must be 

accommodated (because they are reasonable ob-

jections), and CLARIN-NL has done so already 

in its declaration. CLARIN-NL also supports 

researchers (logistically, organizationally, finan-

cially and by means of training and education) to 

enable them to share their resources. 

In short, CLARIN-NL has developed a range 

of policies and facilities to maximize accessibil-

ity of resources and resource descriptions for a 

range of aspects of this term, thus directly con-

tributing to optimal sharing of resources. 

7 Long term preservation 

Resources should be shared not only with con-

temporary researchers, but also with future gen-

eration researchers. This makes it necessary to 

carry out long term preservation of resources. In 

CLARIN-NL, each CLARIN centre is required 

to provide a solution for the long term preserva-

tion of the resources they maintain. Usually the 

centres in the Netherlands do not carry out this 

long term preservation themselves but make use 

of centres dedicated to it. For example, MI out-

sources this to DANS, and the MPI outsources it 

to the organization within the Max Planck Ge-

sellschaft dealing with long term preservation. 

The requirement for long term preservation of 

resources imposed on the CLARIN centres thus 

makes it possible to preserve the resources and 

share them with future generation researchers. 

8 Interoperability 

Resources can be used by other researchers only 

if they are interoperable. Interoperability is thus a 

necessary condition for resource sharing to be 

useful. 

                                                 
30 https://easy.dans.knaw.nl/dms  
31   
32 Though I understand from representatives from other 

disciplines that the Humanities are not unique in this 

respect. 

103



Interoperability of resources is the ability of 

resources to seamlessly work together. The need 

for interoperability of resources is more stringent 

in CLARIN than in other domains, since the tar-

geted users, humanities researchers, usually do 

not have the technical skills to make ad-hoc con-

versions and adaptations to make resources work 

together. But of course, even for HLT research-

ers and developers, full interoperability will save 

a lot of (often duplicated) effort for ad-hoc re-

adjustment of resources to make them interoper-

able. 

Full interoperability is only possible if the re-

sources meet the requirements (1) of formal or 

syntactic interoperability and (2) of meaning or 

semantic interoperability. Projects in CLARIN-

NL must attempt to meet these requirements, and 

report when problems for achieving this arise. In 

this way we learn about the limitations of various 

proposed standards and can make proposals to 

deal with them and make suggestions for im-

proved standards and best practices. We will dis-

cuss syntactic and semantic interoperability in 

more detail in the next subsections, 

8.1 Syntactic Interoperability 

Syntactic interoperability in CLARIN is the re-

quirement that the formats of data are selected 

from a limited set of (de facto) standards or best 

practices supported by CLARIN, and that soft-

ware tools and applications take input and yield 

output in these formats. A list of the formats cur-

rently supported is provided by CLARIN.
33

 

Though currently this list is in a fixed document, 

it is evident that experience is teaching us that 

the list is incomplete and needs constant refine-

ment and updating. 

Applying the recommended standards and best 

practices is not easy. In many projects we have 

found that many standards are not fully applica-

ble to existing data and need adaptations. For 

example, the DUELME database of Dutch mul-

tiword expressions (Grégoire 2010a) which was 

represented in an idiosyncratic format was con-

verted to an XML format in accordance with the 

Lexical Markup Framework (LMF).
34

 But the 

new representation requires properties that are 

not covered by LMF and should be considered as 

candidate extensions to LMF (Grégoire 2010b). 

Many resources are stored in relational databases 

or Excel files. No format supported by CLARIN 

                                                 
33 www.clarin.eu/system/files/Standards%20for%20LRT-

v6.pdf  
34 www.lexicalmarkupframework.org/  

can accommodate such data. The CSV format is 

mentioned but not explicitly recommended. An 

XML format implementing (a set of) CSV files 

using XML markup may have to be developed 

here. Such a format will also be able to provide 

facilities for semantic interoperability of such 

resources not offered by the CSV format. 

Nevertheless, the only way to make any pro-

gress towards syntactic interoperability is by try-

ing out the supported formats with existing data, 

learning about their opportunities and limitations, 

making concrete proposals to deal with these 

limitations and constructive proposals for exten-

sions and/or adaptations of the standardized for-

mat. And this is exactly what CLARIN-NL is 

doing in a wide variety of projects and for a wide 

variety of data, including lexical databases, text 

corpora with various levels of annotations, audio 

and video data with their annotations, typological 

and other linguistic databases, and for a variety 

of tools and applications, inter alia data-specific 

search engines, part-of-speech taggers, lemma-

tizers, parsers, speech technology tools for rec-

ognition, alignment and diarisation, and many 

others. 

Resource descriptions play a crucial role in 

ensuring syntactic interoperability. The resource 

description of a data resource should specify, in 

quite some detail, the format of the resource, and 

the resource description of a software resource 

should specify, in quite some detail, which for-

mat(s) it accepts as input and which one(s) it 

yields as output. Such specifications will prevent 

a non-technical user from applying software to 

data it is not suited for or warn the users for the 

limited validity of the results (e.g. textual re-

sources with the wrong character encoding; a 

desktop speech recognizer applied to telephone 

speech, etc.) 

By actively trying out the recommended stan-

dards and best practices for syntactic interopera-

bility CLARIN-NL contributes directly to ena-

bling sharing of resources and it makes the prob-

lems that arise with this explicit so that evidence-

based recommendations can be made for exten-

sions and adaptations. 

8.2 Semantic Interoperability 

Semantic interoperability of resources requires 

explicit semantics of elements in their contents 

(in the case of data) or interface (in the case of 

software). In CLARIN, the semantics of ele-

ments of resources is limited to the semantics of 

data categories (DCs). The basic idea is that the 

semantics of DCs is captured as follows: a privi-

104



leged data category registry (DCR) is set up con-

taining (inter alia) DCs, unique persistent identi-

fiers for DCs (PIDs), their semantics, a defini-

tion, examples and lexicalizations in various lan-

guages. The semantics of each data category 

(DC) used in a specific resource must be speci-

fied by mapping this resource-specific DC to a 

DC from the privileged DCR. This enables every 

researcher to use resource-specific DCs but at the 

same time guarantees that different DCs from 

different resources can be interpreted in the same 

way, via the DC of the privileged DCR, which 

acts as a pivot. 

In CLARIN, ISOCAT
35

 is used as one of the 

privileged DCRs.
36

 In each CLARIN-NL project, 

all resource-specific data categories must be 

mapped to ISOCAT DCs, or, when no DC with 

the right interpretation exists, a new DC must be 

added to ISOCAT. ISOCAT can incorporate re-

sults of independent initiatives for defining DCs, 

and it actually incorporates a subset of the 

GOLD ontology
37

 for linguistic description. 

An example may illustrate how this could be 

useful. A search engine searching for occur-

rences of strings that are annotated for the ISO-

CAT DC Part of Speech
38

 with as value the 

ISOCAT DC noun
39

 will also find occurrences of 

data with resource-specific DCs Substantiv, Nom 

or ZN, if these resource-specific DCs have been 

mapped onto the ISOCAT DC Noun. 

Achieving semantic interoperability is not 

easy, and even with the ISOCAT data category 

registry many problems arise once one really 

starts doing this. It would require a separate pa-

per to discuss this in more detail, but such prob-

lems have been noted, have been discussed in 

workshops,
40

 and for most problems solutions 

have been proposed in these workshops, includ-

ing the set-up of a different registry to register 

relations between DCs, called RELCAT (Wind-

                                                 
35 www.isocat.org/  
36 CLARIN supports multiple preferred DCRs if they are 

complementary. For example, CLARIN supports the use of 

ISO639 language codes contained in a different DCR 

(www.sil.org/iso639-3/codes.asp ). In CLARIN-NL a 

project (CLAVAS) has started up to create a common 

interface to multiple DCRs. 
37 http://linguistics-ontology.org/  
38 More precisely, the ISOCAT DC with PID 

www.isocat.org/datcat/DC-396 
39 More precisely, the ISOCAT DC with PID 

www.isocat.org/datcat/DC-1333 
40 For example in the CLARIN Relation Registry 

Workshop, 8 Jan 2010 (www.isocat.org/2010-RR/) and in 

the CLARIN-NL ISOCAT Workshop, 21 Sep 2010 

(www.isocat.org/2010-ISOcat-status/), both at MPI, 

Nijmegen. 

houwer 2011), and the proposed solutions are 

currently being tested. 

However, one can only encounter such prob-

lems, and make progress in solving them, when 

one actually systematically attempts to achieve 

semantic interoperability for real resources. That 

is exactly what is being done in CLARIN-NL, 

and by doing so, CLARIN-NL contributes to 

optimizing the use of shared resources. 

9 Conclusions 

In this paper we have described how the 

CLARIN-NL project addresses crucial issues for 

maximizing the sharing of resources. We have 

described how CLARIN-NL addresses documen-

tation, visibility, referability, accessibility, and 

long term preservation of the resources, as well 

as syntactic and semantic interoperability. None 

of adopted solutions is without problems, but it is 

only by systematically working on them that any 

progress can be made on these topics. And that is 

exactly what is being done in CLARIN-NL. We 

submit that the approach taken in CLARIN-NL 

is an exemplary approach that deserves adoption 

by other research communities, possibly slightly 

adapted to their own needs and requirements. 

 

Acknowledgments 
This work was funded by the NWO CLARIN-NL 

project. (www.clarin.nl). 

References 

Nicole Grégoire. 2010a. DuELME: A Dutch Elec-

tronic Lexicon of Multiword Expressions. Journal 

of Language Resources and Evaluation 44(1/2), 

23-40. DOI 10.1007/s10579-009-9094-z 

Nicole Grégoire. 2010b. En Garde Project. The redes-

ign of a Dutch Electronic Lexicon of Multiword 

Expressions. Presentation held at the workshop 

Lexicon Tools en Standards, August 4, 2010, Max 

Planck Institute, Nijmegen. [pdf] 

Jan Odijk. 2010. The CLARIN-NL Project. Proceed-

ings of LREC 2010: 48-53. [pdf] 

Dirk Roorda et al. 2009. CLARIN Centres. CLARIN 

Document. [pdf]. 

Stelios Piperidis. 2010. META-SHARE. Presentation 

held at the LREC 2010 Workshop on Language 

Technology issues for International Cooperation, 

Malta, 22 May 2010. [pdf] 

Menzo Windhouwer. ISOcat. Presentation at the 

Standards Workshop (NEERI 09), Helsinki, 

Finland, September 30, 2009. [pdf] 

105



Menzo Windhouwer. 2011. RELCAT and Friends. 

Presentation held at the CLARIN-NL ISOCAT 

Workshop, Utrecht, 5 May 2011. [pdf] 

106


