










































Using Manual and Parallel Aligned Corpora for Machine Translation Services within an On-line Content Management System


Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing, pages 53–58,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 12-14 September 2011.

Using Manual and Parallel Aligned Corpora for Machine Translation

Services within an On-line Content Management System

Cristina Vertan

University of Hamburg
cristina.vertan@uni-hamburg.de

Monica Gavrila

University of Hamburg
gavrila@informatik.

uni-hamburg.de

Abstract

Web content management systems
(WCMSs) are a popular instrument for
gathering, navigating and assessing infor-
mation in environments such as Digital
Libraries or e-Learning. Such environ-
ments are characterized not only through
a critical amount of documents, but also
by their domain heterogeneity, relative
to format, domain or date of production,
and their multilingual character. Methods
from Information and Language Technol-
ogy are the “plug-ins” necessary to any
WCMS in order to ensure a proper func-
tionality, given the features mentioned
above. Among these “plug-ins”, machine
translation (MT) is a key component,
which enables translation of meta-data
and content either for the user or for other
components of the WCMS (i.e. cross-
lingual retrieval component). However,
the MT task is extremely challenging
and lacks frequently the availability of
adequate training data. In this paper
we will present a WCMS including ma-
chine translation, explain the related MT
challenges, and discuss the employment
of corpora as training material, which
are manually and automatically parallel
aligned.

1 Introduction

During the last couple of years, the number of ap-
plications which are entirely Web-based or offer
at least some Web front-ends has grown dramati-
cally. As a response to the need of managing all
this data, a new type of systems appeared: the
web-content management systems. In this article
we will refer to this type of systems as WCMS.
Existent WCMSs focus on storage of documents

in databases and provide mostly full-text search
functionalities. These types of systems have lim-
ited applicability, due to reasons such as the fol-
lowing:

• data available on-line is often multilingual;

• documents within a content management sys-
tem (CMS) are semantically related (share
some common knowledge or belong to simi-
lar topics).

Shortly, currently available CMSs do not exploit
modern techniques from information technology
like text mining, semantic web or machine trans-
lation.

The recently launched ICT PSP EU project AT-
LAS (Applied Technology for Language-Aided
CMS1) aims to fill in this gap by providing three
innovative Web services within a WCMS. These
three Web services (i-Librarian, EUDocLib and i-
Publisher) are not only thematically different, but
also offer different levels of intelligent information
processing.

The ATLAS WCMS makes use of state-of-the-
art text technology methods in order to extract in-
formation and cluster documents according to a
given hierarchy. A text summarization module and
a machine translation engine, as well as a cross-
lingual semantic search engine are embedded. The
system is addressing for the moment seven lan-
guages (Bulgarian, Croatian, English, German,
Greek, Polish and Romanian) from four different
language families. However, the chosen frame-
work allows additions of new languages at a later
point.

Machine Translation is a key component of the
ATLAS-WCMS and it will be embedded in all
three services of the system. The development of
the engine is particularly challenging as the trans-
lation should be used in different domains and on

1
http://www.atlasproject.eu.

53



different text-genres. Additionally, the considered
language-pairs belong most of them to the lesser
resourced group of languages, for which bilingual
training and test material is available only in lim-
ited amount.

The availability of adequate and comparable
training data for all language pairs in the ATLAS
system played an important role in the architec-
tural design of the MT-engine. The selection of
training data was preceded by experiments on se-
lected language pairs. Through these experiments
we intended to investigate if small parallel corpora
can be also used and with which implications on
the translation quality. We investigated addition-
ally the automatic (sentence) alignment in larger
corpora in order to understand which implications
alignment errors may have on the translation pro-
cess.

In the following sections we report about our
findings as follows: in Section 2 we present briefly
the ATLAS functionality and describe the corre-
sponding challenges for the machine translation
engine. In section 3 we present the data we used
for experiments and analyze it from the linguis-
tic point of view. Section 4 deals with experi-
ments which investigate the dependency between
the amount of the training data and the translation
quality. Section 5 gives an overview of future ex-
periments and implementation steps.

2 MT-challenges in the ATLAS-System

2.1 The ATLAS-System

The core on-line service of the ATLAS platform
is i-Publisher, a powerful Web-based instrument
for creating, running and managing content-driven
Web sites. It integrates language-based technolo-
gies to improve content navigation e.g. by in-
terlinking documents based on extracted phrases,
words and names, providing short summaries
and suggested categorization concepts. Currently
two different thematic content-driven Web sites
are being built on top of ATLAS platform, us-
ing i-Publisher as content management layer: i-
Librarian and EUDocLib. i-Librarian is intended
to be a user-oriented web site which allows vis-
itors to maintain a personal workspace for stor-
ing, sharing and publishing various types of doc-
uments and have them automatically categorized
into appropriate subject categories, summarized
and annotated with important words, phrases and
names. EUDocLib is planned as a publicly acces-

Figure 1: The iLibrarian Architecture

sible repository of EU legal documents from the
EUR-Lex collection with enhanced navigation and
multilingual access. All three services operate in
the multilingual setting described in Section 1. To
justify the need of embedded language technology
tools within the ATLAS platform we detail here
only the functionalities of i-Librarian.

The i-Librarian service (see Figure 2.1):

• addresses the needs of authors, students,
young researchers and readers,

• gives the ability to easily create, organize and
publish various types of documents,

• allows users to find similar documents in
different languages, to share personal works
with other people, and to locate the most es-
sential texts from large collections of unfa-
miliar documents.

The facilities described above are supported
through intelligent language technology compo-
nents like automatic classification, named en-
tity recognition and information extraction, auto-
matic text summarization, machine translation and
cross-lingual retrieval. These components are in-
tegrated into the system in a brick-like architec-
ture, which means that each component is built
on top of the other. The baseline brick is the
language processing chains component which en-
sure a heterogeneous linguistic processing of all
documents independent of their language (Ogrod-
niczuk, 2011). A processing chain for a given
language includes a number of existing tools, ad-
justed and (or) fine-tuned to ensure their interop-
erability. In most respects a language processing
chain does not require development of new soft-
ware modules, but rather combining existing tools.

With respect to the machine translation en-
gine the language processing tools provide the

54



part-of-speech (PoS) annotation necessary for fac-
tored models and ensure named entity recognition.
Other bricks of the ATLAS architecture feed infor-
mation into the translation engine as follows:

1. the document categorization gives informa-
tion about the domain of a particular docu-
ment;

2. the automatic summarization deals with
anaphora resolutions and pre-processes the
document in order to simplify the translation
task.

2.2 Challenges of the MT-Task

The machine translation (MT) engine is integrated
in two distinct ways into the ATLAS platform:

• the MT-engine is serving as a translation aid
tool for publishing multilingual content for i-
Publisher. Text is submitted to the translation
engine and the result is subject to the human
post processing;

• for i-Librarian and EuDocLib, the MT-engine
provides a translation for assimilation, which
means that the user retrieving documents in
different languages will use the engine in or-
der to get a clue about the documents, and
decide if he wants to store them. If the trans-
lation is considered as acceptable, it will be
stored into a database.

The integration of a machine translation en-
gine into a web based content management sys-
tem, presents from the user point of view two main
challenges:

• the user may retrieve documents from differ-
ent domains. Domain adaptability is a major
issue in machine translation, and in particular
in corpus-based methods. Poor lexical cov-
erage and false disambiguation are the main
issues when translating documents out of the
training domain;

• the user may retrieve documents from various
time periods. As language changes over time,
language technology tools developed for the
modern languages do not work, or perform
with higher error rate, on diachronic docu-
ments.

With the current available technology it is not
possible to provide a translation system which is

Figure 2: Available parallel corpora for all lan-
guage pairs within the ATLAS system.

domain and language variation independent and
works for a couple of heterogeneous language
pairs. Therefore our approach envisage a system
of user guidance, so that the availability and the
foreseen system-performance is transparent at any
time.

From the development point of view the main
challenge is provided by the high number of lan-
guage pairs2, most of them involving languages
with rich morphology and belonging to structural
different language families. For most of the lan-
guage pairs a limited number of parallel aligned
corpora are available. Additionally, the ATLAS
platform should provide a basic comparable func-
tionality for all language pair, so we cannot train
models for different language pairs on completely
different corpora.

After collecting information regarding parallel
corpora for all involved language pairs, we de-
cided to focus the development of basic training
models on those summarized in Figure 2.23.

It can be observed that with exception of Croa-
tian, for all other involved languages the JRC-
Acquis4 corpus offers a good training basis (cov-
erage and size). In order to ensure domain porta-
bility we decided to train domain factored models
as in (Niehues and Waibel, 2010). This approach
allows the usage of small domain specific corpora.
Small corpora have the advantage that they can be
manually aligned, or at least manually corrected.
In order to see how the translation engine behaves
when exposed to large but automatically trained
corpora and to small but manually aligned texts,
we performed several analyses described in sec-

2More than 40 language-pairs.
3We do not consider in this table the recent additions from

February 4th, 2011 concerning the Europarl corpus.
4
http://optima.jrc.it/Acquis/.

55



tion 4.

3 Manually Aligned Small Corpora vs.

Automatically Aligned Large Corpora

We decided to make selective experiments on cor-
pora involving following language pairs: English,
Romanian and German. Our choice is based on the
availability of human evaluators speaking all three
languages, but also by the fact that the languages
belong to structural different families (Romania is
in the Latin language family, English and German
are Germanic languages). Additionally Romanian
and German are highly inflected.

3.1 JRC-Acquis

The JRC-Acquis Communautaire is nowadays one
of the mostly used parallel aligned corpus for
training models in statistical machine translation
(Koehn et al., 2009). We do not make here
an extensive presentation of the SMT system but
present in Table 1 and 2 just a comparative statis-
tics on the three selected languages5. From these
tables we can infer that the size of the training ma-
terial has large variations across different language
pairs within the JRC-Acquis.

Language pair No. of documents No. of links

German-Romanian 6558 docs 391972 links
German-English 23430 docs 1264043 links
English-Romanian 6557 docs 391334 links

Table 2: JRC-Acquis alignment statistics
(docs=documents).

The corpus is automatically paragraph-aligned,
where a paragraph is a simple or complex sentence
or a sub-sentential phrase (such as noun-phrase).

3.2 RoGER

RoGER (Romanian German English, Russian) is
a parallel corpus, manually aligned at sentence
level. It is domain-restricted, as the texts are from
a users’ manual of an electronic device. The lan-
guages included in the development of this corpus
are Romanian, English, German and Russian. The
corpus was manually compiled. It is not annotated
and diacritics are ignored. The corpus was man-
ually verified: the translations and the (sentence)
alignments were manually corrected.

The initial PDF-files of the manual were auto-
matically transformed into text files (.RTF), where

5Information source: http://wt.jrc.it/lt/
Acquis/JRC-Acquis.3.0/.

pictures were either left out (pictures around the
text), or replaced with text (pictures inside the
text). The initial text was preprocessed by replac-
ing numbers, websites and images with “meta-
notions” as follows: numbers by NUM, pictures
by PICT and websites by WWWSITE. In order
to simplify the translation process, some abbrevi-
ations were expanded. The sentences were man-
ually aligned, first for groups of two languages.
This way we obtained two alignment files. Finally,
the two alignment files obtained were merged,
so that, after all, RoGER contained all four lan-
guages. The merged text files are XML encoded,
as shown below:

<?xml version=’’1.0’’

encoding=’’UTF-8’’?>

<sentences>

................

<sentence id=’’1010’’>

<en>Press Options and some of the

following options may be available

.</en>

<de>Druecken Sie Optionen . und

einige der folgenden Optionen sind ggf.

verfuegbar .</de>

<ro>Apasati Optiuni dupa care unele din

urmatoarele optiuni pot fi disponibile

.</ro>

<ru>...</ru>

</sentence>

......................

</sentences>

The corpus contains 2333 sentences for each
language. More statistical data about the corpus is
presented in Table 3. The average sentence length
is eleven tokens for English, Romanian and Ger-
man and nine for Russian. Punctuation signs are
considered tokens. More about the RoGER corpus
can found in (Gavrila and Elita, 2006)

3.3 Linguistic Analysis of the Corpora

From both corpora we randomly extracted about
100 sentences, i.e. 100 sentences from the JRC-
Acquis corpus for Romanian-English and 100 sen-
tences from the RoGER corpus and the same lan-
guage pair and direction of translation. These sen-
tences were analyzed with respect to translation
divergences and translation mismatches.

Translation divergence means that the same in-
formation appears in both SL and TL, but the
structure of the sentence is different. Translation

56



Language No. texts No. words No. words No. words Total no. words

(Text body) (Signatures) (Annexes) (Whole document)
German 23541 32059892 2542149 16327611 50929652
English 23545 34588383 3198766 17750761 55537910
Romanian 6573 9186947 514296 11185842 20887085
(version 1)
Romanian 19211 30832212 - - 30832212
(version 2)

Table 1: JRC-Acquis statistics.

Feature English Romanian German Russian

No. tokens 26096 25850 27142 22383
Vocabulary size 2012 3104 3031 3883
Vocabulary 1231 1575 1698 1904
(Word-frequency higher than two)

Table 3: Statistics on RoGER.

divergences are presented in the literature in (Dorr
et al., 1999) and (Dorr, 1994). In the case of a
translation mismatch the information that can be
extracted from the SL and TL sentence is not the
same. Translation mismatches have received less
attention in the literature (Kameyama et al., 1991),
but for corpus-based approaches they are impor-
tant, as they directly influence the translation pro-
cess.

Following translation challenges were observed
within the JRC-Acquis:

• Divergences

– Noun (NN) - adjective (Adj) inversion
– Noun-Preposition-Noun (NN-prep-NN)

translated as adjective-Noun (Adj- NN)
– Subordinate clause translated as adjec-

tive
– Different argument structure
– Different type of articles
– Voice change (for verbs)

• Mismatches

– Extra information (the TL sentence is
more explicit than the SL one)

– Reformulations

• Wrong translation (due to incorrect align-
ment)

All these phenomena have a direct (negative) in-
fluence on the automatic evaluation scores. Al-
though the corpus is domain restricted, the like-
lihood of at least one divergence or mismatch
type occurring in a sentence is high. Only in ap-
proximately 10% of the sentences no phenomenon

was encountered. As we encountered totally
wrong translations in the corpus, it shows that the
(paragraph-) alignments in JRC-Acquis are not al-
ways correct.

We also analyzed 100 sentences from the center
of the RoGER corpus. We noticed that the diver-
sity of the challenges is reduced, while the num-
ber of challenges is sometimes higher compared to
what had been encountered in JRC-Acquis, with
up to five challenges in an example (a sentence
and its translation). Usually there is a one-to-one
translation. Only in 12% of cases additional infor-
mation appeared for one of the languages and in
only 9% reformulations have been used. Two phe-
nomena have been found most often: NN-prep-
NN translated as NN-NN (or Adj-NN) and Adj-
NN inversions.

3.4 JRC-Acquis vs. RoGER

The average number of challenges in JRC-Acquis
(1.89 challenges per sentences) is lower than
the average number in RoGER (2.20 challenges
per sentence) for the languages analyzed. How-
ever, challenges with a more negative impact on
the translation quality (such as “Wrong transla-
tion”or “Reformulations”) appear more frequently
in JRC-Acquis. The phenomenon encountered
more often for the language-pair analyzed is noun-
adjective inversions.

4 Implications on the Design of the

MT-Engine in ATLAS

The MT-Engine within the ATLAS System fol-
lows the hybrid approach combining a statistical
based component and an example-based one. Both
approaches are highly dependent from the quality

57



and size of the training data The linguistic analysis
above shows that both corpora present translation
challenges which influence negative any further
automatic processing. Therefore we argue that
small domain specific corpora should be aligned
manually at sentence level, or at least the align-
ment has to be checked manually.

Additional experiments presented in (Gavrila
and Vertan., 2011) shown that using ROGER as
training and test corpus, the performance of the
system does not decrease dramatically. Our ex-
planation relies on the linguistic observations in
Section 3. The linguistic challenges are balanced
by the manual alignment. In this way the corpus,
although small has a more correct sentence align-
ment which triggers a more correct word align-
ment.

These experiments lead to the conclusion that
for the ATLAS-System:

• JRC-Acquis will be used as basis training
corpus, without making an manual correc-
tions. This is impossible by the size of the
corpus

• Small domain specific corpora will be first
manually aligned at sentence level and after-
wards injected in domain factored models.

5 Conclusion and Further Work

In this paper we described the integration of a ma-
chine translation engine within a WCMS system,
dealing with a large number of less resourced lan-
guages. We investigated the linguistic characteris-
tics of two parallel corpora and show how these in-
fluence the translation quality. Further work con-
cerns a statistical relevant analysis of the linguistic
phenomena presented in Section 3, involving other
manually built corpora and other language-pairs.

Acknowledgments

The present work contains ideas from the AT-
LAS EU-Project, supported through the ICT-PSP-
Programme of the EU-Commission (Topic “Multi-
lingual Web”)(Sections 2 and 4) and from Monica
Gavrila’s Ph.D research conducted at the Univer-
sity of Hamburg (Section 3).

References

Bonnie J. Dorr, Pamela W. Jordan, and John W. Benoit.
1999. A survey of current paradigms in machine
translation. Advances in Computers, 49:2–68.

Bonnie J. Dorr. 1994. Machine translation diver-
gences: A formal description and proposed solution.
Computational Linguistics, 20(4):597–633, Decem-
ber.

Monica Gavrila and Natalia Elita. 2006. Roger -
un corpus paralel aliniat. In In Resurse Lingvistice
şi Instrumente pentru Prelucrarea Limbii Române
Workshop Proceedings, pages 63–67, 63-67, De-
cember. Workshop held in November 2006, Pub-
lisher: Ed. Univ. Alexandru Ioan Cuza, ISBN: 978-
973-703-208-9.

Monica Gavrila and Cristina Vertan. 2011. Training
data in statistical machine translation - the more, the
better? In Proceedings of the RANLP-2011 Confer-
ence, Hissar, Bulgaria, September.

Megumi Kameyama, Ryo Ochitani, and Stanley Pe-
ters. 1991. Resolving translation mismatches with
information flow. In Proceedings of the 29th an-
nual meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, ACL ’91, pages 193–200, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn, Alexandra Birch, and Ralf Steinberger.
2009. 462 machine translation systems for europe.
In Proceedings of the MT Summit XII, pages 65–72,
Ottawa, Canada, August.

Jan Niehues and Alex Waibel. 2010. Domain adapta-
tion in statistical machine translation using factored
translation models. In Proceedings of EAMT 2010,
Saint-Raphael.

Maciej Ogrodniczuk. 2011. I-publisher, i-librarian and
eudoclib linguistic services for the web. In Proceed-
ings of the PALC 2011 Conference.

58


