










































Semantic Clustering: an Attempt to Identify Multiword Expressions in Bengali


Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from Parsing and Generation to the Real World (MWE 2011), pages 8–13,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 23 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Semantic Clustering: an Attempt to Identify Multiword Expressions in 
Bengali 

Tanmoy Chakraborty        Dipankar Das        Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 

Jadavpur University, Kolkata 700 032, India 
its_tanmoy@yahoo.co.in, dipankar.dipnil2005@gmail.com  

sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.com 
 

Abstract 

One of the key issues in both natural lan-
guage understanding and generation is the 
appropriate processing of Multiword Ex-
pressions (MWEs). MWE can be defined 
as a semantic issue of a phrase where the 
meaning of the phrase may not be obtained 
from its constituents in a straightforward 
manner. This paper presents an approach of 
identifying bigram noun-noun MWEs from 
a medium-size Bengali corpus by cluster-
ing the semantically related nouns and in-
corporating a vector space model for 
similarity measurement. Additional inclu-
sion of the English WordNet::Similarity 
module also improves the results consider-
ably. The present approach also contributes 
to locate clusters of the synonymous noun 
words present in a document. Experimental 
results draw a satisfactory conclusion after 
analyzing the Precision, Recall and F-score 
values.  

1 Introduction 
Over the past two decades or so, Multi-Word Ex-
pressions (MWEs) have been identified with an 
increasing amount of interest in the field of Com-
putational linguistics and Natural Language 
Processing (NLP). The term MWE is used to refer 
the various types of linguistic units and expres-
sions including idioms (kick the bucket, ‘to die’), 
noun compounds (village community), phrasal 
verbs (find out, ‘search’) and other habitual collo-
cations like conjunction (as well as), institutiona-
lized phrases (many thanks) etc. They can also be 
grossly defined as “idiosyncratic interpretations 
that cross the word boundaries” (Sag et al., 2002).  

MWE is considered as a special issue of seman-
tics where the individual components of an expres-
sion often fail to keep their meanings intact within 
the actual meaning of the expression. This opaque-
ness in meaning may be partial or total depending 
on the degree of compositionality of the whole ex-
pression. In Bengali, an analogous scenario can be 
observed when dealing with the expressions like 
compound nouns (taser ghar, ‘house of cards’, 
‘fragile’), complex predicates such as conjunct 
verbs (anuvab kara, ‘to feel’) and compound verbs 
(uthe para, ‘to arise’), idioms (matir manus, ‘down 
to the earth’), Named Entities (NEs) (Rabindra-
nath Thakur, ‘Rabindranath Tagore’) etc.  

In this paper, we analyze MWEs from the pers-
pective of semantic interpretation. We have fo-
cused mainly on the fact that the individual 
meanings of the components are totally or partially 
diminished in order to form the actual semantics of 
the expression. A constellation technique has been 
employed to group all nouns that are somehow 
related to the meaning of the component of any 
expression in the corpus and hence to build cluster 
for that component. Two types of vector space 
based similarity techniques are applied to make a 
binary classification of the candidate nouns. The 
intuition was that more the similarity of the com-
ponents of an expression, less the probability of the 
candidate to become a MWE. We have also shown 
the results using WordNet::Similarity module.  

The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. In the next section, we review the related 
work on MWE and graph-clustering approach for 
detecting compositionality. Section 3 proposes a 
brief description of the semantic clustering ap-
proach. The system framework is elaborated in 
Section 4. Experimental results and the various 
observations derived from our research are dis-
cussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes 
the paper. 

8



2 Related Work 
A number of research activities regarding MWE 
identification have been carried out in various lan-
guages like English, German and many other Eu-
ropean languages. The statistical co-occurrence 
measurements such as Mutual Information (MI) 
(Church and Hans, 1990), Log-Likelihood (Dun-
ning, 1993) and Salience (Kilgarriff and Rosenz-
weig, 2000) have been suggested for identification 
of MWEs. An unsupervised graph-based algorithm 
to detect the compositionality of MWEs has been 
proposed in (Korkontzelos and Manandhar 2009). 

In case of Indian languages, an approach in 
compound noun MWE extraction (Kunchukuttan 
and Damani, 2008) and a classification based ap-
proach for Noun-Verb collocations (Venkatapathy 
and Joshi, 2009) have been reported. In Bengali, 
the works on automated extraction of MWEs are 
limited in number. One method of automatic ex-
traction of Noun-Verb MWE in Bengali (Agarwal 
et al., 2004) has been carried out using significance 
function. In contrast, we have proposed a cluster-
ing technique to identify Bengali MWEs using se-
mantic similarity measurement. It is worth noting 
that the conducted experiments are useful for iden-
tifying MWEs for the electronically resource con-
strained languages.   

3 Semantic Clustering Approach 
Semantic clustering aims to cluster semantically 
related tokens present in a document. Identifying 
semantically related words for a particular token is 
carried out by looking the surrounding tokens and 
finding the synonymous words within a fixed con-
text window. Statistical idiomaticity demands fre-
quent occurrence of a particular expression as one 
or few occurrences of a particular word cannot in-
fer all its meaning. However, the semantics of a 
word may be obtained by analyzing its similarity 
sets called synset.  Higher value of the similarity 
coefficient between two synonymous sets of the 
multi-word components indicates more affinity of 
the components to each other.  

For individual component of a bigram expres-
sion, semantically related words of the documents 
are extracted by using a monolingual dictionary (as 
discussed in Section 4.4). Count of elements in an 
intersection of two synsets indicates the commo-
nality of the two sets and its absolute value stands 

for their commonality measure. Considering the 
common elements as the dimensions of the vector 
space, similarity based techniques are applied to 
measure the semantic affection of the two compo-
nents present in a bigram. 

4 System Framework 
4.1 Corpus Preparation and Candidate Selec-

tion 
The system uses a large number of Bengali articles 
written by the noted Indian Nobel laureate Rabin-
dranath Tagore 1 . We are primarily interested in 
single document term affinity rather than document 
information and document length normalization. 
Merging all of the articles, a medium size raw cor-
pus consisting of 393,985 tokens and 283,533 
types has been prepared. Basic pre-processing of 
the crawled corpus is followed by parsing with the 
help of an open source shallow parser2 developed 
for Bengali. Parts-of-Speech (POS), chunk, root, 
inflection and other morphological information for 
each token have been retrieved. Bigram noun se-
quence within a noun chunk is extracted and 
treated as candidates based on their POS, chunk 
categories and the heuristics described as follows.   

1. POS:   POS of each token is either ‘NN’ or         
‘NNP’ 

2. Chunk: w1 and w2 must be in the same ‘NP’   
chunk 

3. Inflection: Inflection 3  of w1 must be                
‘-    ন ’(null), ‘-র’(-r), ‘-এর’(-er), ‘-
এ’(-e), ‘-য়’(-y) or ‘- য়র’(-yr) and for 
w2, any inflection is considered. 

4.2 Dictionary Restructuring 
To the best of our knowledge, no full-fledged 
WordNet resource is available for Bengali. Hence, 
the building of Bengali synsets from a monolingual 
Bengali dictionary not only aims to identify the 
meaning of a token, but also sets up the framework 
towards the development of Bengali WordNet. 
Each word present in the monolingual dictionary 
(Samsada Bengali Abhidhana)4 contains its POS, 

                                                        
1 http://www.rabindra-rachanabali.nltr.org 
2  http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/analyzer/bengali 
3  Linguistic study (Chattopadhyay, 1992) reveals that for 
compound noun MWE, considerable inflections of first noun 
are only those which are mentioned above. 
4  http://dsal.uchicago.edu/dictionaries/biswas-bangala/ 

9



phonetics and synonymous sets. An automatic 
technique has been devised to identify the synsets 
of a particular word based on the clues (“,” comma 
and “;” semi-colon) provided in the dictionary to 
distinguish words of similar and different sense 
from the synonymous sets. The symbol tilde (~) 
indicates that the suffix string followed by the tilde 
(~) notation makes another new word concatenat-
ing with the original entry word. A partial snapshot 
of the synsets for the Bengali word “অং ” (Ang-
shu) is shown in Figure 1. In Table 1, the frequen-
cies of different synsets according to their POS are 
shown. 

Dictionary Entry: 
অং  [aṃśu] িব. 1 িকরণ, রি , ভা; ~ ক 
িব. ব  , সূ  ব  ; রশম পাট ইত ািদেত ত 
ব ।  ~ জাল িব. িকরণরািশ, িকরণমালা।  
Synsets: 
অং  িকরণ/রি / ভা_িব.#25_1_1  
অং ক ব /সূ _ব _িব.#26_1_1  
অং ক রশম_পাট_ইত ািদেত_ ত_ব _িব.#26_2_2 
অং জাল িকরণরািশ/িকরণমালা_িব.#27_1_1 

Figure 1: A partial snapshot of the Bengali mono-
lingual dictionary entry (word and synsets) 

 
Total 

#Word  
Total 

#Synset 
Noun Adj- 

ective 
Pro- 
noun 

Verb 

33619 63403 28485 11023 235 1709 

Table 1: Total number of words, synsets and Fre-
quencies of different POS based synsets 

4.3 Generating Semantic Clusters of Nouns 
In the first phase, we have generated the synonym-
ous sets for all nouns present in the corpus using 
the synset based dictionary whereas in the second 
phase, the task is to identify the semantic distance 
between two nouns. The format of the dictionary 
can be thought of as follows:  

W1=n11, n21, n31,  ……………… = {ni1} 
     . 

 . 
Wm=n1m, n2m, n3m,  ……………. = {npm} 

where, W1, W2, ….,Wm are the dictionary word en-
tries and njm (for all j) are the elements of the syn-
sets of Wm. Now, each noun entry identified by the 
shallow parser in the document is searched in the 
dictionary. For example, if a noun N present the 

corpus becomes an entry of the synsets, W1, W3 and 
W5, the synset of N is as follows,  

            SynSet (N) = {Wl, W3, W5}……… (1) 
To identify the semantic similarity between two 

nouns, we have applied simple intersection rule. 
The number of common elements between the syn-
sets of the two noun words denotes the similarity 
between them. If Ni and Nj are the two noun words 
in the document and Wi and Wj are their corres-
ponding synsets, the similarity of the two words 
can be defined as, 
               Similarity (Ni,Nj) = |Wi ∩ Wj|……….(2) 

We have clustered all the nouns present in the 
document for a particular noun and have identified 
the similarity score for every pair of nouns ob-
tained using equation 2. 

4.4 Checking of Candidate Bigram as MWE  
The identification of candidates as MWE is done 
using the results obtained from the previous phase. 
The algorithm to identify the noun-noun bigram 
<M1 M2> as MWE is discussed below with an 
example shown in Figure 2. 

 
ALOGRITHM:  MWE-CHECKING 
    INPUT: Noun-noun bigram <M1 M2> 
    OUTPUT: Return true if MWE, or return false. 
1. Extract semantic clusters of M1 and M2 
2. Intersection of the clusters of both M1 and M2 

(Figure 2.1 shows the common synset entries of 
M1 and M2 using rectangle). 

3. For measuring the semantic similarity between 
M1 and M2: 

3.1. In an n-dimensional vector space (here 
n=2), the common entries act as the axes. Put 
M1 and M2 as two vectors and associated 
weights as their co-ordinates. 
3.2. Calculate cosine-similarity measurement 
and Euclidean distance (Figure 2.2). 

4. Final decision taken individually for two differ-
ent measurements- 

4.1 If cosine-similarity > m, return false;            
Else return true; 

  4.2 If Euclidean-distance >  p, return false; 
                Else return true; 

(Where m and p are the pre-defined cut-off values) 
 

 

    We have also employed English WordNet 5  to 
measure   the   semantic   similarity   between   two  

                                                        
5 http://www.d.umn.edu/tpederse/similarity.html 

10



 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

Figure 2.1: Intersection of the clusters of the con-
stituents (left side); Figure 2.2: Similarity between 
two constituents Evaluation (right side) 

Bengali words translated into English. Word-
Net::Similarity is an open-source package for cal-
culating the lexical similarity between word (or 
sense) pairs based on various similarity measures. 
Basically, WordNet measures the relative distance 
between two nodes denoted by two words in the 
WordNet tree which can vary from -1 to 1 where    
-1 indicates total dissimilarity between two nodes. 
The equation used to calculate this distance is men-
tioned below- 
    Normalized_Distance= minDistToCommonPa-
rent / (DistFromCommonParentToRoot + min-
DistToCommonParent)                    …………..(3) 

We have translated the root of the two compo-
nents of a Bengali candidate into their English 
equivalents using a Bengali to English bilingual 
dictionary. They are passed into the WordNet 
based similarity module for measuring similarity 
between the components.  

If we take an example of a Bengali idiom hater 
panch (remaining resource) to describe our intui-
tion, we have seen that the WordNet defines two 
components of the idiom hat (hand) as ‘a part of a 
limb that is farthest from the torso’ and panch 
(five) as ‘a number which is one more than four’. 
So from these two glosses it is quite clear that they 
are not at all semantically related in any sense.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

The synonymous sets for these two components 
extracted from the formatted dictionary are shown 
below – 

Synset (হাত ‘hat’) = { হ , কর, পািণ, বা , ভুজ, 
কৗশল, হ ে প, ধারণ, রখা, িলিখত, হ া র, 
হ া র, হাজা } 

Synset (পাঁচ ‘panch’) = {প , সংখ া, কম, গ া, 
গব , কন া, ণ, গৗড়, ত , তীথ, প , পেনেরা, 
পূিণমা, প াশ } 

It is clearly seen from the above synonymous 
sets that there is no common element and hence its 
similarity score is obviously zero. In this case, the 
vector space model cannot be drawn using zero 
dimensions. For them, a marginal weight is as-
signed to show them as completely non-
compositional phrase. To identify their non-
compositionality, we have to show that their occur-
rence is not certain only in one case; rather they 
can occur side by side in several occasions. But 
this statistical proof can be determined better using 
a large corpus. Here, for those candidate phrases, 
which show zero similarity, we have seen their 
existence more than one time in the corpus. Taking 
any decision using single occurrence may give in-
correct result because they can be unconsciously 
used by the authors in their writings. That is why, 
the more the similarity between two components in 
a bigram, the less the probability to be a MWE. 

4.5 Annotation Agreement 
Three annotators identified as A1, A2 and A3 were 
engaged to carry out the annotation. The annota-
tion agreement of 628 candidate phrases is meas-
ured using standard Cohen's kappa coefficient (κ) 
(Cohen, 1960). It is a statistical measure of inter-
rater agreement for qualitative (categorical) items. 
In addition to this, we also choose the measure of 
agreements on set-valued items (MASI) (Passon-
neau, 2006) that was used for measuring agreement 
in the semantic and pragmatic annotation.  Annota-
tion results as shown in Table 2 are satisfactory.  

 
Cut-off 

Cosine-Similarity Euclidean Distance WordNet Similarity 
P R FS P R FS P R FS 

0.6 70.75 64.87 67.68 70.57 62.23 66.14 74.60 61.78 67.58 
0.5 78.56 59.45 67.74 72.97 58.79 65.12 80.90 58.75 68.06 
0.4 73.23 56.97 64.08 79.78 53.03 63.71 75.09 52.27 61.63 

 

Table 3: Precision (P), Recall (R) and F-score (FS) (in %) for various measurements 

11



The list of noun-noun collocations are extracted 
from the output of the parser for manual checking. 
It is observed that 39.39% error occurs due to 
wrong POS tagging or extracting invalid colloca-
tions by considering the bigrams in a n-gram chunk 
where n > 2. We have separated these phrases from 
the final list. 

Table 2: Inter-Annotator Agreement (in %) 

4.6 Experimental  Results 
We have used the standard IR matrices like Preci-
sion (P), Recall (R) and F-score (F) for evaluating 
the final results obtained from three modules. Hu-
man annotated list is used as the gold standard for 
the evaluation. The present system results are 
shown in Table 3.  These results are compared with 
the statistical baseline system described in (Cha-
kraborty, 2010). Our baseline system is reported 
with the precision of 39.64%. The predefined thre-
shold has been varied to catch individual results in 
each case. Increasing Recall in accordance with the 
increment of cut-off infers that the maximum 
numbers of MWEs are identified in a wide range 
of threshold. But the Precision does not increase 
considerably. It shows that the higher cut-off de-
grades the performance. The reasonable results for 
Precision and Recall have been achieved in case of 
cosine-similarity at the cut-off value of 0.5 where 
Euclidean distance and WordNet Similarity give 
maximum precision at cut-off values of 0.4 and 0.5 
respectively. In all cases, our system outperforms 
the baseline system.   

It is interesting to observe that English WordNet 
becomes a very helpful tool to identify Bengali 
MWEs. WordNet detects maximum MWEs cor-
rectly at the cut-off of 0.5. Baldwin et al., (2003) 
suggested that WordNet::Similarity measure is ef-
fective to identify empirical model of Multiword 
Expression Decomposability. This is also proved 
in this experiment as well and even for Bengali 
language. There are also candidates with very low 
value of similarity between their constituents (for 
example, ganer gajat (earth of song, affectionate 
of song), yet they are discarded from this experi-
ment because of their low frequency of occurrence 

in the corpus which could not give any judgment 
regarding collocation. Whether such an unexpec-
tedly low frequent high decomposable elements 
warrant an entry in the lexicon depends on the type 
of the lexicon being built. 

5 Conclusions 
We hypothesized that sense induction by analyzing 
synonymous sets can assist the identification of 
Multiword Expression. We have introduced an 
unsupervised approach to explore the hypothesis 
and have shown that clustering technique along 
with similarity measures can be successfully em-
ployed to perform the task. This experiment addi-
tionally contributes to the following scenarios - (i) 
Clustering of words having similar sense, (ii) Iden-
tification of MWEs for resource constraint lan-
guages and (iii) Reconstruction of Bengali 
monolingual dictionary towards the development 
of Bengali WordNet. However, in our future work, 
we will apply the present techniques for other type 
of MWEs (e.g., adjective-noun collocation, verbal 
MWEs) as well as for other languages.    

Acknowledgement 
The work reported in this paper is supported by a 
grant from the “Indian Language to Indian Lan-
guage Machine Translation (IL-ILMT) System 
Phrase II”, funded by Department of Information 
and Technology (DIT), Govt. of India. 

References 
Agarwal, Aswini, Biswajit Ray, Monojit Choudhury, 

Sudeshna Sarkar and Anupam Basu. 2004. Automat-
ic Extraction of Multiword Expressions in Bengali: 
An Approach for Miserly Resource Scenario. In Pro-
ceedings of International Conference on Natural 
Language Processing (ICON), pp. 165-174. 

Baldwin, Timothy, Colin Bannard, Takaaki Tanaka and 
Dominic Widdows. 2003. An Empirical Model of 
Multiword Expression Decomposability. Proceed-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics-2003, Workshop on Multiword Expressions: 
Analysis, Acquisition and Treatment, Sapporo, Japan, 
pp. 89–96. 

Ckakraborty, Tanmoy, 2010, Identification of Noun-
Noun (N-N) Collocations as Multi-Word Expressions 
in Bengali Corpus. Student Session, International 
Conference of Natural Language Processing (ICON), 
IIT Kharagpur, India 

MWEs 
[# 628] 

Agreement  between pair of annotators  
A1-A2      A2-A3    A1-A3        Avg 

KAPPA 87.23 86.14 88.78 87.38 
MASI 87.17 87.02 89.02 87.73 

12



Chakraborty, Tanmoy and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2010. 
Identification of Reduplication in Bengali Corpus 
and their Semantic Analysis: A Rule Based Ap-
proach.  In proceedings of the Workshop on Multi-
word Expressions: from Theory to Applications 
(MWE 2010), 23rd International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics (COLING 2010), pp.73-
76, Beijing, China. 

Chattopadhyay Suniti K. 1992. Bhasa-Prakash Bangala 
Vyakaran, Third Edition.  

Church, Kenneth Wrad and Patrick Hans. 1990. Word 
Association Norms, Mutual Information and Lexico-
graphy.  Proceedings of 27th Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL), 16(1). pp. 22-29. 

Cohen, J. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal 
scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 
vol. 20, pp. 37–46. 

Dunning, T. 1993. Accurate Method for the Statistic of 
Surprise and Coincidence. In Computational Linguis-
tics, pp. 61-74. 

Kilgarriff, Adam and Joseph Rosenzweig. 2000. 
Framework and results for English SENSEVAL. 
Computers and the Humanities. Senseval Special Is-
sue, 34(1-2). pp. 15-48. 

Korkontzelos,Ioannis and Suresh Manandhar. 2009. 
Detecting Compositionality in Multi-Word Expres-
sions. Proceedings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics-IJCNLP, Singapore, pp. 65-68. 

Kunchukuttan F. A. and Om P. Damani. 2008. A Sys-
tem for Compound Noun Multiword Expression Ex-
traction for Hindi. Proceeding of 6th International 
Conference on Natural Language Processing 
(ICON). pp. 20-29. 

Passonneau, R.J. 2006. Measuring agreement on set-
valued items (MASI) for semantic and pragmatic an-
notation. Language Resources and Evaluation. 

Sag, Ivan A., Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann 
Copestake and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword Ex-
pressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. In Proceed-
ings of Conference on Intelligent Text Processing 
and Computational Linguistics (CICLING), pp. 1-15. 

Venkatapathy, Sriram and Aravind Joshi. 2005. Measur-
ing the relative compositionality of verb-noun (V-N) 
collocations by integrating features. Proceedings of 
Human Language Technology Conference and Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing (HLT/EMNLP), Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. pp. 899 - 906.  

13


