










































Exciting and interesting: issues in the generation of binomials


Proceedings of the UCNLG+Eval: Language Generation and Evaluation Workshop, pages 45–53,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Exciting and interesting: issues in the generation of binomials

Ann Copestake
Computer Laboratory,

University of Cambridge,
15 JJ Thomson Avenue,

Cambridge, CB3 0FD, UK
ann.copestake@cl.cam.ac.uk

Aurélie Herbelot
Institut für Linguistik,
Universität Potsdam,

Karl-Liebknecht-Straße 24-25
D-14476 Golm, Germany

herbelot@uni-potsdam.de

Abstract

We discuss the preferred ordering of elements
of binomials (e.g., conjunctions such as fish
and chips, lager and lime, exciting and in-
teresting) and provide a detailed critique of
Benor and Levy’s probabilistic account of En-
glish binomials. In particular, we discuss the
extent to which their approach is suitable as
a model of language generation. We describe
resources we have developed for the investi-
gation of binomials using a combination of
parsed corpora and very large unparsed cor-
pora. We discuss the use of these resources in
developing models of binomial ordering, con-
centrating in particular on the evaluation is-
sues which arise.

1 Introduction

Phrases such as exciting and interesting and gin and
tonic (referred to in the linguistics literature as bi-
nomials) are generally described as having a seman-
tics which makes the ordering of the conjuncts irrel-
evant. For instance, exciting and interesting might
correspond to exciting′(x)∧ interesting′(x) which is
identical in meaning to interesting′(x)∧exciting′(x).
However, in many cases, the binomial is realized
with a preferred ordering, and in some cases this
preference is so strong that the reverse is perceived
as highly marked and may even be difficult to under-
stand. For example, tonic and gin has a corpus fre-
quency which is a very small fraction of that of gin
and tonic. Such cases are referred to as irreversible
binomials, although the term is sometimes used
only for the fully lexicalised, non-compositional ex-
amples, such as odds and ends.

Of course, realization techniques that utilize very
large corpora to decide on word ordering will tend to
get the correct ordering for such phrases if they have

been seen sufficiently frequently in the training data.
But the phenomenon is nevertheless of some practi-
cal interest because rare and newly-coined phrases
can still demonstrate a strong ordering preference.
For instance, the ordering found in the names of
mixed drinks, where the alcoholic component comes
first, applies not just to the conventional examples
such as gin and tonic, but also to brandy and coke,
lager and lime, sake and grapefruit and (hopefully)
unseen combinations such as armagnac and black-
currant.1 A second issue is that data from an un-
parsed corpus can be misleading in deciding on bi-
nomial order. Furthermore, our own interest is pre-
dominantly in developing plausible computational
models of human language generation, and from this
perspective, using data from extremely large cor-
pora to train a model is unrealistic. Binomials are
a particularly interesting construction to look at be-
cause they raise two important questions: (1) to what
extent does lexicalisation/establishment of phrases
play a role in determining order? and (2) is a detailed
lexical semantic classification required to accurately
predict order?

As far as we are aware, the problem of developing
a model of binomial ordering for language genera-
tion has not previously been addressed. However,
Benor and Levy (2006) have published an important
and detailed paper on binomial ordering which we
draw on extensively in this work. Their research
has the objective of determining how the various
constraints which have been proposed in the lin-
guistic literature might interact to determine bino-

1One of our reviewers very helpfully consulted a bartender
about this generalization, and reports the hypothesis that the al-
cohol always comes first because it is poured first. However,
there is the counter-example gin and bitters (another name for
pink gin), where the bitters are added first (unless the drink is
made in a cocktail shaker, in which case ordering is irrelevant).

45



mial ordering as observed in a corpus. We present
a critical evaluation of that work here, in terms of
the somewhat different requirements for a model for
language generation.

The issues that we concentrate on in this paper
are necessary preliminaries to constructing corpus-
based models of binomial reversibility and ordering.
These are:

1. Building a suitable corpus of binomials.

2. Developing a corpus-based technique for eval-
uation.

3. Constructing an initial model to test the evalu-
ation methodology.

In §2, we provide a brief overview of some of
the factors affecting binomial ordering and discuss
Benor and Levy’s work in particular. §3 discusses
evaluation issues and motivates some of the deci-
sions we made in deciding on the resources we have
developed, described in §4. §5 illustrates the evalua-
tion of a simple model of binomial ordering.

2 Benor and Levy’s account

We do not have space here for a proper discussion of
the extensive literature on binomials, or indeed for a
full discussion of Benor and Levy’s paper (hence-
forth B+L) but instead summarise the aspects which
are most important for the current work.

For convenience, we follow B+L in referring to
the elements of an ordered binomial as A and B.
They only consider binomials of the form ‘A and
B’ where A and B are of the same syntactic cate-
gory. Personal proper names were excluded from
their analysis. Because they required tagged data,
they used a combination of Switchboard, Brown and
the Wall Street Journal portion of the Penn Treebank
to extract binomials, selecting 411 binomial types
and all of the corresponding tokens (692 instances).

B+L investigate a considerable number of con-
straints on binomial ordering which have been dis-
cussed in the linguistics literature. They group the
features they use into 4 classes: semantic, word
frequency, metrical and non-metrical phonological.
We will not discuss the last class here, since they
found little evidence that it was relevant once the

other features were taken into account. The metri-
cal constraints were lapse (2 consecutive weak syl-
lables are generally avoided), length (A should not
have more syllables than B) and stress (B should not
have ultimate (primary) stress: this feature was actu-
ally found to overlap almost entirely with lapse and
length). The frequency constraint is that B should
not be more frequent than A, based on corpus spe-
cific counts of frequency (unsurprisingly, frequency
correlates with the length feature).

The semantic constraints are less straightforward
since the linguistics literature has discussed many
constraints and a variety of possible generalisations.
B+L use:

Markedness Divided into Relative formal,
which includes cases like flowers and roses
(more general term first) among others and
Perception-based, which is determined by
extra-linguistic knowledge, including cases
like see and hear (seeing is more salient).
B should not be less marked than A. Un-
fortunately markedness is too complex to
summarise adequately here. It is clear that it
overlaps with other constraints in some cases,
including frequency, since unmarked terms
tend to be more frequent.

Iconicity Sequence ordering of events, numbered
entities and so on (e.g., shot and killed, eighth
and ninth). If there is such a sequence, the bi-
nomial ordering should mirror it.

Power Power includes gender relationships (dis-
cussed below), hierarchical relationships (e.g.,
clergymen and parishioners), the ‘condiment
rule’ (e.g., fish and chips) and so on. B should
not be more powerful than A.

Set Open Construction This is used for certain
conventional cases where a given A may occur
with multiple Bs: e.g., nice and.

Pragmatic A miscellaneous context-dependent
constraint, used, for instance, where the
binomial ordering mirrors the ordering of other
words in the sentence.

B+L looked at the binomials in sentential context
to assign the semantic constraints. The iconicity

46



constraint, in particular, is context-dependent. For
example, although the sequence ninth and eighth
looks as though it violates iconicity, we found that
a Google search reveals a substantial number of in-
stances, many of which refer to the ninth and eighth
centuries BC. In this case, iconicity is actually ob-
served, if we assume that temporal ordering deter-
mines the constraint, rather than the ordering of the
ordinals.

The aspect of binomials which has received most
attention in the literature is the effect of gender:
words which refer to (human) males tend to pre-
cede those referring to females. For instance (with
Google 3-gram percentages for binomials with the
masculine term first): men and women (85%), boys
and girls (80%), male and female (91%) (exceptions
are father and mother (51%) and mothers and fa-
thers (33%)). There is also an observed bias towards
predominantly male names preceding female names.
B+L, following previous authors, take gender as an
example of the Power feature. For reasons of space
we can only touch on this issue very superficially,
but it illustrates a distinction between semantic fea-
tures which we think important. Iconicity generally
refers to a sequence of real world events or enti-
ties occuring in a particular order, hence its context-
dependence. For verbs, at least, there is a truth con-
ditional effect of the ordering of the binomial: shot
and killed does not mean the same thing as killed
and shot. Power, on the other hand, is supposed to
be about a conventional relationship between the en-
tities. Even if we are currently more interested in
chips rather than fish or biscuits rather than tea, we
will still tend to refer to fish and chips and tea and
biscuits. The actual ordering may depend on cul-
ture,2 but the assumption is that, within a particular
community, the power relationship which the bino-
mial ordering depends on is fixed.

B+L analyse the effects of all the features in de-
tail, and look at a range of models for combining
features, with logistic regression being the most suc-
cessful. This predicts the ordering of 79.2% of the
binomial tokens and 76.7% of the types. When se-
mantic constraints apply, they tend to outrank the
metrical constraints. B+L found that iconicity, in

2Our favourite example is an English-French parallel text
where the order of Queen Elizabeth and President Mitterand is
reversed in the French.

particular, is a very strong predictor of binomial or-
der.

B+L’s stated assumption is that a speaker/writer
knows they want to generate a binomial with the
words A and B and decides on the order based on
the words and the context. It is this order that they
are trying to predict. Of course, it is clear that some
binomials are non-compositional multiword expres-
sions (e.g., odds and ends) which are listed in con-
ventional dictionaries. These can be thought of as
‘words with spaces’ and, we would argue that the
speaker does not have a choice of ordering in such
cases. B+L argue that using a model which listed
the fixed phrases would be valid in the prediction of
binomial tokens, but not binomial types. We do not
think this holds in general and return to the issue in
§3.

B+L’s work is important in being the first account
which examines the effect of the postulated con-
straints in combination. However, from our perspec-
tive (which is of course quite different from theirs),
there are a number of potential problems. The first is
data sparsity: the vast majority of binomial types in
their data occur only once. It is impossible to know
whether both orderings are frequent for most types.
Furthermore, the number of binomial types is rather
small for full investigation of semantic features: e.g.,
Power is marked on only 26 types. The second is-
sue is that the combined models which B+L exam-
ine are, in effect, partially trained on the test data, in
that the relative contribution of the various factors is
optimized on the test data itself. Thirdly, the seman-
tic factors which B+L consider have no independent
verification: they were assigned by the authors for
the binomials under consideration, a methodology
which makes it impossible to avoid the possibility of
bias. There was some control over this, in that it was
done independently by the two authors with subse-
quent discussion to resolve disagreements. How-
ever, we think that it would be hard to avoid the
possibility of bias in the ‘Set open’ and ‘Pragmatic’
constraints in particular. Some of the choices seem
unintuitive: e.g., we are unsure why there is a Power
annotation on broccoli and cauliflower, and why go
and vote would be marked for Iconicity while went
and voted is not. It seems to us that the defini-
tion of some of these semantic factors in the liter-
ature (markedness and power in particular) is suf-

47



ficiently unclear for reproducible annotation of the
type now expected in computational linguistics to be
extremely difficult.

Both for practical and theoretical reasons, we are
interested in investigating alternative models which
rely on a corpus instead of explicit semantic fea-
tures. Native speakers are aware of some lexicalised
and established binomials (see (Sag et al, 2002) for a
discussion of lexicalisation vs establishment in mul-
tiword expressions), and will tend to generate them
in the familiar order. Instead of explicit features be-
ing learned for the unseen cases, we want to investi-
gate the possible role of analogy to the known bino-
mials. For instance, if tea and biscuits is known,
coffee and cake might be generated in that order-
ing by semantic analogy. The work presented in
this paper is essentially preparatory to such experi-
ments, although we will discuss an extremely simple
corpus-based model in §5.

3 Evaluating models of binomial ordering

In this section, we discuss what models of binomial
ordering should predict and how we might evaluate
those predictions.

The first question is to decide precisely what we
are attempting to model. B+L take the position that
the speaker/writer has in mind the two words of the
binomial and chooses to generate them in one order
or other in a particular context, but this seems prob-
lematic for the irreversible binomials and, in any
case, is not directly testable. Alternatively we can
ask: Given a corpus of sentences where the binomi-
als have been replaced with unordered pairs of AB,
can we generate the ordering actually found? Both
of these are essentially token-based evaluations, al-
though we could additionally count binomial types,
as B+L do.

One problem with these formulations is that, to do
them justice, our models would really have to incor-
porate features from the surrounding context. Fac-
tors such as postmodification of the binomial affect
the ordering. This type of evaluation would clearly
be the right one if we had a model of binomials in-
corporated into a general realisation model, but it is
not clear it is suitable for looking at binomials in iso-
lation.

Perhaps more importantly, to model the irre-

versible or semi-irreversible binomials, we should
take into account the order and degree of reversibil-
ity of particular binomial types. It seems problem-
atic to formulate the generation of a lexicalised bino-
mial, such as odds and ends, as a process of deciding
on the order of the components, since the speaker
must have the term in mind as a unit. In terms
of the corpus formulation, given the pair AB, the
first question in deciding how to realise the phrase
is whether the order is actually fixed. The case
of established but compositional binomials, such as
fish and chips, is slightly less clear, but there still
seem good grounds for regarding it as a unit (Cruse,
1986). Furthermore, in evaluating a token-based re-
alisation model, we should not penalise the wrong
ordering of a reversible binomial as severely as if
the binomial were irreversible. From these perspec-
tives, developing a model of ordering of binomial
types should be a preliminary to developing a model
of binomial tokens. Context would be important in
properly modelling the iconicity effect, but is less
of an issue for the other ordering constraints. And
even though iconicity is context-dependent, there is
a very strongly preferred ordering for many of the
binomial types where iconicity is relevant.

Thus we argue that it is appropriate to look at the
question: Given two words A, B which can be con-
joined, what order do we find most frequently in a
corpus? Or, in order to look at degree of reversibil-
ity: What proportion of the two orderings do we find
in a corpus? This means that we require relatively
large corpora to obtain good estimates in order to
evaluate a model.

Of course, if we are interested in analogical mod-
els of binomial ordering, as mentioned at the end of
§2, we need a reasonably large corpus of binomials
to develop the model. Ideally this should be a dif-
ferent corpus from the one used for evaluation. We
note that some experiments on premodifier order-
ing have found a considerable drop in performance
when testing on a different domain (Shaw and Hatzi-
vassiloglou, 1999). Using a single corpus split into
training and test data would, of course, be problem-
atic when working with binomial types. We have
thus developed a relatively novel methodology of us-
ing an automatically parsed corpus in combination
with frequencies from Web data. This is discussed
in the next section.

48



4 Binomial corpora and corpus
investigation

In this section, we describe the resources we have
developed for investigating binomials and address-
ing some of the evaluation questions introduced in
the previous section. We then present an initial anal-
ysis of some of the corpus data.

4.1 Benor and Levy data

The appendix of B+L’s paper3 contains a list of the
binomials they looked at, plus some of their markup.
Although the size of the B+L dataset is too small
for many purposes, we found it useful to consider
it as a clean source of binomial types for our initial
corpus investigation and evaluation. We produced a
version of this list excluding the 10 capitalised ex-
amples: some of these seem to arise from sentence
initial capitals while others are proper names which
we decided to exclude from this study. We produced
a manually lemmatised version of the list, which re-
sults in a slightly reduced number of binomial types:
e.g., bought and sold and buy and sell correspond to
a single type. The issue of lemmatisation is slightly
problematic in that a few examples are lexicalised
with particular inflections, such as been and gone.
However, our use of parsed data meant that we had
to use lemmatization decisions which were compat-
ible with the parser.

4.2 Wikipedia and the Google n-gram corpus

In line with B+L, we assume that binomials are
made of two conjuncts with the same part of speech.
It is not possible to use an unparsed corpus to ex-
tract such constructions automatically: first, the raw
text surrounding a conjunction may not correspond
to the actual elements of the coordination (e.g., the
trigram dictionary and phrase in She bought a dic-
tionary and phrase book); second, the part of speech
information is not available. Using a parsed corpus,
however, has disadvantages: in particular, it limits
the amount of data available and, consequently, the
number of times that a given type can be observed.
In this section, we discuss the use of Wikipedia,
which is small enough for parsing to be tractable but

3http://idiom.ucsd.edu/˜rlevy/papers/
binomials-sem-alpha-formatted

which turns out to have a fairly representative distri-
bution of binomials. The latter point is demonstrated
by comparison with a large dataset: the Google n-
gram corpus (Brants and Franz, 2006). Although
the Google data is not suitable for the actual task
of extracting binomials, because it is not parsed, we
hypothesize it is usable to predict the preferred or-
der of a given binomial and to estimate the extent to
which it is reversible.

In order to build a corpus of binomials, we process
the parsed Wikipedia dump produced by Kummer-
feld et al (2010). The parse consists of grammatical
relations of the following form:

(gr word1 x word2 y ... wordn z)

where gr is the name of the grammatical relation,
word1...n are the arguments of the relation, and
x, y...z are the positions of the arguments in the sen-
tence. The lemmatised forms of the arguments, as
well as their part of speech, are available separately.

We used the first one million and coordinations in
the corpus in these experiments. The conjuncts are
required to have the same part of speech and to di-
rectly precede and follow the coordination. The lat-
ter requirement ensures that we retrieve true binomi-
als (phrases, as opposed to distant coordinates). For
each binomial in this data, we record a frequency
and whether it is found in the reverse order in the
same dataset. The frequency of the reverse ordering
is similarly collected. Since we intend to compare
the Wikipedia data to a larger, unparsed corpus, we
merge the counts of all possible parts of speech for
a given type in a given ordering, so the counts for
European and American as nouns and as adjectives,
for instance, are added together. We also record
the preferred ordering (the one with the highest fre-
quency) of the binomial and the ratio of the frequen-
cies as an indication of (ir)reversibility. In line with
our treatment of the B+L data, we disregarded the
binomials that coordinate proper names, but noted
that a large proportion of proper names found in
the Wikipedia data cannot be found in the Google
data.4 The Google corpus also splits (most) hyphen-

4This suggests that the Google n-gram corpus does not con-
tain much (if any) of the Wikipedia data: the particular dump
of Wikipedia from which the parsed data is extracted being in
any case several years later than the date that the Google n-gram
corpus was produced.

49



ated words. Since hyphenation is notoriously irreg-
ular in English, we disregarded all binomials con-
taining hyphenated words. The resulting data con-
tains 279136 unique binomial types. Around 7600
of those types have a frequency of 10 or more in our
Wikipedia subset. As expected, this leaves a large
amount of data with low frequency.

We then attempt to verify how close the sparse
Wikipedia data is to the Google 3-gram corpus. For
each binomial obtained from Wikipedia, we retrieve
the frequency of both its orderings in the Google
data and, as before, calculate the ratio of the frequen-
cies in the larger corpus. The procedure involves
converting the lemmatised forms in the Wikipedia
parse back into surface forms. Rather than using
a morphological generator, which would introduce
noise in our data, we search for the surface forms as
they appeared in the original Wikipedia data, as well
as for the coordinated base forms (this ensures high
recall in cases where the original frequency is low).
So for example, given the one instance of the bino-
mial ‘sadden and anger’ in Wikipedia, appearing as
Saddened and angered in the corpus, we search for
Saddened and angered, sadden and anger and anger
and sadden.

Around 30% of the Wikipedia binomials are not
in the Google data. We manually spot checked a
number of those and confirmed that they were un-
available from the Google data, regardless of inflec-
tion. Examples of binomials not found in the n-gram
corpus include dagger and saber, sagacious and
firm and (rather surprisingly) gay and flamboyant.
19% of the Wikipedia binomials have a different
preferred order in the Google corpus. As expected,
most of those have a low frequency in Wikipedia.
For the binomials with an occurrence count over 40,
the agreement on ordering is high (around 96%).
Furthermore, many of those disagreements are not
‘real’ in that they concern binomials found with a
high dispreferred to preferred order ratio. Disre-
garding cases where this ratio is over 0.3 lowers the
initial disagreement figure to 7%. We will argue in
§4.4 that true irreversibility can be shown to roughly
correspond to a ratio of 0.1. At this cutoff, the per-
centage of disagreements between the two corpora
is only 2%. Thus we found no evidence that the
encyclopaedic nature of Wikipedia has a significant
skewing effect on the frequencies. We thus believe

that Wikipedia is a suitable dataset for training an
automatic binomial ordering system.

4.3 Lexicalisation

Our basic methodology for investigation of lexi-
calisation was to check online dictionaries for the
phrases. However, deciding whether a binomial
should be regarded as a fixed phrase is not entirely
straightforward. For instance, consider warm and
fuzzy. At first sight, it might appear compositional,
but the particular use of fuzzy, referring to feelings,
is not the usual one. While warm and fuzzy is not
listed in most dictionaries we have examined, it has
an entry in the Urban Dictionary5 and is used in ex-
amples illustrating that particular usage of fuzzy in
the online Merriam-Webster.6 Another case from
the B+L data is nice and toasty, which again is used
in a Merriam-Webster example.7

We therefore used a manual search procedure
to check for lexicalisation of the B+L binomials.
We used a broad notion of lexicalisation, treat-
ing a phrase as lexicalised if it occurred as an en-
try in one or more online English dictionaries us-
ing Google search. We included a few phrases as
semi-lexicalised when they were given in examples
in dictionaries produced by professional lexicogra-
phers, but this was, to some extent, a subjective
decision. Since such a search is time-consuming,
we only checked examples which one of us (a na-
tive British English speaker) intuitively considered
might be lexicalised. We first validated that this
would not cause too great a loss of recall by check-
ing a small subset of the B+L data exhaustively: this
did not reveal any additional examples.

Using these criteria, we found 39 lexicalised bi-
nomial types in the B+L data, of which 7 were
semi-lexicalised.8 The phrases backwards and for-
wards, backward and forward, day and night, salt
and pepper and in and out are lexicalised (or semi-
lexicalised) in both orders.

5http://www.urbandictionary.com/
6http://www.merriam-webster.com/
7The convention of indicating semi-fixed phrases in exam-

ples is quite common in lexicography, especially in dictionaries
intended for language learners.

8There are 40 tokens, because cut and dry and cut and dried
are both lexicalised. An additional example, foot-loose and
fancy-free, might be included, but we did not find it in any dic-
tionary with that hyphenation.

50



4.4 Reversibility and corpus evidence

There are a number of possible reasons why a partic-
ular binomial type AB might (almost) always appear
in one ordering (A and B or B and A):

1. The phrase A and B (B and A) might be fully
lexicalised (word with spaces).

2. The binomial might have a compositional
meaning, but have a conventional ordering. A
particular binomial AB might be established
with that ordering (e.g., gin and tonic is es-
tablished for most British and American speak-
ers) or might belong to a conventional pattern
(e.g., armagnac and blackcurrant, sole and ar-
tichokes).

3. The binomial could refer to a sequence of real
world events or entities which almost invari-
ably occur in a particular order. For example,
shot and killed has a frequency of 241675 in
the Google 3-gram corpus, as opposed to 158
for killed and shot. This ratio is larger that that
of many of the lexicalised binomials.

Relatively few of the binomials from the B+L data
are completely irreversible according to the Google
3-gram data. There are instances of the reverse of
even obviously fixed phrases, such as odds and ends.
Of course, there is no available context in the 3-gram
data, but we investigated some of these cases by on-
line search for the reversed phrases. This indicates
a variety of sources of noise, including wordplay
(e.g., Beckett’s play Ends and Odds), different word
senses (e.g., toasty and nice occurs when toasty is
used to describe wine) and false positives from hy-
phenated words etc.

We can obtain a crude estimate of extent to which
binomials which should be irreversible actually turn
up in the ‘wrong’ order by looking at the clearly lex-
icalised phrases discussed in §4.3. Excluding the
cases where both orders are lexicalised, the mean
proportion of inverted cases is about 3%. There are
a few outliers, such as there and back and now and
then which have more than 10% inverted: however,
these all involve very frequent closed class words
which are more likely to show up in spurious con-
texts. We therefore tentatively conclude that up to

10% of the tokens of a open-class irreversible bino-
mial could be inverted in the 3-gram corpus, but that
we can take higher ratios as evidence for a degree of
genuine reversibility.

5 An initial model

We developed an initial n-gram-based model for or-
dering using the Wikipedia-derived counts. The ap-
proach is very similar to that presented in (Malouf,
2000) for adjective ordering. We use the observed
order of binomials where possible and back off to
counts of a lexeme’s position as first or second con-
junct over all binomials (i.e., we use what Malouf
refers to as positional probabilities).

To be more precise, assume that the task is to pre-
dict the order a ≺ b or b ≺ a for a given lexeme pair
a,b. We use the notation C(a and b) and C(b and a)
to refer to the counts in a given corpus of the two
orderings of the binomial (i.e., we count all inflec-
tions of a and b). C(a and) refers to the count of all
binomials with the lexeme a as the first conjunct,
C(and a) all binomials with a as the second con-
junct, and so on. We predict a ≺ b

if C(a and b) > C(b and a)
or C(a and b) = C(a and b)

and
C(a and)C(and b) > C(b and)C(and a)

and conversely for b ≺ a. Most of the cases where
the condition C(a and b) = C(a and b) is true occur
when C(a and b) = C(a and b) = 0 but we also
use the positional probabilities to break ties in the
counts. We could, of course, define this in terms of
probability estimates and investigate various forms
of smoothing and interpolation, but for our initial
purposes it is adequate to see how this very simple
model behaves.

We obtained counts for the model from the
Wikipedia-derived data and evaluated it on the bino-
mial types derived from B+L (as described in §4.1).
There were only 9 cases where there was no pre-
diction, so for the sake of simplicity, we default to
alphabetic ordering in those cases. In Table 1, we
show the results evaluating against the B+L major-
ity decision and against the Google 3-gram majority.
Because not all the B+L binomials are found in the
Google data, the numbers of binomial types evalu-
ated against the Google data is slightly lower. In

51



addition to the overall figures, we also show the rela-
tive accuracy of the bigram prediction vs the backoff
and the different accuracies on the lexicalised and
non-lexicalised data. In Table 2, we group the re-
sults according to the ratio of the less frequent order
in the Google data and by frequency.

Unsurprisingly, performance on more frequent bi-
nomials and lexicalised binomials is better and the
bigram performance, where available, is better than
the backoff to positional probabilities. The scores
when evaluated on the Google corpus are generally
higher than those on the B+L counts, as expected
given the noise created by the data sparsity in B+L
combined with the effect of frequency.

One outcome from our experiments is that it does
not seem essential to treat the lexicalised examples
separately from the high frequency, low reversibil-
ity cases. Since determining lexicalisation is time-
consuming and error-prone, this is a useful result.

The model described does not predict whether or
not a given binomial is irreversible, but our analy-
sis of the data strongly suggests that this would be
important in developing more realistic models. An
obvious extension would be to generate probability
estimates of orderings and to compare these with the
observed Google 3-gram data.

Although n-gram models are completely stan-
dard in computational linguistics, their applicabil-
ity to modelling human performance on a task is
not straightforward. Minimally, if we were to pro-
pose that humans were using such a model as part
of their decision on binomial ordering, it would be
necessary to demonstrate that the counts we are re-
lying on correspond to data which it is plausible to
assume that a human could have been exposed to.
This is not a trivial consideration. We would, of
course, expect to obtain higher scores on this task by
using counts derived from the Google n-gram cor-
pus rather than from Wikipedia, but this would be
completely unrealistic from a psycholinguistic per-
spective. We should emphasize, therefore, that the
model presented here is simply intended as an initial
exercise in developing distributional models of bi-
nomial ordering, which allows us to check whether
the resources we have developed might be an ade-
quate basis for more serious modelling and whether
the evaluation schemes are reasonable.

6 Conclusion

We have demonstrated that we can make use of a
combination of corpora to build resources for devel-
opment and evaluation of models of binomial order-
ing.9 One novel aspect is our use of an automatically
parsed corpus, another is the use of combined cor-
pora. If binomial ordering is primarily determined
by universal linguistic factors, we would not expect
the relative frequency to differ very substantially be-
tween large corpora. The cases where we did ob-
serve differences in preferred ordering between the
Wikipedia and Google data are predominantly ones
where the Wikipedia frequency is low or the bino-
mial is highly reversible. We have investigated sev-
eral properties of binomials using this data and pro-
duced a simple initial model. We tested this on the
relatively small number of binomials used by Benor
and Levy (2006), but in future work we will evalu-
ate on a much larger subset of our corpus. Our in-
tention is to develop further models which use anal-
ogy (morphological and distributional semantic sim-
ilarity) to known binomials to predict degree of re-
versibility and ordering. This will allow us to inves-
tigate whether human performance can be modelled
without the use of explicit semantic features.

We briefly touched on Malouf’s (2000) work on
prenominal adjective ordering in our discussion of
the initial model. There are some similarities be-
tween these tasks, and in fact adjectives in binomials
tend to occur in the same order when they appear as
prenominal adjectives (e.g., cold and wet and cold
wet are preferred over the inverse orders). However,
the binomial problem is considerably more complex.
Binomials are much more variable because they in-
volve all the main syntactic categories. Furthermore,
adjective ordering is considerably easier to investi-
gate because an unparsed corpus can be used, the se-
mantic features which have been postulated are more
straightforward than for binomials and lexicalisation
of adjective sequences is not an issue. We hypoth-
esize that it should be possible to develop similar
analogical models for adjective ordering and bino-
mials which could be relevant for other construc-
tions where ordering is only partially determined
by syntax. In the long term, we would like to in-

9Available from http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/
research/nl/nl-download/binomials/

52



n B+L n Google accuracy B+L (%) accuracy Google (%)
Overall 380 305 69 79
Bigram 187 185 79 89
Pos Prob 184 117 61 65
Unknown 9 3 33 0
Lexicalised 34 34 87 94
Non-lexicalised 346 271 67 77

Table 1: Evaluation of initial model, showing effects of lexicalisation. (n B+L and n Google indicates the number of
binomial types evaluated)

n accuracy B+L (%) accuracy Google (%)
Google count 0 75 59 -

1–1000 71 56 68
1001–10000 81 70 67
> 10000 153 80 91

Google ratio 0 11 64 64
0–0.1 41 94 93
0.1–0.25 33 75 85
> 0.25 220 68 76

Table 2: Evaluation of initial model, showing effects of frequency and reversibility.

vestigate using such models in conjunction with a
grammar-based realizer (cf (Velldal, 2007), (Cahill
and Riester, 2009)). However, for an initial inves-
tigation of the role of semantics and lexicalisation,
looking at the binomial construction in isolation is
more tractable.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by a fellowship
to Aurélie Herbelot from the Alexander von Hum-
boldt Foundation. We are grateful to the reviewers
for their comments.

References

Sarah Benor and Roger Levy. 2006. The Chicken or the
Egg? A Probabilistic Analysis of English Binomials.
Language, 82 233–78.

Thorsten Brants and Alex Franz. 2006. The Google Web
1T 5-gram Corpus Version 1.1. LDC2006T13.

Aoife Cahill and Arndt Riester. 2009. Incorporating
Information Status into Generation Ranking. In Pro-
ceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pp.
817-825, Suntec, Singapore. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

D. Alan Cruse. 1986. Lexical Semantics. Cambridge
University Press.

Jonathan K. Kummerfeld, Jessika Rosener, Tim Daw-
born, James Haggerty, James R. Curran, Stephen
Clark. 2010. Faster parsing by supertagger adapta-
tion Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, Uppsala,
Sweden, pages 345–355

Rob Malouf. 2000. The order of prenominal adjectives
in natural language generation. In Proceedings of the
38th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL 2000), Hong Kong.

Ivan Sag, Tim Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann Copestake,
and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword expressions:
A pain in the neck for NLP. In Third International
Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and Com-
putational Linguistics (CICLING 2002), pages 1–15,
Mexico City, Mexico.

James Shaw and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 1999. Or-
dering among premodifiers. In Proceedings of the 37th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 135–143, College Park, Maryland.

Eric Velldal. 2007. Empirical Realization Ranking.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Oslo, Department of Infor-
matics.

53


