










































A Semantic Feature for Statistical Machine Translation


Proceedings of SSST-5, Fifth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 126–134,
ACL HLT 2011, Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Semantic Feature for Statistical Machine Translation 

 
 

Rafael E. Banchs Marta R. Costa-jussà 
Institute for Infocomm Research Barcelona Media Innovation Centre 

1 Fusionopolis Way, 21-01, Singapore 138632 Av. Diagonal 177, planta 9, 08018 Barcelona 
rembanchs@i2r.a-star.edu.sg marta.ruiz@barcelonamedia.org 

 
 

 
 

Abstract 

A semantic feature for statistical machine trans-
lation, based on Latent Semantic Indexing, is 
proposed and evaluated. The objective of the 
proposed feature is to account for the degree of 
similarity between a given input sentence and 
each individual sentence in the training dataset. 
This similarity is computed in a reduced vector-
space constructed by means of the Latent Se-
mantic Indexing decomposition. The computed 
similarity values are used as an additional fea-
ture in the log-linear model combination ap-
proach to statistical machine translation. In our 
implementation, the proposed feature is dy-
namically adjusted for each translation unit in 
the translation table according to the current in-
put sentence to be translated. This model aims 
at favoring those translation units that were ex-
tracted from training sentences that are seman-
tically related to the current input sentence 
being translated. Experimental results on a 
Spanish-to-English translation task on the Bible 
corpus demonstrate a significant improvement 
on translation quality with respect to a baseline 
system. 

1 Introduction  
In recent years, the statistical approach to machine 
translation has gained a lot of attention from both 
the scientific and the commercial perspective. This 
has basically been a consequence of the increasing 
availability of bilingual training material as well as 
the increasing storage and processing capabilities 
of current computational systems, which have al-
lowed for the construction of machine translation 
systems with general-public acceptance quality. 

For several reasons, the most prominent statisti-
cal machine translation paradigm currently used is 
the phrase-based approach (Koehn et al., 2003), 
which has been derived from the IBM’s word-
based approach originally proposed in the early 
90’s (Brown et al., 1993). This original approach 
was heavily rooted on the noisy-channel model 
framework, which, in our view, continues to play 
an important role in the fundamental conception of 
current statistical machine translation. 

While one of the major assumptions of the 
noisy-channel model approach is the independence 
between decoding and source language probabili-
ties, there exists strong evidence on the important 
role played by source language structure and con-
text within the task of human translation (Padilla & 
Bajo, 1998). In this sense, the inability of main-
stream statistical machine translation to tackle with 
source-context information in a reliable way has 
been already recognized as a major drawback of 
the statistical approach, whereas the use of source-
context information has been proven to be effec-
tive in the case of example-based machine transla-
tion (Carl & Way, 2003). In this regard, attempts 
for incorporating source-context information into 
the phrase-based machine translation framework 
have been already reported (Carpuat & Wu, 2007; 
Carpuat & Wu, 2008; Haque et al., 2009; España-
Bonet et al., 2009; Haque et al., 2010; Costa-jussà 
& Banchs, 2010). However, as far as we know, no 
transcendental improvements in performance have 
been achieved or, at least, reported yet. 

In this work, we elaborate deeper on the ideas 
we have recently presented and discussed in Costa-
jussà & Banchs (2010), where we used a similarity 
metric between the source sentence to be translated 
and all the sentences in the training set as an addi-

126



tional feature in the log-linear combination (Och & 
Ney, 2002) of models of a phrase-based translation 
system. Such a feature, which is dynamic in the 
sense that depends on the input sentence to be 
translated, is intended to favor those translation 
units which were extracted from training sentences 
that are similar to the current input sentence over 
those translation units which were extracted from 
different or unrelated sentences. Different from our 
original methodology, where sentence similarities 
were assessed over a term-document matrix repre-
sentation for words and statistical classes of words, 
here we compute sentence similarities in a low-
dimensional vector space constructed by means of 
Latent Semantic Indexing (Landauer et al., 1998). 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 presents an overview of some recent ap-
proaches attempting to introduce source-context 
information into the statistical machine translation 
framework. Then, section 3 introduces the meth-
odology that is proposed and evaluated in this 
work, and section 4 focuses on some implementa-
tion issues. Section 5 describes the experimental 
settings and results. Section 6 presents a manual 
evaluation of a selected sample of system transla-
tions and discusses the most relevant findings and 
observations. Finally, section 7 presents the most 
relevant conclusions of this work and provides 
guidelines for further research in this area. 

2 Related Work  
Several attempts for incorporating source-context 
information into the statistical machine translation 
framework have been reported in the literature dur-
ing the last few years. Without attempting to be 
comprehensive, we provide a brief overlook of 
some of the most sounded recent works within this 
area which are relevant to the phrase-based statisti-
cal machine translation approach. For a more com-
prehensive review of the state-of-the-art, the reader 
can refer to Haque et al. (2010). 

On the one hand, there are some semantic ap-
proaches. In Carpuat & Wu (2007), for instance, 
word sense disambiguation techniques are intro-
duced into statistical machine translation; and in 
Carpuat & Wu (2008), dynamically-built context-
dependant phrasal translation lexicons are shown 
to be more useful for phrase-based machine trans-
lation than conventional static phrasal translation 
lexicons, which ignore all contextual information. 

On the other hand, there are approaches which 
use machine learning techniques. In Haque et al. 
(2009), different syntactic and lexical features are 
proposed for incorporating information about the 
neighbouring words; and in España-Bonet et al. 
(2009), local classifiers are trained, using linguistic 
and context information, to translate a phrase. 

Finally, our recent approach, which is inspired 
on information retrieval techniques for measuring 
the source-context similarity between the input 
sentence to be translated and the original training 
material, was presented in Costa-jussà & Banchs 
(2010). As our present methodology is closely re-
lated to this approach, more details are provided in 
the following section. 

3 Proposed Methodology  
As already mentioned, the methodology proposed 
and evaluated in this work is based on the source-
context similarity approach we presented in Costa-
jussà & Banchs (2010). Different from that work, 
here we introduce the use Latent Semantic Index-
ing (Landauer et al., 1998) to construct a vector-
space model representation of the data collection in 
a reduced-dimensionality space before computing 
source sentence similarities. First, in subsection 
3.1, we review the source-context similarity ap-
proach. Then, in subsection 3.2 we present the ba-
sics of Latent Semantic Indexing.  

3.1 The Source-Context Similarity Approach 
The method we proposed in Costa-jussà & Banchs 
(2010) introduces and extended concept of transla-
tion unit or phrase by defining a tuple of three ele-
ments: phrase-source-side, phrase-target-side, and 
source-context: 

 
TU = {PSS ||| PTS ||| SC} . (1) 

    
In the most simplistic approach, the source-

context element of a given translation unit can be 
approximated by the complete source sentence the 
translation unit was originally extracted from. To 
illustrate this point, consider the following conven-
tional translation unit {vino|||wine} which has been 
extracted from the training sentence sus ojos están 
brillantes por el vino y sus dientes blancos por la 
leche (his eyes shall be red with wine and his teeth 
white with milk). According to (1), the extended 
translation unit TU is defined as {vino|||wine|||sus 

127



ojos están brillantes por el vino y sus dientes blan-
cos por la leche}. Notice that, from this definition, 
identical source-target phrase pairs that have been 
extracted from different training sentences are re-
garded as different translation units! 

According to this definition, the relatedness of 
contexts between any translation unit and an input 
sentence to be translated can be computed by 
means of some distance or similarity metric over a 
semantic space representation for sentences. This 
idea is implemented in practice by means of the 
following dynamic feature function: 

 
F(TU,IN) = SIM(TU,IN) = SIM(SC,IN) , (2) 

 
where TU refers to a given translation unit, IN re-
fers to the input sentence to be translated, SC refers 
to the source-context component of translation unit 
TU (which in our implementation is the source 
training sentence which the translation unit was 
extracted from), and SIM is a similarity metric over 
a given model space.  

As implied in (2), the source-context feature to 
be implemented consists of a similarity measure-
ment between the input sentence to be translated 
IN and the source-context component SC of the 
available translation units.  

In Costa-jussà & Banchs (2010), we used the 
cosine of the angle between vectors in a term-
sentence matrix representation (Salton et al., 1975) 
for computing the source-context similarity feature 
described in (2). In this work, we use Latent Se-
mantic Indexing (Landauer et al., 1998) for pro-
jecting the term-sentence matrix representation 
into a low-dimensional space and use the cosine of 
the angle between vectors in the resulting reduced 
space for computing the source-context similarity 
feature. With this, we expect to reduce the noise 
resulting from data sparseness problems in the 
original full-dimensional representation. 

To better illustrate the concepts discussed here, 
let us consider the Spanish word vino and the cor-
responding English translations for its two senses: 
wine and came. Both translations can be automati-
cally inferred from training data; and Table 1 illus-
trates the resulting probability values derived for 
both senses of the Spanish word vino from the ac-
tual training dataset used in this work (a detailed 
description of the dataset is given in section 5).  

Notice from the table, how in general the most 
probable sense of vino in our considered dataset is 

wine. This actually happens because the English 
word wine is always related to the Spanish word 
vino, whereas the English word came can refer to 
many different inflections of the same Spanish 
word: vine, viniste, vino, vinimos, vinieron, etc. 

 
phrase φ(f|e) lex(f|e) φ(e|f) lex(e|f) 

{vino|||wine} 0.665198 0.721612 0.273551 0.329431
{vino|||came} 0.253568 0.131398 0.418478 0.446488

 
Table 1: Actual probability values for the two pos-
sible translations of the Spanish word vino. 
 

The idea of the proposed source-context feature 
is to use the contextual similarity between the input 
sentence to be translated and the sentences in the 
training dataset as an additional source of informa-
tion that should be helpful during decoding.  

Consider for instance the following two sen-
tences corresponding to the wine sense of vino:  

 
SC1: No habéis comido pan ni tomado vino ni licor , para que se-
páis que yo soy Jehovah vuestro Dios . (Ye have not eaten bread , 
neither have ye drunk wine or strong drink : that ye might know 
that I am the Lord your God .) 
 
SC2: Cuando fue divulgada esta orden , los hijos de Israel dieron 
muchas primicias de grano , vino nuevo , aceite , miel y de todos 
los frutos de la tierra . (And as soon as the commandment came 
abroad , the children of Israel brought in abundance the firstfruits 
of corn , wine , and oil , and honey , and of all the increase of the 
field .) 
 

and the following two sentences corresponding to 
the came sense of vino: 

 
SC3: Al tercer día vino Jeroboam con todo el pueblo a Roboam , 
como el rey había hablado diciendo : Volved a mí al tercer día . 
(So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day , 
as the king had appointed , saying , Come to me again the third 
day .) 
 
SC4: Ella vino y ha estado desde la mañana hasta ahora . No ha 
vuelto a casa ni por un momento . (She came , and hath continued 
even from the morning until now , that she tarried a little in the 
house .) 
 
As the context for a given word is generally de-

termined by its surrounding words, we should be 
able to infer the correct sense for the word vino in 
a new Spanish sentence by considering its similar-
ity to sentences SC1, SC2, SC3 and SC4. Now, sup-
pose we want to translate the following two input 
sentences into English: 

 
IN1: Hasta que yo venga y os lleve a una tierra como la vuestra , 
tierra de grano y de vino , tierra de pan y de viñas , tierra de aceite 
de olivo y de miel . (Until I come and take you away to a land like 
your own land , a land of corn and wine , a land of bread and 
vineyards , a land of oil olive and of honey .) 

128



IN2: Cuando amanecía , la mujer vino y cayó delante de la puerta 
de la casa de aquel hombre donde estaba su señor , hasta que fue 
de día . (Then came the woman in the dawning of the day , and fell 
down at the door of the man 's house where her lord was , till it 
was light .) 

 
We can select the appropriate sense for vino in 

each case by considering the sentence similarity 
between each of these two sentences and “training” 
sentences SC1, SC2, SC3 and SC4. The actual similar-
ity values are presented in Table 2. 

 
 SC1 SC2 SC3 SC4 

sense {vino|||wine} {vino|||came} 
IN1 0.0636 0.2666 0.0351 0.0310 
IN2 0.0023 0.0513 0.0888 0.0774 

 
Table 2: Actual similarity values between input 
and training sentences containing the word vino. 

 
As seen from the table, the source-context simi-

larity feature is actually giving preference to the 
phrase pair {vino|||wine} in the case of input sen-
tence IN1 and to {vino|||came} in the case of IN2. 
Notice that more than one similarity value is gen-
erally available for each phrase pair. In our pro-
posed implementation, the largest similarity value 
is the one that is retained. More details on how we 
compute these sentence similarities are given in the 
following subsection.   

3.2 Latent Semantic Indexing 
Latent Semantic Indexing (Landauer et al., 1998) 
can be regarded as the text mining equivalent of 
Principal Component Analysis (Pearson, 1901). 
Both methods are based on the singular value de-
composition (SVD) of a matrix (Golub & Kahan, 
1965), according to which a rectangular matrix X 
of dimensions MxN can be factorized as follows: 

 
X = U Σ VT , (3) 

 
where U and V are unitary matrices of dimensions 
MxM and NxN, respectively, and Σ is a diagonal 
matrix containing the singular values associated to 
the decomposition.  

According to Landauer et al. (1998), a low-
dimensional representation of a given document 
vector x can be obtained by means of the SVD de-
composition depicted in (3) as follows: 

 
yT = xT UMxL , (4) 

where y is the L-dimensional document vector cor-
responding to the projection of an M-dimensional 
document vector x, and UMxL is a matrix contain-
ing the L first column vectors of the unitary matrix 
U obtained from (3). 

Finally, the feature F(TU,IN) described in (2) is 
implemented as the internal product between nor-
malized versions of the vector projections obtained 
in (4). In our case, a vector-space model represen-
tation is constructed for sentences, instead of 
documents, and the source-context similarity val-
ues between translation units and input sentences 
are computed accordingly: 

 
F (TU, IN) = (5)  
<scT UMxL / |scTUMxL| , inT UMxL / |inTUMxL|> 
 
While the value of M is given by the vocabulary 

size in the data collection under consideration, se-
veral implementation questions arise regarding the 
most appropriate values for N (amount of sen-
tences to be used for estimating the projection op-
erator U) and L (the dimensionality of the reduced 
space). These and other implementation issues are 
discussed in detail in the following section.  

4 Implementation Issues  
This section discusses some important implemen-
tation issues that have to be dealt with in order to 
implement and evaluate the proposed approach. 
First, in subsection 4.1, the problem of implement-
ing a dynamic feature in a standard phrase-based 
machine translation framework is discussed. Then, 
in subsections 4.2 and 4.3, the problems of deter-
mining the amount of data required for estimating 
the Latent Semantic Indexing projection operator 
and the most appropriate dimensionality size for 
the reduced space representation are discussed.  

4.1 Implementing a Dynamic Feature 
As defined in (2), the value of the proposed source-
context similarity feature depends on each individ-
ual input sentence to be translated by the system. 
This definition implies a major difference between 
this feature and other conventional phrase-based 
translation features: it is a dynamic feature in the 
sense that it cannot be computed in advance before 
the input sentences to be translated are known. 

This on-the-fly requirement, along with the ex-
tended translation unit definition presented in (1), 

129



makes it not possible to directly implement the 
proposed methodology within a standard phrase-
based machine translation framework such as 
MOSES (Koehn et al., 2007). As it is not our in-
tention to develop a customized decoding tool for 
implementing and testing our proposed feature, we 
followed or previous implementation of an off-line 
version of the proposed methodology (Costa-jussà 
& Banchs, 2010), which, although very inefficient 
in the practice, allows us to evaluate the impact of 
the source-context feature on a state-of-the-art 
phrase-based translation system.  

According to this, our practical implementation 
is a follows: 
• Two sentence similarity matrices are com-

puted: one between sentences in the devel-
opment and training sets, and the other 
between sentences in the test and training 
datasets.  

• Each matrix entry mij should contain the 
similarity score between the ith sentence in 
the training set and the jth sentence in the 
development (or test) set. 

• For each sentence s in the test and develop-
ment sets, a phrase list LS of all potential 
phrases that can be used during decoding is 
extracted from the aligned training set. 

• The corresponding source-context similarity 
values are assigned to each phrase in lists LS 
according to values in the corresponding 
similarity matrices. 

• Each phrase list LS is collapsed into a phrase 
table TS by removing repetitions (when re-
moving repeated entries in the list, the larg-
est value of the source-context similarity 
feature is retained). 

• Each phrase table is completed by adding 
standard feature values (which are computed 
in the standard manner).  

• MOSES is used on a sentence-per-sentence 
basis, using a different translation table for 
each development (or test) sentence.  

4.2 Dataset for Latent Semantic Indexing 
Another important implementation issue that re-
quires attention is the computation of the Singular 
Value Decomposition described in (3). Ideally, the 
term-sentence matrix X to be decomposed should 
include all available data, i.e. training, develop-
ment and test sentences; however, in the practice, 

this is not possible because of two reasons. First, 
the sizes of typical datasets and vocabularies used 
in statistical machine translation systems are large 
enough to make Singular Value Decomposition 
unfeasible from a computational point of view 1 . 
Second, in a practical application system, the “test 
set” is actually unknown during the system con-
struction and training phases. In this way, a realis-
tic implementation should be able to work with 
previously unseen data. 

In order to overcome the problem of applying 
the Singular Value Decomposition described in (3) 
to the full term-sentence matrix of all available 
data, we implemented an approximated procedure. 
In our approximation, we compute the similarity 
matrix between two set of sentences as the average 
of several similarity matrices that are computed 
over reduced space projections estimated with dif-
ferent random samples of the training data sen-
tences. In this way, our source-context similarity 
feature, previously defined in (5), becomes: 

 
F (TU, IN) ≈ (6)  

    1/K Σk <scTUkMxL/|scTUkMxL| , inTUkMxL/|inTUkMxL|>  
 
where UkMxL refers to a projection operator that has 
been computed by means of the Singular Valued 
Decomposition of a term-sentence matrix Xk con-
structed with a random sample of N sentences. 
Note that a total of K different similarity scores are 
averaged in (6). 

In order to evaluate the variability of the similar-
ity values estimated by this approximation, several 
experiments were conducted for different values of 
N and L, where the variance of the estimates over 
K=10 different realizations were computed. Figure 
1 shows the resulting standard deviations for simi-
larity values estimated for different values of L 
when varying N (upper panel), and for different 
values of N when varying L (lower panel). 

As seen from the figure, the range 500<N<1000 
seems to constitute a good compromise between 
the size of selected random sentence sets and the 
observed variability for similarity value estimates, 
as it provides a significant reduction in the com-
puted standard deviations with respect to N=100, 
and not important improvement is observed when 
                                                           
1 Even in the case of a small dataset such as the one consid-
ered here (see details in section 5) the Singular Value Decom-
position of the full term-sentence matrix can take several 
weeks to be completed in and standard Linux-based server. 

130



N>1000. According to this, we selected N=1000 
for our proposed approximation described in (6). 

 

 
 
Figure 1: Standard deviations (STD) for similarity 
values between development and test datasets (de-
scribed in section 5) estimated for different values 
of L when varying N (upper panel), and for differ-
ent values of N when varying L (lower panel). In 
all cases K=10. 

4.3 Reduced Space Dimensionality 
The third and final implementation issue to be dis-
cussed is the selection of the reduced space dimen-
sionality. It have been reported in the literature that 
dimensionality reduction, by means of Latent Se-
mantic Indexing, into the range between 100 and 
1000 provides good space representations for word 
and sentence association applications (Landauer et 
al., 1998). Although it is reasonable to assume this 
condition to be valid also for the application under 
consideration, we conducted a more detailed ex-
ploratory analysis for selecting the dimensionality 
L to be used in our experiments. 

First, we studied the distributions of context-
similarity values computed according to (6) over 
the available data. Figure 2 shows the average dis-
tributions of similarities between sentences in the 
development and training datasets (see data de-
scription in section 5) at different dimensionality 
values. As can be seen from the figure, a dimen-
sionality value of L=100 exhibits a very nice dis-
tribution of similarity values; however, according 
to the results depicted in Figure 1 (lower panel), 
the variability of estimates for such a low dimen-
sionality is relatively high. On the other hand, no-
tice again from Figure 2, how a much larger 

dimensionality value such as L=5000 already starts 
to exhibit a distribution of similarities that is heav-
ily biased towards the low similarity region. Ac-
cording to this result, and taking also into account 
the results in Figure 1, we finally decided setting 
the dimensionality of the reduced space to L=500. 

 

 
 
Figure 2: Average distributions of similarity values 
between development and training sentences com-
puted at different dimensionality values. For all 
cases presented here N=500 and K=10. 

5 Experimental Work     
This section describes the experimental work con-
ducted to evaluate the incidence of the proposed 
source-context similarity feature on translation 
quality for a state-of-the-art phrase-based statistical 
machine translation. First, subsection 5.1 describes 
the dataset and experimental setting. Then, subsec-
tion 5.2 presents and discusses the results. 

5.1 Experimental Setting 
The proposed methodology is evaluated on the Bi-
ble dataset (Chew et al., 2006) Spanish-to-English 
translation task, using the MOSES framework as 
baseline phrase-based statistical machine transla-
tion system (Koehn et al., 2007). Table 3 presents 
the main statistics of the bilingual corpus used. 

 
dataset lang. sentences tokens vocab av. lenght 
Train Spa 28,887 781,113 28,178 27 
Train Eng 28,887 848,776 13,126 29 
Test Spa 500 13,312 2,879 27 
Test Eng 500 14,562 2,156 29 
Dev Spa 500 13,170 2,862 26 
Dev Eng 500 14,537 2,095 29 
 

Table 3: Main statistics of the bilingual corpus un-
der consideration (number of sentences, tokens, 
vocabulary, and average sentence length) 
 

Regarding the baseline system, we used the de-
fault parameters of MOSES, which include the 

131



grow-final-diagonal alignment symmetrisation, the 
lexicalized reordering, a 5-gram language model 
using Kneser-Ney smoothing, and phrases up to 
length 10, among others. The optimization was 
done using the standard MERT procedure (Och & 
Ney, 2002). 

5.2 Experimental Results 
Table 4 presents the translation BLEU, measured 
over the development and test sets, for three differ-
ent system implementations: the baseline system, a 
second system implementing the source-context 
similarity feature over the full-dimensional vector 
space (FVS), just as we implemented it in Costa-
jussà & Banchs (2010), and a third system imple-
menting the source-context similarity feature based 
on Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI). 

 
 Development Test 

Baseline 39.92 38.92 
Source-context (FVS) 40.61 39.43 
Source-context (LSI) 40.80 39.86 
 

Table 4: BLEU scores over development and test 
datasets corresponding to three system implemen-
tations: baseline, and source-context similarity fea-
ture at full-dimensional vector space (FVS) and by 
means of Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI).   
 

As seen from the table, the system implementing 
the Latent Semantic Indexing based source-context 
similarity feature outperforms the baseline system 
by almost one absolute BLEU point, and the full-
dimensional vector space system by some less than 
a half absolute BLEU point. An analysis of signifi-
cance (Koehn, 2004) showed that the differences 
among the systems are statistically significant.  

A more comprehensive manual analysis of both 
the baseline and source-context LSI system outputs 
was required to better asses the incidence of the 
implemented source-context similarity feature on 
the generated translations. The result of this analy-
sis is presented in the following section. 

6 Manual Evaluation 
This section presents and discusses the results of a 
manual evaluation that was conducted over a sam-
ple set of translations. Previous to the manual 
evaluation, we performed a sentence-based auto-
matic evaluation using BLEU for the 500 sen-
tences in the test dataset. We obtained that our 

proposed approach is better than the baseline sys-
tem in 208 sentences, while the baseline is better 
than our system in 173 sentences and the remain-
ing 119 had the same BLEU scores. 

Some output sentences were randomly selected, 
regardless of which system performed better, for 
conducting a manual inspection. From these sen-
tences, we have extracted some segments that illus-
trate specific cases in which our proposed source-
context feature is actually helping to select a better 
translation unit according to the context of the in-
put sentence being translated. Five of these seg-
ments are presented in Table 5, where the relevant 
fragments within the segments are shown in bold.  

 
Example 1  

source No des sueño a tus ojos ni dejes dormitar tus párpa-
dos . 

reference Give not sleep to thine eyes , nor slumber to thine 
eyelids . 

baseline Not sleep in thy sight , Let neither slumber thy 
eyelids . 

LSI-context
 

Give not sleep to thine eyes neither slumber , Let 
thine eyelids . 

Example 2  
source Entonces ellos se acercaron , echaron mano a Jesús 

y le prendieron … 
reference Then came they , and laid hands on Jesus , and took 

him … 
baseline And they came near , and cast hand to Jesus , and 

took him … 
LSI-context

 
And they came near , and laid hands on Jesus , and 
took him … 

Example 3  
source Y al tercer día , he aquí que un hombre vino del 

campamento de Saúl … 
reference It came even to pass on the third day , that , behold , a 

man came out of the camp from Saul … 
baseline And the third day , behold , a man wine of the camp 

of Saul … 
LSI-context And the third day , behold , there came a man of the 

camp of Saul … 
Example 4  

source … sed confortados ; sed de un mismo sentir … 
reference … be of good comfort , be of one mind … 
baseline … thirst confortados ; thirst of one mind 's sake … 

LSI-context … be ye confortados : be ye of one mind 's sake … 
Example 5  

source … según sus familias , según sus idiomas , en sus 
territorios y en sus naciones . 

reference … after their families , after their tongues , in their 
countries , and in their nations . 

baseline … according to their families , after their tongues , in 
their coasts , and in their nations . 

LSI-context … after their families , after their tongues , in their 
lands , and in their nations . 

 
Table 5: Sample segments where the LSI-based 
source-context feature has helped to accomplish 
better translation unit selections. 

132



As seen from the table, the LSI-based source-
context system is clearly accomplishing more ap-
propriate unit selections. However, in most of the 
cases this does not imply either a better overall 
translation or a closer match to the available refer-
ence translation. This can explain the relative low 
BLEU gain achieved by the method.  

Similarly, we also extracted some segments that 
illustrate specific cases in which our proposed 
source-context feature fails in helping to select a 
better translation unit. Table 6 presents four of 
these cases. 

 
Example 1  

source … yo he sido enviado con malas noticias para ti . 
reference … for I am sent to thee with heavy tidings . 
baseline … for I have sent with evil tidings unto thee . 

LSI-context … I am sent with evil tidings unto thee . 
Example 2  

source … heredad de Jehovah son los hijos ; recompensa es 
el fruto del vientre . 

reference … children are an heritage of the Lord : and the fruit 
of the womb is his reward . 

baseline … the inheritance of the Lord , are the children ; 
reward is the fruit of the belly . 

LSI-context … the inheritance of the Lord are the children , and 
reward is the fruit of the belly . 

Example 3  
source … y que había enaltecido su reino por amor a su 

pueblo Israel . 
reference … and that he had exalted his kingdom for his 

people Israel 's sake . 
baseline … and for his kingdom was lifted up his people 

Israel . 
LSI-context … and for his kingdom was lifted up unto his 

people Israel . 
Example 4  

source Y sucederá que a causa de la abundancia de leche , 
comerá leche cuajada … 

reference And it shall come to pass , for the abundance of 
milk that he shall eat butter … 

baseline And it shall come to pass , that by reason of the 
multitude of milk , shall eat with milk cuajada … 

LSI-context And it shall come to pass by reason of the multitude 
of milk , and shall eat with milk cuajada … 

 
Table 6: Sample segments where the LSI-based 
source-context feature has failed to accomplish 
better translation unit selections. 
 

In the latter examples in Table 6, the proposed 
source-context feature is clearly failing to provide 
better lexical selections. In some cases, this seems 
to be due to the lack of enough source-context in-
formation in the input sentence to be translated. 
However, in other cases, it is because the source-
context feature alone is not able to compensate the 
system’s bias towards more frequent translations.   

7 Conclusions and Future Work  
A new semantically-motivated feature for statisti-
cal machine translation based on Latent Semantic 
Indexing has been proposed and evaluated. The 
objective of the proposed feature is to account for 
the degree of similarity between a given input sen-
tence and each individual sentence in the training 
dataset. This similarity is computed in a reduced 
vector-space constructed by means of the Latent 
Semantic Indexing decomposition.  

The computed similarity values are used as an 
additional feature in the log-linear model combina-
tion approach to statistical machine translation. In 
our implementation, the proposed feature is dy-
namically adjusted for each translation unit in the 
translation table according to the current input sen-
tence to be translated. 

Experimental results on a Spanish-to-English 
translation task on the Bible corpus showed sig-
nificant improvements of almost 1 and 0.5 absolute 
BLEU points with respect to a baseline system and 
a similar system evaluating sentence similarity at 
the full-dimensional vector space, respectively. A 
manual evaluation revealed that the proposed fea-
ture is actually helping the translation system to 
perform a better selection of translation units on a 
semantic basis.  

As future work, we intend to evaluate different 
association and distance metrics, as well as to ex-
tend the current notion of source-context from the 
input sentence to be translated to any other kind of 
available information beyond the input sentence 
limits. Similarly, different paradigms of semantic 
space representations, including those statistically 
motivated, will be studied and evaluated.  

Implementation issues are also to be revisited 
for better evaluating the impact of both the amount 
of training data and the dimensionality of the re-
duced space on the method’s performance. Finally, 
an on-line version of the method must be imple-
mented in order to be able to evaluate the proposed 
methodology over larger data collections.  

 

Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to thank the Institute for 
Infocomm Research, as well as Barcelona Media 
Innovation Centre and the Juan de la Cierva fel-
lowship program, for their support and permission 
to publish this work. 

133



References  
Brown, P., Della-Pietra, S., Della-Pietra, V., Mercer, R. 

(1993) The Mathematics of Statistical Machine 
Translation: Computational Linguistics 19(2), 263--
311 

Carl, M., Way, A. (2003) Recent Advances in Example-
Based Machine Translation. Kluwer Academic 

Carpuat, M., Wu, D. (2007) How Phrase Sense Disam-
biguation Outperforms Word Sense Disambiguation 
for Statistical Machine Translation. In: 11th Interna-
tional Conference on Theoretical and Methodological 
Issues in Machine Translation. Skovde 

Carpuat, M., Wu, D. (2008) Evaluation of Context-
Dependent Phrasal Translation Lexicons for Statisti-
cal Machine Translation. In: 6th International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC). Marrakech 

Chew, P. A., Verzi, S. J., Bauer, T. L., McClain, J. T. 
(2006) Evaluation of the Bible as a Resource for 
Cross-Language Information Retrieval. In: Workshop 
on Multilingual Language Resources and Interopera-
bility, pp. 68--74, Sydney 

Costa-jussà, M. R., Banchs, R.E. (2010) A Vector-
Space Dynamic Feature for Phrase-Based Statistical 
Machine Translation. Journal of Intelligent Informa-
tion Systems 

España-Bonet, C., Gimenez, J., Marquez, L. (2009) 
Discriminative Phrase-Based Models for Arabic Ma-
chine Translation. ACM Transactions on Asian Lan-
guage Information Processing Journal (Special Issue 
on Arabic Natural Language Processing)  

Golub, G. H., Kahan, W. (1965) Calculating the Singu-
lar Values and Pseudo-Inverse of a Matrix. Journal of 
the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics: 
Numerical Analysis 2(2), 205--224  

Haque, R., Naskar, S. K., Ma, Y., Way, A. (2009) Using 
Supertags as Source Language Context in SMT. In: 
13th Annual Conference of the European Association 
for Machine Translation, pp. 234--241. Barcelona  

Haque, R., Naskar, S. K., van den Bosh, A., Way, A. 
(2010) Supertags as Source Language Context in Hi-
erarchical Phrase-Based SMT. In: 9th Conference of 
the Association for Machine Translation in the 
Americas (AMTA) 

Koehn, P., Och, F. J., Marcu, D. (2003) Statistical 
Phrase-Based Translation. In: Human Language 
Technology Conference and Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing (HLT-
EMNLP), pp. 48--54. Edmonton 

 
Koehn, P. (2004) Statistical Significance Test for Ma-

chine Translation Evaluation. In: Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing 
(EMNLP) 

Koehn, P., Hoang, H., Birch, A., Callison-Burch, C., 
Federico, M., Bertoldi, N., Cowan, B., Shen, W., 
Moran, C., Zens, R., Dyer, C., Bojar, O., Constantin, 
A., Herbst, E. (2007) Moses: Open Source Toolkit 
for Statistical Machine Translation. In: 45th Annual 
Metting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pp. 177--180. Prague 

Landauer, T. K., Laham, D., Foltz, P. (1998) Learning 
Human-Like Knowledge by Singular Value Decom-
position: A Progress Report. In: Conference on Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 
pp. 45--51. Denver 

Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P.W., Laham, D. (1998) Intro-
duction to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse 
Processes 25, 259--284  

Och, F. J., Ney, H. (2002) Discriminative Training and 
Maximum Entropy Models for Statistical Machine 
Translation. In: 40th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pp. 295--302 

Padilla, P., Bajo, T. (1998) Hacia un Modelo de Memo-
ria y Atención en la Interpretación Simultánea. Quad-
erns: Revista de Traducció 2, 107--117  

Pearson, K. (1901) On Lines and Planes of Closest Fit 
to Systems of Points in Space. Philosophical Maga-
zine 2(6), 559--572  

Salton, G., Wong, A., Yang, C. S. (1975) A Vector 
Space Model for Automatic Indexing. Communica-
tions of the ACM 18(11), 613--620  

 
 

134


