










































An Approach to the Automated Evaluation of Pipeline Architectures in Natural Language Dialogue Systems


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2011: the 12th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 279–285,
Portland, Oregon, June 17-18, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Approach to the Automated Evaluation of Pipeline Architectures in
Natural Language Dialogue Systems

Eliza Margaretha∗ and David DeVault
USC Institute for Creative Technologies, 12015 Waterfront Dr., Playa Vista, CA 90094

elizam@coli.uni-saarland.de
devault@ict.usc.edu

Abstract

We present an approach to performing auto-
mated evaluations of pipeline architectures in
natural language dialogue systems. Our ap-
proach addresses some of the difficulties that
arise in such automated evaluations, includ-
ing the lack of consensus among human an-
notators about the correct outputs within the
processing pipeline, the availability of multi-
ple acceptable system responses to some user
utterances, and the complex relationship be-
tween system responses and internal process-
ing results. Our approach includes the devel-
opment of a corpus of richly annotated tar-
get dialogues, simulations of the pipeline pro-
cessing that could occur in these dialogues,
and an analysis of how system responses vary
based on internal processing results within the
pipeline. We illustrate our approach in two im-
plemented virtual human dialogue systems.

1 Introduction

Natural language dialogue systems are typically im-
plemented as complex modular systems, with a
range of internal modules performing tasks such
as automatic speech recognition (ASR), natural
language understanding (NLU), dialogue manage-
ment (DM), natural language generation (NLG),
and speech synthesis (TTS). A common design is
for systems to adopt a pipeline architecture. In a
pipeline, each user utterance is processed in a se-
ries of successive processing steps, with the output
of each module serving as the input of the next mod-
ule, until the system’s response is determined.

∗Now at Saarland University, Germany.

While there are many approaches to dialogue sys-
tem evaluation (see e.g. (Walker et al., 1997; Eck-
ert et al., 1997; Walker, 2005)), in many ways, the
primary data for assessing the performance of a di-
alogue system comes from the collection of live in-
teractive dialogues between an implemented system
and members of its intended user population. Yet,
live dialogue-based evaluation suffers from a num-
ber of limitations and drawbacks. Each dialogue set
can be expensive and time-consuming to collect, and
may only reflect a specific version of a system under
active development. Additional effort is also gener-
ally necessary to identify specific system responses
as problematic or unacceptable. Further annotation
and analysis is then necessary to diagnose and pin-
point the cause of the problematic responses, so that
the relevant pipeline module(s) may be improved.

In this paper, we present and discuss an approach
to performing automated evaluations of pipeline ar-
chitectures. Our approach involves the development
of a corpus of annotated target dialogues, starting
from Wizard-of-Oz data. Our automated evaluation
assesses the support for these target dialogues in a
pipeline system architecture. It is not designed as a
substitute for live system evaluations, but rather as
a complement to them which may help to alleviate
some of these challenges to understanding system
performance and streamlining development. In par-
ticular, unlike the PARADISE framework (Walker
et al., 1997), which aims to evaluate dialogue agent
strategies — by relating overall user satisfaction to
various other metrics (task success, efficiency mea-
sures, and qualitative measures) — our approach
takes the agent’s dialogue strategy for granted (in

279



utterance
user
typed

response
system

(speech act)NLU
user
speech act DM

Figure 1: Simplified pipeline architecture.

the form of a set of target dialogues that exemplify
the desired strategy), and instead zooms in and aims
to directly evaluate the dialogue system’s module
pipeline. Specifically, our approach quantifies the
ability of the pipeline to replicate the processing
steps needed to reproduce a set of target responses.
In our analysis, we place a special emphasis on the
possible lack of consensus among human annotators
about what the processing results should be. We do
not aim to further analyze the system’s live dialogue
behavior in terms of user satisfaction, task success,
or other global measures.

2 Research Setting

The work presented in this paper has been designed
to support the dialogue behavior of two virtual hu-
man systems, the SimCoach and Tactical Ques-
tioning (TACQ) systems. SimCoach (Rizzo et al.,
2011) is an on-going project aiming at empower-
ing military personnel and their significant others
with online healthcare assistance for Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder (PTSD), depression, and family-
related problems. The SimCoach character encour-
ages users to talk about any concerns or problems
they may have. TACQ (Gandhe et al., 2008) is de-
signed to support simulation and training for tactical
questioning skills, and provides virtual humans who
have information but will not answer certain ques-
tions unless the user cooperates by agreeing to their
requests, offering promises in their favor, and so on.
In this work, we have developed target dialogues for
the Amani character, who has been an eyewitness of
a recent shooting incident.

For simplicity, in the experiments reported in this
paper, we have used simplified versions of these two
dialogue systems. The simplification removes ASR
from TACQ,1 and removes NLG and TTS from both
systems. This yields a simple two-module pipeline
architecture that we depict in Figure 1. Note that
the input to NLU is a typed English utterance, and

1SimCoach always uses an instant messaging style typed in-
put interface.

the output of the NLU module (also the input to the
DM module) is a speech act representation. The out-
put of the DM, which we treat here as the system’s
response to the user, is also a speech act represen-
tation. Both of these systems use statistical classi-
fication models for NLU (Leuski and Traum, 2010;
Sagae et al., 2009), and finite state machine models
for DM (Gandhe et al., 2008; Rizzo et al., 2011).

3 Target Dialogues

Target dialogues are annotated versions of dialogues
a system designer would like the system to support.

3.1 Developing Target Dialogues

Wizard-of-Oz (WoZ) and role play dialogues pro-
vide valuable data to designers of dialogue systems,
especially in the form of natural dialogue data and
insights into human-level performance and strate-
gies for the specific dialogue task. However, in prac-
tice, system builders may not be able to implement
all of the strategies and competences of the wizards
or role players, and simplifications may be needed.

SimCoach target dialogues were developed from
a collection of 10 WoZ dialogues in which clini-
cians (wizards) and veterans (users) interacted with
each other. We also built Amani target dialogues for
TACQ starting from 19 WoZ dialogues. Each user
utterance and wizard’s response was annotated with
a target NLU speech act and one or more target DM
speech acts (i.e., the system response).2 The 10 Sim-
Coach target dialogues contain 376 user utterances
and 547 target system response speech acts. The 19
Amani target dialogues contain 317 user utterances
and 354 target system response speech acts. For ex-
cerpts of the SimCoach and Amani target dialogues,
see Tables A.1 and A.2 in the Appendix.

To create our target dialogues, we adjusted the
WoZ dialogues to reflect a number of system de-
sign limitations as well as wizard deviations from
the desired dialogue policy. These changes included
removing unsupported wizard utterances and sub-
dialogues, inserting or reordering system responses
due to wizard mistakes, and introducing clarification
subdialogues for unsupported user utterances.

2For both SimCoach and TACQ, the DM may generate one
or multiple speech acts in response to a user utterance.

280



3.2 Formalizing Target Dialogues
Let P = 〈p1, ..., pk〉 be the pipeline in a system con-
taining k modules. We use St to denote the pipeline
state, which includes the internal states of any mod-
ules that maintain an internal state, at time t.

For a user input xt that occurs at time t, when
the pipeline state is St, we write A(P, St, xt) =
〈y1, ..., yk〉 to represent the actual sequence of out-
puts from the pipeline modules, where yi is the out-
put of module pi for i = 1...k.

For a variety of reasons, these actual module out-
puts may differ from the target module outputs for
this input and pipeline state. Let T (P, St, xt) =
〈z1, ..., zk〉 be the target pipeline response to input
xt, i.e. the sequence of target outputs from each of
the pipeline modules.

A target dialogue D = 〈(x1, T1), ..., (xN , TN )〉,
then, is a sequence of user inputs and corresponding
target pipeline responses. Specifically, for time t =
1...N , Tt = T (P, S∗t , xt) = 〈z1, ..., zk〉 is the target
pipeline response to input xt, where S∗t is the target
pipeline state at each time t.

An important detail is that the target pipeline state
S∗t is the state that the pipeline would be in if all
previous user inputs had triggered exactly the tar-
get pipeline responses. Formally, let S∗1 be the ini-
tial state of the dialogue system pipeline. Then, let
S∗t+1 = update(S

∗
t , xt, Tt), where we use an update

function to capture the effect on the internal state of
the pipeline of the target response Tt to xt. Note that
the target pipeline state may differ from the actual
pipeline state, if an actual pipeline response differs
from the target pipeline response. For example, if
a previous user utterance was misunderstood by an
NLU module, then at run-time, the actual informa-
tion state inside the DM module would reflect this
earlier misunderstanding, while the target pipeline
state would include a corrected version of the in-
formation state. Using corrected information states,
and corrected pipeline states more generally, enables
the utterances within a target dialogue to be consid-
ered independently in a pipeline evaluation.3

We can say that a pipeline P is compatible with
3It also highlights how our pipeline evaluation results do not

translate directly into performance metrics for live dialogues,
as deviations and errors in system responses in live dialogues
may affect the subsequent interaction in ways that are difficult
to predict and deviate substantially from the target dialogues.

User Utterance NLU Speech Act DM Response
Having difficulty
sleeping... bad
dreams.. Wake up
a few times every
night

answer.observable.
sleeping-problems

question.
depression-pre-
check-list.1

answer.observable.
wakeup-generic

question.
depression-pre-
check-list.1

answer.observable.
wakeup-nightmare

question.
ptsd-pre-checklist.1

Table 1: Sample of Different NLU Speech Acts

a target dialogue D = 〈(x1, T1), ..., (xN , TN )〉 iff
A(P, S∗t , xt)[k] = Tt[k] for all t = 1...N . In other
words, for every user utterance, the actual system
response, as emitted by the last (kth) module in the
pipeline, matches the target system response.4 Both
the SimCoach and TACQ pipelines are compatible
in this sense with their target dialogues (Section 3.1).

3.2.1 Addressing the Lack of Consensus
A considerable challenge in the improvement of

pipeline performance is the lack of consensus about
the desired internal processing steps: different sys-
tem designers or human annotators often disagree
about what the intermediate results should be. For
example, in a system such as TACQ or SimCoach,
there may be substantial disagreement among hu-
man annotators about the correct NLU output for
each utterance; see e.g. (Artstein et al., 2009). Table
1 exemplifies 3 different possible NLU speech act
annotations for a user utterance to SimCoach. Note
that for the first two, the DM outputs the same sys-
tem response (which incidentally is the target re-
sponse). However, the third speech act yields a
different response. In our automated evaluations,
rather than trying to resolve all disagreements, our
approach is to characterize the frequency with which
these kinds of phenomena occur in the pipeline.

To support this analysis, for a target dialogue
D = 〈(x1, T1), ..., (xN , TN )〉, we assume then that
each input xt is associated not only with the target
pipeline response Tt, but also with a collection of an-
notations At = 〈a1, ..., ak〉. These annotations may
be derived from a number of independent sources

4A technical detail: for both SimCoach and TACQ, the DM
sometimes emits multiple speech acts; to accommodate these
cases, for now we treat the target DM output as a set of speech
acts A, and count each actual output DM speech act as an in-
dependent match if it matches any speech act in A (ignoring
order). A more complex matching scheme could be employed.

281



S = {s1, ..., sl}, and we write ai(s) = wi to denote
the correct output wi for module pi according to an-
notation source s ∈ S . These independent “anno-
tation sources” might be human annotators, or com-
peting module algorithms, for example.

We can then capture the hypothetical effect of us-
ing annotation source s in place of some module pi
within the pipeline. To do so, we consider the effect
of replacing the output of module pi with ai(s), and
using this as the input to subsequent modules in the
pipeline. Let P ki+1 = 〈pi+1, ..., pk〉 be the remainder
of the pipeline, starting at module pi+1. For input
xt, we can notate the hypothetical pipeline response,
if module i were replaced by annotation source s,
by H(P ki+1, S∗t , ai(s)) = 〈yi+1, ..., yk〉. We will write
h

s\i
t for the hypothetical system response to the user

input at time t, if source s were substituted for the
output of module i: hs\it = H(P ki+1, S∗t , ai(s))[k] =
yk. For a target dialogue of length N , we can sum-
marize the frequency with which the hypothetical
pipeline response would match the target system re-
sponse by a performance measure:

Pstrict =
1

N

N∑
t=1

match(h
s\i
t , Tt[k])

where match(x, y) = 1 if x = y and 0 otherwise.5

A second form of lack of consensus issue is the
existence of multiple acceptable system responses
within a system. Returning to the example in Ta-
ble 1, system designers might decide that either of
the two system responses here would be accept-
able. In some cases, actual NLU outputs which dif-
fer from the target NLU output will simply result in
the system giving alternative acceptable system re-
sponses, as in this example. In other cases, they may
lead to unacceptable system responses.

We measure the frequency with which these phe-
nomena occur as follows. For a target dialogue
D = 〈(x1, T1), ..., (xN , TN )〉, let each input xt be
associated with a set Rt = {r1, ..., rm} of system
responses which differ from the target system re-
sponse Tt[k], but are also acceptable in design terms.
Given these alternative responses, we can then de-
fine a more permissive performance measure:

Pmultiple =
1

N

N∑
t=1

match(h
s\i
t , Tt[k], Rt)

5This strict agreement measure can be easily generalized to
measure the proportion of matches in a set of target dialogues.

NLU
speech act
source

Percent of NLU
speech acts

identical to...
(N=317)

Percent of system
response speech

acts identical to...
(N=354)

the
target
NLU
speech
act
(target)

the target
or other
acceptable
NLU
speech act
(humanall)

a target
system
response
speech
act

a target or
acceptable
system
response
speech act

target 100% 100% 99.4% 100%
human1 79.3% 95.4% 84.2% 88.4%
human2 76.7% 99.7% 86.7% 93.8%
human3 59.3% 90.2% 69.6% 78.8%
NPCEditor 42.3% 50.5% 55.3% 57.4%

Table 2: TACQ Amani Evaluation Results

where

match(h
s\i
t , Tt[k], Rt) =


1 if h

s\i
t = Tt[k]

1 if h
s\i
t ∈ Rt

0 otherwise

.

4 Results

4.1 Annotations and Results for TACQ
We collected a range of annotations for the 19 TACQ
Amani target dialogues, including 6 sources of NLU
speech acts for the 317 user utterances: target (the
target NLU speech act for each utterance); 3 inde-
pendent human annotations of the best NLU speech
act for each utterance; humanall (a set containing
all of the alternative acceptable NLU speech acts
for each utterance, according to the same single re-
searcher who prepared target); and NPCEditor, the
NLU speech act output from NPCEditor (Leuski and
Traum, 2010), the NLU module for TACQ.

We analyzed the effect of differing NLU speech
act sources on the responses given by the system.
We present the results in Table 2. (For a de-
tailed processing example, see Table A.2 in the Ap-
pendix.) The first (leftmost) column of numbers
shows the percentage of NLU speech acts from each
source that are identical to the target NLU speech
act. These results highlight how human annotators
do not always agree with each other, or with the
target. The agreement among the human annota-
tors themselves, measured by Krippendorf’s alpha
(Krippendorff, 2007) is 0.599 (see also (Artstein et
al., 2009)). In the second column of numbers, we
tabulate the frequency with which the NLU speech
acts are present in humanall. While these numbers

282



are higher, they do not reach 100% for the human
annotators, suggesting that a single annotator is un-
likely to be able to circumscribe all the NLU speech
acts that other annotators might find acceptable.

Despite the frequent disagreements among human
annotators, this evaluation shows that the impact on
the target system responses is less than might be ex-
pected. In the third column of numbers, we calculate
Pstrict which measures the effect of using each of
NLU sources, in place of the NLU module’s actual
output, on the pipeline’s ability to produce the tar-
get response. As the table implies, the pipeline often
produces the target system response (third column)
even when the NLU source disagrees with the target
(first column). Indeed, for all the NLU sources ex-
cept for target, the pipeline is significantly more
likely to produce the target system response than the
NLU source is to produce the target NLU speech act
(Wilcoxon test, p < 0.001 for each source).

We also calculate Pmultiple (last column) which
measures the effect of using each NLU source on
the pipeline’s ability to produce either the target or
any other acceptable system response. As the ta-
ble shows, the actual system responses are often ac-
ceptable when they differ from the target responses.
Although this effect seems weaker for NPCEditor,
Wilcoxon tests reveal that for every source other
than target, the differences between Pstrict and
Pmultiple are significant at p < 0.005. This evalu-
ation confirms that the pipeline is significantly more
likely to deliver an acceptable system response than
a target response, and helps quantify to what ex-
tent NLU outputs that differ from the target remain
problematic for the pipeline performance.

4.2 Annotations and Results for SimCoach
We gathered a set of annotations for the 10 Sim-
Coach target dialogues, including 3 sources of NLU
speech acts for the 376 user utterances: target,
human1, and mxNLU (the NLU speech act output
from mxNLU (Sagae et al., 2009), the NLU mod-
ule for SimCoach). We present the evaluation re-
sults in Table 3. As the table shows, our indepen-
dent human annotator often disagreed with the target
NLU speech act. Despite the 72.1% agreement rate,
the system’s response to the human NLU speech act
agreed with the target response 93.3% of the time.

In comparison, mxNLU shows somewhat higher

NLU speech
act source

NLU speech acts
identical to target
(N = 376)

System response
speech acts identical
to target (N = 547)

target 100% 100%
human1 72.1% 93.3%
mxNLU 75.3% 91.1%

Table 3: SimCoach Evaluation Results

agreement (75.3%) with the target NLU annotation.
While this might at first suggest “super-human”
NLU performance, in reality it is because the target
NLU annotation was constructed in very close con-
sultation with the training data for mxNLU.6 Despite
showing higher agreement with target NLU speech
acts, the system responses were not more likely to
match the target system responses with mxNLU.
The explanation is that disagreements for mxNLU
were more serious, reflecting more misunderstand-
ings and failures to understand than occur with a hu-
man annotator, and more deviations from the target
responses. This highlights the value of looking be-
yond the performance of individual modules.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

We have presented an approach to performing au-
tomated evaluations of pipeline architectures, and
demonstrated its application in two implemented
virtual human dialogue systems. The pipeline eval-
uation provided several insights into the current
pipeline performance, including what performance
would be attainable if human-level NLU were possi-
ble. In future work, we would like to expand beyond
our simplified two-module pipeline, and investigate
the connection between our automated pipeline eval-
uations and performance in live dialogues.

Acknowledgments

We thank our reviewers, Sudeep Gandhe, Fab-
rizio Morbini, and David Traum. The project
effort described here has been sponsored by the
U.S. Army Research, Development, and Engineer-
ing Command (RDECOM). Statements and opin-
ions expressed do not necessarily reflect the position
or the policy of the United States Government, and
no official endorsement should be inferred.

6The exact target dialogue utterances were not in the
mxNLU training data, but similar utterances were inspected in
constructing the target dialogues.

283



References
R. Artstein, S. Gandhe, M. Rushforth, and D. Traum.

2009. Viability of a simple dialogue act scheme for
a tactical questioning dialogue system. In SemDial
Workshop, pages 43–50.

W. Eckert, E. Levin, and R. Pieraccini. 1997. User mod-
eling for spoken dialogue system evaluation. In Proc.
IEEE ASR Workshop, pages 80–87.

S. Gandhe, D. DeVault, A. Roque, B. Martinovski,
R. Artstein, A. Leuski, and et al. 2008. From do-
main specification to virtual humans: An integrated
approach to authoring tactical questioning characters.
Proceedings of Interspeech-08.

K Krippendorff. 2007. Computing krippendorff’s alpha-
reliability, June.

A. Leuski and D. Traum. 2010. NPCEditor: A tool for
building question-answering characters. In LREC.

A. Rizzo, B. Lange, J.G. Buckwalter, E. Forbell, J. Kim,
K. Sagae, J. Williams, B.O. Rothbaum, J. Difede,
G. Reger, T. Parsons, and P. Kenny. 2011. An intel-
ligent virtual human system for providing healthcare
information and support. In et al. Westwood, J.D., ed-
itor, Technology and Informatics. IOS Press.

K. Sagae, G. Christian, D. DeVault, and D. R. Traum.
2009. Towards natural language understanding of par-
tial speech recognition results in dialogue systems. In
Short Paper Proceedings of NAACL HLT.

M. A. Walker, D. J. Litman, C. A. Kamm, A. A. Kamm,
and A. Abella. 1997. Paradise: A framework for eval-
uating spoken dialogue agents. pages 271–280.

M. A. Walker. 2005. Can we talk? methods for evalu-
ation and training of spoken dialogue systems. Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, 39(1):pp. 65–75.

284



Appendix

t User Utterance (xt) Target NLU Speech
Act (t1)

Target System
Response (t2)

Textual Version of Target System Response

9 my husband seems distant,
and we have been arguing a
lot more lately

answer.observable.
family-problem

question.bio-info.
has-kids

Does he have children?

10 yes, 2 answer.yes question.family-
pre-checklist.6

In his family, do people collaborate together to
find the best way to solve problems?

Table A.1: Excerpt from a SimCoach Target Dialogue.

t User Utterance (xt) Source of NLU
Speech Act

NLU Speech Act (gloss) System Response Speech Acts (gloss)

1 hi amani. NPCEditor hello hello
target NLU hello hello

2 i wanted to talk to you about
the recent shooting that
occurred

NPC Editor Tell me more about the_ incident location of the_incident is the_shop
target NLU Is amani willing to talk? amani is willing to talk

3 do you know who was
responsible?

NPC Editor What is perpetrator of the_ incident ? perpetrator of the_incident is Saif
target NLU What is name of strange_man ? player should offer ’give-safety’

Table A.2: Excerpt from a TACQ target dialogue, including pipeline module processing.

285


