



















































META-NORD: Towards Sharing of Language Resources in Nordic and Baltic Countries


Proceedings of Workshop on Language Resources, Technology and Services in the Sharing Paradigm, pages 107–114,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 12, 2011.

META-NORD: Towards Sharing of Language Resources in 

Nordic and Baltic Countries 

Inguna Skadiņa 

Tilde 

Riga, Latvia 

inguna.skadina@tilde.lv 

Andrejs Vasiļjevs 

Tilde 

Riga, Latvia 

andrejs@tilde.lv 

Lars Borin 

University of Gothenburg 

Gothenburg, Sweden 

lars.borin@svenska.gu.se 

Koenraad De Smedt 

University of Bergen 

Bergen, Norway 

desmedt@uib.no 

Krister Lindén 

University of Helsinki 

Helsinki, Finland 

krister.linden@helsinki.fi 

Eiríkur Rögnvaldsson 

University of Iceland 

Reykjavik, Iceland 

eirikur@hi.is 

 

Abstract 

This paper introduces the META-NORD pro-

ject which develops Nordic and Baltic part of 

the European open language resource infra-

structure. META-NORD works on assem-

bling, linking across languages, and making 

widely available the basic language resources 

used by developers, professionals and re-

searchers to build specific products and ap-

plications. The goals of the project, overall 

approach and specific action lines on word-

nets, terminology resources and treebanks are 

described. Moreover, results achieved in first 

five months of the project, i.e. language 

whitepapers, metadata specification and IPR 

management, are presented. 

1 Introduction 

In the last decade linguistic resources have 

grown rapidly for all EU languages, including 

lesser-resourced languages. However they are 

located in different places, have been developed 

using different standards (if any) and in many 

cases are not well documented.  

High fragmentation and a lack of unified ac-

cess to language resources are the key obstacles 

to European innovation potential in language 

technology (LT) development and research.  

To address these issues the European Com-

mission has dedicated specific activities in its 

FP7 R&D and ICT-PSP programmes
1
. The over-

all objective is to ease and speed up the provision 

of online services centred around computer-

based translation and cross-lingual information 

access and delivery. The focus is on assembling, 

linking across languages, and making widely 

available the basic language resources used by 

developers, professionals and researchers to 

build specific products and applications.  

Several projects have been started to facilitate 

creation of a comprehensive infrastructure ena-

bling and supporting large-scale multi- and 

cross-lingual services and applications. These 

projects closely cooperate and form the common 

META-NET network
2
. One of its main activities 

is creation of META-SHARE – a sustainable 

network of online repositories for language data, 

tools and related web services. 

At the core of the META-NET is the T4ME 

project which is funded under FP7 programme. 

The Central and Southeast part of META-NET is 

covered by the CESAR project, United Kingdom 

and Southern European countries are represented 

by the METANET4U project, while the META-

NORD project aims to establish an open linguis-

                                                 
1http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/ict_psp/d

ocuments/ict_psp_wp2010_final.pdf 
2
 http://www.meta-net.eu/ 

107



tic infrastructure in the Baltic and Nordic coun-

tries. 

This paper describes the key objectives and 

activities of the META-NORD project, presents 

its first results and discusses cooperation with 

other similar projects, e.g. CLARIN (Váradi et 

al., 2008).  

It is an integral part of the META-NET and 

other related initiatives like CLARIN to create a 

pan-European open linguistic resource exchange 

platform. 

2 The META-NORD Project  

The META-NORD project focuses on 8 Euro-

pean languages – Danish, Estonian, Finnish, Ice-

landic, Latvian, Lithuanian, Norwegian and 

Swedish, – each with less than 10 million speak-

ers. The project partners are University of Co-

penhagen, University of Tartu, University of 

Bergen, University of Helsinki, University of 

Iceland, Institute of Lithuanian Language, Uni-

versity of Gothenburg, and Tilde (coordinator).  

META-NORD contributes to the pan-

European digital resource exchange facility by 

mapping and describing the national language 

technology landscape, identifying and collecting 

resources in the Baltic and Nordic countries and 

by documenting, processing, linking and upgrad-

ing them to agreed standards and guidelines. A 

particular focus of META-NORD is targeted to 

three horizontal action lines: treebanks, wordnets 

and terminology resources. 

In addition important collaboration with other 

EU partners is established within the Initial 

Training Network in the Marie Curie Actions 

CLARA
3
. The CLARA project aims to train a 

new generation of researchers who will be able 

to cooperate across national boundaries on the 

establishment of a common language resources 

infrastructure and its exploitation. 

3 Language Whitepapers 

The META-NORD consortium has prepared re-

ports of the language service and language tech-

nology industry for all the languages targeted by 

the project: Danish, Estonian, Finnish, Icelandic, 

Latvian, Lithuanian, Norwegian (Nynorsk and 

Bokmål) and Swedish.  

The reports are written as a series of separate 

publications for each language, but they are 

closely coordinated in structure. The reports con-

tain information on general facts of the language 

                                                 
3
 http://clara.uib.no/ 

(number of speakers, official status, dialects, 

etc.), particularities of the language, recent de-

velopments in the language and language tech-

nology support, core application areas of lan-

guage and speech technology, and the situation 

in the language with respect to these areas. 

For each language, an analysis of the language 

community has been conducted and the role of 

the language in the respective country/language 

community is described. The language technolo-

gy research community and the language service 

and language technology industry are identified. 

The importance of language technology products 

and services in the language community are as-

sessed. Legal provisions related to language re-

sources and tools, which may differ from country 

to country, are outlined. 

The reports also present a detailed table with 

ratings of language technology tools and re-

sources for each language compiled on the basis 

of the same framework that is used in the whole 

META-NET network. Experts were asked to rate 

the existing tools and resources with respect to 

seven criteria: quantity, availability, quality, cov-

erage, maturity, sustainability, and adaptability. 

Results are summarized in Figure 3 and Figure 4 

for tools and Figure 2 and Figure 5 for resources. 

 
Figure 1. Average scores for resources. 

 

The results indicate that only with respect to 

the most basic tools and resources such as toke-

nizers, PoS taggers, morphological analyz-

ers/generators, syntactic parsers, reference corpo-

ra, and lexicons/terminologies, the status is rea-

sonably positive for all the META-NORD lan-

guages. Furthermore, all the languages seem to 

have some tools for information extraction, ma-

chine translation and speech recognition and syn-

thesis, as well as resources such as parallel cor-

pora, speech corpora, and grammar, although 

these tools and resources are rather simple and 

108



have limited functionality for some of the lan-

guages.  

 
Figure 2. Average scores for tools. 

 

When it comes to more advanced fields such 

as sentence and text semantics, information re-

trieval, language generation, and multimodal da-

ta, it appears that one or more of the languages 

lack tools and resources for these fields.  

 
Figure 3. Evaluation results for tools. 

 

For the most advanced tools and resources 

such as discourse processing, dialogue manage-

ment, semantics and discourse corpora, and onto-

logical resources, most of the languages either 

have nothing of the kind or their tools and re-

sources have a quite limited scope. 

 
Figure 4. Evaluation results for resources. 

 

The figures for all the languages taken togeth-

er indicate that quantity and availability may be a 

greater concern than quality; this need is the very 

raison d´être of the META-NORD project. 

4 Horizontal Action on Multilingual 
Wordnets 

Wordnets organized according to the model of 

the original Princeton WordNet for English 

(Fellbaum 1998) have emerged as one of the ba-

sic standard lexical resources in our field. They 

encode fundamental semantic relations among 

words. In many cases these relations have coun-

terparts in relations among concepts in formal 

ontologies, so that a straightforward mapping 

from the one to the other can be established. 

According to the BLARK (Basic Language 

Resource Kit) scheme (Krauwer, 1998), word-

nets along with treebanks are central resources 

when building language enabled applications. 

The BLARK lists Computer Assisted Language 

Learning (CALL), speech input, speech output, 

dialogue systems, document production, infor-

109



mation access and translation applications as de-

pendent of wordnets. The semantic proximity 

metrics among words and concepts defined by a 

wordnet are very useful in such applications be-

cause in addition to identical words, the occur-

rence of words with similar (more general or 

more specific) meanings contribute to measuring 

of the similarity of content or context or recog-

nizing the meaning.  

Different translations of the same master 

wordnet, such as the Princeton WordNet, can be 

linked with each other resulting in a multilingual 

thesaurus and also a dictionary which is useful 

e.g. in aligning multilingual parallel documents 

and other translation oriented tasks. With such 

linked resources, cross- and multilingual IR ap-

plying semantically-based query expansion be-

comes feasible. Another possible application for 

these resources is Machine Translation (MT). 

The hierarchical structure of wordnets ensures 

that a translation can be found (going up or down 

in the hierarchy) even if a precise equivalent is 

not present between the specific languages. 

During the last decades, wordnets have been 

developed for several languages in the Nordic 

and Baltic countries including Finnish, Danish, 

Estonian, Icelandic and Swedish. Of these word-

nets, Estonian WordNet is the oldest one since it 

was built as part of the EuroWordNet project in 

the 1990s (Vossen, 1999). In contrast, most of 

the other wordnets have been recently initiated, 

e.g. the Danish wordnet has been under devel-

opment since 2005 (cf. Pedersen et al., 2009). 

The builders of these wordnets have applied 

different compilation strategies: where the Dan-

ish, Icelandic and Swedish wordnets are being 

developed via monolingual dictionaries and cor-

pora and subsequently linked to Princeton 

WordNet, the Finnish wordnet has applied the 

translation method by translating Princeton 

WordNet into Finnish for later adjustment.  

From the above mentioned different time per-

spectives and compilation, there is a need for 

upgrade of several wordnet resources to agreed 

standards, which constitutes a prelimary task of 

this META-NORD action.  

A prerequisite for multilingual use of the re-

sources is that the monolingually based resources 

are enhanced with regards to either synsets 

and/or more links to Princeton WordNet. From 

these links, which will primarily constitute the 

so-called “core synsets” extracted at Princeton 

University, pilot cross-lingual resources will be 

derived and further adjusted and validated.  

Partial validation of the resources will be per-

formed by means of comparison with bilingual 

dictionaries for the given languages (where they 

exist). An additional aim of the multilingual task 

is to investigate the possibility of making the 

relevant wordnets accessible through a uniform 

web interface. 

5 Horizontal Action on Multilingual 
Terminology  

Among specific activities of the META-NORD 

project will be consolidation of distributed multi-

lingual terminology resources across languages 

and domains, and upgrading terminology re-

sources to agreed standards and protocols.  

META-NORD will extend an open linguistic 

infrastructure with multilingual terminology re-

sources. The META-NORD partners Tilde, Insti-

tute of Lithuanian Language, University of Tartu 

and University of Copenhagen have already es-

tablished a solid terminology consolidation plat-

form EuroTermBank (Vasiljevs et al., 2008). 

This platform provides a single access point to 

more than 2 million terms in 27 languages. 

EuroTermBank platform will be integrated in-

to an open linguistic infrastructure by adapting it 

to relevant data access and sharing specifica-

tions. META-NORD is approaching holders of 

terminology resources in Nordic countries with 

the aim of facilitating sharing of their data col-

lections through cross-linking and federation of 

distributed terminology systems.  

Mechanisms for consolidated multilingual re-

presentation of monolingual and bilingual termi-

nology entries will be elaborated. Sharing of 

terminology data is based on the TBX (Term-

Base eXchange) standard recently adapted as 

ISO 30042. It is an open XML-based standard 

format for terminological data, created by the 

now dissolved Localization Industry Standard 

Association (LISA) to facilitate interchange 

among termbases. This standard is very suitable 

for industry needs as TBX files can be imported 

into and exported from most software packages 

that include a terminological database. 

6 Horizontal Action on Treebanking  

Treebanks are among the most highly valued 

language resources. Applications include devel-

opment and evaluation of text classification, 

word sense disambiguation, multilingual text 

alignment, indexation and information retrieval, 

parsing and MT systems.  

110



The objective of META-NORD is to make 

treebanks for relevant languages accessible 

through a uniform web interface and state-of-the-

art search tool. In cooperation with the INESS 

project in Bergen, an advanced server-based so-

lution will be provided for parsing and disam-

biguation, for uploading of existing treebanks, 

indexing, management, and exploration. The 

treebanking tools will run on dedicated systems 

and provide fast turnaround. Existing treebanks 

available in the consortium will be integrated 

into this platform. 

A second objective is to link treebanks across 

languages using parallel multilingual treebanking 

based on existing language and corpora. 

Parallel treebanks can be used for translation 

studies, for bilingual dictionary construction, for 

identifying and characterizing structural corre-

spondences, for multilingual training and evalua-

tion of parsers, and for the development and test 

of MT systems.  

Linguistically motivated interactive linking 

with XPAR technology will initially be per-

formed for LFG-based parsebanks which support 

f-structure linking. Danish, Norwegian and Eng-

lish will be used in the first pilot, based on the 

multilingual Sofie-corpus. In the second phase, 

linking will be extended to dependency tree-

banks, e.g the Finnish treebank, using technology 

from FIN-CLARIN. Combining these technolo-

gies, a pilot parallel treebank is planned for 

Norwegian, Danish, Finnish and English. 

A particular goal is to extend the Estonian 

TreeBank and improve its qual-

ity/format/querying interface. The rule based 

parsing system for Estonian can be used for 

building Estonian Treebank.  

The FinnTreeBank can be used for training 

parsers and taggers for Finnish. In the META-

NORD project the goal is to extend the Finnish 

treebank with a parser and sample quality testing 

to a Finnish ParseBank for the Europarl corpus in 

order to create a multilingual treebank so that it 

will be applicable to training e.g. MT systems. In 

particular, the efforts will be coordinated with 

the Norwegian and Danish treebank projects. 

The Icelandic treebank consist of approxi-

mately one million words (cf. Rögnvaldsson et 

al., 2011). The main emphasis is on Modern Ice-

landic but the treebank will also contain texts 

from earlier stages of the language. Thus, it is 

meant to be used both for language technology 

and for syntactic research. This is a Penn-style 

treebank but it should be possible to convert it to 

other formats so that it can be linked to other 

treebanks via the Norwegian treebanking infra-

structure. 

7 Management of Intellectual Property 
Rights 

IPR issues are becoming increasingly important 

in our field as standardization initiatives advance 

in the areas of data formats and content structure, 

making IPR the remaining obstacle to wide-scale 

reuse of resources.  

Promoting the use of open data and following 

the Creative Commons and Open Data Commons 

principles, META-NORD will apply the most 

appropriate license schemes out of the set of 

templates provided by META-NET. Model li-

censes will be checked by the consortium with 

respect to regulations and practices at national 

level, taking account of possibly different re-

gimes due to ownership, type, or pre-existing 

arrangements with the owners of the original 

content from which the resource was derived. 

Resources resulting from the project will be 

cleared i.e. made compliant with the legal princi-

ples and provisions established by META-NET, 

as completed/amended by the consortium and 

accepted by the respective right holders. 

7.1 Open content and open source licenses 

The most widely used Open content license sys-

tem is Creative Commons, CC. The CC licenses 

do not require that the user be part of any prede-

fined group. The CC-licenses give the user the 

right to modify, to copy, to present, and to dis-

tribute the resource. META-NORD recommends 

using of CC-licenses for open content resources 

when the above definition of usage applies. 

The Open source licenses are specifically de-

signed for software and tools. The only widely 

translated license is EUPL (European Union 

Public License) but it is not yet widely used. The 

most popular license for software programs has 

lately been the GNU General Public License 

(GNU GPL or GPL). It provides anybody a right 

to use, copy, modify and distribute the software 

and the source code. If the program is distributed 

further, or if it is part of a derivative, it has to be 

licensed with the same license without any addi-

tional restrictions. LGPL (Lesser General Public 

License) differs from the GPL licenses in that 

where GPL lets the software be combined only 

with other open source programs, LGPL allows 

combining the software with proprietary soft-

ware as well, as long as the open software is dis-

tributed with its source. Only an Apache license 

111



or similar will also allow distribution of the open 

software in closed form. Other open source li-

censes are MsPL and BSD.  

7.2 META-SHARE licenses 

META-SHARE licenses are based on the CC-

licenses discussed above. The only difference is 

that they are restricted to users within the 

META-SHARE community. The resource can be 

distributed via an organisation that is a Member 

of META-SHARE. All the same restrictions ap-

ply.  

META-SHARE licenses are applicable to re-

sources where the copyright holder wants the 

potential users to belong to a predefined group. 

The distribution is not worldwide but restricted 

to the META-SHARE community. This can be 

essential for some copyright holders. The num-

ber of potential users is smaller than with CC-

licenses. The licenses cover IPR issues in con-

nection with collective works, databases and 

works of shared authorship.  

7.3 CLARIN model agreement templates 

CLARIN agreement templates are designed for 

tools and resources distributed within the re-

search community but the Deposition & License 

agreement allows commercial use within the 

scope of the legislation by default when it is not 

explicitly ruled out (Oksanen et al., 2010). With-

out modification, the CLARIN agreement tem-

plates do not allow a right for sub-licensing and 

they apply within the CLARIN community. The 

agreements presume that the copyright holder 

either retains the right to grant usage rights or 

delegates this task to the repository or some other 

body but the process can also be more automatic.  

The CLARIN agreements are templates. The 

agreements can be modified to meet the require-

ments of the copyright holder. This option is not 

available with the CC-licenses or the META-

SHARE licenses as they are fixed licenses.  

The CLARIN model agreements can be modi-

fied and are thus applicable to all kinds of pur-

poses. It is, however, advisable to use the exist-

ing CC, META-SHARE or CLARIN licenses, if 

applicable, and modify the CLARIN licenses 

only for any remaining purpose. 

The CLARIN Deliverable D7S-2.1
4
 includes 

two agreements, a deposition agreement and an 

upgrade agreement. In addition to this, the ap-

pendices include other relevant agreements, such 

as terms of service (between the user and the re-

pository), privacy policy issues (for making sure 

that the details on the user are protected), an ap-

plication form for use of restricted data from the 

repository, data user agreement (between the 

user and the repository) and the data processor 

                                                 
4 http://www-sk.let.uu.nl/u/D7S-2.1.pdf 

Figure 5. Selection of the appropriate open content license. 

112



agreement (between the content provider and the 

service provider).  

8 Metadata and Content Standards 

An important aim of META-NORD is to up-

grade and harmonize national language resources 

and tools in order to make them interoperable, 

within languages and across languages, with re-

spect to their data formats and as far as possible 

also as regards their content. 

Since resources and to some extent tools nor-

mally will remain in one location – one of a 

number of META-NORD centers – the preferred 

way of accessing and utilizing resources and 

tools will be through metadata and APIs, allow-

ing the assembly of on-the-fly toolchains made 

up of standardized component language technol-

ogy tools, processing distributed – and in many 

cases interlinked – language resources in stan-

dardized formats. 

8.1 Metadata standards 

META-NORD is working on standardized top-

level resource descriptions (metadata) for all 

relevant types of resources, based on a recom-

mended set of metadata descriptors for docu-

menting resources provided by META-NET 

through META-SHARE. It will produce such 

descriptions for each and every resource contrib-

uted to the shared pool. Metadata sets include 

mandatory as well as optional elements, together 

with sets of recommended values whenever pos-

sible and appropriate. According to the META-

SHARE model
5
, metadata must include at least a 

specified minimum of information in each of the 

following categories: identification (including a 

persistent identifier); resource type; licens-

ing/distribution; validation; metadata prove-

nance; funding; contact information. The model 

then allows for extensive further elaboration of 

each information category, so that metadata re-

cords for resources and tools can be arbitrarily 

informative. 

The inspiration for the META-SHARE meta-

data model comes largely from the CLARIN 

Metadata Initiative (renamed to Component 

Metadata Initiative (CMDI
6
)), which can be seen 

as building on top of earlier relevant initiatives – 

e.g., DC and OLAC – and which now aims to 

become an ISO standard. The data categories, 

                                                 
5 http://www.meta-net.eu/public_documents/t4me/META-

NET-D7.2.1-Final.pdf 
6  http://www.clarin.eu/cmdi 

e.g., ISOcat, are the main concern of standardiza-

tion, not the metadata schema per se. 

In most cases, the resources and tools to be 

made available in META-NORD do not come 

equipped with the required metadata information, 

let alone encoded as formal metadata. The main 

exceptions are corpora in TEI or XCES format 

which often have header elements containing at 

least some of this information, which can be 

automatically extracted. Some partners are al-

ready publishing structured metadata records for 

at least some of their resources, e.g., the Lan-

guage Bank of Finland is publishing OLAC – 

and the obligatory DC – through OAI-PMH for a 

number of corpora already. In case existing re-

sources are described using popular metadata 

sets – OLAC being a case in point – the consor-

tium will upgrade them using converters, map-

pers and other tools provided by the META-

NET, or in some cases developed by the META-

NORD. 

8.2 Content standards 

We can foresee that users will want access to the 

META-NORD language resources in at least the 

following three ways: 

(1) In toto, i.e., the resource can be downloaded. 
This requires that the resource is in a stan-

dardized, well-documented format, or it 

won’t be very useful to our target groups. It 

also requires that all IPR issues have been 

cleared and licensing terms stated (see sec-

tion 7 above). 

(2) Online browsing either in a standard web 
browser or through a dedicated tool. Here, 

standardized metadata must provide suffi-

cient information for a user to find the URL 

providing the application. However, the base 

resource may be in a proprietary format (al-

though any export facility should provide a 

standardized format). 

(3) In the form of a web service or other API. 
Here, standardized metadata are needed. 

Further, any data returned by a web service 

should be in a standard format. 

Consequently, metadata and resource formats in 

META-NORD should support at least these three 

resource usage scenarios. 

META-NORD greatly benefits from the work 

conducted in CLARIN for best practices and 

guidelines with respect to formats for language 

resources, language tools and metadata. 

From information provided by partners, it is 

clear that the META-NORD resources and tools 

come in many formats. Some resources are in 

113



RDB formats (SQL, Access), some in proprietary 

formats, etc. For interoperability, such resources 

should probably be converted into other formats. 

Data format conversion is generally not a prob-

lem, and should be implemented in many cases, 

since partners may have invested heavily in such 

formats and in such cases we should simply con-

sider a solution whereby conversion is made on 

demand into an interoperable export format. The 

only problem with this solution is that it will add 

complexity, since any change made to the origi-

nal format must be accompanied by the corre-

sponding change in the conversion utility.  

A point of greater concern is that, according to 

the provided information, many of the resources 

and tools lack an explicit and formal content 

model. This issue will need to be addressed in 

META-NORD. 

META-NORD will put considerable effort in-

to making content models of resources and tools 

as interoperable as possible. This can imply 

adopting more strictly structured formats, such as 

LMF rather than proprietary XML or SQL for 

lexical resources. Regardless of this, it will al-

most certainly imply a mapping to a set of stan-

dardized data categories, such as that of ISOcat. 

This can mean a considerable amount of work 

and careful consideration is needed in order not 

to waste effort. On the other hand, the rewards of 

the interoperability achieved in this way are po-

tentially great. 

For new resources and tools or for those where 

conversion of the base resource is desirable, the 

following formats are recommended: 

 corpora: TEI or (X)CES format (standoff 
annotation in ISO formats will be al-

lowed); 

 lexical resources: LMF or Princeton 
WordNet format; 

 terminology resources: TBX; 

 tools: at least as web services (if possible), 
described using WSDL. 

9 Conclusions 

Language whitepapers prepared by the ME-

TA-NORD project show that the Nordic and Bal-

tic countries still have a long way to go to im-

plement the vision of making the area a leading 

region in language technology. META-NORD 

project lays the ground for a fruitful cooperation 

in identifying, enhancing and sharing of lan-

guage tools and resources created in the Nordic 

and Baltic countries, which will considerably 

strengthen the field in a near future. 

Acknowledgements 

The META-NORD project has received funding 

from the European Commission through the ICT 

PSP Programme, grant agreement no 270899. 

References  

Fellbaum, C. (ed). 1998.  WordNet – An Electronic       

Lexical Database. The MIT Press, Cambridge, 

Massachusetts, London, England. 

Krauwer, S. 1998. ELSNET and ELRA: A common 

past and a common future. The ELRA Newsletter, 

Vol. 3, n. 2, Paris. 

Oksanen V., Linden K., Westerlund H. 2010. Laundry 

Symbols and License Management – Practical 

Considerations for the Distribution of LRs based 

on experiences from CLARIN. In the Proceedings 

of LREC 2010. 

Pedersen, B.S, S. Nimb, J. Asmussen, N. Sørensen, L. 

Trap-Jensen, H. Lorentzen. 2009. DanNet – the 

challenge of compiling a WordNet for Danish by 

reusing a monolingual dictionary. Language Re-

sources and Evaluation, Computational Linguistics 

Series. Volume 43, Issue 3:269-299. 

Rögnvaldsson, E., A. K. Ingason and E. F. Si-

gurðsson. 2011. Coping with Variation in the Ice-

landic Diachronic Treebank. In Johannessen, J. B. 

(ed.): Language Variation Infrastructure. Papers 

on selected projects, pp. 97-111. Oslo Studies in 

Language 3.2. University of Oslo, Oslo. 

Vossen, P. (ed). 1999. EuroWordNet, A Multilingual 

Database with Lexical Semantic Networks.  Klu-

wer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands. 

Váradi T., Krauwer S., Wittenburg P., Wynne M., 

Koskenniemi K. 2008. CLARIN: common lan-

guage resources and technology infrastructure. 

Proceedings of the Sixth International Language 

Resources and Evaluation Conference. 

Vasiljevs, A., Rirdance, S., Liedskalnins, A., 2008. 

EuroTermBank: Towards Greater Interoperability 

of Dispersed Multilingual Terminology Data. Pro-

ceedings of the First International Conference on 

Global Interoperability for Language Resources 

ICGL 2008. Hong Kong, 2008, pp.213-220. 

 

114


