










































Towards a Neurobiologically Plausible Model of Human Sentence Comprehension Across Languages


Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Parsing Technologies, page 117,
October 5-7, 2011, Dublin City University. c© 2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards a Neurobiologically Plausible Model of Human Sentence
Comprehension Across Languages

Ina Bornkessel-Schlesewsky
Institut für Germanistische Sprachwissenschaft

Philipps-Universität Marburg
iboke@staff.uni-marburg.de

Abstract

Among human cognitive abilities, language is singular in the diversity of its manifestations:
over 6000 languages are spoken in the world today. Some of the major challenges in modelling
how language is processed by the human brain thus lie in explaining (a) how this diversity is
handled, and (b) whether there are nevertheless some underlying generalisations that recur
across languages of different types. Furthermore, an adequate model should be neurobiolog-
ically plausible, i.e., respect what we know about the structure and function of the human
brain. In this presentation, I will describe a line of research in which we have attempted
to take up these challenges at the level of sentence comprehension. Based on the results of
neurophysiological experiments in a range of typologically varied languages, I will argue for
a comprehension architecture that is actor-centred, i.e., focused on identifying the participant
primarily responsible for the state of affairs under discussion. I will introduce the latest version
of a comprehension model (extended Argument Dependency Model, eADM; Bornkessel and
Schlesewsky, 2006), the architecture of which is built around actor-centrality as a design prin-
ciple, and will describe how it accounts for potential universals of comprehension and critical
dimensions of variation.

References

Ina Bornkessel and Matthias Schlesewsky. 2006. The Extended Argument Dependency Model: A
neurocognitive approach to sentence comprehension across languages. Psychological Review, 113,
787–821.

117


