



















































Language Generation for Spoken Dialogue Systems


Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), page 132,
Nancy, France, September 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Language Generation for Spoken Dialogue Systems

Johanna D. Moore
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh

Edinburgh, United Kingdom
j.moore@ed.ac.uk

The goal of spoken dialogue systems (SDS) is to of-
fer efficient and natural access to applications and
services. A common task for SDS is to help users
select a suitable option (e.g., flight, hotel, restau-
rant) from the set of options available. When the
number of options is small, they can simply be pre-
sented sequentially. However, as the number of
options increases, the system must have strategies
for summarizing the options to enable the user to
browse the option space. In this talk, we evaluate
two recent approaches to information presentation
in SDS: (1) the Refiner approach (Polifroni et al.,
2003) which generates summaries by clustering the
options to maximize coverage of the domain, and (2)
the user-model based summarize and refine (UMSR)
approach (Demberg and Moore, 2006) which clus-
ters options to maximize utility with respect to a user
model, and uses linguistic devices (e.g., discourse
cues, adverbials) to highlight the trade-offs among
the presented items.

To evaluate these strategies, we go beyond the
typical “overhearer” evaluation methodology, in
which participants read or listen to pre-prepared dia-
logues, which limits the evaluation criteria to users’
perceptions (e.g., informativeness, ease of compre-
hension). Using a Wizard-of-Oz methodology to
evaluate the approaches in an interactive setting, we
show that in addition to being preferred by users,
the UMSR approach is superior to the Refiner ap-
proach in terms of both task success and dialogue
efficiency, even when the user is performing a de-
manding secondary task. Finally, we hypothesize
that UMSR is more effective because it uses linguis-
tic devices to highlight relations (e.g., trade-offs) be-

tween options and attributes. We report the results
of two studies which show that the discourse cues in
UMSR summaries help users compare different op-
tions and choose between options, even though they
do not improve verbatim recall.

References
V. Demberg and J.D. Moore. 2006. Information Presen-

tation in Spoken Dialogue Systems. In Proceedings of
the 11th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL).

J. Polifroni, G. Chung, and S. Seneff. 2003. Towards the
Automatic Generation of Mixed-Initiative Dialogue
Systems from Web Content. In Proceedings of Eu-
rospeech, pages 2721–2724.

132


