










































SentiProfiler: Creating Comparable Visual Profiles of Sentimental Content in Texts


Proceedings of Language Technologies for Digital Humanities and Cultural Heritage Workshop, pages 62–69,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 16 September 2011.

SentiProfiler: Creating Comparable Visual Profiles of Sentimental 
Content in Texts 

 
 

Tuomo Kakkonen 
School of Computing 

University of Eastern Finland 
tuomo.kakkonen@uef.fi 

Gordana Galić Kakkonen 
Department of Croatian Language and 

Literature 
University of Split, Croatia 

ggalic@ffst.hr 

 
  

 

Abstract 

 

We introduce the concept of sentiment pro-
files, representations of emotional content in 
texts and the SentiProfiler system for creating 
and visualizing such profiles. We also demon-
strate the practical applicability of the system 
in literary research by describing its use in 
analyzing novels in the Gothic fiction genre. 
Our results indicate that the system is able to 
support literary research by providing valuable 
insights into the emotional content of Gothic 
novels. 

1 Introduction 

In recent years, non-topical text analysis has be-
come an active area of research. In contrast to 
“traditional” text analytics in which the aim is to 
extract and process the facts and concepts, non-
topical text analysis aims at characterizing the 
attitudes, opinions and feelings present in a text.  

Automatic detection and classification of sen-
timents has several potential areas of application. 
Hence, it has become an established field of nat-
ural language processing (NLP) research and a 
rising number of papers and articles dedicated to 
the analysis of the affective content of texts is 
being published each year. Feelings and senti-
ments are often represented within texts in com-
plex and subtle ways, which makes their auto-
matic detection an interesting research challenge. 

Much of the work in sentiment analysis (SA) 
is concentrated on business applications, in par-
ticular the analysis of user-generated online con-
tent, such as customer reviews and tweets, in or-
der to tap into what is sometimes referred to as 
the “Wisdom of the Crowds.” This work departs 

from the general trends in SA research in more 
ways than one.  

First, we apply SA to a field in which it has 
not, to the best of our knowledge, been applied 
before, namely the analysis of novels for literary 
research. Second, rather than concentrating on 
determining the polarity (negative vs. positive) 
of the analyzed document, we aim at providing 
more detailed classification affective content of 
the target texts. Third, although visualization of 
SA results has attracted some interest from the 
opinion mining and SA community, research 
contributions that particularly address the visual 
comparison of SA results are scarce. 

We introduce a system called SentiProfiler 
that generates visual representations of affective 
content of texts and uses techniques to outline 
the differences and similarities between the pairs 
of texts under scrutiny. The design of the tool is 
centered on the idea of sentiment profiles (SPs), 
hierarchical representations of affective contents 
of the input documents. The SPs and the visual 
graphs representing them that the system gener-
ates are in effect summaries of the sentiment 
content of the input documents. The system 
makes use of various NLP and visualization re-
sources and tools in tandem with Semantic Web 
technologies.  

In addition calculating frequencies of senti-
ment-bearing words, a scoring measure is used to 
determine the prevalence of sentiments in the 
target texts. The hierarchical organization of the 
sentiment classes enables the system to aggregate 
these scores in order to gauge the prevalence of 
specific groups of sentiments. Our visualization 
technique uses vertex colors to denote the differ-
ences between the SPs that are being compared. 
This allows for quick browsing and detection of 
differences between the emotional content of the 
target documents. 

62



We demonstrate the practical applicability of 
the SentiProfiler system by considering the ways 
in which it can support literary research by al-
lowing visual comparisons of pairs of SPs cre-
ated from works of a literary genre rich in dark 
and gloomy topics (and hence negative emo-
tions), namely Gothic literature. The fact that 
Gothic novels are divided into two distinct sub-
genres of terror and horror allows us to experi-
ment with the comparison functions of the sys-
tem. 

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 
2, we outline the background of this research by 
shortly summarizing works on visualization of 
SA results and describing the tools and technolo-
gies on top of which SentiProfiler has been built. 
Section 3 introduces the architecture of the Sen-
tiProfiler system and explains the functioning of 
each of its main components. The practical ap-
plicability of the system is demonstrated and dis-
cussed in Section 4. Section 5 concludes by 
summarizing the paper and considering direc-
tions for future work. 

2 Introduction 

2.1 Related work 

Most work on SA visualization has dealt with 
summarizing analysis results for collections of 
documents. Often, basic visualization methods, 
such as bar charts (Liu et al., 2005) and temporal 
graphs (Fukuhara et al., 2007) are utilized. The 
Pulse system by Gamon et al. (2005) generates 
treemap visualizations that display topic clusters 
and their associated sentiments. The size of the 
boxes indicates the number of sentences in the 
topic cluster, and the color denotes the average 
sentiment of the sentences belonging to that 
topic. Chen et al. (2006) generated multiple visu-
alizations (such as decision trees and term varia-
tion networks) in order to enable the analysis of 
conflicting opinions. 

One of the rare works that discusses visual 
comparison of SA results (Gregory et al., 2006) 
introduced a system that combines lexicon loo-
kup-based SA with a visualization engine. The 
paper described an experiment with the well-
known Hu and Liu (2004) customer review data-
set.  

The most relevant of the recent work on visu-
alization of SA results is presented in Wu et al. 
(2010). They introduced OpinionSeer, a system 
that visualizes hotel customer feedbacks that is 
based on a visualization-centric analysis tech-
nique that considers uncertainty for modeling 

and analyzing customer opinions. They also sug-
gested a type of visual representation that con-
veys customer opinions by augmenting scatter-
plots and radial visualization.  

The only research work we are aware of that 
has applied SA to literary research is reported in 
(Taboda et el., 2006). In contrast to our work, 
rather than analyzing novels, Taboda et al. used 
SA techniques to extract information on the 
reputation of six early 20th century authors based 
on writings concerning them.  

2.2 Tools and technologies applied 

The SentiProfiler system uses WordNet-Affect 
(Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004) as the source 
for emotion-bearing words. WordNet-Affect is a 
linguistic resource for the lexical representation 
of affective knowledge. It was developed on the 
basis of WordNet (Miller, 1995) through the se-
lection and labeling of the synsets (the WordNet 
technical term for semantically equivalent 
words) representing affective concepts. Word-
Net-Affect defines a hierarchy of emotions, in 
which the items are referred to as emotional 
categories. Each emotional category is linked 
with a set of WordNet synsets that contain the 
words that are connected with the emotional 
category. The WordNet-Affect hierarchy con-
tains four main categories of emotions: negative, 
positive, ambiguous and neutral. 

The WordNet-Affect hierarchy and the corre-
sponding synsets from WordNet are represented 
in SentiProfiler as an ontology that is automati-
cally generated from the WordNet-Affect hierar-
chy and WordNet synset definitions. The ontol-
ogy is created and accessed by using the Jena 
framework (http://jena.sourceforge.net/). Jena is 
a well-known and stable Java framework for 
building Semantic Web applications that pro-
vides, among other things, an API for manipulat-
ing Semantic Web resources in the Resource De-
scription Framework (RDF) format.  

SentiProfiler makes use of several other well-
known freely available Java tools and libraries. 
The MIT Java WordNet Interface (JWI) 
(http://projects.csail.mit.edu/jwi/) is an API for 
interfacing with WordNet. JWI is used by Senti-
Profiler for retrieving the relevant synsets from a 
local copy of the WordNet dictionaries.  

GATE (Cunningham et al., 2002) is a widely 
used and flexible framework for developing text 
analysis systems. It is commonly applied in the 
NLP research community. SentiProfiler utilizes 
GATE in ontology-based tagging of sentiment-
bearing words. 

63



JUNG (the Java Universal Network/Graph 
Framework) (http://jung.sourceforge.net/) is a 
library for the modeling, analysis, and visualiza-
tion of graphs. It provides an extensible set of 
graph operations, visualization methods and lay-
outs. SentiProfiler usea JUNG for the visualiza-
tion of sentiment profiles. 

3 SentiProfiler  

3.1 Introduction 

The SentiProfiler system consists of three main 
components: ontology and ontology factory, sen-
timent analyzer and SP visualizer. Figure 1 out-
lines the system architecture. 

As shown in Figure 1, the ontology that de-
scribes the hierarchy of the emotions to be de-
tected is generated automatically from WN-
Affect and WordNet data (see Section 3.2). The 
sentiment analyzer component (Section 3.3) con-
sists of a GATE pipeline and a set of Java classes 
that analyze the tags assigned by GATE and cre-
ates the SPs of the input documents. The visual-
izer component (Section 3.3) is responsible for 
displaying SPs in a format that supports easy 
visual comparison. 

3.2 Ontology of sentiments 

The automatic ontology creation process from 
WordNet-Affect and WordNet data works as fol-
lows. First, the XML file containing the relevant 
part of the WordNet-Affect hierarchy is con-
verted and stored in a graph data structure. Next, 
an ontology representing the sentiment hierarchy 
is created that contains the WordNet-Affect sen-
timent categories as classes. We refer to these as 

sentiment classes. The words from the relevant 
WordNet synsets are used as the individuals that 
instantiate each sentiment class. Finally, the on-
tology is written in an RDF/XML file that can be 
browsed and edited with any RDF-aware ontol-
ogy editor. This allows automatically generated 
ontologies to be manually inspected and modi-
fied to the specific needs particular analysis 
tasks. 

The JitterOnto ontology of negative senti-
ments that was generated for the experiments on 
Gothic literature described in Section 4 consisted 
of the 147 classes under the negative-emotion 
branch of the WordNet-Affect hierarchy. The 
maximum depth from the root class negative-
emotion to a leaf sentiment class was five. This 
was the case, for example, with the sentiment 
class negative-emotion/general-dislike/negative-
fear/negative-unconcern/heartlessness/cruelty. 
There are 823 individuals in the ontology, which 
means that the sentiment classes are described by 
a total of 823 nouns, verbs and adjectives. 
Hence, each class has on average of 5.6 instantia-
tions. For instance, the cruelty class mentioned 
above is instantiated by the words “cruel,” “cru-
elly,” “cruelty,” “mercilessness,” “pitilessness,” 
“ruthlessness” and “unkind.” 

Figure 2 shows an extract from the branch of 
the ontology that has to do with the set of emo-
tions that are classified as negative-fear. The 
other seven classes that immediately follow the 
root class negative-emotion are as follows: anxi-
ety, daze, despair, general-dislike, humility, in-
gratitude and sadness. 
 

 

WN-Affect

WordNet JWI

Sentiment

Ontology

Tokenizers

GATE pipeline

Morphological

analyzer

Onto Root

gazetteer

Input 

document 2

Sentiment 

profiler

Sentiment analyzer

Ontology factory

Input 

document 1
Profile for

document 1

Profile for

document 2

Profile visualizer

Profile filter

Profile matcher

and comparator

Visualization for

comparison

JENA

 
Figure 1. Architecture of the SentiProfiler system. 

 

64



 
Figure 2. Extract from JitterOnto showing the two levels of more specific sentiment classes under the parent 

class negative-fear. The figure was created with the Protégé editor (Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics 
Research, 2011). 

3.3 Analysis of affective content 

Sentiment analysis in SentiProfiler consists of 
creating a SP of an input document. A SP is a 
hierarchy of sentiment classes that contains all 
the classes of the source ontology that occurred 
in the document, and the classes that are part of a 
path from such a class to the root (negative-
emotion in case of the ontology used for the ex-
periments in this paper). That is, those sentiment 
classes that did not appear in the input document 
or have any children that appeared in the docu-
ment are not included in the SP. 

For instance, let us have a document in which 
the only negative sentiment classes that appear 
are chill and timidity. Following the paths from 
negative-emotion in Figure 2 to chill and timidity 
gives us the SP of the document. 

The creation of SPs consist of three phases: 
detection of sentiment-bearing words, relating 
each such word with the relevant sentiment class 
and, finally, constructing the hierarchy that de-
scribes the SP of a document. 

SA is performed in SentiProfiler with a GATE 
pipeline that consists of three basic ANNIE 
components (sentence splitter, word tokenizer 
and POS tagger), GATE morphological analyzer 
and an ontology-based tagging tool. Onto Root 
Gazetteer (Damljanovic et al., 2008) is a GATE 
processing resource that dynamically constructs 
a gazetteer from an ontology and creates, in 
combination with other GATE components, on-

tology-based annotations on the given content. In 
the SentiProfiler GATE pipeline Onto Root Gaz-
etteer marks up in the input document the words 
that match with an individual found in the ontol-
ogy. The relevant sentiment class names are used 
as the tags in the output. 

Next, a graph presentation of the sentiment 
class hierarchy (i.e. the sentiment profile) is cre-
ated for the input document in which each graph 
vertex is associated with the number of times a 
word relating to the relevant sentiment class ap-
pears in the document. In addition to the fre-
quency counts we define a score that measures 
the prevalence of each sentiment class. The sen-
timent class scores (SCMs) measure the relative 
frequency with which a specific sentiment si ap-
pears in a document. SCM score is defined as 
follows:  

words

S
SCM ii =1  

where |Si| is the number of times a word instanti-
ating the sentiment class si appears in the docu-
ment and |Si| is the total number of word tokens 
in the document. For instance, let us have a 
document with 1000 word tokens. Three of the 
sentiment-bearing words belong to the class s1. 
The SCM score for the sentiment class s1 is 0.15.  

An aggregate SCM score (ASCM) is defined 
for all the non-leaf sentiment classes. It is calcu-
lated as the sum of the SCM scores of all the sen-
timent classes that succeed the current sentiment 
classes in the hierarchy plus the SCM score of 

65



the current sentiment class. This score provides a 
way of comparing whole branches of the SP 
rather than one single sentiment class at a time. 
Figure 3 illustrates the concept. 

 
Figure 3. An example of SCM and ASCM scores. The 
scores that are not inside parentheses are SCMs (mul-

tiplied by 10 for easier interpretation). The figures 
inside the parentheses are aggregate SCM values. 

3.4 Visualization 

In the visualization of an SP, each sentiment 
class is represented as a vertex that indicates, in 
addition to the name of the sentiment class, any 
combination (depending on the system configu-
ration) of frequency, SCM and ASCM values. 
User can also observe the occurrences of the sen-
timent-bearing words pertaining to specific sen-
timent category along with the context in which 
the word appeared. 

The matching algorithm compares the profiles 
in order to find the sentiment classes that are pre-
sent in only one of the profiles. We refer to these 
as additional sentiment classes. It also calculates 
the differences between the scores of those 
classes that occur in both of the profiles. The 
sentiment classes that receive a higher score are 
referred to as higher score sentiment classes. As 
a result of the matching process, the vertices rep-
resenting additional and higher score sentiment 
classes are denoted by specific user-modifiable 
colors in the visualization. 

4 Experiments with Gothic Novels 

We evaluated the practical applicability of the 
SentiProfiler system by analyzing the SPs of 
Gothic novels. Such novels consist of stories of 
“terror and suspense, usually set in a gloomy old 
castle or monastery” (Baldick, 2004). The Gothic 
literary genre is further divided into works of 
terror and horror. Many explanations of the dis-
tinction between the two subgenres have been 
put forward in the literary research community 
(for example, Botting, 1996). In essence, the dis-
tinction between terror and horror can be sum-
marized as the intensity and the type of emotions 

they depict and evoke in the fictional character as 
well as in the reader him/herself. Although the 
works of both subgenres of the Gothic novels 
contain emotions such as anxiety, fear and gloom, 
in terror these emotions are more connected to a 
threat, real or perceived, rather than actual events 
of cruelty and violence.  

What makes this genre of novels so suitable 
for testing the profile comparison capabilities of 
SentiProfiler is, first, that they can be expected to 
contain a relatively high amount of (negative) 
emotional content. Second, the fact that there are 
two subgenres of Gothic novels provides a way 
of testing the practical use of our system in com-
paring SPs. If SentiProfiler is able, in addition to 
creating SP visualizations of Gothic novels, to 
distinguish differences in the types of emotions 
present in the SPs generated for samples of the 
two Gothic novel subgenres it provides evidence 
that the system can be used as a practical tool for 
supporting literature research.  

Due to the nature of the target texts, we con-
centrated our analysis on negative emotions. 
What we were interested in observing, in particu-
lar, were differences in the SPs that support the 
distinction between the two subgenres of Gothic 
literature as it is understood in the theory of lit-
erature. What we were expecting to be able to 
recognize is that horror novels contain emotions 
that can be described as a sort of an “aftershock”, 
a display of disgust that appears after a horren-
dous event has occurred. Terror, in contrast, 
raises anxiety and timidity caused by the fear of 
something terrible happening in the near future. 
In a sense, terror is of a more “psychological” 
nature than horror. Varma (1966) puts it suc-
cinctly: the difference between the two subgenres 
“is the difference between awful apprehension 
and sickening realization: between the smell of 
death and stumbling against a corpse.” 

Figure 4 illustrates an extract from the com-
parison of a horror and terror novel. The two 
novels used in the comparison were Matthew 
Lewis’s (1796) “The Monk: A romance”. It is 
considered as one of the prime examples of nov-
els in Gothic horror. Ann Radcliffe’s (1794) 
“The Mysteries of Udolpho” enjoys a similar 
status in the Gothic terror genre1.  

                                                
1 All the novels for the research reported in this paper 
were obtained from the Project Gutenberg web site at 
http://www.gutenberg.org. 

66



 
Figure 4. An extract from a sentiment profile comparison of the horror novel (The Monk) with the terror novel 
(Udolpho) from the perspective of the horror novel. Green vertices denote higher score sentiment classes. The 

red vertex (antipathy) indicates an additional sentiment class. 
 

The SP extract in Figure 4 indicates, as ex-
pected under the definitions of the two subgen-
res, that the novel representative of the horror 
subgenre receives higher SCM scores for the 
sentiment classes pertaining to, for example, 
disgust and nausea. The same was observed, 
for example, for the sentiment class cruelty 
(not shown in the figure).  

Figure 5 shows an extract from the same 
pair-wise comparison that was depicted in Fig-
ure 4, but in this case from the perspective of 
the terror novel. 

 
 

Figure 5. An extract from a comparison of the ter-
ror novel with the horror novel showing additional 

sentiment classes diffidence and hesitance and 
higher score class timidity. 

As visualized in Figure 5, as expected, the 
terror novel more frequently contained senti-

ments that have to do with emotions that can 
be described as “less intense” and less con-
nected with cruelty and the shock caused by 
acts of violence. In addition to the sentiment 
classes illustrated in Figure 5, this was the case, 
for instance, with the sentiment classes impa-
tience and depression. 

The color coding of vertices and the ability 
to zoom in and out (see Figure 6 for an exam-
ple) enable the literary scholar to easily locate 
of the branches in the SP that show a signifi-
cant number of differences between the novels 
explored. Moreover, the dialog that shows the 
contexts in which the words linked with a spe-
cific sentiment class occurred helps the com-
parative literature researcher to make more 
detailed analyses of, for instance, style and 
discourse. 

Table 1 summarizes some of the observed 
differences between the SPs created based on 
the terror and horror novel discussed above, 
and the following two canonical works in the 
horror and terror subgenres: Frankenstein; or, 
The Modern Prometheus (Shelley, 1818) and 
the Castle of Otranto (Walpole, 1764). 

The table does not give an exhaustive list of 
all the differences, but rather concentrates on 
those classes that support the notion of divid-
ing the Gothic subgenres based on the “sever-
ity” of emotions. 

 

 
Figure 6. Zoomed-out view of a sentiment profile comparison that demonstrates how the system can be used for 
locating interesting branches in a sentiment profile. In this sample case, attention is drawn to the large branch in 
the middle, as it contains several blue vertices (denoting additional sentiment classes) and a mixture of red and 
green vertices. The user can zoom in to the interesting section of the visualization by turning the mouse wheel. 

 

67



 
Sentiment classes 

Novel pair 
Higher score  Additional 

T H T H T T H 

Udolpho 
Franken-

stein 
timidity, shyness, 

anxiousness 
horror, disgust, 
hate, lividity 

 
hesitance, solici-
tude, insecurity 

- 

Otranto Monk 
sorrow, depres-

sion, anxiety 
horror, disgust, 

repugnance 
 - nausea, lividity 

Udolpho Monk 
timidity, anxiety, 

impatience  
horror, disgust, 

repugnance, cruelty 
 

hesitance, diffi-
dence 

nausea, lividity 

Otranto 
Franken-

stein 
hopelessness, im-

patience 
horror, disgust, 

repugnance 
 - nausea, trepidation 

Table 1: Pair-wise comparison of the two horror and terror novels. The two columns under the heading “higher 
score” lists examples of the sentiment classes that received higher score in the terror (T) and the horror (H) 

novel, respectively. The columns under the heading “additional” contain examples of sentiment classes that were 
present only either in the terror or the horror novel. 

 
The results reported in Table 1 indicate that 

differences can indeed be observed in the relative 
frequency and presence of certain sentiment 
classes between representatives of the two sub-
genres of Gothic literature. Sentiment classes 
such as timidity, anxiety and shyness were more 
frequent in the terror novels than they were in the 
representatives of the horror subgenre. Horror 
and disgust were more frequent sentiment classes 
in horror novels in all the four pair-wise com-
parisons. Nausea was among sentiments that 
were present only in the horror novels included 
in the comparison.  

It is also interesting to note that the terror 
novel Castle of Otranto had additional categories 
aggravation and wrath (not shown in Table1) that 
were not present in either of the horror novels. 
This observation did not seem to support the ex-
pected distinction between terror and horror nov-
els. However, further analysis of relevant re-
search literature (for instance, Hume (1969)) re-
vealed that, while Otranto is often considered as 
a terror novel, it is somewhat of a borderline case 
between the two subgenres. Being able to capture 
such an ambiguity gives additional support to the 
practical applicability of SentiProfiler. 

5 Conclusion 

We introduced the concept of sentiment profiles 
(SPs) and the SentiProfiler system for creating 
easily comparable SPs created from pairs of 
documents. The system is built on the basis of 
various well-known NLP and Semantic Web 
technologies and tools. We demonstrated the use 
of the system by describing how it can support 
research in comparative literature. The visual 
comparisons allow the literary scholar to gain 

insights into the target texts that would be diffi-
cult, if not impossible, to obtain with the tradi-
tional “pen and paper” research methods that are 
typically used in the field.  

The preliminary experiments we reported in 
Section 4 indicated that the tool can provide in-
teresting insights for literary researchers. Senti-
Profiler was able to detect differences between 
the sentiments present in example novels of 
Gothic terror and horror subgenres. Moreover, 
many of the differences observed by the tool 
supported the literature theoretical distinction 
between these two subgenres.  

Our planned future work includes applying the 
SentiProfiler tool to conduct a comprehensive 
study of a larger set of Gothic novels in order to 
verify whether the commonly accepted definition 
of the difference between the emotional content 
present in horror and terror subgenres holds true.  

There are various ways in which SentiProfiler 
could be improved and extended. First, we plan 
to apply the system to a study of Gothic novels. 
Since we are dealing with books from the eight-
eenth and nineteenth centuries, extending the 
JitterOnto ontology of negative emotions with 
words that are not in use in modern English 
would presumably increase the accuracy of the 
system in that particular area of application. 

The system has many potential uses beyond li-
terary research. Negative emotions play a role in 
anti-social behavior. One of the future applica-
tions of SentiProfiler and the JittersOnto ontol-
ogy used in the experiment reported in this paper 
includes automatic detection and prediction of 
potential acts of extreme anti-social behavior 
(such as school shootings) based on messages 
posted online. It is important to note that, despite 
the focus of this paper, SentiProfiler is designed 

68



and implemented in a way that allows any of the 
WordNet-Affect sentiment hierarchy branches, 
and in fact any ontologically represented class 
hierarchy, to be used. Hence, there is no reason 
why the tool and the method could not be applied 
in more general case of SA, rather than focusing 
on negative emotional content. 

Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the project entitled 
“Detecting and Visualizing Changes in Emotions 
in Texts” funded by the Academy of Finland. 

 
References  

Chris Baldick. 2004. The Concise Dictionary of Liter-
ary Terms (2nd edition). Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, UK and New York, USA.  

Fred Botting. 1996. Gothic (The New Critical Idiom). 
Routledge, New York, USA. 

Chaomei Chen, Fidelia Ibekwe-SanJuan, Eric San-
Juan and Chris Weaver. 2006. Visual Analysis of 
Conflicting Opinions. Proceedings of the IEEE 
Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Tech-
nology, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.  

Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, Kalina 
Bontcheva and Valentin Tablan. 2002. GATE: A 
Framework and Graphical Development Environ-
ment for Robust NLP Tools and Applications. Pro-
ceedings of the 40th Anniversary Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistic, Phila-
delphia, Pennsylvania, USA. 

Danica Damljanovic, Valentin Tablan and Kalina 
Bontcheva. 2008 A Text-based Query Interface to 
OWL Ontologies. Proceedings of the 6th Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference, Mar-
rakech, Morocco. 

Tomohiro Fukuhara, Hiroshi Nakagawa and Toyoaki 
Nishida. 2007. Understanding Sentiment of People 
from News Articles: Temporal Sentiment Analysis 
of Social Events. Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, Boulder, 
Colorado, USA. 

Michael Gamon, Anthony Aue, Simon Corston-Oliver 
and Eric Ringger. 2005. Pulse: Mining Customer 
Opinions from Free Text. Proceedings of the 6th 
International Symposium on Intelligent Data Anal-
ysis, Madrid, Spain. 

Michelle L. Gregory, Nancy A. Chinchor, Paul Whit-
ney, Richard Carter, Elizabeth Hetzler and Alan 
Turner. 2006. User-Directed Sentiment Analysis: 
Visualizing the Affective Content of Documents. 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment and 
Subjectivity in Text, Sydney, Australia. 

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining Opinion 
Features in Customer Reviews. Proceedings of 
19th National Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, San Jose, California, USA. 

Robert D. Hume. 1969. Gothic Versus Romantic: A 
Revaluation of the Gothic Novel. PMLA, 84(2): 
282-90. 

Matthew G. Lewis. 1796. The Monk: A Romance. 
Printed for J. Saunders, Waterford, Ireland.  

Bing Liu, Minqing Hu and Junsheng Cheng. 2005. 
Opinion Observer: Analyzing and Comparing Opi-
nions on the Web. Proc. of the 14th International 
Conference on World Wide Web, Chiba, Japan.  

George A. Miller. 1995. WordNet: A Lexical Data-
base for English. Communications of the ACM, 
38(11):39-41. 

Ann Radcliffe. 1794. The Mysteries of Udolpho. 
Printed for G.G. and J. Robinson, London, UK. 

Mary Shelley. 1818. Frankenstein; or, The Modern 
Prometheus. Lackington, Hughes, Harding, Mavor 
& Jones, London, UK. 

Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics Research. 
2011. Protégé. http://protege.stanford.edu/ (Ac-
cessed March 23rd, 2011).  

Carlo Strapparava and Alessandro Valitutti. 2004. 
WordNet-Affect: an Affective Extension of Word-
Net. Proceedings of the 4th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation, Lis-
bon, Portugal. 

Maite Taboada, Mary Ann Gillies and Paul 
McFetridge 2006. Sentiment Classification Tech-
niques for Tracking Literary Reputation. Proceed-
ings of LREC Workshop Towards Computational 
Models of Literary Analysis, Genoa, Italy. 

Horace Walpole. 1764. The Castle of Otranto. Tho-
mas Lownds, London, UK. 

Devendra P. Varma. 1966. The Gothic Flame: Being 
a History of the Gothic Novel in England - Its Ori-
gins, Efflorescence, Disintegration, and Residuary 
Influences. Scarecrow Press, New York, USA. 

Yingcai Wu, Furu Wei, Shixia Liu, Norman Au, 
Weiwei Cui, Hong Zhou and Huamin Qu. 2010. 
OpinionSeer: Interactive Visualization of Hotel 
Customer Feedback. IEEE Transactions on Visu-
alization and Computer Graphics, 16(6):1109-
1118. 

69


