




















Evaluation of Terminologies Acquired from Comparable Corpora : an
Application Perspective

Estelle Delpech
Université de Nantes - LINA FRE UMRS 6249

2 rue de la Houssinière BP 92208, 44322 Nantes Cedex 3, France
estelle.delpech(at)univ-nantes(dot)fr

Lingua et Machina
c/o Inria Rocquencourt, BP 105 Le Chesnay Cedex 78153, France

ed(at)lingua-et-machina(dot)com

Abstract

This paper describes a protocol for the
evaluation of bilingual terminologies ac-
quired from comparable corpora. The
aim of the protocol is to assess the
terminologies’added-value in a task of
specialized translation. The protocol con-
sists in having specialized texts translated
in various situations: without any spe-
cialized resource, with an domain-related
bilingual terminology or using Internet.
By comparing the quality of the segments
translated using these various resources,
we are able to assess the impact of our
bilingual terminologies on the quality of
the translation.

1 Introduction

Evaluation plays an important role in NLP devel-
opments: it assesses the quality of tools, brings
out the progress made between two developments,
spots the limitations and highlights possible lines
of research. Regarding the evaluation of termi-
nologies, Nazarenko et al. (2009) show that termi-
nologies are complex objects and that their evalu-
ation can be quite arduous. These authors distin-
guish between three evaluation modes:

evaluation through reference : the terminology
is compared to a standard reference, the eval-
uation metric indicates the adequacy between
the assessed terminology and the reference
terminology.

evaluation through interaction : the evaluation
aims at measuring the cost of the transforma-
tion of the raw terminology as outputted by
the system into the final, validated, ready-to-
use terminology.

evaluation through application : the evalua-
tion’s purpose is to compare the performance

of a given application with and without the
terminology, the metric indicates the added-
value of the terminology and depends on the
application.

Nazarenko et. al. (2009) propose protocols and
metrics for the first two evaluation modes and fo-
cus on monolingual terminologies only. The aim
of this paper is to propose a protocol for the eval-
uation through application of bilingual terminolo-
gies acquired from comparable corpora. The con-
sidered application is human specialized transla-
tion.

Terminologies acquired from comparable cor-
pora are usually assessed using an evaluation
through reference protocol (Fung, 1997; Sadat et.
al., 2003; Koehn et. al., 2002). Algorithms which
extract bilingual terminologies from comparable
corpora output a list of 1-to-n alignments: each
source term is aligned with the n best candidate
translations, most of the time the Top20 candi-
date translations. The output of the algorithm is
compared to a reference lexicon and the evalua-
tion metric is a precision score computed on the
Top1, Top10 or Top20 candidates. For example, a
50% precision on the Top20 candidates indicates
that the correct translation is found among the first
top 20 candidates for 50% of the source terms.

Although evaluation through reference is use-
ful to monitor the effect of changes in the align-
ment algorithm and to compare the alignment
techniques, we believe it is important to demon-
strate the impact and the usefulness of terminolo-
gies and lexicons acquired from comparable cor-
pora in real-life applications. Renders et al. (2003)
showed the influence of such lexicons on cross-
lingual information retrieval. We would like to
determine the added-value of these bilingual ter-
minologies when they are used in a task of human
specialized translation.

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 66–73



Section 2 explains how terms are aligned in
comparable corpora and examines the issue of
translation quality assessment. The evaluation
protocol is defined in section 3. The experimen-
tation and results are described in section 4. Per-
spectives and future work are discussed in sec-
tion 5.

2 Background

In this section, we describe the algorithm used for
term alignment (section 2.1) and give a brief state-
of-the-art survey in translation quality assessment
(section 2.2).

2.1 Term alignment from comparable
corpora

Comparable corpora are sets of texts written in two
languages which are not translations of each other
but which share a substantial part of their vocab-
ulary, mainly because they are topic-related. The
major advantage of comparable corpora is that it
is much more available than parallel corpora and
enables the processing of unprecedented language
pairs. It is also often argued that the target lan-
guage texts found in comparable corpora contain
more spontaneous / natural terms and expressions
than in parallel corpora because the target texts are
not translations and they have not been influenced
by the language of the source text.

Term alignment from comparable corpora was
initiated by the work of Fung (1997) and
Rapp (1995). The alignment algorithm is based
on distributional linguistics and considers that two
terms are probable translations if they occurr in
similar contexts. The context of a term T is repre-
sented by a vector indicating the number of times
T co-occurs with each word within a given con-
textual window (for instance: three words on the
left of T and three words on the right of T). The
cooccurrence frequencies are normalized using the
log-likelihood ratio (Dunning, 1993). Words in the
source context vectors are translated into the tar-
get language using a bilingual seed lexicon. Then,
the source and target vectors are compared using
a similiarity measure such as the Cosine similarity
measure. The most similar the vectors, the most
likely the target and source terms are translations
of each other. Morin and Daille (2009) report that
the correct translation is to be found among the top
20 best candidates for 42% to 80% of the source
terms depending on corpus size, on the complex-

ity of the terms and whether the alignment is made
using specialized corpora or general language cor-
pora. As a consequence, the output lexicon is
ambiguous and sometimes, the correct translation
does not appear among the candidates.

2.2 Translation quality assessement (TQA)

Because we want to compare the quality of transla-
tions made by humans with and without bilingual
terminologies, we need to find a way to assess hu-
man translation quality. If Machine Translation
(MT) enjoys well-defined and rather consensual
metrics to evaluate its quality, evaluation of human
translation poses a real challenge. These two do-
mains use different protocols for the assessment
of translations. On the one hand, MT evaluation
focuses on comparing the output of different MT
systems. This evaluation is done in reference to
one or several human translations. On the other
hand, translation studies seek to assess the quality
of a human translation on its own, without any ref-
erence to a standard translation. In fact, the only
reference is the judge himself/herself.

2.2.1 TQA and machine translation
There are two ways of assessing machine transla-
tions. One is called objective or automatic eval-
uation. The other is called subjective or human
evaluation.

In objective evaluation, translations are eval-
uated through a measure which is automatically
computable and which has the advantadge of be-
ing reproducible. Examples of such measure are:
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) which is based on
the count of common n-grams between the as-
sessed translation and reference translation(s) and
METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005) which is
similar to BLEU but leaves room for variation by
including morphological variants and synonyms
in the n-gram comparison. These metrics are in
turn meta-evaluated by computing their correla-
tion with human jugements. Though handy for
the evaluation of MT systems on a daily basis,
these metrics were not used in the shared trans-
lation tasks of the ACL Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation where they are perceived as
imperfect substitutes of human assessment, see the
work of Callison-Burch et al. (2009; 2010) for ex-
ample.

MT evaluation campaigns led to the develop-
ment of a series of protocols for what is called sub-
jective or human evaluation of MT. Two evaluation

67

Evaluation of terminologies acquired from comparable corpora: an application perspective

67



protocols stand out :

judgement task The judge grades each transla-
tion independently. The grading scale can be
quite complex, like 5 points scales over two
criteria (fluency, adequacy) or simple binary
judgements (correct/incorrect).

ranking task The judge ranks several translation
of the same source segment from worse to
best, each translation being produced by a
different system.

These protocols are meta-evaluated using inter-
and intra- annotator agreement measures which
gives some indication on the coherence of
the judgements. Experiments by Callison-
Burch (2007) show that annotation tasks which
involve complex sets of categories (e.g. 5 points
scales over adequacy and fluency vs. binary
judgements) and larger segments (sentences vs.
phrases) tend to be more time-consuming and to
result in lower agreement. The ranking task is con-
sidered easier and less time-consuming than the
judgement task. It also yields a higher annotator
agreement.

2.2.2 TQA and translation studies

In translation studies, TQA is mainly used by the
translation industry as a way to monitor the quality
of its products. Secară (2005) gives an overview
of various translation grids. Although there is no
consensus, all grids follow more or less the same
methodology. Translation errors are categorized
(e.g. spelling, grammar, terminology) and each er-
ror type is assigned a certain cost which is propor-
tional to its gravity. A passage of a given length is
randomly selected from the translation under as-
sessment. Errors are marked and the cost points
add up. If the sum of the points exceeds some
threshold, the translation is deemed unacceptable.

These grids are criticised by theoretical ap-
proaches to TQA - see Williams (2001) for in-
stance - because they stick to the lexical and
syntactic levels and do not take into account
higher linguistic levels like discursive or argumen-
tal structures. They are also monolithic and sup-
posed applicable to any kind of text whereas au-
thors like Reiss (1971) have argued that the eval-
uation criteria and their weight should be adapted
to the text’s function.

3 Protocol

The evaluation protocol is based on the rank-
ing and judgement tasks used in MT subjec-
tive evaluation. These tasks were chosen be-
cause of their relative simplicity (compared to
traditional 5-points scales) which also results in
more reliable judgements as shown by Callison-
Burch et al. (2007). Automatic evaluation met-
rics were discarded because their only advantage
- reproducibility - is of no use in this kind of
evaluation: the protocol includes a subtask which
is not reproducible (the translation) which makes
the overall evaluation non-reproducible anyway.
Evaluation grids were also discarded because they
are too complex to put in practice, difficultly avail-
able and scarcely documented.

The evaluation’s protocol is as follows:

1. Translators translate specialized texts in three
different situations which we call “situations
of translation”. These situations of transla-
tion share a common base of identical generic
resources (two monolingual and one bilin-
gual dictionnaries). Translation are made
from second-language to native language:

situation 0 : translate with generic re-
sources only

situation 1 : translate with generic resources
+ a bilingual terminology extracted from
comparable specialized corpora.

situation 2 : translate with generic resources
+ full access to Internet where the trans-
lator can find all sorts of translation aids

Situation 0 acts as a baseline where the trans-
lator has no specialized resource. The ter-
minology used in situation 1 is the terminol-
ogy under assessment. In situation 2, the
Web is considered as some sort of “super-”
or “meta-” specialized resource, because the
translator will have access to all the special-
ized lexicons and termbases that are available
online.

2. Once the translations are done, translators
note down the time they spent in translation
as well as the terms or expressions that they
found problematic to translate and which
drove them to use a linguistic resource. They
also note down which resources they used to
make the translation.

68

Estelle Delpech

68



3. For each problematic term, judges rank the
translations produced in the different situa-
tions1 (ranking task). They also judge each
translation separately using three categories:
exact, acceptable or wrong (judgement task).

4. The added-valued of the bilingual terminol-
ogy (situation 1) is measured by the compar-
ing the quality of the translations produced in
situation 1 with the quality of the translations
produced in situations 0 and 2.

We decided to restrict the evaluation to the
problematic terms rather than evaluating the qual-
ity of the whole translation because it appears
from works in translation studies (Williams, 2001;
Reiss, 1971) that the overall quality of the trans-
lation of a text emerges from the complex inter-
action of various parameters (register, syntax, ar-
gumental structure, spelling, etc.) most of which
terminologies have no influence upon. By focus-
ing on the problematic terms and expressions, we
isolate the part of the translation that terminologies
are meant to improve. As a side effect, evaluating
small segments also saves time and yields more
reliable judgements as demonstrated by Callison-
Burch et. al. (2007).

The judgement task is based on three categories
presented in table 1. These categories were cho-
sen in accordance with Reiss (1971) who states
that the translation of “content-focused texts” (e.g.
scientific and technical texts, manual for use...)
should favor the transfer of the source text’s mean-
ing over the transfer of the source text’s form.
An acceptable translation is a translation which
conveys the meaning of the source term. An ex-
act translation is a translation which makes use
of the expected, standard target term. In a way,
the “meaning transfer” and “accurate form” crite-
ria parallel the more classical “adequacy” and “flu-
ency” criteria found in MT campaigns.

meaning transfer accurate form
exact 4 4
acceptable 4
wrong

Table 1: Translation quality criteria

In order to leverage differences in the quality of
the translations which would arise from the trans-
lator’s expertise rather than from the quality of the

1Ties are allowed.

language resource, each situation of translation is
evaluated on the basis of texts translated by sev-
eral translators. In turn, one has to be cautious that
translators do not translate texts from the same do-
main in different situations of translation. Indeed,
if a translator translates a text from domain A in
situation 1, he/she must not translate a text from
domain A in situation 2: there is a risk that the
translator re-uses some terms’translations he/she
has learnt in the previous situation.

A critical point when judging the translation of
technical texts is that the judges often lack domain
expertise and that domain experts are rarely avail-
able. One can get round this trouble by choosing
specialized texts which already have an existing
translation, like research paper abstracts for exam-
ple. Judges can also get help from general termi-
nological databases such as Termium 2.

The consistency of the judgements can be im-
proved by first running a blank evaluation on a
small set of data and then discussing the dis-
agreements with the judges (Blanchon and Boitet,
2007). In any case, it is necessary to provide the
judges with clear instructions and examples of an-
notations on debatable cases.

4 Experimentation

This section describes the experimental frame-
work (section 4.1) and the result of the evaluation
(section 4.2).

4.1 Experimental framework

4.1.1 Data
Two bilingual terminologies were built for the
evaluation. One was acquired from comparable
corpora on BREAST CANCER and the other from
comparable corpora on WATER SCIENCE . The WA-
TER SCIENCE corpus is quite large (2M words per
language) and its topic is coarse-grained. Texts
are research papers from the journals Sciences de
l’eau3 and Water Science and Technology4. Con-
versely, the BREAST CANCER corpus is small (400k
words per language) with a fine-grained topic.
Texts come from various research papers of the
publications portal Elsevier 5. The texts to be
translated belong to the same domains. They are
divided into scientific texts and popular science

2http://www.termiumplus.gc.ca/
3http://www.rse.inrs.ca/
4http://www.iwaponline.com/wst/
5http://www.elsevier.com/

69

Evaluation of terminologies acquired from comparable corpora: an application perspective

69



texts. The scientic texts are 2 × 3 research pa-
pers abstracts taken from Elsevier and the water
science journals. The popular science texts are 2
× 1 webpages taken from bilingual websites on
breast cancer6 and water treatment7).

BREAST CANCER WATER SCIENCE

scientific 508 499
pop. science 613 425

Table 2: Size of texts to be translated (number of
words)

4.1.2 Data processing

The algorithm described by Fung (1997) was ap-
plied to the terms and to every open-class word
occurring more than 5 times in the corpus. Extra
knowledge was automatically added to the terms
and open-class words in order to help the trans-
lators: part-of-speech, frequency, collocations8,
variants9, related terms10, definitions11, concor-
dances. Translators could browse the terminology
via a dedicated interface designed for terminolo-
gies acquired from comparable corpora (Delpech
and Daille, 2010).

4.1.3 People involved

Due to the lack of human resources to perform
the evaluation, there was some collisions in the
roles of translator/judge and translator/organizer.
Three persons were involved in the test of the pro-
tocol. The author of the paper, who is not a trained
translator, translated the texts in the baseline situ-
tation (general resources only) and organized the
evaluation. Two trained translators translated the
texts in situation 1 (terminology) and 2 (Internet)
and also judged the translations. The translations
were anonymized and randomly shuffled so that
the judges would not know the origin of the trans-
lations.

Texts, domains and situations were distributed
as follows :

6http://www.cbcf.org/
7http://www.lenntech.com/
8most remarkable cooccurrents, the association measure

is the log-likelihood ratio (Dunning, 1993)
9phrases which have not been identified as terms by the

term extractor but have words in common with the entry term
10terms which have words in common with the entry term
11either the Wikipedia or Wiktionary article if avalaible or

a sentence extracted from the corpus and containg a very sim-
ple pattern like “A $TERM is a...”

BREAST CANCER WATER SCIENCE

untrained translator sit. 0 sit. 0
trained translator 1 sit. 1 sit. 2
trained translator 2 sit. 2 sit. 1

4.2 Results

4.2.1 Translators’ feedback
It was difficult for translators to adapt to the am-
biguity of the alignments. Although the aim and
the context of the evaluation had been explained
to them, they still expected the correct transla-
tion to appear “on click”, just like it happens with
the traditional languages resources they are accus-
tomed to. Another obstacle was the coverage of
the terminology, especially for the WATER SCIENCE
domain whose topic was not refined enough. Ta-
ble 3 shows the percentage of words of the texts
to be translated which also appear in the termi-
nology. Clearly, fined-grained corpora should be
favored over large corpora.

BREAST CANCER WATER SCIENCE

EN texts 94% 14%
FR texts 67% 78%

Table 3: Terminology coverage of the vocabulary
of the texts to be translated (EN) and their refer-
ence translation (FR)

4.2.2 Problematic terms
Problematic terms are terms or expressions that a
translator found difficult to translate. Problematic
terms retained for the evaluation are terms which
were tagged problematic by at least 2 translators.
We collected 148 problematic terms (26 tagged by
2 translators and 122 tagged by 3 translators). Ta-
ble 4 shows the repartition of problematic terms
among domains and types of corpora.

BREAST CANCER WATER SCIENCE

pop. science 34 10
specialized 43 51
total 87 61

Table 4: Problematic terms used for evaluation

4.2.3 Time
The texts to be translated amounted to 2,147
words. Translators were quicker in situation 0

70

Estelle Delpech

70



which is normal because they had less resources
to browse (7.15 words/sec. on average). There is
no significant time difference between situation 1
and situation 2 (11.18 and 11.6 words/sec. respec-
tively).

4.2.4 Agreement between judges
Agreement was computed using the Kappa coef-
ficient (Carletta, 1996) which takes into account
the observed agreement P (A) and the agreement
which would have occurred by chance P (E).

Kappa =
P (A)− P (E)
1− P (E)

Agreement was better for the ranking task: 0.65
(substantial) than for the judgement task: 0.36
(fair) which is consistent with the findings of
Callison-Burch et. al. (2007). Agreement was bet-
ter for the popular science texts: 0.57 (moderate)
than for the scientific texts: 0.48 (moderate).

4.3 Judgement task

Table 5 gives quality judgements for the transla-
tions of the BREAST CANCER texts. The propor-
tion of translations judged wrong is almost equiv-
alent for all situations. Translations produced in
situation 1 (with the terminology) are more often
judged exact than the translations produced in situ-
ation 0 (only generic resources). Translations pro-
duced in situation 2 (with Internet) are the most
accurate ones.

sit.0 sit.1 sit.2
exact 38% 43% 47%
acceptable 42% 38% 35%
wrong 20% 19% 18%

Table 5: Translations’ quality - BREAST CANCER do-
main

Table 6 gives quality judgements for the transla-
tions of the WATER SCIENCE texts. One can see that
translations produced in situation 1 are of lesser
quality than those produced in situation 0. This
is unexpected because situation 1 and situation 2
share a common base of generic resources. Trans-
lations produced in situation 1 should be at least
as good as translations produced in situation 0.

The fact is that the translators used the lan-
guages resources in different manners depend-
ing on the situation in which they performed the

sit.0 sit.1 sit.2
exact 59% 56% 77%
acceptable 23% 23% 16%
wrong 18% 21% 7%

Table 6: Translations’ quality - WATER SCIENCE do-
main

translations. Thanks to the data collected dur-
ing the translation phase, we are able to tell, for
each term translation if it was produced using the
generic resource or the specialized resource (ter-
minology/Internet) or relying on intuition (not ex-
clusive). Table 7 shows that the translators who
had access to a specialized resource scarcely used
the generic resource. It might be because they felt
the generic resource was useless to get the trans-
lation of technical terms and they prefered to use
directly the specialised resource. But as the WATER
SCIENCE terminology covers only a small part of
vocabulary of the texts to translate, it was barely
advantageous. A systematic exploitation of the
generic resource in situation 1 would have led to
translations at least as good as those produced in
situation 0.

sit.0 sit.1 sit.2
gen. ress. 43% 14% 3%
spec. ress. - 25% 56%
intutition 79% 77% 44%

Table 7: Exploitation of the language resources
depending on the situation of translation

4.4 Ranking task

The ranking task results are similar to those of the
judgement task. When different translations of the
same terms are compared, those produced in sit-
uation 2 are always better, whatever the domain.
Those produced in situation 1 are better than the
ones produced in situation 0 only for the BREAST
CANCER domain, probably because of divergences
in the exploitation of the language resources as ex-
plained above.

5 Discussion and future work

We have described a protocol which assesses the
added-value of terminologies acquired from com-
parable corpora when used for specialized human
translation. This protocol consists in comparing

71

Evaluation of terminologies acquired from comparable corpora: an application perspective

71



sit.0 sit.2
sit.1 better than 28% 26%
sit.1 as good as 47% 42%
sit.1 worse than 26% 32%

Table 8: Translations’ ranking - BREAST CANCER
domain

sit.0 sit.2
sit.1 better than 18% 16%
sit.1 as good as 49% 41%
sit.1 worse than 33% 43%

Table 9: Translations’ ranking - WATER SCIENCE do-
main

several situations of translation in which the trans-
lators have access to diverse language resources:
only generic resources, generic resources and the
evaluated terminology, generic resources and full
access to Internet. The added-value of the termi-
nology is supposed to be evidenced by the differ-
ence in the quality of the translations produced in
the three situations. We have described in sec-
tion 4 a first trial of the protocol. This first trial
showed that some hitches in our procedure prevent
us from clearly demonstrating the added-value of
terminologies acquired from comparable corpora :
we had contradictory results for the BREAST CAN-
CER and WATER SCIENCE domains. Nonetheless, this
first experimentation, although carried out with a
small set of data and participants, allowed us to
test the feasibility of the protocol and pinpointed
problems which must be solved before launching
a more thorough evaluation :

• The observed added-value of the terminol-
ogy highly depends on its coverage of the
texts used to evaluate it. Any measure of
this added-value should also mention the ade-
quacy between the assessed terminology and
the texts to be translated, otherwise it is not
interpretable. We determined this adequacy
in a simple manner, by computing the propor-
tion of words in the texts to be translated that
also occurr in the terminology. This leaves
some room for improvement. The compara-
bility of the corpora used form terminology
extraction and alignment must also be taken
into account. For this, we are planning to use
the comparability measure developped by Bo
and Gaussier (2010).

• The joint use of several language resources
seems to bias the results as the translators’
behaviour changes in function of the re-
sources he/she has as his/her disposal. It is
better to have only one resource per situation
of translation, for instance:

– situation 0: no resources,
– situation 1: assessed terminology only,
– situation 2: Internet only.

• Translators should be prepared to translate in
a situation which is unusual to them. Ideally,
one shoud run at first a blank translation task
so as to discuss it with the translators and help
them apprehend these new situations and re-
sources.

The next step is to scale-up the protocol. We will
renew the experiment on a much larger scale (a
whole class of students translators) and include all
the improvements listed above.

Finally, even if it was not the goal of this work,
this first evaluation gives rise to some lines of re-
search to improve the usefulness of terminologies
acquired from comparable corpora. First, we have
seen that the acquisition corpus should be col-
lected in function of the texts that are to be trans-
lated and that the topic should be fine-grained.
Second, it is clear that the Internet is a huge repos-
itory of linguistic resources and translations. A
nice development would be to add a new function-
ality to the terminology software which, when the
queried term is not present in the database, would
either automatically generate a translation and fil-
ter it on the Internet or search it in pre-selected
online resources. However, the worth of Inter-
net as a linguistic resource should not be over-
estimated. In most professional translations, trans-
lators have to translate texts whose vocabulary
can not be found on the Internet. It is especially
the case with corporate translations : companies
use their own terminologies, which can only be
found in the texts produced by the company it-
self. Thus, we can not expect to rely on Internet
as a unique source of translations and still need
to improve the term alignment program. For this,
we are planning to use translation techniques re-
lying on the compositionality of terms (Morin and
Daille, 2009) in addition to the distribution-based
approaches (Fung, 1997) presented in section 2.1
and which we used for this evaluation.

72

Estelle Delpech

72



Acknowledgments

This work was funded by the company Lingua
et Machina and the French National Research
Agency (funding no. ANR-08-CORD-009). I
would like to thank Clémence de Baudus and
Mathieu Delage for their participation in the eval-
uation.

References
S. Banerjee and A. Lavie. 2005. METEOR: An Au-

tomatic Metric for MT Evaluation with Improved
Correlation with Human Judgments Proceedings
of Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation
Measures for MT and/or Summarization at the 43rd
Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, pp. 65–72.

H. Blanchon and C. Boitet. 2007. Pour l’évaluation ex-
terne des systèmes de TA par des méthodes fondées
sur la tâche Traitement Automatique des Langues,
48(1):33–65.

L. Bo and E. Gaussier. 2010. Improving Corpus Com-
parability for Bilingual Lexicon Extraction from
Comparable Corpora 23ème International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics, pp. 23–27.

C. Callison-Burch, C. Fordryce, P. Koehn, C. Monz
and J. Schroeder. 2007. (Meta-) Evaluation of Ma-
chine Translation Proceedings of the 2nd workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation, pp. 136–158.

C. Callison-Burch, P. Koehn, C. Monz and J.
Schroeder. 2009. Findings of the 2009 Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation Proceedings of
the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation, pp. 1–28.

C. Callison-Burch, P. Koehn, C. Monz, K. Peterson,
M. Przybocki and O. Zaidan. 2010. Findings of the
2010 Joint Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation and Metrics for Machine Translation Pro-
ceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation and Metrics MATR, pp. 17–53.

J. Carletta. 1996. Assessing Agreement on Classifi-
cation Tasks: The Kappa Statistic Computational
Linguistics, 22(2).

E. Delpech. 2010. Dealing with lexicon acquired from
comparable corpora : validation and exchange Pro-
ceedings of the 2010 Terminology and Knowledge
Engineering Conference (TKE 2010), pp. 211–223.

T. Dunning. 1993. Accurate Methods for the Statistics
of Surprise and Coincidence Computational Lin-
guistics, 19(1):61–74.

P. Fung. 1997. Finding Terminology Translations from
Non-parallel Corpora Proceedings of the 5th Annual
Workshop on Very Large Corpora, pp. 192–202.

P. Koehn and K. Knight. 2002. Learning a Translation
Lexicon from Monolingual Corpora Unsupervised
Lexical Acquisition: Proceedings of the Workshop
pf the ACL Special Interest Group on the Lexicon
(SIGLEX), pp. 9–16. Association for Computational
Linguistics. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

E. Morin and B. Daille. 2009. Compositionality
and lexical alignment of multi-word terms Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LRE), 44:79–95.
P. Rayson, S. Piao, S. Sharoff, S. Evert, B. Villada
Moirón (eds.) Springer Netherlands

A. Nazarenko, H. Zargayouna, O. Hamon and J. Van
Puymbrouk. 2009. Évaluation des outils ter-
minologiques : enjeux, difficultés et propositions
Traitement Automatique des Langues, 50(1):257–
281.

K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward and W.-J. Zhu. 2002.
BLEU: A method for automatic evaluation of ma-
chine translation. Proceedings of the 40th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 311–318.

E. Planas. 2005. Similis : un logiciel d’aide à la
traduction au service des professionnels. Traduire,
206:41–48.

R. Rapp. 1995. Identifying Word Translations in
Non-Parallel Texts. Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pp. 320–322.

K. Reiss. 1971. Translation criticism, the potentials
and limitations : categories and criteria for trans-
lation quality assessment. St. Jerome Pub., Manch-
ester, GB.

M. Renders, H. Djean and E. Gaussier. 1971. Assess-
ing Automatically Extracted Bilingual Lexicons for
CLIR in Vertical Domains: XRCE Participation in
the GIRT Track of CLEF 2002 Lecture Notes in
Computer Science., pp. 363–371.

F. Sadat, M. Yoshikawa and S. Uemura. 2003.
Learning Bilingual Translations from Comparable
Corpora to Cross-Language Information Retrieval:
Hybrid Statistics-based and Linguistics-based Ap-
proach Proceedings of the 6th International Work-
shop on Information Retrieval with Asian Lan-
guages., 11:57–64

A. Secară. 2005. Translation Evaluation - a State of
the Art Survey. eCoLoRe / MeLLANGE Workshop,
39–44.

M. Williams. 2005. The Application of Argumen-
tation Theory to Translation Quality Assessment
Meta : journal des traducteurs / Meta: Translator’s
Journal, 46(2):326–344.

73

Evaluation of terminologies acquired from comparable corpora: an application perspective

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


