










































Extraction of Semantic Word Relations in Turkish from Dictionary Definitions


Proceedings of the ACL 2011 Workshop on Relational Models of Semantics (RELMS 2011), pages 11–18,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Extraction of Semantic Word Relations in Turkish from Dictionary 
Definitions 

Şerbetçi Ayşe Orhan Zeynep Pehlivan İlknur 
Computer Engineering 

Department 
Computer Engineering 

Department 
 

firstnoor@gmail.com 
Fatih University Fatih University  

34500 
Buyukcekmece, Istanbul, 

 Turkey 

34500 
Buyukcekmece, Istanbul, 

Turkey 

 

aserbetci@fatih.edu.tr zorhan@fatih.edu.tr  

  

  

 

Abstract 

Many recent studies have been dedicated to the 
extraction of semantic connections between 
words. Using such information at semantic 
level is likely to improve the performance of 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) systems, 
such as text categorization, question answering, 
information extraction, etc. The scarcity of such 
resources in Turkish, obstructs new 
improvements. There are many examples of 
semantic networks for English and other 
widely-used languages to lead the way for 
studies in Turkish. In this study, developing a 
semantic network for Turkish is aimed by using 
structural and string patterns in a dictionary. 
The results are promising, so that 
approximately two relations can be extracted 
from 3 definitions. The overall accuracy is 86% 
if we consider the correct sense assignment, 
94% without considering word sense 
disambiguation. 

1 Introduction 

Nowadays, the internet is the primary media, 
people use for communicating with each other and 
sharing their ideas with the rest of the world. 
Therefore, a massive amount of data is available 
but it is not understandable to computers. Wide 
usage of the web brings some requirements to 
make this data more beneficial for people. 
Understanding text from a foreign language or 

accessing relevant ones among millions of 
documents has become crucially important.  
However, due to the large size of data, it is very 
difficult for human to maintain these tasks without 
rapid computer processing. Automatic text 
summarization, information extraction and text 
categorization are all important NLP areas, which 
aim to help humans benefit from computer systems 
to perform these tasks.  

The process of obtaining robust computer 
systems capable of handling these tasks involves 
supporting machines with semantic knowledge. 
The type of necessary knowledge depends on the 
target system. Nevertheless, the information of 
what kinds of relations exist between the words 
can be very useful for many purposes especially 
for NLP applications. Starting with the WordNet 
project in 1985, semantic networks or lexical 
databases have been among the important study 
areas in NLP up to the present. WordNet project 
(http://wordnet.princeton.edu/wordnet/download/). 

Obtaining a semantic network for Turkish 
language is the goal of this study. Since this study 
is an initial step of developing a semantic network 
in Turkish, basic relationship of hyponymy and 
synonymy are primarily handled. For this purpose, 
the investigation of dictionary definitions and the 
morphological richness of Turkish language are 
utilized. Different types of relationships are shown 
in Table 1. Since these relationships are very basic, 
they are likely to be used in various kinds of NLP 

11



tasks. 
Various patterns are extracted from dictionary 

by using both syntax and string features of the 
definitions. Each definition represents particular 
sense of a word, so they can be considered as 
different words. For more accurate semantic 
analysis, the connection between words should be 
established between appropriate senses of the 
words. To be more concrete, an example can be 
given on the semantically ambiguous word as; yüz 
‘face’ or ‘hundred’. When a has-a relation is 
detected between the words vücut ‘body’ and yüz, 
the appropriate sense for yüz should be selected as 
‘face’, instead of ‘hundred’. 

 
Relationship Example 
Is-a(hyponymy) flower-plant 
Synonym-of initial-first 
Antonym-of quick-slow 
Member-of academician-academy 
Amount-of kg-weight 
Group-of forest-tree 
Has-a office-computer 
 

Table 1: Basic word relationships 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 discusses the previous work in this field. 
Section 3 explains the implementation methods, 
details and approaches to some NLP problems, like 
morphology or word sense ambiguity. This section 
also gives some statistics about the results. The 
future work to be performed for both improving 
and extending the network is also discussed in this 
section. Section 4 evaluates the overall system. 

2 Previous Work 

Cyc (http://www.opencyc.org) project is one of the 
first attempts of obtaining computer accessible 
world knowledge. Many other studies have been 
performed for constructing large lexical databases 
or semantic networks by extracting the semantic 
connections between words.  

In fact, both the number and types of the 
possible relationships are not clearly identified in 
this area. However, there are some widely accepted 
basic relationships, which can be considered as the 
backbone of semantic networks. No matter which 
method is followed for extracting these 
connections, most of the studies including 

WordNet (Miller, 1995; Fellbaum, 1998) and 
ConceptNet(Havasi et al., 2007) are based on this 
set of specific relationships such as hyponymy, 
synonymy, meronymy etc. These are the most 
basic but also the most informative ones among the 
common relation types. 

Some manual work has been performed at the 
beginning for constructing this kind of semantic 
networks, including but not limited with Wordnet. 
Nowadays, however, semi or fully automatic 
systems capable of performing these processes are 
worked on. Different methods have been used from 
collecting online data to corpus analysis and from 
defining syntactical rules to string patterns. 

ConceptNet collects its data from Open Mind 
Common Sense Project 
(http://commons.media.mit.edu/en/), which is a 
web-based collaboration (Havasi et al., 2007). 
Over 15,000 authors enter sentences to contribute 
to the project. Users can answer questions via the 
web interface, which aim to fill the gaps in the 
project. However, in the study of Nakov and 
Hearts (2008), the whole web is treated like a 
corpus and the occurrences of the noun pairs 
together are converted into feature vectors to 
perform a classification for semantic relations. 

There are various methods under the subject of 
string or structural patterns that represent specific 
semantic relations. Barriere(1997) investigates 
some syntactical rules in her study and matches the 
dictionary definitions to these rules for figuring out 
the relations. Also, in some languages in which 
prepositions are used frequently, some relations 
can be extracted depending on the prepositions, 
like in the study of Celli and Nessim (2009). 

In addition, there are some studies which aim to 
extract some patterns for each relation for the 
purpose of finding new instances.  

Turney’s study (2006) is a good example, 
which uses a corpus based method for finding high 
quality patterns. It searches the noun pairs through 
the corpus to extract some row patterns. The 
patterns are ranked by a ranking algorithm in order 
to determine the most qualified patterns for the 
further steps. Espresso (Pantel and Pennacchiotti, 
2006) is also concerned in finding patterns to 
represent relations. It starts with a few reliable seed 
of relations and iteratively learns the surface 
patterns in a given corpus. 

There is a lot of work to be done for Turkish in 
this area. Except one project (Bilgin et al., 2004), 

12



which was performed and limited within the scope 
of BalkaNet project, there is no significant work in 
this area for Turkish.  

BalkaNet project is valuable in the sense of 
being one of the first attempts for developing 
Turkish Wordnet. It differs from our study in its 
methodology, which involves translation of basic 
concepts in EuroWordNet and then using some 
string patterns to extend the network. In addition, 
target relationships and obtained results are quite 
different and will be handled in the following 
sections.  

 Another work (Önder, 2009) which aimed to 
extract the relations from dictionary definitions by 
using string patterns but was not completed, 
constructs the basics of our study.  

3 Experimental Setup 

In this section, the implementation process is 
discussed in the following order of sub topics: 
• Data 
• Morphological features of Turkish 
• Extracted patterns  
• Morphological analysis and disambiguation 
• Word sense disambiguation 
• Stop word removal 
• Results 

 
Using a dictionary can ease the process of 

extracting semantic relations in a language in many 
aspects. First of all, every word occurs in the 
dictionary at least once, hence the probability of 
missing a word decreases. Secondly, it consists of 
definitions of the words, which are relatively 
informative. Lastly, the sentences in a dictionary 
are generally simple and similar to each other. 
Therefore, they generally follow a set of syntactic 
patterns. This enables to perform easy detection of 
relations. 

 For all the reasons listed above, a dictionary of 
Turkish Language Association (TLA) is used in 
this study. There are 63110 words and 88268 
senses in this dictionary. This concludes that nearly 
25000 of the words are ambiguous. In Table 2, the 
distributions of these words among the most 
frequent parts of speech are given.  

The first step is investigating the dictionary 
definitions manually in order to explore some 
patterns which are likely to keep a particular 
semantic relation inside. The patterns should be 

general enough for obtaining a reasonable recall. In 
addition, they should be specific enough not to 
cause low precision. After a rough analysis, the 
dictionary is scanned for some row patterns to 
evaluate the results in terms of both accuracy and 
comprehensiveness. According to the results, 
either patterns are reorganized or some additional 
features are determined to be used for increasing 
the number of matches and decreasing the error 
rate. Different kinds of features in the dictionary 
definitions and the words being explained are used. 
Morphological structures, noun clauses, clue words 
and the order of the words in the sentence are the 
examples of these features. 

 
Part of Speech Number 
Noun 56400 
Adjective 14554 
Adverb 3011 
Pronoun 104 
Verb 11408 

 

Table 2: The distributions of words in TLA dictionary 

 
Turkish is an agglutinative language which 

results in a rich but rather complex morphological 
structure. Thus, the words do keep a very 
important part of the sense. They can be converted 
from one part of speech into another by adding 
derivational suffixes. For example, from the verb 
gelmek ‘to come’ the adjective gelen ‘the one who 
comes’ can be derived. This feature of Turkish 
constructs the most important effect of increasing 
the number of matches between patterns and 
definitions. In addition, indefinite noun phrases are 
detected with the help of morphological analysis 
and lots of relations are extracted as a result. These 
are only a few examples of where morphology is 
used when extracting the relations. 

Some clue words in the definitions are also 
searched for. In dictionaries, some similar words 
are explained by using the same words and they 
can represent some specific relations. To be more 
concrete, the adjectives that represent the opposite 
of another adjective can be considered. These types 
of words are usually defined by using the words 
olmayan ‘not’ and karşıtı ‘opposite of’. For 
example, in the definition of the word fantasik 
‘fantastic’ there exists the phrase gerçek olmayan 

13



‘not real’. An antonymy relation can be established 
between the word fantastic ‘fantastic’ and gerçek 
‘real’ as a result. For some other types of relations, 
different words are detected and handled. For 
example, for member-of relation, sınıfından ‘from 
the class of’; for is-a relation, türü ‘type of’ are 
selected. 

Additionally, noun clauses, which are defined 
in the dictionary, are investigated. Most of the time 
a noun phrase represents an ‘is-a’ relation. The 
word balık ‘fish’ and kılıç balığı ‘sword fish’ are 
both in the dictionary and kılıç balığı ‘sword fish’ 
is a noun phrase that has balık ‘fish’ in it. It is 
obvious that there is a connection between the 
words kılıç balığı ‘sword fish’ and  balık ‘fish’. 

Various patterns are obtained by using at least 
one of the above features. The obtained patterns 
for each type of relation are shown in Table 3. 
When analyzing the table, the representatives to be 
considered are as follows: X and Y are used for 
representing the words being connected to each 
other, punc represents one of the specified 
punctuations like comma or full stop, w* 
represents zero or more sequential words, w*no_punct 
represents zero or more sequential words without 
any punctuation inside, wx is a word which keeps a 
specific part of speech x, depending on the pattern. 

The extracted relations for the provided word 
definitions are not limited with those mentioned in 
the table. If possible, two or more relations can be 
extracted from a single definition. For instance, 
besides the ‘member-of’ relation between çakal 
‘jackal’ and etoburlar ‘carnivora’, a ‘kind-of’ 
relation is extracted also for çakal ‘jackal’ with 
hayvan ‘animal’, since the definition matches with 
the fourth pattern of ‘kind-of’ relation. Although 
only the relation between pinhan ‘latent’ and saklı 
‘hidden’ is given, another synonymy relation is 
also obtained from this pattern between pinhan 
‘latent’ and gizli ‘ulterior’.  

The morphological structures of the words are 
obtained by using Zemberek project 
(http://code.google.com/p/zemberek), which is an 
open source morphological analyzer for Turkish. 
The analysis result of the word atan ‘be assigned’ 
or ‘your ancestor’ or ‘the one who throws’ is 
displayed with Figure 1.  

The morphological ambiguity is handled with 

two different methods. Firstly, as a pre-processing 
step, some suffixes are determined, which cannot 
occur in the dictionary, such as time suffixes. The 
analyses are pruned from those results that include 
one or more of these suffixes. Secondly, according 
to the pattern requirements, the convenient result is 
selected as the correct one. For example, if a word 
is required to have a particular chain of suffixes, 
the first result providing this necessity is selected. 
If there is no assumption, the first result is selected 
by default. 

The relations are established between the exact 
senses of the words in order to obtain a reliable 
network. Therefore, word sense disambiguation 
should also be performed. One of the words is not 
ambiguous, since one of its particular senses 
(definition) is already being handled for most of 
the relations. On the other hand, for the purpose of 
determining the correct sense of the remaining 
word, simplified Lesk algorithm is used(Lesk, 
1986). Simplified Lesk algorithm benefits from the 
similarity measurements between each sense of the 
ambiguous word and the concept. The algorithm is 
given in Figure 2 and the details are provided in 
the http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lesk_algorithm. 

In order to obtain more accurate results, 
stemming and stop word removal is applied for 
both relation extraction and word sense 
disambiguation. A connection can be established 
only if both of the words are not stop words. Stop 
words are dictionary specific and obtained by 
counting the occurrences of word stems in the 
dictionary. Not all frequent stems are assumed to 
be stop words but the useless ones among the all 
stems whose occurrences are above an upper limit 
are ignored. There are 22 stop words specified, 
including için ‘for’, başka ‘another’ and en ‘the 
most’. 

The system was evaluated by manual 
calculation of the accuracy. Equal number of 
samples is chosen randomly from each pattern. 
Two types of accuracy were obtained, which are 
with and without consideration of correct sense 
assignment. 

The obtained results are given in Table 4. The 
first accuracy column represents the accuracy 
percentage by considering whether the correct 
sense could be matched or not. The second column 
ignores the senses and evaluates the results in 
terms of the correct word relation only. 

14



  

Relation  P no Pattern specification Example 

Hyponymy 

1 
X: (w*) (wadj) (w*) Y punc (w*). 
where X is noun, Y is a noun root. 
(X-Y) 

göl: Önceden denizken kurumalar, çekilmeler 
 yüzünden göl durumuna gelmiş yer.(göl-yer) 
lake: a piece of land, previously existing as sea and 
becoming dry due to droughts,  turns into a small 
body of water(lake-land) 

2 

X: (w*) (wadv) (w*no_punct) (Y) punc (w*) 
where X is verb, wadv is a derived adverb, Y is a 
verb. 
(X-Y) 

hicvetmek: Alay yoluyla yermek.(hicvetmek-
yermek) 
satirize: To criticize by mocking(satirize-criticize) 

3 
X Y : w*. 
where X and Y is an indefinite noun phrase 
(X Y-Y) 

ada çayı: Bu bitkiden yapılan sıcak içecek.(ada çayı-
çay) 
sage tea: The tea that is made of this plant(sage tea-
tea) 

4 
X: w* wnoun Y punc w*. 
where wnoun and Y compose a noun phrase. 
(X-Y) 

post : Tüylü hayvan derisi. (post-deri) 
fur : Hairy animal skin.(fur-skin) 

5 

X : w* Y türü(kind of) | tipi(type of) | çeşidi(sort 
of). 
where X and Y nouns 
(X-Y) 

limuzin: İçinde her türlü donanım bulunan lüks, uzun 
ve geniş otomobil türü.(limuzin-otomobil) 
limousine: The type of long, wide and luxury 
automobile in which there exist various 
equipment(limousine- automobile) 

Synonymy 

1 
X : w* punc Y 
where X and Y are nouns, adverbs, or adjectives 
(X-Y) 

pinhan: Gizli, saklı, gizlenmiş.(pinhan-saklı) 
latent: Ulterior, hidden, covert. (latent-hidden) 

2 

Z : w* punc X, Y punc w* 
where X, Y have equal chain of suffixes and they 
are verbs, adjectives or nouns 
(X-Y) 

razı: Uygun bulan, benimseyen, isteyen, kabul eden 
(benimsemek-istemek) 
willing : The one who approves, embraces, wants, 
agrees on sth.(embrace-want) 

Group-of 1 

X: w* Y bütünü(whole of) | topluluğu(group of) | 
tümü(all of) | kümesi(set of) | sürüsü(flock of) | 
birliği(union of) w* 
where X and Y are nouns. 
(X-Y) 

âlem: Hayvan veya bitkilerin bütünü.(alem - bitki) 
kingdom : The whole of plants or animals.(kingdom-
plant)  

Antonym 1 
X: w* Y olmayan(not) | karşıtı(the opposite of). 
where X and Y are nouns or adjectives. 
(X-Y) 

acı: Bazı maddelerin dilde bıraktığı yakıcı duyu, tatlı 
karşıtı. (acı-tatlı) 
bitter: The feeling of pain which some matters leave 
on tongue, the opposite of sweet. (bitter-sweet) 

Member-of 

1 

X: w* Y sınıfı(class of) | üyesi(member of) | 
takımı(set of). 
where X and Y are nouns 
(X-Y) 

senatör: Senato üyesi.(senatör-senato) 
senator: Member of senate.(senator-senate) 

2 

X :  Ygillerden(from the family of Y) | 
Ylerden(from the family of Y) w*. 
where X and Y nouns. 
(X-Y) 

çakal: Etoburlardan, sürü hâlinde yaşayan, kurttan 
küçük bir yaban hayvanı.(çakal-etobur) 
jackal: From carnivora, a kind of wild animal 
smaller than wolf, which lives in flocks.(jackal-
carnivora) 

Amount-of 1 

X: w* Y miktarı(amount-of) | ölçüsü(measure-of) | 
birimi(unit-of) . 
where X and Y are nouns 
(X-Y) 

amper: Elektrik akımında şiddet birimi.(amper-
şiddet) 
amper: The unit of intensity in electrical 
current.(amper- intensity) 

Has-a 1 
X: w* Y [wnoun] punc w*. 
where Y has the suffix of ‘LI’,  X and Y are nouns 
(X-Y) 

sof : Bir çeşit sertçe, ince yünlü kumaş. (sof,yün) 
alpaca : A kind of hard, thin, wooled cloth. (alpaca, 
wool) 

 

Table 3: The obtained patterns for each type of relation 

15



1. {Icerik:atan Kok:ata tip:FIIL} Ekler:FIIL_KOK+FIIL_EDILGENSESLI_N 

{Content : be assigned Root : assign Pos: Verb} Suffixes : Verb Root + Passive 

2. {Icerik:atan Kok:ata tip:ISIM}  Ekler:ISIM_KOK+ISIM_SAHIPLIK_SEN_IN 

{Content : your ancestor Root : ancestor Pos: Noun} Suffixes : Noun Root + Possesive_you 

3. {Icerik:atan Kok:at tip:FIIL}  Ekler:FIIL_KOK+ FIIL_DONUSUM_EN 

{Content : the one throws Root : throw Pos: Verb} Suffixes : Verb Root + Participle 

 

Figure 1: The morphological analysis result of the word atan(be assigned | your ancestor | the one who throws) 

function SIMPLIFIED LESK(word,sentence) returns best sense of word  
best-sense <- most frequent sense for word 
max-overlap <- 0 
context <- set of words in sentence 
for each sense in senses of word do  

signature <- set of words in the gloss and examples of sense 
overlap <- COMPUTEOVERLAP (signature,context) 
if overlap > max-overlap then  

max-overlap <- overlap 
best-sense <- sense 

end return (best-sense) 
 

Figure 2: Simplified Lesk algorithm 

 Relation Pattern Number of Relations Accuracy % Accuracy(ambiguous) % 

Hyponymy 

1 20566 84 94 
2 1448 84 89 
3 5127 84 90 
4 3502 74 95 
5 387 90 96 

Synonymy 
1 2313 76 88 
2 22518 96 100 

Group-of 1 435 87 97 
Antonym 1 380 99 100 

Member-of 
1 128 92 97 
2 634 100 100 

Amount-of 1 119 81 92 
Has a 1 2430 82 89 
Total   59987 86,85 94,38 
NET   58125     

 

Table 4: The number of relations and the accuracy results for each relation and each pattern rule 

  

16



It should be considered that the number of 
relations extracted per pattern is counted 
individually in order to show the performance of 
each pattern separately. Some of the relations can 
be extracted by different patterns of that relation 
type, so the net total, which is cleaned from the 
repetitions, is less than overall total. 

The results are promising in terms of both the 
comprehensiveness and the accuracy. If some more 
effort can be spent on word sense disambiguation, 
the accuracy may rise to a considerable ratio. The 
comprehensiveness is intended to be increased 
with further work, which is discussed in the 
following section. 

The numbers of relation instances are quite 
greater when compared to BalkaNet project. There 
are nearly 34,000 relation instances in the project, 
including the synonym relations among synset 
members. In this study 58,000 relations are 
available. Also, it is more likely to be extendible, 
since not only string patterns but also structural 
patterns are benefitted from, which will be 
increased with future work. 

4 Conclusion 

The semantic relations between the words are 
extracted in order to develop a semantic network. 
Some basic relation types such as is-a, group-of, 
synonym-of, etc. are targeted to obtain an initial 
network to be extended with further work.  

The words are investigated according to their 
definition in the TLA dictionary. Some row 
patterns which consist of morphological features of 
the words, parts of speech or strings in some 
specific positions and compound words are 
defined. After that, the dictionary is scanned for 
searching the definitions that matches one of these 
patterns. Depending on the results, patterns are 
reformed and additional features are inserted with 
the purpose of increasing pattern quality and 
number of matches. Exact senses of the words are 
tried to be matched by applying a word sense 
disambiguation algorithm. 

The study has shown that, by taking advantage 
of the morphological richness of Turkish language 
and using some structural patterns, it is possible to 
construct a reasonable semantic network. This 
study can pave the way for more complex NLP 
applications and can be used for improving 
ordinary processes such as word sense 

disambiguation. The network can be converted into 
a knowledge base by inserting more accurate 
relationships and investigating larger and more 
comprehensive corpora as the future work. 

5 Future Work 

There is a set of processes to do both for 
improving and extending the network. Firstly, in 
order to eliminate erroneous connections from the 
obtained network, statistical information such as 
co-occurrence of the words can be investigated. 
The assumption here is that if two words are 
related to each other, the possibility of their being 
together in a corpus increases. The existing 
connections can be verified or ranked in terms of 
their reliability by using such information. 

In addition, to remove erroneous sense 
determination, word sense disambiguation method 
can be improved. After obtaining a reliable, small 
network, which will serve as seed, new patterns 
can be extracted by following Turney (2006) and 
by using these patterns more instances can be 
extracted from larger corpora. As an alternative, 
the words can be first tagged with concrete or 
abstract labels automatically. This information can 
limit the types of connections a word can 
contribute. For example, an abstract word cannot 
connect to another word with a part-whole relation. 
For this task, a pre-processing step should be 
applied to classify the words as concrete or 
abstract.  

In addition, with the purpose of improving the 
network, some other resources will be benefitted 
from. The existing patterns will be applied to 
Wikipedia (http://www.wikipedia.org/) entries, by 
selecting only the definitions of the concepts. An 
advantage of this process is that it can be re-
performed periodically to keep the network up-to-
date and dynamic. Also, the number of relation 
types will be increased. Currently, only the nouns, 
noun phrases consisting from two words, 
adjectives and verbs are handled. Also, only the 
relationships within the same type of words are 
extracted that is, a noun can be connected only to 
another noun, not an adjective or a verb. Finer 
grained relationships can establish connections 
among different parts of speech.  

17



References 

Barrière Caroline. 1997. From a children’s first 
dictionary to a lexical knowledge base of 
conceptual graphs. PhD thesis. Simon Fraser 
University, Canada.  

Bilgin Orhan, Çetinoğlu Özlem, and Oflazer 
Kemal. 2004. Morphosemantic Relations In and 
Across Wordnets: A Preliminary Study Based 
on Turkish. Proceedings of the Global WordNet 
Conference. Masaryk, Czech Republic.  

 http://people.sabanciuniv.edu/~oflazer/balkanet/
twn_tr.htm 

Celli Fabio, Nissim Malvina. 2009. Automatic 
identification of semantic relations in Italian 
complex nominals. Proceedings of the 8th 
International Conference on Computational 
Semantics, Tilburg. pp. 45-60. 

Fellbaum, Christiane. 1998. WordNet: An 
Electronic Lexical Database. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 

Havasi Catherina, Speer Robert, and Alonso B. 
Jason.  2007. ConceptNet 3: a Flexible, 
Multilingual Semantic Network for Common 
Sense Knowledge. Proceedings of the 22nd 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 

Lesk, E. Micheal. 1986. Automatic sense 
disambiguation using machine readable 
dictionaries: how to tell a pine cone from an ice 
cream cone. In SIGDOC '86: Proceedings of the 
5th annual international conference on Systems 
documentation, pages 24-26, New York, NY, 
USA. ACM. 

Miller, George A. 1995. WordNet: A Lexical 
Database for English. Communications of the 
ACM Vol. 38, No. 11: 39-41. 

Nakov Preslav, Hearts A. Marti. 2008. Solving 
Relational Similarity Problems Using the Web 
as a Corpus, Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA. pp. 452–460. 

Pantel Patrick, Pennacchiotti Marco. 2006. 
Espresso: Leveraging Generic Patterns for 
Automatically Harvesting Semantic Relations, 
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual 
Meeting of the ACL. Sydney, Australia. pp. 
113-120.  

Turney D. Peter. 2006. Expressing implicit 
semantic relations without supervision. 
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual 
Meeting of the ACL. Sydney, Australia. pp. 
313-320. 

Önder Pınar. 2009. Design and Implementation of 
the semantic Turkish Language and Dialects 
Dictionary. MS thesis. Fatih University, 
İstanbul. 

18


