










































A tagged and aligned corpus for the study of Proper Names in translation


Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing, pages 11–18,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 12-14 September 2011.

A tagged and aligned corpus for the study of Proper Names in 
translation 

 

Emeline Lecuit 
LLL 

Université François Rabelais 
France 

emeline.lecuit@univ-tours.fr 

Denis Maurel 
LI 

Université François Rabelais 
France 

denis.maurel@univ-tours.fr 

Duško Vitas 
Faculty of mathematics 
University of Belgrade 

Serbia 

vitas@matf.bg.ac.rs 

 

Abstract 

In this paper, we propose the creation of a 
tagged and aligned corpus for the study of 
a linguistic phenomenon, the translation of 
proper names. We try to modify the 
hypothesis according to which proper 
names cannot be translated and should 
therefore appear as borrowings in a target-
language. To do so, we introduce a parallel 
multilingual corpus made of eleven 
versions in ten different languages of a 
novel. One of these versions, the French 
one, which appears to be the source-text, 
undergoes named entity extraction so as to 
localize more easily the phenomenon we 
try to study. We focus on the tools used for 
the creation of our corpus and present some 
results refuting the idea that proper names 
are not translatable. 

1 Introduction 

The idea according to which proper 
names cannot be translated seems to be 
unfortunately widely spread. This can lead to 
big translation mistakes. Nevertheless it can 
easily be explained by a long tradition of 
presenting proper names as belonging to a 
linguistic category often defined using very 
reductive criteria which seem to have a very 
long life ahead of them. We have a different 
opinion and believe that proper names can be 
translated and are translated more often than 
people seem to think. We therefore introduce a 
multilingual corpus which will help us defend 
our idea. This corpus is created using several 
NLP tools, including cascade transducers for 
the extraction of named entities and an 
alignment tool, for the alignment of the eleven 
versions of the same text composing our 
corpus.  

This study is therefore a good example 
both of the creation of an annotated 
multilingual corpus and of its usability.  

In Section 2 we present the text(s) 
composing our corpus and the problem we try 
to tackle, giving details about what a proper 
name can be. In Section 3 we describe the 
extraction and annotation of the proper names 
in the French text of our corpus, using the 
Named Entity extractor CasEN. In section 4, 
the different steps for the creation of our 
multilingual corpus, using the alignment tool 
XAlign, are presented. Section 5 contains some 
preliminary answers to our translation problem 
and a conclusion. 

2 A corpus for the observation of a 
linguistic phenomenon 

When talking about translating proper 
names, a French person could argue: “Je 
m’appelle Paul et mon nom ne change pas si je 
me rends à Londres”1, which is correct. But 
Paul’s plane is going to land in London, and 
not Londres. 

A lot of people believe that proper names 
are never translated. This idea, though widely 
spread and defended by many (from Moore2 to 
Kleiber, 1981) can be discussed. 

Our hypothesis is that proper names are, just 
like any other linguistic unit, subject to 
translation processes of all sorts (from 
borrowing to adaptation through calque and 
literal translation, etc.) when transferred from a 
text in source-language to a text in target-
language (as demonstrated by Agafonov et al., 

                                                 

1 “I am called Paul and my name doesn’t change if I go 
to London.” 

2 See Ballard, 2001. 

11



2006). To defend our hypothesis we use a 
parallel multilingual corpus, built with 
different versions (i.e. in different languages) 
of the same novel, Le Tour du Monde en 
quatre-vingts jours (Around the World in 
eighty days), written by the famous French 
author Jules Verne, in 1872. The choice of this 
novel amongst others was motivated by two 
main reasons. Firstly, there exist lots of 
translations of this novel. Indeed, Verne’s 
novel was translated in many languages and is 
nowadays available on the Internet in almost 
all European languages. Secondly, there is an 
important number of proper names of all sorts 
in this novel. This may be due to the fact that 
the novel deals with the adventures of Phileas 
Fogg, a rich and enigmatic English character 
who, after a bet with his fellows from the 
Reform-Club, has to go around the world in 
less than 80 days and who therefore travels 
through many countries and also happens to 
meet a lot of people. The novel references 
proper names belonging to almost all the 
existing categories and sub-categories of 
proper names. 

Proper names can refer to people (or group 
of people) real or fictitious (we call these 
proper names anthroponyms), to places 
(toponyms), to human productions (ergonyms), 
or to events (pragmonyms). Though the 
common idea of a proper name is a simple 
lexical unit (in the form of a family name, for 
example), proper names can be complex 
lexical units, composed of several proper 
names and/or adjectives, common names, etc. 
Consider the following examples: 
Passepartout and l’Institution royale de la 
Grande-Bretagne (the Royal Institution of 
Great-Britain), both taken from the novel, 
though very different in structure, are proper 
names. 

In our corpus, we gather eleven versions of 
the novel: starting from the original French 
version. We also have two English versions 
(by two different translators, at two very 
different periods and oriented towards two 
very different audiences3), as well as one 
version in German, one in Spanish, one in 
Italian, one in Portuguese, one in Serbian 
(using a Roman alphabet), one in Bulgarian, 
one in Polish and one in Greek. This variety of 
                                                 
3 Comparing these two versions will show us if the 
phenomenon of translation of proper names can be 
affected when these factors vary. 

languages allows us to observe the 
phenomenon on languages belonging to 
different families. Once the different versions 
of the text gathered, we need to isolate the 
units we want to study in the French version of 
our text and to align the different versions to 
facilitate the study. 

3 Annotation of the proper names 
using CasEN 

To have a clearer view of the items we 
want to study, it seems a good idea to isolate 
them using a named entity extractor. We 
decided to use the resource CasEN (Friburger 
and Maurel, 2004), which uses the tool 
CasSys, which is now available on the well-
known platform Unitex (Paumier, 2006)4. The 
CasSys system applies a series of finite-state 
transducers to a text. Each transducer describes 
a local grammar for the recognition of some 
entities. The result is a text in which the 
objects to be studied are marked with 
indicative tags. The transducer cascade can 
only be applied to texts which have undergone 
a preprocessing (division of the text into 
sentences, tagging using dictionaries, etc.). 
Only after this first stage the series of 
transducers can be applied (one after the other, 
in a defined order) to the text and locate the 
different contexts that can indicate the 
presence of the object looked for. In our case, 
the objects looked for are all kinds of proper 
names. The transducers we use are extracted 
from a list of transducers created for the 
French Ester campaign.  

The objects we need to extract are 
basically persons, organizations and places. 
Once localized, these objects receive the 
following tags: 
pers (person) 

pers.hum (human), pers.anim (animal) 
org (organization) 

org.pol (political), org.edu (educational), 
org.com (commercial), org.non-profit (non 
commercial), org.div (media and recreation), 
org.gsp (administrative) 
loc (location) 

loc.geo (geographical), loc.admi 
(administrative), loc.line, loc.fac (facilities) 

loc.addr (address), loc.addr.post, loc.addr.tel, 
loc.addr.elec 

                                                 
4 For more information, see http://tln.li.univ-
tours.fr/Tln_CasEN.html. The transducers are available 
for download from this website.  

12



prod (product) 
prod.vehicule, prod.award, prod.art, prod.doc 

Figure 1 below is an example of transducer. 

 
Figure 1: A transducer describing titles introducing person proper names 

 

Let us illustrate the annotation of 
proper names in our corpus. When we apply 
the selected transducers (as explained above) 
to our French text; the input text: 

En l’année 1872, la maison portant le numéro 
7 de Saville-row, Burlington Gardens - maison 
dans laquelle Sheridan mourut en 1814 - , était 
habitée par Phileas Fogg, esq., l’un des 
membres les plus singuliers et les plus 
remarqués du Reform-Club de Londres, bien 
qu’il semblât prendre à tâche de ne rien faire 
qui pût attirer l’attention. 

becomes the tagged text:  

En l'année 1872, la maison portant le numéro 7 
de <ENT type="loc.line">Saville-row 
</ENT>, <ENT type="loc.line"> Burlington 
Gardens</ENT> -- maison dans laquelle 
<ENT type="pers.hum"> Sheridan</ENT> 
mourut en 1814 --, était habitée par <ENT 
type="pers.hum">Phileas Fogg, esq. 
</ENT>, l'un des membres les plus singuliers 
et les plus remarqués du <ENT 
type="org.div">Reform-Club de Londres 
</ENT>, bien qu'il semblât prendre à tâche de 
ne rien faire qui pût attirer l'attention.  

where each recognized proper name receives a 
tag indicating its category and sub-category. 

After applying the cascade, a checking 
was carried out and some corrections were 
manually made (some tags were expanded or 
reduced, i.e. the brackets were moved to adjust 
to the entity, and others were deleted, added, or 
modified). 

This first phase of our work provides 
us with a tagged text, in which all the proper 
names can be easily located using simple 
requests. 

Our French version of the text 
comprises 3415 proper names (519 different). 
These proper names represent 8.6% of all the 
characters in the text and 8% of all the words 
in the text5. 

The following stage consists in aligning 
all the different versions of our text with the 
French one and all together. 

                                                 
5 According to Coates-Stephens (1993), this figure can 
reach 10% in newspaper articles, which shows the 
importance of these units in texts and explains our 
involvement in this subject.  

13



4 Alignement of the texts using 
XAlign 

XAlign is a text aligner developed by the 
LORIA (2006) and available on the Unitex 
Platform. It combines the performances of an 
alignment tool to those of a well-know corpus 
processing system. One of the advantages 
offered by XAlign is the possibility to reuse an 
alignment already existing. This NLP tool 
allows the treatment of two texts at a time, 
which means that to obtain our multilingual 
corpus, we first have to align the texts two by 
two. In fact, we align the French text with all 
the other versions individually. 

Prior to the alignment each translation is 
transformed into a TEI format and marked at a 
sentence, paragraph and division level with 

respectively <s>, <p> and <div> tags. Id 
attributes are also added to the texts. All these 
markers will function as explicit anchor points 
which will help the alignment of the texts. 
Other potential anchor points, such as proper 
names, for example will also help the 
alignment. The alignment will extract the 
complete optimum path (following a pre-
defined set of transitions, 1:1 equivalence, 1:2 
equivalence, 2:1 equivalence, etc.). This 
alignment is represented as a double window, 
with one version of the text (in one language) 
on the left side and the other version of the text 
(in another language) on the right side. 
Between these two versions, red lines link the 
translation equivalents. The alignment is 
therefore visual and easy to consult (see 
Paumier and Dimitriu, 2008). Below is an 
example of alignment.  

 

 
Figure 2 : Extract of an alignment using XAlign 

 
This alignment will be saved as an 

alignment file in the XAlign directory in 
Unitex. The alignment file, in XML format, 
lists all the “linkings” and “alignments” 
between the two texts. The linkings correspond 
to links between two (or more) segments of 
one of the two versions, when the alignments 
are of type 1:2 or 2:1, for example, meaning 
that two segments in one version correspond to 
one segment in the other version or vice versa. 
The linking indicated in the alignment file (see 
Figure 3) means that the two segments will be 
considered as a whole. 

<link targets="\\Private 
\Unitex2.0\French\Corpus\vern-fr-01-37-
fixed.xml#d2p8s6 
\\Private\Unitex2.0\French\Corpus\vern-fr-01-
37-fixed.xml#d2p8s7" type="linking" 
xml:id="l1" /> 

Figure 3 : XAlign Alignment file (linking) 

The alignments indicate, using the id 
codes applied during the preprocessing, 
equivalent segments in the first and second 
texts (see Figure 4). 

14



<link 
targets="\\Private\Unitex2.0\French\Corpus\ve
rn-fr-01-37-fixed.xml#d6p20s1 \\Private 
\Unitex2.0\English\Corpus\vern-En-01-37-
fixed.xml#d6p20s1" type="alignment" /> 
Figure 4: XAlign alignment file (alignment) 

One of the advantages offered by 
XAlign is that, because it is hosted by Unitex, 
it is quite easy to do requests on the texts, 
thanks to the option “XAlign Locate Pattern”. 
Another advantage is that the alignment can 
easily be modified/corrected.  

Now that we have created all our 
bitexts (alignments of the French text with the 
other versions individually), proofread and 
corrected them when needed, we can gather all 
the bitexts in one big multitext (alignment of 
all the texts). This is easily done manually. We 
obtain a big table, allowing us to visualize all 
the equivalent segments of our texts in the 
different languages. The table in Annexe  is an 
extract of our Multilanguage corpus (It shows 
the first sentence of the text aligned in the 
different versions, with the French tagged 
version on the left side). 

This tagged and aligned corpus allows us 
to carry on our study of proper names in 
translation. 

5 Results and conclusion 

We have created a tagged and aligned 
corpus for the study of a linguistic 

phenomenon. Tagged corpora and aligned 
corpora exist. What makes our corpus 
interesting is the high number of languages 
represented and the nature of the text used. 
Indeed, most multilingual corpora are made of 
versions of law texts (see for example 
multilingual corpora of the European Union 
law texts). Vaxelaire (2006) explains that 
choice of non-literary texts for the study of 
proper names because in literary texts “tous les 
types de noms propres peuvent être modifiés 
[…]ou changés par des noms qui ne peuvent 
être considérés comme des équivalents que 
dans ce contexte précis[..].”, which can be 
translated as follows : “ all the types of proper 
names can be modified […] or changed into 
names which cannot be considered as 
equivalents except on this special 
occasion”.We propose to study a novel. We 
will therefore study proper names translated by 
their equivalents but will also meet the case 
when a proper name is translated with names 
which cannot be considered as equivalents of 
translation. The novel we chose is a bit dated 
but this makes it available and free of use. 
Moreover, our corpus is extendable. Indeed, 
there are lots of other versions of the text not 
considered here which could easily be added to 
our corpus. We have already mentioned that 
our corpus is ideal for the study of proper 
names, since there are many of them in the text 
and of very various types, as can be observed 
in the table below (see Figure 5). 

 
hypertypes total number of occurrences number of different occurrences 

anthroponyms 2079 162 
toponyms 1142 320 
ergonyms 186 31 

pragmonyms 8 6 
Figure 5 : The proper names in the original version 

 
Our study is still in progress. We only 

present here figures concerning 10% of the 
proper names of each of the types presented 
above, i.e. 16 anthroponyms, 32 toponyms, 3 
ergonyms and 1 pragmonym. These samples 
are made of the most used items in each 

category. These 52 proper names represent 
2029 occurrences in the French version, i.e. 
about 60% of all the proper names in the text. 

Figure 6 is a table containing the results 
for these occurrences. 

  

15



Target language Borrowing assimilation 
Partial 
or total 
calque 

Absence of 
translation 

Other 
processes 

English (1st version) 69,1% 11,3% 2,2% 12,1% 5,4% 

English (2nd version) 74,2% 13,2% 2,0% 6,6% 4,1% 

German 79,7% 10,6% 3,7% 5,2% 0,6% 

Polish 31,1% 53,4% 4,5% 10,7% 0,2% 
Serbian (Latin 
alphabet) 

4,9% 89,1% 4,5% 0,3% 1,3% 

Bulgarian 0,0% 90,6% 6,3% 2,5% 0,7% 

Greek 0,0% 86,8% 4,6% 3,5% 5,1% 

Italian 72,0% 21,5% 2,6% 3,0% 1,0% 

Portuguese 73,7% 16,0% 5,9% 4,1% 0,2% 

Spanish 51,6% 15,5% 25,1% 7,4% 0,4% 
Figure 6: Translation processes (results)

 
What we can conclude from the study of 

these linguistic units is that the wide-spread 
hypothesis according to which proper names 
cannot be translated can be discussed.  

Indeed, it appears that according to their 
type (fictitious or real proper names), 
according to their category (anthroponyms, 
toponyms, ergonyms, etc.), according to their 
use (as simple references, or as metaphors for 
example), according to their construction 
(simple or complex units), according to the 
target-language (sometimes implying different 
morphologic behaviors, sometimes using 
different alphabets, etc.), proper names can 
undergo a variety of translation processes. 

These phenomena are easily observable thanks 
to our corpus. Indeed, we can use the French 
tagged part of our corpus to identify a segment 
of the text containing a proper name. Then, on 
the same line of our table, we can visualize the 
translations of this proper name in the various 
different languages and analyse them.  

If most proper names are simple 
borrowings from the source-text, as can be 
seen in Figure 6, many are subject to various 
assimilation (graphic and/or phonetic), as 
illustrated in the following example (for 
complete details about translation processes, 
see Vinay and Darbelnet, 2004). 

 
FRA ENG2 SPA ITA 
{ENT 

type'"pers.hum"}Mrs. 
Aouda{/ENT}, ne 

voulant pas être vue, se 
rejeta en arrière. 

Not wishing to be seen, 
Mrs Aouda jumped 

back. 

Mistress Aouida, no 
queriendo ser vista, se 

echó para atrás. 

Mrs Auda, non 
volendo esser visita, si 

ritrasse indietro. 

Figure 7 : Borrowings with graphic and/or phonetic assimilation 

Our corpus also highlights the 
transcription processes (also accounted for in 
the “assimilation” column of Figure 6), which 
are not surprising in Bulgarian and Greek, both 
languages using a non Latin alphabet, but more 
striking in our Serbian (using a Latin alphabet) 
version. In this version, Passepartout, the 
name of the hero’s manservant becomes 
Paspartu, for instance. Partial or total calques 
mentioned in Figure 6 (see Figure 8 for an 

example), mainly concern proper names which 
Jonasson (1994) described as “mixed” and 
“descriptive-based”6 proper names, i.e. 
composed of “pure” proper names and/or other 
lexical elements, such as adjectives, common 
names, etc. The absences of translation, 
especially in the first English version and in 
                                                 
6 “Mixtes” or “ à base descriptives” in the original 
version. 

16



the Polish version, mainly concern 
anthroponyms, which are replaced either by 
pronouns or defined descriptions.  

The “other processes” are various: 
transpositions, free translations, to name just a 
few. The examples below (Figure 9, Figure 10) 
illustrate some of these translation techniques. 

 
FRA ENG GREK POR POL SPA 

Vous allez à {ENT 
type'"loc.admi"}New 

York{/ENT}? 

Are you 
going to New 

York?' 

Πηγαίνετε 
στη Νέα 
Υόρκη; 

Vai para 
Nova York? 

- Jedzie pan 
do Nowego 

Jorku? 

¿Vais a 
Nueva York? 

Figure 8: Partial Calques from the English New York (except for the French, borrowing) 

FRA ENG POL 

Je suis un agent de la {ENT 
type'"org.com"}Compagnie 

péninsulaire{/ENT}. 

Litterally, the Peninsular Company 

I work for P. and O.' 

For Peninsular and Oriental 

- Jestem agentem 
Towarzystwa Morskiego Indii 

Wschodnich. 

Literally, the Society 
Maritime of Oriental India 

Figure 9: Free translation (also called adaptation) 

FRA ENG BUL GER POL SRP 

Canal de Suez Suez Canal 
Суецкия 
канал 

Suez-Canal 

Kanał Sueski 

(Sueski is an 
adjective) 

Suecki kanal 

Figure 10: Transposition (same semantic content but different syntactic structure) 

 
All these examples, which are just a 

few of all the examples localized thanks to our 
corpus, seem to prove that it is wrong to 

promote the systematic use of borrowings 
when translating proper names. 

References 

Agafonov, Claire, Grass, Thierry, Maurel, Denis, 
Rossi-Gensane, Nathalie. and Agata Savary 
2006. “ La traduction multilingue des noms 
propres dans PROLEX ”. Méta, vol.51, n°4, 
p.622-636. 

 
Ballard, Michel 2001. Le Nom propre en 

traduction. Paris : Ophrys. 
 
Coates-Stephens, Stephen 1993. “ The analysis and 

acquisition of proper names for the 
understanding of free text ”, in Computers and 
the Humanities, vol.26, p.441-456. 

 
Friburger, Nathalie and Denis Maurel 2004. 

“Finite-state transducer cascades to extract 
named entities in texts”, Theoretical Computer 
Science, vol.313, p.94-104. 

Jonasson, Kerstin 1994. Le nom propre: 
constructions et interpretations. Louvain-la-
Neuve : Duculot. 

leiber, Georges 1981. Problèmes de référence : 
descriptions définies et noms propres. Paris : 
Klincksieck. 

 
LORIA 2006. XAlign (Alignement multilingue). 

http://led.loria.fr/outils/ALIGN/align.html 
 
Paumier S.ébastie,n 2006. Unitex 2.0 User Manual, 

http://igm.univ-mlv.fr/~unitex~/ 
 
Paumier Sébastien and Dumitriu Dana-Marina 

2008. “Editable text alignments and powerful 
linguistic queries”, in Proceedings of the 27th 
Conference on Lexis and Grammar, L’Aquila. 

 
Vinay Jean-Paul and Darbelnet Jean 2004. “A 

Methodology for Translation”, in The 
Translation Studies Reader. Venuti L. (eds) : 
Routledge. 

17



Vitas, Duško, Koeva, Svetla, Krstev, Cvetana and 
Ivan Obradovic. 2008. “Tour du monde through 

the dictionaries”, in Proceedings of the 27th 
Conference on Lexis and Grammar, L’Aquila.

 

Annexe : Extract of the multitext corpus 

18


