










































ThaiHerbMiner: A Thai Herbal Medicine Mining and Visualizing Tool


Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL-HLT 2011, pages 186–187,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

ThaiHerbMiner: A Thai Herbal Medicine Mining and Visualizing Tool

Choochart Haruechaiyasak† Jaruwat Pailai‡ Wasna Viratyosin∗ Rachada Kongkachandra‡

†Human Language Technology Laboratory (HLT),
National Electronics and Computer Technology Center (NECTEC), Thailand 12120

‡Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Science and Technology
Thammasat University, Thailand 12121

∗BIOTEC Central Research Unit,
National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Thailand 12120

Abstract

Thai Traditional Medicine (TTM) has a long
history in Thailand and is nowadays consid-
ered an effective alternative approach to the
modern medicine. One of the main knowledge
in Thai traditional medicine is the use of var-
ious types of herbs to form medicines. Our
main goal is to bridge the gap between the tra-
ditional knowledge and the modern biomedi-
cal knowledge. Using text mining and visu-
alization techniques, some implicit relations
from one source could be used to verify and
enhance the knowledge discovery in another
source. In this paper, we present our ongoing
work, ThaiHerbMiner, a Thai herbal medicine
mining and visualizing tool. ThaiHerbMiner
applies text mining to extract some salient re-
lations from a collection of PubMed articles
related to Thai herbs. The extracted relations
can be browsed and viewed using information
visualization. Our proposed tool can also rec-
ommend a list of herbs which have similar
medical properties.

1 Introduction

In 1993, the Royal Thai Government instituted the
National Institute of Thai Traditional Medicine, un-
der the supervision of the Ministry of Public Health.
The goal of the institute is to systematize and
standardize the body of Thai Traditional Medicine
(TTM) knowledge. The main task is to gather, re-
vise, verify, classify, and explain the TTM knowl-
edge. There are many ongoing project collaboration
to digitize the TTM knowledge, many of which are
documented on palm leaves. The digitized contents

contain information on Thai medical herbal formu-
lations with the healing properties. A medical herbal
formulation could contain more than one herb and
combined with others for better effect.

Apart from the traditional knowledge, today
biomedical research has advanced into the genetic
level. Many researchers have performed in-depth
studies of herbs’ medical properties on disease treat-
ment. The main goal of our research is to com-
bine the knowledge from traditional and modern
biomedical research. Using knowledge from one
source could support the knowledge discovery in
another source. To assist the researchers in Thai
herbal medicine, we propose ThaiHerbMiner, a text
mining and visualizing platform. ThaiHerbMiner’s
main task is to extract and visualize relations among
herbs, properties and other entities. Our work is sim-
ilar to the current ongoing research in mining Tradi-
tional Chinese Medicine (TCM) which has gained
increasing attention in recent years (He et al., 2011;
Lukman et al., 2007).

2 Design and implementation

Text mining has become a widely applied technique
for analyzing biomedical texts (Cohen and Hersh,
2005). The proposed ThaiHerbMiner is designed
with the standard text mining process. We started
by collecting PubMed articles by using herb names
as keywords. Currently, we have obtained approxi-
mately 18,000 articles related to Thai herbs such as
garlic, curcuma and ginger.

Figure 1 shows the text mining process of extract-
ing relations from given input texts. The process
includes sentence segmentation, tokenization, POS

186



Table 1: The text mining process for extracting relations
from input texts.

tagging and entity & relation recognition. We used
OpenNLP1 to perform all text processing tasks. For
relation recognition based on syntactic structure, we
focus on a group of causal verbs such as activate, in-
duce, inhibit, prevent, regulate and suppress. Then
the information visualization based on JavaScript 2

is applied to represent the extracted relations.
Figure 2 shows an example of a hyperbolic tree

visualizing relations between curcuma and other en-
tities. For example, curcuma has the property of in-
hibit with NF-kappaB, tumor and cancer. Figure 3
shows an example of a force-directed graph visual-
izing similar herbs sharing two entities, cancer and
NF-kappaB. The visualizing result is useful to re-
searchers for finding herbs which share similar med-
ical properties.

3 Conclusion and future work

The results of literature mining can be potentially
useful in revealing implicit relations underlying the
knowledge in herbal medicine. In particular, the re-
sults can be used in screening the research in Thai
herbal medicine to form a novel hypothesis. Our
next step is to perform comparative analysis on the
knowledge from Thai traditional medicine and the
knowledge extracted from the modern research pub-
lications.

1The OpenNLP Homepage, http://opennlp.sourceforge.net
2The JavaScript InfoVis Toolkit, http://thejit.org

Table 2: An example of relations between curcuma and
other relevant entities.

Table 3: An example of relations among different herbs
sharing the same entities.

References
Cohen, Aaron M. and William R. Hersh. 2005. A survey

of current work in biomedical text mining. Briefings
in Bioinformatics, 6(1):57-71.

He, Ping, Ke Deng, Zhihai Liu, Delin Liu, Jun S Liu
and Zhi Geng. 2011. Discovering herbal functional
groups of traditional Chinese medicine. Statistics in
medicine, March 17, 2011.

Lukman, Suryani, Yulan He, and Siu-Cheung Hui.
2007. Computational methods for Traditional Chinese
Medicine: A survey. Comput. Methods Prog. Biomed.,
88(3): 283–294.

187


