










































Reusing Parallel Corpora between Related Languages


Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing, page 1,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 12-14 September 2011.

Reusing Parallel Corpora between Related Languages
(invited talk)

Preslav Nakov
National University of Singapore
nakov@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Recent developments in statistical machine trans-
lation (SMT), e.g., the availability of efficient im-
plementations of integrated open-source toolkits
like Moses, have made it possible to build a proto-
type system with decent translation quality for any
language pair in a few days or even hours. This is
so in theory. In practice, doing so requires hav-
ing a large set of parallel sentence-aligned bilin-
gual texts (a bi-text) for that language pair, which
is often unavailable. Large high-quality bi-texts
are rare; except for Arabic, Chinese, and some of-
ficial languages of the European Union (EU), most
of the 6,500+ world languages remain resource-
poor from an SMT viewpoint. This number is
even more striking if we consider language pairs
instead of individual languages, e.g., while Arabic
and Chinese are among the most resource-rich lan-
guages for SMT, the Arabic-Chinese language pair
is quite resource-poor. Moreover, even resource-
rich language pairs could be poor in bi-texts for
a specific domain, e.g., biomedical text, conversa-
tional text, etc.

Due to the increasing volume of EU parliament
debates and the ever-growing European legisla-
tion, the official languages of the EU are especially
privileged from an SMT perspective. While this
includes “classic SMT languages” such as English
and French (which were already resource-rich),
and some important international ones like Span-
ish and Portuguese, many of the rest have a limited
number of speakers and were resource-poor until
a few years ago. Thus, becoming an official lan-
guage of the EU has turned out to be an easy recipe
for getting resource-rich in bi-texts quickly.

Our aim is to tap the potential of the EU re-
sources so that they can be used by other non-EU
languages that are closely related to one or more
official languages of the EU.

We propose to use bi-texts for resource-rich
language pairs to build better SMT systems for
resource-poor pairs by exploiting the similarity
between a resource-poor language and a resource-
rich one.

We are motivated by the observation that re-
lated languages tend to have (1) similar word order
and syntax, and, more importantly, (2) overlap-
ping vocabulary, e.g., casa (house) is used in both
Spanish and Portuguese; they also have (3) simi-
lar spelling. This vocabulary overlap means that
the resource-rich auxiliary language can be used
as a source of translation options for words that
cannot be translated with the resources available
for the resource-poor language. In actual text, the
vocabulary overlap might extend from individual
words to short phrases (especially if the resource-
rich languages has been transliterated to look like
the resource-poor one), which means that transla-
tions of whole phrases could potentially be reused
between related languages. Moreover, the vocab-
ulary overlap and the similarity in word order can
be used to improve the word alignments for the
resource-poor language by biasing the word align-
ment process with additional sentence pairs from
the resource-rich language. We take advantage of
all these opportunities: (1) we improve the word
alignments for the resource-poor language, (2) we
further augment it with additional translation op-
tions, and (3) we take care of potential spelling
differences through appropriate transliteration.

Speaker’s Bio

Dr. Preslav Nakov is a Research Fellow at the Na-
tional University of Singapore. He received his
PhD in Computer Science from the University of
California at Berkeley in 2007. Dr. Nakov’s re-
search interestes are in the areas of Web as a cor-
pus, lexical semantics, machine translation, infor-
mation extraction, and bioinformatics.

1


