










































The LIGA (LIG/LIA) Machine Translation System for WMT 2011


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 440–446,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

The LIGA (LIG/LIA) Machine Translation System for WMT 2011

Marion Potet1, Raphaël Rubino2, Benjamin Lecouteux1, Stéphane Huet2,
Hervé Blanchon1, Laurent Besacier1 and Fabrice Lefèvre2

1UJF-Grenoble1, UPMF-Grenoble2
LIG UMR 5217

Grenoble, F-38041, France
FirstName.LastName@imag.fr

2Université d’Avignon
LIA-CERI

Avignon, F-84911, France
FirstName.LastName@univ-avignon.fr

Abstract

We describe our system for the news com-
mentary translation task of WMT 2011. The
submitted run for the French-English direction
is a combination of two MOSES-based sys-
tems developed at LIG and LIA laboratories.
We report experiments to improve over the
standard phrase-based model using statistical
post-edition, information retrieval methods to
subsample out-of-domain parallel corpora and
ROVER to combine n-best list of hypotheses
output by different systems.

1 Introduction

This year, LIG and LIA have combined their efforts
to produce a joint submission to WMT 2011 for the
French-English translation task. Each group started
by developing its own solution whilst sharing re-
sources (corpora as provided by the organizers but
also aligned data etc) and acquired knowledge (cur-
rent parameters, effect of the size of n-grams, etc.)
with the other. Both LIG and LIA systems are stan-
dard phrase-based translation systems based on the
MOSES toolkit with appropriate carefully-tuned se-
tups. The final LIGA submission is a combination
of the two systems.

We summarize in Section 2 the resources used
and the main characteristics of the systems. Sec-
tions 3 and 4 describe the specificities and report
experiments of resp. the LIG and the LIA system.
Section 5 presents the combination of n-best lists
hypotheses generated by both systems. Finally, we
conclude in Section 6.

2 System overview

2.1 Used data

Globally, our system1 was built using all the French
and English data supplied for the workshop’s shared
translation task, apart from the Gigaword monolin-
gual corpora released by the LDC. Table 1 sums up
the used data and introduces designations that we
follow in the remainder of this paper to refer to cor-
pora. Four corpora were used to build translation
models: news-c, euro, UN and giga, while three
others are employed to train monolingual language
models (LMs). Three bilingual corpora were de-
voted to model tuning: test09 was used for the de-
velopment of the two seed systems (LIG and LIA),
whereas test08 and testcomb08 were used to tune the
weights for system combination. test10 was finally
put aside to compare internally our methods.

2.2 LIG and LIA system characteristics

Both LIG and LIA systems are phrase-based trans-
lation models. All the data were first tokenized with
the tokenizer provided for the workshop. Kneser-
Ney discounted LMs were built from monolingual
corpora using the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002),
while bilingual corpora were aligned at the word-
level using GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) or its
multi-threaded version MGIZA++ (Gao and Vogel,
2008) for the large corpora UN and giga. Phrase
table and lexicalized reordering models were built
with MOSES (Koehn et al., 2007). Finally, 14 fea-
tures were used in the phrase-based models:

1When not specified otherwise “our” system refers to the
LIGA system.

440



CORPORA DESIGNATION SIZE (SENTENCES)

English-French Bilingual training
News Commentary v6 news-c 116 k
Europarl v6 euro 1.8 M
United Nation corpus UN 12 M
10

9 corpus giga 23 M

English Monolingual training
News Commentary v6 mono-news-c 181 k
Shuffled News Crawl corpus (from 2007 to 2011) news-s 25 M
Europarl v6 mono-euro 1.8 M

Development
newstest2008 test08 2,051
newssyscomb2009 testcomb09 502
newstest2009 test09 2,525

Test
newstest2010 test10 2,489

Table 1: Used corpora

• 5 translation model scores,

• 1 distance-based reordering score,

• 6 lexicalized reordering score,

• 1 LM score and

• 1 word penalty score.

The score weights were optimized on the test09 cor-
pus according to the BLEU score with the MERT
method (Och, 2003). The experiments led specifi-
cally with either LIG or LIA system are respectively
described in Sections 3 and 4. Unless otherwise
indicated, all the evaluations were performed using
case-insensitive BLEU and were computed with the
mteval-v13a.pl script provided by NIST. Ta-
ble 2 summarizes the differences between the final
configuration of the systems.

3 The LIG machine translation system

LIG participated for the second time to the WMT
shared news translation task for the French-English
language pair.

3.1 Pre-processing

Training data were first lowercased with the PERL
script provided for the campaign. They were also

processed in order to normalize a special French
form (named euphonious “t”) as described in (Potet
et al., 2010).

The baseline system was built using a 4-gram LM
trained on the monolingual corpora provided last
year and translation models trained on news-c and
euro (Table 3, System 1). A significant improve-
ment in terms of BLEU is obtained when taking into
account a third corpus, UN, to build translation mod-
els (System 2). The next section describes the LMs
that were trained using the monolingual data pro-
vided this year.

3.2 Language model training

Target LMs are standard 4-gram models trained
on the provided monolingual corpus (mono-news-c,
mono-euro and news-s). We decided to test two dif-
ferent n-gram cut-off settings. The fist set has low
cut-offs: 1-2-3-3 (respectively for 1-gram, 2-gram,
3-gram and 4-gram counts), whereas the second one
(LM2) is more aggressive: 1-5-7-7. Experiment re-
sults (Table 3, Systems 3 and 4) show that resorting
to LM2 leads to an improvement of BLEU with re-
spect to LM1. LM2 was therefore used in the sub-
sequent experiments.

441



FEATURES LIG SYSTEM LIA SYSTEM

Pre-processing
Text lowercased Text truecased
Normalization of French euphonious
’t’

Reaccentuation of French words start-
ing with a capital letter

LM
Training on mono-news-c, news-s and
mono-euro

Training on mono-news-c and news-s

4-gram models 5-gram models

Translation model
Training on news-c, euro and UN Training on 10 M sentence pairs se-

lected in news-c, euro, UN and giga
Phrase table filtering
Use of -monotone-at-punctuation op-
tion

Table 2: Distinct features between final configurations retained for the LIG and LIA systems

3.3 Translation model training

Translation models were trained from the parallel
corpora news-c, euro and UN. Data were aligned
at the word-level and then used to build standard
phrase-based translation models. We filtered the ob-
tained phrase table using the method described in
(Johnson et al., 2007). Since this technique drasti-
cally reduces the size of the phrase table, while not
degrading (and even slightly improving) the results
on the development and test corpora (System 6), we
decided to employ filtered phrase tables in the final
configuration of the LIG system.

3.4 Tuning

For decoding, the system uses a log-linear com-
bination of translation model scores with the LM
log-probability. We prevent phrase reordering over
punctuation using the MOSES option -monotone-at-
punctuation. As the system can be beforehand tuned
by adjusting the log-linear combination weights on
a development corpus, we used the MERT method
(System 5). Optimizing weights according to BLEU
leads to an improvement with respect to the sys-
tem with MOSES default value weights (System 5
vs System 4).

3.5 Post-processing

We also investigated the interest of a statistical
post-editor (SPE) to improve translation hypotheses.
About 9,000 sentences extracted from the news do-
main test corpora of the 2007–2009 WMT transla-

tion tasks were automatically translated by a sys-
tem very similar to that described in (Potet et al.,
2010), then manually post-edited. Manual correc-
tions of translations were performed by means of the
crowd-sourcing platform AMAZON MECHANICAL
TURK2 ($0.15/sent.). These collected data make
a parallel corpus whose source part is MT output
and target part is the human post-edited version of
MT output. This are used to train a phrase-based
SMT (with Moses without the tuning step) that au-
tomatically post-edit the MT output. That aims at
learning how to correct translation hypotheses. Sys-
tem 7 obtained when post-processing MT 1-best out-
put shows a slight improvement. However, SPE was
not used in the final LIG system since we lacked
time to apply SPE on the N-best hypotheses for the
development and test corpora (the N-best being nec-
essary for combination of LIG and LIA systems).
Ths LIGA submission is thus a constrained one.

3.6 Recasing

We trained a phrase-based recaser model on the
news-s corpus using the provided MOSES scripts
and applied it to uppercase translation outputs. A
common and expected loss of around 1.5 case-
sensitive BLEU points was observed on the test cor-
pus (news10) after applying this recaser (System 7)
with respect to the score case-insensitive BLEU pre-
viously measured.

2http://www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome

442



♯ SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
BLEU SCORE
test09 test10

1 Training: euro+news-c 24.89 26.01
2 Training: euro+news-c+UN 25.44 26.43
3 2 + LM1 24.81 27.19
4 2 + LM2 25.37 27.25
5 4 + MERT on test09 26.83 27.53
6 5 + phrase-table filtering 27.09 27.64
7 6 + SPE 27.53 27.74
8 6 + recaser 24.95 26.07

Table 3: Incremental improvement of the LIG system in
terms of case-insensitive BLEU (%), except for line 8
where case-sensitive BLEU (%) are reported

4 The LIA machine translation system

This section describes the particularities of the MT
system which was built at the LIA for its first partic-
ipation to WMT.

4.1 System description

The available corpora were pre-processed using
an in-house script that normalizes quotes, dashes,
spaces and ligatures. We also reaccentuated French
words starting with a capital letter. We significantly
cleaned up the crawled parallel giga corpus, keeping
19.3 M of the original 22.5 M sentence pairs. For ex-
ample, sentence pairs with numerous numbers, non-
alphanumeric characters or words starting with cap-
ital letters were removed. The whole training ma-
terial is truecased, meaning that the words occur-
ing after a strong punctuation mark were lowercased
when they belonged to a dictionary of common all-
lowercased forms; the others were left unchanged.

The training of a 5-gram English LM was re-
strained to the news corpora mono-news-c and news-
s that we consider large enough to ignore other data.
In order to reduce the size of the LM, we first limited
the vocabulary of our model to a 1 M word vocabu-
lary taking the most frequent words in the news cor-
pora. We also resorted to cut-offs to discard infre-
quent n-grams (2-2-3-5 thresholds on 2- to 5-gram
counts) and uses the SRILM option prune, which
allowed us to train the LM on large data with 32 Gb
RAM.

Our translation models are phrase-based models
(PBMs) built with MOSES with the following non-

default settings:

• maximum sentence length of 80 words,

• limit on the number of phrase translations
loaded for each phrase fixed to 30.

Weights of LM, phrase table and lexicalized re-
ordering model scores were optimized on the devel-
opment corpus thanks to the MERT algorithm.

Besides the size of used data, we experimented
with two advanced features made available for
MOSES. Firstly, we filtered phrase tables using the
default setting -l a+e -n 30. This dramatically
reduced phrase tables by dividing their size by a
factor of 5 but did not improve our best configu-
ration from the BLEU score perspective (Table 4,
line 1); the method was therefore not kept in the
LIA system. Secondly, we introduced reordering
constraints in order to consider quoted material as
a block. This method is particularly useful when ci-
tations included in sentences have to be translated.
Two configurations were tested: zone markups in-
clusion around quotes and wall markups inclusion
within zone markups. However, the measured gains
were finally too marginal to include the method in
the final system.

4.2 Parallel corpus subsampling

As the only news parallel corpus provided for the
workshop contains 116 k sentence pairs, we must
resort to parallel out-of-domain corpora in order to
build reliable translation models. Information re-
trieval (IR) methods have been used in the past to
subsample parallel corpora. For example, Hilde-
brand et al. (2005) used sentences belonging to the
development and test corpora as queries to select the
k most similar source sentences in an indexed paral-
lel corpus. The retrieved sentence pairs constituted
a training corpus for the translation models.

The RALI submission for WMT10 proposed a
similar approach that builds queries from the mono-
lingual news corpus in order to select sentence pairs
stylistically close to the news domain (Huet et al.,
2010). This method has the major interest that it
does not require to build a new training parallel
corpus for each news data set to translate. Fol-
lowing the best configuration tested in (Huet et al.,

443



2010), we index the three out-of-domain corpora us-
ing LEMUR3, and build queries from English news-s
sentences where stop words are removed. The 10 top
sentence pairs retrieved per query are selected and
added to the new training corpus if they are not re-
dundant with a sentence pair already collected. The
process is repeated until the training parallel cor-
pus reaches a threshold over the number of retrieved
pairs.

Table 4 reports BLEU scores obtained with the
LIA system using the in-domain corpus news-c and
various amounts of out-of-domain data. MERT was
re-run for each set of training data. The first four
lines display results obtained with the same num-
ber of sentence pairs, which corresponds to the
size of news-c appended to euro. The experiments
show that using euro instead of the first sentences of
UN and giga significantly improves BLEU scores,
which indicates the better adequacy of euro with re-
spect to the test10 corpus. The use of the IR method
to select sentences from euro, UN and giga leads to
a similar BLEU score to the one obtained with euro.
The increase of the collected pairs up to 3 M pairs
generates a significant improvement of 0.9 BLEU
point. A further rise of the amount of collected
pairs does not introduce a major gain since retriev-
ing 10 M sentence pairs only augments BLEU from
29.1 to 29.3. This last configuration which leads to
the best BLEU was used to build the final LIA sys-
tem. Let us note that 2 M, 3 M and 15 M queries
were required to respectively obtain 3 M, 5 M and
10 M sentence pairs because of the removal of re-
dundant sentences in the increased corpus.

For a matter of comparison, a system was also
built taking into account all the training material,
i.e. 37 M sentence pairs4. This last system is out-
performed by our best system built with IR and has
finally close performance to the one obtained with
news-c+euro relatively to the quantity of used data.

5 The system combination

System combination is based on the 500-best out-
puts generated by the LIA and the LIG systems.

3www.lemurproject.org
4For this experiment, the data were split into three parts

to build independent alignment models: news-c+euro, UN and
giga, and they were joined afterwards to build translation mod-
els.

USED PARALLEL CORPORA FILTERING
without with

news-c + euro (1.77 M) 28.1 28.0
news-c + 1.77 M of UN 27.2 -
news-c + 1.77 M of giga 27.1 -
news-c + 1.77 M with IR 28.2 -
news-c + 3 M with IR 29.1 29.0
news-c + 5 M with IR 28.8 -
news-c + 10 M with IR 29.3 29.2
All data 28.9 29.0

Table 4: BLEU (%) on test10 measured with the LIA
system using different training parallel corpora

They both used the MOSES option distinct, en-
suring that the hypotheses produced for a given sen-
tence are different inside an N-best list. Each N-best
list is associated with a set of 14 scores and com-
bined in several steps.

The first step takes as input lowercased 500-best
lists, since preliminary experiments have shown a
better behavior using only lowercased output (with
cased output, combination presents some degrada-
tions). The score combination weights are opti-
mized on the development corpus, in order to max-
imize the BLEU score at the sentence level when
N-best lists are reordered according to the 14 avail-
able scores. To this end, we resorted to the SRILM
nbest-optimize tool to do a simplex-based
Amoeba search (Press et al., 1988) on the error func-
tion with multiple restarts to avoid local minima.

Once the optimized feature weights are com-
puted independently for each system, N-best lists
are turned into confusion networks (Mangu et al.,
2000). The 14 features are used to compute poste-
riors relatively to all the hypotheses in the N-best
list. Confusion networks are computed for each sen-
tence and for each system. In Table 5 we present
the ROVER (Fiscus, 1997) results for the LIA and
LIG confusion networks (LIA CNC and LIG CNC).
Then, both confusion networks computed for each
sentence are merged into a single one. A ROVER
is applied on the combined confusion network and
generates a lowercased 1-best.

The final step aims at producing cased hypothe-
ses. The LIA system built from truecased corpora
achieved significantly higher performance than the

444



LIG LIA LIG CNC LIA CNC LIG+LIA

case-insensitive test10 27.6 29.3 28.1 29.4 29.7
BLEU test11 28.5 29.4 28.5 29.3 29.9

case-sensitive test10 26.1 28.4 27.0 28.4 28.7
BLEU test11 26.9 28.4 27.5 28.4 28.8

Table 5: Performance measured before and after combining systems

LIG system trained on lowercased corpora (Table 5,
two last lines). In order to get an improvement when
combining the outputs, we had to adopt the follow-
ing strategy. The 500-best truecased outputs of the
LIA system are first merged in a word graph (and
not a mesh lattice). Then, the lowercased 1-best
previously obtained with ROVER is aligned with the
graph in order to find the closest existing path, which
is equivalent to matching an oracle with the graph.
This method allows for several benefits. The new
hypothesis is based on a “true” decoding pass gener-
ated by a truecased system and discarded marginal
hypotheses. Moreover, the selected path offers a
better BLEU score than the initial hypothesis with
and without case. This method is better than the one
which consists of applying the LIG recaser (section
3.6) on the combined (un-cased) hypothesis.

The new recased one-best hypothesis is then used
as the final submission for WMT. Our combination
approach improves on test11 the best single sys-
tem by 0.5 case-insensitive BLEU point and by 0.4
case-sensitive BLEU (Table 5). However, it also in-
troduces some mistakes by duplicating in particular
some segments. We plan to apply rules at the seg-
ment level in order to reduce these artifacts.

6 Conclusion

This paper presented two statistical machine trans-
lation systems developed at different sites using
MOSES and the combination of these systems. The
LIGA submission presented this year was ranked
among the best MT system for the French-English
direction. This campaign was the first shot for LIA
and the second for LIG. Beside following the tradi-
tional pipeline for building a phrase-based transla-
tion system, each individual system led to specific
works: LIG worked on using SPE as post-treatment,
LIA focused on extracting useful data from large-

sized corpora. And their combination implied to ad-
dress the interesting issue of matching results from
systems with different casing approaches.

WMT is a great opportunity to chase after perfor-
mance and joining our efforts has allowed to save
considerable amount of time for data preparation
and tuning choices (even when final decisions were
different among systems), yet obtaining very com-
petitive results. This year, our goal was to develop
state-of-the-art systems so as to investigate new ap-
proaches for related topics such as translation with
human-in-the-loop or multilingual interaction sys-
tems (e.g. vocal telephone information-query di-
alogue systems in multiple languages or language
portability of such systems).

References

Jonathan G. Fiscus. 1997. A post-processing system to
yield reduced word error rates:recognizer output vot-
ing error reduction (ROVER). In Proceedings of the
IEEE Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition and
Understanding, pages 347–354, Santa Barbara, CA,
USA.

Qin Gao and Stephan Vogel. 2008. Parallel implemen-
tations of word alignment tool. In Proceedings of the
ACL Workshop: Software Engineering, Testing, and
Quality Assurance for Natural Language Processing,
pages 49–57, Columbus, OH, USA.

Almut Silja Hildebrand, Matthias Eck, Stephan Vogel,
and Alex Waibel. 2005. Adaptation of the translation
model for statistical machine translation based on in-
formation retrieval. In Proceedings of the 10th confer-
ence of the European Association for Machine Trans-
lation (EAMT), Budapest, Hungary.

Stéphane Huet, Julien Bourdaillet, Alexandre Patry, and
Philippe Langlais. 2010. The RALI machine trans-
lation system for WMT 2010. In Proceedings of the
ACL Joint 5th Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation and Metrics (WMT), Uppsala, Sweden.

Howard Johnson, Joel Martin, George Foster, and Roland

445



Kuhn. 2007. Improving translation quality by dis-
carding most of the phrasetable. In Proceedings of
the Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 967–
975, Prague, Czech Republic, jun.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL), Companion Vol-
ume, pages 177–180, Prague, Czech Republic, June.

Lidia Mangu, Eric Brill, and Andreas Stolcke. 2000.
Finding consensus in speech recognition: Word error
minimization and other applications of confusion net-
works. Computer Speech and Language, 14(4):373–
400.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training
in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL), Sapporo, Japan.

Marion Potet, Laurent Besacier, and Hervé Blanchon.
2010. The LIG machine translation for WMT 2010.
In Proceedings of the ACL Joint 5th Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine Translation and Metrics (WMT), Up-
psala, Sweden.

William H. Press, Brian P. Flannery, Saul A. Teukolsky,
and William T. Vetterling. 1988. Numerical Recipes
in C: The Art of Scientific Computing. Cambridge
University Press.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM — an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the 7th In-
ternational Conference on Spoken Language Process-
ing (ICSLP), Denver, CO, USA.

446


