










































Building Timelines from Narrative Clinical Records: Initial Results Based-on Deep Natural Language Understanding


Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL-HLT 2011, pages 146–154,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Building Timelines from Narrative Clinical Records: Initial Results 
Based-on Deep Natural Language Understanding

Hyuckchul Jung, James Allen, Nate Blaylock, Will de Beaumont, 
Lucian Galescu, Mary Swift

Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition
40 South Alcaniz Street, Pensacola, Florida, USA

{hjung,blaylock,jallen,wbeaumont,lgalescu,mswift}@ihmc.us

Abstract

We present an end-to-end system that proc-
esses narrative clinical records, constructs 
timelines for the medical histories of pa-
tients, and visualizes the results. This work 
is motivated by real clinical records and 
our general approach is based on deep se-
mantic natural language understanding.

1 Introduction

It is critical for physicians and other healthcare 
providers to have complete and accurate knowl-
edge of the medical history of patients that  in-
cludes disease/symptom progression over time and 
related tests/treatments in chronological order. 
While various types of clinical records (e.g., dis-
charge summaries, consultation notes, etc.) contain 
comprehensive medical history information, it  can 
be often challenging and time-consuming to com-
prehend the medical history of patients when the 
information is stored in multiple documents in dif-
ferent  formats and the relations among various 
pieces of information is not explicit.

For decades, researchers have investigated tem-
poral information extraction and reasoning in the 
medical domain (Zhou and Hripcsak, 2007). How-
ever, information extraction in the medical domain 
typically relies on shallow NLP techniques (e.g., 
pattern matching, chunking, templates, etc.),  and 
most temporal reasoning techniques are based on 
structured data with temporal tags (Augusto, 2005; 
Stacey and McGregor, 2007).

In this paper, we present our work on develop-
ing an end-to-end system that  (i) extracts interest-
ing medical concepts (e.g., medical conditions/
tests/treatments), related events and temporal ex-

pressions from raw clinical text records, (ii) con-
structs timelines of the extracted information; and 
(iii) visualizes the timelines, all using deep seman-
tic natural language understanding (NLU). 

Our deep NLU system extracts rich semantic 
information from narrative text records and builds 
logical forms that  contain ontology types as well as 
linguistic features. Ontology- and pattern-based 
extraction rules are used on the logical forms to 
retrieve time points/intervals, medical concepts/
events and their temporal/causal relations that are 
pieced together by our system’s temporal reasoning 
component to create comprehensive timelines.

Our system is an extension to a well-proven 
general-purpose NLP system (Allen et  al., 2000) 
rather than a system specialized to the clinical do-
main, and the temporal reasoning in our system is 
tightly integrated into the NLP system’s deep se-
mantic analysis. We believe this approach will al-
low us to process a broader variety of documents 
and complex forms of temporal expressions.

In the coming sections, we first present a moti-
vating example, a real clinical record of a cancer 
patient. Next, we give an overview of our NLU 
system including how medical ontology is inte-
grated into our system. The overview section is 
followed by detailed description of our information 
extraction and temporal reasoning approach. Then, 
we discuss our results and conclude.

2 Motivating Example

Our work is carried out as a collaboration with the 
Moffitt  Cancer Center (part of the NCI Compre-
hensive Cancer Centers), who have provided us 
with access to clinical records for over 1500 pa-
tients. Figure 1 shows a (de-identified) “History of 
Present Illness” (HPI) section of a Thoracic Con-
sultation Note from this data set. 

146



The text of this section provides a very detailed 
description of what  problems/tests/treatments an 
anonymous cancer patient went  through over a pe-
riod. Such narrative text is common in clinical 
notes and, because such notes are carefully created 
by physicians, they tend to have only relevant in-
formation about patient medical history. 

Nonetheless, there are lots of challenges in con-
structing complete and accurate medical history 
because of complex temporal expressions/
relations, medical language specific grammar/
jargons, implicit  information and domain-specific 
medical knowledge (Zhou and Hripcsak, 2007).

In this paper, as an initial step towards con-
structing complete timelines from narrative text, 
we focus on sentences with explicit  temporal ex-
pressions listed below (tagged as Line 1 ~ 11) plus 
a sentence in the present tense (Line 12):1

• Line 1: She had a left radical nephrectomy in  09/
2007; pathological stage at that time  was a T3 
NX MX. 

• Line 2: Prior to her surgery CT scan in 08/2007 
showed lung nodules. 

• Line 3: She was placed on Nexavar in 11/2007. 
• Line 4: She was started on Afinitor on 03/05/08. 
• Line 5: She states that prior to starting the Afini-

tor she had no shortness of breath or dyspnea on 
exertion and she was quite active. 

• Line 6: Unfortunately 4 weeks after starting the 
Afinitor she developed a dry cough and progres-
sive shortness of breath with dyspnea on exer-
tion. 

• Line 7: She received a 5 day dose pack of 
prednisone and was treated with Augmentin in 
05/2008. 

• Line 8: She subsequently had a CT scan of the 
chest  done on 05/14/08 that  showed interval de-
velopment of bilateral lower lobe infiltrates that 
were not present on the 02/19/08 scan. 

• Line 9: Because of her respiratory symptoms, the 
Afinitor was stopped on 05/18/2008. 

• Line 10: Prior to  the Afinitor she was able to 
walk, do gardening, and swim without any 
shortness of breath.  

• Line 11: She has had a 140 pound weight  since 
10/2007.

• Line 12: She denies fevers, chills, hemoptysis or 
chest pain. 
In these 12 sentences, there are instances of 10 

treatments (e.g., procedures such as “nephrectomy” 
and drugs such as “Nexavar”), 3 tests (e.g., CT-
scan), 13 problems/symptoms (e.g., lung nodules) 
and 2 other types of clinical findings (e.g., the can-
cer stage level “T3 NX MX”). There are also 23 
events of various types represented with verbs such 
as  “had”, “was”, “showed”, and “was started”.

While there are simple expressions such as “on 
03/05/08” in Line 3, there are also temporal ex-
pressions in more complex forms with time rela-
tions (e.g., “prior to”), time references (e.g., “at 
that time”) or event references (e.g., “4 weeks after 
starting Afinitor”). Throughout  this paper, we will 
use Line 1 ~ 12 as a concrete example based on 
which we develop general techniques to construct 
timelines.

1 For privacy, identities of patients/physicians were concealed and the dates/time-spans in the original sources were 
altered while maintaining their chronological order. Some measurements and geographic names were also modified.

Figure 1: A sample medical record -- Thoracic 
Consultation Note1

PAST MEDICAL HISTORY: 
1. History of melanoma of the left arm.  She had excision of 3 sentinel lymph nodes in the left axilla 
that were negative.  This was in 07/2007.
2. Status post right hip replacement.
3. Status post cholecystectomy.
4. Status post renal stone removal.
5. Fracture of the right hip and left wrist in a motor vehicle accident.
6. Diabetes.
7. Elevated cholesterol.
8. Hypertension.
9. Spinal stenosis. 

ALLERGIES:
She has no known drug allergies.  She is allergic to IVP dye which causes shortness of breath.  She 
tolerates IV dye when she is pre treated.  

SOCIAL HISTORY: 
She is born and raised in California and she lived in Florida for 30 years.  She has worked as a 
medical billing analyst.  She has never smoked. She does not use alcoholic beverages.

FAMILY HISTORY:
Her father died at age 69 of prostate cancer.  Her mother died at age 72 of emphysema.  She had 1 
sister who died from melanoma.  

REVIEW OF SYSTEMS: 
A complete review of systems was performed.  See the questionnaire.  She has hypothyroidism.  
She has some back pain related to her spinal stenosis.  She suffers from mild depression.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
1. Carvedilol 6.25 mg p.o. daily.
2. Darvocet N100, 1 tablet as needed.
3. Fish oil, 1000 mg three times a day.
4. Glimepiride 4 mg daily in the morning and 2 mg at bedtime.
5. Lipitor 20 mg daily.
6. Metformin 1000 mg twice daily.
7. Paroxetine 20 mg daily.
8. Synthroid 0.112 mg daily.
9. Tylenol as needed.
10. Vitamin B12, 2500 mcg p.o. twice daily.

XXX X XX-XX-XX 
CONSULTATION DATE: 07/06/2008

RE: XXX BIRTH DATE: XX/XX/XXXX
UR#: XX-XX-XX AGE: 75

THORACIC CONSULTATION NOTE

REQUESTING PHYSICIAN:
XXXXXXXXXX, MD.

REASON FOR CONSULTATION:
Shortness of breath and abnormal chest x ray.

HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS:
Ms. XXX is a 75 year old woman who has a history of metastatic renal cancer.  She had a left radical 
nephrectomy in 09/2007; pathological stage at that time was a T3 NX MX.  Prior to her surgery CT 
scan in 08/2007 showed lung nodules.  These nodules have progressed with time.  She was placed 
on Nexavar in 11/2007.  She subsequently was found to have a new mass in her left nephrectomy 
bed.  She was continued on the Nexavar, however, she showed radiographic progression and the 
Nexavar was discontinued.  She was started on Afinitor on 03/05/08.  She states that prior to starting 
the Afinitor she had no shortness of breath or dyspnea on exertion and she was quite active.  
Unfortunately 4 weeks after starting the Afinitor she developed a dry cough and progressive 
shortness of breath with dyspnea on exertion.  She received a 5 day dose pack of prednisone and 
was treated with Augmentin in 05/2008.  This had no impact on her cough or shortness of breath.  
She subsequently had a CT scan of the chest done on 05/14/08 that showed interval development 
of bilateral lower lobe infiltrates that were not present on the 02/19/08 scan.  She had mediastinal 
and right hilar adenopathy that had increased.  She had multiple lung nodules and there was 
recurrent tumor noted in the left renal bed which was thought to be larger.  Because of her 
respiratory symptoms, the Afinitor was stopped on 05/18/08.  She still has a dry cough.  She is short 
of breath after walking 15 to 20 feet.  She has no shortness of breath at rest.  She denies PND or 
orthopnea.  Prior to the Afinitor she was able to walk, do gardening, and swim without any shortness 
of breath.  She has had a 140 pound weight since 10/2007.  She notices anorexia.  She has no 
travel history.

She denies fevers, chills, hemoptysis or chest pain.  She has never smoked.  She denies 
pneumonia, asthma, wheezing, or myocardial infarction, congestion heart failure or heart murmur.  
She has dogs and cats at home and has had them for a long time and this never caused her 
respiratory problems. 

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION: 
VITAL SIGNS:   Blood pressure 131/74, pulse 106, respiratory rate 20, temperature 97.3, weight 
64.0 kg.
HEENT:   Pupils equal, round, reactive to light.  Extraocular muscles were intact.  Nose and mouth 
were clear. 
NECK:  Trachea midline.  Carotids were 2 plus.  No masses, thyromegaly or adenopathy.  
LUNGS:   Respirations were unlabored.  There is no dullness to percussion or tenderness to 
palpation.  She has some bibasilar dry rales.
HEART:   Regular rate and rhythm without murmur.
ABDOMEN:  Soft, positive bowel sounds, nontender. 
EXTREMITIES:   No clubbing or cyanosis.  She had some mild pedal edema. 

DATABASE:
Chest x ray from 06/01/08 was reviewed.  She had bilateral lower lobe patchy densities.  She had 
some nodular densities bilaterally as well.  There is widening of the mediastinum on the right.  CT 
scan of the chest from 05/14/08 also was reviewed.  She had bilateral lower lobe infiltrates that were 
new.  She had mediastinal and right hilar adenopathy.  She had multiple lung nodules.  There is 
recurrent tumor in the left renal bed that was thought to be larger. 

IMPRESSION:
1. Metastatic renal cancer with multiple lung nodules with mediastinal and hilar adenopathy.  
2. Bilateral lower lobe infiltrates.  These infiltrates had developed after starting the Afinitor, as did 
her shortness of breath and dyspnea on exertion.  She recently started on oxygen by her primary 
care physician when she was found to have exercise O2 saturations of 86%.  She is currently taking 
2 liters of oxygen.  I would be concerned that the infiltrates may be related to pneumonitis from the 
Afinitor.  I also think her shortness of breath, cough and hypoxemia are related to the infiltrates as 
well.  

RECOMMENDATIONS:
1. I reviewed my impressions with the patient.
2. I am going to schedule her for a bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage.  I am going to get 
baseline pulmonary function tests on her. 
3. She will be seen by Dr. XXX on 08/12/08.  I will call and discuss the case with him pending the 
above results.  The options are likely going to be observation off Afinitor or may consider placing her 
on prednisone, if the bronchoalveolar lavage is unremarkable.  
4. Further recommendations will be made after the above.

Do not type or edit below this line. This will cause format damage.
  

Dictated by XXXX, MD
Electronically Signed
FXXXXXXX, MD 07/10/2008 10:15
________________________
XXXXX, MD

DD: 07/10/2008  9:24 A
DT: 07/13/2008 11:46 A
ID: XXXXXXX.LML
CS: XXXXXX
cc: 
??

HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS:
Ms. XXX is a 75 year old woman who has a history of metastatic renal 
cancer. She had a left radical nephrectomy in 09/2007; pathological stage 
at that time was a T3 NX MX. Prior to her surgery CT scan in 08/2007 
showed lung nodules. These nodules have progressed with time. She was 
placed on Nexavar in 11/2007. She subsequently was found to have a 
new mass in her left nephrectomy bed. She was continued on the 
Nexavar, however, she showed radiographic progression and the Nexavar 
was discontinued. She was started on Afinitor on 03/05/08. She states 
that prior to starting the Afinitor she had no shortness of breath or 
dyspnea on exertion and she was quite active. Unfortunately 4 weeks 
after starting the Afinitor she developed a dry cough and progressive 
shortness of breath with dyspnea on exertion. She received a 5 day dose 
pack of prednisone and was treated with Augmentin in 05/2008. This had 
no impact on her cough or shortness of breath. She subsequently had a 
CT scan of the chest done on 05/14/08 that showed interval development 
of bilateral lower lobe infiltrates that were not present on the 02/19/08 
scan. She had mediastinal and right hilar adenopathy that had increased. 
She had multiple lung nodules and there was recurrent tumor noted in the 
left renal bed which was thought to be larger. Because of her respiratory 
symptoms, the Afinitor was stopped on 05/18/2008. She still has a dry 
cough. She is short of breath after walking 15 to 20 feet. She has no 
shortness of breath at rest. She denies PND or orthopnea. Prior to the 
Afinitor she was able to walk, do gardening, and swim without any 
shortness of breath. She has had a 140 pound weight since 10/2007. She 
notices anorexia. She has no travel history. She denies fevers, chills, 
hemoptysis or chest pain. She has never smoked. She denies pneumonia, 
asthma, wheezing, or myocardial infarction, congestion heart failure or 
heart murmur. She has dogs and cats at home and has had them for a long 
time and this never caused her respiratory problems.

147



3 Natural Language Understanding 
(NLU) System

Our system is an extension to an existing NLU sys-
tem that is the result of a decade-long research ef-
fort  in developing generic natural language tech-
nology. The system uses a “deep” understanding 
approach, attempting to find a linked, overall 
meaning for all the words in a paragraph. An archi-
tectural view of the system is shown in Figure 2.

3.1 Core NLU Components
At the core of the system is a packed-forest  chart 
parser which builds constituents bottom-up using a 
best-first search strategy. The core grammar is a 
hand-built, lexicalized context-free grammar, aug-
mented with feature structures and feature unifica-
tion. The parser draws on a general purpose seman-
tic lexicon and ontology which define a range of 
word senses and lexical semantic relations. The 
core semantic lexicon was constructed by hand and 
contains more than 7000 lemmas. It  can be also 
dynamically augmented for unknown words by 
consulting WordNet (Miller, 1995). 

To support  more robust processing as well as 
domain configurability, the core system is in-
formed by a variety of statistical and symbolic pre-
processors. These include several off-the-shelf sta-
tisical NLP tools such as the Stanford POS tagger 
(Toutanova and Manning, 2000), the Stanford 
named-entity recognizer (NER) (Finkel et al., 
2005) and the Stanford Parser (Klein and Manning, 
2003). The output of these and other specialized 
preprocessors (such as a street address recognizer) 
are sent  to the parser as advice. The parser then can 
include or not include this advice (e.g., that a cer-

tain phrase is a named entity) as it searches for the 
optimal parse of the sentence.

The result  of parsing is a frame-like semantic 
representation that we call the Logical Form (LF). 
The LF representation includes semantic types, 
semantic roles for predicate arguments, and de-
pendency relations. Figure 3 shows an LF example 
for the sentence “She had a left radical nephrec-
tomy in 09/2007”. In the representation, elements 
that start  with colons (e.g., :THEME) are semantic 
roles of ontological concepts, and role values can 
be a variable to refer to another LF term.

3.2 UMLS Integration
By far the most  critical aspect  of porting our ge-
neric NLU components to the task of understand-
ing clinical text  is the need for domain-specific 
lexical and ontologic information. One widely used 
comprehensive resource that  can provide both is 
the National Library of Medicine’s Unified Medi-
cal Language System (UMLS) (Bodenreider, 
2004). UMLS was integrated into or system via 
MetaMap (Aronson and Lang, 2010), a tool also 
developed by NLM, that  can identify and rank 
UMLS concepts in text.

Specifically, we added MetaMap as a special 
kind of named entity recognizer feeding advice 
into the Parser’s input chart (see Figure 2). We run 
MetaMap twice on the input  text  to obtain UMLS 
information both for the maximal constituents, and 
for individual words in those constituents (e.g.,  
“lung cancer”, as well as “lung” and “cancer”).

The lexicon constructs representations for the 
new words and phrases on the fly. Our general ap-
proach for dealing with how the corresponding 
concepts fit  in our system ontology uses an ontol-

Core Lexicon
& Semantic Ontology

Grammar

Parser

Wordnet

Unknown Word 
Processing

New Lexical Entries

Output
Chart

Input
Chart

Statistical Parser
Bracketing Preferences

Input

Named Entity 
Recognizer Name Hypotheses

POS 
Tagging

POS
Hypotheses

Word Hypotheses

MetaMap UMLS

UMLS
POS/sense 
Hypotheses

LF Semantic 
Representation 
for reasoners

Figure 2: Front-end language processing components with MetaMap and UMLS

148



ogy specialization mechanism which we call on-
tology grafting, whereby new branches are created 
from third party ontological sources, and attached 
to appropriate leaf nodes in our ontology.

The UMLS Semantic Network and certain vo-
cabularies included in the UMLS Metathesaurus  
define concept hierarchies along multiple axes. 
First, we established links between the 15 UMLS 
semantic groups and corresponding concepts in our 
ontology. Second, we selected a list of nodes from 
the SNOMED-CT and NCI hierarchies (27 and 11 
nodes, respectively) and formed ontological 
branches rooted in these nodes that  we grafted onto 
our ontology. 

Based on these processes, UMLS information 
gets integrated into our LF representation. In Fig-
ure 3, the 3rd term has a role called :domain-info 
and, in fact, its value is (UMLS :CUI C2222800 
:CONCEPT "left nephrectomy" :PREFERRED 
"nephrectomy of left kidney (treatment)" 
:SEMANTIC-TYPES (TOPP) :SEMANTIC-
GROUPS (PROC) :SOURCES (MEDCIN MTH)) 
that provides detailed UMLS concept information. 
Here, the semantic type “TOPP” is a UMLS abbre-
viation for “Therapeutic or Preventive Procedure”. 
More details about complex issues surrounding 
UMLS integration into our system can be found in 
(Swift et al., 2010).

4 Information Extraction (IE) from Clinical 
Text Records

In this section, we describe how to extract basic 
elements that will be used as a foundation to con-
struct timelines. We first describe our general ap-
proach to extracting information from LF graphs. 
Then we give details specific to the various types 
of information we extract in our system: various 

clinical concepts, temporal concepts (points as well 
as intervals), events and temporal relations.

4.1 LF Pattern-based Extraction
Given LF outputs from the NLU system described 
in Section 3, we use LF pattern-based rules for in-
formation extraction. The basic structure of an ex-
traction rule is a list  of LF patterns followed by a 
unique rule ID and the output specification.

Each LF-pattern specifies a pattern against  an 
LF. Variables can appear anywhere except as role 
names in different formats:
• ?x - (unconstrained) match anything 
• ?!x - match any non-null value
• (? x V1 V2 ...) - (constrained) match one of the 

specified values V1,  V2, ...
As an example, the extraction rule in Figure 4 

will match LFs that mean a person had a treatment 
or a medical-diagnostic with explicit  UMLS in-
formation (i.e., part of LFs in Figure 3 matches). 
The output specification records critical informa-
tion from the extraction to be used by other rea-
soners. 

The extraction rules have all been developed by 
hand. Nevertheless, they are quite general, since a) 
LF patterns abstract away from lexical and syntac-
tic variability in the broad class of expressions of 
interest (however, lexical and syntactic features 
may be used if needed); and b) LF patterns make 
heavy use of ontological categories, which pro-
vides abstraction at the semantic level.

4.2 Clinical Concept Extraction
Among various types of concepts included in clini-
cal records, we focus on concepts related to 
problems/tests/treatments to build a medical his-

(F V1 (:* ONT::HAVE W::HAVE) :AFFECTED V2 :THEME V3 :MOD V4 :TENSE W::PAST) 
(PRO V2 (:* ONT::PERSON W::SHE) :PROFORM ONT::SHE :CO-REFERENCE V0) 
(A V3 (:* ONT::TREATMENT W::LEFT-RADICAL-NEPHRECTOMY) :DOMAIN-INFO (UMLS .....)
(F V4 (:* ONT::TIME-SPAN-REL W::IN) :OF V1 :VAL V5)
(THE V5 ONT::TIME-LOC :YEAR 2007 :MONTH 9)

Figure 3: LF semantic representation for “She had a left radical nephrectomy in 09/2007”

(?x1 ?y2 (? type1 ONT::HAVE) :AFFECTED ?y2 :THEME ?y3 :MOD ?y4)
(?x2 ?y2 (? type2 ONT::PERSON)))
(?x3 ?y3 (? type3 ONT::TREATMENT ONT::MEDICAL-DIAGNOSTIC) :DOMAIN-INFO ?!info)

List of LF patterns

-extract-person-has-treatment-or-medical-diagnostic>
(EVENT :type ?type1 :class occurrence :subject ?y2 :object ?y3)

Unique rule ID
Output Specification

Figure 4: An example extraction rule

149



tory and extract  them using extraction rules as de-
scribed above. Figure 5 shows a rule to extract 
substances by matching any LF with a substance 
concept (as mentioned already, subclasses such as 
pharmacologic substances, would also match).

The rule in Figure 5 checks the :quantifier role 
and its value (e.g., none) is used to infer the pres-
ence or the absence of concepts. Using similar 
rules, we extract  additional concepts such as 
medical-disorders-and-conditions, physical-
symptom, treatment, medical-diagnostic, medical-
action and clinical-finding. Here, medical-action 
and clinical-finding are to extract concepts in a 
broader sense.2  To cover additional concepts, we 
can straightforwardly update extraction rules.

4.3 Temporal Expression Extraction
Temporal expressions are also extracted in the 
same way but using different  LF patterns. We have 
14 rules to extract  dates and time-spans of varying 
levels of complexity; for the example in Figure 1 
six of these rules were applied. Figure 6 shows LF 
patterns for a rule to extract temporal expressions 
of the form “until X days/months/years ago”; for 
example, here is what the rule extracts for “until 3 
days ago”:

(extraction :type time-span :context-rel (:* 
ont::event-time-rel w::until) :reference (time-position 
:context-rel (:* ont::event-time-rel w::ago) :amount 3 
:unit (:* ont::time-unit ont::day))) 

From this type of output, other reasoners can 
easily access necessary information about given 
temporal expressions without investigating the 
whole LF representation on their own.

4.4 Event Extraction
To construct timelines, the concepts of interest 
(Section 4.2) and the temporal expressions (Sec-
tion 4.3) should be pieced together. For that pur-
pose, it  is critical to extract events because they not 
only describe situations that  happen or occur but 
also represent states or circumstances where some-
thing holds. Furthermore, event features provide 
useful cues to reason about  situations surrounding 
extracted clinical concepts.

Here, we do not formally define events, but  refer 
to (Sauri et  al., 2006) for detailed discussion about 
events. While events can be expressed by multiple 
means (e.g., verbs, nominalizations, and adjec-
tives), our extraction rules for events focus on 
verbs and their features such as class, tense, aspect, 
and polarity. Figure 7 shows a rule to extract  an 
event  with the verb “start” like the one in Line 4, 
“She was started on Afinitor on 03/05/08”. The 
output specification from this rule for Line 4 will 
have the :class, :tense, and :passive roles as (aspec-
tual initiation), past, and true respectively.

These event  features play a critical role in con-
structing timelines (Section 5). For instance, the 
event  class (aspectual initiation) from applying the 
rule in Figure 7 to Line 4 implies that  the concept 
“Afinitor” (a pharmacologic-substance) is not  just 
something tried on the given date, 03/05/08,  but 
something that continued from that date.

4.5 Relation Information Extraction
The relations among extracted concepts (namely, 
conjoined relations between events and set rela-
tions between clinical concepts) also play a key 
role in our approach. When events or clinical con-
cepts are closely linked with such relations, heuris-
tically, they tend to share similar properties that are 
exploited in constructing timelines as described in 
Section 5.

5 Building Timelines from Extracted Results

Extracted clinical concepts, temporal expressions, 
events, and relations (Section 4) are used as a 

2 While concept classification into certain categories is a very important task in the medical domain, sophisticated 
concept categorization like the one specified in the 2010 i2b2/VA Challenge (https://www.i2b2.org/NLP/Relations/) 
is not the primary goal of this paper. We rather focus on how to associate extracted concepts with other events and 
temporal expressions to build timelines.

(?x1 ?y1 (:* ont::event-time-rel w::until) :val ?val) 
(?x2 ?val (? type2 ont::time-loc) :mod ?mod) 
(?x3 ?mod (? type3 ont::event-time-rel) :displacement 
?displacement) 
(?x4 ?displacement (? type4 ont::quantity) :unit ?unit 
:amount ?amount) 
(?x5 ?amount ont::number :value ?num)

Figure 6: LF patterns to extract a time-span

((?x1 ?y1 (? type1 ONT::SUBSTANCE) :domain-info 
?info :quantifier ?quan)
-extract-substance>
(extraction :type substance :concept ?type1 :umlsinfo 
?info :ont-term ?y1 :quantifier ?quan))

Figure 5: A rule to extract substances

150



foundation to construct timelines that  represent 
patients’ medical history. In this section, we pre-
sent  timeline construction processes (as shown in 
Figure 8), using example sentences from Section 2.

Step 1: We first  make connections between events 
and clinical concepts. In the current system, events 
and clinical concepts are extracted in separate rules 
and their relations are not always explicit  in the 
output specification of the rules applied. For in-
stance, Figure 9 shows LFs for the sentence in Line 
7 in a graph format, using simplified LF terms for 
illustration. The clinical concept “prednisone” and 
the event  “received” get  extracted by different 
rules and the relation between them is not explicit 
in their output specifications.

To address such a case, for a pair of an event 
and a clinical concept, we traverse LF graphs and 
decide that a relation between them exists if there 
is a path that  goes through certain pre-defined con-
cepts that  do not separate them semantically and 
syntactically (e.g., concepts of measure-units, 
evidence/history, development, and some proposi-
tions).
Step 2: Second, we find temporal expressions as-
sociated with events. This step is relatively 
straightforward. While temporal expressions and 
events get  extracted separately, by investigating 
their LFs, we can decide if a given temporal ex-
pression is a modifier of an event. In Figure 9, the 
time-span-relation (i.e., “in”) in the dotted-line box 
is a direct modifier of the event “was treated”.
Step 3: Next, we propagate the association be-
tween events and temporal expressions. That is, 
when the relation between an event and a temporal 
expression is found, we check if the temporal ex-
pression can be associated with additional events 
related to the event  (esp. when the related events 
do not have any associated temporal expression). 

In Figure 9, the event  “received” does not have a 
temporal expression as a modifier. However, it  is 
conjoined with the event  “was treated” in the same 
past  tense under the same speech act. Thus, we let 
the event  “received” share the same temporal ex-
pression with its conjoined event. Here, the con-

joined relation was extracted with relation rules 
described in Section 4.5, which allows us to focus 
on only related events.
Step 4: When temporal expressions do not have 
concrete time values within the expressions, we 
need to designate times for them by looking into 
information in their LFs:
• Event references: The system needs to find the 

referred event  and gets its time value. For in-
stance, in “4 weeks after starting Afinitor” (Line 
6),  “starting Afinitor” refers to a previous event 
in Line 4. The system investigates all events with 
a verb with the same- or sub-type of ont::start 
and Afinitor as its object  (active verbs) or its 
subject (passive verbs). After resolving event 
references, additional time reference or relation 
computation may be required (e.g., computation 
for “4 weeks after”).

• Time references: Concrete times for expressions  
like the above example “N weeks after 
<reference-time>” can be easily computed by 
checking the time displacement  information in 
LFs with the reference time. However, expres-
sions such as “N days ago”  are based on the 
context of clinical records (e.g., record creation 

(?x1 ?ev (? type1 ont::start) :affected ?affected :tense ?tense :passive ?passive :progressive ?progresive 
  :perfective ?perfective :negation ?negation)
-extract-start-event>
(EVENT :type ?type1 :class (aspectual initiation) :subject ?affected :object null :tense ?tense :passive
   ?passive :progressive ?progresive :perfective ?perfective :negation ?negation :ont-term ?ev)

Figure 7: An event extraction rule example

Inputs: Clinical concepts, Temporal 
Expressions, Events, Relations, LFs
Outputs: Clinical concepts with associated dates 
or timespans.
Steps: 
1. Build links between events and clinical 

concepts
2. Find associated temporal expressions for 

events
3. Propagate temporal expressions through 

relations between events when applicable
4. Compute concrete time values for temporal 

expressions, taking into account the context of 
clinical records

5. Compute time values for clinical concepts 
based on their associated events

Figure 8: Pseudocode for Timeline Construction

151



time). Document creation time is usually repre-
sented as metadata attached to the document  it-
self, or it could be retrieved from a database 
where clinical records are stored. In addition, 
previously mentioned dates or time-spans can be 
referred to using pronouns (e.g., “at  that/this 
time”). For such expressions, we heuristically 
decide that it refers to the most  recent  temporal 
expression.

• Time relation: Some temporal expressions have 
directional time relations (e.g., “until”, “prior 
to”, and “after”) specifying intervals with open 
ends. When the ending time of a time span is not 
specified (e.g., “since 10/2007” in Line 10). We 
heuristically set it from the context of the clinical 
record such as the document creation time.

Step 5: Finally, we designate or compute times on 
or during which the presence or the absence of 
each clinical concept is asserted. Since temporal 
expressions are associated with events, to find time 
values for clinical concepts, we first check the rela-
tions between events and clinical concepts. When 
an event with a concrete time is found for a clinical 
concept, the event’s class is examined. For classes 
such as state and occurrence, the concrete time 
value of the event  is used. In contrast, for an aspec-
tual event, we check its feature (e.g., initiation or 
termination) and look for other aspectual events 
related to the clinical concept and compute a time 
span. For instance, regarding “Afinitor”, Line 4 
and Line 9 have events with classes (aspectual ini-
tiation) and (aspectual termination) respectively, 
which leads to a time span between the two dates 
in Line 4 and Line 9. Currently, we do not resolve 
conflicting hypotheses. 

Assertion of Presence  or Absence  of Clinical 
Concepts: To check if a certain concept is present 
or not, we take into account quantifier information 
(e.g., none), the negation role values of events, and 
the verb types of events (e.g., “deny” indicates the 
absence assertion). In addition to such information 
readily available in the output  specifications of the 
clinical concept- and event-extraction rules, we 
also check the path (as in Step 1) that relates the 
clinical concepts and the events, and the quantifiers 
of the concepts in the path are used to compute 
negation values. For instance, given “The scan 
shows no evidence of lung nodules”, the quantifier 
of the concept  “evidence” indicates the absence of 
the clinical finding “lung nodules”.

6 Timeline Results and Discussion 

For the example in Section 2 (Line 1 ~ 12), we ex-
tract all the instances of the clinical concepts and 
the temporal expressions. Out of 23 events, 17 
were extracted. While we missed events such as 
state/was (Line 5), done (Line 8), and walk/do/
swim  (Line 10), our event  extraction rules can be 
extended to cover them if need be.

Figure 10 visualizes the extraction results of the 
example. We use a web widget tool called Simile 
Timeline (www.simile-widgets.org/timeline/). 
Some property values (that  were also extracted by 
rules) are shown alongside some concepts (e.g., 
weight  measurement). Note that not  all extracted 
clinical findings are displayed in Figure 10 because 
we visualize clinical concepts only when they are 
associated with temporal expressions in our LFs. 
For instance, the CT-scan on 05/14/08 in Line 8 is 
not shown because the date was not  associated 
with it due to fragmented LFs from the Parser. 

Figure 9: Graph format LFs of the sentence in Line 7 -- “She received a 5 day dose pack of 
                  prednisone and was treated with Augmentin in 05/2008.”

152



However, we were still able to extract “no infil-
trates” and “scan” from a meaningful fragment.

In addition to the fragmented LF issue, we plan 
to work on temporal reasoning for concepts in the 
sentences without explicit temporal expressions, 
and the current limited event reference resolution 
will be improved. We are also working on evalua-
tion with 48 clinical records from 10 patients. An-
notated results will be created as a gold-standard 
and precision/recall will be measured.

7 Related Work

Temporal information is of crucial importance in 
clinical applications, which is why it  has attracted 
a lot  interest over the last  two decades or more 
(Augusto, 2005). Since so much clinical informa-
tion is still residing in unstructured form, in par-
ticular as text  in the patient’s health record, the last 
decade has seen a number of serious efforts in 
medical NLP  in general (Meystre et  al., 2008) and 
in extracting temporal information from clinical 
text in particular. 

Some of this surge in interest  has been spurred 
by dedicated competitions on extraction of con-
cepts and events from clinical text (such as the 
i2b2 NLP challenges). At the same time, the evolu-
tion of temporal markup languages such as Ti-
meML (Sauri et al., 2006), and temporal 
extraction/inference competitions (such as the two 
TempEval challenges,  Verhagen et  al., 2009) in the 
general area of NLP have led to the development 
of tools such as TARSQI (Verhagen et  al., 2005) 
that could be adapted to the clinical domain.

Although the prevailing paradigm in this area is 
to use superficial methods for extracting and clas-
sifying temporal expressions, it has long been rec-
ognized that higher level semantic processing, in-
cluding discourse-level analysis, would have to be 
performed to get  past the limits of the current  ap-
proaches (cf. Zhou and Hripcsak, 2007). 

Recent attempts to use deeper linguistic features 
include the work of  Bethard et  al. (2007), who 

used syntactic structure in addition to lexical and 
some minor semantic features to classify temporal 
relations of the type we discussed in Section 4.3. 
Savova and her team have also expressed interest 
in testing off-the-shelf deep parsers and semantic 
role labelers for aiding in temporal relation identi-
fication and classification (Savova et al., 2009); 
although we are not  aware of any temporal extrac-
tion results yet, we appreciate their effort in ex-
panding the TimeML annotation schema for the 
clinical domain, as well as their efforts in develop-
ing corpora of clinical text  annotated with temporal 
information.

The work of Mulkar-Mehta et  al. (2009) also 
deserves a mention, even though they apply their 
techniques to biomedical text rather than clinical 
text. They obtain a shallow logical form that repre-
sents predicate-argument relations implicit  in the 
syntax by post-processing the results of a statistical 
parser. Temporal relations are obtained from the 
shallow LF based on a set  of hand-built rules by an 
abductive inference engine.

To our knowledge, however, our system is the 
first  general-purpose NLU system that produces a 
full, deep syntactic and semantic analysis of the 
text as a prerequisite to the extraction and analysis 
of relevant clinical and temporal information.

8 Conclusion

In this paper, we presented a prototype deep natu-
ral language understanding system to construct 
timelines for the medical histories of patients. Our 
approach is generic and extensible to cover a vari-
ety of narrative clinical text  records. The results  
from our system are promising and they can be 
used to support medical decision making.

9 Acknowledgement

This work was supported by the National Cancer 
Institute and the H. Lee Moffitt  Cancer Center and 
Research Institute (Award # RC2CA1488332).

Figure 10: Visualization of timeline results

153



References 
James Allen, Donna Byron, Myroslava Dzikovska, 

George Ferguson, Lucian  Galescu, and Amanda 
Stent.  2000. An architecture for a generic dialogue 
shell. Journal of Natural Language Engineering 
6(3):1–16.

Mary Swift, Nate Blaylock, James Allen, Will de 
Beaumont, Lucian Galescu, and Hyuckchul Jung.  
2010. Augmenting a Deep Natural Language Proc-
essing System with UMLS. Proceedings of the 
Fourth International Symposium on Semantic Mining 
in Biomedicine (poster abstract)

Alan R. Aronson and François-Michel Lang.  2010. An 
overview of MetaMap: historical perspective and 
recent advances.  Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association. 17:229-236.

Juan C. Augusto. 2005.  Temporal reasoning for decision 
support in medicine. Artificial Intelligence in Medi-
cine, 33(1): 1-24.

Steven Bethard, James H.  Martin, and Sara Klingen-
stein. 2007. Timelines from Text: Identification of 
Syntactic Temporal Relations. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Semantic Computing 
(ICSC '07), 11-18.

Olivier Bodenreider. 2004. The Unified Medical Lan-
guage System (UMLS): integrating biomedical ter-
minology. Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 32.

Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher 
Manning. 2005. Incorporating Non-local Information 
into Information Extraction Systems by Gibbs Sam-
pling.  Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning.  2003. Fast Ex-
act Inference with a Factored Model for Natural Lan-
guage Parsing. In Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 15 (NIPS 2002), Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.

S.  M. Meystre, G. K. Savova, K. C. Kipper-Schuler, J. 
F. Hurdle. 2008. Extracting information from textual 
documents in the electronic health record: a review 
of recent research. IMIA Yearbook of Medical Infor-
matics.

George A. Miller. 1995. WordNet: A lexical database for 
English. Communications of the ACM, 38(5).

R. Mulkar-Mehta, J.R. Hobbs, C.-C. Liu, and X.J. Zhou. 
2009. Discovering causal and temporal relations in 
biomedical texts. In AAAI Spring Symposium, 74-
80.

Roser Sauri, Jessica Littman, Bob Knippen, Robert Gai-
zauskas, Andrea Setzer, and James Pustejovsky.  
2006. TimeML annotation guidelines. (available at 

http://www.timeml.org/site/publications/time 
MLdocs/annguide_1.2.1.pdf)

G. Savova, S. Bethard, W. Styler, J. Martin, M. Palmer, 
J. Masanz, and W. Ward. 2009. Towards temporal 
relation discovery from the clinical narrative. Pro-
ceedings of the Annual AMIA Symposium, 568-572.

Michael Stacey and Carolyn McGregor. 2007.  Temporal 
abstraction in intelligent clinical data analysis: A sur-
vey. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 39.

Kristina Toutanova and Christopher D. Manning. 2000. 
Enriching the Knowledge Sources Used in a Maxi-
mum Entropy Part-of-Speech Tagger. In Proceedings 
of the Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing and Very Large 
Corpora (EMNLP/VLC-2000).

M. Verhagen, I. Mani, R. Sauri, R. Knippen, S.B. Jang, 
J. Littman, A. Rumshisky, J. Phillips, and 
J. Pustejovsky. 2005. Automating temporal annota-
tion with TARSQI. In Proceedings of the ACL 2005 
on Interactive poster and demonstration sessions 
(ACLdemo '05), 81-84. 

M. Verhagen, R. Gaizauskas, F. Schilder, M. Hepple, 
J. Moszkowicz, and J. Pustejovsky. 2009. The Tem-
pEval challenge: identifying temporal relations in 
text . Language Resources and Evaluation 
 43(2):161-179.

Li Zhou, Carol Friedman, Simon Parsons and George 
Hripcsak. 2005. System Architecture for Temporal 
Information Extraction,  Representation and Reason-
ing in Clinical Narrative Reports. Proceedings of the 
Annual AMIA Symposium.

Li Zhou and George Hripcsak. 2007. Temporal reason-
ing with medical data - A review with emphasis on 
medical natural language processing. Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, 40.

154


