










































Exploring linguistically-rich patterns for question generation


Proceedings of the UCNLG+Eval: Language Generation and Evaluation Workshop, pages 33–38,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Exploring linguistically-rich patterns for question generation

Sérgio Curto
L2F/INESC-ID Lisbon

sslc@l2f.inesc-id.pt

Ana Cristina Mendes
L2F/INESC-ID Lisbon

IST, Tech. Univ. Lisbon
acbm@l2f.inesc-id.pt

Luı́sa Coheur
L2F/INESC-ID Lisbon

IST, Tech. Univ. Lisbon
lcoheur@inesc-id.pt

Abstract

Linguistic patterns reflect the regularities of
Natural Language and their applicability is
acknowledged in several Natural Language
Processing tasks. Particularly, in the task of
Question Generation, many systems depend
on patterns to generate questions from text.
The approach we follow relies on patterns
that convey lexical, syntactic and semantic in-
formation, automatically learned from large-
scale corpora.

In this paper we discuss the impact of varying
several parameters during pattern learning and
matching in the Question Generation task. In
particular, we introduce semantics (by means
of named entities) in our lexico-syntactic pat-
terns. We evaluate and compare the number
and quality of the learned patterns and the
matched text segments. Also, we detail the
influence of the patterns in the generation of
natural language questions.

1 Introduction

Natural Language (NL) is known for its variability
and expressiveness. There are hundreds of ways to
express an idea, to describe a fact. But language also
comprises several regularities, or patterns, that de-
note the presence of certain information. For exam-
ple, Paris is located in France is a common way to
say that Paris is in France, indicated by the words
located in.

The use of patterns is a widely accepted as an ef-
fective approach in the field of Natural Language
Processing (NLP), in tasks like Question-Answering
(QA) (Soubbotin, 2001; Ravichandran and Hovy,
2002) or Question Generation (QG) (Wyse and Pi-
wek, 2009; Mendes et al., 2011).

Particularly, QG aims at generating questions
from text and has became a vibrant line of re-
search. Generating questions (and answers), on one
hand, allows QA or Dialogue Systems to be easily
ported to different domains, by quickly providing
new questions to train the systems. On the other
hand, it is useful for knowledge assessment-related
tasks, by reducing the amount of time allocated for
the creation of tests by teachers (a time consuming
and tedious task if done manually), or by allowing
the self evaluation of knowledge acquired by learn-
ers.

Most systems dedicated to QG are based on hand-
crafted rules and rely on pattern matching to gener-
ate questions. For example, in (Chen et al., 2009),
after the identification of key points, a situation
model is built and question templates are used to
generate questions. The Ceist system (Wyse and Pi-
wek, 2009) uses syntactic patterns and the Tregex
tool (Levy and Andrew, 2006) that receives a set
of hand-crafted rules and matches the rules against
parsed text, generating, in this way, questions (and
answers). Kalady et al.(2010) bases the QG task
in Up-keys (significant phrases in documents), parse
tree manipulation and named entity recognition.

Our approach to QG also relies on linguistic pat-
terns, defined as a sequence of symbols that convey
lexical, syntactic and semantic information, reflect-
ing and expressing a regularity of the language. The
patterns associate a question to its answer and are
automatically learned from a set of seeds, based on
large-scale information corpora, shallow parsing and
named entities recognition. The generation of ques-
tions uses the learned patterns, as questions are cre-
ated from text segments found in free text after being
matched against the patterns.

33



This paper studies the impact on QG of vary-
ing linguistic parameters during pattern learning and
matching. It is organized as follows: in Sec. 2
we introduce our pattern-based approach to QG; in
Sec. 3 we show the experiments and discuss results;
in Sec. 4 we conclude and point to future work.

2 Linguistically-Rich Patterns for
Question Generation

The generation of questions involves two phases: a
first offline phase – pattern learning – where pat-
terns are learned from a set of seeds; and a sec-
ond online phase – pattern matching and question
generation – where the learned patterns are matched
against a target document and the questions are gen-
erated. Next we describe these phases.

Pattern Learning Our approach to pattern learn-
ing is inspired by the work of Ravichandran and
Hovy (2002), who propose a method to learn pat-
terns based on a two-step technique: the first ac-
quires patterns from the Web given a set of seeds and
the second validates the patterns. Despite the sim-
ilarities, ours and Ravichandran and Hovy’s work
have some differences: our patterns also contain
syntactic and semantic information and are not vali-
dated. Moreover, our seeds are well formulated NL
questions and their respective correct answers (in-
stead of two entities), which allows to directly take
advantage of the test sets already built and made
available in evaluation campaigns for QA systems
(like Text REtrieval Conference (TREC) or Cross
Language Evaluation Forum (CLEF)).

We use a set of seeds, each composed by a NL
question and its correct answer. We start by classi-
fying each seed question into a semantic category,
in order to discover the type of information these
are seeking after: for example, the question “Who
painted the Birth of Venus ?” asks for a person’s
name. Afterwards, we extract the phrase nodes of
each seed question (excluding the Wh-phrase), en-
close each in double quotes and submit them as a
query to a search engine. For instance, given the
seed “Who painted the Birth of Venus ?”/Botticelli
and the syntactic structure of its question [WHNP
Who] [VBD painted] [NP the Birth of Venus]1, we

1The Penn Treebank II Tags (Bies et al., 1995) are used.

build the query: "painted" "the Birth of
Venus" "Botticelli".

We build patterns that associate the entities
in the question to the answer from the top re-
trieved documents. From the sentence The Birth
of Venus was painted around 1486 by Botti-
celli, retrieved as result to the above query, we
learn the pattern “NP VBD[was] VBN PP[around
1486]:[Date] IN:[by] NP{ANSWER}”2. The
syntactic labels without lexical information are re-
lated with the constituents of the question, while
those with “{ANSWER}” mark the answer.

By creating queries with the inflected forms of the
main verb of the question, we learn patterns where
the surface form of the verb is different to that of
the verb in the seed question (e.g., “NP{ANSWER}
VBD[began] VBG NP” is learned from the sen-
tence Botticelli began painting the Birth of Venus).
The patterns generated by verb inflection are IN-
FLECTED; the others are STRONG patterns.

Our patterns convey linguistic information ex-
tracted from the sentences in the documents where
all the constituents of the query exist. The pat-
tern is built with the words, their syntactic and se-
mantic classes, that constitute the segments where
those constituents are found. For that, we per-
form syntactic analysis and named entity recog-
nition in each sentence. In this paper, we ad-
dress the impact of adding semantic information
to the patterns, that is, the difference in hav-
ing a pattern “NP VBD[was] VBN PP[around
1486]:[Date] IN:[by] NP{ANSWER}” with or
without the named entity of type DATE, for instance.

Pattern Matching and Question Generation
The match of the patterns against a given free text
is done at the lexical, syntactic and semantic lev-
els. We have implemented a (recursive) algorithm
that explores the parsed tree of the text sentences in
a top-down, left-to-right, depth-first search, unifying
the text with the linguistic information in the pattern.

Also, we discard all matched segments in which
the answer does not agree with the semantic cate-
gory expected by the question.

The generation of questions from the matched text

2The patterns are more complex than the ones presented:
they are linked to the seed question by indexes, mapping the po-
sition of each of its components into the question constituents.

34



segments is straightforward, since we keep track of
the syntactic structure of the questions and the sen-
tences on the origin of the patterns. There is a di-
rect unification of all components of the text seg-
ment with the constituents of the pattern. In the
INFLECTED patterns, the verb is inflected with the
tense and person of the seed question and the auxil-
iary verb is also used.

3 Experiments

3.1 Experimental Setup
We used the 6 seeds shown in Table 1, chosen be-
cause the questions contain regular verbs and they
focus on known entities – being so, it is probable
that there will be several texts in the Web referring to
them. However, understanding the characteristics of
a pair that makes it a good seed is an important and
pertinent question and a direction for future work.

GId: 1
Syntactic Structure: WHNP VBD NP
Semantic Category: HUMAN:INDIVIDUAL
“Who wrote Hamlet?”/Shakespeare
“Who painted Guernica?”/Picasso
“Who painted The Starry Night?”/Van Gogh
GId: 2
Syntactic Structure: WHADVP VBD NP VBN
Semantic Category: NUMERIC:DATE
“When was Hamlet written?”/1601
“When was Guernica painted?”/1937
“When was The Starry Night painted?”/1889

Table 1: Seeds used in the experiments.

The syntactic analysis of the questions was done
by the Berkeley Parser (Petrov and Klein, 2007)
trained on the QuestionBank (Judge et al., 2006).
For question classification, we used Li and Roth
(2002) taxonomy and a machine learning-based
classifier fed with features derived from a rule-based
classifier (Silva et al., 2011).

For the learning of patterns we used the top
64 documents retrieved by Google and to recog-
nize the named entities in the pattern we apply
several strategies, namely: 1) the Stanford’s Con-
ditional Random-Field-based named entity recog-
nizer (Finkel et al., 2005) to detect entities of type
HUMAN; 2) regular expressions to detect NUMERIC

and DATE type entities; 3) gazetteers to detect enti-
ties of type LOCATION.

For the generation of questions we used the top 16
documents retrieved by the Google for 9 personali-
ties from several domains, like literature (e.g., Jane
Austen) and politics (e.g., Adolf Hitler). We do not
have influence on the content of the retrieved doc-
uments, nor perform any pre-processing (like text
simplification or anaphora resolution). The Berkeley
Parser (Petrov and Klein, 2007) was used to parse
the sentences, trained with the Wall Street Journal.

3.2 Pattern Learning Results

A total of 272 patterns was learned, from which 212
are INFLECTED and the remaining are STRONG. On
average, each seed led to 46 patterns.

Table 2 shows the number of learned patterns of
types INFLECTED and STRONG according to each
group of seed questions. It indicates the number of
patterns in which at least one named entity was rec-
ognized (W) and the number of patterns which do not
contain any named entity (WO). Three main results
of the pattern learning phase are shown: 1) the num-
ber of learned INFLECTED patterns is much higher
than the number of learned STRONG patterns: nearly
80% of the patterns are INFLECTED; 2) most of the
patterns do not have named entities; and 3) the num-
ber of patterns learned from the questions of group
1 are nearly 70% of the total number of patterns.

INFLECTED STRONG
GId WO W WO W TOTAL
1 127 19 36 8

146 44 190
2 40 26 10 6

66 16 82
All 167 45 46 14

212 60 272

Table 2: Number of learned patterns.

The following are examples of patterns and the
actual sentences from where they were learned:
– “NP{ANSWER} VBZ NP”: an INFLECTED pattern
learned from group 1, from the sentence 1601
William Shakespeare writes Hamlet in London.,
without named entities;
– “NP VBD VBN IN[in] NP{ANSWER}”: a

35



STRONG pattern learned from group 2, from the
sentence (Guernica was painted in 1937.), without
named entities;
– “NNP VBZ[is] NP[a tragedy] ,[,]
VBN[believed] VBN IN[between]

NP[1599]:[NUMERIC COUNT,NUMERIC DATE]

CC[and] NP{ANSWER}”: an INFLECTED pattern
learned from group 2, from the sentence William
Shakespeare’s Hamlet is a tragedy , believed written
between 1599 and 1601, with 1599 being recog-
nized as named entity of type NUMERIC COUNT
and NUMERIC DATE.

3.3 Pattern Matching and Question
Generation Results

Regarding the number of text segments matched in
the texts retrieved for the 9 personalities, Table 3
shows that, from the 272 learned patterns, only 30
(11%) were in fact effective (an effective pattern
matches at least one text segment). The most effec-
tive patterns were those from group 2, as 12 from 82
(14.6%) matched at least one instance in the text.

GId INFLECTED STRONG TOTAL
1 13 5 18
2 9 3 (2 W) 12
All 22 8 30

Table 3: Matched patterns.

Regarding the patterns with named entities, only
those from group 2 matched instances in the texts.
The pattern that matched the most instances was
“NP{ANSWER} VBD NP”, learned from group 1.

In the evaluation of the questions, we use the
guidelines of Chen et al. (2009), who classify ques-
tions as plausible – if they are grammatically correct
and if they make sense regarding the text from where
they were extracted – and implausible (otherwise).

However, we split plausible questions in three cat-
egories: 1) Pa for plausible, anaphoric questions,
e.g., When was she awarded the Nobel Peace Prize?;
2) Pc for plausible questions that need a context to
be answered, e.g., When was the manuscript pub-
lished?; and 3) Pp, a plausible perfect question. If
a question can be marked both as PLa and PLc, we
mark it as PLa. Also, we split implausible questions
in: 1) IPi: for implausible questions due to incom-

pleteness, e.g., When was Bob Marley invited?; and
2) IP: for questions that make no sense, e.g., When
was December 1926 Agatha identified?.

A total of 447 questions was generated: 31 by
STRONG patterns, 269 by INFLECTED patterns and
147 by both STRONG and INFLECTED patterns. We
manually evaluated 100 questions, randomly se-
lected. Results are in Table 4, shown according
to the type (INFLECTED/STRONG) and presence of
named entities (W/WO) in the pattern that generated
them.

Pa Pc Pp IPi IP Total
INFLECTED 57

WO 2 0 27 23 5
STRONG 13

W 1 0 1 0 1
WO 1 2 3 3 1

INFL/STR 30
WO 0 0 9 18 3

All 4 2 40 44 10 100

Table 4: Evaluation of the generated questions.

46 of the evaluated questions were considered
plausible and, from these, 40 can be used without
modifications. From the 54 implausible questions,
44 were due to lack of information in the question.
69% (9 in 13) of the questions originated in STRONG
patterns were plausible. This value is smaller for
questions generated by INFLECTED patterns: 50.8%
(29 in 57). Questions that had in their origin both a
STRONG and a INFLECTED pattern were mostly im-
plausible, only 9 in 30 were plausible (30%). The
presence of named entities led to an increase of
questions of only 3 (2 plausible and 1 implausible).

3.4 Discussion

The results concerning the transition from lexico-
syntactic to lexico-syntactic-semantic patterns were
not conclusive. There were 59 patterns with named
entities, but only 2 matched new text segments.
Only 3 questions were generated from patterns
with semantics. We think that this happened due to
two reasons: 1) not all of the named entities in the
patterns were detected; and 2) the patterns contained
lexical information that did not allow a match with
the text (e.g., “NP{ANSWER} VBD[responded]

36



PP[in 1937]:textit[Date] WHADVP[when]

NP[he] VBD NP” requires the words responded,
when and he.)

From a small set of seeds, our approach learned
patterns that were later used to generate 447 ques-
tions from previously unseen text. In a sample of
100 questions, 46% were judged as plausible. Two
plausible questions are: “Who had no real interest
in the former German African colonies?”, “When
was The Road to Resurgence published?” and “Who
launched a massive naval and land campaign de-
signed to seize New York?”.

The presence of syntactic information (a differ-
ence between ours and Ravichandran and Hovy’s
work) allows to relax the patterns and to gener-
ate questions of various topics: e.g., the questions
“Who invented the telegraph?” and “Who di-
rected the Titanic?” can be generated from match-
ing the pattern “NP VBD[was] VBN IN:[by]
NP{ANSWER}” with the sentences The telegraph was
invented by Samuel Morse and The Titanic was di-
rected by James Cameron, respectively.

4 Conclusions and Future Work

We presented an approach to generating questions
based on linguistic patterns, automatically learned
from the Web from a set of seeds. We addressed the
impact of adding semantics to patterns in matching
text segments and generating new NL questions.

We did not detect any improvement when adding
semantics to the patterns, mostly because the pat-
terns with named entities did not match too many
text segments. Nevertheless, from a small set of 6
seeds, we generated 447 NL questions. From these,
we evaluated 100 and 46% were considered correct
at the lexical, syntactic and semantic levels.

In the future, we intend to pre-process the texts
against which the patterns are matched and from
which the questions are generated. Also, we are
experimenting this approach in another language.
We aim at using more complex questions as seeds,
studying its influence on the generation of questions.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by FCT (INESC-ID mul-
tiannual funding) through the PIDDAC Program
funds, and also through the project FALACOMIGO

(ProjectoVII em co-promoção, QREN n 13449).
Ana Cristina Mendes is supported by a PhD fel-

lowship from Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnolo-
gia (SFRH/BD/43487/2008).

References

Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen Katz, and Robert Mac-
intyre. 1995. Bracketing Guidelines for Treebank II
Style Penn Treebank Project.

Wei Chen, Gregory Aist, , and Jack Mostow. 2009. Gen-
erating questions automatically from informational
text. In The 2nd Workshop on Question Generation.

Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local informa-
tion into information extraction systems by gibbs sam-
pling. In Proc. 43rd Annual Meeting on Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’05, pages 363–
370. ACL.

John Judge, Aoife Cahill, and Josef van Genabith. 2006.
Questionbank: creating a corpus of parse-annotated
questions. In ACL-44: Proc. 21st Int. Conf. on Com-
putational Linguistics and the 44th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
497–504. ACL.

Saidalavi Kalady, Ajeesh Elikkottil, and Rajarshi Das.
2010. Natural language question generation using
syntax and keywords. In The 3rd Workshop on Ques-
tion Generation.

Roger Levy and Galen Andrew. 2006. Tregex and tsur-
geon: tools for querying and manipulating tree data
structures. In LREC 2006.

Xin Li and Dan Roth. 2002. Learning question classi-
fiers. In Proc. 19th Int. Conf. on Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 1–7. ACL.

Ana Cristina Mendes, Sérgio Curto, and Luı́sa Coheur.
2011. Bootstrapping multiple-choice tests with the-
mentor. In CICLing, 12th International Conference
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational Lin-
guistics.

Slav Petrov and Dan Klein. 2007. Improved inference
for unlexicalized parsing. In Human Language Tech-
nologies 2007: The Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics; Proc. Main Conference, pages 404–411. ACL.

Deepak Ravichandran and Eduard Hovy. 2002. Learn-
ing surface text patterns for a question answering sys-
tem. In ACL ’02: Proc. 40th Annual Meeting on As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 41–47.
ACL.

João Silva, Luı́sa Coheur, Ana Mendes, and Andreas
Wichert. 2011. From symbolic to sub-symbolic in-

37



formation in question classification. Artificial Intelli-
gence Review, 35:137–154.

M. M. Soubbotin. 2001. Patterns of potential answer
expressions as clues to the right answers. In Proc. 10th

Text REtrieval Conference (TREC), pages 293–302.
Brendan Wyse and Paul Piwek. 2009. Generating ques-

tions from openlearn study units. In The 2nd Workshop
on Question Generation.

38


