










































Assignment of Ontology-based Broad Semantic Classes to Biomedical Text


Proceedings of the Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 1–2,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 15 September 2011.

Assignment of ontology-based broad 

semantic classes to biomedical text 

 
 

K. Bretonnel Cohen 
Computational Bioscience Program, U. Colorado School of Medicine 

Department of Linguistics, U. Colorado at Boulder 
kevin.cohen@gmail.com 

 
  

 

Abstract 

 

Natural language processing of biomedical 
text benefits from the ability to recognize 
broad semantic classes, but the number of se-
mantic types is far bigger than is usually 
treated in newswire text.  A method for broad 
semantic class assignment using lightweight 
linguistic analysis is described and evaluated 
using traditional and novel methods. 

1 Introduction 

Experience with coreference resolution, informa-
tion extraction, and document classification indi-
cates that these natural language processing 
tasks, and probably others, benefit from the abil-
ity to assign semantic classes to entities in text.  
However, the set of semantic classes in biomedi-
cal text is much larger than the traditional MUC 
categories of PERSON, ORGANIZATION, and 
LOCATION that are normally dealt with in 
newswire text.  This talk addresses the hypothe-
sis that it is possible to label as many as twenty 
semantic types in biomedical text, with those 
semantic classes being grounded in the topic ar-
eas of ontologies from the Open Biomedical On-
tologies collection at the National Center for 
Biomedical Ontology.  Belonging to the topic of 
an Open Biomedical Ontology is then considered 
to constitute membership in that semantic class.  
We determined membership in semantic classes 
through a lightweight linguistic analysis consist-
ing of four techniques of decreasing levels of 
stringency. 

 

2 Method 

Twenty ontologies thought to be relevant to 
mouse genomics were selected from the Open 
Biomedical Ontologies collection.  Four methods 
were used to match these to pre-extracted 
phrases in text.  In the first technique, a simple 
exact match was attempted.  In the second tech-
nique, a normalized form of the term, with 
whitespace and punctuation removed, was used 
to attempt a match.  (Identical normalization was 
applied to the input text.) 
  
In the third technique, a lightweight linguistic 
technique was applied.  Simple heuristics were 
used to extract the head noun from each term in 
the ontology, and from the input text phrase.  A 
match of the headwords was then attempted.  If 
this failed, both headwords were stemmed and a 
match was attempted again.   
 
The four techniques were applied sequentially.  
This allowed for modular evaluation of each 
technique, and at runtime, it allows for the user 
to select a minimum level of stringency. 
 
The method was evaluated by three techniques: 

 
1. Measuring precision, recall, F-measure, and 

accuracy with a unique corpus of full-text 
journal articles marked up with a number of 
biomedical ontologies. 

2. Using the ontologies themselves as input.  
This is a novel evaluation technique, and it 
was shown to be robust in detecting errors in 
the method. 

3. Running the method against a structured test 
suite (Cohen et al. 2010) used for ontology 
concept recognition. 

1



 
A micro-averaged F-measure of 72.32 was 
achieved on the corpus.  The macro-averaged F-
measure was 75.31.  Accuracies of 77.12 to 
95.73% were achieved, depending on the ontol-
ogy.  The lightweight linguistic technique of 
head noun extraction was found to make a sig-
nificant contribution to efficacy, sometimes a 
very large contribution. 
 
As would be expected, the evaluation against the 
ontologies themselves typically achieved very 
high performance numbers, but in two cases it 
uncovered significant lapses in our processing of 
the ontologies themselves, indicating that this 
novel evaluation method is robust. 
 
Finally, the structured test set yielded consider-
able insight into the strengths and weaknesses of 
the method. 
 
A full description of the materials, method, and 
evaluation can be found in Cohen et al. (2011).   

References  

Cohen, K. Bretonnel; Christophe Roeder; William A. 
Baumgartner Jr.; Lawrence E. Hunter; and Karin 
Verspoor (2010) Test suite design for biomedical 
ontology concept recognition systems.  Languages 
Resources and Evaluation Conference, pp. 441-
446. 

Cohen, K. Bretonnel; Tom Christiansen; William A. 
Baumgartner Jr.; Karin Verspoor; and Lawrence E. 
Hunter (2011) Fast and simple semantic class as-
signment for biomedical text.  Biomedical Natural 
Language Processing 2011, pp. 38-45. 

2


