










































Detecting Entity Relations as a Supporting Task for Bio-Molecular Event Extraction


Proceedings of BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop, pages 147–148,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 24 June, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Detecting Entity Relations as a Supporting Task
for Bio-Molecular Event Extraction

Sofie Van Landeghem1,2, Thomas Abeel1,2,3, Bernard De Baets4 and Yves Van de Peer1,2
1. Dept. of Plant Systems Biology, VIB, Belgium

2. Dept. of Plant Biotechnology and Genetics, Ghent University, Belgium
3. Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA

4. Dept. of Applied Mathematics, Biometrics and Process Control, Ghent University, Belgium
yves.vandepeer@psb.ugent.be

Abstract

Recently, the focus in the BioNLP domain
has shifted from binary relations to more ex-
pressive event representations, largely owing
to the international popularity of the BioNLP
Shared Task (ST) of 2009. This year, the
ST’11 provides a further generalization on
three key aspects: text type, subject domain,
and targeted event types. One of the sup-
porting tasks established to provide more fine-
grained text predictions is the extraction of en-
tity relations. We have implemented an ex-
traction system for such non-causal relations
between named entities and domain terms, ap-
plying semantic spaces and machine learning
techniques. Our system ranks second of four
participating teams, achieving 37.04% preci-
sion, 47.48% recall and 41.62% F-score.

1 Introduction

Understanding complex noun phrases with embed-
ded gene symbols is crucial for a correct interpre-
tation of text mining results (Van Landeghem et al.,
2010). Such non-causal relations between a noun
phrase and its embedded gene symbol are referred
to as entity relations. As a supporting task for
the BioNLP ST’11, we have studied two types of
such entity relations: Subunit-Complex and Protein-
Component. These relationships may occur within
a single noun phrase, but also between two different
noun phrases. A few examples are listed in Table 1;
more details on the datasets and definitions of entity
relations can be found in (Pyysalo et al., 2011).

Valid entity relations involve one GGP (gene or
gene product) and one domain term (e.g. “pro-

moter”) and they always occur within a single sen-
tence. In the first step towards classification of entity
relations, we have calculated the semantic similar-
ity between domain terms (Section 2). Supervised
learning techniques are then applied to select sen-
tences likely to contain entity relations (Section 3).
Finally, domain terms are identified with a novel
rule-based system and linked to the corresponding
GGP in the sentence (Section 4).

2 Semantic analysis

To fully understand the relationship between a GGP
and a domain term, it is necessary to account for
synonyms and lexical variants. We have imple-
mented two strategies to capture this textual varia-
tion, grouping semantically similar words together.

The first method takes advantage of manual anno-
tations of semantic categories in the GENIA event
corpus. This corpus contains manual annotation of
various domain terms such as promoters, complexes
and other biological entities in 1000 PubMed arti-
cles (Kim et al., 2008).

The second method relies on statistical proper-
ties of nearly 15.000 articles, collected by search-
ing PubMed articles involving human transcription
factor blood cells. From these articles, we have
then calculated a semantic space using latent seman-
tic analysis (LSA) as implemented by the S-Space
Package (Jurgens and Stevens, 2010). The algo-
rithm results in high-dimensional vectors that rep-
resent word contexts, and similar vectors then re-
fer to semantically similar words. We have applied
the Markov Cluster algorithm (MCL) (van Dongen,
2000) to group semantically similar terms together.

147



Type of relation Examples
Subunit-Complex “the c-fos content of [AP-1]” / “c-jun, a component of the transcription factor [AP-1]”
Protein-Component “the [IL-3 promoter]” / “the activating [ARRE-1 site] in the IL-2 promoter”

Table 1: Examples of entity relations. GGPs are underlined and domain terms are delimited by square brackets.

3 Machine learning framework

Our framework tries to define for each GGP in the
data whether it is part of any of the two entity re-
lations, by analysing the sentence context. To cap-
ture the lexical information for each sentence, we
have derived bag-of-word features. In addition, 2-
and 3-grams were extracted from the sentence. Fi-
nally, the content of the gene symbol was also used
as lexical information. All lexical information in
the feature vectors has undergone generalization by
blinding the gene symbol with “protx” and all other
co-occurring gene symbols with “exprotx”. Further-
more, terms occurring in the semantic lexicons de-
scribed in Section 2 were mapped to the correspond-
ing cluster number or category. For each generaliza-
tion, a blinded and a non-blinded variant is included
in the feature vector.

Dependency graphs were further analysed for the
extraction of grammatical patterns consisting of two
nodes (word tokens) and their intermediate edge
(grammatical relation). For the nodes, the same gen-
eralization rules as in the previous paragraph are ap-
plied. Finally, similar patterns are generated with
the nodes represented by their part-of-speech tag.

The final feature vectors, representing sentences
with exactly one tagged gene symbol, are classified
using an SVM with a radial basis function as kernel.
An optimal parameter setting (C and gamma) for
this kernel was obtained by 5-fold cross-validation
on the training data.

4 Entity detection

Once a sentence with a gene symbol is classified as
containing a certain type of entity relation, it is nec-
essary to find the exact domain term that is related
to that gene symbol. To this end, we have designed
a pattern matching algorithm that searches within a
given window (number of tokens) around the gene
symbol. The window size is increased to a prede-
fined maximum as long as a maximal number of do-
main terms was not found.

Within the search window, a rule-based algorithm
decides whether a given token qualifies as a relevant
domain term, employing first a high-precision dic-
tionary and then high-recall dictionaries.

5 Results

Our system achieves a global performance of
37.04% precision, 47.48% recall and 41.62% F-
score, coming in second place after the university
of Turku who obtained an F-score of 57.71%, and
ranking before Concordia University who scores
32.04%. It remains an open question why the final
results of the top ranked systems differ so much.

Acknowledgments

SVL and TA would like to thank the Research Foun-
dation Flanders (FWO) for funding their research.
TA is a post doctoral fellow of the Belgian Ameri-
can Education Foundation. The authors thank Jari
Björne for his help with the manuscript.

References
David Jurgens and Keith Stevens. 2010. The S-Space

package: an open source package for word space mod-
els. In Proceedings of the ACL 2010 System Demon-
strations, ACLDemos ’10, pages 30–35.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2008.
Corpus annotation for mining biomedical events from
literature. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(1):10.

Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2011.
Overview of the Entity Relations (REL) supporting
task of BioNLP Shared Task 2011. In Proceedings
of the BioNLP 2011 Workshop Companion Volume for
Shared Task, June.

Stijn van Dongen. 2000. Graph Clustering by Flow Sim-
ulation. Ph.D. thesis, University of Utrecht.

Sofie Van Landeghem, Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta,
and Yves Van de Peer. 2010. Integration of static re-
lations to enhance event extraction from text. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2010 Workshop on Biomedical Natural
Language Processing, BioNLP ’10, pages 144–152.

148


