



















































Generation of Formal and Informal Sentences


Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 187–193,
Nancy, France, September 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generation of Formal and Informal Sentences

Fadi Abu Sheikha and Diana Inkpen

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Ottawa

Ottawa, ON, K1N6N5, Canada
fabus102@uottawa.ca, diana@site.uottawa.ca

Abstract

This  paper  addresses  the  task  of  using 
natural  language  generation  (NLG) 
techniques  to  generate  sentences  with 
formal and with informal style. We studied 
the  main  characteristics  of  each  style, 
which helped us to choose parameters that 
can  produce  sentences  in  one  of  the  two 
styles.  We  collected  some  ready-made 
parallel  list  of formal and informal words 
and  phrases,  from  different  sources.  In 
addition, we added two more parallel lists: 
one that contains most of the contractions 
in  English  (short  forms)  and  their  full 
forms,  and  another  one  that  consists  in 
some common abbreviations and their full 
forms.  These  parallel  lists  might  help  to 
generate sentences in the preferred style, by 
changing  words  or  expressions  for  that 
style.  Our NLG system is  built  on top of 
the SimpleNLG package (Gatt and Reiter, 
2009). We used templates from which we 
generated valid  English texts  with formal 
or informal style.  In order to evaluate the 
quality of the generated sentences and their 
level of formality, we used human judges. 
The  evaluation  results  show  that  our 
system can  generate  formal  and  informal 
style successfully, with high accuracy.  The 
main contribution of our work consists in 
designing  a  set  of  parameters  that  led  to 
good results for the task of generating texts 
with different formality levels.

1 Introduction

In this paper, we introduce an important technique 
that takes into account the differences between the 

formal text style and the informal text style. This 
technique  is  automatic  text  generation  that  can 
generate texts that are formal or informal, based on 
the user preferences.

There are linguistic studies that state that there 
are different levels of formality (Hayakawa, 1994). 
We focus on the coarse-grained level, formal and 
informal style, but finer-grained levels are possible 
(e.g.,  informal,  less  formal,  formal,  extremely 
formal). 

The motivation for our work is  the need for a 
software tool that helps people to generate formal 
or  informal  texts.  One  of  the  difficult  issues  of 
writing  in  English  is  the  knowledge  of  how  to 
adapt  to  formal  or  informal  situations.  Some 
situations (such as applying for a job) are likely to 
be  formal,  whereas  others  (such  as  emailing  a 
friend  or  family  member)  are  more  likely  to  be 
informal.  The  real  problem  when  writing  is  to 
know what words, phrases, or expressions to use. 
There  are  some words,  phrases,  and  expressions 
that are either formal or informal; for instance, if 
the  wrong  word  is  chosen,  then  the  reader  may 
think  we  are  being  either  too  friendly  or  too 
formal.

The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 
we discuss related work; Section 3 addresses the 
main  differences  between  the  formal  and  the 
informal style;  Section 4 presents the  parameters 
that  we used for  generation;  Section  5  describes 
our  text  generation  system;  results  are  shown in 
Section  6;  Section  7  concludes  the  paper  and 
suggests directions of future work.

2 Related Work

In  this  section,  we  briefly  explain  the  natural 
language generation techniques (Reiter and Dale, 
2000), the SimpleNLG package (Gatt  and  Reiter, 
2009),  and  we  discuss  some  of  existing  NLG 

187



systems that included stylistic variations.

2.1 Natural Language Generation (NLG)
Natural  language  generation  is  the  process  of 
constructing  a  natural  language  text  from  non-
linguistic representation of information in order to 
meet  specified  communicative  goals  (McDonald, 
1987). The aim is to build computer systems that 
automatically produce correct texts in English, and 
other human languages (Reiter et  al.,  1995).  The 
main stages and the architecture of a typical NLG 
system were introduced by Reiter and Dale (2000).

2.2 SimpleNLG Package
The SimpleNLG1 package (Gatt and Reiter, 2009) 
can be used to  write  a  program which generates 
grammatically  correct  English  sentences.  It  is  a 
library, written in Java, which performs simple and 
useful tasks that are necessary for natural language 
generation.  The  main  task  that  SimpleNLG 
performs  is  sentence  realisation,  which  includes 
orthography, morphology, and simple grammar.

2.3 NLG and SimpleNLG
Following  the  architecture  of  Reiter  and  Dale 
(2000),  the  SimpleNLG  performs  Surface 
Realisation2, which is one of the main components 
of an NLG System. The Surface Realiser does the 
following tasks:

• Linguistic realisation: this component uses 
the  grammar  rules  to  convert  abstract 
representations  of  sentences  into  actual 
text.

• Structure realisation: converts sentences 
and paragraphs into mark-up symbols and 
displays the text.

2.4 Some NLG Systems that Include Style
There  are  many  NLG  systems  implemented  to 
generate texts for specific purposes. Many of them 
are commercial systems. For example, the Forecast 
Generator (FOG) system was designed in 1992 by 
CoGenTex3 to generate weather reports in English 
and  French;  the  inputs  of  the  system  were 
graphical  and  numerical  weather  depictions 
(Goldberg et al., 1994). 

1 http://www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/~ereiter/simplenlg/
2http://www.ling.helsinki.fi/kit/2008s/clt310gen/docs/si
mplenlg-tutorial-v37.pdf
3 http://www.cogentex.com/

       We discuss here related work in NLG systems 
that take into consideration generating text under 
pragmatic  constraints,  especially  according  to 
style. As far as we are aware, there are only a few 
researchers  who investigated producing text  with 
varied styles.
       Hovy (1988, 1990) introduced an NLG system 
called  PAULINE,  which is  considered  as  one of 
the  earliest  examples  of  Natural  Language 
Generation  systems.  Hovy  proposed  to  generate 
text  under  pragmatic  constraints,  including 
formality.  Although  small  scale,  his  experiments 
generated  the  same  text  in  different  styles,  to 
achieve  different  effects  on  the  reader,  and 
incorporated  some  pragmatics  into  language 
generation. He suggested using different words to 
generate different styles. 

Stamatatos et  al.  (1997)  proposed  a  system 
that can generate business letters based on different 
user requirements, such as style and tone.

Power  et  al.  (2001)  proposed the  Iconoclast 
system that allows the users to choose a number of 
high-level  parameters  for  the  text  style.  These 
parameters could be sentence length, frequency of 
passive  voice  and  pronouns,  and  the  use  of 
technical  terms.  This  system  allows  the  user  to 
choose the parameters by manipulating slider bars 
in a graphical user interface.

Furthermore, Reiter et al. (2003) presented the 
STOP system that was developed in University of 
Aberdeen  for  the  British  Health  Services;  it 
generates  tailored  letters  to  help  people  stop 
smoking.  The  STOP  system  makes  the  text 
friendlier by adding more empathy; it also makes 
the text easier to read for people with poor reading 
skills.

3 Formal and Informal Language Style 

In this section, we explain the main characteristics 
of  informal  versus  formal style.  We also present 
the parallel lists of words, phrases, and expressions 
for both styles, which we collected from different 
sources. The understanding of the main differences 
between the styles will help to build a system that 
generates sentences with formal and informal style, 
by implementing some of these characteristics in 
our NLG system.

188



3.1 Characteristics of Formal versus 
Informal Style

We  briefly  explain  and  summarize  the  main 
characteristics  of  informal  style  versus  formal 
style, as we found them described in (Dumaine and 
Healey, 2003; Obrecht, and Ferris, 2005; Akmajian 
et  al.,  2001;  Park,  2007;  Zapata,  2008;  Siddiqi, 
2008; Redman, 2003; Rob S. et al., 2008; Pavlidis, 
2009;  Obrecht,  1999).  These  characteristics  are 
used  for building templates to generate sentences 
based  on  them.   Here,  we  explain  the 
characteristics of each style and provide examples:

A. Main  Characteristics  of  Informal  Style 
Text:

• It  uses  personal  pronouns  and  the  active 
voice.

• It uses short simple words and sentences.
• It uses Contractions (e.g., “won’t”).
• It uses many abbreviations (e.g., “TV”).
• It uses many phrasal verbs.
• The  words  that  express  rapport  and 

familiarity are often used in speech, such 
as “brother”, “buddy”, and “man”.

• It  uses  a  subjective  style,  expressing 
opinions and feelings.

• It  uses  vague  expressions  and  colloquial 
(slang words are accepted in spoken not in 
written text (e.g., “wanna” = “want to”)).

B. Main Characteristics of Formal Style Text:

• It uses impersonal  pronouns and often the 
passive voice. 

• It uses complex words and sentence.
• It does not use contractions.
• It does not use many abbreviations. 
• It  uses  appropriate  and clear  expressions, 

business, and technical vocabulary.
• It uses politeness words and formulas such 

as “Please”, “Sir”.
• It uses an objective style, using facts and 

references to support an argument.
• It does not use vague expressions and 

slang words.

3.2 Formal versus Informal lists
We present  our  parallel  lists  of  informal  versus 
formal words, phrases, and expressions. These lists 
were  collected  manually  from  different  sources: 

the  first  list  is  for  formal  versus  informal  words 
and  phrases,  the  second  list  is  for  most  of  the 
contractions  in  English,  and  the  third  list  is  for 
some  of  the  common  abbreviations  in  English. 
These lists are important parameters for our system 
of sentence generation.

A. Informal/Formal list of words and phrases

This  is  a  parallel  list  for  informal  versus  formal 
words and phrases. We collected this list manually 
from different sources: (Gillett et al., 2009; Park, 
2007;  Redman,  2003;  Rob  et  al.,  2008).  In 
addition, we obtained a new list that was extracted 
manually  by  Brooke  et  al.  (2010)  from  the 
dictionary  of  synonyms  Choose  The  Right  Word 
(Hayakawa, 1994). Table 1 shows a sample of this 
parallel list.

Informal Formal
about approximately
anybody anyone
ask for request
buy purchase

Table 1: Examples of formal and informal words 
from our parallel list

B. Contractions Lists 

This is a parallel list for most of the contractions in 
English  (short  forms)  that  represent  the  informal 
style versus the full forms of the contractions that 
represent  the  formal  style.  We obtained  this  list 
manually  from  (Redman,  2003;  Garner,  2001; 
Pearl Production, 2005; Woods, 2010). In Table 2, 
we  show  a  sample  of  the  parallel  list  of  the 
contractions and their equivalent full forms.

Informal Formal
aren't are not
can't cannot
I'm I am

Table 2: Examples of contractions versus their 
equivalent full forms

C. Abbreviation Lists

This is a parallel list for some of the most common 
abbreviations in English that represent the informal 
style versus the full forms that corresponds to these 
abbreviations  as  used  in  formal  style.  However, 

189



there are some abbreviations that are acceptable in 
formal texts (Obrecht, 1999). We collected this list 
manually  from  (Redman,  2003;  Gibaldi,  2003; 
Pearl Production, 2005).  Table 3 shows a sample 
of pairs from the parallel list of the abbreviations 
and their equivalent full forms. 

Informal Formal
e.g. for example
etc. and so on
Feb. February
Lab Laboratory

Table 3: Examples of abbreviations and their 
equivalent full forms

4 Formality Parameters

In this section, we propose the following two main 
parameters  that  will  be  used  in  constructing 
formal/informal  sentences.  We  hypothesize  that 
both parameters might help to produce sentences in 
both styles.

a. Phrase,  expression,  and  word  choice 
(lexical choice): This parameter might help 
to generate sentences in both styles (Hovy, 
1988). We implement this parameter in our 
system  based  on  the  parallel  lists 
(formal/informal  words,  the  contraction 
list, and the abbreviation list) that we have 
described in Section 3.

b. Passive/Active  voice  option:  This 
parameter is based on the characteristics of 
both styles which we mentioned in Section 
3. In addition, it  was suggested by Hovy 
(1988).  We  added  this  parameter  to  our 
system  and  we  let  the  system  choose  a 
sentence in the passive or the active voice, 
based on the preferred style.

5 Formal/Informal Sentence Generation

Our  system  can  generate  natural  language 
sentences in a formal/informal style with different 
inputs  of  subject,  verb,  and  complement  (by 
complement,  we  mean  one  or  more  words 
including  subordinate  clauses,  as  expected  in 
SimpleNLG). Therefore, the user might not worry 
about  choosing any word that  he/she is  not  very 
familiar  with,  whether  the  word  is  formal  or 
informal,  because  the  system  will  manage  to 
replace some words with more appropriate words, 

based on the desired style. In addition, our system 
might interact with the user directly, or it can be 
integrated with any system that has the ability to 
send and receive commands from Java programs.

In the following, we explain the main steps for 
our system to generate sentences:

a. Ask the user which style is preferred to be 
generated in the sentence. 

b. Ask  the  user  to  enter  a  template  that 
represents  the  sentence  in  the  form  of  a 
subject,  a  verb,  and  the  rest  of  the 
sentence. 

c. Ask the user about some syntactic features: 
the  verb  tense  (present,  past,  future), 
progressive (yes, no), perfect (yes, no), and 
negation (yes, no).

d. The  system  then  checks  the  verb  in  the 
formal/informal parallel list; if it is formal 
or  informal,  and  the  system  will  find  a 
synonym  of  the  verb  in  the  list,  it  will 
replace it based on the preferred style. In 
addition, if the chosen style is Formal, then 
the  system  will  choose  to  generate  a 
sentence in passive voice. 

e. After  the  sentence  is  constructed,  the 
system will search for any word, phrase, or 
expression  from  the  formal/informal  list, 
the abbreviations list, and the contractions 
list, in order to replace it with a synonym, 
based on the preferred style.

f. Lastly, our system will generate a natural 
language  sentence  according  to  the 
preferred  style,  using  SimpleNLG  for 
surface realization.

6 Results and Evaluation 

Natural  language  generation  is  most  often 
evaluated  using  scores  given  by  human  judges 
(Reiter and Belz, 2009). Our evaluation target was 
to  measure  the  degree  of  formality  (Formal  / 
Informal)  of  the  generated  sentences.  We  asked 
two  human  judges  (graduate  students  in 
computational  linguistics,  native  speakers  of 
English)  to  annotate  100  generated  sentences  as 
having  formal  or  informal  style.  Table  4  shows 
samples4 of  the  generated  sentences  with  the 

4 We  will  make  the  test  set  of  annotated  sentence 
available, on our website, in case other researchers need 
them for testing, as well as the three word lists used by 
our system.

190



judges’ annotations. We estimate the correctness of 
our system by comparing the original class of the 
generated  sentences  (formal/informal)  to  the 
annotations  of  Judge1  and  to  the  annotations  of 
Judge2.  We  calculated  several  evaluation 
measures, to see if our proposed system achieves 
good  quality  in  producing  English  sentences  in 
formal and informal style. These measures are the 
accuracy (correctness) of our system according to 
each  judge,  and  the  precision  for  each  class 
according to each judge. 

Sentence Actual 
Class

Judge1 

annotate

Judge2 

annotate
The plane is  
going to leave 
on Jan. 5th. Informal Formal Informal

They were  
transmuting 
the raw 
materials to  
finished goods. Formal Formal Formal 

Table 4: Samples of the generated sentences with 
the annotations from both judges

                 Predicted Class
Precision

Actual 
Class

Informal Formal
Infor
mal

TP = 45 FN = 0 0.90

For
mal

FP = 5 TN = 50 1.00

Table 5: The results compared to the annotations of 
Judge1, with the precision for each class

                           Predicted Class
Precision

Actual 
Class

Informal Formal
Infor
mal

TP = 50 FN = 1 1.00

For
mal

FP = 0 TN = 49 0.98

Table 6: The results compared to the annotations of 
Judge2, with the precision for each class

The  results  of  the  annotations  show  high 
accuracy for  the  generated sentences.  In Table 5 

and Table 6, we show the results according to each 
of the two judges. The accuracy of our system is 
95% according  to  Judge1 and  99% according  to 
Judge2. 

We also calculated the agreement between the 
two  judges,  and  the  kappa  statistic  that 
compensated  for  agreement  by  chance  (Cohen, 
1960)  (Manning  et  al.,  2008).  The  agreement 
between  the  two  judges  is  94%  and  the  kappa 
value is 0.88. This shows a very good agreement 
for the task.

7 Conclusion and Future Work 

In  this  paper,  we  have  addressed  the  task  of 
generation of formal and informal texts.  The main 
characteristics of formal and informal style that we 
identified are success factors for our work, because 
they helped us to build the parameters that lead to 
good generation results.   In addition, the parallel 
lists of formal versus informal words and phrases 
that we collected from different sources were very 
important  in  designing  our  system  for  the 
generation formal and informal sentences.
 We  developed  an  NLG  system  that  can 
generate formal and informal sentences. We used 
template-based NLG techniques in the SimpleNLG 
package  in  order  to  implement  our  system.  We 
proposed some important parameters that are used 
in  generating formal and informal sentences.  We 
think  that  these  parameters  were  selected 
successfully  because  the  evaluation  with  human 
judges  showed  a  high  accuracy  in  generating 
formal  and  informal  sentences.  Generating 
sentences  with  different  formality  levels  is  very 
useful  for  various  applications  (e.g.,  generating 
feedback  for  e-learning  games,  letters  to  clients, 
and other formal or informal documents). 

Our future work will be on extracting more 
formal and informal lists; this should increase the 
possibility  of  generating  more  and  more 
formal/informal sentences, with high accuracy. We 
will  apply  different  techniques,  such  as 
bootstrapping,  which  can  be  used  in  order  to 
extract  more lists  of  words,  based on some seed 
words. We also plan to extend the implementation 
of  our  NLG  system  to  cover  generating  longer 
texts (e.g., generating several sentences, by adding 
aggregation,  or  replacing  some  nouns  with 
pronouns to avoid repetitions).

191



References 
Akmajian,  Adrian,  Demers,  Richard  A.,  Farmer,  Ann 

K.,  and Harnish,  Robert  M. 2001.  Linguistics:  an 
introduction  to  language  and  communication.  5th 
Edition, MIT Press, Cambridge (MA), pp. 287-291.

Brooke, Julian, Wang, Tong, and Hirst, Graeme. 2010. 
Inducing  Lexicons  of  Formality  from  Corpora. 
Proceedings.  Workshop  on  Methods  for  the 
Automatic Acquisition of Language Resources and 
their Evaluation Methods, 7th Language Resources 
and  Evaluation  Conference,  17-22  May,  Valetta, 
Malta, pp. 605—616.

Cohen,  Jacob.  1960.  Coefficient  of  agreement  for 
nominal  scales.  Educational  and  Psychological 
Measurement. VOL. XX, No. 1, pp. 37-46.

Dumaine,  Deborah,  and  Healey,  Elisabeth  C.  2003. 
Instant-Answer Guide to Business Writing: An A-Z 
Source for Today's Business Writer. 2003 Edition, 
Writers Club Press, Lincoln, pp. 153-156.

Garner, Bryan A. 2001. A Dictionary of Modern Legal 
Usage.  2nd Edition,  pp.  xxv,  Oxford  University 
Press, US.

Gatt,  Albert,  and  Reiter,  Ehud.  2009.  SimpleNLG:  A 
realisation  engine  for  practical  applications.  In 
Proceedings  of  the  12th  European  Workshop  on 
Natural Language Generation (ENLG 2009), 30-31 
March, Athens, Greece, pp. 90-93.

Gibaldi, Joseph. 2003. MLA Handbook for Writers of 
Research Papers. 6th edition, Section 7.4, Modern 
Language  Association  of  America,  (ISBN: 
0873529863 / 0-87352-986-3).

Gillett,  Andy, Hammond, Angela,  and Martala, Mary. 
2009.  Inside  Track  to  Successful  Academic 
Writing.  Pearson  Education,  ISBN:  978-
0273721710.

Goldberg,  E., Driedger,  N., and Kittredge, R. I. 1994. 
Using  Natural  Language  Processing  to  Produce 
Weather  Forecasts.  IEEE  Expert:  Intelligent 
Systems and Their Applications, 9(2): 45-53.

Hayakawa, S. I., editor. 1994. Choose the Right Word: 
A  Contemporary  Guide  to  Selecting  the  Precise 
Word for  Every Situation.  2nd Edition, revised by 
Eugene  Ehrlich.  HarperCollins  Publishers,  NY, 
USA.

Hovy,  Eduard H.  1988.  Generating  Natural  Language 
under  Pragmatic  Constraints.  Lawrence  Erlbaum 
Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, USA, pp. 82 – 87.

Hovy, Eduard H. 1990. Pragmatics and natural language 
generation. AI. vol. 43, pp. 153–197.

Manning,  Christopher  D.,  Raghavan,  Prabhakar,  and 
Schütze, Hinrich. 2008. Introduction to Information 
Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, Chapter 8, 
pp. 165- 166.

McDonald,  David  D.  1987.  Natural  language 
generation.   In  Stuart  C.  Shapiro,  editor, 

Encyclopaedia  of  Artificial  Intelligence,  John 
Wiley and Sons, pp. 642-655.

Obrecht,  Fred  1999.  Minimum Essentials  of  English. 
2nd Edition, Barron’s Educational Series Inc., Los 
Angeles Pierce College, New York, page 13.

Obrecht, Fred, Ferris, Boak. 2005. How to Prepare for 
the California State University Writing Proficiency 
Exams.  3rd  Edition,  Barron’s  Educational  Series 
Inc., New York, page 173.

Park,  David.  2007.  Identifying  &  using  formal  & 
informal vocabulary. IDP Education, the University 
of  Cambridge  and  the  British  Council,  the  Post 
Publishing Public Co. Ltd.

Pavlidis,  Mara.  2009.  Target  Your  Study  Skills: 
Optimise  Your  Learning.  Faculty  of  Health 
Sciences. La Trobe University, Victoria, Australia, 
Chapter 5, page 3.

Pearl  Production  (Ed).  2005.  English  Language  Arts 
Skills & Strategies Level 5. Saddleback Publishing, 
Inc. USA, ISBN 1-56254-839-5.

Power,  Richard,  Scott,  Donia,  and  Bouayad-Agha, 
Nadjet.  2003.  Generating  texts  with  style.  In: 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on 
Intelligent  Text  Processing  and  Computational 
Linguistics (CICLing'03), pp. 444-452.

Redman, Stuart. 2003. English vocabulary in use: Pre-
intermediate  &  intermediate.  2nd Edition, 
Cambridge University press, UK.

Reiter,  Ehud  and  Belz,  Anja.  2009.  An  Investigation 
into the Validity of Some Metrics for Automatically 
Evaluating Natural Language Generation Systems. 
Computational Linguistics 25:529–558.

Reiter, Ehud and Dale, Robert. 2000. Building Natural 
Language Generation Systems (Studies in Natural 
Language Processing). Cambridge University Press 
2000. ISBN 0-521-62036-8.

Reiter,  Ehud, Mellish,  Chris,  and Levine,  John.  1995. 
Automatic Generation of Technical Documentation. 
Applied Artificial Intelligence 9, pp. 259-287.

Reiter, Ehud, Robertson, Roma, and Osman, Liesl. 2003 
Lessons  from  a  Failure:  Generating  Tailored 
Smoking Cessation Letters.  Artificial  Intelligence, 
144, pp. 41-58.

Rob, S. et al. 2008. How to Avoid Colloquial (Informal) 
Writing. WikiHow.

Siddiqi,  Anis.  2008.  The  Difference  Between  Formal 
and Informal Writing. EzineArticles.

Stamatatos,  E.,  Michos,  S.,  Fakotakis,  N.,  and 
Kokkinakis,  G.  1997.  A  User-Assisted  Business 
Letter  Generator  Dealing  with  Text’s  Stylistic 
Variations. The Ninth International Conference on 
Tools with Artificial Intelligence, (TAI-97).

Woods,  Geraldine.  2010.  English  Grammar  for 
Dummies.  2nd  Edition,  page  147,  Wiley 
Publishing, Inc. NJ, USA.

192



Zapata,  Argenis  A.  2008.  Inglés  IV  (B-2008). 
Universidad de Los Andes, Facultad de Humanidades 
y Educación, Escuela de Idiomas Modernos.

193


