










































Towards Strict Sentence Intersection: Decoding and Evaluation Strategies


Workshop on Monolingual Text-To-Text Generation, pages 43–53,

Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 43–53,
Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards Strict Sentence Intersection: Decoding and Evaluation Strategies

Kapil Thadani and Kathleen McKeown
Department of Computer Science

Columbia University
New York, NY 10027, USA

{kapil,kathy}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

We examine the task of strict sentence inter-
section: a variant of sentence fusion in which
the output must only contain the informa-
tion present in all input sentences and nothing
more. Our proposed approach involves align-
ment and generalization over the input sen-
tences to produce a generation lattice; we then
compare a standard search-based approach for
decoding an intersection from this lattice to an
integer linear program that preserves aligned
content while minimizing the disfluency in
interleaving text segments. In addition, we
introduce novel evaluation strategies for in-
tersection problems that employ entailment-
style judgments for determining the validity
of system-generated intersections. Our experi-
ments show that the proposed models produce
valid intersections a majority of the time and
that the segmented decoder yields advantages
over the search-based approach.

1 Introduction

In recent years, there has been growing interest
in text-to-text generation problems which transform
text according to specifications. Tasks such as sen-
tence compression, which strives to retain the most
salient content of an input sentence, and sentence fu-
sion, which attempts to combine the important con-
tent in related sentences, are useful components for
tackling larger natural language problems such as
abstractive summarization of documents. Systems
for these types of text-to-text problems are typically
evaluated on the informativeness of the output text
as judged by human annotators.

A natural aspect of most text generation systems
is that a given input can map to a range of lexi-
cally diverse outputs. However, text-to-text tasks
defined with vague criteria such as the preserva-
tion of the “important” information in text can also
permit outputs that are semantically distinct. This
can make evaluation difficult; for instance, system-
generated sentences may differ (partially or com-
pletely) in informational content from reference
human-annotated text. This phenomenon has been
noted and discussed in the task of pairwise sentence
fusion (Daumé III and Marcu, 2004) and also in sen-
tence compression (McDonald, 2006). Some exam-
ples are listed in Table 1.

In this work, we examine the task of sentence in-
tersection: a variant of sentence fusion that does not
permit semantic variation in the output. A strict1 in-
tersection system is expected to produce a fused sen-
tence that contains all the information common to its
input sentences and avoid information that is in just
one of the inputs. In other words, a valid intersection
should only contain information that is substantiated
by all input sentences. The set-theoretic notions of
intersection (along with union) have been employed
to describe variants of sentence fusion tasks in previ-
ous work (Marsi and Krahmer, 2005; Krahmer et al.,
2008) but, to our knowledge, this work is the first to
explicitly tackle and evaluate the strict intersection
task.

We focus on the case of unsupervised pairwise
sentence intersection and propose a strategy to yield

1We use the term strict to make explicit the distinction from
traditional fusion systems, which generally aim at notions of
intersection but are not formally evaluated with respect to it.

43



(a) Fusion example from
Daumé III and Marcu (2004)

(i) After years of pursuing separate and conflicting paths, AT&T and Digital Equip-
ment Corp. agreed in June to settle their computer-to-PBX differences.
(ii) The two will jointly develop an applications interface that can be shared by
computers and PBXs of any stripe.

Human fusion #1 AT&T and Digital Equipment Corp. agreed in June to settle their computer-to-
PBX differences and develop an applications interface that can be shared by any
computer or PBX.

Human fusion #2 After years of pursuing different paths, AT&T and Digital agreed to jointly develop
an applications interface that can be shared by computers and PBXs of any stripe.

(b) Compression example
from McDonald (2006)

TapeWare , which supports DOS and NetWare 286 , is a value-added process that
lets you directly connect the QA150-EXAT to a file server and issue a command
from any workstation to back up the server

Human compression #1 TapeWare supports DOS and NetWare 286
Human compression #2 TapeWare lets you connect the QA150-EXAT to a file server
(hypothesized)

Table 1: Examples of text-to-text generation problems with multiple valid human-generated outputs that differ signif-
icantly in semantic content. Italicized text is used to indicate fragments that are semantically identical.

valid intersections that follows the basic framework
of previous unsupervised fusion systems (Barzilay
and McKeown, 2005; Filippova and Strube, 2008b).
In our approach, the input sentences are first aligned
using a modified version of a recent phrase-based
alignment approach (MacCartney et al., 2008). We
assume the alignments that are produced define as-
pects of the input that must appear in the output fu-
sion and consider decoding strategies to recover in-
tersections that preserve these alignments. In addi-
tion to a search-based decoding strategy, we propose
a constrained integer linear programming (ILP) for-
mulation that attempts to decode the most fluent sen-
tence covering all these aspects while minimizing
the size and disfluency of interleaving text. This is a
fairly general model which can also be extended to
other alignment-based tasks such as pairwise union
and difference.

As this is a substantially more constrained task
than generic sentence fusion, we also present a
novel evaluation approach that avoids out-of-context
salience judgments. We make use of a recently-
released corpus of fusion candidates (McKeown et
al., 2010) and propose a crowdsourced entailment-
style evaluation to determine the validity of gener-
ated intersections, as well as the grammaticality of
the sentences produced. Additionally, automated
machine translation (MT) metrics are explored to
quantify the amount of information missing from
valid intersections. Our decoding strategies show

promise under these experiments and we discuss po-
tential directions for improving intersection perfor-
mance.

2 Related Work

The distinction between intersection and union of
text was introduced in the context of sentence fu-
sion (Krahmer et al., 2008; Marsi and Krahmer,
2005) in order to distinguish between traditional fu-
sion strategies that attempted to include only com-
mon content and fusions that attempted to include
all non-redundant content from the input. We fo-
cus here on strict sentence intersection, explicitly
incorporating a constraint that requires that a pro-
duced fusion must not contain information that is
not present in all input sentences. This distin-
guishes our approach from traditional sentence fu-
sion approaches (Jing and McKeown, 2000; Barzi-
lay and McKeown, 2005; Filippova and Strube,
2008b) which generally attempt to retain common
information but are typically evaluated in an abstrac-
tive summarization context in which additional in-
formation in the fusion output does not negatively
impact judgments.

This task is also related to the field of sentence
compression which has received much attention in
recent years (Turner and Charniak, 2005; McDon-
ald, 2006; Clarke and Lapata, 2008; Filippova and
Strube, 2008a; Cohn and Lapata, 2009; Marsi et al.,
2010). Intersections can be viewed as guided com-

44



pressions in which the redundancy of information
content across input sentences in a multidocument
setting is assumed to directly indicate its salience,
thereby consigning it to the output.

Additionally, in this work, we frequently con-
sider the sentence intersection task from the per-
spective of textual entailment (cf. §5.1). The textual
entailment task involves automatically determining
whether a given hypothesis can be inferred from a
textual premise (Dagan et al., 2005; Bar-Haim et al.,
2006). Automatic construction of positive and neg-
ative entailment examples has been explored in the
past (Bensley and Hickl, 2008) to provide training
data for entailment systems; however the produc-
tion of text that is simultaneously entailed by two
(or more) sentences is a far more constrained and
difficult challenge.

ILP has been used extensively for text-to-text gen-
eration problems in recent years (Clarke and Lapata,
2008; Filippova and Strube, 2008b; Woodsend et al.,
2010), including techniques which incorporate syn-
tax directly into the decoding to imporove the flu-
ency of the resulting text. In this paper, we focus on
generating valid intersections and do not incorporate
syntactic and semantic constraints into our ILP mod-
els; these are areas we intend to explore in the future.

3 The Intersection Task

The need for strict variants of fusion is motivated
by considerations of evaluation and utility in text-to-
text generation tasks. Without explicit constraints on
the semantic content of valid output, the operational
definition of fusion can encompass the full spectrum
from sentence intersection to sentence union. This
makes the comparison of different fusion systems
dependent on task-based utility2. In addition, inter-
section comprises an interesting problem in its own
right. It necessitates the use of generalization over
phrases in order to convey only the content of the
input sentences when different wording is used and
therefore involves more than just word deletion.

The analogy to set-theoretic intersection in this
task implies an underlying consideration of each
sentence as a set of informational concepts, sim-

2For instance, systems may trade off conciseness against
grammaticality, or informational content with degree of support
across the input sentences.

ilar to previous work in summarization and re-
dundancy (Filatova and Hatzivassiloglou, 2004;
Thadani and McKeown, 2008). While we don’t
commit to any semantic representation for such el-
ements of information, we can nevertheless attempt
to identify repeated information using well-studied
natural language analysis techniques such as align-
ment and paraphrase recognition, and furthermore
isolate this information through text-to-text genera-
tion techniques.

Consider, for example, the first sentence pair from
the examples in Table 2. A valid intersection for
these sentences must not contain any information
that is not substantiated by both of them, so a fu-
sion that mentions “Mr Litvinenko’s poisoning”,
“Britain” or “Sunday” would not satisfy this crite-
rion. In other words, a valid intersection must neces-
sarily be textually entailed by every input sentence.
Following this, we can interpret the sentence inter-
section task as one that requires the generation of
fluent text that is mutually entailed by all input sen-
tences3. We use this perspective in developing an
evaluation technique for strict intersection in §5.1.

A major distinguishing factor between this work
and previous work on fusion is that simply adding
or deleting words in a sentence is not adequate; in
many cases, intersections require additional words
or phrases to be introduced in order to general-
ize over related but non-interchangeable aligned
terms (such as “go” and “expand”). Additionally,
we must attempt to avoid introducing additional
content-bearing text in the output while simultane-
ously striving to maintain the fluency of text.

3.1 Dataset

A corpus of sentence fusion instances was recently
made available by McKeown et al. (2010), consist-
ing of 297 sentence pairs taken from newswire clus-
ters and manually judged as being good candidates
for fusion. Each sentence pair is accompanied by
human-produced intersections and unions collected
via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service4. McKeown
et al. (2010) noted that union responses are mostly
valid but intersections are frequently incorrect and

3From this perspective, the complementary task of sentence
union involves the generation of fluent text that entails all the
input sentences.

4http://www.mturk.com

45



1 (i) Home Secretary John Reid said Sunday the inquiry would go wherever “the police take it.”
(ii) It comes as Home Secretary John Reid said the inquiry into Mr Litvinenko’s poisoning would expand beyond
Britain.

2 (i) Traces of polonium have been found on the planes on which they are believed to have travelled between
London and Moscow.
(ii) Small traces of radioactive substances had been found on the planes.

3 (i) Prosecutors allege that the accuser, who appeared in the program, was molested after the show aired.
(ii) Prosecutors allege that the boy, a cancer survivor, was molested twice after the program aired.

Table 2: Example sentence pairs from the McKeown et al. (2010) corpus. Table 3 contains the corresponding system-
generated intersections for these sentence pairs.

hypothesized that the task is more confusing for
untrained annotators. A similar phenomenon was
noted by Krahmer et al. (2008): while demonstrat-
ing that query-based human fusions exhibited less
variation than generic fusions, it was also observed
that intersections varied more than unions.

Due to the absence of adequate training data for
intersection, our approach to the task is unsuper-
vised, similar to previous work in fusion (Barzilay
and McKeown, 2005; Filippova and Strube, 2008b)
and sentence compression (Clarke and Lapata, 2008;
Filippova and Strube, 2008a). Additionally, we fo-
cus on the case of pairwise sentence intersection and
assume that the common information between the
input sentence pair can be represented within a sin-
gle output sentence. As a result, although the McK-
eown et al. (2010) corpus cannot be used for training
an intersection model, we can make use of the sen-
tence pairs it contains for evaluation.

4 Models for intersection

Our proposed strategies for sentence intersection in-
volve phrase-based alignment, intermediate general-
ization steps that build a generation lattice and tech-
niques for decoding an output sentence, as described
below.

4.1 Phrase-based alignment

The alignment phase is a major component of any
intersection system as it is used to uncover the
common segments in the input that must be pre-
served in the output. We make use of an adapta-
tion of the supervised MANLI phrase-based align-
ment technique originally developed for textual en-
tailment systems (MacCartney et al., 2008); our
implementation replaces approximate search-based

decoding with exact ILP-based alignment decod-
ing and incorporates syntactic constraints to pro-
duce more precise alignments (Thadani and McKe-
own, 2011). The aligner is trained on a corpus of
human-generated alignment annotations produced
by Microsoft Research (Brockett, 2007) for infer-
ence problems from the second Recognizing Tex-
tual Entailment (RTE2) challenge (Bar-Haim et al.,
2006).

Entailment problems are inherently asymmetric
because premise text is generally larger than hypoth-
esis text; however, this does not apply to our inter-
section problems and consequently our MANLI im-
plementation drops asymmetric indicator features.
The absence of these features impacts alignment
performance on RTE2 data but our reimplementa-
tion performs comparably to the original model un-
der the alignment evaluation from MacCartney et al.
(2008).

4.2 Ontology-based generalization
An aligned phrase pair produced by the previous
step does not necessarily indicate that the phrases
are equivalent but merely that they are similar in
the given sentence context (such as “accuser” and
“boy” in the third example from Table 2). We need
to generalize over these phrases as they are not inter-
changeable from the perspective of the intersection
task. We consider an alignment as containing three
types of aligned phrases:

1. Identical phrases or paraphrases: Either of
these may appear in the output

2. Entailed phrases: Only the entailed phrase
must appear in a valid intersection

3. Instances of a general concept: The common
concept must be lexicalized in the output

46



Although generalization of words within stan-
dalone sentences is usually hampered by word sense
ambiguity, our approach is less likely to encounter
this problem because we can generalize simultane-
ously over phrases which have already been aligned
using additional information (such as their neighbor-
ing context), thus avoiding generalizations that do
not fit the alignment.

For our experiments, we make use of the Wordnet
ontology (Miller, 1995) to find the hypernyms com-
mon to every aligned pair of non-identical phrases,
and only attempt to detect entailments which are
comprised of specific instances that entail general
concepts. This approach can be augmented by the
use of entailment corpora and distributional cluster-
ing which we intend to explore in future work. We
also use the lexical resource CatVar (Habash and
Dorr, 2003) to try to generate morphological vari-
ants of aligned words that enable them to be inter-
changed without creating disfluencies.

4.3 Pragmatic abstraction
Our strategy assumes that aligned text must be pre-
served in output intersections whereas unaligned
text must be minimized. However, unaligned text
cannot simply be dropped as it may contain vital
portions for generating fluent text. In addition, un-
aligned phrases can be caused by paraphrased or
metaphorical text that the aligner is not capable of
identifying. For example, the phrases “polonium”
and “radioactive substances” in the second sentence
pair from Table 2 fail to align with each other.

On the other hand, retaining unaligned text from
one of the input sentences for the sake of fluency
is likely to introduce information that is not sup-
ported by the other input sentence. We therefore
need to abstract away as much content from the un-
aligned portions of the text as possible. For this
purpose, we generate a large number of potential
compressions and abstractions for every unaligned
span that occurs between two consecutive aligned
phrases in each sentence. These compressions and
abstractions, referred to as interleaving paths, be-
tween pairs of aligned phrases essentially construct
a lattice over the input sentences that encodes all po-
tential intersection outputs.

Generation of interleaving paths is accomplished
through the application of rules on the dependency

parse structure over unaligned text spans from a sin-
gle sentence (as well as spans that occur before the
first aligned phrase and after the last aligned phrase
in each sentence). Interleaving paths are generated
by applying rules that:

1. Drop insignificant dependent words and un-
aligned prepositional phrases

2. Replace content-bearing verbs with tense-
adjusted generic variants such as “did some-
thing” and “happened”, with an exception for
statement verbs

3. Replace nouns with generic words such as
“someone” or “something”, using Wordnet to
determine which generic variant fits a noun

4. Suggest connective text fragments such as
“something about” to cover long spans and
clause boundaries

Our abstraction rules are relatively simple but can
often generate reasonable interleaving paths. In gen-
eral, we note that shorter abstractions are less likely
to include glaring grammatical errors because long
unaligned spans are often indicative of problematic
alignments that either incorrectly relate unconnected
terms or fail to recognize paraphrases.

4.4 Decoding strategies
After sentence alignment, generalization over
aligned phrases and the construction of interleav-
ing paths, we are left with a lattice that encodes
potential intersections of the input sentence. Fig-
ure 1 describes the general structure of this lattice.
Every alignment link encompasses a set of aligned
phrases. Phrases may be identical or generaliza-
tions, in which case they can appear in the context
of either sentence, or they may be sentence-specific
(for example, verbs with different tenses or nominal-
izations like “nominated” and “nominations”). Ad-
ditionally, the abstraction phase generates interleav-
ing paths from unaligned spans between all pairs of
alignment links. These paths are generated from in-
dividual sentences and can only be used to connect
phrases that appear in the context of those sentences.

Our task now reduces to recovering a well-formed
intersection from this lattice. We make use of a lan-
guage model (LM) to judge fluency and propose two
techniques to decode high-scoring text from the lat-
tice: a simple beam-search technique and an ILP

47



Alignment link k

m

m

m

m
Phrases
from S1

Shared
phrases

Phrases
from S2

Alignment link l

Phrases
from S1

Shared
phrases

Phrases
from S2

Figure 1: The general structure of one segment of the
alignment lattice, illustrating the potential interleaving
paths between aligned phrases. Solid lines indicate paths
derived from sentence 1 and dashed lines indicate paths
derived from sentence 2

strategy that leverages our initial assumption that all
aligned phrases must appear in the output.

4.4.1 Beam search
Search-based decoding is often employed in phrase-
based MT systems (Och and Ney, 2003) and is
implemented in the Moses toolkit5; similar ap-
proaches have also been used in text-to-text gener-
ation tasks (Barzilay and McKeown, 2005; Soricut
and Marcu, 2006). This technique attempts to find
the highest-scoring sentence string under the LM by
unwrapping and searching through a lattice. Since
the dynamic programming search could require an
exponential number of search states, a fixed-width
beam can be used to control the number of search
states being actively considered at each step.

In order to decode an intersection problem, we
first pick a beam size B and initialize the list of can-
didate search states with the first interleaving paths
in each sentence. At every iteration, we consider the
B candidates with the highest normalized scores un-
der the LM and remove them from the candidate list.
Each candidate is then advanced, i.e., all aligned
phrases and interleaving paths following it are ex-
amined, scored and added to the candidate list. We
continue searching in this manner until B candidates
have covered all aligned phrases; the highest scoring
candidate is then retrieved as the target intersection.

4.4.2 Segmented decoding
While beam search is a viable strategy for decoding
intersections, its performance is contingent on the

5http://www.statmt.org/moses/

beam size parameter and it is not guaranteed to re-
turn the highest scoring sentence under the LM. For
instance, if a potential intersection starts with un-
usual text, it is unlikely to be explored by the search-
based approach even if it is the optimal solution to
the decoding problem. To address this, we also pro-
pose an alternative decoding problem that can be
formulated as the optimization of a linear objective
function with linear constraints. This can then be
solved exactly by well-studied algorithms using off-
the-shelf ILP solvers6.

This decoding problem does not look for the
highest scoring sentence under the LM; instead, it
attempts to find the set of interleaving paths and
aligned phrases that are most locally coherent7 un-
der the LM. Good phrase-path combinations that oc-
cur towards the tail end of an intersection can thus
be put on even footing with the combinations that
appear in the beginning. Although the two problems
consider different objective functions, they are both
engaged in the same overall goal: that of recovering
a fluent sentence from the lattice.

We first define boolean indicator variables aki ∈
Ak for every aligned phrase in each aligned link Ak
present in the intersection problem I. We also in-
troduce indicator variables pklij for every possible in-
terleaving path between aligned phrases aki and a

l
j .

The linear objective for I that maximizes the local
coherence of all phrases can be expressed as

f = max
∑

Ak,Al∈I

|Ak|∑
i=0

|Al|∑
j=0

pklij × score(pklij )

where score(pklij ) is the normalized LM score of the
fragment of text representing aki p

kl
ij a

l
j . In other

words, the score for each interleaving path is cal-
culated by appending it and the two phrases it con-
nects into a single fragment of text and determining
the score of that fragment under an LM8.

6We use LPsolve: http://lpsolve.sourceforge.net/
7As noted by Clarke and Lapata (2008), normalizing LM

scores cannot be easily accomplished with linear constraints
and we do not have training data to devise appropriate word-
insertion penalties as used in MT.

8If the fragment of text is smaller than the LM size, we
consider additional sentence context around the aligned phrases
rather than backing off to a smaller LM size to avoid a bias to-
wards short but ungrammatical interleaving paths.

48



We now introduce linear constraints to keep the
problem well-formed. First, we add a restriction
to ensure that only one phrase from each alignment
link is present in the solution.∑

aki ∈Ak

aki = 1 ∀Ak ∈ I

We can also ensure that interleaving paths are only in
the solution when the aligned phrases that they con-
nect together are themselves present using the fol-
lowing set of constraints.

aki −
|Ak|∑
i=0

pk∗i∗ = 1 ∀aki ∈ Ak, Ak ∈ I

alj −
|Al|∑
j=0

p∗l∗j = 1 ∀alj ∈ Al, Al ∈ I

pklij − aki <= 0 ∀i, j, k, l
pklij − alj <= 0 ∀i, j, k, l

As we don’t restrict the structure of the lattice in any
way and allow crossing alignment links, the program
as defined thus far is capable of generating cyclic
and fragmented solutions. To combat this, we add
dummy start and end phrase variables and introduce
additional single commodity flow constraints (Mag-
nanti and Wolsey, 1994) adapted from Martins et
al. (2009) over the interleaving paths to guarantee
that the output will only involve a linear sequence of
aligned phrases and paths.

5 Evaluation

We now turn to the design of experiments for the
strict sentence intersection task and discuss the per-
formance of the proposed models using the corpus
provided by McKeown et al. (2010). We use a beam
size of 50 for the beam search decoder and a 4-gram
LM for all experiments. Dependency parsing is ac-
complished with MICA, a TAG-based parser (Ban-
galore et al., 2009). Our primary considerations
for studying system-generated fusions are validity
(whether the output contains only the information
common to each sentence), coverage (whether the
output contains all the common information in the
input sentences) and the fluency of the output.

5.1 Evaluating Validity and Fluency

Evaluating the validity of an intersection involves
determining whether it contains only the informa-
tion contained in each sentence and nothing else. In
order to do this, we make use of the interpretation of
valid intersections as being mutually entailed by the
input sentences. It follows that the task of judging
the validity of an intersection can simply be decom-
posed into two tasks that judge whether the intersec-
tion is entailed by each input sentence.

We make use of Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
(AMT) platform to have humans evaluate the in-
tersections produced. Crowdsourcing annotations
and judgments in this manner has been shown to be
cheap and effective for natural language tasks (Snow
et al., 2008) and has recently been employed in sim-
ilar entailment-detection tasks (Negri and Mehdad,
2010; Buzek et al., 2010). Since we only seek judg-
ments on produced intersections and avoid present-
ing both input sentences to users, we do not antic-
ipate the noisiness that was noted by McKeown et
al. (2010) when asking AMT users to generate in-
tersections.

Each entailment task is framed as a multiple
choice question. An AMT user is shown just one
input sentence (the premise in entailment terminol-
ogy) along with a potential intersection (the hypoth-
esis) and is required to respond to whether there is
any new or different information in the latter that is
not in the former. They can respond on a 3-point
scale (yes/no/maybe) where maybe is clarified to in-
clude ambiguous rewording in the intersection. For
a given intersection instance, the responses9 using
each input sentence as the premise are averaged sep-
arately and then combined10 to give a measure of
how well the intersection is entailed by both sen-
tences.

A second question allows the user to specify the
grammaticality of the intersection on a 4-point scale.
As this measure doesn’t depend on the input sen-
tence presented to the AMT user, all scores provided
are simply averaged per intersection.

9Each instance is presented to 6 AMT users, 3 per premise.
Responses were automatically filtered for spam and removing
the largest outlier from each per-premise or per-intersection
group did not yield a notable change in relative performance.

10We use the harmonic mean for combination, but the results
are largely similar when using an arithmetic mean.

49



Intersection output Fluency Validity
Aligned words (i) Home Secretary John Reid said the inquiry would go. 0.667 0.800

(ii) Home Secretary John Reid said the inquiry would expand. 0.778
Beam search Home Secretary John Reid said something about the inquiry would move

wherever “the something take it”.
0.389 0.667

Segmented decoder Home Secretary John Reid said the inquiry would change. 0.944 0.909
Aligned words (i) Traces of have been found on the planes. 0.445 1.000

(ii) traces of had been found on the planes. 0.556
Beam search Small traces of some things have been found on the planes. 0.611 0.909
Segmented decoder Small traces of had been found on the planes. 0.500 0.741
Aligned words (i) Prosecutors allege that the accuser the program was molested after aired. 0.167 0.800

(ii) Prosecutors allege that the boy was molested after the program aired. 1.000
Beam search Prosecutors allege that the being, who did something in the program, was

molested after something about aired.
0.400 0.909

Segmented decoder Prosecutors allege that the organism, who did something, was molested
after the program aired.

0.667 0.857

Table 3: Intersections produced for the examples introduced in Table 2 along with judgments from AMT users.

Validity Fluency Har. Mean
Other sentence 0.188 0.945 0.314
Aligned words 0.863 0.563† 0.682†

Beam search 0.729 0.450 0.557
Segmented decoder 0.812† 0.504 0.622
Oracle combination 0.813† 0.575† 0.674†

Table 4: Results of the AMT evaluation described in §5.1.
Statistically insignificant differences within columns are
indicated with †; all other entries are significantly distinct
at p ≤ 0.05.

5.2 Results of AMT evaluation

Table 4 contains the results from this evaluation
over the McKeown et al. (2010) corpus11 and Ta-
ble 3 shows the system-produced intersections cor-
responding to the examples from §3. We report nor-
malized scores of validity and fluency for ease of
comparison, as well as their unweighted harmonic
mean as a crude measure of combined human judg-
ment. In addition to the beam search and segmented
decoders, we report the performance of two upper-
bound systems that present artificial hypothesis sen-
tences to AMT users. Other sentence is simply the
sentence that is not the current premise from the sen-
tence pair; although this is rarely an appropriate in-
tersection in the data, it is useful as a measure of
how well humans judge grammaticality and infor-

11The first 20 sentence pairs of the corpus were examined
when devising abstraction rules and are therefore excluded from
these results.

mation content. Aligned words is the aligned subset
of the premise sentence; this is quite likely to be con-
sidered a valid entailment by AMT users as no new
words are introduced. Although the latter also scores
surprisingly well on fluency, we must note that this
is not an actual intersection solution: the aligned
words displayed to AMT users for a given intersec-
tion instance are different depending on which input
sentence is displayed as the premise.

Turning to the systems under study, we observe
that the ILP-based segmented decoder produces text
that is judged more fluent on average than the beam
search decoder. In order to judge the degree of over-
lap between the two systems, we also report the
performance of a pseudo-hybrid oracle combination
system which assumes the presence of an oracle that
runs both decoders and always chooses the output
intersection that is more grammatical. The improved
performance illustrates that each decoder has its ad-
vantages and that a real hybrid system might yield
improvements over either approach.

5.3 Evaluating Coverage

While validity experiments test whether the pro-
posed intersections contain extraneous or unsup-
ported information, we also need to check whether
the intersections contain all the information that is
shared between the input sentences. This cannot be
factored into a task that involves only one input sen-
tence and therefore cannot be easily accomplished

50



BLEU NIST
Aligned words 0.682 11.10
Beam search 0.726 10.53
Segmented decoder 0.818 11.56

Table 5: Results of the automated evaluation for coverage
of intersections described in §5.3.

without annotators who understand the concept of
intersection.

We instead attempt to utilize the high-quality
human-generated union dataset from McKeown et
al. (2010) in evaluating the coverage of our inter-
section systems. Using the simple absorption law
A ∩ (A ∪ B) = A, we assume that the coverage
of intersection systems can be judged by how well
they can recover an input sentence from human-
generated unions. The resulting outputs are com-
pared to the original input sentences in an MT-
style evaluation under two commonly-used metrics:
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and NIST (Dodding-
ton, 2002).

The results of this automated evaluation are
shown in Table 5. The aligned words system here
always considers words from the union sentence and
can therefore be seen as a baseline system. We ob-
serve that the segmented decoder produces output
that is judged most similar to the input sentences
under BLEU, which measures n-gram overlap, al-
though results under NIST (which gives additional
weight to rarer n-grams) are less conclusive.

6 Discussion

The experimental results indicate that the two sys-
tems we describe, particularly the segmented de-
coder, do a reasonable job of finding valid intersec-
tions with good coverage; however, producing fluent
output remains a challenge. Analysis of the inter-
sections produced leads us to note that the quality
of interleaving paths is the prime obstacle to im-
proving intersection output (cf. Table 3): produc-
ing syntactically-valid textual abstractions to con-
nect text is a challenge that is not met by our sim-
ple rule-based approach. Furthermore, we notice
that the quality of alignment also factors in to this
problem: systems that miss phrases which should
be aligned or systems that mistakenly align faraway
fragments both cause spans of unaligned text that

must be then abstracted over.
We hypothesize that these issues could be tackled

with the use of joint models: a system that aligns
as it decodes could reduce the need for abstrac-
tion over long unaligned spans, although care would
have to be taken to ensure that coverage is main-
tained. Additionally, richer lexical resources such
as wider-coverage ontologies (Snow et al., 2006)
and entailment/paraphrase dictionaries could aid in
improving coverage. Finally, previous work in fu-
sion (Filippova and Strube, 2008b; Filippova and
Strube, 2009) has noted that models based on syntax
outperform techniques that rely solely on LM scores
to determine fluency, and strict intersection appears
to be well-suited for further exploration in this vein.

7 Conclusion

We have examined the text-to-text generation task of
strict sentence intersection, which restricts semantic
variation in the output and necessarily invokes the
problems of generalization and abstraction in addi-
tion to the usual challenge of producing fluent text.
We tackle the task as lattice decoding and discuss
two decoding strategies for producing valid intersec-
tions. In addition, we assume that strict intersec-
tion tasks are best considered as problems of mu-
tual entailment generation and describe evaluation
strategies for this task that make use of both human
judgments as well as automated metrics run over a
related corpus. Experimental results indicate that
these systems are fairly effective at generating valid
intersections and that our novel segmented decoder
strategy outperforms the traditional beam search ap-
proach. Although fluency remains a challenge, we
hypothesize that the use of joint models, syntac-
tic constraints and lexical resources could bring im-
provements.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to the anonymous reviewers
for their helpful feedback. This material is based on
research supported in part by the U.S. National Sci-
ence Foundation (NSF) under IIS-05-34871. Any
opinions, findings and conclusions or recommenda-
tions expressed in this material are those of the au-
thors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
NSF.

51



References

Srinivas Bangalore, Pierre Boullier, Alexis Nasr, Owen
Rambow, and Benoı̂t Sagot. 2009. MICA: a prob-
abilistic dependency parser based on tree insertion
grammars. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL: Short Pa-
pers, pages 185–188.

Roy Bar-Haim, Ido Dagan, Bill Dolan, Lisa Ferro, Danilo
Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, and Idan Szpektor.
2006. The second PASCAL Recognising Textual En-
tailment challenge. In Proceedings of the Second
PASCAL Challenges Workshop on Recognising Tex-
tual Entailment.

Regina Barzilay and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2005. Sen-
tence fusion for multidocument news summarization.
Computational Linguistics, 31(3):297–328.

Jeremy Bensley and Andrew Hickl. 2008. Unsupervised
resource creation for textual inference applications. In
Proceedings of LREC.

Chris Brockett. 2007. Aligning the 2006 RTE cor-
pus. Technical Report MSR-TR-2007-77, Microsoft
Research.

Olivia Buzek, Philip Resnik, and Benjamin B. Bederson.
2010. Error driven paraphrase annotation using me-
chanical turk. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010
Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data
with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, pages 217–221.

James Clarke and Mirella Lapata. 2008. Global infer-
ence for sentence compression: an integer linear pro-
gramming approach. Journal of Artifical Intelligence
Research, 31:399–429, March.

Trevor Cohn and Mirella Lapata. 2009. Sentence com-
pression as tree transduction. Journal of Artificial In-
telligence Research, 34:637–674.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2005. The pascal recognising textual entailment chal-
lenge. In Proceedings of the PASCAL Challenges
Workshop on Recognising Textual Entailment.

Hal Daumé III and Daniel Marcu. 2004. Generic sen-
tence fusion is an ill-defined summarization task. In
Proceedings of the ACL Text Summarization Branches
Out Workshop, pages 96–103.

George Doddington. 2002. Automatic evaluation of ma-
chine translation quality using n-gram co-occurrence
statistics. In Proceedings of HLT, pages 138–145.

Elena Filatova and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 2004.
A formal model for information selection in multi-
sentence text extraction. In Proceedings of COLING,
page 397.

Katja Filippova and Michael Strube. 2008a. Dependency
tree based sentence compression. In Proceedings of
the Fifth International Natural Language Generation
Conference, INLG ’08, pages 25–32.

Katja Filippova and Michael Strube. 2008b. Sentence fu-
sion via dependency graph compression. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP, pages 177–185.

Katja Filippova and Michael Strube. 2009. Tree
linearization in English: improving language model
based approaches. In Proceedings of NAACL, pages
225–228.

Nizar Habash and Bonnie Dorr. 2003. A categorial vari-
ation database for English. In Proceedings of NAACL,
NAACL ’03, pages 17–23.

Hongyan Jing and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2000. Cut
and paste based text summarization. In Proceedings
of NAACL, pages 178–185.

Emiel Krahmer, Erwin Marsi, and Paul van Pelt. 2008.
Query-based sentence fusion is better defined and
leads to more preferred results than generic sentence
fusion. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 193–196.

Bill MacCartney, Michel Galley, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2008. A phrase-based alignment model
for natural language inference. In Proceedings of
EMNLP, pages 802–811.

Thomas L. Magnanti and Laurence A. Wolsey. 1994.
Optimal trees. In Technical Report 290-94,
Massechusetts Institute of Technology, Operations Re-
search Center.

Erwin Marsi and Emiel Krahmer. 2005. Explorations
in sentence fusion. In Proceedings of the European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages
109–117.

Erwin Marsi, Emiel Krahmer, Iris Hendrickx, and Wal-
ter Daelemans. 2010. On the limits of sentence
compression by deletion. In Emiel Krahmer and
Mariët Theune, editors, Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Generation, pages 45–66. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg.

André F. T. Martins, Noah A. Smith, and Eric P. Xing.
2009. Concise integer linear programming formula-
tions for dependency parsing. In Proceedings of ACL-
IJCNLP, pages 342–350.

Ryan McDonald. 2006. Discriminative sentence com-
pression with soft syntactic evidence. In Proceedings
of EACL, pages 297–304.

Kathleen McKeown, Sara Rosenthal, Kapil Thadani, and
Coleman Moore. 2010. Time-efficient creation of an
accurate sentence fusion corpus. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT.

George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database
for english. Communications of the ACM, 38:39–41,
November.

Matteo Negri and Yashar Mehdad. 2010. Creating a
bi-lingual entailment corpus through translations with
mechanical turk: $100 for a 10-day rush. In Proceed-
ings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating

52



Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s Mechani-
cal Turk, pages 212–216.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 29:19–51, March.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evalu-
ation of machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL,
ACL ’02, pages 311–318, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Rion Snow, Daniel Jurafsky, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2006.
Semantic taxonomy induction from heterogenous evi-
dence. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 801–808.

Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and An-
drew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast—but is it good?:
evaluating non-expert annotations for natural language
tasks. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 254–263.

Radu Soricut and Daniel Marcu. 2006. Stochastic lan-
guage generation using widl-expressions and its appli-
cation in machine translation and summarization. In
Proceedings of ACL, pages 1105–1112.

Kapil Thadani and Kathleen McKeown. 2008. A frame-
work for identifying textual redundancy. In Proceed-
ings of COLING, pages 873–880.

Kapil Thadani and Kathleen McKeown. 2011. Optimal
and syntactically-informed decoding for monolingual
phrase-based alignment. In Proceedings of ACL.

Jenine Turner and Eugene Charniak. 2005. Supervised
and unsupervised learning for sentence compression.
In Proceedings of ACL, pages 290–297.

Kristian Woodsend, Yansong Feng, and Mirella Lapata.
2010. Title generation with quasi-synchronous gram-
mar. In Proceedings of EMNLP, EMNLP ’10, pages
513–523.

53


