




















Evaluating the speech quality of the Norwegian synthetic voice Brage 

 
 

Marius Olaussen 
Norwegian Library of Talking Books and Braille 

Oslo, Norway 
marius.olaussen@nlb.no 

 
  

 

Abstract 

 

This document describes the method, results 
and conclusions from my master’s thesis in 
Nordic studies. My aim was to assess the 
speech quality of the Norwegian Filibuster 
text-to-speech system with the synthetic voice 
Brage. The assessment was carried out with a 
survey and an intelligibility test at phoneme, 
word and sentence level. The evaluation crite-
ria used in the study were intelligibility, natu-
ralness, likeability, acceptance and suitability. 

1 Introduction 
1.1 Background 
Visually impaired and print disabled students in 
higher education have a need for adapted litera-
ture. In Norway the Norwegian Library of Talk-
ing Books and Braille (NLB) is responsible for 
such adaptation. Over half of the academic litera-
ture is produced with TTS. All audio books are 
produced as DAISY books. To strengthen the 
services given to students, NLB appropriated a 
million Norwegian kroner by the Ministry of 
Education and Research. The library signed col-
laboration with the Swedish Library of Talking 
Books and Braille (TPB) to adjust their TTS sys-
tem Filibuster to Norwegian Bokmål. Bokmål is 
one of the two written varieties of Norwegian. 
The second variety is Nynorsk. In late 2009, the 
Norwegian synthetic voice Brage was launched. 

1.2 The present study 
The aim of this study was to evaluate the speech 
quality of Brage with respect to the suitability to 
impart academic literature. No similar studies 
regarding evaluation of synthetic speech quality 
have previously been carried out in Norway. 
Four research questions were formulated: 

1. How do visually impaired and print dis-
abled students experience the speech 
quality of Brage assessed by key criteria 
given in evaluation methodology? 

2. How intelligible is Brage compared to 
other Norwegian synthetic voices? 

3. How suitable does Brage seem to be as 
an imparter of academic literature? 

4. How should Filibuster with Brage fur-
ther develop? 

2 Brief description of Filibuster TTS 
TPB needed a TTS system especially trained for 
processing textual challenges distinctive of aca-
demic texts. In 2007, the Filibuster TTS system 
was implemented in production with the first 
Swedish voice Folke. The system is based on 
concatenation with unit selection. 

The Norwegian Filibuster system uses a pro-
nunciation dictionary of somewhat 780,000 en-
tries from The Norwegian language resource col-
lection. All entries are transcribed in SAMPA 
(Wells, 2005). The speech database was recorded 
at NLB with a manuscript of 15,604 Norwegian 
utterances created from a text corpus consisting 
of 10.8 million words from academic literature, 
newspapers, magazines and official Norwegian 
reports (Sjölander and Tånnander, 2009). In ad-
dition, an English manuscript of approximately 
1,150 English utterances from the CMU ARC-
TIC database was used (Kominek and Black, 
2003). 15 xenophones were applied. 

3 Methodology 
3.1 A survey 
A survey was carried out with a questionnaire 
designed with the recommendations of the ITU-T 
evaluation method (Jekosch, 2005). This is a use-
ful method to operationalise key evaluation crite-
ria such as intelligibility, naturalness, likeability, 
acceptance and suitability. 

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 336–339



3.2 An intelligibility test 
The SUS test (Semantically Unpredictable Sen-
tences) was adopted to perform an intelligibility 
test supplementary to the survey. The SUS test is 
primarily a sentence level intelligibility test (Be-
noît, Grice and Hazan, 1995), but has also been 
applied at word level (Boula de Mareüil et al., 
2006). In this study the SUS test was applied at 
phoneme, word and sentence level to compare 
Brage to two other Norwegian synthetic voices, 
which respondents in the survey stated as their 
favourites: Kari (Acapela Group) and Stine (Nu-
ance). Like Brage, both of these voices are based 
on concatenation with unit selection. One of the 
reasons for choosing the SUS test over other in-
telligibility tests is the removal of semantic in-
formation. Thus the informants cannot use con-
textual cues to guess the right words. 

The SUS sentences are generated with five 
syntactic structures (intransitive, transitive, im-
perative, interrogative and relative) limited by a 
set of syntactic and lexical constraints. The test 
material mainly consists of high frequent mono-
syllabic words. The test designers developed 
SUS generator software, but since the software 
wasn’t supported by later OSs, I decided to de-
velop a new one, in addition to a frequency and 
part of speech list generator. The monosyllabic 
frequency lists were based upon all books pro-
duced with Brage in the course of one year. All 
software and both audio and textual test material 
used in this study are available for download at 
www.teksttiltale.no. 
3.3 Informants 
19 visually impaired and 34 other print disabled 
Norwegian students in higher education partici-
pated in the survey. Most of the students had lit-
tle experience with TTS (57 % stated they had 
used TTS for less than a year). In the SUS test, 
18 informants participated. To avoid biased re-
sults that might not correlate to the actual intelli-
gibility, none of the informants were registered 
as patrons at NLB nor were print disabled. 

4 Account of results and discussion 
4.1 The SUS test 
In the SUS test, Brage received on the average 
higher scores than Kari and Stine. The sentences 
were distributed in such a way that six infor-
mants heard the same sentence with the same 
TTS. Of a total of 60 sentences all six informants 
reiterated 26 sentences correctly with Brage, 

compared to 10 sentences with Kari and 7 sen-
tences with Stine. At word level Stine scored 330 
of a total of 408 possible points (8 % less than 
Kari and 14 % less than Brage). Table 1 shows 
the distribution of scores at phoneme level. 
 

Phonemes Brage Kari Stine 
All vowels 0.9926 0.9558 0.8949 
- Front 0.9912 0.9561 0.8972 
- Central 0.9947 0.9520 0.9173 
- Back 0.9938 0.9604 0.8521 
All diphthongs 0.9872 0.9872 0.8077 
All consonants 0.9777 0.9578 0.9225 
- Bilabials 0.9841 0.9722 0.8948 
- Labiodentals 0.9773 0.9621 0.9343 
- Dentals, alveolars, postalveolars 0.9761 0.9558 0.9279 
- Retroflexes 0.9889 0.9889 0.9333 
- Palatals 0.9849 0.9697 0.9242 
- Velars 0.9762 0.9544 0.9028 
- Glottals 1.0000 0.9028 0.9306 

Table 1: The SUS test results at phoneme level 
 
A unique feature of the voice quality of Brage, 
distinguishing this voice from other Norwegian 
synthetic voices, is the reading speed. To demon-
strate this, I carried out a comparison test with 
eight other Norwegian voices. The test results 
showed that Brage reads 27 % slower than the 
average. Kari reads 5 % faster than the average 
and Stine reads 13 % faster. Since Brage on av-
erage scored higher than Kari and Stine in the 
SUS test, there seems to be a correlation between 
reading speed and the ability to define word 
boundaries. Findings indicated that determiners 
and conjunctions play a role in the intelligibility 
at sentence level. For instance, there were fewer 
incorrect reiterations of articles recorded with 
Brage (3 %), compared to Kari (8 %) and Stine 
(13 %). Such a possible correlation has also been 
pointed out in previous studies (Neovius and 
Raghavendra, 1993). 

4.2 The survey 

4.2.1 Intelligibility 
The findings in the SUS test are to be understood 
as an indication of the overall intelligibility. The 
user experienced intelligibility seemed, however, 
to correlate to the findings of the SUS test; 81 % 
of the respondents in the survey stated Brage 
generally had either an intelligible or quite intel-
ligible articulation. The user experienced intelli-
gibility appeared to be closely related to how 
well the respondents thought Brage handled aca-
demic terminology within their branch of study. 
Respondents who studied law, political sciences, 
economic sciences and business and manage-
ment found that Brage did not impart terminol-

337

Evaluating the speech quality of the Norwegian synthetic voice Brage

337



ogy in their curriculum in any acceptable man-
ner. 

When it comes to Norwegian Nynorsk, 75 % 
of the students stated their curriculum didn’t con-
tain elements of Nynorsk. However, despite a 
low coverage of Nynorsk entries in the pronun-
ciation dictionary (0.2 %), 21 % of the students 
found that Brage handled Nynorsk either well or 
quite well. To some extent this also applied to 
English; about half of the respondents (54 %) 
considered the English pronunciation to be good. 

Furthermore, a correlation between experience 
and speech perception was observed. Among the 
respondents who considered the overall articula-
tion of Brage to be either unintelligible or quite 
unintelligible (20 %), 82 % stated that they had 
been using a Norwegian TTS for less than three 
years or not at all. Similar observations have also 
been made in previous studies (Francis, Nus-
baum and Fenn, 2007). 

Addressing particular textual challenges, the 
students stated that Brage did not process digits 
and numeral phrases, homographs and foreign 
proper names in a satisfactory manner. 

4.2.2 Naturalness 
57 % of the respondents liked the voice of Brage 
either well or quite well. Respondents who liked 
it less or not at all also report they had less ex-
perience with speech synthesis. Although many 
liked the voice itself, 45 % of the respondents 
thought Brage was unnatural or quite unnatural. 
None of these students, however, had used 
speech synthesis for more than six years. In 
comparison, none of the respondents who had 
used a Norwegian speech synthesis for seven 
years or more believed Brage to be unnatural. 

86 % of the students stated it was important or 
quite important that synthetic speech resembles 
human speech to a technologically possible ex-
tent. Nonetheless, 6 % reported that it didn’t mat-
ter at all. Interestingly, 8 % preferred synthetic 
speech to human, particularly justifying this with 
the shorter production time, the potential of lar-
ger quantum of academic literature and the direct 
access to the book content electronically. 

Furthermore, 22 % of the respondents found 
the prosody of Brage to be good, while 26 % had 
no remarks at all. Prosodic weaknesses specially 
pointed out concerned stress (15 %), rhythm and 
intonation (24 %) and incorrect reproduction of 
syllables (4 %). 60 % of the respondents who 
thought Brage sounded either unnatural or quite 
unnatural, had remarks concerning prosodic 
characteristics. This indicates the importance of 

prosodic characteristics for the user experienced 
naturalness of a synthetic voice. 

4.2.3 Likeability 
34 % of the students thought it was either pleas-
ant or quite pleasant listing to Brage over time, 
while 30 % stated it was ok, and 36 % found it 
either unpleasant or quite unpleasant. This may 
be due to a number of things. Firstly, the indi-
vidual preferences seemed to vary, particularly 
regarding reading speed. Similar observations 
were done in other evaluation studies (Furui, 
2007). But still there doesn’t seem to have been 
carried out any studies addressing the cause of 
such variation. 

The practise of speech synthesis seemed to 
play a key role in the assessment of user experi-
enced likeability; all the students who did not 
prefer synthetic adaptation (71 %) had been us-
ing Norwegian TTS for less than a year. This 
corroborates the importance of encouraging the 
use of TTS to a larger extent, in order to get posi-
tive user experience (Francis, Nusbaum and 
Fenn, 2007). 

Regarding concentration problems, 83 % 
stated they would strive more to retain focus 
when reading texts adapted with synthetic 
speech, compared to texts adapted with human 
speech. More experienced students seemed to 
exert less than those with less experience. 

4.2.4 Acceptance 
About half of the students (45 %) preferred hu-
man to synthetic speech. Students who reported 
they had more experience, however, showed a 
greater acceptance for such adaptation.  

45 % stated they had good confidence in 
Brage as imparter of academic literature, while 
28 % had some confidence and 26 % little or no 
confidence whatsoever. The lack of confidence 
was justified in particular by user experienced 
intelligibility together with naturalness and like-
ability. It is therefore crucial to improve the in-
telligibility, for instance by finding an effective 
way to ensure that frequent terms in academic 
literature of various branches of study is pro-
nounced correctly. 

5 Conclusions 
5.1 Summary 
Assessment of the suitability to impart academic 
literature should be carried out as a sum of the 
other key evaluation criteria (Jekosch, 2005; 
King, 2007). In this regard, Brage seemed to im-

338

Marius Olaussen

338



part academic literature in an overall acceptable 
manner. 15 respondents preferred Brage over 
other synthetic voices. This is five times as many 
compared to the other voices. It is interesting that 
9 of the 15 respondents preferring Brage, also 
reported that they had only made use of a Nor-
wegian TTS for less than a year. However, only 
4 of these 9 students stated they had knowledge 
of other Norwegian synthesizers. Thus, this 
shouldn’t necessarily be understood as an accep-
tance for Brage, but rather for TTS in general. 

When it comes to characteristics, a unique fea-
ture with Brage is the slow reading pace, which 
would result in distinct word boundaries, but also 
frustration among users preferring to read faster. 

Academic literature spans a wide range of dis-
ciplines. Findings in the study indicate that Brage 
seemed to be less suited to impart texts within 
certain disciplines. Prior to a documented ac-
ceptable degree of coverage of academic termi-
nology, it is recommended to adapt less suited 
academic literature with human speech rather 
than synthetic, until the system has been im-
proved. In the wake of this recommendation, 
tools for mapping out the coverage of the most 
frequent academic terminology within different 
branches of study have recently been developed, 
providing statistical overview of new and miss-
ing entries. A coverage test was carried out with 
a test material of 70 academic books, divided 
between seven different branches of study. Re-
sults from this test showed that the coverage of 
terminology within law (42 %), economic sci-
ences, business and management (38 %), and 
political sciences, was somewhat higher com-
pared to the coverage in academic literature 
within the branches of study which the respon-
dents in the user survey believed Brage imparted 
well or in an acceptable manner. This finding 
seems to indicate that the terminological cover-
age has less impact on how suitable students find 
Brage to be imparting their syllabus than previ-
ously presumed. These tools are presently being 
expanded with automatic phonetic transcription 
and morphological annotation suggestions. 

5.2 Further work 
Any given academic text will almost invariably 
contain words not yet listed in the pronunciation 
dictionary. An intermediate solution to this chal-
lenge could be to develop a spelling feature in 
the DAISY player ensuring the reader access to 
the text. Furthermore, since 45 % of the infor-
mants stated Brage was either unnatural or quite 
unnatural, initiatives to increase the prosody 

should be prioritised. One possible solution is 
phrase splicing (Donovan et al., 1999). 

References  
Benoît, C., Grice, M. and Hazan, V. 1995. The SUS 

test: A method for the assessment of text-to-speech 
synthesis intelligibility using Semantically Unpre-
dictable Sentences. Speech Communication, Vol. 
18, 1996:381-392. 

Boula de Mareüil, P., d’Alessandro, C., Raake, A., 
Bailly, G., Garcia, M-N. and Morel, M. 2006. A 
joint intelligibility evaluation of French text-to-
speech synthesis systems: the EvaSy SUS/ACR 
campaign. Proc. of LREC2006, Genoa, Italy. 

Donovan, R. E., Franz, M., Sorensen, J. S. and Rou-
kos, S. 1999. Phrase Splicing and Variable Substi-
tution using the IBM Trainable Speech Synthesis 
System. Proc. of ICASSP’99, Phoenix, AZ. 

Francis, A. L., Nusbaum, H. C. and Fenn, K. 2007. 
Effects of Training on the Acoustic-Phonetic Rep-
resentation of Synthetic Speech. Journal of Speech, 
Language and Hearing Research, Vol. 50, Nr. 
6:1445-1465. 

Furui, S. 2007. Speech and Speaker Recognition 
Evaluation. In Dybkjær, L., Hemsen, H. and 
Minker, W. 2008. Evaluation of Text and Speech 
Systems. Text, Speech and Language Technology, 
Vo. 37. Springer, New York. 

King, M. 2007. General Principles of User-Oriented 
Evaluation. In Dybkjær, L., Hemsen, H. and 
Minker, W. (ed.). Evaluation of Text and Speech 
Systems. Text, Speech and Language Technology, 
Vol. 37:125-161. Springer, New York. 

Kominek, J. and Black, A. 2003. CMU ARCTIC data-
bases for speech synthesis. Report CMU-LTI-03-
177. Language Technologies Institute. Carnegie 
Mellon University, Pittsburgh. http://festvox.org/ 
cmu_arctic/cmu_arctic_report.pdf. 

Jekosch, U. 2005. Voice and Speech Quality Percep-
tion. Assessment and Evaluation. Springer. Heidel-
berg, Germany. 

Neovius, L. And Raghavendra, P. 1993, Evaluation of 
comprehension of KTH text-to-speech with ‘listen-
ing speed’ paradigm, STL-QPSR, Vol. 34:21-30. 

Sjölander, K. and Tånnander, C. 2009. Adapting the 
Filibuster text-to-speech system for Norwegian 
Bokmål. Proc. of FONETIK 2009. Available at 
http://www.ling.su.se/fon/fonetik_2009/036%20sjo
lander_tannander_fonetik2009.pdf. 

Wells, J. 2005. SAMPA computer readable phonetic 
alphabet. Department of Speech, Hearing and Pho-
netic Sciences, University College London. http:// 
www.phon.ucl.ac.uk/home/sampa/. 

339

Evaluating the speech quality of the Norwegian synthetic voice Brage

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


