










































The RWTH System Combination System for WMT 2011


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 152–158,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

The RWTH System Combination System for WMT 2011

Gregor Leusch, Markus Freitag, and Hermann Ney
RWTH Aachen University

Aachen, Germany
{leusch,freitag,ney}@cs.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract

RWTH participated in the System Combi-
nation task of the Sixth Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine Translation (WMT 2011).

For three language pairs, we combined
6 to 14 systems into a single consen-
sus translation. A three-level meta-
combination scheme combining six dif-
ferent system combination setups with
three different engines was applied on the
French–English language pair. Depend-
ing on the language pair, improvements
versus the best single system are in the
range of +1.9% and +2.5% abs. on
BLEU, and between −1.8% and −2.4%
abs. on TER. Novel techniques compared
with RWTH’s submission to WMT 2010
include two additional system combina-
tion engines, an additional word alignment
technique, meta combination, and addi-
tional optimization techniques.

1 Introduction

RWTH’s main approach to System Combination
(SC) for Machine Translation (MT) is a refined
version of the ROVER approach in Automatic
Speech Recognition (ASR) (Fiscus, 1997), with
additional steps to cope with reordering between
different hypotheses, and to use true casing infor-
mation from the input hypotheses. The basic con-
cept of the approach has been described by Ma-
tusov et al. (2006). Several improvements have
been added later (Matusov et al., 2008). This ap-
proach includes an enhanced alignment and re-
ordering framework. In contrast to existing ap-
proaches (Jayaraman and Lavie, 2005; Rosti et
al., 2007b), the context of the whole corpus rather
than a single sentence is considered in this itera-
tive, unsupervised procedure, yielding a more reli-
able alignment. Majority voting on the generated
lattice is performed using prior weights for each
system as well as other statistical models such

as a special n-gram language model. True cas-
ing is considered a separate step in RWTH’s ap-
proach, which also takes the input hypotheses into
account. The pipeline, and consequently the de-
scription of the main pipeline given in this paper, is
based on our pipeline for WMT 2010 (Leusch and
Ney, 2010), with extensions as described. When
necessary, we denote this pipeline as Align-to-
Lattice, or A2L .

For the French–English task, we used two ad-
ditional system combination engines for the first
time: The first one uses the same alignments as
A2L, but generates lattices in the OpenFST frame-
work (Allauzen et al., 2007). The OpenFST de-
coder (fstshortestpath) is then used to find
the best path (consensus translation) in this lattice.
Analogously, we call this engine A2FST . The sec-
ond additional engine, which we call SCUNC, uses
a TER-based alignment, similar to the approach by
Rosti et al. (2007b). Instead of a lattice rescor-
ing, finding the consensus translation is consid-
ered a per-node classification problem: For each
slot, which one is the “correct” one (i.e. will give
the “best” output)? This approach is inspired by
iROVER (Hillard et al., 2007). Consensus trans-
lations from different settings of these approaches
could then be combined again by an additional ap-
plication of system combination – which we refer
to as meta combination (Rosti et al., 2007a). These
three approaches are described in more detail in
Section 2. In Section 3 we describe how we tuned
the parameters and decisions of our system combi-
nation approaches for WMT 2011. Section 4 then
lists our experimental setup as well as the experi-
mental results we obtained on the WMT 2011 sys-
tem combination track. We conclude this paper in
Section 5.

2 System Combination Algorithm (A2L)
In this section we present the details of our main
system combination method, A2L. The upper part
of Figure 1 gives an overview of the system combi-
nation architecture described in this section. After
preprocessing the MT hypotheses, pairwise align-

152



ments between the hypotheses are calculated. The
hypotheses are then reordered to match the word
order of a selected primary (skeleton) hypothesis.
From this, we create a confusion network (CN)
which we then rescore using system prior weights
and a language model (LM). The single best path
in this CN then constitutes the consensus transla-
tion. The consensus translation is then true cased
and post processed.

2.1 Word Alignment

The main proposed alignment approach is a statis-
tical one. It takes advantage of multiple transla-
tions for a whole corpus to compute a consensus
translation for each sentence in this corpus. It also
takes advantage of the fact that the sentences to be
aligned are in the same language.

For each of the K source sentences in the test
corpus, we select one of its N translations from
different MT systems E,m=1, . . . , N, as the pri-
mary hypothesis. Then we align the secondary hy-
potheses En(n=1, . . . , ; n 6=m) with En to match
the word order in En. Since it is not clear which
hypothesis should be primary, i. e. has the “best”
word order, we let several or all hypothesis play
the role of the primary translation, and align all
pairs of hypotheses (En, Em); n 6= m.

The word alignment is trained in analogy to
the alignment training procedure in statistical MT.
The difference is that the two sentences that have
to be aligned are in the same language. We use the
IBM Model 1 (Brown et al., 1993) and the Hid-
den Markov Model (HMM, (Vogel et al., 1996))
to estimate the alignment model.

The alignment training corpus is created from a
test corpus of effectively N ·(N−1) ·K sentences
translated by the involved MT engines. Model pa-
rameters are trained iteratively using the GIZA++
toolkit (Och and Ney, 2003). The training is per-
formed in the directions Em → En and En →
Em. The final alignments are determined using
a cost matrix C for each sentence pair (Em, En).
Elements of this matrix are the local costs C(j, i)
of aligning a word em,j from Em to a word en,i
from En. Following Matusov et al. (2004), we
compute these local costs by interpolating the
negated logarithms of the state occupation proba-
bilities from the “source-to-target” and “target-to-
source” training of the HMM model.

A different approach that has e.g. been pro-
posed by Rosti et al. (2007b) is the utilization of a
TER alignment (Snover et al., 2006) for this pur-
pose. Because the original TER is insensitive to
small changes in spellings, synonyms etc., it has
been proposed to use more complex variants, e.g.

TERp. For our purposes, we utilized “poor-man’s-
stemming”, i.e. shortening each word to its first
four characters when calculating the TER align-
ment. Since a TER alignment already implies a
reordering between the primary and the secondary
hypothesis, an explicit reordering step is not nec-
essary.

2.2 Word Reordering and Confusion
Network Generation

After reordering each secondary hypothesis Em
and the rows of the corresponding alignment cost
matrix, we determine N − 1 monotone one-to-one
alignments between En as the primary translation
and Em, m = 1, . . . , N ; m 6= n. We then con-
struct the confusion network.

We consider words without a correspondence to
the primary translation (and vice versa) to have a
null alignment with the empty word ε, which will
be transformed to an ε-arc in the corresponding
confusion network.

The N−1 monotone one-to-one alignments can
then be transformed into a confusion network, as
described by Matusov et al. (2008).

2.3 Voting in the Confusion Network (A2L,
A2FST)

Instead of choosing a fixed sentence to define the
word order for the consensus translation, we gen-
erate confusion networks for N possible hypothe-
ses as primary, and unite them into a single lattice.
In our experience, this approach is advantageous
in terms of translation quality compared to a min-
imum Bayes risk primary (Rosti et al., 2007b).

Weighted majority voting on a single confu-
sion network is straightforward and analogous to
ROVER (Fiscus, 1997). We sum up the probabil-
ities of the arcs which are labeled with the same
word and have the same start state and the same
end state.

Compared to A2L, our new A2FST engine al-
lows for a higher number of features for each arc.
Consequently, we add a binary system feature for
each system in addition to the logarithm of the sum
of system weights, as before. The advantage of
these features is that the weights are linear within
a log-linear model, as opposed to be part of a loga-
rithmic sum. Consequently they can later be opti-
mized using techniques designed for linear feature
weights, such as MERT, or MIRA.

2.4 Language Models
The lattice representing a union of several confu-
sion networks can then be directly rescored with
an n-gram language model (LM). When regarding

153



alignment

GIZA++-/
TER- Network 

generation

Weighting
&

Rescoring
& Reordering

Hyp 1

Hyp k

... Consensus
Translation

Creating
Classification

Problem
& Features

Classification
within each

slot

Consensus
Translation

A2L, A2FST

SCUNC

Shortest
Path

Path of
"recognized"

arcs

Figure 1: The system combination architecture.

the lattice as a weighted Finite State Transducer
(FST), this can be regarded (and implemented) as
composition with a LM FST.

In our approach, we train a trigram LM on the
outputs of the systems involved in system combi-
nation. For LM training, we take the system hy-
potheses for the same test corpus for which the
consensus translations are to be produced. Using
this “adapted” LM for lattice rescoring thus gives
bonus to n-grams from the original system hy-
potheses, in most cases from the original phrases.
Presumably, many of these phrases have a correct
word order. Previous experimental results show
that using this LM in rescoring together with a
word penalty notably improves translation quality.
This even results in better translations than using
a “classical” LM trained on a monolingual train-
ing corpus. We attribute this to the fact that most
of the systems we combine already include such
general LMs. Nevertheless, one of the SC systems
we use for the French–English task (IV in Sec-
tion 4.1) uses a filtered fourgram LM trained on
GigaWord and other constrained training data sets
for this WMT tasks as an additional LM.

2.5 Extracting Consensus Translations
To generate our consensus translation, we ex-
tract the single-best path from the rescored lat-
tice, using “classical” decoding as in MT. In A2L,
this is implemented as shortest-path decoder on a
pruned lattice. In A2FST, we use the OpenFST
fstshortestpath decoder, which does not re-
quire a pruning step for lattices of the size and den-
sity produced here.

2.6 Classification in the Confusion Network
(SCUNC)

Instead of considering the selection of the con-
sensus problem as a shortest-path problem in a
rescored confusion network, we can treat it instead
as a classification problem: For each slot (set of
outgoing arcs from one node in a CN), we consider
one or more arcs to be “correct”, and train a clas-

sifier to identify these certain arcs. This is the idea
of the iROVER approach in ASR (Hillard et al.,
2007). We call our implementation System Com-
bination Using N-gram Classifiers, or SCUNC.

For the WMT evaluation, we used the ICSI-
Boost framework (Favre et al., 2007) as classifier
(in binary mode, i.e. giving a yes/no-decision for
each single arc). We generated 109 features from
8 families: Pairwise equality of words from dif-
ferent systems, Number of votes for a word, word
that would win a simple majority voting, empty
word (also in previous two arcs), position at be-
ginning or end of sentence, cross-BLEU-S score
of hypothesis, equality of system with system of
last slot, and SRILM uni- to trigram scores. As
this approach requires strict CN instead of lattices,
a union of CNs for different primary hypotheses
was no longer possible. We decided to select
a fixed single primary system; other approaches
would have been to train an additional classifier
for this purpose, or to select a minimum-Bayes-
risk (MBR) skeleton.

2.7 Consensus True Casing

Previous approaches to achieve true cased output
in system combination operated on true-cased lat-
tices, used a separate input-independent true caser,
or used a general true-cased LM to differentiate
between alternative arcs in the lattice, as described
by Leusch et al. (2009). For WMT 2011, we use
per-sentence information from the input systems
to determine the consensus case of each output
word. Lattice generation, rescoring, and rerank-
ing are performed on lower-cased input, with a
lower-cased consensus hypothesis as their result.
For each word in this hypothesis, we count how
often each casing variant occurs in the input hy-
potheses for this sentence. We then use the vari-
ant with the highest support for the final consensus
output.

154



Table 1: Corpus and Task statistics.

avg. # words #sys
TUNE DEV TEST

FR–EN 15670 11410 49832 25
DE–EN 15508 10878 49395 24
ES–EN 15989 11234 50612 15
# sent 609 394 2000

3 Tuning

3.1 Feature weights
For lattice rescoring, we selected a linear combi-
nation of BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and TER
(Snover et al., 2006) as optimization criterion,
Θ̂ := argmaxΘ {BLEU − TER} for the A2L
engine, based on previous experience (Mauser et
al., 2008). To achieve more stable results, we use
the case-insensitive variants for both measures, de-
spite the explicit use of case information in the
pipeline. System weights were tuned to this cri-
terion using the Downhill Simplex method.

In the A2FST setup, we were able to generate
full lattices, with separate costs for each individual
feature on all arcs (Power Semiring). This allowed
us to run Lattice MERT (Macherey et al., 2008)
on the full lattice, with no need for pruning (and
thus additional outer iterations for re-generating
lattices). We tried different strategies – random
lines vs axis-parallel lines, regularization, random
restarts, etc, and selected the most stable results
on TUNE and DEV for this engine. Optimization
criterion here was BLEU.

3.2 Training a classifier for SCUNC
In MT system combination, even with given refer-
ence translations, there is no simple way to iden-
tify the “correct” arc in a slot. This renders a
classifier-based approach even more difficult than
iROVER in ASR. The problem is even aggravated
because both the alignment of words, and their or-
der, can be incorrect already in the CN. We thus
consider an arc to be “correct” within this task ex-
actly if it gives us the best possible total BLEU-S
score.1 These “correct” arcs, which lie on such an
“oracle path” for BLEU-S, were therefore used as
reference classes when training the classifier.

3.3 System Selection
With the large numbers of input systems – e.g.,
25 for FR–EN – and their large spread in transla-
tion quality – e.g. from 22.2 to 31.4% in BLEU
– not all systems should participate in the system

1We are looking at the sentence level, so we use BLEU-
S (Lin and Och, 2004) instead of BLEU

combination process. This is especially the case
since several of these e.g. 25 systems are often
only small variants of each other (contrastive vs.
primary submissions), which leads to a low vari-
ability of these translations. We considered several
variants of the set of input systems, often starting
from the top, and either replacing some of the sys-
tems very similar to others with systems further
down the list, or not considering those as primary,
adding further systems as additional secondaries.
Depending on the engine we were using, we se-
lected between 6 and 14 different systems as input.

4 Experimental Results

Each language pair in WMT 2011 had its own set
of systems, so we selected and tuned separately for
each language pair . Due to time constraints, we
only participated in tasks with English as the target
language. In preliminary experiments, it turned
out that System Combination was not able to get
a better result than the best single system on the
Czech–English task. Consequently, we focused
on the language pairs French–English, German–
English, and Spanish–English.

We split the available tuning data document-
wise into a 609-line TUNE set (for tuning), and a
394-line DEV set (to verify tuning results). More
statistics on these sets can be found in Table 1.

Unfortunately, late in the evaluation campaign
it turned out that the quality of several reference
sentences used in TUNE and DEV was rather low:
Many reference sentences contained spelling er-
rors, a few dozen lines even contained French
phrases or sentences within or after the English
text. We corrected many of these errors manually
in the references. In total 101 of 690 lines (16.6%)
in TUNE and 58 of 394 lines (14.7%) in DEV
were affected by this. While it was too late to re-
run all of the optimization runs, we re-optimized
at least a few final systems. All scores within this
section were calculated on the corrected reference
translations.

4.1 FR–EN
For French–English, we built in total seven differ-
ent system combination setups to generate a single
consensus translation and two contrastive transla-
tions. Figure 2 shows the structure and the data
flow of our setup for FR–EN. Table 2 lists more
details about the individual engines.

Our primary submission was focused on our ex-
perience that while rule-based MT systems (such
as RBMT-1..5 and systran) tend to have
lower BLEU scores than statistical (SMT) sys-
tems, they usually give considerable improve-

155



II: A2L III: SCUNC IV: A2FST+ GW V: A2L VI: A2FST

cmu-denkowski
cmu-hanneman

cu-zeman
jhu
kit

lia-lig
limsi
lium

online-A
online-B
rwth-huck
systran
udein
rbmt-1
rbmt-2
rbmt-3
rbmt-4
rbmt-5

I: A2L

VII: A2L

primary contrastive 2contrastive 1
Bold arrows denote a system that is always considered as skeleton.
Note that there are two variants of setup II, see text.

Figure 2: System combination pipelines for FR–EN

Table 2: Engines and input systems for FR–EN.

Engine # Input submitted?
I A2L 6 RBMT

II A2L I + 6 primary
II’ A2L fix I + 6 for VII
III SCUNC 6
IV A2FST GW, 8
V A2L 10 contrastive-2

VI A2FST 14
VII A2L II’–VI contrastive-1

“GW” means a 4-gram LM trained on GigaWord.
II uses all skeletons, II’ uses I as fixed skeleton.

Table 3: Results for FR–EN.
TUNE DEV

BLEU TER BLEU TER
kit 31.56 50.15 30.25 52.88

systran 28.18 53.32 26.50 56.07
I 27.37 54.73 26.72 57.73

II 33.69 48.47 32.45 51.09
II’ 33.39 48.77 31.81 51.57
III 32.74 48.06 31.88 50.87
IV 34.16 48.31 31.95 51.64
V 33.17 48.95 32.60 51.14

VI 33.86 48.69 31.56 52.25
VII 34.41 48.20 32.15 51.49

kit is the best single system.
systran is the best single rule-based system.
All scores are case insensitive, and were calculated on the
corrected reference translations.

ments to the latter in a SC setup. Here, though,
the number of such systems was too high to sim-
ply add them to a reasonable set of SMT systems.
Consequently, we first built a SC system (I) com-
bining all RBMT/Systran systems, and then a sec-
ond SC system (II) which combines the output
of I, and 6 SMT systems. As further experi-
ments showed, allowing all hypotheses as primary
(or skeleton) gave significantly better scores than
forcing SC to use the output of I as primary only.
But vice versa, when looking at the meta combi-
nation scheme, VII, using I as primary only (a
setup which we will now denote as II’) gave
measurable improvements in the overall transla-
tion quality. We assume this is due to the similarity
of the output of II with that of the other setups.

Setup III is a SCUNC setup, that is, we built
a single CN for each sentence using poor-man’s-
stemming-TER, with rwth-huck as primary hy-
pothesis. We then generated a large number of fea-
tures for each arc, and trained an ICSIBoost clas-
sifier to recognize the arc (or system) that gave the
best BLEU-S score. This then gave us the consen-
sus translation.

For IV, we built an OpenFST lattice out of eight
systems, and rescored it with both the Hypothe-
sis LM (3-gram), and a 4-gram LM trained on Gi-
gaWord and other WMT constrained training data
for this task. The log-linear weights were trained
using lattice MERT for BLEU. Setup V is a clas-
sical A2L setup, using ten different input systems.
This setup was tuned on BLEU – TER using the
Downhill-Simplex algorithm. In setup VI, again
the A2FST engine was used, this time using the
Hyp LM only, without an additional LM. Tuning

156



Table 4: Results for DE–EN.
TUNE DEV

BLEU TER BLEU TER
online-B 23.13 60.15 26.20 57.20

Primary 24.57 58.51 28.11 54.83
4 best sys 23.85 58.22 27.47 54.96
6 best sys 24.46 57.74 27.82 54.50

online-B is the best single system.

was also performed using lattice MERT towards
BLEU. And finally, setup VII combines the out-
put of II’ to IV using the A2L engine again.

All the results of system combination on TUNE
and DEV are listed in Table 3. It turns out that
with the exception of I, all system combination
approaches were able to achieve a significant im-
provement of at least +1.8% abs. in BLEU com-
pared to the best input system. For I, we need
to keep in mind that all other systems were sev-
eral BLEU points worse than the best one – a sce-
nario where we can expect system combination,
which is based on the consensus translation after
all, to underperform. We also see that both A2FST
and SCUNC, with their large number of features,
show a tendency to overfitting – we see large im-
provements on TUNE, but significantly smaller
improvements on DEV. This tendency is, unfortu-
nately, also the case for meta combination: While
we see an additional +0.3% abs. in BLEU over
the best first-level system combination on TUNE,
this improvement does not reflect in the scores on
DEV: While we still see a +0.2% abs. improve-
ment in BLEU over the setup that performed best
on TUNE, there is even a small deterioration of
−0.4% in BLEU over the setup that performed
best on DEV. Because of this effect, we decided to
submit our meta combination output only as first
contrastive, and the output that performed well
both on TUNE and DEV as our primary submis-
sion for WMT. As second contrastive submission,
we selected the setup that performed best on DEV.

4.2 DE–EN

24 systems were available in the German–English
language pair, but incorporating only 7 of them
turned out to deliver optimal results on DEV. We
ran experiments on several settings of systems,
but only in our tried and tested A2L framework.
We settled for a combination of seven systems
(online-B,cmu-dyer,dfki-xu,limsi,
online-A,rwth-wuebker,kit) as primary
submission. Table 4 also lists two different set-
tings. One setting consists of the four best systems

Table 5: Results for ES–EN.
TUNE DEV

BLEU TER BLEU TER
online-A 30.58 51.69 30.77 51.95

Primary 34.29 48.47 33.41 49.71
Contrastive 34.23 48.27 33.30 49.51

online-A is the best single system.

(online-B,cmu-dyer,rwth-wuebker,
kit) and the other setting contains the six best
systems (online-B,cmu-dyer,dfki-xu,
rwth-wuebker,online-A,kit). When we
added more systems to system combination, we
lost performance in both TUNE and DEV.

4.3 ES–EN
For Spanish–English, we tried several settings
of systems. We sticked to our tried and tested
A2L framework. We settled for a combination
of six systems (alacant,koc,online-A,
online-B,rbmt-1,systran) as contrastive
submission, and a combination of ten systems
(+rbmt-2,rbmt-3,rbmt-4,udein) as pri-
mary submission. Table 5 lists the results for this
task. The difference between our primary setup
(10 systems) and our contrastive setup (6 systems)
is rather small, less than 0.1% abs. in BLEU. Nev-
ertheless, we see significant improvements over
the best single system of +2.4% abs. in BLEU,
and −2.2% in TER.

5 Conclusions
We have shown that our system combination ap-
proach leads to significant improvements over sin-
gle best MT output where a significant number of
comparably good translations is available on a sin-
gle language pair. A meta combination can give
additional improvement, but can be sensitive to
overfitting; so in some cases, using one of its in-
put system combination hypothesis may be a bet-
ter choice. In any way, both of our new engines
have shown that they can compete with our present
approach, so we hope to make good use of the new
possibilities they may offer.

Acknowledgments
This work was partly realized as part of the
Quaero Programme, funded by OSEO, French
State agency for innovation. This work was
partly supported by the Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency (DARPA) under Contract
No. HR0011-06-C-0023.

157



References
C. Allauzen, M. Riley, J. Schalkwyk, W. Skut, and

M. Mohri. 2007. OpenFst: A general and efficient
weighted finite-state transducer library. In Proc. of
the Twelfth International Conference on Implemen-
tation and Application of Automata (CIAA), volume
4783 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
11–23. Springer.

P. F. Brown, S. A. Della Pietra, V. J. Della Pietra, and
R. L. Mercer. 1993. The mathematics of statistical
machine translation: parameter estimation. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 19(2):263–311, June.

B. Favre, D. Hakkani-Tür, and S. Cuendet. 2007.
Icsiboost. http://code.google.come/p/
icsiboost.

J. Fiscus. 1997. A post-processing system to yield re-
duced word error rates: Recognizer output voting er-
ror reduction (ROVER). In IEEE Workshop on Au-
tomatic Speech Recognition and Understanding.

D. Hillard, B. Hoffmeister, M. Ostendorf, R. Schlüter,
and H. Ney. 2007. iROVER: improving sys-
tem combination with classification. In Human
Language Technologies 2007: The Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics; Companion Volume,
Short Papers, NAACL-Short ’07, pages 65–68. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

S. Jayaraman and A. Lavie. 2005. Multi-engine ma-
chine translation guided by explicit word matching.
In Proc. of the 10th Annual Conf. of the European
Association for Machine Translation (EAMT), pages
143–152, Budapest, Hungary, May.

G. Leusch and H. Ney. 2010. The rwth system com-
bination system for wmt 2010. In ACL 2010 Joint
Fifth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
and Metrics MATR, pages 315–320, Uppsala, Swe-
den, July.

G. Leusch, E. Matusov, and H. Ney. 2009. The
RWTH system combination system for WMT 2009.
In Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, pages 56–60, Athens, Greece, March. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

C. Y. Lin and F. J. Och. 2004. Orange: a method for
evaluation automatic evaluation metrics for machine
translation. In Proc. COLING 2004, pages 501–507,
Geneva, Switzerland, August.

W. Macherey, F. Och, I. Thayer, and J. Uszkoreit.
2008. Lattice-based minimum error rate training for
statistical machine translation. In Proc. of the 2008
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP), pages 725–734. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

E. Matusov, R. Zens, and H. Ney. 2004. Symmetric
word alignments for statistical machine translation.

In COLING ’04: The 20th Int. Conf. on Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 219–225, Geneva, Switzer-
land, August.

E. Matusov, N. Ueffing, and H. Ney. 2006. Computing
consensus translation from multiple machine trans-
lation systems using enhanced hypotheses align-
ment. In Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL),
pages 33–40, Trento, Italy, April.

E. Matusov, G. Leusch, R. E. Banchs, N. Bertoldi,
D. Dechelotte, M. Federico, M. Kolss, Y. S. Lee,
J. B. Marino, M. Paulik, S. Roukos, H. Schwenk,
and H. Ney. 2008. System combination for machine
translation of spoken and written language. IEEE
Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Pro-
cessing, 16(7):1222–1237, September.

A. Mauser, S. Hasan, and H. Ney. 2008. Automatic
evaluation measures for statistical machine transla-
tion system optimization. In International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation, Mar-
rakech, Morocco, May.

F. J. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A systematic comparison
of various statistical alignment models. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 29(1):19–51, March.

K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W. J. Zhu. 2002.
BLEU: a Method for Automatic Evaluation of Ma-
chine Translation. In Proc. of the 40th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), pages 311–318, Philadelphia, PA, July.

A. V. Rosti, N. F. Ayan, B. Xiang, S. Matsoukas, R. M.
Schwartz, and B. J. Dorr. 2007a. Combining out-
puts from multiple machine translation systems. In
HLT-NAACL’07, pages 228–235.

A. V. Rosti, S. Matsoukas, and R. Schwartz. 2007b.
Improved word-level system combination for ma-
chine translation. In Proc. of the 45th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association of Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL), pages 312–319, Prague, Czech Republic,
June.

M. Snover, B. Dorr, R. Schwartz, L. Micciulla, and
J. Makhoul. 2006. A Study of Translation Error
Rate with Targeted Human Annotation. In Proc. of
the 7th Conf. of the Association for Machine Trans-
lation in the Americas (AMTA), pages 223–231,
Boston, MA, August.

S. Vogel, H. Ney, and C. Tillmann. 1996. HMM-
based word alignment in statistical translation. In
COLING ’96: The 16th Int. Conf. on Computational
Linguistics, pages 836–841, Copenhagen, Denmark,
August.

158


