










































Stepwise Mining of Multi-Word Expressions in Hindi


Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from Parsing and Generation to the Real World (MWE 2011), pages 110–115,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 23 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Stepwise Mining of Multi-Word Expressions in Hindi  

R. Mahesh K. Sinha 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India

sinharmk@gmail.com 
 

Abstract 

Multi-word expressions (MWEs) play an 
important role in all tasks that involve natu-
ral language processing. MWEs in Hindi 
are quite varied and many of these are of 
the types that are not encountered in Eng-
lish. In this paper, we examine different 
types of MWEs encountered in Hindi. 
Many of these have not received adequate 
attention of investigators. For example, 
‘vaalaa’ constructs, doublets (word-pairs), 
replication, and a variety of verb group 
forms have not been explored as MWEs. 
We examine these MWEs from machine 
translation viewpoint. Many of these are 
frequently used in day-to-day conversa-
tions and informal communication but are 
not that frequently encountered in a formal 
textual corpus. Most of the conventional 
statistical methods for MWE identification 
use corpus with limited linguistic cues. 
These are found to be inadequate for de-
tecting all types of MWEs that exist in real 
life. In this paper, we present a stepwise 
methodology for mining Hindi MWEs us-
ing linguistic knowledge. Interpretation and 
representation for some of these from ma-
chine translation perspective have also 
been explored. 

1 Introduction 
The identification and interpretation of multi-word 
expressions (MWEs) find application in almost all 
NLP tasks such as machine translation, informa-
tion retrieval, question-answering etc. These are 
particularly helpful in parsing where the sequence 
of words forming the MWE is treated as a single 
word with a single part of speech (POS) tag. MWE 
information has been used for word alignment task 
(Venkatapathy et al., 2006). This is useful to lex-
icographers for deciding entry into the dictionary. 

MWEs in Hindi are quite varied and many of 
these are of the types that are not encountered in 
English. No comprehensive work has been re-
ported on Hindi MWE.  In the following section a 
brief survey of related work is given. This is fol-
lowed by a section on types of Hindi MWEs. As-
pects of MWE identification, extraction and 
interpretation for Hindi are presented in section 4.  
Section 5 presents details of experimentation with 
results and section 6 concludes our investigation.  

2 Related work 
Baldwin et al. (2010) is an excellent review cover-
ing almost all aspects of MWEs. MWEs are cha-
racterized by non-compositionality, non-
substitutability and non-modifiability (Brundage et 
al. 1992). Another definition of MWE is that it is 
‘any phrase that is not entirely predictable on the 
basis  of   standard  grammar rules  and  lexical 
entries’ (http://mwe.stanford.edu/reading-group.html). 
The design of a general purpose automated MWE 
extractor is dominated by using association meas-
ures such as point-wise mutual information and 
other statistical hypothesis tests (Church et al. 
1990; Smadja 1993; Pecina 2008). Superior results 
have been reported when a supervised classifier is 
used with multiple association measures (Pecina 
2008). The association measure is extended to in-
clude substitution to test semantic and statistical 
idiomaticity (Lin 1999). Moiron et al. (2006) use 
translation ambiguity to determine non-
compositionality of MWEs.  

For Hindi, there have been limited investigations 
on MWE extraction. Venkatapathy et al. (2005) 
considered N-V collocation extraction problem 
using MaxEnt classifier with certain syntactic and 
semantic features. Mukerjee et al. (2006) used POS 
projection from English to Hindi with corpus 
alignment for extracting complex predicates. Cha-
krabarti et al. (2008) present a method for extract-
ing Hindi V+V compound verbs using linguistic 
features.  Kunchukuttan et al. (2008) present a me-
thod for extracting compound nouns in Hindi using 

110



statistical co-occurrence. Sinha (2009b) use lin-
guistic property of light verbs in extracting com-
plex predicates using Hindi-English parallel 
corpus. All of these works have considered only 
limited aspects of Hindi MWE. In this paper, we 
have  considered almost all types of MWEs in 
Hindi  and present method for their identification 
using linguistic features. 

3 Types of MWEs in Hindi 
Multi-word expressions appear in a variety of 
forms in Hindi.  The  primary  criterion used in 
defining a MWE in this work is non-
compositionality i.e. the meaning of MWE is not 
composed purely on the meanings of the constitu-
ent words (Baldin et al. 2002). From machine 
translation perspective, non-compositionality is of 
primary concern. In the following subsections, we 
enumerate different types of MWEs in Hindi. 

3.1 Replicating words 
All South Asian languages have replicating word 
feature (Abbi 1975, Abbi 1992) that exhibit non-
compositionality property of MWE. This is found 
for all parts of speech. Some examples from Hindi 
(Sinha et. al. 2005) are: ghar ghar {house house}  
‘every house’ ; ruk ruk {stop stop}‘after stopping’;  
baRii baRii {big big}  ‘quite big’; ek ek {one one}; 
‘every one’  or ‘one by one’; dhiire dhiire {slow 
slow} ‘(quite) slowly’ or ‘gradually’; Replicating 
words may also have a particle in between and the 
meaning changes. Example: paani hi paani  (water 
only water) ‘water all over’. Another class of 
MWE is where the replicating word is in singular 
form of the preceding word. An example is: dinon-
din (days-day) ‘day by day’ or ‘gradually’. 

It should be noted here that not all replications 
make an MWE (see section 4). 

3.2 Doublets / pair of words,  Samaas and 
Sandhi 

A pair of words that are antonym of each other 
may form an MWE. Example: din-raat (day night) 
‘all the time’.  Yet another class is where the mean-
ing of the doublet is usually a hyponym or a near 
synonym of the pair of the words. Example: roji-
roti (job bread) ‘employment’.  When there is a 
change of gender in the pair of words, it may 
represent a group. Example: betaa-betii (son daugh-
ter) ‘issues’. When the second word in the pair of 

words is a non-sensical word providing rhythm to 
the group, the meaning is hyponym of the preced-
ing word. Examples: chaay-vaaya  {tea vaaya} 
‘snacks’; taix-viax {tax viax} ‘tax etc’. 

Samaas (N+N, A+N) and Sandhi (means joining 
or fusion of words) are Hindi grammatical con-
structs at the morphological level and are borrowed 
concepts from Sanskrit. In Samaas, while combin-
ing the two words, the intervening postposition 
markers are deleted.  Samaas are of different kinds 
depending upon the semantics of the constituent 
words involved and their importance (head word) 
in the resulting combined word. Examples: rasoi 
(cooking) +ghar(house) = rasoighar (house for 
cooking = kitchen); ganga (Ganges)+jal(water) = 
gangajal (water from Ganges). Sandhi is a process 
by which two words in Hindi get co-joined to yield 
a single word. This process could be recursively 
applied and quite complex compositions with mul-
tiple words are possible. The words formed by the 
process of Sandhi and some of the Samaas, result 
in a single word and as such cannot be called an 
MWE. However, they are very large in number in 
Hindi with innumerable combination of words. It is 
not practical to store all of them in a dictionary. 
Hence algorithms are designed to decompose the 
word into constituent words for interpretation. 
Thus, in a sense, it is the reverse process of MWE. 

3.3 Vaalaa morpheme constructs 
The ‘vaalaa’ Hindi morpheme may appear in 

different morphological forms as ‘vaalaa’, ‘vaalii’, 
‘vaale’ or ‘vaalo.M’. All the constructs involving 
‘vaalaa’ are candidates for MWE. The multi-word 
may involve just the preceding word or both pre-
ceding and following words. The morpheme ‘vaa-
laa’ as such has no meaning. Examples (Sinha 
2009a): jaane vaalaa (go vaalaa) ‘about to go’; 
doodh vaalii balti (milk vaalii bucket) ‘bucket 
filled with milk’; lohe vaalii balti (iron vaalii 
bucket) ‘bucket made of iron’; dilli vaalii gaadii 
(Delhi vaalii train) ‘train to/from Delhi’; nahaane 
vaalaa sabun (bathe vaalaa soap) ‘soap used for 
bathing’; sabzii vaalaa (vegetable vaalaa) ‘vegeta-
ble seller’.  

3.4 Complex and Compound Verbs  
The complex predicates and compound verb forms 
as MWEs have been widely studied (Hook, 1974; 
Abbi, 1992; Mohanan, 1994; Butt, 1995; Venkata-

111



pathy et.al., 2005; Mukerjee et. al., 2006; Chakra-
barti et. al., 2008; Sinha 2009b). A complex predi-
cate is a multi-word expression (MWE) where a 
noun, a verb or an adjective is followed by a light 
verb (LV) and the MWE behaves as a single verb 
unit.  LV (Sinha 2009b) can also be a main verb. A 
compound verb form has the main verb in its 
root/stem form followed by conjugated light verbs. 
In Hindi compound verbs, the primary mean-
ing of the light/helping verbs are often com-
pletely lost and may lead to a different 
semantic interpretation or result in affecting 
tense, aspect and modality of the compound 
verb. A few illustrative examples (light verbs are 
shown underlined): daan denaa (donation give) ‘to 
donate’; mukka maaranaa (fist kill/beat) ‘to 
punch’; mukka de maaranaa (fist give kill/beat) ‘to 
blow punch’; mukka maaraa gaya (fist kill/beat 
went) ‘was punched’; mukka maaraa gaya thaa 
(fist kill/beat went was) ‘had been punched’; muk-
ka maaraa jaa rahaa thaa (fist kill/beat go contin-
ue was) ‘was being punched’; mukka paRaa (fist 
lie)‘got punched ’; ruka jaao (stop go) ‘stop’; aa 
jaao (come go) ‘come’; galati kara baiThanaa 
(mistake do sit); ‘commit mistake (unintentional)’. 

There are innumerable numbers of such MWEs 
in Hindi. However not all verb forms are MWEs. 

3.5 Acronyms and Abbreviations  
The acronyms and abbreviations in Hindi differ 
from their English counterparts. For example, the 
name ‘Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi’ may be 
abbreviated as ‘ma. ka. gaandhii’ (taking the first 
letter) or ‘mo. ka. gaandhii’ (taking the first letter 
with associated vowel modifier) or  ‘ema. ke. 
gaandhii’ (taking the English alphabet letter). Si-
milarly, the Hindi acronym for  ‘Bharatiya  Janata  
Party’ could  be  ‘bee.   je.   pii.’  (first English 
characters with dots)  or  ‘beejepii.’ (first English 
characters with no dots) or  ‘bhaa. ja. paa.’ (first 
Hindi character with associated vowel modifier 
with dots) or ‘bhaajapaa’ (first Hindi character 
with  associated  vowel modifier with no dots). 
Although acronyms without dots are single words 
but they represent MWEs.  

3.6 MWEs with foreign words and terms 
It is often a common practice to mix foreign words 
and terms in day-to-today conversation in Hindi 
(Sinha et al. 2005b). Sometimes there are morpho-

logical variations to these as per Hindi grammar. 
These may appear as MWEs with arbitrary combi-
nations.  Some of these are institutionalized 
MWEs. Examples: skilda (skilled)  mainegaron 
(managers);  spektram  (spectrum)  laaiisenson 
(licenses).  Here,  the words  mainegaron and 
laaiisenson  are plural forms of the transliterated 
English words ‘manager’ and ‘license’ respective-
ly, but the morphological changes are as per the 
Hindi pluralization rule. Since the foreign root 
word may undergo morphological variation as per 
Hindi grammar or may retain its English form, a 
cross morphological analysis is required to be done 
to extract the root word. Further, the transliteration 
of  foreign  word  has  a  number  of  phonetic   
variations which needs to be considered before a 
look up into the English dictionary is performed. 
This class of MWE is not focused in this study. 

4 Identification, extraction and interpre-
tation of MWEs in Hindi 

In this paper, we have considered only those 
MWEs that are particularly applicable to Hindi. 
The general characteristics of these MWEs have 
been outlined in the preceding section. We use 
these very characteristics in extracting the MWEs 
from the corpus. The extraction of MWEs that are 
more generally based on collocation and co-
occurrence, require exhaustive and representative 
corpus to succeed which is not available for Hindi.  

For identifying MWEs, we use multiple strate-
gies and resources depending upon the class of the 
MWEs. The process of identification is semi-
automatic. The automatic process generates the 
probable MWEs and then filtered manually. In fu-
ture, the process can be fully automated using this 
tagged   data   through   machine   learning.  A  
monolingual  corpus   and  a  lexical  database (dic-
tionary) are used in all the cases. In addition, a bi-
lingual English-Hindi corpus and a Hindi wordnet 
are used for identifying some. We attempt to pro-
vide limited interpretation for some of these. Our 
method is mostly based on linguistic knowledge. 
We also show how these interpretations are engi-
neered for a machine translation task by making 
appropriate substitutions in the source text.  

For identification, there is a preferred order in 
which we mine them as it helps in further 
processing.  At a broad level, the processes are: 
sentence boundary identification; POS tagging; 

112



morphological analysis; identification of acronym 
and abbreviation with dots; Hindi chunker and 
verb-phrase form separation; identification of rep-
licating class; identification of doublet class; iden-
tification of vaalaa morpheme construct class; 
complex predicates and compound verb identifica-
tion; identification of acronym (with no dots); and 
identification of named-entities. 

After the sentence boundary identification, POS 
tagging and the morphological analysis, the identi-
fication of acronyms and abbreviations that have 
dots associated with them, is carried out using a 
rule base. Next, chunking is performed. Chunking 
is a process of performing shallow parsing of the 
sentence where the words having affinity with each 
other at a syntactic level are grouped together. An 
example (chunks are shown within curly paren-
theses and English equivalent is enclosed within 
parentheses):{bhagawaan raam ke haathon}(by 
Lord Ram) {mahaabalii raavana}(mighty Ravan) 
{yuddha bhoomi men}(in battlefield) {maara daa-
laa gayaa thaa}(had been killed). In chunking, 
firstly the verb group is identified. Since Hindi is a 
verb ending language, a finite state machine (FSM) 
is designed which starts scanning the words from 
the rear end (right to left) for possible inclusion in 
the  verb  group based on the POS tag and the 
morphemes (Gune et al. 2010) of the words. A 
Hindi complex verb group may consist of auxilia-
ries, light verbs, predicate verbs and intensifiers 
besides the main verb. Such verb groups make an 
MWE because of its non-compositionality. In the 
above example, the last chunk which is the verb 
group chunk, is reproduced with meanings:{maara 
(kill) daalaa (put) gayaa (went) thaa (was)} (had 
been killed).  Here  main  verb is maara (kill),  
daalaa (put) is a light verb making maara daalaa a 
predicate verb,  gayaa (went) is an intensifier and  
thaa (was) is an auxiliary verb. The sequence of 
words that constitute the verb group could be quite 
long and is usually delimited by a postposition, a 
punctuation mark or a noun that does not form part 
of a predicate verb.  

Identification of replicating words with a space, 
hyphen or a particle in between, and with plural-
singular combination are searched within a chunk 
as identified in the earlier stage. The chunker 
creates  a  surface  linear parse structure for the 
sentence and so is useful in eliminating false 
groupings of the replicating words. Replicating 
words (exact match) with a hyphen in between are 

definite MWEs while those without hyphen may 
not be so. In general, their identification and inter-
pretation depends upon the associated POS and 
semantic role.  Given below is an example rule 
(Sinha et al. 2005a) : 
   If the replicative verb has a suffix –te and the  

main verb is of the ‘resultive:psych’ type  
then <verb_x-te><verb_x-te> => 
    due to|of  <verb_x>+ing  
This rule when applied to the Hindi sentence, 

vah daurate daurate thak gayaa (he run run tire 
went), yields the interpretation as ‘He got tired of 
running’. For machine translation, the replicating 
words ‘daurate daurate’ is substituted by a dummy 
variable (say ‘dv1’) with POS as an adverb and its 
value will be stored as ‘of running’. The Hindi sen-
tence is modified to ‘vah dv1  thak gayaa‘ for ma-
chine translation. This kind of strategy is applied 
for all interpretations. The ambiguity resolution, if 
any, is left to the translation engine to tackle. 

Hindi wordnet (Narayan et al., 2002) is used for 
checking antonym, hyponym and near synonym 
relationships in the pair of words. The doublets 
with hyphens are sure candidates of MWE but the 
doublets without hyphen are considered MWEs if 
they belong to the same chunk. In a semi-
onomatopoeia combination, the second word is 
usually an unknown word and its suffix provides a 
rhythmic companionship. This is what is used in 
their identification. For example, in “chaaya 
vaaya”. ‘vaaya’ is an unknown word and the suffix 
‘aaya’ is common to the two words. The interpre-
tation of the semi-onomatopoeia combination is 
usually the hyponym of the first word. Thus 
“chaaya (tea) vaaya” is interpreted as ‘snacks’. 

Since all ‘vaalaa’ constructs are MWEs, the 
mere presence of ‘vaalaa’ morpheme facilitates 
their identification. The major issue is that of de-
termining the adjoining words that form the MWE. 
For this a number of rules are devised based on the 
semantic interpretation of the MWE. Given below 
is an illustration (Sinha 2009a): 

     “If ‘vaalaa’ is preceded by a verb in infinitive 
form and followed by an auxiliary verb, then it 
represents a future event (about to action representing 
the verb). The verb+vaalaa is a MWE.”  

A number of such rules are devised using semantic 
relationships obtained through wordnet or a lexical 
database.  

For identification of compound verb, we use a 
list of 30 light verbs (Sinha 2009b).  When a verb 

113



in its stem form, is followed by a light verb, it is 
identified as a compound verb (strategy used is 
similar to Chakrabarti et al. 2008).  This rule is 
applied recursively to make a larger group.  

For the identification of complex predicates, we 
use a parallel aligned Hindi-English corpus. A 
simple heuristic of the absence of the light verb 
translated  into English in the parallel corpus is 
taken as the complex predicate (Sinha 2009b). 

We use an in-house named-entity recognizer. 
All the forms of the names as outlined in section 
2.11 are detected and interpreted accordingly. All 
the  unknown word sequences are considered 
probable candidates for MWEs. A name gazetteer 
is used to identify the named entities and the rest 
are checked  for  being  acronyms.  A majority of 
acronyms without dots in Hindi are mappings of 
English acronyms.  Therefore,  the  individual  
Roman  alphabet character mapping to Hindi is 
utilized to detect these. The names that are also 
valid dictionary words do not get identified. 

5 Experimentation and Results 
As a general corpus is very sparse in terms of oc-
currences of each type of MWE, we created corpus 
consisting of instances of different types sampled 
from various sources such as news articles, gram-
mar books and corpora available at 
http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/hin_corp_unicode.tar, 
www.cdacnoida.in/snlp/digital_library/gyan_nidhi.asp.  
The sampling was mostly done through an auto-
matic process where templates of patterns were 
supplied with randomly picking up words from a 
list of frequent words created by an analysis of a 
Hindi corpus. These were further clubbed into six 
different classes of MWEs  where  each  class  
consisted of similar MWE type. This helped us in 
taking care of sparseness to some extent to make 
our study more meaningful. Our sample space for 
each class consisted of approximately 5000 words.   

Table 1 shows the results of our experimenta-
tion. The f-score varied from 27% to 97%. The 
identification of named entities is poor as it is 
based on a gazetteer and unknown words. The per-
formance of the MWEs identification in the doub-
let class is affected due to inadequacy of the Hindi 
wordnet that has been used for some of its sub-
classes. The Hindi wordnet is not complete and 
many of the antonyms, hypernyms/hyponyms and 
ontological classification are not present.  

 Table 1: Experimental results 
MWE Type F-score 
acronym and abbreviation with dots  92.2% 
replicating class 97.4% 
doublet class  73.6% 
‘vaala’ construct class 90.7% 
Complex predicates and compound verbs 77.2% 
acronym (with no dots) and named entity  27.5% 

6 Conclusions and Discussions 
In this paper, we have provided comprehensive 
details and characteristics of the MWEs that are 
specific to Hindi. Many of these characteristics are 
generic in nature in the sense that it is not based on 
any statistical inference but it is the linguistic 
property that helps in MWE extraction.   For ex-
ample, all replicating words irrespective of their 
POS, all doublets with plural-singular form combi-
nations, ‘vaala’ forms, complex verb forms etc are 
all strong candidates for MWEs in Hindi irrespec-
tive of whether these have earlier been encountered 
in the corpus or not. This means that even the low 
frequency  MWEs  can  be  captured.   All  the  
statistical  approaches  require  the corpus to be 
representative and exhaustive in order to be able to 
yield reliable results (limitations: Kunchukuttan et 
al., 2008). Moreover, most of the idiosyncrasies of 
the language surface in informal conversations and 
are rarely available in regular textual corpora 
(Baldwin et al., 2010). The statistical approach will 
anyway be needed to mine other types of MWEs 
and discover new and institutionalized MWEs 
(mostly domain specific ) that keep getting added 
(Baldwin et al., 2010).  However,  our stepwise 
methodology of filtering MWEs in stages provides 
a reduced sample space for searching the MWEs. 
Thus the size of the bag of the context words 
(Katz, 2006) needed for their identification and 
interpretation gets reduced.  One of the primary 
aims of this study is to collect MWEs of different 
types in a semi-automatic way for use by the lex-
icographers for possible entry in the dictionary and 
stepwise mining is helpful.  

Our contribution lies in presenting a comprehen-
sive study of all types of MWEs encountered in 
Hindi and devise methods for their mining. We 
have not been able to present a detailed description 
of our method due to space constraints.  In future 
work, we would like to hybridize rule based and 
statistical methods with bootstrapping of the data 
obtained for different classes. 

114



References  
Amitabh Mukerjee, A. Soni, and A. Raina. 2006. De-

tecting Complex Predicates in Hindi using POS Pro-
jection across Parallel corpora. ACL Workshop on 
Multiword Expressions  

Anoop Kunchukuttan and Om P. Damani. 2008. A Sys-
tem for Compound Noun Multiword Expression Ex-
traction for Hindi. Proceedings of International 
Conference on Natural Language Processing 
(ICON2008) 

Anvita Abbi. 1992. Reduplication in South Asian Lan-
guages: An Areal, Typological and Historical Study. 
Allied Publishers, New Delhi.  

Anvita Abbi. 1975. Reduplication in Hindi: A Genera-
tive Semantic Study. Dissertation Abstracts Interna-
cional, Vol. 36, University of NY (1975).  

Anvita Abbi. 1992. The explicator compound verb:some 
definitional issues and criteria for identification. In-
dian Linguistics, 53, 27-46. 

B. V. Moiron and J. Tiedemann. 2006. Identifying idi-
omatic expressions using automatic word alignment. 
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multiword Expressions in 
a multilingual context. 

Debasri Chakrabarti, Hemang Mandalia, Ritwik Priya, 
Vaijayanthi Sarma and Pushpak Bhattacharyya.2008. 
Hindi Compound Verbs and their Automatic Extrac-
tion, Computational Linguistics (COLING08), Man-
chester, UK. 

D. Lin. 1999. Automatic identification of noncomposi-
tional phrases. ACL-1999. 

D. Narayan, D. Chakrabarti, P. Pandey, and 
P.Bhattacharyya. 2002. An experience in building the 
IndoWordNet - a WordNet for Hindi. Global Word-
Net Conference. 

G. Katz and E. Giesbrechts. 2006. Automatic identifica-
tion of noncompositional multi-word expressions us-
ing Latent Semantic Analysis. ACL Workshop on 
Multiword Expressions. 

Harshada Gune, Mugdha Bapat, Mitesh Khapra and 
Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2010. Verbs are where all 
the Action Lies: Experiences of Shallow Parsing of a 
Morphologically Rich Language, Computational 
Linguistics Conference (COLING 2010), Beijing, 
China. 

I. A. Sag,, T. Baldwin, F. Bond, A. C-opestake, and D. 
Flickinger. 2002. Multiword expressions: A pain in 
the neck for NLP. In Proceedings of the 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and 
Computational Linguistics (CICLing-2002), Mexico 
City, Mexico. 1–15 

Jennifer Brundage, M. Kresse, U. Schwall and A. Stor-
rer. 1992. Multiword lexemes: A monolingual and 
contrastive typology for natural language processing 
and machine translation. Technical Report 232, Insti-

tut fuer Wissensbasierte Systeme, IBM Deutschland 
GmbH, Heidelberg.  

K. Church and P. Hanks. 1990. Word association 
norms, mutual information, and  lexicography.  
Computational Linguistics. 16(1). 

Miriam Butt. 1995.  The   Structure   of    Complex  
Predicates in Urdu. CSLI Publications. 

P. Pecina. 2008. Lexical Association Measures. Ph. D. 
thesis, Charles University. 

Peter Edwin Hook. 1974. The  Compound  Verb  in 
Hindi. Center for South and Southeast Asian Studies: 
The University of Michigan. 

R. Mahesh K. Sinha. 2009a. Learning Disambiguation 
of Hindi Morpheme 'vaalaa' with a Sparse Corpus, 
The Eighth International Conference on Machine 
Learning and Applications (ICMLA 2009), Miami, 
Florida, USA 

R. Mahesh K. Sinha. 2009b.  Mining  Complex  Predi-
cates In Hindi Using Parallel Hindi-English Corpus, 
ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Workshop on Multi Word Ex-
pression (MWE 2009), Singapore.  

R. M. K. Sinha and Anil Thakur. 2005a. Dealing with 
Replicative Words in Hindi for Machine Translation 
to English, 10th Machine Translation summit (MT 
Summit X), Phuket, Thailand., 157-164.  

R. M. K. Sinha and Anil Thakur. 2005b. Machine 
Translation of Bi-lingual Hindi-English (Hinglish) 
Text, 10th Machine Translation summit (MT Summit 
X), Phuket, Thailand.. 149-156. 

Sriram Venkatapathy and A. Joshi. 2006. Using infor-
mation about multi-word expressions for the word 
alignment task. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 
Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Identifying 
and Exploiting Underlying Properties, Sydney, Aus-
tralia, 53–60. 

Sriram Venkatapathy and Aravind K. Joshi, 2005. Rela-
tive compositionality of multi-word expressions: a 
study of verb-noun (V-N) collocations, In Proceed-
ings of International Joint Conference on Natural 
Language Processing - 2005, Jeju Island, Korea, 553-
564. 

Tara Mohanan. 1994. Argument Structure in Hindi. 
CSLI Publications, Stanford, California. 

Timothy Baldwin and F. Bond. 2002. Multiword ex-
pressions: Some problems for Japanese NLP. In Pro-
ceedings of the 8th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Natural Language Processing (Ja-
pan), Keihanna, Japan, 379–382. 

Timothy Baldwin and Su Nam Kim. 2010. Multiword 
Expressions, in Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau 
(eds.) Handbook of Natural Language Processing, 
Second Edition, CRC Press, Boca Raton, USA.  267-
292. 

 

115


