










































Automatic Verb Extraction from Historical Swedish Texts


Proceedings of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 87–95,
Portland, OR, USA, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic Verb Extraction from Historical Swedish Texts

Eva Pettersson
Department of Linguistics and Philology

Uppsala University
Swedish National Graduate School

of Language Technology
eva.pettersson@lingfil.uu.se

Joakim Nivre
Department of Linguistics and Philology

Uppsala University
joakim.nivre@lingfil.uu.se

Abstract

Even though historical texts reveal a lot of
interesting information on culture and social
structure in the past, information access is lim-
ited and in most cases the only way to find the
information you are looking for is to manually
go through large volumes of text, searching
for interesting text segments. In this paper we
will explore the idea of facilitating this time-
consuming manual effort, using existing natu-
ral language processing techniques. Attention
is focused on automatically identifying verbs
in early modern Swedish texts (1550–1800).
The results indicate that it is possible to iden-
tify linguistic categories such as verbs in texts
from this period with a high level of precision
and recall, using morphological tools devel-
oped for present-day Swedish, if the text is
normalised into a more modern spelling be-
fore the morphological tools are applied.

1 Introduction

Historical texts constitute a rich source of data for
researchers interested in for example culture and so-
cial structure over time. It is however a very time-
consuming task to manually search for relevant pas-
sages in the texts available. It is likely that language
technology could substantially reduce the manual
effort involved and thus the time needed to access
this information, by automatically suggesting sec-
tions that may be of interest to the task at hand. The
interesting text segments could be identified using
for example semantic features or morphological and
syntactic cues in the text.

This would however require natural language pro-
cessing tools capable of handling historical texts,
which are in many respects different from contem-
porary written language, concerning both spelling
and syntax. Ideally, one would of course like to have
tools developed specifically for the time period of in-
terest, and emerging efforts to develop resources and
tools for historical languages are therefore welcome.
Despite these efforts, however, it is unlikely that we
will have anything close to complete coverage of dif-
ferent time periods even for a single language within
the foreseeable future.

In this paper, we will therefore instead exam-
ine the possibility of improving information access
in historical texts by adapting language technology
tools developed for contemporary written language.
The work has been carried out in close cooperation
with historians who are interested in what men and
women did for a living in the early modern Swedish
society (1550–1800). We will hence focus on identi-
fying linguistic categories in Swedish texts from this
period. The encouraging results show that you may
successfully analyse historical texts using NLP tools
developed for contemporary language, if analysis is
preceded by an orthographic normalisation step.

Section 2 presents related work and character-
istics of historical Swedish texts. The extraction
method is defined in section 3. In section 4 the ex-
periments are described, while the results are pre-
sented in section 5. Section 6 describes how the verb
extraction tool is used in ongoing historical research.
Finally, conclusions are drawn in section 7.

87



2 Background

2.1 Related Work

There are still not many studies performed on natu-
ral language processing of historical texts. Pennac-
chiotti and Zanzotto (2008) used contemporary dic-
tionaries and analysis tools to analyse Italian texts
from the period 1200–1881. The results showed that
the dictionary only covered approximately 27% of
the words in the oldest text, as compared to 62.5%
of the words in a contemporary Italian newspaper
text. The morphological analyser used in the study
reached an accuracy of 0.48 (as compared to 0.91
for modern text), while the part-of-speech tagger
yielded an accuracy of 0.54 (as compared to 0.97
for modern text).

Rocio et al. (1999) used a grammar of contempo-
rary Portuguese to syntactically annotate medieval
Portuguese texts. To adapt the parser to the me-
dieval language, a lexical analyser was added includ-
ing a dictionary and inflectional rules for medieval
Portuguese. This combination proved to be success-
ful for partial parsing of medieval Portuguese texts,
even though there were some problems with gram-
mar limitations, dictionary incompleteness and in-
sufficient part-of-speech tagging.

Oravecz et al. (2010) tried a semi-automatic ap-
proach to create an annotated corpus of texts from
the Old Hungarian period. The annotation was per-
formed in three steps: 1) sentence segmentation
and tokenisation, 2) standardisation/normalisation,
and 3) morphological analysis and disambiguation.
They concluded that normalisation is of vital impor-
tance to the performance of the morphological anal-
yser.

For the Swedish language, Borin et al. (2007)
proposed a named-entity recognition system adapted
to Swedish literature from the 19th century. The sys-
tem recognises Person Names, Locations, Organisa-
tions, Artifacts (food/wine products, vehicles etc),
Work&Art (names of novels, sculptures etc), Events
(religious, cultural etc), Measure/Numerical expres-
sions and Temporal expressions. The named en-
tity recognition system was evaluated on texts from
the Swedish Literature Bank without any adaptation,
showing problems with spelling variation, inflec-
tional differences, unknown names and structural is-
sues (such as hyphens splitting a single name into

several entities).1 Normalising the texts before ap-
plying the named entity recognition system made the
f-score figures increase from 78.1% to 89.5%.

All the results presented in this section indicate
that existing natural language processing tools are
not applicable to historical texts without adaptation
of the tools, or the source text.

2.2 Characteristics of Historical Swedish Texts

Texts from the early modern Swedish period (1550–
1800) differ from present-day Swedish texts both
concerning orthography and syntax. Inflectional dif-
ferences include a richer verb paradigm in historical
texts as compared to contemporary Swedish. The
Swedish language was also strongly influenced by
other languages. Evidence of this is the placement
of the finite verb at the end of relative clauses in a
German-like fashion not usually found in Swedish
texts, as in ...om man i hächtelse sitter as compared
to om man sitter i häkte (“...if you in custody are”
vs “...if you are in custody”).

Examples of the various orthographic differences
are the duplication of long vowels in words such as
saak (sak “thing”) and stoor (stor “big/large”), the
use of of fv instead of v, as in öfver (över “over”),
and gh and dh instead of the present-day g and d, as
in någhon (någon “somebody”) and fadhren (fadern
“the father”) (Bergman, 1995).

Furthermore, the lack of spelling conventions
causes the spelling to vary highly between different
writers and text genres, and even within the same
text. There is also great language variation in texts
from different parts of the period.

3 Verb Extraction

In the following we will focus on identifying verbs
in historical Swedish texts from the period 1550–
1800. The study has been carried out in cooper-
ation with historians who are interested in finding
out what men and women did for a living in the
early modern Swedish society. One way to do this
would be to search for occupational titles occurring
in the text. This is however not sufficient since many
people, especially women, had no occupational ti-
tle. Occupational titles are also vague, and may in-
clude several subcategories of work. In the material

1http://litteraturbanken.se/

88



already (manually) analysed by the historians, oc-
cupation is often described as a verb with a direct
object. Hence, automatically extracting and display-
ing the verbs in a text could help the historians in
the process of finding relevant text segments. The
verb extraction process developed for this purpose
is performed in maximally five steps, as illustrated
in figure 1.

The first step is tokenisation. Each token is
then optionally matched against dictionaries cover-
ing historical Swedish. Words not found in the his-
torical dictionaries are normalised to a more mod-
ern spelling before being processed by the morpho-
logical analyser. Finally, the tagger disambiguates
words with several interpretations, yielding a list of
all the verb candidates in the text. In the experi-
ments, we will examine what steps are essential, and
how they are combined to yield the best results.

3.1 Tokenisation

Tokenisation is performed using an in-house stan-
dard tokeniser. The result of the tokenisation is a
text segmented into one token per line, with a blank
line marking the start of a new sentence.

3.2 Historical Dictionaries

After tokenisation, the tokens are optionally
matched against two historical dictionaries dis-
tributed by The Swedish Language Bank:2

• The Medieval Lexical Database
A dictionary describing Medieval Swedish,
containing approximately 54 000 entries from
the following three books:

– K.F. Söderwalls Ordbok Öfver svenska
medeltids-språket, vol I-III (Söderwall,
1918)

– K.F. Söderwalls Ordbok Öfver svenska
medeltids-språket, vol IV-V (Söderwall,
1973)

– C.J. Schlyters Ordbok till Samlingen af
Sweriges Gamla Lagar (Schlyter, 1877)

• Dalin’s Dictionary
A dictionary covering 19th Century Swedish,
created from the printed version of Ordbok

2http://spraakbanken.gu.se/

Öfver svenska språket, vol I–II by Dalin
(1855). The dictionary contains approximately
64 000 entries.

The dictionaries cover medieval Swedish and 19th
century Swedish respectively. We are actually in-
terested in the time period in between these two pe-
riods, but it is assumed that these dictionaries are
close enough to cover words found in the early mod-
ern period as well. It should further be noticed that
the electronically available versions of the dictionar-
ies are still in an early stage of development. This
means that coverage varies between different word
classes, and verbs are not covered to the same ex-
tent as for example nouns. Words with an irregu-
lar inflection (which is often the case for frequently
occurring verbs) also pose a problem in the current
dictionaries.

3.3 Normalisation Rules

Since both the morphological analyser and the tag-
ger used in the experiments are developed for han-
dling modern Swedish written language, running a
text with the old Swedish spelling preserved pre-
sumably means that these tools will fail to assign
correct analyses in many cases. Therefore, the text is
optionally transformed into a more modern spelling,
before running the document through the analysis
tools.

The normalisation procedure differs slightly for
morphological analysis as compared to tagging.
There are mainly two reasons why the same set
of normalisation rules may not be optimally used
both for the morphological analyser and for the tag-
ger. First, since the tagger (unlike the morphological
analyser) is context sensitive, the normalisation rules
developed for the tagger need to be designed to also
normalise words surrounding verbs, such as nouns,
determiners, etc. For the morphological analyser,
the main focus in formulating the rules has been on
handling verb forms. Secondly, to avoid being lim-
ited to a small set of rules, an incremental normalisa-
tion procedure has been used for the morphological
analyser in order to maximise recall without sacri-
ficing precision. In this incremental process, nor-
malisation rules are applied one by one, and the less
confident rules are only applied to words not iden-
tified by the morphological analyser in the previous

89



Figure 1: Overview of the verb extraction experiment

normalisation step. The tagger on the other hand is
robust, always yielding a tag for each token, even in
cases where the word form is not present in the dic-
tionary. Thus, the idea of running the normalisation
rules in an incremental manner is not an option for
the tagger.

The total set of normalisation rules used for the
morphological analyser is 39 rules, while 29 rules
were defined for the tagger. The rules are inspired
by (but not limited to) some of the changes in
the reformed Swedish spelling introduced in 1906
(Bergman, 1995). As a complement to the rules
based on the spelling reform, a number of empiri-
cally designed rules were formulated, based on the
development corpus described in section 4.1. The
empirical rules include the rewriting of verbal end-
ings (e.g. begärade – begärde “requested” and
utviste – utvisade “deported”), transforming dou-
ble consonants into a single consonant (vetta – veta
“know”, prövass – prövas “be tried”) and vice versa
(upsteg – uppsteg “rose/ascended”, viste – visste
“knew”).

3.4 Morphological Analysis and Tagging

SALDO is an electronically available lexical re-
source developed for present-day written Swedish.
It is based on Svenskt AssociationsLexikon (SAL), a
semantic dictionary compiled by Lönngren (1992).
The first version of the SALDO dictionary was re-
leased in 2008 and comprises 72 396 lexemes. In-
flectional information conforms to the definitions
in Nationalencyklopedins ordbok (1995), Svenska

Akademiens ordlista över svenska språket (2006)
and Svenska Akademiens grammatik (1999). Apart
from single word entries, the SALDO dictionary
also contains approximately 2 000 multi-word units,
including 1 100 verbs, mainly particle verbs (Borin
et al., 2008). In the experiments we will use SALDO
version 2.0, released in 2010 with a number of words
added, resulting in a dictionary comprising approxi-
mately 100 000 entries.

When running the SALDO morphological anal-
yser alone, a token is always considered to be a verb
if there is a verb interpretation present in the dictio-
nary, regardless of context. For example, the word
för will always be analysed both as a verb (bring)
and as a preposition (for), even though in most cases
the prepositional interpretation is the correct one.

When running the maximum five steps in the verb
extraction procedure, the tagger will disambiguate
in cases where the morphological analyser has pro-
duced both a verb interpretation and a non-verb in-
terpretation. The tagger used in this study is Hun-
POS (Halácsy et al., 2007), a free and open source
reimplementation of the HMM-based TnT-tagger
by Brants (2000). Megyesi (2008) showed that
the HunPOS tagger trained on the Stockholm-Umeå
Corpus (Gustafson-Capková and Hartmann, 2006)
is one of the best performing taggers for Swedish
texts.

4 Experiments

This section describes the experimental setup in-
cluding data preparation and experiments.

90



4.1 Data Preparation

A subset of Per Larssons dombok, a selection of
court records from 1638, was used as a basis for de-
veloping the automatic verb extraction tool. This
text consists of 11 439 tokens in total, and was
printed by Edling (1937). The initial 984 to-
kens of the text were used as development data,
i.e. words used when formulating the normalisation
rules, whereas the rest of the text was used solely for
evaluation.

A gold standard for evaluation was created, by
manually annotating all the verbs in the text. For
the verb annotation to be as accurate as possible, the
same text was annotated by two persons indepen-
dently, and the results analysed and compared until
consensus was reached. The resulting gold standard
includes 2 093 verbs in total.

4.2 Experiment 1: Normalisation Rules

In the first experiment we will compare morpholog-
ical analysis results before and after applying nor-
malisation rules. To investigate what results could
optimally be expected from the morphological anal-
ysis, SALDO was also run on present-day Swedish
text, i.e. the Stockholm-Umeå Corpus (SUC). SUC
is a balanced corpus consisting of a number of dif-
ferent text types representative of the Swedish lan-
guage in the 1990s. The corpus consists of approx-
imately one million tokens, distributed among 500
texts with approximately 2 000 tokens in each text.
Each word in the corpus is manually annotated with
part of speech, lemma and a number of morpho-
logical features (Gustafson-Capková and Hartmann,
2006).

4.3 Experiment 2: Morphological Analysis and
Tagging

In the second experiment we will focus on the
combination of morphological analysis and tagging,
based on the following settings:

morph A token is always considered to be a verb
if the morphological analysis contains a verb
interpretation.

tag A token is always considered to be a verb if it
has been analysed as a verb by the tagger.

morph or tag A token is considered to be a verb if
there is a morphological verb analysis or if it
has been analysed as a verb by the tagger.

morph and tag A token is considered to be a verb
if there is a morphological verb analysis and it
has been tagged as a verb.

To further refine the combination of morphologi-
cal analysis and tagging, a more fine-grained dis-
ambiguation method was introduced, where the tag-
ger is only used in contexts where the morphological
analyser has failed to provide an unambiguous inter-
pretation:

morph + tag A token is considered to be a verb if
it has been unambiguously analysed as a verb
by SALDO. Likewise a token is considered not
to be a verb, if it has been given one or more
analyses from SALDO, where none of the anal-
yses is a verb interpretation. If the token has
been given both a verb analysis and a non-verb
analysis by SALDO, the tagger gets to decide.
The tagger also decides for words not found in
SALDO.

4.4 Experiment 3: Historical Dictionaries
In the third experiment, the historical dictionaries
are added, using the following combinations:

medieval A token is considered to be a verb if it has
been unambiguously analysed as a verb by the
medieval dictionary. Likewise a token is con-
sidered not to be a verb, if it has been given
one or more analyses from the medieval dic-
tionary, where none of the analyses is a verb
interpretation. If the token has been given both
a verb analysis and a non-verb analysis by the
medieval dictionary, or if the token is not found
in the dictionary, the token is processed by the
morphological analyser and the tagger as de-
scribed in setting morph + tag.

19c A token is considered to be a verb if it has been
unambiguously analysed as a verb by the 19th
century dictionary. Likewise a token is consid-
ered not to be a verb, if it has been given one
or more analyses from the 19th century dictio-
nary, where none of the analyses is a verb in-
terpretation. If the token has been given both

91



a verb analysis and a non-verb analysis by the
19th century dictionary, or if the token is not
found in the dictionary, the token is processed
by the morphological analyser and the tagger as
described in setting morph + tag.

medieval + 19c A token is considered to be a verb
if it has been unambiguously analysed as a verb
by the medieval dictionary. Likewise a token is
considered not to be a verb, if it has been given
one or more analyses from the medieval dic-
tionary, where none of the analyses is a verb
interpretation. If the token has been given both
a verb analysis and a non-verb analysis by the
medieval dictionary, or if the token is not found
in the dictionary, the token is matched against
the 19th century dictionary before being pro-
cessed by the morphological analyser and the
tagger as described in setting morph + tag.

19c + medieval A token is considered to be a verb
if it has been unambiguously analysed as a verb
by the 19th century dictionary. Likewise a to-
ken is considered not to be a verb, if it has
been given one or more analyses from the 19th
century dictionary, where none of the analyses
is a verb interpretation. If the token has been
given both a verb analysis and a non-verb anal-
ysis by the 19th century dictionary, or if the to-
ken is not found in the dictionary, the token is
matched against the medieval dictionary before
being processed by the morphological analyser
and the tagger as described in setting morph +
tag.

5 Results

5.1 Normalisation Rules
Running the SALDO morphological analyser on the
test text with the old Swedish spelling preserved,
meant that only 30% of the words were analysed
at all. Applying the normalisation rules before the
morphological analysis is performed, drastically in-
creases recall. After only 5 rules have been ap-
plied, recall is increased by 11 percentage units, and
adding another 5 rules increases recall by another
26 percentage units. All in all, recall increases from
30% for unnormalised text to 83% after all normal-
isation rules have been applied, whereas precision

increases from 54% to 66%, as illustrated in table 1.
Recall is still significantly higher for contempo-

rary Swedish texts than for the historical text (99%
as compared to 83% with the best normalisation
settings). Nevertheless, the rapid increase in re-
call when applying the normalisation rules is very
promising, and it is yet to be explored how good re-
sults it is possible to reach if including more normal-
isation rules.

Precision Recall f-score
raw data 0.54 0.30 0.39

5 rules 0.61 0.41 0.49
10 rules 0.66 0.67 0.66
15 rules 0.66 0.68 0.67
20 rules 0.67 0.73 0.70
25 rules 0.66 0.78 0.72
30 rules 0.66 0.79 0.72
35 rules 0.66 0.82 0.73
39 rules 0.66 0.83 0.74

SUC corpus 0.53 0.99 0.69

Table 1: Morphological analysis results using SALDO
version 2.0, before and after incremental application of
normalisation rules, and compared to the Stockholm-
Umeå corpus of contemporary Swedish written language.

5.2 Morphological Analysis and Tagging
Table 2 presents the results of combining the
SALDO morphological analyser and the HunPOS
tagger, using the settings described in section 4.3.

Precision Recall f-score
morph 0.66 0.83 0.74
tag 0.81 0.86 0.83
morph or tag 0.61 0.92 0.74
morph and tag 0.92 0.80 0.85
morph + tag 0.82 0.88 0.85

Table 2: Results for normalised text, combining mor-
phological analysis and tagging. morph = morphological
analysis using SALDO. tag = tagging using HunPOS.

As could be expected, the tagger yields higher
precision than the morphological anlayser, due to
the fact that the morphological analyser renders all
analyses for a word form given in the dictionary, re-
gardless of context. The results of combining the

92



morphological analyser and the tagger are also quite
expected. In the case where a token is considered
to be a verb if there is a morphological verb analy-
sis or it has been analysed as a verb by the tagger,
a very high level of recall (92%) is achieved at the
expense of low precision, whereas the opposite is
true for the case where a token is considered to be
a verb if there is a morphological verb analysis and
it has been tagged as a verb. Using the tagger for
disambiguation only in ambiguous cases yields the
best results. It should be noted that using the morph-
and-tag setting results in the same f-score as the dis-
ambiguation setting. However, the disambiguation
setting performs better in terms of recall, which is of
importance to the historians in the project at hand.
Another advantage of using the disambiguation set-
ting is that the difference between precision and re-
call is less.

5.3 Historical Dictionaries

The results of using the historical dictionaries are
presented in table 3.

Precision Recall f-score
morph + tag 0.82 0.88 0.85
medieval 0.82 0.81 0.81
19c 0.82 0.86 0.84
medieval + 19c 0.81 0.79 0.80
19c + medieval 0.81 0.79 0.80

Table 3: Results for normalised text, combining histor-
ical dictionaries and contemporary analysis tools. me-
dieval = Medieval Lexical Database. 19c = Dalin’s Dic-
tionary. morph = morphological analysis using SALDO.
tag = tagging using HunPOS.

Adding the historical dictionaries did not improve
the verb analysis results; actually the opposite is
true. Studying the results of the analyses from the
medieval dictionary, one may notice that only two
verb analyses have been found when applied to the
test text, and both of them are erroneous in this con-
text (in both cases the word lass “load” as in the
phrase 6 lass höö “6 loads of hay”). Furthermore,
the medieval dictionary produces quite a lot of non-
verb analyses for commonly occurring verbs, for ex-
ample skola (noun: “shool”, verb: “should/shall”),
kunna (“can/could”), kom (“come”), finna (“find”)
and vara (noun: “goods”, verb: “be”). Another rea-

son for the less encouraging results seems to be that
most of the words actually found and analysed cor-
rectly are words that are correctly analysed by the
contemporary tools as well, such as i (“in”), man
(“man/you”), sin (“his/her/its”), honom (“him”) and
in (“into”).

As for the 19th century dictionary, the same prob-
lems apply. For example, a number of frequent
verb forms are analysed as non-verbs (e.g. skall
“should/shall” and ligger “lies”). There are also
non-verbs repeatedly analysed as verbs, such as
stadgar (“regulations”) and egne (“own”). As was
the case for the medieval dictionary, most of the
words analysed correctly by the 19th century dic-
tionary are commonly occuring words that would
have been correctly analysed by the morphological
analyser and/or the tagger as well, for example och
(“and”), men (“but”) and när (“when”).

6 Support for Historical Research

In the ongoing Gender and Work project at the De-
partment of History, Uppsala University, historians
are interested in what men and women did for a liv-
ing in the early modern Swedish Society.3 Informa-
tion on this is registered and made available for re-
search in a database, most often in the form of a verb
and its object(s). The automatic verb extraction tool
was developed in close cooperation with the Gender
and Work participants, with the aim of reducing the
manual effort involved in finding the relevant infor-
mation to enter into the database.

The verb extraction tool was integrated in a pro-
totypical graphical user interface, enabling the his-
torians to run the system on historical texts of their
choice. The interface provides facilities for upload-
ing files, generating a list of all the verbs in the file,
displaying verb concordances for interesting verbs,
and displaying the verb in a larger context. Figure
2 illustrates the graphical user interface, displaying
concordances for the verb anklaga (“accuse”). The
historians found the interface useful and are inter-
ested in integrating the tool in the Gender and Work
database. Further development of the verb extrac-
tion tool is now partly funded by the Gender and
Work project.

3http://gaw.hist.uu.se/

93



Figure 2: Concordances displayed for the verb anklaga (“accuse”) in the graphical user interface.

7 Conclusion

Today historians and other researchers working on
older texts have to manually go through large vol-
umes of text when searching for information on
for example culture or social structure in histori-
cal times. In this paper we have shown that this
time-consuming manual effort could be significantly
reduced using contemporary natural language pro-
cessing tools to display only those text segments
that may be of interest to the researcher. We have
described the development of a tool that automati-
cally identifies verbs in historical Swedish texts us-
ing morphological analysis and tagging, and a proto-
typical graphical user interface, integrating this tool.
The results indicate that it is possible to retrieve
verbs in Swedish texts from the 17th century with
82% precision and 88% recall, using morphological
tools for contemporary Swedish, if the text is nor-
malised into a more modern spelling before the mor-
phological tools are applied (recall may be increased
to 92% if a lower precision is accepted).

Adding electronically available dictionaries cov-

ering medieval Swedish and 19th century Swedish
respectively to the verb extraction tool, did not im-
prove the results as compared to using only contem-
porary NLP tools. This seems to be partly due to
the dictionaries still being in an early stage of devel-
opment, where lexical coverage is unevenly spread
among different word classes, and frequent, irregu-
larly inflected word forms are not covered. It would
therefore be interesting to study the results of the
historical dictionary lookup, when the dictionaries
are more mature.

Since the present extraction tool has been evalu-
ated on one single text, it would also be interesting
to explore how these extraction methods should be
adapted to handle language variation in texts from
different genres and time periods. Due to the lack
of spelling conventions, it would also be interest-
ing to see how the extraction process performs on
texts from the same period and genre, but written by
different authors. Future work also includes experi-
ments on identifying linguistic categories other than
verbs.

94



References
Gösta Bergman. 1995. Kortfattad svensk språkhistoria.

Prisma Magnum, 5th ed., Stockholm.
Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Lennart Lönngren.

2008. SALDO 1.0 (Svenskt associationslexikon ver-
sion 2). Språkbanken, University of Gothenburg.

Lars Borin, Dimitrios Kokkinakis, and Leif-Jöran Ols-
son. 2007. Naming the Past: Named Entity and
Anomacy Recognition in 19th Century Swedish Lit-
erature). In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Lan-
guage Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaT-
eCH 2007), pages 1–8. Prague, Czech Republic.

Bra Böcker. 1995. Nationalencyklopedins ordbok. Bra
Böcker, Höganäs.

Thorsten Brants. 2000. TnT - A Statistical Part-of-
Speech Tagger. In: Proceedings of the 6th Applied
Natural Language Processing Conference (ANLP-00),
Seattle, Washington, USA.

Anders Fredrik Dalin. 1850–1855. Ordbok Öfver sven-
ska språket. Vol I–II. Stockholm.

Nils Edling. 1937. Uppländska domböcker. jämte in-
ledning, förklaringar och register utgivna genom Nils
Edling. Uppsala.

Sofia Gustafson-Capková and Britt Hartmann. December
2006. Manual of the Stockholm Umeå Corpus version
2.0. Description of the content of the SUC 2.0 dis-
tribution, including the unfinished documentation by
Gunnel Källgren.

Péter Halácsy, András Kornai, and Csaba Oravecz 2007.
HunPos - an open source trigram tagger. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics Companion Vol-
ume Proceedings of the Demo and Poster Sessions,
pages 209–212. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Prague, Czech Republic.

Lennart Lönngren. 1992. Svenskt associationslexikon,
del I–IV. Department of Linguistics and Philology,
Uppsala University.

Beáta B. Megyesi. 2008. The Open Source Tagger
HunPoS for Swedish. Department of Linguistics and
Philology, Uppsala University.

Csaba Oravecz, Bálint Sass, and Eszter Simon 2010.
Semi-automatic Normalization of Old Hungarian
Codices. In: Proceedings of the ECAI 2010 Workshop
on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social
Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH 2010). Pages 55–
59. 16 August, 2010 Faculty of Science, University of
Lisbon Lisbon, Portugal.

Marco Pennacchiotti and Fabio Massimo Zanzotto 2008.
Natural Language Processing Across Time: An Em-
pirical Investigation on Italian. In: Aarne Ranta and
Bengt Nordström (Eds.): Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing. GoTAL 2008, LNAI Volume 5221,
pages 371–382. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.

Vitor Rocio, Mário Amado Alves, José Gabriel Lopes,
Maria Francisca Xavier, and Graça Vicente. 1999.
Automated Creation of a Partially Syntactically Anno-
tated Corpus of Medieval Portuguese Using Contem-
porary Portuguese Resources. In: Proceedings of the
ATALA workshop on Treebanks, Paris, France.

Carl Johan Schlyter. 1877. Ordbok till Samlingen af
Sweriges Gamla Lagar. Lund.

Svenska Akademien. 2006. Svenska Akademiens or-
dlista över svenska språket. Norstedts Akademiska
Förlag, Stockholm.

Knut Fredrik Söderwall. 1884–1918. Ordbok Öfver
svenska medeltids-språket, vol I–III. Lund.

Knut Fredrik Söderwall. 1953–1973. Ordbok Öfver
svenska medeltids-språket, vol IV–V. Lund.

Ulf Teleman, Staffan Hellberg, and Erik Andersson.
1999. Svenska Akademiens grammatik. Norstedts Or-
dbok, Stockholm.

95


