










































PaddyWaC: A Minimally-Supervised Web-Corpus of Hiberno-English


Proceedings of EMNLP 2011, Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 22–29,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

PaddyWaC: A Minimally-Supervised Web-Corpus of Hiberno-English

Brian Murphy
Centre for Mind/Brain Sciences,

University of Trento
38068 Rovereto (TN), Italy
brian.murphy@unitn.it

Egon Stemle
Centre for Mind/Brain Sciences,

University of Trento
38068 Rovereto (TN), Italy
egon.stemle@unitn.it

Abstract

Small, manually assembled corpora may be avail-
able for less dominant languages and dialects,
but producing web-scale resources remains a chal-
lenge. Even when considerable quantities of text
are present on the web, finding this text, and distin-
guishing it from related languages in the same region
can be difficult. For example less dominant vari-
ants of English (e.g. New Zealander, Singaporean,
Canadian, Irish, South African) may be found under
their respective national domains, but will be par-
tially mixed with Englishes of the British and US
varieties, perhaps through syndication of journalism,
or the local reuse of text by multinational compa-
nies. Less formal dialectal usage may be scattered
more widely over the internet through mechanisms
such as wiki or blog authoring. Here we automati-
cally construct a corpus of Hiberno-English (English
as spoken in Ireland) using a variety of methods: fil-
tering by national domain, filtering by orthographic
conventions, and bootstrapping from a set of Ireland-
specific terms (slang, place names, organisations).
We evaluate the national specificity of the resulting
corpora by measuring the incidence of topical terms,
and several grammatical constructions that are par-
ticular to Hiberno-English. The results show that
domain filtering is very effective for isolating text
that is topic-specific, and orthographic classification
can exclude some non-Irish texts, but that selected
seeds are necessary to extract considerable quanti-
ties of more informal, dialectal text.

1 Introduction
For less dominant language variants, corpora are usu-
ally painstakingly constructed by hand. This results in
high quality collections of text, classified and balanced
by genre, register and modality. But the process is time-
consuming and expensive, and results in relatively small
resources. For example the International Corpus of En-
glish (ICE) project (Greenbaum, 1996) has already re-
sulted in the publication of corpora covering ten dialects

of English, following a common schema, but the indi-
vidual corpora are limited to approximately one million
words.

An alternative is to use automatic methods to harvest
corpora from the Web. Identification of major languages
is a robust technology, and where the regional boundaries
of a language or dialect correspond closely to a national
top-level internet domain, very large collections (of sev-
eral billion words) can now can be produced easily, with
close to no manual intervention (Baroni et al., 2009).
These methods can also deal with some issues of text
quality found on the web, successfully extracting coher-
ent pieces of running text from web pages (i.e. discard-
ing menu text, generic headings, copyright and other le-
gal notices), reducing textual duplication, and identifying
spam, portal pages and other files that do not contain lin-
guistically interesting text.

Corpora of minor languages that lack their own do-
main, but that have clear orthographic differences from
more dominant neighbouring languages can be collected
automatically by using a small set of seed documents,
from which language-specific search terms can be ex-
tracted (Scannell, 2007). These methods, combined with
automated language identification methods, can quickly
produce large, clean collections with close to no manual
intervention.

However for language variants that do not have their
own domain (e.g. Scots, Bavarian), it is less clear
that such web corpora can be automatically constructed.
Smaller or politically less dominant countries that do
have their own domain (e.g. Belgium, New Zealand),
may also find the language of their “national” web
strongly influenced by other language varieties, for ex-
ample through syndication of journalistic articles, or ma-
terials published by foreign companies.

In this paper we use minimally supervised methods
(Baroni and Bernardini, 2004; Baroni et al., 2009) to
quickly and cheaply build corpora of Hiberno-English
(English as spoken in Ireland), which are many times
larger than ICE-Ireland, the largest published collection

22



currently available (Kallen and Kirk, 2007). We investi-
gate several combinations of strategies (based on domain
names, and on regional variations in vocabulary and or-
thography) to distinguish text written in this minor lan-
guage variant from related dominant variants (US and UK
English). We validate the specificity of the resulting cor-
pora by measuring the incidence of Ireland-specific lan-
guage, both topically (the frequency with which Irish re-
gions and organisations are mentioned), and structurally,
by the presence of grammatical constructions that are par-
ticular to Hiberno-English. We also compare our cor-
pus to another web-corpus of Hiberno-English that is in
development (Crúbadán, Scannell, personal communica-
tion) that relies on domain filtering of crawled web-pages.

The results show that filtering by national domain is
very effective in identifying text that deals with Irish top-
ics, but that the grammar of the resulting text is largely
standard. Using a set of seed terms tailored to the lan-
guage variant (Irish slang, names of Ireland-based organ-
isations, loanwords from Irish Gaelic), yields text which
is much more particular to Hiberno-English usage. At the
same time, such tailored seed terms increase the danger
of finding “non-authentic” uses of Irishisms (sometimes
termed paddywhackery or oirish), either in fictional di-
alogues, or in documents discussing distinctive patterns
in Irish English. The application of a British/American
spelling filter has less clear effects, increasing topical
incidence slightly, while reducing structural incidences
somewhat.

The paper proceeds as follows: in the next section we
introduce Hiberno-English, situating it relative to other
variants of English, and concentrating on the characteris-
tic features that will be used as metrics of “Irishness” of
text retrieved from the Web. Next we describe the process
by which several candidate corpora of Hiberno-English
were constructed (section 3), and the methods we used
to quantify incidence of distinctive usage (section 4). In
the final two sections we compare the incidence of these
markers with those found in corpora of other variants
of English (UK, US), Scannell’s IE-domain filtered cor-
pus, and a hand-crafted corpus of Hiberno-English (ICE-
Ireland), and reflect on the wider applicability of these
methods to variants of other languages and orthographies.

2 Structures and Lexicon of
Hiberno-English

Hiberno-English differs in a range of ways from other
varieties of English. In broad terms it can be grouped
with British English, in that its lexicon, grammar and or-
thographic conventions are more similar to that of Great
Britain, than to that of North America. For example with
lexical variants such as bumper/fender, rubbish bin/trash
can, lift/elevator and zed/zee it shares the former British

usage rather than the latter American usage, though there
are exceptions (in Irish usage the North Americans term
truck is replacing the British lorry). Similarly in syntax
it tends to follow British conventions, for instance He’s
familiar with X rather than X is familiar to him, write to
me rather than write me and the acceptability of singu-
lar verbal marking with group subjects, as in the team are
pleased – though there are counterexamples again, in that
Irish English tends to follow American dialects in dis-
pensing with the shall/will distinction. Most obviously,
Irish writing uses British spellings rather than American
spellings.

However, there are still dialectal differences between
Irish and British English. Beyond the usual regional dif-
ferences that one might find between the words used in
different parts of England, the English spoken in Ireland
is particularly influenced by the Irish language (Gaelic,
Gaeilge) (Kirk and Kallen, 2007). While English is the
first language of the overwhelming majority of residents
of Ireland (estimates of Irish mother-tongue speakers are
of the order of 50,000, or about 1% of the population),
Irish retains status as the first official language of the Re-
public of Ireland, maintained as a core subject at all levels
of school education, and through state-maintained radio
and television channels. As recently as the early 19th
century, Irish was the majority language, and so many
traces of it remain in modern Hiberno-English, in the
form of Irish loan-words (e.g. slán ‘goodbye’, gaelscoil
‘Irish (speaking) school’), Anglicizations (e.g. ‘gansey’,
jumper, from Irish geansaí), and composites (e.g. ‘jack-
een’, a pejorative term for Dubliners, combining the Irish
diminutive -ín with the English ‘Jack’).

In this paper we take a series of characteristic terms
and structures from Hiberno-English, mostly inspired by
(Kirk and Kallen, 2007), and use them as markers of the
Irishness of the text we assemble from the web. While
there are many more interesting grammatical differences
between Hiberno-English and other variants (e.g. per-
fective use of the simple present: I know that family for
years), we restrict ourselves to those that can be automat-
ically identified in a corpus through searching of plain
text, or of shallow syntactic patterns (parts of speech).

The first marker we use is to measure the incidence of
a set of terms that are topically related to Ireland: proper
names of Ireland-based organisations, and geographical
terms. The method for assembling this list is described in
section 4.

The most simple structure that we use as a marker of
Hiberno-English is the contraction I amn’t (I’m not or I
ain’t in other varieties). The next is the “after” perfec-
tive, which often expresses immediacy, and a negative
outcome:

(1) I’m after losing my wallet
‘I just lost my wallet’

23



A further structure that is novel from the point of view
of other variants of English is a particular use of verbs
that take a complement that expresses a question (most
commonly ask, wonder, see and know), without the use
of a complementizer such as if or whether and with an
inversion of subject-verb order (typical of interrogatives):

(2) I wonder is he coming”
‘I wonder if/whether he is coming’

Finally we consider the expanded usage of reflexive pro-
nouns in Hiberno-English, where they may be used for
emphasis, in any argument position, and without be-
ing anaphorically bound, as is usually required. Here
we limit ourselves to subject position reflexives, which
can be identified from word order patterns, without any
deeper semantic analysis:

(3) himself is in big trouble
‘he is in big trouble’

With the exception of the amn’t contraction, all of these
phenomena are demonstrated by (Kirk and Kallen, 2007)
to be common in the ICE-Ireland corpus, though some-
what less common in Northern Irish portion of that col-
lection, and to be very rare or completely absent in
the ICE-GB corpus of the English of Britain (Nelson
et al., 2002). Significantly, these constructions are found
predominantly in the spoken language portion of the
ICE-Ireland corpus, suggesting that speakers are perhaps
aware that they are not “standard” English, and so not
considered appropriate in the written register.

3 Constructing a Web-Corpus of
Hiberno-English

Within the WaCky initiative (Web-as-Corpus kool ynitia-
tive) (Baroni and Bernardini, 2006) a community of lin-
guists and information technology specialists developed
a set of tools to selectively crawl sections of the Web, and
then process, index and search the resulting data. Contri-
butions like BootCaT (Baroni and Bernardini, 2004), an
iterative procedure to bootstrap specialised corpora and
terms from the Web, have been successfully used in a
range of projects: first in the construction of the WaCky
corpora, a collection of very large (>1 billion words) cor-
pora of English (ukWaC), German (deWaC) and Italian
(itWaC); and subsequently by other groups, e.g. noWaC
and jpWaC (Baroni et al., 2009; Guevara, 2010; Erjavec
et al., 2008).

Here we use BootCaT to build seven prototype corpora
of Hiberno-English, and evaluate the dialect-specificity
of each by measuring the incidence of proper terms and
constructions that are associated with this language vari-
ant. Additionally, we use ukWaC as the de-facto stan-
dard British English Web corpus, and construct a medium

size web-corpus of the US domain to represent Ameri-
can usage. Each corpus is preprocessed and formatted for
the IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB, (Christ, 1994;
Web, 2008)), a generic query engine for large text corpora
that was developed for applications in computational lex-
icography.

BootCaT first takes a set of manually assembled seed
terms, these (possibly multi-word) terms are randomly
combined, and then are used as search queries with a
Web search engine; the HTML documents of the top re-
sults are downloaded and cleaned to extract running text
and discard all web-markup. Preprocessing and format-
ting for the CWB consists of tokenising, lemmatising,
and part-of-speech tagging the corpus, and then convert-
ing the result into CWB’s internal format; we replicated
the processing stages employed for ukWaC.

The construction of the nine corpora differs on three
dimensions:

Seeds: two seed sets were used namely, an Hiberno-
English one (IEs), and the original ukWaC list of
mid-frequency terms (UKs) from the British Na-
tional Corpus (Burnard, 1995); the Irish seeds were
used in pairs and triples to attempt to vary the degree
of regional specificity.

TLDs: two types of top-level internet domain (TLD) re-
strictions were imposed during (or after) the con-
struction of the corpora; either no restriction was im-
posed (.ALL), or a corpus was filtered by a specific
national TLD (e.g. .ie).

Spelling: two types of spelling filter were imposed;
either none, or an ‘orthographic convention fac-
tor’ (OCF) was calculated to detect American and
British spellings, and a corpus was filtered accord-
ingly (BrEn).

The IE seeds contained 81 seed terms, gathered using
one author’s native intuition, and words indicated as be-
ing specific to Irish English by the Oxford English Dic-
tionary, and from various Web pages about Hiberno-
English. 76 single-word and 5 two-word terms were used
falling into three main categories: Irish place names, re-
gional variant terms (mostly slang), and load words from
Irish Gaelic (many being state institutions). The full list-
ing of terms is given here:

Place names: Dublin, Galway, Waterford, Drogheda, Antrim, Derry,
Kildare, Meath, Donegal, Armagh, Wexford, Wicklow,
Louth, Kilkenny, Westmeath, Offaly, Laois, Belfast, Cavan,
Sligo, Roscommon, Monaghan, Fermanagh, Carlow, Longford,
Leitrim, Navan, Ennis, Tralee, Leinster, Connaught, Munster, Ul-
ster

Regional variants: banjaxed (wrecked), craic (fun), fecking (variant
of fucking), yoke (thing), yer man/one/wan (that man/woman),
culchie (country dweller), da (father), footpath (pavement),

24



gaff (home), gobshite (curse), gurrier (young child), jack-
een (Dubliner), jacks (toilet), janey mac (exclamation), jaysus
(variant of exclamation “jesus”), kip (sleep; hovel), knacker
(Traveller, gypsy), knackered (wrecked), langer (penis; id-
iot), langers/langered (drunk), scallion (spring onion), skanger
(disgusting person), strand (beach, seaside), scuttered (drunk),
boreen (small road), gob (mouth; spit), eejit (variant of idiot),
lough (lake), fooster (dawdle), barmbrack (traditional Hallow’een
cake), shebeen (unlicensed bar), bogman (contry dweller), old
one (old lady), quare (variant queer), gansey (pullover)

Loan words: garda, gardaí (police), taoiseach (prime minister), dáil
(parliament), Sláinte (“cheers”), Gaeltacht (Irish speaking areas),
Seanad (senate), Tánaiste (deputy prime minister), ceol ((tradi-
tional Irish) music), slán (“goodbye”), grá (affection, love for),
gaelscoil (Irish speaking school)

These seed terms were combined into a set of 3000 3-
tuple (3T) and a set of 3000 2-tuple (2T) search queries,
i.e. two-word terms were enclosed in inverted commas to
form one single term for the search engine. For 3T this re-
sulted in over 80% 3-tuples with 3 single-word terms, and
slightly over 17% with 2 single-word terms, and the re-
maining percentages for 3-tuples with 1 single-word and
no single-word terms; for 2T this resulted in almost 88%
2-tuples with 2 single-word terms, almost 12% with only
1 single-word terms, and less than 1% with no single-
word terms. The UK seeds were the original ones used
during the construction of the ukWaC corpus and they
were combined into 3000 3-tuple search queries.

No TLD restriction means that the search engine was
not instructed to return search results within a specific
domain, and hence, documents originate from typical
English-language domains (.com, .ie, .uk, etc.) but also
from .de and potentially any other. A restriction meant
that the documents could only originate from one TLD.

No spelling filter means that nothing was done. The
OCF indicates the degree to which terms within a docu-
ment are predominantly spelled according to one prede-
fined word list relative to another. The number of term
intersections with each list is counted and OCF is calcu-
lated as the difference between counts over their sum. To
simplify matters, we utilised a spell-checker to return the
list of known words from a document, this corresponds to
checking a document for spelling errors and only keeping
the non-erroneous words. In our case we used an en_GB
dictionary, an en_US one, and the two together. The three
lists yield the needed numbers of words only known by
one of the two dictionaries, and, hence unknown by the
other dictionary, and the ratio in the range of [−1,+1] can
be calculated.

The search engine we used for all queries was Yahoo
(Yahoo! Inc., 1995); for all search queries English results
were requested, that is we relied on the search engine’s
built-in language identification algorithm1, and from all

1This restriction is very effective at distinguishing non-English from
English content, but returns content from any English variant.

search queries the top 10 results were used. Cleaning
of the Web pages (termed boilerplate removal) was ac-
complished by BootCaT’s implementation of the BTE
method (Finn et al., 2001); it strives to extract the main
body of a Web page, that is the largest contiguous text
area with the least amount of intervening non-text ele-
ments (HTML tags), and discards the rest.

Several corpora were constructed from the Irish seeds
using 2- or 3-tuple search terms: either without restrict-
ing the TLDs; subsequent restriction to the .ie TLD; or
subsequent filtering according to spelling. Corpora were
also constructed with the search engine instructed to di-
rectly return documents from the .us or the .ie TLD, re-
spectively, where the latter one was later also filtered ac-
cording to spelling. The ukWaC corpus is restricted to
the .uk TLD.

4 Evaluating Variety Specificity of the
Corpus

To evaluate the dialectal specificity of the text in each pu-
tative corpus of Hiberno-English, we measured the inci-
dence of several characteristic terms and structures. The
same phenomena were counted in corpora of US and UK
English (identified as that found under the .us and .uk
TLDs respectively) to establish baseline frequencies. All
corpora were HTML-cleaned, lemmatised and part-of-
speech tagged using the same methods described above,
and searches were made with identical, case-insensitive,
queries in the CQP language.

First we quantified topical specificity by searching
for a set of Irish geographical terms (towns, counties,
regions), and Ireland-based organisations (companies,
NGOs, public-private bodies), to identify text which is
“about Ireland”. There were 80 terms, evenly split be-
tween the two categories. In this list we avoided proper
names which are orthographically identical to content
words (e.g. Down, Cork, Clones, Trim, Limerick, Mal-
low, Mayo), given names (Clare, Kerry, Tyrone), place
names found in other territories (Baltimore, Skibbereen,
Newbridge, Westport, Passage West), or names that
might be found as common noun-phrases (e.g. Horse
Racing Ireland, Prize Bond Company, Electricity Supply
Board). While political terms might have been appropri-
ate markers (e.g. the political party Fianna Fáil; the par-
liamentary speaker the Ceann Comhairle), the seed terms
we used contained many governmental institutions, and
so this could be considered an unfairly biased diagnostic
marker. The full list of terms is given below.

Topical terms: ActionAid, Aer, Aer, Allied, An, Arklow, Athlone,
Athy, Balbriggan, Ballina, Ballinasloe, Bantry, Bord, Bord, Bord,
Buncrana, Bundoran, Bus, Carrick-on-Suir, Carrickmacross,
Cashel, Castlebar, Christian, Clonakilty, Clonmel, Cobh, Coillte,
Comhl(á|a)mh, Connacht, C(ó|o)ras, Donegal, Dublin, Dublin,
Dungarvan, Eircom, EirGrid, Enniscorthy, Fermoy, Fyffes, Glan-

25



bia, Gorta, Grafton, Greencore, Iarnr(ó|o)d, IONA, Irish, Irish,
Irish, Kerry, Kilkee, Kilrush, Kinsale, Laois, Leixlip, Let-
terkenny, Listowel, Listowel, Loughrea, Macroom, Mullingar,
Naas, Nenagh, Oxfam, Paddy, Portlaoise, Radi(o|ó), Ryanair,
Telif(í|i)s, Templemore, Thurles, Tipperary, Tramore, Trinity,
Tr(ó|o)caire, Tuam, Tullamore, Tullow, Vhi, Waterford, Youghal

For the structural markers we used more conservative
query patterns where appropriate, to minimise false pos-
itives. For this reason the incidence figures given here
should be considered lower estimates of the frequency of
these structures, but they allow us to establish an inde-
pendent metric with a minimum of manual intervention.

As mentioned above, for the emphatic use of reflex-
ives, we searched only in the subject verb configuration,
even though these are possible in other argument posi-
tions also (e.g. I saw himself in the pub yesterday). The
query was restricted to reflexive pronouns (other than it-
self ) found at the start of a sentence, or immediately after
a conjunction, and directly before a finite verb (other than
have or be). The CQP query (4) yields examples such as
(5)-(7).

(4) [pos="CC" | pos="SENT"] [lemma=".+self" &
lemma!="itself"] [pos="VV[ZD]?"];

(5) ... more commonplace or didactic, less
imaginative? Himself added, "You are a romantic
idiot, and I love you more than...

(6) ... Instruments in Lansing, Michigan, where Val
and Don and myself taught bouzouki, mandolin,
guitar and fiddle workshops. It is a...

(7) ... game of crazy golf, except this time it was
outdoor. Conor and myself got bored straight away
so we formed our own game while Mike ...

For the “after” perfective construction, we searched for a
pattern of a personal pronoun (i.e. not including it, this,
that), the lexeme after, and a gerund form of a common
verb (other than have, be). The query (8) allowed for
a modal auxiliary, and for intervening adverbs, as illus-
trated in (9)-(11).

(8) [pos="PP" & word!="it" %c & word!="that" %c &
word!="this" %c] [pos="RB.*"]* [lemma="be"]
[pos="RB.*"]* [word="after"] [pos="RB.*"]*
[pos="V[VH]G"]

(9) ... the holy angels on your head, young fellow. I
hear tell you’re after winning all in the sports
below; and wasn’t it a shame I didn’t ...

(10) ... MICHAEL – Is the old lad killed surely?
PHILLY. I’m after feeling the last gasps quitting
his heart. MICHAEL – Look at ...

(11) ... placards with the words “Blind as a Batt” and
“Batman you are after robbing us”. They came
from as far away as Wexford and called ...

The use of embedded inversions in complements was
queried for the same four verbs identified by (Kirk and
Kallen, 2007): ask, see, wonder and know. Other verbs
were considered, by expansion from these four via Levin
verb classes (Levin, 1993), but preliminary results gave
many false positives. The query used search for one of
these four verbs, followed by a form of the verb be, and
then a personal pronoun specific to the subject position
(12). Examples of the instances extracted are given be-
low (13)-(15).

(12) [pos="VV.*" & lemma="(ask|know|see|wonder)"
%c] [lemma="be"] [word="(I|he|she|we|they)" %c];

(13) ... but that is the reality. I remember as a young
child being asked was I a Protestant or a Catholic:
that’s the worst thing ...

(14) ... unless I get 170+, there isn’t a chance. And then
I wonder am I mad even applying for medicine.
Anyway anyone else who’s...

(15) There was the all important question and she was
dying to know was he a married man or a widower
who had lost his wife or some ...

Finally, examples of the amn’t contraction (17)-(19) were
extracted with the simple case-insensitive query (16).

(16) "am" "n’t";

(17) Hi I’m relatively new to CCTV but work in IT and
so amn’t 100 % lost ! Anyway, I have already set
up a personal ...

(18) ... and plaster, with some pride.) It was he did that,
and amn’t I a great wonder to think I ’ve traced
him ten days with ...

(19) “I will indeed Mrs. R, thanks very much, sure
amn’t I only parchin?” Ye needn’t have gone to the
trouble of ...

It should be noted that these structural usages differ in the
degree to which they are perceived as distinctive. While
speakers of Irish English may not be aware that amn’t
and the embedded inversion construction are dialectally
restricted, many do know that the after and reflexive con-
structions are particular to Ireland. Hence by searching
for these constructions our evaluation is biased towards
colloquial language and consciously dialectal usage.

26



5 Results
As can be seen in the first two rows of table 1, consider-
ably large Irish corpora were gathered with ease, and even
after applying several subsequent filtering strategies, the
smallest corpus was several times the size of the manually
assembled ICE-Ireland corpus.

Figure 1 (left panel) further shows that the strategy of
searching by random seed combinations yielded pages
in many domains, with a considerable proportion being
in the .ie domain, but by no means the majority. This
suggests that Ireland specific usage of English is not re-
stricted to the national internet domain, i.e. the .ie TLD.
The relative proportion of .ie domain pages (see right
panel of same figure) was increased by selecting only
pages which had predominantly British orthography, sug-
gesting that this has some efficacy in eliminating texts
written in American English.

Table 1 also shows the absolute incidence of each
of the five characteristic phenomena considered. All
matches returned by the CQP search queries were man-
ually evaluated, to ensure that they were authentic ex-
amples of the constructions in question (for the larger
ukWaC corpus only a random sample were examined).
Numbers of false positives that were excluded are shown
in brackets, such as the examples from ukWaC below:

(20) ... just as they were after receiving secret briefings
from Health Commission Wales officers.

(21) All I know is they’re getting cold.

The bars in sets one and two show figures for the man-
ually compiled ICE-Ireland corpus, and the Crúbadán
web-corpus. The ICE-Ireland numbers differ somewhat
from those reported in that paper (Kirk and Kallen, 2007),
since we used more selective search strategies (note that
the cut-off reported relative incidences reach about 21 per
mil. tokens), which would miss some examples such as
those below which have the after construction without a
personal pronoun, and have the non-reflexive use in ob-
ject position, respectively:

(22) There’s nothing new after coming in anyway so

(23) Again it’s up to yourself which type of pricing
policy you use

It should also be noted that ICE-Ireland, following the
standard scheme for the International Corpus of English
project (Greenbaum, 1996), is biased towards spoken lan-
guage, with written text only making up only 40% of the
total text.

The relative incidence (per million tokens) of Ireland-
specific topics and constructions is summarised in figure
2. The bars in sets three and four demonstrate that these
same characteristics, very common in Hiberno-English as

evidenced by the ICE-Ireland, appear to be exceedingly
rare in UK and US English. Unsurprisingly, web authors
in the US and UK domains do not write often about Irish
places and organisations. But constructions that are pu-
tatively exclusive to Hiberno-English are seldom found.
Those that are found might be explained by the effect
of language contact with Irish immigrants to those coun-
tries, and the fact that text by Irish authors may be found
in these domains, whether those people are resident in
those countries or not. For instance in the example below,
the given name Ronan suggests that the author might be
of Irish extraction:

(24) At about that point Cardinal Cormac of
Westminster walked right past us and Ronan and
myself went to say hello to him and tell him we
were up here from his diocese.

The sets headed “.ie” show the figures for the corpora we
constructed by querying seed terms within the Irish na-
tional domain. The incidence of characteristic features
of Hiberno-English grammar are higher than those seen
in the US and UK domains, similar to that seen in the
Crúbadán corpus, and lower than in the ICE-Ireland cor-
pus, perhaps reflecting the fact that these constructions
are less common in written Hiberno-English. Subsequent
filtering out of pages with dominance of American En-
glish spelling (“.ie, BrEn”) does not have much effect on
the numbers.

The “Irish Seeds (IEs)” bars show that the use of tai-
lored seed terms returns text which has a similar topical
specificity to that in the .ie domain generally, but which
shows more structural characteristics of Hiberno-English.
These results can also be improved upon, first by concen-
trating on the .ie domain portion of the tailored-seeds ex-
tracted pages (“Irish Seeds (IEs), IE Dom (.ie)”) which
boosts topical specificity. Filtering instead by orthogra-
phy (“IEs, BrEn”) seems to strike a happy medium, in-
creasing incidence in all categories.

However returning to table 1, it is apparent that there
are many false positives among the constructions found
using Irish seed terms. This was caused by the search
strategy retrieving a small number of pages on the topic of
Hiberno-English, that contained many constructed exam-
ples of the structures of interest. The same corpora con-
tained smaller numbers of examples from theatre scripts
and other fiction.

6 Discussion

The results show us that our methods can be effective in
extracting text that is both specific to Irish topics, and in-
cludes instances of constructions that are particular to the
variety of English spoken in Ireland. The incidences rel-
ative to corpus size are not as high as those seen in the

27



Table 1: Corpora sizes, incidences of Ireland terms and constructions; absolute numbers (false positives in brackets)

IC
E

-I
re

la
nd

C
ru

ba
da

n

uk
W

aC

U
K

s,
3T

,.
us

U
K

s,
3T

,.
ie

U
K

s,
3T

,.
ie

,B
rE

n

IE
s,

3T
,.

A
L

L

IE
s,

3T
,.

A
L

L
,.

ie

IE
s,

3T
,.

A
L

L
,B

rE
n

IE
s,

2T
,.

A
L

L

IE
s,

2T
,.

ie

Size (in 106 Tokens) 1.1 46.3 2119.9 74.7 17.8 15.0 25.2 2.6 17.3 18.4 6.4

Size (in 103 Docs) 0.5 43.0 2692.6 4.6 2.0 1.6 3.4 0.7 2.5 7.3 2.3

Ireland Terms 194 17330 12743 82 14199 13802 23527 7264 22071 12454 9935

"after" Construction 7 (-4) 12 (2) 48 (72) 1 (2) 11 (1) 7 (1) 26 (50) 2 (1) 11 (47) 14 (38) 9 (1)

"amn’t" Construction 0 (0) 0 (0) 32 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) 5 (45) 1 (1) 2 (43) 6 (36) 0 (0)

embedded Inversions 24 (-18) 18 (5) 42 (309) 0 (15) 5 (2) 5 (0) 20 (4) 2 (1) 17 (2) 4 (1) 5 (0)

Subject Reflexives 22 (-19) 33 (0) 1797 (115) 35 (8) 15 (1) 10 (0) 39 (0) 2 (0) 30 (0) 17 (3) 8 (1)

Figure 1: Domain composition of Irish-Seed based Corpora

Top−Level Domains

N
um

be
r 

of
 D

oc
um

en
ts

 (
To

ta
l:3

38
2)

0

500

1000

1500

com ie uk org net edu au info Others
Top−Level Domains

N
um

be
r 

of
 D

oc
um

en
ts

 (
To

ta
l:2

48
5)

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

com ie uk org net info au ca Others

Figure 2: Relative Incidences of Ireland terms and constructions, per million words (grey bars indicating the original counts before
manual inspection), in each copus

IC
E-

Ire
lan

d

Cr
ub

ad
an

uk
W

aC

UK
s, 

3T
, .

us

UK
s, 

3T
, .

ie

UK
s, 

3T
, .

ie,
 B

rE
n

IE
s, 

3T
, .

AL
L

IE
s, 

3T
, .

AL
L, 

.ie

IE
s, 

3T
, .

AL
L, 

Br
En

IE
s, 

2T
, .

AL
L

IE
s, 

2T
, .

ie

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7
"after" Construction
"amn't" Construction
embedded Inversions
Subject Refelxives
Ireland Terms (right Scale)

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

28



manually constructed ICE-Ireland corpus. We can specu-
late on the reasons for this. It may be in part due to “pollu-
tion” of our corpus with non-Irish English, via syndicated
journalism (e.g. some Irish newspapers are repackaging
of British newspapers with added Irish content), or via
multinational organisations with bases in Ireland. In our
view the main explanatory factor is that of modality and
register. The ICE-Ireland corpus is predominantly spoken
(~60%), with many texts coming from informal settings
(unscripted speeches, face to face and telephone conver-
sations). One reading of the figures which is consistent
with this viewpoint is that the .ie domain corpora contain
proportionally more high register, edited text (e.g. from
governmental and commercial organisations, for which
the use of the .ie domain may be an important part of cor-
porate identity), and that the tailored-seed corpora con-
tain more text contributed by individuals (forums, blogs,
etc), for whom domain endings are of little consequence.
Nevertheless, the use of Hiberno-English specific seed
terms did reveal higher incidences of distinctive Irish us-
ages than simple domain filtering.

But despite these lower incidences, in absolute terms
our corpora provide many more examples of Hiberno-
English than that were hitherto available. For example
the ICE-Ireland corpus contains a total of seven examples
of the “after” construction, while with our Irish-seeds de-
rived corpus, and using a fairly restrictive query pattern,
we isolated 26 examples of this structure. Further the
size of these pilot corpora were kept intentionally lim-
ited, a small fraction of the approximately 150 million .ie
domain pages indexed by Google. Much larger corpora
could be constructed with relative ease, by using a larger
seed set, or with an interactive seed-discovery method,
where the text from the first round of web-harvesting
could be analysed to identify further terms that are com-
paratively specific to Hiberno-English (relative to corpora
of other varieties of English), in a similar fashion to the
methods discussed in (Scannell, 2007).

In terms of wider implications, the fact that seeds tai-
lored to a particular region and language variant is as ef-
fective as filtering by domain, is encouraging for dialects
and minority languages that lack a dedicated internet do-
main. This suggest that for less-dominant language vari-
ants without distinctive established orthographies (e.g.
Scots, Andalusian, Bavarian), large corpora displaying
characteristic features of that variant can be constructed
in a simple automatic manner with minimal supervision
(a small set of seeds provided by native speakers). Our
methods might also prove useful for dialects in which a
standard variant is dominant in the written language (e.g.
Arabic, Chinese). One might expect that the written Ara-
bic in the .ma (Morocco) domain would differ little from
that in the .qa domain (Qatar) despite the large differences
in vernacular speech. Similarly the grammar and vocabu-

lary of Chinese written in Mainland Chinese, Taiwanese,
Hong Kong and Singaporese domains (ignoring orthog-
raphy) might be less representative of the variation in ev-
eryday language. The use of regional slang and proper
names may help one to collect more examples of this
more natural language usage, and less of the dominant
standard variant.

References
Baroni, M. and Bernardini, S. (2004). BootCaT: Bootstrapping

corpora and terms from the web. In (ELRA), E. L. R. A.,
editor, Proceedings of LREC 2004, Lisbon: ELDA., pages
1313–1316.

Baroni, M. and Bernardini, S., editors (2006). Wacky! Working
papers on the Web as Corpus.

Baroni, M., Bernardini, S., Ferraresi, A., and Zanchetta, E.
(2009). The WaCky wide web: a collection of very large
linguistically processed web-crawled corpora. Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, 43(3):209–226.

Burnard, L. (1995). Users Reference Guide, British National
Corpus, Version 1.0. Oxford University Computing Ser-
vices/British National Corpus Consortium, Oxford.

Christ, O. (1994). A Modular and Flexible Architecture for an
Integrated Corpus Query System. In Papers in Computa-
tional Lexicography (COMPLEX ’94), pages 22–32.

Erjavec, I. S., Erjavec, T., and Kilgarriff, A. (2008). A web cor-
pus and word sketches for Japanese. Information and Media
Technologies, 3:529–551.

Finn, A., Kushmerick, N., and Smyth, B. (2001). Fact or fic-
tion: Content classification for digital libraries.

Greenbaum, S. (1996). Comparing English Worldwide.
Clarendon Press.

Guevara, E. (2010). NoWaC: a large web-based corpus for Nor-
wegian. In Proceedings of the Sixth Web as Corpus Work-
shop (WAC6), pages 1–7. The Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Kallen, J. and Kirk, J. (2007). ICE-Ireland: Local variations on
global standards. In Beal, J. C., Corrigan, K. P., and Moisl,
H. L., editors, Creating and Digitizing Language Corpora:
Synchronic Databases, volume 1, pages 121–162. Palgrave
Macmillan, London.

Kirk, J. and Kallen, J. (2007). Assessing Celticity in a Corpus
of Irish Standard English. In The Celtic languages in con-
tact: papers from the workshop within the framework of the
XIII International Congress of Celtic Studies, Bonn, 26-27
July 2007, page 270.

Levin, B. (1993). English Verb Classes and Alternations. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Nelson, G., Wallis, S., and Aarts, B. (2002). Exploring natural
language: working with the British component of the Inter-
national Corpus of English. John Benjamins.

Scannell, K. (2007). The Crúbadán project: Corpus building
for under-resourced languages. In Fairon, C., Naets, H., Kil-
garriff, A., and de Schryver, G.-M., editors, Building and Ex-
ploring Web Corpora: Proceedings of the 3rd Web as Corpus
Workshop, volume 4, pages 5–15.

Web (2008). The IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB).
Yahoo! Inc. (1995). The Yahoo! Internet search engine.

29


