










































The Role of Information Extraction in the Design of a Document Triage Application for Biocuration


Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL-HLT 2011, pages 46–55,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Role of Information Extraction in the Design of a Document Triage
Application for Biocuration

Sandeep Pokkunuri
School of Computing

University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT

sandeepp@cs.utah.edu

Cartic Ramakrishnan
Information Sciences Institute
Univ. of Southern California

Marina del Rey, CA
cartic@isi.edu

Ellen Riloff
School of Computing

University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT

riloff@cs.utah.edu

Eduard Hovy
Information Sciences Institute
Univ. of Southern California

Marina del Rey, CA
hovy@isi.edu

Gully APC Burns
Information Sciences Institute
Univ. of Southern California

Marina del Rey, CA
burns@isi.edu

Abstract

Traditionally, automated triage of papers is
performed using lexical (unigram, bigram,
and sometimes trigram) features. This pa-
per explores the use of information extrac-
tion (IE) techniques to create richer linguistic
features than traditional bag-of-words models.
Our classifier includes lexico-syntactic pat-
terns and more-complex features that repre-
sent a pattern coupled with its extracted noun,
represented both as a lexical term and as a
semantic category. Our experimental results
show that the IE-based features can improve
performance over unigram and bigram fea-
tures alone. We present intrinsic evaluation
results of full-text document classification ex-
periments to determine automatically whether
a paper should be considered of interest to
biologists at the Mouse Genome Informatics
(MGI) system at the Jackson Laboratories. We
also further discuss issues relating to design
and deployment of our classifiers as an ap-
plication to support scientific knowledge cu-
ration at MGI.

1 Introduction

A long-standing promise of Biomedical Natural
Language Processing is to accelerate the process of
literature-based ‘biocuration’, where published in-
formation must be carefully and appropriately trans-
lated into the knowledge architecture of a biomed-
ical database. Typically, biocuration is a manual
activity, performed by specialists with expertise in

both biomedicine and the computational represen-
tation of the target database. It is widely acknowl-
edged as a vital lynch-pin of biomedical informatics
(Bourne and McEntyre, 2006).

A key step in biocuration is the initial triage of
documents in order to direct to specialists only the
documents appropriate for them. This classifica-
tion (Cohen and Hersh, 2006)(Hersh W, 2005) can
be followed by a step in which desired information
is extracted and appropriately standardized and for-
malized for entry into the database. Both these steps
can be enhanced by suitably powerful Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) technology. In this paper,
we address text mining as a step within the broader
context of developing both infrastructure and tools
for biocuration support within the Mouse Genome
Informatics (MGI) system at the Jackson Labora-
tories. We previously identified ‘document triage’
as a crucial bottleneck (Ramakrishnan et al., 2010)
within MGI’s biocuration workflow.

Our research explores the use of information ex-
traction (IE) techniques to create richer linguis-
tic features than traditional bag-of-words models.
These features are employed by a classifier to per-
form the triage step. The features include lexico-
syntactic patterns as well as more-complex features,
such as a pattern coupled with its extracted noun,
where the noun is represented both as a lexical term
and by its semantic category. Our experimental re-
sults show that the IE-based enhanced features can
improve performance over unigram and bigram fea-
tures alone.

46



Evaluating the performance of BioNLP tools is
not trivial. So-called intrinsic metrics measure the
performance of a tool against some gold standard of
performance, while extrinsic ones (Alex et al., 2008)
measure how much the overall biocuration process
is benefited. Such metrics necessarily involve the
deployment of the software in-house for testing
by biocurators, and require a large-scale software-
engineering infrastructure effort. In this paper, we
present intrinsic evaluation results of full-text doc-
ument classification experiments to determine auto-
matically whether a paper should be considered of
interest to MGI curators. We plan in-house deploy-
ment and extrinsic evaluation in near-term work.

Our work should be considered as the first step of
a broader process within which (a) the features used
in this particular classification approach will be re-
engineered so that they may be dynamically recre-
ated in any new domain by a reusable component,
(b) this component is deployed into reusable infras-
tructure that also includes document-, annotation-
and feature-storage capabilities that support scaling
and reuse, and (c) the overall functionality can then
be delivered as a software application to biocurators
themselves for extrinsic evaluation in any domain
they choose. Within the ‘SciKnowMine’ project, we
are constructing such a framework (Ramakrishnan et
al., 2010), and this work reported here forms a pro-
totype component that we plan to incorporate into
a live application. We describe the underlying NLP
research here, and provide context for the work by
describing the overall design and implementation of
the SciKnowMine infrastructure.

1.1 Motivation

MGI’s biocurators use very specific guidelines for
triage that continuously evolve. These guidelines
are tailored to specific subcategories within MGI’s
triage task (phenotype, Gene Ontology1 (GO) term,
gene expression, tumor biology and chromosomal
location mapping). They help biocurators decide
whether a paper is relevant to one or more subcat-
egories. As an example, consider the guideline for
the phenotype category shown in Table 1.

This example makes clear that it is not sufficient
to match on relevant words like ‘transgene’ alone.

1http://www.geneontology.org/

‘Select paper
If: it is about transgenes where a gene from any
species is inserted in mice and this results in
a phenotype.
Except: if the paper uses transgenes to
examine promoter function’.

Table 1: Sample triage guideline used by MGI biocura-
tors

To identify a paper as being ‘within-scope’ or ‘out-
of-scope’ requires that a biocurator understand the
context of the experiment described in the paper.
To check this we examined two sample papers; one
that matches the precondition of the above rule and
another that matches its exception. The first paper
(Sjögren et al., 2009) is about a transgene inser-
tion causing a pheotype and is a positive example
of the category phenotype, while the second paper
(Bouatia-Naji et al., 2010) is about the use of trans-
genes to study promoter function and is a negative
example for the same category.

Inspection of the negative-example paper illus-
trates the following issues concerning the language
used: (1) This paper is about transgene-use in study-
ing promoter function. Understanding this requires
the following background knowledge: (a) the two
genes mentioned in the title are transgenes; (b) the
phrase ‘elevation of fasting glucose levels’ in the ti-
tle represents an up-regulation phenotype event. (2)
Note that the word ‘transgene’ never occurs in the
entire negative-example paper. This suggests that
recognizing that a paper involves the use of trans-
genes requires annotation of domain-specific enti-
ties and a richer representation than that offered by
a simple bag-of-words model.

Similar inspection of the positive-example paper
reveals that (3) the paper contains experimental ev-
idence showing the phenotype resulting from the
transgene insertion. (4) The ‘Materials and Meth-
ods’ section of the positive-example paper clearly
identifies the construction of the transgene and the
‘Results’ section describes the development of the
transgenic mouse model used in the study. (3)
and (4) above suggest that domain knowledge about
complex biological phenomena (events) such as
phenotype and experimental protocol may be help-
ful for the triage task.

47



Together, points (1)–(4) suggest that different
sections of a paper contain additional important
context-specific clues. The example highlights the
complex nature of the triage task facing the MGI
biocurators. At present, this level of nuanced ‘un-
derstanding’ of content semantics is extremely hard
for machines to replicate. Nonetheless, merely treat-
ing the papers as a bag-of-words is unlikely to make
nuanced distinctions between positive and negative
examples with the level of precision and recall re-
quired in MGI’s triage task.

In this paper we therefore describe: (1) the design
and performance of a classifier that is enriched with
three types of features, all derived from informa-
tion extraction: (a) lexico-syntactic patterns, (b) pat-
terns coupled with lexical extractions, and (c) pat-
terns coupled with semantic extractions. We com-
pare the enriched classifier against classifiers that
use only unigram and bigram features; (2) the de-
sign of a biocuration application for MGI along with
the first prototype system where we emphasize the
infrastructure necessary to support the engineering
of domain-specific features of the kind described
in the examples above. Our application is based
on Unstructured Information Management Architec-
ture (UIMA) (Ferrucci and Lally, 2004), which is
a pipeline-based framework for the development of
software systems that analyze large volumes of un-
structured information.

2 Information Extraction for Triage
Classification

In this section, we present the information extraction
techniques that we used as the basis for our IE-based
features, and we describe the three types of IE fea-
tures that we incorporated into the triage classifier.

2.1 Information Extraction Techniques

Information extraction (IE) includes a variety of
techniques for extracting factual information from
text. We focus on pattern-based IE methods
that were originally designed for event extrac-
tion. Event extraction systems identify the role
fillers associated with events. For example, con-
sider the task of extracting information from dis-
ease outbreak reports, such as ProMed-mail arti-
cles (http://www.promedmail.org/). In contrast to a

named entity recognizer, which should identify all
mentions of diseases and people, an event extraction
system should only extract the diseases involved in
an outbreak incident and the people who were the
victims. Other mentions of diseases (e.g., in histori-
cal discussions) or people (e.g., doctors or scientists)
should be discarded.

We utilized the Sundance/AutoSlog software
package (Riloff and Phillips, 2004), which is freely
available for research. Sundance is an information
extraction engine that applies lexico-syntactic pat-
terns to extract noun phrases from specific linguistic
contexts. Sundance performs its own syntactic anal-
ysis, which includes morphological analysis, shal-
low parsing, clause segmentation, and syntactic role
assignment (i.e., identifying subjects and direct ob-
jects of verb phrases). Sundance labels verb phrases
with respect to active/passive voice, which is im-
portant for event role labelling. For example, “Tom
Smith was diagnosed with bird flu” means that Tom
Smith is a victim, but “Tom Smith diagnosed the el-
derly man with bird flu” means that the elderly man
is the victim.

Sundance’s information extraction engine can ap-
ply lexico-syntactic patterns to extract noun phrases
that participate in syntactic relations. Each pat-
tern represents a linguistic expression, and extracts
a noun phrase (NP) argument from one of three syn-
tactic positions: Subject, Direct Object, or Prepo-
sitional Phrase. Patterns may be defined manu-
ally, or they can be generated by the AutoSlog pat-
tern generator (Riloff, 1993), which automatically
generates patterns from a domain-specific text cor-
pus. AutoSlog uses 17 syntactic ‘templates’ that are
matched against the text. Lexico-syntactic patterns
are generated by instantiating the matching words in
the text with the syntactic template. For example,
five of AutoSlog’s syntactic templates are shown in
Table 2:

(a) <SUBJ> PassVP
(b) PassVP Prep <NP>
(c) <SUBJ> ActVP
(d) ActVP Prep <NP>
(e) Subject PassVP Prep <NP>

Table 2: Five example syntactic templates (PassVP
means passive voice verb phrase, ActVP means active
voice verb phrase)

48



Pattern (a) matches any verb phrase (VP) in a pas-
sive voice construction and extracts the Subject of
the VP. Pattern (b) matches passive voice VPs that
are followed by a prepositional phrase. The NP
in the prepositional phrase is extracted. Pattern (c)
matches any active voice VP and extracts its Subject,
while Pattern (d) matches active voice VPs followed
by a prepositional phrase. Pattern (e) is a more com-
plex pattern that requires a specific Subject2, passive
voice VP, and a prepositional phrase. We applied the
AutoSlog pattern generator to our corpus (described
in Section 3.1) to exhaustively generate every pat-
tern that occurs in the corpus.

As an example, consider the following sentence,
taken from an article in PLoS Genetics:

USP14 is endogenously expressed in
HEK293 cells and in kidney tissue derived
from wt mice.

<SUBJ> PassVP(expressed)
<SUBJ> ActVP(derived)
PassVP(expressed) Prep(in) <NP>
ActVP(derived) Prep(from) <NP>
Subject(USP14) PassVP(expressed) Prep(in) <NP>

Table 3: Lexico-syntactic patterns for the PLoS Genetics
sentence shown above.

AutoSlog generates five patterns from this sen-
tence, which are shown in Table 3:

The first pattern matches passive voice instances
of the verb ‘expressed’, and the second pattern
matches active voice instances of the verb ‘de-
rived’.3 These patterns rely on syntactic analysis,
so they will match any syntactically appropriate con-
struction. For example, the first pattern would match
‘was expressed’, ‘were expressed’, ‘have been ex-
pressed’ and ‘was very clearly expressed’. The third
and fourth patterns represent the same two VPs but
also require the presence of a specific prepositional
phrase. The prepositional phrase does not need to
be adjacent to the VP, so long as it is attached to
the VP syntactically. The last pattern is very spe-
cific and will only match passive voice instances of

2Only the head nouns must match.
3Actually, the second clause is in reduced passive voice (i.e.,

tissue that was derived from mice), but the parser misidentifies
it as an active voice construction.

‘expressed’ that also have a Subject with a particular
head noun (‘USP14’) and an attached prepositional
phrase with the preposition ‘in’.

The example sentence contains four noun phrases,
which are underlined. When the patterns generated
by AutoSlog are applied to the sentence, they pro-
duce the following NP extractions (shown in bold-
face in Table 4):

<USP14> PassVP(expressed)
<kidney tissue> ActVP(derived)
PassVP(expressed) Prep(in) <HEK293 cells>
ActVP(derived) Prep(from) <wt mice>
Subject(USP14) PassVP(expressed) Prep(in) <HEK293

cells>

Table 4: Noun phrase extractions produced by Sundance
for the sample sentence.

In the next section, we explain how we use the in-
formation extraction system to produce rich linguis-
tic features for our triage classifier.

2.2 IE Pattern Features

For the triage classification task, we experimented
with four types of IE-based features: Patterns, Lexi-
cal Extractions, and Semantic Extractions.

The Pattern features are the lexico-syntactic IE
patterns. Intuitively, each pattern represents a phrase
or expression that could potentially capture contexts
associated with mouse genomics better than isolated
words (unigrams). We ran the AutoSlog pattern gen-
erator over the training set to exhaustively generate
every pattern that appeared in the corpus. We then
defined one feature for each pattern and gave it a
binary feature value (i.e., 1 if the pattern occurred
anywhere in the document, 0 otherwise).

We also created features that capture not just the
pattern expression, but also its argument. The Lex-
ical Extraction features represent a pattern paired
with the head noun of its extracted noun phrase.
Table 5 shows the Lexical Extraction features that
would be generated for the sample sentence shown
earlier. Our hypothesis was that these features could
help to distinguish between contexts where an activ-
ity is relevant (or irrelevant) to MGI because of the
combination of an activity and its argument.

The Lexical Extraction features are very specific,
requiring the presence of multiple terms. So we

49



PassVP(expressed), USP14
ActVP(derived), tissue
PassVP(expressed) Prep(in), cells
ActVP(derived) Prep(from), mice
Subject(USP14) PassVP(expressed) Prep(in), cells

Table 5: Lexical Extraction features

also experimented with generalizing the extracted
nouns by replacing them with a semantic category.
To generate a semantic dictionary for the mouse ge-
nomics domain, we used the Basilisk bootstrapping
algorithm (Thelen and Riloff, 2002). Basilisk has
been used previously to create semantic lexicons for
terrorist events (Thelen and Riloff, 2002) and senti-
ment analysis (Riloff et al., 2003), and recent work
has shown good results for bioNLP domains using
similar bootstrapping algorithms (McIntosh, 2010;
McIntosh and Curran, 2009).

As input, Basilisk requires a domain-specific text
corpus (unannotated) and a handful of seed nouns
for each semantic category to be learned. A boot-
strapping algorithm then iteratively hypothesizes ad-
ditional words that belong to each semantic cat-
egory based on their association with the seed
words in pattern contexts. The output is a lexicon
of nouns paired with their corresponding semantic
class. (e.g., liver : BODY PART).

We used Basilisk to create a lexicon for eight se-
mantic categories associated with mouse genomics:
BIOLOGICAL PROCESS, BODY PART, CELL TYPE,
CELLULAR LOCATION, BIOLOGICAL SUBSTANCE,
EXPERIMENTAL REAGENT, RESEARCH SUBJECT,
TUMOR. To choose the seed nouns, we parsed
the training corpus, ranked all of the nouns by fre-
quency4, and selected the 10 most frequent, unam-
biguous nouns belonging to each semantic category.
The seed words that we used for each semantic cat-
egory are shown in Table 6.

Finally, we defined Semantic Extraction features
as a pair consisting of a pattern coupled with the
semantic category of the noun that it extracted. If
the noun was not present in the semantic lexicons,
then no feature was created. The Basilisk-generated
lexicons are not perfect, so some entries will be in-
correct. But our hope was that replacing the lexical
terms with semantic categories might help the clas-

4We only used nouns that occurred as the head of a NP.

BIOLOGICAL PROCESS: expression, ac-
tivity, activation, development, function,
production, differentiation, regulation, re-
duction, proliferation
BODY PART: brain, muscle, thymus, cor-
tex, retina, skin, spleen, heart, lung, pan-
creas
CELL TYPE: neurons, macrophages, thy-
mocytes, splenocytes, fibroblasts, lym-
phocytes, oocytes, monocytes, hepato-
cytes, spermatocytes
CELLULAR LOCATION: receptor, nu-
clei, axons, chromosome, membrane, nu-
cleus, chromatin, peroxisome, mitochon-
dria, cilia
BIOLOGICAL SUBSTANCE: antibody,
lysates, kinase, cytokines, peptide, anti-
gen, insulin, ligands, peptides, enzyme
EXPERIMENTAL REAGENT: buffer,
primers, glucose, acid, nacl, water, saline,
ethanol, reagents, paraffin
RESEARCH SUBJECT: mice, embryos,
animals, mouse, mutants, patients, litter-
mates, females, males, individuals
TUMOR: tumors, tumor, lymphomas,
tumours, carcinomas, malignancies,
melanoma, adenocarcinomas, gliomas,
sarcoma

Table 6: Seed words given to Basilisk

sifier learn more general associations. For exam-
ple, “PassVP(expressed) Prep(in), CELLULAR LO-
CATION” will apply much more broadly than the
corresponding lexical extraction with just one spe-
cific cellular location (e.g., ‘mitochondria’).

Information extraction patterns and their argu-
ments have been used for text classification in pre-
vious work (Riloff and Lehnert, 1994; Riloff and
Lorenzen, 1999), but the patterns and arguments
were represented separately and the semantic fea-
tures came from a hand-crafted dictionary. In con-
trast, our work couples each pattern with its ex-
tracted argument as a single feature, uses an auto-
matically generated semantic lexicon, and is the first
application of these techniques to the biocuration
triage task.

50



3 Results

3.1 Data Set

For our experiments in this paper we use articles
within the PubMed Central (PMC) Open Access
Subset5. From this subset we select all articles that
are published in journals of interest to biocurators
at MGI. This results in a total of 14,827 documents
out of which 981 have been selected manually by
MGI biocurators as relevant (referred to as IN docu-
ments). This leaves 13,846 that are presumably out
of scope (referred to as OUT documents), although
it was not guaranteed that all of them had been man-
ually reviewed so some relevant documents could be
included as well. (We plan eventually to present to
the biocurators those papers not included by them
but nonetheless selected by our tools as IN with
high confidence, for possible reclassification. Such
changes will improve the system’s evaluated score.)

As preprocessing for the NLP tools, we split
the input text into sentences using the Lin-
gua::EN::Sentence perl package. We trimmed non-
alpha-numerics attached before and after words.
We also removed stop words using the Lin-
gua::EN::StopWords package.

3.2 Classifier

We used SVM Light6(Joachims, 1999) for all of our
experiments. We used a linear kernel and a tol-
erance value of 0.1 for QP solver termination. In
preliminary experiments, we observed that the cost
factor (C value) made a big difference in perfor-
mance. In SVMs, the cost factor represents the
importance of penalizing errors on the training in-
stances in comparison to the complexity (general-
ization) of the model. We observed that higher val-
ues of C produced increased recall, though at the ex-
pense of some precision. We used a tuning set to
experiment with different values of C, trying a wide
range of powers of 2. We found that C=1024 gen-
erally produced the best balance of recall and preci-
sion, so we used that value throughout our experi-
ments.

5http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/about/
openftlist.html

6http://svmlight.joachims.org/

3.3 Experiments

We randomly partitioned our text corpus into 5 sub-
sets of 2,965 documents each.7 We used the first 4
subsets as the training set, and reserved the fifth sub-
set as a blind test set.

In preliminary experiments, we found that the
classifiers consistently benefitted from feature se-
lection when we discarded low-frequency features.
This helps to keep the classifier from overfitting to
the training data. For each type of feature, we set
a frequency threshold θ and discarded any features
that occurred fewer than θ times in the training set.
We chose these θ values empirically by performing
4-fold cross-validation on the training set. We eval-
uated θ values ranging from 1 to 50, and chose the
value that produced the highest F score. The θ val-
ues that were selected are: 7 for unigrams, 50 for
bigrams, 35 for patterns, 50 for lexical extractions,
and 5 for semantic extractions.

Finally, we trained an SVM classifier on the en-
tire training set and evaluated the classifier on the
test set. We computed Precision (P), Recall (R), and
the F score, which is the harmonic mean of preci-
sion and recall. Precision and recall were equally
weighted, so this is sometimes called an F1 score.

Table 7 shows the results obtained by using each
of the features in isolation. The lexical extraction
features are shown as ‘lexExts’ and the semantic ex-
traction features are shown as ‘semExts’. We also
experimented with using a hybrid extraction fea-
ture, ‘hybridExts’, which replaced a lexical extrac-
tion noun with its semantic category when one was
available but left the noun as the extraction term
when no semantic category was known.

Table 7 shows that the bigram features produced
the best Recall (65.87%) and F-Score (74.05%),
while the hybrid extraction features produced the
best Precision (85.52%) but could not match the bi-
grams in terms of recall. This is not surprising be-
cause the extraction features on their own are quite
specific, often requiring 3-4 words to match.

Next, we experimented with adding the IE-based
features to the bigram features to allow the classifier
to choose among both feature sets and get the best
of both worlds. Combining bigrams with IE-based

7Our 5-way random split left 2 documents aside, which we
ignored for our experiments.

51



Feature P R F
unigrams 79.75 60.58 68.85
bigrams 84.57 65.87 74.05
patterns 78.98 59.62 67.95
lexExts 76.54 59.62 67.03
semExts 72.39 46.63 56.73
hybridExts 85.52 59.62 70.25
bigrams + patterns 84.87 62.02 71.67
bigrams + lexExts 85.28 66.83 74.93
bigrams + semExts 85.43 62.02 71.87
bigrams + hybridExts 87.10 64.90 74.38

Table 7: Triage classifier performance using different sets
of features.

features did in fact yield the best results. Using bi-
grams and lexical extraction features achieved both
the highest recall (66.83%) and the highest F score
(74.93%). In terms of overall F score, we see a rela-
tively modest gain of about 1% by adding the lexical
extraction features to the bigram features, which is
primarily due to the 1% gain in recall.

However, precision is of paramount importance
for many applications because users don’t want to
wade through incorrect predictions. So it is worth
noting that adding the hybrid extraction features to
the bigram features produced a 2.5% increase in pre-
cision (84.57% → 87.10%) with just a 1% drop in
recall. This recall/precision trade-off is likely to be
worthwhile for many real-world application settings,
including biocuration.

4 Biocuration Application for MGI

Developing an application that supports MGI biocu-
rators necessitates an application design that mini-
mally alters existing curation workflows while main-
taining high classification F-scores (intrinsic mea-
sures) and speeding up the curation process (extrin-
sic measures). We seek improvements with respect
to intrinsic measures by engineering context-specific
features and seek extrinsic evaluations by instru-
menting the deployed triage application to record us-
age statistics that serve as input to extrinsic evalua-
tion measures.

4.1 Software Architecture
As stated earlier, one of our major goals is to build,
deploy, and extrinsically evaluate an NLP-assisted

curation application (Alex et al., 2008) for triage at
MGI. By definition, an extrinsic evaluation of our
triage application requires its deployment and sub-
sequent tuning to obtain optimal performance with
respect to extrinsic evaluation criteria. We antici-
pate that features, learning parameters, and training
data distributions may all need to be adjusted during
a tuning process. Cognizant of these future needs,
we have designed the SciKnowMine system so as
to integrate the various components and algorithms
using the UIMA infrastructure. Figure 1 shows a
schematic of SciKnowMine’s overall architecture.

4.1.1 Building configurable & reusable UIMA
pipelines

The experiments we have presented in this paper
have been conducted using third party implementa-
tions of a variety of algorithms implemented on a
wide variety of platforms. We use SVMLight to
train a triage classifier on features that were pro-
duced by AutoSlog and Sundance on sentences iden-
tified by the perl package Lingua::EN::Sentence.
Each of these types of components has either been
reimplemented or wrapped as a component reusable
in UIMA pipelines within the SciKnowMine in-
frastructure. We hope that building such a li-
brary of reusable components will help galvanize the
BioNLP community towards standardization of an
interoperable and open-access set of NLP compo-
nents. Such a standardization effort is likely to lower
the barrier-of-entry for NLP researchers interested in
applying their algorithms to knowledge engineering
problems in Biology (such as biocuration).

4.1.2 Storage infrastructure for annotations &
features

As we develop richer section-specific and
context-specific features we anticipate the need for
provenance pertaining to classification decisions for
a given paper. We have therefore built an Annotation
Store and a Feature Store collectively referred to as
the Classification Metadata Store8 in Figure 1. Fig-
ure 1 also shows parallel pre-processing populating
the annotation store. We are working on develop-
ing parallel UIMA pipelines that extract expensive
(resource & time intensive) features (such as depen-

8Our classification metadata store has been implemented us-
ing Solr http://lucene.apache.org/solr/

52



dency parses).The annotation store holds features
produced by pre-processing pipelines. The annota-
tion store has been designed to support query-based
composition of feature sets specific to a classifica-
tion run. These feature sets can be asserted to the
feature store and reused later by any pipeline. This
design provides us with the flexibility necessary to
experiment with a wide variety of features and tune
our classifiers in response to feedback from biocura-
tors.

5 Discussions & Conclusions

In this paper we have argued the need for richer se-
mantic features for the MGI biocuration task. Our
results show that simple lexical and semantic fea-
tures used to augment bigram features can yield
higher classification performance with respect to in-
trinsic metrics (such as F-Score). It is noteworthy
that using a hybrid of lexical and semantic features
results in the highest precision of 87%.

In our motivating example, we have proposed
the need for sectional-zoning of articles and have
demonstrated that certain zones like the ‘Materi-
als and Methods’ section can contain contextual
features that might increase classification perfor-
mance. It is clear from the samples of MGI man-
ual classification guidelines that biocurators do, in
fact, use zone-specific features in triage. It there-
fore seems likely that section specific feature ex-
traction might result in better classification perfor-
mance in the triage task. Our preliminary analysis of
the MGI biocuration guidelines suggests that exper-
imental procedures described in the ‘Materials and
Methods’ seem to be a good source of triage clues.
We therefore propose to investigate zone and context
specific features and the explicit use of domain mod-
els of experimental procedure as features for docu-
ment triage.

We have also identified infrastructure needs aris-
ing within the construction of a biocuration applica-
tion. In response we have constructed preliminary
versions of metadata stores and UIMA pipelines to
support MGI’s biocuration. Our next step is to de-
ploy a prototype assisted-curation application that
uses a classifier trained on the best performing fea-
tures discussed in this paper. This application will
be instrumented to record usage statistics for use in

extrinsic evaluations (Alex et al., 2008). We hope
that construction on such an application will also
engender the creation of an open environment for
NLP scientists to apply their algorithms to biomedi-
cal corpora in addressing biomedical knowledge en-
gineering challenges.

6 Acknowledgements

This research is funded by the U.S. National Sci-
ence Foundation under grant #0849977 for the
SciKnowMine project (http://sciknowmine.
isi.edu/). We wish to acknowledge Kevin Co-
hen for helping us collect the seed terms for Basilisk
and Karin Verspoor for discussions regarding feature
engineering.

References

[Alex et al.2008] Beatrice Alex, Claire Grover, Barry
Haddow, Mijail Kabadjov, Ewan Klein, Michael
Matthews, Stuart Roebuck, Richard Tobin, and Xin-
glong Wang. 2008. Assisted curation: does text min-
ing really help? Pacific Symposium On Biocomputing,
567:556–567.

[Bouatia-Naji et al.2010] Nabila Bouatia-Naji, Amélie
Bonnefond, Devin A Baerenwald, Marion Marchand,
Marco Bugliani, Piero Marchetti, François Pattou,
Richard L Printz, Brian P Flemming, Obi C Umu-
nakwe, Nicholas L Conley, Martine Vaxillaire, Olivier
Lantieri, Beverley Balkau, Michel Marre, Claire Lévy-
Marchal, Paul Elliott, Marjo-Riitta Jarvelin, David
Meyre, Christian Dina, James K Oeser, Philippe
Froguel, and Richard M O’Brien. 2010. Genetic and
functional assessment of the role of the rs13431652-
A and rs573225-A alleles in the G6PC2 promoter that
are strongly associated with elevated fasting glucose
levels. Diabetes, 59(10):2662–2671.

[Bourne and McEntyre2006] Philip E Bourne and Jo-
hanna McEntyre. 2006. Biocurators: Contributors to
the World of Science. PLoS Computational Biology,
2(10):1.

[Cohen and Hersh2006] Aaron M Cohen and William R
Hersh. 2006. The TREC 2004 genomics track cate-
gorization task: classifying full text biomedical docu-
ments. Journal of Biomedical Discovery and Collab-
oration, 1:4.

[Ferrucci and Lally2004] D Ferrucci and A Lally. 2004.
Building an example application with the Unstructured
Information Management Architecture. IBM Systems
Journal, 43(3):455–475.

53



Citation
Store

Feature
Store 

(token trigrams, 
stemmed bigrams)

Document
Store

MGI
training
Corpus

Digital Library

Parallel
pre-processing pipelines

Classification Metadata Store

Annotation Store 
(token, Sundance 

patterns, parse trees,)

Classifier training
pipeline

trained triage 
classification 

model

Ranked Triage ResultsDigital Library

MGI Biocuration Application

Newly 
published
papers

Figure 1: Design schematic of the MGI biocuration application. The components of the application are: (A) Digital
Library composed of a citation store and document store. (B) Pre-processing UIMA pipelines which are a mecha-
nism to pre-extract standard features such as parse trees, tokenizations etc. (C) Classification Metadata Store which
is composed of an Annotation Store for the pre-extracted standard features from (B), and a Feature Store to hold de-
rived features constructed from the standard ones in the Annotation Store. (D) Classifier training pipeline. (E) MGI
Biocuration Application.

[Hersh W2005] Yang J Bhupatiraju RT Roberts P M.
Hearst M Hersh W, Cohen AM. 2005. TREC 2005
genomics track overview. In The Fourteenth Text Re-
trieval Conference.

[Joachims1999] Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making
Large-Scale SVM Learning Practical. Advances in
Kernel Methods Support Vector Learning, pages 169–
184.

[McIntosh and Curran2009] T. McIntosh and J. Curran.
2009. Reducing Semantic Drift with Bagging and
Distributional Similarity. In Proceedings of the 47th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.

[McIntosh2010] Tara McIntosh. 2010. Unsupervised dis-
covery of negative categories in lexicon bootstrapping.
In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, number Oc-

tober, pages 356–365. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

[Ramakrishnan et al.2010] Cartic Ramakrishnan, William
A Baumgartner Jr, Judith A Blake, Gully A P C
Burns, K Bretonnel Cohen, Harold Drabkin, Janan
Eppig, Eduard Hovy, Chun-Nan Hsu, Lawrence E
Hunter, Tommy Ingulfsen, Hiroaki Rocky Onda,
Sandeep Pokkunuri, Ellen Riloff, and Karin Verspoor.
2010. Building the Scientific Knowledge Mine ( Sci-
KnowMine 1 ): a community- driven framework for
text mining tools in direct service to biocuration. In
proceeding of Workshop ”New Challenges for NLP
Frameworks” collocated with The seventh interna-
tional conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC) 2010.

[Riloff and Lehnert1994] E. Riloff and W. Lehnert. 1994.
Information Extraction as a Basis for High-Precision
Text Classification. ACM Transactions on Information

54



Systems, 12(3):296–333, July.
[Riloff and Lorenzen1999] E. Riloff and J. Lorenzen.

1999. Extraction-based text categorization: Generat-
ing domain-specific role relationships automatically.
In Tomek Strzalkowski, editor, Natural Language In-
formation Retrieval. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

[Riloff and Phillips2004] E. Riloff and W. Phillips. 2004.
An Introduction to the Sundance and AutoSlog Sys-
tems. Technical Report UUCS-04-015, School of
Computing, University of Utah.

[Riloff et al.2003] E. Riloff, J. Wiebe, and T. Wilson.
2003. Learning Subjective Nouns using Extraction
Pattern Bootstrapping. In Proceedings of the Seventh
Conference on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-
2003), pages 25–32.

[Riloff1993] E. Riloff. 1993. Automatically Construct-
ing a Dictionary for Information Extraction Tasks. In
Proceedings of the 11th National Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence.

[Sjögren et al.2009] Klara Sjögren, Marie Lagerquist,
Sofia Moverare-Skrtic, Niklas Andersson, Sara H
Windahl, Charlotte Swanson, Subburaman Mohan,
Matti Poutanen, and Claes Ohlsson. 2009. Elevated
aromatase expression in osteoblasts leads to increased
bone mass without systemic adverse effects. Journal
of bone and mineral research the official journal of
the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research,
24(7):1263–1270.

[Thelen and Riloff2002] M. Thelen and E. Riloff. 2002.
A Bootstrapping Method for Learning Semantic Lexi-
cons Using Extraction Pa ttern Contexts. In Proceed-
ings of the 2002 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 214–221.

55


