










































Measuring Language Development in Early Childhood Education: A Case Study of Grammar Checking in Child Language Transcripts


Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 87–95,
Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Measuring Language Development in Early Childhood Education: A Case
Study of Grammar Checking in Child Language Transcripts

Khairun-nisa Hassanali
Computer Science Department

The University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX, USA

nisa@hlt.utdallas.edu

Yang Liu
Computer Science Department

The University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX, USA

yangl@hlt.utdallas.edu

Abstract

Language sample analysis is an important
technique used in measuring language devel-
opment. At present, measures of grammati-
cal complexity such as the Index of Productive
Syntax (Scarborough, 1990) are used to mea-
sure language development in early childhood.
Although these measures depict the overall
competence in the usage of language, they do
not provide for an analysis of the grammati-
cal mistakes made by the child. In this paper,
we explore the use of existing Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) techniques to provide
an insight into the processing of child lan-
guage transcripts and challenges in automatic
grammar checking. We explore the automatic
detection of 6 types of verb related grammat-
ical errors. We compare rule based systems
to statistical systems and investigate the use
of different features. We found the statistical
systems performed better than the rule based
systems for most of the error categories.

1 Introduction

Automatic grammar checking and correction has
been used extensively in several applications. One
such application is in word processors where the
user is notified of a potential ungrammatical sen-
tence. This feature makes it easier for the users to
detect and correct ungrammatical sentences. Au-
tomatic grammar checking can also be beneficial
in language learning where students are given sug-
gestions on potential grammatical errors (Lee and
Seneff, 2006). Another application of grammar
checking is in improving a parser’s performance for

ungrammatical sentences. Since most parsers are
trained on written data consisting mostly of gram-
matical sentences, the parsers face issues when pars-
ing ungrammatical sentences. Automatic detection
and correction of these ungrammatical sentences
would improve the parser’s performance by detect-
ing the ungrammatical sentences and performing
a second parse on the corrected sentences (Caines
and Buttery, 2010). From an education perspective,
measuring language skills has been extensively ex-
plored. There are systems in place that automatically
detect and correct errors for second language learn-
ers (Eeg-Olofsson and Knuttson, 2003; Leacock et
al., 2010).

One method used in measuring language devel-
opment is the analysis of transcripts of child lan-
guage speech. Child language transcripts are sam-
ples of a child’s utterances during a specified pe-
riod of time. Educators and speech language pathol-
ogists use these samples to measure language de-
velopment. In particular, speech language pathol-
ogists score these transcripts for grammatical mea-
sures of complexity amidst other measures. Since
manual analysis of transcripts is time consuming,
many of these grammatical complexity measures re-
quire the speech language pathologists to look for
just a few examples. The Index of Productive Syn-
tax (IPSyn) (Scarborough, 1990) is one such mea-
sure of morphological and syntactic structure devel-
oped for measuring language samples of preschool
children. The advantage of measures such as IPSyn
is that they give a single score that can be used to
holistically measure language development. How-
ever, they focus on grammatical constructs that the

87



child uses correctly and do not take into account
the number and type of grammatical errors that are
made by the child.

Educators wishing to measure language develop-
ment and competence in a child will benefit from
having access to the grammatical errors made by a
child. Analysis of these grammatical errors will en-
able educators and speech language pathologists to
identify shortcomings in the child’s language and
recommend intervention techniques customized to
the child. Since manual identification of grammat-
ical errors is both cumbersome and time consum-
ing, a tool that automatically does grammar check-
ing would be of great use to clinicians. Addition-
ally, we see several uses of automatic grammar de-
tection. For example, we can use the statistics of
grammatical errors as features in building classifiers
that predict language impairment. Furthermore, we
could also use the statistics of these grammatical er-
rors to come up with a measure of language develop-
ment that takes into account both grammatical com-
petence and grammatical deficiencies.

In this paper, we use existing NLP techniques to
automatically detect grammatical errors from child
language transcripts. Since children with Language
Impairment (LI) have a greater problem with correct
usage of verbs compared to Typically Developing
(TD) children (Rice et al., 1995), we focus mainly
on verb related errors. We compare rule based sys-
tems to statistical systems and investigate the use
of different features. We found the statistical sys-
tems performed better than the rule based systems
for most error categories.

2 Related Work

While there has been considerable work (Sagae et
al., 2007) done on annotating child language tran-
scripts for grammatical relations, as far as we know,
there has been no work done on automatic gram-
mar checking of child language transcripts. Most
of the existing work in automatic grammar check-
ing has been done on written text. Spoken language
on the other hand, presents challenges such as dis-
fluencies and false restarts which are not present in
written text. We believe that the specific research
challenges that are encountered in detecting and cor-
recting child language transcripts warrant a more de-

tailed examination.
Caines and Buttery (2010) focused on identify-

ing sentences with the missing auxiliary verb in the
progressive aspect constructions. They used logistic
regression to predict the presence of zero auxiliary
occurrence in the spoken British National Corpus
(BNC). An example of a zero auxiliary construction
is “You talking to me?”. They first identified con-
structions with the progressive aspect and annotated
the constructions for the following features: sub-
ject person, subject case, perfect aspect, presence of
negation and use of pronouns. Their model identi-
fied zero auxiliary constructions with 96.9% accu-
racy. They also demonstrated how their model can
be integrated into existing parsing tools, thereby in-
creasing the number of successful parses for zero
auxiliary constructions by 30%.

Lee and Seneff (2008) described a system for verb
error correction using template matching on parse
trees in two ways. Their work focused on correct-
ing the error types related to subject-verb agreement,
auxiliary agreement and complementation. They
considered the irregularities in parse trees caused
by verb error forms and used n-gram counts to fil-
ter proposed corrections. They used the AQUAINT
Corpus of English News Text to detect the irregular-
ities in the parse trees caused by verb error forms.
They reported an accuracy of 98.93% for verb er-
rors related to subject-verb agreement, and 98.94%
for verb errors related to auxiliary agreement and
complementation. Bowden and Fox (2002) devel-
oped a system to detect and explain errors made by
non-native English speakers. They used classifica-
tion and pattern matching rules instead of thorough
parsing. Their system searched for the verb-related
errors and noun-related errors one by one in one sen-
tence by narrowing down the classification of errors.
Lee and Seneff (2006) developed a system to auto-
matically correct grammatical errors related to arti-
cles, verbs, prepositions and nouns.

Leacock et al. (2010) discuss automated gram-
matical error detection for English language learn-
ers. They focus on errors that language learners find
most difficult - constructions that contain preposi-
tions, articles, and collocations. They discuss the
existing systems in place for automated grammati-
cal error detection and correction for these and other
classes of errors in a number of languages. Addi-

88



Label Meaning Example
0 No error I like it.
1 Missing auxiliary verb You talking to me?
2 Missing copulae She lovely.
3 Subject-auxiliary verb agreement You is talking to me.
4 Incorrect auxiliary verb used e.g. using does instead of is She does dead girl.
5 Missing verb She her a book.
6 Wrong verb usage including subject-verb disagreement He love dogs.
7 Missing preposition The book is the table.
8 Missing article She ate apple.
9 Missing subject before verb I know loves me.
10 Missing infinitive marker “to” I give it her.
11 Other errors not covered in 1-10 The put.

Table 1: Different types of errors considered in this study

tionally, they touch on error annotations and system
evaluation for grammatical error detection.

3 Data

For the purpose of our experiments, we used the Par-
adise dataset (Paradise et al., 2005). This dataset
contains 677 transcripts corresponding to 677 chil-
dren aged six that were collected in the course of
a study of the relationship of otitis media and child
development. The only household language spoken
by these children was English. The transcripts in
the Paradise set consist of conversations between a
child and his/her caretaker. We retained only the
child’s utterances and removed all other utterances.
The Paradise dataset (considering only the child’s
utterances) contains a total of 108,711 utterances,
394,290 words, and an average Mean Length of Ut-
terance of 3.64. Gabani (2009) used scores on the
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (Dunn, 1965), total
percentage phonemes repeated correctly on a non-
word repetition task and mean length of utterance
in morphemes to label these transcripts for language
impairment. A transcript was labeled as having been
produced by a child with LI if the child scored 1.5
or more standard deviations below the mean of the
entire sample on at least two of the three tests. Of
the 677 transcripts, 623 were labeled as TD and 54
as LI.

We manually annotated each utterance in the tran-
scripts for 10 different types of errors. Table 1 gives
the different types of errors we considered along

with examples. We focused on these 10 different
types of errors since children with LI have problems
with the usage of verbs in particular. The list of er-
rors we arrived at was based on the errors we ob-
served in the transcripts. Since an utterance could
have more than one error, we annotated each ut-
terance in the transcript for all the errors present
in the utterance. While annotating the utterances,
we observed that there were utterances that could
correspond to multiple types of error. For exam-
ple, consider the following sentence: “She go to
school”. The error in this sentence could be an er-
ror of a missing auxiliary and a wrong verb form
in which case the correct sentence would be “She is
going to school”; or it could be a missing modal, in
which case the correct form would be “She will go to
school”; or it could just be a subject-verb disagree-
ment in which case “She goes to school” would be
the correct form. Therefore, although we know that
the utterance definitely has an error, it is not always
possible to assign a single error. We also observed
several utterances had both a missing subject and a
missing auxiliary verb error. For example, instead of
saying “I am going to play”, some children say “Go-
ing to play”, which misses both the subject and aux-
iliary verb. In this case, the utterance was annotated
as having two errors: missing subject and missing
auxiliary. Finally, single word utterances were la-
beled as being correct.

Table 2 gives the distribution of the errors in the
corpus and percentage of TD and LI population that

89



No Error Type Percentage
(Count)

% of LI children
making error

% of TD children
making error

1 Missing auxiliary 8.43% (641) 7% 5%
2 Missing copulae 36.67% (2788) 77.78% 45%
3 Subject-auxiliary agreement 6.31% (480) 40.74% 35%
4 Incorrect auxiliary verb used 0.71%(54) 11.47% 3%
5 Missing verb 5% (380) 29.63% 10%
6 Wrong verb usage 14.59% (1109) 68.5% 50%
7 Missing preposition 5% (380) 7.4% 5%
8 Missing article 3.97% (302) 29.63% 35%
9 Missing subject 7.69% (585) 3.7% 5%
10 Missing infinitive marker “To” 1.58% (120) 7.5% 11.67%
11 Other errors 10.05% (764) 56.7% 23.2%

Table 2: Statistics of Errors

made the error at least once in the entire transcript.
As we can see from Table 2, 36.67% of the errors in
the corpus are due to missing copulae. Wrong verb
usage was the next most common error contributing
to 14.59% of the errors in the corpus. We observed
that there was a higher percentage of children with
LI that made errors on all error categories except for
errors related to missing article and missing subject.
We observed that on average, the transcripts belong-
ing to children with LI had fewer utterances as com-
pared to transcripts belonging to TD children. Ad-
ditionally, children with LI used many single word
and two word utterances.

One annotator labeled the entire corpus for gram-
matical errors. To calculate inter-annotator agree-
ment, we randomly selected 386 utterances anno-
tated by the first annotator with different error types.
The second annotator was provided these utterances
along with the labels given by the first annotator1.
In case of a disagreement, the second annotator pro-
vided a different label/labels. The annotator agree-
ment using the average Cohen’s Kappa coeffiecient
was 77.7%. Out of the 386 utterances, there were
43 disagreements between the annotators. We found
that for some error categories such as the missing
auxiliary, there was high inter-annotator agreement
of 95.32%, whereas for other categories such as
wrong verb usage and missing articles, there was

1We will perform independent annotation of the errors and
calculate inter-annotator agreement based on these independent
annotations

less agreement (64.2% and 65.3% respectively). In
particular, we found low inter-annotator agreement
on utterances that have errors that could be assigned
to multiple categories.

4 Experiments

The transcripts were parsed using the Charniak
parser (Charniak, 2000). Since the Paradise dataset
consists of children’s utterances, and many of them
have not mastered the language, we observed that
processing these transcripts is challenging. As is
prevalent in spoken language corpora, these tran-
scripts had disfluencies, false restarts and incom-
plete utterances, which sometimes pose problems to
the parser.

We conducted experiments in detecting errors re-
lated to the usage of the -ing participle, subject-
auxiliary agreement, missing copulae, missing
verb, subject-verb agreement and missing infinitive
marker “to”. For each of these categories, we con-
structed one rule based classifier using regular ex-
pressions based on the parse tree structure, an alter-
nating decision tree classifier that used rules as fea-
tures and a naive Bayes multinomial classifier that
used a variety of features. For every category, we
performed 10 fold cross validation using all the ut-
terances. We used the naive Bayes multinomial clas-
sifier and the alternating decision tree classifier from
the WEKA toolkit (Hall et al., 2009). Table 3 gives
the results using the three classifiers for the different
categories of errors, where (P/R) F1 stands for (Pre-

90



Error Rule Based System
(P/R)F1

Decision Tree Clas-
sifier using Rules as
features (P/R)F1

Naive Bayes Classifier
using a variety of fea-
tures (P/R)F1

Usage of -ing participle (0.984/0.978) 0.981 (0.986/1) 0.993 (0.736/0.929) 0.821
Missing copulae (0.885/0.9) 0.892 (0.912/0.94) 0.926 (0.82/0.86) 0.84
Missing verb (0.875/0.932) 0.903 (0.92/0.89) 0.905 (0.87/0.91) 0.9
Subject-auxiliary agree-
ment

(0.855/0.932) 0.888 (0.95/0.84) 0.892 (0.89/0.934) 0.912

Subject-verb agreement (0.883/0.945) 0.892 (0.92/0.877) 0.898 (0.91/0.914) 0.912
Missing infinitive marker
“To”

(0.97/0.954) 0.962 (0.94/0.84) 0.887 (0.95/0.88) 0.914

Overall (0.935/0.923) 0.929 (0.945/0.965) 0.955 (0.956/0.978) 0.967

Table 3: Detection of errors using rule based system, alternating decision tree classifier and naive Bayes classifier

No Feature Type
1 Verb Adjective Bigram
2 Auxiliary Noun Bigram
3 Auxiliary Progressive-verb Bigram
4 Pronoun Auxiliary Bigram
5 Wh-Pronoun Progressive verb Bigram
6 Progressive-verb Wh-adverb Bigram
7 Adverb Auxiliary Skip-1
8 Pronoun Auxiliary Skip-1
9 Wh-adverb Progressive-verb Skip-1
10 Auxiliary Preposition Skip-2

Table 4: Top most bigram features useful for detecting
misuse of -ing participle

cision/Recall) F1-measure. Below we describe the
different experiments we conducted.

4.1 Misuse of the -ing Participle
The -ing participle can be used as a progressive as-
pect, a verb complementation, or a prepositional
complementation. In the progressive aspect, it is
necessary that the progressive verb be preceded by
an auxiliary verb. When used as a verb comple-
mentation, the -ing participle should be preceded by
a verb and similiarly when used as a prepositional
complement, the -ing participle should be preceded
by a preposition.

Rule based system
The -ing participle is denoted by the VBG tag in the
Penn tree bank notation. VP and PP correspond to

the verb phrase and prepositional phrase structures
respectively. The rules that we formed were as fol-
lows:

1. Check that the utterance has a VBG tag (if it
does not have a VBG tag, it does not contain an
-ing participle).

2. If none of the following conditions are met,
there is an error in the usage of -ing participle:

(a) The root of the subtree that contains the
-ing participle should be a VP with the
head being a verb if used as a verb com-
plementation

(b) The root of the subtree that contains the
-ing participle should be a PP if used as a
prepositional complement

(c) The root of the subtree that contains the
-ing participle should be a VP with the
head being an auxiliary verb if used as a
progressive aspect

Predictive model
The features that we considered were:

1. Bigrams from POS tags

2. Skip bigrams from POS tags

We used the skip bigrams to account for the
fact that there could be other POS tags between
an auxiliary verb and the progressive aspect of
the verb such as adverbs. A skip-n bigram is
a sequence of 2 POS tags with a distance of n
between them. We used skip-1 and skip-2 bi-
grams in this study.

91



Analysis
As we can see from Table 3, the alternating decision
tree classifier with rules as features gave the best re-
sults with an F1-measure of 0.993. Table 4 gives
the topmost 10 features extracted using feature se-
lection. We got the best results when we used the
reduced set of features as opposed to using all bi-
grams and skip-1 and skip-2 bigrams. We also used
the results reported by (Caines and Buttery, 2010)
to see if their method was successful in identifying
zero auxiliary constructs on our corpus. When we
used logistic regression with the coefficients and fea-
tures used by (Caines and Buttery, 2010), we got a
recall of 0%. When we trained the logistic regres-
sion model on our data with their features, we got a
precision of 1.09%, recall of 53.6% and F1-measure
of 2.14%. This leads us to conclude that the features
that were used by them are not suitable for child lan-
guage transcripts. Additionally, we also observed
that based on the features they used, in some cases
it is difficult to distinguish zero auxiliary constructs
from those with auxiliary constructs. For example,
“You talking to me?” and “Are you talking to me?”
would have the same values for their features, al-
though the former is a zero auxiliary construct and
the latter is not.

4.2 Identifying Missing Copulae
A copular verb is a verb that links a subject to its
complement. In English, the most common copular
verb is “be”. Examples of sentences that contain a
copular verb is “She is lovely” and “The child who
fell sick was healthy earlier”. An example of a sen-
tence that misses a copular verb is “She lovely”.

Rule based system
The rule that we used was as follows:

If an Adjective Phrase follows a noun phrase, or
a Noun phrase follows a noun phrase, the likelihood
that the utterance is missing a copular verb is quite
high. However, there are exceptions to such rules,
for example, “Apple Pie”. We formed additional
rules to identify such utterances and examined their
parse trees to determine the function of the two noun
phrases.

Predictive model

The features we used were as follows:

1. Does the utterance contain a noun phrase fol-
lowed by a noun phrase?

2. Does the utterance contain a noun phrase fol-
lowed by an adjective phrase?

3. Is the parent a verb phrase?

4. Is the parent a prepositional phrase?

5. Is the parent the root of the parse tree?

6. Is there an auxiliary verb or a verb between the
noun phrase and/or adjective phrase?

Analysis
As we can see from Table 3, the alternating deci-
sion tree classifier performed the best with an F1-
measure of 0.926. Our rules capture simple con-
structs that are used by young children. The majority
of the utterances that missed a copulae consisted of
noun phrase and an adjective phrase or a noun phrase
and a noun phrase. Hence, the rules based system
performed the best. Some of the false positives were
due to utterances like “She an apple” where it is un-
likely that the missing verb is a copular verb.

4.3 Identifying Missing Verbs
Errors of this type occur when a sentence is miss-
ing the verb. For example, the sentence “You can
an apple” lacks the main verb after the modal verb
“can”. Similarly, “I did not it” lacks a main verb af-
ter “did not”. For the purpose of this experiment, we
consider only utterances that contain a modal or an
auxiliary verb but do not have a main verb. We also
consider utterances that use the verb “do” and detect
the main missing verb in such cases.

Rule based system
The rule we used was to check if the utterance con-
tains an auxiliary verb or a modal verb but not a main
verb. In this case, the utterance is definitely missing
a main verb. In order to identify utterances where the
words “did”, “do” and “does” are auxiliary verbs, we
use the following procedure: If the negation “not”
is present after did/do/does, then did/do/does is an
auxiliary verb and needs to be followed by a main
verb. In the case of the utterance being a question,
the presence of did/do/does at the beginning of the
utterances indicates the use as an auxiliary verb. In

92



such a case, we need to check for the presence of a
main verb. The same holds for the other auxiliary
verbs.

Predictive model
We used the following as features:

1. Is an auxiliary verb present?

2. Is a modal verb present?

3. Is a main verb present after the auxiliary verb?

4. Is a main verb present after the modal verb?

5. Type of utterance - interrogative, declarative

6. Is a negation (not) present?

Analysis
As we can see from Table 3, the alternating decision
tree classifier using rules as features gave the best
result with an F1-measure of 0.905. At present, we
handle only a subset of missing verbs and specif-
ically those verbs that contain an auxiliary verb.
Since most of the utterances are simple constructs,
the alternating decision tree classifier performs well.

4.4 Identifying Subject-auxiliary Agreement

In the case of the subject-auxiliary agreement and
subject-verb agreement, the first verb in the verb
phrase has to agree with the subject unless the first
verb is a modal verb. In the sentence “The girls has
bought a nice car”, since the subject “The girls” is
a plural noun phrase, the auxiliary verb should be in
the plural form. While considering the number and
person of the subject, we take into account whether
the subject is an indefinite pronoun or contains a
conjunction since special rules apply to these cases.
Indefinite pronouns are words which replace nouns
without specifying the nouns they replace. Some in-
definite pronouns such as all, any and more take both
singular and plural forms. On the other hand, indefi-
nite pronouns like somebody and anyone always take
the singular form.

Rule based system
The rule we used to identify subject-auxiliary agree-
ment was as follows:

1. Extract the number (singular, plural) of the sub-
ject and the auxiliary verb in the verb phrase.

2. If the number of the subject and auxiliary verb
do not match, there is a subject-auxiliary agree-
ment error.

Predictive model
The features were as follows:

1. Number of subject - singular or plural

2. Type of noun phrase - pronoun or other noun
phrase

3. Person of noun phrase - first, second, third

4. Presence of a main verb in the utterance (we are
looking at the agreement only for the auxiliary
verb)

Analysis
As we can see from Table 3, the naive Bayes multi-
nomial classifier performed the best with an F1-
measure of 0.912. We found that our system did
not detect the subject-auxiliary agreement correctly
if there was an error in the subject such as number
agreement.

4.5 Identifying Subject-verb Agreement
In order to achieve subject-verb agreement, the num-
ber and person of the subject and verb must agree.
The subject-verb agreement applies to the first verb
in the verb phrase. We consider cases wherein the
first verb is a main verb or contains a modal verb.
An example of a sentence that has subject-verb dis-
agreement is “The boy have an ice cream”. The
number and person of the subject “The boy” and the
verb “have” do not match.

Rule based system
The rule we used to identify subject-verb agreement
was as follows:

1. Extract the number (singular, plural) and per-
son (first, second, third) of the subject and the
first verb in the verb phrase.

2. If the verb is not a modal verb and the num-
ber and person of the subject and verb do not
match, there is a subject-verb agreement error.

Predictive model
We used the following features to be used in a statis-
tical setup:

93



1. Type of sentence - interrogative or declarative

2. Number of subject - singular or plural

3. Person of subject if pronoun - first, second or
third

4. Number of verb - singular or plural

5. Person of verb - first, second or third

6. Type of verb - modal, main

Analysis
We found that our system did not detect errors in
cases where there was a number disagreement. For
example, in the sentence “The two dog is playing”,
our system based on the POS tag would assume
that the subject is singular and therefore there is no
subject-verb error. One way to improve this would
be to detect number disagreement in the subject and
correct it before detecting the subject-verb agree-
ment.

4.6 Identifying Missing Infinitive Marker “To”

Errors of this type occur when the sentence lacks the
infinitive marker “to”. An example of such a sen-
tence would be “She loves sleep”. In this case, “She
loves to sleep” would be the correct form. On the
other hand, this statement is ambiguous since sleep
could be used as a noun sense or a verb sense. We
concentrated on identifying utterances that have the
progressive verb followed by the verb in the infini-
tive form. Examples of such sentences are: “She is
going cry”. In this case, we can see that the sentence
is missing the “to”.

Rule based system
If the utterance contains a progressive verb followed
by a verb in its infinitive form, it is missing the in-
finitive marker “to”.

Predictive model
The features we used are:

1. Presence of a progressive verb followed by the
infinitive

2. Presence of infinitive marker “to” before the in-
finitive

Analysis
The naive Bayes multinomial classifier performed
the best with an F1-measure of 0.967. We encoun-
tered exceptions with words like “saying”. An ex-
ample of such a sentence would be “He was saying
play”. Most of our false positives were due to sen-
tences such as this. We considered a subset of utter-
ances in which the infinitive was used along with the
progressive verb. The missing infinitive marker “to”
is also found in other utterances such as “I would
love to swim” in which case we have two verbs that
are in the base form - “love” and “swim”.

4.7 Combining the Classifiers

Finally, we perform sentence level binary classifica-
tion - does the sentence have a grammatical error?
Since an utterance can contain more than one error,
we serially apply the binary classifiers that we de-
scribed above for each error category. If any one of
the classifiers reports an error in the utterance, we
flag the utterance as having a grammatical error. For
evaluation, as long as the utterance had any gram-
matical error, we considered the decision to be cor-
rect. As we can see from Table 3, the best result
for detecting the overall errors was obtained by se-
rially applying the classifiers that used the features
that were not rule based.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper, we described a study of grammati-
cal errors in child language transcripts. Our study
showed that a higher percentage of children with
LI made at least one mistake than TD children on
most error categories. We created different systems
including rule based systems that used parse tree
template matching and classifiers to detect errors re-
lated to missing verbs, subject-auxiliary agreement,
subject-verb agreement, missing infinitive marker
“to”, missing copulae and wrong usage of -ing par-
ticiple. In all cases, we had a recall higher than 84%.
When combining the classifiers to detect sentences
with grammatical errors, the classifiers that used fea-
tures other than rules performed the best with an F1-
measure of 0.967.

The error categories that we detect at present are
restricted in their scope to specific kind of errors.
In future, we plan to enhance our systems to de-

94



tect other grammatical errors such as missing arti-
cles, missing prepositions and missing main verbs
in utterances that do not have an auxiliary verb. Fur-
thermore, we will investigate methods to address is-
sues in child language transcripts due to incomplete
utterances and disfluencies.

At present, we treat sentences that conform to
formal English language as correct. We could en-
hance our systems to look at dialect specific con-
structs and grammatical errors made across differ-
ent demographics. For example, African American
children have a different dialect and do not always
follow the formal English language while speaking.
Therefore, in the context of detecting language im-
pairment, it would be interesting to see whether both
TD children and LI children make the same errors
that are otherwise considered the norm in the dialect
they speak.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Chris Dollaghan for sharing the
Paradise data, and Thamar Solorio for discussions.
This research is partly supported by an NSF award
IIS-1017190.

References

Mari I. Bowden and Richard K. Fox. 2002. A Diagnostic
Approach to the Detection of Syntactic Errors in En-
glish for Non-Native Speakers. Technical report, The
University of Texas-Pan American.

Andrew Caines and Paula Buttery. 2010. You talking to
me?: A predictive model for zero auxiliary construc-
tions. In Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on NLP
and Linguistics: Finding the Common Ground, pages
43–51.

Eugene Charniak. 2000. A maximum-entropy-inspired
parser. In Proceedings of the 1st North American
chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics conference, pages 132–139.

Lloyd M. Dunn. 1965. Peabody picture vocabulary test.
American Guidance Service Circle Pines, MN.

Jens Eeg-Olofsson and Ola Knuttson. 2003. Automatic
grammar checking for second language learners-the
use of prepositions. In Proceedings of NoDaLiDa.

Keyur Gabani. 2009. Automatic identification of lan-
guage impairment in monolingual English-speaking
children. Master’s thesis, The University Of Texas At
Dallas.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The WEKA data mining software: An update.
ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 11(1):10–18.

Claudia Leacock, Martin Chodorow, Michael Gamon,
and Joel Tetreault. 2010. Automated Grammatical Er-
ror Detection for Language Learners. Synthesis Lec-
tures on Human Language Technologies, 3(1):1–134.

John Lee and Stephanie Seneff. 2006. Automatic gram-
mar correction for second-language learners. In Pro-
ceedings of INTERSPEECH-2006, pages 1978–1981.

John Lee and Stephanie Seneff. 2008. Correcting misuse
of verb forms. In Proceedings of ACL-08:HLT, pages
174–182.

Jack L. Paradise, Thomas F. Campbell, Christine A.
Dollaghan, Heidi M. Feldman, Bernard S. Bernard,
D. Kathleen Colborn, Howard E. Rockette, Janine E.
Janosky, Dayna L. Pitcairn, Marcia Kurs-Lasky, et al.
2005. Developmental outcomes after early or delayed
insertion of tympanostomy tubes. New England Jour-
nal of Medicine, 353(6):576–586.

Mabel L. Rice, Kenneth Wexler, and Patricia L. Cleave.
1995. Specific language impairment as a period of
extended optional infinitive. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 38(4):850.

Kenji Sagae, Eric Davis, Alon Lavie, Brian MacWhin-
ney, and Shuly Wintner. 2007. High-accuracy annota-
tion and parsing of CHILDES transcripts. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of Compu-
tational Language Acquisition, pages 25–32.

Hollis S. Scarborough. 1990. Index of productive syntax.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 11(01):1–22.

95


