



















































Proposal for the International Standard Language Resource Number


Proceedings of Workshop on Language Resources, Technology and Services in the Sharing Paradigm, pages 75–83,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 12, 2011.

Proposal for the International Standard Language Resource Number

Khalid Choukri, Jungyeul Park, Olivier Hamon, Victoria Arranz
ELRA/ELDA

55-57, rue Brillat-Savarin
75013 Paris FRANCE

http://www.elda.org

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new identi-
fier scheme for Language Resources to
provide Language Resources with unique
names using a standardised nomenclature.
This will also ensure Language Resources
to be identified, and consequently to be
recognised as proper references in activ-
ities within Human Language Technolo-
gies as well as in documents and scientific
papers.

1 Introduction

Every object in the world requires a kind of iden-
tification to be correctly recognised. Traditional
printed materials like books, for example, have
generally used the International Standard Book
Number (ISBN), the Library of Congress Con-
trol Number (LCCN), the Digital Object Identifier
(DOI) and several other numeric identifiers as a
unique identification scheme. Book identifiers al-
low us to easily identify books in a unique way.
Other domains make use of several other identi-
fier schemes. For instance, it is not hard to come
into contact with an International/European Arti-
cle Number (EAN), which is a universal barcod-
ing system for everyday products. Each of these
schemes seems to have been the output of some
specific need or circumstance within a domain.

In this paper, we review existing identifier
schemes and conclude for the need to propose,
specifically, the use of a new identifier scheme
for language resources (LRs), namely, the In-
ternational Standard Language Resources Num-
ber (ISLRN). It is meant to provide LRs with
unique identifiers using a standardised nomencla-
ture. This will ensure that LRs are correctly iden-
tified, and consequently, recognised as proper ref-
erences for their sharing usage in applications in

R&D projects, products evaluation and benchmark
as well as in documents and scientific papers.
Moreover, it is also a major step in the networked
and shared world of Human Language Technolo-
gies (HLT) has become: unique resources must be
identified as they are and meta-catalogues need a
common identification format to manage data cor-
rectly. Therefore, LRs should carry identical iden-
tification schemes independently of their represen-
tations, whatever their types and wherever their
physical locations may be.

LRs imply corpora, dictionaries, and lexical and
morphological resources in machine readable digi-
tal format. We also consider software tools for nat-
ural language processing and corpus-based com-
putational linguistics as LRs if they can be stably
packaged and deposited. They may include part-
of-speech taggers, noun phrase chunkers, syntac-
tic and semantic parsers, named entity recognisers,
language modelling toolkits, corpus aligners, etc.
Multimodal resources and systems also considered
as LRs. Technology is in constant evolution and so
are LR types, in their objective to help technolog-
ical developments.

A citation has the purpose of acknowledg-
ing the relevance of the works of others. It
attributes prior work to the original sources. It
also allows the reader to provide a stable way
of identifying proper references. However, the
practice of using its proper identifier for LRs
to cite and reference scientific data, along with
individual resources as well as data sets, is
less well developed (ISO-24619, 2011). LRs
might be sometimes cited in a footnote even
with several different names. For instance, the
European Parliament Proceedings Parallel Corpus
(Koehn, 2005) which is one of most cited LRs
in the seventh International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC2010),

75



is cited by using several different names
such as EUROPARL|EuroParl|Europarl
(Parallel) (Corpus)1. In any case, a sad
conclusion is that LRs remain in the background
simply because the focus of the research is not on
the resource per se (Calzolari et al., 2010).

The main goal for introducing the ISLRN for
LRs is to get a unique way for naming a re-
source through the several LR distribution insti-
tutions. For many different reasons, a LR may
be duplicated (on different catalogues/databases),
renamed, modified, moved, or deleted. Thus, a
permanent and unique identifier associated to a
LR will always permit to retrieve it. Further-
more, having the ISLRN requires also the build-
ing of the ISLRN centres that would manage their
attribution. This is a mandatory step that will
also have to work out the permanent localisation
of a LR. The European Language Resources As-
sociation (ELRA) already has a role to discover,
classify, collect, validate and produce LRs since
1995. Otherwise, the Linguistic Data Consortium
(LDC), Gengo-Shigen-Kyokai (GSK), or Bavar-
ian Archive for Speech Signals (BAS) play a sim-
ilar role in the USA, Japan and Germany, respec-
tively. However, current situation shows that each
institution bears different types of identifiers even
for the identical LR.

The remaining of this paper is organised as fol-
lows: We start by introducing a list of current iden-
tifiers in other domains (Section 2) and we also ex-
plore the actual LR identifiers introduced by sev-
eral distribution institutions, in particular ELRA
and LDC (Section 3). Then we explain the pur-
pose of the new identifier for LRs and its asso-
ciated metadata (Section 4). We provide our pro-
posal for the new LR identifier (Section 5) and also
provide previous other proposals for LR identifiers
(Section 6), and we draw conclusions (Section 7).

2 Current Identification Schemes in
Other Domains

Since we are forging a new identifier for LRs,
we investigate in this section current identification
schemes such as the ISBN for books, the AN in
bioinformatics, the DOI and other schemes.

1That is, the corpus is cited as from simply EuroParl to
more completely Europarl Parallel Corpus.

2.1 International Standard Book Number

The International Standard Book Number (ISBN)
is used as a unique numeric book identifier. The
10-digit ISBN format was developed by the Inter-
national Organization for Standardization (ISO) in
1970. Since 1st January 2007, ISBNs have con-
tained 13 digits (See Figure 1). They consist of
the EAN2 code as GS1 prefix3, the group identi-
fier for language-sharing country group, the pub-
lisher code, the item number for the book title and
a checksum character. The result is the ISNB such
as 978-0060995058 for Milan Kundera’s The
Joke (English edition, published in 1993). Note
that other than the check digit, no part of the ISBN
will have a fixed number of digits4. For exam-
ple, the group identifier can be from a 1- to 5-digit
number such as 0 or 1 for English-speaking coun-
tries, 85 for Brazil, 99921 for Qatar, etc. In sum,
ISBNs carry its own semantics derived from pub-
lishing industry practices.

Figure 1: 13 digits ISBN.

2.2 Accession Number

An Accession Number (AN or AC) in bioin-
formatics is a unique identifier given to a De-
oxyribonucleic acid (DNA) or protein sequence
record to allow for tracking of different versions
of that sequence record and the associated se-
quences over time in a single data repository. Re-
searchers who wish to cite entries in their pub-
lications should always cite the first AN in the
list (the primary AN) to ensure that readers can
find the relevant data in a subsequent release.
AN is used in several data resources such as the
UniProt (SwissProt) Knowledgebase5, GenBank6,
the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database7, DNA
Databank of Japan (DDBJ)8, and Locus Reference

2EAN is for the International Article Number. Originally,
it was the European Article Number.

3GS1 is an international association for the development
and implementation of global standards such as the BarCodes
identification system.

4http://www.isbn-international.org/en/
manual.html

5http://www.uniprot.org
6http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank
7http://www.ebi.ac.uk/embl
8http://www.ddbj.nig.ac.jp

76



Genomic9, as identifier. While such sequence in-
formation repositories implement the concept of
AN, it might have subtle variations. For instance,
AN in the UniProt Knowledgebase consists of ar-
bitrary 6 alphanumerical characters in the follow-
ing format10 (e.g. A1B123; P1B123; P12345):

1 2 3 4 5 6
[A-N,R-Z] [0-9] [A-Z] [A-Z,0-9] [A-Z,0-9] [0-9]
[O,P,Q] [0-9] [A-Z,0-9] [A-Z,0-9] [A-Z,0-9] [0-9]

Entries can have more than one accession num-
ber when two or more entries are merged, or when
an existing entry is split into two or more en-
tries. However, AN has different syntax through
data repositories which cannot provide an identi-
cal identification schemes

2.3 Digital object identifier
A Digital Object Identifier (DOI) is a unique
identifier for digital documents and other content
objects11. It provides a system for persistent and
identification (Paskin, 2006). For example, a DOI
name doi:10.1000/18212, where 10., 1000
and 182 represent the DOI registry, the registrant,
and item ID, respectively, can embed a URL using
http://dx.doi.org and it is also linked
as http://dx.doi.org/10.1000/182
which makes a DOI name actionable. In sum
the DOI system (i) assigns a number which can
include any existing identifier of any entity, (ii)
creates a description of the entity associated with
metadata, (iii) makes the identifier actionable
which allows a DOI name to link to current data,
and (iv) allows any business model in a social
infrastructure. As claimed, DOI’s Identifier is a
network actionable identifier which means that
“click on it and do something”. It is irrelevant to
LRs because some LRs may not have the referable
site.

2.4 Other identifiers
Biomedical scientific research papers already
have a PubMed IDentifier (PMID) which is a
unique number assigned to each PubMed record13.
PubMed is a bibliographic database of life sci-
ences and biomedical information. It includes bib-
liographic information for articles from academic
journals. PMID consists of arbitrary 8 digits. For

9http://www.lrg-sequence.org
10http://www.uniprot.org/manual/accession

numbers
11http://www.doi.org
12This is an actual DOI number for The DOI Handbook.
13http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed

example, a PMID 20011301 is for “Surgical man-
agement of locally advanced and locally recurrent
colon cancer” (Landmann and Weiser, 2005)14.

The canonical representation of an Electronic
Product Code (EPC) is a Uniform Resource Iden-
tifier (URI) which is generally used to identify a
name or a resource on the Internet. The EPC URI
is a string having the following form15:

urn:epc:id:scheme:component1.component2...

where scheme names an EPC scheme. The
precise forms of following parts such as
component1, component2 depend on
which EPC scheme is used. An example of a
specific EPC URI is the following:

urn:epc:id:sgtin:0614141.112345.400

Each EPC scheme provides a namespace of iden-
tifiers that can be used to identify physical objects
of a particular type16.

2.5 Summary

Several identifiers have been described in this sec-
tion which may be potential LR identifiers. Cur-
rent identifier schemes are summarised in Table
1 with their name, an example for their syntax,
their target object, their characteristics and rele-
vance for the LR identifier. Since most of them
are developed for other entities such as books for
ISBN, DNA for AN, etc., they do not offer en-
coding schemes for necessary features for LRs.
Therefore, we do not consider them relevant as
LR identifiers. Moreover, ISBN is conceived es-
pecially for books and closely related to copyright
law which may be different and complicated in
each country. We do not believe the DOI name
to be an optimal descriptor of a LR identifier, nei-
ther because of its actionable characteristic. As
we mentioned, some LRs may not have the refer-
able site as for various reasons, notably confiden-
tial company matters. On the other hand, since the
DOI uses the Handle System, it is not for free.

3 Actual LR Identifiers

Most applications in Natural Language Processing
(NLP) mainly depend on the existence of suffi-
cient LRs regardless of their nature (raw data or
annotated corpora). Several institutions for LR

14http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
20011301

15EPCglobal Tag Data Standard Version 1.5. See
http://www.epcglobalinc.org

16ibid.

77



Name Example Target Characteristic
ISBN ISBN:978-0060995058 Books Closely related to copyright law
AN A1B123, AB123456 DNA or protein sequence record Different syntax

through data repositories
DOI doi:10.1000/182 Digital documents and assigned by the copyeditor

other content objects
PMID PMID17170002 Bibliographic database Life sciences and

biomedical information
EPC urn:epc:id:sgtin: Every physical object Limited to physical object

0614141.112345.400

Table 1: Current Identifiers.

distribution in the world, in particular ELRA and
LDC, have been responsible for providing a large
part of the considerable amount of LRs in the do-
main. An increasing number of LRs are made
available in catalogues. Currently, ELRA pro-
poses two types of catalogue for LRs, the ELRA
Catalogue17 and the Universal Catalogue 18. Sim-
ilarly, the LDC’s Catalog also provides hundreds
of corpora and other language data19.

3.1 Identifiers at ELRA

The ELRA Catalogue offers a repository of LRs
made available through ELRA. The catalogue con-
tains over 1,000 LRs in more than 25 languages.
Other LRs identified all over the world, but not
available through ELRA, can be also viewed in
the Universal Catalogue. LRs at ELRA consist
of spoken resources, written resources, evaluation
packages, and multimodal/multimedia resources.
Written resources also contain terminological re-
sources and monolingual and multilingual lexi-
cons. The actual LR identifiers in the ELRA Cat-
alogue contain ELRA as publisher code, a sys-
tematic pattern (B|S|E|W|M|T|L) and 4 digits. B
stands for a bundle which can contain several LRs
within and S|E|W|M|T|L stand for Speech, Eval-
uation, Written, Multilingual corpora, Terminol-
ogy and Lexicon, respectively. For example, the
bundle package B0008 contains two separate spo-
ken corpora: the LC-STAR Spanish phonetic lexi-
con (S0035) and the LC-STAR Catalan phonetic
lexicon (S0048)20. While the ELRA Catalogue
does not contain language processing tools as LRs
at present, the Universal Catalogue does. Since
ELRA is a partner of the Open Language Archives
Community (OLAC), its Catalogue can be viewed

17http://catalog.elra.info
18http://universal.elra.info
19http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog
20http://catalog.elra.info/product info.

php?products id=980

as an OLAC repository21, Oxford Text Archive22,
etc. Note that most of them only contain arbi-
trary digits as identifiers. ELRA is also sharing the
index of its Catalogue through META-SHARE23,
a network of repositories developed within the
META-NET network of excellence24.

3.2 Identifiers at LDC

LDC assigns LDC as publisher code with a
year number followed by (S|T|V|L) and 2 digits.
S|T|V|L stand for speech, text, voice, and lexical(-
related) corpora, respectively. The LDC Catalog is
classified by data type and data source, or release
year. LRs in the LDC Catalog are first divided into
major categories according to the type of data they
contain, and then are further broken down into mi-
nor categories based on the source of the data. For
example, lexicon is further divided into dictionar-
ies lexicon, field recordings lexicon, microphone
speech lexicon, newswire lexicon, telephone con-
versations lexicon, varied lexicon and web collec-
tion lexicon. LDC also classifies software tools as
LRs, such as LDC2004L01 for Klex: Finite-State
Lexical Transducer for Korean (Han, 2004).25

3.3 Identifiers at other institutions

Among other institutions that are responsible for
providing LRs, we explore identifiers at NICT,
GSK, and BAS. The National Institute of Infor-
mation and Communications Technology (NICT),
and Nagoya University, for the purpose of devel-
oping LRs efficiently, have been constructing a
large scale metadata database named SHACHI26

as their joint project by collecting detailed meta-

21http://www.language-archives.org
22http://ota.ahds.ac.uk
23http://www.meta-net.eu/meta-share
24http://www.meta-net.eu
25Note that LDC also introduces the ISBN for LRs unlikely

ELRA. For example, (Han, 2004) can be identified with the
ISBN 1-58563-283-x as well as LDC2004L01.

26http://www.shachi.org

78



data information on LRs in Western and Asian
countries (Tohyama et al., 2008). Identified LRs
from other distribution institutions are assigned 6
unique digits by following C|D|G|T|N which rep-
resent corpus, dictionary, lexicon, thesaurus-like
lexicon, terminology-related resources, and oth-
ers respectively, as their own identifiers. For ex-
ample, C-001543 is for Translanguage English
Database (TED) where they crawl from LDC’s
LDC2002S04. Gengo-Shigen-Kyokai (GSK)
(literally: ‘Language Resources Association’) was
established in June of 2003 to promote the dis-
tribution of LRs in Japan.27 The Language Re-
sources Catalogue at GSK provides dictionaries
and corpora. These are identified with 4 digits for
the year and a capital letter chronically. For ex-
ample, there are GSK2010-A for Annotated Cor-
pus of Iwanami Japanese Dictionary Fifth Edi-
tion 2004 and GSK2010-B for Konan Kodomo
corpus. The Bavarian Archive for Speech Sig-
nals (BAS) was founded as a public institution
in January 1995 and is hosted by the University
of Munich, presently at the Institut für Phonetik
und Sprachverarbeitung (IPS). BAS is dedicated
to make databases of spoken German accessi-
ble in a well-structured form to the speech sci-
ence community as well as to speech engineer-
ing28. They provide a set of Speech Corpora
and Multimodal Corpora with acronym-style iden-
tifiers such as RVG-J for Regional Variants of
German J which contains recordings of read and
spontaneous speech by adolescents age 13-2029.
Chinese-LDC (Chinese Linguistic Data Consor-
tium)30 assigns CLDC as publisher code, followed
by a category, a 4-digit year code and a 3-digit
identifier, for example, CLDC-SPC-2006-008
for a telephone speech recognition corpus. HLT-
Centrale (Centrale voor Taal- en Spraaktechnolo-
gie, ‘Dutch HLT Agency’)31 uses an acronym-
style identifier per corpus, for example, 27MWC for
a 27 Million Words Dutch Newspaper Corpus.

Table 2 summaries the types of identifiers used
by those different institutions. Table 3 shows
the number of LRs per institution by May 2011.
To conclude, no identical LR has yet been for-

27http://www.gsk.or.jp
28http://www.phonetik.uni-muenchen.de/

Bas
29http://www.phonetik.uni-muenchen.de/

forschung/Bas/BasRVG-Jeng.html
30http://www.chineseldc.org
31http://www.inl.nl/en/producten

mally identified through several institutions which
leads same resource bearing two different identi-
fiers. One such example is the Translanguage En-
glish Database (TED), which is catalogued both as
ELRA-S0031 and LDC2002S04, that is, in two
different ways. Our objective is to converge them
using a unique way, that is, by forging a new LR
identifier.

Catalogue Number of LRs
ELRA 1,100+
LDC 500+
NICT 2,500+
GSK 10+
BAS 150+
Chinese LDC 90+
HLT-Centrale 50+
Universal Catalogue 1,800+
LRE Map 2,800+
Total (including duplicates) 9,000+

Table 3: Number of LRs of each institution.

4 Purpose of the New LR Identifier

4.1 Motivation
Identification of existing LRs is an essential, but
a difficult and fastidious task. One has to find
all available sources, from industry to university,
from commercial to research. ELRA has pro-
moted the collection and the dissemination of ex-
isting resources through its Universal Catalogue or
more recently, the Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LRE) Map32. Both tools help to acquire
knowledge using participative work. Another
trend concerns the sharing of LRs through cata-
logues (see for instance, META-SHARE), where
users (i.e. researchers, commercial users) are able
to look for a large panel of data and tools. How-
ever, those two movements have shown several
drawbacks which the community needs to take
into account. One of them is linked to the nature of
the LRs in the Internet era. Indeed, LRs have been
created but also moved, duplicated, modified, or
deleted. The consequence is that a LR may ex-
ist under various shapes, starting by its name, but
also its format or even its content. Therefore, the
community needs a unique way to identify, access,
discover and disseminate LRs.

For instance, “Journal Officiel de la Commu-
nauté Européenne” and “JOC” refer to the same
LR (ELRA-W0017). On the other hand, “Cor-
pus EMILLE/CIIL” (ELRA-W0037) and “Corpus

32http://www.resourcebook.eu

79



ELRA LDC NICT GSK BAS Chinese HLT-Centrale
LDC

Publisher X X X X
Category X X X X
Year X X X
Digit ID X (4) X (2) X (6) X (3)
Letter ID X
Free ID X X
Software X X X X X
Example ELRA-S0035 LDC2004L01 G-00035 GSK2010-C SC10 CLDC-SPC- CORN

2007-002

Table 2: Summary of identifier designs per institution.

EMILLE Lancaster” (ELRA-W0038) are two dif-
ferent corpora and not just a different nomencla-
ture for a same resource. It is about time that we
are helped to refer to the LRs that we are using for-
mally and clearly, without any risk of confusion or
ambiguity. Accordingly, our goal is to allow the
classification within catalogues, even redundant
catalogues. For instance, the NICT catalogue con-
tains mostly LRs from other catalogues, or OLAC
get the export of LRs from many sources and nec-
essarily duplicate inputs. The new LR identifiers
that we want to propose, strictly granted, should
avoid duplication of LR identifiers in the destina-
tion catalogues.

Actually, this proposal does not address the sin-
gle issue related to LR catalogues, that is a de-
sired way to share LRs. Another application of
the identification lies in the production of docu-
mentation such as scientific papers or technical re-
ports. Without the unique identification for LRs,
we would struggle in the formal identification of
any cited LRs within a document. LRs may be
referred to by the new LR identification number
instead of current usages such as URLs or author-
invented names. This also overcomes the problem
of wrong, broken or incomplete URLs.

A potential third application handles the tools
and software that may use one or several LRs. Us-
ing a unique LR identification number eventually
guarantees the correct use of LRs along with re-
source content and version. It is crucial that LRs
should be used for evaluations without any bias.
Our goal is then to define permanent localisations
using the unique identifier for each LR used for
HLT.

4.2 Metadata

Metadata schemas have been in constant evolution
throughout the years. The non-stopping techno-
logical development makes it a requirement that its

classifying or cataloguing procedures remain dy-
namic and open to the new arrivals in the field.
Furthermore, different LR users have different
needs, which can be observed both in the way
the schemas are structured (from rather flat to
very hierarchical) and the content of their compo-
nents/elements, etc. (from rather limited to large
and rich proposals). As it can be expected, the
needs coming from LR providers or LR consumers
range considerably. Likewise when we take into
consideration the repositories themselves, with is-
sues such as links, updating of information, etc.
All this is being taken into consideration within
one of the latest schemas still under development
(the META-MD proposed within META-NET).

In order to name just a few of those different
metadata schemas that have seen the light, we can
refer to the Open Language Archives Community
(OLAC)33, which is Dublin Core-compliant, but
only includes a small number of elements trying
to prioritise interoperability over very rich descrip-
tions. As already mentioned earlier in this paper,
both ELRA Catalogue and Universal Catalogue,
as well as the LDC Catalog provide very popu-
lated catalogues of LRs. Their metadata, although
different, follows a 2-level hierarchy, covering LR
types.

When it comes to identifying LRs, most meta-
data schemas have used different terms to refer
to the resource names. However, as it has been
mentioned in earlier sections, these names are not
always consistent across catalogues, publications
or other citations. Having a unique identifier that
prevails beyond versioning and location changes,
and that is unambiguous through LR searching and
retrieving has also become a key issue for meta-
data. It is in this regard that the current proposal
lies, with the creation of an unique identifier that
will be registered within the metadata schema and

33http://www.language-archives.org

80



that will contribute considerably towards the life
and sustainability of each resource implementing
it. For such purpose, the metadata schema will
contain an unique identifier element within its re-
source information component, and such element
will allocate the standard identification number
that the resource will have been assigned. Figure
2 depicts the idea behind this ID mapping, to show
its “unique label” nature.

Figure 2: Mapping the new LR identifier to meta-
data as PID.

5 Proposal for the LR Identifier

In this section, a first formalisation of the Inter-
national Standard Language Resources Number
(ISLRN) is proposed. Then, several administrative
characteristics that should be taken into account
are defined.

5.1 Formal proposal for syntax

Such approach requires that an ontology in agreed
upon within the community. Unfortunately, over
the last couple of decades, no consensus emerged
despite the number of proposals. It is easy to dis-
tinguish a large class of resources such as cor-
pus versus lexicon, but within a corpus, we can
imagine speech (signal and audio recordings) ver-
sus written texts. It is also difficult to build the
commons over certain LRs such as a textual cor-
pus consisting of transcribed audio data because
one may always make a case that contradict such
semantics. In this section, we review and criti-
cise current practices for semantics of syntax in-
troduced in current LR identification schemes.

• Publisher identifiers exist in ELRA, LDC,
GSK and Chinese LDC classification. How-
ever, the ISLRN should not contain a pub-
lisher name, just as an institution name in
general, because the distribution institutions
are not usually a right holder of the LR and

several institutions may distribute the same
LR. An institution may also choose to dis-
tribute a LR anonymously.

• Category and Type identifiers are used by
most of institutions. Even though it is im-
portant to keep an identification scheme sym-
bolizing a categorisation, LRs can have very
different categories and types as they evolve.
Existing standards such as the BAMDES pro-
posal (Parra et al., 2010) are also often lim-
ited, for instance it does not consider multi-
modal technologies. Moreover, the scope of
LRs also leaves to LRs’ provider and it make
it more difficult to adopt proper categories or
types.

• Year identifiers are used only by two insti-
tutions (LDC and GSK). Indeed, a resource
may evolve over time and there may have
a misunderstanding on the creation date, the
delivery date or the last modification date.

• Alphanumeric characters identifiers are the
most important, and are obviously used as
identification schemes by all institutions,
whatever they are digits or letters. There-
fore, we should not avoid its introduction in
the ISLRN. The size of the number should be
decided according to the potential number of
LRs (cf. Table 3).

One could suggest to add other semantics, but
they are often limited to specific types of LRs.
Language information, for instance, cannot apply
to most of the multimodal technologies, and might
not be easy when dealing with multilingual re-
sources.

In sum, Publisher information do not appear in
the LR identification scheme. As we mentioned
before, wherever physical locations of LRs may
be, a new LR identifier should be universal. A
new LR identifier do not contain semantics about
Category and Type, nor Year information. A LR
identifier should delegate semantics of its syntax
to metadata which can easily describe several se-
mantics such as in DomainInfo, AnnotationInfo,
etc., for example, in META-SHARE. Therefore,
we decide to use 7-digit random numbers as the
new LR identifier followed by 2-digit for version
information and 1-digit for a checksum number.
Having version information also allows us to de-
scribe LRs’ granularity because information for

81



resource bundles or resource collections can be
encoded in Version information. The checksum
number is encrypted from the preceding numeric
identifier and version information. Our proposal
is summarised in Figure 3.

Figure 3: Proposal for the ISLRN syntax.

5.2 Administrative aspect

The definition of an ISLRN is certainly not the
easier task, since administrative questions remain.
First, the device to assign the ISLRN is crucial.
ISLRN should be endorsed by major players and
data centres, acting as an “umbrella” organisation.
ISLRN attributions should be moderated, that is a
small number of institutions should be granted the
right to assign ISLRN. Prerequisite checking be-
fore assigning the ISLRN is also inevitable. LR
Right holders or creators should provide mini-
mum information to make their LRs be assigned
ISLRN. Finally, we should pay attention to the le-
gal issues regarding ISLRN and its usage. For in-
stance, the ISBN is mandatory for printed, graphi-
cal and photographic documents subject ot a legal
deposit. We may probably reflect the political im-
portance of LRs as books are, meaning that the
effort would be bigger than planned. However, the
ISLRN should be assigned for free: no entry fee or
no annual subscription: since the ISLRN will not
be a legal deposit, the ISLRN is not an obligation,
but rather an essential and best practice.

6 Other proposals for LR identifiers

FlaReNet (Fostering Language Resources Net-
work)’s Blueprint of Actions and Infrastrucures
would also “be a guideline for the LR community
and National funding agencies, e.g. to prepare the
ground for an EU directive concerning develop-
ment of LRs at European scale”34. Currently, ISO
already provides specifications both for the PID
framework and its practice for referencing and cit-
ing LRs. The European Persistent Identifier Con-
sortium also provides a service to name scientific
data in a unique and timeless way.

34http://www.flarenet.eu

6.1 ISO’s PISA
Actually, ISO already proposed Language re-
source management - Persistent identification and
sustainable access (PISA) as the International
Standard (ISO-24619, 2011). It specifies require-
ments for the persistent identifier (PID) framework
and for using PIDs as references and citations of
LRs in documents as well as in LRs themselves
(ibid.). It provides general guidelines for attribut-
ing PIDs for LRs as a part of a resource, a resource
itself and a resource collection. The PID frame-
work supports encoding of the PID as a Uniform
Resource Identifier (URI), allows multiple URIs
to render identifiers actionable without requiring
client modifications, should be used to associated
with metadata, and finally provides adequate se-
curity to change the PID-URI mapping or the as-
sociated metadata. ISO’s PISA suggests Handle
System (HS) and Archival Resource Key (ARK)
as persistent identifier system implementations.

6.2 EPIC
The European Persistent Identifier Consortium
(EPIC) provides a new methods to reference the
scientific data in order to name in a universal way,
which are permanent and citeable references.35 It
is not only for LRs, but for general scientific data.
The Persistent Identifier Service is based on the
Handle System like a DOI and uses as a prefix the
number 11858; the ordinary handle has the form
11858/flag-institution-num1-num2-
num3-checksum where its semantics explain
themselves. Only flag is not defined yet and re-
mains for special purposes such as derived han-
dles.

6.3 Summary
While ISO’s PISA has not provide concrete syn-
tax for PID, nor other standardised techniques yet,
EPIC explicitly introduces HS as PID system. As
we mentioned before, there are LRs which may
not have the referable site and the persistent identi-
fier system cannot be applied. Therefore, previous
proposals are not relevant to our purpose.

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we propose the ISLRN to provide
LRs with unique names. This allows LRs to be
identified, and consequently to be recognised as
proper references. Therefore, the ISLRN can be

35http://www.pidconsortium.eu

82



summarised as a unique identifier that allows to
name and discover LRs. Actually, since we do not
claim that the ISLRN is not a legal deposit, it is
not an obligation. However, the ISLRN, when en-
dorsed by major organisations involved in HLT,
shall become an essential and best practice for
LRs.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by FlaReNet
(ECP-2007-LANG-617001) and T4ME Net
(META NET, FP7-ICP-4-249119),

References
Nicoletta Calzolari, Claudia Soria, Riccardo Del

Gratta, Sara Goggi, Valeria Quochi, Irene Russo,
Khalid Choukri, Joseph Mariani, and Stelios
Piperidis. 2010. The lrec map of language re-
sources and technologies. In Proceedings of the
Seventh conference on International Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta,
19–21 May. European Language Resources Associ-
ation (ELRA).

Na-Rae Han. 2004. Klex: Finite-State Lexical Trans-
ducer for Korean. Technical report, Linguistic Data
Consortium, Philadelphia.

ISO-24619. 2011. Language resource management
– Persistent identification and sustainable access
(PISA).

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
MT Summit X, Phuket, Thailand, 12–16 September.

Ron G. Landmann and Martin R. Weiser. 2005. Surgi-
cal Management of Locally Advanced and Locally
Recurrent Colon Cancer. Clinics in Colon and Rec-
tal Surgery, 18(3):182–189.

Carla Parra, Marta Villegas, and Nria Bel. 2010. The
basic metadata description (bamdes) and theharvest-
ingday.eu: Towards sustainability and visibility of
lrt. In Proceedings of workshop on Language Re-
sources: From Storyboard to Sustainability and LR
Lifecycle Management at LREC 2010, pages 49–53,
Valletta, Malta, May. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Norman Paskin. 2006. The DOI Handbook. Interna-
tional DOI Foundation, Inc., Oxford, United King-
dom.

Hitomi Tohyama, Shunsuke Kozawa, Kiyotaka Uchi-
moto, Shigeki Matsubara, and Hitoshi Isahara.
2008. Construction of an infrastructure for provid-
ing users with suitable language resources. In Col-
ing 2008: Companion volume: Posters, pages 119–
122, Manchester, UK, August. Coling 2008 Orga-
nizing Committee.

83


