










































Morphemes and POS tags for n-gram based evaluation metrics


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 104–107,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Morphemes and POS tags for n-gram based evaluation metrics

Maja Popović
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)

Language Technology (LT), Berlin, Germany
maja.popovic@dfki.de

Abstract

We propose the use of morphemes for auto-
matic evaluation of machine translation out-
put, and systematically investigate a set of F
score and BLEU score based metrics calculated
on words, morphemes and POS tags along with
all corresponding combinations. Correlations
between the new metrics and human judg-
ments are calculated on the data of the third,
fourth and fifth shared tasks of the Statisti-
cal Machine Translation Workshop. Machine
translation outputs in five different European
languages are used: English, Spanish, French,
German and Czech. The results show that the
F scores which take into account morphemes
and POS tags are the most promising metrics.

1 Introduction

Recent investigations have shown that the n-gram
based evaluation metrics calculated on Part-of-
Speech (POS) sequences correlate very well with
human judgments (Callison-Burch et al., 2008;
Callison-Burch et al., 2009; Popović and Ney, 2009)
clearly outperforming the widely used metrics BLEU
and TER. The BLEU score measured on morphemes
is shown to be useful for evaluation of morpholog-
ically rich languages (Luong et al., 2010). We pro-
pose the use of morphemes for a set of n-gram based
automatic evaluation metrics and investigate the cor-
relation of the novel metrics with human judgments.
We carry out a systematic comparison between the
F and BLEU based metrics calculated on various
combinations of words, morphemes and POS tags.
The focus of this work is not a comparison of the

morpheme and POS based metrics with the standard
evaluation metrics1 as in (Popović and Ney, 2009),
but rather a comparison within the proposed set of
metrics in order to decide which score(s) should be
submitted to the WMT 2011 evaluation task. There
are fifteen evaluation metrics in total, which can be
divided in three groups: the metrics calculated on
single units, i.e. words, morphemes or POS tags
alone, the metrics calculated on pairs, i.e. words
and POS tags, words and morphemes as well as mor-
phemes and POS tags, and the metrics which take ev-
erything into account – lexical, morphological and
syntactic information, i.e. words, morphemes and
POS tags.

Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients on the
document (system) level between all the metrics
and the human ranking are computed on the En-
glish, French, Spanish, German and Czech texts
generated by various translation systems in the
framework of the third (Callison-Burch et al.,
2008), fourth (Callison-Burch et al., 2009) and
fifth (Callison-Burch et al., 2010) shared translation
tasks.

2 Evaluation metrics

We carried out a systematic comparison between the
following metrics:

• single unit (word/morpheme/POS) metrics:

– WORDF
Standard F score: takes into account all
word n-grams which have a counterpart

1Apart from the standard BLEU score which is tightly re-
lated.

104



both in the corresponding reference and in
the hypothesis.

– MORPHF
Morpheme F score: takes into account all
morpheme n-grams which have a counter-
part both in the corresponding reference
and in the hypothesis.

– POSF
POS F score: takes into account all POS
n-grams which have a counterpart both in
the corresponding reference and in the hy-
pothesis.

– BLEU
The standard BLEU score (Papineni et al.,
2002).

– POSBLEU
The standard BLEU score calculated on
POS tags.

– MORPHBLEU
The standard BLEU score calculated on
morphemes.

• pairwise metrics:

– WPF
F score of word and POS n-grams.

– WMF
F score of word and morpheme n-grams.

– MPF
F score of morpheme and POS n-grams.

– WPBLEU
Arithmetic mean of BLEU and POSBLEU
scores.

– WMBLEU
Arithmetic mean of BLEU and MOR-
PHBLEU scores.

– MPBLEU
Arithmetic mean of MORPHBLEU and
POSBLEU scores.

• metrics taking everything into account:

– WMPF
F score on word, morpheme and POS n-
grams.

– WMPBLEU
Arithmetic mean of BLEU, MORPHBLEU
and POSBLEU scores.

– WMPFBLEU
Arithmetic mean of all F and BLEU scores.

The prerequisite for POS based metrics is avail-
ability of an appropriate POS tagger for the target
language. It should be noted that the POS tags can-
not be only basic but must have all details (e.g. verb
tenses, cases, number, gender, etc.). For the mor-
pheme based metrics, a tool for splitting words into
morphemes is necessary.

All the F scores and the BLEU scores are based on
four-grams (i.e. the value of maximal n is 4). Pre-
liminary experiments on the morpheme based mea-
sures showed that there is no improvement by us-
ing six-grams, seven-grams or eight-grams. As for
the n-gram averaging, BLEU scores use geometric
mean. However, it is also argued not to be optimal
because the score becomes equal to zero even if only
one of the n-gram counts is equal to zero. In ad-
dition, previous experiments on the syntax-oriented
n-gram metrics (Popović and Ney, 2009) showed
that there is no significant difference between arith-
metic and geometric mean in the terms of correlation
coefficients. Therefore, arithmetic averaging with-
out weights is used for all F-scores. For the WMPF
score, an additional experiment with weights is car-
ried out as well.

3 Experiments on WMT 2008, WMT 2009
and WMT 2010 test data

Experimental set-up

The evaluation metrics were compared with human
rankings by means of Spearman correlation coeffi-
cients ρ. Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient is
equivalent to Pearson correlation on ranks, and its
advantage is that it makes fewer assumptions about
the data. The possible values of ρ range between 1
(if all systems are ranked in the same order) and -1
(if all systems are ranked in the reverse order). Thus
the higher the value of ρ for an automatic metric, the
more similar is to the human metric.

The scores were calculated for outputs of transla-
tions from Spanish, French, German and Czech into
English and vice versa. Spanish, French, German
and English POS tags were produced using the Tree-
Tagger2, and the Czech texts are tagged using the

2http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/projekte/corplex/TreeTagger/

105



COMPOST tagger (Spoustová et al., 2009). In this
way, all references and hypotheses were provided
with detailed POS tags.

The words of all outputs were split into mor-
phemes using the Morfessor tool (Creutz and La-
gus, 2005). The tool is corpus-based and language-
independent: it takes a text as input and produces
a segmentation of the word forms observed in the
text. The obtained results are not strictly linguistic,
however they often resemble a linguistic morpheme
segmentation. Once a morpheme segmentation has
been learnt from some text, it can be used for seg-
menting new texts. In our experiments, for each doc-
ument, first a corresponding reference translation
has been split, and then this segmentation is used for
splitting all translation hypotheses. In this way, pos-
sible discrepancies between reference and hypothe-
sis segmentation of the same word are avoided. Ef-
fects of the training on the large(r) monolingual cor-
pora have not been investigated yet.

In Table 1, an English reference sentence can be
seen along with its morpheme and POS equivalents.

words Another leading role in the film
is played by Matt Damon .

morphemes An other lead ing role in the film
is play ed by Ma tt Da mon .

POS tags DT VBG NN IN DT NN
VBZ VBN IN NP NP SENT

Table 1: Example of an English sentence with its corre-
sponding morpheme and POS sequences.

Comparison of metrics

For each evaluation metric described in Section 2,
the system level Spearman correlation coefficients ρ
were calculated for each document. In total, 33 cor-
relation coefficients were obtained for each metric –
four English outputs from the WMT 2010 task, five
from the WMT 2009 and eight from the WMT 2008
task, together with sixteen outputs in other four tar-
get languages. The obtained correlation results were
then summarised into the following three values:

• mean
a correlation coefficient averaged over all trans-
lation outputs;

• rank>
percentage of documents where the particular
metric has better correlation than the other met-
rics investigated in this work;

• rank≥
percentage of documents where the particular
metric has better or equal correlation than the
other metrics investigated in this work.

These values for each metric are presented in Ta-
ble 2.

metric mean rank> rank≥
WORDF 0.550 24.2 42.6
MORPHF 0.608 40.0 58.0
POSF 0.673 63.4 78.0
BLEU 0.566 20.6 38.6
MORPHBLEU 0.567 29.9 44.6
POSBLEU 0.674 54.7 66.9

WPF 0.627 44.0 66.9
WMF 0.587 37.0 53.9
MPF 0.669 51.9 77.4
WPBLEU 0.629 41.0 57.4
WMBLEU 0.557 23.6 41.0
MPBLEU 0.634 44.6 66.6

WMPF 0.645 46.3 71.1
WMPBLEU 0.610 32.7 54.7
WMPFBLEU 0.628 35.8 61.6
WMPF’ 0.668 51.9 78.8

Table 2: Average correlation mean (column 1), rank>
(column 2) and rank≥ (column 3) for each evaluation
metric. Bold represents the best value in the particu-
lar metric group. The most promising metrics are the
F scores containing POS and morpheme information,
namely WMPF’, MPF and POSF, as well as the POSBLEU
score. The standard BLEU score has very low values.

It can be observed that the morpheme based met-
rics outperform the word based metrics, however not
the POS based metrics. As for pairwise metrics, the
MPF score seems to be very promising. Adding the
actual original words unfortunately deteriorates the
system level correlations, nevertheless omitting the
words can possibly lead to the poor sentence level
correlations. Therefore an additional experiment is
carried out with the most promising metric contain-
ing words, namely the WMPF score: a weighted

106



WMPF’ score is introduced, with word weight of
0.2, morpheme weight of 0.3 and POS weight of
0.5. WMPF’ clearly outperforms the simple WMPF
score without weights, and it is comparable to the
morpheme-POS F score MPF as well as POS-based
metrics POSF and POSBLEU. Apart from that, it can
be observed that, in general, the F scores are bet-
ter than the BLEU scores. The combination of all F
and all BLEU scores (WMPFBLEU) is better than the
WMPBLEU score, but does not yield any improve-
ments over the WMPF score.

The most promising metrics are the F scores con-
taining POS and morpheme information, namely
POSF, MPF and WMPF’ together with the WMPF,
as well as the POSBLEU score. The standard BLEU
score has the third lowest average correlation and the
lowest rank values.

4 Conclusions

The results presented in this article show that the use
of morphemes improves n-gram based automatic
evaluation metrics, particularly in combination with
syntactic information in the form of detailed POS
tags. Especially promising are the weighted WMPF
and the MPF scores, which have been submitted to
the WMT 2011 evaluation task. Weights for these
two metrics should be further investigated in fu-
ture work, as well as the possible impact of differ-
ent morpheme splittings (such as training on larger
texts).

Acknowledgments

This work has partly been developed within the
TARAXÜ project3 financed by TSB Technologies-
tiftung Berlin – Zukunftsfonds Berlin, co-financed
by the European Union – European fund for regional
development.

References

Chris Callison-Burch, Cameron Fordyce, Philipp Koehn,
Christof Monz, and Josh Schroeder. 2008. Further
Meta-Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 3rd ACL 08 Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation (WMT 08), pages 70–106, Colum-
bus, Ohio, June.

3http://taraxu.dfki.de/

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
and Josh Schroeder. 2009. Findings of the 2009
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation, pages 1–28, Athens, Greece,
March.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
Kay Peterson, Mark Przybocki, and Omar Zaidan.
2010. Findings of the 2010 joint workshop on sta-
tistical machine translation and metrics for machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation and MetricsMATR
(WMT 10), pages 17–53, Uppsala, Sweden, July.

Mathias Creutz and Krista Lagus. 2005. Unsupervised
morpheme segmentation and morphology induction
from text corpora using morfessor 1.0. Technical Re-
port Report A81, Computer and Information Science,
Helsinki University of Technology, Helsinki, Finland,
March.

Minh-Thang Luong, Preslav Nakov, and Min-Yen Kan.
2010. A Hybrid Morpheme-Word Representation
for Machine Translation of Morphologically Rich
Languages. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP 10), pages 148–157, Cambridge, MA, Octo-
ber.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wie-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL 02), pages 311–318, Philadel-
phia, PA, July.

Maja Popović and Hermann Ney. 2009. Syntax-oriented
evaluation measures for machine translation output. In
Proceedings of the 4th EACL 09 Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine Translation (WMT 09), pages 29–32,
Athens, Greece, March.

Drahomı́ra “Johanka” Spoustová, Jan Hajič, Jan Raab,
and Miroslav Spousta. 2009. Semi-supervised train-
ing for the averaged perceptron POS tagger. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th Conference of the European
Chapter of the ACL (EACL 2009), pages 763–771,
Athens, Greece, March.

107


