










































Fast and Flexible MWE Candidate Generation with the mwetoolkit


Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from Parsing and Generation to the Real World (MWE 2011), pages 134–136,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 23 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Fast and Flexible MWE Candidate Generation
with the mwetoolkit

Vitor De Araujo♠ Carlos Ramisch♠ ♥ Aline Villavicencio♠
♠ Institute of Informatics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil

♥ GETALP – LIG, University of Grenoble, France
{vbuaraujo,ceramisch,avillavicencio}@inf.ufrgs.br

Abstract

We present an experimental environment for
computer-assisted extraction of Multiword
Expressions (MWEs) from corpora. Candi-
date extraction works in two steps: generation
and filtering. We focus on recent improve-
ments in the former, for which we increased
speed and flexibility. We present examples
that show the potential gains for users and ap-
plications.

1 Project Description

The mwetoolkitwas presented and demonstrated
in Ramisch et al. (2010b) and in Ramisch et al.
(2010a), and applied to several languages (Linardaki
et al., 2010) and domains (Ramisch et al., 2010c).
It is a downloadable open-source1 set of command-
line tools mostly written in Python. Our target users
are researchers with a background in computational
linguistics. The system performs language- and
type-independent candidate extraction in two steps2:

1. Candidate generation

• Pattern matching3
• n-gram counting

2. Candidate filtering

• Thresholds, stopwords and patterns
• Association measures, classifiers

1sf.net/projects/mwetoolkit
2For details, see previous papers and documentation
3The following attributes, if present, are supported for pat-

terns: surface form, lemma, POS, syntactic annotation.

The main contribution of our tool, rather than a
novel approach to MWE extraction, is an environ-
ment that systematically integrates the functionali-
ties found in other tools, that is, sophisticated cor-
pus queries like in CQP (Christ, 1994) and Manatee
(Rychlý and Smrz, 2004), candidate generation like
in Text::NSP (Banerjee and Pedersen, 2003), and fil-
tering like in UCS (Evert, 2004). The pattern match-
ing and n-gram counting steps are the focus of the
improvements described in this paper.

2 An Example

Our toy corpus, consisting of the first 20K sentences
of English Europarl v34, was POS-tagged and lem-
matized using the TreeTagger5 and converted into
XML. 6 As MWEs encompass several phenomena
(Sag et al., 2002), we define our target word se-
quences through the patterns shown in figure 1. The
first represents sequences with an optional (?) deter-
miner DET, any number (*) of adjectives A and one
or more (+) nouns N. This shallow pattern roughly
corresponds to noun phrases in English. The sec-
ond defines expressions in which a repeated noun is
linked by a preposition PRP. The backw element
matches a previous word, in this example the same
lemma as the noun identified as noun1.

After corpus indexing and n-gram pattern match-
ing, the resulting unique candidates are returned.
Examples of candidates captured by the first pattern

4statmt.org/europarl
5http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/

projekte/corplex/TreeTagger
6For large corpora, XML imposes considerable overhead.

As corpora do not require the full flexibility of XML, we are
currently experimenting with plain-text, which is already in use
with the new C indexing routines.

134



<pat id="1">
<pat repeat="?"><w pos="DET"/></pat>
<pat repeat="*"><w pos="A"/></pat>
<pat repeat="+"><w pos="N"/></pat>

</pat>
<pat id="2">

<w pos="N" id="noun1"/>
<w pos="PRP"/>
<backw lemma="noun1" pos="noun1"/>

</pat>

Figure 1: Pattern 1 matches NPs, pattern 2 matches se-
quences N1 PRP N1.

are complicated administrative process, the clock,
the War Crimes Tribunal. The second pattern cap-
tures hand in hand, eye to eye, word for word. 7

3 New Features

Friendlier User Interface In the previous ver-
sion, one needed to manually invoke the Python
scripts passing the correct options. The current ver-
sion provides an interactive command-based inter-
face which allows simple commands to be run on
data files, while keeping the generation of interme-
diary files and the pipelining between the different
phases of MWE extraction implicit. At the end, a
user may want to save the session and restart the
work later.8

Regular Expression Support While in the previ-
ous version only wildcard words were possible, now
we support all the operators shown in figure 1 plus
repetition interval (2,3), multiple choice (either)
and in-word wildcards like writ* matching written,
writing, etc. All these extensions allow for much
more powerful candidate patterns to be expressed.
This means that one can also use syntax annotation if
the text is parsed: if two words separated by n words
share a syntactic head, they are extracted. Multi-
attribute patterns are correctly handled during pat-
tern matching, in spite of individual per-attribute in-
dices. Some scripts may fuse the individual indices
on the fly, producing a combined index (e.g. n-gram
counting).

7Currently only contiguous n-grams can be captured; non-
contiguous extraction (e.g., verb-noun pairs, with intervening
material, not part of the expression) is planned.

8Although it is not a graphical interface some users request,
it is far easier to use than the previous version.

Faster processing Candidate generation was not
able to deal with large corpora such as Europarl
and the BNC. The first optimization concerns pat-
tern matching: instead of using the XML corpus and
external matching procedures, now we match candi-
dates using Python’s builtin regular expressions di-
rectly on the corpus index. On a small corpus the
current implementation takes about 72% the origi-
nal time to perform pattern-based generation. On the
BNC, extraction of the two example patterns shown
before took about 4.5 hours and 1 hour, respectively.
The second optimization concerns the creation of
the index. The previous script allowed a static in-
dex to be created from the XML corpus, but it was
not scalable. Thus, we have rewritten index routines
in C. We still assume that the index must fit in main
memory, but the new routines provide faster index-
ing with reasonable memory consumption, propor-
tional to the corpus size. These scripts are still ex-
perimental and need extensive testing. With the C
index routines, indexing the BNC corpus took about
5 minutes per attribute on a 3GB RAM computer.

4 Future Improvements

Additionally to evaluation on several tasks and lan-
guages, we intend to develop several improvements
to the tool. First, we would like to rewrite the pattern
matching routines in C to speed the process up and
reduce memory consumption. Second, we would
like to test several heuristics to handle nested candi-
dates (current strategy returns all possible matches).
Third, we would like to perform more tests on us-
ing regular expressions to extract candidates based
on their syntax annotation. Fourth, we would like
to improve candidate filtering (not emphasized in
this paper) by testing new association measures, fil-
ters, context-based measures, etc. Last but most im-
portant, we are planning a new release version and
therefore we need extensive testing and documenta-
tion.

References

Satanjeev Banerjee and Ted Pedersen. 2003. The de-
sign, implementation, and use of the Ngram Statistic
Package. In Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and Com-

135



putational Linguistics, pages 370–381, Mexico City,
Mexico, Feb.

Oli Christ. 1994. A modular and flexible architecture
for an integrated corpus query system. In COMPLEX
1994, Budapest, Hungary.

Stefan Evert. 2004. The Statistics of Word Cooccur-
rences: Word Pairs and Collocations. Ph.D. thesis, In-
stitut für maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, University
of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.

Evita Linardaki, Carlos Ramisch, Aline Villavicencio,
and Aggeliki Fotopoulou. 2010. Towards the con-
struction of language resources for greek multiword
expressions: Extraction and evaluation. In Stelios
Piperidis, Milena Slavcheva, and Cristina Vertan, ed-
itors, Proc. of the LREC Workshop on Exploitation
of multilingual resources and tools for Central and
(South) Eastern European Languages, pages 31–40,
Valetta, Malta. May.

Carlos Ramisch, Aline Villavicencio, and Christian
Boitet. 2010a. Multiword expressions in the wild?
the mwetoolkit comes in handy. In Proc. of the 23rd
COLING (COLING 2010) — Demonstrations, pages
57–60, Beijing, China, Aug. The Coling 2010 Orga-
nizing Committee.

Carlos Ramisch, Aline Villavicencio, and Christian
Boitet. 2010b. mwetoolkit: a framework for multi-
word expression identification. In Proc. of the Seventh
LREC (LREC 2010), Malta, May. ELRA.

Carlos Ramisch, Aline Villavicencio, and Christian
Boitet. 2010c. Web-based and combined language
models: a case study on noun compound identification.
In Proc. of the 23rd COLING (COLING 2010), pages
1041–1049, Beijing, China, Aug. The Coling 2010 Or-
ganizing Committee.

Pavel Rychlý and Pavel Smrz. 2004. Manatee, bonito
and word sketches for czech. In Proceedings of
the Second International Conference on Corpus Lin-
guisitcs, pages 124–131, Saint-Petersburg, Russia.

Ivan Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann Copes-
take, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword expres-
sions: A pain in the neck for NLP. In Proc. of
the 3rd CICLing (CICLing-2002), volume 2276/2010
of LNCS, pages 1–15, Mexico City, Mexico, Feb.
Springer.

136


