










































The Uppsala-FBK systems at WMT 2011


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 372–378,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Uppsala-FBK systems at WMT 2011

Christian Hardmeier
Jörg Tiedemann

Uppsala universitet
Inst. för lingvistik och filologi

Uppsala, Sweden
first.last@lingfil.uu.se

Markus Saers
Human Language
Technology Center

Hong Kong Univ. of
Science & Technology
masaers@cs.ust.hk

Marcello Federico
Mathur Prashant

Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Human Language Technologies

Trento, Italy
lastname@fbk.eu

Abstract

This paper presents our submissions to the
shared translation task at WMT 2011. We
created two largely independent systems
for English-to-French and Haitian Creole-to-
English translation to evaluate different fea-
tures and components from our ongoing re-
search on these language pairs. Key features
of our systems include anaphora resolution,
hierarchical lexical reordering, data selection
for language modelling, linear transduction
grammars for word alignment and syntax-
based decoding with monolingual dependency
information.

1 English to French

Our submission to the English-French task was a
phrase-based Statistical Machine Translation based
on the Moses decoder (Koehn et al., 2007). Phrase
tables were separately trained on Europarl, news
commentary and UN data and then linearly inter-
polated with uniform weights. For language mod-
elling, we used 5-gram models trained with the
IRSTLM toolkit (Federico et al., 2008) on the mono-
lingual News corpus and parts of the English-French
109 corpus. More unusual features of our system
included a special component to handle pronomi-
nal anaphora and the hierarchical lexical reordering
model by Galley and Manning (2008). Selected fea-
tures of our system will be discussed in depth in the
following sections.

1.1 Handling pronominal anaphora
Pronominal anaphora is the use of pronominal ex-
pressions to refer to “something previously men-
tioned in the discourse” (Strube, 2006). It is a very

common phenomenon found in almost all kinds of
texts. Anaphora can be local to a sentence, or it can
cross sentence boundaries. Standard SMT methods
do not handle this phenomenon in a satisfactory way
at present: For sentence-internal anaphora, they de-
pend on the n-gram language model with its lim-
ited history, while cross-sentence anaphora is left
to chance. We therefore added a word-dependency
model (Hardmeier and Federico, 2010) to our sys-
tem to handle anaphora explicitly.

Our processing of anaphoric pronouns follows
the procedure outlined by Hardmeier and Federico
(2010). We use the open-source coreference resolu-
tion system BART (Broscheit et al., 2010) to link
pronouns to their antecedents in the text. Coref-
erence links are handled differently depending on
whether or not they cross sentence boundaries. If
a coreference link points to a previous sentence, we
process the sentence containing the antecedent with
the SMT system and look up the translation of the
antecedent in the translated output. If the corefer-
ence link is sentence-internal, the translation lookup
is done dynamically by the decoder during search.
In either case, the word-dependency model adds a
feature function to the decoder score representing
the probability of a particular pronoun choice given
the translation of the antecedent.

In our English-French system, this model was
only applied to the inanimate pronouns it and they,
which seemed to be the most promising candidates
for improvement since their French equivalents re-
quire gender marking. It was trained on data au-
tomatically annotated for anaphora taken from the
news-commentary corpus, and the vocabulary of the
predicted pronouns was limited to words recognised
as pronouns by the POS tagger.

372



1.2 Hierarchical lexical reordering
The basic word order model of SMT penalises any
divergence between the order of the words in the in-
put sentence and the order of their translation equiv-
alents in the MT output. All reordering must thus be
driven by the language model when no other reorder-
ing model is present. Lexical reordering models
making certain word order choices in the MT out-
put conditional on the identity of the words involved
have been a standard component in SMT for some
years. The lexical reordering model usually em-
ployed in the Moses decoder was implemented by
Koehn et al. (2005). Adopting the perspective of the
SMT decoder, which produces the target sentence
from left to right while covering source phrases in
free order, the model distinguishes between three or-
dering classes, monotone, swap and discontinuous,
depending on whether the source phrases giving rise
to the two last target phrases emitted were adjacent
in the same order, adjacent in swapped order or sep-
arated by other source words. Probabilities for each
ordering class given source and target phrase are
estimated from a word-aligned training corpus and
integrated into MT decoding as extra feature func-
tions.

In our submission, we used the hierarchical lexi-
cal reordering model proposed by Galley and Man-
ning (2008) and recently implemented in the Moses
decoder.1 This model uses the same approach of
classifying movements as monotone, swap or dis-
continuous, but unlike the phrase-based model, it
does not require the source language phrases to be
strictly adjacent in order to be counted as monotone
or swap. Instead, a phrase can be recognised as ad-
jacent to, or swapped with, a contiguous block of
source words that has been segmented into multi-
ple phrases. Contiguous phrase blocks are recog-
nised by the decoder with a shift-reduce parsing al-
gorithm. As a result, fewer jumps are labelled with
the uninformative discontinuous class.

1.3 Data selection from the WMT Giga corpus
One of the supplied language resources for this eval-
uation is the French-English WMT Giga corpus,

1The hierarchical lexical reordering model was imple-
mented in Moses during MT Marathon 2010 by Christian Hard-
meier, Gabriele Musillo, Nadi Tomeh, Ankit Srivastava, Sara
Stymne and Marcello Federico.

 60

 80

 100

 120

 140

 160

 180

 200

 220

 240

 260

 280

 100  150  200  250  300  350  400
 60

 80

 100

 120

 140

 160

 180

 200

 220

 240

 260

 280

LM
 P

er
pl

ex
ity

LM
 s

iz
e 

(m
ill

io
n 

5-
gr

am
s)

Data Selection Threshold

Threshold vs Perplexity
Threshold vs LM Size

Figure 1: Perplexity and size of language models trained
on data of the WMT Giga corpus that were selected using
different perplexity thresholds.

aka 109 corpus, a large collection of parallel sen-
tences crawled from Canadian and European Union
sources. While this corpus was too large to be used
for model training with the means at our disposal,
we exploited it as a source of parallel data for trans-
lation model training as well as monolingual French
data for the language model by filtering it down to a
manageable size. In order to extract sentences close
to the news translation task, we applied a simple
data selection procedure based on perplexity. Sen-
tence pairs were selected from the WMT Giga cor-
pus if the perplexity of their French part with respect
to a language model (LM) trained on French news
data was below a given threshold. The rationale is
that text sentences which are better predictable by
the LM should be closer to the news domain. The
threshold was set in a way to capture enough novel
n-grams, from one side, but also to avoid adding too
many irrelevant n-grams. It was tuned by training
a 5-gram LM on the selected data and checking its
size and its perplexity on a development set. In fig-
ure 1 we plot perplexity and size of the WMT Giga
LM for different values of the data-selection thresh-
old. Perplexities are computed on the newstest2009
set. As a good perplexity-size trade-off, the thresh-
old 250 was chosen to estimate an additional 5-gram
LM (WMT Giga 250) that was interpolated with
the original News LM. The resulting improvement
in perplexity is reported in table 1. For translation
model data, a perplexity threshold of 159 was ap-
plied.

373



LM Perplexity OOV rate
News 146.84 0.82
News + WMT Giga 250 130.23 0.71

Table 1: Perplexity reduction after interpolating the News
LM with data selected from the 109 corpus.

newstest
2009 2010 2011

Primary submission 0.246 0.286 0.284

w/o Anaphora handling 0.246 0.286 0.284

WMT Giga data
w/o LM 0.244 0.289 0.280
w/o TM 0.247 0.286 0.282
w/o LM and TM 0.247 0.289 0.278

Lexical reordering
phrase-based reo 0.239 0.281 0.275
no lexical reo 0.239 0.281 0.275

with LDC data 0.254 0.293 0.291

Table 2: Ablation test results (case-sensitive BLEU)

1.4 Results and Ablation tests

Owing to time constraints, we were not able to run
thorough tests on our system before submitting it to
the evaluation campaign. We therefore evaluated the
various components included in a post hoc fashion
by running ablation tests. In each test, we left out
one of the system components to identify its effect
on the overall performance. The results of these tests
are reported in table 2.

Performance-wise, the most important particular-
ity of our SMT system was the hierarchical lexical
reordering model, which led to a sizeable improve-
ment of 0.7, 0.5 and 0.9 BLEU points for the 2009,
2010 and 2011 test sets, respectively. We had previ-
ously seen negative results when trying to apply the
same model to English-German SMT, so its perfor-
mance seems to be strongly dependent on the lan-
guage pair it is used with.

Compared to the scores obtained using the full
system, the anaphora handling system did not have
any effect on the BLEU scores. This result is
similar to our result for English-German transla-
tion (Hardmeier and Federico, 2010). Unfortu-
nately, for English-French, the negative results ex-
tends to the pronoun translation scores (not reported
here), where slightly higher recall with the word-

dependency model was overcompensated by de-
graded precision, so the outcome of the experiments
clearly suggests that the anaphora handling proce-
dure is in need of improvement.

The effect of the WMT Giga language model dif-
fers among the test sets. For the 2009 and 2011
test sets, it results in an improvement of 0.2 and 0.4
BLEU points, respectively, while the 2010 test set
fares better without this additional language model.
However, it should be noted that there may be a
problem with the 2010 test set and the News lan-
guage model, which was used as a component in all
our systems. In particular, upgrading the News LM
data from last year’s to this year’s release led to an
improvement of 4 BLEU points on the 2010 test set
and an unrealistically low perplexity of 73 as com-
pared to 130 for the 2009 test set, which makes us
suspect that the latest News LM data may be tainted
with data from the 2010 test corpus. If this is the
case, the 2010 test set should be considered unreli-
able for LM evaluation. The benefit of adding WMT
Giga data to the translation model is less clear. For
the 2009 and 2010 test sets, this leads to a slight
degradation, but for the 2011 corpus, we obtained
a small improvement.

Our shared task submission did not use the French
Gigaword corpus from the Linguistic Data Consor-
tium (LDC2009T28), which is not freely available
to sites without LDC membership. After the sub-
mission, we ran a contrastive experiment including
a 5-gram model trained on this corpus, which led
to a sizeable improvement of 0.7–0.8 BLEU points
across all test sets.

2 Haitian Creole to English

Our experiments with the Haitian Creole-English
data are independent of the system presented for the
English to French task above. We experimented with
both phrase-based SMT and syntax-based SMT. The
main questions we investigated were i) whether we
can improve word alignment and phrase extraction
for phrase-based SMT and ii) whether we can in-
tegrate dependency parsing into a syntax-based ap-
proach. All our experiments were conducted on the
clean data set using Moses for training and decod-
ing. In the following we will first describe the exper-
iments with phrase-based models and linear trans-

374



duction grammars for word alignment and, there-
after, our findings from integrating English depen-
dency parses into a syntax-based approach.

2.1 Phrase-based SMT
The phrase-based system that we used in this series
of experiments uses a rather traditional setup. For
the translations into English we used the news data
provided for the other translations tasks in WMT
2011 to build a large scale-background language
model. The English data from the Haitian Creole
task were used as a separate domain-specific lan-
guage model. For the other translation direction we
only used the in-domain data provided. We used
standard 5-gram models with Witten-Bell discount-
ing and backoff interpolation for all language mod-
els. For the translation model we applied standard
techniques and settings for phrase extraction and
score estimations. However, we applied two differ-
ent systems for word alignment: One is the standard
GIZA++ toolbox implementing the IBM alignment
models (Och and Ney, 2003) and extensions and the
other is based on transduction grammars which will
briefly be introduced in the next section.

2.1.1 Alignment with PLITGs
By making the assumption that the parallel cor-

pus constitutes a linear transduction (Saers, 2011)2

we can induce a grammar that is the most likely to
have generated the observed corpus. The grammar
induced will generate a parse forest for each sen-
tence pair in the corpus, and each parse tree in that
forest will correspond to an alignment between the
two sentences. Following Saers et al. (2010), the
alignment corresponding to the best parse can be ex-
tracted and used instead of other word alignment ap-
proaches such as GIZA++. There are several gram-
mar types that generate linear transductions, and in
this work, stochastic bracketing preterminalized lin-
ear inversion transduction grammars (PLITG) were
used (Saers and Wu, 2011). Since we were mainly
interested in the word alignments, we did not induce
phrasal grammars.

Although alignments from PLITGs may not reach
the same level of translation quality as GIZA++,
they make different mistakes, so both complement

2A transduction is a set of pairs of strings, and thus repre-
sents a relation between two languages.

each other. By duplicating the training corpus and
aligning each copy of the corpus with a different
alignment tool, the phrase extractor seems to be able
to pick the best of both worlds, producing a phrase
table that is superior to one produced with either of
the alignments tools used in isolation.

2.1.2 Results
In the following we present our results on the pro-

vided test set3 for translating into both languages
with phrase-based systems trained on different word
alignments. Table 3 summarises the BLEU scores
obtained.

English-Haitian BLEU phrase-table
GIZA++ 0.2567 3,060,486
PLITG 0.2407 5,007,254
GIZA++ & PLITG 0.2572 7,521,754
Haitian-English BLEU phrase-table
GIZA++ 0.3045 3,060,486
PLITG 0.2922 5,049,280
GIZA++ & PLITG 0.3105 7,561,043

Table 3: Phrase-based SMT (pbsmt) on the Haitian
Creole-English test set with different word alignments.

From the table we can see that phrase-based sys-
tems trained on PLITG alignments performs slightly
worse than the ones trained on GIZA++. However
combining both alignments with the simple data du-
plication technique mentioned earlier produces the
overall best scores in both translation directions.
The fact that both alignments lead to complemen-
tary information can be seen in the size of the phrase
tables extracted (see table 3).

2.2 Syntax-based SMT

We used Moses and its syntax-mode for our exper-
iments with hierarchical phrase-based and syntax-
augmented models. Our main interest was to in-
vestigate the influence of monolingual parsing on
the translation performance. In particular, we tried
to integrate English dependency parses created by
MaltParser (Nivre et al., 2007) trained on the Wall
Street Journal section of the Penn Treebank (Mar-
cus et al., 1993) extended with about 4000 questions

3We actually swapped the development set and the test set
by mistake. But, of course, we never mixed development and
test data in any result reported.

375



from the Question Bank (Judge et al., 2006). The
conversion to dependency trees was done using the
Stanford Parser (de Marneffe et al., 2006). Again,
we ran both translation directions to test our settings
in more than just one task. Interesting here is also
the question whether there are significant differences
when integrating monolingual parses on the source
or on the target side.

The motivation for applying dependency parsing
in our experiments is to use the specific information
carried by dependency relations. Dependency struc-
tures encode functional relations between words that
can be seen as an interface to the semantics of a
sentence. This information is usually not avail-
able in phrase-structure representations. We believe
that this type of information can be beneficial for
machine translation. For example, knowing that a
noun acts as the subject of a sentence is more in-
formative than just marking it as part of a noun
phrase. Whether or not this information can be ex-
plored by current syntax-based machine translation
approaches that are optimised for phrase-structure
representations is a question that we liked to inves-
tigate. For comparison we also trained hierarchical
phrase-based models without any additional annota-
tion.

2.2.1 Converting projective dependency trees
First we needed to convert dependency parses to

a tree representation in order to use our data in
the standard models of syntax-based models imple-
mented in Moses. In our experiments, we used
a parser model that creates projective dependency
graphs that can be converted into tree structures of
nested segments. We used the yield of each word
(referring to that word and its transitive dependents)
to define spans of phrases and their dependency rela-
tions are used as span labels. Furthermore, we also
defined pre-terminal nodes that encode the part-of-
speech information of each word. These tags were
obtained using the HunPos tagger (Halácsy et al.,
2007) trained on the Wall Street Journal section of
the Penn Treebank. Figure 2 illustrates the conver-
sion process. Tagging and parsing is done for all En-
glish data without any manual corrections or optimi-
sation of parameters. After the conversion, we were
able to use the standard training procedures imple-
mented in Moses.

-ROOT- and
CC

how
WRB

old
JJ

is
VBZ

your
PRP$

nephew
NN

?
.

advmoddep poss
nsubjcc

punctnull

<tree label="null">

<tree label="cc">

<tree label="CC">and</tree>

</tree>

<tree label="dep">

<tree label="advmod">

<tree label="WRB">how</tree>

</tree>

<tree label="JJ">old</tree>

</tree>

<tree label="VBZ">is</tree>

<tree label="nsubj">

<tree label="poss">

<tree label="PRP$">your</tree>

</tree>

<tree label="NN">nephew</tree>

</tree>

<tree label="punct">

<tree label=".">?</tree>

</tree>

</tree>

Figure 2: A dependency graph from the training corpus
and its conversion to a nested tree structure. The yield of
each word in the sentence defines a span with the label
taken from the relation of that word to its head. Part-of-
speech tags are used as additional pre-terminal nodes.

2.2.2 Experimental Results

We ran several experiments with slightly differ-
ent settings. We used the same basic setup for
all of them including the same language models
and GIZA++ word alignments that we have used
for the phrase-based models already. Further, we
used Moses for extracting rules of the syntax-based
translation model. We use standard settings for
the baseline system (=hiero) that does not employ
any linguistic markup. For the models that include
dependency-based trees we changed the maximum
span threshold to a high value of 999 (default: 15)
in order to extract as many rules as possible. This
large degree of freedom is possible due to the oth-
erwise strong constraints on rule flexibility imposed
by the monolingual syntactic markup. Rule tables
are dramatically smaller than for the unrestricted hi-
erarchical models (see table 4).

However, rule restriction by linguistic constraints
usually hurts performance due to the decreased cov-
erage of the rule set. One common way of improving

376



reference Are you going to let us die on Ile à Vaches which is located close the city of Les Cayes. I am ...
pbsmt Do you are letting us die in Ilavach island’s on in Les Cayes. I am ...
hiero do you will let us die in the island Ilavach on the in Les Cayes . I am ...
samt2 Are you going to let us die in the island Ilavach the which is on the Les. My name is ...
reference I’m begging you please help me my situation is very critical.
pbsmt Please help me please. Because my critical situation very much.
hiero please , please help me because my critical situation very much .
samt2 Please help me because my situation very critical.
reference I don’t have money to go and give blood in Port au Prince from La Gonave.
pbsmt I don’t have money, so that I go to give blood Port-au-Prince since lagonave.
hiero I don ’t have any money , for me to go to give blood Port-au-Prince since lagonave .
samt2 I don’t have any money, to be able to go to give blood Port-au-Prince since Gonâve Island.

Figure 3: Example translations for various models.

English-Haitian BLEU number of rules
hiero 0.2549 34,118,622
malt (source) 0.2180 1,628,496
- binarised 0.2327 9,063,933
- samt1 0.2311 11,691,279
- samt2 0.2366 29,783,694
Haitian-English BLEU number of rules
hiero 0.3034 33,231,535
malt (target) 0.2739 1,922,688
- binarised 0.2857 8,922,343
- samt1 0.2952 11,073,764
- samt2 0.2954 24,554,317

Table 4: Syntax-based SMT on the Haitian Creole-
English test set with (=malt) or without (=hiero) English
parse trees and various parse relaxation strategies. The
final system submitted to WMT11 is malt(target)-samt2.

rule extraction is based on tree manipulation and re-
laxed extraction algorithms. Moses implements sev-
eral algorithms that have been proposed in the lit-
erature. Tree binarisation is one of them. This can
be done in a left-branching and in a right-branching
mode. We used a combination of both in the set-
tings denoted as binarised. The other relaxation al-
gorithms are based on methods proposed for syntax-
augmented machine translation (Zollmann et al.,
2008). We used two of them: samt1 combines pairs
of neighbouring children nodes into combined com-
plex nodes and creates additional complex nodes of
all children nodes except the first child and similar
complex nodes for all but the last child. samt2 com-
bines any pair of neighbouring nodes even if they are
not children of the same parent. All of these relax-
ation algorithms lead to increased rule sets (table 4).
In terms of translation performance there seems to

be a strong correlation between rule table size and
translation quality as measured by BLEU. None of
the dependency-based models beats the unrestricted
hierarchical model. Both translation directions be-
have similar with slightly worse performances of
the dependency-based models (relative to the base-
line) when syntax is used on the source language
side. Note also that all syntax-based models (includ-
ing hiero) are below the corresponding phrase-based
SMT systems. Of course, automatic evaluation has
its limits and interesting qualitative differences may
be more visible in manual assessments. The use of
linguistic information certainly has an impact on the
translation hypotheses produced as we can see in the
examples in figure 3. In the future, we plan to inves-
tigate the effect of dependency information on gram-
maticality of translated sentences in more detail.

3 Conclusions

In our English-French and Haitian Creole-English
shared task submissions, we investigated the use
of anaphora resolution, hierarchical lexical reorder-
ing and data selection for language modelling
(English-French) as well as LTG word alignment
and syntax-based decoding with dependency infor-
mation (Haitian Creole-English). While the re-
sults for the systems with anaphora handling were
somewhat disappointing and the effect of data fil-
tering was inconsistent, hierarchical lexical reorder-
ing brought substantial improvements. We also ob-
tained consistent gains by combining information
from different word aligners, and we presented a
simple way of including dependency parses in stan-
dard tree-based decoding.

377



Acknowledgements

Most of the features used in our English-French sys-
tem were originally developed while Christian Hard-
meier was at FBK. Activities at FBK were supported
by the EuroMatrixPlus project (IST-231720) and the
T4ME network of excellence (IST-249119), both
funded by the DG INFSO of the European Commis-
sion through the Seventh Framework Programme.

References

Samuel Broscheit, Massimo Poesio, Simone Paolo
Ponzetto, Kepa Joseba Rodriguez, Lorenza Romano,
Olga Uryupina, Yannick Versley, and Roberto Zanoli.
2010. BART: A multilingual anaphora resolution sys-
tem. In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2010), Uppsala.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed de-
pendency parses from phrase structure parses. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC.

Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, and Mauro Cettolo.
2008. IRSTLM: an open source toolkit for handling
large scale language models. In Interspeech 2008,
pages 1618–1621. ISCA.

Michel Galley and Christopher D. Manning. 2008. A
simple and effective hierarchical phrase reordering
model. In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 847–855, Honolulu, Hawaii, October. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Péter Halácsy, András Kornai, and Csaba Oravecz. 2007.
Hunpos: an open source trigram tagger. In Proceed-
ings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL on Inter-
active Poster and Demonstration Sessions, pages 209–
212.

Christian Hardmeier and Marcello Federico. 2010. Mod-
elling Pronominal Anaphora in Statistical Machine
Translation. In Marcello Federico, Ian Lane, Michael
Paul, and François Yvon, editors, Proceedings of the
seventh International Workshop on Spoken Language
Translation (IWSLT), pages 283–289.

John Judge, Aoife Cahill, and Josef van Genabith. 2006.
Questionbank: creating a corpus of parse-annotated
questions. In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and the 44th
annual meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 497–504.

Philipp Koehn, Amittai Axelrod, Alexandra
Birch Mayne, et al. 2005. Edinburgh system
description for the 2005 iwslt speech translation

evaluation. In International workshop on spoken
language translation, Pittsburgh.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, et al.
2007. Moses: open source toolkit for Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. In Annual meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Demonstration
session, pages 177–180, Prague.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and Beat-
rice Santorini. 1993. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of english: The Penn Treebank. Computational
Linguistics, 19:313–330, June.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Atanas Chanev,
Gülsen Eryigit, Sandra Kübler, Svetoslav Marinov,
and Erwin Marsi. 2007. MaltParser: A language-
independent system for data-driven dependency pars-
ing. Natural Language Engineering, 13(2):95–135.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational linguistics, 29:19–51.

Markus Saers and Dekai Wu. 2011. Principled induction
of phrasal bilexica. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual
Conference of the European Association for Machine
Translation, Leuven, Belgium, May.

Markus Saers, Joakim Nivre, and Dekai Wu. 2010. Word
alignment with stochastic bracketing linear inversion
transduction grammar. In Human Language Technolo-
gies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 341–344, Los Angeles, California,
June.

Markus Saers. 2011. Translation as Linear Transduc-
tion: Models and Algorithms for Efficient Learning in
Statistical Machine Translation. Ph.D. thesis, Uppsala
University, Department of Linguistics and Philology.

M. Strube. 2006. Anaphora and coreference resolution,
Statistical. In Encyclopedia of language and linguis-
tics, pages 216–222. Elsevier.

Andreas Zollmann, Ashish Venugopal, Franz Och, and
Jay Ponte. 2008. A systematic comparison of phrase-
based, hierarchical and syntax-augmented statistical
mt. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics - Volume 1, pages
1145–1152.

378


