




















Morphological analysis of a non-standard language variety 

Heiki-Jaan Kaalep 
University of Tartu 

Heiki-Jaan.Kaalep@ut.ee 

Kadri Muischnek 
University of Tartu 

Kadri.Muischnek@ut.ee  

 
Abstract 

This article introduces a corpus-based 
method for improving the process of 
automatic morphological analysis of a 
non-standard text variety. More 
precisely, our paper is concerned with 
the morphological analysis of Estonian 
chatroom texts. First, the 
morphological analyzer designed for 
the standard written Estonian is used 
for the analysis of chatroom texts. On 
the basis of output error analysis a 
method for improving the process is 
proposed. We take advantage of the 
fact that there are deviations with high 
token frequency, but low type 
frequency, on the one hand, and 
deviations with low token frequency, 
but high type frequency, on the other 
hand. The first group has to be 
manually compiled into a user lexicon, 
whereas the second group of errors can 
be taken care of by automatic means: 
automatic preprocessing of texts and 
automatic complementation of the user 
lexicon. As a result, the percentage of 
unknown tokens in the output of the 
morphological analyzer decreases from 
27 to 10.5. 

1  Introduction 

Recently new text types have emerged where 
the language and orthography used differ 
considerably from the conventions of the 
standard written language. E-mails, chatroom 
texts, internet forums and blogs are some of 
the examples of these new text types. The 
expressions ‘language of the computer-
mediated communication’, ‘Internet language’ 
or ‘Netspeak’ (e.g. Crystal 2001) are used to 
designate all of them. 

Morphological analysis is an inevitable 
prerequisite for any kind of further automatic 
analysis of a morphologically complex 
language like Estonian. For standard written 
Estonian the automatic morphological analysis 

is nowadays more or less a solved problem 
(Kaalep, Vaino 2001), but the language and 
orthography of the aforementioned new text 
types differs considerably from that of the 
standard written Estonian and thus the 
morphological analyzer can be expected to 
perform poorly while analyzing the Internet 
language texts. 

In this article we report on the experiments 
on the morphological analysis of the Estonian 
chatroom (or Internet Relay Chat, IRC) texts. 
We present the results of the automatic 
morphological analysis using a tagger meant 
for the standard written language, group and 
analyze the errors and introduce a corpus-
based method for compiling a customized 
lexicon for the analyzer for the text currently at 
hand. 

Estonian language belongs to the Finnic 
group of the Finno-Ugric language family. 
Typologically Estonian is an agglutinating 
language but more fusional and analytic than 
the languages belonging to the northern branch 
of the Finnic languages. Written Estonian uses 
phonemic orthography. One can find a detailed 
description of the grammatical system of 
Estonian in (Erelt 2003). 

The rest of this article is structured as 
follows. Section 2 gives an overview of the 
material we have used: the corpus of Estonian 
chatroom texts and the morphological analyzer 
etmrf. Section 3 presents some related research 
on the linguistic properties and automatic 
morphological analysis of Internet language 
varieties. In Section 4 we analyze the main 
deviations of the language used in Estonian 
chatrooms from the standard written Estonian 
and in Section 5 we put forward different 
strategies for coping with these deviations, 
namely preprocessing of texts prior to the 
morphological analysis and compiling a user 
lexicon. In Section 6 we present the results of 
running the morphological analyzer together 
with preprocessor and user lexicon; in Section 
7 we mention some perspectives for the future 
research and Section 8 concludes. 

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 130–137



2 Material: corpus of chatroom texts 
and the morphological analyzer 
etmrf 

For our experiments we used a corpus of 
Estonian chatroom texts from 2003 and 20061 

consisting of ca 7 million tokens annotated 
according to the TEI P5 guidelines.2 The 
annotation of the corpus dwells from the 
opinion that the chatroom conversation is like 
a kind of staged drama text: there are actors 
who enter the stage, produce their lines, and 
leave. All chatters i.e. their nicknames are 
annotated with the tag <speaker> and the text 
produced by the chatter is annotated with the 
paragraph tag <p>. The nicknames have not 
been changed in any way for anonymisation, 
but e-mail addresses, URLs and phone 
numbers have been masked (by substituting 
parts with ‘xxxx’). 

These chatrooms are an environment for 
general leisurely chatting. The chatters try to 
be witty. Language play, including play with 
orthography and nicknames, is an integral part 
of this type of communication.  

The sentences are not annotated. A sentence 
splitter developed for the standard written 
Estonian fails to find sentence boundaries in 
the chatroom texts, as a typical sentence there 
does not begin with a capital letter nor end 
with a punctuation mark. But the text entered 
by one chatter at one time and annotated as a 
paragraph is typically short and can be treated 
as one sentence for the morphological analysis. 

For the morphological analysis we used 
etmrf, a tool developed by Filosoft Ltd; the 
demo version of the program can be found at 
www.filosoft.ee. Etmrf can be used both as a 
morphological analyzer and as a 
morphological disambiguator; we performed 
only morphological analysis. 

Etmrf is a convenient tool for our purposes 
as its behaviour as a morphological analyzer 
can be modified with a customized user 
lexicon – a text file that contains word-forms 
and their preferred analyses. While analyzing a 
word-form in the text with a user lexicon, 
etmrf first turns to the user lexicon and only in 
the case the word-form is not present there, the 
ordinary process of morphological analysis 

                                                 
1 The corpus is available at 
http://www.cl.ut.ee/korpused/segakorpus/uusmeedi
a/jututoad.php?lang=en  
2 http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/  

starts. Thus the user lexicon enables us to give 
analysis to the word-forms not present in the 
standard written language, or give alternative 
readings to word-forms which usage in 
chatroom texts differs from that of the standard 
written language, e.g. representing a different 
part of speech. 

3 Internet language 

From the linguistic and sociolinguistic point of 
view, David Crystal (2001) gives a 
comprehensive overview of the language used 
in the computer-mediated communication and 
some of its subtypes. He characterizes the 
language used on the Internet as identical 
neither to speech nor writing, but selectively 
and adaptively displaying properties of both 
(Crystal 2001: 47). 

Crystal has a separate chapter on the 
language of the chatgroups, that is a generic 
term he uses for chatrooms, newsgroups, 
mailing lists and other multi-participant 
electronic discourse, whether real-time or not 
(Crystal 2001: 129). 

Among the distinctive features of the 
language used in computer-mediated 
communication Crystal mentions distinctive 
graphology, especially the strong tendency to 
use lowercase everywhere, minimalist 
punctuation and multiplying of vowels and 
consonants to express the “ferocity” of the 
expression. He also notes that chatgroups make 
a great deal of use of phonetic spelling; and 
presents a long list of genre-specific 
abbreviations (2001: 85-86) compiled of the 
initial letters of the words in a phrase (e.g. btw 
‘by the way’, cu ‘see you’).  

In an overview of the Internet language, 
Naomi S. Baron (2003) lists the usage of 
emoticons, abbreviations and acronyms as 
distinctive features of the computer-mediated 
communication. 

Lari Kotilainen (2002) analyzes the usage of 
English words and phrases in Finnish 
chatrooms. Finnish chatters like to use 
phonetic spelling while writing English text 
(e.g. how aar juu). Kotilainen shows that 
English in Finnish chatrooms is used mostly in 
the form of fixed expressions. 

Mark Myslín and Stephan Th. Gries (2010) 
conduct a study of Spanish Internet 
orthography. They conclude that the spelling 
used by the “speakers” of Internet Spanish 
reflects two interrelated rules: ‘modify words 

131

Morphological analysis of a non-standard language variety

131



that have special pragmatic functions and if 
you are really determined to modify a common 
word then make big/several changes’. 

Vincent Ooi (2002) has done work on the 
morphological analysis of English Internet 
Relay Chat texts. The author experiments with 
two taggers, namely CLAWS and AUTASYS, 
both probabilistic taggers.  

Ooi notes the frequent usage of discourse 
particles (which he calls discourse markers) in 
the genre of IRC. Analyzing the output and 
listing frequent errors he mentions that the 
taggers he used could not handle emoticons or 
extra-linguistic acts like lol – an abbreviation 
for laughing out loud. Other frequent errors 
were caused by proper nouns beginning with a 
lower-case letter and therefore not recognized 
as proper nouns, non-standard spelling and 
using digits for syllables, e.g. 2 for too. Ooi 
concludes that clearly the lexicon of the part-
of-speech tagger needs to be modified in order 
to handle the language of the computer-
mediated communication.  

We are not aware of any previous work, 
resulting in a large morphologically tagged 
corpus of internet language. Experiments have 
either led to an analysis of errors, as in (Ooi 
2002), or to a manually corrected small corpus, 
as in (Forsyth, Martell 2007). 

4 Main deviations from standard 
literary language 

As an initial experiment, we performed 
morphological analysis of the chatroom texts 
using simply the morphological analyzer etmrf 
as it is. In the output text, 27% of the tokens 
were tagged as unknown words. This is much 
worse than the 2% reported for estmorf (a 
previous implementation of etmrf) for standard 
literary Estonian by (Kaalep, Vaino 2001). 

By and large, our chatrooms show the same 
types of deviation from the standard written 
form as do other languages (cf Section 3).  

4.1 Parts of Speech 

4.1.1 Discourse particles 

Discourse particles are a part of speech 
widely recognized in spoken language, but not 
present in the word-class system of etmrf. 
Analyzing the frequent word-forms that had 
received the label of an unknown token from 
etmrf, it was clear that we should follow the 
word-class system used for analyzing the 
spoken language (e.g. Hennoste et. al. 2002) 

and create a special part-of-speech tag for 
discourse particles, i.e. these short or shortened 
word-forms that often constitute a clause alone 
and if used in a clause are not syntactically part 
of it. They have mostly no clear semantic 
content but a pragmatic (interactional or 
emotive) function, e.g. tre (a shortened form of 
tere) ’hello’ or kle (a shortened form of kuule) 
’hey, listen’. Discourse particles are a frequent 
part of speech in chatroom text making up 
5.8% of the tokens. 
(1)kle   krizzy   mis  teed 
particle propname what do-
2.ps.sg 
‘hey krizzy, what are you 
doing?’ 

4.1.2 Emoticons 

Emoticons are iconic signs combined of 
punctuation marks that are used for expressing 
emotions, e.g. :P , :-) , :D. As emoticons 
contribute a certain meaning or a meaning 
nuance to the text, just like words do, it would 
be reasonable to analyze them as words and 
give them a word-class tag. If analyzed as 
word-forms, emoticons make up 3.2% of the 
tokens in chatroom texts. 

4.2 Orthography 

In languages with non-phonetic spelling like 
English and French, chatgroups make a great 
deal of use of phonetic spelling. 

Estonian spelling, in contrast, is very close 
to phonetic. Still, dropping h from the 
beginning of a word (e.g. ommik for hommik 
‘morning’) might be called an instance of 
pronunciation affecting spelling as the word-
initial h is not articulated in spoken Estonian. 

4.2.1 Character substitution  

This is a wide-spread phenomenon in chatroom 
texts. Frequent substitutions include using ff 
for hv (e.g. raffas pro rahvas ’people’), x for ks 
(e.g. näitex pro näiteks ’for example’), y for ü 
(e.g. kyll pro küll ’enough’), c for ts (e.g. täica 
pro täitsa ’entirely’), 2 for ä (e.g. h2sti pro 
hästi ’well’), 6 for õ (e.g. h6be pro hõbe 
’silver’) and 8 for ö (e.g. t88 for töö ’work’). 

The tradition of substituting non-ASCII 
characters like äöüõ with some other symbol 
has originally arisen from the wide usage of 
non-customized keyboards, but this need has 
largely disappeared as we can see for example 
from spellings like ykskõik pro ükskõik ‘no 
matter’. 

132

Heiki-Jaan Kaalep and Kadri Muischnek

132



A question that this material brings forth is: 
what is the meaning of all these alternations? 
Why do the chatters bother to alternate the 
orthography of Estonian, although (differently 
from, say, English) it is phonetic already? 
Using ff for hv does not make the typing 
quicker or the orthography more phonetic. One 
explanation would be they need to signal the 
informality of chatroom communication as 
opposed to other registers of the written 
language. 

Multiplication of characters, mostly in order 
to express emotion (e.g. ahhhhh) could also be 
included in this group. 

The question important for compiling the 
user lexicon is, whether these substitutions 
occur in a closed set of frequent word-forms, 
or they are productive, i.e. used also in an open 
set of non-frequent word-forms. In the first 
case we could simply list them in the user 
lexicon of the morphological analyzer; in the 
second case we should think of some kind of 
an algorithm for normalizing the words prior to 
the standard morphological analysis. 

A look at the frequency lists of words with 
these substitutions revealed that their 
frequency profiles differ from each other. For 
example ff is used for hv in only certain high-
frequency word-forms, but x is used for ks in 
non-frequent as well as frequent word-forms, 
e.g. in the grammatical endings of the 
translative case of a noun (e.g. kirurgix 
‘surgeon-sg.transl’) or subjunctive mood of a 
verb (e.g. ärkax ‘awake-ps.subj). 

4.2.2 Non-capitalized proper nouns 

Proper nouns are typically not written with a 
capital letter in the chatroom texts 
(capitalization is used for other purposes, 
namely for emphasizing). Proper nouns make 
up 6.5% of the tokens in chatroom texts. They 
are so frequent because they are used as a 
direct address in order to explicitly show the 
adressee of the message and to catch the 
addressee’s attention, e.g. krizzy kle...’Krizzy 
(proper noun) listen...’ 

4.2.3 Typos 

Typos are frequent in chatroom text as the 
messages are often typed in a hurry and there 
is no time and actually also no need for editing 
the text. Word-forms with typos are frequent as 
a class but this class consists mostly of hapax 
legomena.  

4.3 Vocabulary 

4.3.1 Foreign-language words 

Foreign languages, mostly English, but also 
Russian and other languages are used in 
chatroom texts both in the form of single 
words or phrases in an Estonian sentence or 
whole foreign-language sentences. Similarly to 
Finnish (see Section 3), foreign-language text 
can be written with phonetic spelling, e.g. luk 
huus tooking ’look who’s talking’ as a certain 
form of language play. 

There are no chatroom-specific 
abbreviations, compiled of the initial letters of 
the words in a phrase (e.g. English btw ‘by the 
way’, cu ‘see you’) for frequent Estonian 
phrases; English loans are used instead. 

4.3.2 Neologisms and genre-specific 
vocabulary 

The chatroom texts contain a lot of genre-
specific (i.e. chatroom-specific) vocabulary, 
mostly fresh loanwords, but also innovative 
derivatives. Such vocabulary includes e.g. 
verbs privama ‘hold a private conversation in 
chatroom’ or ruulima ‘rule’; nouns like friik 
‘freak’, adjectives like feik ‘fake’ and adverbs 
like loogish ‘logical’. 

Of course, it is a bit complicated to make a 
clear distinction between a new loanword and 
a foreign word in an Estonian-language 
sentence, cf. e.g. (2). The governing principle 
has been to regard a word-form following the 
rules of Estonian inflection a loanword, e.g. the 
inflected form of the verb chillima ‘chill’ in 
(3). But the problem remains with uninflecting 
words like adverbs and inflecting words in a 
non-marked form, e.g. a nominal in nominative 
case like the adjective cool in (2). 
(2)tahan  ka   cool olla 
want-1.sg also cool be-inf 
‘I want to be cool too’ 
(3) no mis chillite siin 
    so what chill-2.pl here 
‘so what are you chilling/doing 
here?’  

4.3.3 Dialect and colloquial word-forms 

Dialect and colloquial, non-standard word 
variants are frequent in chatroom texts, 
perhaps signaling the informality of the 
interaction. Besides colloquial word-forms also 
colloquial inflectional endings are used. For 
example, the standard ending of the active past 
participle form of a verb is –nud (e.g. teinud 

133

Morphological analysis of a non-standard language variety

133



‘done’) but in chatroom texts often the 
colloquial form ending with –nd (e.g. teind 
‘done’) is used. This ending is productive, i.e. 
used also for forming past participle forms of 
verbs occurring only 1-2 times in the corpus. 

5 Strategies for achieving better 
morphological analysis 

From the viewpoint of automatic processing, 
the non-standard word-forms described in 
Section 4 should be divided into two groups: 
those that have to be included in the user 
lexicon manually, and those that can be 
normalized using some kind of rewriting rules 
prior to the morphological analysis, or added to 
the user lexicon automatically. This division 
corresponds roughly to that of frequent, 
irregular, non-productive on one side, and 
infrequent, regular, productive morphological 
or orthographic changes, on the other side.  

Further in this section we will present these 
two solutions in more detail. Words that are 
frequent in chatroom texts but not present in 
the standard written Estonian are included in 
the user lexicon. The automatic methods are 
twofold: preprocessing of texts prior to the 
morphological analysis and automatic 
complementing of the user lexicon. 

5.1 Preprocessing 

The preprocessing of the corpus started from 
the reducing of repeated characters or 
syllables. Such repetitions are frequently used 
in chatroom texts and their function is mostly 
intensification, e.g eieieieieiei (for intensive ei 
’no’) or jaaaaaaaaaa for intensive ja ’yes’). 
The fact of repetition (being an intensification) 
may be of importance for the further linguistic 
analysis but the exact number of repetitions is 
probably not. So we reduced all multiplied 
characters or syllables to three repetitions, so 
eieieieieiei became eieiei. 

Analogous multiplying occurs in emoticons, 
whereas a punctuation mark in an emoticon 
could be repeated more than hundred times. 
These repetitions were also reduced to three 
during the preprocessing step, thus keeping the 
original intention of the chatter. 

Next, we tried to eliminate flood, i.e. 
repeated chunks of text, often with nonsense 
meaning, entered by some of the chatters in 
order to disturb the conversation or simply as a 
bad joke. Distinctive features of the flood 
messages are their length and repetitions – they 

are usually longer than ordinary messages 
and/or have a distinctly repetitious nature. E.g. 
if a message contained three identical 20-
character spans in a row, or a message was 
repeated at least 5 times, while being at least 
110 characters long, then it was classified as 
flood.  

Flood deletion erased 16,000 tokens, and 
repetition deletion diminished the word type 
count by 18,000, to 390,000.  

5.2 User lexicon 

As mentioned previously, etmrf is a convenient 
tool for our purposes as it has an in-built 
option of a user lexicon. 

5.2.1 Manual complementation of the user 
lexicon  

Among the groups described in Section 4, the 
discourse particles (Section 4.1.1) and 
emoticons (Section 4.1.2) are the most frequent 
ones in texts. The traditional system of the 
parts of speech of Estonian does not recognize 
particles (and of course not the emoticons), nor 
does the morphological analyzer etmrf. For the 
morphological analysis of chatroom texts two 
new part-of speech tags were introduced for 
them. 

As for handling the variability of the 
particles (e.g. the particle with literary meaning 
‘listen’ could be written as kuule, kule or kle), 
we assumed that it is better not to 
overgeneralize and kept the possible variants 
of particles apart, so kuule, kule and kle are 
tagged as three different particles, not variants 
of the same particle. 

The treatment of particles in the output of 
etmrf with user lexicon is not very systematic, 
though. The user lexicon contains mostly those 
word-forms that had received the analysis of 
an unknown token during the morphological 
analysis of the chatroom corpus using etmrf 
without the user lexicon. Some word-forms, 
that on the basis of the usage in spoken 
Estonian could be suspected to be used as 
particles also in the chatroom texts, were 
checked in the corpus and if used as particles, 
added to the user lexicon. 

So, for example the present plural 1st person 
form of the verb ’say’ ütleme and the present 
conditional form of the same verb ütleks are 
used as particles in spoken Estonian and also in 
Estonian chatrooms. But a systematic study of 
the particles in chatroom texts has not been 
conducted, so there certainly are word-forms in 

134

Heiki-Jaan Kaalep and Kadri Muischnek

134



the output text that are used as particles but 
have been tagged with some other part-of-
speech tag. 

The user lexicon also gives a special part-of-
speech tag to the emoticons. There are 100 
different emoticons in the user lexicon; this 
relatively great amount is due to the fact that 
during the preprocessing of the texts multiplied 
punctuation marks up to three repetitions were 
left as they were and more repetitions were 
diminished to three, so the user lexicon 
contains separate entries for  :) , :)) and :))) 

Frequent new loanwords (Section 4.3.2) 
were also entered into the user lexicon. As for 
foreign words and phrases (Section 4.3.1), we 
do not think that the user lexicon is a proper 
way to solve their problem. Instead, some kind 
of a language identification program should be 
used. 

Dialectal and colloquial variants of standard 
words (Section 4.3.3) were entered into the 
user lexicon so that their lemmas are those of 
the standard written language. Neologisms and 
genre-specific words (Section 4.3.2), being out 
of standard written language vocabulary, 
naturally have their own lemmas in the 
lexicon. 

One can easily see that drawing a strict line 
between these two groups is somewhat 
problematic. For example, is the word-form 
plix a genre-specific variant of the standard 
Estonian word plika ‘girlie’ or a different, 
genre-specific word which lemma should be 
pliks? 

The manually complemented lexicon has 
less than 300 entries. 

5.2.2 Automatic complementation of the 
user lexicon 

The remaining groups of deviations from the 
Standard Written Estonian, namely lower-case 
proper nouns (Section 4.2.2) and word-forms 
written with character substitutions (Section 
4.2.1), including the phonology-related word-
forms with omitted initial h, show high type 
frequency, but low token frequency.  

Proper nouns are as a rule not capitalized in 
the chatroom texts and are frequently used as 
direct address in order to catch the adressee’s 
attention. Fortunately a program can scan a 
chatroom transcript prior to analyzing it 
morphologically and compile a list of proper 
nouns used as nicknames in every single 
chatroom, as the nicknames have been 
annotated in the corpus, as described in Section 

2. This list can then be automatically turned 
into a subpart of the user lexicon. 

If a nickname is homonymous with some 
Estonian word-form, the user lexicon leaves 
the word-form ambiguous between the 
readings of a proper noun and the other 
reading. If the chatter has entered his/her 
nickname with a capital letter, it still should be 
included in the user lexicon also with a small 
initial letter – other chatters tend not to use the 
capital letter while addressing her/him or 
chatting about her/him. 

So, for example the examples (4-5) add 
three entries to the user lexicon: 

Dammu as a proper noun 
dammu as a proper noun 
kakuke (‘bun’) as a general noun and a 

proper noun – the general noun reading is 
present in the actual lexicon of etmrf, but as the 
user lexicon “overrides” the original lexicon, 
we have to repeat it here. 
(4) <speaker> Dammu </speaker> 
<p> heihei </p> 
(5) <speaker> kakuke </speaker> 
<p> dammu mis teed </p> 

The nicknames used in one chatroom are 
temporarily included in the user lexicon just 
for the morphological analysis of the same text 
only. The reason for this is that nicknames are 
a very heterogeneous class, containing also 
word-forms that are used as common nouns 
and/or even pronouns, e.g. keegi ’someone’. 
Thus, including them in the user lexicon for 
analysis of all the chatroom texts would result 
in a purposeless increase of ambiguity. 

For non-standard word-forms with character 
substitutions, the user lexicon entries were 
generated in the following cyclical way. 

Etmrf analyzed the text, using the user 
dictionary it had at the moment. The unknown 
words were collected, and modified with some 
character substitution rule reversed, thus 
undoing the substitutions, described in section 
4.2.1, e.g. c was changed to ts in kick and viici. 
The examples resulted in word-forms kitsk 
(nonce word) and viitsi (present personal 
negative form of verb viitsima ’bother’) and 
were given to etmrf for analysis again. If etmrf 
gave the word-form some analysis other than 
that of an unknown word, the original word-
form and the analysis of its rewritten variant 
were made into an entry of the user lexicon. 
The process continued for several cycles, 
trying different character substitution rules in 
every cycle, from the more likely ones to less 

135

Morphological analysis of a non-standard language variety

135



likely ones, and eventually making several 
substitutions on the same word, e.g. viicix pro 
viitsiks (present personal conditional form of 
the verb viitsima ‘to bother’). 

Note that this cyclical process results in 
including in the user dictionary also the 
variants of a chatroom-specific word that has 
been included in the user dictionary manually, 
e.g. sau, sauu, sauh, tsau, zauu, tzau etc. for 
tsau (‘ciao’).  

The result of this automatic 
complementation was a user lexicon of over 
30 000 entries (excluding the nicknames) for 
the whole corpus. 

The automatically generated part of the user 
lexicon is presumably not very useful for the 
analysis of new chatroom texts or the texts of 
the other genres of the new media. More likely, 
it is the methodology of creating the user 
lexicon that is of some value to the future 
work: rewriting the word-forms unknown for 
the morphological analyzer, possibly several 
times, until the morphological analysis 
succeeds, and using the annotation of 
nicknames for the analysis of only the text 
where they occur. 

6 Experiment: morphological analysis 
with the user lexicon 

Finally, we performed morphological analysis 
of the whole corpus of chatroom texts with 
etmrf, using preprocessing and the user 
lexicon, described in Section 5. That is, we 
used the same set of texts we had been using 
for developing the strategies in the first place. 

In the output text, 10.5% of the tokens still 
remained tagged as unknown words. This is a 
clear improvement from the initial 27%, when 
we used etmrf “as is”. 

As for the types of the unknown words, the 
foreign-language word-forms, especially 
frequent English words like the, is, to, in, my, it 
etc constituted the most numerous group. 

In order to evaluate the quality of the 
morphological analysis (in addition to 
coverage), we manually checked certain 
excerpts of the output. These excerpts, 
originating from different chatroom texts 
contained 3281 tokens altogether. 3.4% of 
these tokens had received a wrong analysis 
from our customized etmrf. We counted as 
errors also the occasions if a word-form had 
been attached the label of the part-of-speech it 
typically has in the standard written language, 

but its usage in the chatroom text would have 
suggested another part-of-speech reading. For 
example, the most frequent error, making up ca 
50% of all errors, concerned the word-form 
tere ‘hello’. etmrf analyzed it as an 
interjection, in line with the grammar of 
standard literary Estonian, although it should 
be tagged as a particle, just like its shortened 
counterpart tre that was given the part-of-
speech tag of a particle by means of the user 
lexicon. 

As we worked only with lists of unknown 
tokens while compiling the user lexicon and 
developing the preprocessor, it could be 
anticipated that the other frequent type of 
errors was analysing a foreign-language word-
form homonymous with some Estonian word-
form like an Estonian one; e.g. me is a short 
form of 1st person plural pronoun ‘we’ in 
nominative or genitive case and mind is a 
partitive case form of 1st person singular 
pronoun ‘I’; both of them are also frequent 
tokens in English text. So in the output text all 
instances of me and mind while part of an 
English phrase were erroneously tagged as 
Estonian pronouns. 

Also, if a genre-specific version of some 
Estonian word-form coincides with a Standard 
Written Estonian word-form, it receives an 
erroneous reading during the morphological 
analysis. For example, ikke, a colloquial form 
of ikka ‘still’ is homonymous with singular 
genitive case form of the word ike ‘yoke’ and 
has been given that analysis by etmrf. 

The tagged version of the chatroom corpus 
can be queried at http://www.keeleveeb.ee 

7 Unsolved issues 

In spite of the efforts to recognize and delete 
foreign-language passages during the 
compilation process of the chatroom corpus, 
the texts still contain a considerable amount of 
foreign sentences, also foreign phrases and 
words as parts of Estonian sentences. Foreign 
language written with phonetic spelling is also 
common enough to need some special 
attention. A solution could be applying a 
language identification program that could 
identify as short excerpts of non-Estonian text 
as possible. The foreign language written with 
phonetic spelling needs some special attention 
here; perhaps compiling a small corpus of such 
sentences for (re-)training a language 
identification program is needed. 

136

Heiki-Jaan Kaalep and Kadri Muischnek

136



The other problem we have not found a 
good solution is that of the typos. As described 
in Section 4.2.3, typos are frequent as a type of 
errors but infrequent as word-forms. Perhaps 
we should think of a solution similar to that we 
used for character alternations: for unknown 
word-forms make some changes for fixing the 
common types of typos and try to perform the 
morphological analysis again. 

By common types of typos we mean 
changing the order of two adjacent characters, 
e.g. tow for two, typing a neighboring character 
from the keyboard, e.g. teo for two and 
misplacing the space, e.g. twot imes instead of 
two times. 

8 Conclusion: lessons learnt 

This article focused on the process of 
customizing the morphological analyzer 
originally designed for the purposes of 
standard written language to meet the needs of 
a non-standard language variety; namely that 
of the chatroom texts. 

Our main contribution lies in proposing a 
practical solution for coping with massive 
deviations from standard language, using a tool 
designed for analysis of this standard language. 

The language of chatrooms is a variant of 
written Estonian. At first sight, it looks very 
different from the standard literary language – 
over a quarter of the tokens could not be 
analysed by a program, meant for the standard 
literary Estonian. A closer look, however, 
reveals that, roughly speaking, the differences 
are either systematic or concern a small set of 
words. This is to be expected – a 
(sub)language has to be learnable and usable, 
meaning here that unsystematic deviations 
from the standard language have to be limited 
to a small set of high-frequency words, just 
like irregularly inflected words have to have a 
low type frequency and a high token 
frequency. 

The idea that most of the deviations result 
from some regular, productive modifications of 
the standard orthography might serve as 
guidance for future work. The place for 
looking for these regular modifications is 
hapax legomenon, the set of tokens that occur 
in the corpus only once. 

In a way the chatroom corpus is self-
contained: one can extract data that can be 
used for analyzing the data itself. It is the 
frequency profiles of different words that let us 

decide which words should be added to a user 
lexicon manually, and what productive rules 
might be at work here. It is the nicknames of 
the chatters that give us clues for analyzing 
much of the vocabulary. 

References  

Baron, Naomi S. 2003. Language of the Internet. 
In: Ali Farghali (ed.) The Stanford Handbook for 
Language Engineers. Stanford:CSLI 
Publications, pp. 59-127 

Crystal, David 2001. Language and the Internet. 
Cambridge:University Press 

Forsyth, Eric N., Martell, Craig H. 2007. Lexical 
and Discourse Analysis of Online Chat Dialog. 
International Conference on Semantic 
Computing, Irvine, California, pp. 19-26 

Erelt, Mati (editor) 2003. Estonian Language. 
Linguistica Uralica Supplementary Series vol 1. 
Estonian Academy Publishers, Tallinn. 

Hennoste, Tiit, Liina Lindström, Olga 
Gerassimenko, Airi Jansons, Andriela Rääbis, 
Krista Strandson, Piret Toomet, Riina Vellerind 
2002. Suuline kõne ja morfoloogiaanalüsaator. 
In: Pajusalu, R.; Hennoste, T. (eds). 
Tähendusepüüdja. Tartu: Tartu Ülikooli 
Kirjastus, pp. 161-171 

Kaalep, Heiki-Jaan, Vaino, Tarmo 2001. Complete 
Morphological Analysis in the Linguist’s 
Toolbox. Congressus Nonus Internationalis 
Fenno-Ugristarum Pars V, Tartu, pp. 9-16,  

Kotilainen, Lari 2002. Moi taas, ai äm päk. Lauseet, 
tilanteet ja englanti suomenkielisessä chat-
keskustelussa. In: Ilona Herlin, Jyrki 
Kalliokoski, Lari Kotilainen and Tiina Onikki-
Rantajääskö (eds). Äidinkielen merkitykset. 
Helsinki: Suomalaisen Kirjallisuuden seura, pp. 
191-209. 

Myslín, Mark and Stefan T. Gries. 2010. k dixez? A 
corpus study of Spanish Internet orthography. 
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 25, No. 
1, pp. 85-104. 

Ooi, Vincent B. Y. 2002. Aspects of computer-
mediated communication for research in corpus 
linguistics. In: Peters, P., Collins P., Smith, A. 
(eds.) New Frontiers of Corpus Research: 
papers form the twenty-first International 
Conference on English Language Research on 
Computerized Corpora. Amsterdam: Rodopi, pp. 
91-104. 

 

 

137

Morphological analysis of a non-standard language variety

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


