










































Unsupervised Alignment for Segmental-based Language Understanding


Proceedings of EMNLP 2011, Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 97–104,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Unsupervised Alignment for Segmental-based Language Understanding

Stéphane Huet and Fabrice Lefèvre
Université d’Avignon, LIA-CERI, France

{stephane.huet,fabrice.lefevre}@univ-avignon.fr

Abstract

Recent years’ most efficient approaches for
language understanding are statistical. These
approaches benefit from a segmental semantic
annotation of corpora. To reduce the produc-
tion cost of such corpora, this paper proposes
a method that is able to match first identified
concepts with word sequences in an unsuper-
vised way. This method based on automatic
alignment is used by an understanding sys-
tem based on conditional random fields and
is evaluated on a spoken dialogue task using
either manual or automatic transcripts.

1 Introduction

One of the very first step to build a spoken language
understanding (SLU) module for dialogue systems
is the extraction of literal concepts from word se-
quences hypothesised by a speech recogniser. To
address this issue of concept tagging, several tech-
niques are available. These techniques rely on mod-
els, now classic, that can be either discriminant
or generative. Among these, we can cite: hidden
Markov models, finite state transducers, maximal
entropy Markov models, support vector machines,
dynamic Bayesian networks (DBNs) or conditional
Markov random fields (CRFs) (Lafferty et al., 2001).
In (Hahn et al., 2011), it is shown that CRFs obtain
the best performance on a reference task (MEDIA) in
French (Bonneau-Maynard et al., 2005), but also on
two other comparable corpora in Italian and Polish.
Besides, the comparison of the understanding results
of manually vs automatically transcribed utterances
has shown the robustness of CRFs.

Among the approaches evaluated in (Hahn et al.,
2011) was a method using log-linear models compa-
rable to those used in stochastic machine translation,
which turned out to have lower performance than
CRF. In this paper, we further exploit the idea of ap-
plying automatic translation techniques to language
understanding but limiting ourselves to the objective
of obtaining a segmental annotation of training data.

In many former approaches literal interpretation
was limited to list lexical-concept relations; for in-
stance this is the case of the PHOENIX system (Ward,
1991) based on the detection of keywords. The
segmental approach allows a finer-grained analysis
considering sentences as segment sequences during
interpretation. This characteristic enables the ap-
proach to correctly connect the various levels of
sentence analysis (lexical, syntactic and semantic).
However, in order to simplify its practical appli-
cation, segments have been designed specifically
for semantic annotation and do not integrate any
constraint in their relation with the syntactic units
(chunks, phrasal groups, etc.). Not only it simpli-
fies the annotation process itself but as the overall
objective is to use the interpretation module inside
a spoken dialogue system, transcribed speech data
are noisy and generally bound the performance of
syntactic analysers (due to highly spontaneous and
ungrammatical utterances from the users, combined
with errors from the speech recognizer).

Among other interesting proprieties, segmental
approaches offer a convenient way to dissociate the
detection of a conceptual unit from the estimation of
its associated value. The value corresponds to the
normalisation of the surface form. For instance, if

97



the segment “no later than eleven” is associated with
the concept departure-time, its value is “morn-
ing”; the same value is associated with the segments
“between 8 and noon” or “in the morning”. The
value estimation requires a link between concepts
and sentence words. Then it becomes possible to
treat the normalisation problem by means of regular
expressions or concept-dependent language models
(allowing an integrated approach such as described
in (Lefèvre, 2007)). In the case of global approaches
(not segmental), value detection must be directly
incorporated in the conceptual units to identify, as
in (Mairesse et al., 2009). The additional level is a
real burden and is only affordable when the number
of authorised values is low.

Obviously a major drawback of the approach is its
cost: associating concept tags with a dialogue tran-
scription is already a tedious task and its complexity
is largely increased by the requirement for a precise
delimitation of the support (lexical segment) corre-
sponding to each tag. The SLU evaluation campaign
MEDIA has been the first opportunity to collect and
distribute a reasonably-sized corpus endowed with
segmental annotations.

Anyhow the difficulty remains unchanged each
time a corpus has to be collected for a new task.
We propose in this study a new method that reduces
the effort required to build training data for segmen-
tal annotation models. Making the assumption that
the concepts evoked in a sentence are automatically
detected beforehand or provided by an expert, we
study how to associate them with their lexical sup-
ports without prior knowledge. A conceptual seg-
mental annotation is obtained using alignment tech-
niques designed to align multilingual parallel cor-
pora in the machine translation domain. This anno-
tation can be considered as unsupervised since it is
done without a training corpus with links between
word sequences and concepts.

We present in the paper the necessary adaptations
for the application of the alignment techniques in
this new context. They have been kept to their mini-
mal so as to maintain the highest level of generality,
which in return benefits from the availability of ex-
isting software tools. Using a reference annotation,
we evaluate the alignment quality from the unsuper-
vised approach in two interesting situations depend-
ing on whether the correct order of the concepts is

known or not. Finally, the end-to-end evaluation of
the approach is made by measuring the impact of the
alignments on the CRF-based understanding system.

After a brief recall of the conceptual decoding
principles in Section 2, the principles of automatic
alignment of parallel corpora are described in Sec-
tion 3 along with the specificities due to the align-
ment of semantic concepts. Section 4 presents the
experiments and comments on the results, while
Section 5 concludes the paper.

2 Segmental conceptual decoding

If literal interpretation can be seen as the transla-
tion of natural language to the set of semantic tag
sequences, then the methods and models of machine
translation can be used. Since the number of con-
cepts is generally much lower than the vocabulary
size, this particular type of translation can also be
considered as a mere classification problem in which
the conceptual constituents represent the class to
identify. Interpretation can thus be performed by
methods and models of classification.

Discriminant approaches model the conditional
probability distribution of the semantic constituent
sequence (or concepts) c1 . . . cn considering a word
sequence w1 . . . wT : P (cn1 |wT1 ). In generative ap-
proaches, the joint probability P (cn1 , w

T
1 ) is mod-

elized instead and can be used to compute inferences
either for prediction/decoding or parameter training.

Generative models (such as hidden Markov mod-
els) have been first introduced to address the under-
standing problem with stochastic approaches (Levin
and Pieraccini, 1995). Recent variants offer
more degrees of freedom in modeling (see for in-
stance (He and Young, 2005) or (Lefèvre, 2007)).
Since then log-linear models have clearly shown
their superiority for tasks of sequence tagging (Hahn
et al., 2011).

Several variants of log-linear models differ in
their conditional variable independence assumptions
and use different normalisation steps. CRFs (Laf-
ferty et al., 2001) represent linear chains of random
independent variables, all conditioned over the en-
tire sequence and the normalisation is global over
the sequence.

Some generative approaches such as DBNs make
inferences in multi-level models (Lefèvre, 2007)

98



Figure 1: Example of an alignment of words with their conceptual units.

and intrinsically take into account segmentation.
For models unable to handle multi-level repre-
sentations (as CRF), it is convenient to represent
segments directly at the tag level. For this purpose
the BIO formalism can be used: B is added to tags
starting a segment, I to tags inside a segment and
O to out-of-domain tags (if these are not already
handled through a specific NULL tag). In the case
displayed in Figure 1, the concept sequence be-
comes: B-cmd-task I-cmd-task I-cmd-task
B-null I-null B-loc-town I-loc-town

I-loc-town I-loc-town I-loc-town

B-time-date I-time-date B-time-date

I-time-date I-time-date.

3 Semantic concept alignment

Automatic alignment is a major issue in machine
translation. For example, word-based alignments
are used to generate phrase tables that are core com-
ponents for many current statistical machine trans-
lation systems (Koehn et al., 2007). The alignment
task aims at finding the mapping between words of
two sentences in relation of translation. It faces sev-
eral difficulties:

• some source words are not associated with a
translated word;

• others are translated by several words;

• matched words may occur at different positions
in both sentences according to the syntactic
rules of the considered languages.

Several statistical models have been proposed to
align two sentences (Brown et al., 1993). One of
their main interests is their ability to be built in an
unsupervised way from a parallel corpus aligned at
the sentence level, but not at the word level. For-
mally, from a sentence S = s1 . . . sm expressed in a
source language and its translation T = t1 . . . tn ex-
pressed in a target language, an IBM-style alignment

A = a1 . . . am connects each source word to a tar-
get word (aj ∈ {1, ..., n}) or to the so-called NULL
token which accounts for untranslated target words.
IBM statistical models evaluate the translation of S
into T from the computation of P (S,A|T ); the best
alignment Â can be deduced from this criterion us-
ing the Viterbi algorithm:

Â = argmaxAP (S,A|T ) . (1)

IBM models differ according to their complexity
level. IBM1 model makes the strong assumption
that alignments are independent and can be evalu-
ated only through the transfer probabilities P (si|tj).
The HMM model, which is an improvement over
IBM2, adds a new parameter P (aj |aj−1, n) that as-
sumes a first-order dependency between alignment
variables. The next models (IBM3 to IBM5) are
mainly based on two types of parameters:

• distortion, which measures how words of T are
reordered with respect to the index of the words
from S they are aligned with,

• fertility, which measures the usual number of
words that are aligned with a target word tj .

In order to improve alignments, IBM models are
usually applied in both translation directions. These
two alignments are then symmetrized by combining
them. This last step is done via heuristic methods;
a common approach is to start with the intersection
and then iteratively add links from the union (Och et
al., 1999).

If we have at our disposal a method that can find
concepts contained in an utterance, segmental anno-
tation can be obtained by aligning words S = wT1
with the found concepts T = cn1 (Fig. 1). Con-
cepts are ideally generated in the correct order with
respect to the word segments of the analysed utter-
ance. In a more pragmatic way, concepts are likely
to be produced as bag-of-concepts rather than or-
dered sequences.

99



Statistical alignment methods used in machine
translation are relevant in our context if we consider
that the target language is the concept language.
There are nevertheless differences with genuine lan-
guage translation. First, each word is aligned to at
most one concept, while a concept is aligned with
one word or more. Consequently, it is expected that
word fertilities are one for the alignment of words
toward concepts and concept fertilities are one or
more in the reverse direction. Another consequence
is that NULL words are useless in our context. These
specificities of the alignment process raise some dif-
ficulties with regard to IBM models. Indeed, ac-
cording to the way probabilities are computed, the
alignment of concepts toward words only allows one
word to be chosen per concept, which prevents this
direction from having a sufficient number of links
between words and concepts.

Another significant difference with translation is
related to the translated token order. While word
order is not random in a natural language and fol-
lows syntactic rules, it is not the case anymore when
a word sequence have to be aligned with a bag-of-
concepts. HMM and IBM2 to IBM5 models have
parameters that assume that the index of a matched
source word or the indices of the translations of the
adjacent target words bear on the index of target
words. Therefore, the randomness of the concept
indices can disrupt performance obtained with these
models, contrary to IBM1. As shown in the next
section, it is appropriate to find ways to explicitly
re-order concept sequences than to let the distortion
parameters handle the problem alone.

4 Experiments and results

4.1 Experimental setup

The evaluation of the introduced methods was car-
ried out on the MEDIA corpus (Bonneau Maynard et
al., 2008). This corpus consists of human-machine
dialogues collected with a wizard of Oz procedure
in the domain of negotiation of tourist services. Pro-
duced for a realistic task, it is annotated with 145 se-
mantic concepts and their values (more than 2k in to-
tal for the enumerable cases). The audio data are dis-
tributed with their manual transcripts and automatic
speech recognition (ASR) hypotheses. The corpus
is divided into three parts: a training set (approxi-

matively 12k utterances), a development set (1.2k)
and a test set (3k).

The experiments led on the alignment methods
were evaluated on the development corpus using
MGIZA++ (Gao and Vogel, 2008), a multi-thread
version of GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) which also
allows previously trained IBM alignments models
to be applied on the development and test corpora.1

The conceptual tagging process was evaluated on the
test corpus, using WAPITI (Lavergne et al., 2010)
to train the CRF models. Several setups have been
tested:

• manual vs ASR transcriptions,

• inclusion (or not) of values during the error
computation.

Several concept orderings (before automatic align-
ment) have also been considered:

• a first ideal one, which takes reference concept
sequences as they are, aka sequential order;

• two more realistic variants that sort concepts ei-
ther alphabetically or randomly, in order to
simulate bag-of-concepts. Alphabetical order
is introduced solely to show that a particular
order (which is not related to the natural order)
might misled the alignment process by intro-
ducing undue regularities.

To give a rough idea, these experiments required
a few minutes of computing time to train alignment
models of 12k utterances, a few hours to train CRF
models (using 8 CPUs on our cluster of Xeon CPUs)
and a few seconds to apply alignment and CRF mod-
els in order to decode the test corpus.

4.2 Experimental results for alignment
Alignment quality is estimated using the alignment
error rate (AER), a metric often employed in ma-
chine translation (Och and Ney, 2000). If H stands
for hypothesis alignments andR for reference align-
ments, AER is computed by the following relation:2

AER = 1− 2× |H ∩R|
|H|+ |R|

. (2)

1With previousa, previoust, previousn, etc pa-
rameters.

2This equation is a simplification of the usually provided one
because all alignments are considered as sure in our case.

100



In our context, this metrics is evaluated by repre-
senting a link between source and target identities by
(wi, cj), instead of the usual indices (i, j). Indeed,
alignments are then used to tag words. Besides, con-
cepts to align have positions that differ from the ones
in the reference when they are reordered to simulate
bags-of-concepts.

As mentioned in the introduction, we resort to
widely used tools for alignment in order to be as gen-
eral as possible in our approach. We do not modify
the algorithms and rely on their generality to deal
with specificities of the studied domain. To train
iteratively the alignment models, we use the same
pipeline as in MOSES, a widely used machine trans-
lation system (Koehn et al., 2007):

1. 5 iterations of IBM1,

2. 5 iterations of HMM,

3. 3 iterations of IBM3 then

4. 3 iterations of IBM4.

To measure the quality of the built models, the
model obtained at the last iteration of this chain is
applied on the development corpus.

All the words of an utterance should normally
be associated with one concept, which makes the
IBM models’ NULL word useless. However, in the
MEDIA corpus, a null semantic concept is associ-
ated with words that do not correspond to a concept
relevant for the tourist domain and may be omit-
ted by counting on the probability with the NULL
word included in the IBM models. Two versions
were specifically created to test this hypothesis: one
with all the reference concept sequences and another
without the null tags. The results measured when
taking into account these tags (AER of 14.2 %) are
far better than the ones obtained when they are dis-
carded (AER of 27.4 %), in the word → concept
alignment direction.3 We decided therefore to keep
the null in all the experiments.

Table 1 presents the alignment results measured
on the development corpus according to the way
concepts are reordered with respect to the reference
and according to the considered alignment direction.

3For a fair comparison between both setups, the null con-
cept was ignored in H and R for this series of experiments.

The three first lines exhibit the results obtained with
the last IBM4 iteration. As expected, the AER mea-
sured with this model in the concept→ word direc-
tion (second line), which can only associate at most
one word per concept, is clearly higher than the one
obtained in the opposite direction (first line). Quite
surprisingly, an improvement in terms of AER (third
line) over the best direction (first line) is observed
using the default MOSES heuristics (called grow-
diag-final) that symmetrizes alignments obtained in
both directions.

IBM1 models, contrary to other models, do not
take into account word index inside source and tar-
get sentences, which makes them relevant to deal
with bag-of-concepts. Therefore, we measured how
AER varies when using models previously built in
the training chain. The results obtained by applying
IBM1 and by symmetrizing alignments (last line),
show finally that these simple models lead to lower
performance than the one measured with IBM4 or
even HMM (last line), the concepts being ordered
alphabetically or randomly (two last columns).

The previous experiments have shown that align-
ment is clearly of lower quality when algorithms are
faced with bags-of-concepts instead of well-ordered
sequences. In order to reduce this phenomenon, se-
quences are reordered after a first alignmentA1 gen-
erated by the symmetrized IBM4 model. Two strate-
gies have been considered to fix the new position of
each concept ci. The first one averages the indices
of the words wi that are aligned with ci according to
A1:

pos1(cj) =

∑
is.t.(i,j)∈A1 i

Card({(i, j) ∈ A1})
. (3)

The second one weights each word index with their
transfer probabilities determined by IBM4:

pos2(cj) =

∑
is.t.(i,j)∈A1 i× f(wi, cj)∑

is.t.(i,j)∈A1 f(wi, cj)
(4)

where

f(wi, cj) = λP (cj |wi) + (1− λ)P (wi|cj) (5)

and λ is a coefficient fixed on the development cor-
pus.

Training alignment models on the corpus re-
ordered according to pos1 (Tab. 2, second column)

101



Sequential order Alphabetic order Random order

word→ concept IBM4 14.4 29.2 28.6
concept→ word IBM4 40.9 51.6 49.0

symmetrized IBM4 12.8 27.3 25.7

symmetrized IBM1 33.2 33.2 33.1
symmetrized HMM 14.8 29.9 28.7

Table 1: AER (%) measured on the MEDIA development corpus with respect to the alignment model used and its
direction.

Initial 1st reordering iteration Last reordering iteration
pos1 pos2 pos2

Alphabetic order 27.3 22.2 21.0 19.4
Random order 25.7 21.9 20.2 18.5

Table 2: AER (%) measured on the MEDIA development corpus according to the strategy used to reorder concepts.

or pos2 (third column) leads to a significant im-
provement of the AER. This reordering step can be
repeated as long as performance goes on improving.
By proceeding like this until step 3 for the alphabetic
order and until step 7 for the random order, values of
AER below 20 % (last column) are finally obtained.
It is noteworthy that random reordering has better
results than alphabetic reordering. Indeed, HMM,
IBM3 and IBM4 models have probabilities that are
more biased in this latter case, where the same se-
quences occur more often although many are not in
the reference.

4.3 Experimental results for spoken language
understanding

In order to measure how spoken language un-
derstanding is disturbed by erroneous alignments,
CRFs parameters are trained under two conditions:
one where concept tagging is performed by an ex-
pert and one where corpora are obtained using au-
tomatic alignment. The performance criterion used
to evaluate the understanding task is the concept er-
ror rate (CER). CER is computed in a similar way
as word error rate (WER) used in speech recogni-
tion; it is obtained from the Levenshtein alignment
between both hypothesized and reference sequences
as the ratio of the sum of the concepts in the hy-
pothesis substituted, inserted or omitted on the total
number of concepts in the manual reference anno-

tation. The null concept is not considered during
the score computation. The CER can also take into
account the normalized values in addition to the con-
cept tags.

Starting from a state-of-the-art system (Manual
column), degradations due to various alignment con-
ditions are reported in Table 3. It can be noted that
the absolute increase in CER is at most 8.0 % (from
17.6 to 25.6 with values) when models are trained on
the corpus aligned with IBM models; the ordering
information brings it back to 3.7 % (17.6 to 21.3),
and finally with automatic transcription the impact
of the automatic alignments is smaller (resp. 5.8 %
and 2.0 %). As expected random order is preferable
to alphabetic order (slight gain of 1 %).

In Table 4, the random order alignments are used
but this time the n-best lists of alignments are con-
sidered and not only the 1-best hypotheses. Instead
of training CRFs with only one version of the align-
ment for a concept-word sequence pair, we filter
out from the n-best lists the alignments having a
probability above a given threshold. It can be ob-
served that varying this confidence threshold allows
an improvement of the SLU performance (CER can
be reduced by 0.8 % for manual transcription and
0.4 % for automatic transcription). However, this
improvement is not propagated to scores with val-
ues (CER was reduced at best by 0.1 for manual
transcription and was increased for automatic tran-

102



Automatic alignments
Manual Sequential Alphabetic order Random order

Manual transcription 13.9 (17.6) 17.7 (21.3) 22.6 (26.4) 22.0 (25.6)
ASR transcription (wer 31 %) 24.7 (29.8) 27.1 (31.8) 31.5 (36.4) 30.6 (35.6)

Table 3: CER (%) measured for concept decoding on the MEDIA test corpus with several alignment methods of the
training data. Inside parenthesis, CER for concepts and values.

scription). After closer inspection of the scoring
alignments, an explanation for this setback is that
the manually-designed rules used for value extrac-
tion are perturbed by loose segmentation. This is
particularly the case for the concept used to anno-
tate co-references, which has confusions between
the values singular and plural (e.g. “this” is sin-
gular and “those” plural). This issue can be solved
by an ad hoc adaptation of the rules. However, it
would infringe our objective of relying upon unsu-
pervised approaches and minimizing human exper-
tise. Therefore, a better answer would be to resort to
a probabilistic scheme also for value extraction (as
proposed in (Lefèvre, 2007)).

The optimal configuration (confidence threshold
of 0.3, 4th row of Table 4) is close to the baseline
1-best system in terms of the number of training
utterances. We also tried a slightly different setup
which adds the filtered alignments to the former cor-
pus before CRF parameter training (i.e. the 1-best
is not filtered in the n-best list). In that case perfor-
mance remains pretty stable with respect to the filter-
ing process (CER is around 21.4 % for concepts and
25.2 % for concept+value for thresholds between 0.1
and 0.7).

5 Conclusion

In this study an unsupervised approach is proposed
to the problem of conceptual unit alignment for spo-
ken language understanding. We show that unsuper-
vised statistical word alignment from the machine
translation domain can be used in this context to as-
sociate semantic concepts with word sequences. The
quality of the derived alignment, already good in the
general case (< 20 % of errors on the word-concept
associations), is improved by knowledge of the cor-
rect unit order (< 15 %). The impact of automatic
alignments on the understanding performance is an
absolute increase of +8 % in terms of CER, but is re-

duced to less than +4 % in the ordered case. When
automatic transcripts are used, these gaps decrease
to +6 % and below +3 % respectively. From these
results we do believe that the cost vs performance
ratio is in favour of the proposed method.

Acknowledgements

This work is partially supported by the ANR funded
project PORT-MEDIA.4

References

Hélène Bonneau-Maynard, Sophie Rosset, Christelle Ay-
ache, Anne Kuhn, and Djamel Mostefa. 2005. Seman-
tic annotation of the MEDIA corpus for spoken dialog.
In Proceedings of Eurospeech, pages 3457–3460, Lis-
boa, Portugal.

Hélène Bonneau Maynard, Alexandre Denis, Frédéric
Béchet, Laurence Devillers, F. Lefèvre, Matthieu
Quignard, Sophie Rosset, and Jeanne Villaneau. 2008.
MEDIA : évaluation de la compréhension dans les
systèmes de dialogue. In L’évaluation des technolo-
gies de traitement de la langue, les campagnes Tech-
nolangue, pages 209–232. Hermès, Lavoisier.

Peter F. Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent J.
Della Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathe-
matics of statistical machine translation: Parameter es-
timation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):263–311.

Qin Gao and Stephan Vogel. 2008. Parallel implemen-
tations of word alignment tool. In Software Engineer-
ing, Testing, and Quality Assurance for Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 49–57, Columbus, OH, USA.

Stefan Hahn, Marco Dinarelli, Christian Raymond, Fab-
rice Lefèvre, Patrick Lehen, Renato De Mori, Alessan-
dro Moschitti, Hermann Ney, and Giuseppe Riccardi.
2011. Comparing stochastic approaches to spoken
language understanding in multiple languages. IEEE
Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Pro-
cessing (TASLP), 19(6):1569–1583.

4www.port-media.org

103



# train utterances Manual transcription ASR transcription
(WER = 31 %)

1-best 12795 22.0 (25.6) 30.6 (35.6)

filtered 10-best (conf thres = 0.1) 18955 21.7 (25.8) 31.2 (36.9)
filtered 10-best (conf thres = 0.2) 15322 21.3 (25.5) 30.7 (36.3)
filtered 10-best (conf thres = 0.3) 13374 21.2 (25.7) 30.2 (36.0)
filtered 10-best (conf thres = 0.5) 10963 21.4 (25.7) 30.6 (36.2)
filtered 10-best (conf thres = 0.7) 9647 25.4 (29.1) 32.9 (38.2)

Table 4: CER (%) measured for concept decoding on the MEDIA test corpus with filtered n-best lists of random order
alignments of the training data. Inside parenthesis, CER for concepts and values.

Yulan He and Steve Young. 2005. Spoken language
understanding using the hidden vector state model.
Speech Communication, 48(3–4):262–275.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL, Companion Volume, pages 177–180,
Prague, Czech Republic.

John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando Pereira.
2001. Conditional random fields: Probabilistic mod-
els for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In
Proceedings of ICML, pages 282–289, Williamstown,
MA, USA.

Thomas Lavergne, Olivier Cappé, and François Yvon.
2010. Practical very large scale CRFs. In Proceed-
ings of ACL, pages 504–513, Uppsala, Sweden.

Fabrice Lefèvre. 2007. Dynamic bayesian networks and
discriminative classifiers for multi-stage semantic in-
terpretation. In Proceedings of ICASSP, Honolulu,
Hawai.

Esther Levin and Roberto Pieraccini. 1995. Concept-
based spontaneous speech understanding system. In
Proceedings of Eurospeech, pages 555–558, Madrid,
Spain.

François Mairesse, Milica Gašić, Filip Jurčíček, Simon
Keizer, Blaise Thomson, Kai Yu, and Steve Young.
2009. Spoken language understanding from unaligned
data using discriminative classification models. In
Proceedings of ICASSP, Taipei, Taiwan.

Franz Joseph Och and Hermann Ney. 2000. A compari-
son of alignment models for statistical machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of Coling, volume 2, pages
1086–1090, Saarbrücken, Germany.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Franz Josef Och, Christoph Tillmann, and Hermann Ney.
1999. Improved alignment models for statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the Joint SIGDAT
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Very Large Corpora, pages 20–
28, College Park, MD, USA.

Wayne Ward. 1991. Understanding spontaneous speech:
the Phoenix system. In Proceedings of ICASSP, pages
365–368, Toronto, Canada.

104


