










































WordNet.PT global - Extending WordNet.PT to Portuguese varieties


Proceedings of EMNLP 2011, Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 70–74,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

WordNet.PTglobal – Extending WordNet.PT to Portuguese varieties 

 

 

Palmira Marrafa
1
, Raquel Amaro

2
 and Sara Mendes

2
 

Group for the Computation of Lexical and Grammatical Knowledge, 

Center of Linguistics of the University of Lisbon 

Avenida Professor Gama Pinto, 2 

1649-003 Lisboa, Portugal 
1
palmira.marrafa@netcabo.pt 

2
{ramaro,sara.mendes}@clul.ul.pt 

 

 
 

 

 

 

Abstract 

This paper reports the results of the 

WordNet.PTglobal project, an extension of 

WordNet.PT to all Portuguese varieties. 

Profiting from a theoretical model of high 

level explanatory adequacy and from a 

convenient and flexible development tool, 

WordNet.PTglobal achieves a rich and multi-

purpose lexical resource, suitable for 

contrastive studies and for a vast range of 

language-based applications covering all 

Portuguese varieties.  

1 Introduction 

WordNet.PT is being built since July 1999, at the 

Center of Linguistics of the University of Lisbon 

as a project developed by the Group for the 

Computation of Lexical and Grammatical 

Knowledge (CLG). 

WordNet.PT is being developed within the 

general approach of EuroWordNet (Vossen 1998, 

1999). Therefore, like each wordnet in EWN, 

WordNet.PT has a general conceptual architecture 

structured along the lines of the Princeton 

WordNet (Miller et al. 1990; Fellbaum 1998). 

For early strategic reasons concerning 

applications, this project is being carried out on the 

basis of manual work, assuring the accuracy and 

reliability of its results. 

Aiming at using the Portuguese WordNet in 

language learning applications, among others, the 

starting point for the specification of a fragment of 

the Portuguese lexicon, in the first phase of the 

project (1999-2003), consisted in the selection of a 

set of semantic domains covering concepts with 

high productivity in daily life communication. The 

encoding of language-internal relations followed a 

mixed top-down/bottom-up strategy for the 

extension of small local nets (Marrafa 2002). Such 

work firstly focused on nouns, but has since then 

been extended to all the main POS, a work which 

has resulted both in refining information 

specifications and increasing WordNet.PT 

coverage (Amaro et al. 2006; Marrafa et al. 2006; 

Amaro 2009; Mendes 2009).  

Relational lexica, and wordnets in particular, 

play a leading role in machine lexical knowledge 

representation. Hence, providing Portuguese with 

such a rich linguistic resource, and particularly 

Portuguese varieties not often considered in lexical 

resources, is crucial, not only to researchers 

working in contrastive studies or with the so-called 

non-standard varieties, but also to the general 

public, as the database is made available for 

consultation in the WWW through an intuitive and 

perspicuous web interface. Such work is also 

particularly relevant as the resulting database can 

be extensively used in a vast range of language-

based applications, able to cover, this way, all 

Portuguese varieties. 

This paper depicts the work developed and the 

results achieved under the scope of the 

WordNet.PTglobal project, funded by Instituto 

Camões, which, as mentioned above, aims at 

extending WordNet.PT to Portuguese varieties.  

70



2 The Data 

Portuguese is spoken in all five continents by over 

250 million speakers, according to recent studies, 

and is the official language of 8 countries: Angola, 

Brazil, Cape Verde, East Timor, Guinea Bissau, 

Mozambique, Portugal, and Sao Tome e Principe. 

Being spoken in geographically distant regions and 

by very different communities, both in terms of 

size and culture, Portuguese is naturally expected 

to show variation. Despite this, regional varieties 

are far from being equally provided with linguistic 

resources representing their specificities, as most 

research work is focused either on the Brazilian or 

the European varieties
1
. 

In the work depicted here we aim at contributing 

to reverse this situation, considering that this kind 

of resource is particularly adequate to achieve this 

goal, since it allows for representing lexical 

variation in a very straightforward way: concepts 

are the basic unit in wordnets, defined by a set of 

lexical conceptual relations with other concepts, 

and represented by the set of lexical expressions 

(tendentially all) that denote them. We have to 

antecipate the possibility of different varieties 

showing distinct lexicalization patterns, 

particularly some lexical gaps or lexicalizations of 

more specific concepts. This is straightforwardly 

dealt with in the WordNet model: once a system of 

relevant tags has been implemented in the database 

in order to identify lexical expressions with regard 

to their corresponding varieties, lexical gaps are 

simply encoded by not associating the tag of the 

variety at stake to any of the variants in the synset; 

specific lexicalizations, on the other hand, are 

added to the network as a new node and associated 

to the variety tag at stake. 

Our approach consisted in extracting 10 000 

concepts from WordNet.PT, and associating them 

with the lexical expressions that denote them in 

each Portuguese variety considered in this project. 

In order to accomplish this, we consulted native 

speakers from each of these varieties, resident in 

their original communities, and asked them to 

                                                           
1 Official standardized versions of East Timorese and African 

varieties of Portuguese essentially correspond to that of 

European Portuguese. Moreover, these varieties are not 

provided with dedicated lexical resources, such as dictionaries 

or large-scale corpora. Being so, speakers in these regions 

generally use European Portuguese lexical resources, which 

only exceptionally cover lexical variants specific to these 

varieties. 

pinpoint the expressions used for denoting the 

aforementioned 10 000 concepts. Informants were 

selected by Instituto Camões among undergrad 

students in Portuguese studies and supervised by 

Portuguese lectors in each local university. Besides 

the European Portuguese variety, which is already 

encoded in WordNet.PT, specifications for six 

other Portuguese varieties were integrated in the 

database
2

: Angolan Portuguese, Brazilian 

Portuguese, Cape Verdean Portuguese, East 

Timorese Portuguese, Mozambican Portuguese and 

Sao Tome e Principe Portuguese. For each 

concept, several lexicalizations were identified and 

both the marked and unmarked expressions 

regarding usage information
3
 were considered and 

identified. 

2.1 Data selection  

As mentioned above, our approach for enriching 

WordNet.PT with lexicalizations from all 

Portuguese varieties consisted in extracting 10 000 

concepts from WordNet.PT and associating them 

to the lexical expressions which denote them in 

each variety. 

 

domain nouns verbs adjectives 
proper 

nouns 
total 

art 422 14 83 0 519 

clothes 467 62 74 0 603 

communication 314 151 106 82 653 

education 536 37 30 82 685 

food 1131 130 115 0 1376 

geography 281 0 166 200 647 

health 1159 92 175 0 1426 

housing 595 28 46 0 669 

human activities 641 0 0 0 641 

human relations 620 189 100 0 909 

living things 1597 113 119 1 1830 

sports 480 34 23 2 539 

transportation 659 562 67 30 659 

all domains 7893 802 1022 284 10001 

domain overlap 10,36% 12,54% 4,22% 22,62% 10,35% 
 

Table 1: concepts extended to Portuguese varieties 

                                                           
2  All Portuguese varieties spoken in countries where 

Portuguese is the official language were considered. However, 

for the time being, data from Guinean Portuguese are not yet 

encoded in the WordNet.PTglobal database due to difficulties in 

maintaining a regular contact with the native speakers 

consulted. Despite this, we still hope to be able to include this 

variety in the database at some point in the future. 
3 Informants were provided with a limited inventory of usage 

markers: slang; vulgar; informal; humerous; popular; unusual; 

regional; technical; old-fashioned. 

71



The semantic domain approach initially used in 

developing WordNet.PT, provided us with a 

natural starting point for the selection of data to be 

considered in this project. The table above presents 

the distribution, per POS and semantic domain
4
, of 

the WordNet.PT concepts extended to non-

European Portuguese varieties. 

2.2 Data implementation 

Once the data described above were presented to 

the native speakers consulted and their input 

organized, all the information obtained was 

incorporated in the database.  

This way, for a concept like bus (public 

transportation which has regular pre-established 

stops at short intervals, typically operating within 

cities), for instance, the following lexicalizations 

were obtained: autocarro, machibombo, 

machimbombo, ônibus, and microônibus. 

Autocarro was found to be the more common 

expression used for denoting the concept at stake 

in Angola, Cape Verde, East Timor, Portugal, Sao 

Tome e Principe and Mozambique. However, this 

variant is marked as “unusual” in Mozambique 

variety. Machibombo and machimbombo are only 

used in Mozambique, whereas ônibus and 

microônibus are only used in Brazil. With this kind 

of data at hand, each lexicalization was tagged 

with regard to the varieties in which it is used and, 

for each variety, associated, when relevant, to a 

usage label, as illustrated below. 

 

 
 

In the codification of the aforementioned 

information we used Synsetter – a new, very 

flexible wordnet development tool previously 

developed for the full implementation of 

                                                           
4 Note that some of the concepts considered are associated to 

more than one semantic domain. This results in partial 

overlaps between semantic domains, whose extent is presented 

in the last row of Table 1. 

innovative research results in WordNet.PT. In 

order to do so, this computational tool has been 

developed to straightforwardly allow for updates 

and improvements. In the specific case of the task 

addressed in this paper, extending the coverage of 

the WordNet.PT database to lexicalizations of 

different Portuguese varieties involved the design 

of additional features regarding the identification 

of Portuguese varieties and variety-dependent 

usage label encoding.  

2.3 The results 

Encoding the data obtained in WordNet.PTglobal 

extends a relevant fragment of WordNet.PT to 

Portuguese varieties other than European 

Portuguese. This way, researchers are provided 

with a crucial database for developing contrastive 

studies on the lexicon of different Portuguese 

varieties or research on a specific Portuguese 

variety, just to mention a possible application. The 

table below presents the distribution of variants per 

variety in the fragment of the lexicon considered, 

making apparent, for instance, that in the collection 

of data considered in this project some varieties 

have more synonym forms for denoting the same 

concept than others (see average of variants per 

concept). 
 

Portuguese 

varieties 

number of 

concepts 

number of 

variants 

variants per 

concept (average) 

Angola 10 000 11713 1,17 

Brazil 10 000 12060 1,20 

Cape Verde 10 000 12563 1,26 

East Timor 10 000 12131 1,21 

Mozambique 10 000 11740 1,17 

Portugal 10 000 13006 1,30 

Sao Tome e 

Principe 
6981 9552 1,37 

all varieties 10 000 14751 1,47 

 

Naturally, this is only an overall view of the 

results obtained. The new extended WordNet.PT 

version is also a crucial resource allowing for 

contrastive studies on lexicalization patterns 

depending on semantic domains or on frequency of 

use, for instance, for all or for specific Portuguese 

varieties.  

In order to make these data publicly available, a 

new WordNet.PT version, the WordNet.PTglobal has 

been released on the WWW
5

. Releasing the 

WordNet.PT fragment extended to Portuguese 

                                                           
5 http://www.clul.ul.pt/wnglobal. 

72



varieties online involved developing an updated 

version of the web interface for wordnet online 

navigation. In Section 3 we present the main 

features of this web interface and how users can 

navigate and straightforwardly access the data on 

Portuguese varieties.  

3 Navigating the lexicon of Portuguese 
varieties online 

The new updated version of the web interface for 

wordnet navigation was developed with specific 

features allowing for the visualization of 

information on Portuguese varieties and for 

narrowing down searches depending on the needs 

of the user. Among the most salient aspects of the 

new web interface we underline the following: 

allowing the user to restrict the search to a given 

(or to a set of) Portuguese variety(ies) (see caption 

below); displaying information about each lexical 

expression regarding the varieties which use it and 

whether this use is marked or not.  
 

 
 

Going back to the example mentioned in section 

2.2, in Portuguese, the concept {bus} can be 

denoted by several expressions, depending on the 

variety considered. This information is 

straightforwardly displayed and made available to 

the user by a simple system of tags, as illustrated 

below. 
 

 
 

Also, all marked uses are indicated by 

underlining the variety label corresponding to the 

variety in which the use of the relevant expression 

is marked (see tags associated to autocarro in the 

caption above, particularly the MZ tag signaled by 

an arrow). By clicking on this label the relevant 

usage label is displayed, as illustrated below.  

 

4 Final Remarks  

WordNet.PTglobal is, thus, a relational lexicon 

allowing for modelling the lexicon of Portuguese 

varieties in a consistent and motivated way.  

Covering 10 000 concepts, lexicalized by a total 

of 14 751 expressions representing all the main 

POS (nouns, verbs, adjectives, and proper nouns), 

WordNet.PTglobal also provides a lexical-conceptual 

network of relations establishing the relevant links 

between each concept and the other concepts in the 

net, in a total of more than 30 000 relations, 

including relations with their corresponding 

lexicalizations in English.  

This way, Portuguese now has a rich and useful 

lexical resource covering all of its varieties 

(Angolan, Brazilian, Cape Verdean, East 

Timorese, European, Mozambican, Sao Tome e 

Principe and Guinean Portuguese (forthcoming – 

see footnote 1)), freely available for online 

consultation both to researchers and to the general 

public.  

Moreover, the database presented in this paper 

can be extensively used in a vast range of 

language-based applications which are now able to 

cover all Portuguese varieties. As a final remark on 

future work, the data resulting from 

WordNet.PTglobal can be used as a basis for 

comparative studies regarding, for instance, variant 

distribution per variety. Note, however, that 

pursuing such studies requires comparable corpora 

for each variety, both with POS tagging and 

semantic annotation. Nonetheless, several 

advances are being taken in this direction
6
. 

                                                           
6  see http://www.clul.ul.pt/en/research-teams/87-linguistic-

resources-for-the-study-of-the-african-varieties-of-portuguese-r. 

73



References  

Amaro, R. (2009) Computation of Verbal Predicates in 

Portuguese: relational network, lexical-conceptual 

structure and context – the case of verbs of 

movement, PhD dissertation, University of Lisbon. 

Amaro, R., R. P. Chaves, P. Marrafa & S. Mendes 

(2006) “Enriching WordNets with new relations and 

with event and argument structures”, Proceedings of  

CICLing 2006,  Mexico City, pp. 28-40. 

Fellbaum, C. (1998) (ed.) WordNet: an Electronic 

Lexical Database, MA: The MIT Press. 

Marrafa, P. (2002) “The Portuguese WordNet: General 

Architecture and Semantic Internal Relations”, 

DELTA, Brasil. 

Marrafa, P., R. Amaro, R. P. Chaves, S. Lourosa & S. 

Mendes (2006) “WordNet.PT new directions”, 

Proceedings of  GWC’06, Jeju Island, pp. 319-321. 

Mendes, S. (2009) Syntax and Semantics of Adjectives 

in Portuguese: analysis and modelling, PhD 

dissertation, University of Lisbon. 

Miller, G., R. Beckwith, C. Fellbaum, D. Gross & K. J. 

Miller (1990) “Introduction to WordNet: An On-line 

Lexical Database”, International Journal of 

Lexicography, volume 3, number 4. 

Vossen, P. (1998) (ed.) EuroWordNet: A Multilingual 

Database with Lexical Semantic Networks, 

Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.  

Vossen, P. (1999) EuroWordNet General Document, 

University of Amsterdam. 

74


