










































FipsCoView: On-line Visualisation of Collocations Extracted from Multilingual Parallel Corpora


Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from Parsing and Generation to the Real World (MWE 2011), pages 125–127,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 23 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

FipsCoView: On-line Visualisation of Collocations
Extracted from Multilingual Parallel Corpora

Violeta Seretan
School of Informatics

University of Edinburgh
violeta.seretan@gmail.com

Eric Wehrli
Language Technology Laboratory

University of Geneva
eric.wehrli@unige.ch

Abstract

We introduce FipsCoView, an on-line inter-
face for dictionary-like visualisation of collo-
cations detected from parallel corpora using a
syntactically-informed extraction method.

1 Introduction

Multilingual (parallel) corpora—e.g., Europarl
(Koehn, 2005)—represent a valuable resource
for tasks related to language production that is
exploitable in a wide variety of settings, such as
second language learning, lexicography, as well as
human or automatic translation. We focus on lexi-
cographic exploitation of such resources and present
a system, called FipsCoView,1 which is specifically
aimed at supporting the work of lexicographers who
compile multilingual collocation resources.

Collocation, a rather ill-defined linguistic con-
cept referring to a large and heterogeneous sub-class
of multi-word expressions, is understood here as a
combination of words that produces natural-soun-
ding speech and writing (Lea and Runcie, 2002)
and that has syntactic and semantic properties which
cannot be entirely predicted from those of its com-
ponents and therefore has to be listed in a lexicon
(Evert, 2004). Collocations are particularly interest-
ing from a translation point of view, and our system
can also be used to facilitate the task of translators
looking for the right translation of a word in context.

The usage scenario is the following. Given a
word, like money, our system provides a concise and
intuitive presentation of the list of collocations with

1Available at http://tinyurl.com/FipsCoView.

that word, which have previously been detected in
the source language version of the parallel corpus.
By selecting one of the items in this list, e.g., money
laundering, users will be able to see the contexts of
that item, represented by the sentences in which it
occurs. In addition, users can select a target lan-
guage from the list of other languages in which the
multilingual corpus is available2 and visualise the
target language version of the source sentences.

This presentation enables users to find potential
translation equivalents for collocations by inspecting
the target sentences. Thus, in the case of French, the
preferred equivalent found is blanchiment d’argent,
lit., ‘money whitening’, rather than the literal trans-
lation from English, *lavage d’argent. In the case of
Italian, this is riciclaggio di denaro, lit., ‘recycling
of money’, rather than the literal translation ?lavag-
gio di soldi, also possible but much less preferred.
Access to target sentences is important as it allows
users to see how the translation of a collocation vary
depending on the context. Besides, it provides use-
ful usage clues, indicating, inter alia, the allowed or
preferred morphosyntactic features of a collocation.

In this paper, we present the architecture of
FipsCoView and outline its main functionalities.
This system is an extension of FipsCo, a larger
fully-fledged off-line system, which, in turn, is in-
tegrated into a complex framework for process-
ing multi-word expressions (Seretan, 2009). While
the off-line system finds direct applicability in our
on-going projects of large-scale multilingual syntac-

2Europarl includes 11 languages: French, Italian, Spanish,
Portuguese, English, Dutch, German, Danish, Swedish, Greek,
Finnish. Note that our tool is not tailored to this specific corpus.

125



Figure 1: FipsCoView: System architecture.

tic parsing (Wehrli, 2007) and syntax-based machine
translation (Wehrli et al., 2009), the on-line version
is designed to offer access to the derived collocation
resources to a broader community.

2 Architecture and Main Functionalities
Figure 1 shows the architecture of FipsCoView. The
main system modules are the collocation extraction
module, the search & visualisation module, the con-
cordancing and the sentence alignment modules.

The processing flow is pipelined. The key mod-
ule of the system, collocation extraction, relies on
a syntax-based methodology that combines lexi-
cal statistics with syntactic information provided by
Fips, a deep symbolic parser (Wehrli, 2007). This
methodology is fully described and evaluated in
Seretan (2011). In principle, the extraction takes
place only once, but new corpora can be processed
later and results are cumulated. The sentence align-
ment (Nerima et al., 2003) is performed partially,
i.e., only for the sentences actually displayed by the
concordancing module. It is done on the fly, thus
eliminating the need of pre-aligning the corpora.

The role of the concordancing module is to
present the sentence contexts for a selected colloca-
tion (cf. scenario described in §1). The words in this
collocation are highlighted for readability. The list
of sentences is displayed in the order given by the
syntactic variation of collocations, that is, the collo-
cation instances for which the distance between the
components is larger are displayed first. This func-
tionality is designed to support the work of users in-
specting the syntactic properties of collocations.

The search & visualisation module takes as input
the word entered by the user in the system interface,
performs a search in the database that stores the col-
location extraction results, and provides a one-page
presentation of the collocational information related
to the sought word. Users can set visualisation pa-

rameters such as the minimal frequency and associa-
tion score, which limit the displayed results accord-
ing to the number of occurrences in the corpus and
the “association strength” between the component
words, as given by the lexical association measure
used to extract collocations. The measure we typi-
cally use is log-likelihood ratio (Dunning, 1993); see
Pecina (2008) for an inventory of measures.

Depending on these parameters, the automatically
created collocation entry is more or less exhaustive
(the output adapts to the specific user’s purpose). A
different sub-entry is created for each part of speech
of the sought word (for instance, report can either
be a noun or a verb). Under each sub-entry, colloca-
tions are organised by syntactic type, e.g., adjective-
noun (comprehensive report), noun-noun (initiative
report), subject-verb (report highlights), verb-object
(produce a report). To avoid redundancy, only the
collocating words are shown. The sought word is
understood and is replaced by a tilde character, in
a paper dictionary style. Unlike in paper dictionary
presentations, the online presentation benefits from
the HTML environment by using colours, adapt-
ing the font size so that it reflects the association
strength (the most important combinations are more
visually salient), displaying additional information
such as score and frequency, and using hyper-links
for navigating from one word to another.

With respect to similar systems (Barlow, 2002;
Scott, 2004; Kilgarriff et al., 2004; Charest et al.,
2007; Rayson, 2009; Fletcher, 2011), our system
uniquely combines parallel concordancing with col-
location detection based on deep syntactic process-
ing. It is available for English, French, Spanish and
Italian and it is being extended to other languages.

Acknowledgement
This work is partly supported by the Swiss National
Science Foundation (grant no. PA00P1 131512).

126



References
Michael Barlow. 2002. Paraconc: Concordance software

for multilingual parallel corpora. In Proceedings of
the Third International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation. Workshop on Language Re-
sources in Translation Work and Research, pages 20–
24, Las Palmas, Spain.

Simon Charest, Éric Brunelle, Jean Fontaine, and
Bertrand Pelletier. 2007. Élaboration automatique
d’un dictionnaire de cooccurrences grand public. In
Actes de la 14e conférence sur le Traitement Au-
tomatique des Langues Naturelles (TALN 2007), pages
283–292, Toulouse, France, June.

Ted Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statistics
of surprise and coincidence. Computational Linguis-
tics, 19(1):61–74.

Stefan Evert. 2004. The Statistics of Word Cooccur-
rences: Word Pairs and Collocations. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Stuttgart.

William H. Fletcher. 2011. Phrases in english: Online
database for the study of English words and phrases.
http://phrasesinenglish.org. Accessed
March, 2011.

Adam Kilgarriff, Pavel Rychly, Pavel Smrz, and David
Tugwell. 2004. The Sketch Engine. In Proceedings of
the Eleventh EURALEX International Congress, pages
105–116, Lorient, France.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of The
Tenth Machine Translation Summit (MT Summit X),
pages 79–86, Phuket, Thailand, September.

Diana Lea and Moira Runcie, editors. 2002. Oxford Col-
locations Dictionary for Students of English. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.

Luka Nerima, Violeta Seretan, and Eric Wehrli. 2003.
Creating a multilingual collocation dictionary from
large text corpora. In Companion Volume to the
Proceedings of the 10th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (EACL’03), pages 131–134, Budapest, Hungary.

Pavel Pecina. 2008. Lexical Association Measures: Col-
location Extraction. Ph.D. thesis, Charles University
in Prague.

Paul Rayson. 2009. Wmatrix: a web-based corpus
processing environment. http://ucrel.lancs.
ac.uk/wmatrix. Accessed March, 2011.

Mike Scott. 2004. WordSmith Tools version 4. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.

Violeta Seretan. 2009. An integrated environment for
extracting and translating collocations. In Michaela
Mahlberg, Victorina González-Dı́az, and Catherine
Smith, editors, Proceedings of the Corpus Linguistics
Conference CL2009, Liverpool, UK.

Violeta Seretan. 2011. Syntax-Based Collocation Ex-
traction. Text, Speech and Language Technology.
Springer, Dordrecht.

Eric Wehrli, Luka Nerima, and Yves Scherrer. 2009.
Deep linguistic multilingual translation and bilingual
dictionaries. In Proceedings of the Fourth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 90–94,
Athens, Greece. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Eric Wehrli. 2007. Fips, a “deep” linguistic multilingual
parser. In ACL 2007 Workshop on Deep Linguistic
Processing, pages 120–127, Prague, Czech Republic.

127


