










































Perception of Personality and Naturalness through Dialogues by Native Speakers of American English and Arabic


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2011: the 12th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 286–293,
Portland, Oregon, June 17-18, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Perception of Personality and Naturalness through Dialogues by
Native Speakers of American English and Arabic

Maxim Makatchev
Robotics Institute

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

mmakatch@cs.cmu.edu

Reid Simmons
Robotics Institute

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

reids@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Linguistic markers of personality traits have
been studied extensively, but few cross-
cultural studies exist. In this paper, we eval-
uate how native speakers of American English
and Arabic perceive personality traits and nat-
uralness of English utterances that vary along
the dimensions of verbosity, hedging, lexical
and syntactic alignment, and formality. The
utterances are the turns within dialogue frag-
ments that are presented as text transcripts to
the workers of Amazon’s Mechanical Turk.
The results of the study suggest that all four di-
mensions can be used as linguistic markers of
all personality traits by both language commu-
nities. A further comparative analysis shows
cross-cultural differences for some combina-
tions of measures of personality traits and nat-
uralness, the dimensions of linguistic variabil-
ity and dialogue acts.

1 Introduction

English has been used as a lingua franca across the
world, but the usage differs. The variabilities in En-
glish introduced by dialects, cultures, and non-native
speakers result in different syntax and words ex-
pressing similar meanings and in different meanings
attributed to similar expressions. These differences
are a source of pragmatic failures (Thomas, 1983):
situations when listeners perceive meanings and af-
fective attitudes unintended by speakers. For exam-
ple, Thomas (1984) reports that usage of Illocution-
ary Force Indicating Devices (IFIDs, such as “I warn
you”, (Searle, 1969)) in English by native speak-
ers of Russian causes the speakers to sometimes

appear “inappropriately domineering in interactions
with English-speaking equals.” Dialogue systems,
just like humans, may misattribute attitudes and mis-
interpret intent of user’s utterances. Conversely, they
may also cause misattributions and misinterpreta-
tions on the user’s part. Hence, taking into account
the user’s dialect, culture, or native language may
help reduce pragmatic failures.

This kind of adaptation requires a mapping from
utterances, or more generally, their linguistic fea-
tures, to meanings and affective attributions for each
of the target language communities. In this paper
we present an exploratory study that evaluates such
a mapping from the linguistic features of verbosity,
hedging, alignment, and formality (as defined in
Section 3.1) to the perceived personality traits and
naturalness across the populations of native speak-
ers of American English and Arabic.

Estimating the relationship between linguistic
features and their perception across language com-
munities faces a number of methodological difficul-
ties. First, language communities shall be outlined,
in a way that will afford generalizing within their
populations. Defining language communities is a
hard problem, even if it is based on the “mother
tongue” (McPherson et al., 2000). Next, linguistic
features that are potentially important for the adap-
tation must be selected. These are, for example,
the linguistic devices that contribute to realization of
rich points (Agar, 1994), i.e. the behaviors that sig-
nal differences between language communities. To
be useful for dialogue system research, the selected
linguistic features should be feasible to implement in
natural language generation and interpretation mod-

286



ules. Then, a corpus of stimuli that span the variabil-
ity of the linguistic features must be created. The
stimuli should reflect the context where the dialogue
system is intended to be used. For example, in case
of an information-giving dialogue system, the stim-
uli should include some question-answer adjacency
pairs (Schegloff and Sacks, 1973). Finally, scales
should be chosen to allow for scoring of the stimuli
with respect to the metrics of interest. These scales
should be robust to be applied within each of the lan-
guage communities.

In the remainder of this paper, we describe each of
these steps in the context of an exploratory study that
evaluates perception of English utterances by native
speakers of American English and Arabic. Our ap-
plication is an information-giving dialogue system
that is used by the robot receptionists (roboception-
ists) in Qatar and the United States (Makatchev et
al., 2009; Makatchev et al., 2010). In the next sec-
tion, we continue with an overview of the related
work. Section 3 introduces the experiment, includ-
ing the selection of stimuli, measures, design, and
describes the recruitment of participants via Ama-
zon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk). We discuss results
in Section 4 and provide a conclusion in Section 5.

2 Related work

2.1 Cross-cultural variability in English

Language is tightly connected with culture (Agar,
1994). As a result, even native speakers of a lan-
guage use it differently across dialects (e.g. African
American Vernacular English and Standard Amer-
ican English), genders (see, for example, (Lakoff,
1973)) and social statuses (e.g. (Huspek, 1989)),
among other dimensions.

Speakers of English as a second language display
variabilities in language use that are consistent with
their native languages and backgrounds. For exam-
ple, Nelson et al. (1996) reports that Syrian speakers
of Arabic tend to use different compliment response
strategies as compared with Americans. Aguilar
(1998) reviews types of pragmatic failures that are
influenced by native language and culture. In partic-
ular, he cites Davies (1987) on a pragmatic failure
due to non-equivalence of formulas: native speakers
of Moroccan Arabic use a spoken formulaic expres-
sion to wish a sick person quick recovery, whereas in

English the formula “get well soon” is not generally
used in speech. Feghali (1997) reviews features of
Arabic communicative style, including indirectness
(concealment of wants, needs or goals (Gudykunst
and Ting-Toomey, 1988)), elaborateness (rich and
expressive language use, e.g. involving rhetorical
patterns of exaggeration and assertion (Patai, 1983))
and affectiveness (i.e. “intuitive-affective style of
emotional appeal” (Glenn et al., 1977), related to
the patterns of organization and presentation of ar-
guments).

In this paper, we are concerned with English us-
age by native speakers of American English and na-
tive speakers of Arabic. We have used the features
of the Arabic communicative style outlined above
as a guide in selecting the dimensions of linguistic
variability that are presented in Section 3.1.

2.2 Measuring pragmatic variation

Perception of pragmatic variation of spoken lan-
guage and text has been shown to vary across
cultures along the dimensions of personality
(e.g. (Scherer, 1972)), emotion (e.g. (Burkhardt et
al., 2006)), deception (e.g. (Bond et al., 1990)),
among others. Within a culture, personality traits
such as extraversion, have been shown to have
consistent markers in language (see overview in
(Mairesse et al., 2007)). For example, Furnham
(1990) notes that in conversation, extraverts are less
formal and use more verbs, adverbs and pronouns.
However, the authors are not aware of any quantita-
tive studies that compare linguistic markers of per-
sonality across cultures. The present study aims to
help fill this gap.

A mapping between linguistic dimensions and
personality has been evaluated by grading es-
says and conversation extracts (Mairesse et al.,
2007), and by grading utterances generated automat-
ically with a random setting of linguistic parame-
ters (Mairesse and Walker, 2008). In the exploratory
study presented in this paper, we ask our participants
to grade dialogue fragments that were manually cre-
ated to vary along each of the four linguistic dimen-
sions (see Section 3.1).

287



3 Experiment

In the review of related work, we presented some ev-
idence supporting the claim that linguistic markers
of personality may differ across cultures. In this sec-
tion, we describe a study that evaluates perception
of personality traits and naturalness of utterances by
native speakers of American English and Arabic.

3.1 Stimuli

The selection of stimuli attempts to satisfy three ob-
jectives. First, our application: our dialogue system
is intended to be used on a robot receptionist. Hence,
the stimuli are snippets of dialogue that include four
dialogue acts that are typical in this kind of em-
bodied information-giving dialogue (Makatchev et
al., 2009): a greeting, a question-answer pair, a dis-
agreement (with the user’s guess of an answer), and
an apology (for the robot not knowing the answer to
the question).

Second, we would like to vary our stimuli along
the linguistic dimensions that are potentially strong
indicators of personality traits. Extraverts, for exam-
ple, are reported to be more verbose (use more words
per utterances and more dialogue turns to achieve
the same communicative goal), less formal (Furn-
ham, 1990) (in choice of address terms, for exam-
ple), and less likely to hedge (use expressions such
as “perhaps” and “maybe”) (Nass et al., 1995). Lex-
ical and syntactic alignment, namely, the tendency
of a speaker to use the same lexical and syntactic
choices as their interlocutor, is considered, at least
in part, to reflect the speaker’s co-operation and will-
ingness to adopt the interlocutor’s perspective (Hay-
wood et al., 2003). There is some evidence that the
degree of alignment is associated with personality
traits of the speakers (Gill et al., 2004).

Third, we would like to select linguistic dimen-
sions that potentially expose cross-cultural differ-
ences in perception of personality and naturalness.
In particular, we are interested in the linguistic de-
vices that help realize rich points (the behaviors that
signal differences) between the native speakers of
American English and Arabic. We choose to real-
ize indirectness and elaborateness, characteristic of
Arabic spoken language (Feghali, 1997), by vary-
ing the dimensions of verbosity and hedging. High
power distance, or influence of relative social status

on the language (Feghali, 1997), can be realized by
the degrees of formality and alignment.

In summary, the stimuli are dialogue fragments
where utterances of one of the interlocutors vary
across (1) dialogue acts: a greeting, question-answer
pair, disagreement, apology, and (2) four linguistic
dimensions: verbosity, hedging, alignment, and for-
mality. Each of the linguistic dimensions is parame-
terized by 3 values of valence: negative, neutral and
positive. Within each of the four dialogue acts, stim-
uli corresponding to the neutral valences are repre-
sented by the same dialogue across all four linguistic
dimensions. The four linguistic dimensions are real-
ized as follows:

• Verbosity is realized as number of words within
each turn of the dialogue. In the case of the
greeting, positive verbosity is realized by in-
creased number of dialogue turns.1

• Positive valence of hedging implies more ten-
tative words (“maybe,” “perhaps,” etc.) or ex-
pressions of uncertainty (“I think,” “if I am
not mistaken”). Conversely, negative valence
of hedging is realized via words “sure,” “defi-
nitely,” etc.

• Positive valence of alignment corresponds to
preference towards the lexical and syntactic
choices of the interlocutor. Conversely, neg-
ative alignment implies less overlap in lexical
and syntactic choices between the interlocu-
tors.

• Our model of formality deploys the follow-
ing linguistic devices: in-group identity mark-
ers that target positive face (Brown and Levin-
son, 1987) such as address forms, jargon and
slang, and deference markers that target nega-
tive face, such as “kindly”, terms of address,
hedges. These devices are used in Arabic po-
liteness phenomena (Farahat, 2009), and there
is an evidence of their pragmatic transfer from
Arabic to English (e.g. (Bardovi-Harlig et al.,
2007) and (Ghawi, 1993)). The set of stimuli
that vary along the formality are presented in
Table 2.

Each dialogue fragment is presented as a text on
1The multi-stage greeting dialogue was developed via

ethnographic studies conducted at Alelo by Dr. Suzanne
Wertheim. Used with permission from Alelo, Inc.

288



an individual web page. On each page, the partici-
pant is asked to imagine that he or she is one of the
interlocutors and the other interlocutor is described
as “a female receptionist in her early 20s and of
the same ethnic background” as that of the partici-
pant. The description of the occupation, age, gender
and ethnicity of the interlocutor whose utterances
the participant is asked to evaluate should provide
minimal context and help avoid variability due to the
implicit assumptions that subjects may make.

3.2 Measures

In order to avoid a possible interference of scales,
we ran two versions of the study in parallel. In
one version, participants were asked to evaluate the
receptionist’s utterances with respect to measures
of the Big Five personality traits (John and Srivas-
tava, 1999), namely the traits of extraversion, agree-
ableness, conscientiousness, emotional stability, and
openness, using the ten-item personality question-
naire (TIPI, see (Gosling et al., 2003)). In the other
version, participants were asked to evaluate the re-
ceptionist’s utterances with respect to their natu-
ralness on a 7-point Likert scale by answering the
question “Do you agree that the receptionist’s utter-
ances were natural?” The variants of such a natural-
ness scale were used by Burkhardt et al. (2006) and
Mairesse and Walker (2008).

3.3 Experimental design

The experiment used a crossed design with the fol-
lowing factors: dimensions of linguistic variability
(verbosity, hedging, alignment, or formality), va-
lence (negative, neutral, or positive), dialogue acts
(greeting, question-answer, disagreement, or apol-
ogy), native language (American English or Arabic)
and gender (male or female).

In an attempt to balance the workload of the par-
ticipants, depending on whether the participant was
assigned to the study that used personality or nat-
uralness scales, the experimental sessions consisted
of one or two linguistic variability conditions—12
or 24 dialogues respectively. Hence valence and dia-
logue act were within-subject factors, while linguis-
tic variability dimension were treated as an across-
subject factor, as well as native language and gen-
der. Within each session the items were presented in

Language Country N

Arabic Algeria 1
Bahrain 1
Egypt 56
Jordan 32
Morocco 45
Palestinian Territory 1
Qatar 1
Saudi Arabia 5
United Arab Emirates 13
Total 155

American English United States 166

Table 1: Distribution of study participants by country.

a random order to minimize possible carryover ef-
fects.

3.4 Participants

We used Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) to re-
cruit native speakers of American English from the
United States and native speakers of Arabic from
any of the set of predominantly Arabic-speaking
countries (according to the IP address).

Upon completion of each task, participants re-
ceive monetary reward as a credit to their MTurk ac-
count. Special measures were taken to prevent mul-
tiple participation of one person in the same study
condition: the study website access would be re-
fused for such a user based on the IP address, and
MTurk logs were checked for repeated MTurk user
names to detect logging into the same MTurk ac-
count from different IP addresses. Hidden questions
were planted within the study to verify the fluency
in the participant’s reported native language.

The distribution of the participants across coun-
tries is shown in Table 1. We observed a regional
gender bias similar to the one reported by Ross et al.
(2010): there were 100 male and 55 female partici-
pants in the Arabic condition, and 63 male and 103
female participants in the American English condi-
tion.

4 Results

We analyzed the data by fitting linear mixed-effects
(LME) models (Pinheiro and Bates, 2000) and per-
forming model selection using ANOVA. The com-
parison of models fitted to explain the personality

289



and naturalness scores (controlling for language and
gender), shows significant main effects of valence
and dialogue acts for all pairs of personality traits
(and naturalness) and linguistic features. The results
also show that for every personality trait (and nat-
uralness) there is a linguistic feature that results in
a significant three-way interaction between its va-
lence, the native language, and the dialogue act.
These results suggest that (a) for both language com-
munities, every linguistic dimension is associated
with every personality trait and naturalness, for at
least some of the dialogue acts, (b) there are differ-
ences in the perception of every personality trait and
naturalness between the two language communities.

To further explore the latter finding, we conducted
a post-hoc analysis consisting of paired t-tests that
were performed pairwise between the three values of
valence for each combination of language, linguis-
tic feature, and personality trait (and naturalness).
Note, that comparing raw scores between the lan-
guage conditions would be prone to find spurious
differences due to potential culture-specific tenden-
cies in scoring on the Likert scale: (a) perception
of magnitudes and (b) appropriateness of the inten-
sity of agreeing or disagreeing. Instead, we compare
the language conditions with respect to (a) the rela-
tive order of the three valences and (b) the binarized
scores, namely whether the score is above 4 or be-
low 4 (with scores that are not significantly different
from 4 excluded from comparison), where 4 is the
neutral point of the 7-point Likert scale.

The selected results of the post-hoc analysis are
shown in Figure 1. The most prominent cross-
cultural differences were found in the scoring of
naturalness across the valences of the formality di-
mension. Speakers of American English, unlike the
speakers of Arabic, find formal utterances unnatu-
ral in greetings, question-answer and disagreement
dialogue acts. Formal utterances tend to also be
perceived as indicators of openness (omitted from
the plot) and conscientiousness by Arabic speakers,
and not by American English speakers, in disagree-
ments and apologies respectively. Finally, hedging
in apologies is perceived as an indicator of agree-
ableness by American English speakers, but not by
speakers of Arabic.

Interestingly, no qualitative differences across
language conditions were found in the perception

of extraversion and stability. It is possible that this
cross-cultural consistency confirms the view of the
extraversion, in particular, as one of most consis-
tently identified dimensions (see, for example, (Gill
and Oberlander, 2002)). It could also be possi-
ble that our stimuli were unable to pinpoint the
extraversion-related rich points due to a choice of
the linguistic dimensions or particular wording cho-
sen. A larger variety of stimuli per condition, and an
ethnography to identify potentially culture-specific
linguistic devices of extraversion, could shed the
light on this issue.

5 Conclusion

We presented an exploratory study to evaluate a set
of linguistic markers of Big Five personality traits
and naturalness across two language communities:
native speakers of American English living in the
US, and native speakers of Arabic living in one
of the predominantly Arabic-speaking countries of
North Africa and Middle East. The results suggest
that the four dimensions of linguistic variability are
recognized as markers of all five personality traits by
both language communities. A comparison across
language communities uncovered some qualitative
differences in the perception of openness, conscien-
tiousness, agreeableness, and naturalness.

The results of the study can be used to adapt nat-
ural language generation and interpretation to native
speakers of American English or Arabic. This ex-
ploratory study also supports the feasibility of the
crowdsourcing approach to validate the linguistic
devices that realize rich points—behaviors that sig-
nal differences across languages and cultures.

Future work shall evaluate effects of regional di-
alects and address the issue of particular wording
choices by using multiple stimuli per condition.

Acknowledgments

This publication was made possible by the support
of an NPRP grant from the Qatar National Research
Fund. The statements made herein are solely the re-
sponsibility of the authors.

The authors are grateful to Ameer Ayman Abdul-
salam, Michael Agar, Hatem Alismail, Justine Cas-
sell, Majd Sakr, Nik Melchior, and Candace Sidner
for their comments on the study.

290



References

Michael Agar. 1994. Language shock: Understanding
the culture of conversation. William Morrow, New
York.

Maria Jose Coperias Aguilar. 1998. Intercultural
(mis)communication: The influence of L1 and C1
on L2 and C2. A tentative approach to textbooks.
Cuadernos de Filologı́a Inglesa, 7(1):99–113.

Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig, Marda Rose, and Edelmira L.
Nickels. 2007. The use of conventional expressions of
thanking, apologizing, and refusing. In Proceedings
of the 2007 Second Language Research Forum, pages
113–130.

Charles F. Bond, Adnan Omar, Adnan Mahmoud, and
Richard Neal Bonser. 1990. Lie detection across cul-
tures. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 14:189–204.

P. Brown and S. C. Levinson. 1987. Politeness: Some
universals in language usage. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

F. Burkhardt, N. Audibert, L. Malatesta, O. Trk, Arslan,
L., and V Auberge. 2006. Emotional prosody—does
culture make a difference? In Proc. Speech Prosody.

Eirlys E. Davies. 1987. A contrastive approach to the
analysis of politeness formulas. Applied Linguistics,
8(1):75–88.

Said Hassan Farahat. 2009. Politeness phenomena in
Palestinian Arabic and Australian English: A cross-
cultural study of selected contemporary plays (PhD
thesis). Australian Catholic University, Australia.

Ellen Feghali. 1997. Arab cultural communication pat-
terns. International Journal of Intercultural Relations,
21(3):345–378.

A. Furnham. 1990. Language and personality. In
H. Giles and W. Robinson, editors, Handbook of Lan-
guage and Social Psychology, pages 73–95. Wiley.

Mohammed Ghawi. 1993. Pragmatic transfer in Arabic
learners of English. El Two Talk, 1(1):39–52.

A. Gill and J. Oberlander. 2002. aking care of the lin-
guistic features of extraversion. In Proceedings of the
24th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science So-
ciety, pages 363–368.

A. Gill, A. Harrison, and J. Oberlander. 2004. Inter-
personality: Individual differences and interpersonal
priming. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Confer-
ence of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 464–469.

E. S. Glenn, D. Witmeyer, and K. A. Stevenson. 1977.
Cultural styles of persuasion. International Journal of
Intercultural Relations, 1(3):52–66.

Samuel D. Gosling, Peter J. Rentfrow, and Jr. William
B. Swann. 2003. A very brief measure of the Big-Five
personality domains. Journal of Research in Person-
ality, 37:504–528.

W. B. Gudykunst and S. Ting-Toomey. 1988. Culture
and interpersonal communication. Sage, Newbury
Park, CA.

S. Haywood, M. Pickering, and H. Branigan. 2003. Co-
operation and co-ordination in the production of noun
phrases. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual Confer-
ence of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 533–538.

Michael Huspek. 1989. Linguistic variability and power:
An analysis of you know/I think variation in working-
class speech. Journal of Pragmatics, 13(5):661 – 683.

Oliver P. John and Sanjay Srivastava. 1999. The Big Five
trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and theoreti-
cal perspectives. In Lawrence A. Pervin and Oliver P.
John, editors, Handbook of Personality: Theory and
Research, pages 102–138.

Robin Lakoff. 1973. Language and woman’s place. Lan-
guage in Society, 2(1):45–80.

Francois Mairesse and Marilyn Walker. 2008. Trainable
generation of big-five personality styles through data-
driven parameter estimation. In Proc. of 46th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL).

F. Mairesse, M. A. Walker, M. R. Mehl, and R. K. Moore.
2007. Using linguistic cues for the automatic recogni-
tion of personality in conversation and text. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 30:457–500.

Maxim Makatchev, Min Kyung Lee, and Reid Simmons.
2009. Relating initial turns of human-robot dialogues
to discourse. In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Human-
Robot Interaction (HRI), pages 321–322. ACM.

Maxim Makatchev, Imran Aslam Fanaswala, Ameer Ay-
man Abdulsalam, Brett Browning, Wael Mahmoud
Gazzawi, Majd Sakr, and Reid Simmons. 2010. Dia-
logue patterns of an arabic robot receptionist. In Proc.
of the Int. Conf. on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI),
pages 167–168. ACM.

M. McPherson, L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M. Cook. 2000.
What is a language community? American Journal of
Political Science, 44(1):142–155.

Clifford Nass, Y. Moon, B. Fogg, and B. Reeves. 1995.
Can computer personalities be human personalities?
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 43:223–239.

Gaylel Nelson, Mahmoud Al-Batal, and Erin Echols.
1996. Arabic and english compliment responses:
Potential for pragmatic failure. Applied Linguistics,
17(4):411–432.

R. Patai. 1983. The Arab mind. Charles Scribner’s Sons,
New York.

J. C. Pinheiro and D. M. Bates. 2000. Mixed-Effects
Models in S and S-PLUS. Springer.

Joel Ross, Lilly Irani, M. Six Silberman, Andrew Zal-
divar, and Bill Tomlinson. 2010. Who are the crowd-
workers?: shifting demographics in mechanical turk.

291



In Proceedings of the 28th of the international con-
ference extended abstracts on Human factors in com-
puting systems, CHI EA ’10, pages 2863–2872, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Emanuel A. Schegloff and Harvey Sacks. 1973. Opening
up closings. Semiotica, 8(4):289–327.

Klaus R. Scherer. 1972. Judging personality from voice:
A cross-cultural approach to an old issue in interper-
sonal perception. Journal of Personality, 40:191–210.

John Searle. 1969. Speech acts: An essay in the philoso-
phy of language. Cambridge University Press.

Jenny Thomas. 1983. Cross-cultural pragmatic failure.
Applied Linguistics, 4(2):91–112.

Jenny Thomas. 1984. Cross-cultural discourse as ’un-
equal encounter’: Towards a pragmatic analysis. Ap-
plied Linguistics, 5(3):226–235.

292



Greeting Question-Answer Disagreement Apology

A: Good morning.
B: What’s up? Need
anything?

A: Could you tell me where
the library is?
B: Just go to the end of the
hallway, you can’t miss it.

A: Could you tell me where the library is?
B: Go to the second floor.
A: I thought it was on the first floor.
B: No, honey, there is none on the first floor.

A: Could you tell me
where the library is?
B: Sorry about that, I have
no idea.

A: Good morning.
B: Good morning. How
may I help you?

A: Could you tell me where
the library is?
B: It’s at the end of the hall-
way on your left.

A: Could you tell me where the library is?
B: It’s on the second floor.
A: I thought it was on the first floor.
B: No, there is no library on the first floor.

A: Could you tell me
where the library is?
B: Sorry, I don’t know.

A: Good morning.
B: Good morning, sir
(madam). Would you
allow me to help you
with anything?

A: Could you tell me where
the library is?
B: Kindly follow this hallway
and you will encounter the
entrance on your left.

A: Could you tell me where the library is?
B: Yes, you may find the library on the second floor.
A: I thought it was on the first floor.
B: I am afraid that is not correct, there is no library on
the first floor.

A: Could you tell me
where the library is?
B: I have to apologize, but
I don’t know.

Table 2: Stimuli that correspond to negative (top row), neutral (middle row), and positive (bottom row) formality.

greeting qa disagree apology

American English, formality, naturalness

1
2

3
4

5
6

7 ** ** **
**

** ** ** **

greeting qa disagree apology

Arabic, formality, naturalness

1
2

3
4

5
6

7 ** *
**

**
**

greeting qa disagree apology

American English, formality, conscienciousness

1
2

3
4

5
6

7 ** *
** * *

greeting qa disagree apology

Arabic, formality, conscienciousness

1
2

3
4

5
6

7 *
*

**
*

greeting qa disagree apology

American English, hedging, agreeableness

1
2

3
4

5
6

7 * **
**

**
** **

**
**

greeting qa disagree apology

Arabic, hedging, agreeableness

1
2

3
4

5
6

7

**
**

Figure 1: A subset of data comparing scores on the Big Five personality traits and naturalness as given by native
speakers of American English (left half of the page) and Arabic (right half of the page). Blue, white, and pink bars
correspond to negative, neutral, and positive valences of the linguistic features respectively. Dialogue acts listed along
the horizontal axis are a greeting, question-answer pair, disagreement, and apology. Error bars the 95% confidence
intervals, brackets above the plots correspond to p-values of paired t-tests at significance levels of 0.05 (∗) and 0.01
(∗∗) after Bonferroni correction.

293


