










































A Pattern Approach for Biomedical Event Annotation


Proceedings of BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop, pages 149–150,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 24 June, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Pattern Approach for Biomedical Event Annotation 

Quang Le Minh 
Faculty of Information 

Technology 
University of Science 

Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam 
leem-

inhquang@gmail.com 

Son Nguyen Truong 
Faculty of Information  

Technology 
University of Science 

Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam 
ntson@fit.hcmus.edu.

vn 

Quoc Ho Bao 
Faculty of Information  

Technology 
University of Science 

Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam 
hbquoc@fit.hcmus.edu

.vn 

Abstract 

We describe our approach for the GENIA 
Event Extraction in the Main Task of BioNLP 
Shared Task 2011.  There are two important 
parts in our method: Event Trigger Annotation 
and Event Extraction. We use rules and dic-
tionary to annotate event triggers. Event ex-
traction is based on patterns created from 
dependent graphs. We apply UIMA Frame-
work to support all stages in our system. 

1 Introduction 

BioNLP Shared Task 2011 has been the latest 
event following the first attracted event in 2009-
2010. We enrolled and submitted the results of En-
tity Relations Supporting Task and GENIA Event 
Extraction. In brief, the GENIA task requires the 
recognition of 9 biological events on genes or gene 
products described in the biomedical literature. 
Participants are required to extract and classify 9 
kinds of event with appropriate arguments.   

First time joining biomedical domain, we aim 
to learn current problems and approaches in bio-
medical research. Therefore, we have chosen sim-
ple approaches such as rule-based and pattern-
based. In the following section, we will explain our 
work on GENIA Event Extraction Task (GENIA) 
in details. Finally, we will analyze and discuss re-
sults. 

2 Our approach 

The project uses UIMA Framework 1 , an open 
source framework for analyzing unstructured in-
formation, to develop all analysis components. 
Events bounded in a sentence are 94.4% in training 
                                                           
1 Available at http://uima.apache.org/   

corpus. Consequently, sentences are processed in 
succession at each step. We divide the whole sys-
tem into 3 parts: Preprocessing, Event Trigger an-
notation and Event annotation. 

2.1 Preprocessing 
At this step, the input documents are converted 
into objects of the framework. All analysis compo-
nents will process objects and put results into 
them. Then we go through natural language pro-
cesses that include sentence splitting, tokenizing 
and POS tagging by OpenNLP library. Lastly, the 
given Protein concepts are annotated.  

2.2 Event Trigger annotation 
According to our statistics in the training corpus, 
the percentage of single token trigger is 91.8%. To 
simplify it, we focus on triggers which span on one 
token. At this stage, rule-based and dictionary-
based approaches are combined. 

We choose tokens which are near a protein and 
have appropriate POS tags. Heuristic rules extract-
ed from training corpus are used to identify candi-
date triggers. Those rules are, for instance, 
NN/NNS + of + PROTEIN, VBN + PROTEIN and 
so on. 

Event triggers are diverse in lexical and ambig-
uous in classification (Björne et al. (2009) and 
Buyko et al. (2009)). Candidate triggers are classi-
fied by a dictionary. The dictionary containing 
words of triggers with their corresponding classes 
is built from training corpus. For ambiguous trig-
ger classes, the class that has the highest rate of 
appearance is chosen. 

2.3 Event annotation 
Basing on the number of arguments and type of 
arguments, we categorize 9 event classes into 3 
groups. The first group including Gene expression, 

149



Transcription and Protein catabolism has only one 
Protein as the argument. The second group con-
tains events with Protein and Entity as argument. 
Phosphorylation, Localization and Binding belong 
to that group. The third group has the most com-
plex types, i.e. Regulation, Positive regulation and 
Negative regulation. These events can have other 
events as their argument.  

Our method of event detection is using depend-
ency graph as results of deep syntactic parsing. We 
prune parse tree and assign concept to nodes. Next, 
sub-trees which contains only conceptual node as 
patterns are extracted and represented as string 
form. We travel breadth-first and write conceptual 
labels to the string pattern. The pattern list is built 
from training data.  

Firstly, for each sentence contains at least one 
trigger, we get the parse tree of the sentence. We 
prune nodes which contain only one child and that 
child node has zero or one descendant. It reduces 
the complexity and retains important and general 
parts of the parse tree.  

Secondly, candidate arguments of events are 
identified by combining Protein, Entity and Event 
Trigger in that sentence. The number of combina-
tion can be huge, so we restrict it by the following 
conditions. Each combination has at least one 
Event Trigger with one Protein or Event. The 
number of argument depends on types of events 
and is usually less than 5. In addition, the differ-
ence of depth on tree between arguments has to be 
under a threshold.  

Thirdly, concepts of arguments in each combi-
nation are assigned to parse tree nodes. The as-
signment bases on the span of argument and 
content of nodes. The pattern is extracted from the 
parse tree and examined whether it belongs to the 
pattern list. In order to increase the precision, we 
discard patterns having the depth of the tree greater 
than a threshold. The threshold is chosen by count-
ing on the training corpus. 

Finally, we classify events and determine role 
of arguments for each event. The type of the event 
is chosen by the type of the trigger of that event. 
We still simply assign roles of arguments in a fixed 
order of arguments.  

3 Results and conclusions 

Our fully official result in GENIA main task is de-
scribed in Table 1. The F-score is only 14,75% and 

we were ranked 13th among 14 participants. It re-
flects many shortcomings in our system. We obtain 
a lot of experience. 

In general, the patterns which we built are still 
generic. Besides, the OpenNLP library still en-
countered errors when processing documents, thus 
affected our result. For example, there are some 
sentences that OpenNLP parsed or tokenized 
wrongly and raised errors. In the step of Event 
Trigger annotation, there are a few rules to cover 
cases. The result of Regulation, Positive regulation 
and Negative regulation has the lowest result be-
cause we only process recursion with simple 
events.  
 
Approach recall precision f-score 
Gene expression 26.45 39.73 31.76 
Transcription 16.09 14.58 15.30 
Protein catabolism 33.33 50.00 40.00 
Phosphorylation 32.43 47.62 38.59 
Localization 16.23 27.68 20.46 
Binding 4.68 12.92 6.88 
Regulation 0.26 1.35 0.44 
Positive regulation 2.08 13.04 3.59 
Negative regulation 1.40 11.27 2.49 
All Total 10.12 27.17 14.75 
Table 1: Our final result in GENIA BioNLP’11 Shared 
Task with approximately span and recursive matching 
 

For future work, we intend to apply hybrid ap-
proach. We combine other methods such as ma-
chine learning in Event Trigger and Event 
annotation parts. We consider other NLP library to 
improve the performance of all steps relating to 
NLP processing. Rules from domain professions 
will be added to existent heuristic rules. We will 
try to add more features to improve the patterns. 

References 
 Ekaterina Buyko, Erik Faessler, Joachim Wermter and 

Udo Hahn, "Event Extraction from Trimmed 
Dependency Graphs," in Proceedings of the 
Workshop on BioNLP: Shared Task, 2009, pp. 19-
27. 

 Jari Bjorne, Juho Heimonen, Filip Ginter, Antti Airola, 
Tapio Pahikkala and Tapio Salakoski, "Extracting 
Complex Biological Events with Rich Graph-Based 
Feature Sets," in Proceedings of the Workshop on 
BioNLP: Shared Task, 2009, pp. 10-18. 

 

150


