










































Digital Library of Poland-related Old Ephemeral Prints: Preserving Multilingual Cultural Heritage


Proceedings of Language Technologies for Digital Humanities and Cultural Heritage Workshop, pages 27–33,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 16 September 2011.

Digital Library of Poland-related Old Ephemeral Prints:
Preserving Multilingual Cultural Heritage

Maciej Ogrodniczuk

Institute of Computer Science

Polish Academy of Sciences

maciej.ogrodniczuk@gmail.com

Wlodzimierz Gruszczynski

Warsaw School of Social Sciences

and Humanities

wgruszczynski@swps.edu.pl

Abstract

The article presents the results from the

project of the thematic Digital Library

of Polish and Poland-related Ephemeral

Prints from the 16th, 17th and 18th Cen-

turies, intending to preserve the unique

multilingual material, make it available for

education and extend it with the joint ef-

forts of historians, philologists, librarians

and computer scientists.

The paper also puts forward the idea of a

living digital library, created with a closed

set of resources which can form the basis

for their further extension, thus turning tra-

ditional digital archives into collaboration

platforms.

1 Introduction

Nowadays digital libraries most likely tend to mir-

ror traditional libraries. They collect and display

resources as traditional librarians would do, per-

fectly embracing the new archiving capabilities,

but too often stopping at this border. The the-

matic Digital Library of Polish and Poland-related

Ephemeral Prints from the 16th, 17th and 18th

Centuries (PL. Cyfrowa Biblioteka Drukow Ulot-

nych polskich i Polski dotyczacych z XVI, XVII

i XVIII w. – hence and from here: CBDU,

http://cbdu.id.uw.edu.pl) offers a new

approach to the idea of a modern digital library

by extending the conventional paradigm with us-

ing consistent sets of materials as an object pool

for new collaboration tasks. In our case the prints

digitized in the first step of the project were further

analyzed and enhanced by experts co-operating on

a digital content platform.

The work had been carried out within the

project financed by the Polish state with inten-

tion to provide public online access to all pre-

served and described in the literature pre-press

documents. Some of them have been preserved

in the single copy, so their availability had been

evidently restricted. In the course of the project

the resources were gathered basing on the list

of 2,000 bibliographical entries from Konrad Za-

wadzki’s publication (Zawadzki, 1990) extended

with objects described or discovered after its is-

sue. Selected prints have been commented by his-

torians, media experts and linguists to explain less

known background details or presently unintelli-

gible metaphors or symbols. Links have been cre-

ated between related documents (e.g. translations

and their alleged sources or derivates) to facilitate

comparisons of similar materials. For 70% of the

prints their images were obtained and made avail-

able in DjVu format. At the end of the project the

revised edition of Zawadzki’s work was published

in electronic form.

Apart from this particular work plan, the ulte-

rior idea was to test the concept of using the digital

library as a collaboration platform for experts from

different backgrounds basing on the assumption

that real opening resources to the public means not

just providing them for viewing and download, but

preparing the environment to extend them in the

immediate or more distant future. The technical

challenge was to select the computer system which

could serve this purpose best by mostly configura-

tion and without too much tedious low-level pro-

gramming. This goal was achieved with EPrints

free repository software.

At present the library is actively used by histori-

ans and linguists (not to mention the students) who

seem to benefit the most from the cooperation and

further development of the resources. Their recent

interests include adding transliterations (which al-

ready started with a new project based on the li-

brary materials) and using the print texts as source

data for the searchable text corpus. Multilinguality

of texts should also be shortly addressed since the

first stage of work concentrated mostly on Polish

27



and German documents.

The aspect of making the digital library a col-

laboration platform seems the most important in

our study, putting less light into other important

issues of creating thematic libraries, commenting

historical content or digital library-based teaching.

As such, creation of a digital library may be in

most cases turned into a development project, be-

ing of benefit to the scientific community.

2 Origin, scope and limitations of the

project

The project has been initiated in response to the

need of permanent access to ephemeral prints from

16th-18th centuries by researchers coming from

the academic teams preparing the historical dictio-

naries of Polish (Institute of Polish Language and

Institute of Literary Research at Polish Academy

of Sciences) as well as journalism and translation

historians (Institute of Journalism, Institute of Ap-

plied Linguistics and Institute of German Studies

at the Warsaw University) and students of journal-

ism.

Temporal range of selected materials results

from the long history of Polish journalism with

three significant dates: 1501 – when the first

known press materials in Polish appeared in print

(the report on the anti-Turkish treaty signed by the

Holy See and several European countries, includ-

ing Poland, in Buda), 1661 – when the first reg-

ularly issued Polish newspaper “Merkuriusz Pol-

ski Ordynaryjny” came out, and 1729 – when

“Nowiny Polskie” (Polish news) started regular

circulation. The period in between was filled by

ephemeral prints – disposable and occasional in-

formative publications, playing an important part

in the development of Polish writing, serving as a

the most influential media for important news.

The scope of the materials is Poland-related,

which combines the Polish sources with prints

published abroad, concerning the Republic of

Poland, political, religious and military issues (e.g.

the reports on the famous relief of Vienna in 1683),

but also sensational facts or canards. The materi-

als were prepared “live”, mostly by participants or

observers of the reported events and as such they

are valuable sociological source of information on

mechanisms of spreading information at that time,

its reception, propaganda and readers’ interests.

The list of bibliographical data of prints com-

plying with all above-mentioned requirements has

been collated by Konrad Zawadzki in the 1970s

and 1980s and was published as a three-volume

work with the first volume issued in 1979 and the

last one in 1990. It covers 1967 prints dating from

1501 to 1725, each described with the title (in

modern transcription), issue date and place, printer

name, format, volume size, information on bibli-

ographical sources and an exact description of the

title page (with line breaks, font names, illustra-

tions etc.).

The originals of prints remain in various li-

braries over Europe, but at the period of prepar-

ing the bibliography many were successfully bor-

rowed from their mother institutions to produce

microfilmed copies to be included into the re-

sources of The Polish National Library (Za-

wadzki’s place of employment). As microfilmed

resources are not the most comfortable ones to op-

erate on a daily basis, usually their photocopies

were used for research and teaching. The online

era created a new possibility to interact with such

resources (e.g. broaden the scope of materials

showed to students) and resulted in applying for

funds to create a digital library of metadata and

images of prints enhanced with information useful

for understanding the context of a given object.

The priority of making prints available for the

daily work (disparate with the need of preserva-

tion of original objects) resulted in the assumption

of building on the quality of microfilms rather than

archiving originals scattered over many libraries

in many countries. This also helped minimize

costs and speed up the overall process, mostly also

thanks to the presence of vast majority of materials

at the National Library.

The source of funding was constrained to na-

tional (ministry) level and not to the consortium

of libraries (owners of microfilmed print copies)

knowing the three contradictory factors:

1. vast resources of large libraries, such as the

Polish National Library,

2. their limited funds for digitization,

3. a policy (telling the truth, a reasonable one)

of digitizing the most valuable resources first.

This combination can make many interesting

materials wait for years to be made available at

their owner’s institution. Providentially, in March

2009 the 12-month project obtained the support

28



Figure 1: A sample bibliographical entry

from the Ministry of Culture and National Her-

itage and the Foundation for the Development of

Journalism Education.

3 Towards the thematic digital library

The project team was headed by Wlodzimierz

Gruszczynski and joined forces of computer sci-

entists (Maciej Ogrodniczuk, Jakub Wilk), his-

torians (Adam Kozuchowski), philologists (Ewa

Gruszczynska, Anna Just, Dorota Lewandowska-

Jaros, Katarzyna Jasinska-Zdun) and librarians

(the team of Maria Piber), coordinated by Grazyna

Oblas.

The process started with scanning Zawadzki’s

bibliography in the format sufficient to automated

OCR processing of the text (200 dpi, greyscale,

lossless compression of the result files, see Fig.

1). The images have been read with ABBYY

FineReader 9 with support for several modern lan-

guages turned on (French, German, Latin, Polish)

since texts could contain transcriptions of names

in various (modern) languages.

As a result, a recognized plain text of the bib-

liography has been obtained, covering not only

full bibliographical entries (with additional com-

ments, location information etc.), but also all front

and back matter data (volume introductions, er-

rata, foreign-language abstracts etc.) to be reused

in the electronic edition of the bibliography. Plain

text version was used to expedite the task of ex-

traction of individual fields of each entry regard-

less of its initial inconsistent formatting (which

was easily introduced at a later stage, basing on

the entry structure). The text has been saved in

UTF-8 character encoding to seamlessly represent

all diacritics.

Perl scripts have been implemented to split bib-

liographical entries into individual data records ac-

cording to the description of fields retrieved from

the bibliography introduction (full and short title,

information about author, publisher, format etc.)

In fact, the field list was designed to be more spe-

cific than the original to support verification of

content (e.g. the model of a list of copies with sub-

fields storing library name and a catalogue num-

ber was introduced against the original composite

string value). The field set has been later used as a

basis of the target model for the computer system

storing the library data with new fields describing

the project-specific properties going beyond the

traditional bibliographical entry (e.g. commen-

taries of an object). The records were then verified

with regular expression patterns testing their con-

tents (e.g. publication date standard format) and

content of fields used in further steps (e.g. micro-

film catalogue numbers) extracted separately and

additionally verified.

As the majority of microfilms were available

at the National Library, the preparation of scans

has been commissioned mainly to this institution,

after obtaining formal permission to use the re-

sulting electronic documents on the project site,

ultimately available to the general public. Since

29



the project duration was relatively short, the scans

were produced in batches to let contributors start

work on the previous portion when the following

one was still in preparation (which sometimes re-

quired cleaning the microfilm plates or seeking

improperly catalogued collection). Similarly, all

other project phases (metadata proofreading, im-

port and conversion of scanned materials, prepa-

ration of commentaries and dictionaries etc.) were

also being carried out simultaneously.

Among many available repository systems for

digital libraries, including a prominent (in Poland)

dLibra (dLibra, 2010), EPrints has been selected

as the target storage and publication framework.

EPrints (EPrints, 2010) is a free, GPL-licensed

multiplatform repository software developed since

2000 at the University of Southampton. Its open

source origin presents a major benefit for projects

intending not only to deploy it “as is”, but seek-

ing possibilities to extend it with new solution-

specific functionalities. The system has been in-

stalled, configured and in most respects translated

into Polish (with translations made available to the

community), setting up the print repository.

As already stated above, an important organi-

zational assumption made at the beginning of the

project was to use EPrints also as a collabora-

tion platform, starting from the very first phases

of the work. Following this statement, the bibli-

ographical entries (henceforth, metadata descrip-

tions) were imported into EPrints even before they

were finally proofread. This stage has been car-

ried out already in the system, using the workflow

defined for the project. After metadata has been

revised against the image (or paper) version of the

bibliography, the scanned images of prints were

converted into DjVu format and uploaded into the

library (each object corresponding to one file).

Versions of objects (most likely translations or

alterations of the base text) have been linked bas-

ing on information available in the bibliography

or detected by the experts. For materials only re-

ported in literature, when the original is unknown

or not preserved, the information on the base lan-

guage has been provided.

Going beyond simply making the objects avail-

able as electronic versions of the bibliographic en-

tries with scanned copies, the repository model

has been extended with new fields storing the new

value created by the project: historical commen-

taries relating to facts and people described in the

material, media-historical or language-historical

observations, translations of then common Latin

interjections and translations of foreign texts into

Polish or local dictionaries. Such approach seems

novel in the design of digital libraries. What is

more, the system creates possibility to form a liv-

ing thematic information exchange environment

around the library site, making it possible to store

expert comments, versions of materials etc.

To make the scope of description complete and

up-to-date, a survey of the library holdings has

been carried out. The annual volumes of library

professional journals published by ten major sci-

entific libraries in Poland has been investigated

and 80 new objects (not included in Zawadzki’s

bibliography) discovered. Since the project was

short of funds to generate their scanned versions,

only their metadata were added to the library.

The last phase of the project was preparation of

the supplemented electronic edition of Zawadzki’s

bibliography which illustrates how digital content

can help maintain traditional publications. The

electronic version was intended to be published,

but cuts in the initial project budget forced the

team to leave this additional step to future projects.

The new publication layout has been created

in LateX. To facilitate usage, in contrast to the

original work, separation into three volumes was

not preserved and a single volume was produced.

Introductions, lists of printers and print shops as

well as back matter illustrations were taken over

from the OCR-ed source and collated. All materi-

als transferred to the digital library have been ex-

ported into XML format and were included in the

final edition. This means that all supplements and

errata which were merged with the library objects

were automatically corrected. Back matter content

such as lists of titles, people names and geograph-

ical names were not transferred from the original

work but were regenerated from the library.

All scripts and transformations created through-

out the project were preserved to facilitate genera-

tion of new electronic editions of the bibliography

in case new errors are reported by the library users

or new materials included. This also demonstrates

new collaborative approach to preparation of elec-

tronic publications

4 Library interface, statistics and usage

The repository is located on the server of the Insti-

tute of Journalism of the University of Warsaw and

30



Figure 2: Library homepage

the library has been made available at http://

cbdu.id.uw.edu.pl1. The site (see home-

page on Fig. 2) allows typical browse and search

interfaces in Polish or English. Objects can be

browsed according to multiple criteria, includ-

ing those normally used in bibliographical de-

scriptions (mostly borrowed from Zawadzki), as

well as those less typical: thematic, genre-related

and other. The native EPrints advanced search is

supplemented with a recently customized simple

search with a Google-like single text field.

Prints relating to the same facts are hyperlinked,

especially those that are most likely or certainly

translations from other texts available in the li-

brary. Taking into account the number of identi-

fied dependencies and benefits resulting from pos-

sibility of their visual comparison, the system of-

fers a function to open related documents in a

split window. Moreover, the new implementations

include enhanced inter-metadata linking capabili-

ties, new facets for repository browsing and a list

1The default language of the interface is Polish; it can
be changed to English by selecting the second menu option
(“Ustaw jezyk”) and then the first entry on the language list
(English – “angielski”).

of recently revised objects replacing the standard

list of recently added.

Currently the library holds 2009 objects. 1404

objects have scans attached (with 11 585 pages

in total). 11 languages are represented. The lan-

guages with widest coverage (over 50 objects) are:

German (797 objects), Polish (325 objects – see

Fig. 3), Italian (180) and Latin (69); the remain-

ing ones are Swedish, French, Spanish, English,

Dutch, Czech and Danish. Around 200 prints in

Polish and 50 in German have attached dictionar-

ies explaining currently unused words or phrases

(giving explanations in contemporary Polish or

German). Latin dictionaries are also included.

The final version of the library has been made

official early 2010, so it has been more than half a

year since its resources can be used for interested

parties and some initial findings from observed us-

age of the library resources can be obtained. Data

from March-November 2010 show that the library

hosted 34 unique visitors daily (47 visits) and is

stabilizing; approx. 40% of the open pages are

DjVu files (not indexed by popular search engines

which should imply human visitors).

31



Figure 3: A sample object

The library has been included into the network

of Polish Digital Libraries Federation by means of

The Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Meta-

data Harvesting (OAI-PMH, 2002) with metadata

represented in Dublin Core (ISO, 2009). OAI-

PMH is natively supported by EPrints, so no ad-

ditional implementation was necessary.

To advertise the library among the general pub-

lic a series of dissemination events have been or-

ganized. They included radio broadcasts (univer-

sity radio Kampus, Polish news radio TOK FM),

newspaper articles and historical portal news.

5 Further steps and conclusions

Recently the library contents found new applica-

tions: it is currently used in the EU-co-funded

IMPACT project for training Gothic script OCR

software by ABBYY (the producer of FineReader

with XIX module for recognition of Fraktur or

“black letter” texts). Simultaneously the tran-

scribed versions are being prepared and are

planned to be included in the library (respective

metadata fields were defined in the project, but

only one transcription was filled in since it ex-

ceeded the scope of the project). Other project

which can benefit from the library resources, cur-

rently being carried out by the Institute of Polish

Language at the Polish Academy of Sciences is the

dictionary of the historical Polish from 17th and

the first half of 18th century (see SXVII, 2010).

Another interesting direction is broadening of

the scope of materials the library covers. Since the

project has been closely related to the resources of

The Polish National Library, it can be extended to

cover materials coming from other libraries, most

likely from abroad, both preserving originals and

storing their microfilmed copies. With the possi-

bility of preparation of copies on site, the costs

should not significantly differ from the costs of the

national project. Starting with Zawadzki’s bibliog-

raphy, there are still around 200-300 objects to be

acquired this way. The geographical key seems an

important factor here: the limitations imposed on

Zawadzki before 1989 resulted in underrepresen-

tation of resources from the libraries of the coun-

tries belonging to the former Soviet Union. Last

but not least, Vatican archives can prove to be one

of the most important source of materials of the

32



described type, with so far limited availability.

Apart from obvious development ideas such as

widening the scope of description of gathered ob-

jects or deepening the analysis, the idea of creating

a collaboration platform of the digital library site

can be followed. For instance, the system can be

extended with new functionalities provided to the

library users (not just experts with editing rights)

such as adding comments to materials or an inte-

grated forum. Such add-ons can prove similarly

efficient in development of the materials and in re-

lated projects.

Despite its small scale, we trust that our li-

brary will prove equally useful for old-Polish

researchers as much larger heritage accessibil-

ity projects such as Europeana (see http://

www.europeana.eu) or ENRICH (European

Networking Resources and Information concern-

ing Cultural Heritage, see http://enrich.

manuscriptorium.com/).

References

dLibra (2010). Digital Library Framework. Poznan Su-
percomputing and Networking Center affiliated to
the Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Polish
Academy of Sciences.

EPrints (2010). EPrints free software. Southampton:
School of Electronics and Computer Science at the
University of Southampton.

Gruszczynski W., Ogrodniczuk M. (2010). Cyfrowa
Biblioteka Drukow Ulotnych Polskich i Polski doty-
czacych z XVI, XVII i XVIII w. w nauce i dydaktyce
(Digital Library of Poland-related Old Ephemeral
Prints in research and teaching, in Polish). In Pro-
ceedings of “Polskie Biblioteki Cyfrowe 2010” (Pol-
ish Digital Libraries 2010) conference, Poznan, 18-
22 October 2010.

ISO 2009: ISO 15836:2009. Information and docu-
mentation – The Dublin Core metadata element set.

OAI-PMH (2002). The Open Archives Initiative
Protocol for Metadata Harvesting. Protocol Version
2.0 of 2002-06-14, Document Version 2008-
12-07. http://www.openarchives.org/OAI/open-
archivesprotocol.html.

SVXI (1987). Slownik polszczyzny XVI w. (Dictionary
of 16 century Polish, in Polish). Krakow: Instytut
Badan Literackich PAN.

SVXII (2010). Slownik jezyka polskiego XVII
i 1. polowy XVIII w. (Dictionary of 17 century and
1st half of 18 century Polish, in Polish). Warszawa:
Polska Akademia Nauk, Instytut Jezyka Polskiego.

Zawadzki, K. (1990). Gazety ulotne polskie i Polski
dotyczace z XVI, XVII i XVIII wieku (Polish and
Poland-related Ephemeral Prints from the 16th-18th
Centuries, in Polish). Wroclaw: Zaklad Narodowy
im. Ossolinskich, Wydawnictwo Polskiej Akademii
Nauk.

33


