



















































Using semantic roles to improve summaries


Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 164–169,
Nancy, France, September 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using semantic roles to improve summaries 

 

 

Diana Trandabăț 

Faculty of Computer Science 

University “Alexandru Ioan Cuza” Iasi 

Iasi, Romania 

dtrandabat@info.uaic.ro 

 

 

Abstract 

This paper describes preliminary analysis 

on the influence of the semantic roles in 

summary generation. The proposed method 

involves three steps: first, the named 

entities in the original text are identified 

using a named entity recognizer; secondly, 

the sentences are parsed and semantic roles 

are extracted; thirdly, selection of the 

sentences containing specific semantic 

roles for the most relevant entities in text. 

Although the method is language 

independent, in order to check its viability, 

we tested the proposed approach for 

Romanian summaries. 

1 Introduction 

Text summarization refers to the task of shortening 

a long text. There are two major directions in text 

summarisation: the extractive and the abstractive 

paradigm (Mani, 2001). The first approach in 

creating summaries (most common) is based on 

identifying important words in texts by using their 

frequencies, and determining those sentences that 

contain a bigger number of important words. These 

sentences are extracted from the original text, and 

taken to constitute the summary. In this paradigm, 

the summarization is performed through sentence 

extraction: the summary is a subset of the 

sentences in the original text. 

An alternative approach is to build a summary 

consisting of sentences that don’t necessarily have 

to show up in that specific form in the source text. 

This requires a certain amount of deeper 

understanding of the text. This method can also be 

applied in the case of very large texts, such as a 

whole novel, where neither the determination of 

most significant sentences based on occurrences of 

frequent words, nor building discourse structures 

could be of help. In these cases, other methods, 

mainly expanding a collection of predefined 

flexible summary patterns (based for instance on 

the genre of the novel, or on some data on the main 

characters of the novel, a time and place 

positioning, and a rather shallow sketch of the 

initiation of the action) could be applied. 

Our approach to summary building uses the first 

method, sentence extraction. However, the novelty 

of our approach consists in basing the extraction of 

different sentences from the original text on 

semantic role analysis, an association which is not 

yet explored at its full potential. The method is 

language independent, provided that named entity 

and semantic roles extraction modules are 

available. 

The next Section introduces the sentence 

extraction phase of the summary generation using 

semantic roles. Section 3 presents the named entity 

recognition system use to identify entities in the 

initial text, while Section 4 presents the semantic 

role labeling procedure. The last section presents 

preliminary results obtained on 20 summaries, and 

discusses further development of the system. 

2 Generating Summaries based on 
Semantic Roles 

The natural language processing community has 

recently experienced a growth of interest in 

semantic roles, since they describe WHO did 

WHAT to WHOM, WHEN, WHERE, WHY, 

HOW etc. for a given situation, and contribute to 

the construction of meaning. If for text analysis, 

semantic roles have gained their way into natural 

164



language analysis systems (see for instance Lluis et 

al., 2008; Surdeanu et al., 2003), they are rarely 

used at their full potential for text generation. 

Christopherson (1981) was among the first to 

investigate the usefulness of semantic roles in 

summaries. More recently, Suanmali et al. (2010) 

used semantic roles and WordNet (Fellbaum, 

1998) to compute the semantic similarity of two 

sentences in order to decide if the sentences are to 

be kept or not in the summary. The proposed 

method is a further step in this direction, 

combining semantic roles and named entity for 

sentence extraction. 

The overall pipeline architecture of the proposed 

method is presented in Figure 1. 

The method presented in this paper works in 

three steps: first, the original text is parsed for 

named entities; secondly, semantic roles are 

extracted from the sentences containing named 

entities; thirdly, sentences are selected to be kept in 

the summary, based on the semantic role the 

named entity has. Each module is detailed in the 

Sections below.  

2.1 Identifying entities 

In order to identify the semantic role a specific 

entity express, the entity must be first identified in 

the text. This is the task of named entity 

recognition (NER). NER systems typically use 

linguistic grammar-based techniques or statistical 

models (an overview is presented in (Nadeau and 

Satoshi Sekine. 2007)). Hand-crafted grammar-

based systems typically obtain better precision, but 

at the cost of lower recall and months of work by 

experienced computational linguists. Besides, they 

are hard to adapt to new domains. Statistical NER 

systems typically require a large amount of 

manually annotated training data. Machine 

learning techniques, such as the ones discussed in 

(Scurtu et al., 2009) or (Nadeanu, 2007), allow 

systems to be adapted to new domains and perform 

very well for coarse-grained classification, but 

require large training data. 

Thus, as a preprocessing module for our 

summary generation system, we used a Named 

Entity Recognition component for Romanian, 

based on linguistic grammar-based techniques and 

a set of resources. The NER system is based on 

two modules, the named entity identification 

module and the named entity classification 

module. After the named entity (NE) candidates 

are marked for each input text, each candidate is 

classified into one of the considered categories, 

such as Person, Organization, Place, Country, etc. 

The major drawback of the sentence extraction 

approach for summaries generation is that it 

ignores the referential expressions that could occur 

in the initial text and should have been kept in the 

summary. Thus, due to the elimination of previous 

sentences, their antecedents may not be present 

anymore, resulting in incomprehensive readings. 

For example, consider the following text to be 

summarized: 
Hercules, of all of Zeus’s 

illegitimate children seemed to be 

the focus of Hera’s anger. She sent a 

two-headed serpent to attack him when 

he was just an infant. 

The summary of this very short fragment, using 

the sentence elimination method, could 

(hypothetically) be: 
She sent a two-headed serpent to 

attack him. 

which is really incomprehensible if no explanation 

is provided of who is “she” or “him”. 

One way to increase the coherence of such 

summaries is to derive first the discourse structure 

of the text and to guide the selection of the 

sentences to be included into the summary by a 

score that considers both the relevance of the 

sentence in a discourse tree and the coherence of 

Hercules seemed 

to be the focus of 

Hera’s anger

Hercules, of all of Zeus’s 

illegitimate children seemed to be 

the focus of Hera’s anger. She sent 

a two-headed serpent to attack him 

when he was just an infant.

Named 

Entity 

Recognition

Semantic 

role labeling

Selecting 

relevant 

sentences

Figure 1. Overall architecture of the proposed summary generation method based on 

semantic roles 

165



the text
1
, as given by solving anaphoric references. 

For the summary example above, solving 

anaphoric references means identifying “she” as 

Hera and “him” as Hercules. Thus, the provided 

summary becomes readable: 
Hera sent a two-headed serpent to 

attack Hercules. 

Therefore, after identifying named entities and 

their types (person, organization, place, etc.), a 

simple anaphora resolution method, based on a set 

of reference rules, is applied to our input text, in 

order to link all entities to their referees. 

The anaphoric system we used is a basic rule-

based one, focusing on named entity anaphoric 

relations. Thus, we developed a rule-based system 

that performs the following actions: 

 identifies a subset of a named entity with the 
full named entity, if it appears as such in the same 

text. For instance, Caesar is identified with Julius 

Caesar if both entities appear in the same text. 

Similarly, the President of Romania and the 

President are considered anaphoric relations of the 

same entity, if they appear in a narrow word 

window in the text. 

 solves acronyms using a gazetteer we have 
initially built over the Internet, and which is 

continuously growing in size. For instance, United 

States of America and USA are co-references.  

 searches for different addressing modalities 
and matches the ones that are similar. For instance, 

John Smith is co-referenced with Mr. Smith, and 

Mary and John Smith is co-referenced with The 

Smiths, or The Smith Family. 

 solve pronominal anaphora in a simplistic way. 
Thus, if a pronoun (i.e. she, he, him, his etc.) is 

found in the text, and in the preceding sentence a 

named entity with the entity type person is found, 

then we create an anaphoric link between the 

pronoun and its antecedent. A similar rule exists 

for companies, where the pronoun it may be linked 

to the Insurance Company, for instance. Lists 

stating these correspondences are presently used 

and, although the rules are limited so far, our tests 

show that the overall accuracy of the 

summarization system benefits from this simple 

anaphoric resolution system for named entities.  

The next step is the identification of the 

semantic roles that each named entity plays. 

                                                           
1
 A detailed analysis of the coherence of different texts 

is presented in (Cristea and Iftene, 2011). 

2.2 Identifying semantic roles 

Fillmore in (Fillmore, 1968) defined six semantic 

roles: Agent, Instrument, Dative, Factive, Object 

and Location, also called deep cases. His later 

work on lexical semantics led to the conviction that 

a small fixed set of deep case roles was not 

sufficient to characterize the combinatorial 

properties of lexical items, therefore he added 

Experiencer, Comitative, Location, Path, Source, 

Goal and Temporal, and then other cases. This 

ultimately led to the theory of Frame Semantics 

(Fillmore, 1982), which later evolved into the 

FrameNet project
2
. 

In the last decades, hand-tagged corpora that 

encode such information for the English language 

were developed (VerbNet
3
(Levin and Rappaport, 

2005), FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998) and 

PropBank
4

 (Palmer et al., 2005)). For other 

languages, such as German, Spanish, and Japanese, 

semantic roles resources are being developed. For 

Romanian, Trandabăț and Husarciuc (2008) have 

started to automatically build such a resource. 

For role semantics to become relevant for 

language technology, robust and accurate methods 

for automatic semantic role assignment are needed. 

With the SensEval-3 competition
5
 and the CONLL 

Shared Tasks
6
, Automatic Labeling of Semantic 

Roles, identifying frame elements within a 

sentence and tag them with appropriate semantic 

roles given a sentence (Lluis et al., 2008), has 

become increasingly present among researchers 

worldwide. In recent years, a number of studies, 

such as (Chen and Rambow, 2003) and (Gildea 

and Jurafsky, 2002), has investigated this task on 

the FrameNet corpus. Role assignment has 

generally been modeled as a classification task. 

While using different statistical frameworks, most 

studies have largely converged on a common set of 

features to base their decisions on, namely 

syntactic information (path from predicate to 

constituent, phrasal type of constituent) and lexical 

                                                           
2
 FrameNet web page: http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu/

 

3 
VerbNet web page:  

http://verbs.colorado.edu/~mpalmer/projects/verbnet/do

wnloads.html
 

4 
PropBank web page:  

http://verbs.colorado.edu/~mpalmer/projects/ace.html
 

5
 SemEval web address: http://www.senseval.org/  

6
 ConLL web address: http://ifarm.nl/signll/conll/  

166



information (head word of the constituent, 

predicate). 

Semantic roles are classified in terms of how 

central they are to a particular verb. Arguments 

(or core semantic roles) instantiate required roles, 

which are in a close relation to the verb whose 

sense they complete, and adjuncts (or non-core 

semantic roles), which are more general roles that 

can apply to any verb.  

Adjuncts represent circumstantial objects and 

can be of the following types: directions, locatives, 

temporal, manner, extent, reciprocals, secondary 

predication, purpose, cause, discourse, adverbials, 

modals, negation. For instance, temporal and 

locative adjuncts can be found in both sentences 

below: 
John broke the window [at the 

school]LOC [yesterday]TMP. 

John visited his kids [at the 

school]LOC [yesterday]TMP. 

An important drawback in this domain is that 

most researches focus on text analysis, and text 

generation applications using semantic roles are 

not so well developed. In this context, using the 

semantic role labeling system presented in 

(Trandabat, 2010), we annotated the sentences 

containing entities from the input text with the 

semantic roles these entities play, and passed to the 

third step. 

The semantic role system we used for Romanian 

was obtained by training 12 machine translation 

algorithms (see Trandabat, 2010) from the Weka 

framework (Hall et al., 2009) with different feature 

sets. After running all the classifiers for different 

modules (the module that separately identifies the 

semantic roles and classify them, or the module 

that jointly identifies semantic roles and classify 

them), their performance is compared, and the 

module that obtains the highest performance is 

considered the best configuration. The models for 

this best configuration are saved, and the best path 

is written to a configuration file. This configuration 

can then be used at a later time to annotate new 

texts with the developed SRL system.  

The 10 fold cross-validation results of all 

classifiers are also saved since they provide a 

confusion matrix that can be used to see which 

classes were correctly predicted by different 

classifiers. The output of the system presented in 

(Trandabat, 2010) is a Semantic Role Labeling 

System, a sequence of trained models which can be 

used to annotate new texts.. 

2.3 Selecting relevant sentences 

The third module of the summary generation 

system implies selecting, among the list of 

sentences from which summaries can be generated, 

the ones in which the entity has core semantic 

roles. The proposed method involves four main 

steps: 
 Identifying the main character 

 Extract sentences containing the main character 

 Keep sentences with core roles for the specific 
character. 

 Simplify sentences 

There are two possible ways of identifying the 

main character: the easiest one is when the central 

character of the text is a-priori given as argument 

(in case a character-oriented summary is 

requested). Otherwise, the main character is 

considered to be the named entity having the 

higher number of occurrences in the text (including 

references, see Section 2.1). For the example 

below, the main character is considered to be 

Alcmene, with 9 occurrences. 
Hercules was the son of Zeus and 

Alcmene. Alcmene's husband 

Amphiteryon was out avenging her 

brother's death at the hands of 

pirates. Zeus, disguised as 

Amphiteryon, came to her and told her 

stories of how he killed the pirates 

to avenge her brother's death. That 

night Zeus went to bed with Alcmene 

and impregnated her. The next day the 

real Amphiteryon returned with his 

stories of avenging the pirates, and 

he could not understand why his wife 

was irritated with him and seemed 

disinterested in the stories. It was 

then that Amphiteryon consulted a 

blind seer and became aware of what 

Zeus did. 

For the extraction of the sentences containing 

the main character, both the entity as if, and its 

references, are considered. For the example above, 

the last sentence is kept out, as not containing the 

character or a reference to it. 

The distinction between the situations when the 

main character has core and non-core semantic 

roles (or adjuncts vs. arguments) represents the 

backbone of our system. Thus, when the entity 

considered for the summary has a semantic role 

167



that is mandatory for a sentence meaning (it is a 

core semantic role, such as an Agent), the sentence 

containing it is kept. In contrast, if a sentence 

contains the entity in a non-core position 

(expressing temporal, spatial, modal, etc. 

circumstances), then its meaning is not essential 

for the summary, and the sentence containing the 

entity will be discarded from the summary. As an 

example, in the sentence below, Alcmene (refered 

as his wife) is only part of a non-core semantic role 

(Content for the verb understand), so this sentence 

will be discarded and not kept for the final 

summary: 
The next day the real Amphiteryon 

returned with his stories of avenging 

the pirates, and [he]Cognizer [could 

not understand]TARGET [why his wife 

was irritated with him and seemed 

disinterested in the stories]Content. 

The last step involved a simplification of the 

sentences. This simplification is based on a set of 

heuristics using semantic roles. Thus, in a 

sentence, not only one verb requiring semantic 

roles may appear. In order to simplify these 

complex sentences, we only keep the predicate
7
 for 

which the entity is a semantic role. To give an 

example, consider the sentence below: 

[Alcmene's]Partner1 [husband]TARGET 
[Amphiteryon]Partner2 was out avenging 

her brother's death at the hands of 

pirates. 

In this case, two predicates are annotated with 

semantic roles: husband as a relationship predicate 

(according to FrameNet), and avenging as an 

activity predicate. Simplifying this sentence means 

keeping only the semantic roles for the first 

predicate (husband), for which the main character 

plays a semantic role, i.e. keeping only “Alcmene’s 

husband, Amphiteryon was out”. 

3 Discussion and Further Work 

In this paper, we presented a summary generation 

system based on semantic roles. The main 

components of the system are dedicated to 

identifying named entities, marking semantic roles, 

and selecting the sentences of the text to be kept in 

the summary. 

                                                           
7 In general, predicates are associated with verbs. However, 

semantic roles theories have recently accepted the existence of 

predicate-like nouns and adjectives, which can gather around 

them semantic roles, just like verbs do. 

We evaluated the method on 20 summaries 

extracted from the Legend of the Olympus novel. 

In a first batch, 5 volunteers received full version 

of the 20 texts, and were asked to generate short 

summaries (about 10% of the size if the full text). 

A second batch of 5 volunteers received the initial 

text marked with semantic roles, and were 

instructed to create short summaries (the same 

10%) using the semantic role information. 

Although the evaluation was only intended to give 

a feedback on the method, and a proper evaluation 

is still to be developed, the volunteers reported that 

knowing the semantic roles of entities and guiding 

the summary on it makes the summary generation 

task easier. 

Acknowledgments 

The research presented in this paper was funded by 

the Sectoral Operational Programme for Human 

Resources Development through the project 

"Development of the innovation capacity and 

increasing of the research impact through post-

doctoral programs" POSDRU/89/1.5/S/49944. 

References 

Baker G., Collin F., Fillmore, Charles J., and Lowe, 

John B. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In 

Proceedings of the COLING-ACL, Montreal, 

Canada. 1998 

Chen J. and O. Rambow. 2003. Use of deep linguistic 

features for the recognition and labeling of semantic 

arguments. In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference 

on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 

Processing, 2003. 

Christopherson, Steven L . 1981. Effects of knowledge 

of semantic roles on summarizing written prose. 

Contemporary Educational Psychology, Vol 6(1), Jan 

1981, 59-65 

Cristea and Iftene. 2011. If you want your talk be fluent, 

think lazy! Grounding coherence properties of 

discourse. Invited talk at SPED-2011, University of 

Brasov, May 

Fillmore Charles J. 1968. The case for case. In Bach and 

Harms, editors, Universals in Linguistic Theory, 

pages 1-88. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York, 

1968. 

Fillmore Charles J. 1982. Frame semantics, în 

Linguistics in the Morning Calm, Hanshin 

Publishing, Seoul , 1982, 111-137. 

168



Gildea Daniel and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic 

labeling of semantic roles. Computational 

Linguistics, 28(3):245-288, 2002 

Hall, Mark, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard 

Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, Ian H. Witten (2009); 

The WEKA Data Mining Software: An Update; 

SIGKDD Explorations, Volume 11, Issue 1 

Levin B. and M. Rappaport Hovav. 2005. Argument 

Realization. Research Surveys in Linguistics Series. 

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2005. 

Mani Inderjeet, automatic summarization, John 

Benjamins Pub Co; ISBN: 1588110591 (hardcover), 

1588110605 (paperback), 2001. 

Marquez Lluis, Xavier Carreras, Kenneth C. Litkowski, 

and Suzanne Stevenson. 2008. Semantic role 

labeling: An introduction to the Special Issue. 

Computational Linguistics, 34(2):145-159, 2008. 

David Nadeau and Satoshi Sekine. 2007. A survey of 

named entity recognition and classification, 

Linguisticae Investigationes 30, no. 1, 3{26, 

Publisher: John Benjamin’s Publishing Company 

David Nadeau. 2007. Semi-supervised named entity 

recognition: Learning to recognize 100 entity types 

with little supervision, PhD Thesis. 

Palmer Martha, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury. 

2005. The proposition bank: An annotated corpus of 

semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71-

106, 2005. 

Scurtu V., Stepanov E., Mehdad, Y. 2009. Italian 

named entity recognizer participation in NER 

task@evalita 09,  2009. 

Suanmali, L., Salim, N. and Binwahlan, M. S.. 2010. 

SRL-GSM : A Hybrid Approach based on Semantic 

Role Labeling and General Statistic Method for Text 

Summarization. Journal of Applied Sciences 10(3) : 

166-173 

Trandabăţ D.  2010. Natural Language Processing 

Using Semantic Frames, PhD Thesis, University Al. 

I. Cuza Iasi, Romania   

Trandabat Diana and Maria Husarciuc. 2008. Romanian 

semantic role resource. In Proceedings of the Sixth 

International Language Resources and Evaluation 

(LREC'08), Marrakech, Morocco, may 2008. 

169


