















































Engineering a Deep HPSG for Mandarin Chinese


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 18–22,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 12 and 13, 2011.

Engineering a Deep HPSG for Mandarin Chinese

Yi Zhang Rui Wang Yu Chen
LT-Lab, German Reserach Center for Artificial Intelligence, Saarbrücken, Germany

{yzhang,rwang}@coli.uni-sb.de, yuchen@dfki.de

Abstract

In this paper, we present our on-going
grammar development effort towards a
linguistically precise and broad coverage
grammar for Mandarin Chinese in the
framework of HPSG. The use of LinGO
Grammar Matrix facilitates the quick start
of the development. We propose a series of
linguistic treatments for a list of interest-
ing phenomena. The analyses are largely
compatible with the HPSG framework. In
addition, the grammar also composes se-
mantic representations in Minimum Re-
cursion Semantics. Preliminary tests of
the grammar on a phenomenon-oriented
test suite show encouraging precision and
coverage.

1 Introduction

Broad coverage in-depth and accurate linguistic
processing is desirable for both linguistic studies
and practical NLP applications. In recent years,
several competing linguistic frameworks emerge
with proper expressive power and good computa-
tional properties. Typically offered by such frame-
works are not only the description of the syntactic
structures, but also the ways in which meanings
are composed. Among the most popular frame-
works are CCG, TAG, LFG and HPSG.

With the increasing availability of deep linguis-
tic processing platforms, large-scale grammar re-
source development becomes possible. The past
experience on large-scale grammar engineering
shows that it is a long-term undertaking, which
amounts to years or decades of both labor- and
intelligence-intensive work. More recently, it has
been shown that such process could be largely
accelerated by the accumulative experience from
various grammar development projects. Also, the
data-driven techniques reduce the tedious repeti-
tive work and allow grammar writers to focus on
the challenging phenomena.

Encouraged by these breakthroughs, we have
seen the emergence of various grammar develop-
ment projects in the last decade, not only for lan-
guages with large speaker population, but also for
endangered or extinct languages (Bender, 2008).
Despite the huge population of Mandarin Chi-
nese native speakers, strikingly few attempts have
been made so far to formally describe the lan-
guage within the above-mentioned modern lin-
guistic frameworks. This is partially due to the
fact that Mandarin Chinese is relatively less gram-
maticalized in the sense that the wellformedness of
a sentence cannot be clearly judged from the syn-
tactic structure alone. But given that some modern
frameworks (such as HPSG) integrates the syntac-
tic and semantic representations, a joint analysis is
feasible.

Another trendy approach in deep grammar en-
gineering is the corpus-driven approach. For in-
stance, Miyao et al. (2004) showed that by enrich-
ing the PTB annotation with HPSG feature struc-
tures and applying top-down unifications, one can
automatically acquire detailed lexical templates.
The similar procedure was practiced by Hocken-
maier and Steedman (2005) (though in a differ-
ent framework) in the creation of the CCGbank.
Recently, some of these success stories have been
transferred to the development of Mandarin Chi-
nese grammars on the Penn Chinese Treebank
(CTB; (Xue et al., 2005)). Nevertheless, we be-
lieve that the corpus-driven approach does not re-
place the need for a carefully engineered core
grammar, with which the basic linguistic gener-
alizations could be captured and consistently ap-
plied to various instantiations in the corpus. Thus,
we believe that a hand-written grammar will con-
stitute the very foundation of the deep linguistic
processing.

In this paper, we report on the on-going devel-
opment of a Mandarin Chinese grammar (MCG) in
the framework of HPSG. With the modern gram-
mar engineering setup, we were able to cover a

18



large number of interesting phenomena with satis-
factory accuracy from both syntactic and seman-
tic points of view. The evaluation of the gram-
mar resource is an important aspect of the devel-
opment. At the current stage, we value the cor-
rect choice of linguistic solutions to be more im-
portant than the less meaningful parsing coverage
on arbitrary “gold standard” annotation. For this
reason, we choose to test the core-grammar on a
phenomenon-oriented test suite instead of a cor-
pus of naturally occurring texts.

2 An HPSG Analysis of Mandarin

2.1 Design of sign & schemata
The design of the HPSG sign in MCG is compatible
with the design in the LinGO Grammar Matrix.
Four valcence features were employed: SUBJ for
subjects, COMPS for complements, SPR for speci-
fiers, and SPEC for back-reference from the spec-
ifier to its head. Unlike Yu et al. (2010) who sep-
arate complement list into LCOMPS and RCOMPS,
we keep all complements on the same complement
list (COMPS), and use an additional boolean fea-
ture

[
RC ±

]
to indicate whether the complement

is to the right or to the left of the head.
The grammar currently contains about 20 rule

schemata. It should be noted that most of these
rule schemata are very general. They are be used
to handle multiple types of constructions, some of
which will be illustrated below.

2.2 HEAD types
The HEAD types in HPSG identify the major cat-
egories of part-of-speech for the language. The
structure of MCG’s HEAD type hierarchy is show in
Figure 1. Worth noticing is that we have adjectives
being a sub-type of predicative, so it can serve as
the predicate of a sentence (similar to verb) with-
out “type-raising”. A special category coverb is
designed to cover words which share certain prop-
erties of verbs, but usually do not serve as the
main predicate of a sentence, such as prepositions
(在,用), BA (把), BEI (被), and resultative coverbs
(e.g. 来,开).

2.3 Topic Construction
According to Li and Thompson (1989), a topic of
a sentence refers to the theme of the sentence and
appears before the subject. For a better account of
the semantics, we further distinguish the follow-

ing types of topics and treat them separately with
different schemata.

• When the sentential topic equals the subject,
the composition is done with SUBJ-HEAD,
with no special treatment involved

• Temporal or location topics are treated as
modifiers with ADJ-HEAD

• A special rule SUBJ2-HEAD is used to fill
topics headed by noun or verb into the SPR
valence of the main sentence. This is also
referred to as the “double subject” construc-
tions

Yu et al. (2010) introduce an extra valence fea-
ture (TOPIC) for the topic construction. Tse and
Curran (2010) distinguish two types of topics,gap
or non-gap. Both solutions are rather similar to
ours nonetheless.

2.4 Numeral-classifiers & demonstratives
Numeral-classifier structures are analyzed as a
phrase with rule SPEC-HEAD, and they together
serve as a specifier to the head noun. A feature
“CL” in the HEAD type of noun identifies the suit-
able groups of classifiers. Demonstratives are also
treated as specifiers to nouns (similar to the double
specifier account in (Ng, 1997)), though specific
word order constraints are further enforced for the
correct NP structure. Both specifiers of nouns are
optional. The numeral before the classifier can be
optional too, unless the NP is in a subject position
and no demonstrative is available (e.g. *头大象
爱吃苹果).

2.5 DE-Constructions
DE (的) is involved in two major types of phrases:

• Associative DE-phrase where a semantic re-
lation is created to associate the NPs before
and after DE. The relation is similar to (and
more general than) the possessive relation

• Nominalizing DE-phrase where DE combines
with the predicative phrase before it to make
a nominal phrase

While the associative DE-phrase is straightfor-
ward to model, the semantics of the nominalizing
DE-phrase is more intriguing. We further catego-
rize the nominalizing DE-phrase into the following
three types:

19



head

content

substantive

noun temp loc dem num cl

predicate

verb adj

adv

functional

particle

sfp am

conj coverb

prep ba bei rv

Figure 1: HEAD type hierarchy

• subject gapping relative DE
where the NP after DE will serve as the sub-
ject to the predicative before DE

• complement gapping relative DE
where the NP after DE will serve as the com-
plement to the predicative before DE

• non-gapping DE
where neither of the above two cases applies

Yu et al. (2010) mentioned the treatment of
relative clauses using DE as a relativizer. How-
ever it is not clear whether different sub-types
of the relative clauses (with different argument
composition) are captured with specialized rules.
Guo et al. (2007) differentiated three types of DE-
constructions, ADJ-REL (relative clause), AD-
JUNCT (adjective), and POSS (possessive DE).
We have a more fine-grained inventory for the rel-
ative clauses and treat the adjective case in the sub-
ject gapping relative DE-phrases (since we allow
adjectives to be predicates, as shown in Figure 1).
For example, 大 的苹果 (big apple) will be ana-
lyzed as大 (big) is the (adjectival) predicate of苹
果 (apple).

2.6 Locatives & temporals
Locative phrases serve as both pre-verbal and
post-verbal modifiers, and generally take the form
of zai + NP + Loc, e.g. 在桌子上 (on the table),
在房子东面 (to the east of the house), etc.

Locative phrases can always serve as pre-verbal
modifiers. But only certain verbs can take post-
verbal locatives with the HEAD-ADJ rule. The
treatment of locative phrases as normal preposi-
tional phrases as in (Wang et al., 2009) may lead
to massive over-generation.

The analysis of temporal phrases is similar to
the locative phrases.

2.7 BA-Construction
BA-construction moves the direct object of a verb

to the pre-verbal position. In our analyses, we use
a specialized unary rule BA-FRONTED to change
the last element of the verb’s complement list from


HEAD noun
RC +
INDEX 1


to




HEAD ba
RC -
INDEX 1


.

There are various discussions on BA in the liter-
ature. Bender (2000) considered it as a verb, Gao
(2000) and Wang et al. (2009) treated it as a case-
marker, and Yu et al. (2010) as a preposition. We
categorize BA as a special coverb. This makes it
similar to prepositions. But it will be subcatego-
rized by (instead of modifying) the verb phrase.

2.8 BEI-Construction
BEI-construction is used to compose passive voice
sentences in Chinese. Similar to the analysis of
BA, we use a specialized unary rule to promote the
complement of the verb into the subject list, and

change the original subject

[
HEAD noun
INDEX 1

]
into a

“bei” headed left complement




HEAD bei
RC -
INDEX 1


.

Consistent with their analysis of BA, (Yu et al.,
2010) treat BEI as a preposition. They view the
complement of BEI as an extracted subject and
use filler-head rule to combine the subject and the
predicate. Guo et al. (2007), on the other hand,
assume that the NP and VP following BEI is in
one constituent, and will be case-marked by BEI
jointly.

2.9 Various Markers
Several types of constructions were covered by
the HEAD-MARKER/MARKER-HEAD rule, among
them are the aspect markers (着,了,过), sentence-
final particles (了, 吗), ordinal numeral prefix
(第), etc. Various specific semantic information
is supplemented by the marking construction.

20



2.10 Resultative verb compound
The resultative verb compounds refer to the com-
pounding of a verb together with a resultative
coverb (e.g., 来, 去, 开, 到, etc.), taking HEAD
type rv, to signal the “result” of the action or pro-
cess conveyed by the first verb. This is different
to the normal modification in that the valency of
the compound is mainly determined by the resul-
tative coverb. We capture the compounding with a
special RVC rule which will pass upward the head
type from the first verb, and the complements from
the resultative coverb.

2.11 Serial verb constructions
Serial verb construction refers to a group of com-
plex phenomena in Mandarin Chinese where mul-
tiple verb phrases or clauses occurs in a sentence
without any marker indicating the relationship be-
tween them. According to Li and Thompson
(1989), it can be divided into four groups: i) two
or more separate events; ii) one verb phrase or
clause serving as the subject or direct object of an-
other verb; iii) pivotal constructions; iv) descrip-
tive clauses. We have adopted different analyses
for each of them.

Yu et al. (2010) dealt mainly with the first case
of the serial verb constructions. Two or more
verbs were treated as coordinations, which can
share subjects, topics or left-complements. Tse
and Curran (2010) treated both serial verb con-
structions and resultative verb compound (see Sec-
tion 2.10) as verbal compounding. Müller and
Lipenkova (2009) offered more detailed theoret-
ical analyses of certain Chinese serial verb con-
structions, capturing subtle semantic differences
in the descriptive clauses category with additional
constructional semantic relations. We intend to in-
vestigate their solutions in the future.

3 Development & Evaluation

The MCG is currently developed on the LKB plat-
form (Copestake, 2002), which implements the
typed feature structure formalism in TDL (Krieger
and Schäfer, 1994). The first stage of gram-
mar development was done with the help of the
LinGO Grammar Matrix customization system,
which took care of the general design of the fea-
ture geometry in HPSG, as well as the defini-
tion of the universal types for basic rule schemata
and corresponding semantic compositions. Sig-
nificant amount of development time were spent

on the careful revision of the design and the con-
stant debate on the treatment of various Chinese
specific phenomena, while trying to keep in line
with the classical HPSG theory and the conven-
tions from other DELPH-IN grammars. As it cur-
rently stands, in addition to the types provided by
the grammar Matrix, the MCG contains over 200
new type descriptions, and over 3000 lines of code
in TDL. A small hand-crafted lexicon containing
over 500 entries is currently used for development
and testing.

Also developed is a phenomenon-oriented test
suite of over 700 sentences (with both positive and
negative test items). We randomly sampled 129
previously unseen sentences from the test suite
and parsed them with MCG, among them are 110
wellformed sentences and 19 illformed.

Gold standard
Positive Negative

System Positive 82 2Negative 28 17

Table 1: Test suite parsing performance of MCG

While the test set contains only short sentences,
the phenomena are non-trivial from the linguistic
view point. A sentence is considered to be suc-
cessfully parse when there is a reading that is both
syntactically and semantically correct. We achieve
a high precision (82/84=97.6%) with an accept-
able recall (82/110=74.5%). Among all negative
sentences, the grammar only generated reading for
two of them. One was due to the incorrect clas-
sifier constraints from a noun lexical entry. The
other was due to the over-relaxed head selection
in adjective+head modification. Both errors are
fixed after observing the error. The parser outputs
on average 5.04 readings per sentence, which at-
tributes to the constraints we encoded in the gram-
mar to avoid over-generation. Full coverage over
phenomena such as coordinations is still lacking
in MCG.

4 Summary

An overview of the MCG grammar design is
presented, though the detailed presentation of
our linguistic solutions does not fit in the short-
paper format the workshop organizer chose for
us. Nevertheless, the grammar is in line with
the open-source spirit of DELPH-IN, and freely
available for research purposes (http://mcg.
opendfki.de/).

21



References
Emily M. Bender and Dan Flickinger. 2005. Rapid

prototyping of scalable grammars: Towards modu-
larity in extensions to a language-independent core.
In Proceedings of the 2nd International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing IJCNLP-
05 (Posters/Demos), Jeju Island, Korea.

Emily M. Bender. 2000. The syntax of mandarin ba:
Reconsidering the verbal analysis. Journal of East
Asian Linguistics, 9(2):105–145, April.

Emily M. Bender. 2008. Evaluating a crosslinguis-
tic grammar resource: A case study of Wambaya.
In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 977–985,
Columbus, Ohio, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Ann Copestake, Dan Flickinger, Carl J. Pollard, and
Ivan A. Sag. 2005. Minimal recursion semantics:
an introduction. Research on Language and Com-
putation, 3(4):281–332.

Ann Copestake. 2002. Implementing Typed Feature
Structure Grammars. CSLI, Stanford, USA.

Qian Gao. 2000. Argument Structure, HPSG, and Chi-
nese Grammar. Ph.D. thesis, The Ohio State Uni-
versity.

Yuqing Guo, Josef van Genabith, and Haifeng Wang.
2007. Treebank-based acquisition of lfg resources
for chinese. In Proceedings of LFG07 Conference,
pages 214–232.

Yuqing Guo. 2009. Treebank-Based Acquisition of
Chinese LFG Resources for Parsing and Genera-
tion. Ph.D. thesis, School of Computing, Dublin
City University, July.

Julia Hockenmaier and Mark Steedman. 2005. Ccg-
bank: User’s manual. Technical Report MS-CIS-05-
09, Department of Computer and Information Sci-
ence, University of Pennsylvania.

Hans-Ulrich Krieger and Ulrich Schäfer. 1994. Tdl
- a type description language for constraint-based
grammars. In Proceedings of the15th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING
’94), August 5-9, pages 893–899.

Charles N. Li and Sandra A. Thompson. 1989. Man-
darin Chinese: A functional reference grammar.
University of California Press, London, England.

Yusuke Miyao, Takashi Ninomiya, and Jun’ichi Tsu-
jii. 2004. Corpus-oriented grammar development
for acquiring a Head-driven Phrase Structure Gram-
mar from the Penn Treebank. In Proceedings of the
1st International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (IJCNLP 2004), pages 684–693,
Hainan Island, China.

Stefan Müller and Janna Lipenkova. 2009. Serial
verb constructions in chinese: A hpsg account. In
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference
on Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar, pages
234–254, Germany.

Say Kiat Ng. 1997. A double-specifier account of chi-
nese nps using head-driven phrase structure gram-
mar. Master’s thesis, Department of Linguistics.
University of Edinburgh.

Carl Pollard and Ivan A. Sag. 1994. Head-Driven
Phrase Structure Grammar. The University of
Chicago Press and CSLI Publications, Chicago, IL
and Stanford, CA.

Daniel Tse and James R. Curran. 2010. Chinese ccg-
bank: extracting ccg derivations from the penn chi-
nese treebank. In Proceedings of the 23rd Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics
(Coling 2010), pages 1083–1091, Beijing, China.

Xiangli Wang, Shunya Iwasawa, Yusuke Miyao,
Takuya Matsuzaki, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2009. De-
sign of chinese hpsg framework for data-driven pars-
ing. In Proceedings of the 23rd Pacific Asia Confer-
ence on Language, Information and Computation,
December.

Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu-Dong Chiou, and Martha
Palmer. 2005. The penn chinese treebank: Phrase
structure annotation of a large corpus. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 11(02):207–238.

Kun Yu, Miyao Yusuke, Xiangli Wang, Takuya
Matsuzaki, and Junichi Tsujii. 2010. Semi-
automatically developing chinese hpsg grammar
from the penn chinese treebank for deep parsing.
In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages
1417–1425, Beijing, China.

22


