



















































Language-Independent Context Aware Query Translation using Wikipedia


Language-Independent Context Aware Query Translation using Wikipedia

Rohit Bharadwaj G
Search and Information Extraction Lab

LTRC
IIIT Hyderabad, India

bharadwaj@research.iiit.ac.in

Vasudeva Varma
Search and Information Extraction Lab

LTRC
IIIT Hyderabad, India
vv@iiit.ac.in

Abstract

Cross lingual information access (CLIA) sys-
tems are required to access the large amounts
of multilingual content generated on the world
wide web in the form of blogs, news articles
and documents. In this paper, we discuss our
approach to query formation for CLIA sys-
tems where language resources are replaced
by Wikipedia. We claim that Wikipedia,
with its rich multilingual content and struc-
ture, forms an ideal platform to build a CLIA
system. Our approach is particularly useful
for under-resourced languages, as all the lan-
guages don’t have the resources(tools) with
sufficient accuracies. We propose a context
aware language-independent query formation
method which, with the help of bilingual dic-
tionaries, forms queries in the target language.
Results are encouraging with a precision of
69.75% and thus endorse our claim on using
Wikipedia for building CLIA systems.

1 INTRODUCTION

Cross lingual information access (CLIA) systems
enable users to access the rich multilingual content
that is created on the web daily. Such systems are
vital to bridge the gap between information avail-
able and languages known to the user. Considerable
amount of research has been done on building such
systems but most of them rely heavily on the lan-
guage resources and tools developed. With a con-
stant increase in the number of languages around the
world with their content on the web, CLIA systems

are in need. Language independent approach is par-
ticularly useful for languages that fall into the cat-
egory of under-resourced (African, few Asian lan-
guages), that doesn’t have sufficient resources. In
our approach towards language-independent CLIA
system, we have developed context aware query
translation using Wikipedia. Due to voluntary con-
tribution of millions of users, Wikipedia gathers very
significant amount of updated knowledge and pro-
vides a structured way to access it.

Figure 1: Number of Wikipedia pages(Y-axis) with and
without Inter language link (ILL) to English in each lan-
guage (X-axis)

The statistics in the Figure 1 show that it has
rich multilingual content and is growing indepen-
dent of the presence of English counter part. With
its structurally rich content, it provides an ideal plat-
form to perform cross lingual research. We harness
Wikipedia and its structure to replace the language
specific resources required for CLIA.

Our work is different from existing approaches in

145

Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, pages 145–150,
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,

Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics



terms of

• No language resource has been used at any
stage of query translation.

• Wikipedia structure has been fully utilized for
achieving CLIA between English and Hindi,
unlike the existing approaches, especially for
query formation.

We have constructed a bilingual dictionary us-
ing cross lingual links present across the articles of
same topic in different languages. As each word in
the dictionary can have several translations based on
various attributes like context, sense etc, we need
a mechanism to identify the target word accurately
based on the context of the query. To identify
the context of a query, “Content Words”, that are
built for each Wikipedia article, are used. “Content
Words” of the article are similar to the tags of the ar-
ticle, that reflects the context of the article in a more
detailed way.

In this paper, we detail our approach in forming
this “Content Words” and using them to form the
query. Since our approach is language-independent
and context-aware, we used a metric proposed
by (Bharadwaj and Varma, 2011) to evaluate along
with a dicationary-based metric. The system is built
between languages English and Hindi. Hindi is se-
lected as target language because of the availabil-
ity of resources for evaluation. As our approach
is language-independent, it can be used to trans-
late queries between any pair of languages present
in Wikipedia. The remainder of paper is organized
as follows. Section 2 shows the related work. Pro-
posed method is discussed in Section 3. Results and
Discussion are in Section 4. We finally conclude in
Section 5.

2 RELATED WORK

We discuss the related work of the two stages are in-
volved in our system of language-independent con-
text aware query translation,

• Resource building/ collection (Dictionaries in
our case)

• Query formation

Dictionary building can be broadly classified into
two approaches, manual and automatic. At initial
stages, various projects like (Breen, 2004) try to
build dictionaries manually, taking lot of time and
effort. Though manual approaches perform well,
they lag behind when recent vocabulary is consid-
ered. To reduce the effort involved, automatic ex-
traction of dictionaries has been envisioned. The
approach followed by (Kay and Roscheisen, 1999)
and (Brown et al., 1990) were towards statistical ma-
chine translation, that can also be applied to dic-
tionary building. The major requirement for us-
ing statistical methods is the availability of bilin-
gual parallel corpora, that again is limited for under-
resourced languages. Factors like sentence struc-
ture, grammatical differences, availability of lan-
guage resources and the amount of parallel corpus
available further hamper the recall and coverage of
the dictionaries extracted.

After parallel corpora, attempts have been made
to construct bilingual dictionaries using various
types of corpora like comparable corpus (Sadat
et al., 2003) and noisy parallel corpus (Fung and
McKeown, 1997). Though there exist various ap-
proaches, most of them make use of the language
resources. Wikipedia has also been used to mine
dictionaries. (Tyers and Pienaar, 2008), (Erdmann et
al., 2008), (Erdmann et al., 2009) have built bilin-
gual dictionaries using Wikipedia and language re-
sources. We have mined our dictionaries similarly
considering the cross lingual links present. Our ap-
proach to dictionary building is detailed in section 3.

Wikipedia has been used for CLIA at various
stages including query formation. Most recently,
Wikipedia structure has been exploited in (Gaillard
et al., 2010) for query translation and disambigua-
tion. In (Schönhofen et al., 2008), Wikipedia has
been exploited at all the stages of building a CLIA
system. We tread the same path of (Schönhofen
et al., 2008) in harnessing Wikipedia for dictionary
building and query formation. Similar to them we
extract concept words for each Wikipedia article and
use them to disambiguate and form the query.

For evaluation purposes, we adapted evaluation
measures based on Wikipedia and existing dictio-
naries (Bharadwaj and Varma, 2011). The authors
have proposed a classification based technique, us-
ing Wikipedia article and the inter-language links

146



present between them to classify the sentences as
parallel or non-parallel based on the context of the
sentences rather than at the syntactic level. We adopt
a similar classification based technique and build
feature vectors for classification using Support Vec-
tor Machines (SVM 1) for evaluation.

3 PROPOSED METHOD

The architecture of the system is given in the Fig-
ure 2.

Figure 2: Architecture of the system

The following subsections describe each module
in detail.

3.1 Dictionary Building

Bilingual dictionaries (English-Hindi) are built from
Wikipedia by mining parallel/ near-parallel text
from each structural information like title, infobox,
category and abstract (initial paragraph) of the En-
glish(En) and Hindi(Hi) articles that are connected
with Inter language link (ILL, arrows between En
Wikipedia articles and Hi Wikipedia articles in Fig-
ure 2). The motivation for considering the other
structural information of the Wikipedia article is to
increase vocabulary of the dictionary both in terms
of the number of words and categories of words. Ti-
tles, Infobox and Categories of the article consider
only named entities that are used in the language.

1http://www.cs.cornell.edu/People/tj/
svm_light/

To increase the coverage of the dictionary and also
to include other categories of words (like negations,
quantifiers etc), abstract of the article is considered.
Also the Inter language links between the articles
are assumed to be bi-directional even if they are uni-
directional. An approach similar to (Tyers and Pien-
aar, 2008) is followed to construct dictionaries. The
dictionary is constructed iteratively by using the pre-
viously constructed dictionaries from each structure.
The structural aspects of the article used are

• Title: Titles of the articles linked.

• Infobox: Infobox of the articles that are linked.

• Category: Categories of the articles linked.

• Abstract: The inital paragraph of the articles
linked are considered as the article abstracts
and are used for dictionary building.

A dictionary consists of word and its several pos-
sible translations, scored according to their align-
ment scores. Each structural information is used to
enhance the dictionary built previously. Dictionary
built from titles are used as starting point. As each
English word is mapped to several Hindi words, fil-
tering of words or re-ranking of the words at query
formation is vital. The scoring function used for the
words while building the dictionary is

score(wiE , w
j
H) =

W iE
⋂

W jH
W iE

(1)

Where wiE is the i
th word in English word list; wjH

is the jth word in Hindi word list; W iE
⋂

W jH is the
count of co-occurrence of wiE and w

j
H in the parallel

corpus and; W iE is the count of occurrences of the
word wiE in the corpus.

3.2 Building Content words

The context of each English Wikipedia article Ai is
extracted from the following structural information
of the article.

• Title : Title of the article

• Redirect title : Redirect title of the article, if
present.

147



• Category : Categories of the article that are pre-
defined.

• Subsections : Titles of the different sub-
sections of the article.

• In-links : Meta data present in the links to this
article from other articles in same language.

• Out-links : Meta data of the links that link
the current article to other articles in same lan-
guage.

As these structural attributes are spread across the
article, they help to identify the context (orienta-
tion) of the article in depth when compared with
the Categories of the article. Each structural as-
pect described above have unique content that will
help to identify the context of the article. “Content
Words” are formed from each of these structural as-
pects. Word count of the words present in each of
the above mentioned attributes are calculated and
are filtered by a threshold to form the context words
of the article. The threshold for filtering has been
calculated by manual tagging with the help of lan-
guage annotators. “Content Words” for the Hindi
articles are also formed similarly. The formation of
“Content Words” is similar to tagging but is not a
stricly tagging mechanism as we have no constraint
on the number of tags. Category alone can help to
get the context but considering in-links, out-links,
subsections will increase the depth of context words
and will reduce the information lost by tagging the
words.

3.3 Query formation

Query formation of our system depends on the con-
text words built. For an English query (qE) that con-
tains the words wiE (i: 0 to n),

• Build WH of size m, that contains the words re-
turned by the dictionary for each of the words.

• For all words in (qE), extract all the articles aki
(k: 0 to n) with wiE as one of its context word.

• Form the corresponding Hindi set of articles Ah

using the cross lingual link, if present in the En-
glish article set constructed in the above step.

• For each Hindi word wjH (j: 0 to m), add it to
Hindi query (qH) if at least one of the articles
ai (with w

j
H as its context word) is present in

Ah.

This approach helps to identify the context of the
query as each query is represented by a set of articles
instead of query words, that forms the concepts that
the query can be interpreted to limited to Wikipedia
domain. Queries are translated based on the archi-
tecture described in Figure 2.

4 Results and Discussion

4.1 Evaluation, Dataset and Results

A classification based approach and a dictionary
based approach are employed to calculate the accu-
racy of the queries translated. 400 sentences with
their corresponding translations (English-Hindi)
have been used as test set to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the query formation. The sentence pairs
are provided by FIRE2. These sentences contain all
types of words (Named entities, Verbs etc) and will
be referred to as samples. The English language sen-
tences are used as queries and are translated to Hindi
using the approach described. Before forming the
query, stop words are removed from the English sen-
tence. The query lengths after removing stop words
vary from 2 words to 8 words. The dictionary used
for evaluation is an existing one, Shabdanjali3. In
the following sections, we describe our two evalu-
ation strategies and the performance of our system
using them.

4.1.1 Dictionary based evaluation

Shabdanjali dictionary has been used to evaluate
the translated queries. The evaluation metric is word
overlap, though it is relaxed further. The formula

2http://www.isical.ac.in/ clia/
3Shabdanjali is an open source bilingual dictionary that

is most used between English and Hindi. It is available
at http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/onlineServices/
Dictionaries/Dict_Frame.html

148



used for calculating the precision is

precision =
No.ofCorrectSamples

TotalNumberofSamples
(2)

A sample is said to be correct if its overLapScore
is greater than threshold instead of complete over-
lap. The overLapScore of each sample is mea-
sured using Formula 3. Threshold is the average
overLapScore of the positive training set used for
training the classifier (Training dataset is discussed
in Section 4.1.2).

overLapScore =
No.ofWordOverlap

TotalNumberofWords
(3)

The number of word overlaps are measured both
manually and automatically to avoid inconsistent re-
sults due to varios syntactic representation of the
same word in Wikipedia.

The precision for the test dataset using this ap-
proach is 42.8%.

4.1.2 Classification based evaluation

As described in Section 2, we have used a clas-
sification based technique for identifying whether
the translated queries contain the same informa-
tion or not. We have collected 1600 pairs of sen-
tences where 800 sentences are parallel to each
other (positive samples, exact translations) while
the other half have word overlaps, but not paral-
lel, (not exact translations but have similar content)
form the negative samples. Various statistics are
extracted from Wikipedia for each sentence pair to
construct feature vector as described in (Bharad-
waj and Varma, 2011). Each English and Hindi
sentences are queried as bag-of-words query to cor-
responding Wikipedia articles and statistics are ex-
tracted based on the articles retrieved. The classifier
used is SVM and is trained on the feature vectors
generated for 1600 samples. The precision in this
approach is the accuracy of the classifier. The for-
mula used for calculating the accuracy is

accuracy =
No.ofSamplesCorrectlyClassified

TotalNumberofSamples
(4)

The correctness of the sample is the prediction of the
classifier. The precision for the test set is 69.75%.

4.2 Discussion

The precision achieved by classification based eval-
uation is higher than that of existing dictionary
(Shabdanjali) primarily due to

• Dictionary (Shabdanjali) doesn’t contain words
of the query. (Coverage is less).

• Word forms present in the dictionary are differ-
ent to that of words present in translated query.
(Ex: spelling, tense etc).

To negate the effect of above factors, classification
based evaluation ( 4.1.2) has been considered. Clas-
sification based evaluation shows that the results are
better when the entire sentence and its context is
considered. As there are no existing systems that
translate queries based on the context and language
independent, our results are encouraging to work in
this direction. Since no language resources were
used, our approach is scalable and can be applied to
any pair of languages present in Wikipedia. The rel-
atively low coverage of the dictionaries built using
Wikipedia structure also affects the process of query
translation. In future, the coverage of dictionaries
can also be increased by considering other structural
properties of Wikipedia.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we have described our approach
towards building a language-independent context
aware query translation, replacing the language re-
sources with the rich multilingual content provider,
Wikipedia. Its structural aspects have been exploited
to build the dictionary and its articles are used to
form queries and also to evaluate them. Further ex-
ploitation of Wikipedia and its structure to increase
the coverage of the dictionaries built will increase
the overall precision. Though queries are translated
in a language-independent way, using language re-
sources of English, as it is a richly resourced lan-
guage, for query formation is also envisioned.

References
Rohit G. Bharadwaj and Vasudeva Varma. 2011. Lan-

guage independent identification of parallel sentences

149



using wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 20th inter-
national conference companion on World wide web,
WWW ’11, pages 11–12, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

J. W. Breen. 2004. JMdict:A Japanese-Multilingual
Dictionary. In COLING Multilingual Linguistic Re-
sources Workshop, pages 71–78.

P.F. Brown, J. Cocke, S.A.D. Pietra, V.J.D. Pietra, F. Je-
linek, J.D. Lafferty, R.L. Mercer, and P.S. Roossin.
1990. A statistical approach to machine translation.
Computational linguistics, 16(2):85.

M. Erdmann, K. Nakayama, T. Hara, and S. Nishio.
2008. An approach for extracting bilingual terminol-
ogy from wikipedia. In Database Systems for Ad-
vanced Applications, pages 380–392. Springer.

M. Erdmann, K. Nakayama, T. Hara, and S. Nishio.
2009. Improving the extraction of bilingual termi-
nology from Wikipedia. ACM Transactions on Multi-
media Computing, Communications, and Applications
(TOMCCAP), 5(4):1–17.

P. Fung and K. McKeown. 1997. A technical word-and
term-translation aid using noisy parallel corpora across
language groups. Machine Translation, 12(1):53–87.

B. Gaillard, M. Boualem, and O. Collin. 2010. Query
Translation using Wikipedia-based resources for anal-
ysis and disambiguation.

M. Kay and M. Roscheisen. 1999. Text-translation
Alignment. In Computational Linguistics, volume 19,
pages 604–632.

F. Sadat, M. Yoshikawa, and S. Uemura. 2003. Bilin-
gual terminology acquisition from comparable corpora
and phrasal translation to cross-language information
retrieval. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting
on Association for Computational Linguistics-Volume
2, pages 141–144. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

P. Schönhofen, A. Benczúr, I. Bı́ró, and K. Csalogány.
2008. Cross-language retrieval with wikipedia. Ad-
vances in Multilingual and Multimodal Information
Retrieval, pages 72–79.

F.M. Tyers and J.A. Pienaar. 2008. Extracting bilingual
word pairs from Wikipedia. Collaboration: interop-
erability between people in the creation of language
resources for less-resourced languages, page 19.

150


