




















Query Constraining Aspects of Knowledge
A Case Study

Ann-Marie Eklund
University of Gothenburg

Gothenburg, Sweden
ann-marie.eklund@svenska.gu.se

Abstract

In this paper we present a first analy-
sis towards better understanding of the
query constraining aspects of knowledge,
as expressed in the most used public med-
ical bibliographic database MEDLINE.
Our results indicate that new terms oc-
cur, but also that traditional terms are re-
placed by more specific ones and decrease
in use as major defining keywords, even
though they are still used in abstracts. In
other words, as knowledge, including ter-
minology, evolve over time, queries and
search methods will have to adapt to these
changes to enable finding recent as well as
older research papers in databases.

1 Introduction

When on-line databases are queried, answers are
automatically derived from the contents of the
database. For instance, MEDLINE (National
Library of Medicine, 2010b) is a bibliographic
database containing 18 million records from over
5000 biomedical journals, and for researchers
in life science and medicine it is one of the
most important on-line sources of new knowl-
edge. Queries posted to the database are matched
against bibliographic records of unstructured text
(abstracts), titles and associated keywords. Each
record aims at reflecting the knowledge of a given
paper and its authors, and the best matching
records are returned as answers to a query. In
this case the answers are constrained by the bib-
liographic data. This data also has an impact on
which terms would be the most efficient ones to
use in a query. Since MEDLINE users, compared
to users of general web search engines, are more
persistent in their search for information and of-
ten reformulate their queries (Dogan et al., 2009),
improved understanding of search behaviour may

be of importance for automatic query optimisa-
tion. Another interesting question that rises in in-
fodemiology, i.e. “the study of the determinants
and distribution of health information” (Eysen-
bach, 2006), is how the data, hence the encapsu-
lated knowledge, residing in a database, impacts
the querying process.

In this paper we will present the first steps
of an ongoing work towards better understand-
ing of the constraining aspects of a database, by
analysing a subset of MEDLINE records corre-
sponding to the publications on the obesity-related
protein adiponectin. This analysis indicates that
new terms occur, but also that traditionally used
terms are replaced by more specific ones and de-
crease in use as major defining keywords, even
though they are still used in abstracts.

2 Materials and Methods

We used a corpus of 5851 MEDLINE (Na-
tional Library of Medicine, 2010b) records (1993-
2009) of bibliographic data, containing the term
adiponectin1 in title, abstract or keywords. We call
this term an anchor term due to its role of defin-
ing the corpus. From each record we used title,
abstract, year of publication and keywords. The
keywords consist of Medical Subject Headings
(MeSH) (National Library of Medicine, 2010a),
which is NLM’s controlled vocabulary thesaurus
organised in a hierarchical structure.

The implementation2 was done in Python using
the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) (tokeniza-
tion and lemmatization) and Biopython (data re-
trieval and management). The analysis of data was
done using Microsoft Excel in combination with R

1We chose the term adiponectin because it is unambigu-
ous and without synonyms, and due to its relatively new ap-
pearance in life science the corresponding corpus becomes
rather easy to analyse.

2The program and result files can be obtained from the
author on request.

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 279–282



(visualisation of data)3. Since this study is only an
intitial analysis of the existing data, we have not
utilised any other analysis methods than manual
inspection of the data.

3 Results

In the adiponectin context, around 4500 different
MeSH terms, or keywords, have been used since
the first adiponectin paper in 1993. The abstracts
contain around 20,000 different words, stopwords
not included, and only a small part of the terms
have been examined here. The emphasis in this
section is on findings related to uses of the cor-
pus anchor term (adiponectin), hyponyms of the
words/terms used in the context of adiponectin,
and the introduction of new terms over time.

3.1 Use of the anchor term

One interesting aspect of knowledge and its ex-
pression is if and when it becomes common,
thereby more seldom explicitly stated in commu-
nication.

The first MEDLINE record containing the term
adiponectin is from 1993, but before the year 2000
there are not many papers in MEDLINE men-
tioning adiponectin (figure 1, top). The num-
ber of papers containing adiponectin in title, ab-
stract or keywords has increased every year since
1999, but more and more of the papers do not have
Adiponectin as a keyword, (figure 1, bottom).

Hence, it seems like the use of the anchor term
as a keyword has decreased over time.

3.2 Use of terms and their hyponyms

Since the MeSH keywords are hierarchically or-
ganised, it is possible to study if, and how, the
use of more general (hypernym) and specific (hy-
ponym) terms changes over time.

The percentage of papers having Obesity as a
keyword decreased from around the year 2000. A
corresponding decrease can be found in titles and
abstracts, where we also have a percentage de-
crease in the use of the word obese (which is not
by itself a MeSH term). The keyword Obesity, Ab-
dominal is a hyponym of the term Obesity and can
be found in the papers from the last two years. In
the abstracts we see a frequent use of the word ab-
dominal since 2003.

Other adiponectin related keywords, Diabetes
Mellitus and its hyponym Diabetes Mellitus, Type

3nltk.org, biopython.org, r-project.org

1995 2000 2005

0
50
0

10
00

15
00

Year

C
ou
nt

Abstract
Title
Keywords
Corpus

1995 2000 2005 2010

0.
0

0.
2

0.
4

0.
6

0.
8

1.
0

Year

%
 o

f t
ot

al

Abstract
Title
Keywords

Figure 1: Number of MEDLINE records contain-
ing the term adiponectin in abstract, title or key-
words (top), and the percentage of papers in the
adiponectin corpus having the term in abstract, ti-
tle and keywords respectively (bottom).

2, both first appeared in 2000 and both show a per-
centage decrease, although they increase in num-
bers. In titles and abstracts there is a percentage
decrease for the term diabetes, but it is not as sig-
nificant as for the keywords.

The keywords Adipose Tissue and Adipocytes
were used in the first paper from 1993. They are
both still in use as keywords, but there is a per-
centage decrease every year (figure 2). From 2007
Adipocytes, White and Adipocytes, Brown are be-
ing used as keywords. They are both hyponyms
of the term Adipocytes. Similarly for Adipose
Tissue, there are the hyponyms Adipose Tissue,
Brown, first seen in 2002, and Adipose Tissue,

280

Ann-Marie Eklund

280



White, which first occurred in 2006.
To conclude, by these examples we have seen

indications of a shift over time in the use of
traditionally used adiponectin related terms like
adipocytes, obesity and adipose tissue towards the
use of more specific terms (hyponyms).

1995 2000 2005 2010

0.
0

0.
2

0.
4

0.
6

0.
8

1.
0

Year

%
 o

f t
ot

al

Keywords

Figure 2: Percentage of papers indexed with key-
word Adipose Tissue.

3.3 Use of new terms

If we assume that new knowledge and interests of
a researcher are reflected in terms and keywords
used in a paper, it is interesting to study if new
words appear in our adiponectin corpus.

One interesting example of this is the increased
use of words like older, middle and aged (figure
3) that we see in titles since their first occurrence
in 2004. In abstracts older first appeared in 2003,
and middle and aged in 2002. The keywords Aged
and Middle Aged occurred for the first time in
1999, and since then both of them have been in
frequent use. The keyword Young Adult is much
used in 2009.

Another example is the plant related keywords.
The keyword Plant Extracts has increased slightly
since it was first used in 2005, and the keyword
Seeds can also be found in a few papers every year
since 2007 (Seeds is a descendant of Plant Struc-
tures or of Food and Beverages in the MeSH hi-
erarchy). The last two years the keywords Plant,
Plant Stems, “Plants, Medicinal” and Plant Prepa-
rations have appeared. In the last few years the
words plant and seed have occurred mainly in ab-
stracts, but also in a few titles.

Hence, by our analysis it is also possible to trace
the occurrence of new terms, related to for in-
stance age and plant concepts.

1995 2000 2005 2010

0
50

10
0

15
0

20
0

25
0

Year

C
ou
nt

Abstract
Title
Keywords

Figure 3: Number of occurrences of the term aged.

3.4 Other reflections
In addition to the topics above we have noted some
variations of the term adiponectin.

Even in reviewed papers, misspellings of the
anchor term adiponectin can be found in the ab-
stracts, for example adiponetin, adipnectin and
adyponectin. Another interesting aspect is that,
based on the old term, new words have been cre-
ated, e.g. adiponectinaemia, adiponectinemic, hy-
peradiponectinemia, which have all appeared after
2001.

4 Discussion

In this section we will discuss the uses of the cor-
pus anchor term (adiponectin), hyponyms of terms
and the introduction of new terms over time in the
context of the results presented above. However,
first we will elaborate on some aspects of the ma-
terials and methods used in this paper.

4.1 Materials and methods
Since MeSH is designed to reflect knowledge and
use of terms in the field of biomedicine, a term
may have been used in titles and abstracts for some
time before it is introduced into the MeSH ontol-
ogy and is available for use as an indexing term.
Thereby, basing a trend analysis on only keywords
may not reflect the actual use of terms, or ex-
pressed knowledge. We have not taken into ac-

281

Query Constraining Aspects of Knowledge

281



count the year of introduction of a keyword into
the MeSH ontology. When we find a keyword for
the first time in the adiponectin context we do not
know if this is the first time it is available as an
indexing term or if it has been a MeSH term for
some time. This may be slightly misleading when
comparing the use of terms as keywords to their
use in abstracts and titles.

In this study we only look at the term itself, and
not at the term in combination with its hypernyms
and hyponyms. If we took into account the terms
above and below in the MeSH hierarchy, we might
be able to see even more clear tendencies. For in-
stance, by analysing the plant related terms and
their hypo-/hypernyms together, we would add
their different contributions, thereby making the
new plant related aspect clearer.

In the light of the above limitations, our contin-
ued discussion will focus on the use of hyponyms
and new terms.

4.2 Use of terms and hyponyms
In the examples in Results (section 3) we have
seen indications of keywords becoming more spe-
cific, the annotations seem to have become more
detailed, for example in the case of Adipocytes
which decrease while its hyponyms Adipocytes,
White and Adipocytes, Brown have started to be
used as keywords. The use of more specific terms
could indicate more detailed knowledge of a sub-
ject. To describe the new more detailed knowl-
edge, new words may need to be used in the text,
which may have led to the use of other more spe-
cific keywords to reflect that.

Another reason for the decrease in the use of
for example terms like Obesity could be that obe-
sity is already a given premise in this context and
does not need to be stated explicitely anymore -
terms become common knowledge, cf the above
discussion on decreased use of the anchor term
adiponectin.

4.3 Use of new terms
By studying the occurrence of new terms not used
before in the adiponectin context, we find that
terms related to completely new concepts appear.
One example is the plant related terms, which cor-
respond to an introduction of a new aspect into
the research field. We can also see an increased
age aspect, with terms like Aged and Young Adult
being more and more common. New aspects like
these often originate in the analysis of earlier study

results, where new connections can be seen in the
data and lead to new angles to study. When new
terms appear, like the plant or age related terms
in the adiponectin context, it could reflect new
knowledge and new interests within the field. The
increased use of plant related terms seen in the last
few years could indicate an increasing interest in
plants in medicine.

5 Conclusions

In the examples above, we have presented indica-
tions of a shift over time in the use of terms to-
wards more specific terms (hyponyms), where the
use of more specific terms could indicate a more
detailed knowledge of a subject. There was also
a decrease in the use of some keywords which are
closely connected to the anchor term adiponectin.
This decrease could indicate that the concepts de-
scribed by these terms are already given in this
context and that the concepts have become com-
mon knowledge. We have also seen examples
of the appearance of new terms related to con-
cepts not previously occurring in this context. This
could be an indication of new knowledge being
added to the existing one.

To summarise, in this paper we have tried to
exemplify how the use of terms in bibliographic
records changes over time, and how this may be
related to the evolution of new knowledge. As
a consequence, as knowledge evolve over time,
queries and search methods will have to adapt to
these changes, so that the search terms which are
used reflect the actual contents of the papers in the
database.

References
Rezarta Islamaj Dogan, G. Craig Murray, Aurelie

Neveol, and Zhiyong Lu. 2009. Understanding
PubMed user search behavior through log analysis.
Database (Oxford), 2009:bap018.

Gunther Eysenbach. 2006. Infodemiology: track-
ing flu-related searches on the web for syndromic
surveillance. AMIA Annu Symp Proc, pages 244–
248.

National Library of Medicine. 2010a. Fact sheet Med-
ical Subject Headings (MeSH).

National Library of Medicine. 2010b. Fact sheet Med-
line.

282

Ann-Marie Eklund

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


