















































Towards automatic detection of antisocial behavior from texts


Proceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment Analysis where AI meets Psychology (SAAIP), IJCNLP 2011, pages 20–27,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 13, 2011.

Towards automatic detection of antisocial behavior from texts 
 

Myriam Munezero 

School of Computing 

University of Eastern  

Finland 

mmunez@cs.joensuu.fi 

Tuomo Kakkonen 

School of Computing 

University of Eastern  

Finland 

tuomo.kakkonen@uef.fi 

Calkin S. Montero 

School of Computing 

University of Eastern  

Finland 

calkinm@gmail.com 

 

  

 

Abstract 

 

The automatic analysis of emotional content 

of text has become pervasive and has been 

applied in many fields of research. The work 

reported in this paper is in particular interest-

ed in modeling antisocial behavior and the 

emotional states that define it. We introduce 

the antisocial behavior detection (ASBD) 

model for portraying the emotions pertaining 

to antisocial behavior. In addition to describ-

ing negative affective states, our model uses 

the concepts of action tendencies and evi-

dences in order to predict possible acts of an-

tisocial behavior based on input texts. We 

outline a design for an antisocial behavior de-

tection system based on the ASBD model.  

1 Introduction 

Emotions connect individuals to the social world 

and, hence, are the triggers of many social psy-

chological phenomena, such as altruism, antiso-

cial behavior, and aggression (Parrot, 2001). To 

be able to identify and classify a behavior, one 

has to understand the behavior itself and the 

emotional states (e.g. happiness, sadness and an-

ger) that pertain to it. This paper focuses on 

modeling the emotional states that characterize 

antisocial behavior. 

We define antisocial behavior as any unconsi-

dered action against others that may cause harm 

or distress to society. Antisocial behavior has 

been linked to disruptive and impulsive beha-

viors, bullying, and in extreme cases, school 

shootings (Flory et al, 2007; Sutton et al, 1999; 

Borum et al, 2010).  

Upon reviewing the available data about ex-

treme antisocial behavior, O’Toole (2000) re-

ported that often the individuals involved have 

disclosed in advance their plans orally or in writ-

ten form. In particular, the Internet has been used 

as the outlet for the expression of their emotional 

states through the use of blogs or video sites 

(Crowley, 2007). In many cases these troubled 

people have written and publicly distributed doc-

uments over the web in the form of manifestos as 

a way of shouting out their intentions before en-

gaging in their acts of violence (Web search, Dec 

2010). Interestingly, little research has been done 

regarding the automatic analysis of the media in 

order to warn the pertinent authorities of the 

threat. 

The aim of our research is the automatic anal-

ysis of texts in order to uncover emotions and 

possible behavioral traits related to antisocial 

behavior. By analyzing and identifying these 

specific traits in writings we seek to determine 

hints of antisocial behavior while the possible 

acts of violence that may follow are still in their 

planning stages.  

As a cornerstone, this paper introduces our 

proposed model of emotions for the detection of 

antisocial behavior from text sources. Section 2 

reviews the related previous and ongoing re-

search on antisocial behavior and briefly intro-

duces the circumplex model of emotions. Section 

3 outlines our proposed model of emotions and 

its connection to antisocial behavior. Design of a 

system for detecting antisocial behavior based on 

the ASBD model is outlined in Section 4. Con-

clusions and directions for future work are given 

in Section 5. 

2 Background Work 

2.1 Research on antisocial behavior and 
associated emotions 

Antisocial behavior has been substantially re-

searched in the fields of psychology and educa-

tion (Borum et al, 2010). It can manifest itself or 

be expressed in different ways; it can range from 

aggression to verbal abuse, from conduct disord-

20



er to delinquencies (Foster, 2005). In our work 

we are interested in the emotional traits of anti-

social behavior that can be perceived linguistical-

ly in people’s writings. 

Notably, aggression is the behavioral state that 

is most directly associated with antisocial beha-

vior (Clarke, 2003). Other types of behavioral 

states also associated with antisocial behavior 

include violence, hostility, and lack of empathy. 

Behavioral states in this paper are considered as 

a result of emotions. For example, hostile and 

aggressive inclinations are a result of depression 

and anger (Parrot, 2001). 

Antisocial behavior has also been linked to 

several negative emotions. Some of these emo-

tions include anger, frustration, arrogance, 

shame, anxiety, depression, sadness, low levels 

of fear, and lack of guilt (Cohen, 2005). Many of 

these emotions have been shown detectable in 

writings (Gill et al, 2008). 

2.2 Previous work on automatic detection 
of antisocial behavior 

Sentiment analysis and opinion mining are estab-

lished areas of study within the NLP research 

community and both have received a raising 

amount of attention over the last decade. Al-

though negative emotions like anger and sadness 

have been identified in writings, the detection of 

antisocial behavior from text per se is a new area 

of research interest. The analyses of texts written 

by terrorist groups and the automatic detection of 

criminal behavior have received some attention 

from the NLP community. While terrorism and 

crime might be regarded as extreme forms of 

antisocial behavior, they form a rather narrow 

sub-part of the whole issue we are dealing with 

in this work. Nonetheless, as no previous general 

models for detecting antisocial behavior from 

text exist, we provide an overview of the work 

done in the context of terrorism and criminal be-

havior since they are also a result of negative 

emotions.  

Perhaps the most notable related work is car-

ried out in a research project entitled “Intelligent 

information system supporting observation, 

searching and detection for security of citizens in 

urban environment” (INDECT) (The INDECT 

consortium, 2009). The project aims at “automat-

ic detection of terroristic threats and recognition 

of serious criminal (“abnormal”) behavior or vi-

olence” based on multi-media content. Within 

context of INDECT, such abnormal behavior is 

defined as “criminal behavior”, and specifically 
as “behavior related to terrorist acts, serious 

criminal activities or criminal activities in the 

Internet”.  

The work presented in this article differs from 

the one done in the INDECT project in the focus 

of the research. While INDECT aims at using the 

analysis of images and video to text, our focus is 

on the analysis of text data.  

2.3 Circumplex model 

While most of the work on sentiment analysis 

has been done based on the theories of basic 

emotions, our work however starts from a differ-

ent view - the circumplex model. Whereas the 

basic emotions based models (e.g. Ekman, 1992) 

divide all human emotions into a limited set of 

discrete and independent categories (such as fear, 

anger), the circumplex model, first proposed by 

Russell (1980), asserts that emotions can be cha-

racterized in a two-dimensional space: pleasure-

displeasure and arousal-sleep. In this model, 

emotions are seen as a linear combination of the 

two dimensions rather than judged belonging or 

not belonging into a specific basic emotion cate-

gory. This allows for a “fuzzy” characterization 

of emotions. 

Posner et al. (2005), for example, stated that 

the fact that people have difficulties in assessing 

their own emotions implies that “individuals do 

not experience, or recognize, emotions as iso-

lated, discrete entities, but that they rather recog-

nize emotions as ambiguous and overlapping 

experiences”. The circumplex model provides a 

starting point for the development of our model 

of emotions. For a full description of the cir-

cumplex model see (Russell, 1980; Posner et al, 

2005). 

3 Model for Detection of Antisocial Be-
havior from Texts 

Based on the relevant literature on antisocial be-

havior (see Section 2), we developed the ASBD 

model (Figure 1) that takes into consideration 

negative emotional states (Section 3.1), action 

tendencies (Section 3.2) and evidence (Section 

3.3) that may lead into those behavioral states 

that are associated with antisocial behavior. 

3.1 Circumplex-based model of emotions 
related to antisocial behavior 

The left-hand side of our model, shown in Figure 

1, illustrates 14 interplaying emotions (not an 

exhaustive list) that may lead to antisocial beha-

vior. These discrete emotions are seen in a two 

dimensional space within the unpleasantness and  

21



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

arousal dimensions. As previously stated, this 

spatial representation has been adopted from 

Russell’s 1980) circumplex model of emotions. 

In our proposed model, each emotion type is 

placed within the two dimensional space accord-

ing to its subjective proportion of unpleasantness 

and arousal as given by Reisenzein (1994) and 

Russell (1980). 

The proportion of unpleasantness and arousal 

of a specific emotion determines its emotion 

quality, which is represented by the angle be-

tween the emotion type and the unpleasantness 

axis. The conceptual emotion intensities used in 

our model are taken from the works of Reisenze-

in (1994). Reisenzein demonstrated that the in-

tensity of an emotion can be represented by the 

distance from a subjective neutral point (hedonic 

neutrality and medium arousal level) to a point in 

the space symbolizing that emotion. The subjec-

tive neutral point of the space corresponds to a 

neutral emotional state; a state in which there is 

no emotion present. The minimum intensity for 

an emotion (denoted in Figure 1 by a small dot 

along the line towards the neutral point) is the 

neutral state for that particular emotion. 

3.2 Connecting emotions to behaviors 

While the way in which emotions and behaviors 

are connected has been heavily debated in psy-

chological and social science literature (see, for 

example Green, 1970; Lyons, 1978; Baumeister 

et al, 2009) there does not, however, appear to be 

a lack of consensus that such a connection exists.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1 gives samples of the types of connec-

tions that have been reported in research litera-

ture between specific emotions and behaviors. 

Table 1. Emotions and associated behaviors 

Emotion 
Associated be-

havior 
Source 

hurt feelings, 

shame leading 

to rise of anger 

anger, resent-

ment, hatred 

 

feeling agi-

tated, angry, 

fearful 

Aggression and 

conflict escala-

tion 

Maiese, 2005 

Give rise to cycle 

of violence 

“…cause disputes 

to escalate and 

sometimes even 

cause negotia-

tions to break 

down.” 

chronic anger 

Endorsement of 

aggressive solu-

tions, and identi-

fication with de-

linquent peers”. 

Granic and 

Butler, 1998  

anger 

Provides suffi-

cient impetus for 

the formation of 

the intention to 

correct what is 

perceived as a 

problem. 

Cho and Wal-

ton, 2009  

frustration 
Increased aggres-

sion 

Verona and 

Curtin, 2006 

Clarke, 2003 

 
Figure 1. Model of antisocial behavior 

22



Regardless of the precise way in which the 

connection between emotion and behavior occurs 

in the human brain, in our model we adopt the 

notion of emotions as influencing or participating 

in shaping the mind’s processes, including those 

which activate behavior (Russell, 2003).   

What can be concluded based on Table 1 is 

that emotions do influence the motivational state 

of a person to carry out an action or behavior. 

We use the notions of action tendency and evi-

dence to model this connection. 

Action Tendency 

In order to link the emotion to a possible action 

outcome, the ASBD model supplements the cir-

cumplex representation of emotions with Frijda’s 

(1986) concept of action tendencies (ATs). 

Frijda (1986)’ emotion theory associates emo-

tions to a small set of action tendencies (see Ta-

ble 2.), which are defined as “states of readiness 

to execute a given kind of action [which] is de-

fined by its end result aimed at or achieved”. For 

example, in the case of negative emotions, reach-

ing the corresponding end state should mitigate 

its experience (e.g., anger subsides once one be-

lieves the object of one’s anger has been re-

moved) Frijda (1986). Table 2, provides some 

examples of ATs. 

Table 2, tells us that, for example, in the case 

of anger, a person is in a “state of readiness” to 

remove their obstruction. However, ATs should 

not be mistaken for intentions, while intensions 

are goal-directed, ATs are stimulus driven (Frij-

da, 1986). Hence, a person’s intentions or man-

ner in which they are planning to carry out the 

action is only revealed to us through additional 

information (evidence) in the text.  

Table 2. Classification of some action tenden-

cies. Adapted from Frijda (1986) (p.88) 

Evidence 

In addition to using the concept of ATs, we draw 

from Green’s (1970) concept of evidence to de-

scribe indications of antisocial behavior linked to 

negative emotions. Green describes evidence as 

the actions or reactions that a person ordinarily 

carries out or has when they experience a par-

ticular emotion within “appropriate circums-

tances”. Thus, instead of directly connecting an-

tisocial behavior to specific negative emotions 

we describe those behaviors that a certain emo-

tion might evoke under specific conditions:  ‘B is 

the behavior a person is likely to engage in when, 

among other things, they feel emotion E in C 

circumstances’. 

While various types of circumstances leading 

to anti-social behavior have been suggested (see 

for instance the references given in Table 1), we 

do not believe that it is possible to reliably detect 

all of them based on a piece of text. Taking 

Maiese (2005) as an example, she suggests that 

being angry and fearful may cause disputes to 

escalate when “a person feels that their interests 

are threatened”. It would be impossible to make 

judgments about such a condition without having 

access to detailed information about the situation 

the author is facing. Such background informa-

tion is almost impossible to obtain based solely 

on analyzing few text fragments written by an 

author. 

Thus we confine ourselves to a subset of these 

circumstances in which we believe we can obtain 

from text fragments and user profiles. The sub-

set, though not exhaustive includes the follow-

ing: 

• Age: Moffitt (1993) has noted that antiso-
cial behavior is almost ten times more 

common among adolescents than other 

age groups.  

• Gender: It is commonly accepted that 
males are more prone to extreme forms of 

antisocial behavior, such as violence, de-

linquency and physical aggression 

(Björkqvist et al, 1992). 

• Presence of frustration: Research has re-
vealed a strong link between frustration 

and antisocial behavior, showing that fru-

stration can lead to extreme manifestations 

of antisocial behavior such as aggression 

(Clerk, 2005). 

In addition, we expand this concept of evi-

dence to include keywords, such as ‘kill’, shoot’, 

‘gun’, abuse’, etc, that are commonly expressed 

Emo-

tion 

Func-

tion 

Action 

tenden-

cy 

End state 

desire 
con-

sume 
approach access 

anxiety caution 
inhibi-

tion 

absence 

of re-

sponse 

anger control agonistic 

obstruc-

tion re-

moved 

fear 
protec-

tion 

avoid-

ance 

own inac-

cessibility 

disgust 
protec-

tion 
rejecting 

object 

removed 

23



by people exhibiting violent and antisocial beha-

vior. 

4 Design of an antisocial behavior de-
tection system based on the proposed 

model 

The ASBD model serves as the backbone for the 

design of an antisocial behavior system. The sys-

tem will function as follows. When it receives an 

input text, it first detects the emotions (quality 

and intensity) in the text. Next, it resolves the 

ATs corresponding to each detected emotion. 

Thirdly, the system identifies the available evi-

dence (both in the input text and from external 

sources, for instance, user profiles). Finally, the 

system uses all the collected information to pre-

dict the behavioral state connected with the in-

put. Figure 2 illustrates the system design. 

As shown in Figure 2, the system consists of 

three components. The Emotor component com-

bines the circumplex-based model for detecting 

emotions along with their corresponding ATs. 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2. Architecture of an antisocial behavior 

detection system based on the ASBD model. 

Adapted from (Frijda and Moffat, 1994) 

 

The Perceiver component collects the pieces 

of evidence from the input document and other 

sources. The Predictor component finally com-

bines the information collected by the Emotor 

and Perceiver in order to predict which behavior-

al state associated to antisocial behavior might 

occur.  

Figure 3 gives an example of the process of 

detecting potential anti-social behavior with the 

proposed system. As illustrated in Figure 3, the 

Emotor component first automatically detects 

and analyses the emotion qualities and intensities 

present in the two input sentences (s1 and s2) 

based on the circumplex model. It makes use of a 

supervised classification algorithm developed 

through a human-annotated corpus to resolve the 

emotion quality and intensity. Thus s1 is re-

solved to be near the emotion ‘disgust’ and s2 

near the emotion ‘anger’. The Emotor com-

ponent then identifies the ATs connected to these 

two emotions. s1 is defined to have the AT ‘re-

jecting’ and s2 ‘agonistic’ (see Table 2).    

The Perceiver collects sets of evidence, such 

as the writer’s gender and age if they are availa-

ble in the text or the user profile. In addition, it is 

able to detect the keywords related to various 

forms of antisocial behavior such as violence, 

racism and crime. To that end, we are developing 

an ontology and an ontology-based information 

extraction tool. The antisocial behavior, conflict 

and violence (ABCV) ontology currently con-

sists of a 19-class classification system for terms 

related to antisocial behavior and is capable of 

detecting a total of 340 terms related to these 

classes. The predictor finally collects the analysis 

results from the Emotor and Perceiver, and based 

on a statistical classification algorithm, it resol-

ves that s1 could indicate potential hostile beha-

vior and s2 is showing signs of threatening beha-

vior. 

4.1 Data model 

A key design issue related to the implementation 

of the proposed system architecture was the data 

model. Our main aim was to come up with an 

extensible data model that is based on a standard. 

We therefore opted for the EmotionML (Emotion 

Mark-up Language) that was recently introduced 

by W3C as a working draft standard for 

representing emotions in text (Baggia et al, 

2011). 

EmotionML is an XML-based mark-up lan-

guage that provides a standard interface between 

components. It defines a set of vocabularies for 

representing emotion-related states (Schröder 

and Pelachaud, 2011). EmotionML comes with 

the vocabulary definition for Frijda’s (1986) 

ATs. This pre-defined set, however, does not 

support the circumplex-based representation of 

emotions. EmotionML is flexible enough to al-

low us to define our own vocabularies depending 

on the needs of our model and system. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Emotor 

emotions + 

AT’s 

Perceiver 
evidence 

Predictor 

behavioral 

states 

24



4.2 Vocabulary definition of emotions and 
action tendencies 

As the Emotor component is representing emo-

tions the circumplex-based model, we need to 

define a new vocabulary in accordance to the 

structure of EmotionML. As described above, 

our emotional model has two values for 

representing an emotion: quality and intensity. 

These can be defined in EmotionML as follows: 

 

<vocabulary type = "dimension"            

            id="cplex"> 

<item name="quality" /> 

<item name="intensity" /> 

</vocabulary> 

 

Let us assume that we want to describe the 

emotion ‘anger’ which has an emotion quality of 

81 degrees (when taking the unpleasant axis as 

0degrees) and an intensity value of 0.5. The defi-

nition for ‘anger’ would appear in an Emo-

tionML document inside <emotion> tags as: 

 

<emotion dimension-set="#cplex"> 

      <dimension name = "quality"  

           val ue="81degrees"/> 

      <dimension name = "intensity"   

           value = "0.5"/> 

</emotion> 

 

In addition, the Emotor module annotates the 

text with the available default set of ATs. The  

AT for the emotion ‘anger’ would appear in an 

EmotionML document as (Ashimura et al, 2011):  

 

<emotion dimension-set="#cplex" ac-

tion-tendency-set=”#frijda-subset”> 

      <dimension name = "quality"  

           value="81degrees"/> 

      <dimension name = "intensity"   

           value = "0.5"/> 

      <action-tendency name=”agonistic” 

value=”0.9”/> 

</emotion> 

 

Furthermore, in our XML-based document re-

presentation, the Perceptor module annotates the 

evidence in the text with <evidence> tags. 

Vocabulary definition for behavioral 

states 

Whenever the Predictor component receives in-

formation from the Emotor and Perceiver com-

ponent, it analyses and computes the value of a 

behavioral state. The Predictor component also 

outputs in EmotionML format. The vocabulary 

of the behavioral states is defined as follows: 

 

<vocabulary type="behavior-state" 

id="antisocial-subset"> 

  <item name="violence"/> 

 <item name="aggression"/> 

  <item name="hostility"/> 

  <item name="threats"/> 

</vocabulary> 

 
Figure 3. Example of antisocial behavior detection process. s1 and s2 are two sample input sen-

tences. Example sentences cited from (OddCulture, 2011). 
 

25



Let us consider an example: 

 

<emotion behavior-state="#antisocial-

subset "> 

< behavior-state  name = "vi-

olence" value="0.3"/> 

< behavior-state  name = ag-

gression" value = "0.5"/> 

</emotion> 

 

In addition to the above representations, Emo-

tionML allows us to provide reference informa-

tion regarding the resolved behavior. For exam-

ple, if the behavior resolved is ‘hostility’ we can 

reference the following values:  

• Who expressed the behavior (experien-
cedBy)  

• To whom the behavior is directed at 
(targetedAt).  

The <reference> element may occur as a child 

of the <emotion> element (Baggia et al, 2011). 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 

We have reviewed the previous research work on 

antisocial behavior, its defining emotions and 

automatic detection from texts. We also pro-

posed ASBD, a combined model of negative af-

fect states, ATs, evidence and behavioral states 

that have been shown to lead to antisocial beha-

vior. 

In addition, the paper outlined the architecture 

of antisocial behavior detection system based on 

the ASBD model. The system design consists of 

three modules that communicate with each other 

using the standard EmotionML markup lan-

guage. We defined new EmotionML vocabulary 

sets which pertain to the purpose of our system. 

Our future work involves the implementation 

of the outlined system. The next steps in this 

work include collecting and annotating a corpus 

with the proposed annotations and running sen-

timent detection experiments by applying the 

circumplex model. 

Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the “Detecting and 

visualizing emotions and their changes in text” 

project, funded by the Academy of Finland. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

References  

Kazuyuki Ashimura, Paolo Baggia, Felix Burkhardt, 

Alessandro Oltramari, Christian Peter, and Enrico 

Zovato. 2011. Vocabularies for EmotionML. W3C 

Working Draft 7 April 2011. [Cited: 01.06.2011] 

www.w3.org/TR/2011/WD-emotion-voc-

20110407/ 

Paolo Baggia, Felix Burkhardt, Catherine Pelachaud, 

Christian Peter and Enrico Zovato. 2011. Emotion 

Markup Language (EmotionML) 1.0. W3C Work-

ing Draft 7 April 2011. [Cited: 01.06.2011] 

www.w3.org/TR/2011/WD-emotionml-20110407/ 

Roy F. Baumeister, Nathan C. DeWall, Kathleen D. 

Vohs and Jessica L. Alquist. 2009. Does Emotion 

Cause Behavior (Apart from Making People Do 

Stupid, Destructive Things)? In Christopher R. 

Agnew, Donald E. Carlston, William G. Graziano, 

and Janice R. Kelly (eds.). Then a Miracle Occurs: 

Focusing on Behavior in Social Psychological 

Theory and Research. 119-137. Oxford University 

Press, New York, USA. 

Kaj Björkqvist, Kirsti M. J. Lagerspetz and Ari Kau-

kiainen. 1992. Do Girls Manipulate and Boys 

Fight? Developmental Trends in Regard to Direct 

and Indirect Aggression. Aggressive Behavior, 

18(2):117-127. 

Randy Borum, Dewey G. Cornell, William Modze-

leski and Shane R. Jimerson. 2010. What Can Be 

Done About School Shooting? A Review of the 

Evidence. Educational Researcher, 39(1):27-37. 

Seungho Cho and Laura R. Walton. 2009. Integrating 

Emotion and the Theory of Planned Behavior to 

Explain Consumers’ Activism in the Internet. In-

stitute for Public Relations, Gainesville, Florida, 

USA.  

David Clarke. 2003. Pro-social and Anti-social Beha-

vior. Routledge. New York, USA. 

Lisa J. Cohen. 2005. Neurobiology of Antisociality 

In: C. Stough. (ed.). Neurobiology of Exceptionali-

ty. Kluver Academic/Plenum Publishers, New 

York, USA. 107-124.  

Sean Crowley. 2007. Finland Shocked at Fatal Shoot-

ing. BBC News. [Cited: 10.12.2010] 

http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/7084045.s

tm 

Paul Ekman. 1992. An Argument for Basic Emotions. 

Cognition and Emotion, 6:169-200. 

Janine D. Flory, Jeffrey H. Newcorn, Carlin Miller, 

Seth Harty and Jeffrey M. Halperin. 2007. Seroto-

26



nergic Function in Children with Attention-Deficit 

Hyperactivity Disorder: Relationship to Later Anti-

social Personality Disorder. The British Journal of 

Psychiatry. 190:410-414. 

Sharon L. Foster. 2005, Aggression and Antisocial 

Behavior in Girls. In Debora Bell, Sharon L. Fos-

ter, Eric J. Mash (eds). Handbook of Behavioral 

and Emotional Problems in Girls. Issues on Clini-

cal Child Psychology. Springer, New York, USA. 

149-180. 

Nico H. Frijda.  1986. The emotions. Studies in emo-

tion and social interaction. Cambridge University 

Press, Cambridge, UK. 

Nico H. Frijda, David Moffat. 1994. Modeling emo-

tion. Cognitive Studies, 1(2):5-15. 

Alastair J. Gill, Robert M. French, Darren Gergle and 

Jon Oberlander. 2008. The Language of Emotion in 

Short Blog Texts. Proceedings of the 2008 ACM 

Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 

Work. ACM, New York, USA. 299-302. 

Isabela Granic and Stephen Butler. 1998. The Rela-

tion Between Anger And Antisocial Beliefs In 

Young Offenders. Personal Individual Difference. 

24(6):759-765. 

Harvey O. Green. 1970. The Expression of Emotion. 

Mind, 79(316):551-568. 

William E. Lyons. 1978. Emotions and Behavior. 

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research. 

38(3):410-418. 

Michelle Maiese. 2005. "Emotions." Beyond Intracta-

bility. In Guy Burgess and Heidi Burgess (eds.). 

Conflict Research Consortium, University of Col-

orado, Boulder.  

Terrie E. Moffitt. 1993. Antisocial Behavior: A Deve-

lopmental Taxonomy. Psychological Review, 

100(4): 674-701.  

OddCulture. The Pekka Eric Auvinen Manifesto. 

[Cited: 02.06.2011] www.oddculture/weird-news-

stories/the-pekka-eric-auvinen-manifesto/ 

Marry Ellen O'Toole. 2000. School Shooter: A Threat 

Assessment Perspective. National Center for the 

Analysis of Violent Crime, Federal Bureau of In-

vestigation, Quantico, Virginia, USA. 

Gerrot W. Parrot. 2001. Emotions in Social Psycholo-

gy. Taylor & Francis. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 

USA.  

Jonathan Posner, James A. Russell and Bradley S. 

Peterson. 2005. The Circumplex Model of Affect: 

An Integrative Approaches to Affective Neuros-

cience, Cognitive Development and Psychopathol-

ogy. Development and Psychopathology. 17:715-

734. 

Rainer Reisenzein. 1994. Pleasure-Arousal Theory 

and the Intensity of Emotions. Journal of Personal-

ity and Social Psychology, 67(3):525-539. 

James A. Russell. 1980. A Circumplex Model of Af-

fect. Personal and Social Psychology. 39(6):1161-

1178. 

James A. Russell. 2003. Core Affect and the Psycho-

logical Construction of Emotion. Psychological 

Review. 110(1):145-172. 

Jon Sutton, Peter K. Smith and John Swettenham. 

1999. Social Cognition and Bullying: Social In-

adequacy or Skilled Manipulation? British Journal 

of Developmental Psychology, 17: 435-450. 

The INDECT Consortium. 2009. XML Data Corpus: 

Report on Methodology for Collection, Cleaning 

and Unified Representation of Large Textual Data 

from Various Sources: News Reports, Weblogs, 

Chat. [Cited: 10.12.2010] http://www.indect-

project.eu/files/deliverables/public/INDECT_Deliv

erable_4.1_v20090630a.pdf/view. 

Edelyn Verona and John J. Curtin. 2006. Gender Dif-

ferences in the Negative Affective Priming of Ag-

gressive Behavior. Emotion, 6:115-124. 

Web Search. "school shooting manifesto".  [Cited: 

10.12. 2010.]. 

 

27


