



















































What is in a text and what does it do: Qualitative Evaluations of an NLG system - the BT-Nurse - using content analysis and discourse analysis


Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 22–31,
Nancy, France, September 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

What is in a text and what does it do: Qualitative Evaluations of an NLG 

system – the BT-Nurse – using content analysis and discourse analysis. 

Rahul Sambaraju 
Queen Margaret Univ, UK 

rsambaraju@qmu.ac.uk 

Ehud Reiter 
Univ of Aberdeen, UK 

e.reiter@abdn.ac.uk 

Robert Logie 
Univ of Edinburgh, UK 

rlogie@staffmail.ed.ac.uk 

Andy McKinlay 
Univ of Edinburgh, UK 
hos.ppls@ed.ac.uk 

Chris McVittie 
Queen Margaret Univ, UK 
cmcvittie@qmu.ac.uk 

Albert Gatt 
Univ of Malta, Malta 

albert.gatt@um.edu.mt 

Cindy Sykes 

Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, U.K 
Cindy.Sykes@luht.scot.nhs.uk 

 

Abstract 

Evaluations of NLG systems generally are 
quantiative, that is, based on corpus 

comparison statistics and/or results of 

experiments with people. Outcomes of such 

evaluations are important in demonstrating 

whether or not an NLG system is successful, 

but leave gaps in understanding why this is the 

case. Alternatively, qualitative evaluations 

carried out by experts provide knowledge on 

where a system needs to be improved. In this 

paper we describe two such evaluations carried 

out for the BT-Nurse system, using two 

different methodologies (content analysis and 
discourse analysis). The outcomes of such 

evaluations are discussed in comparison to 

what was learnt from a quantitiave evaluation 

of BT-Nurse. Implications for the role of 

similar evaluations in NLG are also discussed. 
 

1 Introduction 

Natural-Language Generation (NLG) systems are 

usually evaluated quantitatively, by measuring im-
pact on task performance, human opinions on 

Likert-like scales, and/or similarity to a gold-

standard corpus. While such evaluations are essen-
tial, we believe there is also a role for qualitative 

evaluations, especially when the goal of the 

evaluation is formative that is, assessing weak-

nesses and identifying how the NLG system could 
be improved. 

In this paper we describe how we used two 

qualitative methodologies, content analysis and 
discourse analysis, to evaluate texts produced by 

the BT-Nurse system (Hunter et al., 2011). These 

methodologies require a human analyst to read and 
analyse the generated texts; and indeed for both 

types of analysis it is helpful to conduct a similar 

analysis of human-written corpus texts, so that 

generated texts can be compared to manually-
authored texts. From a practical perspective this 

means that only a relatively limited number of 

texts can be analysed using these methodologies; 
but nevertheless we believe they can substantially 

help in formative evaluation of NLG systems. 

2 Background 

2.1 Evaluation in NLG 

The great majority of published evaluations of 
NLG systems are quantitative: as described by 

Reiter and Belz (2009), they either measure the 

impact of a generated text on task performance, 
ask human subjects to rate generated texts on a 

Likert-like scale, or compare the similarity of gen-

erated texts to corpus texts using automatic metrics 
such as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002). Reiter and 

Belz point out that many human-based quantitative 

NLG evaluations also solicit free-text comments 

from their subjects, and these are very helpful in 
diagnosing and fixing problems in generated texts. 

Soliciting such comments, however is usually a 

secondary goal of evaluations of NLG systems, the 
primary goal being quantitative. 

One instance of the use of qualitative method-

ologies in evaluating NLG systems was that by 
McKinlay et al (2010) who used discourse analysis 

to analyse texts generated by the BT45 NLG sys-

tem (Portet et al., 2009). The evaluation revealed 

certain problems with generated texts, such as a 

22



poor narrative structure (Reiter et al., 2008). The 

discourse analysis work presented here uses a simi-
lar approach to McKinlay et al (2010). 

 

2.2 BT-Nurse 

The BT-Nurse system (Hunter et al., 2011) gener-
ates nursing shift handover reports for babies in a 

Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU), from data 

stored in the baby‟s electronic medical record. The 
input data include numeric time-series data (e.g., 

heart rate), ad-hoc structured data (e.g., lab re-

sults), and descriptions of actions and observations 
of medical and nursing staff (such as administering 

drugs and performing surgical procedures). The 

handover report is produced at the end of a 12-hour 

nursing shift, and is given to the incoming nurse on 
the next shift as part of the handover process. Its 

purpose is to help the incoming nurse plan her care 

activities, and also ensure that she is aware of the 
baby‟s circumstances. 

BT-Nurse is part of the BabyTalk family of sys-

tems (Gatt et al., 2009), and like other BabyTalk 
systems it combines signal analysis and pattern 

matching, data interpretation based on expert 

medical knowledge, and NLG techniques. It was 

developed in close consultation with NICU nurses, 
and used no input data other than what was stored 

in the electronic medical record. 

As part of the development process, an expert 
NICU nurse wrote a corpus of 32 example nursing 

summaries based on data in the medical record 

related to 10 babies collated over a period of 3 

months. The babies concerned here were diag-
nosed to have a range of medical conditions affect-

ing various body systems at differing levels of 

pathology. These texts differed from real-world 
existing handover reports in two ways: (1) they 

were much longer and more detailed (on-duty 

nurses do not have the time to write detailed shift-
handover reports), and (2) they were purely based 

on the electronic patient record (and not, for exam-

ple, on visual observation of the baby). 

 BT-Nurse was designed so that the output texts 
resemble corpus texts with the aim of complement-

ing nurses engaged in their duties. In the remainder 

of this paper, corpus text refers to one of the spe-
cially written summaries above for the purposes of 

designing the system, and actual handover text 

refers to a real-world handover report written by an 
on-duty nurse for a baby she was looking after. At 

the time of analysis the BT-Nurse was focusing on 

producing texts that described only the baby‟s 

clinical history and respiratory system, so qualita-
tive analyses were limited to these parts of the cor-

pus texts, actual handover texts and BT-Nurse 

generated texts. 

An extract from an actual handover text is 
shown in Figure 1, an extract from nurse-written 

corpus text is shown in Figure 2, and an extract 

from the corresponding BT-Nurse text is shown in 
Figure 3 (the complete texts are several pages 

long).  

 
 

Figure 1: Actual handover text 
 

2.3 Quantitative Evaluation: 

BT-Nurse was evaluated by deploying the system 
on-ward in the NICU, asking nurses to use it as 

part of the shift handover process, and soliciting 

ratings and free-text comments from nurses as to 
the understandability, accuracy, and helpfulness of 

BT-Nurse texts (Hunter et al., 2011). Overall, 90% 

of nurses thought BT-Nurse texts were understand-

23



able, 70% thought they were completely accurate, 

and 60% thought they were helpful. Free-text 
comments focused on specific content issues (re-

quests for additional information, complaints about 

incorrect content, suggestions to remove content). 

There were fewer comments about language is-
sues. These tended to be fairly specific when ad-

dressing microplanning issues (for example “would 

prefer not to see the word 'since' with the date”), 
but vaguer when addressing document-planning 

and narrative issues (for example, “this summary 

does not convey the feeling that the baby has made 
progress” and “The above comments are accurate 

statements, however they do not present a 'picture' 

of current condition”). 

This evaluation worked well from the perspec-
tive of getting some numbers on the system‟s per-

ceived utility, which was its primary goal. 

However, from the perspective of diagnosing prob-
lems and suggesting enhancements, it worked 

much better for content and low-level phrasing 

issues than for document structure and narrative 
issues. This suggests that other methodologies, 

probably involving analysts with specialist exper-

tise in narrative and structural issues, might be 

needed to diagnose and address these issues. In the 
remainder of this paper we describe how we used 

two such methodologies, content analysis and dis-

course analysis, to gain a better understanding of 
BT-Nurse‟s deficiencies from this perspective. 

3 Evaluation using content analysis 

3.1 Content Analysis 

Content analysis is widely used as a data explora-

tory tool by qualitative researchers in psychology, 
linguistics and other social sciences. In content 

analysis, qualitative data, mainly texts, are coded 

according to some coding scheme which is usually 
predetermined, either from previous research or 

researcher expectations. Following this, frequen-

cies can be calculated to enable a numerical com-
parison. A unit of analysis (sentence, paragraph or 

a page) is identified and classified according to 

specific codes. These codes could either be de-

scriptive or analytic (Richards, 2009). The level of 
coding and what is done on these codes depends to 

a good extent on the research question (Saldaña, 

2009). Here we were interested in what sorts of 
data representation was contained within BT-Nurse 

generated texts as compared to that in corpus texts. 

Therefore, the analysis had as its focus identifying 

content in these texts which was reflective of rep-
resentations of data in textual form. 

 

3.2 Method 

The corpus of 32 nurse written texts was first ana-
lyzed to come up with a coding scheme; this was 

then applied to corpus texts, BT-Nurse texts, and 

actual handover texts. The extent of corpus texts 
subjected to analysis was defined in two ways: (1) 

focus here was on identifying lexical items that 

communicated „complex‟ information; for example 
temporal relations and causality (but not simple 

statements of parameter values such as heart rate) 

and (2) as mentioned above those parts of the texts 

relating to babies‟ clinical history and respiratory 
system only. Analysis led to the identification of 

various items that were abstracted into higher order 

„codes‟ forming the coding scheme A sample of 
nurse written corpus text was made available to a 

doctorate student with brief notes on what was be-

ing looked for in those texts and to form some sort 
of codes relating to data representation. Codes 

identified were checked against the first authors‟ 

for agreement (Cohen‟s ĸ = .74), in line with 

common practices of doing such analyses with 
codes (Saldaña, 2009). The coding scheme pre-

sented here was used to calculate frequency of oc-

currence of each item in nurse written corpus texts, 
BT-Nurse summaries and actual handover texts. 

 

3.3 Coding Scheme 

Items on the coding scheme can be usefully differ-
entiated into descriptive items that describe various 

particulars of information and inferential elements, 

which provide for inferences amongst data items. 

 

1) Descriptive items in the coding scheme: 

a) Temporal information: Data items, have 
time stamps, that is, they are presented as having 

occurred at some time:  

i. Specific clock times: Temporal information is 
provided in terms of normative clock times – 
11:00 or 13:30. E.g.: “The last blood gas was at 

18:30 and no changes were made”. 

ii. Vague temporal markers: Temporal information 
provided in terms that do not readily specify the 

exact point in clock times, such as: „morning‟, „a 

few minutes ago‟ and others. E.g.: “but this af-
ternoon he also looks pale”. 

24



iii. Shift time: shift start and end times are made use 
of as temporal markers. E.g.: “Insulin just com-
menced”. 

iv. References to other events: Clock time is pro-
vided for one event „A‟ and another event „B‟ is 

temporally located via references to „A‟. E.g.: 
“He received morphine prior to intubation at 

00:30; no spontaneous respiratory effort noted 

since being re-ventilated”. 
b) Time intervals: Provision of temporal in-
formation for events that do not have a single tem-

poral marker but two that refer to the start and end 
times, is made as unitary condensed entities. E.g.: 

“However, over the day his oxygen requirements 

generally have come down from 30% to 25%”. 

c) Trends in parameter values: Recordings of 
parameter values are made to capture changes in 

the parameter over a period of time providing the 

initial and final values along with the direction of 
such change. E.g.: “Baseline SpO2 drifted down 

from 95% to 88% accompanied by increasing 

SpO2 variability associated with handling”. [SpO2 
– Oxygen saturation in blood] 

d) Evaluations of parameter values: Parame-
ter values are also evaluated either in terms of what 

is physiologically normal or in terms of what is 
locally taken to be normal for that particular shift 

and that particular baby. E.g.: “ABG at 23:10 

showed CO2 increased from 7.7 to 9.27 in three 
hours”. [ABG – Arterial Blood Gas; CO2 – Carbon 

Di-oxide] 

e) Events in temporal relation with other 
events: Information about certain events and data 
items is presented as preceding or succeeding other 

events. E.g.: “Received one dose of surfactant after 

admission to NNU”. [NNU – Neonatal Unit] 

2) Inferential items in the coding scheme: 
a) Event characterizations: Events are those 
data items that indicate a recording of a parameter 

value, a change in a parameter value, interventions 
and such. 

i. Events „marked up‟: Events are presented as im-
portant within the local context via providing 

clock times and describing other events in rela-
tion to this particular event. The use of one 

event „A‟ as a temporal anchor for another „B‟ 

presents it as consequential to „A‟. E.g.: “Elec-
tively re-intubated at 00:30 to CMV rate 50, 

pressures 18/4 in 30% oxygen. On ventilation, 

oxygen requirement reduced to 30% and ABG 

initially improved”. [CMV – Continuous Man-

datory Ventilation] 
ii. Event presented as forming a context for other 

events: Events are presented as occurring over a 

period of time and then other events are pre-

sented as having occurred in the contextual 
background of the former event. E.g.: “While on 

BiPAP, oxygen requirement increased to 50% 

by 23:00.” [BiPAP – Bi-level Positive Airway 
Pressure] 

b) Evaluation: The presentation of parameter 
values or medical interventions forms an evalua-
tion of a prior event or parameter value. E.g.: 

“ABG taken 2 hours post-extubation was reasona-

bly good: pH 7.33 and pCO2 7.08”. [pCO2 – Par-

tial pressure of Carbon Di-oxide]. Evaluative 
information together with the temporal marker an-

chored in „extubation‟ serves to present changes in 

ABG as an evaluation of the outcomes of „extuba-
tion‟. 

c) Parameters grouped together: Two or 
more dissimilar parameter descriptions are made 
together with a conjunctive indicating some sort of 

an association between the two parameters. E.g.: 

“Desaturation to 15% with bradycardia to 50-

60s”. 
d) Grouping similar events: descriptions of 
two or more event descriptions are juxtaposed to 

each other. As above these descriptions are of their 
temporal status, outcomes and such. E.g.: “Tried 

off CPAP once but put back on after 30 minutes 

due to increased work of breathing; otherwise has 

not been off CPAP”. [CPAP – Continuous Positive 
Airway Pressure]. Here, descriptions attend to two 

events: being on CPAP and being off CPAP. In-

cluding descriptions on these two events provides 
for inferences as to the reasons, outcomes and 

other such features of those events. 

e) Causation: Events are presented to be 
causally related to each other either via an explicit 

discourse marker or presenting the parameter re-

cordings or events in temporal relation to each 

other that makes relevant causal links between 
them. E.g.: “several episodes (about 3 per hour) of 

bradycardia with desaturation that only resolved 

after stimulation or increase in FiO2”. 
 

3.4 Results and Discussion 

Results shown in Table 1 include frequencies of 
coding items in corpus texts, BT-Nurse texts, and 

in actual handover texts. BT-Nurse texts score 

25



 
Table 1: Frequencies of coding items. 

 

more on descriptive items: they contain quantita-
tively more temporal information, higher reporting 

of trends in parameters, and more items of evalua-

tion on parameter values. However, they do not 
contain representations of „time intervals‟ (1 (b)). 

Representing time intervals can be thought of as 

using at least two time stamps on a temporal axis: 
the „start‟ and „end‟ (Adlassnig et al., 2006). BT-

Nurse software apparently does not enable such 

representation, the outcome of which is reflected in 

item 2 (a) ii. The lack of representing an event „B‟ 
as occurring over a period of time in BT-Nurse 

texts does not make for characterizing an event „A‟ 

as occurring in the background context of the on-
going event „B‟ (the event „B‟ having „start‟ time 

and an „end‟ time). Although BT-Nurse texts do 

contain inferential items, overall these items are 

less frequent compared to nurse written corpus 
texts. Moreover, inferential items presented do not 

readily make it clear as to the nature of the rela-

tionship (see 4.3 below). These findings then re-
veal how representing temporal information has 

outcomes on other forms of data representation in 

BT-Nurse texts, and thus contribute to the design 
of the system. 

Analysis of actual handover texts served to at-

tend to issues of external validity of the evaluation. 
Results indicate that actual handover texts are 

more similar to nurse written corpus texts in con-

taining more inference enabling items and more 

instances of explicit inferences. These results at 
one level are not very surprising as nurses engaged 

in doing their duties would arguably require infor-

mation of this sort. In that sense, this evaluation 
has pointed to features of data-to-text systems that 

are indicative of the sorts of requirements users of 

these systems have. Thus, by providing more in-
formation on relevant parameters, a better trend 

detection ability and producing an easily usable 

textual document, BT-Nurse has significant poten-

tial to enhance nurse care planning in the NICU. 
 

4 Evaluation using discourse analysis 

4.1 Discourse analysis: 

The other qualitative evaluation employed dis-
course analysis, which has as its focus pragmatic 

outcomes of texts. Discourse analysis specializes 

in the analysis of spoken or written discourse, as a 
topic of study in its own right (McKinlay et al., 

2008). In contrast to content analysis, discourse 

analysis takes as its focus the action-orientation of 

discourse. The analyst focuses on identifying prop-
erties within the text, such as the design of individ-

ual discourse elements and how sets of such 

elements are sequentially organized in order to ac-
complish particular pragmatic outcomes in that, 

discourse is considered for the sorts of actions that 

ensue from specific forms of usage. Discourse 

analysis differs from other forms of linguistic 
analyses (such as those based on Rhetorical Struc-

tural Theory (Thompson et al., 1987) or Discourse 

Structural Relations (Hovy, 1993)) in focusing on 
the ways in which language gets used for specific 

outcomes, that is, the focus is on an analysis of 

discourse rather than on linguistic features of any 
fixed „unit‟ of text. The analysis seeks to draw out 

those aspects of discourse production and reception 

which are treated by participants in a particular 

discursive interaction as „everyday‟ or „common-
sense‟ but which are, at the same time, central to a 

full understanding of what is written. Outcomes of 

discourse analysis then are of a psychological na-
ture than merely linguistic. 

26



A prior use of such methodology in conducting 

an evaluation of another data-to-text system – BT-
45 – showed that corpus texts written by domain 

experts had better narrative structures than system 

generated texts (McKinlay et al., 2010). These are 

considered to be desirable aspects in texts gener-
ated by NLG systems (Reiter et al., 2008), there-

fore we conducted an evaluation using this 

methodology. 
This evaluation was in fact conducted on a pre-

liminary version of BT-Nurse, and some changes 

were made to the final version of BT-Nurse based 
on this evaluation; for example the way „causality‟ 

was expressed was changed in some cases to en-

hance clarity. The content analysis and quantitative 

evaluations, in contrast, were carried out on the 
final version of BT-Nurse. 

 
4.2 Method 

For reasons of illustration and space we provide 

here a comparative analysis of one nurse written 

corpus text and the corresponding BT-Nurse gen-
erated text for one 12 hour shift. This particular 

shift summary pair was randomly selected amongst 

the 32 pairs available. Analysis provided here aims 
to demonstrate the utility of discourse analysis in 

formative evaluations of NLG systems. The analy-

sis was conducted by three of the authors on an 
extract taken from each of these texts that detailed 

occurrences within the shift related to baby‟s respi-

ratory system. Analysis involved identification of 

lexical items (words, sentences and such) that were 
selected for inclusion and how they were sequen-

tially combined within the summary. The identifi-

cation of such was considered for the sorts of 
outcomes made available. Here, this led to the 

identification of three pragmatic discursive fea-

tures present in nurse written corpus texts. These 

analytic findings were subsequently made use of in 
evaluating BT-Nurse output texts.  

 

4.3 Analyses:  
Figure 2 is an example nurse written corpus text 

that includes descriptions of baby‟s respiratory 

status. Figure 3 is the corresponding BT-Nurse 
generated text produced for the same baby for the 

same shift. It can readily be seen that they are simi-

lar in terms of producing a list of events that oc-

curred during the said shift. The following 
comparative analysis aims to show the pragmatic 

outcomes of these two summaries. For the pur-

poses of this paper, the analysis is presented along 

three main pragmatic features: 

 
a) Foregrounding the actor:  

The summary in Figure 2 begins with the admis-
sion of the baby and the status of his respiration. 

Through the use of „he‟ at line 2, the author explic-

itly introduces the baby as a character. This first 
item also specifies a particular, desirable health 

status for the baby at that time: „in air‟. This pro-

vides a context for the rest of the description or-

ganized around the baby as a central character in a 
sequence of events. The final item selected for in-

clusion at lines 21-22 also makes explicit reference 

to the baby, thereby presenting a conclusion that is 
designed to highlight health of the central character 

at the end of the sequence.  

Figure 3, however, begins at line 2 by describing 
an event, namely a decrease in oxygen saturation, 

occurring over an extended period of time which 

commences towards the beginning of shift. Thus, 

this account treats as the first reportable item a de-
scription of an event and not of the baby. It is not 

until line 7 of the summary that we see any men-

tion of the baby himself. This relatively late intro-
duction of the baby into the summary fails to 

foreground the baby himself as a central character 

in relation to the events that are being described. 
Additionally, the final item on the list makes no 

reference to the initial topic or a change in baby‟s 

respiratory status. 

 
b) Temporal organization of events:  

The description in Figure 2 begins at the start of 

the shift and concludes at the end, and the interven-
ing events are temporally marked in a sequential 

order. The list begins at line 2 with a description 

located at the start of the period of observation. 

Subsequent items are designed in terms of their 
temporal connections to this starting point. The 

temporal marker „Within an hour‟ at line 3 de-

scribes the next item on the list in relation to the 
commencement of observation. The next item at 

lines 8-14 is temporally indexed to be subsequent 

in the overall listing of events. Similarly, at lines 
15-17, descriptions of the baby‟s respiratory status 

are temporally marked in relation to the time of 

occurrence and the age of the baby. Finally, at 

lines 21-22, concluding descriptions temporally 
mark events as occurring at the end of the shift by 

the use of „now‟ (line 20). 

27



 

Figure 2: Nurse written corpus text. 

 

 

Figure 3: BT-Nurse generated text. 

 

Such temporal organization in Figure 3 however 
is limited. The initial description does make ex-

plicit reference to specific times and so marks the 

starting point for a temporally organised summary. 

As the listing of events continues, at a number of 

points specific events are also temporally marked 
in order to indicate their relationship to the chrono-

logical starting point of the description, ending at 

lines 15-16 with a description of drug administra-

tion presented as occurring towards the end of the 
period of observation. This sequence, however, is 

not organised entirely chronologically, in that the 

temporal reference at line 4 to „12.15‟ precedes the 
second such reference at line 2 which is to „14.30‟. 

To the extent that the description provided is 

framed by reference to times near the start and end 
of the observational period it is presented in the 

form of a temporal sequence. 

c) Causal connectivity:  

Descriptions of events in Figure 2 highlight causal 
connectedness of preceding and subsequent events 

and actions. For instance, the description at lines 8-

14 takes up as relevant the topic introduced at the 
conclusion of the preceding item, that of „incubator 

oxygen‟. This topic flow causally connects events 

described to that topic by detailing steps taken to 
support the breathing of the baby at that time. In 

addition, events found within this description are 

explicitly linked through the use of grammatical 

markers and the conjunctive „and‟. The parentheti-
cal „morphine and sux‟ at line 10 can be read as 

relevant to the immediately preceding description 

of intubation, making explicit for the reader the 
connection between these events. Following this, at 

lines 15-17 the description makes an explicit con-

nection between two events, namely the medica-

tion given and the subsequent status of the baby. 
Further, the description of the baby as being „in 

air‟ can be heard as a desirable state of affairs, in 

contrast to previous descriptions. This positive de-
scription provides a context for description of ven-

tilation being „weaned‟, which also suggests an 

improvement as a result of the actions taken. Fi-
nally, at lines 21-20, the summary concludes with a 

description that takes as its explicit topic „breath-

ing‟ and describes actions of the baby at this time. 

The reference here to „taking spontaneous breaths‟ 
can be heard as desirable, and in so doing to be a 

continuation of the baby‟s breathing status set out 

previously. As such, the description draws together 
disparate elements – the baby as the actor in the 

events being described, his respiratory status, and 

the temporal context – in offering a hearably posi-
tive upshot to the sequence of events that occurred 

during the shift. Together, the continuation of topic 

28



and linking of events presents the events being de-

scribed as connected and as located within an on-
going narrative relating to the breathing of the 

baby over the course of the shift. 

With respect to causal connectivity, in Figure 3 

there is seen to be variation in how events are 
causally linked. First, some events are explicitly 

linked: at lines 7-8, the process of intubation is 

clearly marked as linked to the baby being moved 
from incubator oxygen to „CMV‟ (CMV is a form 

of mechanical ventilation that follows from being 

intubated). Second, some are not marked in this 
way but can be read as being connected through 

the consecutive descriptions of particular actions 

and states: at lines 4-6, we see a description of a 

blood gas measurement being taken, an evaluation 
of parameters, and descriptions of particular meas-

urements that allow them to be treated as conse-

quentially relevant and the later descriptions to be 
treated as presenting the outcomes of the proce-

dure. Third, the form of description works to sug-

gest that there is no immediate connection between 
different events being described: at lines, 7-14, we 

are given a description of a process of intubation, 

of the baby being given morphine, and of the baby 

being given suxamethonium. Explicitly describing 
these events as occurring at a similar approximate 

time suggests that these are not related events oc-

curring in a connected manner but rather are dis-
crete events that simply happen to have occurred at 

the same time in the shift. This combination of de-

scriptions that are explicitly linked, those that can 

be read as linked and those that are presented in an 
unconnected manner fails to provide a coherent 

ongoing causal narrative for the period of observa-

tion. 
 

4.4 Discussion 

Taken together, these pragmatic features function 
to present descriptions in Figure 2 in a recognisa-

bly narrative form. Figure 3, however differs from 

Figure 2 in the following ways. The selection of 

reportable events, particularly the first and last 
items in the summary, differs markedly from those 

in Figure 2. The first reported item provides little, 

if any, context for the descriptions to follow and 
makes no reference to the baby as the focus of the 

summary. Further, the causal organization of the 

events being described is variable, making some 
connections explicit, other connections inferable, 

and failing to make relevant causality in instances 

where it might be appropriate. In these respects, 

the text produced by the NLG system does not 
have the narrative form seen in the nurse-written 

corpus text in Figure 2. However, temporal organi-

zation of events and inclusion of some causal ele-

ments provide a more coherent organization of 
descriptions and thus make available at least some 

causal connections between events. To this extent, 

the NLG system appears to have produced text that 
more closely resembles that produced in nurse 

written corpus text. These findings show that dis-

course analysis represents a useful tool for evalua-
tion of NLG systems. The analyses identified a 

range of pragmatic features which are desirable 

features in a text which seeks to describe in an ef-

ficient and useable manner the sequence of events 
and occurrences which can arise in nursing shifts 

in an NICU. 

These findings have implications for the design 
of NLG systems. First, in terms of content selec-

tion, corpus texts show that the nurse does not 

merely select items as being topically relevant, but 
treats these items as topically relevant in terms of 

how descriptions of actions and events are de-

signed and of how these descriptions are sequen-

tially organized. In this respect, topical relevance 
must be viewed not as an objective feature of the 

situations being described, but rather as a prag-

matic outcome of texts themselves. Second, it is 
apparently important to carefully select those items 

that are reported at the very start and the very end 

of the text. The first and last entries function to 

introduce the topic of the summary and offer an 
upshot of the matters at the end, that is these items 

take up functional „slots‟. Third, the human nurse 

expert attends to the topic flow: the sequential or-
ganization of a text to provide for readily recogniz-

able shifts from one topic to another; this is absent 

from the text produced by the BT-Nurse system. 
These issues come together in the issue of narra-

tive structure. Narrative can be viewed as a form of 

talk or text in which descriptions of events are se-

quentially ordered so as to tell a story about those 
events. The human nurse‟s text contains pragmatic 

features such as identifying the baby as an actor in 

events, and indicating causal relationships among 
the actions and events being described, which fea-

tures make it likely for it being treated as having a 

narrative form (Daiute et al., 2003). 

29



5 General Discussion 

5.1 Findings on BT-Nurse: 

In terms of types of content, BT-Nurse texts have 
more instances of trend detection and recordings of 

parameter values, and fewer instances of inference 

enabling data representations than the corpus texts. 

This is perhaps a natural consequence of the differ-
ences in capabilities between a computer (good at 

crunching numbers) and a person (good at making 

domain inferences). It probably makes sense to 
accept this distinction and try to determine how a 

computer-generated text can most usefully support 

a nurse: an improved analysis of numeric data. 
The evaluation using discourse analysis showed 

that BT-Nurse texts are deficient from a narrative 

perspective. They show a minimal foregrounding 

of the baby as a central character, inconsistent 
temporal organization of events and variable causal 

connectivity. Narrative form is a desirable feature 

of texts from an understandability and utility per-
spective (Reiter et al., 2008) more so because nar-

ratives are a pervasive feature of human interaction 

(Jefferson, 1978; Sacks, 1992). 
 

5.2 Implications for NLG systems: 

A content analysis of corpus texts reveals various 

ways in which domain experts represent various 
domain relevant types of information. For instance, 

here we see various ways in which both temporal 

markers and events are presented in corpus texts 
which can inform ways in which inferential items 

can potentially be included in NLG system gener-

ated texts. Knowledge of this sort then is certainly 

useful in designing NLG systems to produce texts 
which present information in appropriate ways for 

the domain. 

Discourse analysis differs from content analysis 
in providing an understanding of ways in which 

users engaged in their daily duties present summa-

ries or similar texts as part of their duties and helps 
in producing texts that take up such concerns. 

Here, aspects of presenting the baby as a central 

character was one feature of producing corpus 

texts. This is readily seen to be relevant for activi-
ties performed by nurses in that their duties are 

about caring and/or providing nursing care for one 

particular party, namely „the baby‟. To see that 
human users take up aspects such as these to be 

relevant features is knowledge useful in the design 

of NLG systems that are to be deployed in specific 

domains. Another finding of relevance is the role 

of items that occupy the start and final positions in 
a text. The inclusion of specific items at certain 

points in a text by human users allows them to do 

specific functions: doing an introduction, offering 

an upshot and others. Of note is that such features 
serve to make the text more of a narrative. 

The interesting thing about the above findings is 

that they did not arise from the quantitative evalua-
tion of BT-Nurse. To us, this suggests that such 

findings are more likely to arise from a qualitative 

evaluation conducted by analysts with expertise in 
discourse analysis or content analysis; they are not 

likely to be spontaneously suggested by subjects 

who have domain expertise but no expertise in 

analysis of texts. 
 

5.3 Limitations: 

Although, the extent of texts covered in these 
analyses is limited, outcomes of such evaluations 

are useful and a complete analysis is likely to 

throw up further useful knowledge. For instance, 
across the corpus texts foregrounding the baby as a 

central character and how descriptions offered are 

made in ways to make overall evaluations of the 

baby‟s status, such as being „okay‟ or „deteriorat-
ing‟ are seen to be consistent features. 

Additionally matters that appear to be of a quan-

titative nature were revealed as relevant aspects of 
these texts only posterior to qualitative analyses. 

For example, the content analysis showed a differ-

ence in the frequency of trend descriptions of pa-

rameter values between corpus texts and BT-Nurse 
texts. This could probably be tested using quantita-

tive techniques; this would require annotating the 

texts, and the annotation scheme could be based on 
the scheme used in content analysis. In theory a 

task evaluation study could even be performed to 

evaluate the impact of having more trend descrip-
tions, although this would be an expensive under-

taking. 

6 Conclusion 

The qualitative evaluations presented above make 
use of two different but complementary method-

ologies. Content analysis provides us with knowl-
edge on the sorts of items present in a text. 

Discourse analysis on the other hand moves a step 

further and makes clear aspects of ways in which 

these items are presented in the service of certain 

30



actions (making the baby a central character, for 

instance). In particular, content analysis is appro-
priate in showing what goes into a text and dis-

course analysis reveals what the texts are designed 

to do.  

Qualitative analyses described above identified 
many differences between generated texts and cor-

pus texts. Some of the differences identified may 

be desirable, such as the fact that BT-Nurse texts 
contain more trend descriptions than corpus texts. 

Other differences are probably not desirable, such 

as narrative deficiencies in the generated texts. 
However, the key point is that qualitative analyses 

have identified these differences, so that develop-

ers are aware of them and can decide what action 

to take. 
 

Acknowledgements 
This research was funded by the UK Engineering and 

Physical Sciences Research Council under grants 
EP/D049520/1, EP/D05057X/1, and EP/E011764/1. 

The authors would like to thank other members of the 

BABYTALK project including François Portet, Jim 

Hunter, Somayajulu Sripada, and Neil McIntosh for 

their help. 

 

References 
K Adlassnig,  C Combi, A Das, E Keravnou, and G 

Pozzi. 2006. Temporal representation and reasoning 

in medicine: Research directions and challenges. 

Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 38(2): 101 - 113. 

C Daiute and C Lightfoot.  2003. Narrative analysis: 

Studying the development of individuals in society. 

London: Sage. 

A Gatt, F Portet, E Reiter, J Hunter, S Mahamood, W 

Moncur, and S Sripada. 2009. From data to text in 

Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: Using NLG 

technology for decision support and information 

management. AI Communications, 22: 153 - 186. 
E Hovy 1993. Automated Discourse Generation Using 

Discourse Structure Relations. Artificial Intelligence, 

63(1-2): 341 - 386. 

J Hunter, Y Freer, A Gatt, E Reiter, S Sripada, C Sykes, 

and D Westwater. 2011. BT-Nurse: Computer 

generation of natural language shift summaries from 

complex heterogenous medical data., Journal of 

American Medical Informatics Association 18:621-

624. 

G Jefferson 1978. Sequential aspects of storytelling in 

conversation. In, J. Schenkein (Ed), Studies in the 
organization of conversational interaction. London: 

Academic Press. 

A McKinlay, C McVittie, E Reiter, Y Freer, C Sykes,  

and R Logie. 2010. Design issues for socially 

intelligent user-interfaces: A Discourse analysis of a 

data-to-text system for summarizing clinical data. 

Methods of Information in Medicine, 49(4): 379 - 

387. 

A McKinlay and C McVittie. 2008. Social Psychology 

& Discourse. Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell. 
K Papineni, S Roukos, T Ward, and W Zhu. 2002. 

BLEU: A method for automatic evaluation of 

machine translation. Proceedings of ACL-2002, 

pages 311-318. 

F Portet, E Reiter, A  Gatt, S Sripada, Y Freer, and C 

Sykes. 2009. Automatic generation of textual 

summaries from neonatal intensive care data. 

Artificial Intelligence, 173(7,8): 789 - 816. 

E Reiter and A Belz. 2009. An investigation into the 

validity of some metrics for automatically evaluating 

Natural Language Generating systems. 

Computational Linguistics, 35: 529 - 558. 
E Reiter, A Gatt, F Portet, and M van der Meulen. 2008. 

The importance of narrative and other lessons from 

an evaluation of an NLG system that summarizes 

clinical data. Proceedings of INLG-08, pages 147-

155 

L Richards. 2009. Handling Qualitative Data: A 

Practical Guide. London: SAGE. 

H Sacks. 1992. Lectures on Conversation. Oxford: 

Blackwell's. 

J Saldaña. 2009. The Coding Manual for Qualitative 

Researchers. London: SAGE. 
S Thompson and W Mann. 1987. Rhetorical Structure 

Theory: A framework for the Analysis of Texts. 

IPRA Papers in Pragmatics, 1: 79 - 105. 

31


