










































MWEs and Topic Modelling: Enhancing Machine Learning with Linguistics


Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from Parsing and Generation to the Real World (MWE 2011), page 1,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 23 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

MWEs and Topic Modelling:
Enhancing Machine Learning with Linguistics

Timothy Baldwin
University of Melbourne, Australia
tim@csse.unimelb.edu.au

Abstract

Topic modelling is a popular approach to joint clus-
tering of documents and terms, e.g. via Latent
Dirichlet Allocation. The standard document repre-
sentation in topic modelling is a bag of unigrams,
ignoring both macro-level document structure and
micro-level constituent structure. In this talk, I
will discuss recent work on consolidating the micro-
level document representation with multiword ex-
pressions, and present experimental results which
demonstrate that linguistically-richer document rep-
resentations enhance topic modelling.

Biography

Tim Baldwin is an Associate Professor and Deputy
Head of the Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering, University of Melbourne and
a contributed research staff member of the NICTA
Victoria Research Laboratories. He has previously
held visiting positions at the University of Wash-
ington, University of Tokyo, University of Saarland,
and NTT Communication Science Laboratories. His
research interests cover topics including deep lin-
guistic processing, multiword expressions, deep lex-
ical acquisition, computer-assisted language learn-
ing, information extraction and web mining, with a
particular interest in the interface between compu-
tational and theoretical linguistics. Current projects
include web user forum mining, information person-
alisation in museum contexts, biomedical text min-
ing, online linguistic exploration, and intelligent in-
terfaces for Japanese language learners. He is Pres-
ident of the Australasian Language Technology As-
sociation in 2011-2012.

Tim completed a BSc(CS/Maths) and

BA(Linguistics/Japanese) at the University of
Melbourne in 1995, and an MEng(CS) and
PhD(CS) at the Tokyo Institute of Technology in
1998 and 2001, respectively. Prior to commencing
his current position at the University of Melbourne,
he was a Senior Research Engineer at the Center for
the Study of Language and Information, Stanford
University (2001-2004).

1


