










































The Ngram Statistics Package (Text::NSP) : A Flexible Tool for Identifying Ngrams, Collocations, and Word Associations


Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from Parsing and Generation to the Real World (MWE 2011), pages 131–133,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 23 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Ngram Statistics Package (Text::NSP) - A Flexible Tool for Identifying
Ngrams, Collocations, and Word Associations

Ted Pedersen∗

Department of Computer Science
University of Minnesota

Duluth, MN 55812

Satanjeev Banerjee
Twitter, Inc.

795 Folsom Street
San Francisco, CA 94107

Bridget T. McInnes
College of Pharmacy

University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455

Saiyam Kohli
SDL Language Weaver, Inc.
6060 Center Drive, Suite 150

Los Angeles, CA 90045

Mahesh Joshi
Language Technologies Institute

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Ying Liu
College of Pharmacy

University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455

Abstract

The Ngram Statistics Package (Text::NSP)
is freely available open-source software that
identifies ngrams, collocations and word as-
sociations in text. It is implemented in Perl
and takes advantage of regular expressions to
provide very flexible tokenization and to allow
for the identification of non-adjacent ngrams.
It includes a wide range of measures of associ-
ation that can be used to identify collocations.

1 Introduction

The identification of multiword expressions is a key
problem in Natural Language Processing. Despite
years of research, there is still no single best way
to proceed. As such, the availability of flexible and
easy to use toolkits remains important. Text::NSP
is one such package, and includes programs for
counting ngrams (count.pl, huge-count.pl), measur-
ing the association between the words that make up
an ngram (statistic.pl), and for measuring correlation
between the rankings of ngrams created by differ-
ent measures (rank.pl). It is also able to identify n-
th order co-occurrences (kocos.pl) and pre–specified
compound words in text (find-compounds.pl).

This paper briefly describes each component of
NSP. Additional details can be found in (Banerjee
and Pedersen, 2003) or in the software itself, which
is freely available from CPAN 1 or Sourceforge 2.

∗Contact author : tpederse@d.umn.edu. Note that authors
Banerjee, McInnes, Kohli and Joshi contributed to Text::NSP
while they were at the University of Minnesota, Duluth.

1http://search.cpan.org/dist/Text-NSP/
2http://sourceforge.net/projects/ngram/

2 count.pl

The program count.pl takes any number of plain
text files or directories of such files and counts the
total number of ngrams as well their marginal to-
tals. It provides the ability to define what a token
may be using regular expressions (via the --token
option). An ngram is an ordered sequence of n to-
kens, and under this scheme tokens may be almost
anything, including space separated strings, charac-
ters, etc. Also, ngrams may be made up of nonadja-
cent tokens due to the --window option that allows
users to specify the number of tokens within which
an ngram must occur.

Counting is done using hashes in Perl which are
memory intensive. As a result, NSP also provides
the huge-count.pl program and various other huge-
*.pl utilities that carry out count.pl functionality us-
ing hard drive space rather than memory. This can
scale to much larger amounts of text, although usu-
ally taking more time in the process.

By default count.pl treats ngrams as ordered se-
quences of tokens; dog house is distinct from house
dog. However, it may be that order does not always
matter, and a user may simply want to know if two
words co-occur. In this case the combig.pl program
adjusts counts from count.pl to reflect an unordered
count, where dog house and house dog are consid-
ered the same. Finally, find-compounds.pl allows a
user to specify a file of already known multiword ex-
pressions (like place names, idioms, etc.) and then
identify all occurrences of those in a corpus before
running count.pl

131



3 statistic.pl

The core of NSP is a wide range of measures of
association that can be used to identify interest-
ing ngrams, particularly bigrams and trigrams. The
measures are organized into families that share com-
mon characteristics (which are described in detail in
the source code documentation). This allows for an
object oriented implementation that promotes inher-
itance of common functionality among these mea-
sures. Note that all of the Mutual Information mea-
sures are supported for trigrams, and that the Log-
likelihood ratio is supported for 4-grams. The mea-
sures in the package are shown grouped by family
in Table 1, where the name by which the measure is
known in NSP is in parentheses.

Table 1: Measures of Association in NSP
Mutual Information (MI)
(ll) Log-likelihood Ratio (Dunning, 1993)
(tmi) true MI (Church and Hanks, 1990)
(pmi) Pointwise MI (Church and Hanks, 1990)
(ps) Poisson-Stirling (Church, 2000)
Fisher’s Exact Test (Pedersen et al., 1996)
(leftFisher) left tailed
(rightFisher) right tailed
(twotailed) two tailed
Chi-squared
(phi) Phi Coefficient (Church, 1991)
(tscore) T-score (Church et al., 1991)
(x2) Pearson’s Chi-Squared (Dunning, 1993)
Dice
(dice) Dice Coefficient (Smadja, 1993)
(jaccard) Jaccard Measure
(odds) Odds Ratio (Blaheta and Johnson, 2001)

3.1 rank.pl

One natural experiment is to compare the output of
statistic.pl for the same input using different mea-
sures of association. rank.pl takes as input the out-
put from statistic.pl for two different measures, and
computes Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coefficient
between them. In general, measures within the same
family correlate more closely with each other than
with measures from a different family. As an ex-
ample tmi and ll as well as dice and jaccard differ

by only constant terms and therefore produce identi-
cal rankings. It is often worthwhile to conduct ex-
ploratory studies with multiple measures, and the
rank correlation can help recognize when two mea-
sures are very similar or different.

4 kocos.pl

In effect kocos.pl builds a word network by finding
all the n-th order co-occurrences for a given literal
or regular expression. This can be viewed somewhat
recursively, where the 3-rd order co-occurrences of
a given target word are all the tokens that occur with
the 2-nd order co-occurrences, which are all the to-
kens that occur with the 1-st order (immediate) co-
occurrences of the target. kocos.pl outputs chains of
the form king -> george -> washington,
where washington is a second order co-occurrence
(of king) since both king and washington are first
order co-occurrences of george. kocos.pl takes as
input the output from count.pl, combig.pl, or statis-
tic.pl.

5 API

In addition to command line support, Test::NSP of-
fers an extensive API for Perl programmers. All of
the measures described in Table 1 can be included
in Perl programs as object–oriented method calls
(Kohli, 2006), and it is also easy to add new mea-
sures or modify existing measures within a program.

6 Development History of Text::NSP

The Ngram Statistics Package was originally imple-
mented by Satanjeev Banerjee in 2000-2002 (Baner-
jee and Pedersen, 2003). Amruta Purandare in-
corporated NSP into SenseClusters (Purandare and
Pedersen, 2004) and added huge-count.pl, com-
big.pl and kocos.pl in 2002-2004. Bridget McInnes
added the log-likelihood ratio for longer ngrams
in 2003-2004 (McInnes, 2004). Saiyam Kohli
rewrote the measures of association to use object-
oriented methods in 2004-2006, and also added
numerous new measures for bigrams and trigams
(Kohli, 2006). Mahesh Joshi improved cross plat-
form support and created an NSP wrapper for Gate
in 2005-2006. Ying Liu wrote find-compounds.pl
and rewrote huge-count.pl in 2010-2011.

132



References

S. Banerjee and T. Pedersen. 2003. The design, imple-
mentation, and use of the Ngram Statistics Package.
In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 370–381, Mexico City, February.

D. Blaheta and M. Johnson. 2001. Unsupervised learn-
ing of multi-word verbs. In ACL/EACL Workshop on
Collocations, pages 54–60, Toulouse, France.

K. Church and P. Hanks. 1990. Word association norms,
mutual information and lexicography. Computational
Linguistics, pages 22–29.

K. Church, W. Gale, P. Hanks, and D. Hindle. 1991. Us-
ing statistics in lexical analysis. In U. Zernik, editor,
Lexical Acquisition: Exploiting On-Line Resources to
Build a Lexicon. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hills-
dale, NJ.

K. Church. 1991. Concordances for parallel text. In
Seventh Annual Conference of the UW Centre for New
OED and Text Research, Oxford, England.

K. Church. 2000. Empirical estimates of adaptation:
The chance of two noriegas is closer to p/2 than p2.
In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (COLING-2000), pages
180–186, Saarbrücken, Germany.

T. Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statistics of
surprise and coincidence. Computational Linguistics,
19(1):61–74.

S. Kohli. 2006. Introducing an object oriented design to
the ngram statistics package. Master’s thesis, Univer-
sity of Minnesota, Duluth, July.

B. McInnes. 2004. Extending the log-likelihood ratio
to improve collocation identification. Master’s thesis,
University of Minnesota, Duluth, December.

T. Pedersen, M. Kayaalp, and R. Bruce. 1996. Signifi-
cant lexical relationships. In Proceedings of the Thir-
teenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
pages 455–460, Portland, OR, August.

A. Purandare and T. Pedersen. 2004. Word sense
discrimination by clustering contexts in vector and
similarity spaces. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
41–48, Boston, MA.

F. Smadja. 1993. Retrieving collocations from text:
Xtract. Computational Linguistics, 19(1):143–177.

133


