















































Linguist's Assistant: A Resource For Linguists


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 41–49,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 12 and 13, 2011.

Linguist’s Assistant: A Resource For Linguists 

 
 

Stephen Beale 
University of Maryland, Baltimore County  

Baltimore, MD 
sbeale@cs.umbc.edu 

Tod Allman 
Onyx, Consulting 

Baltimore, MD 
todallman@yahoo.com 

 
  

 

Abstract 

The Linguist’s Assistant (LA) is a practical 
computational paradigm for describing lan-
guages. In this paper we describe how to use 
LA with naturally occurring texts that exem-
plify interesting target-language linguistic 
phenomena. We will describe how such texts 
can be semantically analyzed using a conven-
ient semi-automatic document authoring in-
terface, in effect adding them to LA’s stan-
dard semantic-based elicitation corpus. We 
then exemplify the language description 
process using a phenomenon that is prevalent 
in our research: alienable vs. inalienable 
nominal possession.  

1 Introduction 

The Linguist’s Assistant (LA) is a practical com-
putational paradigm for efficiently and thor-
oughly describing languages. Previously (Beale, 
submitted) we reported on the first of three main 
modes of LA-based language description: using 
the provided elicitation corpus of semantically 
analyzed sentences as the starting point and or-
ganizing principle from which the user describes 
the linguistic surface forms of a language using 
LA’s visual lexicon and grammatical rule devel-
opment interface. We described the semantic 
representation system that we developed and the 
make-up of the corpus of semantically analyzed 
texts that are meant to provide examples of a 
large subset of the kinds of meaning found in 
written communication. We described the visual 
lexicon and grammatical rule development inter-
face that the linguist uses to record the lexical 
and grammatical knowledge needed to translate 
the semantic corpus into the target language. 

Having read this previous paper, a respected 
linguist offered some valid criticism (valid, that 
is, if LA were restricted to this first mode of op-
eration): “I am, in general, a bit reluctant to use 

ready-made questionnaires, for all sorts of rea-
sons -- some of which you mention yourself.  It 
so happens that my personal interest has always 
been on naturalistic speech… I have always paid 
a lot of attention to what actually shows up in 
everyday spoken speech, as opposed to what 
could exist 'grammatically' but is never heard. 
I've always wondered why so many grammars or 
articles in linguistics work on sentences such as 
‘The man sees the woman.’ which don't appear 
ever in naturalistic speech.” (Alex François, per-
sonal communication). This paper is an attempt 
to counter such criticism by describing the sec-
ond mode of operation in LA-based language 
description: acquiring language data and gram-
matical knowledge using naturally occurring 
texts that exemplify interesting target-language 
linguistic phenomena. We will describe how 
such texts can be semantically analyzed using a 
convenient semi-automatic document authoring 
interface, in effect adding them to the standard 
semantic-based elicitation corpus used in the first 
mode of operation. We exemplify the process 
using a linguistic phenomenon that is prevalent 
in Oceanic languages: alienable vs. inalienable 
nominal possession. Ishizuka (2010) describes a 
similar phenomenon in Japanese and Korean. 

Before moving on, we should mention the 
third mode of LA-based language description: 
acquiring knowledge (lexical and grammatical) 
to cover pre-authored stories (“authored” in our 
context means that a semantic representation has 
been prepared). The semantically motivated 
elicitations from mode one combined with 
knowledge gained from the naturally occurring 
texts of mode two provide a solid foundation for 
lexicon and grammar development, but we have 
found that adding to that the experience and dis-
cipline of acquiring the knowledge necessary to 
generate actual story-length texts is invaluable. 
This is usually the best opportunity for docu-
menting phenomena that is more lexically de-

41



pendent since the vocabulary in the semantic-
based elicitation stage is quite limited. It also 
provides a test bed for the knowledge acquired in 
the first two modes of operation. For this reason 
we include several pre-authored community de-
velopment texts/stories with LA. After acquiring 
the necessary lexical and grammatical knowl-
edge for the target language, a draft translation of 
the stories can be produced and checked for natu-
ralness and accuracy. LA has been used in this 
mode to produce a significant amount of high-
quality translations in Jula (a Niger-Congo lan-
guage), Kewa (Papua New Guinea), North Tanna 
(Vanuatu), Korean and English. Work continues 
in Vanuatu, with additional languages planned in 
the near future. We argue that the high quality 
results achieved in these translations demonstrate 
the quality and coverage of the underlying lan-
guage description that LA produces. Beale et al. 
(2005) and Allman and Beale (2004; 2006) give 
more information on using LA in translation and 
for documentation on the evaluations of the 
translations produced.  

 
Figure 1: Semantic representation 
 
   LA is available for academic research and non-
profit applications. Tutorials and related papers 
are also available, although a significant portion 
of our planned work is to produce better tutorials 
and workshop materials. The developers plan to 
offer tutorials at various conferences in the near 
future. We emphasize that LA is a work in pro-
gress. In any practical product with complex 
theoretical underpinnings there is a development 
loop where a “critical mass” of theory is imple-
mented, the surrounding support tools created 
and tested, the product is used and evaluated, and 
then work begins again on improving the theo-

retical base. LA is somewhere in the late stages 
of the "being used and evaluated” step of this 
cycle. We certainly intend to improve the theo-
retical basis of each aspect of the product as time 
goes on, in large part as a result of the feedback, 
suggestions and criticisms of our users.  

2 Introduction to LA 
Consult Beale (submitted) for details on LA, in-
cluding the semantic representation language and 
the visual lexicon and grammar interfaces. In 
order to make this paper self-contained, we 
summarize some of this material here. 

A top-level view of the semantic representa-
tion is shown in Figure 1. Each concept “bundle” 
takes up three lines of text (for example, in the 
middle of the figure, “say”, the line directly be-
low that with “V-1ArUINA”, and the line with 
the question marks). The top line is the English 
gloss of the concept. It must be emphasized that 
the English gloss is only shown for convenience; 
it represents a concept in our ontology. The up-
per yellow box appears upon a mouse-over of the 
concept; it provides details about the definition 
and usage of the concept. The middle line of the 
concept bundle consists of letters and numbers 
that specify the semantic features associated with 
this particular instance of the concept. These fea-
tures can be viewed by placing the cursor over 
the concept. Note that phrases and clauses have 
semantic features defined for them in the same 
way that instances of concepts do. As shown in 
the figure, noun phrases have features such as 
semantic role. Verbs have time, aspect and mood 
features. Nouns have features that specify per-
son, number and various reference-related mean-
ings. The bottom line of the concept bundle is the 
“translation” of the concept into whatever target 
language is currently loaded (in the figure, ques-
tion marks are displayed because no language is 
loaded). This “translation” is only a mapping to a 
target root word; often a concept will require 
more than a direct word-for-concept substitution.  

Each sentence in the elicitation corpus has a 
semantic representation. In the first mode of lan-
guage description described in Beale (submitted), 
the linguist needs to “teach” the computer how to 
realize each of the parts of that input semantic 
representation, including all the individual con-
cepts, each of the semantic features and all the 
relationships (such as the case role relationships, 
discourse relations and adposition relationships). 
Backing up a bit, it is important to think about 
the overall nature of an LA project. The elicita-

42



tion corpus contains the wide range of phenom-
ena that we are interested in documenting. The 
linguist creates the lexical knowledge and 
grammatical rules so that LA's built-in text 
generator can accurately translate the underlying 
meaning of the included semantic-based elicita-
tion corpus. After this first stage is complete, the 
second stage of language description that is high-
lighted in this paper begins: using naturally oc-
curring target language texts to describe 
important linguistic phenomena that occur in the 
language. Once the descriptive phases are 
complete, the resulting computational model of 
the language can be used in translation 
applications or output as part of a language 
documentation project.  

 
Figure 2: Lexical features for Spanish 

 
Figure 3: Lexical forms for Spanish 

How does the linguist “teach the computer 
how to realize”? LA provides a rich, visual inter-
face for building target lexicons and grammatical 
rules.  Figure 2 shows the interface for creating 
and displaying lexical features, for example, the 
inflection type (-ar, -er or –ir) of a Spanish verb. 
Figure 3 shows the interface for displaying 
forms. Lexical form generation rules can be writ-
ten to automatically generate each of the forms 
of a word. The white boxes in Figure 3 are ir-
regular forms that were corrected by the user. 

Grammatical rules typically describe how a 
given semantic structure is realized in the lan-
guage. The whole gamut of linguistic phenomena 
is covered, from morphological alternations to 
case frame specifications to phrase structure or-
dering to lexical collocations – and many others. 
Figures 4-8 are examples of various types of 
grammatical rules. Figure 4 shows a morpho-
phonemic rule; Figure 5 a phrase structure order-
ing rule; Figure 6 a feature copying rule (as 
would be used, for example, in Subject-Verb 
agreement in English), Figure 7 a table, and Fig-

ure 8 a theta-grid (or case-frame) realization rule. 
There are also rules similar to Figure 8 for con-
verting the base semantic representation to a 
deep structure that is more appropriate for the 
target language. For example, Kewa1 has a rule 
that converts the basic semantics for “X respects 
Y” into “X lifts-up the name of Y.” 

 
Figure 4: Morphophonemic rule 

 
Figure 5: Phrase structure ordering rule 

 
Figure 6: Feature copying rule 
 

Currently, the linguist is responsible for the 
creation of rules, albeit with a natural, visual in-
terface that often is able to set up the requisite 
input semantic structures automatically. We con-
tinue work on modules that will allow the semi-

                                                
1 Dr. Karl Franklin supplied the Kewa data. 

43



automatic generation of rules similar to research 
in the BOAS (McShane et al., 2002), LinGO 
(Bender et al., 2010), PAWS (Black and Black, 
2009) and Avenue (Probst et al., 2003) projects. 
Such modules will, we believe, make LA acces-
sible to a larger pool of linguists. We also pro-
vide a growing list of rule templates that linguists 
can use to describe common phenomena. 

 
Figure 7: Table rule 

 
Figure 8: Theta grid (or case-frame) rule 

3 Possession in Maskelynes  
This paper focuses on using LA to describe a 
particular linguistic phenomenon using naturally 
occurring texts. We use alienable vs. inalienable 
nominal possession in Maskelynes as our case 
study. Ishizuka (2010) describes a similar phe-
nomenon in Japanese and Korean. Maskeleynes 
is an Oceanic language spoken by about 1400 
people in central Vanuatu. The language data and 
analysis presented here was inspired by a draft 
version of David Healey’s doctoral thesis (which 
he has asked me not to directly reference in its 
present form). In addition to the draft nature of 
that document, some of the data presented below 
was extrapolated from the examples without con-
firmation by a native speaker. As such, we do not 

intend this to be a linguistic specification. How-
ever, the phenomenon described is typical of 
Oceanic languages and has been directly ob-
served by the author in other Vanuatu languages. 
For the workshop presentation we will augment 
or replace this example with one more directly 
relevant to Asia; the point here is to describe the 
scope and methodology of LA as a linguistic re-
source. 

Oceanic linguists have historically divided 
nouns into alienable and inalienable classes. 2 
Inalienable nouns always appear with their “pos-
sessor.” For example, body parts (“my arm”) and 
relatives (“John’s father”) must occur with their 
possessor, as just illustrated. Healey also reports 
the more recently understood distinction of direct 
vs. indirect possession (Lichtenberk, 1985), 
which occurs in addition to the alienable vs. inal-
ienable distinction. Directly possessed nouns in 
Maskelynes carry the marker of possession on 
the head noun whereas indirectly possessed 
nouns carry the possessive marker on the posses-
sor noun or pronoun. We summarize the data in 
the rest of this section and in Figure 9. 

In Maskelynes, inalienable nouns (section 1 of 
Figure 9) can either be directly possessed or indi-
rectly possessed, depending on the class of the 
noun. Kinship terms and visible body parts gen-
erally are directly possessed (section 1A). Di-
rectly possessed inalienable nouns take an 
obligatory possession suffix. If the possessor 
must be specified (beyond the pro reference of 
the possession suffix), the possessor noun fol-
lows the head noun with no additional marking.  

Maskelynes also has indirectly possessed inal-
ienable nouns (section 1B). Some inanimate 
nouns that must be referred to with a possessor 
(for example, “his song” and “the home’s 
shadow”) and many internal body parts are indi-
rectly possessed. These all follow the ‘h’ class of 
indirectly possessed nouns described below. 

All alienable nouns (section 2) are indirectly 
possessed. 

All indirectly possessed nouns (sections 1B, 
2A and 2B) are either in the ‘h’ class (section 
2A, typically foods and drinks) or the ‘s’ class 
(section 2B, general nouns). Indirect possession 
can be realized with a possessive pronoun (that 
agrees with the ‘h’ or ‘s’ class, as appropriate), 
or, when the possessor cannot be a pronoun, a 
genitive proclitic (hX- or sX- depending on the 
noun class) attached to the possessor noun, in 

                                                
2 See (Ishizuka 2010) for a treatment of alienable vs. inal-
ienable possession in Japanese and Korean.  

44



which case the nominaliser (which generally oc-
curs on nouns) of the possessor is deleted. 

A final noun class relevant to our discussion 
involves the nominaliser: the human vs. non-
human class. Nouns in the human class take the 
'a-‘ nominaliser (section 1Ai) whereas non-
human nouns (section 1Aii) take the ‘nX-‘ nomi-
naliser. The ‘X’ in this nominaliser and in the 
proclitic is phonologically conditioned; we will 
leave it as ‘X’ to simplify the discussion. 

The examples in Figure 9 give an exhaustive 
reckoning of the different realization possibilities 
(other than the fact that different persons and 
numbers can be used for the pronouns and pos-
sessive suffixes).  

4 Describing Possession Using LA 
4.1 Authoring Examples 
The first step in describing a new phenomenon in 
LA is to author examples. This process will pro-

duce semantically analyzed examples that will be 
used in the knowledge acquisition stage (sections 

4.2 through 4.4 below) and in the 
testing stage (section 4.5).  

Upon starting the document 
author, the system will ask for input 
sentences in a controlled English.3 
This is a key benefit and a limitation 
at the same time. LA is not able to 
parse target texts into the semantic 
representation that is needed in the 
subsequent stages (since it does not 
have a complete target grammar at 
this stage). Therefore we allow the 
user to mentally translate the mean-
ing of the target language examples 
into the restricted English. Our built-
in English analyzer will then semi-
automatically produce the semantic 
analysis with only a small amount of 
editing of the results required from 
the user. Of course it would be opti-
mal if the user could enter the exam-
ples in the target language and have 
an automatic semantic analysis per-
formed, but this is impossible in the 
absence of a target language ana-
lyzer. Work has begun, however, on 
tools that will allow computer-
assisted semantic analysis of target 
texts, which would obviate the need 
for the user entering simplified Eng-
lish translations. 

To describe possession in Maske-
lynes, the user first enters the re-
stricted English translations of the 
target sentences from Figure 9, as 

shown in Figure 10. In practice, because the 
authoring stage is relatively simple, the user 
could enter many more examples than shown, 
including an exhaustive accounting of all the 
possible combinations of number and person of 
both the head and possessor nouns. Figure 11 
shows (in admittedly small print) a version of the 
results of the built-in semantic analysis. In the 
case of the first input phrase “My(John’s) 
mother”, the analysis is correct and no further 
editing is required. Notice that the analyzer chose 
the correct number and person (1st singular) for 
“John” and the correct Kinship relationship. For 
“my leg” the analyzer correctly chose the Body-
Part relationship. We continue to work on the 

                                                
3 See Beale et. al (2005) for a description of the controlled 
English and for a description of the authoring process. 

1. Inalienable 
  A. Directly possessed 
     i. Human 
       Pro-suffix possessor:     a-na-gw 
        NOM-mother-POSS.1st.excl.sing 
      “my mother” 
       Possessor must be specified:  a-na-n a-vanuan 
           NOM-mother-POSS.3rd.sing  NOM-man 
            “the man’s mother” 
     ii. Non-human 
       Pro-suffix possessor:     nX-rie-gw 
        NOM-leg-POSS.1st.excl.sing 
      “my leg” 
       Possessor must be specified:  nX-rie-n a-vanuan 
           NOM-leg-POSS.3rd.sing  NOM-man 
            “the man’s leg” 
  B. Indirectly possessed 
    Pronomial possessor:   nX-bwe hagw 
      NOM-song  POSSPRO.1st.excl.sing 
       “my song” 
    Possessor must be specified: nX-bwe hX-vanuan 
      NOM-song    POSS.1st.excl.sing-man    
          “the man’s song” 
2. Alienable (and indirectly possessed) 
  A. h class 
    Pronomial possessor:   nX-buai hagw 
      NOM-pig  POSSPRO.1st.excl.sing 
       “my pig” 
    Possessor must be specified: nX-buai hX-vanuan 
      NOM-pig    POSS.1st.excl.sing-man    
      “the man’s pig” 
  B. s class 
    Pronomial possessor:   nX-kuvkuv sagw 
      NOM-axe  POSSPRO.1st.excl.sing 
       “my axe” 
    Possessor must be specified: nX-kuvkuv sX-vanuan 
      NOM-axe    POSS.1st.excl.sing-man    
       “the man’s axe” 
Figure 9: Possession Examples for Maskelynes 

45



accuracy of the built-in English analyzer, but 
minor adjustments are sometimes necessary. 

4.2 Setting Up Target Language Features 
The key to describing possession in LA for 
Maskelynes - and indeed the key to using LA in 
general - is to first identify and create the target 
language features that will make it easy to write 
surface rules. In the case of possession, we need 
to know what class of noun is involved: inalien-
able vs. alienable, direct vs. indirect, and human 
vs. non-human. The user can define these fea-
tures in the LA lexicon and specify the correct 
value for each for each noun root. Figure 12 
shows an example lexicon for Maskelynes’ 
nouns. Note the “class” and “human?” features.  

 Figure 10: Document authoring input text 
 

As you can see in Figure 9, it is also necessary 
to know whether the possessor noun is specified 
or whether there can be a suffix or a full pronoun 
reference to it. A key step in describing posses-
sion is to define such a feature on nouns, “Reali-
zation Type,” which takes the values “noun” or  
“pronoun.” The user can delay consideration of 
how to actually set that feature for later. To con-
serve space we do not show the trivial process of 
defining a new target feature. 

Some words in Figure 9 have a POSS suffix 
(like a-na-gw in 1Ai). Some words have a gen-
tive proclitic (like hX-vanuan in 2A). And other 
words have no possession affixes (like nX-bwe in 
2A). Therefore another target feature that will 
make the final surface production rules easier is 
the “Noun Possession Type” feature for nouns. 
This will take the values “none”, “possessed” 
and “genitive proclitic”. This is the key feature 
used in our discussion in section 4.3 below. 
Again, the assignment of the correct value to this 
feature can be assumed when writing the rule 
that generates the actual surface form (section 
4.3); later (section 4.4) the rule(s) will be written 
to set the correct value.  

Note the difference between lexical features 
that are associated with a given root (and are de-
fined in the lexicon) and the general target fea-
tures that are defined outside the lexicon and 

whose values must be set by some rule. Given 
the two general features (“Realization Type” and 
“Noun Possession Type”) and the two lexical 
features (class and human?), it will be possible to 
construct surface rules that implement the full 
range of possible realizations of possession. 

 
Figure 11: Document author's semantic analysis 

 
Figure 12: Maskelynes noun classes in lexicon 

 
Figure 13: Feature copying rule 

 
The preparation of features needed by the sur-

face rules often has a final source: feature copy-
ing rules. In this case, the surface rules for 
choosing the correct possessor suffix to add to 
the main root for directly possessed nouns (sec-
tion 1 of Figure 9) must have access to the per-
son and number of the possessor. Figure 13 
shows a rule that copies the number of the em-
bedded possessor to the NP level of the main 
phrase. Note that the resulting feature will be 
called “possessor number.” A similar rule copies 
the person. Figure 13 also shows (in the mouse-
over tooltip pointed to by the arrow) an addi-

46



tional Noun Phrase target feature not mentioned 
yet: the “Noun Phrase Function.” This feature 
can have various values in Maskelynes, but will 
be set to the value “possessor” for these exam-
ples by a rule that we will not discuss (which is, 
in fact, the main point: we can define these fea-
tures and use them without worrying about the 
rules that will correctly set their values). The fact 
that we did not mention (or even think of!) this 
feature earlier points out what must be obvious: 
the need for target features often only becomes 
evident as you consider how to build an easy sur-
face rule, or even as you think about how to 
write the rules to set other target features (in sec-
tion 4.4 below). In all, there are three sources of 
features to be used in the surface rules: lexical 
features, target features defined by the user and 
set by rules, and features that were copied from 
other constituents using feature copying rules. 

4.3 Writing Surface Rules 
Space prevents us from presenting all of the sur-
face rules; we concentrate on the rule that pro-
duces the possessive suffix for directly possessed 
nouns (section 1 of Figure 9). Figure 14 shows 
the surface table rule that adds possessive suf-
fixes to directly possessed nouns. The three ar-
rows point to mouse-over pop-ups that detail 
which feature values are referenced in the indi-
cated row or column. The top-left corner cell of 
the table is a catch-all cell; the input must match 
this corner cell or the rule will not apply. In this 
case, the requirement is that the “Noun Posses-
sion Type” feature of the noun must be “pos-
sessed.” The “Noun Possession Type” is the tar-
get feature we discussed above. Later, we will 
need to write a rule to set its value to “possessed” 
for directly possessed head nouns. But the main 
point here is that this particular surface rule that 
adds the suffixes is extremely simple if we as-
sume the presence of that feature. The pop-up 
that appears on a mouse-over of the first row 
shows that this row refers to the “possessor per-
son” feature on the Noun Phrase. This feature 
(which is a copy of the person of the possessor 
noun) was created above using the feature copy-
ing rules. Likewise the first column refers to the 
“possessor number” feature on the Noun Phrase, 
also copied using the feature copying rule de-
scribed above. The table rule simply defines the 
correct suffixes for each combination of Person 
and Number. 

A rule of similar complexity will add the geni-
tive proclitic (as for hX-vanuan) for the case 
when the Noun Possession Type feature is “geni-

tive proclitic.” A separate rule will add the 
possession word (for example, hagw or sagw) 
when the Possession Type is “none.” In general, 
we have identified the three major realization 
cases, created a target feature to reflect these 
choices, and then wrote three different surface 
output rules to actually realize each choice. Each 
rule is relatively simple (once a proficiency in 
using LA is attained). At this stage we have not 
even worried about the rules that set the target 
feature that makes these surface output rules 
possible.  

 
Figure 14: Table rule for possessive suffixes 

4.4 Writing Rules that Set Target Features 
The surface rules described above are simple 
because a well thought-out system of target fea-
tures is assumed. The target features can come 
from the lexicon, from user-defined target fea-
tures, or from feature copying rules. Those that 
are user-defined need to have their values set 
with rules. The “Noun Possession Type” feature 
is set by rules (Figures 15-18) that examine the 
class of noun and the realization type (pronoun 
or full noun) of the possessor.4  

 
Figure 15: direct possession 

Figure 15 corresponds to the directly pos-
sessed case in 1A of Figure 9. Note the “Noun 

                                                
4 For the workshop presentation, we will go over the Noun 
Possession Type rules in greater depth and/or use a com-
pletely different example related to Asian linguistics. 

47



Possession Type” is attached to the head noun. 
Figures 16 and 17 correspond to the indirectly 
possessed cases in Figure 9 in which possessive 
suffixes are used; note that the output feature is 
attached to the possessor noun. And finally Fig-
ure 18 corresponds to the indirect case where a 
genitive proclitic is used. 

 
Figure 16: Indirect with possessive suffix on 
possessor (1st or 2nd person possessor) 

 
Figure 17: Similar to Figure 17 for 3rd pronoun 

 
Figure 18: Indirect with genitive proclitic 
 

We will not pretend that these rules are easy to 
follow in a paper with such limited space. We 
will be able to describe the rules better at the 

presentation. The main point is that the rules 
themselves are relatively simple to construct 
once a certain level of familiarity with LA is at-
tained. The progression we presented here is 
typical. The surface rules (section 4.3) are easy 
because we assume the presence of well thought-
out target features. The rules that set these target 
features (section 4.4) can be simple as well. Thus 
the entire process is often straightforward once 
the methodology is learned. The workshop pres-
entation will focus on using LA to implement 
this methodology. 

4.5 Testing the Acquired Knowledge 
The final stage of knowledge acquisition is to 
test the system by generating target text from the 
example sentences that were previously authored 
(section 4.1). Figure 19 shows the results of gen-
erating from the authored examples. The top text 
box contains the target translations, which in this 
case match the expectations from Figure 9. The 
yellowish mouse-over pop-up that appears when 
the cursor is placed on a-na-gw shows all of the 
rules that were applied that were related to that 
target word. LA also includes a breakpoint 
mechanism that allows the user to step through 
the application of a rule. These debugging tools 
(Allman, 2010) are invaluable in the knowledge 
acquisition, test, revision loop that is typical. 

Conclusion 

This paper along with Beale (submitted; 2011) 
describe the two main modes of language de-
scription in LA: 1) using the provided semantic 
elicitation corpus to guide knowledge acquisi-
tion, and 2) using naturally occurring texts that 
exemplify interesting target-language linguistic 
phenomena. We demonstrated the latter process 
in this paper using possession in Maskelynes as 
an example. In future publications we intend to 
present other linguistic phenomena, summaries 
of LA’s overall use to document a specific lan-

guage, and 
further tutorials 
and descriptions 
of LA itself.  

Figure 19:  Output translations 

48



References  
Tod Allman. 2010. The Translator‘s assistant: a multi-

lingual natural language generator based on lin-
guistic universals, typologies, and primitives. Ar-
lington, TX: University of Texas dissertation. 

Tod Allman and Stephen Beale. 2006. “A natural lan-
guage generator for minority languages,” in Pro-
ceedings of SALTMIL, Genoa, Italy. 

Tod Allman and Stephen Beale. 2004. “An environ-
ment for quick ramp-up multi-lingual authoring,” 
International Journal of Translation 16(1). 

Stephen Beale. Submitted. “Documenting endangered 
languages with linguist’s assistant.” Language 
Documentation and Conservation Journal. Draft 
available at: http://ilit.umbc.edu/sbeale/LA/papers/DEL-for-
LDC-journal.pdf 

Stephen Beale. 2011. Using Linguist’s Assistant for 
language description and translation. In Proceed-
ings of The 5th International Joint Conference on 
Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP-11) 
Demonstrations, Chiang Mai, Thailand. 

Stephen Beale, S. Nirenburg, M. McShane, and Tod 
Allman. 2005. “Document authoring the Bible for 
minority language translation,” in Proceedings of 
MT-Summit, Phuket, Thailand. 

Emily Bender, S. Drellishak, A. Fokkens, M. Good-
man, D. Mills, L. Poulson, and S. Saleem. 2010. 
“Grammar prototyping and testing with the LinGO 
grammar matrix customization system,” in Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2010 System Demonstrations. 

Sheryl Black and Andrew Black. 2009. “PAWS: 
parser and writer for syntax: drafting syntactic 
grammars in the third wave,” 
http://www.sil.org/silepubs/PUBS/51432/SILForu
m2009-002.pdf. 

Tomoko Ishizuka. 2010. Alienable-Inalienable asym-
metry in Japanese and Korean possession. 
University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in 
Linguistics. Volume 16: issue 1. 

Frantisek Licthenberk. 1985. “Possessive construc-
tions in Oceanic languages and Proto-Oceanic,” in 
Austronesean linguistics at the 15th Pacific Science 
Congress, Canberra: Pacific Linguistics C-88. 

Marjorie McShane, Sergei Nirenburg, Jim Cowie, and 
Ron Zacharski. 2002. “Embedding knowledge 
elicitation and MT systems within a single archi-
tecture,”  Machine Translation 17(4), pp.271-305. 

Katharina Probst, Lori Levin, Erik Petersen, Alon 
Lavie and Jaime Carbonell. 2003. “MT for minor-
ity languages using elicitation-based learning of 
syntactic transfer rules,” Machine Translation 
17(4), pp.245-270. 

49


