










































Improving Translation Model by Monolingual Data


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 330–336,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Improving Translation Model by Monolingual Data∗

Ondřej Bojar and Aleš Tamchyna
bojar@ufal.mff.cuni.cz, a.tamchyna@gmail.com

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics,
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University in Prague

Abstract

We use target-side monolingual data to ex-
tend the vocabulary of the translation model
in statistical machine translation. This method
called “reverse self-training” improves the de-
coder’s ability to produce grammatically cor-
rect translations into languages with morphol-
ogy richer than the source language esp. in
small-data setting. We empirically evalu-
ate the gains for several pairs of European
languages and discuss some approaches of
the underlying back-off techniques needed to
translate unseen forms of known words. We
also provide a description of the systems we
submitted to WMT11 Shared Task.

1 Introduction

Like any other statistical NLP task, SMT relies on
sizable language data for training. However the par-
allel data required for MT are a very scarce resource,
making it difficult to train MT systems of decent
quality. On the other hand, it is usually possible to
obtain large amounts of monolingual data.

In this paper, we attempt to make use of the
monolingual data to reduce the sparseness of surface
forms, an issue typical for morphologically rich lan-
guages. When MT systems translate into such lan-
guages, the limited size of parallel data often causes
the situation where the output should include a word
form never observed in the training data. Even
though the parallel data do contain the desired word

∗ This work has been supported by the grants EuroMatrix-
Plus (FP7-ICT-2007-3-231720 of the EU and 7E09003 of the
Czech Republic), P406/10/P259, and MSM 0021620838.

in other forms, a standard phrase-based decoder has
no way of using it to generate the correct translation.

Reverse self-training addresses this problem by
incorporating the available monolingual data in the
translation model. This paper builds upon the idea
outlined in Bojar and Tamchyna (2011), describing
how this technique was incorporated in the WMT
Shared Task and extending the experimental evalu-
ation of reverse self-training in several directions –
the examined language pairs (Section 4.2), data size
(Section 4.3) and back-off techniques (Section 4.4).

2 Related Work

The idea of using monolingual data for improving
the translation model has been explored in several
previous works. Bertoldi and Federico (2009) used
monolingual data for adapting existing translation
models to translation of data from different domains.
In their experiments, the most effective approach
was to train a new translation model from “fake”
parallel data consisting of target-side monolingual
data and their machine translation into the source
language by a baseline system.

Ueffing et al. (2007) used a boot-strapping tech-
nique to extend translation models using mono-
lingual data. They gradually translated additional
source-side sentences and selectively incorporated
them and their translations in the model.

Our technique also bears a similarity to de Gis-
pert et al. (2005), in that we try to use a back-off
for surface forms to generalize our model and pro-
duce translations with word forms never seen in the
original parallel data. However, instead of a rule-
based approach, we take advantage of the available

330



Source English Target Czech Czech Lemmatized
Parallel (small) a cat chased. . . = kočka honila. . . kočka honit. . .

I saw a cat = viděl jsem kočku vidět být kočka
I read about a dog = četl jsem o psovi čı́st být o pes

Monolingual (large) ? četl jsem o kočce čı́st být o kočka
I read about a cat ← Use reverse translation backed-off by lemmas.

Figure 1: The essence of reverse self-training: a new phrase pair (“about a cat” = “o kočce”) is learned based on a
small parallel corpus and large target-side monolingual texts.

data and learn these forms statistically. We are there-
fore not limited to verbs, but our system is only able
to generate surface forms observed in the target-side
monolingual data.

3 Reverse Self-Training

Figure 1 illustrates the core of the method. Using
available parallel data, we first train an MT system
to translate from the target to the source language.
Since we want to gather new word forms from the
monolingual data, this reverse model needs the abil-
ity to translate them. For that purpose we use a fac-
tored translation model (Koehn and Hoang, 2007)
with two alternative decoding paths: form→form
and back-off→form. We experimented with several
options for the back-off (simple stemming by trun-
cation or full lemmatization), see Section 4.4. The
decoder can thus use a less sparse representation of
words if their exact forms are not available in the
parallel data.

We use this reverse model to translate (much
larger) target-side monolingual data into the source
language. We preserve the word alignments of the
phrases as used in the decoding so we directly ob-
tain the word alignment in the new “parallel” cor-
pus. This gives us enough information to proceed
with the standard MT system training – we extract
and score the phrases consistent with the constructed
word alignment and create the phrase table.

We combine this enlarged translation model with
a model trained on the true parallel data and use
Minimum Error Rate Training (Och, 2003) to find
the balance between the two models. The final
model has four separate components – two language
models (one trained on parallel and one on monolin-
gual data) and the two translation models.

We do not expect the translation quality to im-

prove simply because more data is included in train-
ing – by adding translations generated using known
data, the model could gain only new combinations
of known words. However, by using a back-off
to less sparse units (e.g. lemmas) in the factored
target→source translation, we enable the decoder
to produce previously unseen surface forms. These
translations are then included in the model, reducing
the data sparseness of the target-side surface forms.

4 Experiments

We used common tools for phrase-based translation
– Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) decoder and tools,
SRILM (Stolcke, 2002) and KenLM (Heafield,
2011) for language modelling and GIZA++ (Och
and Ney, 2000) for word alignments.

For reverse self-training, we needed Moses to also
output word alignments between source sentences
and their translations. As we were not able to make
the existing version of this feature work, we added a
new option and re-implemented this funcionality.

We rely on automatic translation quality eval-
uation throughout our paper, namely the well-
established BLEU metric (Papineni et al., 2002). We
estimate 95% confidence bounds for the scores as
described in Koehn (2004). We evaluated our trans-
lations on lower-cased sentences.

4.1 Data Sources

Aside from the WMT 2011 Translation Task data,
we also used several additional data sources for the
experiments aimed at evaluating various aspects of
reverse self-training.

JRC-Acquis

We used the JRC-Acquis 3.0 corpus (Steinberger
et al., 2006) mainly because of the number of avail-
able languages. This corpus contains a large amount

331



Source Target Corpus Size (k sents) Vocabulary Size Ratio Baseline +Mono LM +Mono TM
Para Mono

English Czech 94 662 1.67 40.9±1.9 43.5±2.0 *44.3±2.0
English Finnish 123 863 2.81 27.0±1.9 27.6±1.8 28.3±1.7
English German 127 889 1.83 34.8±1.8 36.4±1.8 37.6±1.8
English Slovak 109 763 2.03 35.3±1.6 37.3±1.7 37.7±1.8
French Czech 95 665 1.43 39.9±1.9 42.5±1.8 43.1±1.8
French Finnish 125 875 2.45 26.7±1.8 27.8±1.7 28.3±1.8
French German 128 896 1.58 38.5±1.8 40.2±1.8 *40.5±1.8
German Czech 95 665 0.91 35.2±1.8 37.0±1.9 *37.3±1.9

Table 1: BLEU scores of European language pairs on JRC data. Asterisks in the last column mark experiments for
which MERT had to be re-run.

of legislative texts of the European Union. The fact
that all data in the corpus come from a single, very
narrow domain has two effects – models trained on
this corpus perform mostly very well in that domain
(as documented e.g. in Koehn et al. (2009)), but fail
when translating ordinary texts such as news or fic-
tion. Sentences in this corpus also tend to be rather
long (e.g. 30 words on average for English).

CzEng

CzEng 0.9 (Bojar and Žabokrtský, 2009) is a par-
allel richly annotated Czech-English corpus. It con-
tains roughly 8 million parallel sentences from a
variety of domains, including European regulations
(about 34% of tokens), fiction (15%), news (3%),
technical texts (10%) and unofficial movie subtitles
(27%). We do not make much use of the rich anno-
tation in this paper, however we did experiment with
using Czech lemmas (included in the annotation) as
the back-off factor for reverse self-training.

4.2 Comparison Across Languages

In order to determine how successful our approach
is across languages, we experimented with Czech,
Finnish, German and Slovak as target languages. All
of them have a rich morphology in some sense. We
limited our selection of source languages to English,
French and German because our method focuses on
the target language anyway. We did however com-
bine the languages with respect to the richness of
their vocabulary – the source language has less word
forms in almost all cases.

Czech and Slovak are very close languages, shar-
ing a large portion of vocabulary and having a very
similar grammar. There are many inflectional rules

for verbs, nouns, adjectives, pronouns and numerals.
Sentence structure is exhibited by various agreement
rules which often apply over long distance. Most of
the issues commonly associated with rich morphol-
ogy are clearly observable in these languages.

German also has some inflection, albeit much less
complex. The main source of German vocabulary
size are the compound words. Finnish serves as an
example of agglutinative languages well-known for
the abundance of word forms.

Table 1 contains the summary of our experimen-
tal results. Here, only the JRC-Acquis corpus was
used for training, development and evaluation. For
every language pair, we extracted the first 10 per-
cent of the parallel corpus and used them as the par-
allel data. The last 70 percent of the same corpus
were our “monolingual” data. We used a separate
set of 1000 sentences for the development and an-
other 1000 for testing.

Sentence counts of the corpora are shown in the
columns Corpus Size Para and Mono. The table
also shows the ratio between observed vocabulary
size of the target and source language. Except for
the German→Czech language pair, the ratios are
higher than 1. The Baseline column contains the
BLEU score of a system trained solely on the paral-
lel data (i.e. the first 10 percent). A 5-gram language
model was used. The “+Mono LM” scores were
achieved by adding a 5-gram language model trained
on the monolingual data as a separate component
(its weight was determined by MERT). The last col-
umn contains the scores after adding the translation
model self-trained on target monolingual data. This
model was also added as another component and the
weights associated with it were found by MERT.

332



For the back-off in the reverse self-training, we
used a simple suffix-trimming heuristic suitable for
fusional languages: cut off the last three characters
of each word always keeping at least the first three
characters. This heuristic reduces the vocabulary
size to a half for Czech and Slovak but it is much
less effective for Finish and German (Table 2), as
can be expected from their linguistic properties.

Language Vocabulary reduced to (%)
Czech 52
Finnish 64
German 73
Slovak 51

Table 2: Reduction of vocabulary size by suffix trimming

We did not use any linguistic tools, such as mor-
phological analyzers, in this set of experiments. We
see the main point of this section in illustrating the
applicability of our technique on a wide range of lan-
guages, including languages for which such tools are
not available.

We encountered problems when using MERT to
balance the weights of the four model components.
Our model consisted of 14 features – one for each
language model, five for each translation model
(phrase probability and lexical weight for both di-
rections and phrase penalty), word penalty and dis-
tortion penalty. The extra 5 weights of the reversely
trained translation model caused MERT to diverge in
some cases. Since we used the mert-moses.pl
script for tuning and kept the default parameters,
MERT ran for 25 iterations and stopped. As a result,
even though our method seemed to improve trans-
lation performance in most language pairs, several
experiments contradicted this observation. We sim-
ply reran the final tuning procedure in these cases
and were able to achieve an improvement in BLEU
as well. These language pairs are marked with a ’*’
sign in Table 1.

A possible explanation for this behaviour of
MERT is that the alternative decoding paths add a
lot of possible derivations that generate the same
string. To validate our hypothesis we examined a
diverging run of MERT for English→Czech transla-
tion with two translation models. Our n-best lists
contained the best 100 derivations for each trans-

Figure 2: Vocabulary ratio and BLEU score

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

 1.2

 0.8  1  1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8  2  2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8  3

G
ai

n 
in

 B
LE

U
 (

ab
so

lu
te

)

Vocabulary size ratio

en-cs
en-fi

en-de

en-sk

fr-cs
fr-fi

fr-dede-cs

lated sentence from the development data. On av-
erage (over all 1000 sentences and over all runs), the
n-best list only contained 6.13 different translations
of a sentence. The result of the same calculation
applied on the baseline run of MERT (which con-
verged in 9 iterations) was 34.85 hypotheses. This
clear disproportion shows that MERT had much less
information when optimizing our model.

Overall, reverse self-training seems helpful for
translating into morphologically rich languages. We
achieved promising gains in BLEU, even over the
baseline including a language model trained on the
monolingual data. The improvement ranges from
roughly 0.3 (e.g. German→Czech) to over 1 point
(English→German) absolute. This result also indi-
cates that suffix trimming is a quite robust heuristic,
useful for a variety of language types.

Figure 2 illustrates the relationship between vo-
cabulary size ratio of the language pair and the
improvement in translation quality. Although the
points are distributed quite irregularly, a certain ten-
dency towards higher gains with higher ratios is ob-
servable. We assume that reverse self-training is
most useful in cases where a single word form in the
source language can be translated as several forms in
the target language. A higher ratio between vocab-
ulary sizes suggests that these cases happen more
often, thus providing more space for improvement
using our method.

333



4.3 Data Sizes

We conducted a series of English-to-Czech experi-
ments with fixed parallel data and a varying size of
monolingual data. We used the CzEng corpus, 500
thousand parallel sentences and from 500 thousand
up to 5 million monolingual sentences. We used
two separate sets of 1000 sentences from CzEng for
development and evaluation. Our results are sum-
marized in Figure 3. The gains in BLEU become
more significant as the size of included monolingual
data increases. The highest improvement can be ob-
served when the data are largest – over 3 points ab-
solute. Figure 4 shows an example of the impact on
translation quality – the “Mono” data are 5 million
sentences.

When evaluated from this point of view, our
method can also be seen as a way of considerably
improving translation quality for languages with lit-
tle available parallel data.

We also experimented with varying size of paral-
lel data (500 thousand to 5 million sentences) and its
effect on reverse self-training contribution. The size
of monolingual data was always 5 million sentences.
We first measured the percentage of test data word
forms covered by the training data. We calculated
the value for parallel data and for the combination of
parallel and monolingual data. For word forms that
appeared only in the monolingual data, a different
form of the word had to be contained in the parallel
data (so that the model can learn it through the back-
off heuristic) in order to be counted in. The differ-
ence between the first and second value can simply
be thought of as the upper-bound estimation of re-
verse self-training contribution. Figure 5 shows the
results along with BLEU scores achieved in transla-
tion experiments following this scenario.

Our technique has much greater effect for small
parallel data sizes; the amount of newly learned
word forms declines rapidly as the size grows.
Similarly, improvement in BLEU score decreases
quickly and becomes negligible around 2 million
parallel sentences.

4.4 Back-off Techniques

We experimented with several options for the back-
off factor in English→Czech translation. Data from
training section of CzEng were used, 1 million par-

Figure 3: Relation between monolingual data size and
gains in BLEU score

 26

 27

 28

 29

 30

 31

 32

 33

 0  1  2  3  4  5

B
LE

U

Monolingual data size (millions of sentences)

Mono LM and TM
Mono LM

Figure 5: Varying parallel data size, surface form cov-
erage (“Parallel”, “Parallel and Mono”) and BLEU score
(“Mono LM”, “Mono LM and TM”)

 26

 28

 30

 32

 34

 36

 38

 0  0.5  1  1.5  2  2.5  3  3.5  4  4.5

 90

 92

 94

 96

 98

B
LE

U

C
ov

er
ag

e 
of

 s
ur

fa
ce

 fo
rm

s 
(%

)

Parallel data size (millions of sentences)

Mono LM and TM
Mono LM

 26

 28

 30

 32

 34

 36

 38

 0  0.5  1  1.5  2  2.5  3  3.5  4  4.5

 90

 92

 94

 96

 98

B
LE

U

C
ov

er
ag

e 
of

 s
ur

fa
ce

 fo
rm

s 
(%

)

Parallel data size (millions of sentences)

Parallel and Mono
Parallel

allel sentences and another 5 million sentences as
target-side monolingual data. As in the previous
section, the sizes of our development and evaluation
sets were a thousand sentences.

CzEng annotation contains lexically disam-
biguated word lemmas, an appealing option for our
purposes. We also tried trimming the last 3 charac-
ters of each word, keeping at least the first 3 charac-
ters intact. Stemming of each word to four charac-
ters was also evaluated (Stem-4).

Table 3 summarizes our results. The last column
shows the vocabulary size compared to original vo-
cabulary size, estimated on lower-cased words.

We are not surprised by stemming performing the

334



System Translation Gloss
Baseline Jsi tak zrcadla? Are youSG so mirrors? (ungrammatical)
+Mono LM Jsi neobjednávejte zrcadla? Did youSG don’t orderPL mirrors? (ungrammatical)
+Mono TM Už sis objednal zrcadla? Have youSG orderedSG the mirrors (for yourself) yet?

Figure 4: Translation of the sentence “Did you order the mirrors?” by baseline systems and a reversely-trained system.
Only the last one is able to generate the correct form of the word “order”.

worst – the equivalence classes generated by this
simple heuristic are too broad. Using lemmas seems
optimal from the linguistic point of view, however
suffix trimming outperformed this approach in our
experiments. We feel that finding well-performing
back-off techniques for other languages merits fur-
ther research.

Back-off BLEU Vocabulary Size (%)
Baseline 31.82±3.24 100
Stem-4 32.73±3.19 19
Lemma 33.05±3.40 54
Trimmed Suffix 33.28±3.32 47

Table 3: Back-off BLEU scores comparison

4.5 WMT Systems

We submitted systems that used reverse self-
training (cu-tamchyna) for English→Czech and
English→German language pairs.

Our parallel data for German were constrained to
the provided set (1.9 million sentences). For Czech,
we used the training sections of CzEng and the sup-
plied WMT11 News Commentary data (7.3 million
sentences in total).

In case of German, we only used the supplied
monolingual data, for Czech we used a large col-
lection of texts for language modelling (i.e. uncon-
strained). The reverse self-training used only the
constrained data – 2.3 million sentences in German
and 2.2 in Czech. In case of Czech, we only used
the News monolingual data from 2010 and 2011 for
reverse self-training – we expected that recent data
from the same domain as the test set would improve
translation performance the most.

We achieved mixed results with these systems –
for translation into German, reverse self-training did
not improve translation performance. For Czech,
we were able to achieve a small gain, even though
the reversely translated data contained less sentences

than the parallel data. Our BLEU scores were also
affected by submitting translation outputs without
normalized punctuation and with a slightly different
tokenization.

In this scenario, a lot of parallel data were avail-
able and we did not manage to prepare a reversely
trained model from larger monolingual data. Both
of these factors contributed to the inconclusive re-
sults.

Table 4 shows case-insensitive BLEU scores as
calculated in the official evaluation.

Target Language Mono LM +Mono TM
German 14.8 14.8
Czech 15.7 15.9

Table 4: Case-insensitive BLEU of WMT systems

5 Conclusion

We introduced a technique for exploiting monolin-
gual data to improve the quality of translation into
morphologically rich languages.

We carried out experiments showing improve-
ments in BLEU when using our method for trans-
lating into Czech, Finnish, German and Slovak with
small parallel data. We discussed the issues of in-
cluding similar translation models as separate com-
ponents in MERT.

We showed that gains in BLEU score increase
with growing size of monolingual data. On the other
hand, growing parallel data size diminishes the ef-
fect of our method quite rapidly. We also docu-
mented our experiments with several back-off tech-
niques for English to Czech translation.

Finally, we described our primary submissions to
the WMT 2011 Shared Translation Task.

335



References

Nicola Bertoldi and Marcello Federico. 2009. Do-
main adaptation for statistical machine translation with
monolingual resources. In Proceedings of the Fourth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
182–189, Athens, Greece, March. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Ondřej Bojar and Aleš Tamchyna. 2011. Forms Wanted:
Training SMT on Monolingual Data. Abstract at
Machine Translation and Morphologically-Rich Lan-
guages. Research Workshop of the Israel Science
Foundation University of Haifa, Israel, January.

Ondřej Bojar and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2009. CzEng
0.9: Large Parallel Treebank with Rich Annotation.
Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, 92:63–
83.

Adrià de Gispert, José B. Mariño, and Josep M. Crego.
2005. Improving statistical machine translation by
classifying and generalizing inflected verb forms. In
Eurospeech 2005, pages 3185–3188, Lisbon, Portugal.

Kenneth Heafield. 2011. Kenlm: Faster and smaller
language model queries. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, Edin-
burgh, UK, July. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Philipp Koehn and Hieu Hoang. 2007. Factored Transla-
tion Models. In Proc. of EMNLP.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In ACL. The
Association for Computer Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn, Alexandra Birch, and Ralf Steinberger.
2009. 462 machine translation systems for europe. In
MT Summit XII.

Philipp Koehn. 2004. Statistical significance tests for
machine translation evaluation. In EMNLP, pages
388–395. ACL.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improved sta-
tistical alignment models. pages 440–447, Hongkong,
China, October.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training
in statistical machine translation. In ACL, pages 160–
167.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evalua-
tion of machine translation. In ACL, pages 311–318.

Ralf Steinberger, Bruno Pouliquen, Anna Widiger,
Camelia Ignat, Tomaz Erjavec, Dan Tufis, and Daniel
Varga. 2006. The JRC-acquis: A multilingual

aligned parallel corpus with 20+ languages. CoRR,
abs/cs/0609058. informal publication.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. Srilm — an extensible language
modeling toolkit, June 06.

Nicola Ueffing, Gholamreza Haffari, and Anoop Sarkar.
2007. Semi-supervised model adaptation for statistical
machine translation. Machine Translation, 21(2):77–
94.

336


