










































CMU Haitian Creole-English Translation System for WMT 2011


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 386–392,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

CMU Haitian Creole-English Translation System for WMT 2011

Sanjika Hewavitharana, Nguyen Bach, Qin Gao, Vamshi Ambati, Stephan Vogel
Language Technologies Institute

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

{sanjika,nbach,qing,vamshi,vogel+}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper describes the statistical machine
translation system submitted to the WMT11
Featured Translation Task, which involves
translating Haitian Creole SMS messages into
English. In our experiments we try to ad-
dress the issue of noise in the training data,
as well as the lack of parallel training data.
Spelling normalization is applied to reduce
out-of-vocabulary words in the corpus. Us-
ing Semantic Role Labeling rules we expand
the available training corpus. Additionally we
investigate extracting parallel sentences from
comparable data to enhance the available par-
allel data.

1 Introduction

In this paper we describe the CMU-SMT Haitian
Creole-English translation system that was built as
part of the Featured Translation Task of the WMT11.
The task involved translating text (SMS) messages
that were collected during the humanitarian opera-
tions in the aftermath of the earthquake in Haiti in
2010.

Due to the circumstances of this situation, the
SMS messages were often noisy, and contained in-
complete information. Additionally they sometimes
contained text from other languages (e.g. French).
As is typical in SMS messages, abbreviated text (as
well as misspelled words) were present. Further,
since the Haitian Creole orthography is not fully
standardized (Allen, 1998), the text inherently con-
tained several different spelling variants.

These messages were translated into English by
a group of volunteers during the disaster response.

The background and the details of this crowdsourc-
ing translation effort is discussed in Munro (2010).
Some translations contain additional annotations
which are not part of the original SMS, possibly
added by the translators to clarify certain issues with
the original message. Along with the noise, spelling
variants, and fragmented nature of the SMS mes-
sages, the annotations contribute to the overall diffi-
culty in building a machine translation system with
this type of data. We aim to address some of these
issues in out effort.

Another challenge with building a Haitian Creole-
English translation system is the lack of parallel
data. As Haitian Creole is a less commonly spo-
ken language, the available resources are limited.
Other than the manually translated SMS messages,
the available Haitian Creole-English parallel data
is about 2 million tokens, which is considerably
smaller than the parallel data available for the Stan-
dard Translation Task of the WMT11.

Lewis (2010) details the effort quickly put
forth by the Microsoft Translator team in building
a Haitian Creole-English translation system from
scratch, as part of the relief effort in Haiti. We took
a similar approach to this shared task: rapidly build-
ing a translation system to a new language pair uti-
lizing available resources. Within a short span (of
about one week), we built a baseline translation sys-
tem, identified the problems with the system, and
exploited several approaches to rectify them and im-
prove its overall performance. We addressed the is-
sues above (namely: noise in the data and sparsity of
parallel data) when building our translation system
for Haitian Creole-English task. We also normalized

386



different spelling variations to reduce the number of
out-of-vocabulary (OOV) tokens in the corpus. We
used Semantic Role Labeling to expand the available
training corpus. Additionally we exploited other re-
sources, such as comparable corpora, to extract par-
allel data to enhance the limited amount of available
parallel data.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2
presents the baseline system used, along with a de-
scription of training and testing data used. Section 3
explains different preprocessing schemes that were
tested for SMS data, and their effect on the trans-
lation performance. Corpus expansion approach is
given in Section 4. Parallel data extraction from
comparable corpora is presented in section 5. We
present our concluding remarks in Section 6.

2 System Architecture

The WMT11 has provided a collection of Haitian
Creole-English parallel data from a variety of
sources, including data from CMU1. A summary
of the data is given in Table 1. The primary in-
domain data comprises the translated (noisy) SMS
messages. The additional data contains newswire
text, medical dialogs, the Bible, several bilingual
dictionaries, and parallel sentences from Wikipedia.

Corpus Sentences Tokens (HT/EN)

SMS messages 16,676 351K / 324K
Newswire text 13,517 336K / 292K
Medical dialog 1,619 10K / 10K
Dictionaries 42,178 97K / 92K
Other 41,872 939K / 865K
Wikipedia 8,476 77K / 90K

Total 124,338 1.81M / 1.67M

Table 1: Haitian Creole (HT) and English (EN) parallel
data provide by WMT11

We preprocessed the data by separating the punc-
tuations, and converting both sides into lower case.
SMS data was further processed to normalize quo-
tations and other punctuation marks, and to remove
all markups.

To build a baseline translation system we fol-
lowed the recommended steps: generate word align-

1www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/haitian/

ments using GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) and
phrase extraction using Moses (Koehn et al., 2007).
We built a 4-gram language model with the SRI
LM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) using English side of
the training corpus. Model parameters for the lan-
guage model, phrase table, and lexicalized reorder-
ing model were optimized via minimum error-rate
(MER) training (Och, 2003).

The SMS test sets were provided in two formats:
raw (r) and cleaned (cl), where the latter had been
manually cleaned. We used the SMS dev clean to op-
timize the decoder parameters and the SMS devtest
clean and SMS devtest raw as held-out evaluation sets.
Each set contains 900 sentences. A separate SMS
test, with 1274 sentences, was used as the unseen
test set in the final evaluation. For each experiment
we report the case-insensitive BLEU (Papineni et
al., 2002) score.

Using the available training data we built several
baseline systems: The first system (Parallel-OOD),
uses all the out-of-domain parallel data except the
Wikipedia sentences. The second system, in addi-
tion, includes Wikipedia data. The third system uses
all available parallel training data (including both the
out-of-domain data as well as in-domain SMS data).
We used the third system as the baseline for later
experiments.

dev (cl) devtest (cl) devtest (r)

Parallel-OOD 23.84 22.28 17.32
+Wikipedia 23.89 22.42 17.37
+SMS 32.28 33.49 29.95

Table 2: Translation results in BLEU for different corpora

Translation results for different test sets using the
three systems are presented in Table 2. No signifi-
cant difference in BLEU was observed with the ad-
dition of Wikipedia data. However, a significant
improvement in performance can be seen when in-
domain SMS data is added, despite the fact that this
is noisy data. Because of this, we paid special atten-
tion to clean the noisy SMS data.

3 Preprocessing of SMS Data

In this section we explain two approaches that we
explored to reduce the noise in the SMS data.

387



3.1 Lexicon-based Collapsing of OOV Words

We observed that a number of words in the raw SMS
data consisted of asterisks or special character sym-
bols. This seems to occur because either users had
to type with a phone-based keyboard or simply due
to processing errors in the pipeline. Our aim, there-
fore, was to collapse these incorrectly spelled words
to their closest vocabulary entires from the rest of
the data.

We first built a lexicon of words using the entire
data provided for the Featured Task. We then built
a second probabilistic lexicon by cross-referencing
SMS dev raw with the cleaned-up SMS dev clean.
The first resource can be treated as a dictionary
while the second is a look-up table. We processed
incoming text by first selecting all the words with
special characters in the text, and then computing
an edit distance with each of the words in the first
lexicon. We return the most frequent word that is
the closest match as a substitute. For all words that
don’t have a closest match, we looked them up in the
probabilistic dictionary and return a potential substi-
tution if it exists. As the probabilistic dictionary is
constructed using a very small amount of data, the
two-level lookup helps to place less trust in it and
use it only as a back-off option for a missing match
in the larger lexicon.

This approach only collapses words with special
characters to their closest in-vocabulary words. It
does not make a significant difference to the OOV
ratios, but reduces the number of tokens in the
dataset. Using this approach we were able to col-
lapse about 80% of the words with special characters
to existing vocabulary entries.

3.2 Spelling Normalization

One of the most problematic issues in Haitian Cre-
ole SMS translation system is misspelled words.
When training data contains misspelled words, the
translation system performance will be affected at
several levels, such as word alignment, phrase/rule
extractions, and tuning parameters (Bertoldi et al.,
2010). Therefore, it is desirable to perform spelling
correction on the data. Spelling correction based
on the noisy channel model has been explored in
(Kernighan et al., 1990; Brill and Moore, 2000;
Toutanova and Moore, 2002). The model is gener-

ally presented in the following form:

p(ĉ|h) = arg max
∀c

p(h|c)p(c) (1)

where h is the Haitian Creole word, and c is a pos-
sible correction. p(c) is a source model which is a
prior of word probabilities. p(h|c) is an error model
or noisy channel model that accounts for spelling
transformations on letter sequences.

Unfortunately, in the case of Haitian Creole SMS
we do not have sufficient data to estimate p(h|c)
and p(c). However, we can assume p(c|h) ≈ p(c)
and c is in the French vocabulary and is not an En-
glish word. The rationale for this, from linguistic
point of view, is that Haitian Creole developed from
the 18th century French. As a result, an important
part of the Haitian Creole lexicon is directly derived
from French. Furthermore, SMS messages some-
times were mixed with English words. Therefore,
we ignore c if it appears in an English dictionary.

Given h, how do we get a list of possible normal-
ization c and estimate p(c)? We use edit distance
of 1 between h and c. An edit can be a deletion,
transposition, substitution, or insertion. If a word
has l characters, there will be 66l+31 possible cor-
rections2. It may result in a large list. However,
we only keep possible normalizations which appear
in a French dictionary and do not appear in an En-
glish dictionary3. To approximate p(c), we use the
French parallel Giga training data from the Shared
Task of the WMT11. p(c) is estimated by MLE. Fi-
nally, our system chooses the French word with the
highest probability.

dev (cl) devtest (cl) test (cl)

Before 2.6 ; 16 2.7 ; 16 2.6 ; 16
After 2.2 ; 13.63 2.3 ; 13.95 2.2 ; 14.3

Table 3: Percentage of OOV tokens and types in test sets
before and after performing spelling normalization.

Table 3 shows that spelling normalization helps
to bring down the percentage of OOV tokens and
types by 0.4% and 2% respectively on the three test
2l deletions, l-1 transpositions, 32l substitutions, and 32(l+1)
insertions; Haitian Creole orthography has 32 forms.

3The English dictionary was created from the English Gigaword
corpus.

388



sets. Some examples of Haitian Creole words and
their French normalization are (tropikal:tropical),
(economiques:economique), (irjan:iran), (idanti-
fie:identifie).

dev (cl) devtest (cl) devtest (r)

Baseline 32.28 33.49 29.95
S1 32.18 30.22 25.45
S2 28.9 31.06 27.69

Table 4: Translation results in BLEU with/without
spelling correction

Given the encouraging OOV reductions, we ap-
plied the spelling normalization for the full corpus,
and built new translation systems. Our baseline sys-
tem has no spelling correction (for the training cor-
pus or the test sets); in S1, the spelling corrections
is applied to all words; in S2, the spelling correc-
tion is only applied to Haitian Creole words that oc-
cur only once or twice in the data. In S1, 11.5% of
Haitian Creole words had been mapped to French,
including high frequency words. Meanwhile, 4.5%
Haitian Creole words on training data were mapped
to French words in S2. Table 4 presents a compar-
ison of translation performance of the baseline, S1
and S2 for the SMS test sets. Unfortunately, none of
systems with spelling normalization outperformed
the system trained on the original data. Restricting
the spelling correction only to infrequent words (S2)
performed better for the devtest sets, but not for the
dev set, although all the test sets come from the same
domain.

4 Corpus Expansion using Semantic Role
Labeling

To address the problem of limited resources, we
tried to expand the training corpus by applying the
corpus expansion method described in (Gao and Vo-
gel, 2011). First, we parsed and labeled the semantic
roles of the English side of the corpus, using the AS-
SERT labeler (Pradhan et al., 2004). Next, using the
word alignment models of the parallel corpus, we
extracted Semantic Role Label (SRL) substitution
rules. SRL rules consist of source and target phrases
that cover whole constituents of semantic roles, the
verb frames they belong to, and the role labels of

the constituents. The source and target phrases must
comply with the restrictions detailed in (Gao and Vo-
gel, 2011). Third, for each sentence, we replaced
one of embedded SRL substitution rules with equiv-
alent rules that have the same verb frame and the
same role label.

The original method includes an additional but
crucial step of filtering out the grammatically incor-
rect sentences using an SVM classifier, trained with
labeled samples. However, we were unable to find
Haitian Creole speakers who could manually label
training data for the filtering step. Therefore, we
were forced to skip this filtering step. We expanded
the full training corpus which contained 124K sen-
tence pairs, resulting in an expanded corpus with
505K sentences. The expanded corpus was force-
aligned using the word alignment models trained
on the original unexpanded corpus. A new trans-
lation system was built using the original plus the
expanded corpus. As seen in Table 5, we observed
a small improvement with the expanded corpus for
the raw devtest. This method did not improve per-
formance for the other two test sets.

dev (cl) devtest (cl) devtest (r)

Baseline 32.28 33.49 29.95
+Expanded 31.79 32.98 30.1

Table 5: Translation results in BLEU with/without corpus
expansion

A possible explanation for this, in addition to
the missing component of filtering, is the low qual-
ity of SRL parsing on the SMS corpus. We ob-
served a very small ratio of expansions in the
Haitian Creole-English data, when compared to the
Chinese-English experiment shown in (Gao and Vo-
gel, 2011). The latter used a high quality corpus for
the expansion and the expanded corpus was 20 times
larger than the original one. Due to the noisy nature
of the available parallel data, only 61K of the 124K
sentences were successfully parsed and SRL-labeled
by the labeler.

389



5 Extracting Parallel Data from
Comparable Data

As we only have a limited amount of parallel data,
we focused on automatically extracting additional
parallel data from other available resources, such as
comparable corpora. We were not able to find com-
parable news articles in Haitian Creole and English.
However, we found several hundred Haitian Creole
medical articles on the Web which were linked to
comparable English articles4. Although some of the
medical articles seemed to be direct translations of
each other, converting the original pdf formats into
text did not produce sentence aligned parallel arti-
cles. Rather, it produced sentence fragments (some-
times in different orders) due to the structural dif-
ferences in the article pair. Hence a parallel sen-
tence detection technique was necessary to process
the data. Because the SMS messages are related to
the disaster relief effort, which may include many
words in the medical domain, we believe the newly
extracted data may help improve translation perfor-
mance.

Following Munteanu and Marcu (2005), we used
a Maximum Entropy classifier to identify compara-
ble sentence. To avoid the problem of having dif-
ferent sentence orderings in the article pair, we take
every source-target sentence pair in the two articles,
and apply the classifier to detect if they are paral-
lel. The classifier approach is appealing to a low-
resource language such as Haitian Creole, because
the features for the classifier can be generated with
minimal translation resources (i.e. a translation lex-
icon).

5.1 Maximum Entropy Classifier
The classifier probability can be defined as:

Pr(ci|S, T ) =
exp

(∑n
j=1 λjfij(ci, S, T )

)
Z(S, T )

(2)

where (S, T ) is a sentence pair, ci is the class, fij
are feature functions and Z(S) is a normalizing fac-
tor. The parameters λi are the weights for the feature
functions and are estimated by optimizing on a train-
ing data set. For the task of classifying a sentence
pair, there are two classes, c0 = non − parallel
4Two main sources were: www.rhin.org and www.nlm.nih.gov

and c1 = parallel . A value closer to one for
Pr(c1|S, T ) indicates that (S, T ) are parallel.

The features are defined primarily based on trans-
lation lexicon probabilities. Rather than computing
word alignment between the two sentences, we use
lexical probabilities to determine alignment points
as follows: a source word s is aligned to a tar-
get word t if p(s|t) > 0.5. Target word align-
ment is computed similarly. We defined a feature set
which includes: length ratio and length difference
between source and target sentences, lexical proba-
bility scores similar to IBM model 1 (Brown et al.,
1993), number of aligned/unaligned words and the
length of the longest aligned word sequence. Lexi-
cal probability score, and alignment features gener-
ate two sets of features based on translation lexica
obtained by training in both directions. Features are
normalized with respect to the sentence length.

5.2 Training and Testing the Classifier
To train the model we need training examples that
belong to each of the two classes: parallel and non-
parallel. Initially we used a subset of the available
parallel data as training examples for the classifier.
This data was primarily sourced from medical con-
versations and newswire text, whereas the compa-
rable data was found in medical articles. This mis-
match in domain resulted in poor classification per-
formance. Therefore we manually aligned a set of
250 Haitian Creole-English sentence pairs from the
medical articles and divided them in to a training set
(175 sentences) and a test set (100 sentences).

The parallel sentence pairs were directly used as
positive examples. In selecting negative examples,
we followed the same approach as in (Munteanu
and Marcu, 2005): pairing all source phrases with
all target phrases, but filter out the parallel pairs and
those that have high length difference or a low lex-
ical overlap, and then randomly select a subset of
phrase pairs as the negative training set. The test
set was generated in a similar manner. The model
parameters were estimated using the GIS algorithm.
We used the trained ME model to classify the sen-
tences in the test set into the two classes, and notice
how many instances are classified correctly.

Classification results are as given in Table 6. We
notice that even with a smaller training set, the clas-
sifier produces results with high precision. Using

390



Precision Recall F-1 Score

Training Set 93.90 77.00 84.61
Test Set 85.53 74.29 79.52

Table 6: Performance of the Classifier

the trained classifier, we processed 220 article pairs
which contained a total of 20K source sentences
and 18K target sentences. The classifier selected
about 10K sentences as parallel. From these, we se-
lected sentences where pr(c1|S, T ) > 0.7 for trans-
lation experiments. The extracted data expanded the
source vocabulary by about 5%.

We built a second translation system by combin-
ing the baseline parallel corpus and the extracted
corpus. Table 7 shows the translation results for this
system.

dev (cl) devtest (cl) devtest (r)

Baseline 32.28 33.49 29.95
+Extracted 32.29 33.29 29.89

Table 7: Translation results in BLEU with/without ex-
tracted data

The results indicate that there is no significant per-
formance difference in using the extracted data. This
may be due to the relatively small size of the com-
parable corpus we used when extract the data.

6 Conclusion

Building an MT system to translate Haitian Creole
SMS messages involved several challenges. There
was only a limited amount of parallel data to train
the models. The SMS messages tend to be quite
noisy. After building a baseline MT system, we
investigated several approaches to improve its per-
formance. In particular, we tried collapsing OOV
words using a lexicon generated with clean data, and
normalize different variations in spelling. However,
these methods did not results in improved translation
performance.

We tried to address the data sparseness problem
with two approaches: expanding the corpus using
SRL rules, and extracting parallel sentences from
a collection of comparable documents. Corpus ex-

pansion showed a small improvement for the raw
devtest. Both corpus expansion and parallel data
extraction did not have a positive impact on other
test sets. Both these methods have shown significant
performance improvement in the past in large data
scenarios (for Chinese-English and Arabic-English),
but failed to show improvements in the current low-
data scenario. Thus, we need further investigations
in handling noisy data, especially in low-resource
scenarios.

Acknowledgment

We thank Julianne Mentzer for assisting with editing
and proofreading the final version of the paper. We
also thank the anonymous reviewers for their valu-
able comments.

References
Jeff Allen. 1998. Lexical variation in haitian cre-

ole and orthographic issues for machine translation
(MT) and optical character recognition (OCR) appli-
cations. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Em-
bedded Machine Translation systems of AMTA confer-
ence, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, October.

Nicola Bertoldi, Mauro Cettolo, and Marcello Federico.
2010. Statistical machine translation of texts with mis-
spelled words. In Human Language Technologies:
The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Los Angeles, California, June.

Eric Brill and Robert C. Moore. 2000. An improved
error model for noisy channel spelling correction. In
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting on Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2000), pages
286–293.

Peter F. Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della
Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathematics
of statistical machine translation: Parameter estima-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):263–311.

Qin Gao and Stephan Vogel. 2011. Corpus expansion
for statistical machine translation with semantic role
label substitution rules. In Proceedings of the 49th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Portland,
Oregon, USA, June.

Mark D. Kernighan, Kenneth W. Church, and William A.
Gale. 1990. A spelling correction program based on
a noisy channel model. In Proceedings of the 13th
conference on Computational linguistics - Volume 2,
COLING ’90, pages 205–210.

391



Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, Prague, Czech Republic,
June.

William Lewis. 2010. Haitian Creole: How to build and
ship an mt engine from scratch in 4 days, 17 hours, &
30 minutes. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual confer-
ence of the European Association for Machine Trans-
lation (EAMT), Saint-Raphaël, France, May.

Robert Munro. 2010. Crowdsourced translation for
emergency response in haiti: the global collaboration
of local knowledge. In AMTA Workshop on Collab-
orative Crowdsourcing for Translation, Denver, Col-
orado, USA, October-November.

Dragos Stefan Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2005. Im-
proving machine translation performance by exploit-
ing non-parallel corpora. Computational Linguistics,
31(4):477–504.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 160–167, Sapporo, Japan.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evalua-
tion of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 311–318, Philadelphia, Pennsylva-
nia, USA, July.

Sameer S. Pradhan, Wayne Ward, Kadri Hacioglu,
James H. Martin, and Daniel Jurafsky. 2004. Shal-
low semantic parsing using support vector machines.
In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
Conference/North American chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics annual meeting
(HLT/NAACL-2004).

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. An extensible language model-
ing toolkit. In Proc. of International Conference on
Spoken Language Processing, volume 2, pages 901–
904, Denver, CO, September.

Kristina Toutanova and Robert Moore. 2002. Pronun-
ciation modeling for improved spelling correction. In
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL 2002).

392


