










































POMY: A Conversational Virtual Environment for Language Learning in POSTECH


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2011: the 12th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 344–346,
Portland, Oregon, June 17-18, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

POMY: A Conversational Virtual Environment for Language Learning 

in POSTECH 

 

Hyungjong 

 Noh 
Kyusong  

Lee 

Sungjin  

Lee 

 

Gary Geunbae 

Lee 

Department of Computer Science and Engineering 

Pohang University of Science & Technology, Pohang, South Korea 

{nohhj, kyusonglee, junion, gblee}@postech.ac.kr 

  

 

 

Abstract 

This demonstration will illustrate an inter-

active immersive computer game, POMY, 

designed to help Korean speakers learn 

English. This system allows learners to ex-

ercise their visual and aural senses, receiv-

ing a full immersion experience to increase 

their memory and concentration abilities to 

a greatest extent. In POMY, learners can 

have free conversations with game charac-

ters and receive corrective feedback to their 

errors. Game characters show various emo-

tional expressions based on learners’ input 

to keep learners motivated. Through this 

system, learners can repeatedly practice 

conversations in everyday life setting in a 

foreign language with no embarrassment. 

1 Introduction 

The needs for computer-based methods for learn-

ing language skills and components are increasing. 

One of the ultimate goals of computer-assisted 

language learning is to provide learners with an 

immersive environment that facilitates acquiring 

communicative competence. According to Second 

Language Acquisition (SLA) theories, there are 

some essential factors for improving learners’ con-

versational skills: 1) comprehensible inputs and 

outputs, 2) corrective feedback, and 3) motivation 

and attitude. SLA theories imply that providing 

learners with the opportunity to have free conver-

sations with someone who can correct their errors 

is very important for successful acquisition of for-

eign languages. Moreover, motivation is another 

crucial factor; therefore a good CALL system 

should have elements which can interest learners 

[1]. 

Considering these requirements, we have devel-

oped a conversational English education frame-

work, POMY (POstech iMmersive English studY). 

The program allows users to exercise their visual 

and aural senses to receive a full immersion expe-

rience to develop into independent English as a 

Foreign Language (EFL) learners and increase 

their memory and concentration abilities to a 

greatest extent [2].  

 
 

Figure 1: Example screenshots of POMY: path-finding, post office, and market 

344



2 Demonstrated System 

In order to provide learners with immersive world, 

we have developed a virtual reality environment 

using the Unity 3D game engine
1
. For the domains 

that learners are exposed to, we select such do-

mains as path-finding, market, post office, library, 

and movie theater (Figure 1) to ensure having 

learners practice conversations in everyday life 

setting. To keep learners motivated and interested 

during learning sessions, learners are encouraged 

to accomplish several missions. For example, the 

first mission in the post office is to send a camera 

to one’s uncle in England. The package must be 

insured and delivered by the next week. In order to 

send the package, a learner must talk to Non-

Player Characters (NPCs) to fill in the zip-code 

properly.  

All NPCs can perceive the utterances of learners, 

especially Korean learners of English. Korean 

learners’ production of the sound is different from 

those of native speakers, resulting in numerous 

pronunciation errors. Therefore, we have collected 

a Korean-English corpus to train acoustic models. 

In addition, since language learners commit nu-

merous grammatical errors, we should consider 

this to understand their utterances. Thus, we statis-

tically infer the actual learners' intention by taking 

not only the utterance itself but also the dialog con-

text into consideration, as human tutors do [1]. 

While free conversation is invaluable to the 

acquisition process, it is not sufficient for learners 

to fully develop their L2 proficiency. Corrective 

feedback to learners’ grammatical errors is 

necessary for improving accuracy in their 

interlanguage. For this purpose, we designed a 

                                                           
1 http://unity3d.com/ 

special character, Ghost Tutor, which plays the 

role of English tutor and helps learners to use more 

appropriate words and expressions during the game. 

When a learner produces ungrammatical utterances, 

the Ghost Tutor provides both implicit and explicit 

negative and positive feedback in a form of 

elicitation or recast, which was manifested as 

effective ways in the second language acquisition 

processes [3].  To provide corrective feedback on 

grammatical errors, we use a method which con-

sists of two sub-models: the grammaticality check-

ing model and the error type classification model 

[4]. Firstly, we automatically generate grammatical 

errors that learners usually commit [5-6], and con-

struct error patterns based on the articulated errors. 

Then the grammaticality checking model classifies 

the recognized user speech based on the similarity 

between the error patterns and the recognition re-

sult using confidence scores. After that, the error 

type classification model chooses the error type 

based on the most similar error pattern and the er-

ror frequency extracted from a learner corpus. 

Finally, the human perception of NPC’s emo-

tional expressions plays a crucial role in human 

computer interaction. Thus, all NPCs are provided 

with a number of communicative animations such 

as talking, laughing, waving, crying, thinking, and 

getting angry (Figure 2).The total number of ani-

mations is over thirty from which the system can  

select one based on the response of a learner. The 

system generates positive expressions such as 

clapping and laughing when the learner answers 

correctly, and negative expressions such as crying 

and getting angry for incorrect answers.  
 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2: Various character animations 

345



Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the Industrial Strate-

gic technology development program, 10035252, 

development of dialog-based spontaneous speech 

interface technology on mobile platform, funded 

by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy (MKE, 

Korea), and by Basic Science Research Program 

through the National Research Foundation of Ko-

rea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, 

Science and Technology (2010-0019523). 

References  

Lee, S., Noh, H., Lee, J., Lee, K., Lee, G. G., Sagong, S., 

Kim, M. 2011. On the Effectiveness of Robot-

Assisted Language Learning, ReCALL Journal, 

Vol.23(1). 

Lee, S., Noh, H., Lee, J., Lee, K., Lee, G. G. 2010. 

POSTECH Approaches for Dialog-based English 

Conversation Tutoring. Proceedings of the APSIPA 

annual summit and conference, Singapore. 

Long, M. H., Inagaki, S., Ortega, L. 1998. The Role of 

Input and Interaction in Second Language Acquisi-

tion. The Modern Language Journal, 82, 357-371.  

Lee, S., Noh, H., Lee, K., Lee, G. G. 2011. Grammatical 

error detection for corrective feedback provision in 

oral conversations. Proceedings of the 25th AAAI 

conference on artificial intelligence (AAAI-11), San 

Francisco. 

Lee, S., Lee J., Noh, H., Lee, K., Lee, G. G, 2011. 

Grammatical Error Simulation for Computer-

Assisted Language Learning, Knowledge-Based Sys-

tems (to be published). 

Lee, S. and Lee, G. G. 2009. Realistic grammar error 

simulation using markov logic. Proceedings of the 

ACL, Singapore. 

 

346


