










































Extracting Biological Events from Text Using Simple Syntactic Patterns


Proceedings of BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop, pages 143–146,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 24 June, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Extracting Biological Events from Text Using Simple Syntactic Patterns 

Quoc-Chinh Bui, Peter M.A. Sloot 
Computational Science, Informatics Institute 

University of Amsterdam 
Science Park 904, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
{c.buiquoc,p.m.a.sloot}@uva.nl 

 

Abstract 

This paper describes a novel approach pre-
sented to the BioNLP’11 Shared Task on 
GENIA event extraction. The approach con-
sists of three steps. First, a dictionary is auto-
matically constructed based on training 
datasets which is then used to detect candidate 
triggers and determine their event types. Sec-
ond, we apply a set of heuristic algorithms 
which use syntactic patterns and candidate 
triggers detected in the first step to extract 
biological events. Finally, a post-processing is 
used to resolve regulatory events. We 
achieved an F-score of 43.94% using the 
online evaluation system. 

1 Introduction 

The explosive growth of biomedical scientific 
literature has attracted a significant interest on de-
veloping methods to automatically extract biologi-
cal relations in texts. Until recently, most research 
was focused on extracting binary relations such as 
protein-protein interactions (PPIs), gene-disease, 
and drug-mutation relations. However, the ex-
tracted binary relations cannot fully represent the 
original biomedical data. Therefore, there is an 
increasing need to extract fine-grained and com-
plex relations such as biological events (Miwa et 
al., 2010). The BioNLP’09 Shared Task (Kim et 
al., 2009) was the first shared task that provided a 
consistent data set and evaluation tools for extrac-
tion of such biological relations.  

Several approaches to extract biological events 
have been proposed for this shared task. Based on 
their characteristics, these approaches can be di-
vided into 3 groups. The first group uses a rule-
based approach which implements a set of manu-
ally defined rules developed by experts or auto-
matically learned from training data. These rules 

are then applied on dependency parse trees to ex-
tract biological events (Kaljurand et al., 2009; Kil-
icoglu and Bergler, 2009). The second group uses a 
machine learning (ML)-based approach which ex-
ploits various specific features and learning algo-
rithms to extract events (Björne at al., 2009; Miwa 
et al., 2010). The third group uses hybrid methods 
that combine both rule- and ML-based approaches 
to solve the problem (Ahmed et al., 2009; Móra et 
al., 2009). Among these proposed approaches, the 
ML achieved the best results, however, it is non-
trivial to apply. 

In this paper, we propose a rule-based approach 
which uses two syntactic patterns derived from a 
parse tree. The proposed approach consists of the 
following components: a dictionary to detect trig-
gers, text pre-processing, and event extraction.  

2 System and method 

2.1 Dictionary for event trigger detection 
The construction of the dictionary consists of the 
following steps: grouping annotated triggers, filter-
ing out irrelevant triggers, and calculating suppor-
tive scores. First, we collect all annotated triggers 
in the training and development datasets, convert 
them to lowercase format and group them based on 
their texture values and event types. For each trig-
ger in a group, we count its frequency being anno-
tated as trigger and its frequency being found in 
the training datasets to compute a confident score.  

Next, we create a list of non-trigger words from 
the training dataset which consists of a list of prep-
ositions (e.g. to, by), and a list of adjectives (e.g. 
high, low). We then filter out triggers that belong 
to the non-trigger list as well as triggers that con-
sist of more than two words as suggested in the 
previous studies (Kilicoglu and Bergler, 2009). We 
further filter out more triggers by setting a fre-
quency threshold for each event type. Triggers that 

143



have a frequency lower than a given threshold 
(which is empirically determined for each event 
type) are excluded.  

In addition, for each binding trigger (i.e. trigger 
of binding event) we compute a t2score which is 
the ratio of having a second argument.  For each 
regulatory trigger we compute an escore which is 
the ratio of having an event as the first argument 
(theme) and a cscore is the ratio of having a second 
argument (cause).  

2.2 Text preprocessing 
Text preprocessing includes splitting sentences, 

replacing protein names with place-holders, and 
parsing sentences using the Stanford Lexical Par-
ser1. First, we split the input text (e.g. title, ab-
stract, paragraph) into single sentences using 
LingPipe sentence splitter2. Sentences that do not 
contain protein names are dropped.  Second, we 
replace protein names with their given annotated 
IDs in order to prevent the parser from segmenting 
multiple word protein names. Finally, the sen-
tences are parsed with the Stanford parser to pro-
duce syntactic parse trees. All parse trees are 
stored in a local database for later use. 

Detection of event trigger and event type: For 
each input sentence, we split the sentence into to-
kens and use the dictionary to detect a candidate 
trigger and determine its event type (hereafter we 
referred to as ‘trigger’ type). After this step, we 
obtain a list of candidate triggers and their related 
scores for each event type.  

2.3 Event extraction 
To extract the biological events from a parse 

tree after obtaining a list of candidate triggers, we 
adapt two syntactic patterns based on our previous 
work on extracting PPIs (Bui et al., 2011). These 
patterns are applied for triggers in noun, verb, and 
adjective form. In the following sections we de-
scribe the rules to extract events in more detail. 

 
Rule 1: Extracting events from a noun phrase (NP) 
If the candidate trigger is a noun, we find a NP 
which is a joined node of this trigger and at least 
one protein from the parse tree. There are two NP 
patterns that can satisfy the given condition which 
are shown in Figure 1. In the first case (form1), NP 
                                                           
1 http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml 
2 http://alias-i.com/lingpipe/ 

does not contain a PP tag, and in the second case 
(form2), the trigger is the head of this NP. Depend-
ing on the trigger type (simple, binding or regula-
tory event), candidate events are extracted by the 
following rules as shown in Table 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Event 
type 

Conditions and Actions 

Simple  
or 
Regula-
tory 

NP in form1: extract all proteins on the 
left of the trigger from NP. Form event 
pairs <trigger, protein>. 
NP in form2: extract all proteins on the 
right of the trigger from NP. Form event 
pairs <trigger, protein>. 

Binding 
  

NP in form1: If proteins are in compound 
form i.e. PRO1/PRO2, PRO1-PRO2 then 
form an event triple <trigger, protein1, 
protein2>. Otherwise, form events pairs 
<trigger, protein>. 
NP in form2: If NP contains one of the 
following preposition pairs: between/and, 
of/with, of/to, and the trigger’ t2score >0.2 
then split the proteins from NP into two 
lists: list1 and list2 based on the second 
PP (preposition phrase) or CC (conjunc-
tion). Form triples <trigger, protein1, pro-
tein2>, in which protein1 from list1 and 
protein2 from list2. Otherwise, form 
events the same way as simple event case. 

 
Table 1: Conditions and actions to extract events from a 
NP. Simple and regulatory events use the same rules. 
 
Rule 2: Extracting events from a verb phrase (VP) 
If the candidate trigger is a verb, we find a VP 
which is a direct parent of this trigger from the 
parse tree and find a sister NP immediately preced-
ing this VP. Next, candidate events are extracted 
by the following rules as shown in Table 2. 
 

NP 

PRO1 

NN NN 

expression 

NN 

NP 

IN NP 

PP 

NP 

PRO0 PRO1 and 

NN CC 

DT NN 

interaction the between 

Form 2 

Form 1 

Figure 1: NP patterns containing trigger 

144



The event trigger is an adjective: For a candidate 
trigger which is an adjective, if the trigger is in a 
compound form (e.g. PRO1-mediated), we apply 
rule1 to extract events. In this case, the compound 
protein (e.g. PRO1) is used as cause argument. 
Otherwise, we apply rule 2 to extract.   

2.4 Post-processing 
Post-processing includes determination of an 

event type for a shared trigger and checking cross-
references of regulatory events. For each extracted 
event which has a shared trigger3, this event is ver-
ified using a list of modified words (e.g. gene, 
mRNA) to determine final event type. For regula-
tory events, the post-processing is used to find 
cross reference events. The post-processing is 
shown in Algorithm 1.  

 

 
Table 2: Conditions and actions to extract events from a 
VP 

2.5 Algorithm to extract events 
The whole process of extracting biological event is 
shown in Algorithm 1 

                                                           
3 A shared trigger is a trigger that appears in more than one 
group, see section 2.1. 

Algorithm 1. // Algorithm to extract biological events 
from sentence. 
Input: pre-processing sentence, parse tree, and lists 
of candidate triggers for each event type 
Output: lists of candidate events of corresponding 
event type 
Init: found_list = null // store extracted events for 
reference later 
 
Step 1: Extracting events 

For each event type  
    For each trigger of the current event type 
        Extract candidate events using extraction rules 
        If candidate event found 
              Store this event to the found_list 
         End if 
    End for 
End for 

 
Step 2: Post-preprocessing 

For each extracted event from found_list  
    If event has a shared trigger 
        Verify this event with the modified words 
        If not satisfy 
              Remove this event from found_list 
         End if 
    End if 
    If event is a regulatory event and escore>0.3 
       Check its argument (protein) for cross-reference 
       If found 
             Replace current protein with found event 
        End if 
    End if 
End for 

3 Results and discussion 

Table 3 shows the latest results of our system 
obtained from the online evaluation system (the 
official evaluation results are 38.19%). The results 
show that our method performs well on simple and 
binding events with an F-score of 63.03%. It out-
performs previously proposed rule-based systems 
on these event types despite the fact that part of the 
test set consists of full text sentences. In addition, 
our system adapts two syntactic patterns which 
were previously developed for PPIs extraction. 
This means that the application of syntactic infor-
mation is still relevant to extract biological events. 
In other words, there are some properties these ex-
traction tasks share. However, the performance 

Event type Conditions and Actions  
Simple If VP contains at least one protein then 

extract all proteins which have a posi-
tion on the right of the trigger from the 
VP to create a protein list. Otherwise, 
extract all proteins that belong to the 
NP. Form event pairs <trigger, protein> 
with the obtained protein list. 

Binding If VP contains at least one protein then 
extract all proteins which have a posi-
tion on the right of the trigger from VP 
to create a protein list1. Extracting all 
proteins that belong to the NP to create 
protein list2. If both list1 and list2 are 
not empty then form triples <trigger, 
protein1, protein2>, in which protein1 
from list1 and protein2 from list2. Oth-
erwise, form event pairs <trigger, pro-
tein> from the non-empty protein list. 

Regulatory If trigger’ cscore>0.3 then extract the 
same way as for the binding event, in 
which protein from list1 is used for 
cause argument. Otherwise follows the 
rule of the simple event. 

145



significantly decreases on regulatory events with 
an F-score of 26.61%.  

Analyzing the performance of our system on 
regulatory events reveals that in most of false posi-
tive cases, the errors are caused by not resolving 
reference events properly. These errors can be re-
duced if we have a better implementation of the 
post-processing phase. Another source of errors is 
that the proposed method did not take into account 
the dependency among events. For example, most 
transcription events occurred when the regulatory 
events occurred (more than 50% cases). If associa-
tion rules are applied here then the precision of 
both event types will increase.  

 

 

To improve the overall performance of the sys-
tem, there are many issues one should take into 
account. The first issue is related to the distance or 
the path length from the joined node between an 
event trigger and its arguments. By setting a 
threshold for the distance for each event type we 
increase the precision of the system. The second 
issue is related to setting thresholds for the extrac-
tion rules (e.g. t2score, cscore) which is done by 
using empirical data. Many interesting challenges 
remain to be solved, among which are the co-
reference, anaphora resolution, and cross sentence 
events. Furthermore, the trade-off between recall 
and precision needs to be taken into account, set-
ting high thresholds for a dictionary might increase 
the precision, but could however drop the recall 
significantly.   

4 Conclusion 

In this paper we have proposed a novel system 
which uses syntactic patterns to extract biological 
events from a text. Our method achieves promising 
results on simple and binding events. The results 
also indicate that syntactic patterns for extracting 
PPIs and biological events share some common 
properties. Therefore systems developed for ex-
tracting PPIs can potentially be used to extract bio-
logical events. 

Acknowledgements 
 
The authors sincerely thank Dr. Sophia Katrenko 
and Rick Quax for their useful comments. This 
work was supported by the European Union 
through the DynaNets project, EU grant agreement 
no: 233847, and the Vietnamese Oversea Training 
Program. 

References 
 
S. Ahmed et al. 2009. BioEve: Bio-Molecular Event 

Extraction from Text Using Semantic Classification 
and Dependency Parsing. In Proceedings of the 
Workshop on BioNLP’09  Shared Task, pp. 99-102. 

G. Móra et al. 2009. Exploring ways beyond the simple 
supervised learning approach for biological event ex-
traction. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Bi-
oNLP’09  Shared Task, pp.137-140. 

J. Kim et al. 2009. Overview of BioNLPʼ09 shared task 
on event extraction. Proceedings of the Workshop on 
BioNLP’09 Shared Task, pp. 1-9. 

K. Kaljurand et al. 2009. UZurich in the BioNLP 2009 
shared task. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Bi-
oNLP’09 Shared Task, pp. 28-36. 

H. Kilicoglu and S. Bergler. 2009. Syntactic depend-
ency based heuristics for biological event extraction. 
2009. In Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP’09 
Shared Task, pp. 119-127. 

Q.C. Bui, S. Katrenko, and P.M.A. Sloot. 2011. A hy-
brid approach to extract protein-protein interactions. 
Bioinformatics. 27(2), pp. 259-265. 

M. Miwa, R. Sætre, J.-D. Kim, and J. Tsujii. 2010. 
Event Extraction with Complex Event Classification 
Using Rich Features. Journal of Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology, 8, pp. 131-146. 

J. Björne, F. Ginter, S. Pyysalo, J. Tsujii, T. Salakoski. 
2010. Complex event extraction at PubMed scale. 
Bioinformatics, 26, pp. i382-390.  

Event Class Recall Precision Fscore 
Gene_expression 67.27 75.82 71.29 
Transcription 46.55 79.41 58.70 
Protein_catabolism 40.00 85.71 54.55 
Phosphorylation 74.05 80.59 77.18 
Localization 44.50 81.73 57.63 
Binding 35.23 51.18 41.74 
EVT-TOTAL 56.17 71.80 63.03 
Regulation 19.22 27.11 22.49 
Positive_regulation 22.52 33.89 27.06 
Negative_regulation 24.34 33.74 28.28 
REG-TOTAL 22.43 32.73 26.61 
ALL-TOTAL 38.01 52.06 43.94 

Table 3: Evaluation results on test set 

146


