










































Automatic Matching of ICD-10 codes to Diagnoses in Discharge Letters


Proceedings of the Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 11–18,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 15 September 2011.

Automatic Matching of ICD-10 codes to 

 Diagnoses in Discharge Letters  

 

 

Svetla Boytcheva 

State University of Library Studies and Information Technologies, 

119, Tzarigradsko Shosse, 1784 Sofia, Bulgaria 

svetla.boytcheva@gmail.com 

 

  

 

Abstract 

This paper presents an approach for auto-

matic mapping of International Classifica-

tion of Diseases 10th revision (ICD-10) 

codes to diagnoses extracted from dis-

charge letters. The proposed algorithm is 

designed for processing free text docu-

ments in Bulgarian language. Diseases are 

often described in the medical patient 

records as free text using terminology, 

phrases and paraphrases which differ sig-

nificantly from those used in ICD-10 clas-

sification. In this way the task of diseases 

recognition (which practically means e.g. 

assigning standardized ICD codes to dis-

eases’ names) is an important natural lan-

guage processing (NLP) challenge. The 

approach is based on multiclass Support 

Vector Machines method, where each 

ICD-10 4 character classification code is 

considered as single class. The problem is 

reduced to multiple binary classifiers and 

classification is done by a max-wins vot-

ing strategy. 

1 Introduction 

The nomenclature ICD or ICD CM (International 

Classification of Diseases with Clinical Modifi-

cation), supported by WHO (World Health Or-

ganization) [1], is translated to many languages 

and serves as the main source for diagnoses defi-

nition.  

The Bulgarian hospitals are reimbursed by the 

National Insurance Fund via the “clinical path-

ways” scheme. When a patient is hospitalized, 

they often select from the Hospital Information 

System (HIS) menu one diagnosis which is suffi-

cient for the association of the desired clinical 

pathway to the respective patient. Thus most of 

complementary diseases diagnosed by the medi-

cal experts are recorded in the personal history as 

free text. To describe diseases as free text in the 

medical patient records (PRs) usually is used 

different terminology than those used in ICD-10 

classification in order to express more specific 

and detailed information concerning particular 

disorder or using paraphrases, which usually are 

not available in general classification. For in-

stance, in some diagnoses is specified the stage 

“затлъстяване І степен” (Stage 1 Obesity), the 

specific location “катаракта на ляво око“ (left 

eye cataract) etc. 

Thus the task of diagnoses recognition from 

free-text discharge letters and assignment of 

standardized ICD codes to diseases’ names is an 

important natural language processing (NLP) 

challenge [2]. 

PRs in all Bulgarian hospitals have mandato-

ry structure, which is published in the Official 

State Gazette within the legal Agreement be-

tween the Bulgarian Medical Association and the 

National Health Insurance Fund [3]. PRs contain 

the following sections: (i) personal data; (ii) di-

agnoses; (iii) anamnesis; (iv) patient status; (v) 

lab data; (vi) medical examiners comments; (vii) 

discussion; (viii) treatment; and (ix) recommen-

dations. Most of the diagnoses are entered in the 

discharge letter section Diagnoses as free text 

and some of them are only mentioned in the Dis-

cussion or Medical examiners comments. 

In this paper we present an approach based on 

multiclass Support Vector Machines (SVM) for 

automatic diagnoses recognition from free-text 

PRs and assignment the ICD-10 codes to them. 

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 

overviews related work, Section 3 describes re-

course bank, Section 4 presents the method, sys-

tem architecture and some examples, Section 5 

11



discusses evaluation and results and Section 6 

sketches further work and conclusion.  

2 Related Work  

The application of natural language processing 

methods to clinical free-text is of growing inter-

est for both health care practitioners and academ-

ic researchers. Unfortunately there is no interna-

tional standard for discharge letters presentation. 

Another main difficulty in such texts is medical 

terminology - German, English and French med-

ical terminology mainly is based on domesticated 

terms, but still some Latin terms are used and 

some of them are modified by preserving Latin 

root and using domestic ending 

There are no systems dealing with clinical 

texts in Bulgarian. Thus we will overview some 

of the recent results achieved mainly for 

processing discharge letters in English [6, 8, 9], 

German [7] and French.  

Several methods dealing with this problem 

were presented on 2007 Computational Medicine 

Challenge where about 50 participants submitted 

results [4]. The main goal was to create and train 

computational intelligence algorithms that auto-

mate the assignment of ICD-9-CM codes to ano-

nymised radiology reports with a training set of 

978 documents and a test set of 976 documents.  

In NLP the performance accuracy of text ex-

traction procedures usually is measured by the 

precision (percentage of correctly extracted enti-

ties as a subset of all extracted entities), recall 

(percentage correctly extracted entities as a sub-

set of all entities available in the corpus) and 

their harmonic mean  

F-measure: F=2*Precision*Recall/(Precision+Recall). 

In 2007 Computational Medicine Challenge 

[5] the top-performing systems achieved F-

measure 0.8908, the minimum was with F-

measure 0.1541, and the mean was 0.7670, with 

a standard deviation of 0.1340. Some 21 systems 

have F-measure between 0.81 and 0.90. Another 

14 systems have F-measure 0.70. The article [9] 

compares three machine learning methods on 

radiological reports and points out that the best 

F-measure is 77%. 

The top rated systems use variety of ap-

proaches like: Machine-learning; Symbolic 

methods; Hybrid approaches; UMLS Structures, 

Robust classification algorithm (naive Bayes) 

etc. the system reported in [8] uses a hybrid ap-

proach combining example-based classification 

and a simple but robust classification algorithm 

(naive Bayes) with high performance over 22 

million PRs: F-measure 98,2%; for about 48% of 

the medical records at Mayo clinic. SynDiKATe 

[7] based on combination between text parsing 

and semantic information derivation from a 

Bayesian network and reports about 76% F-

measure.  

The better systems process negations, 

hypernyms and synonyms and were apparently 

doing significant amounts of symbolic 

processing.  

SVMs and related approaches to machine 

learning were strongly represented in this chal-

lenge, but did not seem to be reliably predictive 

of high ranking. This motivated us to try to use 

SVM method for ICD-10 codes assignment to 

diagnoses, but enhanced with some preprocess-

ing techniques applied to input data, concerning 

usage of synonyms, hyponyms, negation 

processing and word normalization and etc. used 

in other methods with better performance.  

 

3 Material 

The IE experiments were performed on training 

corpus if 1,300 and test corpus of 6200 ano-

nymised hospital PRs for patients with endocrine 

and metabolic diseases provided by the Univer-

sity Specialised Hospital for Active Treatment of 

Endocrinology (USHATE), Medical University 

Sofia, Bulgaria. 

Bulgarian medical texts contain a specific 

mixture of terminology in Latin, Bulgarian  and 

Latin terms transcribed with Cyrillic letters (Ta-

ble 1). There is no preferred language for the 

terminology so the two forms are used like syn-

onyms. The terms occur in the text with a variety 

of wordforms which is typical for the highly-

inflexional Bulgarian language. 

The mixture of such terminology, given in 

Cyrillic and Latin alphabets, makes very hard the 

task for automatic assignment of ICD-10 codes 

to diagnoses. About 2.34% of the text is 

presented with Latin letters; the rest is written 

with Cyrillic symbols but contains Latin 

terminology (mostly diagnoses, anatomic organs 

and examinations) which is transliterated to 

Cyrillic alphabet (about 11.6% of all terms). 

About 37% of all diagnoses in our test corpus of 

1,300 PRs were presented in Latin. This very 

specific medical language reflects the established 

medical tradition to use Latin language. Last but 

not least the foreign terminology is due to the 

lack of controlled vocabularies in Bulgarian 

12



language. In addition no bilingual Bulgarian-

Latin medical dictionary is available in electronic 

format as well. 

Table 1 Examples for diagnoses representation 

Type Example 

Mixture of 

medical 

terminology 

in Latin and 

Bulgarian 

Консултация с офталмолог: 

ВОД= 0,6 ВОС=0,6, двуочно 

0,8 с корекция. Фундоскопия: 

папили на нивото на 

ретината. Angiosclerosis 

vas. retinae hypertonica. 

Начални промени по типа на 

диабетна ретинопатия. 

Medical 

terminology 

in Bulgarian 

Диагноза: Захарен диабет тип 

2. Затлъстяване ІІ ст. 

Диабетна полиневропатия. 

Артериална хипертония-ІІст. 

Диенцефален синдром.  

Latin terms 

transcribed 

with Cyrillic 

letters 

Диагноза: 

Хипопаратиреоидизмус 

постоператива компенсата. 

Хипотиреоидизмус 

Постоператива компенсата. 

Статус пост тиреоидектомиам 

про карцинома папиларе лоби 

синистри. Статус пост 

радиойодаблациам. 

 

Further we have developed semi-

automatically a dictionary with pairs of Latin and 

Bulgarian terms corresponding to anatomic 

organs and their status containing about 7,230 

terms. The most complicated task was to develop 

semi-automatically the list of correspondences 

between diagnoses in Bulgarian and Latin. For 

this task were used resources available in Bulga-

rian [10] and English [11]: ICD-10 Classification 

(Fig. 1); Index of diseases and pathological states 

and their modifications (Fig. 2). There were also 

used: (i) Terminologia Anatomica providing 

terminology in English and Latin; (ii) Sets of 

about 300 prefixes and suffixes, about 100 roots,  

about 150 abbreviations in Latin and Greek and 

their corresponding meanings in English and 

Bulgarian; (iii) Rules for transliteration from Lat-

in to Cyrillic.  

 

 
Fig. 1 ICD-10 Classification in Bulgarian - excerpt 

for class “E” 

 
Fig. 2 ICD-10 Volume 2 Tabular Index in Bulgarian – 

excerpt for “K” terms 

 

ICD-10-CM (Clinical Modification) codes 

may consist of up to seven digits (Fig 3). A se-

venth character is required on some diagnoses 

that begin with "M," "O," "R," "S," "T," and 

"VWXY." and represents visit encounter or 

squeal for injuries and external causes. 

 
Fig. 3 ICD-10-CM Code Format 

 

The ICD-10-CM is divided into the Alphabet-

ic Index, an alphabetical list of terms and their 

corresponding code, and the Tabular List, a 

chronological list of codes divided into chapters 

based on body system or condition. The Alpha-

betic Index consists of the following parts: the 

Index of Diseases (Fig. 2) and Injury, the Index 

of External Causes of Injury, the Table of Neop-

lasms (Fig. 4) and the Table of Drugs and Chem-

icals [10]. 

 

 
Fig. 4 ICD-10 Volume 2 Table of Neoplasm 

 

The data from ICD-10 Volume 2 Tabular in-

dex [10] are organized with leading term – level 

1 (diagnose or pathological state) and modifica-

tions, which can be specified up to 7 levels. For 

instance for “A” terms are used 18256 words in total 
for explanation in different levels and 3568 different 

words. 

13



 
Fig. 5 Number of different diagnoses per cluster described in ICD-10 Volume 2 Tabular Index in Bulgarian 

Searching in different sublevels not necessary 

specifies the ICD-10 codes. For instance, if the 

leading term is “Cyst” [10, 11], modification on 

level 1 “development” leads to K09.1, but further 

modification on level 2 “ovary” or “ovarian” 

leads to codes Q50.1 which belongs to other 

cluster. Another example for “Cyst” with mod-

ification on level 1 “epidermal” leads to L72.0 

and further modification on level 2 “mouth” or 

“oral soft tissue” leads to codes K09.8. This 

shows that we need to use all nested levels of 

modifiers before final conclusion for the correct 

ICD-10 code for some diagnose. 

In addition Tabular Index contains 19,161 dif-

ferent words and 291,116 words in total with 

repetitions, 2,221 in Latin (11.59%) and occur-

rences 83,713 in total (about 28.76%). This 

shows that direct application of Tabular index is 

not appropriate for automatic ICD-10 codes as-

sociation for free-text diagnoses from discharge 

letters. 

Tabular Index contains 76,939 descriptions of 

ICD-10 codes representing 9,044 different codes. 

ICD-10 classification [10] contains 14,439 dif-

ferent codes descriptions.  

4 Method 

4.1 SVM Classifier 

SVMs have an ability to learn independent of the 

dimensionality of the feature space. This makes 

SVM Classifiers suitable approach for our task 

for automatic assignment of ICD-10 codes to 

diagnoses extracted from free-text PRs. This 

means that we can generalize even in the pres-

ence of very many features, because SVMs use 

overfitting protection, which does not necessarily 

depends on the number of features [12]. 

We present all ICD-10 codes as a set 

{ }kcccC ,,, 21 K= . The distribution in different 
clusters of codes described in the Tabular index 

(Fig. 5) shows that most of the diagnoses, except 

"VWXY" clusters, are described with variety of 

descriptions that in our opinion should be enough 

for generating rules for automatic classification.  

To cover all possible codes included in ICD-

10 classification we create training set of pairs 

( )ji cx ,  of diagnoses descriptions ix  and their 
corresponding ICD-10 codes Cc j ∈ from ex-
tracted diagnoses descriptions from Tabular In-

dex in Bulgarian, those used in ICD-10 classifi-

cation and 1,300 PRs from training corpus. In 

the training set vectors ix contains words used 

to describe diagnose with omitting meaningless 

word (e.g. a, an, the, this, that, and, or). 

The implemented system (Fig. 6) works in 

two steps [13,14]: (i) Preprocessing and (ii) SVM 

Classification. 

Preprocessing analysis includes several text 

processing tasks performed as pipeline: PRs sec-

tions splitting; Tokenization; Diagnoses extrac-

tion; Abbreviations expansion; Transliteration; 

Latin terminology processing; Words normaliza-

tion; Medical terminology synonyms; SVM 

model. 

Bulgarian hospitals discharge letters have 

mandatory structure [3]. The system splits the 

text on all available sections and passes Diag-

nose section text for further processing. Diag-

nose section text is spitted into words set 

{ }pwwwW ,,, 21 K= . Using scoping rules ap-
plied to Diagnose section text words from the 

generated set W are combined into diagnoses 

{ }ndddD ,,, 21 K= . For each diagnose Ddm ∈  
we create vector >=< mqmmmi wwwy ,,, 21 K  
containing words included in it. Using sets AL 

and AB of abbreviations in Latin and Bulgarian 

language and functions LatALal →: and 

14



BulABab →: , words in vectors miy  for each 

diagnose Ddm ∈  are substituted by expanded 
terms meaning in Latin (Lat) and Bulgarian (Bul) 

language correspondingly according (1). 

( )
( )

otherwise

ALwif

ABwif

w

wa

wa

u mj

mj

mj

mjl

mjb

mj ∈

∈









=

,

,

,

 (1) 

Then we replace vectors miy  by their corres-

ponding vectors >=< mqmmmi uuuz ,,, 21 K  for 

each diagnose Ddm ∈ . Using transliteration 
rules LatinCyrillict →:   from Cyrillic to Latin 
alphabet we convert each word in vector miz to 

its equivalent in Latin. The cases when some 

words in vector miz are in Latin and the other are 

in Cyrillic are very rare. If 

LatuorLatut mjmj ∈∈)(  we substitute it 

by its corresponding term Bulbmj ∈  from Bul-
garian terminology repository Bul, otherwise we 

suppose that mju is in Bulgarian and set mjmj ub = . 
Using rules for words derivatives we replace all 

terms mjb by their lemmas Bullmj ∈  and con-

struct vector >=< mrmmmi lllv ,,, 21 K . The result 

vector miv  contains only words in Bulgarian. 

Further we process negations [15] and searching 

for synonyms and hyponyms of disease and pa-

thological states names in Bulgarian medical 

terminology repository. We generate all possible 

partitions mjP  of consecutive words in vector miv : 

},...,|...|,,|,,{ 11 mrmsmtmqmqmmj llllllP KK += (2) 

For each sequence in (2) in partition mjP  we 

create set of its synonyms ls . Usually parts contain 

from 1 up to 7 consecutive words in the vector. The 

Cartesian product of synonym sets for partition 

mjP  generates set },,{ 11 pqmj yyssY KK =××=  
of input vectors. The union (3) of these sets for 

all partitions contains input vectors with different 

descriptions of each diagnose md : 

U
mjP

mjm YY =  (3) 

We use the formal representation for SVM 

model, learned by training examples, to trans-

form test examples as input vectors for SVM. 

SVM Classification - The input space in 

SVM Classifier is a vector space and the output 

is a single number corresponding to different 

classes. SVM classifier applies binary classifica-

tion for each of the input vectors mt Yy ∈  for 

each diagnose Ddm ∈ and each of the classes in 
C . Winning strategy ranks all classes and 

chooses the highest ranked class imc  for each 

diagnose Ddm ∈ . 

 
Fig. 6 System Architecture 

15



4.2 Example 

The implemented system allows processing of a 

single PR stored as text file in manual mode. 

There is also available automatic mode where 

can be processed all PRs stored in the selected 

folder and the result is stored in single CVS for-

mat file. In manual mode (Fig. 7) the text of PR 

is opened in section (1). After opening the text 

file, PR first is applied preprocessing steps from 

the algorithm and PR is automatically separated 

on sections and the text from diagnoses section is 

displayed in section (2). After choosing “Ana-

lyze” function from menu bar the extracted text 

in section (2) is processed and automatically is 

generated list (3) with recognized diagnoses 

within the text. 

After selection of diagnose from list (3) to be 

processed its name is automatically excluded 

from list (3) and displayed in section (5). In the 

current example the selected diagnose “киста 

оварии декстра” (киста на яйчника – in Bulga-

rian, cyst of ovary – in English) is displayed in 

sections (5). The system identifies possible ICD-

10 codes assignments and displays them in list 

(4) - =83.0 Фоликуларна киста на яйчника 

(=83.0 Follicular cyst of ovary). It is possible the 

system to identify more than one possible codes 

for assignment, in this case different options are 

displayed in list (4) in decreasing order of rank-

ing. The most appropriate association is ranked 

first. The data for processed diagnoses from list 

(3) are displayed in list (6) for further storage in 

CVS format text file.  

In this example the diagnose 

“феохромицитома” (pheochromocytoma) is 

presented using Latin terminology with translite-

ration. This term corresponds to 

“Доброкачествено новообразувание  на 

надбъбречна жлеза” (neoplasm of Adrenal 

gland) in Bulgarian language. In ICD-10 4 chars 

categories it corresponds to D35.0. The next di-

agnose “киста оварии декстра” (киста на 

яйчника – in Bulgarian, cyst of ovary – in Eng-

lish) is processed using again latin terminology 

transliteration for Latin term “оварии” (ovarian) 

(яйчници – in Bulgarian) and the result assigned 

code is =83.0 Фоликуларна киста на яйчника 

(=83.0 Follicular cyst of ovary). Here 

“декстра” in Latin means (дясна – in Bulga-

rian, Right – in English) is not considered in 

classification in this case. 

 

  

 
Fig. 7 Screenshot of System processing PR in manual mode 

 

 

1 

3 

2 5 

4 

6 

16



5 Evaluation and Results 

The experiments were made with a training 

corpus described in Section 3 and the evaluation 

results are obtained using a test corpus, contain-

ing 6,200 PRs for patients with endocrine and 

metabolic diseases provided by USHATE. 

For the test corpus there was identified de-

scriptions of 26,826 diagnoses and 448 different 

classes diagnoses. 

Because for the purposes of our project we 

are processing PRs for patients with endocrine 

and metabolic diseases their leading diagnoses 

are obviously classified in cluster “E”. Thus 

some of the clusters are presented by few classi-

fied diagnoses (Fig. 8) and the other clusters (K, 

M, N, H, D, G, I) representing endocrine and 

metabolic diseases and related to them complica-

tions are presented by several classifications 

(Fig. 9). 

 
Fig. 8 Number of diagnoses classified  

for rare clusters 

 
Fig. 9 Number of diagnoses classified  

for most common clusters 

 
Fig. 10 Number of different diagnoses  

per cluster  

Although the experiments was performed for 

such specific test set the diversity of result 

classes of diagnoses in test set presented on Fig. 

10 and the average number of classified diagnoses 
per cluster (Fig. 11) shows that almost all cluster were 

presented by sufficient amount of examples. 

 

 
Fig. 11 Average number of classified  

diagnoses per cluster 

Evaluation results (Table 3) shows high per-

centage of success in diagnoses recognition in 

PRs texts. 

 

Table 3 Extraction sensitivity according to the IE 

performance measures 

 
Precision Recall F-measure 

Diagnoses 97.3% 74.68% 84.5% 

F-measure for leading diagnose in E-cluster 

and the diagnoses from the most common clus-

ters (Fig. 9) is 98.76% for about 81.53% of the 

test set examples. 

Obtained results are comparable with recent 

systems performing such task. For leading diag-

noses we obtain better results, but still there are 

several difficulties like incorrect codes associa-

tion due to: 

• Latin terminology -  for 345 cases; 
• Abbreviations – for 538 cases 
• Other – 1,202 cases describing mainly “status 

post” conditions, most of them is difficult to 

classify even manually. 

For some diagnoses associated codes can be 

considered partially correct, because they the 

first three symbols of the ICD-10 code are as-

signed correctly, but the next tree symbols are 

either not specified, or associated to too general 

classes like “... unspecified”, “... classified else-

where”, “other disorders of ...” etc.  

17



6 Conclusion and Further Work 

This paper presents software modules for ongo-

ing scientific project which supports the automat-

ic extraction of diagnoses from PR texts 

The implemented modules are strictly 

oriented to Bulgarian language.  

Usage of SVM method for ICD-10 codes as-

signment to diagnoses, enhanced with some pre-

processing techniques applied to input data, con-

cerning usage of synonyms, hyponyms, negation 

processing, word normalization, Latin terminol-

ogy and abbreviations processing and etc. shows 

better performance in certain context. 

The plans for their further development and 

application are connected primarily to Bulgarian 

local context. For diagnoses recognition task we 

plan improvement of rules and extension of re-

source bank for Latin terminology and abbrevia-

tions for more precise code assignments. 

 

Acknowledgments 

The research tasks leading to these results have 

received funding from the EC’s FP7 ICT under 

grant agreement n° 216130 PSIP (Patient Safety 

through Intelligent Procedures in Medication) as 

well as from the Bulgarian National Science 

Fund under grant agreement n° DO 02-292  

EVTIMA (Efficient Search of Conceptual Patters 

with Application in Medical Informatics). 

 

References  

[1] International classification od Diseases, World 

Health Organization, 
http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/ 

[2] Demner-Fushman, D., W. Chapman and C. 

McDonald. What can natural language processing 

do for clinical decision support? Journal of 

Biomedical Informatics, Volume 42, Issue 5, 

October 2009, (2009), pp. 760-772. 

[3] National Framework Contract between the 

National Health Insurance Fund, the Bulgarian 

Medical Association and the Bulgarian Dental 

Association, Official State Gazette 

№106/30.12.2005, updates №68/22.08.2006 and 

№101/15.12.2006,Bulgaria, http://dv.parliament.bg/  

[4] 2007 International Challenge: Classifying 

Clinical Free Text Using Natural Language 

Processing, 
http://computationalmedicine.org/challenge/previous 

[5] Pestian J, C. Brew, P. Matykiewicz, DJ 

Hovermale, N. Johnson, K. B. Cohen, and D. 

Wlodzislaw. A shared task involving multi-label 

classification of clinical free text. In: ACL’07 

workshop on biological, translational, and 

clinical language processing (Bio=LP’07). 

Prague, Czech Republic; (2007), pp. 36–40. 

[6] Sotelsek-Margalef, A. and J. Villena-Román. 

MIDAS: An Information-Extraction Approach to 

Medical Text Classification (MIDAS: Un 

enfoque de extracción de información para la 

clasificación de texto médico), Procesamiento del 

lenguaje =atural n. 41, (2008), pp. 97-104. 

[7] Hahn, U., M. Romacker and S. Schultz. Creating 

Knowledge Repositories from Biomedical 

Reports: The MEDSYNDIKATE Text Mining System, 

In Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing, vol. 7, 

(2002), pp. 338-349. 

[8] Pakhomov, S., J. Buntrock and C. G. Chute. 

Automating the assignment of diagnosis codes to 

patient encounters, Journal of American Medical 

Informatics Association, 13, (2006), pp. 516-52. 

[9] Coffman, A. and N. Wharton. Clinical Natural 

Language Processing: Auto-Assigning ICD- 9 

Codes. Overview of the Computational Medicine 

Center’s 2007 Medical Natural Language 

Processing Challenge. Available online at 
http://courses.ischool.berkeley.edu/i256/f09/Final%20

Projects%20write-

ups/coffman_wharton_project_final.pdf  

[10] National Center of Health Information, 

http://www.nchi.government.bg/download.html  

[11] 2011 ICD-10-CM Diagnosis Codes Index, 

http://www.icd10data.com/ and 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/icd/icd10cm.htm#10update 

[12] T. Joachims. Text categorization with support 

vector machines: learning with many relevant 

features. In Claire N´edellec and C´eline 

Rouveirol, editors, Proceedings of ECML-98, 

10th European Conference on Machine Learning, 

number 1398, Chemnitz, DE, Springer Verlag, 

Heidelberg, DE,  (1998), pp. 137–142.  

[13] Boytcheva, S. Assignment of ICD-10 Codes to 

Diagnoses in Hospital Patient Records in 

Bulgarian. In: Alfred, R., G. Angelova and H. 

Pfeiffer (Eds.). Proc. of the Int. Workshop 

Extraction of Structured Information from Texts 

in the Biomedical Domain (ESIT-BioMed 2010), 

ICCS-2010, Malaysia, (2010), pp. 56-66.  

[14] Tcharaktchiev, D., G. Angelova, S. Boytcheva, Z. 

Angelov, and S. Zacharieva. Completion of 

Structured Patient Descriptions by Semantic 

Mining. In Koutkias V. et al. (Eds), Patient 

Safety Informatics, Stud. Health Technol. Inform. 

2011 Vol. 166, IOS Press, (2011), pp. 260-269. 

[15] Boytcheva, S., A. Strupchanska, E. Paskaleva, 

and D. Tcharaktchiev, Some Aspects of Negation 

Processing in Electronic Health Records. In Proc. 

of Int. Workshop Language and Speech 

Infrastructure for Information Access in the 

Balkan Countries, Bulgaria, (2005), pp. 1-8. 

18


