










































Unsupervised Cross-Lingual Lexical Substitution


Proceedings of EMNLP 2011, Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 13–23,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Unsupervised Cross-Lingual Lexical Substitution

Marianna Apidianaki
Alpage, INRIA & Univ Paris Diderot

Sorbonne Paris Cité, UMRI-001
75013 Paris, France

Marianna.Apidianaki@inria.fr

Abstract

Cross-Lingual Lexical Substitution (CLLS) is
the task that aims at providing for a target
word in context, several alternative substitute
words in another language. The proposed
sets of translations may come from external
resources or be extracted from textual data.
In this paper, we apply for the first time an
unsupervised cross-lingual WSD method to
this task. The method exploits the results of
a cross-lingual word sense induction method
that identifies the senses of words by cluster-
ing their translations according to their seman-
tic similarity. We evaluate the impact of using
clustering information for CLLS by applying
the WSD method to the SemEval-2010 CLLS
data set. Our system performs better on the
’out-of-ten’ measure than the systems that par-
ticipated in the SemEval task, and is ranked
medium on the other measures. We analyze
the results of this evaluation and discuss av-
enues for a better overall integration of unsu-
pervised sense clustering in this setting.

1 Introduction

Lexical Substitution (LS) aims at providing alterna-
tive substitute words (or phrases) for a target word
in context, a process useful for monolingual tasks
such as paraphrasing and textual entailment (Mc-
Carthy and Navigli, 2009). Its multilingual coun-
terpart, Cross-Lingual Lexical Substitution (CLLS),
aims at finding for a target word in context, alter-
native substitute words in another language. CLLS
systems may assist human translators and language
learners, while their output may constitute the in-

put to cross-language Information Retrieval and Ma-
chine Translation (MT) systems (Sinha et al., 2009;
Mihalcea et al., 2010).

The multilingual context in which CLLS is per-
formed permits to override some issues common to
monolingual semantic processing tasks, such as the
selection of an adequate sense inventory and the def-
inition of the granularity of the semantic descrip-
tions. In a multilingual context, word senses can be
easily identified using their translations in other lan-
guages (Resnik and Yarowsky, 2000). Although this
conception of senses presents some theoretical and
practical drawbacks, it provides a standard criterion
for sense delimitation which explains its wide adop-
tion in recent works on multilingual Word Sense
Disambiguation (WSD) and WSD in MT (Carpuat
and Wu, 2007; Ng and Chan, 2007).

In this paper, we explain how semantic clustering
may provide answers to some of the issues posed
by the traditional cross-lingual sense induction ap-
proach, and how it can be efficiently exploited for
CLLS. Given that existing CLLS systems rely on
predefined semantic resources, we show, for the first
time, that CLLS can be performed in a fully un-
supervised manner. The paper is organized as fol-
lows: in the next section, we present some argu-
ments towards unsupervised clustering for cross-
lingual sense induction. The clustering method used
is presented in section 3. Section 4 describes the
SemEval-2010 CLLS task, and section 5 presents
the cross-lingual WSD method used for CLLS. In
section 6, we proceed to a detailed analysis of the
obtained results, before concluding with some av-
enues for future work.

13



2 Cross-lingual sense induction

2.1 Related work

Word sense induction (WSI) methods offer an alter-
native to the use of predefined semantic resources
for NLP. They automatically define the senses of
words from textual data and may adapt the obtained
descriptions to the WSD needs of specific applica-
tions. In a monolingual context, WSI is performed
by exploiting more or less refined distributional in-
formation (Navigli, 2009), while in a multilingual
context WSI is mostly based on translation informa-
tion. In this setting, the senses of words in one lan-
guage are identified by their translations in another
language, usually found in a parallel corpus (Resnik
and Yarowsky, 2000).

This empirical approach to sense induction of-
fers a standard criterion for sense delimitation and,
consequently, dissociates WSD from semantic theo-
ries and predefined semantic inventories. Moreover,
by establishing semantic distinctions pertinent for
translation between the implicated languages, it al-
lows to tune sense induction to the needs of multilin-
gual applications. It has thus been widely adopted in
works on multilingual WSD and WSD in MT, where
senses are derived from parallel data (Diab, 2003;
Ide, 1999; Ide et al., 2002; Ng et al., 2003; Chan et
al., 2007; Carpuat and Wu, 2007). By linking WSD
and its evaluation to translation, this hypothesis also
offers a solution to the problem of non-conformity
of monolingual WSD methods in this setting.

Nevertheless, the assumption of biunivocal (’one-
to-one’) correspondences between senses and trans-
lations is rather simplistic. One word sense may be
translated by different synonymous words in another
language, whose relatedness should be considered
during sense induction. Furthermore, this approach
does not permit to account for cases of parallel am-
biguities (Resnik, 2007), and cases where the senses
of a word share some of their translations (Sinha et
al., 2009). Additional problems arise at the practical
level as the induced senses are uniform and, so, the
constraints used during WSD for selecting between
close and distant senses are similar. Furthermore,
when WSD coincides with lexical selection in MT,
the selection of a translation different from the refer-
ence is considered as wrong even if it is semantically
correct. So, this conception of senses does not per-

mit to penalize WSD errors relatively to their impor-
tance (Resnik and Yarowsky, 2000), unless semantic
resources are used to identify semantic correspon-
dences.

2.2 Cross-lingual sense clustering

Instead of using translations as straightforward
sense indicators, it is possible to perform a more
thorough semantic analysis during cross-lingual
WSI by combining distributional and translation in-
formation. The sense clustering method proposed by
Apidianaki (2008) identifies complex semantic re-
lations between word senses and their translations.
The method is based on the contextual hypothe-
ses of meaning and of semantic similarity (Harris,
1954; Miller and Charles, 1991), which underlie
monolingual WSI methods, and is combined to the
assumption of a semantic correspondence between
words and their translations in real texts (Chester-
man, 1998). Following these hypotheses, informa-
tion coming from the source contexts of a target
word when translated with a precise translation in
a parallel corpus, is used to reveal the senses carried
by the translation. Furthermore, the similarity of the
source contexts reveals the semantic relatedness of
the translations.

This cross-lingual WSI method groups the seman-
tically similar translations of ambiguous words into
clusters that serve to describe their senses instead
of the individual translations. For instance, the tra-
ditional cross-lingual WSI approach would propose
three senses for the English noun coach, correspond-
ing to each of its Spanish translations: entrenador,
autocar and autobús.1 However, this solution is not
sound given that the translations autocar and au-
tobús are semantically related and do not lexical-
ize distinct senses of the English word, as is the
case with entrenador. Sense clustering permits to
estimate the semantic similarity of the translations
and to not consider synonymous translations as in-
dicators of distinct senses. Consequently, the En-
glish word coach has two senses after sense cluster-
ing: one described by the cluster {autocar, autobús}
(the ”bus” sense) and one described by the cluster
{entrenador} (the ”trainer” sense). In the automat-

1This set of translations was extracted from the word aligned
Europarl corpus (Koehn, 2005) after applying a set of filters that
will be described in section 3.

14



ically built bilingual inventories, the senses of the
words in one language are thus described by clus-
ters of their translations in another language.

2.3 Applications

This type of sense clustering has proved to be use-
ful in various application settings. When exploited
in cross-lingual WSD, it permits to assign ’sense-
tags’ containing several semantically correct trans-
lations to new instances of words in context (Apid-
ianaki, 2009). Moreover, the use of clustering in-
formation during evaluation allows for a differing
penalization of WSD errors. In an MT evaluation
setting, sense clusters have been integrated into an
MT evaluation metric (METEOR) (Lavie and Agar-
wal, 2007) and brought about an increase of the met-
ric’s correlation with human judgments of transla-
tion quality in different languages (Apidianaki and
He, 2010). The use of sense clusters in this set-
ting permits to identify semantic correspondences
between translations and hypotheses, and to circum-
vent the strict requirement for exact surface corre-
spondences, one of the main critics addressed to MT
evaluation metrics. The same notion of sense clus-
ters has been adopted in the most recent SemEval
Cross-Lingual WSD task (Lefever and Hoste, 2010).
Instead of considering translations as indicators of
distinct senses, as was the case in previous tasks, the
senses of a small number of ambiguous words were
described by manually created clusters of transla-
tions.

We consider that the sense cluster inventories cre-
ated by the unsupervised WSI method proposed by
Apidianaki (2008) would be useful in other applica-
tive contexts as well and, especially, in CLLS. In
unsupervised cross-lingual WSD, the clusters con-
stitute the candidate senses from which one has to
be selected for each new instance of the words in
context. So, when an instance of a word is dis-
ambiguated, a cluster of semantically related trans-
lations is selected on the basis of the source con-
text describing its sense. This is exactly the goal
of CLLS, as described in the relevant task set up
in SemEval-2010, where the systems had to provide
for instances of words in context, several possible
translations in another language (Sinha et al., 2009;
Mihalcea et al., 2010). It seems thus that CLLS con-
stitutes a suitable field for exploiting this sense clus-

tering method and, in what follows, we will try to
evaluate this assumption.

3 Unsupervised clustering for sense
induction

3.1 Bilingual lexicons

The SemEval-2010 CLLS task concerned the pair
of languages English (EN) - Spanish (SP). In or-
der to apply our cross-lingual WSD method to the
data of the SemEval-2010 CLLS task, an EN-SP
sense cluster inventory had first to be built where
the senses of English words would be described by
clusters of their Spanish translations. The training
corpus used for building the sense cluster inventory
is the SP-EN part of Europarl (release v5), which
contains 1,689,850 aligned sentence pairs (Koehn,
2005). Before clustering, some preprocessing steps
are performed. First, the corpus is lemmatized and
tagged by POS (Schmid, 1994). Then sentence pairs
presenting a great difference in length (i.e cases
where one sentence is three times longer than the
other) are eliminated and the corpus is aligned at
the level of word types using Giza++ (Och and Ney,
2003).

Two bilingual lexicons of content words are built
from the alignment results, one for each translation
direction (EN-SP/SP-EN). In the entries of these lex-
icons, source words are associated with the transla-
tions to which they are aligned. As these lexicons
are automatically created, they contain some noise
mainly due to spurious word alignments. In order to
eliminate erroneous translation correspondences, we
first apply a filter which discards translations with
a probability below 0.001 (according to the scores
assigned during word alignment). Then an intersec-
tion filter is applied which discards correspondences
not found in lexicons of both directions. Finally, the
two lexicons are filtered by POS, keeping for each w
only its translations that pertain to the same POS cat-
egory.2 The translations of a word (w) used for clus-
tering are the ones that translate w at least 20 times in
the training corpus. This frequency threshold leaves
out some translations of the source words but has
a double merit: it eliminates erroneous translations

2For instance, for English nouns we retain their noun trans-
lations in Spanish; for verbs, we keep verbs, etc.

15



and reduces data sparseness issues which pose prob-
lems in distributional semantic analysis.

3.2 Clustering based on semantic similarity

The semantic clustering is performed in the target
language by using source language feature vectors.
Each translation of a word w is characterized by
a vector built from the content words that cooccur
with w whenever it is translated by this word in
the aligned sentences of the training corpus.3 The
vector similarity is calculated using a variation of
the Weighted Jaccard measure (Grefenstette, 1994)
which weighs each source context feature according
to its relevance for the estimation of the translations
similarity.

The input of the similarity calculation consists of
the frequency lists of w’s translations. The score as-
signed to a pair of translations indicates their degree
of similarity. Each feature (j) gets a total weight (tw)
relatively to a translation (i), which corresponds to
the product of its global (gw) and its local weight
(lw) with this translation. The gw is based on the dis-
persion of j in the contexts of w, and on its frequency
of cooccurrence (cooc freq) with w when translated
by each i (cf. formula 1). So, it depends on the num-
ber of translations with which j is related (nrels) and
on its probability of cooccurrence with each one of
them (cf. formula 2). The local weight (lw) between
j and i depends on their frequency of cooccurrence
(cf. formula 3).

gw(j) = 1 −

∑
i pij log(pij)

nrels
(1)

pij =
cooc freq of j with i

|js| for i
(2)

lw(j, i) = log(cooc freq of j with i) (3)

The Weighted Jaccard (WJ) coefficient of two trans-
lations m and n is given by formula 4.

WJ(m,n) =

∑
j min(tw(m, j)tw(n, j))∑
j max(tw(m, j)tw(n, j))

(4)

The pairwise similarity of the translations is thus es-
timated by comparing the corresponding weighted

3We use a stoplist of English function words (conjunctions,
prepositions and articles) that may be erroneously tagged as
content words.

source feature vectors. A similarity score is assigned
to each pair of translations and stored in a table that
is being looked up by the clustering algorithm. The
pertinence of the relation of each translation pair is
estimated by comparing its score to a threshold de-
fined locally for each w by the following iterative
procedure.

1. The initial threshold (T) corresponds to the mean of
the scores (above 0) of the translation pairs of w.

2. The set of translations is segmented into pairs
whose score exceeds the threshold and pairs whose
score is inferior to the threshold, creating two sets
(G1, G2).

3. The average of each set is computed (m1 = average
value of G1, m2 = average value of G2).

4. A new threshold is created that is the average of m1
and m2 (T = (m1 + m2)/2).

5. Go back to step 2, now using the new threshold
computed in step 4, keep repeating until conver-
gence has been reached.

The clustering algorithm groups the translations
by exploiting the similarity calculation results. The
condition for a translation to be included in a cluster
is to have pertinent relations with all the elements
already in the cluster. The clustering stops when all
the translations of w are included in some cluster and
all their relations have been checked. All the ele-
ments of the final clusters are linked to each other by
pertinent relations. The translations not having any
strong relations to other translations are included in
separate one-element clusters.

3.3 The EN-SP sense cluster inventory

In the obtained semantic inventory, the senses of
each English word are described by clusters of its
semantically similar translations in Spanish.4 Some
entries from the EN-SP sense cluster inventory are
presented in Table 1. We provide examples for
words of different POS (nouns, verbs, adjectives and
adverbs) and with varying degrees of polysemy. The

4The inventory contains entries for all English content words
in the corpus. Here, we focus on the target words used in the
CLLS task.

16



POS EN word # SP Ts # occ Sense clusters

Nouns
coach 3 265 {entrenador}{autocar, autobús}

test 11 3162

{prueba, ensayo, examen} {experimento, análisis, examen, ensayo}
{evaluación} {comprobación} {experimentación, ensayo, análisis, ex-
perimento} {inspección} {experimento, control, análisis, examen}
{experimentación, control, análisis, experimento} {criterio}

Verbs
drop 10 390

{disminuir, reducir, bajar, caer, descender} {retirar} {dejar, abandonar}
{lanzar}

check 5 1343 {examinar} {revisar} {controlar, verificar, comprobar}

Adjs
heavy 7 448

{elevado, fuerte, grave, grande}{elevado, enorme}{grave, duro, fuerte,
grande} {grave, alto, elevado}

open 6 6286
{público, libre, transparente} {público, franco, transparente} {abierto}
{sincero, franco}

Advs
around 5 742 {alrededores}{casi, aproximadamente, cerca}{menos}

now 9 33662
{aquı́, actualmente, hoy, ahora bien} {actualmente, ahora, hoy}
{entretanto, aquı́, ahora bien} {de momento}, {adelante}, {por ahora, en-
tretanto}

Table 1: Entries from the EN-SP sense cluster inventory.

third column of the table gives the number of Span-
ish words (SP Ts) translating more than 20 occur-
rences of the English words in the corpus and re-
tained for clustering. This threshold ensures that
the words being clustered are good translations of
the English words. The fourth column of the ta-
ble shows the number of English word occurrences
translated by the retained translations.

As is shown in these examples, the translations
of the English words are not considered as straight-
forward indicators of their senses but are grouped
into clusters describing senses. For instance, the
word drop, which is translated by ten different words
into Spanish (disminuir, reducir, bajar, caer, descen-
der, retirar, dejar, abandonar, lanzar) is not con-
sidered as having ten distinct senses but four, de-
scribed by each cluster of translations: {disminuir,
reducir, bajar, caer, descender}: ”decrease, reduce”,
{retirar}: ”remove, withdraw”, {dejar, abandonar}:
”leave, abandon” and {lanzar}: ”launch”. The
obtained clusters group semantically similar words
which would be erroneously considered as indica-
tors of distinct senses by the traditional cross-lingual
sense induction method.

Another important point is that this algorithm
performs a soft clustering, highly adequate in this
setting. Given that the generated clusters de-
scribe senses, their overlaps describe the relations
between the corresponding senses. For instance,

the two senses of the word test described by the
clusters {experimentación, control, análisis, exper-
imento} and {experimento, control, análisis, exa-
men} share three elements and are closer than those
described by {experimentación, control, análisis,
experimento} and {evaluación}, which have no ele-
ment in common. The first two senses could also be
considered as nuances of a coarser sense (”examina-
tion / analysis”) that could be obtained by merging
the overlapping clusters. Capturing inter-sense re-
lations is important in lexical semantics and numer-
ous works have been criticized for just enumerating
word senses without describing their relations. Dis-
covering these links automatically, as is done with
this sense clustering method, permits to account for
differences in the status of senses during WSD and
its evaluation. It also offers the possibility to au-
tomatically modify the granularity of the obtained
senses according to the WSD needs of the applica-
tions. Moreover, when the sense cluster inventory
is used for cross-lingual WSD, it allows to capture
subtle relations between word usages in cases where
the senses of a word share some of their translations
but not all of them, an issue highlighted in the Se-
mEval CLLS task (Sinha et al., 2009) which will be
presented in the next section.

17



4 The SemEval-2010 CLLS task

In the SemEval-2010 Cross-Lingual Lexical Substi-
tution task, annotators and systems had to provide
several alternative correct translations in Spanish for
English target words in context. Given a paragraph
containing an instance of an English target word, the
annotators had to find as many good substitute trans-
lations as possible for that word in Spanish. Unlike
a full-blown MT task, CLLS targets one word at a
time rather than an entire sentence. So, annotators
were asked to translate the target word and not en-
tire sentences. Moreover, they were asked to supply,
for each instance, as many translations as they felt
were valid and not just one translation, which would
be the case in MT.

The task of the participating systems was then to
predict the translations provided by the annotators
for each target word instance. By analyzing the con-
text of the English target word instances, the sys-
tems had to provide for each instance, several cor-
rect Spanish translations which should fit the given
source language context. The set of target words
in the SemEval CLLS task is composed of Nouns,
Verbs, Adjectives and Adverbs exhibiting a wide va-
riety of substitutes. The annotators were allowed to
use any resources they wanted to in order to supply
substitutes for instances of the English target words.
So, instances of the target words in context were
tagged by sets of Spanish translations.5 The inter-
annotator agreement for this task was calculated as
pairwise agreement between sets of substitutes from
annotators and corresponds to 0.2777.

The sets of translations provided for different in-
stances of a target word could overlap in different
degrees, depending on the meaning of the instances.
These overlaps reveal subtle relations between word
usages in cases where they share some of their trans-
lations but not all of them (Sinha et al., 2009). This
also shows the absence of clear divisions between
usages and senses: usages overlap to different ex-
tents without having identical translations. Although
no clustering of translations from a specific resource
into senses was performed for this task, the interest
of examining the possibility of clustering the transla-

5The average numbers of substitutes provided by the anno-
tators for words of different POS are: 4.47 for nouns, 5.2 for
verbs, 4.99 for adjectives and 4.77 for adverbs.

tions provided by the annotators is highlighted (Mi-
halcea et al., 2010).

5 Cross-lingual WSD

The source language features that revealed the sim-
ilarity of the translations and served to their cluster-
ing (cf. section 3) can be exploited by an unsuper-
vised WSD classifier (Apidianaki, 2009). In order
to disambiguate a new instance of an English word
w, cooccurrence information coming from its con-
text is compared to these feature sets and the clus-
ter that has the highest similarity with the new con-
text is selected. We adopt this WSD method in or-
der to exploit the sense clustering results and per-
form CLLS in an unsupervised manner. Instead of
comparing the new contexts to the features that are
common to all the translations in a cluster (i.e. the
intersection of their source language features), as is
done in the initial method, we compare them to the
features shared by each pair of translations. This in-
creases the coverage of the method, given that these
source features sets are larger than the ones contain-
ing the intersection of the features of all the clus-
tered translations. As the training corpus was lem-
matized and POS-tagged prior to building the fea-
ture vectors (only content word cooccurrences were
retained), the new contexts have to be lemmatized
and POS-tagged as well.

If common features (CFs) are found between the
new context and a translation pair, a score is as-
signed to this ’context-pair’ association which cor-
responds to the mean of the weights of the CFs rel-
atively to each translation of the pair. The weights
used here are the total weights (tws) that were as-
signed to the context features relatively to the trans-
lations during the semantic similarity calculation (cf.
section 3.2). In formula 5, i is equal to 2 (i.e. the
number of translations in the pair) and j is the num-
ber of CFs between the translation pair and the new
context.

If the highest-ranked translation pair is found in
just one sense cluster, this cluster is selected as de-
scribing the sense of the new instance. Otherwise,
if the translation pair is found in different clusters,
it is checked whether the CFs characterize the other
translations in these clusters (or some of them). If
this is the case, a score is assigned to each cluster

18



Test instance WSD suggestion Gold annotation
test.n 1698 prueba;ensayo;examen; examen 4;prueba 4;test 1;

board.n 1781
consejo;bordo;junta;comité;cuenta;
administración;

junta directiva 2;consejo 2;mesa directiva 1;junta
1;junta de ayuda 1;directiva 1;comite 1;comision 1;

drop.v 1288 bajar;disminuir;reducir;caer;descender
dejar caer 2;tirar 1;arrojar 1;lanzar 1;soltar 1;dejar
1;bajar 1;

check.v 851 comprobar;controlar;verificar;
verificar 3;checar 2;confirmar 1;anotar 1;rectificar
1;revisar 1;comprobar 1;

yet.r 1766 todavı́a;aún;sin embargo; sin embargo 2;pero 2;no obstante 1;aun 1;todavia 1;

now.r 1019 hoy;aquı́;actualmente;ahora bien;
hoy 2;ahora 2;este momento 2;a partir 1;el presente
1;de aqui 1;

Table 2: Clusters suggested by the WSD method.

depending on the weights of the features with the
other translations, and the cluster with the highest
score is selected as describing the sense of the new
instance. The score is again calculated by formula 5
but this time i is equal to the number of translations
in the cluster having CFs with the new context.

score =

∑
i

∑
j tw(i, j)

i ∗ j
(5)

If no CFs are found using the translation pairs, the
WSD algorithm considers each translation’s feature
set separately (which is naturally larger than the fea-
ture sets of the translation pairs). If CFs exist, the
translation with the highest score is selected as well
as the cluster containing it. If the translation is
found in the intersection of different clusters, it is
checked whether the CFs characterize some of the
other translations found in the clusters. If this is the
case, a score is assigned to the clusters depending on
the weights of the features with the translations and
the cluster with the highest score is selected. The
cluster containing the translation pair with the high-
est similarity to the new context is retained as the
sense of the new instance. If no CFs are found in
this way neither, a most frequent sense heuristic is
used which selects the most frequent cluster (i.e. the
one assigned to most of the new instances of w).

For the 1000 test instances in the SemEval CLLS
task, the WSD method proposes 625 clusters with
more than one element and 118 one element clus-
ters.6 The most frequent translation is suggested in

6262 clusters with two elements; 157 clusters with three; 73
with four; 64 with five; 69 clusters with more than five and less

210 cases while the most frequent cluster is chosen
in 43 cases. A cluster is chosen randomly only in
3 cases. In Table 2, we present some suggestions
made by the WSD method for target words of dif-
ferent POS (n: nouns, v: verbs, a: adjectives, r: ad-
verbs) and the corresponding gold standard (GS) an-
notations. For instance, the following occurrence of
the English noun test:

Entries typically identify the age or school grade lev-
els for which the test is appropriate, as well as any
subtests.

is tagged by the Spanish cluster {prueba, examen,
ensayo} during WSD, which is close to the GS an-
notation {examen, prueba, test} and correctly de-
scribes its sense.

The first translation provided in the results is the
word of the cluster that translates most of the En-
glish target word instances in the corpus (and which
is duplicated in order to be reinforced during the
’out-of-ten’ evaluation, as we will explain in the next
section). We observe that this most frequent word,
although it is a correct translation (i.e. found in the
GS annotations), does not coincide with the annota-
tors’ first choice. This explains the evaluation results
that we present in the next section.

It is also important to note that the system sug-
gests not only translations that have been proposed
by the annotators, but also other semantically perti-
nent translations that were found in the training cor-
pus and which do not exist in the GS annotations.
This is the case, for instance, with the translation

than ten elements; 23 clusters with ten elements and 22 clusters
with more than ten elements.

19



”controlar” of the verb check and the translation ”en-
sayo” proposed for the noun test. This shows that
the suggestions made by the WSD method greatly
depend on the corpus used for training.

6 Evaluation

6.1 The setting

We evaluate our method on the SemEval-2010
CLLS task test set. The metrics used for evalua-
tion are the best and out-of-ten (oot) precision (P)
and recall (R) scores. In the SemEval task, the sys-
tems were allowed to supply as many translations as
they felt fit the context. These suggestions were then
given credit depending on the number of annotators
that had picked each translation. The credit was di-
vided by the number of annotator responses for the
item. For the best score, the credit for the system an-
swers for an item was also divided by the number of
answers provided by the system, which allows more
credit to be given to instances with less variation.

The oot scorer allows up to ten system responses
and does not divide the credit attributed to each
answer by the number of system responses. This
scorer allows duplicates which means that systems
can get inflated scores (i.e. > 100), as the credit
for each item is not divided by the number of substi-
tutes and the frequency of each annotator response
is used. Allowing duplicates permits that the sys-
tems boost their scores with duplicates on transla-
tions with higher probability.7

Two baselines are used for evaluation: a
dictionary-based one (DICT), which contains the
Spanish translations of all target words provided by
an SP-EN dictionary, and a dictionary and corpus-
based one (DICTCORP), where the translations pro-
vided by the dictionary for a given target word are
ranked according to their frequencies in the Spanish
Wikipedia. In DICT, the best baseline is produced
by taking the first translation provided by the dic-
tionary while the oot baseline considers the first ten
translations.

6.2 Results

In order to evaluate our WSD method, we proceed as
follows. If the cluster selected by the WSD method

7The metrics used for evaluation are defined in Mihalcea et
al. (2010).

contains ten translations (or more), all the transla-
tions are given in the oot results. Otherwise, the
translations found in the cluster are proposed and the
most frequent translation is duplicated till reaching
ten elements. For best, we always retain the most
frequent translation of the selected cluster.

Our intuition was that the WSD method, which
assigns sense clusters (i.e. sets of semantically sim-
ilar and, more or less, substitutable translations),
would fit and perform well on the oot subtask of the
SemEval CLLS task. This is confirmed by the re-
sults presented in Table 3.8 Our method (denoted
by ’WSD’ in the table) outperforms the 14 systems
that participated in the CLLS task as well as the re-
call (R) and precision (P) baselines. It is important
to note that, contrary to our method which is totally
unsupervised, all the systems that participated in the
SemEval-2010 task used predefined resources. The
second ranked system (SWAT-E), for instance, per-
forms lexical substitution in English and then trans-
lates each substitute into Spanish using two prede-
fined bilingual dictionaries, while SWAT-S does the
inverse, performing lexical substitution in the trans-
lated text (Wicentowski et al., 2010).

Systems R P Mode R Mode P
WSD 180.10 186.25 56.52 58.44
SWAT-E 174.59 174.59 66.94 66.94
SWAT-S 97.98 97.98 79.01 79.01
UvT-v 58.91 58.91 62.96 62.96
UvT-g 55.29 55.29 73.94 73.94
DICT 44.04 44.04 73.53 73.53
DICTCORP 42.65 42.65 71.60 71.60

Table 3: oot results (%)

Another interesting point is that the sense cluster
inventory used by the cross-lingual WSD method is
derived from Europarl, which is the European Par-
liament Proceedings parallel corpus (Koehn, 2005).
Despite this fact, the WSD method that exploits
this inventory performs particularly well on this task
which concerns the semantic analysis and transla-
tion of words of general language. We would thus
expect the results to be even better if the sense induc-

8We report the results obtained by the highest-ranked sys-
tems in the SemEval-2010 CLLS task. The full table of results
can be found in Mihalcea et al. (2010).

20



tion and the WSD method were trained on a bigger,
or more general, parallel corpus.

The mode recall and precision (Mode R and Mode
P) metrics evaluate the performance of the systems
in predicting the translation that was most frequently
selected by the annotators, provided that such a
translation extists. To identify the most frequent re-
sponse, we order the system responses according to
their frequency as translations of the target words in
the training corpus. The relatively low scores ob-
tained for the Mode R and Mode P metrics (com-
pared to R and P) are explained by the fact that the
most frequent translation in the training corpus does
not always correspond to the translation that was
most frequently selected by the annotators, although
it may be a good translation for the target word.

The same reason explains the weaker perfor-
mance of the method in the best evaluation subtask
(cf. Table 4), where our system is ranked eighth
compared to the 14 systems that participated in the
task.9 Here too, the best translation according to the
annotators does not correspond to the most frequent
translation in the corpus. This highlights the impact
that the relevance of the training corpus to the do-
mains of the processed texts has on unsupervised
CLLS.

Systems R P Mode R Mode P
UBA-T 27.15 27.15 57.20 57.20
USPWLV 26.81 26.81 58.85 58.85
WLVUSP 25.27 25.27 52.81 52.81
WSD 19.73 19.93 41.29 41.75
UBA-W 19.68 19.68 39.09 39.09
SWAT-S 18.87 18.87 36.63 36.63
IRST-1 15.38 22.16 33.47 45.95
TYO 8.39 8.62 14.95 15.31
DICT 24.34 24.34 50.34 50.34
DICTCORP 15.09 15.09 29.22 29.22

Table 4: best results (%)

Another important factor that has to be taken into
account is that the WSD method that we use is ori-
ented towards multilingual applications (more pre-
cisely MT). In these applications, it is possible to
filter the proposed sense clusters by reference to the

9We report some indicative results from the best subtask.
The full table of results can be found in Mihalcea et al. (2010).

target language context (for instance, by using a lan-
guage model) in order to retain the most adequate
translation. It is interesting to note that the systems
that perform better in the best subtask get relatively
low results in the oot subtask, and the inverse. This
is the case, for instance, for UBA-T (Basile and Se-
meraro, 2010), while Aziz and Specia (2010) clearly
specify that their main goal is to maximize the accu-
racy of their system (USPwlv) in choosing the best
translation. A conclusion that can be drawn is that
each subtask has different requirements, which may
be satisfied by different types of methods.

In order to investigate other possible reasons be-
hind the different behavior of the WSD method in
the two evaluation subtasks, we performed the eval-
uation separately for each POS. The results are pre-
sented in Tables 5 and 6.

POS R P Mode R Mode P
Adjs 287.94 296.41 72.44 74.43
Nouns 127.01 141.65 37.78 42.29
Verbs 115.94 121.43 53.17 55.90
Advs 111.46 111.46 65.15 65.15

Table 5: oot results for different POS (%)

POS R P Mode R Mode P
Adjs 30.77 31.00 63.56 64.13
Nouns 14.61 16.29 25.78 28.86
Verbs 14.98 14.98 29.76 29.76
Advs 13.07 13.07 37.88 37.88

Table 6: best results for different POS (%)

In both the oot and best evaluation subtasks, the
best scores are obtained for adjectives. Especially in
the best subtask, where the method seemed to per-
form worse than the other systems, the recall and
precision scores obtained for adjectives (with and
without mode) are higher than those obtained by the
highest-ranked system (cf. Table 4) and much higher
than the baselines. A more detailed look at the ob-
tained results proved that the most frequent transla-
tion of the English adjectives in our training corpus –
proposed in the best evaluation subtask and empha-
sized in the oot subtask – is often the most frequent
translation proposed by the annotators. This is not
the case for the other POS, where the most frequent

21



translation in the corpus often does not correspond
to the annotators’ first choice. Furthermore, the
translation proposed by the system is not the same
as the most frequent translation of the word in the
general dictionary and the Spanish Wikipedia which
were used, respectively, for the DICT and DICT-
CORP baselines. Consequently, this issue could
probably be resolved if a more balanced corpus was
used for training the WSI and WSD methods.

7 Conclusions and future work

We have shown that Cross-Lingual Lexical Substi-
tution can be performed in a totally unsupervised
manner, if a parallel corpus is available. We applied
an unsupervised cross-lingual WSD method based
on semantic clustering to the SemEval-2010 CLLS
task. The method performs well compared to the
systems that participated in the task, which exploit
predefined lexico-semantic resources. It is ranked
first on the out-of-ten measure and medium on mea-
sures that concern the choice of the best translation.
We wish to pursue this work and explore other ways
for selecting best translations than solely relying on
frequency information. As unsupervised methods
heavily rely on the training data, it would also be
interesting to experiment with different corpora in
order to evaluate the impact of the type and the size
of the corpus on CLLS.

The sense clusters assigned to target word in-
stances during CLLS contain semantically similar
translations of these words, more or less substi-
tutable in the target language context. We consider
that it would be interesting to integrate target lan-
guage information in the CLLS decision process for
selecting best translations. Given that MT is one of
the envisaged applications for this type of task, but
the use of a full-blown MT system would probably
mask system capabilities at a lexical level, a possi-
bility would be to exploit the CLLS system sugges-
tions in a simplified MT task such as word transla-
tion (Vickrey et al., 2005) or lexical selection (Apid-
ianaki, 2009), or in an MT evaluation context. This
would permit to estimate the usefulness of the sys-
tem suggestions in a specific application setting.

References

Marianna Apidianaki and Yifan He. 2010. An algorithm
for cross-lingual sense clustering tested in a MT eval-
uation setting. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Workshop on Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT-
10), pages 219–226, Paris, France.

Marianna Apidianaki. 2008. Translation-oriented sense
induction based on parallel corpora. In Proceedings
of the 6th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC-08), pages 3269–3275,
Marrakech, Morocco.

Marianna Apidianaki. 2009. Data-driven Semantic
Analysis for Multilingual WSD and Lexical Selection
in Translation. In Proceedings of the 12th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (EACL-09), pages 77–85,
Athens, Greece.

Wilker Aziz and Lucia Specia. 2010. USPwlv and
WLVusp: Combining Dictionaries and Contextual In-
formation for Cross-Lingual Lexical Substitution. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluations (SemEval-2), ACL 2010, pages
117–122, Uppsala, Sweden.

Pierpaolo Basile and Giovanni Semeraro. 2010. UBA:
Using Automatic Translation and Wikipedia for Cross-
Lingual Lexical Substitution. In Proceedings of the
5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations
(SemEval-2), ACL 2010, pages 242–247, Uppsala,
Sweden.

Marine Carpuat and Dekai Wu. 2007. Improving Sta-
tistical Machine Translation using Word Sense Disam-
biguation. In Proceedings of the Joint EMNLP-CoNLL
Conference, pages 61–72, Prague, Czech Republic.

Yee Seng Chan, Hwee Tou Ng, and David Chiang. 2007.
Word Sense Disambiguation Improves Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL-07), pages 33–40, Prague, Czech Republic.

Andrew Chesterman. 1998. Contrastive Functional
Analysis. John Benjamins Publishing Company, Ams-
terdam/Philadelphia.

Mona Diab. 2003. Word sense disambiguation within
a multilingual framework. Ph.D. dissertation, Univer-
sity of Maryland.

Gregory Grefenstette. 1994. Explorations in Automatic
Thesaurus Discovery. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Norwell, MA.

Zelig Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word,
10:146–162.

Nancy Ide, Tomaz Erjavec, and Dan Tufis. 2002. Sense
discrimination with parallel corpora. In Proceedings
of the ACL Workshop on Word Sense Disambiguation:

22



Recent Successes and Future Directions, pages 54–60,
Philadelphia.

Nancy Ide. 1999. Cross-lingual sense determination:
Can it work? Computers and the Humanities, 34(1-
2):223–234.

Philip Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of MT
Summit X, pages 79–86, Phuket, Thailand.

Alon Lavie and Abhaya Agarwal. 2007. METEOR: An
Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with High Levels
of Correlation with Human Judgments. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL-2007 Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pages 228–231, Prague, Czech Republic.

Els Lefever and Veronique Hoste. 2010. SemEval-2010
Task 3: Cross-lingual Word Sense Disambiguation.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2), ACL 2010, pages
15–20, Uppsala, Sweden.

Diana McCarthy and Roberto Navigli. 2009. The En-
glish lexical substitution task. Language Resources
and Evaluation Special Issue on Computational Se-
mantic Analysis of Language: SemEval-2007 and Be-
yond, 43(2):139–159.

Rada Mihalcea, Ravi Sinha, and Diana McCarthy. 2010.
SemEval-2010 Task 2: Cross-Lingual Lexical Sub-
stitution. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2), ACL
2010, pages 9–14, Uppsala, Sweden.

George A. Miller and Walter G. Charles. 1991. Contex-
tual correlates of semantic similarity. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 6(1):1–28.

Roberto Navigli. 2009. Word Sense Disambiguation: a
Survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 41(2):1–69.

Hwee Tou Ng and Yee Seng Chan. 2007. SemEval-
2007 Task 11: English lexical sample task via
English-Chinese parallel text. In Proceedings of the
4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations
(SemEval-2007), pages 54–58, Prague, Czech Repub-
lic.

Hwee Tou Ng, Bin Wang, and Yee Seng Chan. 2003.
Exploiting Parallel Texts for Word Sense Disambigua-
tion: An Empirical Study. In Proceedings of the 41st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 455–462, Sapporo, Japan.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A Systematic
Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment Models.
Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Philip Resnik and David Yarowsky. 2000. Distinguish-
ing Systems and Distinguishing Senses: New Evalua-
tion Methods for Word Sense Disambiguation. Natu-
ral Language Engineering, 5(3):113–133.

Philip Resnik. 2007. WSD in NLP applications. In
Eneko Agirre and Philip Edmonds, editors, Word

Sense Disambiguation: Algorithms and Applications,
pages 299–337, Dordrecht. Springer.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-Speech Tag-
ging Using Decision Trees. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on New Methods in Language
Processing, pages 44–49, Manchester, UK.

Ravi Sinha, Diana McCarthy, and Rada Mihalcea. 2009.
SemEval-2010 Task 2: Cross-Lingual Lexical Substi-
tution. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT Workshop
SEW-2009 - Semantic Evaluations: Recent Achieve-
ments and Future Directions, pages 76–81, Boulder,
Colorado.

David Vickrey, Luke Biewald, Marc Teyssier, and
Daphne Koller. 2005. Word-Sense Disambiguation
for Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference on Human Language Technology / Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing (HLT-
EMNLP), pages 771–778, Vancouver, Canada.

Richard Wicentowski, Maria Kelly, and Rachel Lee.
2010. SWAT: Cross-Lingual Lexical Substitution
using Local Context Matching, Bilingual Dictionar-
ies and Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the
5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations
(SemEval-2), ACL, pages 123–128, Uppsala, Sweden.

23


