



















































Identifying Parallel Documents from a Large Bilingual Collection of Texts: Application to Parallel Article Extraction in Wikipedia.


Identifying Parallel Documents from a Large Bilingual Collection of Texts:
Application to Parallel Article Extraction in Wikipedia.

Alexandre Patry
KeaText

845, Boulevard Dcarie, bureau 202
Saint-Laurent, Canada H4L 3L7

alexandre.patry@keatext.com

Philippe Langlais
DIRO/RALI

Université de Montréal
Montréal, Canada H3C3J7

felipe@iro.umontreal.ca

Abstract

While several recent works on dealing with
large bilingual collections of texts, e.g. (Smith
et al., 2010), seek for extracting parallel sen-
tences from comparable corpora, we present
PARADOCS, a system designed to recognize
pairs of parallel documents in a (large) bilin-
gual collection of texts. We show that this
system outperforms a fair baseline (Enright
and Kondrak, 2007) in a number of con-
trolled tasks. We applied it on the French-
English cross-language linked article pairs of
Wikipedia in order see whether parallel ar-
ticles in this resource are available, and if
our system is able to locate them. Accord-
ing to some manual evaluation we conducted,
a fourth of the article pairs in Wikipedia are
indeed in translation relation, and PARADOCS
identifies parallel or noisy parallel article pairs
with a precision of 80%.

1 Introduction

There is a growing interest within the Machine
Translation (MT) community to investigate compa-
rable corpora. The idea that they are available in
a much larger quantity certainly contributes to fos-
ter this interest. Still, parallel corpora are playing
a crucial role in MT. This is therefore not surprising
that the number of bitexts available to the commu-
nity is increasing.

Callison-Burch et al. (2009) mined from institu-
tional websites the 109 word parallel corpus1 which
gathers 22 million pairs of (likely parallel) French-
English sentences. Tiedemann (2009) created the

1http://www.statmt.org/wmt10

Opus corpus,2 an open source parallel corpus gath-
ering texts of various sources, in several languages
pairs. This is an ongoing effort currently gathering
more than 13 Gigabytes of compressed files. The
Europarl corpus3 (Koehn, 2005) gathers no less than
2 Gigabytes of compressed documents in 20 lan-
guage pairs. Some other bitexts are more marginal in
nature. For instance, the novel 1984 of George Or-
wel has been organized into an English-Norvegian
bitext (Erjavec, 2004) and Beyaz Kale of Orhan Pa-
muk as well as Sofies Verden of Jostein Gaardner
are available for the Swedish-Turk language pair
(Megyesi et al., 2006).

A growing number of studies investigate the ex-
traction of near parallel material (mostly sentences)
from comparable data. Among them, Munteanu et
al. (2004) demonstrate that a classifier can be trained
to recognize parallel sentences in comparable cor-
pora mined from news collections. A number of
related studies (see section 5) have also been pro-
posed; some of them seeking to extract parallel sen-
tences from cross-language linked article pairs in
Wikipedia4 (Adafre and de Rijke, 2006; Smith
et al., 2010). None of these studies addresses specif-
ically the issue of discovering parallel pairs of arti-
cles in Wikipedia.

In this paper, we describe PARADOCS, a system
capable of mining parallel documents in a collec-
tion, based on lightweight content-based features ex-
tracted from the documents. On the contrary to other
systems designed to target parallel corpora (Chen

2http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/
3http://www.statmt.org/europarl/
4http://fr.wikipedia.org/

87

Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, pages 87–95,
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,

Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics



and Nie, 2000; Resnik and Smith, 2003), we do
not assume any specific naming conventions on file-
names or URLs.

The reminder of this article is organized as fol-
lows. In the next section, we describe our ap-
proach to mining parallel documents in a bilingual
collection of texts. We test our approach on the
Europarl corpus in section 3. We present in sec-
tion 4 the application of our system to a subpart
of the French-English articles of Wikipedia. We
describe related work in section 5, summarize our
work in section 6 and present future works in sec-
tion 7.

2 PARADOCS

In order to identify pairs of parallel documents in a
bilingual collection of texts, we designed a system,
named PARADOCS, which is making as few assump-
tions as possible on the language pair being consid-
ered, while still making use of the content of the doc-
uments in the collection. Our system is built on three
lightweight components. The first one searches for
target documents that are more likely parallel to a
given source document (section 2.1). The second
component classifies (candidate) pairs of documents
as parallel or not (section 2.2). The third component
is designed to filter out some (wrongly) recognized
parallel pairs, making use of collection-level infor-
mation (section 2.3).

2.1 Searching Candidate Pairs

In a collection containing n documents in a given
language, and m in another one, scoring each of the
n×m potential pairs of source-target documents be-
comes rapidly intractable. In our approach, we re-
sort to an information retrieval system in order to
select the target documents that are most likely par-
allel to a given source one. In order to do so, we
index target documents t in the collection thanks to
an indexing strategy φ that will be described shortly.
Then, for a source document s, we first index it, that
is, we compute φ(s), and query the retrieval engine
with φ(s), which in turn returns the N most simi-
lar target documents found in the collection. In our
experiments, we used the Lucene5 retrieval library.

5http://lucene.apache.org

We tested two indexing strategies: one reduces a
document to the sequence of hapax words it contains
(φ ≡hap), the other one reduces it to its sequence
of numerical entities (φ ≡num). Hapax words have
been found very useful in identifying parallel pairs
of documents (Enright and Kondrak, 2007) as well
as for word-aligning bitexts (Lardilleux and Lep-
age, 2007). Following Enright and Kondrak (2007),
we define hapax words as blank separated strings of
more than 4 characters that appear only once in the
document being indexed. Also, we define a numer-
ical entity as a blank separated form containing at
least one digit. It is clear from this description that
our indexing strategies can easily be applied to many
different languages.

2.2 Identifying candidate pairs
Each candidate pair delivered by Lucene, is classi-
fied as parallel or not by a classifier trained in a su-
pervised way to recognize parallel documents. Here
again, we want our classifier to be as agnostic as
possible to the pair of languages considered. This
is why we adopted very light feature extractors ψ
which are built on three types of entities in docu-
ments: numerical entities (ψ ≡num), hapax words
(ψ ≡hap) and punctuation marks6 (ψ ≡punc). For
each sequence of entities ψ(s) and ψ(t) of a source
document s and a target document t respectively, we
compute the three following features:

• the normalized edit-distance between the two
representations:

σ = ed(ψ(s), ψ(t))/max(|ψ(s)|, |ψ(t)|)

where |ψ(d)| stands for the size of the sequence
of entities contained in d. Intuitively, σ gives
the proportion of entities shared across docu-
ments,

• the total number of entities in the representation
of both documents:

|ψ(s)|+ |ψ(t)|

We thought this information might complement
the one of σ which is relative to the document’s
sequence length.

6We only considered the 6 following punctuation marks that
are often preserved in translation: .!?():

88



• A binary feature which fires whenever the pair
of documents considered receives the smaller
edit-distance among all the pairs of documents
involving this source document:

δ(s, t) ={
1 if ed (ψ(s), ψ(t)) ≤ ed (ψ(s), ψ(t′)) ∀ t′
0 otherwise

Intuitively, the target document considered is
more likely the good one if it has with the
source document the smallest edit distance.
Since we do compute edit-distance for all the
candidate documents pairs, this feature comes
at no extra computational cost.

We compute these three features for each se-
quence of entities considered. For instance, if we
represent a document according to its sequence of
numerical entities and its hapax words, we do com-
pute a total of 6 features.7

It is fair to say that our feature extraction strat-
egy is very light. In particular, it does not capitalize
on an existing bilingual lexicon. Preliminary exper-
iments with features making use of such a lexicon
turned out to be less successful, due to issues in the
coverage of the lexicon (Patry and Langlais, 2005).

To create and put to the test our classifier, we used
the free software package Weka (Hall et al., 2009),
written in Java.8 This package allows the easy ex-
perimentation of numerous families of classifiers.
We investigated logistic regression (logit), naive
bayes models (bayes), adaboost (ada), as well as
decision tree learning (j48).

2.3 Post-treatments
The classifiers we trained label each pair of docu-
ments independently of other candidate pairs. This
independence assumption is obviously odd and leads
to situations where several target documents are
paired to a given source document and vice-versa.
Several solutions can be applied; we considered two
simple ones in this work. The first one, hereafter
named nop, consists in doing nothing; therefore
leaving potential duplicates source or target docu-
ments. The second solution, called dup, filters out

7We tried with less success to compute a single set of fea-
tures from a representation considering all entities.

8www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/

pairs sharing documents. Another solution we did
not implement would require to keep from the set of
pairs concerning a given source document the one
with the best score as computed by our classifier. We
leave this as future work.

3 Controlled Experiments

We checked the good behavior of PARADOCS
in a controlled experimental setting, using the
Europarl corpus. This corpus is organized into
bitexts, which means that we have a ground truth
against which we can evaluate our system.

3.1 Corpus

We downloaded version 5 of the Europarl cor-
pus.9 Approximatively 6 000 documents are avail-
able in 11 languages (including English), that is, we
have 6 000 bitexts in 10 language pairs where En-
glish is one of the languages. The average number
of sentences per document is 273. Some documents
contain problems (encoding problems, files ending
unexpectedly, etc.). We did not try to cope with this.
In order to measure how sensible our approach is
to the size of the documents, we considered several
slices of them (from 10 to 1000 sentences). 10

3.2 Protocol

We tested several experimental conditions, varying
the language pairs considered (en-da, -de, -el, -es,
-fi, -fr, -it, -nl, -pt and -sv) as well as the doc-
ument length (10, 20, 30, 50, 70, 100 and 1 000
sentences). We also tested several system configu-
rations, varying the indexing strategy (num, hap),
the entities used for representing documents (hap,
num, num+hap, num+punc), the classifier used
(logit, ada, bayes, and j48), as well as the
post-filtering strategy (nop, dup). This means that
we conducted no less than 4 480 experiments.

Because we know which documents are paral-
lel, we can compute precision (percentage of iden-
tified parallel pairs that are truly parallel) and recall
(percentage of true parallel pairs identified) for each
configuration.

9http://www.statmt.org/europarl
10We removed the first sentences of each document, since

they may contain titles or other information that may artificially
ease pairing.

89



Since our approach requires to train a classifier,
we resorted in this experiment to a 5-fold cross-
validation procedure where we trained our classifiers
on 4/5 of the corpus and tested on the remaining part.
The figures reported in the reminder of this section
are averaged over the 5 folds. Also, all configura-
tions tested in this section considered the N = 20
most similar target documents returned by the re-
trieval engine for each source document.

3.3 Results
3.3.1 Search errors

We first measured search errors observed during
step 1 of our system. There are actually two types
of errors: one when no document is returned by
Lucene (nodoc) and one when none of the target
documents returned by the retrieval engine are sanc-
tioned ones (nogood). Figure 1 shows both error
types for the Dutch-English language pair, as a func-
tion of the document length.11 Clearly, search errors
are more important when documents are short. Ap-
proximatively a tenth of the source documents of (at
most) 100 sentences do not receive by Lucene any
target document. For smaller documents, this hap-
pens for as much as a third of the documents. Also,
it is interesting to note that in approximatively 6% of
the cases where Lucene returns target documents,
the good one is not present. Obviously we pay the
prize of our lightweight indexation scheme. In or-
der to increase the recall of our system, nodoc er-
rors could be treated by employing an indexing strat-
egy which would use more complex features, such
as sufficiently rare words (possibly involving a key-
word test, e.g. tf.idf). This is left as future work.

3.3.2 Best System configuration
In order to determine the factors which influence

the most our system, we varied the language pairs
(10 values) and the length of the documents (7 val-
ues) and counted the number of times a given sys-
tem configuration obtained the best f-measure over
the 70 tests we conducted. We observed that most
of the time, the configurations recording the best
f-measure are those that exploit numerical entities
(both at indexing time and feature extraction time).
Actually, we observed that computing features on

11Similar figures have been observed for other language
pairs.

nb. of sent.

errors %

 10

 15

 20

 25

 30

 35

 40

 45

 8  16  32  64  128  256  512  1024

nodoc + nogood
nodoc

Figure 1: Percentage of Dutch documents for which
Lucene returns no English document (nodoc), or no
correct document (nodoc+nogood) as a function of the
document size counted in sentences.

hapax words or punctuation marks on top of nu-
merical entities do not help much. One possible
explanation is that often, and especially within the
Europarl corpus, hapax words correspond to nu-
merical entities. Also, we noted that frequently, the
wining configuration is the one embedding a logistic
regression classifier, tightly followed by the decision
tree learner.

3.3.3 Sensitivity to the language pair
We also tested the sensibility of our approach to

the language pair being considered. Apart from the
fact that the French-English pair was the easiest to
deal with, we did not notice strong differences in
performance among language pairs. For documents
of at most 100 sentences, the worst f-measure (0.93)
is observed for the Dutch/English language pair,
while the best one (0.95) is observed for the French-
English pair. Slightly larger differences were mea-
sured for short documents.

nb. of sent.

gain %

 0

 5

 10

 15

 20

 25

 30

 35

 40

 8  16  32  64  128  256  512  1024

da
de
el
es
fi
fr
it
nl
pt
sv

Figure 2: Absolute gains of the best variant of our sys-
tem over the approach described by Enright and Kon-
drak (2007).

90



3.3.4 Sanity check

We conducted a last sanity check by comparing
our approach to the one of (Enright and Kondrak,
2007). This approach simply ranks the candidate
pairs in decreasing order of the number of hapax
words they share. The absolute gains of our ap-
proach over theirs are reported in Figure 2, as a
function of the document length and the language
pair considered. Our system systematically outper-
forms the hapax approach of (Enright and Kondrak,
2007) regardless of the length of the documents and
the language pairs considered. An average absolute
gain of 13.6% in f-measure is observed for long doc-
uments, while much larger gains are observed for
shorter ones. It has to be noted, that our approach
requires to train a classifier, which makes it poten-
tially less useful in some situations. Also, we used
the best of our system in this comparison.

4 Experiments with Wikipedia

Many articles in Wikipedia are available in
several languages. Often, they are explicitly
marked as linked across languages. For instance,
the English article [Text corpus] is linked to the
French one [Corpus], but they are not transla-
tion of each other, while the English article [De-
cline of the Roman Empire] and the French one
[Déclin de l’empire romain d’Occident] are paral-
lel.12

4.1 Resource

During summer 2009, we collected all French-
English cross-language linked articles from
Wikipedia. A very straightforward pre-
processing stage involving simple regular expres-
sions removed part of the markup specific to this
resource. We ended up with 537 067 articles in
each language. The average length of the English
pages is 711 words, while the average for French is
445 words. The difference in length among linked
articles has been studied by Filatova (2009) on a
small excerpt of bibliographical articles describing
48 persons listed in the biography generation task
(Task 5) of DUC 2004.13

12At least they were at the time of redaction.
13http://duc.nist.gov/duc2004/tasks.html/

4.2 Parallelness of cross-language linked
article pairs in FR-EN Wikipedia.

In this experiment, we wanted to measure the pro-
portion of cross-language linked article pairs in
Wikipedia that are in translation relation. In or-
der to do so, we manually evaluated 200 pairs of arti-
cles in our French-English Wikipedia repository.

A web interface was developed in order to anno-
tate each pair, following the distinction introduced
by Fung and Cheung (2004): parallel indicates
sentence-aligned texts that are in translation relation;
noisy characterizes two documents that are never-
theless mostly bilingual translations of each other;
topic corresponds to documents which share sim-
ilar topics, but that are not translation of each oth-
ers and very-non that stands for rather unrelated
texts.

The results of the manual evaluation are reported
in the left column of table 1. We observe that a
fourth of the pairs of articles are indeed parallel or
noisy parallel. This figure quantifies the observa-
tion made by Adafre and de Rijke (2006) that while
some articles in Wikipedia tend to be translations
of each other, the majority of the articles tend to be
written independently of each other. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first time someone is mea-
suring the degree of parallelness of Wikipedia at
the article level.

If our sample is representative (something which
deserves further investigations), it means that more
than 134 000 pairs of documents in the French-
English Wikipedia are parallel or noisy parallel.

We would like to stress that, while conducting
the manual annotation, we frequently found diffi-
cult to label pairs of articles with the classes pro-
posed by Fung and Cheung (2004). Often, we could
spot a few sentences translated in pairs that we rated
very-non or topic. Also, it was hard to be con-
sistent over the annotation session with the distinc-
tion made between those two classes. Many arti-
cles are divided into sub-topics, some of which be-
ing covered in the other article, some being not.

4.3 Parallelness of the article pairs identified
by PARADOCS

We applied PARADOCS to our Wikipedia collec-
tion. We indexed the French pages with the Lucene

91



Wikipedia PARADOCS

Type Count Ratio Count Ratio

very-non 92 46% 5 2.5%
topic 58 29% 34 17%
noisy 22 11% 39 19.5%

parallel 28 14% 122 61%

Total 200 200

Table 1: Manual analysis of 200 pairs cross-language
linked in Wikipedia (left) and 200 pairs of articles
judged parallel by our system (right).

toolkit using the num indexing scheme. Each En-
glish article was consequently transformed with the
same strategy before querying Lucene, which was
asked to return the N = 5 most similar French arti-
cles. We limited the retrieval to 5 documents in this
experiment in order to reduce computation time. As
a matter of fact, running our system on Wikipedia
took 1.5 days of computation on 8 nodes of a pen-
tium cluster. Most of this time was devoted to com-
pute edit-distance features.

Each candidate pair of articles was then labeled
as parallel or not by a classifier we trained to rec-
ognize parallel documents in an in-house collection
of French-English documents we gathered in 2009
from a website dedicated to Olympic games.14 Us-
ing a classifier trained on a different task gives us the
opportunity to see how our system would do if used
out-of-the-box. A set of 1844 pairs of documents
have been automatically aligned (at the document
level) thanks to heuristics on URL names; then man-
ually checked for parallelness. The best classifier
we developed on this collection (thanks to a 5-fold
cross-validation procedure) was a decision tree clas-
sifier (j48) which achieves an average f-measure of
90% (92.7% precision, and 87.4% recall). This is
the classifier we used in this experiment.

From the 537 067 English documents of our col-
lection, 106 896 (20%) did not receive any answer
from Lucene (nodoc). A total of 117 032 pairs of
documents were judged by the classifier as parallel.
The post-filtering stage (dup) eliminated slightly
less than half of them, leaving us with a total of

14http://www.olympic.org

61 897 pairs. We finally eliminated those pairs that
were not cross-language linked in Wikipedia. We
ended up with a set of 44 447 pairs of articles iden-
tified as parallel by our system.

Since there is no reference telling us which cross-
language linked articles in Wikipedia are indeed
parallel, we resorted to a manual inspection of a ran-
dom excerpt of 200 pairs of articles identified as par-
allel by our system. The sampling was done in a way
that reflects the distribution of the scores of the clas-
sifier over the pairs of articles identified as parallel
by our system.

The results of this evaluation are reported in the
right column of table 1. First, we observe that
20% (2.5+17) of the pairs identified as parallel by
our system are at best topic aligned. One explana-
tion for this is that topic aligned articles often share
numbers (such as dates), sometimes in the same or-
der, especially in bibliographies that are frequent in
Wikipedia. Clearly, we are paying the prize of
a lightweight content-oriented system. Second, we
observe that 61% of the annotated pairs were indeed
parallel, and that roughly 80% of them were parallel
or noisy parallel. Although PARADOCS is not as ac-
curate as it was on the Europarl corpus, it is still
performing much better than random.

4.4 Further analysis

We scored the manually annotated cross-language
linked pairs described in section 4.2 with our clas-
sifier. The cumulative distribution of the scores is
reported in table 2. We observe that 64% (100-
35.7%) of the parallel pairs are indeed rated as par-
allel (p ≥ 0.5) by our classifier. This percentage is
much lower for the other types of article pairs. On
the contrary, for very non-parallel pairs, the classi-

p ≤ 0.1 p ≤ 0.2 p < 0.5 avr.
very-non 1.1% 91.4% 92.5% 0.25
topic 1.7% 74.6% 78.0% 0.37
noisy 13.6% 77.3% 90.9% 0.26
parallel 7.1% 25.0% 35.7% 0.71

Table 2: Cumulative distribution and average score given
by our classifier to the 200 manually annotated pairs of
articles cross-language linked in Wikipedia.

92



fier assigns a score lower than 0.2 in more than 91%
of the cases. This shows that the score given by the
classifier correlates to some extent with the degree
of parallelness of the article pairs.

Among the 28 pairs of cross-language linked arti-
cle pairs manually labelled as parallel (see table 1),
only 2 pairs were found parallel by PARADOCS,
even if 18 of them received a score of 1 by the classi-
fier. This discrepancy is explained in part by the fil-
ter (dup) which is too drastic since it removes all the
pairs sharing one document. We already discussed
alternative strategies. The retrieval stage of our sys-
tem is as well responsible of some failures, espe-
cially since we considered the 5 first French docu-
ments returned by Lucene. We further inspected
the 10 (28-18) pairs judged parallel but scored by
our classifier as non parallel. We observed sev-
eral problems; the most frequent one being a fail-
ure of our pre-processing step which leaves unde-
sired blocs of text in one of the article, but not in
the other (recall we kept the preprocessing very ag-
nostic to the specificities of Wikipedia). These
blocs might be infoboxes or lists recapitulating im-
portant dates, or even sometimes HTML markup.
The presence of numerical entities in those blocs is
confounding the classifier.

5 Related Work

Pairing parallel documents in a bilingual collection
of texts has been investigated by several authors.
Most of the previous approaches for tackling this
problem capitalize on naming conventions (on file
URL names) for pairing documents. This is for in-
stance the case of PTMINER (Chen and Nie, 2000)
and STRAND (Resnik and Smith, 2003), two sys-
tems that are intended to mine parallel documents
over the Web. Since heuristics on URL names does
not ensure parallelness, other cues, such as the ratio
of the length of the documents paired or their HTML
structure, are further being used. Others have pro-
posed to use features computed after sentence align-
ing a candidate pair of documents (Shi et al., 2006),
a very time consuming strategy (that we tried with-
out success). Others have tried to use bilingual lex-
icons in order to compare document pairs; this is
for instance the case of the BITS system (Ma and
Liberman, 1999). Also, Enright and Kondrak (2007)

propose a very lightweight content-based approach
to pairing documents, capitalizing on the number of
hapax words they share. We show in this study, that
this approach can easily be outperformed.

Zhao and Vogel (2002) were among the first to
report experiments on harvesting comparable news
collections in order to extract parallel sentences.
With a similar goal, Munteanu et al. (2004) pro-
posed to train in a supervised way (using some par-
allel data) a classifier designed to recognize paral-
lel sentences. They applied their classifier on two
monolingual news corpora in Arabic and English,
covering similar periods, and showed that the paral-
lel material extracted, when added to an in-domain
parallel training corpus of United Nation texts, im-
proved significantly an Arabic-to-English SMT sys-
tem tested on news data. Still, they noted that the
extracted material does not come close to the qual-
ity obtained by adding a small out-domain parallel
corpus to the in-domain training material. Different
variants of this approach have been tried afterwards,
e.g. (Abdul-Rauf and Schwenk, 2009).

To the best of our knowledge, Adafre and de Rijke
(2006) where the first to look at the problem of ex-
tracting parallel sentences from Wikipedia. They
compared two approaches for doing so that both
search for parallel sentence pairs in cross-language
linked articles. The first one uses an MT engine in
order to translate sentences of one document into the
language of the other article; then parallel sentences
are selected based on a monolingual similarity mea-
sure. The second approach represents each sentence
of a pair of documents in a space of hyperlink an-
chored texts. An initial lexicon is collected from the
title of the articles that are linked across languages
(they also used the Wikipedia’s redirect feature
to extend the lexicon with synonyms). This lexicon
is used for representing sentences in both languages.
Whenever the anchor text of two hyperlinks, one in
a source sentence, and one in a target sentence is
sanctioned by the lexicon, the ID of the lexicon en-
try is used to represent each hyperlink, thus making
sentences across languages sharing some representa-
tion. They concluded that the latter approach returns
fewer incorrect pairs than the MT based approach.

Smith et al. (2010) extended these previous lines
of work in several directions. First, by training a
global classifier which is able to capture the ten-

93



dency of parallel sentences to appear in chunks. Sec-
ond, by applying it at large on Wikipedia. In
their work, they extracted a large number of sen-
tences identified as parallel from linked pairs of arti-
cles. They show that this extra materiel, when added
to the training set, improves a state-of-the-art SMT
system on out-domain test sets, especially when the
in-domain training set is not very large.

The four aforementioned studies implement some
heuristics in order to limit the extraction of paral-
lel sentences to some fruitful document pairs. For
news collections, the publication time can for in-
stance be used for narrowing down the search; while
for Wikipedia articles, the authors concentrate
on document pairs that are linked across languages.
PARADOCS could be used for narrowing the search
space down to a set of parallel or closely parallel
document pairs. We see several ways this could
help the process of extracting parallel fragments.
For one thing, we know that extracting parallel
sentences from a parallel corpus is something we
do well, while extracting parallel sentences from a
comparable corpus is a much riskier enterprise (not
even mentioning time issues). As a matter of fact,
Munteanu et al. (2004) mentioned the inherent noise
present in pairs of sentences extracted from com-
parable corpora as a reason why a large set of ex-
tracted sentence pairs does not contribute to improve
an SMT system more that a small but highly specific
parallel dataset. Therefore, a system like ours could
be used to decide which sort of alignment technique
should be used, given a pair of documents. For an-
other thing, one could use our system to delimit a
set of fruitful documents to harvest in the first place.
The material acquired this way could then be used
to train models that could be employed for extract-
ing noisiest document pairs, hopefully for the sake
of the quality of the material extracted.

6 Conclusion

We have described a system for identifying paral-
lel documents in a bilingual collection. This system
does not presume specific information, such as file
(or URL) naming conventions, which can sometime
be useful for mining parallel documents. Also, our
system relies on a very lightweight set of content-
based features (basically numerical entities and pos-

sibly hapax words), therefore our claim of a lan-
guage neutral system.

We conducted a number of experiments on the
Europarl corpus in order to control the impact
of some of its hyper-parameters. We show that
our approach outperforms the fair baseline described
in (Enright and Kondrak, 2007). We also con-
ducted experiments in extracting parallel documents
in Wikipedia. We were satisfied by the fact that
we used a classifier trained on another task in this
experiment, but still got good results (a precision of
80% if we consider noisy parallel document pairs
as acceptable). We conducted a manual evalua-
tion of some cross-language linked article pairs and
found that 25% of those pairs were indeed paral-
lel or noisy parallel. This manually annotated data
that can be downloaded at http://www.iro.
umontreal.ca/˜felipe/bucc11/.

7 Future Work

In their study on infobox arbitrage, Adar et al.
(2009) noted that currently, cross-language links in
Wikipedia are essentially made by volunteers,
which explains why many such links are missing.
Our approach lends itself to locate missing links
in Wikipedia. Another extension of this line of
work, admittedly more prospective, would be to de-
tect recent vandalizations (modifications or exten-
sions) operated on one language only of a parallel
pair of documents.

Also, we think that there are other kinds of data
on which our system could be invaluable. This is
the reason why we refrained in this work to engi-
neer features tailored for a specific data collection,
such as Wikipedia. One application of our sys-
tem we can think of, is the organization of (pro-
prietary) translation memories. As a matter if fact,
many companies do not organize the flow of the doc-
uments they handle in a systematic way and there is
a need for tools able to spot texts that are in transla-
tion relation.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Fabienne Venant who participated
in the manual annotation we conducted in this study.

94



References
Sadaf Abdul-Rauf and Holger Schwenk. 2009. On

the use of comparable corpora to improve smt per-
formance. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, EACL ’09, pages 16–23.

Sisay Fissaha Adafre and Maarten de Rijke. 2006. Find-
ing Similar Sentences across Multiple Languages in
Wikipedia. In 11th EACL, pages 62–69, Trento, Italy.

Eytan Adar, Michael Skinner, and Daniel S. Weld. 2009.
Information arbitrage across multi-lingual wikipedia.
In Proceedings of the Second ACM International Con-
ference on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM ’09,
pages 94–103.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
and Josh Schroeder. 2009. Findings of the 2009
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation, pages 1–28, Athens, Greece,
March. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jiang Chen and Jian-Yun Nie. 2000. Parallel Web text
mining for cross-language IR. In RIAO, pages 62–67,
Paris, France.

Jessica Enright and Gregorz Kondrak. 2007. A Fast
Method for Parallel Document Identification. In
NAACL HLT 2007, Companion Volume, pages 29–32,
Rochester, NY.

Tomaz Erjavec. 2004. MULTEXT-East Version 3:
Multilingual Morphosyntactic Specifications, Lexi-
cons and Corpora. In LREC, Lisbon, Portugal.

Elena Filatova. 2009. Directions for exploiting asymme-
tries in multilingual wikipedia. In Third International
Cross Lingual Information Access Workshop, pages
30–37, Boulder, Colorado.

Pascale Fung and Percy Cheung. 2004. Mining very-
non-parallel corpora: Parallel sentence and lexicon ex-
traction via bootstrapping and EM. In Dekang Lin
and Dekai Wu, editors, Proceedings of EMNLP 2004,
pages 57–63, Barcelona, Spain, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The WEKA Data Mining Software: An Update.
SIGKDD Explorations, 11, Issue 1(10–18).

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A multilingual corpus
for evaluation of machine translation. In 10th Machine
Translation Summit, Phuket, Thailand, sep.

Adrien Lardilleux and Yves Lepage. 2007. The con-
tribution of the notion of hapax legomena to word
alignment. In 3rd Language & Technology Conference
(LTC’07), pages 458–462, Poznań Poland.

Xiaoyi Ma and Mark Liberman. 1999. Bits: A method
for bilingual text search over the web. In Machine
Translation Summit VII, Singapore, sep.

Beata Bandmann Megyesi, Eva Csato Johansson, and
Anna Sgvall Hein. 2006. Building a Swedish-Turkish
Parallel Corpus. In LREC, Genoa, Italy.

Dragos Stefan Munteanu, Alexander Fraser, and Daniel
Marcu. 2004. Improved machine translation perfor-
mance via parallel sentence extraction from compara-
ble corpora. In Daniel Marcu Susan Dumais and Salim
Roukos, editors, HLT-NAACL 2004: Main Proceed-
ings, pages 265–272, Boston, Massachusetts, USA,
May. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Alexandre Patry and Philippe Langlais. 2005. Automatic
identification of parallel documents with light or with-
out linguistic resources. In 18th Annual Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (Canadian AI), pages 354–365,
Victoria, British-Columbia, Canada.

Philip Resnik and Noah A. Smith. 2003. The web as a
parallel corpus. Computational Linguistics, 29:349–
380. Special Issue on the Web as a Corpus.

Lei Shi, Cheng Niu, Ming Zhou, and Jianfeng Gao.
2006. A dom tree alignment model for mining par-
allel data from the web. In Proceedings of the 21st
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING) and the 44th annual meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages
489–496, Sydney, Australia.

Jason R. Smith, Chris Quirk, and Kristina Toutanova.
2010. Extracting parallel sentences from comparable
corpora using document level alignment. In Human
Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference
of the NAACL, HLT ’10, pages 403–411.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2009. News from OPUS – A Collection
of Multilingual Parallel Corpora with Tools and Inter-
faces. In N. Nicolov, K. Bontcheva, G. Angelova, and
R. Mitkov, editors, Recent Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 237–248. John Benjamins,
Amsterdam/Philadelphia.

Bing Zhao and Stephan Vogel. 2002. Adaptive parallel
sentences mining from web bilingual news collection.
In Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE International Con-
ference on Data Mining, ICDM ’02, pages 745–748,
Maebashi City, Japan.

95


