















































Using Explicit Semantic Analysis for Cross-Lingual Link Discovery


Proceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 2–10,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 8-12, 2011.

Using Explicit Semantic Analysis for Cross-Lingual Link Discovery

Petr Knoth
KMi, The Open University
p.knoth@open.ac.uk

Lukas Zilka
KMi, The Open University
l.zilka@open.ac.uk

Zdenek Zdrahal
KMi, The Open University

z.zdrahal@open.ac.uk

Abstract

This paper explores how to automati-
cally generate cross-language links be-
tween resources in large document col-
lections. The paper presents new meth-
ods for Cross-Lingual Link Discovery
(CLLD) based on Explicit Semantic Anal-
ysis (ESA). The methods are applicable to
any multilingual document collection. In
this report, we present their comparative
study on the Wikipedia corpus and provide
new insights into the evaluation of link dis-
covery systems. In particular, we mea-
sure the agreement of human annotators in
linking articles in different language ver-
sions of Wikipedia, and compare it to the
results achieved by the presented methods.

1 Introduction

Cross-referencing documents is an essential part
of organising textual information. However, keep-
ing links in large, quickly growing, document col-
lections up-to-date, is problematic due to the num-
ber of possible connections. In multilingual doc-
ument collections, interlinking semantically re-
lated information in a timely manner becomes
even more challenging. Suitable software tools
that could facilitate the link discovery process by
automatically analysing the multilingual content
are currently lacking. In this paper, we present
new methods for Cross-Lingual Link Discovery
(CLLD) applicable across different types of mul-
tilingual textual collections.

Our methods are based on Explicit Semantic
Analysis (ESA) introduced by Gabrilovich and
Markovitch (2007). ESA is a method that calcu-
lates semantic relatedness of two texts by map-
ping their term vectors to a high dimensional
space (typically, but not necessarily, the space of
Wikipedia concepts) and by calculating the sim-

ilarity between these vectors (instead of compar-
ing them directly). The method has received
much attention in the recent years and it has also
been extended to a multilingual version called
Cross-Lingual Explicit Semantic Analysis (CL-
ESA) (Sorg and Cimiano, 2008). To the best of our
knowledge, this method has not yet been applied
in the context of automatic link discovery systems.

Since the CLLD field is relatively young, it is
also important to establish a constructive means
for evaluating these systems. Our paper pro-
vides insight into this problem by investigating the
agreement/reliability of man-made links and by
presenting a possible approach for the definition
of ground truth, i.e. gold standard.

The paper brings the following contributions:

(a) It applies Explicit Semantic Analysis to the
link discovery and CLLD tasks.

(b) It provides new insights into the evaluation of
CLLD systems and into the way people link
information in different languages, as mea-
sured by their agreement.

2 Related Work

CLLD Methods
Current approaches to link detection can be di-

vided into three groups:

(1) link-based approaches discover new links by
exploiting an existing link graph (Itakura and
Clarke, 2008; Jenkinson et al., 2008; Lu et
al., 2008).

(2) semi-structured approaches try to discover
new links using semi-structured information,
such as the anchor texts or document titles
(Geva, 2007; Dopichaj et al., 2008; Granitzer
et al., 2008; Milne and Witten, 2008; Mihal-
cea and Csomai, 2007).

2



(3) purely content-based approaches use as an
input plain text only. They typically dis-
cover related resources by calculating se-
mantic similarity based on document vectors
(Allan, 1997; Green, 1998; Zeng and Blo-
niarz, 2004; Zhang and Kamps, 2008; He,
2008). Some of the mentioned approaches,
such as (Lu et al., 2008), combine multiple
approaches. To the best of our knowledge, no
approach has so far been reported to use Ex-
plicit Semantic Analysis to address this task.

The main disadvantage of the link-based and
semi-structured approaches is probably the dif-
ficulty associated with porting them across dif-
ferent types of document collections. The two
well-known solutions to monolingual link detec-
tion, the Geva’s and Itakura’s algorithms (Trotman
et al., 2009), fit in these two categories. While
these algorithms have been demonstrated to be ef-
fective on a specific Wikipedia set, their perfor-
mance has significantly decreased when they were
applied to a slightly different task of interlink-
ing two encyclopedia collections. Purely content-
based methods have been mostly found to produce
slightly worse results than the two previous classes
of methods, however their advantage is that their
performance should remain stable across different
document collections. As a result, they can al-
ways be used as part of any link discovery sys-
tem and can even be combined with domain spe-
cific methods that make use of the link graph or
semi-structured information. In practice, domain-
specific link discovery systems can achieve high
precision and recall. For example, Wikify! (Mihal-
cea and Csomai, 2007) and the link detector pre-
sented by Milne and Witten (2008) can be used
to identify suitable anchors in text and enrich it
with links to Wikipedia by combining multiple ap-
proaches with domain knowledge.

In this paper, we present four methods (three
purely content-based and one combining the link-
based and content-based approach) for CLLD
based on CL-ESA. Measuring semantic similar-
ity using ESA has been previously shown to pro-
duce better results than calculating it directly on
document vectors using cosine and other similar-
ity measures and it has also been found to outper-
form the results that can be obtained by measuring
similarity on vectors produced by Latent Seman-
tic Analysis (LSA) (Gabrilovich and Markovitch,
2007). Therefore, the cross-lingual extension of

ESA seems a plausible choice.
Evaluation of link discovery systems
The evaluation of link discovery systems is cur-

rently problematic as there is no widely accepted
gold standard. Manual development of such a
standard would be costly, because: (a) the num-
ber of possible links is very high even for small
collections, (b) the link generation task is subjec-
tive (Ellis et al., 1994) and (c) it is not entirely
clear how the link generation task should be de-
fined in terms of link granularity (for example,
document-to-document links, anchor-to-document
links, anchor-to-passage links etc.). Developing
such a CLLD corpora manually would be even
more complicated.

As a result, Wikipedia links were extracted and
taken as the gold standard (ground truth) in a com-
parative evaluation in (Huang et al., 2008). The
authors admit that Wikipedia links are not perfect
(validity of existing links is sometimes question-
able and useful links may be missing) the compar-
ative evaluation of methods and systems should
be considered informative only. For example, it
would be naı̈ve to expect that measuring preci-
sion/recall characteristics would be accurate.

In this paper we discuss the issues in automati-
cally defining the ground truth for CLLD systems.
We take into account the differences in the way
people link content in different languages to as-
sess the agreement between the different language
versions with the goal to find out how well our sys-
tem performs. Our experiments are conducted on
the Wikipedia dataset, however we use the articles
only as a set of documents abstracting from the
Wikipedia encyclopedic nature.

3 The CLLD methods

This section describes the methods used in our ex-
periments. The whole process of cross-language
link detection is shown in Figure 1. The method
takes as an input a new “orphan” document (i.e.
a document that is not linked to other documents)
written in the source language and automatically
generates a ranked list of documents written in the
target language (the suitable link targets from the
source document). The task involves two steps:
the cross-language step and the link generation
step. We have experimented with four different
CLLD methods: CL-ESA2Links, CL-ESADirect,
CL-ESA2ESA and CL-ESA2Similar that will be
described later on. The names of the methods

3



Figure 1: Cross-language link discovery process

are derived from the approach applied in the first
and the second step. These methods have differ-
ent characteristics and would be useful in different
scenarios.

In the first step, an ESA vector is calculated
for each document in the document collection.
This results in obtaining a weighted vector of
Wikipedia concepts for each document in the tar-
get language. The cardinality of the vector is given
by the number of concepts (pages) in the target
language version of Wikipedia (i.e. it is about 3.8
million for English, 764,000 for Spanish, etc.). A
similar procedure is applied on the orphan doc-
ument, however, the source language version of
ESA is used. The resulting ESA vector is then
compared to the ESA vectors that represent docu-
ments in the target language collection (CL-ESA
approach). A set of candidate vectors representing
documents in the target language is acquired as an
output of the cross-language step, see Section 3.1.

In the second step, the candidate vectors are
taken as a seed and are used to discover documents
that are suitable link targets. The four different

Figure 2: CLLD candidates

approaches used in this step distinguish the above-
mentioned methods, see Section 3.2.

3.1 The cross-language step

The main rationale for the cross-language step is
to find t suitable candidates in the target language
that can later be exploited to identify link targets.
Semantically similar target language documents to
the source language document are considered by
our methods as suitable candidates. To identify
such documents, the ESA vector of the source doc-
ument is compared to the ESA vectors of docu-
ments in the target document collection.

Each dimension in an ESA vector expresses the
similarity of a document to the given language ver-
sion of a Wikipedia concept/article. Therefore, the
cardinality of the source document vector is differ-
ent from the cardinality of the vectors represent-
ing the documents in the target language collec-
tion (Figure 2). In order to calculate the similarity
of two vectors, we map the dimensions that corre-
spond to the same Wikipedia concepts in different
language versions. In most cases, if a Wikipedia
concept is mapped to another language version,
there is a one-to-one correspondence between the
articles in those two languages. However, there
are cases when one page in the source language is
mapped to more than one page in the target lan-
guage and vice versa.1 For the purpose of simi-
larity calculation, we use 100 dimensions with the
highest weight that are mappable from the source
to the target language. The number of candidates
to be extracted is controlled by parameter t. We
have experimentally found that its selection has a
significant impact on the performance of our meth-
ods.

1These multiple mappings appear quite rarely, e.g. in
5,889 cases out of 550,134 for Spanish to English and for
2,528 cases out of 163,715 for Czech to English.

4



Figure 3: Schematic illustration of the four ap-
proaches used by the CLLD methods.

3.2 The link generation step

In the link generation step, the candidate docu-
ments are taken and used to produce a ranked list
of targets for the original source document. The
following approaches, schematically illustrated in
Figure 3, are taken by our four methods:

• CL-ESA2Links - This method requires ac-
cess to the link structure in the target collec-
tion. More precisely, the method takes the
original orphan document in the source lan-
guage and tries to link it to an already inter-
linked target language collection. After ap-
plying CL-ESA in the first step, existing links
are extracted from the candidate documents.
The link targets are then ranked according to
their similarity to the source document, i.e.
documents that are more similar are ranked
higher. This list is then used as a collection
of link targets.

• CL-ESADirect - This method applies CL-
ESA on the source document and takes the
list of candidates directly as link targets.

• CL-ESA2ESA - In this method, the applica-
tion of CL-ESA is followed by another appli-
cation of monolingual ESA, which measures
the semantic similarity of the candidates with

all documents in the document collection, to
identify link targets.

• CL-ESA2Similar - Instead of generating the
ranked list of link targets using monolin-
gual ESA as in the previous method, which
is computationally expensive, we calculate a
vector sum from the candidate list of ESA
document vectors. We then select strong
Wiki concepts representing these dimensions
as the set of targets. This is equivalent to cal-
culating cosine similarity using tfidf vectors.
Though much quicker, the main disadvantage
is that if we wanted to use this method on an-
other set than Wikipedia, ESA would have to
be used with a different background collec-
tion.

All of the methods have different properties.
CL-ESA2Links requires the knowledge of the link
graph in the target document collection. CL-
ESA2ESA and ESADirect are two methods that
are universal, i.e. can be easily applied in any doc-
ument collection. The difference between them is
that the former one requires significantly less doc-
ument vector comparisons than the later method.
CL-ESA2Similar works almost as fast as CL-
ESADirect, but it has the disadvantage that ESA
has to be used with the specific document collec-
tion as a background.

4 The underlying data

Wikipedia has been used as a corpus for the meth-
ods evaluation. This decision has the following
advantages that make it possible for us to test and
analyse the methods on a real use case:

• A very large multilingual text collection.

• The articles are well-interlinked and the in-
terlinking has been approved by a large com-
munity of users.

• A large proportion of articles contain ex-
plicit mapping between different language
versions.

In our study, we have experimented with the
English, Spanish and Czech language versions of
Wikipedia. We consider the cases of linking from
Spanish to English and from Czech to English,
i.e. from a less resourced language to the more
resourced one. We believe that this is the more in-
teresting direction for CLLD methods as the target

5



language version is more likely to contain relevant
information not available in the source language.
The language selection has been motivated by the
aim to test the methods in two very different envi-
ronments. The Spanish version is relatively well
resourced containing 764,095 pages (about four
times fewer than English), the Czech language
is much less resourced containing 196,494 pages
(about four times fewer than Spanish).

5 Evaluation methodology

One of the main obstacles in systematically im-
proving link discovery systems is the difficulty to
evaluate the results. The issue that makes reliable
evaluation problematic is due to both technical and
cognitive aspects. The difficulty in obtaining the
“ground truth” for a sufficiently large dataset is
caused both by the lack of human resources to
manually annotate a very large number of docu-
ment combinations, and the inherent subjectivity
of the task. As a result, we find it essential to es-
timate the agreement between annotators and see
to what extent the precision and recall character-
istics can be measured with respect to interlinked
document collections.

We claim that the reasons for linking two pieces
of information is made at the level of seman-
tics, i.e. the annotator has to understand the con-
cepts/ideas described in two papers to decide if
they should be connected by a link. We claim
that this process should be language independent.
Thus, an article about London will be related to an
article about the United Kingdom regardless of the
language the articles are written in.

Therefore, let us define the link generation task
in the following way: Given a document2 in the
source language, find documents in the target lan-
guage that are suitable link targets for the source
document, i.e. there is a semantic relationship be-
tween the source document and the linked target
documents.

Based on the definition, the ground truth for
a topic document d is the set of documents that
can be considered (semantically) suitable link tar-
gets. Though this set is typically unknown to us,
we can in our experiment approximate it by taking
the existing Wikipedia links as ground truth. Be-
cause the Wikipedia link structure has been agreed
by a large number of contributing authors, it is

2The term topic is also sometimes used to refer to the doc-
ument.

likely to have a relatively consistent link struc-
ture in comparison to content that would be linked
just by a single person. To establish the ground
truth for the original source document, we can ex-
tract all links originating in the source document
and pointing to other documents. Since the pro-
cess of linking information is performed at the se-
mantic level, and is thus language independent, we
can enrich our ground truth with link graphs from
different language versions of Wikipedia. This
causes the ground truth to get larger which has two
consequences: (1) It increases the reliability of the
evaluation as many relevant links are often omit-
ted (Knoth et al., 2010) (2) It is more difficult to
achieve higher recall.

6 Results

6.1 Experimental setup
The experiment was carried out for two language
pairs: Spanish to English and Czech to English.
We will denote the source language Lsource and
the target language Ltarget. The input for the dif-
ferent CLLD methods are two document sets:

• Let SOURCELsource be the set of topic
documents selected as pages that contain a
Wikipedia link between different language
versions. In our case, 100 pages were se-
lected.

• Let TARGETLtarget be the collection of
documents in the target language from which
the link targets are selected. In our case,
this collection contains all (3.8 million)
Wikipedia pages in English.

The output of the method is a set (ranked list)
LISTresult = 〈TARGETLtarget , score〉. To es-
tablish the ground truth we define:

• Let ρ be the mapping from documents in the
source language to their target language ver-
sions ρ : DLsource → DLtarget .

• Let SOURCELtarget be the set of topic
documents mapped to the target language
SOURCELtarget = ρSOURCELsource .

• Let α, β be the mappings from documents
to the other documents they link to in the
source and target language respectively α :
DLsource → DLsource , β : DLtarget →
DLtarget .

6



then we define the ground truth (GT) as the
union of ground truths for different language ver-
sions, in this experiment we define it as the union
of ground truth for the source and target language.

GT = α(SOURCELsource)∪β(SOURCELtarget)

A given generated item 〈d, score〉 ∈
LISTresult is evaluated as a hit if and only
if d ∈ GT .

6.2 Methods evaluation

To investigate the performance of the first part of
CLLD - the cross-language step carried out by
CL-ESA, we have analysed how well the system
finds for a given topic document in the source lan-
guage the duplicate document in the target lan-
guage. In this step, the system takes a docu-
ment in the source language, and selects from the
3.8 million large document set in the target lan-
guage the documents with the highest similarity.
We then check, if a duplicate document (d =
ρdsource) appears among the top k retrieved doc-
uments. The experiment is repeated for all exam-
ples in SOURCELsource and the results are then
averaged (Figure 4). The graph suggests that the
method performs well, as the document often ap-
pears among the first few results. In about 65%
of cases, the document is found among the first 50
retrieved items. We believe that if the set of candi-
dates (controlled by the t parameter) contains this
document, the CLLD method is likely to produce
better results, this is especially true for the CL-
ESA2Links method.

The overall results for all the methods are pre-
sented in Figure 5. We have experimentally set
t = 10 for Spanish to English and t = 3 for Czech
to English CLLD. CL-ESA2Links performed in
the experiments the best achieving 0.2 precision
at 0.3 recall. CL-ESA2Similar performed the best
out of the purely content-based methods.

Though the precision/recall might seem quite
low, a number of things should be taken into ac-
count:

• A significant number of potentially useful
links is still missing in our ground truth, be-
cause people typically do not intend to link
all relevant information. As a result, many
potentially useful connections are not explic-
itly present in Wikipedia (Knoth et al., 2010).

 0

 0.1

 0.2

 0.3

 0.4

 0.5

 0.6

 0.7

 0.8

 0.9

 50  100  150  200  250  300  350  400  450  500

P

TOP-k

TOP-k probability (es)
TOP-k probability (cs)

Figure 4: The probability (y-axis) of finding the
target language version of a given source language
document using CL-ESA in the top k retrieved
documents (x-axis). Drawn as a cumulative dis-
tribution function.

The problem can be partly mitigated by com-
bining the ground truth from more language
versions. Another approach is to measure the
agreement instead of precision/recall charac-
teristics (see Section 6.3).

• A significant number of links in Wikipedia
are conceptual links. These links do not ex-
press a particularly strong relationship at the
article level. This makes it very difficult for
the pure-content based methods to find them,
which results in low recall. It seems that CL-
ESA2Links is the only method that does not
suffer from this issue.

• The experiment settings make it hard for the
methods to achieve high precision/recall per-
formance. The TARGETLtarget set contains
3.8 million articles, out of which, the meth-
ods are supposed to identify on average just
a small subset of target documents. More
precisely, in Spanish to English CLLD, our
ground truth contains on average 341 tar-
get documents with standard deviation 293,
in Czech to English, it contains on average
382 target documents with standard deviation
292.

6.3 Measuring the agreement
To assess the subjectivity of the link genera-
tion task and to investigate the reliability of the
acquired ground truth, we have compared the
link structures from different language version of

7



 0

 0.05

 0.1

 0.15

 0.2

 0.25

 0.3

 0.35

 0.4

 0  0.05  0.1  0.15  0.2  0.25  0.3  0.35  0.4

P
re

c
is

io
n

Recall

CL-ESA2Links

CL-ESA2Similar

CL-ESA2ESA

CL-ESADirect

 0

 0.05

 0.1

 0.15

 0.2

 0.25

 0.3

 0.35

 0.4

 0.45

 0  0.05  0.1  0.15  0.2  0.25  0.3  0.35

P
re

c
is

io
n

Recall

CL-ESA2Links

CL-ESA2Similar

CL-ESA2ESA

CL-ESADirect

Figure 5: The precision (y − axis)/recall (x-axis) graphs for Spanish to English (left) and Czech to
English (right) CLLD methods.

Spanish vs English
Yen Nen N/Aen

Yes 5,563 10,201 3,934
Nes 15,715 539,299,641 99,191,766
N/Aes 5781 321,326,145 0
Czech vs English

Yen Nen N/Aen
Ycz 4,308 8,738 2,194
Ncz 12,961 392,411,445 7,501,806
N/Acz 9,790 356,532,740 0

Table 1: The agreement of Spanish and English
Wikipedia and Czech and English Wikipedia on
their link structures calculated and summed for all
pages in SOURCEes. Y - indicates yes, N - no,
N/A - not available/no decision

Wikipedia. We have iterated over the set of top-
ics from SOURCELsource and recorded for each
document in TARGETLtarget in each step if it is
a valid link target (yes - Y ) or if it is not a valid
link target (no - N ) for the given source document
in each language, thus measuring the agreement
between the link structures in different languages.
The results are presented in Table 1.

As demonstrated in Figure 6, a subset of
Wikipedia pages cannot be mapped to other lan-
guage versions. Either the semantically equiva-
lent page does not exist or the cross-language link
is missing. These links were classified as no de-
cision/not available (N/A). The mappable docu-
ments were classified in a standard way according
to their appearance in the link graphs of the lan-
guage versions. Only these links are taken into
account while measuring the agreement.

A common way to assess inter-annotator agree-

Figure 6: Individual cases of agree-
ment/disagreement/no decision (not available) for
two language versions of Wikipedia link graphs.

ment between two raters in Information Retrieval
is using the Cohen’s Kappa calculated as:

κ =
Pr(a)− Pr(e)

1− Pr(e) ,

where Pr(a) is the relative observed frequency of
agreement and Pr(e) is the hypothetical probabil-
ity of chance agreement. Pr(a) is typically cal-
culated as |Y,Y |+|N,N ||Y,Y |+|Y,N |+|N,Y |+|N,N | . Since there is
a strong agreement on the negative decisions, the
probability will be close to 1. If we ignore the
|N,N | cases, which do not carry any useful infor-
mation, the formula looks as follows:

Pr(a) =
|Y, Y |

|Y, Y |+ |Y,N |+ |N,Y | .

The probability of a random agreement is ex-
tremely low, because the probability of a link

8



 0

 0.05

 0.1

 0.15

 0.2

 0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100

a
g
re

e
m

e
n
t

% truth

CL-ESA2Links
CL-ESA2Similar

CL-ESA2ESA
CL-ESADirect

 0

 0.05

 0.1

 0.15

 0.2

 0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100

a
g
re

e
m

e
n
t

% truth

CL-ESA2Links
CL-ESA2Similar

CL-ESA2ESA
CL-ESADirect

Figure 7: The agreements of the Spanish to English (left) and Czech to English (right) CLLD methods
with GTes,en and GTcz,en respectively. The y-axis shows the agreement strength and the x-axis the
number of generated examples as a fraction of the number of examples in ground truth.

connecting any two pages is approximately:3

plink =
|links|
|pages|2 =

78.3M

3.2M2
= 0.000007648.

Thus, the hypothetical number of items appear-
ing in the Y, Y class by chance is p2link.(|Y, Y | +
|Y,N |+ |N,Y |+ |N,N |). This formula estimates
the number of agreements achieved by chance. In
our case the value is much smaller than 1, hence
P (e) is close to 0. Therefore, we can calculate the
agreement for English and Spanish as:

κen,es =
5, 563

31, 479
= 0.177.

The agreement for Czech and English is:

κen,cz =
4, 308

26, 007
= 0.166.

The value indicates a relatively low inter-annotator
agreement. We believe that the fact that such a
low agreement has been measured is very inter-
esting, particularly because the link structure in
Wikipedia is a result of a collaborative effort of
many contributors. Therefore, we would expect
that even lower agreement might be experienced
in other types of text collections.

Motivated by the previous findings, we have
calculated the agreement between the output of
our method and the link graphs present in dif-
ferent language versions of Wikipedia. We were
especially interested to find out if the agree-
ment is significantly different from the agreement

3Following the official Wikipedia statistics. Though dif-
ferent language versions have different plink, the differences
do not effect the results.

measured between different language versions of
Wikipedia. We have generated by our CLLD
methods 100% of |GT | links for every orphan doc-
ument in SOURCELsource , i.e. if a particular
document is linked in Wikipedia to 57 documents,
we generate 57 links. We have then measured the
agreement for each topic document and averaged
the agreement values. The results of the exper-
iment for Spanish to English and Czech to En-
glish CLLD are shown in Figure 7. They suggest
that CL-ESA2Links achieved a level of agreement
comparable to that of human annotators. A very
reasonable level of agreement has also been mea-
sured for CL-ESA2Similar, especially for the first
10% of the generated links. CL-ESADirect and
CL-ESA2ESA exhibit a lower level of agreement.

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we have presented and evaluated
four different methods for Cross-Language Link
Discovery (CLLD). We have used Cross-language
Explicit Semantic Analysis as a key component in
the development of the four presented methods.
The results suggest that methods that are aware
of the link graph in the target language achieve
slightly better results than those that identify links
in the target language only by calculating seman-
tic similarity. However, the former methods can-
not be applied in all document collections and thus
the later methods are valuable. Though it might
seem at first sight that CLLD methods do not pro-
vide very high precision and recall, we have shown
that the performance can, in fact, reach the results
achieved by human annotators.

9



References
James Allan. 1997. Building hypertext using informa-

tion retrieval. Inf. Process. Manage., 33:145–159,
March.

Philipp Dopichaj, Andre Skusa, and Andreas Heß.
2008. Stealing anchors to link the wiki. In Geva
et al. (Geva et al., 2009), pages 343–353.

David Ellis, Jonathan Furner-Hines, and Peter Wil-
lett. 1994. On the measurement of inter-linker
consistency and retrieval effectiveness in hypertext
databases. In SIGIR ’94: Proceedings of the 17th
annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Re-
search and development in information retrieval,
pages 51–60, New York, NY, USA. Springer-Verlag
New York, Inc.

Evgeniy Gabrilovich and Shaul Markovitch. 2007.
Computing semantic relatedness using wikipedia-
based explicit semantic analysis. In In Proceedings
of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence, pages 1606–1611.

Shlomo Geva, Jaap Kamps, and Andrew Trotman, ed-
itors. 2009. Advances in Focused Retrieval, 7th In-
ternational Workshop of the Initiative for the Evalu-
ation of XML Retrieval, INEX 2008, Dagstuhl Cas-
tle, Germany, December 15-18, 2008. Revised and
Selected Papers, Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence. Springer.

Shlomo Geva. 2007. Gpx: Ad-hoc queries and auto-
mated link discovery in the wikipedia. In Norbert
Fuhr, Jaap Kamps, Mounia Lalmas, and Andrew
Trotman, editors, INEX, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science. Springer.

Michael Granitzer, Christin Seifert, and Mario Zech-
ner. 2008. Context based wikipedia linking. In
Geva et al. (Geva et al., 2009), pages 354–365.

Stephen J. Green. 1998. Automated link generation:
can we do better than term repetition? Comput.
Netw. ISDN Syst., 30(1-7):75–84.

Jiyin He. 2008. Link detection with wikipedia. In
Geva et al. (Geva et al., 2009), pages 366–373.

Wei Che Huang, Andrew Trotman, and Shlomo Geva.
2008. Experiments and evaluation of link discovery
in the wikipedia.

Kelly Y. Itakura and Charles L. A. Clarke. 2008. Uni-
versity of waterloo at inex 2008: Adhoc, book, and
link-the-wiki tracks. In Geva et al. (Geva et al.,
2009), pages 132–139.

Dylan Jenkinson, Kai-Cheung Leung, and Andrew
Trotman. 2008. Wikisearching and wikilinking. In
Geva et al. (Geva et al., 2009), pages 374–388.

Petr Knoth, Jakub Novotny, and Zdenek Zdrahal.
2010. Automatic generation of inter-passage links
based on semantic similarity. In Proceedings of the

23rd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 590–598, Beijing,
China, August.

Wei Lu, Dan Liu, and Zhenzhen Fu. 2008. Csir at inex
2008 link-the-wiki track. In Geva et al. (Geva et al.,
2009), pages 389–394.

Rada Mihalcea and Andras Csomai. 2007. Wikify!:
linking documents to encyclopedic knowledge. In
Proceedings of the sixteenth ACM conference on
Conference on information and knowledge manage-
ment, CIKM ’07, pages 233–242, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

David Milne and Ian H. Witten. 2008. Learning to
link with wikipedia. In James G. Shanahan, Sihem
Amer-Yahia, Ioana Manolescu, Yi Zhang, David A.
Evans, Aleksander Kolcz, Key-Sun Choi, and Abdur
Chowdhury, editors, CIKM, pages 509–518. ACM.

Philipp Sorg and Philipp Cimiano. 2008. Cross-
lingual information retrieval with explicit seman-
tic analysis. In Working Notes for the CLEF 2008
Workshop.

Andrew Trotman, David Alexander, and Shlomo Geva.
2009. Overview of the inex 2010 link the wiki track.

Jihong Zeng and Peter A. Bloniarz. 2004. From key-
words to links: an automatic approach. Information
Technology: Coding and Computing, International
Conference on, 1:283.

Junte Zhang and Jaap Kamps. 2008. A content-
based link detection approach using the vector space
model. In Geva et al. (Geva et al., 2009), pages 395–
400.

10


