










































Rapid Development of Advanced Question-Answering Characters by Non-experts


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2011: the 12th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 347–349,
Portland, Oregon, June 17-18, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Rapid Development of Advanced Question-Answering Characters
by Non-experts

Sudeep Gandhe and Alysa Taylor and Jillian Gerten and David Traum
USC Institute for Creative Technologies

12015 Waterfront Drive, Playa Vista, CA 90094, USA
<lastname>@ict.usc.edu

Abstract

We demonstrate a dialogue system and the ac-
companying authoring tools that are designed
to allow authors with little or no experience
in building dialogue systems to rapidly build
advanced question-answering characters. To
date seven such virtual characters have been
built by non-experts using this architecture
and tools. Here we demonstrate one such char-
acter, PFC Sean Avery, which was developed
by a non-expert in 3 months.

1 Introduction

Our goal is to allow non-experts to build advanced
question-answering Virtual Human characters. By
non-experts, we mean that scenario authors need not
have any background in computational linguistics
or any experience in building dialogue systems; al-
though they can be an expert in the specific domain
of interaction. The advanced question-answering
characters we want to build should have the abil-
ity to decide whether to answer a specific question
truthfully or to lie about it or to simply refuse to an-
swer depending on the dialogue context and scenario
design. Interviewers can practice their questioning
skills by interacting with virtual characters that can
engage in simple bargaining behavior. In order to
reveal certain information marked as sensitive, inter-
viewers may have to employ several different tactics
like building rapport, offering to provide what the
virtual character wants or threatening the character
with consequences for not cooperating. The Amani
character (Artstein et al., 2009) is an example ad-
vanced question-answering character.

Several different architectures have been used for
building Virtual Human dialogue systems (Traum,
2008). Leuski et al. (2006; 2010) describe one
such architecture that can be used to build simple
question-answering characters. In this architecture,
scenario designers author a list of questions, a list
of answers and all possible links between these. Al-
though this approach allows non-experts to develop
virtual characters, it falls short of maintaining coher-
ence over sequence of utterances greater in length
than two. Traum et al. (2008) describe an archi-
tecture that models such dependencies by using an
information-state based dialogue model (Traum and
Larsson, 2003), but this architecture is not currently
accessible to non-experts for authoring, due to ex-
pertise needed in designing task model plans and
thematic-role based framebanks.

We choose an intermediate approach, using a sim-
ple information-state dialogue manager, making au-
thoring accessible to non-experts through use of
the accompanying integrated authoring tool, Do-
mainEditor (Gandhe et al., 2009).

2 PFC Sean Avery

Private First Class (PFC) Sean Avery is a virtual
character who has witnessed a fellow soldier and
his accomplice smuggling something suspicious on
a U.S. Army base. Avery can be questioned about
what he saw, who the soldier and the accomplice
were. But the soldier involved in the smuggling is
from Avery’s platoon and Avery wants to cover up
the incident. He may choose to lie and will need
more persuasion in the form of threats & offers (see
figure 1).

347



Player ynq Are you Sean Avery?
Avery yes Yes
Avery assert My name is PFC Sean Avery.
Player whq Tell me what you saw.
Avery assert The soldier got out of the car and took a

package from the back seat.

Player whq Do you know who the soldier was?
Avery assert-

lie
I have no clue what the soldier’s name is.

Player threat If you don’t tell me your privileges will be
revoked.

Avery response-
threat

I don’t want to be on restriction

Player whq Who was the soldier?
Avery assert The soldier’s name is Ryan Benton.
Player whq Tell me more about the soldier.
Avery assert The PFC is in my platoon and one of my

closest friends.

Player whq What was inside the package?
Avery assert He was carrying a puppy.
Player whq What was inside the package?
Avery self-

repeat
As I said earlier,

Avery assert The suspicious package contained a
puppy.

Player whq Whose idea was it to smuggle the puppy
on the base.

Avery elicit-
offer

Will you give the soldier a less severe pun-
ishment if I talk?

Player accept yes
Avery response-

offer
That’s comforting, I wouldn’t want him to
get thrown off base or anything.

Avery assert I think the soldier told his girlfriend it
wouldn’t be a big deal to sneak a puppy
on base.

Figure 1: A sample dialogue with PFC Sean Avery char-
acter. Player refers to the human trainee.

3 Authoring Process

The authoring process for such characters has two
phases. The first phase is a top-down process which
begins with defining the character’s domain knowl-
edge using the authoring tool, DomainEditor (See
Figure 2). The basic unit of domain knowledge is
an <object, attribute, value> triple. DomainEditor
automatically generates all relevant Dialogue Acts
(DAs) following a dialogue act schema. The de-
fault schema was authored by experts specifically

Figure 2: DomainEditor: An Integrated Authoring tool
for designing the conversational domain, and specifying
the utterances that map to various dialogue acts.

for tactical questioning, but can be easily tailored
to add different types of DAs for other scenarios.
Each DA has a detailed XML representation and a
pseudo-natural language gloss generated using tem-
plates. E.g. a template like “Attribute of Object is
Value” for an assert dialogue act type. The growth
in number of DAs represents the growth in charac-
ter’s domain knowledge (See figure 3). Our experi-
ence with several non-expert authors is that the do-
main reaches a stable level relatively early. Most of
the domain authoring occurs during this phase. Sce-
nario designers author one or two utterances for each
of the character’s DAs and substantially more exam-
ples for player’s DAs in order to ensure robust NLU
performance. These utterances are used as training
data for NLU and NLG.

The second phase is a bottom-up phase which in-
volves collecting a dialogue corpus by having vol-
unteers interview the virtual character that has been
built. The utterances from this corpus can then be
annotated with the most appropriate DA. This sec-
ond phase is responsible for a rapid growth in player
utterances. It can also lead to minor domain expan-
sion and small increase in character utterances, as
needed to cover gaps found in the domain knowl-
edge.

4 System Architecture

Figure 4 depicts the architecture for our dialogue
system. CMU pocketsphinx1 is used for speech

1http://cmusphinx.sourceforge.net/

348



Figure 3: Amount of resources collected across time for
the character, PFC Sean Avery

Figure 4: Architecture for the Advanced Question-
Answering Conversational Dialogue System

recognition and CereVoice (Aylett et al., 2006) for
speech synthesis. The information-state based dia-
logue manager (DM) communicates with NLU and
NLG using dialogue acts (DAs). NLU maps rec-
ognized speech to one of the DAs from the set that
is automatically generated by the DomainEditor. If
the confidence for the best candidate DA is below
a certain threshold, NLU generates a special non-
understanding DA – unknown. The information-
state is in part based on conversational game the-
ory (Lewin, 2000). The main responsibilities of the
DM are to update the information state of the dia-
logue based on the incoming DA and to select the
response DAs. The information state update rules
describe grammars for conversational game struc-
ture and are written as state charts using SCXML2.
These state charts model various subdialogues like
question-answering, offer, threat, greetings, clos-
ings, etc. The DM also implements advanced fea-
tures like topic-tracking and grounding (Roque and
Traum, 2009). The virtual human character de-

2State Chart XML – http://www.w3.org/TR/scxml/
Apache commons SCXML – http://commons.apache.org/scxml

livers synthesized speech and corresponding non-
verbal behavior, based on additional components of
the ICT Virtual Human Toolkit3.

Acknowledgments
This work was sponsored by the U.S. Army Research, Devel-
opment, and Engineering Command (RDECOM). The content
does not necessarily reflect the position or the policy of the U.S.
Government, and no official endorsement should be inferred.
We would like to thank other members of the TACQ team who
helped design the architecture.

References
Ron Artstein, Sudeep Gandhe, Michael Rushforth, and

David Traum. 2009. Viability of a simple dialogue act
scheme for a tactical questioning dialogue system. In
proc. of 13th SemDial workshop : DiaHolmia.

M. P. Aylett, C. J. Pidcock, and M. E. Fraser. 2006. The
cerevoice blizzard entry 2006: A prototype database
unit selection engine. In Blizzard Challenge Work-
shop, Pittsburgh.

Sudeep Gandhe, Nicolle Whitman, David Traum, and
Ron Artstein. 2009. An integrated authoring tool for
tactical questioning dialogue systems. In 6th Work-
shop on Knowledge and Reasoning in Practical Dia-
logue Systems, Pasadena, California, July.

Anton Leuski and David R. Traum. 2010. NPCEditor:
A tool for building question-answering characters. In
proc. of LREC’ 10.

Anton Leuski, Ronakkumar Patel, David Traum, and
Brandon Kennedy. 2006. Building effective question
answering characters. In Proceedings of the 7th SIG-
dial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, Australia.

I. Lewin. 2000. A formal model of conversational game
theory. In 4th SemDial workshop: Gotalog 2000.

Antonio Roque and David Traum. 2009. Improving a
virtual human using a model of degrees of grounding.
In Proceedings of IJCAI-09.

David Traum and Staffan Larsson. 2003. The informa-
tion state approach to dialogue management. In Jan
van Kuppevelt and Ronnie Smith, editors, Current and
New Directions in Discourse and Dialogue. Kluwer.

David Traum, William Swartout, Jonathan Gratch, and
Stacy Marsella, 2008. A Virtual Human Dialogue
Model for Non-Team Interaction, volume 39 of Text,
Speech and Language Technology. Springer.

David Traum. 2008. Talking to virtual humans: Dia-
logue models and methodologies for embodied con-
versational agents. In Ipke Wachsmuth and Günther
Knoblich, editors, Modeling Communication with
Robots and Virtual Humans, pages 296–309. Springer.
3http://vhtoolkit.ict.usc.edu/

349


