










































e-Research for Linguists


Proceedings of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 24–32,
Portland, OR, USA, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

e-Research for Linguists

Dorothee Beermann
Norwegian University of Science

and Technology
Trondheim, Norway

dorothee.beermann@hf.ntnu.no

Pavel Mihaylov
Ontotext,

Sofia, Bulgaria
pavel@ontotext.com

Abstract

e-Research explores the possibilities offered
by ICT for science and technology. Its goal is
to allow a better access to computing power,
data and library resources. In essence e-
Research is all about cyberstructure and being
connected in ways that might change how we
perceive scientific creation. The present work
advocates open access to scientific data for lin-
guists and language experts working within
the Humanities. By describing the modules of
an online application, we would like to out-
line how a linguistic tool can help the lin-
guist. Work with data, from its creation to
its integration into a publication is not rarely
perceived as a chore. Given the right tools
however, it can become a meaningful part of
the linguistic investigation. The standard for-
mat for linguistic data in the Humanities is In-
terlinear Glosses. As such they represent a
valuable resource even though linguists tend
to disagree about the role and the methods
by which data should influence linguistic ex-
ploration (Lehmann, 2004). In describing the
components of our system we focus on the po-
tential that this tool holds for real-time data-
sharing and continuous dissemination of re-
search results throughout the life-cycle of a
linguistic project.

1 Introduction

Within linguistics the management of research data
has become of increasing interest. This is partially
due to the growing number of linguists that feel
committed to the documentation and preservation
of endangered and minority languages (Rice, 1994).

Modern approaches to Language Description and
Documentation are not possible without the tech-
nology that allows the creation, retrieval and stor-
age of diverse data types. A field whose main aim
is to provide a comprehensive record of language
constructions and rules (Himmelmann, 1998) is cru-
cially dependent on software that supports the effort.
Talking to the language documentation community
Bird (2009) lists as some of the immediate tasks that
linguists need help with; interlinearization of text,
validation issues and, what he calls, the handling
of uncertain data. In fact, computers always have
played an important role in linguistic research. Start-
ing out as machines that were able to increase the
efficiency of text and data management, they have
become tools that allow linguists to pursue research
in ways that were not previously possible.1 Given an
increased interest in work with naturally occurring
language, a new generation of search engines for on-
line corpora have appeared with more features that
facilitate a linguistic analysis (Biemann et al., 2004).
The creation of annotated corpora from private data
collections, is however, still mainly seen as a task
that is only relevant to smaller groups of linguists
and anthropologists engaged in Field Work. Shoe-
box/Toolbox is probably the oldest software espe-
cially designed for this user group.Together with the
Fieldwork Language Explorer (FLEx), also devel-

1We would like to cite Tognini-Bonelli (2001) who speaks
for corpus linguistics and (Bird, 2009) who discusses Natural
Language Processing and its connection to the field of Lan-
guage Documentation as sources describing this process.

24



oped by SIL2, and ELAN3 which helps with multi-
media annotation, this group of applications is prob-
ably the best known set of linguistic tools specialised
in supporting Field Linguists.

A central task for linguistic field workers is
the interlinearization of text which is needed for
the systematisation of hand-written notes and
transcripts of audio material. The other central
concern of linguists working with small and en-
dangered languages is the creation of lexica. FLEx
therefore integrates a lexicon (a word component),
and a grammar (a text interlinearization component).

The system that is described here, assists with the
creation of interlinear glosses. However, the focus
is on data exchange and data excavation. Data from
the Humanities, including linguistic data, is time-
consuming to produce. However, in spite of the ef-
fort, this data is often not particularly reusable. Stan-
dardly it exists exclusively as an example in a pub-
lication. Glosses tend to be elementary and relative
to a specific research question. Some grammatical
properties are annotated but others that are essential
for the understanding of the examples in isolation
might have been left out, or are only mentioned in
the surrounding text. Source information is rarely
provided.

The tool presented in this paper tries to facilitate
the idea of creating re-usable data gathered from
standard linguistic practices, including collections
reflecting the researcher’s intuition and her linguis-
tic competence, as well as data derived from directed
linguistic interviews and discussions with other lin-
guists or native speakers resulting in sentence collec-
tion derived from hand-written notes or transcripts
of recordings. Different from natural language pro-
cessing tools and on a par with other linguistic tools
our target user group is “non-technologically ori-
ented linguists” (Schmidt, 2010) who tend to work
with small, noisy data collections.

2 General system description

Our tool consists of a relational database combined
with a tabular text editor for the manual creation of

2SIL today stands for International Partners in Language
Development.

3http://www.lat-mpi.eu/tools/elan/

text annotations wrapped into a wiki which serves as
a general entrance port and collaboration tool. The
system is loaded in a browser. The customised wiki
serves as an access point to the database. Using
standard wiki functionality we direct the user to the
database via New text, My texts, and Text- or Phrase
search. My texts displays the user’s repository of
annotations called ‘Texts’. The notion of Text does
not only refer to coherent texts, but to any collection
of individual phrases. My texts, the user’s private
space, is divided into two sections: Own texts and
Shared texts. This reflects the graded access design
of the system. Users administer their own data in
their private space, but they can also make use of
other users’ shared data. In addition texts can be
shared within groups of users.4

Interlinear Glosses can be loaded to the sys-
tems wiki where they can be displayed publically
or printed out as part of a customized wiki page.
As an additional feature the exported data automat-
ically updates when the natural language database
changes.

Comparing the present tool with other linguis-
tic tools without a RDBMS in the background, it
seems that the latter tools falter when it comes to
data queries. Although both the present system and
FLEx share some features, technically they are quite
distinct. FLEx is a single-user desktop system with a
well designed integration of interlinear glossing and
dictionary creation facilities (Rogers, 2010), while
the present system is an online application for the
creation of interlinear glosses specialised in the ex-
change of interlinear glosses. The system not only
‘moves data around’ easily, its Interlinear Glosser,
described in the following section, makes also data
creation easier. The system tries to utilise the ef-
fect of collaboration between individual users and
linguistic resource integration to support the fur-
ther standardisation of linguistic data. Our tag sets
for word and morpheme glossing are rooted in the
Leipzig Glossing Rules, but have been extended and
connected to ontological grammatical information.
In addition we offer sentence level annotations.

Glossing rules are conventional standards and one
way to spread them is (a) to make already existing

4At present data sets can only be shared with one pre-defined
group of users at the time.

25



standards easily accessible at the point where they
are actively used and (b) to connect the people en-
gaged in e-Research to create a community. Gloss-
ing standards as part of linguistic research must be
pre- defined, yet remain negotiable. Scientific data
in the Humanities is mainly used for qualitative anal-
ysis and has an inbuilt factor of uncertainty, that is,
linguists compare, contrast and analyse data where
where uncertainty about the relation between actual
occurring formatives and grammatical concepts is
part of the research process and needs to be accom-
modated also by annotation tools and when it comes
to standardisation.

2.1 Interlinear Glossing Online

After having imported a text into the Editor which is
easily accessed from the site’s navigation bar (New
text), the text is run through a simple, but efficient
sentence splitter. The user can then select via mouse
click one of the phrases and in such a way enter into
the annotation mode. The editor’s interface is shown
in Figure 1.

The system is designed for annotation in a multi-
lingual setting. The user starts annotating by choos-
ing the language for the text that she has loaded
to the system from an integrated ISO-language list.
Many languages of Africa are known under differ-
ent names and it therefore is useful to find a direct
link to the web version of Ethnologue, a SIL Inter-
national resource. Ethnologue can for example help
with identifying alternative language names and of-
fers useful pointers to SIL publications. The present
system distinguishes between different levels of an-
notation. Free translational glosses, standard for
all interlinear glosses, and what we call construc-
tion descriptions are sentence level annotations; so
is Global Tagging. These global tags can be selected
in the form of eight construction parameters

Construction kernel: transitiveVerb, reflexive-
Verb, multiplePredicate, transitiveOblique-
Verb,...

Situation: causation, intention, communication,
emotional-experienced, ...

Frame alternation: passive, middle, reflexive, pas-
sive+applicative, ...

Secondary predicates: infinitivial, free gerund, re-
sultative,...

Discourse function: topicalisation, presentation-
als, rightReordering,...

Modality: deontic, episthemic, optative, realis, ir-
realis,...

Force: declarative, hortative, imperative, ...

Polarity: positive, negative

The field Construction description is meant for
keeping notes, for example in those cases where the
categorisation of grammatical units poses problems
for the annotator. Meta data information is not en-
tered using the Interlinear Glosser but the systems
wiki where it is stored relative to texts. The texts
can then fully or partially be loaded to the Interlin-
ear Glosser. Using the wiki’s Corpus namespace the
user can import texts up to an individual size of 3500
words. We use an expandable Metadata template to
prompt to user for the standard bibliographic infor-
mation, as well as information about Text type, An-
notator and Contributor. At present the corpus texts
and the annotated data needs to be linked manually.

Word- and morpheme level annotation represents
the centre piece of the annotation interface which ap-
pears as a simple table. Information is ordered hor-
izontally and vertically, so that words and morphs
are aligned vertically with their Baseform, Meaning,
Gloss and Part of speech information. From the an-
notation table the user can chose one of the words
and mark it as Head adding some basic syntactic in-
formation. Annotation can be partial and the idea is
that free class morphemes are annotated for mean-
ing while closed class items receive a gloss. Morphs
may be accompanied by null to many glosses lead-
ing to enumerations of gloss symbols when neces-
sary.

Each phrase has a unique identifier. This means
that a data token can be shared freely online. The
use case in Figure 2 illustrates this point.

Next to real-time data-sharing it is mainly the easy
access to the relevant linguistic resources that facili-
tates manual annotation.5

5With the Lazy Annotation Mode (LAM) we offer an ad-
ditional function that automatically enriches annotation tables

26



Figure 1: The Interlinear Glosser

Three users of our system work together on the Bantu language Runyankore-Rukiga, a Bantu language spoken in Uganda. The language has no

digital resources and annotated text is hard to come by. The group members experience a a lot of uncertainty in the selection of gloss values. While

one of them is a lecturer at Makerere University in Kampala the other two study abroad. Mulogo attends class today, the topic is Tense and Aspect.

He remembers that Ojore who tends to work at home has recently annotated his Field Work transcripts for his thesis on Tense and Aspect. Ojore

happens to be online. Mulogo quickly asks Ojore if he could link him the two examples that he had mentioned the other day. They illustrated the

co-occurrences of the immediate past and the perfective marker -ire. Ojore links him the tokens in Skype. Mulogo opens them in his browser and

asks the teacher if he could project the examples after the break for some discussion. Meanwhile Ojore discovers that Dembe had in some contexts

identified a morpheme that he has glossed as the immediate past as a present tense marker. Dembe is not online right now, so he links the two

crucial examples to her in an e-mail. Normally they talk online in the morning when the connection to Kampala is better. He also adds a note to the

construction description of the tokens for Mulogo and Dembe to read later.

Figure 2: A use case illustrating real-time data sharing

27



First of all lists over tags can be accessed from
the wiki navigation bar where they are automatically
updated when the database changes. The tag lists
can be ordered either according to Gloss class or al-
phabetically. Short explanations for the glosses are
provided. We have grouped all glosses into annota-
tion classes and mapped them to the GOLD (Gen-
eral Ontology for Linguistic Description) ontology
(See Figure 3). The idea behind Gold (Farrar and
Langendoen, 2003) is to facilitate a more standard-
ised use of basic grammatical features. As an OWL
ontology it presents features in terms of categories
and their relations. At this point the integration with
GOLD is only light-weight and meant to give users
of the system direct access to an ontology over gram-
matical types supplemented by bibliographic infor-
mation and further examples showing the use of cat-
egories. This way essential information is made
available at the point where it is needed. Uncertainty
about the meaning of gloss can be reduced this way.

An important feature of the Interlinear Glosser is
that it allows export of data to some of the main text
editors - Microsoft Word, OpenOffice.org Writer
and LaTeX. The example below illustrates an ex-
ported interlinear gloss. In addition to export from
the Interlinear Glosser, individual or sets of interlin-
ear glosses can be exported from the SEARCH inter-
face which we will discuss in the next section. Offer-
ing a solution to the issue of wrapping (Bow et al.,
2003), which arises for the representation of inter-
linear glosses for long sentences,6 the system allows
a clean representation of annotated sentences of any
length. In general the alignment of morphemes and
glosses (optionally indicated by a dotted line) forms
the body of the interlinear gloss, while the original
string and the free translation are wrapped indepen-
dently

with word related information already known to the database.
LAM annotations need to be evaluated by the human annota-
tor. They have only a limited value for languages with a rich
system of allomorphic variation, but they are quite helpful oth-
erwise even for languages with a rich portmanteau morphemes.
In Toolbox this function is called ‘sentence parsing’

6What is a long sentence is a relative issue which is not only
determined by the number of words that a sentence consists of,
but also by the length of the enumeration of gloss tags that are
aligned with each of the individual morphemes.

Omu nju hakataahamu abagyenyi
m nj hkthm bgyngy
Omu
in

n ju
CL9 house

ha ka taah a mu
CL16 PST enter IND LOC

a ba gyenyi
IV CL2 visitor

PREP N V N
‘In the house entered visitors’

The example illustrates locative inversion in
Ruyankore-Rukiga, a Bantu language spoken in
Uganda. The translational and functional glosses,
which belong to two distinct tiers in our editor, ap-
pear as one line when imported to a word-processor.
Although glossing on several tiers is conceptually
more appropriate, linguistic publications require a
more condensed format.
Although to annotate manually is time consuming,
it is the re-usability of the data that pays off. The
ease with which already existing data can be ex-
ported from the system in order to be integrated into
publications is one way to make this point.

In addition to export to Text Editors the system
allows also from the graphical user interface the ex-
port of XML. The Akan sentence àkyérEw ǹhòmá
nò , meaning ’he has written the letter’ (see Figure
1) is given as an XML structure in Figure 4. No-
tice that Construction descriptions and Global tags
are exported together with the word- and morpheme
annotations. Used for machine to machine commu-
nication, the XML rendering of interlinear glossses
has interested the linguistic community (see for ex-
ample (Bow et al., 2003)) as a means to find a gen-
eralised model for interlinear text.

2.2 Search

Data queries operate on phrases, which means that
the result of a query is a phrase level representation.
Each line (or block) of the search result represents
an individual sentence.7 Lists of sentences, as the
result of a search, are more easily evaluated by hu-
man observers than lines of concordances. Search
results come as either lines of sentences which al-
low a first quick scan of the data or as blocks of
interlinear glosses. This latter search output gives
the linguist access to the sentence internal annota-
tions. Using general browser functionality search
results can easily be scanned. The system allows for
complex searches from the graphical interface where
word or morpheme queries can relatively freely be
combined with a search for specific glosses or com-

7or sentence fragment such as a noun phrase

28



Figure 3: Mapping between system-tags and GOLD concepts

Figure 4: XML export

29



binations of glosses. Search for portmanteau mor-
phemes as well as for word-level co-occurrences of
glosses is facilitated by allowing the user to deter-
mine the scope of gloss-co-occurrence which can
either be the morph, the word or the phrase level.
Queries are used to establish inter-annotator consis-
tency, as well as to which degree an annotator is con-
sistent in her annotations. For example, a search
of 1154 Runyankore-Rukiga sentences, annotated
by three different native-speakers in the context of
different linguistic projects, shows that the annota-
tors disagree on the meaning of the morpheme -ire.
It is mainly annotated as PERF(ective) Aspect, but
also as PAST, ANT(erior) and STAT(ive). However,
when the same morpheme occurs in a negative con-
text -ire is in 51 out of the 53 negative sentences
annotated as expressing the perfective Aspect.8 Al-
though at present aggregate functions for the SQL
queries can not be executed from the graphical user
interface, the search offered by the system is already
at this point a useful tool for linguistic data manage-
ment.

3 Free data sharing and linguistic
discovery

Collaborative databases where individual re-
searchers or groups of researchers own portions of
the data have their own dynamics and requirements
for maintaining data sharing, recovery and integrity.
They can be used with profit as an in-class tool or
by research projects, and each of these uses requires
a different set of rules for ensuring data quality and
privacy. Annotations made by language specialists
working on their own research reflect differences in
interest and linguistic expertise.

Interesting data trends can be noticed by looking
at the annotations made by annotators independently
working on the same language. We will briefly illus-
trate this point with an example.

We have analysed the interlinear texts of four an-
notators working on individual linguistic projects in
Akan, a Kwa language of Ghana. Together their
work represents an annotated 3302 word corpus. We
have analysed which glosses9 were used and how
frequently each of the glosses occurred. The most

8Date of query 03-03-2011
9The present survey does not cover pos tags.

frequently used tags for Akan were SBJ and OBJ
standing for subject and object, respectively. Com-
paring the Akan data with data coming from other
users working on typologically distinct languages,
we observe that the relative frequency in which the
users annotate for the grammatical core relations
‘subject’ and ‘object’ differed from language to lan-
guage.

As shown in Table 1 the absolute number of anno-
tated morphemes and the relative frequency of SBJ
and OBJ tags is highest for the two most configu-
rational languages in our sample. This data has to
be seen in the context of a possible use case not
as the result of an empirical study. Other data ten-
dencies indicative of annotator behaviour as much
as of data properties can be observed too. Looking
at Tense or Aspect within the same dataset shows
that Akan which is a predominantly Aspect marking
language (Boadi, 2008) (Osam, 2003) is by all four
annotators mostly annotated for Aspect, with few
tags for present tense. Between the Aspect tags we
find HAB (habitual), as well as PRF and COMPL.
The two latter glosses, referring to the perfective and
the completive Aspect, where ‘completive Aspect’
means according to Bybee “to do something thor-
oughly and to completion”, might have been used to
refer to a completed event. In the nominal domain it
is the frequent use of the DEF gloss, as opposed to
the very few uses of the gloss INDEF, that highlights
that Akan marks definiteness but not indefiniteness.
Interesting is that deixis is hardly marked although
the definite marker in Akan has been claimed to have
a deictic interpretation (Appiah Amfo, 2007).

The success of real-time data sharing depends on
the trust that data consumers have in the data qual-
ity. All public data can be traced back to the an-
notator through the system’s Text search. As part
of the first-time login procedure, each annotator is
asked to contribute a small bio to her user page on
the system’s wiki. In this way ‘data about the data’
is created and can be used to judge the data’s ori-
gin and authenticity. In addition an Advisory Board
of senior linguists can be contacted for data review.
Also, the list of Advisors can be viewed from the
system’s wiki.

However, the kernel of all efforts is to assure that
the data quality conforms to established criteria and
procedures in the field. One way to accomplish this

30



Language SUBJ OBJ units SBJ % OBJ %
German 5 2 1680 0,29 0,12
Norwegian 328 144 1787 18,35 8,05
Akan 470 393 4700 10 8,36
Kistaninya 0 0 737 0 0
R.-
Rukiga

25 5 5073 0,50 0,10

Table 1: Relative frequency of core relational tags for 5 languages

is to link annotations to an ontology of grammati-
cal concepts that reflects our present knowledge of
grammatical categories and their relations. While
we can work towards data validity, data complete-
ness for a collaborative database will always depend
on the linguistic goals pursued by the individual an-
notators.

It has been suggested by the GOLD community
that the creation of Language profiles (Farrar and
Lewis, 2005) could be a way to account for the
morpho-syntactic categories of a specific language
by using concepts found in GOLD under annotation.
Given our own experience with the present integra-
tion of GOLD a mapping from the system’s gloss
sets to the GOLD ontology could be equally inter-
esting. As an exercise in Ontology Extraction the
mapping of annotation profiles from the present sys-
tem to GOLD could as a first step allow the filling of
category gaps. For the category CASE the equative
is not yet known to GOLD, likewise Deixis and its
forms such as proximate, distal, medial and remote
are not currently represented.10 It would be inter-
esting to develop an algorithm which would allow
to (a) build a model that can predict the ‘class’ of
a certain gloss tag and (b) let ontological categories
inform data search in the system presented here.

4 Conclusion

Data annotation and real-time data sharing requires
a tool that is suitable for work in the Humanities.
The system discussed here represents linguistically
annotated data in the form of interlinear glosses,
a well established format within philology and
the structural and generative fields of linguistics.
The present system is novel in that is allows the
exchange of research data within linguistics proper.

10Gold 2010 Data of search: 03/29/2011

The systems’s design has a clear focus on real-time
data sharing combined with simplicity of use and
familiarity of representation. It allows its users
to concentrate on the linguistic task at hand. The
system is particularly suitable for the creation of
corpora of less documented languages.

While linguistic software makes use of forums,
blogs and other social software, the present system
IS social software. It is a powerful tool, however, its
real potential resides in a growing user community
and the effect that the community approach might
have on data quality and the use of standards.
Standards are ignored if not disseminated through
an attractive public site that makes it easy for
annotators to use them.With its relative longevity,
and its institutional support, the system has two of
the main characteristics of a digital tool that can
serve as part of the cyberinfrastructure which is
needed to support e-Research for the humanities
(Nguyen and Shilton, 2008).

References
Nana Appiah Amfo. 2007. Akan demonstratives. In

Doris L. Payne and Jaime Pea, editors, Selected Pro-
ceedings of the 37th Annual Conference on African
Linguistics.

Chris Biemann, Uwe Quasthoff, and Christian Wolff.
2004. Linguistic corpus search. In Proceedings
Fourth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, Lissabon.

Steven Bird. 2009. Natural language processing
and linguistic fieldwork. Computational Linguistics,
35(3):469–474.

Lawrence A. Boadi. 2008. Tense, aspect and mood in
Akan. In Felix K. Ameka and Mary Esther Kropp
Dakubu, editors, Tense and Aspect in Kwa Languages.
John Benjamins.

31



Cathy Bow, Baden Hughes, and Steven Bird. 2003. To-
wards a general model of interlinear text. In Proceed-
ings of EMELD Workshop 2003: Digitizing & An-
notating Texts & Field Recordings. Electronic Metas-
tructure for Endangered Language Data. (EMELD)
Project, May.

Scott Farrar and Terence Langendoen. 2003. A linguistic
ontology for the semantic web. GLOT International,
7(3):97–100.

Scott Farrar and William D. Lewis. 2005. The gold
community of practice: An infrastructure for linguistic
data on the web. In Proceedings of the EMELD 2005
Workshop on Digital Language Documentation: Lin-
guistic Ontologies and Data Categories for Language
Resources.

Nikolaus P. Himmelmann. 1998. Documentary and de-
scriptive linguistics. Linguistics, 36.

Christian Lehmann. 2004. Data in linguistics. The Lin-
guistic Review, 21(3-4):175–210.

Lilly Nguyen and Katie Shilton. 2008. Tools for Human-
ists. In D. Zorich, editor, A Survey of Digital Human-
ities Centres in the United States. Council on Library
and Information Resources.

Emmanuel Kweku Osam. 2003. An Introduction to the
Verbal and Multi-Verbal System of Akan. In Dorothee
Beermann and Lars Hellan, editors, Proceedings of
the workshop on Multi-Verb Constructions Trondheim
Summer School 2003.

Keren. Rice. 1994. Language documentation: Whose
ethics? In Lenore A. Grenobel and N. Louanna
Furbee-Losee, editors, Language Documentation:
Practice and values. John Benjamins.

Chris Rogers. 2010. Review of fieldworks language ex-
plorer (flex) 3.0. Language Documentation & Conser-
vation, 04:78–84.

Thomas Schmidt. 2010. Linguistic tool development be-
tween community practices and technology standards.
In Proceedings of the LREC Workshop Language Re-
source and Language Technology Standards state of
the art, emerging needs, and future developments, Val-
letta, Malta, May. European Language Resources As-
sociation (ELRA).

Elena Tognini-Bonelli. 2001. Corpus linguistics at work.
Amsterdam: Benjamins.

32


