










































Adapting Slovak ASR for native Germans speaking Slovak


Proceedings of EMNLP 2011, Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 60–64,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Adapting Slovak ASR for native Germans speaking Slovak 

 
Štefan Beňuš 1,2, Miloš Cerňak1, Milan Rusko1, Marián Trnka1, Sachia Darjaa1 

1 Institute of Informatics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia 
2 Constantine the Philosopher University, Nitra, Slovakia 

 
sbenus@ukf.sk, {Milos.Cernak, Milan.Rusko, Marian.Trnka, 

Sachia.Darzagin}@savba.sk 

 
 
 

Abstract 

We explore variability involved in speech 
with a non-native accent. We first employ a 
combination of knowledge-based and data-
driven approaches for the analysis of 
pronunciation variants between L1 
(German) and target L2 (Slovak). 
Knowledge gained in this two-step process 
is then used in adapting acoustic models 
and the lexicon. We focus on modifications 
in the pronunciation dictionary and speech 
rate. Our results show that the recognition 
of German-accented Slovak is significantly 
improved with techniques modeling slow 
L2 speech, and that the adaptation of the 
pronunciation dictionary yields only 
insignificant gains.  

1 Introduction 
Automatic recognition of non-native accented 
speech represents a complex problem, especially 
since this type of variability becomes more 
common even in languages with a relatively small 
number of speakers due to globalization and 
increased mobility of people. The methods most 
commonly used for dealing with this type of 
speech variability include pronunciation modeling, 
acoustic modeling, or topological modeling (Oh, 
Yoon and Kim, 2007, Tomokiyo, 2000). This 
paper presents an approach that starts with an 
analysis of the pronunciation variability of 
nonnative speech taking into account most salient 
differences between L1 language (in our case 
German) and L2 target language (Slovak). 

Following this knowledge-base step, a semi-
automatic data-driven approach analyzes the 
pronunciation variants on a subset of a training 
corpus is proposed. The knowledge gained in this 
two-step process is then used to adapt our state-of-
the-art ASR system for Slovak in an effort to 
improve the baseline recognition of this system in 
German accented Slovak. We primarily experiment 
with adapting the pronunciation dictionary and 
speech rate. In short, we test the acoustic model 
and lexicon adaptation based on the analysis of 
pronunciation proximity between the German-
accented and standard varieties of Slovak. 

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
describes the corpora used for testing and training. 
Section 3 discusses differences between Slovak 
and German pronunciation by analyzing the 
phonological systems of the two languages (3.1) 
and by analyzing the errors Germans make when 
speaking Slovak (3.2).  Section 4 presents the setup 
and results of experiments in adapting our state-of-
the-art ASR system for Slovak to German-accented 
pronunciation of Slovak focusing on speech rate 
manipulation and appending pronunciation 
dictionary. Section 5 discusses the findings and 
concludes the paper. 

2 Description of the databases 
Our testing corpus consists of Slovak sentences 
read by 18 native speakers of German. The 
sentences were selected or created to represent four 
types of variability: dialectological (100), foreign 
accent (100), phonetic richness and balance (300), 
and prosody (90). The first type was based on 
common differences among Slovak dialects, the 
second specially designed for problematic areas of 
native German speakers speaking Slovak. 

60



Depending on the L2 proficiency level of the 
subjects, they were divided into two groups: 
Beginner – Intermediate (A1-B1), and Upper-
intermediate – Advanced (B2-C2). The subjects 
were evenly distributed into these two groups with 
9 speakers each. The first group read sentences for 
the dialectological and accent tests accompanied 
by 100 phonetically rich and balance sentences, 
and the second group read all 590 sentences. In 
total, the testing corpus represents 8010 sentences 
(9*300 + 9*590). 

3 Features of Slovak with German accent 

3.1 Knowledge-based approach 
One of the most common ways of predicting 
differences between native (L1) and foreign-
accented (L2) speech is to compare the sound 
systems of L1 and L2. Here we present a brief 
overview of most robust pronunciation differences 
between German and Slovak.  

In terms of segmental inventories, Slovak does 
not have front rounded vowels and has only one 
front mid vowel quality while German has two. 
Also, both languages have phonemically distinct 
short and long vowels, but the length distinction in 
German robustly affects vowel quality (short 
vowels being lax and more centralized), while this 
tendency for Slovak is much less salient and a mid 
central schwa is missing in the Slovak inventory 
(Beňuš and Mády 2010). Additionally, a major 
difference comes from Slovak palatal consonants 
(stops, nasal, and lateral) that are missing in 
German. Finally, /r/ is an apical trill in Slovak in 
all positions while it commonly has uvular or 
vocalized qualities in German.  

Many allophonic processes are different in the 
two languages. The most perceptually salient 
include the aspiration of voiceless stops and the 
glottalization of initial vowels in German and its 
absence in Slovak. German lacks a so called dark 
/l/ quality in syllable codas while most /l/s in 
Slovak have this quality. In terms of phonotactics, 
Slovak has a richer set of potential onset clusters 
than German. Additionally, Slovak syllabic nuclei 
might be formed by liquids (/l/, /r/) that also 
participate in lengthening alternations, which is not 
the case in German. While both languages have 
pervasive voicing assimilation and neutralization, 
voicing neutralization in obstruent coda consonants 
is slightly more salient in German than in Slovak.  

Finally, most salient prosodic differences 
include a fixed left-most word stress in Slovak (cf. 
variable in German). Slovak in general also 
reduces the length and quality of unstressed vowels 
minimally, while in German, unstressed vowels 
tend to be shortened and centralized.  

3.2 Analysis of accent sentences 
In this section we test the theoretical predictions of 
pronunciation problems in Slovak with German 
accent stemming from interferences between L1 
and L2 described in the previous section. We took 
a subset of our corpus, 100 accent sentences read 
by all 18 speakers and asked trained annotators to 
mark all perceptually salient markers of accented 
speech at the level of segments together with word 
stress differences. Different annotators (N=6) were 
given identical instructions and labeled different 
subsets of the data. A single expert then checked 
all annotations for mistakes and inconsistencies. 
 

 
Figure 1. Error counts for all subjects divided by 

their L2 proficiency level (there were 2540 reference 
phonemes for each speaker) 

 
 
The annotators found 6966 segmental 

differences between ‘standard’ and German 
accented Slovak, which represents 15.2% of all 
45720 phonemes in the 1800 accent sentences. 
Roughly half of the differences involved syllable 

61



nuclei including liquids (53.1%) and the rest 
involved onset and coda consonants. The 
assignment to proficiency levels showed a fairly 
reasonable correspondence with the number of 
segmental problems in the accent sentences, as can 
be seen in Figure 1 above. 

Given the discussion in Section 3.1, we noticed 
several expected and unexpected patterns in the 
distribution of pronunciation deviations. Table 1 
below lists the most frequent groups of 
pronunciation problems. The expected problems 
involved differences in the palatalization of 
alveolar consonants (15.6%), and the presence of 
aspiration with voiceless plosives (3.3%). Two 
notable unexpected patterns were observed. First, 
despite some differences in the short and long 
syllabic nuclei, described in 3.1, the overall 
frequency of deviations in phonemic length was 
surprising: almost one third (31.6%) of all marked 
differences involved either the shortening of long 
nuclei or lengthening of short ones. Additionally, 
despite the clear and predictable placement of 
Slovak word stress, 13.7% of differences involved 
an incorrect placement of word stress. The 
production of German vowel quality (such as front 
rounded vowels or schwa) was relatively low 
(1.8%). Hence, prosodic and metrical features of 
vowels were perceived as far more problematic 
than the features related to their quality.  

 
Type of error Count % 
Vowel shortening 1164 16.7 
Palatalization 1090 15.6 
Obstruent voicing 1078 15.5 
Vowel lengthening 1038 14.9 
Nucleus stress 954 13.7 
Rhotic 537 7.7 
Aspiration 227 3.3 
German vow. quality 123 1.8 

 
Table 1: Most common errors in accent sentences 

 
The second unexpected pattern was a relatively 

high frequency of differences in the voicing of 
obstruent consonants (15.5%). The majority of 
these cases included the devoicing of consonants 
that, in regular fluent Slovak, would be produced 
as voiced. This pattern is related to pervasive coda 
voicing neutralization in German mentioned in 
section 3.1. Voicing of canonically voiceless 

consonants was observed as well, especially in the 
voicing of /s/ to /z/. 

It is worth noting that both of the unexpected 
patterns relate to speech rate. A generally slower 
rate of L2 speakers results in frequent pauses 
between words thus creating an environment that 
meets the description for obstruent devoicing in 
German and prevents across-the-word voice 
assimilation that is pervasive in Slovak. 
Additionally, the presence of these pauses 
facilitates so called pre-boundary lengthening (e.g. 
Delattre, 1968 for German), in which the rime of 
the pre-pausal syllable is elongated. Finally, a 
generally slower rate may result in vowels 
intended as short to be perceived as long especially 
in the speech that is slowed down locally (for 
example with unknown words for L2 speakers).  

4 ASR experiment  
The analysis of accent sentences in the previous 
section revealed a potential impact of slower 
speaking rate of L2 speakers on the frequency of 
pronunciation deviations. We test the effects of 
speaking rate and variability in the pronunciation 
dictionary on the recognition of German accented 
Slovak in the following experiment. 

4.1 Test setup 
The training audio database contained 130 hours of 
phonetically rich sentences, gender balanced, from 
domains such as news and articles from various 
magazines, recorded from 140 speakers with 
Sennheiser ME3 headset microphone with 
Sennheiser MZA 900 P in-line preamplifier and 
EMU Tracker Pre USB audio interface. Database 
was annotated using the Transcriber annotation 
tool (Barras et al., 2000), twice checked and 
corrected. Recordings were split on segments if 
possible not bigger than 10 sec. 

The training text corpora contained a total of 
about 92 million sentences with 1.25 billion Slovak 
words. A general-domain trigram language model 
(LM) was created with a vocabulary size of 350k 
unique words (400k pronunciation variants) which 
passed the spell-check lexicon and subsequently 
were also checked manually. Similarly to other 
recognizers in Slovak (Staš, Hládek and Juhár, 
2010) the modified Kneser-Ney algorithm was 
used as a smoothing technique. The general LM 

62



was adapted with all 590 sentences from the target 
domain. 

The Julius decoder (Lee, Kawahara, and 
Shikano, 2001) was used as a reference speech 
recognition engine, and the HTK toolkit was used 
for word-internal acoustic models (AMs) training. 
We trained AMs using the triphone mapping as 
described in (Darjaa et al., 2011), with 32 Gaussian 
densities per each HMM state. 

Experiments have been performed using AMs 
and LM trained from the training databases, and 
the 8010 sentences from the testing corpus as 
described in Section 2. 

4.2 Results 
To estimate the potential effect of slow L2 speech 
on the recognition accuracy, we first performed 
signal level acceleration directly on the recorded 
waveforms. The Praat speech analysis system 
(Boersma and Weenink 2011) was used, 
particularly its functionality of adjusting the time-
domain of a sound file with a fixed conversion 
factor used in subsequent PSOLA resynthesis of 
the resulting file. We resynthesized all test 
sentences using the factors 0.9, 0.7, and 0.5 (the 
last one corresponding to 50% duration of the 
original file) and performed recognition with an 
unadapted LM that had the baseline WER of 55%. 
The results showed that the acceleration factor 
with the highest accuracy gain was 0.7, which 
improved the baseline to 43.4% WER. Factor 0.9 
lowered WER to 49.5% while factor 0.5 showed 
the worst result (54.1% WER).  

Following this encouraging initial result, feature 
level acceleration was performed by simple change 
of frame shift in the ASR front-end. The original 
features were calculated from 25 ms frame 
durations and a 10 ms frame shift. While keeping 
the frame durations constant, we increased the 
frame shift to 14 ms. This corresponds to the 
acceleration factor of 0.714, approximately 
identical to the best performing factor in the signal 
modulation experiments. 

Table 2 shows achieved recognition results 
based on the adapted LM used as the baseline. This 
refers to the performance of the system on German 
accent sentences without any rate modifications. 
Unfortunately, we don’t have a corpus of these 
sentences produced by Slovak speakers to provide 
a system baseline for non-accented speech but in a 
similar, albeit larger, corpus of 18 speakers reading 

380 sentences this system’s WER was 21.3% 
(Beňuš et al., 2011).  

Speaker rate was accelerated at the signal and 
feature levels. We see that both signal and feature 
adaptation of speech rate significantly improved 
the accuracy of recognition with the latter 
outperforming the former. The extent of the 
improvement is rather surprising and suggests that 
speech rate in read sentences is a major factor 
when recognizing German-accented Slovak. 

 
Test WER 

% 
Baseline 40.58 
Alternate dictionary 40.48 
Signal-adapted speech rate 28.67 
Signal-adapted rate+alt. dictionary 28.13 
Feature-adapted speech rate 25.79 
Feature-adapted rate+alt. dictionary 25.33 
 

Table 2: Word error rates (WER) for signal and 
feature adaptations (speech rate accelerations). 

 
The analysis in section 3 also identified two 

common patterns: devoicing of consonants of 
German speakers that, in regular fluent Slovak, 
would be produced as voiced, and vowel 
shortening of German speakers. We tried to use 
this knowledge for improving the speech 
recognition system. In order to better match the 
pronunciation of German speakers in Slovak ASR 
system, we added alternative pronunciations to 
each entry of Slovak dictionary according to Table 
3. For example, the entry ‘Aachene’ with 
pronunciation /a: x e J e/, was extended with an 
alternative pronunciation /a x e n e/ by the 
application of the rules in the 1st and 4th rows. 

 
 

Original phones Phones used in  
alternative pronunciations 

/J/, /n/ /n/ 
/c/, /t/ /t/ 
/J\/, /d/ /d/ 

/a:/ /e:/ /i:/ /o:/ /u:/ /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, /u/ 
 

Table 3: Rules for generation of alternative 
pronunciations (/J/, /c/, /J\/ are Slovak SAMPA symbols 

for palatal variants of /n/, /t/, and /d/ respectively).  
 

63



The results in Table 2 show that the changes to 
the dictionary resulted in only insignificant 
improvements on top of the rate adjustment. 

Finally, we compared the average WER for 
individual speakers in the baseline system with the 
adapted systems. For 17 out of 18 speakers the 
improvement was greater than 5% and ranged up 
to 34%; only one speaker’s results showed 
deterioration (2%). Interestingly, despite a 
relatively good correspondence between the 
proficiency level and the number of pronunciation 
errors showed in Figure 1, neither the recognition 
accuracy of the adapted model, nor the extent of 
improvement after feature adaptation, showed a 
consistent relationship to the perceived proficiency 
of our subjects. This may be due to the greater 
number and complexity of test sentences used for 
advanced speakers compared to the beginners. 

5 Discussion and conclusion 
Our results showed that adjusting the rate of non-
native speech to resemble the rate of the native 
training corpus significantly improves the 
recognition of speech with foreign accent. 
Moreover, we showed that feature-based 
acceleration outperforms signal-based acceleration. 
This is important since feature-based acceleration 
is much easier to perform, and an ASR system runs 
faster as it processes less frames. Furthermore, it is 
plausible that speech rate variability will be similar 
in non-native accents of multiple L1 languages, 
which cannot be expected for the pronunciation 
variants. Hence, although the acceleration of the 
signal or features does not account for all of the 
phonetic interference phenomena described in 
Section 3.2, sophisticated speech rate modeling 
that includes the combination of phone rate, 
syllable rate, and word rate promises to provide a 
robust technique for dealing with variability 
stemming from non-native accents.  

6 Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the European Project 
of Structural Funds, ITMS: 26240220064. 

References  
Barras, C., Geoffrois, E., Wu, Z., and Liberman, M. 

2000. Transcriber: development and use of a tool for 
assisting speech corpora production. Speech 
Communication, 33 (1–2). 

Beňuš, Š., Cerňak, M., Rusko, M., Trnka, M., Darjaa, 
S., and Sabo, R. 2011. Semi-automatic approach to 
ASR errors categorization in multi-speaker corpora. 
Proceedings of the International Conference Slovko. 

Beňuš, Š, and Mády, K. 2010. Effects of lexical stress 
and speech rate on the quantity and quality of Slovak 
vowels. Proceedings of the 5th International 
Conference on Speech Prosody. 

Boersma, P., and Weenink, D. 2011. Praat: doing 
phonetics by computer [Computer program, 
http://www.praat.org/].  

Darjaa, S., Cerňak, M., Trnka, M., Rusko, M., Sabo, R. 
2011. Effective Triphone Mapping for Acoustic 
Modeling in Speech Recognition. Proceedings of 
Interspeech 2011 Conference. 

Delattre, P. 1968. A Comparison of Syllable Length 
Conditioning Among Languages. International 
Review of Applied Linguistics, IV:183-198. 

Gusfield, D.. 1997. Algorithms on Strings, Trees and 
Sequences. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK. 

Lee, A., Kawahara, T., and Shikano, K. 2001. Julius – 
an Open Source Real-Time Large Vocabulary 
Recognition Engine. In Proc. of the European 
Conference on Speech Communications and 
Technology (EUROSPEECH). 

Oh, Y.R., Yoon, J.S., Kim, H.K. 2007. Acoustic model 
adaptation based on pronunciation variability 
analysis for non-native speech recognition. Speech 
Communication 49(1), 59-70.  

Staš, J., Hládek, D., Juhár, J. 2010. Language Model 
Adaptation for Slovak LVCSR. In Proc. of the Intl. 
Conference on AEI, pp. 101–106. 

Tomokiyo, L.M., 2000. Lexical and acoustic modeling 
of non-native speech in LVCSR. In: Proc. ICSLP, 
Beijing, China, pp. 346–349. 

64


