



















































Prospects for an Ontology-Grounded Language Service Infrastructure


Proceedings of Workshop on Language Resources, Technology and Services in the Sharing Paradigm, pages 1–7,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 12, 2011.

Prospects for an Ontology-Grounded Language Service Infrastructure

Yoshihiko Hayashi
Graduate School of Language and Culture, Osaka University

1-8 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, 5600043 Japan
hayashi@lang.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract

Servicization of language resources (LR)
and technologies (LT) on an appropriately
designed and adequately operated infras-
tructure is a promising solution for sharing
them effectively and efficiently. Given this
rationale, this position paper reviews rele-
vant attempts around the Language Grid,
and presents prospects for an ontology-
grounded language service infrastructure.
As the associated issues may have sub-
stantial depth and stretch, collaborations
among international and inter-cultural ex-
perts are finally called for.

1 Introduction

Servicization of language resources (LR) and tech-
nologies (LT) on an appropriately designed and
adequately operated infrastructure is a promis-
ing solution for effectively and efficiently sharing
them. Such an infrastructure would enable: (a)
More non-expert users to have accesses to LR/LT
without being too much bothered by cumber-
some IPR issues; (b) virtual/dynamic language re-
sources to be realized as language services through
useful combination of the existing language ser-
vices. To enjoy the benefit particularly described
in (b), however, we need to address the issue of
interoperability (Calzolari, 2008).

In the rest of this position paper: The no-
tion of an ontology-grounded language service
infrastructure is first introduced; An ontologi-
cal construct for describing language services
and the associated linguistic elements, referred
to as language service ontology, is then sketched
out; By reviewing the attempts around the Lan-
guage Grid (Ishida, 2006; Ishida, 2011), includ-
ing the language service ontology, issues and the
prospects for an ontology-grounded language ser-
vice infrastructure is then discussed. As the as-
sociated issues may have substantial depth and

stretch, collaborations among international and
inter-cultural experts are finally called for.

2 Language Service Infrastructure

A language service infrastructure is a software
platform on which effective and efficient dissem-
ination and utilization of servicized language re-
sources will be possible. As nicely demonstrated
by the Language Grid, such an infrastructure can
provide a solid foundation for supporting activities
of certain types. For example, the primary goal
of the Language Grid was to support a range of
activities associated with intercultural collabora-
tion. However, such an infrastructure can attract
more audiences as originally intended, if it could
provide easier access to a reasonable set of lan-
guage resources; the Language Grid, for instance,
has been utilized by researches in the field of in-
formation and communication sciences.

Therefore a language service infrastructure
should be designed, built, and operated while
considering a wide variety of potential users,
which include not only activists/end-users (ser-
vice consumers) but also LR/LT experts (ser-
vice providers). In addition, further cooperations
among language service infrastructures should be
considered as probably discussed in this work-
shop.

Given the potential benefits of language re-
source servicization, as discussed in the previous
section, one of the most important features of a
language service infrastructure is to provide a suf-
ficient set of actual services, each classified into a
reasonable service type. This is particularly im-
portant, as a service interface (or application pro-
gram interface: API) should be specified accord-
ing to the type of a service. To enable this, we pri-
marily have to have a reasonable list or taxonomy
of language service types.

As of February 2011, the Language Grid ac-
commodates more than 100 Web services, which

1



Figure 1: Language services in the Language Grid

are classified into one of the around 20 service
types1. A user can utilize the provided language
services through accordingly defined APIs. Fig-
ure 1 shows a screenshot from the Language Grid
Web site, where a user can search for a language
service based on the service type and/or supported
languages.

To identify possible language service types and
to further organize them structurally, we should,
at least, consider two aspects: (1) functionality of
the service, and (2) the input/output data types.
The issue of interoperability arises here: as the
underlying language resources are independently
developed, they essentially exhibit idiosyncrasies
in many aspects. A promising approach to partly
address this issue would be to have a comprehen-
sive vocabulary, or an ontological construct, so as
to we can define and describe a language service
type and the accordingly defined interface.

3 Language Service Ontology

Among the relevant attempts (Klein and Pot-
ter, 2004; Villegas et al., 2010), one came out
from around the Language Grid is an ontologi-
cal construct referred to as language service on-
tology (Hayashi et al., 2011). The language ser-
vice ontology is intended to cover not only lan-
guage services but their necessary elements in-
cluding types of linguistic data object.

Figure 2 illustrates the top-level of the proposed
language service ontology. The upper half of the
diagram depicts our notion of the fundamental

1http://langrid.org/service manager/
language-services

structure of a language service: (1) a language ser-
vice is provided by a language process; (2) a lan-
guage process operates upon linguistic objects by
using language data resources; (3) a language data
resource consists of linguistic objects; (4) a lan-
guage data resource is created by organizing a set
of linguistic objects each processed by language
processes.

It should be noted here that the linguistic ob-
ject class includes a range of linguistic anno-
tations as well as linguistic expressions, which
are the targets of annotations. These types of
abstract objects comprise the data to/from NLP
tools/systems, as well as the content of language
data resources.

The lower half of the diagram, on the other
hand, additionally introduces some important
classes. Each box in the diagram denotes a
top-level class in the whole ontology; some of
these classes further induce corresponding sub-
ontologies (Hayashi et al., 2011).

Among these top-level classes,
LanguageService is functionally the top-
most one: a language service is provided by an in-
stance of LanguageProcessingResource
class. Note that a language data resource does
not provide a language service by itself; as it is
a static resource, it is always activated through
an access mechanism, which is an instance of a
language processing resource subclass.

A language processing resource takes
LinguisticObject as the input/output,
and may use LanguageDataResource.
LanguageDataResource consists of
LinguisticObject, which might have
been brought about by the results of
LanguageProcessingResource. The
language processing resources should be further
classified according to their functionalities; the
functionality is largely characterized by the
types of associated objects. More specifically,
the types of used language resources and/or the
types of input/output language objects induce the
taxonomy of language processing resources as
displayed in Fig. 3

LinguisticObject, according to
Saussure tradition, can have linguistic forms
(LinguisticExpression) and meanings
(LinguisticMeaning), where the former de-
notes the latter. Additionally, a linguistic meaning
can be described by TextualDescription.

2



Figure 2: Top-level of the Language Service Ontology

Figure 3: Taxonomy of the Language Processing Resources

Note here that an instance of the linguistic
meaning class functions as a place holder for
representing a semantic equivalent relation
among linguistic objects. On the other hand, a
LinguisticObject instance can be annotated
by instances of LinguisticAnnotation,
which should have actual annotation content
represented with FeatureStructure.

4 Prospects for an Ontology-Grounded
Language Service Infrastructure

4.1 Two issues uncovered

Each language service in the Language Grid
is classified as one of the around twenty ser-
vice types, including: CONCEPT DICTIO-
NARY, MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS, DE-
PENDENCY PARSER, and TRANSLATION.
Each service type specifies its API, which includes
data type specification for the input/output. The
input/output data types, as also discussed previ-
ously, contributes to forming the taxonomy of lan-

guage processing resources. Table 1 demonstrates
this by listing major Language Grid service types
and relating them to classes in the language ser-
vice ontology. Note here that the ontology classes
shown in the table are placed relatively upper in
the taxonomy.

Through this review, the following two issues
are uncovered.

• Although the language service ontology has
been formalized so as to be comprehen-
sive and linguistically-sound, the consensus
among the related experts has not yet been
reached. Also the current coverage may not
be sufficient, insisting that the language ser-
vice ontology has to be further expanded and
revised.

• Although the set of Language Grid service
types has been developed so as to be com-
patible with the language service ontology,
there are no direct connections between them,
insisting that actual utility of the language

3



Table 1: Major Language Grid Service Types and the Associated Ontology Classes

Service type Ontology class Input type Output type
TRANSLATION Translator sentence string sentence string
PARAPHRASE Paraphraser sentence string sentence string
CONCEPT DICTIONARY DictionaryAccessor query string lexical entry
BILINGUAL DICTIONARY DictionaryAccessor query string lexical entry
PARALLEL CORPUS CorpusAccessor query string annotation
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS LinguisticAnalyzer sentence string morphological annotation
DEPENDENCY PARSER LinguisticAnalyzer sentence string dependency annotation

service ontology is still not obvious, hence
should be attested and demonstrated.

We will look at these issues in more detail.

4.2 Refining the language service ontology

The language service ontology should be consid-
erably expanded and detailed in order for it to
be used as an effective vocabulary for describing
a wide variety of language services and the ele-
ments.

To accomplish this, we first need to identify the
current and potential language service types and
the elements. An actual language service infras-
tructure such as the Language Grid provides us
with a concrete list of such elements, we however
have to go beyond to further enrich the list; this,
at least, requires collaborations among LR/LT ex-
perts. We however may further need to incorpo-
rate user requirements, particularly in a collabora-
tive environment, for example the one offered by
the Language Grid. Figure 4 generally illustrates
necessary steps toward the goal, where we have to:

• Identify possible language service types.
To this end, bottom-up activities, such as
”LREC2010 Map of Language Resources,
Technologies and Evaluation”2, are crucially
important. In parallel, we need to establish
more connections with potential user com-
munities of various kinds to discover novel
service functionalities.

• Classify and describe the service types. We
first have to clarify the dimensions of clas-
sification. Obviously, input/output linguis-
tic data type and language processing func-
tionality are two important things. We then
need to organize ontological knowledge that

2http://www.lrec-conf.org/lrec2010/
?LREC2010-Map-of-Language-Resources

includes a taxonomy of application-oriented
use intentions as well as LR/LT domain on-
tologies: these domain ontologies can partly
be organized by basing on the relevant inter-
national standards for linguistic data model-
ing, as further noted below.

• Facilitate the Web-servicization. We will be
able to facilitate this by giving a wrapper
template for each service type. Ontologi-
cal knowledge would be further beneficial,
as they could be utilized in (semi-)automatic
service composition as discussed later.

A note on another role of LR standards:
In further detailing some of the important sub-
ontologies, on the other hand, we believe it is cru-
cial to incorporate relevant international standards
to deal with the issue of interoperability. In this
sense, we have been looking at Linguistic Anno-
tation Framework (LAF) (Ide and Romary, 2004)
and Lexical Markup Framework (LMF) (Fran-
copoulo et al., 2009) and the associated standards
discussed in ISO3. LAF has been incorporated
into our ontology not only for specifying the in-
put/output data type of NLP tools, but also for
defining the content type of corpora; while LMF
has been introduced to develop a taxonomy of lex-
icon classes, which obviously forms a part of the
language data resource taxonomy.

Figure 5 depicts how a particular class for syn-
tactic annotation can be defined in the language
service ontology by incorporating the Syntactic
Annotation Framework (SynAF) (Declerck, 2008)
standard, which is a subtype of general LAF in
the sense that it focuses on syntactic annotations.
Similarly Fig 6 shows that subtypes of lexicon
class can be defined in terms of types of lexical en-
try, and the types of lexical entry should be speci-

3http://www.tc37sc4.org/

4



Identifying service types Classifyingservice types Describingservice types

Web-servicization

datatool datadatatooltool
Language Resources

User Communities
standardized set of APIs

LanguageServices

Metadata,Profile forLanguageServices

LR/HLT Communities
bottom-up/seeds-based

top-down/needs-based

Classifyinguse intentions
Language resource standards

Language ServiceOntology

Figure 4: Steps toward standardized service APIs

Figure 5: Ontologization of LAF and SynAF

fied by incorporating the ontologized LMF speci-
fication.

4.3 Linking service specifications with
service ontology

The current standard for giving the concrete tech-
nical specification to a Web service (type) is
to assign a Web Service Description Language
(WSDL)4 document to the Web service. Although
a WSDL document defines the service name, func-
tions, and input/output data types, it does not pro-
vide any semantic annotation to the elements. For
example, the input/output data types defined in a
WSDL document do not give us any ideas about
which abstract linguistic object type is associated
with which concrete data type. Therefore, to en-
sure the interoperability of a service and its ser-
vice description, the WSDL document should be
associated with the background service ontology
in some way.

Among several possible solutions to this is-

4http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl

sue5, we see adoption of the W3C recommenda-
tion Semantic Annotations for WSDL and XML
Schema (SAWSDL)6 could be a reasonable first
step. The most prominent reason for this is its sim-
plicity: as semantic annotations are just added to
a WSDL document, the current Web service prac-
tices around WSDL can be maintained; SAWSDL
does not require any special language for rep-
resenting semantic models for the annotations,
meaning that we could interrelate a WSDL doc-
ument with the language service ontology. In fact,
with the sawsdl:modelReference construct
provided by SAWSDL, we can semantically an-
notate a WSDL document by making references
to the classes in the language service ontology.

Although this solution could be a reasonable
first step toward the full-fledged semantic Web
services as discussed in (Yu, 2007), we will

5(Villegas et al., 2010) also discuss this topic and adopt a
MyGrid approach (Wolstencroft et al., 2007), where descrip-
tions about service invocation are also separated from the ser-
vice ontology.

6http://www.w3.org/TR/sawsdl/

5



Figure 6: Lexicon Taxonomy as based-on LMF

have to develop an external mechanism for ser-
vice discovery and compositions on top of the
language service ontology and semantically aug-
mented descriptions of the set of language Web
service types. Furthermore, if we are stepping for-
ward to the direction of planning-based automatic
service composition, we have to device a system
for representing goals and statuses. This is an area
where almost nothing has been worked out, partic-
ularly with respect to the language service ontol-
ogy.

5 Discussion

In this section, two distinct topics are discussed as
below.

The first topic is about the activities for achiev-
ing an effective linguistic service infrastructure
or software platform. A number of activities
can be mentioned; among them, UIMA (Hahn
et al., 2008) has gained a prominent position,
particularly in text mining applications. U-
Compare (Kano et al., 2009) is one of the rep-
resentative software platforms that utilizes UIMA
as the foundation. U-Compare, in particular, has
stressed on task-dependent comparison and eval-
uation of the linguistic processing elements, and
provides utilities to accomplish these tasks. A
type system for a range of linguistic annotations
with the UIMA framework is proposed in (Hahn
et al., 2007), sharing common objectives with a
part of the language service ontology. Heart of
Gold (Schäfer, 2008) is another example of soft-
ware platform, in which XML together with XSLT
play a crucial role. In Heart of Gold, the integra-
tion of shallow and deep NLP components is par-
ticularly focused on. It should be noted that these

platforms, in general, center on the effective cre-
ation of a so-called NLP pipeline, and pay little
attention to access to lexical resources.

The second topic is just associated with the ac-
cess to lexical resources. Maybe needless to say,
there exist types of resource and/or types of re-
source access that do not suit well with the query-
based access usually provided by language Web
services. For example, an access requesting trans-
ferring large amount of data would be impossible
or prohibited. Moreover, types of access requir-
ing long computational time, for example one that
demands complex corpus statistics figures, would
be inadequate in a language service infrastructure.
Nevertheless, as pointed out at the beginning of
this paper, easier access to lexical resources might
allow the users to realize a virtual/dynamic re-
source, that actually does not exist as a whole. One
might expect classes of hybrid dictionary, as ex-
emplified in (Hayashi, 2011), to be virtually re-
alized in a language service infrastructure on a
query-driven and an on-demand basis.

6 Concluding Remarks

This position paper argued that realizing and
maintaining a standardized set of Web APIs is
crucially important, and the APIs should be for-
mally classified and described by grounding on a
shared ontological foundation. However it is obvi-
ous that we have to address a number of issues to
achieve the goal. Therefore this paper broke down
some of the important issues by reviewing the at-
tempts made around the Language Grid project,
and showed general steps and presented some de-
tailed proposals, in hope of making some contribu-
tion toward the goal. As the issues however may

6



have substantial depth and stretch, collaborations
among international experts, as discussed in (Cal-
zolari and Soria, 2010), are called for. We also
argued that user involvements, particularly in a
collaborative environment, would be necessary to
identify possible language services and resources
that are definitely required but remained unaware
to the LR/LT experts.

Acknowledgments

The presented work was largely supported by the
Strategic Information and Communications R&D
Promotion Programme (SCOPE) of the Ministry
of Internal Affairs and Communications of Japan.
The author would like to thank Toru Ishida, Yohei
Murakami, Chiharu Narawa, and other Language
Grid members, as well as the international experts
in collaboration: Thierry Declerck (DFKI, Ger-
many), Nicoletta Calzolari, Monica Monachini,
Claudia Soria (ILC-CNR, Italy), and Paul Buite-
laar (DERI, Ireland).

References

Nicoletta Calzolari. 2008. Approaches towards a
‘ Lexical Web ’: the Role of Interoperability. Proc.

ICGL2008, pp.34–42.

Nicoletta Calzolari, and Claudia Soria. 2010. Prepar-
ing the Field for an Open and Distributed Resource
Infrastructure: the Role of the FlaReNet Network.
Proc. LREC2010.

Thierry Declerck. 2008. A Framework for Standard-
ized Syntactic Annotation. Proc. LREC2008.

Gil Francopoulo, Núria Bel, Monte George, Nicoletta
Calzolari, Monica Monachini, Mandy Pet, and Clau-
dia Soria. 2009. Multilingual Resources for NLP in
the Lexical Markup Framework (LMF). Language
Resources and Evaluation, Vol.43, No.1, pp.57–70.

Udo Hahn, Ekaterina Buyko, Rico Landefeld, Matthias
Muhlhausen, Michael Poprat, Katrin Tomanek , and
Joachim Wermter. 2008. An overview of JCoRe,
the JULIE lab UIMA component repository, Proc.
LREC’08 Workshop on Towards Enhanced Interop-
erability for Large HLT Systems: UIMA for NLP,
pp.1–7.

Udo Hahn, Ekaterina Buyko, Katrin Tomanek , Scott
Piao, John McNaught, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, and
Sophia Ananiadou. 2007. An annotation type sys-
tem for a data-driven NLP pipeline. Proc. the Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop, pp.33–40.

Yoshihiko Hayashi, Thierry Declerck, Nicoletta Cal-
zolari, Monica Monachini, Claudia Soria, and Paul
Buitelaar. 2011. Language Service Ontology.

Toru Ishida (editor). The Language Grid: Service-
Oriented Collective Intelligence for Language Re-
source Interoperability, Springer.

Yoshihiko Hayashi. 2011. A Representation Frame-
work for Cross-lingual/Interlingual Lexical Seman-
tic Correspondences. Proc. IWCS2011, pp.155–
164.

Nancy Ide, and Laurent Romary. 2004. International
Standard for a Linguistic Annotation Framework.
Journal of Natural Language Engineering, Vol.10,
No.3–4, pp.211–225.

Toru Ishida. 2006. Language Grid: An Infrastruc-
ture for Intercultural Collaboration. Proc. SAINT-
06, Keynote address, pp.96–100.

Toru Ishida (editor). 2011. The Language Grid:
Service-Oriented Collective Intelligence for Lan-
guage Resource Interoperability, Springer.

Kano, Yoshinobu, William A. Baumgartner Jr., Luke
McCrohon, Sophia Ananiadou, K. Bretonnel Cohen,
Lawrence Hunter and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2009. U-
Compare: share and compare text mining tools with
UIMA, Bioinformatics, 25(15), pp.1997–1998.

Ewan Klein, and Stephen Potter. 2004. An Ontology
for NLP Services. Proc. LREC2004 Workshop on
REgistry of Linguistic Data Categories.

Urlich Schäfer. 2008. Integrating Language Process-
ing Components with XML. VDM Verlag.

Liayng Yu. 2007. Introduction to the Semantic Web
and Semantic Web Services. Chapman & Hall/CRC.

Martha Villegas, Núria Bel, Santiago Bel, and Victor
Rodrı́guez. 2010. A Case Study on Interoperabil-
ity for Language Resources and Applications. Proc.
LREC2010.

Katy Wolstencroft, Pinar Alper, Duncan Hull, Christo-
pher Wroe, Phillip Lord, Robert Stevens, and Car-
ole Goble. 2007. The myGrid Ontology: Bioinfor-
matics Service Discovery. International Journal of
Bioinformatics Resesearch and Applications, Vol. 3,
No. 3, pp.303–325.

7


