















































Enriching Social Communication through Semantics and Sentics


Proceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment Analysis where AI meets Psychology (SAAIP), IJCNLP 2011, pages 68–72,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 13, 2011.

Enriching Social Communication Through Semantics and Sentics 

 
Praphul Chandra 

Hewlett Packard Labs,  
India 

praphul.chandra@hp.com 

Erik Cambria 
National University of Singapore, 

Singapore 
cambria@nus.edu.sg 

 

Alvin Pradeep 
Hewlett Packard,  

India  
alvin.pradeep@hp.com 

  
 

Abstract 

Online communication is one of the key value 
propositions of mobile devices. While a varie-
ty of instant messaging clients offer users the 
ability to communicate with other users in re-
al-time, the user experience remains dominat-
ed by a basic exchange of textual content. 
When compared to face-to-face communica-
tion, this experience is significantly poorer. In 
our proposed solution, we seek to enhance the 
chat experience by using an intelligent adap-
tive user interface that exploits semantics and 
sentics, that is the cognitive and affective in-
formation, associated with the ongoing com-
munication. In particular, our approach lever-
ages sentiment analysis techniques to process 
communication content and context and, 
hence, enable the interface to be adaptive in 
order to offer users a richer and more immer-
sive chat experience. 

1 Introduction 
Online communication is an extremely popular 
form of social interaction. Unlike face-to-face 
communication, online instant messaging (IM) 
tools are extremely limited in conveying emo-
tions or the context associated with a communi-
cation. Users have adapted to this environment 
by inventing their own vocabulary, e.g., by put-
ting actions within asterisks (‘I just came from a 
shower *shivering*’), by using emoticons (), 
by addressing a particular user in a group com-
munication (@Ravi).  
Such evolving workarounds clearly indicate a 
latent need for a richer, more immersive user 
experience in social communication. We address 
this problem by exploiting the semantics and 
sentics, that is the cognitive and affective infor-

mation, associated with the ongoing communica-
tion to develop an adaptive user interface (UI) 
capable to change according to content and con-
text of the online chat. 

2 Related Work  
Popular approaches to enhance and personalize 
computer mediated communication (CMC) in-
clude emoticons, skins, avatars, customizable 
status messages, etc. However, all these ap-
proaches require explicit user configuration or 
action: the user needs to select the emoticon, sta-
tus-message or avatar, which best represents her. 
Furthermore, most of these enhancements are 
static – once selected by the user, they do not 
adapt themselves automatically. There is some 
related work on automatically updating the status 
of the user by analyzing various sensor data 
available on mobile devices (Milewski and 
Smith, 2000). However, most of these personali-
zation approaches are static and do not automati-
cally adapt.  
Our approach is unique in that it is: intelligent, as 
it analyzes content and does not require explicit 
user configuration; adaptive, as the UI changes 
according to communication content and context; 
inclusive, as the emotions of one or more partici-
pants in the chat session are analyzed to let the 
UI adapt dynamically. 
The underlying technique in our approach is 
based on sentiment analysis of natural language 
text. Text analysis for understanding the underly-
ing semantics is a large and well-established 
field of work (Fellbaum, 1998). Sentiment analy-
sis is also an active research field and has been 
applied previously for a variety of applications 
including customer reviews (Hu and Liu, 2004) 
and news content (Subasic and Huettner, 2001). 

68



Uniquely, our approach applies sentiment analy-
sis techniques to social communication in order 
to create an adaptive UI. Our module architecture 
can be deployed either on the cloud (if the client 
has low processing capabilities) or on the client 
(if privacy is a concern). Another advantage of 
our solution is that, even when the interface is 
used by only one participant in the communica-
tion session, it enhances the experience of that 
user. 

3 The Weather Metaphor 
Most IM clients offer a very basic UI for text 
communication. In this work we focus on ex-
tracting the semantics and sentics embedded in 
the text of the chat session to provide a UI, 
which adapts itself to the mood of the communi-
cation. For our prototype applicationwe worked 
with the weather metaphor, as it is scalable and 
has previously been used effectively to reflect 
the subject’s mood (Chang, 2009) or content’s 
‘flavor’ (Pampalk et al., 2002).  
In our UI, if the detected mood of the conversa-
tion is ‘happy’, the UI will reflect a clear sunny 
day. Similarly a gloomy weather reflects a mel-
ancholy tone in the conversation. Of course, this 
is a subjective metaphor – one that we think 
scales well with conversation analysis. We can 
think of other scalable metaphors that are rele-
vant, e.g., colors (Havasi et al., 2010).  
Our adaptive UI primarily consists of three fea-
tures: the stage, the actors and the story. For any 
mapping these elements pay a crucial role in 
conveying the feel and richness of the conversa-
tion mood, e.g., in the ‘happy’ conversation the 
weather ‘clear sunny day’ will be the stage, the 
actors will be lush green valley, the rainbow and 
the cloud which may appear or disappear as per 
the current conversation tone of the story. The 
idea is similar to a visual narrative of the mood 
the conversation is in; as the conversation goes 
on the actors may come in or go off as per the 
tone of the thread.  
 

 
    “Figure 1. Happy and Sad adaptive UI” 

 
“Figure 2. Cry and Anger adaptive UI” 

 
By analyzing the semantics and sentics associat-
ed with communication content (data) and con-
text (metadata), the UI may adapt to include im-
ages of landmarks from remote-user’s location 
(e.g., Times Square), images about concepts in 
the conversation (pets, education, etc.) or time of 
day of remote user (e.g., sunrise or dusk).  

4 Social Communication Analysis  
For the extraction of semantics and sentics, we 
leverage sentic computing (Cambria et al., 
2010a), a multi-disciplinary approach to opinion 
mining and sentiment analysis that exploits both 
computer and social sciences to better recognize, 
interpret and process emotions over the Web. In 
sentic computing, the analysis of natural lan-
guage is based on common sense reasoning tools 
and domain-specific ontologies.  
Unlike statistical classification, which generally 
requires large inputs and thus cannot appraise 
texts with satisfactory granularity, sentic compu-
ting enables the analysis of documents not only 
at page- or paragraph-level but also at sentence 
and clause-level. 
In particular, we exploit the following four mod-
ules (re-adapted for real-time analysis): a natural 
language processing (NLP) module, which per-
forms a first skim of chat text, a Semantic Parser, 
whose aim is to extract concepts from the lem-
matized text, the ConceptNet module, for the 
inference of semantics, and the AffectiveSpace 
module, for the extraction of sentics. 

4.1 Preprocessing Modules 
The NLP module parses the textual metadata 
associated with media to output lemmatized text. 
It recognizes and interprets the affective valence 
indicators usually contained in text such as spe-
cial punctuation (e.g., ‘!!!!’), complete upper-
case words (‘I DID NOT SAY THAT’), excla-
mations (‘as if!’), degree adverbs, emoticons () 
etc. This makes the NLP module suitable for 
short emotive texts used in chat. 

69



The Semantic Parser extracts concepts from the 
lemmatized text and deconstructs it into concepts 
using a lexicon based on n-grams. The lexicon 
we use is ConceptNet (Havasi et al., 2007), a 
semantic graph built from a corpus of common 
sense knowledge collected and rated by volun-
teers on the Web. The nodes of this graph are 
‘concepts’ and its labeled edges are assertions of 
common sense that connect two concepts. There-
fore, ConceptNet expresses assertions as rela-
tions between concepts, selected from a limited 
set of relations such as IsA, UsedFor and HasA. 

4.2 Extracting Semantics  
ConceptNet is an extremely large lexicon with 
several thousand concepts. In order to adapt our 
messaging UI on concept-based themes, we need 
to cluster the social communication around some 
core concepts. First, we find a set of ‘core con-
cepts’ for some a-priori categories extracted from 
Picasa’s popular tags. These categories are meant 
to cover common topics found in personal com-
munication, e.g., friends, travel, wedding, holi-
day, movies etc.  
We assume that these are the set of concepts we 
are likely to find in online communication, i.e., 
we use social media as representative of social 
communication in terms of the concepts they 
entail. To find these core concepts, we use a 
technique called CF-IOF (Cambria et al., 2010b) 
(similar to TF-IDF). Using the popular tags in 
Picasa as common social categories, CF-IOF is 
used to find a set of concepts from ConceptNet 
which are most related to these categories.  
We define nij := number of occurrences of con-
cept-i (ci) in the comments, description, tags etc. 
of j-tagged photos and |M| := total number of 
photos divided by the number of photos contain-
ing the concept-i (ci). Then, 

!" − !"# ! =
!!"
!!"!!

!"#
|!|

|{!: !!!  !}|
 

 

 
“Figure 3. A subnet from ConceptNet” 

Second, we expand this set of ‘core concepts’ 
with semantically related concepts using an ap-
proach called spectral association (Havasi et al., 
2010), similar to spreading activation. In this 
technique, we represent the ConceptNet as a 
square symmetric concept-concept matrix with 
each entry in the matrix containing the weight of 
the assertion in ConceptNet. The normalized 
form of this matrix, C, when applied to a vector 
containing a single concept (derived from the 
text content of an online chat session), spreads 
that concept’s value to other concepts connected 
to this concept in the ConceptNet.  
Applying C2 spreads the concept’s value to 
neighboring concepts two hops away and so on. 
To spread the activation with diminishing num-
ber of links, we use the operator: 

1 + ! +
!!

2!
+
!!

3!
+⋯ =   !! = !!!!! 

The right hand equation holds true because C is a 
symmetric square matrix and can therefore be 
decomposed as VAVT where V is an orthogonal 
real matrix of the eigenvectors of C and A is a 
diagonal matrix of its eigenvalues (spectral de-
composition). Raising this decomposed form, to 
any power cancels everything but the power of 
A. This approach is especially suitable for sparse 
matrices like our matrix C, derived from Con-
ceptNet since we can easily truncate the decom-
position by considering only the top-k eigenvec-
tors and thus save space while generalizing from 
similar concepts.  
The role of the ConceptNet module is to map the 
concepts extracted by the Semantic Parser to this 
‘expanded core set’ of concepts. By focusing the 
conversation around a limited set of concepts, we 
aim to provide a manageable yet powerful set of 
UIs to adapt according to the conversation. 

4.3 Extracting Sentics  
The aim of the AffectiveSpace module is to de-
rive the affective valence of the concepts output 
by the ConceptNet module. To achieve this, the 
AffectiveSpace module projects the retrieved 
concepts into a multi-dimensional vector space 
(Cambria et al., 2009).  
Since ConceptNet does not have any information 
regarding the affective information related to 
these concepts, we use WordNet-Affect (Valitutti 
and Strapparava, 2004), a linguistic resource for 
the lexical representation of affective knowledge. 
We combine the ConceptNet and WordNet-
Affect matrices linearly into a single large ma-
trix. In this matrix, the rows are concepts (from 
ConceptNet, e.g., dog) and columns are either 

70



common-sense assertion relations (from Con-
ceptNet, e.g., isA-pet) or affective features (from 
WordNet-Affect, e.g., hasEmotion-joy). We then 
apply truncated singular value decomposition 
(TSVD) (Wall et. al. 2003) on this large matrix.  
The resulting matrix has the form Ak = Uk Sk VkT 
and is a low-rank approximation of A, the origi-
nal data. This approximation is based on mini-
mizing the Frobenius norm of the difference be-
tween A and Ak under the constraint rank(A) = k. 
Thus, Ak is the best approximation of A in the 
Frobenius norm sense when σi = si (i = 1, 2…. k) 
and the corresponding singular vectors are the 
same as those of A. If we choose to discard all 
but the first-k principal components, common 
sense concepts and emotions are represented by 
vectors of k coordinates: these coordinates can 
be seen as describing concepts in terms of 
eigenmoods that form the axes of Affec-
tiveSpace, that is, the basis e0,...,ek-1 of the vector 
space. By selecting the top-k eigenvalues, we are 
in effect, clustering the concepts.  
The clustering of this multi-dimensional space, 
with respect to emotion-categories can therefore 
help us derive sentics in the chat text. In particu-
lar, we use the Hourglass of Emotions (Cambria 
et al., 2010c) to infer the affective valence of the 
retrieved concepts according to the relative posi-
tion they occupy in the multi-dimensional vector 
space.  
In the hourglass model, emotions are classified 
into four concomitant but independent dimen-
sions in order to understand the Pleasantness, 
Attention, Sensitivity and Aptitude. Each of the-
se dimensions is characterized by six levels of 
activation, called sentic levels, which determine 
the intensity of the expressed/perceived emotion 
as a float between [-3, 3]. Thus, we specify the 
affective information as a four dimensional sen-
tic vector, that can potentially express any human 
emotion in terms of Pleasantness, Attention, Sen-
sitivity and Aptitude. 

 

  
“Figure 4. A sketch of AffectiveSpace” 

 
“Figure 5. The Hourglass of Emotions” 

 
Thus, by exploiting the information sharing 
property of TSVD, concepts with the same affec-
tive valence are likely to have similar features, 
that is, concepts conveying the same emotion 
tend to fall near each other in AffectiveSpace, 
e.g., we can find concepts such as ‘beautiful 
day’, ‘birthday party’, ‘laugh’ and ‘make person 
happy’ very close in direction in the vector 
space, while concepts like ‘sick’, ‘feel guilty’, 
‘be laid off’ and ‘shed tear’ are found in a com-
pletely different direction (nearly opposite with 
respect to the center of the space). 

5 Discussion and Future Work 
Popular approaches to enhance CMC include 
emoticons, skins, avatars, customizable status 
messages, etc. Sharing photos or combining vid-
eo streams with text is also supported in popular 
IM clients. However, our approach of adaptive 
UI for chat is a novel concept. Text analysis for 
understanding the underlying semantics is a large 
and well-established field of work as well as sen-
timent analysis is an active research field.  
Uniquely, our approach applies sentic computing 
techniques to social communication in order to 
create an adaptive UI. Our module architecture 
can be deployed either on the cloud (if the client 
has low processing capabilities) or on the client 
(if privacy is a concern). In the next future, we 
also plan to explore other metaphors of adaptive 
UIs, both sentic and semantic based. 

71



Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Vimal Sharma for his 
guidance on the design of the user interface. 
 

References  
Allen Milewski and Thomas Smith. 2000. Providing 

Presence Cues to Telephone Users. In Proceedings 
of the 2000 ACM Conference on Computer Sup-
ported Cooperative Work. 

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998, WordNet: An Electronic 
Lexical Database, The MIT Press ISBN-13: 978-
0262061971. 

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and Summa-
rizing Customer Reviews. In Proceedings of the 
tenth ACM SIGKDD. 

Pero Subasic and Alison Huettner. 2001 Affect Anal-
ysis of Text Using Fuzzy Semantic Typing. IEEE 
Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, volume 9, issue 4, 
pages 483-496. 

Hsia Chang. 2009. Emotion Barometer of Reading: 
User Interface Design of a Social Cataloging Web-
site. In Proceedings of the 27th International Con-
ference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. 

Elias Pampalk, Andreas Rauber, and Dieter Merkl. 
2002. Content-based Organization and Visualiza-
tion of Music Archives. In Proceedings of the tenth 
ACM International Conference on Multimedia. 

Catherine Havasi, Robert Speer, and Justin Holmgren. 
2007. Automated Color Selection Using Semantic 
Knowledge. In Commonsense Knowledge: Papers 
from the AAAI Fall Symposium. 

Erik Cambria, Amir Hussain, Catherine Havasi, and 
Chris Eckl. 2010a. Sentic Computing: Exploitation 
of Common Sense for the Development of Emo-
tion-Sensitive Systems. volume 5967 of Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, pages 148–156. 
Springer, Berlin Heidelberg. 

Catherine Havasi, Robert Speer, and Jason Alonso. 
2007. ConceptNet 3: a Flexible, Multilingual Se- 
mantic Network for Common Sense Knowledge. In 
Proceedings of RANLP. 

Erik Cambria, Amir Hussain, Tariq Durrani, Cathe-
rine Havasi, Chris Eckl, and James Munro. 2010b. 
Sentic Computing for Patient Centered Applica-
tions. In IEEE ICSP10. 

Erik Cambria, Amir Hussain, Catherine Havasi, and 
Chris Eckl. 2009. AffectiveSpace: Blending Com-
mon Sense and Affective Knowledge to Perform 
Emotive Reasoning. In WOMSA at CAEPIA. 

Alessandro Valitutti and Carlo Strapparava. 2004. 
WordNet-Affect: An Affective Extension of 
WordNet. In Proceedings of the 4th International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion. 

Michael Wall, Andreas Rechtsteiner, and Luis Rocha. 
2003. Singular Value Decomposition and Principal 
Component Analysis. In Berrar, D. et al. (eds.) A 
Practical Approach to Microarray Data Analysis. 
pages 91-109. Kluwer, Norwell. 

Erik Cambria, Amir Hussain, Catherine Havasi, and 
Chris Eckl. 2010c. SenticSpace: Visualizing Opin- 
ions and Sentiments in a Multi-Dimensional Vec- 
tor Space. volume 6279 of Lecture Notes in Com- 
puter Science, pages 385–393. Springer, Berlin 
Heidelberg. 

72


