



















































Challenges in Developing a Rule based Urdu Stemmer


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on South and Southeast Asian Natural Language Processing (WSSANLP), IJCNLP 2011, , pages 46–51,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 8, 2011.

Challenges in Developing a Rule based Urdu Stemmer 

 
Sajjad Ahmad Khan, Waqas Anwar, Usama Ijaz Bajwa 

Department of Computer Science 
COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad, Pakistan 

sajjadkhan25@hotmail.com,waqas@ciit.net.pk,usama@ciit.net.pk 
 
 

Abstract 

Urdu language raises several challenges to Natu-
ral Language Processing (NLP) largely due to its 
rich morphology. In this language, morphological 
processing becomes particularly important for In-
formation Retrieval (IR). The core tool of IR is a 
Stemmer which reduces a word to its stem form.  
Due to the diverse nature of Urdu, developing 
stemmer is a challenging task. In Urdu, there are 
large numbers of variant forms (derivational and 
inflectional forms) for a single word form. The 
aim of this paper is to present issues pertaining to 
the development of Urdu stemmer (rule based 
stemmer). 

1. Introduction 
Urdu is an Indo-Aryan language. It is the nation-
al language of Pakistan and is one of the twenty-
three official languages of India. It is written in 
Perso-Arabic script. The Urdu vocabulary con-
sists of several languages including Arabic, Eng-
lish, Turkish, Sanskrit and Farsi (Persian) etc. 
Urdu’s script is right-to-left and form of a word’s 
character is context sensitive, means the form of 
a character is dissimilar in a word because of the 
position of that character in the word (beginning, 
centre, on the ending) (Waqas et al., 2006). 
 In Urdu language, morphological processing 
becomes particularly important for Information 
Retrieval (IR). Information retrieval system is 
used to ensure easy access to stored information. 
It also deals with saving, representation and or-
ganization of information objects. Modules of an 
IR system consist of a group of information ob-
jects, a group of requests and a method to decide 
which information items are most possibly help-
ing to meet the requirements of the requests. In-
side IR, the information data which is stored and 
receives search calls usually corresponds to the 
lists of identifiers recognized as key terms, key-
words. One of the attempts to make the search 
engines more efficient in information retrieval is 
the use of stemmer. Stem is the base or root form 
of a word. Stemmer is an algorithm that reduces 

the word to their stem/root form e.g. tested, test-
ing, pretest and tester have the stem “test”. Simi-
larly the Urdu stemmer should stem the words  کم
مند عقل ,(senseless) عقل  (sensible), عقل مندی (sa-
gacity) to Urdu stem word عقل (sense). Stemming 
is part of the complex process of taking out the 
words from text and turning them into index 
terms in an IR system. Indexing is the process of 
selecting keywords for representing a document. 
The smallest units of word which cannot be de-
composed further into smaller meaningful units 
are called Morphemes.1 They are of two kinds: 
free morphemes and bound morphemes. Mor-
phemes which exist freely (alone) are called free 
morphemes whereas bound morphemes are made 
as a result of combination with another mor-
pheme. For instance "flower" is a free mor-
pheme, while "s" is the example of a bound mor-
pheme. 

The study of internal structure of words is 
called Morphology.2 Deriving new words from 
the existing ones is called derivational mor-
phemes e.g. Honour, Honourable, Honourably. 
Examples in Urdu: The words چاہت (love), چاہتا 
(to love) and چہيتا (lovely) are the derivatives of 
word چاہ (love). Those morphemes that produce 
the grammatical formation of a word is called 
Inflectional morphemes e.g. Boys. Examples in 
Urdu: The words سخت تر (harder) and سخت ترين 
(hardest) are the inflected forms of word سخت 
(hard). 

The stemmer is also applicable to other natural 
language processing applications needing mor-
phological analysis for example spell checkers, 
word frequency count studies, word parsing etc. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In 
section 2, different rule based stemming algo-
rithms are discussed. Section 3 gives an introduc-
tion regarding orthographic features. In section 4, 
several issues pertaining to Urdu stemmer are 

                                                 
1 http://www.ielanguages.com/linguist.html 
2 http://introling.ynada.com/session-6-types-of-
morphemes 

46



discussed in detail. Conclusion of the study and 
the future work is discussed in section 5. 

2. Stemming Algorithms  
 

There are four kinds of stemming approaches      
(Frakes, R.Baeza-Yates, 1992): table lookup, 
affix removal, successor variety and n-grams. 
Table lookup method is also known as brute 
force method, where every word and its respec-
tive stem are stored in table. The stemmer finds 
the stem of the input word in the respective stem 
table. This process is very fast, but it has severe 
disadvantage i.e. large memory space required 
for words and their stems and the difficulties in 
creating such tables. This kind of stemming algo-
rithm might not be practical. The affix removal 
stemmer eliminates affixes from words leaving a 
stem. The successor variety stemmer is based on 
the determination of morpheme borders, i.e., it 
needs information from linguistics, and is more 
complex than affix removal stemmer. The N-
grams stemmer is based on the detection of bi-
grams and trigrams. 
The (J.B. Lovins, 1968) published the first Eng-
lish stemmer and used about 260 rules for stem-
ming the English language. She suggested a 
stemmer consisting of two-phases. The first stage 
removes the maximum possible ending which 
matches one on a redefined suffix list. The spel-
ling exceptions are covered in the 2nd stage. 
 The (M.F. Porter, 1980) developed the 
stemmer on the truncation of suffixes, by means 
of list of suffixes and some restric-
tions/conditions are placed to recognize the suf-
fix to be detached and generating a valid stem. 
Porter Stemmer performs stemming process in 
five steps. The Inflectional suffixes are handled 
in the first step, derivational suffixes are han-
dling through the next three steps and the final 
step is the recoding step. Porter simplified the 
Lovin’s rules upto 60 rules.    
      Different stemmers have also been developed 
for Arabic language. The (S. Khoja and R. Gar-
side, 1999) developed an Arabic stemmer called 
a superior root-based stemmer, developed by 
Khoja and Garside. This stemming algorithm 
truncates prefixes, suffixes and infixes and then 
uses patterns for matching to pull out the roots. 
The algorithm has to face many problems partic-
ularly with nouns. The (Thabet. N., 2004) created 
a stemmer, which performs on classical Arabic in 
Quran to produce stem. For each Surah, this 
stemmer generates list of words. These words are 
checked in stop word list, if they don’t exist in 

this list then corresponding prefixes and suffixes 
are removed from these words.  
The (Eiman Tamah Al-Shammari, Jessica Lin, 
2008) proposed the Educated Text Stemmer 
(ETS). It is a simple, dictionary free and efficient 
stemmer that decreases stemming errors and has 
lesser storage and time required.  
   Bon was the first stemmer developed for Per-
sian language (M. Tashakori, M. Meybodi & F. 
Oroumchian, 2003). Bon is an iterative longest 
matching stemmer. The iterative longest match-
ing stemmer truncates the longest possible mor-
pheme from a word according to a set of rules. 
This procedure is repeated until no more charac-
ters can be eliminated. The (A. Mokhtaripour and 
S. Jahanpour, 2006) proposed a Farsi stemmer 
that works without dictionary. This stemmer first 
removes the verb and noun suffixes from a word. 
After that it starts truncation of prefixes from that 
word.  
 Till date only one stemmer i.e. Assas-Band, 
developed for Urdu language (Q. Akram, A. Na-
seer and S. Hussain, 2009). This stemmer ex-
tracts the stem/root word of only Urdu words and 
not of borrowed words i.e. words from Arabic, 
Persian and English words. This algorithm re-
moves the prefix and suffix from a word and re-
turns the stem word. This stemmer does not han-
dle words having infixes.  

3. Orthographic Features of Urdu  
According to (Malik M G Abbas et al., 2008), 
Urdu alphabet consists of 35 simple consonants, 
15 aspired consonants, 10 vowels, 15 diacritical 
marks, 10 digits and other symbols. 

3.1 Consonants 

Consonants are divided into two groups: 
a. Aspirated Consonants 

There are 15 aspirated consonants in Urdu lan-
guage. These consonants are shown by a group-
ing of a simple consonant to be aspirated. A spe-
cial letter called Heh Doachashmee (ه) is used to 
mark the aspiration. Aspired Consonants are   به,  
ته  ,په ده  ,چه ,جه ,ٹه , ڈه  , که  , گه  , ره  , , ڑه   ,  
نه  ,مه له  ,  
 

b. Non Aspirated Consonants 
Urdu language consists of 35 non aspirated con-
sonant signs that represent 27 consonant sounds. 
Various scripts are employed to show the similar 
sound in Urdu, For example: Sad (ص), Seen (س) 
and Seh (ث) represent the sound [s]. 

47



3.2 Vowels 

Urdu has ten vowels. Seven of them contain na-
salized forms. Out of these seven, four long vo-
wels are represented by Alef Madda (آ), Alef (ا), 
Choti Yeh (ی) and Vav (و) and three short vo-
wels are represented by Arabic Kasra (Zer), 
Arabic Fatha (Zabar) and Arabic Damma (Pesh). 
In Urdu language, the Vowel demonstration is 
context sensitive. For example, the Urdu Choti 
Yeh (ی) and Vav (و) can also be used as a conso-
nant (Malik M G Abbas et al., 2008). 

3.3 Aerab Marks 

The aerab marks are those marks that are added 
to a letter to change the pronunciation of a word 
or to differentiate among similar words. It is also 
called as diacritical mark or diacritic.3  
There are 15 accent marks in Urdu (Malik M G 
Abbas et al., 2008). Accent marks (Zabar, Zer, 
Pesh, Ulta Pesh, Do-Zabar, Do-Zer, Do-Pesh etc) 
represent vowel sounds. These are placed above 
or below of an Urdu word. The accent marks are 
very rarely used by people in writing Urdu. 
When the diacritic of a character in a word is 
changed then it could entirely change its mean-
ing. These accent marks play a significant role in 
the right pronunciation and recognition of mean-
ing of a sentence, such as:  
 درخت پر انگور کی بيل ہے۔  

(A vine is on the tree) 
and  س کها رہا ہے۔بيل گها  

)The bull is eating grass(    
In the first sentence, the word (بيل) means “a 
creeping plant” or a “vine” while in the second 
sentence it means a “bull”. To remove the doubt 
between these two words, there should be Zabar 
after Beh (ب) in the second sentence. 

3.4 Special Characters 

There are two special characters used in Urdu 
which are discussed bellow: 

a. Hamza (ء) 
Hamza is used to separate two consecutive vo-
wels sounds. For example, in  ءآو (come), Hamza 
is separating two vowel sounds i.e. Alef Madda 
 .(و) and Vav (آ)

b. Heh Doachashmee (ه)  
Heh Doachashmee (ه) changes the action of a simple 

                                                 
3 http://www.the-comma.com/diacritics.php 
 

 consonant and makes it aspired consonant. For exam-
ple,  ه  + پ , جه= ه + ج  په =
Examples in words: پهل ,جهنڈا 

      (Flag, Fruit) 

4. Issues in developing an Urdu Stemmer 

4.1 Morphological rich language 

Urdu is morphologically rich language. It pro-
duces high number of derivational and inflec-
tional words for a single word form. There are 57 
different forms that can be generated from a sin-
gle Urdu word (Rizvi, S. & Hussain, M., 2005). 
For Example, some different forms of Urdu word 
  :read) are) پڑه
پڑهنا،پڑها،پڑهے،پڑهيں،پڑهی،پڑهنی،پڑهو،پڑهوں، 
 پڑها،پڑهانا،پڑهاتے،پڑهاتا،پڑهوا،پڑهواتا،پڑهوں      

 Besides its own vocabulary, the Urdu vocabu-
lary also consists of large number of Arabic, Per-
sian, Hindi and English words etc. Thus Urdu 
language inherits the characteristics of the above 
mentioned languages too and as a result stem-
ming process becomes a challenging task. We 
cannot achieve a good level of precision if a 
stemmer of any borrowed language is used as a 
stemmer on Urdu words. The reason is that, the 
Arabic stemmer will just stem Arabic words that 
are used in Urdu as borrowed words and a Per-
sian stemmer will just stem borrowed Persian 
words etc.  
By using traditional process of modeling every 
form of a word as a unique word generates a lot 
of problems for Natural Language Processing 
applications such as growth of vocabulary, in-
flectional gaps, larger out-of-vocabulary rates 
and poor language model probability estimation. 
 

The relation among words in Urdu is found by 
using inflecting nouns, postposition and pro-
nouns to state case information, number and 
gender. Inflecting verbs to reproduce number, 
gender and person information etc. Inflecting 
adjectives are to agree with the noun in number, 
gender and case. Thus, the standard stemmers 
which are developed for English words are not 
practically implementable for Urdu language. 

4.2 Engineering issues 

Urdu is bidirectional language and electronically 
we cannot represent it in ASCII form. Such type 
of language is represented by a special character 

48



set called Unicode. The Arabic Orthography Un-
icode Standards are used to process Urdu.  
Unicode is not supported by many programming 
languages. The languages that support Unicode 
include C#, Python and Java etc. Some pro-
gramming language support Unicode but the IDE 
may not support it fully.  

4.3 Diacritical Marks 

Special attention should be given to the diacriti-
cal marks while developing an Urdu stemmer. 
The stem of an Urdu word changes with the use 
of these marks. For example عالم is used in two 
senses, when Zabar is placed above the character 
 then its meaning is people and its ,ل and on ع
stem is عالم (people). But when Zer is placed be-
low ل, then its meaning is scholar and its stem is 
 .(knowledge) علم
Similarly رسل word has two meanings. One is 
messengers when Pesh is used on ر and س with 
stem رسول (messenger) and other is access when 
Zabar is used on ر  and س with stem ارسال (send-
ing). Another example is the word خاتم , which 
has two meanings (The last/ring), the first one 
has stem ختم (finish) and second has خاتم (ring). 

4.4 Compound Words 

For word formation, compounding is one of the 
morphological procedures. The grouping of two 
words which already exist is called a compound 
word (Payne, Thomas E., 2006). When two or 
more than two lexeme stems are merged together 
to produce another lexeme, then it is called com-
pound word (Sproat. R., 1992). Examples are: 
Firefighter, Blackbird, Water-hose, Hardhat, 
Rubber-hose and Fire-hose in English. 
It is very difficult to classify the compound 
words as a single or multiple words. The (Durra-
ni N., 2007) discussed three schemes of com-
pound words in Urdu i.e. AB, A-o-B and A-e-B.  

a. AB formation  
This scheme involves only joining of two free 
morphemes e.g.  مرہم پٹی  (Bandaging) , مياں بيوی 
(husband wife), couple literally, حال احوال (condi-
tion). AB form of compounds is further classified 
into Dvanda, Tatpurusa, Karmadharaya and Di-
vigu (Sabzwari S, 2002). 

b. A-o-B formation  
This formation of  Urdu  compounds contains a 
linking morpheme “o” and is represented by a 
character “و” , e.g. عجزوانکساری  (soberness and 
humility), خط وکتابت (correspondence), امن وامان 
(law and order). 

c. A-e-B formation 
 In this formation constituent words are con-
nected with the help of one of the enclitic short 
morphemes; zer-e-izafat or hamza-e-izafat e.g. 
 president) is combined by a diacritical) صدرمملکت
mark “Zer” below ر called as zer-e-izafat while 
in لد جذبہء   (heart’s spirit) and  مخلفائےاسال  (Islam-
ic caliphs), the diacritical mark hamza (ء) is used 
as a hamza-e-izafat. 
Some times the reduplication also produces am-
biguity; whether it is treated as single or double 
word e.g. جگہ جگہ،آہستہ آہستہ،ساته ساته 

(together, slowly, at every place) 
Therefore there should be some rule for the 
identification of compound words. Thus these 
points should be considered while developing an 
Urdu stemmer. 

4.5 Tokenization 

The natural language processing applications 
need that the entered text should be tokenized for 
further processing. English language generally 
uses white spaces or punctuation marks for the 
identification of word boundaries. 
Although in Urdu, space character is not present 
but with increasing usage of computer, it is now 
being used, for generating right shaping and to 
break up words.  
Example: صدرنےدورسےوزیرکوآوازدی 

    (The President called away the Minister) 
In the above sentence there are eight words (to-
kens) but computer will consider the whole sen-
tence as a single word because the computer will 
generate tokens on the basis of space occurrence. 
As due to non-joiner characters (here ،و،زےر، ) in 
the words, no space occurs among words, so this 
whole sentence is considered as a single word.  
Therefore, during stemming, these non-joiner 
characters wrongly generate tokens of input text, 
stemmer will generate wrong resultantly stem. 
Tokenization process should be error free, hence 
producing correct tokens before applying an Ur-
du stemmer.  

4.6 Affixes Removal 

The word affix is used by the linguists for ex-
pressing that where a bound morpheme precisely 
be joined to a word. The Prefix, Suffix and infix 
are called affixes. Due to the use of affixes, a 
single word may contain a lot of variants and by 
removing these affixes (prefix and suffix) from a 
word will result into a stem word e.g. بدگمانی (mis 
presumption). After removing the Urdu prefix 

49



and suffix from this word, produced a stem word 
  .(presumption) گمان
A lot of stemmers (except for Urdu) were devel-
oped for stripping off prefixes & suffixes from a 
word but there is little work done on infix strip-
ping from a word. We cannot get stem word of 
an Urdu word by only stripping off prefixes and 
(or) suffixes e.g.  اقوام (nations) , مساجد (mos-
ques) , علوم (knowledge).  
These words contain infixes and large amount of 
such type of words are present in Urdu. Special 
attention should be given to those Urdu words 
having infixes. After studying the morphology of 
Urdu words, it is noticed that if patterns for such 
type of words (having infixes) are made, then a 
correct stem could be achieved. 

4.7 Exceptional Cases 

a. Exceptional words 
 

The removal of affixes (Prefixes and Suffixes) 
from a word produces a stem word but some 
times truncating these affixes leads to an errone-
ous stem e.g. نادار. Here نا is a prefix, where the 
stemmer eliminates it by producing دار , which is 
not a correct stem of the above stated word. 
It means that in some words, the affixes play the 
role of stem characters and should not be re-
moved. Such type of words should be treated as 
an exceptional case. In Urdu, there are a lot of 
words that can be treated as an exceptional case, 
thus for a stemmer, such word lists should be 
maintained in advance. 

b. Urdu digits, Arithmetic Symbols and 
Punctuations 

 

Urdu is read and written from right to left but 
when numbers are introduced, it is read and writ-
ten from left to right.  

ہے٢٠٠٩فروری ٢حفصہ کی برته ڈے   
(Hafsa’s birthday is 2nd February 2009) 

The Urdu digits (٩-٠), Arithmetic Symbols (+,-
,*, /) and Punctuation marks (۔, ؟   (:, ؛, ",' , ، , ٫  ,
should be treated as an exceptional case during 
developing Urdu stemmer. 

4.8 Stem-word Dictionary 

To check the accuracy of any stemmer, there 
should be a stem word dictionary. After studying 
relevant literature, it is noted that there is no stem 
dictionary available for Urdu text. Therefore, 
development of an Urdu stem dictionary is ne-
cessary for testing the accuracy of a stemmer on 
huge corpus. 

4.9 Different Urdu words having same stem 

In Urdu, there are a lot of words that are different 
in meaning but their stem is same e.g. تاثير (cha-
racteristic) and آثار (signs). As we mentioned that 
the meaning of these two words are different 
from each other but their stem is same i.e. اثر 
Similarly the words ملوک (rulers) and ماليک (an-
gels) are two different words having single script 
for their stem without diacritical marks i.e. ملک. 
The word ملک has two meanings i.e. ruler or an-
gel. The word اصول (principles) and اصليت (facts) 
have same stem i.e. اصل (principle/fact). Such 
type of words needs attention while developing a 
stemmer for Urdu language. 

4.10 Code switching 

Code switching, in linguistics, is the parallel use 
of more than one languages during conversation. 
The code switching in Urdu language is common 
and it accepts foreign words especially from 
English, e.g. کيمرہ يہ   borrowed ہے   (This Camera 
is borrowed). 
In this example the Urdu text is from right to 
left-wards, while the English word “borrowed” is 
from left to right. The tokenization of the above 
sentence is performed in proper way electronical-
ly but Urdu stemmer will not stem the foreign 
word “borrowed”, which is an issue. 

5. Conclusion and Future Work 

Stemmer is the core tool of any IR system. In this 
paper we have discussed some rule based Eng-
lish, Arabic, Persian and Urdu stemmers. Very 
less work has been done on Urdu stemmer due to 
its complex and rich morphology. Besides its 
own vocabulary, Urdu is also influenced by other 
morphology such as Arabic, Persian, Hindi, Eng-
lish etc. We have pointed out some challenges 
pertaining to the development of an Urdu stem-
mer. These issues should be considered while 
developing a rule based Urdu stemmer. 
After studying different stemmers developed for 
Arabic, Persian and Urdu languages, we intend to 
develop an efficient rule based Urdu stemmer 
which will not only handle those Urdu words 
having prefixes and suffixes but also infixes. We 
will make patterns for handling infixes. For pre-
processing of the proposed Urdu stemmer, Urdu 
stop word list will be maintained. An Urdu stem-
word dictionary will also be prepared for evalua-
tion purposes.  

50



References  
 

A. Mokhtaripour and S. Jahanpour, 2006. Introduc-
tion to a New Farsi Stemmer, CIKM’06, No-
vember 5–11, Arlington, Virginia, USA. 

 
Durrani N.  2007. Typology of Word and Automat-

ic Word Segmentation in Urdu Text Corpus. 
National University of Computer and Emerging 
Sciences,Lahore, Pakistan. 

 
Eiman Tamah Al-Shammari, Jessica Lin, October 30, 

2008. Towards an Error-Free Arabic Stem-
ming, iNEWS’08, Napa Valley, California, USA. 

 
Frakes, R.Baeza-Yates, 1992. Information Retriev-

al: Data Structures & Algorithms, New Jer-
sey: Prentice Hall PTR. 

 

J.B. Lovins, 1968. Development of a stemming 
algorithm. Mechanical Translation and 
Computational Linguistics, 11, pp.22–31. 

 
Javed I. 1985. New Urdu Grammar. Advance Urdu 

Buru, New Dehali 
 
Malik, M. G. Abbas. Boitet, Christian. Bhattcharyya, 

Pushpak.  2008. Hindi Urdu Machine Transli-
teration using Finite-state Transducers, pro-
ceedings of COLING 2008, Manchester, UK. 

 

M.F. Porter, 1980. An algorithm for suffix strip-
ping, Program, 14(3) pp. 130-137. 

 
M Tashakori, MR Meybodi, F Oroumchian, 2003. 

Bon: The Persian stemmer, in Proc. 1st EurA-
sian Conf. on Information.  

Payne, Thomas E. 2006. Exploring Language 
Structure, A Student’s Guide. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press. 

 

Q. Akram, A. Naseer and S. Hussain, 6-7 August 
2009. Assas-Band, an Affix- Exception-List 
Based Urdu Stemmer, Proceedings of the 7th 
Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pp. 40–
47, Suntec, Singapore. 

 

Rizvi, S. & Hussain, M.  2005, Analysis, Design 
and Implementation of Urdu Morphological 
Analyzer, Engineering Sciences and Technology, 
SCONEST 2005. Student Conference, pp. 1-7  

 
Sabzwari, S. 2002, Urdu Quwaid. Lahore: Sang-e-

Meel Publication 
 
S. Khoja and R. Garside, 1999. Stemming Arabic 

Text, Lancaster, UK, Computing Department, 
Lancaster University. 

 

Sproat, R. 1992. Morphology and Computation. 
The MIT Press 

 
Thabet, N. 2004. Stemming the Qur’an In the Pro-

ceedings of the Workshop on Computational Ap-
proaches to Arabic Script-based Languages. 

 
Waqas A., Xuan W., Lu Li, Xiao-long W. 2006. A  

Survey of Automatic Urdu Language Processing.     
International Conference on Machine Learning 
and Cybernetics, pp: 4489-4494 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

51


