










































Building frame-based corpus on the basis of ontological domain knowledge


Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL-HLT 2011, pages 74–82,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Building frame-based corpus on the basis of ontological domain knowledge

He Tan
Institutionen för
datavetenskap

Linköpings universitet
Sweden

he.tan@liu.se

Rajaram Kaliyaperumal
Institutionen för
medicinsk teknik

Linköpings universitet
Sweden

rajka625

Nirupama Benis
Institutionen för
medicinsk teknik

Linköpings universitet
Sweden

nirbe455@student.liu.se

Abstract

Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) plays a key
role in many NLP applications. The develop-
ment of SRL systems for the biomedical do-
main is frustrated by the lack of large domain-
specific corpora that are labeled with seman-
tic roles. Corpus development has been very
expensive and time-consuming. In this paper
we propose a method for building frame-based
corpus on the basis of domain knowledge pro-
vided by ontologies. We believe that ontolo-
gies, as a structured and semantic represen-
tation of domain knowledge, can instruct and
ease the tasks in building the corpora. In the
paper we present a corpus built by using the
method. We compared it to BioFrameNet, and
examined the gaps between the semantic clas-
sification of the target words in the domain-
specific corpus and in FrameNet and Prop-
Bank/VerbNet.

1 Introduction

The sentence-level semantic analysis of text is con-
cerned with the characterization of events, such as
determining ”who” did ”what” to ”whom”, ”where”,
”when” and ”how”. It is believed to play a key role
in NLP applications such as Information Extraction,
Question Answering and Summarization. Seman-
tic Role Labeling (SRL) is a process that, for each
predicate in a sentence, indicates what semantic re-
lations hold among the predicate and other sentence
constituents that express the participants in the event
(such as who and where). The relations are de-
scribed by using a list of pre-defined possible se-
mantic roles for that predicate (or class of predi-

cates). Recently, large corpora have been manually
annotated with semantic roles in FrameNet (Fill-
more et al., 2001) and PropBank (Palmer et al.,
2005). With the advent of resources, SRL has be-
come a well-defined task with a substantial body of
work and comparative evaluation. Most of the work
has been trained and evaluated on newswire text (see
(Màrquez et al., 2008)).

Biomedical text considerably differs from the
newswire text, both in the style of the written text
and the predicates involved. Predicates in newswire
text are typically verbs, biomedical text often prefers
nominalizations, gerunds, and relational nouns (Kil-
icoglu et al., 2010). Predicates like endocytosis, exo-
cytosis and translocate, though common in biomed-
ical text, are absent from both the FrameNet and
PropBank data (Bethard et al., 2008). Predicates
like block, generate and transform, have been used
in biomedical documents with different semantic
senses and require different number of semantic
roles compared to FrameNet (Tan, 2010) and Prop-
Bank (Wattarujeekrit et al., 2004). The development
of SRL systems for the biomedical domain is frus-
trated by the lack of large domain-specific corpora
that are labeled with semantic roles.

The projects, PASBio (Wattarujeekrit et
al., 2004), BioProp (Tsai et al., 2006) and
BioFrameNet (Dolbey et al., 2006), have made
efforts on building PropBank-like and FrameNet-
like corpora for processing biomedical text. Up
until recently, these corpora are relatively small.
Further, no general methodology exists to sup-
port domain-specific corpus construction. The
difficulties include, how to discover and define

74



semantic frames together with associated semantic
roles within the domain? how to collect and group
domain-specific predicates to each semantic frame?
and how to select example sentences from publi-
cation databases, such as the PubMed/MEDLINE
database containing over 20 million articles? In
this paper, we propose that building frame-based
lexicon for the domain can be strongly instructed
by domain knowledge provided by ontologies. We
believe that ontologies, as a structured and semantic
representation of domain-specific knowledge, can
instruct and ease all the above tasks.

The paper proceeds as follows: first we explain
our method how ontological domain knowledge in-
structs the main tasks in building a frame-based lexi-
con. This is followed by the related work. In section
4, we present a ”study case” of the method. We built
a frame Protein Transport containing text annotated
with semantic roles. The construction is carried
out completely under the supervision of the domain
knowledge from the Gene Ontology (GO) (Ash-
burner et al., 2000). We evaluated it to the frame
Protein transport in the BioFrameNet and examined
the gaps between the semantic classification of the
target words in the domain-specific corpus and in
FrameNet and PropBank/VerbNet. Finally, we con-
clude our work.

2 The Method

The FrameNet project is the application of the the-
ory of Frames Semantics (Fillmore et al., 1985) in
computational lexicography. Frame semantics be-
gins with the assumption that in order to understand
the meanings of the words in a language, we must
first have knowledge of the background and moti-
vation for their existence in the language and for
their use in discourse. The knowledge is provided
by the conceptual structures, or semantic frames. In
FrameNet, a semantic frame describes an event, a
situation or a object, together with the participants
(called frame elements (FE)) involved in it. A word
evokes the frame, when its sense is based on the
frame. The relations between frames include is-a,
using and subframe.

Ontology is a formal representation of knowledge
of a domain of interest. It has concepts that represent
sets or classes of entities within a domain. It defines

different types of relations among concepts. Intu-
itively, ontological concepts and their relations can
be used as the frame-semantic descriptions imposed
on a lexicon.

A large number of ontologies have been devel-
oped in the domain of biomedicine. Many of them
contain concepts that comprehensively describe a
certain domain of interest, such as GO. GO bi-
ological process ontology, containing 20,368 con-
cepts, provides the structured knowledge of biolog-
ical processes that are recognized series of events
or molecular functions. For example, the con-
cept GO:0015031 protein transport defines the sce-
nario, ”the directed movement of proteins into,
out of or within a cell, or between cells, by
means of some agent such as a transporter or
pore”. It is a subclass of GO:0006810:transport and
GO:0045184:establishment of protein localization.
The class has 177 descendant classes in is-a hierar-
chies. A Protein Transport frame can be effectively
described by using these classes and relations be-
tween them.

In many cases ontological terms can be seen
as phrases that exhibit underlying compositional
structures (McCray et al., 2002; Ogren et al.,
2005). Figure 1 presents the compositional
structures of 9 direct subclasses describing var-
ious types of protein transport. They pro-
vide that translocation, import, recycling,
secretion and transport are the possible pred-
icates, evoking the protein transport event. The
more complex expressions, e.g. translocation of
peptides or proteins into other organism involved
in symbiotic interaction (GO:0051808), express par-
ticipants involved in the event, i.e. the en-
tity (peptides or proteins), destination (into
other organism) and condition (involved in
symbiotic interaction) of the event.

So far, we, using these classes and relations be-
tween them, have partly defined the semantic frame
Protein Transport, decided the participants involved
in the event, and listed the domain-specific words
evoking the frame. The complete frame description
can be given after studying all the related classes
and their relations. Lastly, collecting example sen-
tences will be based on knowledge based search
engine for biomedical text, like GoPubMed (Doms
and Schroeder, 2005). As such, domain knowledge

75



Figure 1: A concise view of 9 GO terms describing Protein Transport. We use the modified finite state automaton
(FSA) representation given in (Ogren et al., 2005). Any path that begins at a start state, represented by double solid
borders, and ends in an end state, represented by a single solid border, corresponds to a term. The nodes with a dashed
border are neither start states nor end states.

provided by ontologies, such as GO biological pro-
cess ontology and molecular function ontology, and
pathway ontologies, can instruct us in building large
frame-based corpora for the domain.

We outline the aspects of how ontologies instruct
building a frame-based corpus:

1. The structure and semantics of domain knowl-
edge in ontologies constrain the frame seman-
tics analysis, i.e. decide the coverage of seman-
tic frames and the relations between them;

2. Ontological terms can comprehensively de-
scribe the characteristics of events/scenarios in
the domain, so domain-specific semantic roles
can be determined based on terms;

3. Ontological terms provide a list of domain-
specific predicates, so the semantic senses of
the predicates in the domain are determined;

4. The collection and selection of example sen-
tences can be based on knowledge-based search
engine for biomedical text.

3 Related Work

The PropBank project is to add a semantic layer on
the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1994). For each
unique verb sense, a set of semantic roles is de-
fined at its accompanying syntactic realizations. The
VerbNet project (Kipper et al., 2000) systematically
creates English verb entries in a lexicon with syntac-
tic and semantic information, referring to Levin verb
classes. It made efforts to classify individual verbs
in PropBank into VerbNet classes, based on patterns
of usage (Kingsbury and Kipper, 2003).

The FrameNet project collects and analyzes the
corpus (the British National Corpus) attestations of
target words with semantic overlapping. The attes-
tations are divided into semantic groups, noting es-
pecially the semantic roles of each target words, and
then these small groups are combined into frames.

Ontologies have been put under the spotlight for
providing the framework for semantic representa-
tion of textual information, and thus a basis for text
mining systems (Spasic et al., 2005; Ashburner et
al., 2008). Up to recently, TM systems mainly use
ontologies as terminologies to recognize biomedical
terms, by mapping terms occurring in text to con-
cepts in ontologies, or use ontologies to guide and
constrain analysis of NLP results, by populating on-
tologies. In the latter case, ontologies are more ac-
tively used as a structured and semantic representa-
tion of domain knowledge.

The FrameNet project links Semantic Types (ST)
of FrameNet to the Suggested Upper Merged Ontol-
ogy (SUMO) classes (Scheffczyk et al., 2006). The
main function of ST is to indicate the basic typing
of fillers of semantic roles, e.g. ”Sentient” defined
for the semantic role ”Cognizer” in the frame ”Cog-
itation”. The goal of the work is to combine frame
semantics in FrameNet and the formal world knowl-
edge from SUMO, for improving FrameNet capabil-
ity for deductive reasoning.

BioFrameNet is a domain-specific FrameNet ex-
tension. Its intracellular protein transport frames
are mapped to the Hunter Lab 1 knowledge base
(HLKB) protein transport classes. The frame ele-
ments are taken from HLKB slots. BioFrameNet

1Website for Hunters Bioinformatics research lab: http:
//compbio.uchsc.edu/.

76



considered a collection of Gene References in Func-
tion (GRIF) texts that are annotated by the HLKB
protein transport classes in the knowledge base.
Predicates are extracted from this collection of GRIF
texts.

PASBio and BioProp are the projects that aim to
produce definitions of Predicate Argument Structure
(PAS) frames. They do not offer a direct linking
of the predicates or their arguments to domain or
general ontologies. PASBio used a model for a hy-
pothetical signal transduction pathway of an ideal-
ized cell, to motivate verb choices. BioProp anno-
tated the arguments of 30 frequent biomedical verbs
found in the GENIA corpus (Kim et al., 2003).

4 Case Study: Protein Transport Frame

In this section we present the frame Protein Trans-
port. The frame is built completely based on the do-
main knowledge provided by the piece of GO de-
scribing the event. The core structure of the frame is
the same as that of FrameNet. The description of the
scenario evoked by the frame is provided, along with
a list of the frame elements and their definitions. A
list of lexical units (LUs) that evoke the frame is pro-
vided. In addition, example sentences that contain
at least one of the LUs, are given annotations us-
ing definitions of the frame. The annotations follow
FrameNet’s guidelines for lexicographic annotation,
described in (Ruppenhofer et al., 2005).

4.1 The Frame

Resources. The description of the frame uses the
scenario defined in GO:0015031 protein transport
from the GO biological process ontology. It is a sub-
class of GO:0006810 transport and GO:0045184 es-
tablishment of protein localization. The class has 177
descendant classes. A total of 581 class names and
synonyms are collected for the study. In addition to
that from GO concepts, synonyms are also gathered
by querying the UMLS Metathesaurus (Schuyler et
al., 1992).

Frame. The definition (see Table 1) follows the
definition of GO:0015031 protein transport.

Frame Elements. By studying all the names and
synonyms (we call them ”term” in the paper), we
defined all possible FEs for the frame (see Table 2).
The first 4 FEs are considered as core FEs. Ta-

”This frame deals with the cellular process in
which a protein or protein-complex, the Trans-
port Entity, moves from the Transport Origin to
a different location, the Transport Destination.
Sometimes the Transport Origin and Trans-
port Destination are not specified or are the same
location. The Transport Entity undergoes di-
rected movement into, out of or within a cell or
between cells or within a multicellular organism.
This activity could be aided or impeded by other
substances, organelles or processes and could in-
fluence other cellular processes.”

Table 1: The frame definition.

ble 3 gives the number of the GO terms that indi-
cate the FEs. For instance, in the term GO:003295
B cell receptor transport within lipid bilayer, lipid
bilayer is the location within which protein
transport happens. The term GO:0072322 protein
transport across periplasmic space describes the
path along which protein transport occurs. The
term GO:0043953 protein transport by the Tat com-
plex specifies a molecule that carries protein dur-
ing the movement. GO:0030970 retrograde pro-
tein transport, ER to cytosol indicates the direc-
tion (retrograde) of the movement. An attribute
(SRP-independent) of the event is described in
the term GO:0006620 SRP-independent protein-
membrane targeting ER.

Predicates. All lexical units in the frame are
listed in Table 4. The first row gives the head of
the GO terms (noun phrases). The number in the
bracket indicates the number of GO terms with the
head. If the verb derived from a head, can be used
to describe the event that is expressed by the head,
it is also included as a LU. GO terms, such as re-
lated and broader synonyms, may be not consid-
ered for collecting predicates. For example, fat body
metabolism, a broad synonym of GO:0015032 stor-
age protein import into fat body, is not considered.

Example Sentences. The example sentences are
retrieved from the PubMed/MEDLINE database by
using the GoPubMed (Doms and Schroeder, 2005),
a knowledge-based search engine for biomedical
text. The sentences to be annotated, are always the
most relevant and from the latest publications. For

77



FEs definition
Transport
Entity (TE)

Protein or protein complex which is
undergoing the motion event into,
out of or within a cell, or between
cells, or within a multicellular or-
ganism.

Transport
Origin
(TO)

The organelle, cell, tissue or gland
from which the Transport Entity
moves to a different location.

Transport
Destination
(TDS)

The organelle, cell, tissue or gland
to which the Transport Entity moves
from a different location.

Transport
Condition
(TC)

The event, substance, organelle or
chemical environment which posi-
tively or negatively directly influ-
ences or is influenced by, the motion
event. The substance organelle does
not necessarily move with the Trans-
port Entity

Transport
Location
(TL)

The organelle, cell, tissue or gland
where the motion event takes place
when the origin and the destination
are the same or when origin or des-
tination is not specified.

Transport
Path (TP)

The substance or organelle which
helps the entity to move from
the Transport Origin to the Trans-
port Destination, sometimes by con-
necting the two locations, without it-
self undergoing translocation

Transport
Transporter
(TT)

The substance, organelle or cell cru-
cial to the motion event, that moves
along with the Transport Entity, tak-
ing it from the Transport Origin to
the Transport Destination.

Transport
Direction
(TDR)

The direction in which the mo-
tion event is taking place with re-
spect to the Transport Place, Trans-
port Origin, Transport Destination
or Transport Location.

Transport
Attribute
(TA)

This describes the motion event in
more detail by giving information
on how (particular movement, speed
etc.) the motion event occurs. It
could also give information on char-
acteristic or typical features of the
motion event.

Table 2: The frame elements

#T 578 50 159 95 41 27 6 2 1
FEs TE TO TDS TC TL TP TT TDR TA

Table 3: The number of the GO terms that describe the
frame elements

the
head
of GO
terms

delivery (1), egress (2), establishment
of ... localization (19), exit (2), export
(20), import (88), recycling (2), release
(1), secretion (226), sorting (4), target-
ing (68), trafficking (1), translocation
(76), transport (100), uptake (5)

LUs delivery.n, deliver.v, egress.n, estab-
lishment of ... localization.n, exit.n,
exit.v, export.n, export.v, import.n, im-
port.v, recycling.n recycle.v, release.n,
release.v, secretion.n, secrete.v, sort.v,
sorting.n, target.v, targeting.n, translo-
cation.n, translocate.v, transport.v,
transport.n, trafficking.n, uptake.n

Table 4: The lexical units

[L.pneumophilaTransport Origin|NP.Ext] [trans-
locatepredicate] [more than 100 effector
proteinsTransport Entity|NP.Obj] [into host
cytoplasmTransport Destination|PP[into].Dep] [us-
ing Dot/Icm T4BSSTransport Path|VPing.Dep],
[modulating host cellular functionsTransport
Condition|VPing.Dep] to establish a replicative
niche within host cells.
(PMID: 20949065)

Table 5: An example sentence: the three layers of anno-
tations are given as FE|PT.GF.

78



LUs derived from one head, we acquired sentences
by using the GO terms with the head. The query
starts from using the most general GO terms. In the
case that the number of query results is huge, more
specific terms are used instead. Minimally, 10 sen-
tences are gathered for each LU, if applicable. In
cases when only specific GO terms are available and
the number of query results is too small, we gener-
alize the query term. For example, the lexical units,
release.n and release.v, are derived and only
derived from GO:0002001 renin secretion into blood
stream’s synonym renin release into blood stream.
No query result returns for the GO term. The gen-
eral term ”protein release” is used as the query term
instead.

Table 5 shows an example sentence for the frame.
For each sentence annotated, we mark the target LU,
and collect and record syntactic and semantic infor-
mation about the relevant frame’s FEs. For each
FE, three types of annotation are gathered. The first
layer is the identity of the specific FE. In cases when
the FE is explicitly realized, phrase type (PT, for ex-
ample NP) and grammatical function (GF) of the re-
alization are annotated. The GFs describe the ways
in which the constituents satisfy abstract grammati-
cal requirements of the target word. In cases when
the FE is omitted, the type of its null instantiation is
recorded. These three layers for all of the annotated
sentences, along with complete frame and FE de-
scriptions are used in summarizing valence patterns
for each annotated LU.

4.2 Evaluation

4.2.1 Compared to BioFrameNet

We compared this frame to the frame Pro-
tein transport in BioFrameNet 2. The frame in-
volves the phenomenon of intracellular protein
transport. BioFrameNet considered a collection of
GRIF texts that describe various types of intracellu-
lar protein transport phenomena. The GRIFs texts
are annotated by HLKB protein transport classes.
All the 5 HLKB protein transport classes are ar-
ranged in is-a hierarchy. The description of the top
level class protein transport is taken from the defini-
tion of GO:0015031 protein transport which is a su-

2http://dolbey.us/BioFN/BioFN.zip (28-Mar-
2009)

perclass of GO:0006886 intracellular protein trans-
port in GO. For the frame, BioFrameNet provides
definitions for 4 FEs, including Transported entity,
Transport origin, Transport destination and Trans-
port locations. The proposed FEs are taken from
the slot definitions in the HLKB classes.

Table 6 illustrates the difference between the
LUs in the 2 frames. The LUs that are not
included in our corpus, can be classified into
two groups. The first group include the LUs
enter.v, redistribution.n, return.v, and
traffic.n. They or their nominals are absent from
GO biological process ontology terms. The second
group includes those appear in GO, but in the terms
that are not included in descendants of GO:0015031
protein transport.

The LUs, endocytosis.n, internaliza-
tion.n, recruitment.n, do not appear in the
descendants of GO:0015031 protein transport, but
appear in GO terms that indeed describe protein
transport event. endocytosis is the head of 9
GO terms, among which 2 concepts indeed describe
an endocytotic process of protein (e.g.GO:0070086
ubiquitin-dependent endocytosis). 3 GO terms have
internalization as the head. They all de-
scribe protein transport event (e.g. GO:0031623 re-
ceptor internalization). recruitment.n occurs in
GO:0046799 recruitment of helicase-primase com-
plex to DNA lesions and GO:0046799 recruitment
of 3’-end processing factors to RNA polymerase II
holoenzyme complex, which describe the movement
of protein complex to another macro molecule.

The LUs, efflux.n, entry.n, exo-
cytosis.n, migrate.n, mobilization.n,
move.v, movement.n, shuttle.n and
shuttling.v, appear in GO terms that are
descendants of GO:0006810 transport. They are
used to describe various kinds of transport events
that protein is not involved in.
shift.n only occurs in GO:0003049 regula-

tion of systemic arterial blood pressure by capillary
fluid shift. capillary fluid shift describes
a kind of transport event. relocation.n and
relocate.v only appear in GO:0009902 chloro-
plast relocation which is considered as a kind of or-
ganelle organization.

Example Sentences. The number of example
sentences for each lexical unit in BioFrameNet re-

79



LUs
only
in Bio-
Frame-
Net

efflux.n, endocytosis.n, enter.v, en-
try.n, exocytosis.n, internalization.n,
migrate.v, mobilization.n, move.v,
movement.n, recruitment.n, redistribu-
tion.n, relocate.v, relocation.n, return.v,
shift.n, shuttle.v, shuttling.n, traffic.n

LUs in
both
corpus

delivery.n, exit.v, export.n, import.n,
recycle.v, recycling.n, release.n, tar-
geting.n, trafficking.n, translocate.v,
translocation.n, transport.n, transport.v

LUs
only
in our
corpus

deliver.v, egress.n, establishment of ...
localization.n, exit.n, export.v, import.v,
release.v, secretion.n, secrete.v, sort.v,
sorting.n, target.v, uptake.n

Table 6: The comparison of LUs in the 2 frames

lies on the existing collection of GRIFs in HLKB.
The number of annotated sentences for each LU
ranges from 1 to over 200. 207 GRIFs use
the LU translocation.n, and 10 GRIFs use
transport.v.

In our corpus, minimally for each LU 10 an-
notated sentences are gathered, if applicable. Ta-
bles 7 and 8 show the realizations of the FEs for
the LUs translocation.n and translocate.v.
The second columns give the number of times that
the FE is realized in the 10 sentences. The PT and
GF layers and the number of times they occur are
given in the last columns, in the format of PT GF
(number of occurrences). There are differences be-
tween the valence patterns of two corpus. We no-
tice that example sentences in BioFrameNet mainly
describe about protein. Although protein transport
is described, different topics may be covered in the
sentences in our corpus.

4.2.2 Predicates in FrameNet and
PropBank/VerbNet

We examined the gaps between the semantic clas-
sification of the LUs (or only verbs) in the frame,
and in FrameNet and PropBank/VerbNet. Around
half of the LUs from the frame are absent from
FrameNet data. 5 LUs are used in describing protein
transport event, with the same semantic sense as in
FrameNet. We identified the FEs for Protein Trans-
port frame based on the domain knowledge. The

FEs # Realizations
TE 10 PP[of] Dep (6); NP Dep (3); Poss

Gen (1);
TO 1 PP[from] Dep (1);
TDS 7 A Dep (2); PP[into] Dep (2); PP[to]

Dep (3);
TC 6 NP Ext (5); NP dep (1);
TL 2 PP[in] Dep (1); A Dep (1);
TP 1 PP[across] Dep (1);
TT 0 -
TD 0 -
TA 1 AJP Dep (1);

Table 7: FE realizations for annotations with
translocation.n

FEs # Realizations
TE 10 PP[than].Dep (1); NP Ext (6); NP

Obj (3);
TO 4 PP[from] Dep (2); PP[of] Dep (1);

NP Ext (1);
TDS 9 PP[to] Dep (6); PP[into] Dep (3);
TC 6 NP Ext (1); PP[upon] Dep (2);

PP[prior to] Dep (1); PP[during]
Dep (1); VPing Dep (1); VPbrst Dep
(1); VPfin Dep (1);

TL 0 -
TP 4 NP Ext(3); VPing Dep (1)
TT 0 -
TD 0 -
TA 2 PP[with] Dep (1); AVP Dep (1)

Table 8: FE realizations for annotations with
translocate.v

80



LUs FrameNet SS
egress.n, establishment
of ... localization,
export.n, localiza-
tion.n, localize.v,
recycling.n, recycle.v,
targeting.n, transloca-
tion.n, translocate.v,
trafficking.n, uptake.n

- -

delivery.n, deliver.v Delivery
√

exit.v Departing
√

export.v Sending
√

Exporting
Import export

import.n Importance
import.v Importing

Import export
release.n, release.v Releasing
secrete.v Emitting

√

sort.n Type
sort.v Differentiation
target.v Aiming
transport.n, transport.v Bringing

√

Table 9: Predicates in FrameNet: If the predicate is used
with the same semantic sense as in the FrameNet’s frame,
”semantic sense (SS)” is checked.

number of FEs and their definitions are very differ-
ent from FrameNet data. Other LUs are used with
different semantic senses.

Except translocate, all verbs are included in
PropBank data. Half of the verb senses have been
classified into VerbNet classes. Only 3 verbs are
used with the same sense as in describing protein
transport event.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we propose a method for building
frame-based corpus for the domain of biomedicine.
The corpus construction relies on domain knowl-
edge provided by ontologies. We believe that onto-
logical domain knowledge can instruct us and ease
the tasks in building the corpora. We built a cor-
pus for transport event completely on basis of the
piece of domain knowledge provided by GO bio-

verbs VerbNet PropBank
translocate - -
deliver,
transport

send-11.1 with the same
semantic sense

secrete -
exit escape-51.1 with different
release free-80.1 semantic sense
sort classify-29.10
target confront-98
export,
import,
localize,
recycle

-

Table 10: Verbs in PropBank/VerbNet

logical process ontology 3. We compared the frame
Protein Transport to the frame Protein transport in
BioFrameNet, and examined the gaps between the
semantic classification of the target words in the
domain-specific corpus and in FrameNet and Prop-
Bank/VerbNet.

In the future, we aim to extend the corpus to cover
other biological events. GO ontologies will be the
main resource to provide domain knowledge, but
also other ontologies, such as pathway ontologies
will be considered as important domain knowledge
resources. The identification of frames and the rela-
tions between frames are needed to be investigated.
In addition, we will study the definition of STs in the
domain corpus and their mappings to classes in top
domain ontologies, such as BioTop (Beißwanger et
al., 2008).

Acknowledgement

We acknowledge the financial support of the Center
for Industrial Information Technology (CENIIT)
and the foundation Stiftelsen Olle Engkvist
Byggmästare.

References

Michael Ashburner, Catherine A. Ball, Judith A. Blake,
David Botstein, Heather Butler, J. Michael Cherry, Al-
lan P. Davis, Kara Dolinski, Selina S. Dwight, Janan

3The corpus is publicly available on http://www.ida.
liu.se/˜hetan/bio-onto-frame-corpus

81



T. Eppig, Midori A. Harris, David P. Hill, Laurie Issel-
Tarver, Andrew Kasarskis, Suzanna Lewis, John C.
Matese, Joel E. Richardson, Martin Ringwald, Gerald
M. Rubin and Gavin Sherlock. 2000. Gene Ontology:
tool for the unification of biology. Nature Genetics,
25:25-29.

Michael Ashburner, Ulf Leser and Dietrich Rebholz-
Schuhmann (Eds.). 2008. Ontologies and Text Mining
for Life Sciences: Current Status and Future Perspec-
tives. 24.03-28.03, Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings.

Steven Bethard, Zhiyong Lu, James H Martin and
Lawrence Hunter. 2008. Semantic Role Labeling for
Protein Transport Predicates. BMC Bioinformatics,
9:277.

Elena Beißwanger, Stefan Schulz, Holger Stenzhorn and
Udo Hahn. 2008. BioTop: An upper domain ontol-
ogy for the life sciences: A description of its current
structure, contents and interfaces to OBO ontologies.
Applied Ontology, 3(4):205-212.

Adress Doms and Michael Schroeder. 2005. GoP-
ubMed: exploring PubMed with the Gene Ontology.
Nucleic Acids Research, 33:W783-786.

Andrew Dolbey, Michael Ellsworth and Jan Scheffczyk.
2006. BioFrameNet: A Domain-Specific FrameNet
Extension with Links to Biomedical Ontologies. The
proceedings of KR-MED, 87-94.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1985. Frames and the semantics of
understanding. Quaderni di Semantica, 6(2).

Charles J. Fillmore, Charles Wooters and Collin F. Baker.
2001. Building a Large Lexical Databank Which Pro-
vides Deep Semantics. The Pacific Asian Conference
on Language, Information and Computation.

Halil Kilicoglu, Marcelo Fiszman, Graciela Rosemblat,
Sean Marimpietri and Thomas C. Rindflesch. 2010.
Arguments of nominals in semantic interpretation of
biomedical text. Proceedings of the 2010 Work-
shop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing
(BioNLP’10).

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Yuka Teteisi and Jun’ichi
Tsujii. 2003. GENIA corpus - a semantically an-
notated corpus for bio-textmining. Bioinformatics.
19(suppl. 1):180-182.

Paul Kingsbury and Karin Kipper. Deriving Verb-
Meaning Clusters from Syntactic Structure. Work-
shop on Text Meaning, held in conjunction with
HLT/NAACL 2003.

Karin Kipper, Hoa Trang Dang and Martha Palmer. 2000.
Class-Based Construction of a Verb Lexicon. AAAI-
2000 Seventeenth National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.

Mitchell Marcus, Grace Kim, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz,
Robert MacIntyre, Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen

Katz and Britta Schasberger. 1994. The Penn Tree-
bank: annotating predicate argument structure. In Pro-
ceedings of the workshop on Human Language Tech-
nology (HLT ’94).

Alexa T. McCray, Allen C. Browne and Olivier Boden-
reider. 2002. The Lexical Properties of the Gene On-
tology (GO). Proceedings of AMIA Symposium , 504-
508.

Lluı́s Màrquez, Xavier Carreras, Kenneth C. Litkowski
and Suzanne Stevenson. 2008. Semantic role label-
ing: an introduction to the special issue. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(2).

Philip V. Ogren, K. Bretonnel Cohen and Lawrence
Hunter. 2005. Implications of compositionality in the
gene ontology for its curation and usage. Pacific Sym-
posium on Biocomputing, 10:174-185.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea and Paul Kingsbury. 2005.
The Proposition Bank: an annotated corpus of seman-
tic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31:71-105.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R. L.
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson and Jan Scheffczyk.
2005. ICSI. FrameNet II: Extended Theory and Prac-
tice.

Irena Spasic, Sophia Ananiadou, John McNaught and
Anand Kumar. 2005. Text mining and ontologies in
biomedicine: making sense of raw text. Briefings in
Bioinformatics, 6(3):239-251.

Jan Scheffczyk, Adam Pease and Michael Ellsworth.
2006. Linking FrameNet to the SUMO Ontology. In-
ternational Conference on Formal Ontology in Infor-
mation Systems (FOIS 2006).

Peri L. Schuyler, William T. Hole, Mark S. Tuttle and
David D. Sherertz. 1992. The UMLS Metathe-
saurus: representing different views of biomedical
concepts. Bulletin of the Medical Library Association,
81(2):217-22.

He Tan. 2010. A study on the relation between
linguistics-oriented and domain-specific semantics.
Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Se-
mantic Web Applications and Tools for the Life Sci-
ences.

Richard Tzong-Han Tsai, Wen-Chi Chou, Ying-Shan Su,
Yu-Chun Lin, Cheng-Lung Sung, Hong-Jie Dai, Irene
Tzu-Hsuan Yeh, Wei Ku, Ting-Yi Sung and Wen-Lian
Hsu. 2006. BIOSMILE: adapting semantic role label-
ing for biomedical verbs: an exponential model cou-
pled with automatically generated template features.
Proceedings of the 2005 Workshop on Biomedical Nat-
ural Language Processing (BioNLP’06).

Tuangthong Wattarujeekrit, Parantu K Shah and Nigel
Collier. 2004. PASBio: predicate-argument structures
for event extraction in molecular biology. BMC Bioin-
formatics, 5:155.

82


