










































Going Beyond Shallow Semantics


Proceedings of the ACL 2011 Workshop on Relational Models of Semantics (RELMS 2011), page 1,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Going Beyond Shallow Semantics
(invited talk)

Martha Palmer
University of Colorado at Boulder

Martha.Palmer@colorado.edu

Abstract

Shallow semantic analyzers, such as semantic role labeling and sense tagging, are increasing in ac-
curacy and becoming commonplace. However, they only provide limited and local representations of
local words and individual predicate-argument structures. This talk will address some of the current
challenges in producing deeper, connected representations of eventualities. Available resources, such
as VerbNet, FrameNet and TimeBank, that can assist in this process will also be discussed, as well as
some of their limitations.

Speaker’s Bio

Martha Palmer is a Full Professor at the University of Colorado with joint appointments in Linguistics
and Computer Science and is an Institute of Cognitive Science Faculty Fellow. She recently won a
Boulder Faculty Assembly 2010 Research Award. Beginning with her dissertation work at Edinburgh
and her first job as a Research Scientist at Unisys, her research has been focused on trying to capture
the meanings of words in representations that the computer can use to build up meanings of complex
sentences and documents. These representations can in turn be used to improve the computer’s ability
to perform question answering, information retrieval, and machine translation. Current approaches rely
on techniques for applying supervised machine learning algorithms, which use vast amounts of anno-
tated training data. Therefore, she and her students, both at Colorado and previously at the University of
Pennsylvania, are engaged in providing data with word sense tags and semantic role labels for English,
Chinese, Arabic, and Hindi, funded by DARPA and NSF. They also use machine learning algorithms
to develop automatic sense taggers and semantic role labelers, and to extract bilingual lexicons from
parallel corpora. A more recent focus is the application of these methods to biomedical journal articles
and clinical notes, funded by NIH. She is a co-editor for both the Journal of Natural Language Engi-
neering and LiLT, Linguistic Issues in Language Technology. She is a past President of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, past Chair of SIGLEX and SIGHAN, and is currently the Director of
the 2011 Linguistics Institute to be held in Boulder, Colorado.

1


