










































The BM-I2R Haitian-Creole-to-English translation system description for the WMT 2011 evaluation campaign


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 452–456,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

The BM-I2R Haitian-Créole-to-English translation system description
for the WMT 2011 evaluation campaign

Marta R. Costa-jussà
Barcelona Media Innovation Center

Av Diagonal, 177, 9th floor
08018 Barcelona

marta.ruiz@barcelonamedia.org

Rafael E. Banchs
Institute for Infocomm Research

1 Fusionopolis Way 21-01
Singapore 138632

rembanchs@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract

This work describes the Haitian-Créole to En-
glish statistical machine translation system
built by Barcelona Media Innovation Center
(BM) and Institute for Infocomm Research
(I2R) for the 6th Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation (WMT 2011). Our sys-
tem carefully processes the available data and
uses it in a standard phrase-based system en-
hanced with a source context semantic feature
that helps conducting a better lexical selection
and a feature orthogonalization procedure that
helps making MERT optimization more reli-
able and stable. Our system was ranked first
(among a total of 9 participant systems) by the
conducted human evaluation.

1 Introduction

During years there has been a big effort to produce
natural language processing tools that try to under-
stand well written sentences, but the question is how
well do these tools work to analyze the contents
of SMS. For example, not even syntactic tools like
stemming can bring to common stems words that
have been shortened (like Xmas or Christmas).

This paper describes our participation on the 6th
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT
2011). The featured task from the workshop was
to translate Haitian-Créole SMS messages into En-
glish. According to the WMT 2011 organizers, these
text messages (SMS) were sent by people in Haiti in
the aftermath of the January 2010 earthquake. Our
objective in this featured task is to translate from
Haitian-Créole into English either using raw or clean
data.

We propose to build an SMT system which could
be used for both raw and clean data. Our base-
line system is an standard phrase-based SMT sys-
tem built with Moses (Koehn et al., 2007). Starting
from this system we propose to introduce a semantic
feature function based on latent semantic indexing
(Landauer et al., 1998). Additionally, as a total dif-
ferent approximation, we propose to orthogonalize
the standard feature functions of the phrase-based
table using the Gram-Schmidt methodology (Greub,
1975). Then, we experimentally combine both en-
hancements.

The only difference among the raw and clean
SMT system were the training sentences. In order
to translate the clean data, we propose to normalize
the corpus of short messages given very scarce re-
sources. We only count with a small set of parallel
corpus at the level of sentence of chat and standard
language. A nice normalization methodology can
allow to make the task of communication easier. We
propose a statistical normalization technique using
the scarce resources we have based on a combina-
tion of statistical machine translation techniques.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 briefly describes the phrase-based SMT sys-
tem which is used as a reference system. Next, sec-
tion 3 describes our approximation to introduce se-
mantics in the baseline system. Section 4 reports our
idea of orthogonalizing the feature functions in the
translation table. Section 5 details the data process-
ing and the data conversion from raw to clean. As
follows, section 6 shows the translation results. Fi-
nally, section 7 reports most relevant conclusions of
this work.

452



2 Phrase-based SMT baseline system

The phrase-based approach to SMT performs the
translation splitting the source sentence in segments
and assigning to each segment a bilingual phrase
from a phrase-table. Bilingual phrases are trans-
lation units that contain source words and target
words, e.g. unité de traduction — translation unit,
and have different scores associated to them. These
bilingual phrases are then selected in order to maxi-
mize a linear combination of feature functions. Such
strategy is known as the log-linear model (Och,
2003) and it is formally defined as:

ê = arg max
e

[
M∑

m=1

λmhm (e, f)

]
(1)

where hm are different feature functions with
weights λm. The two main feature functions are
the translation model (TM) and the target lan-
guage model (LM). Additional models include lexi-
cal weights, phrase and word penalty and reordering.

3 Semantic feature function

Source context information is generally disregarded
in phrase-based systems given that all training sen-
tences contribute equally to the final translation.
The main objective in this section is to motivate
the use of a semantic feature function we have re-
cently proposed (Banchs and Costa-jussà, 2011) for
incorporating source context information into the
phrase-based statistical machine translation frame-
work. Such a feature is based on the use of a sim-
ilarity metric for assessing the degree of similarity
between the sentences to be translated and the sen-
tences in the original training dataset.

The measured similarity is used to favour those
translation units that have been extracted from train-
ing sentences that are similar to the current sen-
tence to be translated and to penalize those trans-
lation units than have been extracted from unrelated
or dissimilar training sentences. In the proposed fea-
ture, sentence similarity is measured by means of the
cosine distance in a reduced dimension vector-space
model, which is constructed by using Latent Seman-
tic Indexing (Landauer et al., 1998), a well know
dimensionality reduction technique that is based on

the singular value decomposition of a matrix (Golub
and Kahan, 1965).

The main motivation of this semantic feature is
the fact that source context information is actually
helpful for disambiguating the sense of a given word
during the translation process. Consider for instance
the Spanish word banco which can be translated into
English as either bank or bench depending on the
specific context it occurs. By comparing a given
input sentence containing the Spanish word banco
with all training sentences from which phrases in-
cluding this word where extracted, we can figure
out which is the most appropriated sense for this
word in the given sentence. This is because for the
sense bank the Spanish word banco will be more
like to co-occur with words such as dinero (money),
cuenta (account), intereses (interest), etc., while for
the sense bench it would be more likely to co-occur
with words such as plaza (square), parque (park),
mesa (table), etc; and the chances are high for such
disambiguating words to appear in one or more of
the training sentences from which bilingual phrases
containing banco has been extracted.

In the particular case of translation tasks where
multi-domain corpora is used for training machine
translation systems, such as the Haitian-Creole-to-
English task considered here, the proposed seman-
tic feature has proven to contribute to a better lexi-
cal selection during the decoding process. However,
in tasks considering mono-domain corpora the se-
mantic feature does not improves translation quality
as the most frequent translation pairs learned by the
system are actually the correct ones.

Another important issue related to the semantic
feature discussed here is that it is a dynamic feature
in the sense that it is computed for each potential
translation unit according to the current input sen-
tence being translated. This makes the implementa-
tion of this semantic feature very expensive from a
computational point of view. At this moment, we do
not have an efficient implementation, which makes it
unfeasible in the practice to apply this methodology
to large training corpora.

As the training corpus available for the Haitian-
Creole-to-English is both small in size and multi-
domain in nature, it constitutes the perfect scenario
for experimenting with the recently proposed source
context semantic feature. For more details about im-

453



plementation and performance of this methodology
in a different translation task, the reader should refer
to (Banchs and Costa-jussà, 2011).

4 Heuristic enhacement

The phrase-based SMT baseline system contains,
by default, 5 feature functions which are the con-
ditional and posterior probabilities, the direct and
indirect lexical scores and the phrase penalty. Usu-
ally, these feature functions are not statistical inde-
pendent from each other. Based on the analogy be-
tween the statistical and geometrical concepts of in-
dependence and orthogonality, and given that, dur-
ing MERT, the optimization of feature combination
is conducted on log-probability space; we decided
to explore the effect of using a set of orthogonal fea-
tures during MERT optimization.

It is well know in both spectral analysis and vec-
tor space decomposition that orthogonal bases allow
for optimal representations of signals and variables,
as they allow for each individual natural component
to be represented independently of the others. In
linear lattice predictors, for instance, each filter co-
efficient can be optimized independently from the
others while convergence to the optimal solution is
guarantied (Haykin, 1996). In the case of statisti-
cal machine translation, the linear nature of feature
combination in log-probability space suggested us
that transforming the features into a set of orthog-
onal features could make MERT optimization more
robust and efficient.

According to this, we used Gram-Schmidt
(Greub, 1975) to transform all available feature
functions into an orthogonal set of feature func-
tions. This orthogonalization process was con-
ducted directly over the log-probability space, i.e,
given the five vectors representing the feature
functions h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, we used the Gram-
Schmidt algorithm to construct an orthogonal basis
v1, v2, v3, v4, v5. The resulting set of features con-
sisted of 5 vectors that form an orthogonal basis.
This new orthogonal set of features was used for
MERT optimization and decoding.

5 Experimental framework

In this section we report the details of the used data
preprocessing and raw to clean data conversion.

5.1 Data preprocessing
The WMT evaluation provided a high variety of
data. Our preprocessing consisted of the following:

• Lowercase and tokenize all files using the
scripts from Moses.

• In the case of the haitian-Creole side of the
data, replace all stressed vowels by their plain
forms.

• Filter out those sentences which had no words
or more than 120.

Table 1 shows the data statistics of the different
sources before and after this preprocessing. The dif-
ferent sources of the table include: in-domain SMS
data (SMS); medical domain (medical); newswire
domain (newswire); united nations (un); state de-
partment (state depart.); guidelines for approapriate
international disaster donations (guidelines); kren-
gle senetences (krengle) and a glossary includes
wikipedia name entities and haitisurf dictionary.
The sources of this material are specified in the web
page of the workshop.

All data from table 1 was concatenated and used
as training corpus. The English part of this data was
used to build the language model. As development
and test corpus we used the data provided by the
organization. Both development and test contained
900 sentences.

Finally, in the evaluation, we included develop-
ment and tests as part of the training corpus, and
then, we translated the evaluation set.

5.2 Raw to clean data conversion
This featured task contained two subtasks. One was
to translate raw data and the other was to translate
clean data. Therefore, we have to build two sys-
tems. Our raw data system was built using the train-
ing data from table 1. The clean data system was
built using all training data from table 1 except in-
domain SMS data. Particularly, a modified version
of the in-domain SMS data was included in the clean
data system. The modification consisted in cleaning
the original in-domain SMS data using an standard
Moses SMT system. We built an SMT system to
translate from raw data to clean data. This SMT sys-
tem was built with the development, test and evalu-
ation data which in total were 2700 sentences. We

454



Statistics
before after

SMS
sentences 17,192 16,594
words 386.0k 383.0k

medical
sentences 1,619 1,619
words 10.4k 10.4k

newswire
sentences 13,517 13,508
words 326.9k 326.7k

wikipedia
sentences 8,476 8,476
words 113.9k 113.9k

un
sentences 91 91
words 1,906 1,906

state depart.
sentences 56 14
words 450 355

guidelines
sentences 60 9
words 795 206

krengle
sentences 658 655
words 4.2k 4.2k

bible
sentences 30,715 30,677
words 946k 944k

glossary
sentences 49,990 49,980
words 126.4k 126.3k

Table 1: Data Statistics before and after training prepro-
cessing. Number of words are from the English side.

used 2500 sentences as training data and 200 sen-
tences for development to adjust weights. The raw
and clean systems were tuned with their respective
developments and tested on their respective tests.

6 Experimental results

In this section we report the results of the approaches
proposed in previous sections. Table 2 and 3 report
the results on the development and test sets on the
raw and clean subtask, respectively.

First row on both tables report the results of the
baseline system briefly described in section 2. Sec-
ond row and third row on both tables report the per-
formance of the semantic feature function and on the
heuristic approach of orthogonalization (orthofea-
tures) respectively. Finally, the last row on both
tables report the performance of both semantic and
heuristic features when combined.

Results shown in tables 2 and 3 do not show
coherent improvements when introducing the new

System Dev Test
baseline 32.00 31.01
+semanticfeature 32.34 30.68
+orthofeatures 31.63 29.90
+semanticfeature+orthofeatures 32.21 30.34

Table 2: BLEU results for the raw data. Best results in
bold.

System Dev Test
baseline 35.86 33.78
+semanticfeature 35.98 33.90
+orthofeatures 35.57 34.10
+semanticfeature+orthofeatures 36.28 33.53

Table 3: BLEU results for the clean data. Best results in
bold.

methodologies proposed. The clean data seems to
benefit from the semantic features and the orthofea-
tures separately. However, the raw data seems not to
benefit from the orthofeatures and keep the similar
performance to the baseline system when using the
semantic feature. Although, this trend is clear, the
results are not conclusive. Therefore, we decided to
participate in the evaluation with the full system (in-
cluding the semantic features and orthofeatures) in
the clean track and with the system including the se-
mantic feature in the raw track. Actually, we used
those systems that performed best in the develop-
ment set. Additionally, results with the semantic
feature may not be significantly better than the base-
line system, but we have seen it actually heps to im-
prove lexical selection in practice in previous works
(Banchs and Costa-jussà, 2011).

7 Conclusions

This paper reports the BM-I2R system description in
the Haitian-Créole to English translation task. This
system was ranked first in the WMT 2011 by the
conducted human evaluation. The translation sys-
tem uses a PBSMT system enhanced with two dif-
ferent methodologies. First, we experiment with the
introduction of a semantic feature which is capa-
ble of introducing source context information. Sec-
ond, we propose to transform the five standard fea-
ture functions used in the translation model of the
PBSMT system into five orthogonal feature func-

455



tions using the Gram-Schmidt methodology. Results
show that the first methodology can be used for both
raw and clean data. Whereas the second seems to
only benefit clean data.

Acknowledgments

The research leading to these results has received
funding from the Spanish Ministry of Science and
Innovation through the Juan de la Cierva fellowship
program. The authors would like to thank Barcelona
Media Innovation Center and Institute for Infocomm
Research for their support and permission to publish
this research.

References
R. Banchs and M.R. Costa-jussà. 2011. A semantic fea-

ture for statistical machine translation. In 5th Work-
shop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical
Translation (at ACL HLT 2011), Portland.

G. H. Golub and W. Kahan. 1965. Calculating the sin-
gular values and pseudo-inverse of a matrix. journal of
the society for industrial and applied mathematics. In
Numerical Analysis 2(2), pages 205–224.

W. Greub. 1975. Linear Algebra. Springer.
S. Haykin. 1996. Adaptive Filter Theory. Prentice Hall.
P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch,

M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen,
C. Moran, R. Zens, C. Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Constantin,
and E. Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit
for statistical machine translation. In Proc. of the 45th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 177–180, Prague, Czech Republic,
June.

T. K. Landauer, D. Laham, and P. Foltz. 1998. Learning
human-like knowledge by singular value decomposi-
tion: A progress report. In Conference on Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 45–51,
Denver.

F.J. Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in statistical
machine translation. In Proc. of the 41th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 160–167, Sapporo, July.

456


