




















Something Old, Something New – Applying a Pre-trained Parsing Model
to Clinical Swedish

Martin Hassel
DSV, Stockholm University

Kista, Sweden
xmartin@dsv.su.se

Aron Henriksson
DSV, Stockholm University

Kista, Sweden
aronhen@dsv.su.se

Sumithra Velupillai
DSV, Stockholm University

Kista, Sweden
sumithra@dsv.su.se

Abstract
Information access from clinical text is a
research area which has gained a large
amount of interest in recent years. Au-
tomatic syntactic analysis for the creation
of deeper language models is potentially
very useful for such methods. However,
syntactic parsers that are tailored to ac-
commodate for the distinctive properties
of clinical language are rare and costly
to build. We present an initial study on
the applicability of an existing parser, pre-
trained on general Swedish, to clinical text
in Swedish. We manually evaluate twelve
documents and obtain a 92.4% part-of-
speech tagging accuracy and a 76.6% la-
beled attachment score for the syntactic
dependency parsing.

1 Introduction

The increasing use of electronic patient records
has made it possible to explore this rich source of
information by means of natural language process-
ing. In order for the many potential applications to
be successful, lexical information is often insuffi-
cient; syntactic information, such as dependency
structures, is also needed.

The MaltParser system (Nivre et al., 2007) may
be employed to provide such an analysis: it allows
a dependency parser to be induced from a tree-
bank, i.e. a syntactically annotated corpus. By
building a treebank one can generate a parser for
any language or sublanguage. This is, however, a
somewhat demanding task.

The purpose of this paper is to evaluate to which
degree a pre-trained model is directly transferable
to a new domain, in this case clinical text. Given
the linguistic differences between clinical and gen-
eral Swedish (Dalianis et al., 2009), it may prove
necessary to create a model tailored specifically to
the clinical domain.

2 Background

There are a number of parsers that have been de-
veloped for Swedish, two of which are grammar-
based dependency parsers (Knutsson et al.,
2003). The MaltParser, however, is language-
independent and data-driven, allowing parsers to
be induced for any language or sublanguage. This
approach is advantageous when the linguistic data
resources are available (Nivre et al., 2007). The
system has been successfully applied to an array of
languages, yielding an average labeled attachment
score1 of 80.8%2 across 13 languages (84.6% for
Swedish) (Nivre, 2008).

Clinical text differs from general text in terms
of both language and content, making it a dis-
course of its own. It is written by professionals
responsible for patient care and is primarily used
for record-keeping and transfer of information be-
tween healthcare personnel (Allvin et al., 2010).

In addition to the fragmentary style of clini-
cal language and the prevalence of misspellings
and abbreviations, there is also a significant dif-
ference in the respective vocabularies. This makes
the application of natural language processing
methods—including syntactic parsing—to clinical
text a potential challenge (Dalianis et al., 2009).

Haverinen et al. (2009) have built a treebank
for clinical Finnish3, which was used to induce
a domain-specific dependency parser using the
MaltParser system. They annotated the corpus
using the Stanford Dependency scheme, which
was adapted to accommodate for properties of the
Finnish language in general and clinical Finnish
in particular. Using a standard version of Nivre’s
arc-eager parsing algorithm (Nivre et al., 2007),
they report an overall labeled attachment score of
69.9%.

1The proportion of scoring tokens that are assigned both
the correct head and the correct dependency relation label.

2Using Nivre’s algorithm.
31,019 intensive care unit nursing documents.

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 287–290



A comparative study of intensive care unit doc-
uments written in Swedish and Finnish respec-
tively shows that, despite significant linguistic dif-
ferences, there are many structural and content-
related similarities, such as missing predicates,
copulas and subjects (Allvin et al., 2010).

3 Method

We apply the pre-trained model for Swedish, Swe-
Malt4, developed for the MaltParser system, on a
set of Swedish clinical assessment entries5, where
each entry is treated as a document. These en-
tries are written by physicians from an emergency
ward. The model is trained on the Talbanken sec-
tion of the Swedish Treebank6. As input to the
system, we need part-of-speech (PoS) tagged data.
We use the Granska Tagger (Carlberger and Kann,
1999) in this initial step. No cleaning or other pre-
processing is performed on the documents prior to
applying the PoS tagger; however, the evaluation
is performed only on content tokens, i.e. punctua-
tion and formatting issues are ignored.

As there is no morphologically and syntacti-
cally annotated corpus of Swedish clinical text that
can be used for evaluation, we manually evalu-
ate twelve randomly extracted documents with re-
gards to the following: (1) PoS tagging accuracy
and (2) labeled and unlabeled attachment score
(LAS and UAS), as well as labeled accuracy score
(LA), of the syntactic parses. For the evaluation of
the syntactic parses, we use the visualization tool
provided by MaltEval7.

The results are evaluated manually by two re-
searchers, both educated in (Swedish) linguistics,
but with no formal training in the specific morpho-
logical and syntactic schemas used by MaltParser.
One document is evaluated jointly, while the re-
maining eleven documents are evaluated individu-
ally, after which differences are resolved through
discussion.

4Available at http://maltparser.org/mco/
swedish_parser/swemalt.html

5This research has been carried out after approval
from the Regional Ethical Review Board in Stockholm
(Etikprövningsnämnden i Stockholm), permission number
2009/1742-31/5.

6For a description of the treebank, see http://stp.
ling.uu.se/˜nivre/swedish_treebank/

7Available at http://w3.msi.vxu.se/˜jni/
malteval/

4 Results

In Table 1 we present overall information about
the twelve documents used in the experiment.
Sentences vary greatly in length, ranging from two
to 36 content tokens, but consist of around ten
words per sentence on average. The documents
are very short (5.6 sentences on average), ranging
from only one sentence to ten.

# min - max avg ± std
Sentences 68 1 - 10 (/d) 5.6±2.0 (/d)
Tokens 676 2 - 36 (/s) 9.9±6.4 (/s)

4 - 128 (/d) 57.6±30.5 (/d)

Table 1: General statistics for the twelve docu-
ments. Minimum, maximum, average and stan-
dard deviation for sentences per document and to-
kens per sentence and document. d = document, s
= sentence.

Analysis and measure # errors % score
PoS, accuracy 51 92.4
Syntactic parse, LAS 142 76.6
Syntactic parse, UAS 117 80.7
Syntactic parse, LA 133 78.1

Table 2: Results of part-of-speech (PoS) tagging
and syntactic parses. LAS = Labeled Attachment
Score, UAS = Unlabeled Attachment Score, LA =
Label Accuracy Score.

4.1 Part-of-Speech Tagging
In general, the PoS tagging results were very
high (see Table 2). However, some mistakes fre-
quently recur. One of the most common words,
pat (”patient”, abbreviated), was consistently as-
signed the class proper name (PM), which is er-
roneous. Moreover, other abbreviations such as
ua (utan anmärkning, ”without remarks”) and ca
(”approx.”) were, in many cases, broken up in
the morphological analysis, or split in the original
text (with a space or a colon inserted in between),
which led to errors in the PoS assignments.

Moreover, the documents contain many clinical
terms, such as disease names, medications, wards,
etc. These were sometimes tagged as nouns (NN),
sometimes as proper names (PM), although not al-
ways consistently. These cases are not easy to dis-
criminate, as they, in context, work either way. For
instance, the disease dvt (djup ventrombos, ”deep

288

Martin Hassel, Aron Henriksson and Sumithra Velupillai

288



venous thrombosis”, abbreviated) is tagged as a
proper name (PM), while myocardit (myocarditis)
has been tagged as a noun (NN). These conflict-
ing analyses are not, however, problematic for the
syntactic analysis.

4.2 Syntactic Parsing

The overall results of the syntactic parsing are pre-
sented in Table 2. The most common errors are
related to conjunctions, adverbials and preposi-
tional constructions. These are also among the
most common dependency relation types, with PA
(Complement of preposition) being the most fre-
quent (77 instances).

Many sentences lack a main predicate (32%),
which is known to be a problematic issue for syn-
tactic parsers (Haverinen et al., 2009). Moreover,
main subjects are often omitted (43%), which fur-
ther complicates the analysis. This feature is not
unique to Swedish in the clinical domain (Allvin
et al., 2010). In Figure 1, we see an example of
a rather typical sentence, where there is no predi-
cate or subject, with several errors in the syntactic
analysis as a result.

In general, shorter sentences such as således dvt
(”thus dvt”) are analyzed correctly (ROOT→ dvt
→ CA→ således), while longer sentences contain
several errors, in particular sentences with compli-
cated conjunctional, conditional and prepositional
constructions.

Figure 1: Example parse tree for the sentence åter
imorgon för ny kontroll (”back tomorrow for new
check-up”)

5 Discussion

Although this study is performed on a very small
set of documents, the general results could be in-
terpreted as indicators. The twelve documents

were randomly extracted from a total of 150
parsed documents. A comparison of the gen-
eral characteristics—the average number of to-
kens per sentence, common tokens and depen-
dency relations—of the sample set with that of all
the parsed documents shows that the evaluation
was conducted on a data set that is at least fairly
representative of Swedish emergency ward docu-
mentation.

5.1 Part-of-Speech Tagging

The pre-trained SweMalt model presupposes in-
put text that has been morphosyntactically dis-
ambiguated using the Stockholm-Umeå Corpus
(SUC) tag set (Ejerhed et al., 1992). It should thus
be noted that there has not been any tailoring to
resolve differences between morphosyntactic cat-
egories in the Granska Tagger system compared
to the SUC categories. This fact could possibly in-
fluence results in the syntactic parses, as the parser
might encounter tags that it does not recognize8

and the lack of information on past participles, for
instance, might be harmful for the parser.

We have not evaluated the full morphosyntactic
tag, but rather focused on the part-of-speech. The
results of the PoS tagging were very high (92.4%
accuracy), which is in line with state-of-the-art
performance of Swedish PoS taggers. Carlberger
and Kann (1999) report an accuracy of 92.0% for
unknown words and 96.3% for all words when
evaluated on a part of SUC. Since the clinical do-
main is also new to the tagger, it is in this study ex-
posed to a higher degree of unknown words in the
form of medical brands, tests and diseases, as well
as ad-hoc abbreviations of much of the aforemen-
tioned terminology (Allvin et al., 2010). These
prove to be a challenge already in the tokenisation
step of the analysis.

5.2 Syntactic Parsing

The syntactic parsing results (see Table 2) are
lower than state-of-the-art results of (general)
Swedish (LAS: 84.6%, UAS: 89.5%, LA: 87.4%
(Nivre, 2008)). However, the results are still
within the range of average overall parser perfor-
mances accross languages (LAS: 80.8%). Com-
pared to other parsing results for clinical language,
we observe higher LAS scores than those pre-
sented in Haverinen et al. (2009) (LAS: 69.9% for

8The Granska Tagger has, apart from removing 14
tags/features, introduced 5 new tags.

289

Something Old, Something New — Applying a Pre-trained Parsing Model to Clinical Swedish

289



a statistical parser, LAS: 75.2% for a rule-based
parser). Although the results are not directly com-
parable to the mentioned previous studies (e.g. in
both Nivre (2008) and Haverinen et al. (2009), the
parsing model is not evaluated on a new domain;
there are, of course, language differences; differ-
ent evaluation methods are used; etc.), we believe
the general trends are comparable.

The distribution of the most common depen-
dency relation types can—with such reservations
as stated above—be compared to those reported
for general Swedish in (Nivre et al., 2007). De-
spite differences in dependency relation schemes,
we observe some similarities in the distribution
patterns. For example, prepositional dependency
relations (PA, Complement of preposition, and
PR, Preposition dependent) and conjunctional re-
lations (CJ, Conjunct and CC, Coordination) are
among the most common (approx. 10% respec-
tively). One important difference is, however, the
number of adverbial dependency relation types in
the different schemes. In Nivre et al. (2007) only
one adverbial relation is used, while in this setting
there are ten. Since there are so many different
adverbial types in our setting, and the adverbial
relations are one of the larger sources of errors in
our evaluation, one possible explanation might be
the low frequency per adverbial type.

Other than that, although we have not quantified
the amount of errors per dependency relation type,
similar tendencies are apparent. For instance,
among error types categorized as the ”medium-
accuracy set” in Nivre et al. (2007), we find error
types linked to incorrect attachment, e.g. modifier
attachment ambiguities and attachment ambigui-
ties. These are common error types in our exper-
iment as well. The general indications are thus
that the error types found in this evaluation are
not necessarily domain-dependent; however, mod-
eling syntactic analyses of sentences lacking pred-
icates and/or subjects would probably be needed
in order to improve results. This particular char-
acteristic seems to be typical for clinical language
(see e.g. Haverinen et al. (2009)).

5.3 Conclusion

The main finding is that the morphological charac-
teristics of Swedish clinical language do not dif-
fer greatly from general language and that exist-
ing tools can be used successfully when it comes
to PoS information. Syntactic parsing also works

well in most cases, but the errors that are produced
are relatively severe. One solution to this would
be to enrich an existing treebank with only these
types of sentences. Along these lines, we plan
to use this evaluated set as a small gold standard
for further development of parsing Swedish clini-
cal documentation, as well as for studying domain
adaptation for other professional languages.

References
Helen Allvin, Elin Carlsson, Hercules Dalianis, Riita

Danielsson-Ojala, Vidas Daudaravičius, Martin
Hassel, Dimitrios Kokkinakis, Heljä Lundgren-
Laine, Gunnar Nilsson, Ø ystein Nytrø, Maria
Skeppstedt, Hanna Souminen, and Sumithra
Velupillai. 2010. Characteristics and Analysis
of Finnish and Swedish Clinical Intensive Care
Nursing Narratives. In Second Louhi Workshop
on Text and Data Mining of Health Documents
(Louhi-10), number 2, pages 53–60, Los Angeles,
U.S. Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL).

Johan Carlberger and Viggo Kann. 1999. Imple-
menting an efficient part-of-speech tagger. Software
Practice and Experience, 29(9):815–832, July.

Hercules Dalianis, Martin Hassel, and Sumithra
Velupillai. 2009. The Stockholm EPR corpus:
Characteristics and some initial findings. In Proc.
14th ISHIMR, volume 219, pages 243–249, Kalmar,
Sweden.

Eva Ejerhed, Gunnel Källgren, Ola Wennstedt, and
Magnus Åström. 1992. The linguistic annotation
system of the The Stockholm-Umeå corpus project.
Technical Report DGLUUM-R-33, Department of
General Linguistics, University of Umeå.

Katri Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Veronika Laippala, and
Tapio Salakoski. 2009. Parsing clinical Finnish:
Experiments with rule-based and statistical depen-
dency parsers. In Kristiina Jokinen and Eckhard
Bick, editors, Proc. 17th NODALIDA 2009, number
1998, pages 65–72.

Ola Knutsson, Johnny Bigert, and Viggo Kann. 2003.
A robust shallow parser for Swedish. In Proc.
NODALIDA 2003, Reykavik, Iceland.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Atanas
Chanev, Gülsen Eryigit, Sandra Kübler, Svetoslav
Marinov, and Erwin Marsi. 2007. MaltParser:
A language-independent system for data-driven de-
pendency parsing. Natural Language Engineering,
13(2):95–135, January.

Joakim Nivre. 2008. Algorithms for deterministic in-
cremental dependency parsing. Computational Lin-
guistics, 34(4):513–553, December.

290

Martin Hassel, Aron Henriksson and Sumithra Velupillai

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


