










































A low-budget tagger for Old Czech


Proceedings of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 10–18,
Portland, OR, USA, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Low-budget Tagger for Old Czech

Jirka Hana
Charles University, MFF

Czech Republic
first.last@gmail.com

Anna Feldman
Montclair State University

USA
first.last@montclair.edu

Katsiaryna Aharodnik
Montclair State University

USA
ogorodnichek@gmail.com

Abstract

The paper describes a tagger for Old Czech
(1200-1500 AD), a fusional language with
rich morphology. The practical restrictions
(no native speakers, limited corpora and lex-
icons, limited funding) make Old Czech an
ideal candidate for a resource-light cross-
lingual method that we have been developing
(e.g. Hana et al., 2004; Feldman and Hana,
2010).

We use a traditional supervised tagger. How-
ever, instead of spending years of effort to cre-
ate a large annotated corpus of Old Czech, we
approximate it by a corpus of Modern Czech.
We perform a series of simple transformations
to make a modern text look more like a text
in Old Czech and vice versa. We also use a
resource-light morphological analyzer to pro-
vide candidate tags. The results are worse
than the results of traditional taggers, but the
amount of language-specific work needed is
minimal.

1 Introduction

This paper describes a series of experiments in an
attempt to create morphosyntactic resources for Old
Czech (OC) on the basis of Modern Czech (MC) re-
sources. The purpose of this work is two-fold. The
practical goal is to create a morphologically anno-
tated corpus of OC which will help in investigation
of various morphosyntactic patterns underpinning
the evolution of Czech. Our second goal is more
theoretical in nature. We wanted to test the resource-
light cross-lingual method that we have been devel-
oping (e.g. Hana et al., 2004; Feldman and Hana,

2010) on a source-target language pair that is di-
vided by time instead of space. The practical restric-
tions (no native speakers, limited corpora and lexi-
cons, limited funding) make OC an ideal candidate
for a resource-light approach.

We understand that the task we chose is hard
given the 500+ years of language evolution. We are
aware of the fact that all layers of the language have
changed, including phonology and graphemics, syn-
tax and vocabulary. Even words that are still used in
MC are often used with different distributions, with
different declensions, with different gender, etc.

Our paper is structured as follows. We first briefly
describe related work and motivate our approach.
Then we outline the relevant aspects of the Czech
language and compare its Modern and Old forms.
Then we describe the corpora and tagsets used in our
experiments. The rest of the paper describes the ac-
tual experiments, the performance of various models
and concludes with a discussion of the results.

2 Related Work

Since there are no morphological taggers devel-
oped specifically for OC, we compare our work
with those for MC. Morče (http://ufal.mff.
cuni.cz/morce/) is currently the best tagger,
with accuracy slightly above 95%. It is based on
a statistical (averaged perceptron) algorithm which
relies on a large morphological lexicon containing
around 300K entries. The tool has been trained and
tuned on data from the Prague Dependency Tree-
bank (PDT; Bémova et al., 1999; Böhmová et al.,
2001). The best set of features was selected af-
ter hundreds of experiments were performed. In

10



contrast, the resource-light system we developed is
not as accurate, but the amount of language-specific
work needed is incomparable to that of the state-
of-the-art systems. Language specific work on our
OC tagger, for example, was completed in about 20
hours, instead of several years.

Research in resource-light learning of mor-
phosyntactic properties of languages is not new.
Some have assumed only partially tagged train-
ing corpora (Merialdo, 1994); some have begun
with small tagged seed wordlists (Cucerzan and
Yarowsky, 2002) for named-entity tagging, while
others have exploited the automatic transfer of an
already existing annotated resource in a different
genre or a different language (e.g. cross-language
projection of morphological and syntactic informa-
tion as in (Cucerzan and Yarowsky, 2000; Yarowsky
et al., 2001), requiring no direct supervision in the
target language). The performance of our system is
comparable to the results cited by these researchers.

In our work we wanted to connect to pre-
existing knowledge that has been acquired and sys-
tematized by traditional linguists, e.g. morpholog-
ical paradigms, sound changes, and other well-
established facts about MC and OC.

3 Czech Language

Czech is a West Slavic language with significant in-
fluences from German, Latin and (in modern times)
English. It is a fusional (flective) language with rich
morphology and a high degree of homonymy of end-
ings.

3.1 Old Czech

As a separate language, Czech forms between 1000-
1150 AD; there are very few written documents
from that time. The term Old Czech usually refers
to Czech roughly between 1150 and 1500. It is fol-
lowed by Humanistic Czech (1500-1650), Baroque
Czech (1650-1780) and then Czech of the so-called
National Revival. Old Czech was significantly in-
fluenced by Old Church Slavonic, Latin and Ger-
man. Spelling during this period was not standard-
ized, therefore the same word can have many dif-
ferent spelling variants. However, our corpus was
transliterated – its pronunciation was recorded using
the rules of the Modern Czech spelling (see Lehečka

change example
ú > ou non-init. múka > mouka ‘flour’
sě > se sěno > seno ‘hay’
ó > uo > ů kóň > kuoň > kůň ‘horse’
šč > št’ ščı́r > štı́r ‘scorpion’
čs > c čso > co ‘what’

Table 1: Examples of sound/spelling changes from OC to
MC

and Voleková, 2011, for more details).

3.2 Modern Czech
Modern Czech is spoken by roughly 10 million
speakers, mostly in the Czech Republic. For a more
detailed discussion, see for example (Naughton,
2005; Short, 1993; Janda and Townsend, 2002;
Karlı́k et al., 1996). For historical reasons, there
are two variants of Czech: Official (Literary, Stan-
dard) Czech and Common (Colloquial) Czech. The
official variant is based on the 19th-century resur-
rection of the 16th-century Czech. Sometimes it is
claimed, with some exaggeration, that it is the first
foreign language the Czechs learn. The differences
are mainly in phonology, morphology and lexicon.
The two variants are influencing each other, result-
ing in a significant amount of irregularity, especially
in morphology. The Czech writing system is mostly
phonological.

3.3 Differences
Providing a systematic description of differences be-
tween Old and Modern Czech is well beyond the
scope of this paper. Therefore, we just briefly men-
tion a few illustrative examples. For a more detailed
description see (Vážný, 1964; Dostál, 1967; Mann,
1977).

3.3.1 Phonology and Spelling
Examples of some of the more regular changes be-
tween OC and MC spelling can be found in Table 1
(Mann (1977), Boris Lehečka p.c.).

3.3.2 Nominal Morphology
The nouns of OC have three genders: feminine,
masculine, and neuter. In declension they distin-
guish three numbers: singular, plural, and dual,
and seven cases: nominative, genitive, dative, ac-
cusative, vocative, locative and instrumental. Voca-

11



category Old Czech Modern Czech
infinitive péc-i péc-t ‘bake’
present 1sg pek-u peč-u

1du peč-evě –
1pl peč-em(e/y) peč-eme
:

imperfect 1sg peč-iech –
1du peč-iechově –
1pl peč-iechom(e/y) –
:

imperative 2sg pec-i peč
2du pec-ta –
2pl pec-te peč-te
:

verbal noun peč-enie peč-enı́

Table 2: A fragment of the conjugation of the verb
péci/péct ‘bake’ (OC based on (Dostál, 1967, 74-77))

tive is distinct only for some nouns and only in sin-
gular.

MC nouns preserved most of the features of OC,
but the dual number survives only in a few paired
names of parts of the body, in the declensions of
the words “two” and “both” and in the word for
“two hundred”. In Common Czech the dual plural
distinction is completely neutralized. On the other
hand, MC distinguishes animacy in masculine gen-
der, while this distinction is only emerging in late
OC.

3.3.3 Verbal Morphology
The system of verbal forms and constructions was
far more elaborate in OC than in MC. Many forms
disappeared all together (three simple past tenses,
supinum), and some are archaic (verbal adverbs,
plusquamperfectum). Obviously, all dual forms are
no longer in MC. See Table 2 for an example.

4 Corpora

4.1 Modern Czech Corpus

Our MC training corpus is a portion (700K tokens)
of PDT. The corpus contains texts from daily news-
papers, business and popular scientific magazines. It
is manually morphologically annotated.

The tagset (Hajič (2004)) has more than 4200
tags encoding detailed morphological information.

It is a positional tagset, meaning the tags are se-
quences of values encoding individual morpholog-
ical features and all tags have the same length, en-
coding all the features distinguished by the tagset.
Features not applicable for a particular word have a
N/A value. For example, when a word is annotated
as AAFS4----2A---- it is an adjective (A), long
form (A), feminine (F), singular (S), accusative (4),
comparative (2), not-negated (A).

4.2 Old Czech Corpora

Several steps (e.g., lexicon acquisition) of our
method require a plain text corpus. We used texts
from the Old-Czech Text Bank (STB, http://
vokabular.ujc.cas.cz/banka.aspx), in
total about 740K tokens. This is significantly less
than we have used in other experiments (e.g., 39M
tokens for Czech or 63M tokens for Catalan (Feld-
man and Hana, 2010)).

A small portion (about 1000 words) of the corpus
was manually annotated for testing purposes. Again
this is much less than what we would like to have,
and we plan to increase the size in the near future.
The tagset is a modification of the modern tagset us-
ing the same categories.

5 Method

The main assumption of our method (Feldman and
Hana, 2010) is that a model for the target language
can be approximated by language models from one
or more related source languages and that inclusion
of a limited amount of high-impact and/or low-cost
manual resources is greatly beneficial and desirable.

We use TnT (Brants, 2000), a second order
Markov Model tagger. The language model of such
a tagger consists of emission probabilities (corre-
sponding to a lexicon with usage frequency infor-
mation) and transition probabilities (roughly corre-
sponding to syntax rules with strong emphasis on lo-
cal word-order). We approximate the emission and
transition probabilities by those trained on a mod-
ified corpus of a related language. Below, we de-
scribe our approach in more detail.

12



6 Experiments

We describe three different taggers:

1. a TnT tagger using modified MC corpus as a
source of both transition and emission proba-
bilities (section 6.1);

2. a TnT tagger using modern transitions but
approximating emissions by a uniformly dis-
tributed output of a morphological analyzer
(MA) (sections 6.2 and 6.3); and

3. a combination of both (section 6.4).

6.1 Translation Model

6.1.1 Modernizing OC and Aging MC
Theoretically, we can take the MC corpus, translate
it to OC and then train a tagger, which would proba-
bly be a good OC tagger. However, we do not need
this sophisticated, costly translation because we only
deal with morphology.

A more plausible idea is to modify the MC corpus
so that it looks more like the OC just in the aspects
relevant for morphological tagging. In this case, the
translation would include the tagset, reverse phono-
logical/graphemic changes, etc. Unfortunately, even
this is not always possible or practical. For exam-
ple, historical linguists usually describe phonologi-
cal changes from old to new, not from new to old.1

In addition, it is not possible to deterministically
translate the modern tagset to the older one. So, we
modify the MC training corpus to look more like the
OC corpus (the process we call ‘aging’) and also the
target OC corpus to look more like the MC corpus
(‘modernizing’).

6.1.2 Creating the Translation Tagger
Below we describe the process of creating a tagger.
As an example we discuss the details for the Trans-
lation tagger. Figure 1 summarizes the discussion.

1. Aging the MC training (annotated) corpus:

• MC to OC tag translation:
Dropping animacy distinction (OC did not
distinguish animacy).

1Note that one cannot simply reverse the rules, as in general,
the function is not a bijection.

• Simple MC to OC form transformations:
E.g., modern infinitives end in -t, OC in-
finitives ended in -ti;
(we implemented 3 transformations)

2. Training an MC tagger. The tagger is trained
on the result of the previous step.

3. Modernizing an OC plain corpus. In this
step we modernize OC forms by applying
sound/graphemic changes such as those in Ta-
ble 1. Obviously, these transformations are not
without problems. First, the OC-to-MC transla-
tions do not always result in correct MC forms;
even worse, they do not always provide forms
that ever existed. Sometimes these transforma-
tions lead to forms that do exist in MC, but are
unrelated to the source form. Nevertheless, we
think that these cases are true exceptions from
the rule and that in the majority of cases, these
OC translated forms will result in existing MC
words and have a similar distribution.

4. Tagging. The modernized corpus is tagged
with the aged tagger.

5. Reverting modernizations. Modernized words
are replaced with their original forms. This
gives us a tagged OC corpus, which can be used
for training.

6. Training an OC tagger. The tagger is trained on
the result of the previous step. The result of this
training is an OC tagger.

The results of the translation model are provided
in Tables 3 (for each individual tag position) and
4 (across various POS categories). What is evident
from these numbers is that the Translation tagger is
already quite good at predicting the POS, subPOS
and number categories. The most challenging POS
category is the category of verbs and the most diffi-
cult feature is case. Based on our previous experi-
ence with other fusional languages, getting the case
feature right is always challenging. Even though
case participates in syntactic agreement in both OC
and MC, this category is more idiosyncratic than,
say, person or tense. Therefore, the MC syntactic
and lexical information provided by the translation

13



STB
old plain

O2M: form translation

tag & form
(back) translation

STB'
plain

STB'
tagged

STB
tagged

tagging

train Old CzechHMM tagger

PDT corpus
modern 

annotated

M2O: tag & form translation

PDT ' corpus
annotated

train

HMM tagger

1

2

3

4

5

6

Figure 1: Schema of the Translation Tagger

model might not be sufficient to compute case cor-
rectly. One of the solutions that we explore in this
paper is approximating the OC lexical distribution
by the resource-light morphological analyzer (see
section 6.3).

While most nominal forms and their morpholog-
ical categories (apart from dual) survived in MC,
OC and MC departed in verbs significantly. Thus,
for example, three OC tenses disappeared in MC
and other tenses replaced them. These include the
OC two aorists, supinum and imperfectum. The
transgressive forms are almost not used in MC any-
more either. Instead MC has periphrastic past, pe-
riphrastic conditional and also future. In addition,
these OC verbal forms that disappeared in MC are
unique and non-ambiguous, which makes it even
more difficult to guess if the model is trained on the
MC data. The tagger, in fact, has no way of provid-
ing the right answer. In the subsequent sections we
use a morphological analyzer to address this prob-
lem. Our morphological analyzer uses very basic

hand-encoded facts about the target language.

6.2 Resource-light Morphological Analysis

The Even tagger described in the following section
relies on a morphological analyzer. While it can
use any analyzer, to stay within a resource light
paradigm, we have used our resource-light analyzer
(Hana, 2008; Feldman and Hana, 2010). Our ap-
proach to morphological analysis (Hana, 2008) takes
the middle road between completely unsupervised
systems on the one hand and systems with exten-
sive manually-created resources on the other. It ex-
ploits Zipf’s law (Zipf, 1935, 1949): not all words
and morphemes matter equally. A small number of
words are extremely frequent, while most words are
rare. For example, in PDT, 10% most frequent noun
lemmas cover about 75% of all noun tokens in the
corpus. On the other hand, the less frequent 50% of
noun lemmas cover only 5% of all noun tokens.

Therefore, in our approach, those resources that
are easy to provide and that matter most are created

14



Tags: 70.6
Position 0 (POS ): 91.5
Position 1 (SubPOS ): 88.9
Position 2 (Gender ): 87.4
Position 3 (Number ): 91.0
Position 4 (case ): 82.6
Position 5 (PossGen): 99.5
Position 6 (PossNr ): 99.5
Position 7 (person ): 93.2
Position 8 (tense ): 94.4
Position 9 (grade ): 98.0
Position 10 (negation): 94.4
Position 11 (voice ): 95.9

Table 3: Accuracy of the Translation Model on individual
positions (in %).

All Full: 70.6
SubPOS 88.9

Nouns Full 63.1
SubPOS 99.3

Adjs Full: 60.3
SubPos 93.7

Verbs Full 47.8
SubPOS 62.2

Table 4: Performance of the Translation Model on major
POS categories (in %).

manually or semi-automatically and the rest is ac-
quired automatically. For more discussion see (Feld-
man and Hana, 2010).

Structure The system uses a cascade of modules.
The general strategy is to run “sure thing” modules
(ones that make fewer errors and that overgener-
ate less) before “guessing” modules that are more
error-prone and given to overgeneration. Simplify-
ing somewhat the current system for OC contains the
following three levels:

1. Word list – a list of 250 most frequent OC
words accompanied with their possible analy-
ses. Most of these words are closed class.

2. Lexicon-based analyzer – the lexicon has been
automatically acquired from a plain corpus us-
ing the knowledge of manually provided infor-
mation about paradigms (see below).

3a. Guesser – this module analyzes words relying
purely on the analysis of possible endings and
their relations to the known paradigms. Thus
the English word goes would be analyzed not
only as a verb, but also as plural of the po-
tential noun goe, as a singular noun (with the
presumed plural goeses), etc. In Slavic lan-
guages the situation is complicated by high in-
cidence of homonymous endings. For exam-
ple, the Modern Czech ending a has 14 differ-
ent analyses (and that assumes one knows the
morpheme boundary).

Obviously, the guesser has low precision, and
fails to use all kinds of knowledge that it po-
tentially could use. Crucially, however, it has
high recall, so it can be used as a safety net
when the more precise modules fail. It is also
used during lexicon acquisition, another con-
text where its low precision turns out not to be
a major problem.

3b. Modern Czech word list – a simple analyzer
of Modern Czech; for some words this module
gives the correct answer (e.g., svátek ‘holiday’,
some proper names).

The total amount of language-specific work needed
to provide OC data for the analyzer (information
about paradigms, analyses of frequent forms) is
about 12 hours and was done by a non-linguist on
the basis of (Vážný, 1964; Dostál, 1967).

The results of the analyzer are summarized in Ta-
ble 5. They show a similar pattern to the results we
have obtained for other fusional languages. As can
be seen, morphological analysis without any filters
(the first two columns) gives good recall but also
very high average ambiguity. When the automat-
ically acquired lexicon and the longest-ending fil-
ter (analyses involving the longest endings are pre-
ferred) are used, the ambiguity is reduced signifi-
cantly but recall drops as well. As with other lan-
guages, even for OC, it turns out that the drop in
recall is worth the ambiguity reduction when the re-
sults are used by our MA-based taggers. Moreover,
as we mentioned in the previous section, the tag-
ger based purely on the MC corpus has no chance
on verbal forms that disappeared from the language
completely.

15



Old Czech text

MA

analyzed Old 
Cz text

tagged 
Old Cz text

3

tag translation
4record of the 

original tags

compiling tnt 
emissions

5

tnt

tag back 
translation

even OCz 
emissions

Old Czech text

tag translation
1

tag translation
2

Cz 
transitions

Cz 
emissions

MA Creation

Frequent forms

Lexicon + Paradigms

Ending based Guesser

Modern Czech Forms

Figure 2: Schema of the MA Based Even Tagger

Lexicon & leo no yes
Recall Ambi Recall Ambi

Overall 96.9 14.8 91.5 5.7
Nouns 99.9 26.1 83.9 10.1
Adjectives 96.8 26.5 96.8 8.8
Verbs 97.8 22.1 95.6 6.2

Table 5: Evaluation of the morphological analyzer on Old
Czech

6.3 Even Tagger

The Even tagger (see Figure 2) approximates emis-
sions by using the output of the morphological ana-
lyzer described in the previous section.

The transition probabilities are based on the Aged
Modern Czech corpus (result of step 2 of Figure 1).
This means that the transitions are produced during
the training phase and are independent of the tagged
text. However, the emissions are produced by the
morphological analyzer on the basis of the tagged
text during tagging. The reason why the model
is called Even is that the emissions are distributed
evenly (uniformly; which is a crude approximation
of reality).

The overall performance of the Even tagger drops
down, but it improves on verbs significantly. Intu-

All Full: 67.7
SubPOS 87.0

Nouns Full 44.3
SubPOS 88.6

Adjs Full: 50.8
SubPos 87.3

Verbs Full 74.4
SubPOS 78.9

Table 6: Performance of the Even Tagger on major POS
categories (in %)

itively, this seems natural, because there is a rel-
atively small homonymy among many OC verbal
endings (see Table 2 for an example) so they are
predicted by the morphological analyzer with low
or even no ambiguity.

6.4 Combining the Translation and Even
Taggers

The TranslEven tagger is a combination of the
Translation and Even models. The Even model
clearly performs better on the verbs, while the Trans-
lation model predicts other categories much better.
So, we decided to combine the two models in the fol-
lowing way. The Even model predicts verbs, while

16



the Translation model predicts the other categories.
The TranslEven Tagger gives us a better overall per-
formance and improves the prediction on each indi-
vidual position of the tag. Unfortunately, it slightly
reduces the performance on nouns (see Tables 7 and
8).

All Full: 74.1
SubPOS 90.6

Nouns Full 57.0
SubPOS 91.3

Adjs Full: 60.3
SubPos 93.7

Verbs Full 80.0
SubPOS 86.7

Table 7: Performance of the TranslEven tagger on major
POS categories (in %)

Full tags: 74.1
Position 0 (POS ): 93.0
Position 1 (SubPOS ): 90.6
Position 2 (Gender ): 89.6
Position 3 (Number ): 92.5
Position 4 (case ): 83.6
Position 5 (PossGen): 99.5
Position 6 (PossNr ): 94.9
Position 7 (person ): 94.9
Position 8 (tense ): 95.6
Position 9 (grade ): 98.6
Position 10 (negation): 96.1
Position 11 (voice ): 96.4

Table 8: Performance of the TranslEven tagger on indi-
vidual positions (in %).

7 Discussion

We have described a series of experiments to cre-
ate a tagger for OC. Traditional statistical taggers
rely on large amounts of training (annotated) data.
There is no realistic prospect of annotation for OC.
The practical restrictions (no native speakers, lim-
ited corpora and lexicons, limited funding) make OC
an ideal candidate for a resource-light cross-lingual
method that we have been developing. OC and MC
departed significantly over the 500+ years, at all lan-
guage layers, including phonology, syntax and vo-

cabulary. Words that are still used in MC are often
used with different distributions and have different
morphological forms from OC.

Additional difficulty of this task arises from the
fact that our MC and OC corpora belong to different
genres. While the OC corpus includes poetry, cook-
books, medical and liturgical texts, the MC corpus
is mainly comprised of newspaper texts. We can-
not possibly expect a significant overlap in lexicon
or syntactic constructions. For example, the cook-
books contain a lot of imperatives and second per-
son pronouns which are rare or non-existent in the
newspaper texts.

Even though our tagger does not perform as the
state-of-the-art tagger for Czech, the results are al-
ready useful. Remember that the tag is a combina-
tion of 12 morphological features and if only one of
them is incorrect, the whole positional tag is marked
as incorrect. So, the performance of the tagger
(74%) on the whole tag is not as low in reality. For
example, if one is only interested in detailed POS
information (the tagset that roughly corresponds to
the English Penn Treebank tagset in size), the per-
formance of our system is over 90%.

Acknowledgments

This research was generously supported by
the Grant Agency Czech Republic (project ID:
P406/10/P328) and by the U.S. NSF grants
#0916280, #1033275, and #1048406. We would
like to thank Alena M. Černá and Boris Lehečka
for annotating the testing corpus and for answering
questions about Old Czech. We also thank Institute
of Czech Language of the Academy of Sciences of
the Czech Republic for the plain text corpus of Old
Czech. Finally, we thank anonymous reviewers for
their insightful comments. All mistakes are ours.

References

Bémova, A., J. Hajic, B. Hladká, and J. Panevová
(1999). Morphological and Syntactic Tagging of
the Prague Dependency Treebank. In Proceedings
of ATALA Workshop, pp. 21–29. Paris, France.

Böhmová, A., J. Hajic, E. Hajičová, and B. Hladká
(2001). The Prague Dependency Treebank:
Three-Level Annotation Scenario. In A. Abeillé
(Ed.), Treebanks: Building and Using Syntacti-

17



cally Annotated Corpora. Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers.

Brants, T. (2000). TnT – A Statistical Part-of-
Speech Tagger. In Proceedings of ANLP-NAACL,
pp. 224–231.

Cucerzan, S. and D. Yarowsky (2000). Language
Independent Minimally Supervised Induction of
Lexical Probabilities. In Proceedings of the 38th
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), Hong Kong, pp. 270–277.

Cucerzan, S. and D. Yarowsky (2002). Bootstrap-
ping a Multilingual Part-of-speech Tagger in One
Person-day. In Proceedings of the 6th Confer-
ence on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL),
pp. 132–138. Taipei, Taiwan.

Dostál, A. (1967). Historická mluvnice česká II –
Tvaroslovı́. 2. Časovánı́ [Historical Czech Gram-
mar II - Morphology. 2. Conjugation]. Prague:
SPN.

Feldman, A. and J. Hana (2010). A resource-light
approach to morpho-syntactic tagging. Amster-
dam/New York, NY: Rodopi.

Hajič, J. (2004). Disambiguation of Rich Inflection:
Computational Morphology of Czech. Praha:
Karolinum, Charles University Press.

Hana, J. (2008). Knowledge- and labor-light mor-
phological analysis. OSUWPL 58, 52–84.

Hana, J., A. Feldman, and C. Brew (2004, July). A
resource-light approach to Russian morphology:
Tagging Russian using Czech resources. In D. Lin
and D. Wu (Eds.), Proceedings of EMNLP 2004,
Barcelona, Spain, pp. 222–229. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Janda, L. A. and C. E. Townsend (2002). Czech.

Karlı́k, P., M. Nekula, and Z. Rusı́nová (1996).
Přı́ručnı́ mluvnice češtiny [Concise Grammar of
Czech]. Praha: Nakladatelstvı́ Lidové Noviny.

Lehečka, B. and K. Voleková (2011).
(polo)automatická počı́tačová transkripce
[(semi)automatic computational transcription].
In Proceedings of the Conference Dějiny českého
pravopisu (do r. 1902) [History of the Czech
spelling (before 1902)]. in press.

Mann, S. E. (1977). Czech Historical Grammar.
Hamburg: Buske.

Merialdo, B. (1994). Tagging English Text with
a Probabilistic Model. Computational Linguis-
tics 20(2), 155–171.

Naughton, J. (2005). Czech: An Essential Gram-
mar. Oxon, Great Britain and New York, NY,
USA: Routledge.

Short, D. (1993). Czech. In B. Comrie and G. G.
Corbett (Eds.), The Slavonic Languages, Rout-
ledge Language Family Descriptions, pp. 455–
532. Routledge.

Vážný, V. (1964). Historická mluvnice česká II
– Tvaroslovı́. 1. Skloňovánı́ [Historical Czech
Grammar II - Morphology. 1. Declension].
Prague: SPN.

Yarowsky, D., G. Ngai, and R. Wicentowski (2001).
Inducing Multilingual Text Analysis via Robust
Projection across Aligned Corpora. In Proceed-
ings of the First International Conference on Hu-
man Language Technology Research (HLT), pp.
161–168.

Zipf, G. K. (1935). The Psychobiology of Language.
Houghton-Mifflin.

Zipf, G. K. (1949). Human Behavior and the Prin-
ciple of Least-Effort. Addison-Wesley.

18


