



















































Levels of organisation in ontology verbalisation


Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 158–163,
Nancy, France, September 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Levels of organisation in ontology verbalisation

Sandra Williams, Allan Third and Richard Power
Computing Department, The Open University
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, U.K.

s.h.williams@open.ac.uk a.third@open.ac.uk r.power@open.ac.uk

Abstract

The SWAT TOOLS ontology verbaliser
generates a hierarchically organised hypertext
designed for easy comprehension and
navigation. The document structure, inspired
by encyclopedias and glossaries, is organised
at a number of levels. At the top level, a
heading is generated for every concept in
the ontology; at the next level, each entry
is subdivided into logically-based headings
like ‘Definition’ and ‘Examples’; at the
next, sentences are aggregated when they
have parts in common; at the lowest level,
phrases are hyperlinked to concept headings.
One consequence of this organisation is
that some statements are repeated because
they are relevant to more than one entry;
this means that the text is longer than one
in which statements are simply listed. This
trade-off between organisation and brevity is
investigated in a user study.

1 Introduction

Since OWL (Web Ontology Language) became the
standard language for the semantic web in 2004,1

several research groups have developed systems,
known as ‘verbalisers’, for generating Controlled
English from OWL ontologies (Kaljurand and
Fuchs, 2007; Dolbear et al., 2007; Schwitter and
Tilbrook, 2004; Funk et al., 2007). The resulting
texts may contain linguistic errors, especially when
the lexicon is inferred from identifier names (as
in SWAT TOOLS) rather than handcrafted, but

1http://www.w3.org/2004/01/sws-pressrelease

they are still easier to understand than formal
languages (Kuhn, 2010). We describe here a
generic verbaliser2 (applicable to any OWL-DL
ontology with English identifiers/labels) which
delivers its output (e.g., figure 1) in the form of an
organised hypertext,3 akin to an online encyclopedia
or glossary, and investigate whether this extra
organisation makes the text easier to understand and
navigate.

Figure 1: A section of SWAT TOOLS encyclopedia-style
output, length 7746 words or 25 A4 pages, generated
from an ontology about spider anatomy.

Elsewhere (Stevens et al., 2010; Stevens et
al., 2011) we reported two evaluations with
bioinformatics staff in which the glossary-style
verbalisation was judged effective, for instance
in detecting errors in the knowledge; however,
these studies were not designed to test the
value of organisation, through comparison with
an unorganised list of statements. It might seem
obvious that organisation will help: indeed, teachers
of reading comprehension are required to ensure that

2SWAT TOOLS available at http://swat.open.ac.uk/tools/
3The hypertext in figure 1 was generated from spider.owl

from owl.cs.manchester.ac.uk/repository/

158



their students are aware of the use of textual features
such as headings and subheadings in locating
information (Steeds, 2001); and it comes as no
surprise that reading strategies differ between a text
structured as an encyclopedia and one organised as,
say, a poem (Hanauer, 1998). However, organisation
actually has one potential disadvantage, in that
statements may be relevant in more than one context,
and must thus be repeated. We describe here a
study which checks this point by pitting organisation
against brevity for a task requiring accurate retrieval
of information from a text.

2 Verbalising statements

The input to a verbaliser is a set of OWL statements
describing individuals, classes or properties; the
simplest output therefore consists of a set of
sentences, one per statement, as illustrated in figure
2, where the sentence ‘A cribellar spigot is part of
a cribellum’ has been generated from the following
statement:4

subClassOf(class(#SPD_0000276),
objectSomeValuesFrom(

objectProperty(#part_of),
class(#SPD_0000115)))

The basic verbalisation method in SWAT TOOLS
has been described in detail elsewhere (Stevens
et al., 2011). Briefly, the OWL/XML input is
transcoded to Prolog,5 using the format illustrated in
the example just given; then a lexicon for realising
atomic terms (individuals, classes or properties) is
inferred from their identifier names or labels; finally,
a sentence is generated from each statement using
a Definite Clause Grammar (Clocksin and Mellish,
1987) covering almost all of OWL-DL, using
wording influenced by earlier work on controlled
languages (Schwitter et al., 2008; Kaljurand and
Fuchs, 2007; Dolbear et al., 2007).
Sentences are ordered according to the alphabetical
order of their underlying OWL statements: i.e.,
sentences generated from ClassAssertion
statements will come before those generated from
SubClassOf statements.

4The ‘non-semantic’ identifiers #SPD 0000276 and
#SPD 0000276 are annotated with English labels elsewhere in
the ontology.

5The verbaliser is implemented in SWI Prolog

3 Document structuring

The highest levels of organisation, illustrated
in figure 1, are headings and subheadings.
Subheadings are inspired mainly by Berzlanovich et
al.’s (2008) ‘information oriented’ discourse labels
(name, definition, description, etc.) from their
analysis of the discourse structure of encyclopedia
articles; and also by Aristotle’s genus-differentia
descriptions.6

Lower levels of organisation were also influenced
by Berzlanovich et al. (2008), whose investigation
of lower-level lexical cohesion in encylopedia
entries highlighted the high incidence of hypernymic
lexical cohesion.

3.1 Headings
The top level of organisation is an alphabetical series
of headings corresponding to atomic terms in the
ontology (i.e., individuals, classes, or object/data
properties), taken directly from the lexicon that the
system infers from the ontology’s identifier names or
labels. Where singular and plural forms have been
inferred, the singular is used, as illustrated by ‘SETA
CEPHALOTHORAX (class)’ in figure 1.

An OWL statement is selected for inclusion
under a heading if the class, property or individual
that the heading refers to occurs as a top-level
argument in the statement.7 Inevitably, sentences
that apply to more than one group are duplicated,
e.g., ‘a seta appendage cephalothorax is a seta’
is added to entries for both SETA APPENDAGE
CEPHALOTHORAX and SETA.

3.2 Subheadings
The second level of organisation is a set of
subheadings. Within each entry, statements are
organised into sub-groups according to their logical
type. Subheadings are always generated in a
fixed order (Definition, Taxonomy, Description,
Distinctions, Examples) similar to that found
in encyclopedia entries (Berzlanovich et al.,
2008). For classes, EquivalentClasses
statements in which the atomic class is the first

6en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genusdifferentia definition
7Theoretically, this could mean that some statements are

omitted altogether because their top-level arguments are non-
atomic, but in practice such statements are almost never found
(Power and Third, 2010).

159



argument occur under the definition subheading,
the taxonomy is the superclass (from an OWL
SubClassOf statement), descriptive statements
correspond to the OWL functor SubClassOf,
distinctions to DisjointClasses, and examples
to the individuals belonging to the class. For
individuals the class is given first (from an
OWL ClassAssertion statement), followed
by descriptions typically corresponding to
ObjectPropertyAssertion. For properties, the
descriptive statements specify the domain and range,
and features such as functionality and transitivity,
and examples are provided by statements about
individuals or classes in which the property is used.

3.3 Aggregating and truncating

A third level of organisation occurs when statements
with identical structures and one identical argument
are aggregated; see Williams and Power (2010) for
more details. For some ontologies, this process can
lead to very long lists of subclasses or individuals,
so under the ‘Examples’ subheading where these
occur we truncate them to a predefined maximum
length and add the phrase ‘and so on (N items in
total)’. Figure 1 shows an example of aggregation
and truncation in the sentence ‘The following
are seta appendage cephalothorax: male palpal
femoral thorns, female palp femoral thorns and spd
0000203s, and so on (5 items in total)’. An obvious
refinement would be to add a facility to view the
entire list, if desired.

3.4 Hypertext links

The final and lowest level of organisation occurs
when hyperlinks are introduced for each phrase
corresponding to a class, individual or property;
these link to the headings of their entries.

3.5 Related systems

To our knowledge, SWAT TOOLS takes document
structuring further than other domain-independent
ontology verbalisers. We are aware of only one other
domain-independent system that attempts document
structuring, ACE (Kaljurand and Fuchs, 2007). ACE
lists statements under class, individual and property
headings; and it inserts hyperlinks; but it has no
intermediate levels of organisation.

Regarding domain-dependent systems, most of
them aggregate statements and generate referring
expressions (Bontcheva and Wilks, 2004; Dongilli,
2008; Galanis and Androutsopoulos, 2007;
Hielkema, 2009; Liang et al., 2011). Only one
attempts further discourse structuring: Laing et al.’s
system for verbalising medical ontologies organises
text according to rhetorical structure.

4 Evaluation

The evaluation study reported here focusses on
the following question: Does the organisation just
described help people to understand and navigate
a text in spite of its longer length? This is
addressed through a navigation task in which people
were asked to locate information in either an
organised text or an unorganised one and then give
a judgement on how difficult the information was to
find. The study design is between-subjects in two
independent groups. Participants were 57 members
of the ACL special interest groups SIGGEN8 and
SIGdial9.

4.1 Materials and method
The texts were generated from an ontology about
spider anatomy.3 One group saw the encyclopedia-
styled version illustrated in figure 1, henceforth the
‘organised text’; the other saw the same information
as a list of sentences10 as shown in figure 2
(‘unorganised text’). At 7746 words (25 A4-sized
pages), the organised text is much longer than
the unorganised one (4803 words, 9-pages) mainly
because of duplicated information and headings (as
explained in section 3). To render the unorganised
text’s appearance as similar as possible to the
organised one, spaces were introduced every fourth
line with blocks of text placed on a taupe-coloured
background identical to that of the entries in the
organised text.

The same five navigation and information
location tasks (table 1) were used for both groups.
The survey was administered via SurveyMonkey11

in which each navigation question was followed
8www.siggen.org
9www.sigdial.org

10Sentences were ordered alphabetically by their underlying
OWL statements as described in section 2.

11www.surveymonkey.com

160



Figure 2: A section of SWAT TOOLS sentence-list-style
output, 4,803 words or 9 A4 pages, the ‘unorganised text’
of our study generated from the spider anatomy ontology.

by a judgement ‘How difficult was it to find the
information?’ on a 5-point scale (‘Very Easy’ to
‘Very Hard’).

Regarding search for information to answer
the questions, both texts were viewed on-line
and of course could be navigated with the usual
‘Find’ menu items, CTRL-F key sequence, and
so on. To determine whether textual features
such as headings, subheadings and hyperlinks had
been used, subjects with the organised text were
asked whether the following features had helped
them to search for information: (i) heading, (ii)
typology subheading, (iii) description subheading,
(iv) examples subheading, (v) alphabetical ordering
of entries,(vi) hyperlinks within entries, and (vii)
totals for number of items in lists (section 3.3).
Subjects given the unorganised text answered
instead seven questions about techniques used for
navigation, e.g., ‘Did you use scrolling?’.

No. Questions
Q1 What is a tarsus?
Q2 Name 3 kinds of spigot shaft.
Q3 What is a palp?
Q4 Name 2 kinds of silk cable.
Q5 How many kinds of seta appendage

cephalothorax are there in total?

Table 1: Questions for the navigation tasks

Lastly, we had chosen the spider anatomy
ontology because we hoped that the subject would
be unfamiliar to participants causing them to consult
the text (as we instructed) rather than using their own
general knowledge to answer the questions. The
final question in the survey asked about familiarity
with spider anatomy.

4.2 Results
Table 2 shows that despite the drop in performance
on question 5 (and question 1 for the unorganised
text group), both groups were relatively successful
in locating information. However, difficulty
judgements differed significantly between groups
(see table 3), with the group using the organised
text judging the tasks much easier. This preference
was confirmed by a non-parametric independent
samples Mann-Whitney U test over all judgements
(p < 0.0001). Results for questions about usage
of specific organisational features (answered only by
the group that viewed the organised text) are given
in table 4. None of the participants claimed to be
expert in spider anatomy.

n Text Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5
28 Unorganised 20 27 26 27 19
29 Organised 28 27 26 27 25

Table 2: Results for numbers of correct answers (n =
number of participants per group)

Q n Text VE Easy Neith Hard VH
Q1 28 Unorg 2 6 7 11 2

29 Org 10 12 3 4 0
Q2 28 Unorg 3 13 4 6 2

29 Org 11 10 6 2 0
Q3 28 Unorg 1 11 6 5 5

29 Org 11 13 4 1 0
Q4 28 Unorg 6 17 2 2 1

29 Org 12 13 3 1 0
Q5 28 Unorg 0 1 12 10 4

29 Org 10 11 4 3 1

Table 3: Results for difficulty judgements (Q = question
number, n = number of participants per group, Unorg =
unorganised text, Org = organised text, VE = Very easy,
Neith = neither hard or easy, VH = Very hard).

5 Discussion

In our earlier user studies (Stevens et al., 2010;
Stevens et al., 2011), experts in bioinformatics
assessed technical descriptions corresponding
to glossary entries, with statements linked by
aggregation but not grouped by logical subheadings.
The consensus was that these were understandable,
and useful to developers as a means of checking
accuracy. However, various criticisms were made,

161



Organisational Feature Used by
Headings 17
Typology subheadings 17
Description subheadings 20
Examples subheadings 22
Alphabetical ordering 20
Hyperlinks 19
Totals for items in truncated lists 21

Table 4: Results for usage of organisational features
(number of people who used them out of 29 participants
who viewed the organised text).

the main theme being that natural English should be
priveleged over fidelity to OWL semantics.

The SWAT TOOLS system evaluated here
incorporates some stylistic changes proposed in
the earlier study, and retains the aggregation
feature which combines several statements into a
single sentence (thus potentially reducing fidelity
to the underlying OWL); it also adds grouping by
subheadings. None of this organisation is directly
encoded in an OWL ontology: it represents rather a
further move towards making the verbalisation more
natural and humanlike.

From our study comparing organised and
unorganised texts, two main points emerge: first, we
find no evidence that people viewing the organised
text perform a navigation task more accurately;
second, people viewing the organised texts found
the task easier. One explanation for these findings
would be that people do whatever is necessary to
achieve a desired level of performance, so that when
provided with superior tools they achieve roughly
the same result but with less effort.12

The drop in performance by the unorganised
text group on question 1 might have been due
to unfamiliarity with a sentence-list type of text
(all participants answered question 1 first since
questions were always presented in the same order).
Improvements on later questions could have been
the result of a learning effect with this group. The
near-perfect performance of the organised text group
on the first questions demonstrates the benefit of
viewing a familiar genre. A drop in performance
by the unorganised text group on question 5,
‘How many kinds of seta appendage cephalothorax

12In this case responses for organised texts should be faster,
a point we intend to check in future work.

are there in total?’ was expected since it is a
harder question that requires a search of the entire
unorganised text whilst simultaneously counting
instances. It is not clear why four people in
the organised text group failed to get the correct
answer to question 5 since it merely requred them
to understand the text ‘5 items in total’ under
‘Examples’ (see figure 1).

Regarding the analysis of different organisational
features, the overall response was that all these
features were considered useful by a majority
of users, although none of them stood out as
particularly important.

6 Conclusion

We assume that most users prefer an ontology
verbalisation that is worded and organised like a
naturally occurring text of the appropriate genre —
i.e., an encyclopedia or technical glossary. One
possible objection is that such a text provides a
loose rendering of OWL semantics, introducing
organisational principles that are not present in
the original code; however, as evidenced by the
earlier studies we have cited, this attitude is not
taken even by OWL specialists. A second possible
objection is that the organised text is necessarily
longer than a bare list of sentences; this point is
tested in the study reported here, which suggests
that organisation makes the texts easier to use, with
no loss of performance. In future work we intend
to look more closely at how the texts are used in
retrieval tasks, and to obtain accurate measures of
time differences.

Acknowledgments

The SWAT project (Semantic Web Authoring Tool)
is supported by the UK Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) grants
G033579/1 (Open University) and G032459/1
(University of Manchester). We would also like to
thank colleagues and reviewers for their comments
and suggestions.

References

I. Berzlanovich, M. Egg, and G. Redeker. 2008.
Coherence structure and lexical cohesion in expository

162



and persuasive texts. In A. Benz, P. Kuhnlein and M.
Stede (Eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop Constraints
in Discourse III, Potsdam, Germany, pages 19–26.

K. Bontcheva and Y. Wilks. 2004. Automatic
report generation from ontologies: the MIAKT
approach. In Nineth International Conference on
Applications of Natural Language to Information
Systems (NLDB’2004), pages 214–225, Manchester,
UK.

F. Clocksin and Chris Mellish. 1987. Programming in
Prolog. Springer-Verlag, 3 edition.

Cathy Dolbear, Glen Hart, Katalin Kovacs, John
Goodwin, and Sheng Zhou. 2007. The RABBIT
Language: Description, Syntax and Conversion to
OWL. Technical Report Technical Report, Ordnance
Survey Research.

Paolo Dongilli. 2008. Natural language rendering of
a conjunctive query. Technical Report Knowledge
Representation Meets Databases (KRDB) Research
Centre Technical Report: KRDB08-3, Free University
of Bozen-Bolzano.

Adam Funk, Valentin Tablan, Kalina Bontcheva, Hamish
Cunningham, Brian Davis, and Siegfried Handschuh.
2007. Clone: Controlled language for ontology
editing. In K. Aberer et al. (Eds.) Proceedings of
ISWC/ASWC 2007, pages 142–155. Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg 2007.

Dimitrios Galanis and Ion Androutsopoulos. 2007.
Generating multilingual descriptions from
linguistically annotated owl ontologies: the naturalowl
system. In Proceedings of the Eleventh European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages
143–146, Saarbrücken, Germany, June. DFKI GmbH.
Document D-07-01.

David Hanauer. 1998. The genre-specific hypothesis
of reading: Reading poetry and encyclopedic items.
Poetics, 26:63–80.

Feikje Hielkema. 2009. Using Natural Language
Generation to Provide Access to Semantic Metadata.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Aberdeen.

Kaarel Kaljurand and Norbert E. Fuchs. 2007.
Verbalizing owl in attempto controlled english. In
Proceedings of Third International Workshop on
OWL: Experiences and Directions, Innsbruck, Austria
(6th–7th June 2007), volume 258.

Tobias Kuhn. 2010. An evaluation framework for
controlled natural languages. In Norbert E. Fuchs,
editor, Proceedings of the Workshop on Controlled
Natural Language (CNL 2009), volume 5972 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1–20,
Berlin / Heidelberg, Germany. Springer.

Shao Fen Liang, Donia Scott, Robert Stevens, and Alan
Rector. 2011. Unlocking medical ontologies for non-
ontology experts. In Proceedings of BioNLP 2011

Workshop, pages 174–181, Portland, Oregon, USA,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Richard Power and Allan Third. 2010. Expressing
OWL axioms by English sentences: dubious in
theory, feasible in practice. In Proceedings of
the 23rd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics.

R. Schwitter and M. Tilbrook. 2004. Controlled natural
language meets the semantic web. In Proceedings
of the Australasian Language Technology Workshop,
pages 55–62, Macquarie University.

Rolf Schwitter, Kaarel Kaljurand, Anne Cregan,
Catherine Dolbear, and Glen Hart. 2008. A
comparison of three controlled natural languages for
owl 1.1. In OWL: Experiences and Directions
(OWLED), page online.

Andrew Steeds. 2001. Adult literacy core curriculum
including spoken communication. Technical report,
Cambridge Training and Development Ltd. on behalf
of The Basic Skills Agency. ISBN 1-85990-127-1.

Robert Stevens, James Malone, Sandra Williams, and
Richard Power. 2010. Automating class definitions
from owl to english. In Proceedings of Bio-Ontologies
2010: Semantic Applications in Life Sciences, SIG
at 18th Annual International conference on Intelligent
Systems for Molecular Biology (ISMB 2010).

R. Stevens, J. Malone, S. Williams, R. Power, and
A. Third. 2011. Automating generation of textual
class definitions from owl to english. Journal of
Biomedical Semantics, 2(Suppl 2):S5.

Sandra Williams and Richard Power. 2010. Grouping
axioms for more coherent ontology descriptions.
In 6th International Natural Language Generation
Conference (INLG 2010).

163


