










































Character Profiling in 19th Century Fiction


Proceedings of Language Technologies for Digital Humanities and Cultural Heritage Workshop, pages 70–77,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 16 September 2011.

Character Profiling in 19th Century Fiction

Dimitrios Kokkinakis
Center for Language Technology &

Språkbanken, Department of Swedish
University of Gothenburg, Sweden

dimitrios.kokkinakis@svenska.gu.se

Mats Malm
Department of Literature, History of

Ideas and Religion
University of Gothenburg, Sweden

mats.malm@lit.gu.se

Abstract

This paper describes the way in which per-
sonal relationships between main characters
in 19th century Swedish prose fiction can be
identified using information guided by named
entities, provided by a entity recognition sys-
tem adapted to the 19th century Swedish lan-
guage characteristics. Interpersonal relation
extraction is based on the context between
two relevant, identified person entities. The
relationships extraction process also utilizes
the content of on-line available lexical se-
mantic resources (suitable vocabularies) and
fairly standard context matching methods that
provide a basic mechanism for identifying a
wealth of interpersonal relations. Such rela-
tions can hopefully aid the reader of a 19th-
century Swedish literary work to better un-
derstand its content and plot, and get a bird’s
eye view on the landscape of the core story.

1 Introduction

Digitized information and the task of storing,
generating and mining an ever greater volume of
(textual) data become simpler and more efficient
with every passing day. Along with this opportu-
nity, however, comes a further challenge: to
create the means whereby one can tap this great
potentiality and engage it for the advancement of
(scientific) understanding and knowledge min-
ing. The goal of this research is to generate a
complete profile for all main characters in each
arbitrary volume in a literature collection of 19th
century fiction. We also aim at a methodology
that should be easily transferable to any other
piece of literary work. A complete profile im-
plies an exhaustive list of any kind of interper-
sonal relationships, such as Friend Of and Anta-
gonist Of that can be encountered between the
main characters in a literary work.

Similarly to social network extraction, there are
numerous imaginable semantically oriented rela-
tionships between named entity pairs, this paper
however only examines interpersonal ones. It
also provides a brief description of the lexical
resources and extended named entities, used by a
Swedish named entity recognition (NER) system
applied for the annotation of the collection. The
NER system is to a great extent rule-based and
uses a large set of lexically-driven resources. The
system originates from a generic NER system
used for annotation of modern Swedish which
has been enhanced and improved by respecting
common orthographic norms of nineteenth-
century Swedish spelling.

One of the purposes in mind for this work is
to test the applicability of Natural Language
Processing (NLP) technologies in data from a
deviant domain and time period than the ones the
technology is designed for (i.e., contemporary,
modern Swedish) in order to get a clearer picture
of the strengths and weaknesses of the resources
and tools and thus identify ways to further im-
prove the obtained outcomes. This way we can
facilitate the extraction of content-related seman-
tic metadata, an important element in the man-
agement, dissemination and sustenance of digital
repositories.

Name extraction in combination with filtering
scripts that model the vocabularies, as well as
fairly standard context matching methods pro-
vide a mechanism for identifying interpersonal
relations that can also aid the reader of a literary
work to better understand its content and plot,
and get a bird’s eye view on the landscape of the
core story. Despite the risks of spoiling the en-
joyment that some readers of the narrative would
otherwise have experienced without revealing of
any plot elements, we still believe that such sup-
porting aid can be used for an in-depth story un-
derstanding (for the human reader). Moreover,
creating biographical sketches (e.g., birthplace)

70



and extracting facts for entities (e.g., individuals)
can be easily exploited in various possible ways
by NLP technologies such as summarization and
question answering (e.g., Jing et al., 2007).

2 Related Work

Natural-language processing is an attractive ap-
proach to processing large text collections for
relation extraction (usually defined as a relation
predicate ranging over two arguments, e.g., con-
cepts or people) and there exist a number of
techniques that have applicability to any type of
text; for a general review see Hachey (2009).
Such techniques can facilitate more advanced
research on literature and provide the appropriate
mechanisms for generating multiple views on
corpora and insights on people, places, and
events in a large scale, through various types of
relations.

Relation extraction was introduced in the mid
1990s by the Template Element and Template
Relation tasks in MUC-6 (Message Understand-
ing Conferences) and followed by the ACE (Au-
tomatic Content Extraction) Relation Detec-
tion/Recognition tasks (cf. Doddington et al.,
2004). Since then it has been an active and fruit-
ful area of research, partly driven by the explo-
sion of the available information via the Web and
partly by the evidence that embedded relations
are useful for various NLP tasks such as Q&A
and Information Retrieval.

Relation extraction approaches (particularly
binary ones) can be classified in various ways.
Knowledge engineering approaches (e.g., rule-
based, linguistic based), learning approaches
(e.g., statistical, machine learning, bootstrapping)
and hybrid ones; for an overview of techniques
see Jinxiu (2007). Learning approaches become
more and more common in the open domain i.e.
large corpora of web scale, cf. Agichtein & Gra-
vano, (2000); Christensen et al. (2010); relations
are also of particular interest and prominent in
the (bio)medical domain; e.g. Rosario & Hearst
(2004); Giles & Wren (2008); Roberts et al.
(2008). Elson et al. (2010) describe a method to
extract social networks from literature (nine-
teenth-century British novels and serials) de-
pending on the ability to determine when two
characters are in conversation. The authors use a
named-entity tagger to automatically locate all
the names in a novel and then a classifier that
automatically assigns a speaker to every instance
of direct speech in the novel using features of the
surrounding text. A “conversation” occurs if two

characters speak within 300 words each other,
and finally, a social network is constructed from
the conversations. Nodes are named speakers and
edges appear if there was a conversation between
two characters, a heavier edge means more con-
versations. Our approach is mainly influenced by
the work by Hasegawa et al. (2004) who pro-
posed an unsupervised, domain-neutral approach
to relation extraction by clustering named entity
pairs according to the similarity of context words
intervening between two entities and selecting
the most frequent words from the context to label
the relation.

3 Material: a Prose Fiction Corpus

Prose fiction is a just one type of textual material
that has been brought into the electronic “life”
using large scale digitized efforts. Prose fiction is
an essential source within many disciplines of
humanities (history, religion, sociology, linguis-
tics etc) and social studies and an invaluable
source for understanding the movements of soci-
ety by its ability to demonstrate what forces and
ideas are at work in the society of its time. Prose
fiction is complex and difficult to use not only
because of interpretational complexity but also
because of its limited availability. The "19th
Century Sweden in the Mirror of Prose Fiction"
(Det svenska 1800-talet speglat i prosafiktionen)
project (2009-12) aims at developing a represen-
tative corpus which mirrors society at given
points in time, chronologically selected in such a
way that historical comparisons can be made.
The material is all fiction, written in the original
and published separately for the first time, that
appeared in Swedish during the years 1800,
1820, 1840, 1860, 1880 and 1900 (300 publica-
tions, ca 60,000 pages). The material provides a
whole century of evolution and social, aesthetic,
scientific, technical, cultural, religious and phi-
losophical change.

3.1 Lexical Resources

The main focus of this research is the extraction
of main character profiles1, in literary archives
and as a starting point we only look into interper-
sonal relationships. There is a number of suita-
ble, freely available resources that we have
started to exploit in order to aid the relation iden-
tification process, particularly the RELATION-

1 Currently, this work is similar to the extraction of social
networks but in the long run it is also desirable to extract
more than merely interdependency relations of individuals
(e.g., birth place, workplace etc.).

71



SHIP2 vocabulary and two Swedish lexical se-
mantic resources, namely the FrameNet++3 and
the Swesaurus4. These resources are useful and
provide the appropriate machinery for our goals,
namely to both identify appropriate relationship
oriented lexical units and also appropriate rela-
tionship labels.

The RELATIONSHIP vocabulary defined by
Davis & Vitiello (2010) is a good starting point
for the labeling of the interpersonal relations. In
their work Davis & Vitiello provide a description
of 35 possible relationships that can occur be-
tween individuals. The description is not unprob-
lematic since some of these relationships may be
partially overlapping or even tautological such as
ChildOf vs. AncestorOf / DescedentOf and frien-
dOf vz. closeFriendOf, The two other resources,
namely the Swedish Swesaurus (Borin & Fors-
berg, 2010), that is fuzzy synsets in a WordNet-
like resource under active development, and the
Swedish FrameNet++ (Borin et al., 2009) pro-
vides a large, and constantly growing number of
synonyms and related words that are important
for the relation extraction task.

In the Swedish FrameNet++ such words are
called lexical units and are described by a num-
ber of frames. A frame is a script-like structure
of concepts, which are linked to the meanings of
linguistic units and associated with a specific
event or state. A number of frames and particu-
larly the lexical units encoded therein are rele-
vant for interpersonal relationship extraction,
such frames are for instance the Person-
al_Relationship (with lexical units: flickvän ‘girl
friend’ and make ‘husband’, etc.), the Kinship
(with lexical units: barnbarn ‘grandchild’, bror
‘brother’, brorsdotter ‘niece’, dotter ‘daughter’,
etc.) and the Forming_Relationship (with lexical
units: förlova_sig ‘become engaged with’, gif-
ta_sig ‘marry with’, etc.). These frames are semi-
automatically mapped to the RELATIONSHIP
vocabulary and their containing lexical units be-
come the actual lexical manifestation of the rela-
tionship in question. Similarly, we have experi-
mented with the Swedish Swesaurus in order to
identify synonyms for some of these lexical
units. This way we can increase the amount of
the words that can be part of various relations
types. Thus, for the word kollega ‘colleague’ we
can get a set of acceptable near synonyms such
as arbetskamrat ‘co-worker’ but unfortunately

2 http://vocab.org/relationship/.html
3 http://spraakbanken.gu.se/eng/swefn
4 http://spraakbanken.gu.se/swe/forskning/swefn/swesaurus

also a number of not so suitable near synonyms
such as kompis ‘buddy’, therefore we had to ma-
nually go through such near synonym lists and
discard erroneous entries.

3.2 Named Entities and Animacy

There has been some work in the past on defin-
ing and applying rich name hierarchies, both
specific (Fleischman & Hovy, 2002) and generic
(Sekine, 2004) to various corpora. However, in
other approaches (Kokkinakis, 2004) the wealth
of name types is captured by implementing a
fine-grained named entity taxonomy by keeping
a small generic set of named entity types as main
types and modeling the rest using a subtype me-
chanism. In this latter work a Person entity (a
reference to a real word entity) is defined as
proper nouns – personal names (forenames, sur-
names), animal/pet names, mythological names,
names of Gods etc. – and common nouns and
noun phrases denoting groups/sets of people. In
this work the rule-based component for Person
entity identification utilizes a large set of desig-
nator words (e.g., various types of nominal men-
tions) and phrases (e.g., typically verbal con-
structions) that require animate subjects, a rele-
vant piece of knowledge which is explored for
the annotation of animate instances in literary
texts and other related tasks (cf. Orasan & Evans,
2001). These designators are divided into four
groups according to their semantic denotation:

 nationality or the ethnic/racial group of a per-
son (e.g. tysken ‘the German [person]’)

 profession (e.g. läkaren ‘the doctor’)
 family ties and relationships (e.g. svärson

‘son in law’; moster ‘aunt [from the mother’s
side]’)

 individual that cannot be unambiguously ca-
tegorized into any of the other three groups
(e.g. patienten ‘the patient’)

Animacy markers are further marked for gender
(male, female or unknown/unresolved such as
barn ‘child’). An example of animacy annotation
is given below. In this example the animacy
attribute, ANI, has a value FAF which stands for
FAmily and Female, while the attributes TYPE
and SuBType refer to PeRSon and HUMan re-
spectively: <ENAMEX TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM"
ANI="FAF">Didriks mor</ENAMEX> i.e. ‘Didriks
mother’. An important use of the animacy
attribute is that it can be helpful for ruling out
some erroneous non-allowable, gender-bearing

72



relations such as the one given in example 5. In
this example there in an obvious anomaly in-
volved considering the otherwise erroenous final
relation, SiblingOf. Stina is recognized as female
(through the attribute UNF) while in the preced-
ing context the word broder 'brother' implies a
following mention of a male gender, such fea-
tures could be perhaps rule out spurious relation-
hips.

4 Method

NLP techniques, such as Information Extraction,
provide methods for identifying domain specific
relations and event information. From a initial
perspective such methods seem to be doomed to
fail since each literary work is in itself a kind of
closed world or domain where one may deal with
death and resurrection and another on travelo-
gues. However, each piece of work has certain
general characteristics that can be captured by
applying fairly standard NLP components such
as named entity recognizers and indexers using
various generic lexical resources, such as lexical
units extracted from the Swesaurus. Also, in-
spired by similar methodologies that have shown
high recall and precision figures, such as Hase-
gawa et al. (2004) we also try to capture inter-
personal relationships by investigating ways in
which the context between two entities can be
modeled using unsupervised methods. Our basic
approach is outlined below:

1. Entity detection: annotate corpora with
named entities and animacy markers

2. Context extraction: extract sentences with
co-occurring pairs of person named enti-
ties

3. Relation detection and labeling: label the
extracted pairs of person entities

a. automatically; for window size of 1-3
tokens using pattern matching tem-
plates with lexical units from the re-
sources

b. for window size of 4-10 tokens measure
the context similarity between the ex-
tracted pairs of person entities

i. make clusters of pairs and their
context

ii. semi-automatically label the clus-
ters

4. Merging: filter, join and plot the results of
(3a and 3b)

We automatically annotated each available vo-
lume in the collection with a slightly tuned to
19th century Swedish system; for details cf. Borin
et al. (2007) and Borin & Kokkinakis (2010). We
started by first clustering all possible context
lengths and also applied template pattern match-
ing once again on all possible contexts. After
some experiments we split the process into two
separate ones guided by the number of tokens
between the entities. Very short contexts can be
quickly and reliably captured in a pattern match-
ing fashion. Therefore, we decided to first apply
template pattern matching involving two recog-
nized person entities and matched the intervened
context with the lexical information extracted
and modeled from the various lexical sources.
Example of manually designed, pattern matching
templates are provided below:

GrandparentOf: morfar|mormor|farfar|farmor|morfader|...

<PRSentity-1> any? {GrandparentOf} <PRSentity-2>
<PRSentity-1> {GrandparentOf} any? <PRSentity-2>

<PRSentity-1> any? <PRSentity-s-2> {GrandparentOf}

These template-examples attempt to capture the
GrandparentOf relation by testing whether any of
the lexical units, extracted from the resources as
previously described, are between two person
entities or immediately to the right of the second
if this is in genitive form, i.e., ends in '-s'; any
refers here to any optional non-empty sequence
of characters while GrandparentOf is simply a con-
venient shorthand notation that gives a single
name to a set of related lexical units. The results
with this method were reliable when the inter-
vening context is only a couple of tokens. The
examples below illustrate the process; examples
1-3 contain the metadata obtained by the NER,
and 1´-3´ the obtained relations after pattern
matching and filtering.

(1) <ENAMEX TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI="UNM">
Muhammeds</ENAMEX> dotter <ENAMEX TYPE=
"PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI="FAF">Fatima</ENAMEX>; i.e.,
“Muhammeds daughter Fatima”

(2) <ENAMEX TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI="UNU">
Strindberg</ENAMEX> hade träffat <ENAMEX TYPE
="PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI="UNF">Nennie</ENAMEX>;
i.e., “Strindberg had met Nennie”

(3) <ENAMEX TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI="UNF">
Taube</ENAMEX> anställde nu <ENAMEX TYPE=
"PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI="UNF">Marie Susanne Ceder-
löf</ENAMEX>; i.e., “Taube employed now Marie
Susanne Cederlöf”

73



(1´) Muhammeds=>dotter/ParentOf=>Fatima
ParentOf (Fatima, Muhammed)

(2´) Strindberg=>träffat/HasMet=>Nennie
HasMet (Strindberg, Nennie)

(3´) Taube=>anställde/EmployerOf=>Marie
Susanne Cederlöf

EmployerOf (Taube, Marie Susanne Cederlöf)

For contexts between 4 and 10 tokens we pro-
duce context vectors (bag of words) from all in-
tervening tokens of all contexts, with the exclu-
sion of punctuation and numerical tokens. We
chose not to include the very short contexts since
pattern matching is reliable for short window
sizes. After some test we limited the maximum
window to be 10 tokens;, larger size of interven-
ing tokens introduce in many cases noisy results.
Examples 4-6 illustrate cases with a context be-
tween the person entities of >2 tokens. Note that
the extracted relations in example 5´ is actually
erroneous probably caused by one of the context
words, namely brodern 'the brother'. This could
be actually eliminated if the animacy attribute
ANI=UNF (Female) could be considered, a case
left for future developments of this work. Exam-
ple (6) illustrates another issue namely that of a
potential relations that cannot be captured by the
existing vocabulary; i.e. a tautology. For such
relations there seems to be a default one, labeled,
Relationship which is defined as "A class whose
members are a particular type of connection ex-
isting between people related to or having deal-
ings with each other", which we also use5.

(4) <ENAMEX TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI=”UNF”>
Mafalda</ENAMEX> var van att se upp till syster
<ENAMEX TYPE ="PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI=”FAF”> Lin-
da</ENAMEX>; i.e., “Mafalda was used to seeing
up to sister Linda”

(5) <ENAMEX TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI=”UNM”>
Ivar</ENAMEX> eggade med minspel och ögon-
kast brodern att trotsa, medan <ENAMEX
TYPE="PRS" SBT= "HUM" ANI=”UNF”>Stina
</ENAMEX>; i.e., “Ivar edged with facial expres-
sions and looks brother to defy, while Stina”

(6) <ENAMEX TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI="UNU">
Modén</ENAMEX> som av kamraterna också kal-
lades <ENAMEX TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI="UNU">
Moderat</ENAMEX>; i.e., “Modén who of the col-
leagues also called Moderat”

5 Here we could imagine an "Identical" relation since both
names refer to the same individual. As a matter of fact we
have recently initiated work in order to extend the list with
missing relation types.

(4´) Mafalda=>syster/SiblingOf => Linda
SiblingOf (Mafalda, Linda)

(5´) *Ivar=>brodern/SiblingOf => Stina
?SiblingOf (Ivar, Stina)

(6´) Modén => kallades/Relationship =>
Moderat

Relationship(Modén, Moderat))

5 Results

The context similarity between extracted pairs of
entities can be measured in various ways. We
applied hierarchical clustering (Seo & Shneider-
man, 2002) with complete linkage and with co-
sine similarity as a similarity measure. We then
manually evaluated obtained clusters and picked-
up the top-5 most frequent words in these clus-
ters as a means to characterize the cluster and
tried to map these to the RELATIONSHIP voca-
bulary. Unfortunately, this activity revealed limi-
tations since it was challenging to point to an
appropriate label possibly because the data was
too limited in size and also because most clusters
had very few members (see more discussion be-
low). For the evaluation (Precision, Recall and F-
score) we chose to examine in more detail three
randomly distinct volumes (see the References'
section). Precision (Pr) is the fraction of relation
instances that is correct, and for clustering Prhc
the correct contexts that could be mapped among
the contexts clustered automatically. Recall (R)
is the fraction of relation instances that has been
correctly extracted among all possible that in-
volve two person named entities.

Table 1 summarizes these results, here All is
the number of all window sizes with two person
entities for a book and <4 the number of contexts
matched with the pattern matching approach.
The abbreviated B1-B3 stand for the three vo-
lumes examined; B1 (Almqvist, 1847); B2 (Lo-
Johansson, 1935) and B3 (Bergman, 1910).

All <4 Pr<4 R<4 F<4 Prhc
B1 428 219 91.7%

24 rels
70,6% 79,7% 47,1%

B2 227 115 93,7%
16 rels

84,2% 88,7% 39,8%

B3 130 80 100%
9 rels

75% 85,7% 41,8%

Table 1: Evaluation of relations in three books
F<4=2×Pr×R/Pr+R

We manually inspected the <4 contexts and we
found that only a small fraction of those (9) were
wrong due to errors produced by the named enti-
ty tagger, e.g., <ENAMEX TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM"
ANI="UNM">Kring</ENAMEX> sig hade <ENAMEX

74



TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI="UNU">Kurt</ENAMEX>
några...; i.e., “Around him had Kurt some...”, here
Kring is simply an adverb..

6 Discussion

Our preliminary results showed that we need dif-
ferent strategies for modeling context between
entities of interest and accordingly we have sepa-
rated this modeling into two different relation
detection methods, for short and longer context
depending on the number of tokens intervening
between named entities (within a single sen-
tence). As one might expect, the use of patterns
over very short contexts is much more successful
than the clustering approach taken for long con-
texts. It seems that the unsupervised relation dis-
covery approach is inappropriate to the applica-
tion of extracting relationships from individual
works of fiction. A problem with clustering such
contexts is that one often gets a lot of small clus-
ters and labeling is hard. Possibly because other
work in the field or relation extraction generally
assumes a very large corpus of (mainly) news
texts, where relationships can be expected to be
expressed multiple times in different documents
and precision is improved through aggregation of
mentions. However, in an individual work of
fiction relationship are not expressed multiple
times but rather once or twice. Therefore, this
requires approaches with very high accuracy on
individual relation mentions.

There is still another method that it would be
lies in the gray zone between pattern matching
and clustering. For instance Riloff (1996) applied
more generalised patterns using regular expres-
sions, e.g., X * daughter * Y where X and Y are
person entities and * is any string of tokens, and
she showed good results with this approach back
in the 1990s.

The combined relations extracted can be
viewed as a social network, i.e. a graph of rela-
tionships that indicate the important entities in a
literary work and can be used to study or summa-
rise interactions. The networks could also pro-
vide an alternative to standard presentation of
information retrieval results when interacting
with a litterary collection, e.g. by providing
browsable representation of entities and their
relationships that link to text passages where
they are described.

Our first attempt to character profiling resulted
in moderate precision and recall scores, at least
for the clustering approach. But we believe that
there is also plenty of scope for improvements

and even of new research directions. For exam-
ple, negations and speculative language might be
a tricky issue since it can completely change the
scope of a relation, e.g., Han visste, att <ENAMEX
TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI="UNF">Mafalda
</ENAMEX> icke tyckte om <ENAMEX TYPE="PRS"
SBT="HUM" ANI="UNM">Zini</ENAMEX> i.e., “He
knew that Mafalda didn't like Zini”. There are
other issues that so far we have not confronted
with, such as nameless characters, infrequently-
appearing named characters, questions and opi-
nions that once again can change the quality of a
social network one experiences in a novel, e.g.,
do you think X likes Y?.

7 Conclusions

This paper has reported on initial experiments to
automate character profiling in 19th century Swe-
dish prose fiction. Profile implies intra-sentential
relationship discovery between person entities.
The aim is to support the users of digitized litera-
ture collections with tools that enable semantic
search and browsing. In this sense, we can offer
new ways for exploring the volumes of literary
texts being made available through cultural herit-
age digitization projects.

In the future we also intend to even elaborate
with relationships between main characters and
other categories driven by named entities, such
as between persons and locations and improve
both the quantity and quality of the results. This
way we can also extract significant properties of
the characters and not only interpersonal rela-
tionships. It should be fairly straightforward
since named entities can be reliably identified
and a similar methodology as the one outlined in
this paper can be applied. Applying other types
of named entity types will eventually detect more
relations about the characters and this will make
the profiling more comprehensive than at the
moment, which will reveal a clearer picture of
the main characters’ activities and associations.
Another issue that needs attention is contexts
with conjunctive mentions of entities, e.g. X and
Y, since tokens in the near context might be good
indicators of a relations as in the example:
Bröderne <ENAMEX TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM" ANI=
"UNM">Tage</ENAMEX> och <ENAMEX TYPE="PRS"
SBT="HUM" ANI="UNM">Robert</ENAMEX>, i.e. "The
brothers Tage and Robert".

At the moment we are looking at explicit rela-
tionships supported by textual evidence and did
not include relations that dependent on the
reader’s understanding of the document’s mean-

75



ing and/or her world knowledge, also a number
of implicit relations could be inferred (e.g. X
ChildOf Y implies Y ParentOf X). Moreover we
would like to explore co-reference (pronominal
references) since it plays an important role for
profiling (biographical) extraction and for recog-
nizing a larger set of relations between charac-
ters. Also learning of relationships in a comple-
mentary fashion in the future is envisaged and
we plan to annotate data for this purpose.

Acknowledgments

This work is partially supported by the Centre for
Language Technology (CLT) <http://clt.gu.se/>
and the project 19th Century Sweden in the Mir-
ror of Prose Fiction financed by the "Research
infrastructures" programme by the Swedish Re-
search Council.

References

Carl Jonas Love Almqvist. 1847. Herrarne på
Ekolsund, del 1&2. Samlade Verk 31. Almqvist &
Wiksell International

Eugene Agichtein and Luis Gravano L. 2000. Snow-
ball: Extracting Relations from large Plain-Text
Collections. Proceedings of the 5th ACM Interna-
tional Conf. on Digital Libraries. New York.

Hjalmar Bergman. 1910. Amourer. Albert Bonniers
Förlag, Stockholm.

Lars Borin, Dimitrios Kokkinakis and Leif-Jöran Ols-
son. 2007. Naming the Past: Named Entity and
Animacy Recognition in 19th Century Swedish Li-
terature. Workshop on Language Technology for
Cultural Heritage Data (LaTeCH 2007), pages 1–8.
Prague.

Lars Borin, Dana Dannélls, Markus Forsberg, Maria
Toporowska Gronostaj and Dimitrios Kokkinakis.
2009. Thinking Green: Toward Swedish Frame-
Net++. Proceedings of the FrameNet Masterclass
and Workshop. Milan, Italy.

Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2010. Beyond the
synset: Swesaurus – a fuzzy Swedish wordnet.
Proceedings of the symposium: Re-thinking syn-
onymy: semantic sameness and similarity in lan-
guages and their description. Helsinki, Finland.

Lars Borin and Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2010. Literary
Onomastics and Language Technology. In Literary
Education and Digital Learning. Methods and
Technologies for Humanities Studies. van Peer W.,
Zyngier S., Viana V. (eds). Pp. 53-78. IGI Global.

Janara Christensen, Mausam, Stephen Soderland and
Oren Etzioni. 2010. Semantic Role Labeling for
Open Information Extraction. Proceedings of the

NAACL HLT First International Workshop on
Formalisms and Methodology for Learning by
Reading. Pp 52–60, Los Angeles, California.

Ian Davis and Eric Vitiello Jr E. 2010. RELATION-
SHIP: A vocabulary for describing relationships
between people. <http://vocab.org/relationship/
.html>.

David K. Elson, Nicholas Dames, Kathleen R.
McKeown. 2010. Extracting Social Networks from
Literary Fiction. Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL 2010), Uppsala, Sweden.

George Doddington, Alexis Mitchell, Mark Przybock-
i, Lance Ramshaw, Stephanie Strassel and Ralph
Weischedel. 2004. The automatic content extrac-
tion (ACE) program tasks, data, and evaluation.
Proc of the 4th Int Conf on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC), pp 837–840, Lisbon.

Michael Fleischman and Eduard Hovy. 2002. Fine
Grained Classification of Named Entities. Proceed-
ings of the 19th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics. Taipei, Taiwan. 1–7.

Cory B. Giles and Jonathan D. Wren. 2008. Large-
scale directional relationship extraction and resolu-
tion. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9 (Suppl 9):
S11doi:10.1186/1471-2105-9-S9-S11.

Benjamin Hachey 2009, Towards Generic Relation
Extraction. PhD Thesis. Institute for Communicat-
ing and Collaborative Systems School of Informat-
ics, University of Edinburgh.

Takaaki Hasegawa, Satoshi Sekine and Ralph Grish-
man. 2004. Discovering relations among named
entities from large corpora. The 42nd Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. Barcelona, Spain.

Hongyan Jing, Nanda Kambhatla, and Salim Roukos.
(2007). Extracting social networks and biographi-
cal facts from conversational speech transcripts.
Proceedings of the 45th Meeting of the Assoc. of
Computational Linguistics, Prague, Czech Rep.

Chen Jinxiu. 2007. Automatic relation extraction
among named entities from text contents. PhD the-
sis, University of Singapore.

Ivar Lo-Johansson. 1935. Kungsgatan. Albert
Bonniers Förlag, Stockholm.

Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2004 Reducing the Effect of
Name Explosion. LREC Workshop: Beyond
Named Entity Recognition, Semantic Labelling for
NLP tasks. 4th LREC. Lissabon, Portugal.

Constantin Orasan and Richard Evans. 2001. Learn-
ing to Identify Animate References. Proceedings of
the Workshop on Computational Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL-2001). Toulouse, France.

76



Ellen Riloff. 1996. Automatically Generating Extrac-
tion Patterns form Untagged Text. Proceedings of
the Thirteenth National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI-96), pp. 1044-1049.

Angus Roberts, Robert Gaizauskas and Mark Hepple.
2008. Extracting Clinical Relationships from Pa-
tient Narratives. BioNLP 2008. Pp 10–18, Ohio,
USA.

Barbara Rosario and Marti A. Hearst. 2004. Classify-
ing Semantic relations in Bioscience Texts. Pro-
ceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting on ACL.
Barcelona, Spain.

Satoshi Sekine. 2004. Definition, Dictionaries and
Tagger for Extended Named Entity Hierarchy. Pro-
ceedings of the Language Resources and Evalua-
tion Conf (LREC). Lisbon, Portugal.

Jinwook Seo and Ben Shneiderman, 2002. Interac-
tively Exploring Hierarchical Clustering Results.
IEEE Computer, Vol. 35:7, pp. 80-86.
<http://www.cs.umd.edu/ hcil/hce/>

77


