










































A verb lexicon model for deep sentiment analysis and opinion mining applications


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, ACL-HLT 2011, pages 10–18,
24 June, 2011, Portland, Oregon, USA c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

A verb lexicon model for deep sentiment analysis and opinion mining  

applications 

 
Isa Maks Piek Vossen 

VU University, Faculty of Arts 

De Boelelaan 1105, 1081 HV Amsterdam, 

The Netherlands 

VU University, Faculty of Arts 

De Boelelaan 1105, 1081 HV Amsterdam, 

The Netherlands 

e.maks@let.vu.nl p.vossen@let.vu.nl 

 
 

 

 

 

Abstract 

This paper presents a lexicon model for subjec-

tivity description of Dutch verbs that offers a 

framework for the development of sentiment 

analysis and opinion mining applications based 

on a deep syntactic-semantic approach. The 

model aims to describe the detailed subjectivity 

relations that exist between the participants of 

the verbs, expressing multiple attitudes for each 

verb sense.  Validation is provided by an anno-

tation study that shows that these subtle subjec-

tivity relations are reliably identifiable by 

human annotators.  

 

1 Introduction 

This paper presents a lexicon model for the de-

scription of verbs to be used in applications like 

sentiment analysis and opinion mining. Verbs are 

considered as the core of the sentence as they name 

events or states with participants expressed by the 

other elements in the sentence. We consider the 

detailed and subtle subjectivity relations that exist 

between the different participants as part of the 

meaning of a verb that can be modelled  in a lex-

icon. 

Consider the following example: 

 

Ex. (1) … Damilola’s killers were boasting about      

his murder... 

 

This sentence expresses a positive sentiment of the 

killers towards the fact they murdered Damilola 

and it expresses the negative attitude on behalf of 

the speaker/writer who has negative opinion of the 

the murderers of Damilola. Both attitudes are part 

of the semantic profile of the verb and should be 

modelled in a subjectivity lexicon.   

  As opinion mining and sentiment analysis appli-

cations tend to utilize more and more the composi-

tion of sentences (Moilanen (2007), Choi and 

Cardie (2008), Jia et al. (2009)) and to use the val-

ue and properties of the verbs expressed by its 

dependency trees, there is a need for specialized 

lexicons where this information can be found. For 

the analysis of more complex opinionated text like 

news, political documents, and (online) debates the 

identification of the attitude holder and topic are of 

crucial importance. Applications that exploit the 

relations between the verb meaning and its argu-

ments can better determine sentiment at sentence-

level and trace emotions and opninions to their 

holders.   

  Our model seeks to combine the insights from a 

rather complex model like Framenet (Ruppenhofer 

et al. (2010)) with operational models like Senti-

wordnet where simple polarity values (positive, 

negative, neutral) are applied to the entire lexicon.  

Subjectivity relations that exist between the differ-

ent participants are labeled with information con-

cerning both the identity of the attitude holder and 

the orientation (positive vs. negative) of the atti-

tude. The model accounts for the fact that verbs 

may express multiple attitudes. It includes a cate-

gorisation into semantic categories relevant to opi-

nion mining and sentiment analysis and provides 

means for the identification of the attitude holder 

and the polarity of the attitude and for the descrip-

tion of the emotions and sentiments of the different 

10



participants involved in the event. Attention is paid 

to the role of the speaker/writer of the event whose 

perspective is expressed and whose views on what 

is happening are conveyed in the text. 

  As we wish to provide a model for a lexicon that 

is operational and can be exploited by tools for 

deeper sentiment analysis and rich opinion mining, 

the model is validated by an annotation study of 

580 verb lexical units (cf. section 4). 

 

2 Related Work 

   Polarity and subjectivity lexicons are valuable 

resources for sentiment analysis and opinion min-

ing. For English, a couple of smaller and larger 

lexicons are available. 

      Widely used in sentiment analysis are auto-

matically derived or manually built polarity lexi-

cons. These lexicons are lists of words (for 

example, Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown (1997), 

Kamps et al. (2004), Kim and Hovy (2004) or 

word senses (for example, Esuli and Sebastiani 

(2006), Wiebe and Mihalcea (2006), Su and Mar-

kert, (2008)) annotated for negative or positive 

polarity. As they attribute single polarity values 

(positive, negative, neutral) to words they are not 

able to account for more complex cases like boast 

(cf. example 1) which carry both negative and 

positive polarity dependening on who is the atti-

tude holder.  

  Strapparava and Valitutti (2004) developed 

Wordnet-Affect, an affective extension of Word-

net. It describes ‘direct’ affective words, i.e. words 

which denote emotions. Synsets are classified into 

categories like emotion, cognitive state, trait, be-

haviour, attitude and feeling. The resource is fur-

ther developed (Valittutti and Strapparava, 2010) 

by adding the descriptions of ‘indirect’ affective 

words according to a specific appraisal model of 

emotions (OCC). An indirect affective word indi-

rectly refers to emotion categories and can refer to 

different possible emotions according to the sub-

jects (actor, actee and observer) semantically con-

nected to it. For example, the word victory, if 

localized in the past, can be used for expressing 

pride (related to the actor or “winner”), and disap-

pointment (related to the actee or “loser”). If victo-

ry is a future event the expressed emotion is hope.  

Their model is similar to ours, as we both relate 

attitude to the participants of the event. However, 

their model focuses on a rich description of differ-

ent aspects and implications of emotions for each 

participant whereas we infer a single positive or 

negative attitude. Their model seems to focus on 

the cognitive aspects of emotion whereas we aim 

to also model the linguistic aspects by including 

specifically the attitude of the Speaker/Writer in 

our model. Moreover, our description is not at the 

level of the synset but at lexical unit level which 

enables us to differentiate gradations of the 

strength of emotions within the synsets. This 

enables us to relate the attitudes directly to the 

syntactic-semantic patterns of the lexical unit.   

  Also Framenet (Ruppenhofer et al. (2010)) is 

used as a resource in opinion mining and sentiment 

analysis (Kim and Hovy (2006)). Framenet (FN) is 

an online lexical resource for English that contains 

more than 11,600 lexical units. The aim is to clas-

sify words into categories (frames) which give for 

each lexical unit the range of semantic and syntac-

tic combinatory possibilities. The semantic roles 

range from general ones like Agent, Patient and 

Theme to specific ones such as Speaker, Message 

and Addressee for Verbs of Communication. FN 

includes frames such as Communication, Judg-

ment, Opinion, Emotion_Directed and semantic 

roles such as Judge, Experiencer, Communicator 

which are highly relevant for opinion mining and 

sentiment analysis. However, subjectivity is not 

systematically and not (yet) exhaustively encoded 

in Framenet. For example, the verb gobble (eat 

hurriedly and noisily) belongs to the frame Inges-

tion (consumption of food, drink or smoke) and 

neither the frame nor the frame elements account 

for the negative connotation of gobble. Yet, we 

think that a resource like FN with rich and corpus 

based valency patterns is an ideal base/ starting 

point for subjectivity description. 

  None of these theories, models or resources is 

specifically tailored for the subjectivity description 

of verbs. Studies which focus on verbs for senti-

ment analysis, usually refer to smaller subclasssess 

like, for example, emotion verbs (Mathieu, 2005, 

Mathieu and Fellbaum, 2010) or quotation verbs 

(Chen 2005, 2007). 

 

3 Model  

The proposed model is built as an extension of an 

already existing lexical database for Dutch, i.e. 

11



Cornetto (Vossen et al. 2008). Cornetto combines 

two resources with different semantic organisa-

tions: the Dutch Wordnet (DWN) which has, like 

the Princeton Wordnet, a synset organization and 

the Dutch Reference Lexicon (RBN) which is or-

ganised in form-meaning composites or lexical 

units. The description of the lexical units includes 

definitions, usage constraints, selectional restric-

tions, syntactic behaviors, illustrative contexts, etc. 

DWN and RBN are linked to each other as each 

synonym in a synset is linked to a corresponding 

lexical unit. The subjectivity information is mod-

elled as an extra layer related to the lexical units of 

Reference Lexicon thus providing a basis for the 

description of the verbs at word sense level.  

 

3.1 Semantic Classes 

For the identification of relevant semantic classes 

we adopt – and broaden – the definition of subjec-

tive language by Wiebe et al. (2006). Subjective 

expressions are defined as words and phrases that 

are used to express private states like opinions, 

emotions, evaluations, speculations.  

Three main types are distinguished: 

 

Type I: 

Direct reference to private states (e.g. his alarm  

grew, he was boiling with anger). We include in 

this category emotion verbs (like feel, love and 

hate) and cognitive verbs (like defend, dare,realize 

etc.) ; 

 

Type II: 

Reference to speech or writing events that express 

private states (e.g. he condemns the president, they 

attack the speaker). According to our schema, this 

category  includes all speech and writing events 

and the annotation  schema points out if they are 

neutral (say, ask) or bear polarity (condemn, 

praise); 

 

Type III: 

Expressive subjective elements are expressions 

that indirectly express private states (e.g. superb, 

that doctor is a quack).  According to our annota-

tion  schema this category is not a separate one , 

but verbs senses which fall in this category are 

always also member of one of the other categories. 

For example, boast (cf. ex. 1) is both a Type II (i.e. 

speech act verb) verb and a Type III verb as it indi-

rectly expresses the negative attitude of the speak-

er/writer towards the speech event. By considering 

this category as combinational, it enables to make 

a clear distinction between Speaker/Writer subjec-

tivity and participant subjectivity. 

 

Moreover, we add a fourth category which in-

cludes verbs which implicitly refer to private 

states. If we consider the following examples: 

 

Ex. (2) the teacher used to beat the  students  

Ex. (3) C.A is arrested for public intoxication  by 

the police 

 

Neither beat nor arrest are included in one of the 

three mentioned categories as neither of them ex-

plicitly expresses a private state. However, in 

many contexts these verbs implicitly and indirectly 

refer to the private state of one of the participants. 

In ex. (2) the teacher and the students will have 

bad feelings towards each other and also in ex. (3) 

C.A. will have negative feelings about the situa-

tion. To be able to describe also these aspects of 

subjectivity we define the following additional 

category:  

 

Type IV: 

Indirect reference to a private state that is the 

source or the consequence of an event (action, state 

or process). The event is explicitly mentioned.   

 

Verb senses which are categorized as Type I, II or 

III are considered as subjective; verb senses cate-

gorized as Type IV are only subjective if one of the 

annotation categories (see below for more details) 

has a non-zero value; otherwise they are consi-

dered as objective. 

We assigned well-known semantic categories to 

each of the above mentioned Types (I, II and IV).  

Table 1 presents the resulting categories with ex-

amples for each category. The first column lists the 

potential subjectivity classes that can apply. 
 
  

12



 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1 Semantic Categories

Type %ame Description Examples 

I (+III) EXPERIENCER Verbs that denote emotions. Included are both experiencer 

subject and experiencer object verbs. 

hate, love, enjoy, enter-

tain, frighten, upset, fru-

strate 

I(+III) ATTITUDE A cognitive action performed by one of the participants, in 

general the structural subject of the verb. The category is rele-

vant as these cognitive actions may imply attitudes between 

participants.  

defend, think, dare, ig-

nore, avoid, feign, pre-

tend, patronize, devote, 

dedicate 

II(+III) JUDGMENT A judgment (mostly positive or negative) that someone may 

have towards something or somebody. The verbs directly refer 

to the thinking or speech act of judgment. 

praise, admire, rebuke, 

criticize, scold, reproach, 

value, rate, estimate 

II(+III) COMM-S A speech act that denotes the transfer of a spoken or written 

message from the perspective of the sender or speaker (S) of 

the message. The sender or speaker is the structural subject of 

the verb. 

speak, say, write, grum-

ble, stammer, talk, email, 

cable, chitchat, nag, in-

form 

II(+III) COMM-R A speech act that denotes the transfer of a spoken or written 

message from the perspective of the receiver(R) of the mes-

sage. The receiver is the structural subject of the verb 

 read, hear, observe, 

record, watch, compre-

hend 

IV(+III) ACTION A physical action performed by one of the participants, in 

general the structural subject of the verb. The category is rele-

vant as in some cases participants express an attitude by per-

forming this action.    

run, ride, disappear, hit, 

strike, stagger, stumble 

IV(+III) PROCESS_STATE This is a broad and underspecified category of state and process 

verbs (non-action verbs) and may be considered as a rest cate-

gory as it includes all verbs which are not included in other 

categories.  

grow, disturb, drizzle, 

mizzle  

13



 

                    

 

3.2 Attitude and roles 

 
In our model, verb subjectivity is defined in terms 
of verb arguments carrying attitude towards each 
other, i.e. as experiencers holding attitudes towards 
targets or communicators expressing a judgment 
about an evaluee. The various participants or atti-
tude holders which are involved in the events ex-
pressed by the verbs all may have different 
attitudes towards the event and/or towards each 
other. We developed an annotation schema (see 
Table 2 below) which enables us to relate the atti-
tude holders, the orientation of the attitude (posi-
tive, negative or neutral) and the syntactic 
valencies of the verb to each other.  
  To be able to attribute the attitudes to the relevant 
participants we identify for each form-meaning 
unit the semantic-syntactic distribution of the ar-
guments, the associated Semantic Roles and some 
coarse grained selection restrictions. 
We make a distinction between participants 

which are part of the described situation, the so-
called event internal participants, and participants  
that are outside the described situation, the external 
participants.  
 

• Event internal attitude holders 
 
The event internal attitude holders are partici-

pants which are lexicalized by the structural sub-
ject (A1), direct object (A2 or A3) or 
indirect/prepositional object (A2 or A3). A2 and 
A3 both can be syntactically realized as an NP, a 
PP, that-clause or infinitive clause. Each partici-
pant is associated with coarse-grained selection 
restrictions: SMB (somebody +human), SMT 
(something -human) or SMB/SMT (some-
body/something + – human).  
Attitude (positive, negative and neutral) is attri-

buted to the relations between participants A1 vs. 
A2 (A1A2) and A1 vs. A3 (A1A3) and/or the rela-
tion between the participants (A1, A2 and A3) and 
the event itself (A1EV, A2EV and A3EV, respec-
tively) as illustrated by the following examples.  
 
verdedigen  (defend: argue or speak in defense of) 

A1A2:  positive 

A1A3:  negative 

SMB (A1) SMB/SMT 

(A2) 

tegen SMB/SMT 

(A3) 

He(A1) defends his decision(A2) against 

 critique(A3) 

 

verliezen (lose: miss from one's possessions) 

A1EV: negative 

SMB(A1) SMB/SMT(A2) 

He (A1) loses his sunglasses (A2) like crazy  

 
• Event external attitude holders 
 
Event external attitude holders are participants who 
are not part of the event itself but who are outside 
observers. We distinguish two kind of perspec-
tives, i.e. that of the Speaker or Writer (SW) and a 
more general perspective (ALL) shared by a vast 
majority of people.  
 
• Speaker /Writer (SW) 
 
The Speaker/Writer (SW) expresses his attitude 
towards the described state of affairs by choosing 
words with overt affective connotation (cf. ex. 4) 
or by conveying his subjective interpretation of 
what happens (cf. ex. 5).  
 

Ex. 4: He gobbles down three hamburgers a day 
 
In (ex. 4) the SW not only describes the eating 
behavior of the ‘he’ but he also expresses his nega-
tive attitude towards this behavior by choosing the 
negative connotation word gobble.  
 

(Ex. 5) B. S. misleads district A voters 
 
In (ex. 5), the SW expresses his negative attitude 
towards the behavior of the subject of the sentence, 
by conceptualizing it in a negative way.  
 
• ALL 
 
Some concepts are considered as negative by a vast 
majority of people and therefore express a more 
general attitude shared by most people. For exam-
ple, to drown, will be considered negative by eve-
rybody, i.e. observers, participants to the event and 
listener to the speech event. These concepts are 
labeled with a positive or negative attitude label for 
ALL. The annotation model is illustrated in table 2. 

14



 

 

FORM SUMMARY SEMTYPE COMPLEME%TATIO% A1A2 A1A3 A1EV A2EV A3EV SW ALL 

vreten 

(devour, gobble) 

 eat immoderately 

and hurriedly 
ACTION SMT (A2) 2 0 0 0 0 -4 0 

afpakken 

(take away) 

take without the 

owner’s consent 
ACTION SMT(A2) van SMB (A3) 0 0 0 0 -3 0 0 

verliezen (lose) 
lose: fail to keep 

or to maintain 
PROCESS SMT (A2) 0 0 -3 0 0 0 0 

dwingen (force) 

 

urge a person to 

an action 
ATTITUDE SMB (A2) tot SMT (A3) -3 2 0 0 0 0 0 

opscheppen (boast) 

to speak with 

exaggeration and 

excessive pride 

COMM-S over SMB/SMT (A2) 3 0 0 0 0 -4 0 

helpen (help) 

give help or assis-

tance ; be of 

service 

ACTION SMB(A2) met SMT (A3) 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 

bekritiseren(criticize) 
express criticism 

of 
COMM-S SMB (A2)  -3 0 0 0 0 0 0 

zwartmaken (slander) 

charge falsely or 

with malicious 

intent 

COMM-S SMB (A2)  -3 0 0 0 0 -4 0 

verwaarlozen (neglect) fail to attend to ATTITUDE SMB (A2) -3 0 0 0 0 -4 0 

afleggen 

(lay out) 

prepare a dead 

body 
ACTION SMB (A2) 0 0 0 0 0 0 -1 

Explanation: 

A1A2   A1 has a positive (+) or negative(-) attitude towards A2 

A1A3  A1 has a positive (+) or negative(-) attitude towards A3 

A1EV  A1 has a positive or negative attitude towards the event 

A2EV  A2 has a positive or negative attitude towards the event 

A3EV  A3 has a positive or negative attitude towards the event 

SW  SW has a positive or negative attitude towards event or towards the structural subject of the event 

ALL   there is a general positive or negative attitude towards the event 

 

 

Table 2: Annotation Schema 

 

4 Intercoder Agreement Study 

 
To explore our hypothesis that different attitudes  
associated with the different attitude holders can be 
modelled in an operational lexicon and to explore 
how far we can stretch the description of subtle 
subjectivity relations, we performed an inter-
annotator agreement study to assess the reliability 
of the annotation schema.  
We are aware of the fact that it is a rather complex 
annotation schema and that high agreement rates 
are not likely to be achieved. The main goal of the 

annotation task is to determine what extent this 
kind of subjectivity information can be reliably 
identified, which parts of the annotation schema 
are more difficult than others and perhaps need to 
be redefined. This information is especially valua-
ble when – in future- lexical acquisition tasks will 
be carried out to acquire automatically parts of the 
information specified by the annotation schema. .  
Annotation is performed by 2 linguists (i.e. both 
authors of this paper). We did a first annotation 
task for training and discussed the problems before 
the gold standard annotation task was carried out. 
The annotation is based upon the full description of 

 

15



the lexical units including glosses and illustrative 
examples. 

4.1 Agreement results 

All attitude holder categories were annotated as 
combined categories and will be evaluated together 
and as separate categories.   
• Semantic category polarity  
   Overall percent agreement for all 7 attitude hold-
er categories is 66% with a Cohen kappa (κ) of 
0.62 (cf. table 3, first row). Table 3 shows that not 
all semantic classes are of equal difficulty.  
 

 Number 

of items 

Kappa 

Agreement 

Percent 

Agreement 

All  581 0.62 0.66 

Comm-s 57 0.75 0.77 

Comm-r 16 0.55 0.81 

Attitude 74 0.55 0.60 

Action 304 0.60 0.66 

StateProcess 83 0.47 0.55 

Judgment 25 0.82 0.84 

Experiencer 23 0.74 0.83 

Table 3: Agreement for semantic categories  

 

• Attitude Holder Polarity 

Table 4 shows that agreement rates for each sepa-

rate attitude holder differ. Although some catego-

ries are not reliable identifiable (cf. A1EV, A2EV, 

A3EV, ALL), the larger categories with many 

sentiment-laden items (cf. the third column which 

gives the coverage in percentage with regard to 

positive or negative annotations) are the ones with 

high agreement rates.  

 

 

 Kappa Percent 

agreement 

PosOrNeg 

A1-A2 0.73 0.89 25% 

A1-A3 0.73 0.98 2% 

A1EV 0.41 0.93 6% 

A2EV 0.56 0.94 7% 

A3EV 0.54 0.98 2% 

SW 0.76 0.91 23% 

ALL 0.37 0.87 10% 

  Table 4: Agreement rates for attitude holder categories  

 

• Attitude Holder Polarity 

Table 5 gives agreement figures for the most im-

portant attitude holder categories (A1A2 and SW) 

with respect to the different semantic categories. 

Low scores are found especially in categories (like 

State_Process) less relevant for Sentiment Analysis 

and opinion mining.  
 

 A1A2(
κ)  

SW(κ) 

Comm-s 0.83 0.93 

Comm-r 1.00 1.00  

Experiencer 0.82 0.84 

Action 0.61 0.78 

Judgment 0.92 0.63 

State-process 0.33 0.64 

Attitude 0.72 0.68 

Table 5: Kappa agreement  for SW and A1A2  

 

• Single Polarity  

One single polarity value for each item is derived 

by collapsing all attitude holder polarity values 

into one single value. If an item is tagged with 

different polarity values we apply them in the fol-

lowing order: SW, A1A2, A1A3, A1EV, A2EV, 

A3EV, ALL. As can be seen from table 6, ob-

served agreement is 84% and kappa=0.75. Separate 

polarity computation (positive, negative and neu-

tral) – with one polarity value of interest and the 

other values combined into one non-relevant cate-

gory - shows that all polarity values are reliable 

identifiable.  
 

 Kappa Percent 

Agreement 

Single polarity 0.75 0.84 

Positive 0.70 0.91 

Negative 0.82 0.92 

Neutral 0.72 0.86 

Table 6: agreement rates for polarity categories 

 

4.2 Disagreement Analysis 

 

Overall agreement is 66% (K=0.62) which is a 

reasonable score, in particular for such a compli-

cated annotation schema. Moreover, scores are 

high for semantic categories such as Communica-

tion (0.75), Judgment (0.80), Experiencer (0.74) 

which are relevant for subjectivity analysis. 

   Table 4 shows that low performance is largely 

due to the attitude holder categories A1EV, A2EV, 

A3EV and ALL which have scores ranging from 

0.37 to 0.56 whereas the categories A1A2, A1A3 

and SW are reliably identifiable. As the last 3 cate-

gories are the largest ones with respect to senti-

16



ment bearing items, overall scores do not degrade 

much.    

   The low scores of A1EV, A2EV, A3EV and 

ALL are probably due to the fact that they are easi-

ly confused with each other.  For example, jagen 

(hunt), vallen (fall), klemmen (stick, jam) and 

flauwvallen (faint) all have negative polarity but 

the annotators do not agree about who is the atti-

tude holder:  ALL (i.e. ALL have a negative atti-

tude towards hunting, falling, being jammed, and 

fainting) or A1/2-RES (i.e. the person who falls, is 

jammed, is fainted or is hunted is the one who has 

the negative attitude).  Confusion is found also 

between A2EV and A1A2. For example, with re-

spect to misleiden (mislead), annotators agree 

about a negative attitude from A1 vs. A2 , but one 

annotator marks additionally a negative attitude on 

behalf of A2 (A2EV: negative) whereas the other 

does not. 

   Especially the category ALL seems not to be 

defined well as many items are marked positive or 

negative by one annotator and neutral by the other.  

Examples of disagreements of this kind are ploe-

gen (plough), ontwateren (drain), omvertrekken 

(pull over) and achternalopen (follow, pursue).  

Both annotators regard these items as objective 

expressions but they do not agree about whether 

some general positive or negative feelings are as-

sociated to them or not.  

    Disagreement occurs also where collocational 

information may lead one annotator to see subjec-

tivity in a sense and the other not. For example, 

houden (keep - conform one’s action or practice 

to) associated with collocations like to keep ap-

pointments and to keep one’s promises is consi-

dered positive (A1A2) by one annotator and 

neutral by the other.  This seems to apply to all 

frequent  light verbs with little semantic content 

like make, do and take. 

   With respect to the category SW disagreements 

do not arise from confusions with other categories 

but from judgments which differ between neutral 

vs. non-neutral. Consider for example, tevredens-

tellen (mollify) as in I mollified her (A2) by clean-

ing my room. Both annotators agree about the 

positive attitude between A1 and A2, but they dis-

agree (SW:positive vs. SW:neutral) about whether 

the SW conveys a positive attitude towards ‘I’ by 

describing her behavior or not. Other examples of 

this type are ignoreren (ignore), zich verzoenen 

(make up), redden (deal with), and dwingen 

(force).  

  Overall agreement for one polarity is rather high 

with κ=0.75. (cf. table 6). The scores are compar-
ible to agreement rates of other studies where verbs 

are marked for single polarity. For example, inter-

annotator agreement between 2 annotators who 

annotated 265 verb senses of the Micro-WNop 

corpus (Cerini et al. (2007)) is 0.75 (κ) as well.  It 
shows that a complicated and layered annotation 

does not hamper overall agreement and may also 

produce lexicons which are appropriate to use 

within applications that use single polarity only.   

   Summarizing, we conclude that overall agree-

ment is good, especially with regard to most se-

mantic categories relevant for subjectivity analysis 

and with respect to the most important attitude 

holder categories, SW and A1A2.  When defining 

an operational model the small and low scoring  

categories, i.e. A1/A2/A3EV and ALL, will be 

collapsed into one underspecified attitude holder 

category.  

5 Conclusions 

  In this paper we presented a lexicon model for the 
description of verbs to be used in applications like 
deeper sentiment analysis and opinion mining, 
describing the detailed and subtle subjectivity rela-
tions that exist between the different participants of 
a verb. The relations can be labeled with subjectiv-
ity information concerning the identity of the atti-
tude holder, the orientation (positive vs. negative) 
of the attitude and its target. Special attention is 
paid to the role of the speaker/writer of the event 
whose perspective is expressed and whose views 
on what is happening are conveyed in the text. 
  We measured the reliability of the annotation. 
The results show that when using all 7 attitude 
holder categories, 3 categories, SW, A1A2 and 
A1A3 are reliable and the other 4 are not. As these 
not reliable categories are also small, we think that 
the annotation schema is sufficiently validated. 
  An additional outcome to our study is that we 
created a gold standard of 580 verb senses. In the 
future we will use this gold standard  to test me-
thods for the automatic detection of subjectivity 
and polarity properties of word senses in order to 
build a rich subjectivity lexicon for Dutch verbs. 
 

17



6 Acknowledgments 

  This research has been carried out within the 
project  From Text To Political Positions (http: 
//www2.let.vu.nl/oz/cltl/t2pp/). It is funded by the 
VUA Interfaculty Research Institute CAMeRA.  
 

7 References 

Andreevskaia, A.  and S. Bergler (2006) Mining Word-

Net for Fuzzy Sentiment:Sentiment Tag Extraction 

fromWordNet Glosses. In: EACL-2006, Trento, Ita-

ly. 

Chen, L. (2005) Transitivity in Media Texts: negative 

verbal process sub-functions and narrator bias. In In-

ternational Review of Applied Linguistics in Teach-

ing, (IRAL-vol. 43) Mouton De Gruyter, The Hague, 

The Netherlands.   

Cerini, S., Compagnoni, V., Demontis, A., Formentelli, 

M., and Gandini, G. (2007). Language resources and 

linguistic theory: Typology, second language acquisi-

tion, English linguistics (Forthcoming), chapter Mi-

cro-WNOp: A gold standard for the evaluation of 

automatically compiled lexical resources for opinion 

mining. Milano, Italy. 

 
Choi Y. and C. Cardie (2008). Learning with Composi 

     tional Semantics as Structural Inference for subsen                

tential Sentiment Analysis.  Proceedings of Recent 

Advances in Natural Language Processing (RANLP), 

Hawaii.  

Esuli, Andrea and Fabrizio Sebastiani. (2006). Senti-

WordNet: A Publicly Available Lexical Resource for 

Opinion Mining. In: Proceedings of LREC-2006, 

Genova, Italy. 

Hatzivassiloglou, V., McKeown, K.B. (1997) Predicting 
the semantic orientation of adjectives. In Proceedings 
of ACL-97, Madrid, Spain. 

 

Jia, L., Yu, C.T., Meng, W. (2009) The effect of negation 

on sentiment analysis and retrieval effectiveness. In 

CIKM-2009, China. 

 
Kamps, J.,  R. J. Mokken, M. Marx, and M. de Rijke 
(2004). Using WordNet to measure semantic orienta-
tion of adjectives. In  Proceedings LREC-2004, Paris. 

 

Kim, S. and E. Hovy (2004) Determining the sentiment 

of opinions. In Proceedings of COLING, Geneva, 

Swtizerland. 

 

Kim, S. and E. Hovy (2006) Extracting Opinions Ex-

pressed in Online News Media Text with Opinion 

Holders and Topics.  In: Proceedings of the Workshop 

on Sentiment and Subjectivity in Text (SST-06). Syd-

ney, Australia. 

 

Maks, I.and P. Vossen (2010)  Modeling Attitude, Polar-

ity and Subjectivity in Wordnet. In Proceedings of 

Fifth Global Wordnet Conference, Mumbai, India.  
 

Mathieu, Y. Y. (2005). A Computational Semantic 

Lexicon of French Verbs of Emotion. In: Computing 

Attitude and Affect in Text: Theory and Applications 

J. Shanahan, Yan Qu, J.Wiebe (Eds.). Springer, Dor-

drecht, The Netherlands.  

Mathieu,Y.Y. and C. Felbaum (2010). Verbs of emotion 

in French and English. In: Proceedings of GWC-

2010, Mumbai, India. 

Moilanen K. and S. Pulman. (2007). Sentiment Compo-

sition. In Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural 

Language Processing (RANLP), Bulgaria. 

Ruppenhofer, J. , M. Ellsworth, M. Petruck, C. Johnson, 

and J. Scheffzcyk (2010) Framenet II: Theory and 

Practice (e-book) http://framenet.icsi. berkeley.edu/ 

book/book.pdf. 

C. Strapparava and A. Valitutti (2004). WordNet-Affect: 
an affective extension of WordNet. In Proceedings 
LREC 2004, Lisbon, Portugal 

 
Su, F.and K. Markert (2008). Eliciting Subjectivity and 
Polarity Judgements on Word Senses. In Proceedings 
of Coling-2008, Manchester, UK. 

 

Valitutti, A. and C. Strapparava (2010). Interfacing 
Wordnet-Affect withj OCC model of emotions. In 
Proceedings of EMOTION-2010, Valletta, Malta.  

 
Wiebe, Janyce and Rada Micalcea.(2006) . Word Sense 
and Subjectivity. In Proceedings of ACL’06, Sydney, 
Australia.  

18


