










































WM Load Influences the Interpretation of Referring Expressions


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics, pages 67–75,
Portland, Oregon, June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

WM load influences the interpretation of referring expressions 

 
Jacolien van Rij 

University of Groningen 
J.C.van.Rij@rug.nl 

Hedderik van Rijn 
University of Groningen 

D.H.van.Rijn@rug.nl 

Petra Hendriks 
University of Groningen 
P.Hendriks@rug.nl 

 
 

Abstract 

This paper presents a study of the effect of 
working memory load on the interpretation of 
pronouns in different discourse contexts: sto-
ries with and without a topic shift. We present 
a computational model (in ACT-R, Anderson, 
2007) to explain how referring subjects are 
used and interpreted. We furthermore report 
on an experiment that tests predictions that 
follow from simulations. The results of the 
experiment support the model predictions that 
WM load only affects the interpretation of 
pronouns in stories with a topic shift, but not 
in stories without a topic shift.  

1 Introduction 

How do listeners interpret a potentially ambiguous 
referring expression? To describe a particular 
event, object or character, often different referring 
expressions can be used. Some referring expres-
sions are more specific than others. For example, a 
proper name such as ‘Eric’ is more specific than 
the personal pronoun ‘he’, which can refer to any 
of the male characters in a given linguistic context.  

Generally, pronouns are used and interpreted as 
referring to the most salient character or object 
(the topic) in the linguistic context (a.o., Ariel, 
1990; Gundel, Hedberg, & Zacharski, 1993). In 
contrast, full noun phrases or proper names are 
used to introduce new characters or to refer to less 
salient characters. Different factors have been 
found to affect the saliency of characters or ob-
jects in the linguistic context (see Arnold, 1998, 
for a review), among others the grammatical role.  
The subject of the previous sentence is likely to be 
the current topic (Grosz, Weinstein, & Joshi, 
1995). As a result, listeners will often interpret a 
pronoun as referring to the previous subject (a.o., 
McDonald & MacWhinney, 1995; Stevenson, 
Crawley, & Kleinman, 1994).  

However, for children up to the age of 7, the 
grammatical role seems to be a less important cue 
than for adults. Manipulating the discourse struc-
ture, Koster and colleagues showed that children 
interpret subject pronouns in a different way than 
adults do (Koster, Hoeks, & Hendriks, in press). 
They presented adults and children with prere-
corded short stories about two characters of the 
same gender. Two types of stories were tested, 
stories with and without a topic shift. In the stories 
with topic shift the topic shifted halfway by 
changing the grammatical role of the characters 
(see Table 1): the second character becomes the 
subject of next sentences, rather than the first 
character. In all stories the final sentence started 
with a potentially ambiguous pronoun (‘he’ or 
‘she’).  

 
Story with topic shift (+TS) 

1. Eric/gaat/voetballen/in de sporthal. 
‘Eric is going to play soccer in the sports hall.’ 

2. Philip/vraagt/Eric/om mee te rijden/naar de training. 
‘Philip asks Eric to carpool to the training.’ 

3. Philip/haalt/Eric/na het eten/met de auto op. 
‘Philip picks up Eric after dinner by car.’ 

4. Hij/voetbalt/al twintig jaar. 
‘He has played soccer for twenty years.’ 

Story without topic shift (-TS) 

1. Eric/gaat/voetballen/in de sporthal. 
‘Eric is going to play soccer in the sports hall.’ 

2. Eric/vraagt/Philip/om mee te rijden/naar de training. 
‘Eric asks Philip to carpool to the training.’ 

3. Eric/haalt/Philip/na het eten/met de auto op. 
‘Eric picks up Philip after dinner by car.’ 

4. Hij/voetbalt/al twintig jaar. 
‘He has played soccer for twenty years.’ 

Q Wie voetbalt al twintig jaar? 
‘Who has played soccer for twenty years?’ 

Table 1: Example of the Dutch sentences (and the Eng-
lish translations) of a story with and without topic shift. 
 

67



Adult listeners interpreted this pronoun as refer-
ring to the second character in stories with a topic 
shift, and as referring to the first character in sto-
ries without a topic shift. Children, on the other 
hand, did not distinguish between these two types 
of stories: they showed a small preference for the 
first character as the referent of the pronoun. Kos-
ter et al. found that children with a higher auditory 
working memory capacity performed more adult-
like, which raises the question whether limited 
WM capacity causes decreased performance.  

We have implemented a cognitive model to in-
vestigate the effect of WM load on the interpreta-
tion of subject pronouns in discourse. To test the 
prediction following from our model that WM 
load can decrease adults’ comprehension of stories 
with a topic shift, we also performed an experi-
ment. 

2 Modeling pronoun interpretation 

We have implemented a cognitive model within 
the cognitive architecture ACT-R (Anderson, 
2007) that can simulate both the use and interpre-
tation of referring subjects (Van Rij, Van Rijn, & 
Hendriks, submitted). Here we focus on the inter-
pretation of subject pronouns.  

2.1 Computational simulation 
To simulate the results of Koster et al. (in press), 
the model is presented with stories of 6 sentences, 
with or without a topic shift. The stories are pro-
vided to the model word by word. During on-line 
sentence processing the model builds a (simpli-
fied) representation of the preceding discourse: 
every character in the story is represented in the 
declarative memory. Each representation (referred 
to as “chunk”) has a certain amount of activation 
that reflects the saliency of the character in the 
current discourse. The model determines the refer-
ent of the potentially ambiguous pronoun in the 
final sentence, by selecting the chunk with the 
highest level of activation as the current discourse 
topic and as the referent of the pronoun.  

Explaining children’s and adults’ performance 

In ACT-R, the activation of chunks reflects the 
chunk’s history, because activation is dependent 
on the frequency of use (the more frequently used, 
the higher the activation) and the recency of the 
last retrieval (the more recent the last retrieval, the 

higher the activation). The activation of chunks 
decays with time, but is increased when the chunk 
is retrieved. In addition to this base-level activa-
tion, spreading activation can temporarily boost 
the activation of a chunk in a particular context, 
reflecting the usefulness of that chunk in that con-
text1. Chunks that are currently being processed 
spread activation to other, connected chunks in 
declarative memory. As the amount of spreading 
activation determines the ability to maintain goal-
relevant information, differences in spreading ac-
tivation account for individual differences in 
working memory capacity (Daily, Lovett, & 
Reder, 2001). In our model, the subject of the pre-
vious sentence spreads activation to all discourse 
elements associated with it. 

To explain the difference between children’s 
and adults’ interpretation of subject pronouns, we 
manipulated the amount of spreading-activation 
from the previous subject. If the amount of spread-
ing activation is high, the chunk representing the 
subject spreads a large amount of activation and 
discourse elements that are associated with the 
subject become more activated in comparison with 
the other discourse elements. As a result, the 
model will retrieve the subject of the previous sen-
tence as the current discourse topic. However, if 
the subject spreads a small amount of activation, 
reflecting a low WM capacity, then there will be 
no effect on the discourse elements associated 
with the subject. In that case, the effects of fre-
quency and recency will be the main determinants 
of which referent is retrieved.  

Figure 1 shows the effect of WM capacity (i.e., 
the amount of spreading activation) on the activa-
tion of the two referents in the stories that were 
provided to the model. The second character, ref-
erent ‘b’, is introduced in the third sentence. The 
+TS condition starts to differ from the – TS condi-
tion in sentence 4, where the second character be-
                                                             
1  In ACT-R the activation of chunk i is defined by: 

, with n being the 

number of presentations of chunk i, and tk the time since the 
kth presentation, m the number of chunks that are connected 
with chunk i, Wj the amount of activation that is spread from 
chunk j, Sji the strength of association between j and i, and εi  
noise.  
The activation of a chunk determines the time it takes to re-

trieve it from declarative memory: 

€ 

T = e−Ai . 

68



comes the subject in the +TS stories but not the –
TS stories (cf. Koster et al., in press). With a high 
WM capacity, the model selects the subject of the 
previous sentence as the referent of the pronoun in 
sentence 6, because this discourse element clearly 
has the highest activation (Figure 1, right). How-
ever, with a low WM capacity, the model will 
show a much-reduced preference for the second 
character as the referent of the pronoun, and often 
chooses the first character. Similarly to children’s 
performance, the models’ interpretation of pro-
nouns is not affected by grammatical role (Figure 
1, left).  

 

 
Figure 1. Mean levels of activation of the first charac-
ter (a) and the second character (b) in stories with 
(+TS) and without (-TS) a topic shift, measured at the 
end of each of 5 sentences (x-axis). In sentence 6, the 
model selects the character with the highest activation 
as the referent of the pronoun. 
 

Prediction of the model 

On the basis of these simulations we propose that 
an individual’s WM capacity determines how 
much the grammatical structure of the previous 
sentence plays a role in resolving a potentially 
ambiguous subject pronoun. If this hypothesis is 
correct, we expect that adults show difficulties in 
detecting a topic shift when their WM is taxed by 
having to perform a memory task in parallel. This 
prediction follows directly from the ACT-R 
model: goal-relevant information spreads a pro-
portion of the total spreading activation to other 
chunks in the declarative memory. If the number 
of sources from which activation is spread in-
creases, the amount of spreading activation that is 
received by individual chunks decreases. In a high 

WM load situation, more information needs to be 
maintained in an activated state and as a result, the 
subject of the previous sentence spreads less acti-
vation to the discourse elements associated with 
the subject. Therefore, the model predicts that 
adult listeners or readers show more child-like per-
formance in high WM load conditions: they will 
more often select the first character as the current 
discourse topic. In addition, the model predicts 
that it will take more time to retrieve a discourse 
element in a high WM load condition, because the 
retrieval time is determined by the level of activa-
tion (the lower the activation, the longer it takes to 
retrieve the information).   

3 Experiment 

We performed a dual-task experiment to test our 
prediction that adult listeners will show difficulties 
with the comprehension of a topic shift if they 
have less WM capacity available. To manipulate 
WM load, participants were asked to perform a 
combined task: memorizing a sequence of digits 
for later recall and performing a moving-window 
task (Just, Carpenter, & Woolley, 1982). 

3.1 Methods 

Digit task 

At the start of each trial, participants were pre-
sented with a sequence of either three or six digits 
(low and high WM load conditions) that they had 
to memorize. Digits were shown for 1 second each 
in the center of a computer screen. After complet-
ing the moving-window task, the participants re-
called the memorized digits. The digits were 
pseudo-randomly chosen from 1 to 9, while ensur-
ing that not all the digits were the same.  

Moving-window task 

After the presentation of the digits, the moving-
window task started. In this task, participants had 
to read stories of four sentences each (see Table 
1), followed by a comprehension question. The 
sentences were presented one by one and were 
subdivided into smaller word clusters (indicated 
by dashes in Table 1). Using a typical moving-
window paradigm (Just et al., 1982), only the let-
ters of one single word cluster were visible at a 
time. All other letters were replaced by a dot. By 
pressing a button, the participant could move the 

69



window to the next word cluster. After reading the 
four-sentence story in this way, a question was 
presented in the center of the screen, and two an-
swer alternatives were presented in the bottom 
corners of the screen. Participants had to press the 
corresponding button to answer the question. After 
answering the question, they had to type in the 
digits that were presented at the beginning of the 
trial.  

At the end of each trial, participants only re-
ceived feedback on the digit task to ensure suffi-
cient focus on the WM task. We collected 
different measures per trial: the reading times per 
region, accuracy and reaction times for the ques-
tions and the number of errors in reproducing the 
digits. 

Design  

Stories. In every story two characters of the same 
gender played a role, of which the first names 
started with a different letter. All names consisted 
of 4-8 characters, and two syllables. Importantly, 
the final sentence started with a subject pronoun 
hij (‘he’) or zij (‘she’) that was ambiguous: the 
pronoun could refer to both characters, so that the 
only clue to the interpretation of the pronouns was 
the structure of the story.  

We designed two variants of every test story 
(see Table 1), in which we manipulated whether 
there was a shift of topic. The topic shift is real-
ized by making the second character (‘Philip’) the 
subject of the second sentence. If there was no 
topic shift, we expected participants to prefer the 
firstly introduced character as the referent of the 
ambiguous pronoun, but if there was a topic shift, 
we expected participants to prefer the second char-
acter. At the end of every test story a question was 
presented to elicit the preferred interpretation of 
the ambiguous pronoun. 

Lists. The presented materials were part of a 
larger experiment, in which we additionally tested 
another two variants of every story. In total, 64 
test stories were designed in four different vari-
ants. Four lists of 64 test stories were constructed, 
so that every list received a different variant of the 
test stories and thus contained 16 test stories per 
condition. Besides the test stories, the lists also 
contained 128 filler items (the same for all lists), 
so that the lists consisted of 192 items in total. The 
filler stories had the same structure as the test sto-
ries, so 64 filler stories per condition. The filler 

stories were followed by a question about the first 
or second sentence of the story to avoid reading 
strategies and to mask the experimental manipula-
tions. Half of the filler questions asked about one 
of the characters, the other half asked about a non-
referent (what- or where-question). Note that in 
contrast to the test questions, that were designed to 
elicit an interpretational preference, filler ques-
tions were not ambiguous and could be unambigu-
ously scored as right or wrong.  

Here, we report on 2 times 32 test items, and 
the 64 filler items with the same two discourse 
structures. One test story (both variants) was re-
moved from the data, because of a technical prob-
lem during presentation. 

Procedure 

Participants were randomly assigned to one of the 
four lists. The experiment consisted of two blocks: 
a low WM load block (3 digits) and a high WM 
load block (6 digits). The order of blocks was 
counterbalanced; within blocks the items were 
randomly distributed. Participants first received 
instructions, followed by a practice trial suited for 
the current WM load condition. Between the two 
blocks participants received instructions for the 
other digit task. 

Participants 

Sixty-two first-year psychology students (17 men, 
40 women; mean age 20) participated in the ex-
periment in exchange for course credits. Five 
participants could not complete the experiment 
because of technical problems. Another 5 partici-
pants were excluded from data analysis, because 
they answered less than 75% of the filler questions 
correctly in the low WM load condition, and/or 
performed at chance level in one of the two types 
of filler questions. Data of 52 participants (15 
men, 37 women) was used for the statistical analy-
ses. 

3.2 Results 
In this section we first discuss the performance on 
the digit tasks, followed by the off-line story com-
prehension results, i.e., answers on the questions 
and the related reaction times, and the self-paced 
reading data.  

70



Digit task results 

Participants made more errors on the digit-task in 
the high WM load condition than in the low WM 
load condition (percentage correct trials: 3-
digits=77.2%, 6-digits=52.0%, mean errors per 
trial: 3-digits=0.343, 6-digits=0.852), indicating 
that the 6-digit condition was indeed more diffi-
cult. We did not find any effect of story condition 
on the number of errors in the digit task or on the 
percentages correct trials.  

Off-line results 

Answers. Figure 2 shows the preference for either 
the first or second character as the referent of the 
ambiguous pronoun at the end of the test stories.  

 

 
Figure 2: Referent preference for stories without (-TS) 
and with (+TS) topic shift (± SE), plotted separately for 
both WM load conditions.  
 
Figure 2 shows that participants were sensitive to 
the topic-shift manipulation. In both WM load 
conditions, the expected referent was preferred 
(i.e., Referent 1 in –TS, and Referent 2 in +TS).  

We examined the effects of Topic shift, WM 
load, and Trial position, the position of the trial in 
the experiment, on the choice for the first charac-
ter (yes or no) using logistic mixed-effects models 
(cf. Baayen, 2008). More complex models that 
included additional predictors did not show quali-
tatively different effects. In all the presented mod-
els, participant and item (i.e., all variants of a story 
were labeled as the same item) were included as 
crossed-random effects.  

We compared different models using a step-
wise variable deletion procedure, starting with the 
complete interaction model. For every model 
comparison, we examined whether the difference 
in -2 log likelihood is significant, given the differ-
ence in degrees of freedom using the chi-square 
distribution.  If this difference is significant, the 

reduced model has a significantly lower goodness-
of-fit, indicating that the deletion of the variable or 
interaction is not justified. As removing the 3-way 
interaction did not show a significant difference 
with the complete interaction model, we selected 
the model without this three-way interaction as the 
baseline (or full model). Figure 3 summarizes the 
model comparisons performed to investigate 
whether WM load and the type of story affect the 
choice for the first character (left graph). All two-
way interactions (Topic shift by Trial position, 
Trial position by WM load, and importantly Topic 
shift by WM load) needed to be included in the 
statistical model.  

 

 
Figure 3. Explained variance in -2 log likelihood of 
interactions compared to a full model (see text). The 
statistical significance is calculated with a χ2-test (with 
1,1,1, or 3 degrees of freedom respectively).  (‘*’ 
p<.05, ‘**’ p<.01, ‘***’ p<.001) 
 

The best model showed that, in stories with 
topic shift (+TS), the first character was selected 
more often in the high WM load condition than in 
the low WM load condition (β=0.844, z=3.57; 
p<.001), in line with the assumption that decreas-
ing working memory capacity reduces pronoun 
resolution performance. The model showed no 
general effect of WM load (β=0.308, z=1.10; 
p>.1). Thus, no differential effect for WM load 
condition was found for the condition without top-
ic shift. In addition, participants were more likely 
to select the first character in stories with a topic 
shift as the experiment progressed (β=0.008, 
z=3.81; p<.001), but in the high WM load condi-
tion this effect was reduced (β=-0.005, z=-2.28; 
p=.023).   

Reaction times. In the same way as we ana-
lyzed the choice of referent, we analyzed the log-
transformed reaction times after excluding the 
short outliers (<= 50ms; less than 1% of the data). 
However, we did not find any significant interac-
tion (see Figure 3). The best fitting model, which 

71



included the main effects, but no interactions, only 
showed a significant contribution of Trial posi-
tion: Participants became faster in answering dur-
ing the experiment (β=-0.002, t=-5.97; p<.001).  

To summarize, we found that WM load affects 
the comprehension of stories with a topic shift, but 
not the stories without a topic shift: participants 
more often select the first character as the referent 
of the ambiguous pronoun in the high WM load 
condition. However, we did not find a difference 
in reaction times between the two types of stories, 
suggesting that the questions after stories with a 
topic shift are not more difficult to answer. These 
findings support our prediction that adults will 
show difficulties in processing a topic shift if they 
experience more WM load. 

3.3 Reading time data 
Before analyzing the reading time data we re-
moved missing data (2%), short outliers (smaller 
than 50 ms, 19%) and used a log-transform to re-
duce the effect of the long outliers (cf. Baayen & 
Milin, 2010). The relatively large amount of short 
outliers was caused by a technical problem.  As 
the outliers were equally distributed over the story 
conditions and the WM load conditions 
(χ2(1)=0.925, p>.1), it is unlikely that this influ-
ences our results in qualitative ways.  

We compared linear mixed-effects models in 
the same way as before to test the effects of Topic 
shift, WM load, and Trial position for all moving-
window regions on the log-transformed reading 
times. More complex models that included addi-
tional predictors did not show qualitatively differ-
ent effects. We found no significant 3-way or 2-
way interactions in the analyzed regions that 
needed to be included in the statistical model. We 
therefore only report on the main-effects model.  

Sentence 1. The first sentence of the story is 
identical in both variants of the stories (-TS and 
+TS). Figure 4 displays reading times of the first 
three regions for the two working memory condi-
tions, collapsed over the two story types. The 
main-effects model showed an effect of Trial posi-
tion (participants read faster as the experiment 
progressed, β=-0.004, t=-13.00; p<.001), an effect 
of WM load (increased reading time in high WM 
condition, β=0.245, t=9.44; p<.001), but no effect 
of Topic shift (β=0.012, t=0.48; p>.1). Similar re-
sults were found for region 2. 

 

 
Figure 4. Reading times (raw data) of the first three 
regions of sentence 1 (±SE). (English translation of an 
example sentence from Table 1) 

 
Sentence 2. In the stories with a topic shift 

(+TS), the topic shift is initiated in the second sen-
tence, by introducing a new character in subject 
position. Therefore, we would expect to see differ-
ences in reading times between the two story 
types. In addition, we expected to find an interac-
tion between WM load and Topic shift, as an early 
measure of the effect of WM load on the off-line 
data: in the high WM load condition, the previous 
subject has less influence, therefore we would ex-
pect the difference in reading times to be reduced. 
However, we did not find any significant interac-
tion.  

Figure 5 shows the normalized effects of re-
gions 1-4 of the second sentence (normalized by 
the first region). For region 1, the main effects 
model revealed that participants became faster 
over the course of the experiment (β=-0.004, t=-
12.21; p<.001). However, Topic shift (β=0.024, 
t=0.83; p>.1) and WM load (β=-0.010, t=-0.33; 
p>.1) did not contribute to the fit of the data.    

 

 
Figure 5. Normalized reading times (difference with 
region 1) of the first four regions of sentence 2 (±SE). 
(English translations of example sentences from Table 
1) 

72



For analyzing the reading times of region 2 we 
removed possible confounding effects at the be-
ginning of the sentence, such as the effect of Trial 
position, by taking the difference in reading time 
between the second and first region.2 The main-
effects model for analyzing region 2 without Trial 
position showed a significant increase in reading 
time for the stories with a topic shift in compari-
son with the stories without a topic shift (β=0.085, 
t=2.79; p=0.004), indicating that participants ex-
pected to see the subject of the previous sentence 
instead of a new referent. However, there was no 
significant contribution of WM load. Analyzing 
the remaining regions of sentence 2 did not show 
an effect of Topic shift or WM load. In sentences 3 
and 4, we did not find significant effects of Topic 
shift or WM load, nor an interaction between these 
two factors.  

To summarize, we found an effect of WM load 
in the first sentence and an effect of Topic shift in 
the second sentence. The longer reading times on 
the first sentence in the high WM load condition 
probably reflect some final rehearsing of the dig-
its. However, after this first sentence, no effect of 
WM load is found.  

4 Discussion 

We predicted, on the basis of our cognitive model, 
that adults will show more difficulties in process-
ing a topic shift in higher WM load conditions. 
We performed a dual-task experiment to investi-
gate this prediction. We hypothesized that as WM 
load increased, adult readers would show a sig-
nificant decrease in their preferences for the sec-
ond character as the referent of a pronoun in the 
stories with a topic shift. In addition, we expected 
an increase in reading times in stories with a topic 
shift as a result of the topic shift, but we expected 
that this increase would diminish in the high WM 
load condition.  

The off-line data support the prediction of the 
model: participants selected the first character as 
the referent of the ambiguous pronoun signifi-
cantly more often in the high WM load condition. 
No differences in reaction times were found, sug-
gesting that the comprehension questions were 

                                                             
2 Analysis of the absolute reading times revealed the same 
effects. The reading times of region 1 were included in the 
analysis of the absolute reading times. 

similarly difficult to answer for the two types of 
stories. 

With respect to the reading times, we found an 
increase in reading times immediately after pre-
senting a new referent in subject position, which 
indicates that readers expected to see the subject 
of the previous sentence instead of a new referent. 
However, we did not measure a significant inter-
action between WM load and type of story. Dif-
ferent explanations are possible for why this 
interaction did not reach significance, contrary to 
our expectations. It could be that WM load does 
not affect the processing of the sentence, but only 
affects the updating of the discourse representation 
with new sentence information. In that case, sen-
tence wrap-up effects could have masked the ef-
fects of WM load. An alternative explanation is 
that the moving-window task is not suited to de-
tect the effect of WM load. It is reasonable to as-
sume that the effect of WM load on the topic shift 
is spread out over different regions, and is thus 
more difficult to detect. ERP studies provide sup-
port for this explanation, because for unexpected 
noun phrases readers show an ERP effect 300-600 
ms after the determiner of the unexpected noun 
phrase (Otten & Van Berkum, 2009), which is 
much longer than it took participants in our ex-
periment to read one region. 

The link between WM capacity and language 
processing is not new. For example, within the 
context of ACT-R, Lewis and Vasishth (2005) 
have explained difficulties in sentence processing, 
which have been attributed to WM load, by ACT-
R’s fluctuating activation and similarity-based 
interference in the retrieval of chunks. The fluctu-
ating activation of chunks also plays a role in our 
account of the interpretation of pronouns in dis-
course. This implementation is consistent with the 
memory account of Foraker and McElree (2007) 
that characterizes the prominence of discourse 
elements as differences in strength of their repre-
sentations in memory (in contrast with a.o. Grosz 
et al., 1995; Gundel et al., 1993). Our implementa-
tion is similar to the account of Reitter, Keller and 
Moore (2011), who use ACT-R’s spreading acti-
vation mechanism to explain short-term priming 
of syntactical structures. In addition, to explain the 
difference between children’s and adults’ per-
formance, we implemented the WM theory of 
Daily, Lovett, and Reder (2001), who manipulated 
the amount of spreading activation to account for 

73



individual differences in working memory capac-
ity on digit span tasks. 

Our account is also in line with previously pro-
posed computational models in different frame-
works that explain the relation between WM 
capacity and language processing, such as CC 
READER (Just & Carpenter, 1992), or 4CAPS 
(Just & Varma, 2007). In these models, WM ca-
pacity is implemented as a limited amount of acti-
vation that is used for storage of intermediate 
results and for computation. The amount of activa-
tion is different for individuals. If more capacity is 
required for processing or storage than is avail-
able, this will result in longer processing times or 
retrieval errors. On the basis of this theory, Dane-
man and Carpenter (1980) predicted longer read-
ing times on discourse pronouns for readers with a 
low WM capacity. In contrast, MacDonald and 
Christiansen (2002) have argued against the lim-
ited capacity theory of Just and Carpenter: they 
propose instead that differences in WM capacity 
are differences in skill that arise from variations in 
exposure to the language, and biological differ-
ences. However, our data that shows that WM 
load can affect the interpretation of stories with a 
topic shift, is difficult to explain in terms of lan-
guage skills.  

To conclude, on the basis of earlier research 
(Koster et al., in press) we hypothesized that lim-
ited WM capacity might cause decreased compre-
hension of stories with a topic shift. To investigate 
how WM capacity affects the comprehension of 
the discourse structure, we implemented a cogni-
tive model. Our model implied that sufficient WM 
capacity is necessary for an adult-like interpreta-
tion of a potentially ambiguous subject pronoun. 
With sufficient WM capacity, information about 
the grammatical roles of the referents in the previ-
ous sentence determines the interpretation of the 
ambiguous pronoun, but readers or listeners with-
out sufficient WM capacity rely more on the base 
level activation of discourse elements. To test 
whether adults’ performance would decrease when 
their WM is taxed, we performed a dual-task ex-
periment in which we manipulated the WM load. 
The results confirmed that with higher WM load, 
adults are less likely to distinguish between stories 
with and without a topic shift, similarly to chil-
dren. Thus WM load can affect the interpretation 
of ambiguous subject pronouns.  

References 
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How Can the Human Mind 

Occur in the Physical Universe? New York: Oxford 
University Press, USA. 

Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing Noun-Phrase Antecedents. 
London: Routledge. 

Arnold, J. E. (1998). Reference Form and Discourse 
Patterns. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Stanford 
University. 

Baayen, R. H. (2008). Analyzing Linguistic Data: A 
Practical Introduction to Statistics Using R: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Baayen, R. H., & Milin, P. (2010). Analyzing Reaction 
Times. International Journal of Psychological 
Research, 3(2), 12-28. 

Daily, L. Z., Lovett, M. C., & Reder, L. M. (2001). 
Modeling individual differences in working memory 
performance: A source activation account. Cognitive 
Science, 25(3), 315. 

Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P. (1980). Individual 
differences in working memory and reading. Journal 
of verbal learning and verbal behavior, 19(4), 450-
466. 

Foraker, S., & McElree, B. (2007). The role of 
prominence in pronoun resolution: Active versus 
passive representations. Journal of Memory and 
Language, 56(3), 357-383. 

Grosz, B. J., Weinstein, S., & Joshi, A. K. (1995). 
Centering: a framework for modeling the local 
coherence of discourse. Computational Linguistics, 
21(2), 203-225. 

Gundel, J. K., Hedberg, N., & Zacharski, R. (1993). 
Cognitive status and the form of referring 
expressions in discourse. Language, 69(2), 274-307. 

Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992). A capacity 
theory of comprehension: Individual differences in 
working memory. Psychological Review, 99(1), 122-
149. 

Just, M. A., Carpenter, P. A., & Woolley, J. D. (1982). 
Paradigms and processes in reading comprehension. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 111(2), 228-
238. 

Just, M. A., & Varma, S. (2007). The organization of 
thinking: What functional brain imaging reveals 
about the neuroarchitecture of complex cognition. 
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 
7(3), 153-191. 

74



Koster, C., Hoeks, J., & Hendriks, P. (in press). 
Comprehension and production of subject pronouns: 
Evidence for the asymmetry of grammar. In A. 
Grimm, A. Müller, C. Hamann & E. Ruigendijk 
(Eds.), Production-comprehension asymmetries in 
child language. Berlin: De Gruyter. 

Lewis, R. L., & Vasishth, S. (2005). An activation-
based model of sentence processing as skilled 
memory retrieval. Cognitive Science, 29(3), 375-
419. 

MacDonald, M. C., & Christiansen, M. H. (2002). 
Reassessing working memory: Comment on Just and 
Carpenter (1992) and Waters and Caplan (1996). 
Psychological Review, 109(1), 35-54. 

McDonald, J. L., & MacWhinney, B. (1995). The time 
course of anaphor resolution: Effects of implicit verb 
causality and gender. Journal of Memory and 
Language, 34(4), 543-566. 

Otten, M., & Van Berkum, J. J. A. (2009). Does 
working memory capacity affect the ability to 
predict upcoming words in discourse? Brain 
research, 1291, 92-101. 

Reitter, D., Keller, F., & Moore, J. D. (2011). A 
Computational Cognitive Model of Syntactic 
Priming. Cognitive Science, 35. 

Stevenson, R. J., Crawley, R. A., & Kleinman, D. 
(1994). Thematic roles, focus and the representation 
of events. Language and Cognitive Processes, 9(4), 
519-548. 

Van Rij, J., Van Rijn, H., & Hendriks, P. (submitted). 
Production and comprehension of referring subjects: 
A computational model of the interaction between 
linguistic and cognitive constraints. 

 

 

75


