



















































Generating Affective Natural Language for Parents of Neonatal Infants


Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 12–21,
Nancy, France, September 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generating Affective Natural Language for Parents of Neonatal Infants

Saad Mahamood and Ehud Reiter
Department of Computing Science

University of Aberdeen
Scotland, United Kingdom

{s.mahamood, e.reiter}@abdn.ac.uk

Abstract

This paper presents several affective NLG
strategies for generating medical texts for par-
ents of pre-term neonates. Initially, these were
meant to be personalised according to a model
of the recipient’s level of stress. However, our
evaluation showed that all recipients preferred
texts generated with the affective strategies,
regardless of predicted stress level.

1 Introduction

In recent years there has been a great interest in
building NLG systems that do not only inform but
also take into consideration the recipients emotional
state. The need to take such additional factors into
account arises from the fact that end users in various
contextual circumstances can have more than infor-
mational needs to meet. This is particularly appar-
ent for parents of babies that are being looked after
in a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). This is
an environment that has many challenges in receiv-
ing and understanding information. It is also an en-
vironment in which parents have to come to terms
with information that they are not familiar with and
have to deal with the emotional impact of the in-
formation presented to them. However, whereas
medical staff can express affect through voice-tone
and body language, the affect-limited nature of text
means that information given to recipients by com-
puters must carry the appropriate affective tone in
the way that words are expressed to the recipient.
The use of empathy to recognise and express emo-
tions to efficiently convey the affective tone of in-
formation could allow computers to influence the

mood of their users (Picard, 1997). NLG technology
has made it possible to produce data-to-text infor-
mation summaries for human recipients. However,
very few NLG systems have any form of strategies
that take into consideration the recipients emotional
state when communicating information.

In this paper, we discuss our effort to do this in the
context of the BabyTalk (Gatt et al., 2009) project.
In particular, this paper will focus on the affective
approaches used by the BabyTalk-Family system,
which was designed to communicate medical infor-
mation summaries for parents of pre-term neonatal
infants. We describe the design, construction, and
evaluation of this system in the hope to stimulate dis-
cussion on how best to incorporate human emotions
as a component of communication between comput-
ers and humans.

2 Background

In the United Kingdom 12% of newly born babies
need specialist medical care in a NICU or in a Spe-
cial Care Baby Unit (SCBU). The length of stay
for such infants can range from a few days to sev-
eral months. Inside these units, critical life support,
physiological monitoring, and medical attention are
provided twenty-four hours a day. The babies that
are cared for may have complex and serious medical
problems. The environment of neonatal care is one
of “high technology” in which babies are looked af-
ter in incubators surrounded by monitors, wires, and
tubes.

For parents of children in NICU, the need for in-
formation that is tailored to emotional and infor-
mational needs is very much evident. The birth

12



of a child that requires neonatal care is a particu-
lar circumstance that has the potential to cause a
considerable amount of stress and anxiety for the
parents. The sequence of events in NICU can be
akin to a roller coaster ride, with many unexpected
ups, downs, and turns of events. Parents rarely feel
safe from the fear and uncertainty of the problems
that can occur whilst the child is in care (McGrath,
2001). In addition, the stress and shock of having a
sick child in neonatal intensive care might also mean
that parents will not be able to process large amounts
of information (Brazy et al., 2001). However, the
provision of information is important in giving par-
ents a sense of hope and a feeling of involvement in
their child’s care (Charchuk and Simpson, 2005).

2.1 NLG and e-Health systems

NLG systems have been increasingly used for the
creation of e-Health systems (Hüske-Kraus, 2003),
such as generating information for smoking cessa-
tion patients (Reiter et al., 2000), breast surgery pa-
tients (DiMarco et al., 2007), and so forth. Within
healthcare, increasing amounts of patient data are
being stored within computerised health databases.
This information is being stored in patient records
and is combined with drug databases and knowl-
edge bases of medical terminology. Besides helping
to provide information support to clinicians, NLG is
playing a greater role in providing patients with ac-
cess to information in a personal form. One prime
example is the HealthDoc project that aimed to cus-
tomise patient information at an individual level
based upon their medical condition, demographic,
personality profile, and other relevant factors (Di-
Marco et al., 2007). Such personalisation compares
favourably when compared to traditional patient lit-
erature which is often limited in its effectiveness by
having to address a wide audience (DiMarco et al.,
1995).

2.2 Affective NLG

Recently, the NLG community has explored the use
of emotion as a way of adapting information to the
recipient. This development has led to the rise of
‘Affective’ NLG (ANLG), which has been defined
as “NLG that relates to, arises from, or deliberately
influences emotions or other non-strictly rational as-
pects of the hearer” (de Rosis and Grasso, 2000). In

other words, it is a form of NLG that outputs text
from a non-linguistic source, but unlike most NLG
systems it also takes into account the emotional as-
pects of the recipient and modifies its textual out-
put for the intended recipient. ANLG attempts to
redefine NLG methods and knowledge sources to
produce more affective texts (de Rosis and Grasso,
2000). One approach proposed by de Rosis and
Grasso (2000) was to introduce models at the sen-
tence planning stage that adapts the message for the
intended recipient’s communicative goal and also
employs rule-based heuristics for the usage of empa-
thy in the resultant text. Other ANLG systems have
used emotional or physiological models to define
the type of affective text generation. For example,
the PERSONAGE system, whilst strictly not deal-
ing with emotion, has shown that by using the ‘Big
Five’ personality traits model it is possible to gen-
erate tailored output for particular personality traits
(Mairesse and Walker, 2007).

A review of past work in ANLG by Belz (2003)
concluded that the research in ANLG has not yet
been successful in making the connection between
emotion and NLG. Empirical testing of ANLG sys-
tems can also pose many challenges as well, with
very few past systems being tested. Work by van der
Sluis and Mellish (2009) on measuring the emotions
of recipients when given positively slanted texts has
recently shown it is possible to measure the emo-
tional effect. However, the overall lack of empirical
testing from past ANLG systems makes it hard to
determine the effectiveness of previous ANLG im-
plementations and the relative importance of their
individual techniques.

2.3 The BabyTalk Project

The goal of the BabyTalk project (Gatt et al., 2009)
is to develop software that generates English sum-
maries of medical data about babies in a NICU. The
babies that are cared for may have complex and se-
rious medical problems, and could require critical
life support, physiological monitoring, and medical
attention twenty-four hours a day. Large quantities
of data (a megabyte per day or more) are generated
from the real-time monitoring of the baby’s physi-
ological condition (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure)
and discrete medical events (e.g., equipment set-
tings, drug administration, parent interactions) are

13



also logged. This large, diverse array of information
is stored by modern NICUs in an Electronic Medical
Record (EMR). Typically, these EMRs are accessed
by medical practitioners through a computer beside
the baby’s cot.

The main aim for all of the BabyTalk systems is to
generate English summaries of EMR data for a vari-
ety of readers and purposes. They use signal anal-
ysis and medical data interpretation techniques to
identify key events and inter-relationships, and NLG
to express these events and relationships as a textual
narrative. The overriding philosophy of BabyTalk is
to use information only within the medical record
and not to rely on any additional data input from
its recipients. So as not to inconvenience clinicians,
nurses, and parents with additional demands. Three
BabyTalk (BT) systems have been built. BT-45
(Portet et al., 2007) generates summaries for medical
professionals, to assist in real-time decision making;
BT-Nurse (Hunter et al., 2011) generates summaries
for nurses, to assist in shift handover; and BT-Family
generates summaries for parents, to keep them in-
formed about the condition of their child.

Our focus in this paper is on the BT-Family sys-
tem. This is a system where it is essential that the
texts generated be comprehensible to people who are
not medical professionals, that the texts do not cause
unnecessary stress and anxiety, and most impor-
tantly, the texts communicate the information that
parents want to know.

3 Stress Modelling in BabyTalk-Family

To develop a more effective approach to communi-
cating information to parents, BT-Family must take
into account the possible state of mind of the in-
tended recipient and the context or climate that the
message would be received in (Berry, 2004). In
neonatal care, one of the most predominate emo-
tions that parents face is one of stress. The level
of distress experienced by parents can be significant
especially if their child is critically ill (Shields-Poë
and Pinelli, 1997). Parents can also become dis-
tressed by noticing colour changes such as Jaundice,
or witnessing episodes of Apnea or respiratory dis-
tress (Miles and Holditch-Davis, 1997; Bass, 1991).
The small, fragile and undeveloped appearance of
an infant in NICU whilst being surrounded by med-

ical apparatus such as respirators, intravenous fluid
lines, and monitoring equipment can be very stress-
ful for parents (Miles et al., 1991; Holditch-Davis
and Miles, 2000). Parents can find the experience of
having their child looked after in a technological en-
vironment considerably distressing and oppressive
(Jämsä and Jämsä, 1998). The baby’s appearance
can have such an impact that even at one month of
age, mothers of very low birthweight infants show a
higher degree of stress compared to mothers of full-
term infants (Jackson et al., 2003).

Since neonatal care is a dynamic environment, the
sources and levels of stress for parents can change
over time and therefore it is important to obtain re-
peated stress measurements to obtain an accurate as-
sessment of parental stress (Reid et al., 2007). In
BT-Family this was done through a stress predic-
tion model called PNSS (Predictive Neonatal Stress
Score). Unlike traditional stress self-questionnaire
instruments for parents of pre-term neonatal infants,
the focus of this model was to have a repeatable
non-invasive way of calculating the recipient’s level
of stress. A detailed explanation of this model’s
implementation is beyond the scope of this paper,
but in essence the model focused on utilising the
baby’s EMR data to generate a stress score on a
three point Likert scale. The higher the score, the
more likely the parent could potentially be stressed.
The PNSS model composed of thirteen elements.
These elements were derived from a partial subset of
the Parental Stress Scale (PSS): NICU (Miles et al.,
1991) and the Neonatal Unit Parental Stress (Reid et
al., 2007) questionnaire instruments. As one of the
main factors of parental stress is the physiological
health of the child (Shields-Poë and Pinelli, 1997;
Seideman et al., 1997), most of the elements in the
PNSS model focus on this particular aspect. An-
other reason to focus on the physiological aspect
was due to the fact that most data contained with the
baby’s EMR focused on the physiological state or
medical treatments of the patient. Information about
the parents is sparsely recorded or not recorded at
all. Therefore, any attempt to simply use all the
elements within existing stress questionnaire instru-
ments is not possible.

To evaluate the accuracy of the PNSS model, it
was validated against a set of PSS: NICU scores
that were obtained from eight mothers who had a

14



child actively receiving care in a neonatal unit. Sta-
tistical analysis of the results obtained showed that
the PNSS score had no statistically significant non-
parametric correlation with the PSS: NICU score
(p=0.204, rs=-0.504). These forms of discrepancy
could possibly be attributed to the lack of elements
that describe the parental role in the PNSS model.
This is primarily because this information is not
available in the EMR. Whilst the philosophy of
BabyTalk is to avoid asking external information
from users (such as clinicians, nurses, and parents),
in the case of stress scores such input would be re-
quired from parents. Further work is required in
this area to produce a more accurate predictive stress
score.

4 Implementing ANLG in BT-Family

The ANLG architecture (illustrated in Figure 1) used
in BT-Family is an extension of the NLG data-to-
text architecture that was proposed by Reiter (2007),
in which natural language text is generated from a
non-linguistic data source. Most of the core parts
of this system are based upon the BT-Nurse sys-
tem, in which there are six core components: Badger
EMR Database, BabyTalk Ontology, Signal Analy-
sis, Data Interpretation, Document Planner, and Mi-
croplanner & Realisation. A detailed explanation of
how these core modules function can be found in
Gatt et al., (2009) and Mahamood (2010).

The system presented in this section is built upon
the BT-Nurse system, but there are crucial differ-
ences between these two systems that make both
unique from each other. BT-Family contains addi-
tional affective extensions to produce textual output
that takes into consideration the emotional status of
the recipient. The modifications and innovations in
the BT-Family system rest in three key areas:

1. Implementation of a stress model within a tradi-
tional NLG architecture.

2. The development of a selective document planner
that reacts to parental level of distress.

3. The application of multiple affective strategies that
attempt to mitigate emotional affect.

Figures 2 & 3 shows the difference between the
12-hour BT-Nurse and 24-hour BT-Family reports
produced from the same EMR record.

The PNSS model implemented in BT-Family is
based on the work described in the previous sec-
tion. The implementation uses the BabyTalk ontol-
ogy to query for the existence of particular factual
details about the baby’s records to help determine
the score for each of the thirteen separate stress fac-
tors. This score is stored and made accessible to all
other components of the BT-Family system. How-
ever, the PNSS score could be calculated by other
means or even directly entered by a parent or medi-
cal staff; this would not affect the rest of the system.

BT-Nurse – Patient: 100299, Shift Ending: 2004-02-16 20:00
Background
The baby was born at 24 weeks weighing 755 g. He is 7 weeks
old, with corrected gestational age of 30 weeks and 4 days, and
weighs 1113 g. He is in an intensive care nursery.

Current problems

• Oxygen or ventilator requirement at 28 days of age (since
31/01/2004).

• Hyponatraemia (since 02/02/2004).
• PDA (since 07/02/2004).
• Thrombocytopaenia (since 09/02/2004).
• Confirmed bacterial sepsis (since 10/02/2004).

Respiratory Support
Currently, the baby is on CPAP in 27 % O2. CPAP pressure is
4.4 cms H2O.
SaO2 is variable within the acceptable range and there have
been some desaturations.
The most recent blood gas was taken at around 11:45. There is
fully compensated respiratory acidosis or secondary compensa-
tion of metabolic acidosis. pH is 7.32. CO2 is 9.52 kPa. BE is
9.7 mmol/L. The last oral suction was done at about 16:30.

Events During the Shift
Between 09:00 and 11:30, RR decreased from 81 to 38.
At around 10:00, the baby was given caffeine.

Current Status
Currently, HR is stable within the acceptable range although
there have been some bradycardias. At about 19:45, it
decreased from 157 bpm to 141 bpm. T1 is variable within the
acceptable range.

Figure 2: A partial BT-Nurse report example.

The BT-Family system has a document planner
that generates a text structure in a more accessible
narrative format for parents rather than producing
technical diagnostic texts for nurses. Research find-
ings from past knowledge acquisition phases with
parents of neonatal infants were used to create ad-
ditional subject matter in the generated reports that
were of particular interest to parents, but not con-
sidered to be clinically relevant (Mahamood et al.,

15



Figure 1: Diagram illustrating the overall ANLG architecture

BT-Family – Baby 100299, 16/02/2004 08:00 to 17/02/2004
08:00
John was in intensive care. Your child was stable during the day
and night. Since last week, his weight increased from 860 grams
(1 lb 14 oz) to 1113 grams (2 lb 7 oz). He was nursed in an
incubator.

Yesterday, John was on a ventilator. The mode of ventila-
tion is Bilevel Positive Airway Pressure (BiPAP) Ventilation.
This machine helps to provide the support that enables him
to breathe more comfortably. Since last week, his inspired
Oxygen (FiO2) was lowered from 56% to 21% (which is the
same as normal air). This is a positive development for your child.

During the day, Nurse Johnson looked after your baby.
Nurse Stevens cared for your baby during the night.

Since last week Milk feeds have increased from 3.0 mls
per every hour to 7.0 mls per every hour. This is a reassuring
development for your baby.

Baby John had Mummy & Daddy provide some care to
him yesterday. John had a gastric milk feed. Also, baby John
had some visitors who came to visit him yesterday.

Figure 3: An equivalent BT-Family report.

2008; Moncur et al., 2009). This included mat-
ters such as addressing the nursing staff details, list-
ing the parental based care given to child, a re-
minder of information leaflets given to the parents,
and even details on whether the baby had slept well
during the night. Some of the content topics are
only addressed if the relevant medical details are
present within the baby’s medical record. Likewise,

BT-Nurse also contains detailed clinical information
that is not present in BT-Family, such as blood gas
test results (pH, CO2, and Base Excess (BE) levels).

The initial core of the BT-Family document plan-
ner, however, relies on addressing four main physi-
ological topics in its textual reports:

1. Details of the baby’s weight.

2. Ventilation and inspired oxygen details.

3. Baby’s feeding details.

4. Arterial and IV tube insertion/removal details.

What makes these four subject matters different
from BT-Nurse is how they are handled in the BT-
Family document planner. Instead of just simply re-
porting the factual details, additional information is
also generated to accompany these subject matters.
Each of the four main subject matters uses one or
more of these additional affective information types,
which can consist of:

1. Explanatory Justifications / Details

2. Positive Trend Descriptions

3. Reassurance statements

The main fundamental difference between BT-
Family and BT-Nurse resides within the document
planner module of the two systems. In BT-Nurse,
the document planner utilises several algorithms that
specify the maximum length of the document and

16



the minimum importance an event must have to be
mentioned. Key events are specifically identified
by the BT-Nurse document planner whose impor-
tance exceeds a preset threshold and these events are
placed at the head of a paragraph, with each para-
graph being ordered by the time of occurrence of the
key events (Gatt et al., 2009). This implementation
differs substantially from BT-Family, where the doc-
ument planner is based upon fixed categorical top-
ics and clinical events are described in more general
terms rather than having the specificity found in BT-
Nurse.

4.1 Explanatory justification
Explanatory justification is an affective technique
that aims to provide additional explanatory textual
information to parents for why particular medical
actions have occurred by stressing the positive ef-
fects for the baby. For example, if a child is moved
from one ventilation equipment type to another, that
could be viewed by the parents as a negative reflec-
tion on the child’s well being. But with an explana-
tory justification statement, the positive benefits are
stated for the parents to offset any possible negative
perceptions. These statements were implemented as
fixed statements that are inserted into the document
plan automatically for the last three main topics, be-
sides the baby’s weight. This strategy is similar to
one employed by Haimowitz (1991) and de Rosis
et al. (1999) in which empathy is used by “stressing
favourable information while downplaying or offset-
ting unfavourable information” (Haimowitz, 1991).

“This machine helps to provide the support that en-
ables him to breathe more comfortably.”

Figure 4: Explanatory justification example.

4.2 Positive Trend Descriptions
Trend descriptions, on the other hand, present trend
information over the previous twenty-four hours or
week weight, inspired oxygen, and feeding quan-
tities. This is BT-Family’s second affective tech-
nique. Unlike other strategies BT-Family has discre-
tion when reporting trends. Only those trends that
could be considered positive or stable by the par-
ents are reported as such. If no positive or stable
trends could be identified, then BT-Family will al-
ways present the current value by itself without any

trend description. The trend analysis module tries to
determine a positive or stable trend by analysing pre-
vious medical data to see if a relative decline or in-
crease has occurred in the given timeframe. Twenty-
four hour trends are only computed by the system
when the infant has been hospitalised for less than
seven days. For inspired oxygen, IV feeds, and ni-
tric oxide, a positive trend was one that has declined
over time, whereas for milk feeds and weight, a pos-
itive trend was defined as a trend that increased over
a specific time period. Table 1 details the trend ex-
pectations of parents for each of the different data
sources. If no positive or stable trend could be iden-
tified, then no additional trend statement was created
at all and the factual statement, such as the babys
weight, would be presented on it’s own.

It was hoped that the use of trend statements
would give parents a better understanding of the
medical situation that their child faces. The provi-
sion of such extra information could prevent parents
from feeling that they are not being told every de-
tail and thus would lose hope or assume the worst
(Charchuk and Simpson, 2005).

“Since last week, his inspired Oxygen (FiO2) was low-
ered from 56% to 21% (which is the same as normal
air).”

Figure 5: Trend description example.

4.3 Reassurance Statements

Finally, within BT-Family there are two forms of re-
assurance statements: Positive Assurance and Sup-
portive Reassurance statements. If no positive or
stable trend from the parents perspective was iden-
tified by the system, then a supportive reassurance
sentence would be used instead. This would help to
reassure the parent that whilst no additional progress
has been made, the medical staff nevertheless will
continue to support the baby. Such a strategy is also
used to help parents cope with the distress of seeing
their child having a temporary downturn by helping
to reassure parents that the baby has made signifi-
cant progress over the long term: “We’ll continue to
monitor your baby’s condition and provide all the
support he needs.”

For Positive Assurance, statements like “Your
baby has made good progress today” are used by the

17



Data Source Trend Expectation Trend Explanation
Babys Weight Positive Increases in the Babys weight in grams over a 24-hour / 7-day period.
IV Feed Fluid Negative Decreases in the amount of Dextrose (mls) over a 24-hour / 7-day period.

Milk Feed Positive Increases in the amount of Milk (mls) over a 24-hour / 7-day period.
Inspired Oxygen Negative Decreases in the amount of Inspired Oxygen (%) over a 24-hour / 7-day period.

Nitric Oxide Negative Decreases in the amount of Nitric Oxide (%) over a 24-hour / 7-day period.

Table 1: Trend expectations listing for each data source

system to assure parents that positive physiological
progress is being made by the child.

4.4 Affective and non-Affective Texts

The PNSS model was simply used as a means of
switching the affective strategies on or off. In prac-
tice this resulted in two forms of text: Affective
and non-Affective texts for a given situation. State-
ments such as trend descriptions and reassurance
statements were used as part of an Affective text
if the strategies were turned on, but otherwise re-
mained absent from their equivalent non-affective
text.The affective strategies would be activated at
key junctures of the document planner that dealt
with any of the four core physiological topics listed
above. Other information types such as explanatory
justifications can differ between affective and non-
affective texts as shown in Figure 6. Both explana-
tory statements try to communicate the same con-
cept to the parent. However the affective version is
far more concise than the non-affective version so
that parents would be prevented from being over-
whelmed with information.

Affective Version
The mode of ventilation is Conventional Mechanical
Ventilation (CMV). This machine helps to provide the
support that enables him to breathe more comfortably.

Non-Affective Version
The mode of ventilation is Conventional Mechanical
Ventilation (CMV). This kind of ventilation helps your
babys breathing by inflating his lungs, oxygenating
the blood, and removing carbon dioxide so that he
breathe a lot more easily.

Figure 6: A comparison of explanatory justification state-
ments

Figure 7 shows the difference between the non-
affective and affective texts when describing in-
spired oxygen information for a neonate. From
the version it is apparent that the affective version

attempts to reassure the parent far more than the
non-affective version. On the other hand, the non-
affective version attempts to only communicate the
factual status of the baby. The affective version not
only addresses the parents information need like the
non-affective version but also goes beyond and at-
tempts to reassure as well.

Non-Affective Text Version:
“Since yesterday, he was in air (which is the same as
21% oxygen).”

“In the evening, John was fed on specialised
milk at 56 mls. John was able to take his milk feeds
well yesterday. .”

Affective Text Version:
“Since last week, his inspired Oxygen (FiO2) was
lowered from 56% to 21% (which is the same as
normal air). This is a positive development for your
child.”

“Milk feeds have increased since last week from
53.0 mls per every three hours to 56.0 mls per every
three hours. This is a reassuring development for
your baby. John was able to take his milk feeds well
yesterday.”

Figure 7: A comparison between non-affective and af-
fective versions of inspired oxygen information and milk
feeds.

5 Evaluation

BT-Family was evaluated with parents that previ-
ously had a child in neonatal care (intensive care,
high dependency care, or special care) to see the ef-
fectiveness of several aspects of the generated texts.
A total of thirteen parents were recruited for this
study. Recruited participants were mostly socio-
economically affluent and well-educated. Parents
with babies currently in NICU were not used for this
study due to ethical constraints.

Methodology:

18



The thirteen participants were asked to evaluate
two different types of text that communicated the
same information over ten different medical scenar-
ios, making a total of twenty texts in total. These
two types of texts were the computer generated
BT-Family reports that were presented as “affec-
tive” and “non-affective” variants to the participants.
These texts were presented to parents randomly la-
belled as either text ‘A’ or ‘B’, with no indication
given of which text was which. In order to reduce
the time required for the study, parents were shown
only half of a BT-Family report instead of a com-
plete report.

One of the main objectives of this evaluation was
to understand the parent’s preference for either an
“affective” or “non-affective” text for a given medi-
cal scenario. In particular, did the participating par-
ents share the same preferences for affective texts
in complex medical scenarios and for non-affective
texts in simpler medical situations? As subjects
could not be made stressed for ethical reasons, they
were instead given medical details for each scenario
and were asked to imagine that they were the parent
of the baby. The PNSS score was used as a way of
indirectly identifying between complex and simple
medical scenarios as the majority of the score’s in-
dicators dealt with the baby’s physiological health.
Ten different medical scenarios were chosen with
five medical scenarios having a high PNSS score and
the other five scenarios having a low PNSS score.

To present the two texts for each scenario, the
researcher gave a verbal description describing the
medical condition and circumstances of the baby in
the scenario. This description helped the participant
to mentally familiarise themselves with the situation
of the baby in the given scenario without prejudic-
ing their preferences. After presenting the partici-
pants with a verbal description of the medical cir-
cumstance of the baby, they were asked to examine
the two texts generated by BT-Family for the given
scenario. The participants were informed that the
system can produce two types of texts that can ex-
press the same information but were not informed
about the explicit reason why the texts differ, so as
not to prejudice their choice. Following which the
researcher asked the participants the following sets
of questions:

1. Text style preference: Whether the participants pre-
ferred either text A or B for the given scenario.

2. The level of understandability for text A and B (Lik-
ert scale of 1 to 5) .

3. The helpfulness for both text A and B (Likert scale
of 1 to 5).

4. The level of which both text A and B appropriately
considers the parents’ emotional state in the given
scenario (Likert scale of 1 to 5).

5. Participant’s comments about the two texts.

Results: An overwhelming number of parents
(80%) preferred the affective text version than com-
pared to the non-affective text version (20%) in
the first five high PNSS score scenarios. Contrary
to expectations, in the low PNSS score scenarios,
the non-affective text version was disapprovingly
looked upon by the parents (13%) compared to the
affective text version (87%). It seems that for both
cases, parents overwhelmingly prefer the affective
text version compared to the non-affective version
representing the same information regardless of the
baby’s scenario. On average, all of the understand-
ability, helpfulness, and emotional appropriateness
ratings were weighted in favour of the affective texts
across all scenarios.

Several reasons were given by participants for
their overwhelming preference for affective texts
across all scenarios. For the high PNSS scenarios,
the affective texts were favoured due to the fact that
the non-affective texts were viewed as “too techni-
cal” for some of the parents or that they contain “too
much information”. Secondly, for low PNSS scenar-
ios, the opposite reaction occurred. Parents stated
that the non-affective texts contained less informa-
tion compared to the affective version, as they con-
tained additional trend and reassurance statements
that were not present in the non-affective text. The
use of positive reassurance statements in the affec-
tive texts were well received by the parents and also
were perceived as producing “more friendly text”.
However, one parent in particular did find the lan-
guage used by some of the affective texts “a bit pa-
tronising”. Additionally, the presence of trend state-
ments for the baby’s weight, inspired oxygen, and
feeds were positively welcomed by the parents. The
combination of these factors led most parents to pre-
fer the affective text version in all scenarios regard-

19



less of the emotional and situational circumstances
of the scenario.

From the ratings results gathered, a two-tailed
Pearson cross-correlation statistical test was calcu-
lated. The null hypothesis was that there should
be no correlations between any of the affective and
non-affective ratings in all of the three categories.
This proved to be incorrect, as three significant re-
sults were identified. The first result shows a sta-
tistically significant positive correlation between the
emotional appropriateness rating and the helpful-
ness rating for affective texts (p=0.049, r=0.633).
Additionally, the emotional appropriateness rating
had a second statistically significant correlation with
understanding ratings for affective texts (p=0.001,
r=0.885). What these two results seem to indicate is
that there is a relationship between the emotional ap-
propriateness rating for affective texts and the rating
scores given by parents for the levels of helpfulness
and understandability for the affective texts. The
non-affective texts showed only one significant re-
sult, a positive correlation between the level of emo-
tional appropriateness and the level of helpfulness
(p=0.006, r=0.793).

6 Current Work

BT-Family is still work in progress. Work on BT-
Family is preparing for on-ward evaluations with
parents, scheduled for late 2011. Using the feed-
back from parents in the previous section and com-
ments from clinicians, refinements have been made
in the textual output of the system and additional
topics have been added that were not covered previ-
ously, such as drug medication, blood sugar levels,
stool and urine output, details of the baby’s cot loca-
tion, and more. Ideas such as the PNSS model and
non-affective text output have been removed as ul-
timately they have proved to be unsuccessful when
evaluated.

Ethical permission was sought and granted for
two on-ward evaluations with parents of neonatal in-
fants. The first evaluation will focus on refining the
quality of the texts from a content and readability
perspective with parents providing direct feedback
on texts generated for their own baby. The second
evaluation will focus on evaluating the usefulness
of the texts by seeing how frequently parents access

the texts through a web based portal. We will also
conduct post-discharge interviews with participating
parents to see if they thought BT-Family texts were
communicating appropriate and understandable in-
formation. These two evaluations will ultimately
help to assess the usefulness of generating such re-
ports for parents.

7 Conclusion

We have presented in this paper several affective
strategies for communicating medical information
for parents of neonatal infants. Initially, we tried
to personalise this for the recipient’s level of stress.
We found that all recipients preferred texts gener-
ated with our affective strategies. The key finding is
that the use of such affective strategies may be ap-
propriate whenever an NLG system is communicat-
ing emotional sensitive information to an non-expert
recipient.

Acknowledgements
This work is funded by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences
Council (EPSRC) under a Doctoral Training Award and Digital Econ-
omy grant EP/H042938/1. Many thanks to Chris Mellish and the other
members of the Babytalk team for their help.

References

Linda S. Bass. 1991. What do parents need when their
infant is a patient in the NICU? Neonatal Network,
10(4):25–33, December.

Anja Belz. 2003. And now with feeling: Developments
in emotional language generation. Report itri-03-21,
Information Technology Research Institute, University
of Brighton.

Dianne C. Berry. 2004. Risk, Communication and
Health Psychology. Open University Press.

Jane E. Brazy, Barbara M. H. Anderson, Patricia T.
Becker, and Marion Becker. 2001. How parents of
premature infants gather information and obtain sup-
port. Neonatal Network, 20(2):41–48, March.

Margo Charchuk and Christy Simpson. 2005. Hope,
Disclosure, and Control in the Neonatal Intensive Care
Unit. Health Communication, 17(2):191–203.

Fiorella de Rosis and Floriana Grasso. 2000. Affective
natural language generation. Affective Interactions,
Springer Lecture Notes in AI, pages 204 – 218.

Fiorella de Rosis, Floriana Grasso, and Dianne C. Berry.
1999. Refining instructional text generation after eval-
uation. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 17(1):1–36.

20



Chrysanne DiMarco, Graeme Hirst, Leo Wanner, and
John Wilkson. 1995. Healthdoc: Customizing pa-
tient information and health eduction by medical con-
dition and personal characteristics. In Workshop on
Artificial Intelligence in Patient Education,, Glassgow,
Scotland, UK.

Chrysanne DiMarco, H. Dominic Covvey, P. Bray,
D. Cowan, V. DiCiccio, E. Hovy, and D. Mulholland
J. Lipa. 2007. The Development of a Natural Lan-
guage Generation System For Personalized e-Health
Information. In 12th International Health (Medical)
Informatics Congress, Brisbane, Australia. Medinfo
2007.

Albert Gatt, François Portet, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter,
Saad Mahamood, Wendy Moncur, and Somayajulu
Sripada. 2009. From Data to Text in the Neonatal
Intensive Care Unit: Using NLG Technology for Deci-
sion Support and Information Management. AI Com-
munications.

Ira J. Haimowitz. 1991. Modelling all dialouge sys-
tem participants to generate empathetic responces.
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine,
35(4):321–330, August.

D. Holditch-Davis and M.S. Miles. 2000. Mothers’ Sto-
ries about Their Experiences in the Neonatal Intensive
Care Unit. Neonatal Network, 19(3):13–21.

James Hunter, Yvonne Freer, Albert Gatt, Ehud Reiter,
Somayajulu Sripada, Cindy Sykes, and Dave Westwa-
ter. 2011. BT-Nurse: Computer Generation of Natural
Language Shift Summaries from Complex Heteroge-
neous Medical Data. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 18:621–624.

D. Hüske-Kraus. 2003. Text Generation in Clinical
Medicine — a review. Methods of Information in
Medicine, 1:51–60.

Karin Jackson, Britt-Marie Ternestedt, and Jens Schollin.
2003. From alienation to familarity: experiences of
mothers and fathers of preterm infants. Journal of Ad-
vanced Nursing, 43(2):120–129.

Kaisa Jämsä and Timo Jämsä. 1998. Technology in
neonatal intensive care — a study on parents’ expe-
riences. Technology and Health Care, 6(4):225–230,
March.

Saad Mahamood, Ehud Reiter, and Chris Mellish. 2008.
Neonatal Intesive Care Information for Parents – An
Affective Approach. In Proceedings of 21st IEEE In-
ternational Symposium on Computer-Based Medical
Systems, Jyväskylä, Finland.

Saad Mahamood. 2010. Generating Affective Natural
Language for Parents of Neonatal Infants. Ph.D. the-
sis, University of Aberdeen, Department of Comput-
ing Science, Aberdeen, Scotland, United Kingdom.

François Mairesse and Marilyn Walker. 2007. PER-
SONAGE: Personality generation for dialogue. In An-
nual Meeting-Association For Computational Linguis-
tics, volume 45, pages 496–503.

Jacqueline M. McGrath. 2001. Building Relationships
with Families in the NICU: Exploring the Guarded
Alliance. Journal of Perinatal & Neonatal Nursing,
15(3):74–83.

Margaret Shandor Miles and Diane Holditch-Davis.
1997. Parenting the Prematurely Born Child: Path-
ways of Influence. Seminars in Perinatology,
21(3):254–266, June.

Margaret Shandor Miles, Sandra G. Funk, and Mary Ann
Kasper. 1991. The Neonatal Intensive Care Unit Envi-
roment: Sources of Stress for Parents. AACN Clinical
Issues in Critical Care Nursing, 2(2):346–354.

Wendy Moncur, Saad Mahamood, Ehud Reiter, and
Yvonne Freer. 2009. Involving Healthcare Con-
sumers in Knowledge Acquisition for Virtual Health-
care. Technical Report FS-09-07, AAAI Press, Menlo
Park, California, USA, November.

Rosalind W. Picard. 1997. Affective Computing. MIT
Press, Cambridge (Mass.).

François Portet, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter, and Somaya-
julu Sripada. 2007. Automatic generation of textual
summaries from neonatal intensive care data. In Pro-
ceedings of the 11th Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence in Medicine (AIME ’07). LNCS, July.

Tilly Reid, Ros Bramwell, Nicola Booth, and A. M.
Weindling. 2007. A new stressor scale for parents ex-
periencing neonatal intensive care: the NUPS (Neona-
tal Unit Parental Stress) scale. Journal of Reproduc-
tive and Infant Psychology, 25(1):66–82, February.

Ehud Reiter, Roma Robertson, and Liesel Osman. 2000.
Knowledge acquisition for natural language genera-
tion. In First International Conference on Natural
Language Generation (INLG-2000), pages 217–224.

Ehud Reiter. 2007. An architecture for data-to-text sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the 11th European Workshop
on Natural Language Generation (ENLG’07), June.

Ruth Young Seideman, Margaret A. Watson, Karen E.
Corff, Phillip Odle, Joan Haase, and Jane L. Bower-
man. 1997. Parent Stress and Coping in NICU and
PICU. Journal of Pediatric Nursing, 12(3):169–177,
June.

Donna Shields-Poë and Janet Pinelli. 1997. Variables
Associated with Parental Stress in Neonatal Intensive
Care Units. Neonatal Network, 16(1):29–37, Febru-
ary.

Ielka van der Sluis and Chris Mellish. 2009. Towards
Empirical Evaluation of Affective Tactical NLG. In
Proceedings of the Twelfth European Natural Lan-
guage Generation Conference (ENLG 2009).

21


