



















































Report on the Second Second Challenge on Generating Instructions in Virtual Environments (GIVE-2.5)


Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 270–279,
Nancy, France, September 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Report on the Second Second Challenge on Generating Instructions in
Virtual Environments (GIVE-2.5)

Kristina Striegnitz
Union College

striegnk@union.edu

Alexandre Denis
LORIA/CNRS

denis@loria.fr

Andrew Gargett
U.A.E. University

andrew.gargett@uaeu.ac.ae

Konstantina Garoufi
University of Potsdam

garoufi@uni-potsdam.de

Alexander Koller
University of Potsdam

akoller@uni-potsdam.de

Mariët Theune
University of Twente

m.theune@utwente.nl

Abstract

GIVE-2.5 evaluates eight natural language
generation (NLG) systems that guide human
users through solving a task in a virtual envi-
ronment. The data is collected via the Internet,
and to date, 536 interactions of subjects with
one of the NLG systems have been recorded.
The systems are compared using both task per-
formance measures and subjective ratings by
human users.

1 Introduction

This paper reports on the methodology and results
of GIVE-2.5, the second edition of the Second Chal-
lenge on Generating Instructions in Virtual Environ-
ments (GIVE-2). GIVE is a shared task for the eval-
uation of natural language generation (NLG) sys-
tems, aimed at the real-time generation of instruc-
tions that guide a human user in solving a treasure-
hunt task in a virtual 3D world. For the evalua-
tion, we connect these NLG systems to users over
the Internet, which makes it possible to collect large
amounts of evaluation data at reasonable cost and
effort.

While the shared task became more complex go-
ing from GIVE-1 to GIVE-2, we decided to main-
tain the same task in GIVE-2.5 (hence, the second
second challenge). This allowed the participating re-
search teams to learn from the results of GIVE-2 and
it gave some teams (especially student teams), who
were not able to participate in GIVE-2 because of
timing issues, the opportunity to participate.

Eight systems are participating in GIVE-2.5. The
data collection is currently underway. During July

and August 2011, we collected 536 valid games,
which are the basis for all results presented in this
paper. This number is, so far, much lower than
the number of experimental subjects in GIVE-1 and
GIVE-2. Recruiting subjects has proved to be more
difficult than in previous years. We discuss our hy-
potheses why this might be the case and hope to still
increase the number of subjects during the remain-
der of the public evaluation period. When the eval-
uation period is finished, the collected data will be
made available through the GIVE website.1

As in previous editions of GIVE, we evaluate
each system both on objective measures (success
rate, completion time, etc.) and subjective measures
which were collected by asking the users to fill in a
questionnaire. In addition to absolute objective mea-
sures, for GIVE-2.5 we also look at some new, nor-
malized measures such as instruction rate and speed
of movement. Compared to GIVE-2, we cut down
the number of subjective measures and instead en-
couraged users to give more free-form feedback.

The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2,
we give some brief background information on the
GIVE Challenge. In Section 3, we present the eval-
uation method, including the timeline, the evalua-
tion worlds, the participating NLG systems, and our
strategy for recruiting subjects. Section 4 reports
on the evaluation results based on the data that have
been collected so far. Finally, we conclude and dis-
cuss future work in Section 5.

1http://www.give-challenge.org/research/

270



Figure 1: What the user sees in a GIVE world.

2 The GIVE Challenge

In GIVE, users carry out a treasure hunt in a virtual
3D world. The challenge for the NLG systems is to
generate, in real time, natural language instructions
that guide users to successfully complete this task.

Users participating in the GIVE evalua-
tion start the 3D game from our website at
www.give-challenge.org. They first down-
load the 3D client, the program that allows them
to interact with the virtual world; they then get
connected to one of the NLG systems by the
matchmaker, which runs on the GIVE server and
chooses a random NLG system and virtual world
for each incoming connection. The game results
are stored by the matchmaker in a database. After
starting the game, the users get a brief tutorial and
then enter one of three evaluation worlds, displayed
in a 3D window as in Figure 1. The window shows
instructions and allows the user to move around in
the world and manipulate objects.

The task of the users in the GIVE world is to
pick up a trophy from a safe that can be opened by
pushing a sequence of buttons. Some floor tiles are
alarmed, and players lose the game if they step on
these tiles without deactivating the alarm first. Be-
sides the buttons that need to be pushed, there are
a number of distractor buttons that make the genera-
tion of references to target buttons more challenging.
Finally, the 3D worlds contain a number of objects
such as lamps and plants that do not bear on the task,
but are available for use as landmarks in spatial de-
scriptions generated by the NLG systems.

The GIVE Challenge took place for the first time
in 2008–09 (Koller et al., 2010a), and for the sec-
ond time in 2009–10 (Koller et al., 2010b). The
GIVE-1 Challenge was a success in terms of the
amount of data collected. However, while it allowed
us to show that the evaluation data collected over the
Internet are consistent with similar data collected in
a laboratory, the instruction task was relatively sim-
ple. The users could only move through the worlds
in discrete steps, and could only make 90 degree
turns. This made it possible for the NLG systems
to achieve a good task performance with simple in-
structions of the form “move three steps forward”.
The main novelty in GIVE-2 was that users could
now move and turn freely, which made expressions
like “three steps” meaningless, and made it hard
to predict the precise effect of instructing a user to
“turn left”. Presumably due to the harder task, in
combination with more complex evaluation worlds,
the success rate was substantially worse in GIVE-2
than in GIVE-1. GIVE-2.5 is an opportunity to learn
from the GIVE-2 experiences and improve on these
results.

3 Evaluation Method

See (Koller et al., 2010a) for a detailed presentation
of the GIVE data collection method. This section
describes the aspects specific to GIVE-2.5, such as
the timeline, the evaluation worlds, the participating
NLG systems, and our strategy for recruiting sub-
jects.

3.1 Software infrastructure

GIVE-2.5 reuses the software infrastructure from
GIVE-2 described in (Koller et al., 2009) and (Koller
et al., 2010b). Parts of the code were rewritten to
improve how the visibility of objects is computed
and how messages are sent between the components
of the GIVE infrastructure: matchmaker, NLG sys-
tem, and 3D client. The code is freely available at
http://code.google.com/p/give2.

3.2 Timeline

GIVE-2.5 was first announced in July 2010. Inter-
ested research teams could start development right
away, since the software interface would be the same
as in GIVE-2. The participating teams had to make

271



their systems available for an internal evaluation pe-
riod by May 23, 2011. This allowed the organiz-
ing team to verify that the NLG systems satisfied
at least a minimal level of quality, while the par-
ticipating research teams could make sure that their
server setup worked properly, accepting connections
of the matchmaker and clients to their NLG sys-
tem. Furthermore, the evaluation worlds were dis-
tributed to the research teams during this period so
that they could test their systems with these worlds,
adapt their lexicon, if necessary, and fix any bugs
that coincidentally never surfaced with the develop-
ment worlds. Of course, the teams were not allowed
to manually tune their systems to the new evaluation
worlds in ad-hoc ways. One team had built a system
that learns how to give instructions from a corpus
of human-human interactions. This team was given
permission to use the evaluation worlds during the
internal evaluation period to collect such a corpus.

The original plan was to launch the public eval-
uation on June 6th. Unfortunately, some problems
with the newly reworked networking code delayed
the start of the public evaluation period until June
21st. At the time of writing, the public evaluation is
still ongoing so that all results presented below are
based on a snapshot of the data collected by August
29, 2011.

3.3 Evaluation worlds

Figure 2 shows the three virtual worlds we used in
the GIVE-2.5 evaluation. The worlds were designed
to be similar in complexity to the GIVE-2 worlds,
and as in previous rounds of GIVE, they pose differ-
ent challenges to the NLG systems. World 1 has a
simple layout and buttons are arranged in ways that
make it easy to uniquely identify buttons. World 2
provides challenges for the systems’ referring ex-
pression generation capabilities. It contains many
clusters of buttons of the same color and provides
the opportunity to refer to rooms using their color
or furniture. World 3 focuses on navigation instruc-
tions. One part of the world features a maze-like lay-
out, another room contains multiple alarm tiles that
the player needs to navigate around, whereas a third
room has several doors and many plants but only a
few other objects, making it hard for the players to
orient themselves.

3.4 NLG systems

Eight NLG systems were submitted (one more than
in GIVE-2, three more than in GIVE-1).

A University of Aberdeen (Duncan and van
Deemter, 2011)

B University of Bremen (Dethlefs, 2011)

C Universidad Nacional de Córdoba (Racca et al.,
2011)

CL Universidad Nacional de Córdoba and LO-
RIA/CNRS (Benotti and Denis, 2011)

L LORIA/CNRS (Denis, 2011)

P1 and P2 University of Potsdam (Garoufi and
Koller, 2011)

T University of Twente (Akkersdijk et al., 2011)

Compared to the previous GIVE editions, these
systems employ more varied approaches and are bet-
ter grounded in the existing CL and NLG literature.
Systems A, C, L, and T are rule-based systems us-
ing hand-designed strategies. System A focuses on
user engagement, T and C both focus on giving ap-
propriate feedback to the user with C implementing
the grounding model of Traum (1999), and L uses
a strategy for generating referring expressions based
on the Salmon-Alt and Romary (2000) approach to
modeling the salience of objects.

System B uses decision trees learned from a cor-
pus of human interactions in the GIVE domain (Gar-
gett et al., 2010) augmented with additional anno-
tations. System P1 uses the same corpus to learn
to predict the understandability of referring expres-
sions. The model acquired in this way is integrated
into an NLG strategy based on planning. System
P2 serves as a baseline for comparison against P1.
Finally, system CL selects instructions from a cor-
pus of human-human interactions in the evaluation
worlds that the CL team collected during the inter-
nal evaluation phase.

See the individual system descriptions in this vol-
ume for more details about each system.

3.5 Recruiting subjects

We used a variety of avenues to recruit subjects.
We posted to international and national mailing lists,
gaming websites, and social networks. We had a

272



World 1 World 2 World 3

Figure 2: The 2011 evaluation worlds.

GIVE Facebook page and were mentioned on a rel-
atively widely read blog. The University of Potsdam
made a press release, we contributed an article to
the IEEE Speech and Language Processing Techni-
cal Committee Newsletter, and submitted an entry to
a list of psychological experiments online.

Unfortunately, even though we were more active
in pursuing opportunities to advertise GIVE than in
the last two years, we were less successful in re-
cruiting subjects. In two months we only recorded
slightly over 500 valid games, whereas in the previ-
ous years we were already well over the 1000 games
mark at that point. What helped us recruit subjects
in the past was that our press releases were picked up
by blogs and other channels with a wide readership.
Unfortunately, that did not happen this year. Maybe
the summer break in the northern hemisphere, which
coincided with our public evaluation phase, played a
role. We are, therefore, extending the public evalu-
ation phase into the fall, hoping to recruit enough
subjects for more detailed and statistically powerful
analyses than we can present in this paper.

4 Results

This section reports the results for GIVE-2.5, based
on the data collected between June 21 and August
29, 2011. During this time period 536 valid games
were played, that is, games in which players finished
the tutorial and the game did not end prematurely
due to a software or networking issue.

As in previous years, all interactions were logged.
We use these logs to extract a set of objective mea-
sures. In addition, players were asked to fill in a
demographic questionnaire before the game, and a
questionnaire assessing their impression of the NLG

system after the game. We first present some ba-
sic demographic information about our players; then
we discuss the objective measures and the subjec-
tive questionnaire data. Finally, we present some
further, more detailed analyses, looking at how the
different evaluation worlds and demographic factors
affect the results.

Again as in previous years, some of the measures
are in tension with each other. For instance, a system
that generates detailed and clear instructions will
perhaps lead to longer games than one which tends
to give instructions that are brief yet not as clear.
This emphasizes that, as with previous GIVE chal-
lenges, we have aimed at a friendly challenge rather
than a competition with clear winners.

4.1 Demographics

For this round of GIVE, 58% of all games were
played by men and 27% by women; a further 15%
did not specify their gender. While this means that
we had twice as many male players as female play-
ers, we have a better gender balance than in the pre-
vious two editions of GIVE, where only about 10%
of the players were female. Of all players whose
IP address was geographically identifiable, about
32% were connected from Germany, 13% from the
US, and 12% from the Netherlands. Argentina and
France accounted for about 8% of the connections
each, while 5% of them were from Sweden. The
rest of the players came from 28 further countries.
About half the participants (54%) were in the age
range 20–29, 27% were aged 30–39, 4% were be-
low 20, while the remaining 14% were between 40
and 69.

About 19% of the participants who answered the

273



task success: Did the player get the trophy?
duration: Time in seconds from the end of the tutorial
until retrieval of the trophy.
distance: Distance traveled (measured in distance units
of the virtual environment).
actions: Number of object manipulation actions.
instructions: Number of instructions produced by the
NLG system.
words: Number of words used by the NLG system.

Figure 3: Summary of raw objective measures.

error rate: Number of incorrect button presses, over the
total actions performed in a single game.
speed: Total distance over total time.
instruction speed: Total number of instructions over to-
tal time taken.
words per instruction: Length of instructions in number
of words used.
word rate: Total number of words over total time taken.

Figure 4: Summary of normalized objective measures.

question were native English speakers, and an addi-
tional 73% of them self-rated their English language
proficiency as at least good. The vast majority (84%)
rated themselves as more experienced with comput-
ers than most people, while 47% self-rated their fa-
miliarity with 3D computer or video games as higher
than that of most people. Finally, 16% indicated that
they had played a GIVE game before in 2011.

4.2 Objective measures

Descriptions of the raw objective measures and of
the normalized objective measures are given in Fig-
ures 3 and 4, respectively. Duration, distance trav-
elled, and total number of actions, instructions, and
words can only be compared meaningfully between
games that were successful. The normalized mea-
sures, on the other hand, are independent of the re-
sult of the game. So, when comparing systems with
the normalized objective measures, we have used all
games in which the player managed to press at least
the first button in the safe sequence.

Figures 5 and 6 show the results of raw and nor-
malized objective measures, respectively. Task suc-
cess is reported as the percentage of successfully
completed games. For the other measures we give
the mean value of that measure per game for each
system. The figures also form groups of systems

A B C CL L P1 P2 T

task
success

42% 32% 70% 58% 68% 66% 65% 58%
A A A A A A

B B B B B
C C C C C

duration

687 701 538 539 341 407 415 480
A A A

B B B
C C C

D D

distance

180 204 132 153 117 128 116 166
A A A A
B B B

C C C
D D D

actions
17 35 14 15 14 14 16 16
A A A A A A A

B

instruc-
tions

165 281 254 183 211 241 235 160
A A A
B B B

C C C
D D D D

words

1894 2693 1328 1269 962 1122 1139 1024
A A A A

B B B B
C C C C

D
E

Figure 5: Results for the raw objective measures.

for each evaluation measure, as indicated by the let-
ters. If two systems do not share the same letter,
the difference between these two systems is signifi-
cant with p<0.05. Significance was tested using χ2

for task success, and ANOVA for the other objective
measures, with all systems compared pairwise using
post-hoc tests (pairwise χ2 and Tukey).

4.3 Subjective measures

Subjective measures were collected using a post-
task questionnaire, which asked users to rate the
instructions delivered by the NLG systems with a
series of ten questions. Figure 8 shows the ques-
tions that were asked, and the average responses re-
ceived. The results are based on all games, inde-
pendent of success. Ratings ranged from -100 to
100, non-responses were filtered out, and, follow-
ing standard practice, negative items (e.g. Q2 on
confusion caused by instructions) had their scores

274



A B C CL L P1 P2 T

error
rate

21% 49% 10% 11% 12% 9% 15% 19%
A A A A A A

B B B B B B
C

distance
per sec

0.22 0.24 0.26 0.28 0.36 0.29 0.27 0.35
A A

B B B
C C C C C

D D D D D

instruc-
tions
per sec

0.21 0.36 0.48 0.32 0.62 0.56 0.54 0.33
A

B B B
C C

D D
E

words
per
instruc-
tion

11.9 9.6 5.2 7.1 4.6 4.7 4.8 6.5
A A A

B B
C

D
E

F

words
per sec

2.4 3.4 2.5 2.3 2.9 2.6 2.6 2.1
A A A A
B B B B B

C C C C
D

Figure 6: Results for the normalized objective measures.

reversed. Once again, systems were grouped by let-
ters where there was no significant difference be-
tween them (significance level: p<0.05). We used
ANOVAs and post-hoc Tukey tests to test for signif-
icance.

Figure 7 furthermore shows side by side the re-
sults for the first question, which asked users for
their overall impression of the system, and the re-
sults for an aggregated score obtained by summing
over the rest of the questions that tried to asses spe-
cific aspects of the system.

4.4 Effects of the evaluation world and
demographic factors

Which NLG system subjects interacted with is not
the only factor that affects their success rate. The
evaluation worlds as well as some demographic fac-
tors also had statistically significant effects.

Not surprisingly, the evaluation world affects task
success (p<0.001), with performance in worlds 1

A B C CL L P1 P2 T

Q1: Overall, the system gave me good instructions.

-18 -31 54 24 47 31 10 -3
A A A A

B B B
C C C

D D D
E E E

Q2–10: Remaining subjective measures (summed)

98 47 414 245 347 323 231 146
A A A

B B B B
C C C

D D D

Figure 7: Results for the subjective measures.

and 2 around 67%, but much lower in world 3
(41%). Many systems reflect the same overall pat-
tern in their task success rates, but individual sys-
tems behave very differently as shown in Figure 9.
For example, systems A and P2 do much better in
world 2 than world 1, while system B does much
worse in world 2 than world 1. And while all other
systems have their lowest success rate in world 3,
system A is doing much better in worlds 2 and 3
than in world 1.

Male players have a somewhat higher task success
rate than female players (65% vs. 54%). This dif-
ference is not statistically significant, but it is close
(p=0.052). Unfortunately, we don’t have enough
data, yet, to do a by system analysis of the effects
that demographic properties have on task success.

The results also indicate that proficiency in En-
glish affects task success (p=0.047). This overall
significance is due to the task success rate of sub-
jects who rate themselves as near native being, with
74%, much higher than the task success rate of sub-
jects who think of themselves as merely good (58%),
or very good (57%). Native English speakers have a
task success rate of 65%, which in pairwise com-
parisons is not significantly different from any of
the other groups. Subjects rated their English profi-
ciency on a 5-point scale. However, we had to drop
the lowest category (basic) due to data scarcity.

Finally, there were effects for both familiarity
with video games (p<0.005), and computer ex-
pertise (p<0.05). The questionnaire asked sub-

275



A B C CL L P1 P2 T

Q1: Overall, the system gave me good instruc-
tions.
-18 -31 54 24 47 31 10 -3

A A A A
B B B
C C C

D D D
E E E

Q2: I was confused about which direction to go
in.
-22 -16 52 27 31 26 16 -17

A A A A
B B B B

C C C

Q3: I could easily identify the buttons the sys-
tem described to me.
37 3 60 46 42 39 16 23
A A A A A
B B B B B B
C C C C

Q4: I had to re-read instructions to understand
what I needed to do.
14 -4 50 19 53 19 1 2

A A
B B B

C C C C C C

Q5: The system’s instructions were visible long
enough for me to read them.
-10 -12 42 13 51 37 38 24

A A A A A
B B B B B

C C C C

A B C CL L P1 P2 T

Q6: The system’s instructions came too late or
too early.
-6 -10 36 -3 34 24 19 2

A A A A
B B B B B
C C C C C

Q7: The system immediately offered help
when I was in trouble.
-13 1 52 17 38 48 35 1

A A A A
B B B

C C C
D D D

Q8: The system gave me useful feedback about
my progress.
-4 -16 62 37 23 57 33 27

A A A A
B B B B
C C C C

D D

Q9: The system was very friendly.

25 31 54 46 49 54 42 35
A A A A A A A

B B B B B B B

Q10: I felt I could trust the system’s instruc-
tions.
0 -25 69 38 52 44 30 12

A A A A
B B B B
C C C

D D D
E E

Figure 8: Results for individual questionnaire items.

jects to rate themselves as being much less familiar
with video games/experienced with computers than
most people, less familiar/experienced than most
people, equally familiar/experienced, more famil-
iar/experienced, or much more familiar/experienced.
Again, due to data scarcity, we had to collapse the
lowest two and highest two categories for familiar-
ity with video games and the lowest three categories
for computer expertise. On closer inspection, these
overall significant effects are accounted for by a
significant difference in task success (p<0.001) be-
tween players who rated themselves as less familiar
with video games than most people (51% task suc-
cess rate) and players who rated themselves as more

familiar (69%). Similarly, the subjects who think of
themselves as much more experienced with comput-
ers than most people (66%) are significantly more
successful than subjects who think they are less or
equally experienced than most people (49%).

4.5 Discussion

The objective and subjective measures largely agree
in ranking systems C, CL, L, P1, P2, T before sys-
tems A and B. The first six systems do not differ
significantly from each other in terms of task suc-
cess or error rate. However, there are some signifi-
cant differences between them when looking at the
other objective measures. For example, games with

276



0
20

40
60

80
10

0

world

%
 o

f s
uc

ce
ss

fu
l g

am
es

world_1 world_2 world_3

●

●

●

●

System

A
B
C
CL
L
P1
P2
T

Figure 9: Effect of the different evaluation worlds on the
task success rate of the NLG systems.

systems L, P1, and P2 are shorter than than those
with systems C and CL, while system T is sitting in
between the two groups.

Interestingly, shorter durations do not necessar-
ily coincide with the players moving faster. For
instance, players interacting with systems P1 and
P2 move significantly slower than players who in-
teract with system L. System L also delivers its
instructions at a very fast pace, followed by sys-
tems P1 and P2. Those are the same systems
that achieve the shortest game durations, and they
also make the group of systems which produces the
most concise instructions. However, it is not nec-
essary for an NLG system to be as fast paced as
the L and P systems to be successful. If we com-
pare the two systems with the highest task suc-
cess rates, systems C (70%) and L (68%), we see
that L has very short games, fast moving players,
and delivers its concise instructions at an extremely
high rate. C, on the other hand, yields signifi-
cantly longer games, has players that move at a sig-
nificantly slower speed, and produces significantly
longer instructions (though still concise compared to
some other systems) at a much lower rate.

There is also some indication, though, that being
too slow and wordy might be detrimental. Systems
A and B, the least effective in terms of task suc-

cess and error rate, have extremely long games, slow
players, and long instructions that get sent at a slow
pace.

As mentioned above, the subjective measures
largely agree with the ranking suggested by the ob-
jective measures: systems C, CL, L, P1, P2, T are
ranked before systems A and B. However, the top
group is a little more split up. Systems C, L, and
P1 are ranked highest both by Q1, the question-
naire item asking for an overall assessment, and by
the summed scores for the remaining questionnaire
items. Systems CL and P2, on the other hand, come
in the next tier according to these subjective mea-
sures, while system T follows.

System C is doing well on questionnaire items
that have to do with timing (such as Q6 and Q7),
suggesting that even though it is slower than some
of the other most successful systems, its instructions
are well-timed. One interesting point to notice is
that system A, which overall is not so successful, is
doing relatively well on item Q3. In fact, referring
expression generation is one of the aspects system
A’s team focused on.

Comparing this year’s results to those of GIVE-2,
we can report that task success has increased some-
what. The task success rate of systems in GIVE-2
ranged from 3% to 47% with a mean success rate of
29%. For GIVE-2.5, task success rates range from
32% to 70% with a mean of 57%. Though these re-
sults are measured in different worlds and are thus
not directly comparable, they do provide some ev-
idence of the overall increasing quality of systems
entered in this round of GIVE.

Interestingly, the overall quality ratings (Q1) did
not go up across the board in a similar way, al-
though the systems that did best on this measure
in GIVE-2.5 had somewhat higher scores than the
best systems in the previous installment of GIVE.
In GIVE-2, the systems had a mean score for that
question that ranged from -33 to 36. In GIVE-2.5,
the mean scores ranged from -31 to 54. Some of
the other subjective measures improved more dra-
matically, though. For example, the systems’ mean
ratings for Q2 (I was confused which direction to go
in) ranged from -32 to 21 in GIVE-2, but from -22
to 52 in GIVE-2.5.

Unfortunately, we don’t have enough data, yet, to
compare the effect that demographic factors have on

277



phase 0 phase 1 phase 2 phase 3 phase 4 phase 5

farthest game phase reached

pe
rc

en
ta

ge
 o

f l
os

t/c
an

ce
lle

d 
ga

m
es

0.
0

0.
1

0.
2

0.
3

0.
4

0.
5

lost
cancelled

Figure 10: Player progress before they lose/cancel.

individual systems. By the end of our evaluation pe-
riod, we will hopefully be able to make that analysis.

5 Conclusions and Outlook

This paper has described the methodology and re-
sults of GIVE-2.5, the second edition of the Sec-
ond Challenge on Generating Instructions in Virtual
Environments. In a number of ways, GIVE-2.5 ex-
panded successfully on GIVE-2. Eight NLG sys-
tems participated in GIVE-2.5, one more than in
GIVE-2. These systems represent a broader variety
of approaches to NLG than seen before in a GIVE
challenge, and the instructions they generate are of
a higher quality.

Unexpectedly, our efforts to recruit subjects over
the Internet were not as successful as in previous
years. We think that this is mostly due to less luck
with getting our advertising into channels that reach
a broad audience, which was possibly exacerbated
by the timing of the public evaluation period during
the northern hemisphere summer break. It would be
desirable to develop an advertising strategy for fu-
ture editions of the challenge that can distribute our
call to play GIVE more reliably.

One problem we already identified in GIVE-1 and
GIVE-2 is that the task is not as engaging for play-
ers as modern 3D games are. As in GIVE-2, this is

evidenced by the observation that many players can-
cel or lose the game before they ever press the first
button in the safe sequence. (Figure 10 shows how
close subjects got to finding the trophy before los-
ing or canceling. Phase 0 means that not even the
first button of the safe sequence was pressed suc-
cessfully; phase 1 means that one button of the safe
sequence was pressed successfully, etc.) The free
text comments also contain complaints in that direc-
tion. We did not expect this problem to disappear,
since the task is the same as in GIVE-2, but its per-
sistence re-confirms that the next revision of GIVE
needs to address this issue.

We are currently discussing the task and time-
line for GIVE-3. The plan is to make a substantial
change to the task. The specification of this new
task and the implementation of the necessary soft-
ware infrastructure needs some time, so that we will
most likely not organize another edition of GIVE
before 2013. However, Oliver Lemon and Srini Ja-
narthanam will organize a challenge similar to GIVE
in 2012, called Generating Route Instructions under
Uncertainty in Virtual Environments (GRUVE). Its
main features are that the game world will be an out-
door environment based on publicly available map
data, and that it will be possible for NLG systems
to interact with users in a more dialog-like fashion
by generating questions plus a set of possible an-
swers for the user to choose from. In addition, there
will be an uncertainty track, where the player co-
ordinates sent to the NLG system by the client will
be artificially distorted in order to simulate a noisy
GPS signal. (See Janarthanam and Lemon (2011) in
this volume for more details.) We encourage every-
body interested in GIVE to consider participating in
GRUVE.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank all participating research
teams for their contributions, and the GIVE Steering
Committee (Donna Byron, Justine Cassell, Robert
Dale, Johanna Moore, Jon Oberlander) for their help
and support in organizing the GIVE challenges.

References
S. Akkersdijk, M. Langenbach, F. Loch, and M. Theune.

2011. The Thumbs Up! Twente system for GIVE 2.5.

278



In Proceedings of the Generation Challenges Session
at the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, Nancy, France.

L. Benotti and A. Denis. 2011. CL system: Giving in-
structions by corpus based selection. In Proceedings
of the Generation Challenges Session at the 13th Eu-
ropean Workshop on Natural Language Generation,
Nancy, France.

A. Denis. 2011. The Loria instruction generation sys-
tem L in GIVE 2.5. In Proceedings of the Generation
Challenges Session at the 13th European Workshop on
Natural Language Generation, Nancy, France.

N. Dethlefs. 2011. The Bremen system for the GIVE-2.5
Challenge. In Proceedings of the Generation Chal-
lenges Session at the 13th European Workshop on Nat-
ural Language Generation, Nancy, France.

B. Duncan and K. van Deemter. 2011. Direction giv-
ing: an attempt to increase user engagement. In Pro-
ceedings of the Generation Challenges Session at the
13th European Workshop on Natural Language Gen-
eration, Nancy, France.

A. Gargett, K. Garoufi, A. Koller, and K. Striegnitz.
2010. The GIVE-2 corpus of Giving Instructions in
Virtual Environments. In Proceedings of the 7th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2010), Malta.

K. Garoufi and A. Koller. 2011. The Potsdam NLG sys-
tems at the GIVE-2.5 Challenge. In Proceedings of the
Generation Challenges Session at the 13th European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, Nancy,
France.

S. Janarthanam and O. Lemon. 2011. The GRUVE Chal-
lenge: Generating Routes under Uncertainty in Vir-
tual Environments. In Proceedings of the Generation
Challenges Session at the 13th European Workshop on
Natural Language Generation, Nancy, France.

A. Koller, D. Byron, J. Cassell, R. Dale, J. Moore,
J. Oberlander, and K. Striegnitz. 2009. The software
architecture for the First Challenge on Generating In-
structions in Virtual Environments. In Proceedings of
the EACL-09 Demo Session.

A. Koller, K. Striegnitz, D. Byron, J. Cassell, R. Dale,
J. Moore, and J. Oberlander. 2010a. The First Chal-
lenge on Generating Instructions in Virtual Environ-
ments. In E. Krahmer and M. Theune, editors, Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Generation, volume
5790 of LNCS, pages 337–361. Springer.

A. Koller, K. Striegnitz, A. Gargett, D. Byron, J. Cassell,
R. Dale, J. Moore, and J. Oberlander. 2010b. Re-
port on the Second NLG Challenge on Generating In-
structions in Virtual Environments (GIVE-2). In Pro-
ceedings of the Generation Challenges Session at the
6th International Natural Language Generation Con-
ference, Trim, Ireland.

D.N. Racca, L. Benotti, and P. Duboue. 2011. The
GIVE-2.5 C generation system. In Proceedings of the
Generation Challenges Session at the 13th European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, Nancy,
France.

S. Salmon-Alt and L. Romary. 2000. Generating re-
ferring expressions in multimodal contexts. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Coherence in Generated
Multimedia (Co-located with INLG), Mitzpe Ramon,
Israel.

D.R. Traum. 1999. Computational models of ground-
ing in collaborative systems. In Working Notes of
the AAAI Fall Symposium on Psychological Models of
Communication, North Falmouth, MA, USA.

279


