










































Structured Databases of Named Entities from Bayesian Nonparametrics


Proceedings of EMNLP 2011, Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2–12,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Structured Databases of Named Entities from Bayesian Nonparametrics

Jacob Eisenstein Tae Yano William W. Cohen Noah A. Smith Eric P. Xing
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

{jacobeis,taey,wcohen,nasmith,epxing}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

We present a nonparametric Bayesian ap-
proach to extract a structured database of enti-
ties from text. Neither the number of entities
nor the fields that characterize each entity are
provided in advance; the only supervision is
a set of five prototype examples. Our method
jointly accomplishes three tasks: (i) identify-
ing a set of canonical entities, (ii) inferring a
schema for the fields that describe each entity,
and (iii) matching entities to their references in
raw text. Empirical evaluation shows that the
approach learns an accurate database of enti-
ties and a sensible model of name structure.

1 Introduction

Consider the task of building a set of structured
records from a collection of text: for example, ex-
tracting the names of people or businesses from
blog posts, where each full name decomposes into
fields corresponding to first-name, last-name, title,
etc. To instruct a person to perform this task, one
might begin with a few examples of the records to
be obtained; assuming that the mapping from text to
records is relatively straightforward, no additional
instruction would be necessary. In this paper, we
present a method for training information extraction
software in the same way: starting from a small table
of partially-complete “prototype” records (Table 1),
our system learns to add new entries and fields to
the table, while simultaneously aligning the records
to text.

We assume that the dimensionality of the database
is unknown, so that neither the number of entries

John McCain Sen. Mr.
George Bush W. Mr.
Hillary Clinton Rodham Mrs.
Barack Obama Sen.
Sarah Palin

Table 1: A set of partially-complete prototype records,
which constitutes the only supervision for the system.

nor the number of fields is specified in advance. To
accommodate this uncertainty, we apply a Bayesian
model which is nonparametric along three dimen-
sions: the assignment of text mentions to entities
(making popular entries more likely while always al-
lowing new entries); the alignment of individual text
tokens to fields (encouraging the re-use of common
fields, but permitting the creation of new fields); and
the assignment of values to entries in the database
itself (encouraging the reuse of values across entries
in a given field). By adaptively updating the con-
centration parameter of stick-breaking distribution
controlling the assignment of values to entries in the
database, our model can learn domain-specific infor-
mation about each field: for example, that titles are
often repeated, while names are more varied.

Our system’s input consists of a very small proto-
type table and a corpus of text which has been au-
tomatically segmented to identify names. Our de-
sired output is a set of structured records in which
each field contains a single string — not a distribu-
tion over strings, which would be more difficult to
interpret. This requirement induces a tight proba-
bilistic coupling between the assignment of text to
cells in the table, so special care is required to ob-

2



tain efficient inference. Our procedure alternates
between two phases. In the first phase, we per-
form collapsed Gibbs sampling on the assignments
of string mentions to rows and columns in the table,
while marginalizing the values of the table itself. In
the second phase, we apply Metropolis-Hastings to
swap the values of columns in the table, while simul-
taneously relabeling the affected strings in the text.

Our model performs three tasks: it constructs a
set of entities from raw text, matches mentions in
text with the entities to which they refer, and discov-
ers general categories of tokens that appear in names
(such as titles and first names). We are aware of
no existing system that performs all three of these
tasks jointly. We evaluate on a dataset of political
blogs, measuring our system’s ability to discover
a set of reference entities (recall) while maintain-
ing a compact number of rows and columns (pre-
cision). With as few as five partially-complete pro-
totype examples, our approach gives accurate tables
that match well against a manually-annotated refer-
ence list. Our method outperforms a baseline single-
link clustering approach inspired by one of the most
successful entries (Elmacioglu et al., 2007) in the
SEMEVAL “Web People Search” shared task (Ar-
tiles et al., 2007).

2 Task Definition

In this work, we assume that a bag of M mentions
in text have been identified. The mth mention wm
is a sequence of contiguous word tokens (its length
is denoted Nm) understood to refer to a real-world
entity. The entities (and the mapping of mentions to
entities) are not known in advance. While our focus
in this paper is names of people, the task is defined
in a more generic way.

Formally, the task is to construct a table x where
rows correspond to entities and columns to func-
tional fields. The number of entities and the num-
ber of fields are not prespecified. x·,j denotes the
jth column of x, and xi,j is a single word type fill-
ing the cell in row i, column j. An example is Ta-
ble 1, where the fields are first-name, last-name, ti-
tle, middle-name, and so on. In addition to the table,
we require that each mention be mapped to an en-
tity (i.e., a row in the table). Success at this task
therefore requires (i) identifying entities, (ii) discov-

ering the internal structure of mentions (effectively
canonicalizing them), and (iii) mapping mentions
to entities (therefore resolving coreference relation-
ships among mentions). Note that this task differs
from previous work on knowledge base population
(e.g., McNamee, 2009) because the schema is not
formally defined in advance; rather, the number of
fields and their meaning must be induced from just
a few prototype examples.

To incorporate partial supervision, a subset of the
table x is specified manually by an annotator. We
denote this subset of “prototypes” by x̃; for entries
that are unspecified by the user, we write x̃i,j = ∅.
Prototypes are not assumed to provide complete in-
formation for any entity.

3 Model

We now craft a nonparametric generative story that
explains both the latent table and the observed men-
tions. The model incorporates three nonparamet-
ric components, allowing an unbounded number of
rows (entities) and columns (fields), as well as an un-
bounded number of values per column (field values).
A plate diagram for the graphical model is shown in
Figure 1.

A key point is that the column distributions φ
range over possible values at the entity level, not
over mentions in text. For example, φ2 might be
the distribution over possible last names and φ3 the
distribution over elected office titles. Note that φ2
would contain a low value for the last name Obama
— which indicates that few people have this last
name — even though a very high proportion of men-
tions in our data include the string Obama.

The user-generated entries (x̃) can still be treated
as the outcome of the generative process: using ex-
changeability, we treat these entries as the first sam-
ples drawn in each column. In this work, we treat
them as fully observed, but it is possible to treat
them as noisy and incorporate a stochastic depen-
dency between xi,j and x̃i,j .

4 Inference

We now develop sampling-based inference for the
model described in the previous section. We be-
gin with a token-based collapsed Gibbs sampler, and
then add larger-scale Metropolis-Hastings moves.

3



µ σ2

x φ α

w r θr

c ηr

θc ηc

Figure 1: A plate diagram for the
text-and-tables graphical model.
The upper plate is the table x, and
the lower plate is the set of textual
mentions. Notation is defined in the
generative model to the right.

• Generate the table entries. For each column j,
– Draw a concentration parameter αj from a log-normal distribution,

logαj ∼ N (µ, σ2).
– Draw a distribution over strings from a Dirichlet process φj ∼

DP(αj , G0), where the base distribution G0 is a uniform distribution
over strings in a fixed character alphabet, up to an arbitrary finite length.

– For each row i, draw the entry xi,j ∼ φj .

• Generate the text mentions.
– Draw a prior distribution over rows from a stick-breaking distribution,
θr ∼ Stick(ηr).

– Draw a prior distribution over columns from a stick-breaking distribu-
tion, θc ∼ Stick(ηc).

– For each mention wm,
∗ Draw a row in the table rm ∼ θr.
∗ For each word token wm,n (n ∈ {1, . . . , Nm}),
· Draw a column in the table cm,n ∼ θc.
· Set the text wm,n = xrm,cm,n .

4.1 Gibbs sampling

A key aspect of the generative process is that the
word token wm,n is completely determined by the
table x and the row and column indicators rm and
cm,n: given that a token was generated by row i
and column j of the table, it must be identical to
the value of xi,j . Using Bayes’ rule, we can reverse
this deterministic dependence: given the values for
the row and column indices, the entries in the table
are restricted to exact matches with the text men-
tions that they generate. This allows us to marginal-
ize the unobserved entries in the table. We can also
marginalize the distributions θr, θc, and φj , using
the standard collapsed Gibbs sampling equations for
Dirichlet processes. Thus, sampling the row and col-
umn indices is all that is required to explore the en-
tire space of model configurations.

4.1.1 Conditional probability for word tokens

The conditional sampling distributions for both
rows and columns will marginalize the table (be-
sides the prototypes x̃). To do this, we must be
able to compute P (wm,n | rm = i, cm,n =
j, x̃,w−(m,n), r−m, c−(m,n), αj), which represents
the probability of generating word wm,n, given
rm = i and cm,n = j. The notation w−(m,n), r−m,
and c−m,n represent the words, row indices, and col-

umn indices for all mentions besides wm,n. For sim-
plicity, we will elide these variables in much of the
subsequent notation.

We first consider the case where we have a user-
specified entry for the row and column 〈i, j〉— that
is, if x̃ij 6= ∅. Then the probability is simply,

P (wm,n | rm = i, cm,n = j, x̃, . . .) =

{
1, if x̃ij = wm,n
0, if x̃ij 6= wm,n.

(1)

Because the table cell xij is observed, we do not
marginalize over it; we have a generative probability
of one if the word matches, and zero otherwise. If
the table cell xij is not specified by the user, then we
marginalize over its possible values. For any given
xij , the probability P (wm,n | xij , rm = i, cm,n =
j) is still a delta function, so we have:∫

P (wm,n | xrm,cm,n)P (xrm,cm,n | . . .) dxrm,cm,n

= P (x = wm,n | w−(m,n), r−m, c−(m,n), x̃, . . .)

The integral is equal to the probability of the value
of the cell xrm,cm,n being identical to the string
wm,n, given assignments to all other variables. To
compute this probability, we again must consider
two cases: if the cell xi,j has generated some other
string wm′,n′ then its value must be identical to that

4



string; otherwise it is unknown. More formally, for
any cell 〈i, j〉, if ∃wm′,n′ : rm′ = i ∧ cm′,n′ =
j ∧ 〈m′, n′〉 6= 〈m,n〉, then P (xi,j = wm′,n′) = 1;
all other strings have zero probability. If xi,j has not
generated any other entry, then its probability is con-
ditioned on the other elements of the table x. The
known elements of this table are themselves deter-
mined by either the user entries x̃ or the observa-
tionsw−(m,n). We can define these known elements
as x̄, where x̄ij = ∅ if x̃ij = ∅ ∧ @〈m,n〉 : rm =
i ∧ cm,n = j. Then we can apply the standard Chi-
nese restaurant process marginalization to obtain:

P (xij | x̄−(i,j), α) ={ N(x̄−(i,j)=xij)
N(x̄−(i,j) 6=∅)+α , N(x̄−(i,j) = xij) > 0

α
N(x̄−(i,j) 6=∅)+α , N(x̄−(i,j) = xij) = 0

(2)

In our implementation, we maintain the table x̄,
updating it as we resample the row and column as-
signments. To construct the conditional distribution
for any given entry, we first consult this table, and
then compute the probability in Equation 2 for en-
tries where x̄ij = ∅.

4.1.2 Sampling columns
We can now derive sampling equations for the

column indices cm,n. We first apply Bayes’ rule
to obtain P (cm,n | wm,n, rm, . . .) ∝ P (cm,n |
c−(m,n), ηc)×P (wm,n | cm,n, rm, x̃, . . .). The like-
lihood term P (wm,n | cm,n, . . .) is defined in the
previous section; we can compute the first factor us-
ing the standard Dirichlet process marginalization
over θc. Writing N(c−(m,n) = j) for the count of
occurrences of column j in the set c−(m,n), we ob-
tain

P (cm,n = j | c−(m,n), ηc) ={ N(c−(m,n)=j)
N(c−(m,n))+ηc

, if N(c−(m,n) = j) > 0
ηc

N(c−(m,n))+ηc
, if N(c−(m,n) = j) = 0

(3)

4.1.3 Sampling rows
In principle the row indicators can be sampled

identically to the columns, with the caveat that the
generative probability P (wm | rm, . . .) is a product
across all Nm tokens in wm.1 However, because of

1This relies on the assumption that the values of {cm,n} are
mutually independent given c−m. Future work might apply

the tight probabilistic coupling between the row and
column indicators, straightforward Gibbs sampling
mixes slowly. Instead, we marginalize the column
indicators while sampling r. Only the likelihood
term is affected by this change:

P (wm | rm,w−m, r−m, . . .)

=
∑
j

P (c = j | c−m, ηc)P (wm,n | cm,n = j, rm, x̄, α).

(4)

The tokens are conditionally independent given the
row, so we factor and then explicitly marginalize
over each cm,n. The chain rule gives the form in
Equation 4, which contains terms for the prior over
columns and the likelihood of the word; these are
defined in Equations 2 and 3. Note that neither the
inferred table x̄ nor the heldout column counts c−m
include counts from any of the cells in row m.

4.2 Column swaps

Suppose that during initialization, we encounter the
string Barry Obama before encountering Barack
Obama. We would then put Barry in the first-name
column, and put Barack in some other column for
nicknames. After making these initial decisions,
they would be very difficult to undo using Gibbs
sampling — we would have to first shift all instances
of Barry to another column, then move an instance
of Barack to the first-name column, and then move
the instances of Barry to the nickname column. To
rectify this issue, we perform sampling on the table
itself, swapping the columns of entries in the table,
while simultaneously updating the relevant column
indices of the mentions.

In the proposal, we select at random a row t and
indices i and j. In the table, we will swap xt,i with
xt,j ; in the text we will swap the values of each cm,n
whenever rm = t and cm,n = i or j. This pro-
posal is symmetric, so no Hastings correction is re-
quired. Because we are simultaneously updating the
table and the column indices, the generative likeli-
hood of the words is unchanged; the only changes

a more structured model of the ways that fields are combined
when mentioning an entity. For example, a first-order Markov
model could learn that family names often follow given names,
but the reverse rarely occurs (in English).

5



in the overall likelihood come from the column in-
dices and the values of the cells in the table. Letting
x∗, c∗ indicate the state of the table and column in-
dices after the proposed move, we will accept with
probability,

Paccept(x→ x∗) = min
(

1,
P (c∗)P (x∗)

P (c)P (x)

)
(5)

We first consider the ratio of the table probabili-
ties, P (x

∗|α)
P (x|α) . Recall that each column of x is drawn

from a Dirichlet process; appealing to exchangeabil-
ity, we can treat the row t as the last element drawn,
and compute the probabilities P (xt,i | x−(t,i), αi),
with x−(t,i) indicating the elements of the column i
excluding row t. This probability is given by Equa-
tion 2. For a swap of columns i and j, we compute
the ratio:

P (xt,i | x−(t,j), αj)P (xt,j | x−(t,i), αi)
P (xt,i | x−(t,i), αi)P (xt,j | x−(t,j), αj)

(6)

Next we consider the ratio of the column proba-
bilities, P (c

∗)
P (c) . Again we can apply exchangeabil-

ity, P (c) = P ({cm : rm = t} | {cm′ : rm′ 6=
t})P ({cm′ : rm′ 6= t}). The second term P ({cm′ :
rm′ 6= t}) is unaffected by the move, and so is iden-
tical in both the numerator and denominator of the
likelihood ratio; probabilities from columns other
than i and j also cancel in this way. The remaining
ratio can be simplified to,(

P (c = j | c−t, ηc)
P (c = i | c−t, ηc)

)N(r=t∧c=i)−N(r=t∧c=j)
(7)

where the counts N() are from the state of the sam-
pler before executing the proposed move. The prob-
ability P (c = i | c−t, ηc) is defined in Equation 3,
and the overall acceptance ratio for column swaps is
the product of (6) and (7).

4.3 Hyperparameters

The concentration parameters ηr and ηc help to con-
trol the number of rows and columns in the ta-
ble, respectively. These parameters are updated to
their maximum likelihood values using gradient-
based optimization, so our overall inference pro-
cedure is a form of Monte Carlo Expectation-
Maximization (Wei and Tanner, 1990).

The concentration parameters αj control the di-
versity of each column in the table: if αj is low then
we expect a high degree of repetition, as with titles;
if αj is high then we expect a high degree of diver-
sity. When the sampling procedure adds a new col-
umn, there is very little information for how to set
its concentration parameter, as the conditional like-
lihood will be flat. Consequently, greater care must
be taken to handle these priors appropriately.

We place a log-normal hyperprior on the col-
umn concentration parameters, logαj ∼ N (µ, σ2).
The parameters of the log-normal are shared across
columns, which provides additional information to
constrain the concentration parameters of newly-
created columns. We then use Metropolis-Hastings
to sample the values of each αj , using the joint like-
lihood,

P (αj , x̄
(j) | µ, σ2) ∝

exp(−(logαj − µ)2)α
kj
j Γ(αj)

2σ2Γ(nj + αj)
,

where x̄(j) is column j of the inferred table, nj is
the number of specified entries in column j of the
table x̄ and kj is the number of unique entries in
the column; see Rasmussen (2000) for a derivation.
After repeatedly sampling several values of αj for
each column in the table, we update µ and σ2 to their
maximum-likelihood estimates.

5 Temporal Prominence

Andy Warhol predicted, “in the future, everyone will
be world-famous for fifteen minutes.” A model of
temporal dynamics that accounts for the fleeting and
fickle nature of fame might yield better performance
for transient entities, like Joe the Plumber. Among
several alternatives for modeling temporal dynamics
in latent variable models, we choose a simple non-
parametric approach: the recurrent Chinese restau-
rant process (RCRP; Ahmed and Xing, 2008). The
core idea of the RCRP is that time is partitioned into
epochs, with a unique Chinese restaurant process in
each epoch. Each CRP has a prior which takes the
form of pseudo-counts computed from the counts in
previous epochs. We employ the simplest version of
the RCRP, a first-order Markov model in which the
prior for epoch t is equal to the vector of counts for
epoch t− 1:

6



P (r(t)m = i|r
(t)
1...m−1, r

(t−1), ηr) ∝{
N(r

(t)
1...m−1 = i) + N(r

(t−1) = i), if > 0;
ηr, otherwise.

(8)

The count of row i in epoch t − 1 is written
N(r(t−1) = i); the count in epoch t for mentions
1 to m − 1 is written N(r(t)1...m−1 = i). As before,
we can apply exchangeability to treat each mention
as the last in the epoch, so during inference we can
replace this with the count N(r(t)−m). Note that there
is zero probability of drawing an entity that has no
counts in epochs t or t − 1 but exists in some other
epoch; the probability mass ηr is reserved for draw-
ing a new entity, and the chance of this matching
some existing entity from another epoch is vanish-
ingly small.

During Gibbs sampling, we also need to consider
the effect of r(t)m on the subsequent epoch t + 1.
While space does not permit a derivation, the result-
ing probability is proportional to

P (r(t+1)|r(t)−m, r(t)m = i, ηr) ∝
1 if N(r(t+1) = i) = 0,
N(r(t+1)=i)

ηr
if N(r(t)−m = i) = 0,

1 + N(r
(t+1)=i)

N(r
(t)
−m=i)

if N(r(t)−m = i) > 0.
(9)

This favors entities which are frequent in epoch
t+ 1 but infrequent in epoch t.

The move to a recurrent Chinese restaurant pro-
cess does not affect the sampling equations for the
columns c, nor the concentration parameters of the
table, α. The only part of the inference procedure
that needs to be changed is the optimization of the
hyperparameter ηr; the log-likelihood is now the
sum across all epochs, and each epoch makes a con-
tribution to the gradient.

6 Evaluation Setup

Our model jointly performs three tasks: identifying
a set of entities, discovering the set of fields, and
matching mention strings with the entities and fields
to which they refer. We are aware of no prior work
that performs these tasks jointly, nor any dataset that

is annotated for all three tasks.2 Consequently, we
focus our quantitative evaluation on what we take to
be the most important subtask: identifying the enti-
ties which are mentioned in raw text. We annotate
a new dataset of blog text for this purpose, and de-
sign precision and recall metrics to reward systems
that recover as much of the reference set as possi-
ble, while avoiding spurious entities and fields. We
also perform a qualitative analysis, noting the areas
where our method outperforms string matching ap-
proaches, and where there is need for further im-
provement.

Data Evaluation was performed on a corpus
of blogs describing United States politics in
2008 (Eisenstein and Xing, 2010). We ran the Stan-
ford Named Entity Recognition system (Finkel et
al., 2005) to obtain a set of 25,000 candidate men-
tions which the system judged to be names of peo-
ple. We then pruned strings that appeared fewer than
four times and eliminated strings with more than
seven tokens (these were usually errors). The result-
ing dataset has 19,247 mentions comprising 45,466
word tokens, and 813 unique mention strings.

Gold standard We develop a reference set of 100
entities for evaluation. This set was created by sort-
ing the unique name strings in the training set by fre-
quency, and manually merging strings that reference
the same entity. We also manually discarded strings
from the reference set if they resulted from errors in
the preprocessing pipeline (tokenization and named
entity recognition). Each entity is represented by
the set of all word tokens that appear in its refer-
ences; there are a total of 231 tokens for the 100 en-
tities. Most entities only include first and last names,
though the most frequent entities have many more:
for example, the entity Barack Obama has known
names: {Barack, Obama, Sen., Mr.}.

Metrics We evaluate the recall and precision of
a system’s response set by matching against the
reference set. The first step is to create a bipar-
tite matching between response and reference enti-
ties.3 Using a cost function that quantifies the sim-

2Recent work exploiting Wikipedia disambiguation pages
for evaluating cross-document coreference suggests an appeal-
ing alternative for future work (Singh et al., 2011).

3Bipartite matchings are typical in information extraction
evaluation metrics (e.g., Doddington et al., 2004).

7



ilarity of response and reference entities, we opti-
mize the matching using the Kuhn-Munkres algo-
rithm (Kuhn, 1955). For recall, the cost function
counts the number of shared word tokens, divided
by the number of word tokens in the reference enti-
ties; the recall is one minus the average cost of the
best matching (with a cost of one for reference enti-
ties that are not matched, and no cost for unmatched
response entities). Precision is computed identically,
but we normalize by the number of word tokens in
the response entity. Precision assigns a penalty of
one to unmatched response entities and no penalty
for unmatched reference entities.

Note that this metric grossly underrates the preci-
sion of all systems: the reference set is limited to 100
entities, but it is clear that our text mentions many
other people. This is harsh but fair: all systems are
penalized equally for identifying entities that are not
present in the reference set, and the ideal system will
recover the fifty reference entities (thus maximizing
recall) while keeping the table as compact as possi-
ble (thus maximizing precision). However, the raw
precision values have little meaning outside the con-
text of a direct comparison under identical experi-
mental conditions.

Systems The initial seed set for our system con-
sists of a partial annotation of five entities (Table 1)
— larger seed sets did not improve performance. We
run the inference procedure described in the previ-
ous section for 20,000 iterations, and then obtain a
final database by taking the intersection of the in-
ferred tables x̄ obtained at every 100 iterations, start-
ing with iteration 15,000. To account for variance
across Markov chains, we perform three different
runs. We evaluate a non-temporal version of our
model (as described in Sections 3 and 4), and a tem-
poral version with 5 epochs. For the non-temporal
version, a non-parallel C implementation had a wall
clock sampling time of roughly 16 hours; the tem-
poral version required 24 hours.

We compare against a baseline that incrementally
clusters strings into entities using a string edit dis-
tance metric, based on the work of Elmacioglu et
al. (2007). Starting from a configuration in which
each unique string forms its own cluster, we incre-
mentally merge clusters using the single-link crite-
rion, based on the minimum Jaccard edit distance

0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

recall

p
re

c
is

io
n

 

 

baseline

atemporal model

temporal model

Figure 2: The precision and recall of our models, as com-
pared to the curve defined by the incremental clustering
baseline. Each point indicates a unique sampling run.

Bill Clinton Benazir Bhutto
Nancy Pelosi Speaker
John Kerry Sen. Roberts

Martin King Dr. Jr. Luther
Bill Nelson

Table 2: A subset of the entity database discovered by
our model, hand selected to show highlight interesting
success and failure cases.

between each pair of clusters. This yields a series of
outputs that move along the precision-recall curve,
with precision increasing as the clusters encompass
more strings. There is prior work on heuristics for
selecting a stopping point, but we compare our re-
sults against the entire precision-recall curve (Man-
ning et al., 2008).

7 Results

The results of our evaluation are shown in Figure 2.
All sampling runs from our models lie well beyond
the precision-recall curve defined by the baseline
system, demonstrating the ability to achieve reason-
able recall with a far more compact database. The
baseline system can achieve nearly perfect recall by
creating one entity per unique string, but as it merges
strings to improve precision, its recall suffers sig-
nificantly. As noted above, perfect precision is not
possible on this task, because the reference set cov-
ers only a subset of the entities that appear in the
data. However, the numbers do measure the ability
to recover the reference entities in the most compact
table possible, allowing a quantitative comparison of
our models and the baseline approach.

8



Table 2 shows a database identified by the atem-
poral version of our model. The most densely-
populated columns in the table correspond to well-
defined name parts: columns 1 and 2 are almost
exclusively populated with first and last names re-
spectively, and column 3 is mainly populated by ti-
tles. The remaining columns are more of a grab
bag. Column 4 correctly captures Jr. for Martin
Luther King; column 5 correctly captures Luther,
but mistakenly contains Roberts (thus merging the
John Kerry and John Roberts entities), and Bhutto
(thus helping to merge the Bill Clinton and Benazir
Bhutto entities).

The model successfully distinguishes some, but
not all, of the entities that share tokens. For example,
the model separates Bill Clinton from Bill Nelson;
it also separates John McCain from John Kerry
(whom it mistakenly merges with John Roberts).
The ability to distinguish individuals who share first
names is due in part to the model attributing a low
concentration parameter to first names, meaning that
some repetition in the first name column is expected.
The model correctly identifies several titles and al-
ternative names, including the rare title Speaker for
Nancy Pelosi; however, it misses others, such as the
Senator title for Bill Nelson. This may be due in
part to the sample merging procedure used to gener-
ate this table, which requires that a cell contain the
same value in at least 80% of the samples.

Many errors may be attributed to slow mixing.
After mistakenly merging Bhutto and Clinton at
an early stage, the Gibbs sampler — which treats
each mention independently — is unable to sep-
arate them. Given that several other mentions of
Bhutto are already in the row occupied by Clin-
ton, the overall likelihood would benefit little from
creating a new row for a single mention, though
moving all such mentions simultaneously would re-
sult in an improvement. Larger scale Metropolis-
Hastings moves, such as split-merge or type-based
sampling (Liang et al., 2010) may help.

8 Related Work

Information Extraction A tradition of research
in information extraction focuses on processing raw
text to fill in the fields of manually-defined tem-
plates, thus populating databases of events or re-

lations (McNamee and Dang, 2009). While early
approaches focused on surface-level methods such
as wrapper induction (Kushmerick et al., 1997),
more recent work in this area includes Bayesian
nonparametrics to select the number of rows in the
database (Haghighi and Klein, 2010a). However,
even in such nonparametric work, the form of the
template and the number of slots are fixed in ad-
vance. Our approach differs in that the number of
fields and their meaning is learned from data. Recent
work by Chambers and Jurafsky (2011) approaches
a related problem, applying agglomerative cluster-
ing over sentences to detect events, and then clus-
tering syntactic constituents to induce the relevant
fields of each event entity. As described in Section 6,
our method performs well against an agglomerative
clustering baseline, though a more comprehensive
comparison of the two approaches is an important
step for future work.

Name Segmentation and Structure A related
stream of research focuses specifically on names:
identifying them in raw text, discovering their struc-
ture, and matching names that refer to the same en-
tity. We do not undertake the problem of named en-
tity recognition (Tjong Kim Sang, 2002), but rather
apply an existing NER system as a preprocessing
step (Finkel et al., 2005). Typical NER systems
do not attempt to discover the internal structure of
names or a database of canonical names, although
they often use prefabricated “gazetteers” of names
and name parts as features to improve performance
(Borthwick et al., 1998; Sarawagi and Cohen, 2005).

Charniak (2001) shows that it is possible to learn a
model of name structure, either by using coreference
information as labeled data, or by leveraging a small
set of hand-crafted constraints. Elsner et al. (2009)
develop a nonparametric Bayesian model of name
structure using adaptor grammars, which they use to
distinguish types of names (e.g., people, places, and
organizations). Li et al. (2004) use a set of manually-
crafted “transformations” of name parts to build a
model of how a name might be rendered in multi-
ple different ways. While each of these approaches
bears on one or more facets of the problem that we
consider here, none provides a holistic treatment of
name disambiguation and structure.

9



Resolving Mentions to Entities The problem of
resolving mentions to entities has been approach
from a variety of different perspectives. There is
an extensive literature on probabilistic record link-
age, in which database records are compared to de-
termine if they are likely to have the same real-world
referents (e.g., Felligi and Sunter, 1969; Bilenko
et al., 2003). Most approaches focus on pairwise
assessments of whether two records are the same,
whereas our method attempts to infer a single coher-
ent model of the underlying relational data. Some
more recent work in record linkage has explicitly
formulated the task of inferring a latent relational
model of a set of observed datasets (e.g., Cohen
et al., 2000; Pasula et al., 2002; Bhattacharya and
Getoor, 2007); however, to our knowledge, these
prior models have all exploited some predefined
database schema (i.e., set of columns), which our
model does not require. Many of these prior mod-
els have been applied to bibliographic data, where
different conventions and abbreviations lead to im-
perfect matches in different references to the same
publication. In our task, we consider name mentions
in raw text; such mentions are short, and may not
offer as many redundant clues for linkage as biblio-
graphic references.

In natural language processing, coreference res-
olution is the task of grouping entity mentions
(strings), in one or more documents, based on their
common referents in the world. Although much of
coreference resolution has on the single document
setting, there has been some recent work on cross-
document coreference resolution (Li et al., 2004;
Haghighi and Klein, 2007; Poon and Domingos,
2008; Singh et al., 2011). The problem we consider
is related to cross-document coreference, although
we take on the additional challenge of providing
a canonicalized name for each referent (the corre-
sponding table row), and in inferring a structured
representation of entity names (the table columns).
For this reason, our evaluation focuses on the in-
duced table of entities, rather than the clustering of
mention strings. The best coreference systems de-
pend on carefully crafted, problem-specific linguis-
tic features (Bengtson and Roth, 2008) and exter-
nal knowledge (Haghighi and Klein, 2010b). Future
work might consider how to exploit such features for
the more holistic information extraction setting.

9 Conclusion

This paper presents a Bayesian nonparametric ap-
proach to recover structured records from text. Us-
ing only a small set of prototype records, we are able
to recover an accurate table that jointly identifies en-
tities and internal name structure. In our view, the
main advantage of a Bayesian approach compared
to more heuristic alternatives is that it facilitates in-
corporation of additional information sources when
available. In this paper, we have considered one
such additional source, incorporating temporal con-
text using the recurrent Chinese restaurant process.

We envision enhancing the model in several other
respects. One promising direction is the incorpo-
ration of name structure, which could be captured
using a first-order Markov model of the transitions
between name parts. In the nonparametric setting,
a transition matrix is unbounded along both dimen-
sions, and this can be handled by a hierarchical
Dirichlet process (HDP; Teh et al 2006).4 We en-
vision other potential applications of the HDP: for
example, learning “topics” of entities which tend to
appear together (i.e., given a mention of Mahmoud
Abbas in the American press, a mention of Ben-
jamin Netanyahu is likely), and handling document-
specific burstiness (i.e., given that an entity is men-
tioned once in a document, it is much more likely
to be mentioned again). Finally, we would like
to incorporate lexical context from the sentences in
which each entity is mentioned, which might help to
distinguish, say, computer science researchers who
share names with former defense secretaries or pro-
fessional basketball players.

Acknowledgments This research was enabled
by AFOSR FA95501010247, DARPA grant
N10AP20042, ONR N000140910758, NSF DBI-
0546594, IIS-0713379, IIS-0915187, IIS-0811562,
an Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship, and Google’s support
of the Worldly Knowledge project at CMU. We
thank the reviewers for their thoughtful feedback.

4One of the reviewers proposed to draw entire column se-
quences from a Dirichlet process. Given the relatively small
number of columns and canonical name forms, this may be a
straightforward and effective alternative to the HDP.

10



References
Amr Ahmed and Eric P. Xing. 2008. Dynamic non-

parametric mixture models and the recurrent Chinese
restaurant process with applications to evolutionary
clustering. In International Conference on Data Min-
ing.

Javier Artiles, Julio Gonzalo, and Satoshi Sekine. 2007.
The SemEval-2007 WePS evaluation: establishing a
benchmark for the web people search task. In Pro-
ceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Seman-
tic Evaluations, SemEval ’07, pages 64–69. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Eric Bengtson and Dan Roth. 2008. Understanding
the value of features for coreference resolution. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’08,
pages 294–303, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Indrajit Bhattacharya and Lise Getoor. 2007. Collec-
tive entity resolution in relational data. ACM Trans.
Knowl. Discov. Data, 1(1), March.

Mikhail Bilenko, William W. Cohen, Stephen Fien-
berg, Raymond J. Mooney, and Pradeep Ravikumar.
2003. Adaptive name-matching in information in-
tegration. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 18(5):16–23,
September/October.

A. Borthwick, J. Sterling, E. Agichtein, and R. Grishman.
1998. Exploiting diverse knowledge sources via max-
imum entropy in named entity recognition. In Sixth
Workshop on Very Large Corpora New Brunswick,
New Jersey. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2011. Template-
based information extraction without the templates. In
Proceedings of ACL.

Eugene Charniak. 2001. Unsupervised learning of name
structure from coreference data. In Proceedings of the
Second Meeting of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics.

William W. Cohen, Henry Kautz, and David McAllester.
2000. Hardening soft information sources. In Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 255–
259.

George Doddington, Alexis Mitchell, Mark Przybocki,
Lance Ramshaw, Stephanie Strassel, and Ralph
Weischedel. 2004. The automatic content extraction
(ace) program: Tasks, data, and evaluation. In 4th
international conference on language resources and
evaluation (LREC’04).

Jacob Eisenstein and Eric Xing. 2010. The CMU 2008
political blog corpus. Technical report, Carnegie Mel-
lon University.

Ergin Elmacioglu, Yee Fan Tan, Su Yan, Min-Yen Kan,
and Dongwon Lee. 2007. Psnus: Web people name
disambiguation by simple clustering with rich features.
In Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 268–
271, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Micha Elsner, Eugene Charniak, and Mark Johnson.
2009. Structured generative models for unsupervised
named-entity clustering. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 164–172, Boulder,
Colorado, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

I. P. Felligi and A. B. Sunter. 1969. A theory for record
linkage. Journal of the American Statistical Society,
64:1183–1210.

Jenny R. Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher Man-
ning. 2005. Incorporating non-local information
into information extraction systems by Gibbs sam-
pling. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on
Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’05,
pages 363–370, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Aria Haghighi and Dan Klein. 2007. Unsupervised
coreference resolution in a nonparametric bayesian
model. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting
of the Association of Computational Linguistics, pages
848–855, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Aria Haghighi and Dan Klein. 2010a. An entity-level
approach to information extraction. In Proceedings
of the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers, ACLShort
’10, pages 291–295, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Aria Haghighi and Dan Klein. 2010b. Coreference reso-
lution in a modular, entity-centered model. In Human
Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 385–393, Los An-
geles, California, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Harold W. Kuhn. 1955. The Hungarian method for the
assignment problem. Naval Research Logistic Quar-
terly, 2:83–97.

Nicholas Kushmerick, Daniel S. Weld, and Robert
Doorenbos. 1997. Wrapper induction for information
extraction. In Proceedings of IJCAI.

Xin Li, Paul Morie, and Dan Roth. 2004. Identification
and tracing of ambiguous names: Discriminative and
generative approaches. In Proceedings of AAAI, pages
419–424.

11



Percy Liang, Michael I. Jordan, and Dan Klein. 2010.
Type-Based MCMC. In Human Language Technolo-
gies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 573–581, Los Angeles, California,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hin-
rich Schütze. 2008. Introduction to Information Re-
trieval. Cambridge University Press, 1 edition, July.

Paul McNamee and Hoa Trang Dang. 2009. Overview
of the TAC 2009 knowledge base population track. In
Proceedings of the Text Analysis Conference (TAC).

Hanna Pasula, Bhaskara Marthi, Brian Milch, Stuart Rus-
sell, and Ilya Shpitser. 2002. Identity uncertainty and
citation matching. In Advances in Neural Processing
Systems 15, Vancouver, British Columbia. MIT Press.

Hoifung Poon and Pedro Domingos. 2008. Joint un-
supervised coreference resolution with Markov Logic.
In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 650–
659, Honolulu, Hawaii, October. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Carl E. Rasmussen. 2000. The Infinite Gaussian Mixture
Model. In In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 12, volume 12, pages 554–560.

Sunita Sarawagi and William W. Cohen. 2005. Semi-
Markov conditional random fields for information ex-
traction. In Lawrence K. Saul, Yair Weiss, and Léon
Bottou, editors, Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 17, pages 1185–1192. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Sameer Singh, Amarnag Subramanya, Fernando Pereira,
and Andrew McCallum. 2011. Large-scale cross-
document coreference using distributed inference and
hierarchical models. In Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(ACL HLT).

Yee W. Teh, Michael I. Jordan, Matthew J. Beal, and
David M. Blei. 2006. Hierarchical dirichlet pro-
cesses. Journal of the American Statistical Associa-
tion, 101:1566–1581, December.

Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang. 2002. Introduction to
the CoNLL-2002 shared task: Language-independent
named entity recognition. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Conference on Natural Language Learning.

Greg C. G. Wei and Martin A. Tanner. 1990. A Monte
Carlo Implementation of the EM Algorithm and the
Poor Man’s Data Augmentation Algorithms. Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 85(411):699–
704.

12


