










































Automatic extraction of data deposition statements: where do the research results go?


Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL-HLT 2011, pages 103–104,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic extraction of data deposition sentences:  

where do the research results go? 

Aurélie Névéol, W. John Wilbur, Zhiyong Lu 

National Center for Biotechnology Information 

U.S. National Library of Medicine 
Bethesda, MD 20894, USA 

{Aurelie.Neveol,John.Wilbur,zhiyong.lu}@nih.gov 

  

Abstract 

Research in the biomedical domain can have a 

major impact through open sharing of data 

produced. In this study, we use machine learn-

ing for the automatic identification of data 

deposition sentences in research articles. Arti-

cles containing deposition sentences are cor-

rectly identified with 73% f-measure. These 

results show the potential impact of our meth-

od for literature curation.  

1 Background 

Research in the biomedical domain aims at further-
ing the knowledge of biological processes and im-
proving human health. Major contributions 
towards this goal can be achieved by sharing the 
results of research efforts with the community, in-
cluding datasets produced in the course of the re-
search work. While such sharing behavior is 
encouraged by funding agencies and scientific 
journals, recent work has shown that the ratio of 
data sharing is still modest compared to actual data 
production. For instance, Ochsner et al. (2008) 
found the deposition rate of microarray data to be 
less than 50% for work published in 2007.  

Information about the declaration of data depo-
sition in research papers can be used both for data 
curation and for the analysis of emerging research 
trends. Our long-term research interest is in as-
sessing the value of deposition sentences for pre-
dicting future trends of data production. The initial 
step of automatically identifying deposition sen-
tences would then lead to an assessment of the 
need for storage space of incoming data in public 
repositories. 

2 Objective 

In this study, we aim at automatically perform-
ing a fine-grained identification of biological data 
deposition sentences in biomedical text. That is, 
we aim at identifying articles containing deposition 
sentences, extracting the specific sentences and 
characterizing the information contained in the 
sentences in terms of data type and deposition lo-
cation (e.g. database, accession numbers).  

3 Material and Methods 

Data deposition sentences . A collection of sen-
tences reporting the deposition of biological data 
(such as microarray data, protein structure, gene 
sequences) in public repositories was compiled 
based on previous work that we extended. We take 
these sentences as a primary method of identifying 
articles reporting on research that produced the 
kind of data deposited in public repositories. (1) 
and (2) show examples of such sentences. In con-
trast, (3) and (4) contain elements related to data 
deposition while focusing on other topics.   

(1) The sequences reported in this paper have been 
deposited in the GenBank database (acces sion 

numbers AF034483 for susceptible strain RC688s 

and AF034484 for resistant strain HD198r). 

(2) The microarray data were submitted to MIAMEx-
press at the EMBL-EBI. 

(3) Histone TAG Arrays are a repurposing of a micro-
array design originally created to represent the 

TAG sequences in the Yeast Knockout collection 

(Yuan et al 2005 NCBI GEO Accession Number 

GPL1444). 

(4) The primary sequence of native Acinetobacter 

CMO is identical to the gene sequence for chnB 

deposited under accession number AB006902. 

103



Sentence classification. A Support Vector Ma-
chine (SVM) classifier was built using a corpus of 
583 positive data deposition sentences and 578 
other negative sentences. Several sets of features 
were tested, including the following: sentence to-
kens, associated part-of-speech tags obtained using 
MEDPOST

1
, relative position of the sentence in 

the article, identification of elements related to data 
deposition (data, deposition action, database, ac-
cession number) obtained using a CRF model

2
.   

Article classification. The automatic classification 
of articles relied on sentence analysis. The full text 
of articles was segmented into sentences, which 
were then scored by the sentence-level SVM clas-
sifier described above. An article is classified as 
positive if its top-scored sentence is scored higher 
than a threshold, which is predetermined as the 25

th
 

percentile score for positive sentences in the train-
ing set.  
Evaluation corpus . A corpus composed of 670 
PubMed Central articles was used to evaluate arti-
cle classification. 200 articles were considered as 
“positive” for data deposition based on MEDLINE 
gold standard annotations in the [si] field used to 
curate newly reported accession numbers.  

4 Results  

Table 1 shows the performance of selected SVM 
models for article classification on the test set. 
While differences were very small for cross-
validation on the training set, they are emphasized 
on the test set.   
 

Features P         R           F 
Tokens, position, part-of-
speech tags 

52%      56%     54% 

Token, position, CRF+, 
part-of-speech tags  

65%      58%     62% 

Tokens, position, CRF+/-, 
part-of-speech tags 

69%     78%     73% 

Table 1: Precision, Recall and F-measure of SVM 
models for article classification on test set. 

5 Discussion and Conclusion 

Portability of the method. Although trained 
mainly on microarray data deposition sentences, 
the method adapts well to the identification of oth-

                                                                 
1 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/staff/lsmith/MedPost.html 
2 http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/ 

er data deposition sentences, e.g. gene sequences, 
protein coordinates.  
Comparison to other work. Our approach is not 
directly comparable to any of the previous studies. 
At the article level, we perform an automatic clas-
sification of articles containing data deposition 
sentences, in contrast with Oshner et al. who per-
formed a one-time manual classification. Piwowar 
et al used machine learning and rule-based algo-
rithms for article classification. However, they re-
lied on identifying the names of five predetermined 
databases in the full text of articles. Our approach 
is generic and aiming at the automatic identifica-
tion of any biological data deposition in any public 
repository. Furthermore, our approach also re-
trieves specific data deposition sentences where 
data and deposition location are identified. At the 
sentence level, this is also different from the classi-
fication of databank accession number sentences 
performed by Kim et al. (2010) in two ways: first, 
we focus on retrieving sentences containing acces-
sion numbers if they are deposition sentences (vs. 
data re-use, etc.) and second, we are also interested 
in retrieving data deposition sentences that do not 
contain accession numbers.  

Error analysis . Almost half of the articles clas-
sified as containing a deposition sentence by our 
method but not by the gold standard were found to 
indeed contain a deposition sentence.  

Conclusion. These results show the potential 
impact of our method for literature curation. In 
addition, it provides a robust tool for future work 
assessing the need for storage space of incoming 
data in public repositories. 

Acknowledgments 

This research was supported by the Intramural Re-
search Program of the NIH, NLM.  

References  

Jongwoo Kim, Daniel Le, Georges R. Thoma. Naïve 

bayes and SVM classifiers for classifying databank 

accession number sentences from online biomedical 

articles. Proc. SPIE 2010 (7534): 7534OU-OU8 

Scott A. Ochsner, Davd L Steffen, Christian J Stoeckert 

Jr, Neil J. McKenna. Much room for improvement 

in deposition rates of expression microarray da-

tasets. Nat Methods. 2008 Dec;5(12):991.  

Heather A. Piwowar, Wendy W. Chapman. Identifying 

data sharing in biomedical literature.AMIA Annu 

Symp Proc. 2008 Nov 6:596-600. 

104


