



















































Talkin' bout a revolution (statistically speaking)


Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), page 1,
Nancy, France, September 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Talkin’ bout a revolution (statistically speaking)

Oliver Lemon
Heriot-Watt University

Edinburgh, United Kingdom
o.lemon@hw.ac.uk

This talk will describe new methods for generating
Natural Language in interactive systems – methods
which are similar to planning approaches, but which
use statistical machine learning to develop adap-
tive NLG components. Employing statistical models
of users, generation contexts, and of Natural Lan-
guages themselves, has several potentially benefi-
cial features: the ability to train models on real data,
the availability of precise mathematical methods for
optimisation, and the capacity to adapt robustly to
previously unseen situations. Rather than emulating
human behaviour in generation (which can be sub-
optimal) these methods can even find strategies for
NLG which improve upon human performance.

Recently, some encouraging results have been ob-
tained with real users of 3 different systems devel-
oped using these methods, for the tasks of Informa-
tion Presentation in an automated tourist guide, Re-
ferring Expression Generation in a technical support
system, and generation of Temporal Referring Ex-
pressions in an appointment scheduling system. The
results show that optimised NLG significantly out-
performs related prior approaches, and can also im-
prove the global performance of dialogue systems.

As well as explaining the core Reinforcement
Learning and user modelling methods and concepts
behind this work, I will also cover some recent work
from other researchers which fits with this general
perspective on NLG. Finally, I discuss some future
directions for this research area, for example the is-
sues of incremental generation and generation under
uncertainty.

References
Srini Janarthanam and Oliver Lemon. 2010a. Learning

to adapt to unknown users: Referring expression gen-
eration in spoken dialogue systems. In Proceedings of
ACL.

Srinivasan Janarthanam and Oliver Lemon. 2010b.
Adaptive referring expression generation in spoken di-
alogue systems: evaluation with real users. In Pro-
ceedings of SIGDIAL.

Srinivasan Janarthanam, Helen Hastie, Oliver Lemon,
and Xingkun Liu. 2011. ’the day after the day after
tomorrow?’ a machine learning approach to adaptive
temporal expression generation: training and evalua-
tion with real users. In Proceedings of SIGDIAL.

Oliver Lemon, Srini Janarthanam, and Verena Rieser.
2010. Generation under uncertainty. In Proceedings
of the Generation Challenges Session at INLG.

Oliver Lemon. 2011. Learning what to say and how
to say it: joint optimization of spoken dialogue man-
agement and natural language generation. Computer
Speech and Language, 25(2).

Verena Rieser and Oliver Lemon. 2009. Natural lan-
guage generation as planning under uncertainty for
spoken dialogue systems. In Proceedings of EACL.

Verena Rieser, Oliver Lemon, and Xingkun Liu. 2010.
Optimising information presentation for spoken dia-
logue systems. In Proceedings of ACL.

1


