



















































Towards Generating Text from Discourse Representation Structures


Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 145–150,
Nancy, France, September 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards Generating Text from Discourse Representation Structures

Valerio Basile
Humanities Computing
University of Groningen
v.basile@rug.nl

Johan Bos
Humanities Computing
University of Groningen
johan.bos@rug.nl

Abstract

We argue that Discourse Representation
Structures form a suitable level of language-
neutral meaning representation for micro
planning and surface realisation. DRSs can be
viewed as the output of macro planning, and
form the rough plan and structure for generat-
ing a text. We present the first ideas of build-
ing a large DRS corpus that enables the devel-
opment of broad-coverage, robust text gener-
ators. A DRS-based generator imposes vari-
ous challenges on micro-planning and surface
realisation, including generating referring ex-
pressions, lexicalisation and aggregation.

1 Introduction

Natural Language Generation, NLG, is often viewed
as a complex process comprising four main tasks
(Bateman and Zock, 2003): i) macro planning,
building an overall text plan; ii) micro planning, se-
lecting referring expressions and appropriate content
words; iii) surface realisation, selection of gram-
matical constructions and linear order; and iv) phys-
ical presentation, producing final articulation and
layout operations. Arguably, the output of the macro
planning component in an NLG system is some sort
of abstract, language-neutral representation that en-
codes the information and messages that need to
be conveyed, structured by rhetorical relations, and
supported by information that is presupposed to be
common ground.

We argue that the Discourse Representation
Structures (DRSs) from Discourse Representation
Theory (Kamp, 1984) form an appropriate represen-
tation for this task. This choice is driven by both
theoretical and practical considerations:

• DRT, being a theory of analysing meaning, is
by principle language-neutral;

• Many linguistic phenomena are studied in the
framework provided by DRT;

• DRT has a model-theoretical backbone, allow-
ing applications to perform logical inferences
with the aid of theorem provers.

As a matter of fact, DRT has means to encode pre-
supposed information in a principled way (Van der
Sandt, 1992), and connections with rhetorical rela-
tions are spelled out in detail (Asher, 1993). More-
over, the formal integration of DRS with named en-
tities, thematic roles and word senses is natural.

These are, mostly, purely theoretical considera-
tions. But in order to make DRSs a practical plat-
form for developing NLG systems a large corpus of
text annotated with DRSs is required. Doing this
manually is way too costly. But given the develop-
ments in (mostly statistical) parsing of the last two
decades we are now in a position to use state-of-
the-art tools to semi-automatically produce gold (or
nearly gold) standard DRS-annotated corpora.

Such a resource could form a good basis to de-
velop (statistical) NLG systems, and this thought is
supported by current trends in broad-coverage NLG
components (Elhadad and Robin, 1996; White et
al., 2007), that take deep semantic representations
as starting points for surface realisation. The impor-
tance of a multi-level resource for generation is un-
derlined by Bohnet et al. (2010), who feel the lack
of such a resource is hampering progress in the field.

In this paper we show how we are building such
a corpus (SemBank, Section 2), what the exact na-
ture of the DRSs in this corpus is, and what phe-
nomena are covered (Section 3). We also illustrate
what challenges it poses upon micro planning and
surface realisation (Section 4). Finally, in Section 5,
we discuss how generating from DRSs relates to the
traditional NLG pipeline.

2 The Groningen SemBank

Various semantically annotated corpora of reason-
able size exist nowadays: PropBank (Palmer et al.,

145



Figure 1: Screenshot of SemBank’s visualisation tool for the syntax-semantics interface combining CCG and DRT.

2005), FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998), the Penn Dis-
course TreeBank (Prasad et al., 2005), and sev-
eral resources developed for shared tasks such as
CoNNL and SemEval. Annotated corpora that com-
bine various levels of annotation into one formal-
ism hardly exist. A notable exception is OntoNotes
(Hovy et al., 2006), combining syntax (Penn Tree-
bank style), predicate argument structure (based on
PropBank), word senses, and coreference. Yet all of
these resources lack a level comprising a formally
grounded “deep” semantic representation that com-
bines various layers of linguistic annotation.

Filling this gap is exactly the purpose of Sem-
Bank. It provides a collection of semantically anno-
tated texts with deep rather than shallow seman-
tics. Its goal is to integrate phenomena instead
of covering single phenomena into one formalism,
and representing texts, not sentences. SemBank
is driven by linguistic theory, using CCG, Com-
binatory Categorial Grammar (Steedman, 2001),
for providing syntactic structure, employing (Seg-
mented) Discourse Representation Theory (Kamp,
1984; Asher and Lascarides, 2003) as semantic
framework, and first-order logic as a language for
automated inference tasks.

In our view, a corpus developed primarily for
research purposes must be widely available to re-
searchers in the field. Therefore, SemBank will only
consists of texts which distribution isn’t subject to
copyright restrictions. Currently, we focus on En-
glish newswire text from an American newspaper
whose articles are in the public domain. In the fu-
ture we aim to cover other text genres, possibly inte-
grating resources from the Open American National

Corpus (Ide et al., 2010). The plan is to release a
stable version of SemBank in regular intervals, and
to provide open access to the development version.

The linguistic levels of SemBank are, in order of
analysis depth: part of speech tags (Penn tagset);
named entities (roughly based on the ACE ontol-
ogy); word senses (WordNet); thematic roles (Verb-
Net); syntactic structure (CCG); semantic represen-
tations, including events and tense (DRT); rhetorical
relations (SDRT). Even though we talk about differ-
ent levels here, they are all connected to each other.
We will show how in the following section.

Size and quality are factors that influence the use-
fulness of annotated resources. As one of the things
we have in mind is the use of statistical techniques
in NLG, the corpus should be sufficiently large.
However, annotating a reasonably large corpus with
gold-standard semantic representations is obviously
a hard and time-consuming task. We aim to provide
a trade-off between quality and quantity, with a pro-
cess that improves the annotation accuracy in each
periodical stable release of SemBank.

This brings us to the method we employ to con-
struct SemBank. We are using state-of-the-art tools
for syntactic and semantic processing to provide a
rough, first proposal of semantic representation for
a text. Among other tools, the most important are
the C&C parser (Clark and Curran, 2004) for syn-
tactic analysis, and Boxer (Bos, 2008) for semantic
analysis. This software, trained and developed on
the Penn Treebank, shows high coverage for texts in
the newswire domain (up to 98%), is robust and fast,
and therefore suitable for this task.

The output of these tools are corrected by crowd-

146



Table 1: Illustration of linguistic information integration in SemBank
Level Theory/Source Internal DRS Encoding
semantics DRT (Kamp and Reyle, 1993) drs(...,...)
named entity ACE named(X,’Clinton’,per)
thematic roles VerbNet (Kipper et al., 2008) rel(E,X,’Agent’)
word senses WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) pred(X,loon,n,2)
rhetorical relations SDRT (Asher and Lascarides, 2003) rel(K1,K2,elaboration)

sourcing methods, comprising (i) a group of experts
that are able to propose corrections at various lev-
els of annotation in a wiki-based fashion; and (ii)
a group of non-experts that provide information for
the lower levels of annotation decisions by way of
a Game with a Purpose, similar to the successful
Phrase Detectives (Chamberlain et al., 2008) and
Jeux de Mots (Artignan et al., 2009).

3 Discourse Representation Structures

A DRS comprises two parts: a set of discourse ref-
erents (the entities introduced in the text), and a set
of conditions, describing the properties of the ref-
erents and the relations between them. We adopt
well-known extensions to the standard theory to in-
clude rhetorical relations (Asher, 1993) and presup-
positions (Van der Sandt, 1992). DRSs are tradition-
ally visualised as boxes, with the referents placed in
the top part, and the DRS conditions in the bottom
part. The convention in SemBank is to sort the dis-
course referents into entities (variables starting with
an x), events (e), propositions (p), temporalities (t),
and discourse segments (k), as Figure 2 shows.

The DRS conditions can be divided into basic and
complex conditions. The basic conditions are used
to describe names of discourse referents (named),
concepts of entities (pred), relations between dis-
course referents (rel), cardinality of discourse ref-
erents denoting sets of objects (card), or to express
identity between discourse referents (=). The com-
plex conditions introduce embedded DRSs: implica-
tion (⇒), negation (¬), disjunction (∨), and modal-
ities (2, 3). DRSs are thus of recursive nature,
and the embedding of DRSs restrict the resolution of
pronouns (and other anaphoric expressions), which
is one of the trade mark properties of DRT.

The aim of SemBank is to provide fully resolved
semantic representations. Obviously, natural lan-
guage expressions can be ambiguous and picking
the most likely interpretation isn’t always straight-

forward: Some pronouns have no clear antecedents,
word senses are often hard to distinguish, and scope
orderings are sometimes vague. In future work this
might give rise to adding some underspecification
mechanisms into the formalism.

DRSs are formal structures and come with a
model-theoretic interpretation. This interpretation
can be given directly (Kamp and Reyle, 1993) or via
a translation into first-order logic (Muskens, 1996).
This is interesting from a practical perspective, be-
cause it permits the use of efficient existing infer-
ence engines developed by the automated deduction
community. Applying logical inference can play a
role in tasks surrounding NLG (e.g., summarisation,
question answering, or textual entailment), but also
dedicated components of NLG systems, such as gen-
erating definite descriptions, which requires check-
ing contextual restrictions (Gardent et al., 2004).

Figure 1 illustrates how SemBank provides the
compositional semantics of each sentence in the text
in the form of a CCG derivation. Here each to-
ken is associated with a supertag (a lexical CCG
category) and its corresponding lexical semantics, a
partial DRS. The CCG derivation, a tree structure,
shows the compositional semantics in each step of
the derivation, with the aid of the λ-calculus (the @
operator denotes function application).

Table 1 shows how the various levels of annota-
tion are integrated in DRSs. Thematic roles (Verb-
Net) are implied by the neo-Davidsonian event se-
mantics employed in SemBank, and are represented
as two-place relations. The named entity types form
part of the basic DRS condition for names, and Word
senses (WordNet) are represented as a feature on the
one-place conditions for nouns, verbs and modifiers.
Rhetorical relations are already part and parcel of
SDRT. Hence, SemBank provides all these different
layers of information within a DRS. Figure 2 shows
an SDRS for a small text of SemBank.

147



Figure 2: SDRS for the text “David Bowie grew up in
Kent. He played the saxophone. He was a singer in Lon-
don blues bands”, as shown in SemBank.

4 Challenges for Text Generation

We believe that taking DRS as the basis for NLG
will introduce not only variants of known problems,
but will impose many new challenges. Here we fo-
cus on just three of them: generating referring ex-
pressions, lexicalisation, and aggregation.

4.1 Generating referring expressions
Viewed from a formal perspective, DRT is said to be
a dynamic theory of semantics: the interpretation of
an embedded DRS depends on the interpretation of
the DRSs that subordinate it — either be sentence-
internal structure, or by the structure governed by
rhetorical relations. A case in point is the treat-
ment of anaphoric expressions including pronouns,
proper names, possessive constructions and definite
descriptions.

In DRT, anaphoric expressions are resolved to
a suitable antecedent discourse referent. Proper
names and definite descriptions are too, but if find-
ing a suitable antecedent fails then a process usu-
ally referred to as presuppositional accommodation
introduces the semantic material of the anaphoric
expression on an accessible level of DRS (Van der
Sandt, 1992). The result of this process yields a
DRS in which all presupposed information is explic-
itly distinguished from asserted information. This
gives rise to an interesting challenge for NLG.

A DRS corresponding to a discourse unit will
contain free variables for semantic material that is
presupposed or has been linked to the preceeding

context. On encountering such a free variable denot-
ing an entity, the generator has a couple of choices in
the way it can lexicalise it: as a quantifier, pronoun,
proper name, or definite description. Even though
the DRS context may provide information on names
and properties assigned to this free variable, we ex-
pect it will be non-trivial to decide what properties
to include in the corresponding expression. Text co-
herence probably plays an important role here, but
whether thematic roles and rhetorical relations will
be sufficient to predict an appropriate surface form
remains a subject for future research. It is also inter-
esting to explore the insights from approaches dedi-
cated to generating referring expressions using log-
ical methods (van Deemter, 2006; Gardent et al.,
2004) with robust surface realisation systems.

4.2 Aggregation

Coordinated noun phrases are known to be poten-
tially ambiguous between distributive and collective
interpretations. A simple DRT analysis for the dis-
tributive interpretation yields two possible ways to
generate strings: one where the noun phrases are
coordinated within one sentence, and one where
the noun phrases involved are generated in sepa-
rate sentences. For instance, the DRSs correspond-
ing to “Deep Purple and Pink Floyd played at a
charity show” (with a distributive interpretation) and
“Deep Purple played at a charity show, and Pink
Floyd played at a charity show”, would be equiv-
alent. This is due to copying semantic material in
the compositional process of computing the mean-
ing of the coordinated noun phrase “Deep Purple
and Pink Floyd”. (Note that the collective reading,
as in “Deep Purple and Pink Floyd played together at
a charity show” would not involve copying semantic
material, and would result in a different DRS, with
a different interpretation.) It is the task of the ag-
gregation process to pick one of these realisations,
as discussed by White (2006). Doing this from the
level of DRS poses an interesting challenge, because
one would need to recognise that such an aggrega-
tion choice is possible in the first place. Alterna-
tively, instead of copying, one could use an explicit
operator that signals a distributive reading of a plural
noun phrase, for instance as suggested by Kamp and
Reyle (1993). Arguably, this is required anyway to
adequately represent sentences such as “Both Deep
Purple and Pink Floyd played at a charity show”.

148



4.3 Lexicalisation
The predicates (the one-place relations) found in a
DRS correspond to concepts of an hierarchical on-
tology. Time expressions and numerals have canon-
ical representations in SemBank. The representation
for noun and verb concepts are based on the syn-
onym sets provided by WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998).
A WordNet synset can be referred to by its internal
identifier, or by any of its member word-sense pairs.
For instance, synset 102999757 is composed of
the noun–sense pairs strand-3, string-10,
and chain-10. The lexicalisation challenge is to
select the most suitable word out of these possibili-
ties. Local context might help to choose: a “string
of beads” is perhaps better than a “chain of beads”
or “strand of beads”. As another example, con-
sider the synset {loon-2,diver-3} representing
the concept for a kind of bird. American birdwatch-
ers would use the noun “loon”, whereas in Britain
“diver” would be preferred to name this bird.

5 Discussion

In the DRT-based framework that we propose for
generating text, the issue arises where in the tradi-
tional NLG pipeline DRSs play a role. In the intro-
duction of this paper we suggested that DRSs would
be output by the macro planner, and hence fed as in-
put to the micro planner. On the one hand this makes
sense, as in a segmented DRS all content to be gen-
erated is present and the rhetorical structure is given
explicitly. But then the question remains whether the
theoretical distinction between micro planning and
surface realisation really works in practice or would
just be counter-productive. Perhaps a revised archi-
tecture tailored to DRS generation should be tried
instead. This issue is closely connected to the level
of semantic granularity that one would like to see in
a DRS. We illustrate this by four examples:

• pronouns — we have made a particular pro-
posal using free variables, but we could also
have followed Kamp and Reyle (1993), intro-
ducing explicit referents for pronouns;

• distributive noun phrases — as the discussion
in Section 4.2 shows, it is unclear which repre-
sention for distributive noun phrases would be
most suitable for the purpose of sentence plan-
ning;

• sentential and verbal complements — should
there be a difference in meaning representation
between “Tim expects to win” and “Tim ex-
pects that he will win”?

• active vs. passive voice — should a meaning
representation reflect the difference between
active and passive sentences?

At this moment, it is not clear whether one wants
a more abstract DRS and give more freedom to sen-
tence planning, or a more specific DRS restrict-
ing the number of sentential paraphrases of its con-
tent. Perhaps even an architecture permitting both
extremes would be feasible, where the task of mi-
cro planning would be to add more constraints to
the DRS until it is specific enough for the surface
realisation component to generate text from it. It
is even thinkable that such a planning component
would take over some tasks of the macro planner,
making the distinction between the two fuzzier.

A final point that we want to raise is a possible
role that inference can play in our framework. DRSs
can be structurally different, yet logically equiva-
lent. This could influence the design of a genera-
tion system and have a positive impact on its out-
put. For instance, it would be thinkable to equip the
NLG system with a set of meaning-preserving tran-
formation rules that change the structure of a DRS,
consequently producing different surface forms.

6 Conclusion

SemBank provides an annotated corpus combining
shallow with formal semantic representations for
texts. The development version is currently avail-
able online with more than 60,000 automatically an-
notated texts; the release of a first stable version
comprising ca. 1,000 texts is planned later this year.
We expect SemBank to be a useful resource to make
progress in robust NLG. Using DRSs as a basis for
generation poses new challenges, but also could of-
fer fresh perspectives on existing problems in NLG.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Michael White, who provided us with
useful feedback to the idea of using a DRS corpus for de-
veloping and training text generation systems. We also
would like to thank the three anonymous reviewers of
this article. They gave extremely valuable comments that
considerably improved our paper.

149



References
Guillaume Artignan, Mountaz Hascoët, and Mathieu

Lafourcade. 2009. Multiscale visual analysis of lexi-
cal networks. Information Visualisation, International
Conference on, 0:685–690.

N. Asher and A. Lascarides. 2003. Logics of conver-
sation. Studies in natural language processing. Cam-
bridge University Press.

Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects in
Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In 36th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and 17th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics. Proceedings of the Conference,
pages 86–90, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Que-
bec, Canada.

John Bateman and Michael Zock. 2003. Natural Lan-
guage Generation. In R. Mitkov, editor, Oxford Hand-
book of Computational Linguistics, chapter 15, pages
284–304. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Bernd Bohnet, Leo Wanner, Simon Mille, and Alicia
Burga. 2010. Broad coverage multilingual deep sen-
tence generation with a stochastic multi-level realizer.
In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics, pages 98–106.

Johan Bos. 2008. Wide-Coverage Semantic Analysis
with Boxer. In J. Bos and R. Delmonte, editors, Se-
mantics in Text Processing. STEP 2008 Conference
Proceedings, volume 1 of Research in Computational
Semantics, pages 277–286. College Publications.

John Chamberlain, Massimo Poesio, and Udo Kr-
uschwitz. 2008. Addressing the Resource Bottle-
neck to Create Large-Scale Annotated Texts. In Johan
Bos and Rodolfo Delmonte, editors, Semantics in Text
Processing. STEP 2008 Conference Proceedings, vol-
ume 1 of Research in Computational Semantics, pages
375–380. College Publications.

Stephen Clark and James R. Curran. 2004. Parsing the
WSJ using CCG and Log-Linear Models. In Proceed-
ings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL ’04), pages 104–111,
Barcelona, Spain.

Michael Elhadad and Jacques Robin. 1996. An overview
of SURGE: a reusable comprehensive syntactic real-
ization component. Technical report.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet. An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press.

Claire Gardent, Hélène Manuélian, Kristina Striegnitz,
and Marilisa Amoia. 2004. Generating definite de-
scriptions: Non-incrementality, inference and data. In
Thomas Pechmann and Christopher Habel, editors,
Multidisciplinary approaches to language production,
pages 53–85. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin.

Eduard Hovy, Mitchell Marcus, Martha Palmer, Lance
Ramshaw, and Ralph Weischedel. 2006. Ontonotes:
the 90% solution. In Proceedings of the Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference of the NAACL, Com-
panion Volume: Short Papers, pages 57–60, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA.

Nancy Ide, Christiane Fellbaum, Collin Baker, and Re-
becca Passonneau. 2010. The manually annotated
sub-corpus: a community resource for and by the peo-
ple. In Proceedings of the ACL 2010 Conference Short
Papers, pages 68–73, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Hans Kamp and Uwe Reyle. 1993. From Discourse to
Logic; An Introduction to Modeltheoretic Semantics of
Natural Language, Formal Logic and DRT. Kluwer,
Dordrecht.

Hans Kamp. 1984. A Theory of Truth and Semantic
Representation. In Jeroen Groenendijk, Theo M.V.
Janssen, and Martin Stokhof, editors, Truth, Inter-
pretation and Information, pages 1–41. FORIS, Dor-
drecht – Holland/Cinnaminson – U.S.A.

Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and
Martha Palmer. 2008. A large-scale classification of
English verbs. Language Resources and Evaluation,
42(1):21–40.

Reinhard Muskens. 1996. Combining Montague Seman-
tics and Discourse Representation. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 19:143–186.

Martha Palmer, Paul Kingsbury, and Daniel Gildea.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated corpus of
semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71–
106.

Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee,
Eleni Miltsakaki, and Bonnie Webber. 2005. The
Penn Discourse TreeBank as a resource for natural lan-
guage generation. In Proc. of the Corpus Linguistics
Workshop on Using Corpora for Natural Language
Generation, pages 25–32.

Mark Steedman. 2001. The Syntactic Process. The MIT
Press.

Kees van Deemter. 2006. Generating referring expres-
sions that involve gradable properties. Computational
Linguistics, 32(2):195–222.

Rob A. Van der Sandt. 1992. Presupposition Projection
as Anaphora Resolution. Journal of Semantics, 9:333–
377.

Michael White, Rajakrishnan Rajkumar, and Scott Mar-
tin. 2007. Towards broad coverage surface realization
with CCG. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Using
Corpora for NLG: Language Generation and Machine
Translation (UCNLG+MT).

Michael White. 2006. Efficient realization of coordinate
structures in combinatory categorial grammar. Re-
search on Language & Computation, 4:39–75.

150


