















































Introducing Argumention in Opinion Analysis: Language and Reasoning Challenges


Proceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment Analysis where AI meets Psychology (SAAIP), IJCNLP 2011, pages 28–34,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 13, 2011.

Introducing Argumention in Opinion Analysis: Language and Reasoning
Challenges

Camille Albert, Leila Amgoud
Florence Dupin de Saint-Cyr, Patrick Saint-Dizier

IRIT-CNRS, 118, route de Narbonne
31062 Toulouse cedex France

amgoud,dupin,stdizier@irit.fr

Charlotte Costedoat
Prometil

42 Avenue du Gal Decroute
31100 Toulouse, France

c.costedoat@prometil.com

Abstract

This paper concentrates on pairing opinion
analysis with argument extraction in order
to identify why opinions about a certain
feature are positive or negative. The objec-
tive is to have a better grasp at the underly-
ing elements that support the analysis. In a
second stage, given customer recommen-
dations, the goal is to identify the prefer-
ences or priorities of customers, e.g. fares
over welcome attitude. This induces cus-
tomers value systems. Finally, we give el-
ements of the implementation based on the
<TextCoop> platform, dedicated to dis-
course analysis.

1 Introduction

Nowadays, there is an increasing need for an opin-
ion analysis tool. While politicians may find it
useful to analyze the popularity of new propos-
als or the overall public reaction to certain events,
companies are definitely interested in consumer
attitudes towards a product and the reasons and
motivations of these attitudes. It is therefore es-
sential to accurately and quickly analyze opinion
intensity on a particular object. In addition to find-
ing a quantitative and qualitative rating, it pro-
vides different information on the object like the
most important features for people and the weak-
nesses of the object. The conjunction of efforts in
language processing and artificial intelligence is a
new promising way to address the problem. Argu-
ment analysis (Walton et al. 2008), (Reed, 1998)
is a central challenge that has seldom been carried
out in such a framework in particular paired with
opinion analysis, where the semantics of evalu-
ative expressions remains by large an open is-
sue. The introduction of domain or common-sense
knowledge (Breck et al. 2004) for the interpreta-
tion of these expressions is also an open issue.

In order to be able to analyze opinion, besides
the language processing aspects and semantic in-
terpretation challenges, we need to define efficient
models for aggregating the different opinions re-
ported on the web (Ashley et al. 2002), (Amgoud
et al. 2005). We will take advantage of existing
works in social choice theory, namely on judgment
aggregation. The output would be a final rating of
the object as well as a global rating of each feature
and a list of key features. The main difficulty will
be the choice of the aggregation function. Differ-
ent kinds of simulations can also be made, in par-
ticular in order to know which feature(s) should be
improved in order to alter the global rating of an
object (Amgoud et al. 2001) (Keil, 2000) (Pollock
1974). Finally, we may help a user to get an opin-
ion on an object. The idea is to ask the user to give
her preferences on the set of features, then using
an efficient multiple-criteria decision system, we
could give an appropriate recommendation.

In this paper we first address the language point
of view focusing on argument identification and
extraction. Then, we introduce the main formal
aspects of an aggregation system that allows to ef-
ficiently and accurately compute opinion values
and their arguments, as found in various texts.
The project is now in a development stage, imple-
mented within the <TextCoop> platform and the
Dislog language (under submission).

2 The global situation of opinion analysis

The current stage of opinion analysis is somewhat
more oriented towards the analysis of short texts:
blogs, in particular consumer blogs, news editori-
als or short news messages. This requires a more
accurate linguistic analysis. A smaller amount of
texts is then necessary, allowing opinions to be
elaborated for a larger variety of topics. The as-
sumption is to consider that the products or per-
sons being evaluated can be qualified by means
of a few salient predefined properties or attributes.

28



These properties may however be more or less in-
dependent from each other, salience is another im-
portant feature, which may depend on the text au-
thor. For example, for a political person: honesty,
rigor, friendliness, capacity to listen to people, etc.
For a hotel, welcome attitude, cleanliness, calm,
fares, proximity of restaurants or attractions, qual-
ity of breakfast, etc. are salient properties from
the consumer point of view. These properties may
not correspond to the most salient ones from the
product provider point of view: e.g., fares become
profit.

In terms of argumentation, a statement in the
hotel domain such as very friendly welcome can
be interpreted as: This hotel is good because the
staff is very friendly, or: welcome is good because
it is very friendly. The argument is organized as
follows: this hotel is good is the conclusion, while
because the staff is very friendly is its support.
The conclusion can also be attacked by other state-
ments which are negatively oriented: ... but it is
really noisy because of heavy air traffic. In fact,
the conclusion summarizes the general feeling or
recommendation of the customer, this conclusion
being supported or attacked by various statements.
The conclusion orientation w.r.t. its attacks and
supports reveal the customer preferences and pri-
orities: in our example, the hotel is good even if it
is noisy: welcome has a higher priority over noise.

Product description in newspapers or technical
brochures abound in product descriptions based on
e.g. charts of properties with yes/no indications or
marks. Using these properties in opinion analysis
results, in general, in an analysis of the opinion
per attribute, based on an a priori classification of
adjectives or closely related evaluative expressions
identified as having a positive or a negative orien-
tation. While this obviously constitutes a major
progress w.r.t. the previous stage, the results re-
main quite limited. In particular:
- properties are not necessarily independent from
each other; dependencies may be difficult to iden-
tify, and their impact on opinion cohesion diffi-
cult to establish (Redeker 1990) (Miltasaki et al.
2004),
- a number of texts abound in evaluative expres-
sions with very rich forms, including metaphors,
which need grammatical elaborations and an ac-
curate semantic interpretation,
- some evaluative elements are very much domain
and property dependent (Potts 2007), for example

high is either positive or negative depending on the
objects it applies to and possibly the point of view:
high salary versus high taxes. Accurate and con-
textually constrained lexical resources are neces-
sary to avoid misinterpretations,
- we observed incorporation phenomena where the
attribute and its evaluation are merged into a single
term (mal assis (uncomfortable seats), bon marché
(cheap)),
- we also observed a number of situations where
the evaluation is given without any explicit men-
tion of the evaluated property, because in general
that property is easy to infer for a standard reader,
- finally, we noted that a number of discourse
structures can be interpreted as evaluative forms.
For example, giving a list of close-by touristic at-
tractions for a hotel indicates that it is well-located
for tourists, even though this is not explicitly said.

3 Identifying the motivations of an
opinion

While the results produced by this second stage
are of much interest and can produce accurate
opinion analysis, e.g. taking into account temporal
aspects for opinion evolution analysis, one of the
main limitations is that there is no ’deep’ analysis
behind the satisfaction or dissatisfaction rates that
would indicate why consumers are happy, unhappy
with, approve or disapprove a certain political or
economical decision. Such an analysis would also,
in the long term, allow to induce some of the main
priorities or preferences of consumers. This in-
volves a deeper semantic interpretation of evalua-
tive expressions and some discourse analysis fol-
lowing e.g. (Marcu 1997), (Saito et al. 2006).

A closer analysis of the expression of opinions,
in e.g. consumer blogs, allow a deeper analysis
of the pair property - value. The property is in
general expressed by a short natural language ex-
pression (e.g. a noun or an event). This is the head
of the structure: it ’subcategorizes’ for an evalua-
tive expression and, since it conveys the context,
it gives the evaluative expression its interpretation
in context. The evaluative expression, which can
be very complex, contains itself its own head term,
often an adjective, which may be modified by sev-
eral types of constructions. In general, the for-
mulation of the opinion has the following abstract
form:
property - evaluative expression.
The evaluative expression is often a complex se-

29



mantic structure that integrates in one or a few
words several aspects:

• a positive or negative orientation (Cheng et
al. 2008) (Kim et al. 2007) (Takamura et al.
2005),

• the strength of that orientation, which may be
elaborated via composition, from the various
elements of the expression,

• an implicit qualification of the orientation,
which is often very rich (for example cheap
fares and competitive fares do not convey ex-
actly the same meaning)

• various circumstances, realized e.g. by dis-
course structure(s), e.g. an illustration, which
may also be interpreted as an argument,

• a number of arguments which are often incor-
porated into the main evaluative term.

We argue that interpreting arguments in opinion
texts allows to identify why consumers like or dis-
like a product, a political decision, etc. and to de-
termine, more generally, classes of values or pref-
erences. Identifying arguments and value systems
is therefore a major step in opinion analysis. For
example, in a hotel, a result could be that fares and
breakfast are more crucial than the room design.

In the remainder of this section, we develop
a few prototypical cases of argument realization
in consumer blogs. Our investigations have been
conducted on French; English glosses are given
for the sake of readability, however it must be
noted that English structures may be quite differ-
ent. Our corpora include opinions blogs on hotels,
restaurants, hifi products and banking products.

If we consider consumer blogs from a global
point of view, we note that they are in general
short, well-written, with a direct style, and a clear
aim of being explicit and accessible to a majority
of readers. In most cases a few anecdotes illustrate
the evaluation. A consumer blog ends (or begins)
by a recommendation statement, that summarizes
the overall feeling about the product or person at
stake, in text form or by means of icons, e.g. a
number of stars.

3.1 Adjectival incorporation of arguments
The theory of incorporation (Baker 1988) pos-
tulates a prelexical level, language independent,
where the different ’facets’ of a concept receive

a kind of conceptual realization, which is not yet
lexical. Then, given a language, this concept re-
ceives one or more language (lexical) realizations
where some of these facets are no longer linguis-
tically realized for various reasons. By lexical re-
alizations we mean a single word as well as an ex-
pression.

We postulate that most of the adjectives found
in evaluative expressions, besides their polarity
and strength, incorporate semantic features which
can be interpreted as arguments in the opinion
analysis domain because they explain the polarity
and the strength. For example, an expression in
the hotel domain such as:
acceuil familial (English gloss: you are welcome
as a family member) has the following features:
- positive orientation, strength: high,
- incorporated argument, with the probable inter-
pretation: ’because the owners behave as if you
were from their family’.
Obviously, the term ’family’ could then be inter-
preted in a number of ways, but we do not need at
this stage to go much further.

The extraction of the incorporated meaning, in-
terpreted as an argument, raises major challenges
in lexical semantics and lexical inference. In con-
ceptual semantics, the semantics of an adjective
is defined by either a set of features, in attribute
value form, or, more or less equivalently, by a for-
mula. Both modes of representations can be com-
bined. In general, the semantics of the adjective
is largely underspecified or higher order. Indeed
the semantic interpretation largely depends on the
semantics of the modified term, generally a noun.
The full meaning is induced by a subtle combina-
tion of the semantics of both the adjective and the
modified term. This means complex lexical devel-
opments even if some generalizations are possible.
For example, high has almost an infinite number of
senses that depends on the noun it combines with.
Its basic meaning is simply e.g. ’performs better
than average’ applied to one or more properties of
the noun.

Concerning the above example, ’familial’ is a
higher-order adjective which has the following
representations:
(1) Communication domain: (acceuil familial,
conversation familiale, etc.) globally means a
communication act realized as if you were a fam-
ily member. The modified nouns are predicative,
e.g. conversation(X,Y ), the semantic represen-

30



tation of the adjective can then be:
behave(X, in− family − of(Y,X))
assuming that ’behave’ and ’in-family-of’ are de-
fined as primitive terms.
(2) Concrete objects domain: repas familial
(family-style meal) means a meal that has proper-
ties such as: casual, home-made, good and abun-
dant, etc. Meal is not predicative: meal(X), it has
at least two facets: contents and atmosphere. At-
mosphere being of communication type, it is rep-
resented as above. Besides a list of features, the
contents feature can be represented by a formula
as follows:
meal(X) ∧ food(Y ) − of(Y,X) ∧ good(Y ) ∧
abundant(Y ).

These small formulae (or their language para-
phrase) constitute the arguments which can be ex-
tracted. These arguments support the evaluation
provided by the customer by adding precise in-
formation to the polarity and strength. The main
problem of this approach are feasibility and scal-
ability. For a given domain, the number of adjec-
tives used is in general relatively large, between
50 and 300. For each property, we observed an av-
erage of 40 adjectives with maximums around 90,
including metaphorical uses and a large number
of quasi-synonyms. This is obviously large. How-
ever, about 70% of the adjectives in a given do-
main are stable over all properties and have a fixed
polarity and strength. About 10% have a variable
polarity depending on the term they are combined
with.

The last stage of the process is to construct a
synthesis: given an entity (e.g. a hotel) and a prop-
erty, and given a set of blogs, the challenge is to
construct a synthesis of all the evaluative expres-
sions which have been found. This synthesis is
a set of arguments positively or negatively evalu-
ating the property at stake, in other terms either
supporting or attacking the statement ’property is
good’ or supporting or attacking each other.

3.2 Discourse relations as arguments

While the previous section requires local lan-
guage analysis, which can be handled by local
grammars, opinion analysis abound in statements
which must be processed at discourse level. Re-
formulations, illustrations, elaborations (Mann et
al. 1988) (Grosz et al. 1986) of various types
abound with a rich linguistic structure, including
emphasis and irony, with different argumentative

purposes. Elaborations tend to reinforce an eval-
uation via a more detailed analysis of the reasons
why the evaluation is positive or negative (e.g. ...,
in other words, free wifi).
insonorisation élevée qui permet de se reposer
après une dure journée de travail
(a high soundproofing that allows you to have a
rest after a long working day).
The property ’soundproofing’ of the hotel gets
a positive value, associated with an elaboration
which does not elaborate the soundproofing but
one of its advantages in the present context, giv-
ing additional weight to that property. Considering
our corpora on hotels and on banking products, it
seems to us that the level of argumentation intro-
duced by the elaboration relation is rather modest.

Illustrations, which also abound in opinion
texts, are much more interesting. In general, the
structure is the following:
property - polarity - illustration.
The polarity is optional: location: 5 mns from
Capitole and 10 mns from the station.
The illustration gives the strength of the evalua-
tion, possibly its orientation if there is no explicit
polarity, and an argument that supports it:
well located (2 mns from the Capitole, 5 mns from
Saint Sernin, close to the station, close to fancy
restaurants, ...). The illustration is here between
brackets, under the form of an enumeration of el-
ements of interest for tourists. Language elements
that indicate distance (in minutes or ’close’ obvi-
ously need to be interpreted to get a positive or
negative orientation). The illustration therefore
explains why the hotel is well located (or not).

Identifying illustrations as arguments (and not
just as mere enumerations) often requires domain
knowledge. Touristic spots, food places and trans-
portation facilities are identified as features of in-
terest for tourists. The positive evaluation of the
enumeration is induced e.g. from the spatial ex-
pressions that indicate proximity, which are, in our
system, recognized by a local grammar. Prox-
imity associated with touristic facilities is posi-
tively evaluated and constitutes an argument sup-
port. Besides the use of an ontology of the hotel
domain and possibly touristic activity domain, in-
ferential patterns that capture modes or strategies
of evaluation are needed.

To further illustrate and generalize the above ex-
ample, we developed a few, domain dependent,
inferential schemas to identify illustrations which

31



behave as arguments. For example:
Room comfort (List of equipments in room): such
a list indicates the level of comfort of the room:
the evaluation is based on the level and amount of
relevant room facilities.
Breakfast (List of food elements): such a list also
indicates the quality of the breakfast. The evalua-
tion is based on the proposed items, their original-
ity, variety, etc. If the list is negative (e.g. no fruit
juice, no pastries), then the polarity of the evalua-
tion is inverted.
At the moment these remain quite basic. More
corpus analysis should lead to the elaboration of
higher level inferential patterns, but this is outside
the scope of the present paper. The task is to in-
vestigate generalizations which would be domain
independent that would capture generic uses of il-
lustrations as an argument.

4 The lexicon of opinion analysis

Besides domain specific terms, in particular nouns
denoting properties, we have categorized the dif-
ferent lexical units that structure evaluative ex-
pressions from the point of view of their polar-
ity and strength in the domain of news editorial
analysis (Bal and Saint-Dizier, 2008). The case of
opinion analysis is relatively similar, with features
which are much less prominent such as proposi-
tional attitudes or report verb semantics and prag-
matics.

First, a polarity and strength lexicon of evalua-
tive expressions (adjectives and other expressions)
has been designed. For each expression, the fol-
lowing features are mentioned: syntactic category,
polarity: which may be general or attribute de-
pendent, in this latter case, polarity is coded by a
pair (attribute name, polarity), this level also cap-
tures metaphorical uses, and strength (or persua-
sion force): which seems to be rather stable over
domains.

Next, our lexicon contains pre-modifier terms
which are basically adverbs of intensity (very,
somewhat, quite, etc.). About 55 such adverbs
have been identified for French. Their orienta-
tion is described as a binary feature: increase or
decrease. Then, we have identified three classes
of intensifiers which have a kind of modal mean-
ing: (1) emphasizers, with the following sub-
classes: Really (truly, genuinely, actually), Sim-
ply (merely, just, only, plainly), For sure (surely,
certainly, sure, for certain, sure enough, undoubt-

edly), Of course (naturally); (2) amplifiers, with
the following subclasses: Completely (all, alto-
gether, entirely, totally, whole, wholly), Abso-
lutely (totally and definitely, without question,
perfectly, utterly), Heartily (cordially, warmly,
with gusto and without reservation); (3) downton-
ers: Kind of (sort of, kind a, rather, to some extent,
almost, all but), Mildly (gently).

Finally, a modal verb lexicon of those verbs
that occur to soften opinions or make them rela-
tive to a certain view, introduces notions such as
possibility, advice or necessity: can, could, may,
might, should, etc.. These various lexical struc-
tures are associated with several local grammars
as described above which are designed to recog-
nize the structure of evaluative expressions be they
basic (single adjective) or more complex (conjunc-
tion of terms, use of adverbs, etc.). Strength and
polarity are compositionally computed from the
terms that constitute the evaluation.

5 A formal framework for analyzing
opinions

In this section, we propose a formal framework for
modeling opinion analysis that can accommodate
the previous observations. We consider a partic-
ular object (called target) on which some people
have given their opinions. An opinion is gener-
ally given as a global rating on the object, and val-
ues associated with its attributes, and a set of argu-
ments supporting this rating. Arguments highlight
the positive (or the negative) features of the object
on which the opinion is expressed. Let us consider
the following opinion expressed on a digital cam-
era: It is a great digital camera for this century.
The rotatable lens is great. It’s very easy to use,
and has fast response from the shutter. The LCD
has increased from 1.5 to 1.8, which gives bigger
view. But, it would be better if the model is de-
signed for smaller size. I recommend this camera.

The object here is the digital camera, the overall
rating is “recommended”, while the features are:
the size, rotatable lens, response from the shut-
ter, size of LCD. For instance, “it’s easy to use”
belongs to the arguments pros the digital camera
while “it would be better if the model is designed
for smaller size” is an argument against (or be-
longs to the cons) the camera.

Hence, we face a decision problem, namely,
given an object O and information about O we
should decide if this object should be recom-

32



mended or not. We propose the following defini-
tions in order to be able to deal with this particular
decision problem.

Definition 1 (Recommendation domain). A rec-
ommendation domain, RD, is a set that should
contain at least two values representing the deci-
sion to recommend and not to recommend a given
object.

Example 1. Recommendation domains can be ei-
ther a boolean set {Y ES,NO}, or a set of qual-
itative decision values {x1, . . . xk} or a continu-
ous interval [0, 1], where 0 represents “not recom-
mended” and 1 represents “recommended”.

We propose the following framework in order to
aggregate opinions on a given subject:

Definition 2 (General opinion aggregation frame-
work (GOAF)). Given a target O, a set of
agents, Ag = a1, . . . an, a set of features, F =
f1, . . . , fm, where each feature fj is associated
with a domain Dj (which is a set of possible val-
ues that can be assigned to the feature fj of the
object O).
Let us denote the recommendation of agent ai
about object O by ri(O), the global recommen-
dation about the object O by r(O), and let vi,j be
the value attributed by agent ai to the feature fj of
object O.

The data can be represented as follows:
f1 . . . fj . . . fm Target

Ag \ domains D1 . . . Dj . . . Dm /
a1 v1,1 . . . v1,j . . . v1,m r1(O)
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

ai vi,1 . . . vi,j . . . vi,m ri(O)
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

an vn,1 . . . vn,j . . . vn,m rn(O)

Group v(f1) . . . v(fj) . . . v(fm) r(O)
where each vi,j ∈ Dj .

Some values of this table clearly depend from
each other, namely, if the agent ai is rational, then
ri(O) should depend from the vi, . Hence, we can
assume that each rational agent ai can be associ-
ated with an aggregation function agregi defined
as follows:

Definition 3 (MCA-function of an agent). Let ai
be a rational agent and RD be a recommendation
domain, a multi-criteria aggregation function for
agent ai is a function mcai from D1× . . .×Dj ×
. . .×Dm to RD linking the values of the features
to the recommendation:

∀i ∈ [1, n] ri(O) = mcai(vi,1, . . . vi,m)

The same kind of aggregation can be done in
order to summarize a group of opinions about a
given feature, note that each feature may be asso-
ciated with a distinct aggregation function (sim-
ilarly, agents do not necessarily have the same
MCA-function).

Definition 4 (group aggregation). Let fj be a fea-
ture and Dj be its domain, a group aggregation
function for the feature fj is a function groupj
from (Dj)n to Dj linking the values given by
agents to the feature fj to only one value:

∀j ∈ [1,m] v(fj) = groupj(v1,j , . . . vn,j)

Definition 5 (Group MCA recommendation). A
group multicriteria recommendation can be de-
fined by:

• either computing the MCA recommendation
of each agent and then aggregates this result
on the group of agent

• or computing the group values of the features
and then making a multicriteria aggregation
of these values.

6 Applications and perspectives

The applications under development concern basic
services : hotels, restaurants and e-commerce con-
sumer opinions. A question-answering interface is
being developed so that users can query the system
only on one or a few properties, i.e. is hotel X well
located ?. Besides these useful experimentations
and developments, we are now investigating the
e-reputation framework, of much importance for
companies and public persons (we are having ma-
jor elections in 2012), in particular using data from
social networks, wikis and some rapidly evolving
blogs. Then, given criteria and thresholds, alert
signals can be sent to these companies or persons
with an analysis of the reasons of opinion evolu-
tion, via arguments.

Finally, given that we can propose an analysis
based on arguments, we can then model a network
for opinion sharing via argumentation, analyzing
support and attack situations, as developed in ar-
gumentation. The language part of this project has
been implemented with the <TextCoop> platform
(Saint-Dizier 2011, forthcoming). This platform is
dedicated to discourse analysis and integrates lex-
ical semantics and reasoning capabilities.

33



References
Ashley, K.,D., Desai, R., Levine, J.M., Teaching case-

based argumentation concepts using dialectic argu-
ments vs. didactic explanations, ITS 2002, Lecture
notes in computer science, 2002.

Amgoud, L., Bonnefon, J.F., Prade, H., An
Argumentation-based Approach to Multiple Criteria
Decision, in 8th European Conference on Symbolic
and Quantitative Approaches to Reasoning with Un-
certainty, ECSQARU’2005, Barcelona, 2005.

Amgoud, L., Parsons, S., Maudet, N., Arguments, Di-
alogue, and Negotiation, in: 14th European Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, Berlin, 2001.

Bal, K.B., Saint-Dizier, P. Towards Building Annotated
Resources for Analyzing Opinions and Argumenta-
tion in News Editorials, LREC, Malta, 2008.

Baker, Mark C. Incorporation: A theory of gram-
matical function changing. Chicago, University of
Chicago Press, 1988.

Bethard S., Yu H., Thornton A., Hatzivassiloglou V.,
Rafsky D., Automatic extraction of opinion proposi-
tions and their holders, Proceedings AAAI04, 2004.

Breck E., Choi Y., Cardie C., Identifying expressions
of opinion in context. Twentieth International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2007.

Cheng X., Xu F., Fine-grained opinion topic and po-
larity identification, Proceedings of LREC’08, mar-
rakech, morocco, 2008.

Grosz, B., Sidner, C., Attention, intention and the struc-
ture of discourse, Computational Linguistics 12(3),
1986.

Keil, F.C., Wilson, R.A., Explanation and Cognition,
Bradford Book, 2000.

Kim, s.m. and Hovy, E., Crystal: analyzing predictive
opinions on the web. EMNLP 2007

Mann, W., Thompson, S., Rhetorical Structure Theory:
Towards a Functional Theory of Text Organisation,
TEXT 8 (3) pp. 243-281, 1988.

Mann, W., Thompson, S.A. (eds), Discourse Descrip-
tion: diverses linguistic analyses of a fund raising
text, John Benjamins, 1992.

Marcu, D., The Rhetorical Parsing of Natural Lan-
guage Texts, ACL 1997.

Marcu, D., Au unsupervised approach to recognizing
Discourse relations, ACL 2002.

Miltasaki, E., Prasad, R., Joshi, A., Webber, B., Anno-
tating Discourse Connectives and Their Arguments,
new frontiers in NLP, 2004.

Pollock, J.L., Knowledge and Justification, Princeton
university Press, 1974.

Potts, C., The expressive dimension. Theoretical lin-
guistics 33(2):165-197, 2007

Redeker, G. (1990). Ideational and Pragmatic Markers
of Discourse Structure, Journal of Pragmatics, vol.
14.

Reed, C., Generating Arguments in Natural Language,
PhD dissertation, University College, London, 1998.

Saito, M., Yamamoto, K., Sekine, S., Using Phrasal
Patterns to Identify Discourse Relations, ACL, 2006.

Takamura h., Inui,T., Okumura M., Extracting seman-
tic orientations of words using spin model, Proceed-
ings of the 43rd annual meeting on ACL, 2005.

Takechi, M., Tokunaga, T., Matsumoto, Y., Tanaka,
H., Feature Selection in Categorizing Procedu-
ral Expressions, The Sixth International Workshop
on Information Retrieval with Asian Languages
(IRAL2003), pp.49-56, 2003.

Walton, D., Reed, C., Macagno, F., Argumentation
Schemes, Cambridge University Press, 2008.

Wierzbicka, A., English Speech Act Verbs, Academic
Press, 1987.

Wright, von G.H., Explanation and understanding,
Cornell university Press, 2004.

34


