



















































Evaluating Salience Metrics for the Context-Adequate Realization of Discourse Referents


Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 32–43,
Nancy, France, September 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Evaluating Salience Metrics for the Context-Adequate Realization of
Discourse Referents

Christian Chiarcos
chiarcos@uni-potsdam.de

Universität Potsdam

Abstract

We describe the application of a framework
for salience metrics and linguistic variabil-
ity with respect to the contextually adequate
choice of referring expressions and grammati-
cal roles: Where multiple meaning-equivalent
candidate realizations are available that dif-
fer in one of these aspects, NLG systems can
apply salience metrics to predict contextually
adequate realization preferences. We evalu-
ate this claim and a number of parameters of
salience metrics found in the theoretical liter-
ature on two German newspaper corpora.
Key features of the approach described here
include the application of a two-dimensional
model of salience, how its theoretical pre-
dictions can be exploited to develop salience
metrics for a particular phenomenon, and that
these salience metrics can be subsequently ap-
plied to other phenomena. This approach can
be applied to develop classifiers to predict
packaging preferences for phenomena where
little training data is available.

1 Motivation and Background

For an example sentence from the RST Discourse
Treebank (Carlson et al., 2003, file 3), example (1)
illustrates how the same ‘thought’ can be realized,
or ‘packaged’ (Chafe, 1976) in many different ways:
Three referents, the insurance agent Toni, her sister
Cynthia and their apartment suffer from an earth-
quake, the central protagonist of the paragraph is
Toni, and the text goes on elaborating her situation.

(1) The apartment she shares with her sister was rattled
...

(a) The apartment the agent shares with her sister ...

(b) The earthquake rattled the apartment she shares
...

We consider two packaging phenomena: Referring
expressions (1a: definite NP vs. pronoun), and
grammatical roles (1b: active vs. passive).1

These variants are meaning-equivalent in the
sense of Dorr et al. (2004), but according to theories
of referential coherence (Sgall et al., 1986; Grosz et
al., 1995; Givón, 2001), they express different dis-
course functions, often described with reference to
the notion of ‘discourse salience’.2 Accordingly, the
local discourse context – or, better, a salience score
calculated on this basis – can help to predict contex-
tually adequate packaging preferences.

In NLG, discourse salience has been employed to
generate referring expressions (McCoy and Strube,
1999), to assign grammatical roles (Stede, 1998),
and word order preferences (Kruijff et al., 2001).
More recently, however, salience-based approaches
have been increasingly superseded by statistical ap-
proaches, that nevertheless build on earlier theories
of salience, e.g., Shiramatsu et al. (2007) for refer-
ring expressions, Zarrieß et al. (2011) for voice al-
ternation, and Cahill and Riester (2009) for word
order. One of the reasons for this methodological
shift may be the observation (noted, for example, by

1Along with referring expressions and grammatical roles,
word order alternation has been described in a similar way,
and it is of particular importance for the motivation of two-
dimensional models of salience (Chiarcos, 2011b). For reasons
of space, however, this paper concentrates on referring expres-
sions and grammatical roles.

2Discourse salience is to be distinguished from other types
of salience, that are either not specific to discourse referents
(e.g., salience of semantic features, Ortony et al. 1985), or de-
fined with respect to other modalities (e.g., visual salience, Itti
2003, Kelleher 2011).

32



Navaretta, 2002) that the existing approaches devel-
oped until the late 1990s were only partially com-
patible with each other, as they employed different
theories of referential coherence.

Major theories of referential coherence, e.g., Cen-
tering (Grosz et al., 1995), its instantiations (Poesio
et al., 2004), Topicality (Givón, 2001) and Func-
tional Generative Description (Sgall et al., 1986,
FGD) share a set of common insights, in particular,
the close association between referential coherence
and attentional states (as manifested in the salience
of discourse referents), but they focus on different
aspects of referential coherence and formalize them
in different ways.3

Even worse, the field is notoriously plagued
by a multitude of incompatible terminologies:
‘Salience’, for example, is used as a near-synonym
of ‘givenness’ (Sgall et al., 1986, p.54f.), but also as
a near-synonym of ‘newness (for the hearer)’ (Davis
and Hirschberg, 1988), or ‘degree of interest (of the
speaker)’ (Langacker, 1997, p.22). Therefore, the
operationalization of discourse salience in NLG re-
quires a theoretical foundation and a formalization
of salience and its effects on information packaging.

This paper takes its point of departure from a the-
oretical framework of discourse salience that has
been developed as a generalization over Centering,
Topicality and FGD. This framework, as sketched in
Sect. 2, resolves the terminological difficulties as-
sociated with the notion of salience by distinguish-
ing two dimensions of salience, with independent
effects on referring expressions, grammatical roles
and word order. One advantage of this theory-based
approach as compared to a plain statistical classifier
is that it incorporates a set of theoretical assumptions
that guide the development of salience metrics, and
that predict an impact of a salience metric even on
phenomena not considered during the development
of this particular metric.

Section 3 identifies a number of parameters that
allow to reconstruct different instantiations of Cen-
tering, Topicality and FGD salience within this

3For example, Grosz et al.’s Centering posits an adjacency
constraint, whereas FGD and Topicality employ distance mea-
surements. FGD predicts constraints on word order and refer-
ring expressions, but it differs from Centering and Topicality in
that in formalizes only the backward-looking aspect of salience
in discourse.

model. Section 4 deals with the empirical evalua-
tion of these parameters on two German newspaper
corpora, in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 elementary metrics
for both dimensions of salience are developed, and
Sect. 4.3 confirms theoretical predictions on the im-
pact of both dimensions of salience on noun phrase
complexity and grammatical roles.

2 A Framework of Salience in Discourse

Inspired by Givón’s topicality measurements and
hierarchies of grammatical devices associated with
them, Chiarcos (2010; 2011a) developed an oper-
ationalizable formalization of functional-cognitive
theories of information packaging within the Men-
tal Salience Framework (MSF), a framework for the
development and interpretation of salience metrics
in discourse. Below, we sketch the reconstruction of
Centering, Topicality and FGD salience within this
approach. We provide a brief, technical description
only, as the focus of this paper is to evaluate the re-
sulting salience metrics.

The framework, schematically illustrated in Fig.
1, consists of the following components:

• a theoretical model of salience, grounded in
cognitive linguistics and functional grammar
(Chiarcos, 2011a),

• the specification of two dimensions of
salience, backward-looking hearer salience,
and forward-looking speaker salience (Sect.
2.1), and the corresponding metrics (Sect. 2.2),

• packaging hierarchies, i.e., rankings of gram-
matical devices for different packaging phe-
nomena (Sect. 2.3), that are aligned with cu-
mulated salience scores calculated from hearer
salience and speaker salience (Sect. 2.4), and

• principles for the mapping between packaging
hierarchies and salience scores (Sect. 2.5).

As opposed to related models in functional-
cognitive linguistics, e.g., Mulkern (2007), our for-
malization is operationalizable for NLG applica-
tions: It allows to predict packaging preferences for
discourse referents from numerical salience scores
(Sect. 2.5).

Metrics of salience applied in Natural Language
Processing are dominated by research on anaphora

33



resolution in the tradition of Lappin and Leass
(1994). Such salience metrics do, however, fo-
cus on the backward-looking, hearer-oriented as-
pect of salience, whereas the speaker-oriented,
forward-looking aspect of salience is neglected.
This tradition also had a strong impact on NLG,
in particular in the field of generating referring
expressions (GRE). Current metrics of discourse
salience in GRE are thus essentially concerned with
hearer salience,4 although the relevance of speaker-
oriented factors has been recognized for other as-
pects of NLG, e.g., for German word order as being
sensitive to a domain-specific ‘aboutness’ criterion
(Filippova and Strube, 2007).

Within the MSF, Centering, Topicality and FGD
salience can be reconstructed as configurations of
hearer and speaker salience. As opposed to ear-
lier generalizations over some of these theories, e.g.,
Krahmer and Theune (2002), this paper adopts a
two-dimensional model of salience for NLG. This
bidimensionality not only helps to resolve conflicts
between different terminological traditions, it also
accounts for newer evidence that many packaging
phenomena require the differentiation of (at least)
two dimensions of discourse salience (Kaiser and
Trueswell, 2010; Chiarcos, 2011b).

The most important parameters are summarized
in Sect. 3.

2.1 Salience

In neurobiology and psychology, salience is defined
as a gradual assessment of attentional states (Itti et
al., 2005), and it is used in this sense also in func-
tional grammar (Sgall et al., 1986), cognitive lin-
guistics (Talmy, 2000) and computational linguistics
(Grosz et al., 1995). In order to resolve the termino-
logical difficulties mentioned above, we distinguish
two dimensions of salience in discourse associated
with different roles regarding the flow of attention
in discourse.

From the perspective of an NLG system, ‘atten-
tional states’ are primarily those of the speaker:

4This is true even for multidimensional models of salience in
GRE such as van der Sluis and Krahmer (2001): Their ‘focus-
space salience’ is concerned with the visual environment, ‘in-
herent salience’ is a semantic criterion (uniqueness within a
domain), ‘linguistic salience’ is the hearer-oriented, backward-
looking aspect of discourse salience.

Information that is relevant to the speaker is more
salient than information not considered relevant
(Pattabhiraman, 1992; Reed, 2002). Beyond this, a
cooperative speaker takes the perspective of the ad-
dressee into consideration, i.e., she acts according to
her assumptions about the attentional states of the
hearer (Prince, 1981). Generating text that is both
coherent (for the hearer) and goal-directed (for the
speaker) requires both perspectives.

The resulting multidimensionality of salience is
not specific to dialog, but has also been confirmed
for written, monologuous discourse, e.g., by Kaiser
and Trueswell (2010) and Chiarcos (2011b). The
latter also provides evidence for a differentiation be-
tween a backward-looking and a forward-looking di-
mension of salience. Taking up Centering terminol-
ogy, assumed attentional states of the hearer can in-
deed be characterized as being primarily backward-
looking (the preceding discourse allows to approx-
imate the attentional states of the hearer), whereas
attentional states of the speaker involve a forward-
looking aspect (subsequent discourse can unveil the
speaker’s earlier intentions to elaborate on a partic-
ular issue).

This difference is modelled here by distinguishing
two independent dimensions of discourse salience:
(i) speaker salience represents the attentional states
of the speaker (that express her intentions to guide
the hearer’s focus of attention), and (ii) hearer
salience represents the speaker’s approximation of
the attentional states of the hearer.

Cross-linguistic research indicates that both as-
pects of attention control in discourse are neces-
sary to chose of referring expressions, and to assign
grammatical roles appropriately.5

2.2 Salience metrics

Salience is represented by means of numerical
scores, so that a principally unlimited number of
attentional states can be distinguished, cf. Sgall et
al. (1986), Ariel (1990), and Lappin and Leass

5Referring expressions are associated with hearer salience
(Ariel, 1990; Gundel et al., 1993; for German see Heusinger;
1997), demonstratives also with speaker salience (attention
guidance, contrast) (Ehlich, 1982; Diessel, 2006; for German
see Bosch et al., 2007). The assignment of grammatical roles is
sensitive to hearer salience (Fillmore, 1977; Sgall et al., 1986)
as well as speaker salience (foregrounding) (Pustet, 1995; Tom-
lin, 1995).

34



Figure 1: The Mental Salience Framework, schematically

(1994). The salience of a referent r is assessed by
means of one metric of hearer salience, hsal(r), and
one metric of speaker salience, ssal(r). Backward-
looking salience factors that pertain to the preced-
ing discourse are available to both speaker and
hearer; they represent primarily factors of hearer
salience. Forward-looking factors that take the sub-
sequent discourse into consideration are factors of
speaker salience: If the speaker intended to guide
the hearer’s attention in a planful way – to prepare
him for the following development of discourse –
the subsequent discourse provides a rough approxi-
mation of the speaker’s intentions at the moment the
current utterance was produced.

For a referent r, the salience factor i is repre-
sented as a numerical value xri with 0 ≤ xri < 2.
Hearer salience and speaker salience are calculated
from the weighted sum of these factors. The weights
wi,hsal ∈ R and wi,ssal ∈ R correspond to the rel-
ative impact that a particular salience factor xri has
on the salience scores hsal(r) and ssal(r). If xri is
speaker-private, then wj,hsal = 0.

Salience scores are normalized to the range 0 ≤
sal(r) < 2: Scores greater than 1 indicate a high
degree of salience, 0 the absence of salience. For

distance-sensitive factors of hearer salience, we em-
ploy the normalization function n(x, k) = xk x+1
where k represents the distance from the last men-
tion of the referent (e.g., the number of intermedi-
ate clauses), and x the salience score that the refer-
ent would have if the last mention was in the pre-
ceding utterance. All theories mentioned above as-
sume that a referent r mentioned in the last utter-
ance is more hearer salient than any referent in the
utterance before, i.e., x > n(2, 1) = 23 . We thus
adopt 0.8 as minimum value for x. For presenta-
tional reasons, we further assume that 1.0 is the av-
erage hearer salience score for a referent mentioned
in the preceding utterance, possible values of x are
thus normalized to the range 0.8 ≤ x ≤ 1.2.6

2.3 Packaging hierarchies

Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the predicted impact of
salience on referring expressions and grammatical
roles. These hierarchies generalize over several

6Hearer salience scores greater than 1.2 are obtained if a ref-
erent’s hearer salience is calculated not only from its mention,
but if salience scores from the entire referential chain are added
up (as in Lappin and Leass’ original proposal). This paper, how-
ever, follows Centering, Topicality and FGD and only considers
the last mention of the referent.

35



rankings and scales of grammatical devices devel-
oped in cognitive and functional linguistics (foot-
note 5): They are assumed to be applicable cross-
linguistically, and also to English (Chafe, 1994; Cor-
nish, 2007; Fillmore, 1977; Tomlin, 1995), and thus
illustrated for ex. 1:

(1a): In accordance with Fig. 2, the use of the agent in
place of the pronoun is possible as a means to express a
high degree of speaker salience, e.g., in order to put Toni
in the foreground. However, as Toni already is the max-
imally hearer salient referent in the preceding discourse,
this is not necessary and thus avoided.
(1b): In the original, Toni is the subject of a relative
clause attached to the subject apartment. In (1b), the rel-
ative clause is attached to the direct object, and in accor-
dance with Fig. 3, this indicates a lower degree of hearer
salience and speaker salience as compared to the origi-
nal realization. This is justified only if the earthquake
was speaker salient, e.g., because it would be the in-
tended main protagonist of the following sentences (what
it isn’t), (1b) is thus dispreferred as it would distract the
hearer’s focus of attention from Toni.

2.4 Cumulated salience scores

We employ cumulated salience scores for the map-
ping between salience scores and packaging hierar-
chies: For every packaging phenomenon, the cumu-
lated salience score is the weighted sum of hearer
salience score hsal(r) and speaker salience score
ssal(r), i.e., ref(r) for referring expressions and
gr(r) for grammatical roles.

ref(r) := whsal,ref hsal(r) + wssal,ref ssal(r)
gr(r) := whsal,gr hsal(r) + wssal,gr ssal(r)

As a convention, the realization favored by a high
degree of hearer salience is associated with high,
positive cumulated salience scores. If a high degree
of speaker salience favors the same realization, ssal
is assigned a positive weight (as for gr(r)), if ssal fa-
vors a deviation from hsal preferences, it is assigned
a negative weight (as for ref(r)).

In practical application, the relative weights of
hsal and ssal for a particular phenomenon, say,
sentence-initial word order, can be trained with
a simple Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) with one
hidden node: hsal and ssal scores serve as input
nodes and two nodes representing ±initial as out-
put nodes. After training the MLP, the weights of

hearer salience and speaker salience can be extra-
polated from the activation function of the hidden
node.

2.5 Predicting packaging preferences

Cumulated salience scores are interpreted against a
packaging hierarchy by means of hierarchy align-
ment: The referent with the highest cumulated
salience score is assigned the highest-ranking gram-
matical device available, etc. For grammatical roles,
for example, the candidate realization would be pre-
ferred that minimizes the deviations between the
salience ranking of discourse referents and their rel-
ative syntactic prominence (e.g., when a highly ref-
erent is assigned object role while a non-salient ref-
erent is assigned subject role).

This hierarchy alignment, as well as additional re-
alization thresholds that express, for example, that
pronouns require a certain minimum of salience,
can be implemented as constraints in an optimality-
theoretic setting. Alternatively, alignment between
salience scores and their most likely realization can
also be formulated as a minimization problem, so
that standard approaches to optimization problems
can be applied (Pattabhiraman, 1992). A similar
ranking-based approach has been applied, for ex-
ample, by Zarrieß et al. (2011) for voice alternation
in German. Another possibility to derive packaging
preferences from salience metrics is to train a clas-
sifier that makes use of cumulated salience scores as
one (or even the only) factor.

3 Parameters of salience metrics

The framework sketched above specifies a number
of parameters of salience metrics, i.e.,

• salience factors that involve (a) different as-
pects of the linguistic realization of previ-
ous/subsequent mentions of the referent, (b)
different distance measurements from the last
mention of the referent, or (c) different fre-
quency measurements,

• weights of salience factors for the calculation
of hsal(r) and ssal(r),

• weights of hsal(r) and ssal(r) for the calcula-
tion of cumulated salience scores, and

36



Figure 2: Salience and
referring expressions

Figure 3: Salience and
grammatical roles

• optional realization thresholds

Different theories of referential coherence entail
different parameter configurations, as observed by
Hajičová and Kruijff-Korbayová (1997), Krahmer
and Theune (2002) and others for differences be-
tween Centering and FGD, and by Poesio et al.
(2004) for different instantiations of Centering. The
parameter configurations for these theories, as well
as for Givón’s Topicality – whose operationalization
as part of an NLG system has not been considered
so far – are shortly introduced below.

3.1 Topicality parameters

Givón (1983, 2001) established two dimensions of
‘topicality’ – abbreviated TOP –, anaphoric topical-
ity and cataphoric topicality, and described correla-
tions between both dimensions of topicality and the
choice of grammatical devices.

The anaphoric topicality of a referent r is mea-
sured by the distance from its last mention, cat-
aphoric topicality by its persistence (frequency)
within the subsequent n utterances:

distcl(r) =





1
k+1 with k ≥ 0 intermediate clauses

since last mention of r

0 if no previous mention of r

persistn/cl(r) =

˛̨
˛̨
˛̨

mentions of r within the

next n clauses

˛̨
˛̨
˛̨

n

Here and below, the subscript cl indicates that a fac-
tor is defined with reference to clauses. Alterna-
tively, sentences could be considered (subscript s).

Hearer salience corresponds to anaphoric topi-
cality, and speaker salience to cataphoric topical-
ity, i.e., hsalTOP (r) = distcl(r) and ssalTOP (r) =
persist10/cl(r). As for cumulated salience scores,
Givón (2001) predicts that (i) high values of hsal(r)

result in high ref(r) scores (anaphoric topicality
favors pronominal realization), and that (ii) high
ssal(r) scores result in high scores for gr(r) (subject
assignment indicates foregrounding):

refTOP (r) = hsalTOP (r)
grTOP (r) = ssalTOP (r)

3.2 Centering parameters

For Centering (Grosz et al., 1995) – abbreviated CT
–, hearer salience corresponds to the ranking of ref-
erents in the preceding utterance, with the ranking
subject > object > other, implemented here as an
extension of the dist(r) function above:

grcl(r)
=





grante(r)
k grante(r)+1

with k ≥ 0 intermediate clauses
since last mention of r

0 if no previous mention of r

with grante(r) =





1.2 if antecedent is subject
1.0 if antecedent is object
0.8 otherwise

The numerical scores of grante(r) reflect the relative
ranking proposed by the theory, and that they are
equally distributed between 0.8 and 1.2.7

In accordance with the concept of “backward-
looking center” (CB), speaker salience can be de-
fined with respect to the following utterance: A ref-
erent is speaker salient if it represents the CB of
the following utterance. To prevent cyclic defini-
tions, the CB of the following utterance (clause) can

7While later studies may involve empirically justified num-
bers for grante(r), this paper only considers theory-internal ev-
idence to motivate numerical salience factors. The numerical
values are thus chosen such that they reflect the original rank-
ing, but the exact numerical values of salience factors are ar-
bitrary. Important for their appropriate interpretation and for
the training of decision trees on individual factors is only that
relative differences are preserved.

37



be heuristically identified by pronominal realization
(Centering Rule 1):

pronana/cl(r) =





1.0 iff r realized as pronoun in
the following clause

0 otherwise

Pronominalization is associated with the CB (Cen-
tering Rule 1), i.e., the most (hearer-) salient refer-
ent in the current utterance, high hsal(r) scores thus
entail high ref(r) scores:

refCT (r) = hsalCT (r)

Grammatical roles determine the CB of the follow-
ing utterance, so that high ssal(r) scores entail high
gr(r) scores. Further, Centering Rule 2 predicts a
preference for CB continuity, so that hsal(r) has a
positive influence on gr(r):

grCT (r) = 0.5 hsalCT (r) + 0.5 ssalCT (r)

3.3 Functional parameters

Functional Centering (Strube and Hahn, 1999) and
Functional Generative Description (Sgall et al.,
1986) introduce hsal(r) factors that evaluate the type
of referring expression of the antecedent and its
word order: Following Strube and Hahn (1999) the
functions reftopcl (r) and wo

top
cl (r) can be defined in

analogy with grcl(r) above with the following sub-
functions:

reftopante(r) =





1.2 iff r realized as pronoun, proper
name, or simple definite NP

1.0 iff r realized as possessive NP or
complex definite NP

0.8 iff r realized as indefinite NP

wotopante(r) =
(
0.8 + 0.4m−nm

)

with m number of words in antecedent sentence, and
n < m number of words preceding the antecedent

The functions reftopante(r) and wo
top
ante(r) formalize

the claim that referents with topical (given) an-
tecedents are more hearer salient than referents with
focal (new) antecedents. The opposite claim, for-
mulated by Sgall et al. (1986), requires alternative
formulations of these salience factors reffocante(r) :=
2− reftopante(r) and wofocante(r) := 2− wotopante(r).

4 Evaluation

The parameters identified above are evaluated
against referring expressions and grammatical roles
in two German newspaper corpora that combine syn-
tactic and anaphoric annotations, i.e., a coreference-
annotated subcorpus of the NEGRA corpus (Skut et
al., 1997; Schiehlen, 2004), and the Potsdam Com-
mentary Corpus (Stede, 2004; Krasavina and Chiar-
cos, 2007, PCC).

4.1 Pronominalization and hsal metrics

Hearer salience is evaluated with respect to pronom-
inalization. As shown in Fig. 2, personal pronouns
are characterized by a high degree of hearer salience
(otherwise, a definite description would have been
used) and a low degree of speaker salience (oth-
erwise, a demonstrative pronoun would have been
used). As speaker salience is neutralized, pronomi-
nalization provides a test case for metrics of hearer
salience.

For the study of hearer salience, we applied
CART and C4.5 decision trees and classified hearer
salience scores against the pronominal and nominal
realization of third-person referents. Both learning
algorithms produced almost identical results (Tab.
1). All hsal factors outperformed the baseline (pre-
dict nominal), and with the exception of distcl(r) on
NEGRA, this improvement was statistically signifi-
cant as confirmed by a χ2 test. For all factors, high
salience scores were identified with a preference to
pronominal realization, thereby confirming the pre-
dicted influence of hearer salience on the choice of
referring expressions (Fig. 2).

With respect to plain distance measurements,
sentence-level segmentation outperformed clause-
level segmentation. This configuration was thus
adopted for hearer salience factors that take the form
of the antecedent into consideration. The over-
all best results were achieved with reftops (r) and
reffocs (r).

Closer inspection of the classifier revealed that
prominent realization compensates distance, i.e., a
referent that is realized in a prominent way in Uk−2
(e.g., as subject) is more likely to occur as a pronoun
than a referent that is realized in a non-prominent
way in Uk−1 (e.g., as non-argument). The classifica-
tion results did thus not provide a concrete pronom-

38



Table 1: Correctness of hsal factors for the prediction of
nominal and pronominal realization (C4.5), χ2 signifi-
cance of correctness improvements over baseline

salience correctness (significance)
factor NEGRA PCC

baseline .799 .726
distcl(r) .819 (not sig.) .836 (p < .001)
dists(r) .845 (p < .001) .853 (p < .001)
grs(r) .845 (p < .001) .861 (p < .001)
reftops (r) .969 (p < .001) .942 (p < .001)
reffocs (r) .969 (p < .001) .942 (p < .001)
wotops (r) .863 (p < .001) .887 (p < .001)
wofocs (r) .861 (p < .001) .886 (p < .001)
total (# ref.exp) 976 2355

Table 2: Pronominalization thresholds for reftop(r),
reffoc(r), and gr(r) as identified with a single conjunc-
tive rule learner

salience corpus threshold predicted pronouns
factor prec. recall f

grs(r) PCC .472 .695 .84 .761
NEGRA .472 .569 .837 .678

reftops (r) PCC .523 .830 .899 .863
NEGRA .523 .782 .913 .842

reffocs (r) PCC .389 .631 .899 .741
NEGRA (conjunctive rule learner failed)

inalization threshold, but rather, multiple classes
scattered along the range of possible hsal scores.

In experiments with a single conjunctive rule
learner (that forces a binary partition of salience
scores) reftops (r) outperformed the other factors in
precision and recall of pronoun prediction (Tab. 2).
For subsequent experiments, we adopt reftops (r) as
the primary metric of hearer salience.

4.2 Subject role assignment and ssal metrics

Speaker salience is evaluated here against the as-
signment of grammatical roles. The subject repre-
sents either a high degree of hearer salience or a high
degree of speaker salience (Fig. 3). For the study
of speaker salience, we eliminated the influence of
hearer salience by considering only sentences where
one non-subject referent was at least as hearer salient
(reftops (r)) as the subject. The relatively low number
of sentences that match this pattern (approx. 10%)
indicates that subjects tend to be hearer salient. To

Table 3: Correctness of ssal factors for the predic-
tion of subject/non-subject status (CART, subsection of
NEGRA+PCC)

factor correctness (significance)

baseline (non-subject) .521
persist10/s(r) .595 (p < .05)
persist3/s(r) .576 (not sig.)
persist1/s(r) .613 (p < .01)
persist10/cl(r) .585 (p < .1)
persist3/cl(r) .571 (not sig.)
persist1/cl(r) .562 (not sig.)
pronana/cl(r) .571 (not sig.)
pronana/s(r) .627 (p < .01)
pronana(r) .636 (p < .001)
total (# ref.exp) 216

compensate for data sparsity, data from NEGRA and
PCC was combined.

We trained decision trees to predict subject
or non-subject realization (Tab. 3). Both C4.5
and CART classifiers confirmed that high speaker
salience entails a subject preference.

All persistence measurements outperform the
baseline (non-subject), and we find that sentence-
level segmentation performs better than clause-level
segmentation. As for Centering-inspired speaker
salience factors that address the pronominaliza-
tion of the anaphor, three different variants were
tested: pronominalization in the immediately fol-
lowing clause pronana/cl(r), in the immediately fol-
lowing sentence pronana/s(r) and pronominaliza-
tion of the anaphor without contextual restriction
pronana(r). Factor pronana(r) achieved highest
correctness, closely followed by pronana/s(r), and
persist1/s(r) and then by persist10/s(r). For other
salience factors, the correctness improvement over
the baseline was marginally significant or insignifi-
cant.

4.3 Beyond pronouns and subjects

Having identified reftops (r) and pronana(r) as suit-
able measurements of hearer salience and speaker
salience, Fig. 4 illustrates their application to NP
complexity and grammatical roles. Different gram-
matical devices are ordered according to their av-
erage salience scores. Edges between two scores
indicate highly significant differences between the

39



Figure 4: Average salience scores for selected grammatical devices (NEGRA+PCC)

salience scores for two grammatical devices (two-
sample t-test, p < .001), dotted edges indicate
marginally significant differences (p < .05), no edge
indicates an insignificant difference (p ≥ .05).

The results obtained mirror the theory-based pre-
dictions on salience metrics summarized in Figs. 2
and 3. Remarkable here is that these phenomena
were not taken in consideration when the salience
metric was developed (resp., a salience factor se-
lected for its approximation). For pronana(r) and
reftops (r), these effects were not even anticipated by
the researchers who proposed the salience factors
in the first place: Neither Centering nor Functional
Centering predict a difference between complex and
non-complex proper names. Such differences are,
however, fully in line with assumptions of the the-
oretical literature, Ariel (1990), for example, postu-
lated a gradual decrease of complexity with increas-
ing salience.

Figure 4 shows two types of extensions in the ap-
plication of salience metrics as compared to the data
sets they were developed on: (1) change of domain
(pronana(r) applied to referring expressions), and
(2) change of granularity (pronana(r) applied to dif-
ferentiate non-subject referents, reftops (r) applied to
differentiate nominal expressions). For both types of
extension, the theory-based predictions of the MSF
could be confirmed, and on this basis, a classifier for
packaging preferences can be developed (Sect. 2.5).
For the development of such a classifier from an es-
tablishes salience metric, it is sufficient to consider
only the salience scores and the respective target re-
alizations. With so few parameters, a small amount
of data is sufficient to train a classifier for this task.

This is of practical relevance to NLG because it
allows us to develop a salience metric for an easily

observable phenomenon with loads of training data,
and then apply it to another domain, where little
training data is available, just sufficient to perform
the necessary adjustments (e.g., to calculate the rel-
ative weight of hearer salience and speaker salience
for the phenomon under discussion). An interest-
ing prediction is, for example, that speaker salience
(and absence of hearer salience) entails differences
in accentuation (following Ariel, 1990, and Levelt,
1989, prosodically prominent expressions are more
‘complex’ than prosodically non-prominent expres-
sions, and thus subject to the complexity predic-
tions of Fig. 2). Corpora with prosodic and corefer-
ence annotation are available, but expensive to cre-
ate, and thus relatively small (e.g., the German radio
news corpus DIRNDL, with 3221 sentences anno-
tated for prosody and information structure, Eckert
et al., 2011). But with salience metrics developed
for text corpora, this limited amount of data is suffi-
cient to evaluate whether the salience metrics yield
the predicted effects, and to develop a classifier for
the salience-based prediction of prosody from previ-
ously established metrics.

5 Results and Discussion

This paper described the application of a frame-
work of salience in discourse that introduces a
formal distinction between metrics of (backward-
looking) hearer salience and (forward-looking)
speaker salience, and a definition of information
packaging as an alignment between the salience
ranking of discourse referents and hierarchies of
grammatical devices.

Our model extends Centering in that it assigns ev-
ery referent a numerical score rather than concen-
trating on the top-level element in a ranking of ref-

40



erents from the preceding utterance. By doing so,
it is possible to study the effect of distance mea-
surements and to predict packaging preferences for
all referents in an utterance, whereas Centering is
restricted to adjacent utterances and constraints on
possible realizations of the backward-looking center
and the preferred center only. Further, our frame-
work is not restricted to pronominalization, but ca-
pable to cover elaborate hierarchies of referring ex-
pressions.

Evaluation results on the choice of referring ex-
pressions and grammatical roles in German con-
firmed the theoretical predictions on how hearer
salience and speaker salience affects both packaging
phenomena (cf. Figs. 2 and 3). Essential assump-
tions about packaging hierarchies and associated as-
pects of salience could thus be confirmed.

(Subhierarchies of) the rankings in Figs. 2 and 3
have previously been applied in NLG: Fig. 2 cov-
ers standard assumptions about pronominal, defi-
nite and indefinite descriptions that can be found
in similar form in the GRE algorithms of Dale and
Reiter (1995) and McCoy and Strube (1999), and
in the generation direction of optimality-theoretic
models of anaphor interpretation and generation
(Beaver, 2004; Byron and Gegg-Harrison, 2004).
Thes salience ranking of grammatical roles has been
employed for lexicalization of verbs, e.g., by Stede
(1998). Zarrieß et al. (2011) describe an experiment
to generate voice alternation on the basis of an im-
plicit notion of hearer salience (‘information status’,
approximated from surface features such as pronom-
inalization and definiteness, cf. (Cahill and Riester,
2009) for a similar approach on word order).

The two-dimensional model of salience gener-
alizes over Centering, Topicality and FGD, but it
also allows us to formulate novel predictions, e.g.,
that subsequent pronominalization has an effect on
NP complexity, or that the same notion of speaker
salience is affecting both grammatical roles and the
choice of referring expressions. Both claims have
not been stated as such within the original theories.

Furthermore, the evaluation showed that the
theory-guided adaption of salience metrics from
one packaging phenomenon to another is possi-
ble. The theoretical background model adopted here
may thus provide us with an opportunity to develop
salience-based predictors for domains with relative

little training data available.
By combining information drawn from different

packaging phenomena, new metrics of salience may
be developed and integrated into existing NLG algo-
rithms to predict referring expressions and grammat-
ical roles (as well as word order) in a contextually
adequate way.

Acknowledgements

The research described in this paper was partially
conducted within the Collaborative Research Cen-
ter (SFB) 632 ‘Information Structure’, Universität
Potsdam, and financially supported by the Linguis-
tics Department, Universität Potsdam. I would also
like to thank Manfred Stede and three anonymozs
reviewers.

References

Mira Ariel. 1990. Accessing Noun-Phrase Antecedents.
Routledge, London, New York.

David I. Beaver. 2004. The optimization of discourse.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 27(1).

Peter Bosch, Graham Katz, and Carla Umbach. 2007.
The non-subject bias of German demonstrative pro-
nouns. In Monika Schwarz-Friesel, Manfred Consten,
and Mareile Knees, editors, Anaphors in Texts. Cog-
nitive, Formal and Applied Approaches to Anaphoric
Reference, pages 145–164. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam.

António Branco, Tony McEnery, Ruslan Mitkov, and
Fátima Silva, editors. 2007. Proceedings of the
6th Discourse Anaphor and Anaphor Resolution Col-
loquium (DAARC 2007), Lagos (Algarve), Portugal,
2007, March 29-30. Centro de Linguistica da Univer-
sidade do Porto, Porto.

Donna K. Byron and Whitney Gegg-Harrison. 2004.
Evaluating optimality theory for pronoun resolution
algorithm specification. In Proceedings of the Dis-
course Anaphora and Reference Resolution Collo-
quium (DAARC 2004), pages 27–32, September.

Aoife Cahill and Arndt Riester. 2009. Incorporating in-
formation status into generation ranking. In Proceed-
ings of the Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meet-
ing of the ACL and the 4th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP,
pages 817–825, Suntec, Singapore, August.

Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen Okurowski.
2003. Building a discourse-tagged corpus in the
framework of Rhetorical Structure Theory. In Jan van

41



Kuppevelt and Ronnie Smith, editors, Current Di-
rections in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 85–112.
Kluwer, Dordrecht.

Wallace Chafe. 1976. Giveness, contrastiveness, def-
initeness, subjects, topics, and point of view. In
Charles N. Li, editor, Subject and Topic, pages 25–55.
Academic Press, New York.

Wallace Chafe. 1994. Discourse, Consiousness, and
Time. The Flow and Displacement of Conscious Expe-
rience in Speaking and Writing. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago and London.

Christian Chiarcos. 2010. Mental Salience and Gram-
matical Form. Ph.D. thesis, Universität Potsdam, Jun.

Christian Chiarcos. 2011a. The mental salience frame-
work. In Christian Chiarcos, Berry Claus, and Michael
Grabski, editors, Salience. Multidisciplinary Perspec-
tives on Its Function in Discourse. Mouton de Gruyer,
Berlin.

Christian Chiarcos. 2011b. On the dimensons of dis-
course salience. Bochumer Linguistische Arbeits-
berichte, 3:31–44, February.

Francis Cornish. 2007. Deictic, discourse-deictic and
anaphoric uses of demonstrative expressions in Eng-
lish. In Workshop on Anaphoric Uses of demonstrative
Expressions at the 29th Annual Meeting of the DGfS,
Siegen.

Robert Dale and Ehud Reiter. 1995. Computational in-
terpretation of the Gricean maxims in the generation of
referring expressions. Cognitive Science, 2(19):233–
263.

James Raymond Davis and Julia Hirschberg. 1988. As-
signing intonational features in synthesized spoken di-
rections. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
1988), pages 187–193, Buffalo, June.

Holger Diessel. 2006. Demonstratives, joint attention,
and the emergence of grammar. Cognitive Linguistics,
17:463–489.

Bonnie J. Dorr, Rebecca Green, Lori Levin, Owen Ram-
bow, David Farwell, Nizar Habash, Stephen Helmre-
ich, Eduard Hovy, Keith J. Miller, Teruko Mitamura,
Florence Reeder, and Advaith Siddharthan. 2004. Se-
mantic annotation and lexico-syntactic paraphrase. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Building Lexical Re-
sources from Semantically Annotated Corpora, LREC
2004, Portugal.

Kerstin Eckert, Arndt Riester, and Katrin Schweitzer.
2011. A discourse information radio news database
for linguistic analysis. unpublished ms. Institut für
Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, Universität Stuttgart.

Konrad Ehlich. 1982. Anaphora and deixis: Same, sim-
ilar, or different? In Robert J. Jarvella and Wolfgang
Klein, editors, Speech, Place and Action. Studies in

Deixis and Related Topics, pages 315–338. John Wi-
ley, Chichester.

Katja Filippova and Michael Strube. 2007. The German
vorfeld and local coherence. Journal of Logic, Lan-
guage and Information, 16(4):465–485.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1977. Topics in lexical semantics.
In Roger W. Cole, editor, Current Issues in Linguistic
Theory, pages 76–138. Indiana University Press, Bloo-
mington.

Talmy Givón, editor. 1983. Topic Continuity in Dis-
course: A Quantitative Cross-Language Study. John
Benjamins, Amsterdam and Philadelphia.

Talmy Givón. 2001. Syntax. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam and Philadelphia. 2nd, revised ed.

Barbara J. Grosz, Aravind K. Joshi, and Scott Weinstein.
1995. Centering: A framework for modelling the lo-
cal coherence of discourse. Computational Linguis-
tics, 21(2):203–225.

Jeanette K. Gundel, Nancy A. Hedberg, and Ron
Zacharski. 1993. Cognitive status and the form
of referring expressions in discourse. Language,
69(2):247–307.

Eva Hajičová and Ivana Kruijff-Korbayová. 1997. Top-
ics and centers: A comparison of the salience-based
approach and the Centering theory. Prague Bulletin of
Mathematical Linguistics, 67:25–50.

Klaus von Heusinger. 1997. Salienz und Referenz. Der
Epsilonoperator in der Semantik der Nominalphrase
und anaphorischer Pronomen. Akademie Verlag,
Berlin.

Laurent Itti, Geraint Rees, and John K. Tsotsos, editors.
2005. Neurobiology of Attention. Elsevier.

Laurent. Itti. 2003. Visual attention. In Handbook of
Brain Theory and Neural Networks. 2nd edition.

Elsi Kaiser and John Trueswell. 2010. Investigating
the interpretation of pronouns and demonstratives in
Finnish: Going beyond salience. In Edward Gib-
son and Neal J. Pearlmutter, editors, The Processing
and Acquisition of Reference. MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass.

John D. Kelleher. 2011. Visual salience and the other
one. In Christian Chiarcos, Berry Claus, and Michael
Grabski, editors, Salience. Multidisciplinary Perspec-
tives on Its Function in Discourse. Mouton de Gruyer,
Berlin.

Emiel Krahmer and Mariët Theune. 2002. Efficient con-
textsensitive generation of referring expressions. In
Kees van Deemter and Rodger Kibble, editors, Infor-
mation Sharing: Reference and Presupposition in Lan-
guage Generation and Interpretation, pages 223–264.
CSLI, Stanford.

Olga Krasavina and Christian Chiarcos. 2007. PoCoS -
Potsdam Coreference Scheme. In Proceedings of the

42



Linguistic Annotation Workshop. Held in Conjunction
with the ACL-2007, pages 156–163, Prague, Czech
Republic, June.

Geert-Jan M. Kruijff, Ivana Kruijff-Korbayová, John
Bateman, and Elke Teich. 2001. Linear order as
higher-level decision: Information structure in strate-
gic and tactical generation. In Helmut Horacek, editor,
Proceedings of the 8th European Workshop on Natural
Language Generation, pages 74–83, Toulouse, France,
July 5-6.

Ronald W. Langacker. 1997. Constituency, dependency,
and conceptual grouping. Cognitive Linguistics, 8:1–
32.

Shalom Lappin and Herbert J. Leass. 1994. An al-
gorithm for pronominal anaphora resolution: A criti-
cal evaluation. Computational Linguistics, 20(4):535–
561.

Willem J.M. Levelt. 1989. Speaking: From Intention to
Articulation. MIT Press.

Kathleen F. McCoy and Michael Strube. 1999. Gene-
rating anaphoric expressions: Pronoun or definite de-
scription? In Proceedings of the ACL-1999 Workshop
on the Relation of Discourse/Dialogue Structure and
Reference, pages 63–71, Maryland, June.

Ann E. Mulkern. 2007. Knowing who’s important: Rel-
ative discourse salience and Irish pronominal forms.
In Nancy A. Hedberg and Ron Zacharski, editors, The
Grammar-Pragmatics Interface: Essays in honor of
Jeanette K. Gundel, pages 113–142. John Benjamins,
Amsterdam and Philadelphia.

Costanza Navaretta. 2002. Combining information
structure and centering-based models of salience for
resolving intersentential pronominal anaphora. In An-
tonio Branco, Tony McEnery, and Ruslan Mitkov,
editors, Proceedings of the 4th Discourse Anaphora
and Anaphora Resolution Colloquium (DAARC 2002)
, pages 135–140, Lisbon, September 18-29.

Andrew Ortony, R.J. Vondruska, M.A. Foss, and J.E.
Jones. 1985. Salience, similes and the asymmetry of
similarity. Journal of Memory and Language, 24:569–
594.

Thiyagarajasarma Pattabhiraman. 1992. Aspects of
Salience in Natural Language Generation. Ph.D. the-
sis, Simon Fraser University, August.

Massimo Poesio, Barbara Di Eugenio, Rosemary Steven-
son, and Janet Hitzeman. 2004. Centering: A para-
metric theory and its instantiations. Computational
linguistics, 30(3):309–363.

Ellen F. Prince. 1981. Toward a taxonomy of given-new
information. In P. Cole, editor, Radical Pragmatics,
pages 223–256. Academic Press, New York.

Regina Pustet. 1995. Obviation and subjectivization:
The same basic phenomenon? A study of participant
marking in Blackfoot. Studies in Language, 19:37–72.

Chris Reed. 2002. Saliency and the attentional state in
natural language generation. In Proceedings of the
15th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(ECAI 2002), pages 440–444, Lyon, France.

Michael Schiehlen. 2004. Optimizing algorithms for
pronoun resolution. In Proceedings of the 20th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING), pages 515–521, Geneva, August.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajićová, and Jarmila Panevova. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in its Semantic and Prag-
matic Aspects. Reidel, Dordrecht.

Shun Shiramatsu, Kazunori Komatani, Kôiti Hasida, Tet-
suya Ogata, and Hiroshi G. Okuno. 2007. Meaning-
game-based Centering model with statistical definition
of utility of referential expression and its verification
using Japanese and English corpora. In (Branco et al.,
2007), pages 121–126.

Wojciech Skut, Brigitte Krenn, Thorsten Brants, and
Hans Uszkoreit. 1997. An annotation scheme for
free word order languages. In Proceedings of the 5th
Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing
(ANLP), Washington, D.C.

Manfred Stede. 1998. A generative perspective on verb
alternations. Computational Linguistics, 24(3):401–
429.

Manfred Stede. 2004. The Potsdam Commentary Cor-
pus. In Bonnie Webber and Donna K. Byron, editors,
Proceedings of the ACL-2004 Workshop on Discourse
Annotation, pages 96–102, Barcelona, July.

Michael Strube and Udo Hahn. 1999. Functional Center-
ing - Grounding referential coherence in information
structure. Computational Linguistics, 25(3):309–344.

Leonard Talmy. 2000. Toward a Cognitive Semantics,
volume I. Concept Structuring Systems. MIT Press,
Cambridge and London.

Russel S. Tomlin. 1995. Focal attention, voice, and word
order. An experimental, cross-linguistic study. In
Mickey Noonan and Pamela Downing, editors, Word
Order in Discourse, pages 517–554. John Benjamins,
Amsterdam and Philadelphia.

Ielka van der Sluis and Emiel Krahmer. 2001. Gene-
rating referring expressions in a multimodal context:
An empirically oriented approach. In Walter Daele-
mans et al., editor, Selected Papers from the 11th CLIN
Meeting. Rodopi, Amsterdam and Atlanta.

Sina Zarrieß, Aoife Cahill, and Jonas Kuhn. 2011. Un-
derspecifying and predicting voice for surface reali-
sation ranking. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 1007–
1017, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

43


