










































Medstract - The Next Generation


Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL-HLT 2011, pages 184–185,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Medstract – The Next Generation

Marc Verhagen
Computer Science Department

Brandeis University, Waltham, USA
marc@cs.brandeis.edu

James Pustejovsky
Computer Science Department

Brandeis University, Waltham, USA
jamesp@cs.brandeis.edu

Abstract

We present MedstractPlus, a resource for min-
ing relations from the Medline bibliographic
database. It was built on the remains of Med-
stract, a previously created resource that in-
cluded a bio-relation server and an acronym
database. MedstractPlus uses simple and scal-
able natural language processing modules to
structure text and is designed with reusability
and extendibility in mind.

1 Introduction

In the late 1990s, the Medstract project (Pustejovsky
et al., 2002) set out to use common Natural Lan-
guage Processing techniques and employ them to
access relational information in Medline abstracts.
Medstract used a set of pipelined Python scripts
where all scripts operated on in-memory objects.
The output of this pipeline was a set of relations,
indexed by the PubMed identifier of the abstract in
which they appeared. A Perl script proposed poten-
tial acronyms using a set of regular expressions on
named entities in Medline abstracts. Both relations
and acronyms were fed into an Oracle database,
where access to these datasources was enabled by
a set of Perl CGI scripts. The code, however, was
not made public and was not maintained in any se-
rious fashion after 2004. Developers of the system
dispersed over the world and the Medstract server
fatally crashed in 2007.

Here, we describe the resurrection of Medstract.
One goal was that code should be open source and
that installation should not depend on idiosyncra-

cies of the developer’s machine, which was a prob-
lem with the inherited code base. Reusability and
extendability are ensured by following the princi-
ples embodied in the Linguistic Annotation Format
(LAF) (Ide and Romary, 2006). In LAF, source data
are untouched, annotations are grouped in layers that
can refer to each other and to the source, and each
layer is required to be mappable to a graph-like pivot
format. For MedstractPlus, each component is set
up to be independent from other layers, although of
course each layer may need access to certain types
of information in order to create non-trivial output.
This allows us to swap in alternative modules, mak-
ing it easier to experiment with different versions of
the tagger and chunker for example. We now pro-
ceed to describe the system in section 2 and finish
with the current status and future work in section 3.

2 System Design and Implementation

The general design of MedstractPlus is presented in
Figure 1. The Lemmatizer creates what LAF calls
the base-segmentation, a first layer of tokenized text
that is the input to processing modules associated
with other layers. The Lemmatizer incorporates a
Python version of the Brill Tagger, extended with
entries from the UMLS Thesaurus.

The Semantic Tagger is a group of components
using (i) regular expressions for finding simple types
like URLs, (ii) dictionary lookup in the UMLS type
and concept lists as well as other typed word lists,
(iii) off-the-shelf components like the Abner gene
tagger (http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/ bsettles/abner/) and
(iv) a statistical disambiguation model for genes
trained on the GENIA corpus.

184



Medline Abstracts Lemmatizer

GENIA Corpus
Acronyms

UMLS

RelationsSemantic Types

Semantic Tagger

- regular expressions
- dictionary lookup
- Abner tagger
- disambiguation

Relation Extraction

- shallow parser
     three-level YACC parser
- argument linker

Web InterfacePubMed

Figure 1: Overview of the MedstractPlus Architecture

The Relation Extraction component now contains
a three-level 59-rule YACC parser that, starting with
simple low-level chunking of noun and verb groups,
proceeds to add more complex noun phrases and
subordinated phrases. The argument linker produces
binary relations, using a finite-state machine that
runs on the data created by the shallow parser.

An advantage of this data-driven approach is that
processing can be split up. A complete run of Med-
stractPlus on all Medline abstracts would take ap-
proximately 30 days on a entry-level desktop. But
some relatively stable components like the Lemma-
tizer and the shallow parser (the latter being the most
time-consuming component) can be run just once
and subsequent runs can be restricted to those com-
ponents that were changed.

The Web Interface gives access to the types and
relations in a fairly standard way. In its current pro-
totype form, it allows a user to type in a gene and
then view all relations that the gene participates in.
Alternatively, a pair of genes can be given.

3 Current Status and Future Work

The basic architecture depicted in Figure 1 is in
place, but some components like the type disam-
biguator are in embryonic form. The web inter-
face and the source code are or will be available at
http://medstractplus.org.

Extensive additions to the basic typing and re-
lation extraction component groups are in progress
and the Relation Extraction component can be ex-
tended with specialized rule sets for specific rela-
tions like inhibit or phosphorylate. The interaction
with the PubMed server is now limited to providing
links. But the plan is that the MedstractPlus server
will also query PubMed for relation pairs in case its
own database provides little information. This ap-
proach can be extended to other relation servers like
Chilibot (http://www.chilibot.net/), thereby moving
towards a system than presents merged relations
from the MedstractPlus database as well as relations
from other servers.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the National Institutes
of Health, under grant number 5R01NS057484-04.

References
Nancy Ide and Laurent Romary. 2006. Representing lin-

guistic corpora and their annotations. In Proceedings
of the Fifth Language Resources and Evaluation Con-
ference (LREC), Genoa, Italy.

James Pustejovsky, José Castaño, Roser Saurı́, Anna
Rumshisky, Jason Zhang, and Wei Luo. 2002. Med-
stract: Creating large-scale information servers for
biomedical libraries. In Proceedings of ACL’02.

185


