










































Towards Temporal Segmentation of Patient History in Discharge Letters


Proceedings of the Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 49–54,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 15 September 2011.

Towards Temporal Segmentation of Patient History
in Discharge Letters

Galia Angelova
Institute of Information and Commu-

nication Technologies, Bulgarian 
Academy of Sciences (IICT-BAS)

Sofia, Bulgaria
galia@lml.bas.bg

Svetla Boytcheva
IICT-BAS and

University of Library Studies and In-
formation Technologies 

Sofia, Bulgaria
svetla.boytcheva@gmail.com

Abstract

This paper reports about ongoing work in au-
tomatic identification of temporal markers and 
segmentation of patient histories into episodes.
We discuss the discourse structure of the 
Anamneses in Bulgarian hospital discharge let-
ters and present experiments with a corpus of 
1,375 anonymised discharge letters of patients
with endocrine and metabolic diseases. Our IE 
prototype discovers 32,445 key terms in the 
corpus, among them more that 7,000 occur-
rences of drug names and about 7,500 occur-
rences of diagnoses. The temporal markers oc-
cur 8,248 times usually paired with tokens 
pointing the direction of time “forward” or 
“backwards”. Temporal markers are identified 
with precision 84%, recall 57% and f-measure 
67.9%.

1 Introduction

Medical informatics has made little progress in 
the temporal representation and reasoning tasks
[1]. This is partly due to the complexity of the 
free text descriptions in clinical narratives where 
temporal information is presented. On the other 
hand, there is no agreement about the essence of 
clinical temporal models and the concepts and 
relationships that have to be taken into account. 
Research on temporal information interpretation 
is still in its embryonic stage according to [2]. 
The progress requires theoretic models as well as 
large training corpora of annotated medical texts 
which are expensive to construct.

This paper summarises work in progress on 
discharge letters structuring and experiments in 
automatic extraction of temporal markers. We 
deal with discharge letters in Electronic Health 
Records (EHR) in Bulgarian language. These 
letters contain predefined sections due to the 
general practice of structuring clinical notes into 
sections which dates back to the 60's and 70's of 

the last century as a result of centralised regula-
tions1 . Our present IE system, which analyses
discharge letter texts, automatically identifies the 
Anamnesis (Patient history). This section con-
tains a sketchy abstract, manually prepared by 
medical experts, who summarise the patient his-
tory in order to communicate it to another doctor.
Explicit temporal markers designate the main 
phases in disease development, the main inter-
ventions and their effects. The unified text for-
mat is a motivation for its inclusion in methods 
for automatic episode recognition. Our main idea 
is to select a discourse structure theory and to try 
extracting pieces of information that have mean-
ings as discourse units. The paper presents our
first results in this direction.

Section 2 overviews related approaches. Sec-
tion 3 considers the context of our work: the dis-
course structure of discharge letters and existing 
prototypes for section splitting and information 
extraction. Section 4 presents the evaluation of 
the current component for automatic extraction 
of temporal markers as well as our research 
agenda for building timelines of clinical events. 
Section 5 contains the conclusion.

2 Related Work

Research on temporal information processing
is a relatively recent activity in biomedical NLP. 
Savova et al. [4] presents an annotation schema 
with temporal relations based on TimeML [5] 
and analyses the potential of TimeML tags as 
annotation tool for clinical narratives. The gener-
al objective is to build a temporal relation dis-
covery component and a reasoner to create time-
lines of clinically relevant concepts. The authors 
consider five Event classes including Occurence
(events that happened) and State (a condition or 
                                               
1 The list of sections in Bulgarian hospital discharge letters 

is published as a legal Agreement in the Official State 
Gazette, Article 190(3) [3].

49



state, e.g. symptoms, descriptors and chronic 
conditions). The paper explicates important fine-
grained characteristics of events and temporal 
relations in clinical texts which are related to lin-
guistic units.

Five tags for marking up temporal informa-
tion are suggested in [6]: reference point, direc-
tion, number, time unit, and pattern. The authors 
identified 254 temporal expressions in 50 dis-
charge summaries and represented them using 
the suggested scheme. The inter-rater agreement 
was 75% which shows the complexity of tem-
poral annotations even when simple tags are 
used.

Harkema et al. [7] presents an algorithm 
called ConText which identifies clinical condi-
tions that are described in clinical reports: they 
can be negated, hypothetical, historical, or expe-
rienced by someone other than the patient. Con-
Text infers the status of a condition with regard 
to these properties from simple lexical clues oc-
curring in the context of the condition. The study 
deals with 4,654 annotations from 240 clinical 
reports: 2,377 annotated conditions in the devel-
opment set and 2,277 annotated conditions in the 
test set. The evaluation summarises results ob-
tained in a six-token window (stw) and end-of-
sentence (eos) contexts. For “historical” condi-
tion, ConText achieves stw precision 78% and 
recall 70% as well as eos precision 77% and re-
call 79% across all report types that contain such 
conditions.

Hripcsak et al. model temporal information as 
contraint satisfaction problem [8]. Medical 
events from 231 discharge summaries are 
represented as intervals, and assertions about
events are represented as constraints. Up to 151 
medical events and 388 temporal assertions were 
identified per complete discharge summary. 
Non-definitional assertions were explicit (36%) 
or implicit (64%) and absolute (17%), qualitative 
(72%), or metric (11%). Implicit assertions were 
based on domain knowledge and assumptions, 
e.g., the section of the report determined the or-
dering of events. The source texts contained no 
instances of discontinuous temporal disjunction.
The authors conclude that a simple temporal 
constraint satisfaction problem appears sufficient 
to represent most temporal assertions in dis-
charge summaries and may be useful for encod-
ing electronic medical records.

In our present work, we are mostly influenced 
by [6], which is attractive because of its relative 
simplicity, and [8].

3 Project context

The general objectives of our project are: (i) to 
develop a system for knowledge extraction from 
discharge letter texts and (ii) to design algo-
rithms for searching conceptual patterns in the 
extracted clinical facts. Recognising the events 
and ordering them in timelines is an essential 
part of the project research agenda.

3.1 Materials

The discharge letters in our corpus contain sec-
tions which can be automatically recognised with 
accuracy 99.99% using their headers. Sometimes
the structure is not strictly kept due to section 
merging, changing the section headers, skipping 
(empty) sections and replacing the default sec-
tion sequence. Table 1 shows the percentage of 
discharge letters with available standard sections 
in the corpus of 1,375 EHRs.

Section title Discharge letters con-
taining the section

Diagnoses 100%
Anamnesis 100%
Past diseases 88.52%

Allergies, risk factors 43.56%

Family Medical History 52.22%
Patient Status 100%
Lab data, clinical tests 100%
Examiners’ comments 59.95%
Debate 100%
Treatment 26.70%

Table 1. Formatting discharge letters according to 
centralised state regulations

Having the potential to identify automatically 
the Anamnesis section, which contains the pa-
tient history, we can plan further research tasks 
related to its temporal segmentation.

3.2 Methods

We have developed extractors of ICD-10 codes
(the International Classification of Diseases, v.
102) and ATC codes (the Anatomical Therapeu-
tic Chemical Classification System3) from dis-
charge letter texts [9, 10, 11]. The tool for diag-
nosis extraction assigns ICD-10 codes to Bulga-
rian nominal phrases designating disease names 
with 84.5% precision [9]. The drug extractor as-
signs ATC codes to Bulgarian drug names with 
f-measure 98.42% and achieves 93.85% f-

                                               
2 http://www.nchi.government.bg/download.html
3 http://www.who.int/classifications/atcddd/en/

50



measure for the dosage recognition [10]. Auto-
matic extraction of “current treatment” is possi-
ble with highest accuracy for the drugs discussed 
in the Anamnesis (precision 88%, recall 92.45%, 
f-measure 90.17%, overgeneration 6%) [11].

Figure 1 shows the connections between the 
text (pre-)processing components that have been 
developed so far in our projects. The anonymised 
input discharge letter is split into section; after 
tokenisation and sentence splitting, the temporal 

markers are identified and episodes are tagged. 
Within the episodes, diseases and drugs are rec-
ognised by the existing tools. Other entities to be 
recognised in the episodes are conditions (symp-
toms, complains and status) and treatment out-
come. The system works on a resource bank of 
medical nomenclatures, terminologies and lin-
guistic resources. The output consists of anno-
tated anamneses whit tagged episodes.

Figure 1. Text pre-processing components and extractors of diseases, drug names, and temporal markers

4 Extraction of temporal markers and 
ideas for structuring episodes

4.1 Evaluation results

We have performed experimental tests with 
1,375 discharge letters where our IE prototype 
discovers 32,445 key terms or markers in the 
Anamneses (in average 23.59 per discharge let-
ter). The distribution of these terminologies and
temporal markers is presented in Table 2.

Temporal 
Marker

Occurrences EHRs Avg

drug names 7,108 1,213 5.86
diagnoses 7,565 1,292 5.86
complains 1,274     841 1.51
temporal 8,248 1,373 6.01
direction 8,249 1,374 6.01

Total 32,445 1,375 23.59

Table 2. Recognised entities in 1,375 discharge letters

Not surprisingly the temporal and direction 
markers occur as pairs, because direction mark-
ers point “forward” or “backward” from the time 
marker. The share of temporal and direction 
markers is significant (51% in total, see Fig. 2).
These figures explicate the importance of tempo-
ral information for the case history description.

Figure 2. Percentage of temporal markers

51



The present recall in the recognition of the 
temporal markers in about 57% and the precision 
is 84% (f-measure 67.9%). 

4.2 Segmentation into episodes
In medicine, an episode comprises all activities 
that are performed between the diagnosis of a 
disease and its cure (or stabilisation in case of 
chronic diseases). Studying various approaches 
to determine and annotate the granularity of tem-
poral intervals, we view the patient history epi-
sodes as sets of events defined via the explicit 
temporal markers stated by the physicians who 
examine and treat the patients.

Most discharge letters in our corpus concern
patients with endocrine and metabolic diseases
diagnosed decades ago. In general only the major 
illness phases are discussed in the Anamnesis
together with the treatment and medication 
changes. We consider below an example of a 
case history written in 2010:

Example 1. Diabetes Mellitus diagnosed
5-6 years ago, manifested by most
symptoms. At the beginning started 
treatment with Maninil only, after-
wards in combination with Siofor. 
After few months the Maninil was re-
placed by Diaprel. Since October 
2005 treated with Insulin Novomix 30 
– 32E in the morning, 26E in the 
evening with diagnosed diabetic 
retinopathy. Complains of strong 
pains in the feet mostly at night. 

We believe that human experts declare ex-
plicitly the most important temporal markers 
which are sufficient (in their view) to adequately 
and unambiguously communicate the case histo-
ry to another medical doctor. Therefore, we con-
sider these markers as intentional signals for dis-
course segmentation. Our temporal model is 
framed using three tags suggested in [6]:

 reference point, direction, and temporal 
expression

plus additional tags needed for our project: 
 diagnoses or disorders, 
 complains or symptoms,
 drugs/treatment applied as well as
 treatment outcome.

There could be several diagnoses or symp-
toms enumerated in one episode as well as more 
than one drug correspondingly prescribed to the 
patient.

Let us consider the episodes in Example 1
which are defined by the explicit temporal ex-
pressions. Interpreting the text and ordering the 

temporal markers in a time progression scale ac-
cording to the concrete moments, we construct 
the representation shown in Table 3. The conven-
tional literal ′now′ denotes the speech/writing 
moment, in this case the moment of hospitalisa-
tion in 2010. Table 3 integrates the results of two 
extractors that were referred to in Section 3.2.

Ep1 Reference point Now minus 5-6 years
Direction forward
Temporal expression 5-6 years ago
Diagnoses Diabetes Mellitus

E10
Complains, symptoms
Drugs/Treatment Maninil A10BB01
Drugs/Treatment Siofor 1 A10BA02
Treatment outcome

Ep2 Reference point (Now – (5-6 years)) 
+ few months

Direction forward
Temporal expression After few months 
Diagnoses
Complains, symptoms
Drugs/Treatment Diaprel A10BB09
Drugs/Treatment Siofor 1 A10BA02
Treatment outcome

Ep3 Reference point October 2005
Direction forward
Temporal expression Since October 2005
Diagnoses Diabetic retinopathy 

H36.0
Complains, symptoms
Drugs/Treatment Insulin Novomix 30 

– 32E mon., 26E ev.
Treatment outcome

Ep4 Reference point Now
Direction
Temporal expression
Diagnoses
Complains, symptoms strong pains in the 

feet
…..

Table 3. Temporal segmentation with integration of
automatic diagnoses and drugs extraction

Studying manually the discharge letters in our 
corpus, we think that the episodes resemble dis-
course segments as introduced in [12]. It seems 
reasonable to consider every temporal marker as 
a cue phrase signaling a new episode, because 
cue phrases express the intention of the writer to 
emphasize on major disease phases. In Example 
1 and Table 3 we can also follow the topical fo-
cus shifts [13]: an episode might

 retain the topic of the previous one and 
contain references to the discourse entities in 

52



the previous episode. For instance, episode 2
which was uttered immediately after episode 
1 refers to the entity Maninil introduced in 
episode 1;
 shift the topic and start discussion of 
another entity like e.g. episode 3. 

Practical guidance of how to recognise segments 
is given in [14] where a discourse segment is 
viewed as a sequence of clauses that display lo-
cal coherence. The following properties are listed 
as features that should hold within a segment:

(i) Resolution of references should be possi-
ble by techniques based on recency;

(ii) The time is fixed or there is a simple pro-
gression;

(iii) A fixed set of background assumptions is 
relevant to all clauses in the segment;

(iv) From intentional perspective, all the sen-
tences in the segment contribute to a com-
mon discourse purpose, i.e. the same 
communicative goal motivates the writer 
to utter all clauses in the segment;

(v) From informational perspective, all the 
sentences in the segment are related to 
each other by some temporal, causal or 
rhetoric relations, i.e. all sentences and 
phrases combine together to describe a co-
herent event or situation.

Following these five properties, we might view
the elementary episode 1 and episode 2 as a sin-
gle segment because they discuss the progression 
of the diabetes, while episode 3 is focused on the
diabetes complication Diabetic retinopathy diag-
nosed in 2005. We also note that the clauses in 
episode 1 and episode 2 form a focus space 
where the diabetes progress in considered; in 
computational linguistics the focus spaces are 
organised in hierarchies and the preferred option 
is to open each topic only once. 

These structural features are seen in most
discharge letters that we have studied manually 
but we are far from final generalisation of our 
empirical observations. At the end we note that 
most temporal markers contain explicit refer-
ences to time which help to construct the “ele-
mentary episodes”. Only 0.014% of the temporal 
markers contain vague statements like “long-
term diabetes” and only 0.01% use expressions 
like “since several years/weeks/days”. The rela-
tive temporal markers are oriented in two direc-
tions:
 To the time marker of the immediately pre-

ceding previous episode, e.g. since then, be-
fore that, after that, etc. and

 To the moment Now when the discharge let-
ter is written: like e.g. few months ago. Such 
episodes might elaborate a past event or pe-
riod no matter that they are oriented accord-
ing to the present moment.

The next task in our research agenda is to de-
velop heuristics enabling to automatically posi-
tion the temporal markers on a linear time scale 
with respect to the actual date of hospitalisation 
which is known in the Hospital Information Sys-
tem. In this way the episodes might be ordered in 
a sequence using a simple procedure which tries 
to calculate the actual date and constructs a list 
of linearly-ordered reference points. Moreover, 
applying the discourse coherence considerations, 
we could aim at semantic coupling of episodes 
which discuss the same topic (like episode 1 and 
episode 2 that are adjacent and display local co-
herence). This seems to be a challenge but one 
can aim to achieve it because adjacent episodes 
should be uttered in consecutive sentences deal-
ing with the same entities. Figure 3 is obtained in 
this way. At present we only extract temporal 
markers and build “elementary” episodes of pa-
tient history phases.

2004 
(5-6 years ago)
Episode 1

October 2005
Episode 3

After few
months
Episode 2

Figure 3. Grouping episodes into segments with local 
coherence for an Anamnesis written in 2010

Background medical knowledge might also 
help for the automatic grouping of adjacent epi-
sodes into intervals. For instance our system 
needs to perform semantic analysis of episodes 1 
and 2 in order to understand that Maninil
A10BB01 was replaced by Diaprel A10BB09 in 
a few months. However, these two drugs belong 
to the same generic group (which is seen by the 
ATC code) and cannot be taken together, and 
this medical default might support the semantic 
analysis of the textual description. This fact is 
another hint that episode 2 elaborates episode 1
and presents further description of the treatment

53



related to diabetes. Therefore, it is easy to find 
informational signals that episode 2 belongs to 
the local context of episode 1.

5 Conclusion

This paper presents work in progress aiming at 
the automatic segmentation of episodes in the 
patient history (usually events or periods) as de-
scribed in discharge letters.

So far, we have found no case of temporal 
ambiguity which prohibits the manual annotation 
(although it is based on human interpretation of 
the text semantics). Further research needs to be 
done for designing a heuristic strategy of how to 
“glue” adjacent groups of clauses together be-
cause they display local coherence properties. To 
solve such a task our system needs to understand 
which episode elaborates the previous one. The 
present paper reports first findings in this respect.

Acknowledgments
The research work presented here is supported 
by grant DO 02-292 "Effective search of 
conceptual information with applications in 
medical informatics", funded by the Bulgarian
National Science Fund in 2009-2012.

The authors are grateful to the paper review-
ers for the useful comments and numerous sug-
gestions.

References 

1. Zhou L., C. Friedman, S. Parsons, and G. 
Hripcsak. System architecture for temporal in-
formation extraction, representation and rea-
soning in clinical narrative reports. In Proc. 
AMIA Ann. Symp. 2005, pp. 869–873.

2. Zhou L. and G. Hripcsak. Temporal reasoning 
with medical data - a review with emphasis on 
medical natural language processing. J. Biom.
Informatics 2007, 40(2), pp. 183-202.

3. National Framework Contract between the 
National Health Insurance Fund, the Bulgarian 
Medical Association and the Bulgarian Dental 
Association, Official State Gazette №106
(2005), updates №68(2006) and №101(2006), 
Sofia, Bulgaria, http://dv.parliament.bg/.

4. Savova, G., S. Bethard, W. Styler, J. Martin, 
M. Palmer, J. Masanz, and W. Ward. Towards 
Temporal Relation Discovery from the Clini-
cal Narrative. In Proc. AMIA Annual Sympo-
sium 2009, pp. 568–572.

5. Sauri R., J. Littman, B. Knippen, R. Gai-
zauskas, A. Setzer and J. Pustejovky. TimeML 
annotation guidelines, Version 1.2.1, 31 Janu-

ary 2006. Available online at 
http://www.timeml.org/site/publications/time
MLdocs/annguide_1.2.1.pdf.

6. Hyun S., S. Bakken and S.B. Johnson. Markup 
of temporal information in electronic health 
records. In Stud. Health Technologies and In-
formatics Vol. 122, 2006, pp. 907-908.

7. Harkema, H., J. Dowling, T. Thornblade, and 
W. Chapman. Context: An Algorithm for De-
termining Negation, Experiencer, and Tem-
poral Status from Clinical Reports. J Biomed 
Inform. 2009 42(5): 839–851. 

8. Hripcsak G., L. Zhou, S. Parsons, A. K. Das, 
and S.B. Johnson. Modeling electronic dis-
charge summaries as a simple temporal con-
straint satisfaction problem. JAMIA 2005, 
12(1), pp. 55-63.

9. Tcharaktchiev, D., G. Angelova, S. Boytche-
va, Z. Angelov, and S. Zacharieva. Comple-
tion of Structured Patient Descriptions by Se-
mantic Mining. In: Koutkias et al. (Eds.), Pa-
tient Safety Informatics - Adverse Drug 
Events, Human Factors and IT Tools for Pa-
tient Medication Safety, Stud. Health Techn.
Inform. 166, 2011, pp. 260-269.

10. Boytcheva, S. Shallow Medication Extraction 
from Hospital Patient Records. In: Koutkias 
Koutkias et al. (Eds.), Patient Safety Informa-
tics – Adverse Drug Events, Human Factors 
and IT Tools for Patient Medication Safety, 
Stud. Health Techn. Inform. 166, 2011, pp.
119-128.

11. Boytcheva, S., D. Tcharaktchiev and G. An-
gelova. Contextualization in automatic extrac-
tion of drugs from Hospital Patient Records.
In A. Moen et al. (Eds.) User Centred Net-
worked Health Case, Proc. of MIE-2011, the 
23th Int. Conf. of the European Federation of 
Medical Informatics, Stud. Health Techn. In-
form. 169, 2011, pp. 527-531.

12. Grosz, B. and C. Sidner. Attention, Intention 
and the Structure of Discourse. Computational
Linguistics 1986, 12(3), Reprinted in RNLP.

13. Grosz, B. The representation and use of fo-
cus in a system for understanding dialogues. 
IJCAI 1977, pp. 67-76, Reprinted in RNLP.

14. Allen, J. Natural Language Understanding, 
2nd Edition, Benjamin/Cummings, 1995.

54


