










































Distributed Structures and Distributional Meaning


Proceedings of the Workshop on Distributional Semantics and Compositionality (DiSCo’2011), pages 10–15,

Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Distributed Structures and Distributional Meaning

Fabio Massimo Zanzotto
DISP University of Rome “Tor Vergata”

Via del Politecnico 1
00133 Roma, Italy

zanzotto@info.uniroma2.it

Lorenzo Dell’Arciprete
University of Rome “Tor Vergata”

Via del Politecnico 1
00133 Roma, Italy

lorenzo.dellarciprete@gmail.com

Abstract

Stemming from distributed representation the-
ories, we investigate the interaction between
distributed structure and distributional mean-
ing. We propose a pure distributed tree (DT)
and distributional distributed tree (DDT). DTs
and DDTs are exploited for defining dis-
tributed tree kernels (DTKs) and distributional
distributed tree kernels (DDTKs). We com-
pare DTKs and DDTKs in two tasks: approx-
imating tree kernels TK (Collins and Duffy,
2002); performing textual entailment recog-
nition (RTE). Results show that DTKs corre-
late with TKs and perform in RTE better than
DDTKs. Then, including distributional vec-
tors in distributed structures is a very difficult
task.

1 Introduction

Demonstrating that distributional semantics is a se-
mantic model of natural language is a real research
challenge in natural language processing. Frege’s
principle of compositionality (Frege, 1884), nat-
urally taken into account in logic-based semantic
models of natural language (Montague, 1974), is
hardly effectively included in distributional seman-
tics models. These models should composition-
ally derive distributional vectors for sentences and
phrases from the distributional vectors of the com-
posing words.

Besides vector averaging (Landauer and Dumais,
1997; Foltz et al., 1998), that can model distribu-
tional meaning of sentences, recent distributional
compositional models focus on finding distribu-
tional vectors of word pairs (Mitchell and Lapata,

2010; Guevara, 2010; Baroni and Zamparelli, 2010;
Zanzotto et al., 2010). Scaling up these 2-word se-
quence models to the sentence level is not trivial as
syntactic structure of sentences plays a very impor-
tant role. Understanding the relation between the
structure and the meaning is needed for building dis-
tributional compositional models for sentences.

Research in Distributed Representations (DR)
(Hinton et al., 1986) proposed models and methods
for encoding data structures in vectors, matrices, or
high-order tensors. Distributed Representations are
oriented to preserve the structural information in the
final representation. For this purpose, DR models
generally use random and possibly orthogonal vec-
tors for words and structural elements (Plate, 1994).
As distributional semantics vectors are unlikely to
be orthogonal, syntactic structure of sentences may
be easily lost in the final vector combination.

In this paper, we investigate the interaction be-
tween distributed structure and distributional mean-
ing by proposing a model to encode syntactic trees
in distributed structures and by exploiting this model
in kernel machines (Vapnik, 1995) to determine the
similarity between syntactic trees. We propose a
pure distributed tree (DT) and a distributional dis-
tributed tree (DDT). In line with the distributed rep-
resentation theory, DTs use random vectors for rep-
resenting words whereas DDTs use distributional
vectors for words. Our interest is in understand-
ing if the introduction of distributional semantic in-
formation in an inherently syntactic based model,
such as distributed representations, leads to better
performances in semantic aware tasks. DTs and
DDTs are exploited for defining distributed tree ker-

10



nels (DTKs) and distributional distributed tree ker-
nels (DDTKs). We study the interaction between
structure and meaning in two ways: 1) by compar-
ing DTKs and DDTKs with the classical tree sim-
ilarity functions, i.e., the tree kernels TK (Collins
and Duffy, 2002); 2) by comparing the accuracy of
DTKs and DDTKs in a semantic task such as recog-
nizing textual entailment (RTE). Results show that
DTKs correlate with TKs and perform in RTE better
than DDTKs. This indicates that including distri-
butional vectors in distributed structures should be
performed in a more complex fashion.

2 Related Work

Distributed Representations (DR) (Hinton et al.,
1986) are models and methods for encoding data
structures as trees in vectors, matrices, or high-
order tensors. DR are studied in opposition to sym-
bolic representations to describe how knowledge is
treated in connectionist models (Rumelhart and Mc-
clelland, 1986). Basic symbolic elements, e.g., John
or car, as well as eventually nested structures, e.g.,
buy(John,car,in(1978)), are represented as vectors,
matrices, or higher order tensors. Vectors of ba-
sic elements (words, or concepts) can be randomly
generated (e.g. (Anderson, 1973; Murdock, 1983))
or, instead, they may represent their attributes and
can be manually built (e.g. (McRae et al., 1997; An-
drews et al., 2009)). Vectors, matrices, or tensors for
structures are compositionally derived using vectors
for basic elements.

Good compositionally obtained vectors for struc-
tures are explicit and immediately accessible: infor-
mation stored in a distributed representation should
be easily accessible with simple operations (Plate,
1994). Circular convolution in Holographic Re-
duced Representations (HRRs) (Plate, 1994) is de-
signed to satisfy the immediate accessibility prop-
erty. It supports two operations for producing and
accessing the compact representations: the circular
convolution and the correlation. Given that com-
ponent vectors are obtained randomly (as in (An-
derson, 1973; Murdock, 1983)), correlation is the
inverse of composition. Yet, distributed represen-
tations offer an informative way of encoding struc-
tures if basic vectors are nearly orthogonal.

3 Distributed Trees and Distributional
Distributed Trees

Stemming from distributed representations, we pro-
pose a way to encode syntactic trees in distributed
vectors. These vectors can be pure distributed tree
vectors (DT) or distributional distributed tree vectors
(DDT). Once defined, these vectors can be used as
a tree similarity function in kernel machines (Vap-
nik, 1995). We can build pure distributed tree ker-
nels (DTK) or distributional distributed tree kernels
(DDTK) to be used in recognizing textual entailment
(RTE).

The rest of the section is organized as follows.
We firstly present the distributed trees and the dis-
tributed tree kernels (Sec. 3.1). We then describe
how to obtain DTs and DDTs (Sec. 3.2). Finally, we
describe how the related kernels can be used for the
recognizing textual entailment task (Sec. 3.2.1).

3.1 Distributed Trees and Distributed Tree
Kernels

We define a distributed vector in order to finally pro-
duce a similarity function between trees (i.e., a ker-
nel function) as the classical tree kernel (Collins and

Duffy, 2002). A distributed vector ~̃T is a vector rep-
resenting the subtrees of a tree T . The final function
is:

~̃
T =

∑
n∈N(T )

s(n) (1)

where N(T ) is the set of nodes of the tree T , n is
a node, and s(n) is the sum of the distributed vec-
tors of the subtrees of T rooted in the node n. The
function s(n) is recursively defined as follows:

• s(n) = ~n⊗~w if n is a pre-terminal node n→ w
where ~n is the vector representing n and ~w is
the one representing the word w.

• s(n) = ~n⊗ (~c1 + s(c1))⊗ . . .⊗ (~cn + s(cn))
where n is not a pre-terminal node, n →
c1 . . . cn is the first production of the tree rooted
in n, ~n is the vector of the node n, and ~ci are
the vectors of the nodes ci.

The distributed vectors of the nodes only depend on
tags of the nodes.

11



The function ⊗ is defined as the reverse element-
wise product ~v = ~a⊗~b as:

vi = γaibn−i+1 (2)

where vi, ai, and bi are the elements of, respectively,
the vectors ~v, ~a, and ~b; n is the dimension of the
space; and γ is a value to ensure that the operation⊗
approximate the property of vector module preserva-
tion. This function is not commutative and this guar-
antees that different trees t have different vectors ~t.
It is possible to demonstrate that:

~̃
T =

∑
t∈S(T )

~t (3)

where S(T ) is the set of the subtrees of T , t is one
of its subtrees, and ~t is its distributed representation.

The distributed kernel T̃K function over trees
then easily follows as:

T̃K(T1, T2) =
~̃
T1 ·

~̃
T2 =

∑
t1∈S(T1)

∑
t2∈S(T2)

~t1 ·~t2 (4)

If the different trees are orthogonal, T̃K(T1, T2)
counts approximately the number of subtrees in
common between the two trees T1 and T2.

3.2 Pure Distributed vs. Distributional
Distributed Trees

For producing the distributed trees, we use basic ran-
dom vectors representing tree nodes ~n. These are
generated by independently drawing their elements
from a normal distribution N(0,1) with mean 0 and
variance 1. The vectors are then normalized so that
they have unitary Euclidean length. This generation
process guarantees that, for a high enough number
of dimensions, the vectors are statistically expected
to be nearly orthogonal, i.e. the dot product among
pairs of different vectors is expected to be 0.

We can obtain the pure distributed trees (DT) and
the distributional distributed trees (DDT) along with
their kernel functions, DTK and DDTK, by using
different word vectors ~w. In the DTs, these vectors
are random vectors as the other nodes. In DDTs,
these vectors are distributional vectors obtained on
a corpus with an LSA reduction (Deerwester et al.,
1990).

3.2.1 Entailment-specific Kernels
Recognizing textual entailment (RTE) is a

complex semantic task often interpreted as a classi-
fication task. Given the text T and the hypothesis
H determine whether or not T entails H . For
applying the previous kernels to this classification
task, we need to define a specific class of kernels.
As in (Zanzotto and Moschitti, 2006; Wang and
Neumann, 2007; Zanzotto et al., 2009), we encode
the text T and the hypothesis H in two separate
syntactic feature spaces. Then, given two pairs of
text-hypothesis P1 = (T1, H1) and P2 = (T2, H2),
the prototypical kernel PK is written as follows:

PK(P1, P2) = K(T1, T2) +K(H1, H2) (5)

where K(·, ·) is a generic kernel. We will then ex-
periment with different PK kernels obtained using:
the original tree kernel function (TK) (Collins and
Duffy, 2002), DTK, and DDTK.

Along with the previous task specific kernels, we
use a simpler feature (Lex) that is extremely effec-
tive in determining the entailment between T andH .
This simple feature is the lexical similarity between
T andH computed using WordNet-based metrics as
in (Corley and Mihalcea, 2005). This feature, here-
after called Lex, encodes the similarity between T
andH , i.e., sim(T,H). This feature is used alone or
in combination with the previous kernels and it gives
an important boost to their performances. In the
task experiment, we will then also have: Lex+TK,
Lex+DTK, and Lex+DDTK.

4 Experimental Evaluation

In this section, we experiment with the distributed
tree kernels (DTK) and the distributional distributed
tree kernels (DDTK) in order to understand whether
or not the syntactic structure and the distributional
meaning can be easily encoded in the distributed
trees. We will experiment in two ways: (1) direct
comparison of the distances produced by the origi-
nal tree kernel (TK) (Collins and Duffy, 2002) and
the novel kernels DTK and DDTK; (2) task driven
evaluation of DTK and DDTK using the RTE task.

The rest of the section is organized as follows. We
firstly introduce the experiment set up that is used
for the two settings (Sec. 4.1). Secondly, we report
on the experimental results (Sec. 4.2).

12



4.1 Experimental Set-up

We have the double aim of producing a direct com-
parison of how the distributed tree kernel (DTK) is
approximating the original tree kernel (TK) and a
task based comparison for assessing if the approx-
imation is enough effective to similarly solve the
task that is textual entailment recognition. For both
experimental settings, we take the recognizing tex-
tual entailment sets ranging from the first challenge
(RTE-1) to the fifth (RTE-5) (Dagan et al., 2006;
Bar-Haim et al., 2006; Giampiccolo et al., 2007;
Bentivogli et al., 2009).

The distributional vectors used for DDTK have
been obtained by an LSA reduction of the word-by-
word cooccurrence matrix generated on the UKWaC
corpus (Ferraresi et al., 2008), using a context win-
dow of size 3. An appropriate size for the LSA re-
duction was deemed to be 250. Thus, in the exper-
iments we used 250 dimensions both for distribu-
tional and random vectors, to allow a correct com-
parison between DTK and DDTK models.

For the direct comparison, we used tree pairs de-
rived from the RTE sets. Each pair is derived from a
T-H pair where T and H are syntactically analyzed
and each RTE set produces the corresponding set of
tree pairs, e.g., the development set of RTE1 pro-
duces a set of 567 tree pairs. To determine whether
or not a distributed kernel, DTK or DDTK, is be-
having similarly to the original TK kernel, given a
set of tree pairs, we produce two ranked lists of tree
pairs: the first is ranked according to the original TK
applied to the tree pairs and the second according to
the target distributed kernel. We evaluate the corre-
lation of the two ranked lists according to the spear-
man’s correlation. Higher correlation corresponds to
a better approximation of TK.

For the task driven comparison, we experimented
with the datasets in the classical learning setting: the
development set is used as training set and the final
classifier is tested on the testing set. We used a sup-
port vector machine (Joachims, 1999) with an im-
plementation of the original tree kernel (Moschitti,
2006). The classifiers are evaluated according to the
accuracy of the classification decision on the testing
set, i.e., the ratio of the correct decisions over all the
decisions to take.

Average Spearman’s Correlation
DTK 0.8335
DDTK 0.7641

Table 1: Average Spearman’s correlations of the tree ker-
nel (TK) with the distributed tree kernel (DTK) and the
distributed distributional tree kernel (DDTK) in a vector
space with 250 dimensions

avg RTE1 RTE2 RTE3 RTE5
TK 55.02% 55.50% 53.38% 55.88% 55.33%
DTK 55.63% 57.25% 54.88% 54.38% 56.00%
DDTK 55.11% 54.00% 53.88% 55.38% 57.17%
Lex+TK 62.11% 59.75% 61.25% 66.62% 60.83%
Lex+DTK 63.25% 61.12% 62.12% 66.25% 63.50%
Lex+DDTK 62.90% 60.62% 61.25% 66.38% 63.33%

Table 2: Accuracies of the different methods on the tex-
tual entailment recognition task

4.2 Experimental results
In the first experiment of this set, we want to in-
vestigate which one between DTK and DDTK cor-
relates better with original TK. Table 1 reports the
spearman’s correlations of tree kernels with DTK
and DDTK in a vector space with 250 dimensions.
These correlations are obtained averaging the corre-
lations over the 9 RTE sets. According to these re-
sults, DTK better correlates with TK with respect to
DDTK. Distributional vectors used for words are not
orthogonal as these are used to induce the similarity
between words. Yet, this important feature of these
vectors determines a worse encoding of the syntactic
structure.

In the task driven experiment, we wanted to in-
vestigate whether the difference in correlation has
some effect on the performance of the different sys-
tems. Accuracy results on the RTE task are reported
in Table 2. The columns RTE1, RTE2, RTE3, and
RTE5 represent the accuracies of the different ker-
nels using the traditional split of training and test-
ing. The column avg reports the average accuracy
of the different methods in the 4 sets. Rows rep-
resent the different kernels used in this comparative
experiment. These kernels are used with the task
specific kernel PK by changing the generic kernel
K. The first 3 rows represent the pure kernels while
the last 3 rows represent the kernels boosted with
the lexical similarity (Lex), a simple feature com-
puted using WordNet-based metrics, as in (Corley

13



and Mihalcea, 2005). Looking at the first 3 rows,
we derive that there is not a significant difference be-
tween TK, DTK, and DDTK. DTK and DDTK can
then be used instead of the TK. This is an important
result, since the computation of DTK (or DDTK) is
much faster than that of TK, due to TK’s complex-
ity being quadratic with respect to the size of the
trees, and DTK requiring a simple dot product over
vectors that can be obtained with linear complex-
ity with respect to the tree size. The second fact is
that there is no difference between DTK and DDTK:
more semantically informed word vectors have the
same performance of random vectors.

5 Conclusions

Distributed structures and distributional meaning are
largely correlated. In this paper, we analyzed this
correlation with respect to the research challenge of
producing compositional models for distributional
semantics. In the studies of distributed represen-
tation, compositionality is a big issue that has pro-
duced many models and approaches. Compositional
distributional semantics poses the same issue. We
empirically showed that a methodology for includ-
ing distributional meaning in distributed represen-
tation is possible, but it must be furtherly devel-
oped to be an added value. Distributional semantics
has been positively added in traditional tree kernels
(Mehdad et al., 2010). Yet, the specific requirement
of distributed tree kernels (i.e., the orthogonality of
the vectors) reduces this positive effect.

References
James A. Anderson. 1973. A theory for the recognition

of items from short memorized lists. Psychological
Review, 80(6):417 – 438.

Mark Andrews, Gabriella Vigliocco, and David Vinson.
2009. Integrating experiential and distributional data
to learn semantic representations. Psychological Re-
view, 116(3):463 – 498.

Roy Bar-Haim, Ido Dagan, Bill Dolan, Lisa Ferro, Danilo
Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, and Idan Szpektor.
2006. The second pascal recognising textual entail-
ment challenge. In Proceedings of the Second PAS-
CAL Challenges Workshop on Recognising Textual
Entailment. Venice, Italy.

Marco Baroni and Roberto Zamparelli. 2010. Nouns
are vectors, adjectives are matrices: Representing

adjective-noun constructions in semantic space. In
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1183–1193, Cambridge, MA, October. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Luisa Bentivogli, Ido Dagan, Hoa T. Dang, Danilo Gi-
ampiccolo, and Bernardo Magnini. 2009. The Fifth
PASCAL Recognizing Textual Entailment Challenge.
In Proceedings of TAC’2009.

Michael Collins and Nigel Duffy. 2002. New ranking
algorithms for parsing and tagging: Kernels over dis-
crete structures, and the voted perceptron. In Proceed-
ings of ACL02.

Courtney Corley and Rada Mihalcea. 2005. Measur-
ing the semantic similarity of texts. In Proc. of the
ACL Workshop on Empirical Modeling of Semantic
Equivalence and Entailment, pages 13–18. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, Ann Arbor, Michi-
gan, June.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The pascal recognising textual entailment chal-
lenge. In Quionero-Candela et al., editor, LNAI 3944:
MLCW 2005, pages 177–190. Springer-Verlag, Milan,
Italy.

Scott C. Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, Thomas K. Lan-
dauer, George W. Furnas, and Richard A. Harshman.
1990. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Jour-
nal of the American Society of Information Science,
41(6):391–407.

Adriano Ferraresi, Eros Zanchetta, Marco Baroni, and
Silvia Bernardini. 2008. Introducing and evaluating
ukwac, a very large web-derived corpus of english. In
In Proceed-ings of the WAC4 Workshop at LREC 2008,
Marrakesh, Morocco.

P. Foltz, W. Kintsch, and T. Landauer. 1998. The mea-
surement of textual coherence with latent semantic
analysis. Discourse Processes, 25(2&3):285–307.

Gottlob Frege. 1884. Die Grundlagen der Arith-
metik (The Foundations of Arithmetic): eine logisch-
mathematische Untersuchung ber den Begriff der
Zahl. Breslau.

Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, Ido Dagan, and
Bill Dolan. 2007. The third pascal recognizing tex-
tual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of the ACL-
PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Para-
phrasing, pages 1–9. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Prague, June.

Emiliano Guevara. 2010. A regression model of
adjective-noun compositionality in distributional se-
mantics. In Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on
GEometrical Models of Natural Language Semantics,
pages 33–37, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

14



G. E. Hinton, J. L. McClelland, and D. E. Rumelhart.
1986. Distributed representations. In D. E. Rumel-
hart and J. L. McClelland, editors, Parallel Distributed
Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of
Cognition. Volume 1: Foundations. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.

Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making large-scale svm
learning practical. In B. Schlkopf, C. Burges, and
A. Smola, editors, Advances in Kernel Methods-
Support Vector Learning. MIT Press.

Thomas K. Landauer and Susan T. Dumais. 1997. A so-
lution to plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis
theory of acquisition, induction, and representation of
knowledge. Psychological Review, 104(2):211–240,
April.

K. McRae, V. R. de Sa, and M. S. Seidenberg. 1997.
On the nature and scope of featural representations of
word meaning. J Exp Psychol Gen, 126(2):99–130,
June.

Yashar Mehdad, Alessandro Moschitti, and Fabio Mas-
simo Zanzotto. 2010. Syntactic/semantic structures
for textual entailment recognition. In Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, HLT ’10, pages 1020–
1028, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Composition in
distributional models of semantics. Cognitive Science.

Richard Montague. 1974. English as a formal language.
In Richmond Thomason, editor, Formal Philosophy:
Selected Papers of Richard Montague, pages 188–221.
Yale University Press, New Haven.

Alessandro Moschitti. 2006. Making tree kernels prac-
tical for natural language learning. In Proceedings of
EACL’06, Trento, Italy.

Bennet B. Murdock. 1983. A distributed memory model
for serial-order information. Psychological Review,
90(4):316 – 338.

T. A. Plate. 1994. Distributed Representations and
Nested Compositional Structure. Ph.D. thesis.

David E. Rumelhart and James L. Mcclelland. 1986.
Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the
Microstructure of Cognition : Foundations (Parallel
Distributed Processing). MIT Press, August.

Vladimir Vapnik. 1995. The Nature of Statistical Learn-
ing Theory. Springer.

Rui Wang and Günter Neumann. 2007. Recognizing tex-
tual entailment using sentence similarity based on de-
pendency tree skeletons. In Proceedings of the ACL-
PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Para-
phrasing, pages 36–41, Prague, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Fabio Massimo Zanzotto and Alessandro Moschitti.
2006. Automatic learning of textual entailments with
cross-pair similarities. In Proceedings of the 21st Col-
ing and 44th ACL, pages 401–408, Sydney, Australia,
July.

Fabio Massimo Zanzotto, Marco Pennacchiotti, and
Alessandro Moschitti. 2009. A machine learning ap-
proach to textual entailment recognition. NATURAL
LANGUAGE ENGINEERING, 15-04:551–582.

Fabio Massimo Zanzotto, Ioannis Korkontzelos,
Francesca Fallucchi, and Suresh Manandhar. 2010.
Estimating linear models for compositional dis-
tributional semantics. In Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING), August,.

15


