















































User Profile Construction in the TWIN Personality-based Recommender System


Proceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment Analysis where AI meets Psychology (SAAIP), IJCNLP 2011, pages 73–79,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 13, 2011.

 

 

User Profile Construction in the TWIN  
 Personality-based Recommender System 

 
 

Alexandra Roshchina 
Social Media Research Group, 

ITT Dublin / Ireland  
sasharo@itnet.ie 

John Cardiff 
Social Media Research Group, 

ITT Dublin / Ireland 
John.Cardiff@ittdublin.ie 

  
Paolo Rosso 

NLE Lab-ELiRF, Universidad Politécnica 
de Valencia / Spain 

prosso@dsic.upv.es         

 
 
 

Abstract 

The information overload experienced by peo-
ple who use online services and read user-
generated content (e.g. product reviews and 
ratings) to make their decisions has led to the 
development of the so-called recommender 
systems. We address the problem of the large 
increase in the user-generated reviews, which 
are added to each day and consequently make 
it difficult for the user to obtain a clear picture 
of the quality of the facility in which they are 
interested.  

In this paper, we describe the TWIN (“Tell 
me What I Need”) personality-based recom-
mender system, the aim of which is to select 
for the user reviews which have been written 
by like-minded individuals. We focus in par-
ticular on the task of User Profile construction. 
We apply the system in the travelling domain, 
to suggest hotels from the TripAdvisor1 site by 
filtering out reviews produced by people with 
similar, or like-minded views, to those of the 
user. In order to establish the similarity be-
tween people we construct a user profile by 
modelling the user’s personality (according to 
the Big Five model) based on linguistic cues 
collected from the user-generated text. 

1 Introduction 

With the transformation of the Web from a static 
data source into an interactive environment that 
allows users to actively communicate with each 
other and produce shared content, the amount of 

                                                 
1 http://www.tripadvisor.com 

the information available online has grown tre-
mendously. As a result the task of automatic data 
analysis has emerged to help people make better 
choices of the ever increasing number of prod-
ucts and services. In situations where the number 
of alternatives is very large, people tend to rely 
on the opinions of experts. Regarding the Web, 
so-called “recommender systems” (Ricci et al., 
2010) have been constructed to serve this expert 
function following the user-oriented approach in 
the online world. There are many existing rec-
ommenders on the Internet nowadays serving 
different purposes such as recommending films 
(Movies2Go 2 ), music and TV programs 
(Last.fm3), etc. 

One of the domains in which the necessity of 
making a good choice is very important is travel-
ling. People are faced with a high degree of un-
certainty when choosing a place (hotel, restau-
rant) they have never been to, consequently they 
must rely on other travellers’ reviews which sites 
such as TripAdvisor provide. However, when the 
number of such reviews becomes large, it is crit-
ical to provide a filtration system, whereby the 
reviews most likely to be valued by the reader 
are highlighted. In Viney (2008), it has been 
shown that people normally do not go further 
than the second or third page in search results. 

In this paper, we propose the “Tell me What I 
Need” (TWIN) recommender system, the goal of 
which is to select reviews written by people with 
like-minded views to those of the reader to get 

                                                 
2 http://www.movies2go.net 
3 http://www.last.fm 

73



 

 

the list of hotels that could be of interest for him. 
A critical component of this task is to accurately 
construct the profile of the user. Traditionally, 
this has been constructed from the person’s pref-
erences or their explicit or implicit ratings (Ricci 
et al., 2010), however in our case we follow the 
emerging approach of personality-based user 
profile construction (Nunes, 2008) from linguis-
tic cues retrieved from the text of the user re-
views (Mairesse et al., 2007). 

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 
we provide an overview of online recommender 
systems and proceed to discuss the modelling of 
personality with the emphasis on the identifica-
tion of a writer’s personality from the text they 
write. We give an overview of the importance of 
the social sites in the online travelling domain. In 
Section 3 we present the prototype of the TWIN 
recommender system. In Section 4 we discuss 
the preliminary work on the evaluation of the 
TWIN system in regard to the User Profile con-
struction. Finally, the conclusions are presented 
in Section 5. 

2 Background 

2.1 Recommender systems 

The function of a recommender system is to as-
sist a person to make the right decision about 
choosing a particular product or service, from the 
vast number that is available. This functionality 
is beneficial not only for customers but also for 
business providing the product or service, as pos-
itive recommendations will increase the volume 
of sales. Some of these systems are being built 
for commercial reasons (to sell more diverse 
goods, etc.), while others are purely for research 
needs (to improve recommendation algorithms, 
study users’ needs more precisely, etc.) (Ricci et 
al., 2010). 

Types of recommender systems 

The main two types of recommender systems are 
content-based and collaborative filtering (Mar-
manis and Babenko, 2009). Content-based sys-
tems rely on the attributes of items and require 
users to provide their initial preferences in order 
to recommend items which match those prefer-
ences. One of the main advantages of this type of 
recommender system is that a user’s unique taste 
is not smoothed by the preferences of others 
(Nageswara and Talwar, 2008) and people with 
extreme likes will still receive appropriate rec-
ommendations. 

Collaborative filtering algorithms are the 
most popular nowadays (Ricci et al., 2010). They 
use various similarity measures to estimate the 
distance between items (item-item approach) or 
between people (user-based neighborhood con-
struction methods). The widely used similarity 
measures are: cosine similarity (each item’s at-
tributes are seen as a multidimensional vector 
and to assess the similarity between two such 
vectors the cosine of the angle between them is 
considered). The Pearson correlation similarity 
is based on the correlation between two items, 
and probability-based similarity, where if the 
user purchased one item after another then the 
probability of the similarity of those items in-
creases. 

Other types of recommender systems which 
include demographic recommender systems 
(based on the age, country or language of the 
user), knowledge-based recommenders (special-
ize in recommending data from a particular do-
main of knowledge through estimating person’s 
needs in that field), community-based (recom-
mendations are based on the items that are favor-
able for user’s friends) and hybrid recommender 
systems (utilize a combination of the above men-
tioned approaches) (Ricci et al., 2010). 

2.2 Personality traits 

One of the most the widely addressed philosoph-
ical questions (having its roots in works of Aris-
totle) has been the variance of personality traits 
between people, and how this variance influ-
ences people’s behavior. The appearance of the 
scientific trait theory has become possible at the 
beginning of the 20th century through systematic 
data collection and the development of statistical 
methods like data correlation techniques and fac-
tor analysis (Matthews et al., 2009). A number of 
statistical approaches are used to find correla-
tions between various traits and then factor anal-
ysis techniques are subsequently applied to group 
positively correlated traits into larger groups. 
Each dimension consists of a number of traits 
that are related to each other and thus if the per-
son has one of the traits in a particular dimension 
he is likely to have other traits from the same 
group. 

Big Five model 

The Big Five personality trait classification is 
one of the most widely used and recognized 
models (Matthews et al., 2009) utilized for the 
research as well as for the staff recruitment pur-

74



 

 

poses. It consists of the five major trait catego-
ries: Extraversion (the desire of active and ener-
getic participation in the world around), Agreea-
bleness (the tendency to eagerly cooperate with 
others and generally be more helpful and gener-
ous), Conscientiousness (the ability to control the 
impulses and to hold to the long-term plans as 
well as being able to foresee the consequences of 
one’s behavior), Neuroticism (which is positively 
correlated with the susceptibility to experiencing 
negative feelings such as anxiety, anger and de-
pression) and Openness to experience (the ten-
dency of the person to be sensitive to new ideas, 
non-conventional thinking and to being intellec-
tually curious).  

2.3 Personality from the text 

Research has shown that there is a correlation 
between the “The Big Five” dimensions and lin-
guistic features found in texts. In particular, 
Tausczik and Pennebaker (2009) have discov-
ered that the use of first-person singular pro-
nouns correlates with depression levels while the 
amount of positive emotions words reveals ex-
traversion. Mairesse et al. (2007) has shown that 
emotional stability (as an opposite of neuroti-
cism) is correlated with the amount of swearing 
and anger words used by the person while agree-
ableness is associated with back-channelling 
(personality types were estimated form self-
reports and observers’ reports). Some of the traits 
were studied more thoroughly (for example, ex-
traversion) which could be caused by a higher 
level of representativeness of the particular trait-
related linguistic cues (Mairesse et al., 2007). 

In our research we utilize the Personality Rec-
ognizer which is one of the available tools that 
allow estimating Big Five personality scores 
(Mairesse et al., 2007). 

2.4 Travelling and social media sites 

One of the fast developing online domains is the 
travelling sector. Travellers trying to find a suit-
able accommodation tend to rely on a number of 
factors. In particular their choice depends on the 
hotel awareness (the place is somehow more fa-
miliar to the person, for example as a result of 
advertising) and hotel attitude based on the at-
tributes of the hotel that are pivotal to the person 
(for example location, cleanliness, service, etc.) 
(Vermeulen and Seegers, 2008). Thus the choice 
the traveller makes can become highly influ-
enced by the market games, advertising, popular-
ity of some locations, etc. For this reason many 

people tend to trust more the opinions of other 
travellers when making a decision about a par-
ticular place to go (O’Connor, 2010).  

Research shows that the role of social sites in 
online travelling domain that allows experience 
sharing is significant and a high percent of search 
engine results are links to the social media sites 
belonging to a number of major categories like 
virtual community sites, review sites, personal 
blog sites and social networking tools (Xiang and 
Gretzel, 2010). 

Recently social sites such as TripAdvisor 
have started to emerge to allow their users to 
publish reviews of the places they travelled to. 
TripAdvisor provides the interface to search 
through the travel facilities (hotels, restaurants, 
etc.), check their availability for a specific date 
and read the reviews associated with them. Most 
of the users of TripAdvisor (97%) return to the 
site and utilize its content to plan their next trip 
(O’Connor, 2010). But as the volume of the 
available reviews is growing in size every day, it 
is impractical for users to manually retrieve and 
consider each review. 

In our approach, we propose a recommender 
system based on the hypothesis that users are 
more likely to be interested in the views of others 
who have the same personality traits as them-
selves. Accordingly, in the TWIN System we 
aim to identify key personality characteristics of 
users (both readers and writers) based on their 
writings in order to identify texts written by re-
viewers who are similar to the reader. 

3 The TWIN system 

The proposed personality-based recommender 
system follows a user-based collaborative filter-
ing approach. We make an assumption that the 
“similarity” between people can be established 
by analyzing the context of the words they are 
using. Accordingly, the occurrence of the partic-
ular words in the particular text reflects the per-
sonality of the author. This suggestion leads to 
the possibility of the text-based detection of a 
circle of “twin-minded” authors whose choices 
of particular places to stay (hotels reviewed in 
TripAdvisor, in our case) could be quite similar 
and thus could be recommended to each other. 
This approach provides recommendations that 
rely on the factors independent in many ways 
from the user’s preexisting attitudes in the ho-
tels’ market and also avoids the subjective step 
of specifying explicit preferences. 

 

75



 

 

 

 
Figure 1. TWIN system architecture 

 

3.1 Architecture 

The diagram in Figure 1 represents the main 
components of the proposed TWIN recommend-
er system described below. 

Reviews Processor 

The Reviews Processor component retrieves the 
textual data from the user (plain text written by 
person) and does the text preprocessing step 
(dealing with special characters, etc.).  

Personality Recognizer 

The Personality Recognizer tool is utilized for 
the estimation of personality scores (ranging 
from 1 to 7). It maps words found in the text to 
LIWC 1  (Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count) 
(Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2009) and MRC 
(Medical Research Council) Psycholinguistic 
database2 (Coltheart, 1981) categories and calcu-
lates the number of words in each one. Then it 
applies the pre-constructed WEKA3 (data analy-
sis tool) (Hall et al., 2009) models of each of the 
Big Five dimensions to calculate the correspond-
ing scores based on the found correlations be-
tween above the mentioned categories and each 
of the traits. There are 4 different models that are 
currently supported by the Personality Recogniz-
er: Linear Regression, M5’ Model Tree, M5’ 
Regression Tree and SVM with Linear Kernel. 
 

                                                 
1 http://www.liwc.net 
2 http://www.psy.uwa.edu.au/mrcdatabase/uwa_mrc.htm 
3 http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/ 

Profile creator 

The Profile Creator stores the general infor-
mation about the user (login, age group, etc.) as 
well as personality scores in the user profile that 
follows the GUMO ontology (General User 
Model Ontology) (Heckmann, 2005). This model 
provides a way of extensive description of the 
user and is a part of the framework that realizes 
the concept of ubiquitous user modelling. It in-
cludes demographic information, psychological 
state and a lot of other aspects. It has appropriate 
classes to represent the Big Five model personal-
ity parameters as well as general user data (age, 
gender, etc.). 

Similarity Estimator 

The Similarity Estimator component utilizes the 
Weka clustering model built using the K-Means 
algorithm (Witten and Frank, 2005). During the 
recommendation process the above-mentioned 
model is assigning the person to the appropriate 
cluster based on his profile information. Rec-
ommendations are calculated considering the 
items liked by people in this estimated cluster.  

Results Visualizer 

The Results Visualizer is constructed as a web-
based Flash application to represent the results of 
the recommendation for the user, i.e. the list of 
hotels. 

76



 

 

4 Evaluation 

This section provides an overview of the work 
undertaken to date on the TWIN system con-
struction. In particular we focus here on the 
structure of the personality-based user profile. 
For the purposes of the experiments we describe, 
a dataset of hotel reviews was constructed, as 
described in the following section. 

4.1 Dataset description 

We built a Java crawler and constructed a dataset 
based on reviews submitted to the TripAdvisor 
website. The dataset consists of hotels reviews 
(texts and numerical ratings of the particular ho-
tel) and the information about their authors 
(username, age group and gender) crawled from 
the TripAdvisor user profiles. For evaluation 
purposes, we have considered only authors who 
have more than 5 reviews. The description of key 
characteristics of the dataset is shown in Table 1. 
 

Dataset parameter Value 
Num of reviews 14 000 
Num of people 1030 
Total amount of words 1.9 million 
Avg num of reviews per person 13.8 
Min reviews per person 5 
Max reviews per person 40 
Num of all words 
Avg num of words per review 

2.9 million 
210.8 

Avg num per sentence 
Min words per sentence 
Max words per sentence 

16.6 
3 

39.7 
 

Table 1. TripAdvisor dataset description 

4.2 User profile 

The common way to store information about 
people and model their identity within the rec-
ommender system is to create User Profiles. The-
se profiles can be knowledge-based (if person’s 
details are acquired through the questionnaire) or 
behavior-based (extracted by means of various 
natural language processing techniques) (Nunes, 
2008). Here we follow the behavior-based ap-
proach, retrieving the profile data implicitly 
through the analysis of the reviews written by the 
particular person. 

To model the personality we store the mean 
score of each of the Big Five parameters calcu-
lated from the text of each of the reviews written 
by the particular person. We selected 15 people 
from our dataset who have contributed more than 
35 reviews. Using the Personality Recognizer 

(with a linear regression algorithm) we have ob-
tained personality scores for each of the texts 
written by each individual. As each score is cal-
culated from the text of the review independently 
we have analyzed them separately. The visual-
ized scores per each of the Big Five dimensions 
are presented in Figures 2 – 6. 

 

 

 
Figure 2. Extraversion scores distribution with 

means per each set of 15 people’s reviews 
 

 

 
Figure 3. Agreeableness scores distribution with 

means per each set of 15 people’s reviews 
 

 

 
Figure 4. Conscientiousness scores distribution 
with means per each set of 15 people’s reviews 

 

77



 

 

The ANOVA test (Meloun and Militky, 2011) 
has shown significant differences (p < 0.001) 
between persons in each of the Big Five catego-
ries. Thus it could be concluded that the mean 
scores vary sufficiently from one person to an-
other which enables us to use the mean score as 
the estimation of the personality in each of the 5 
dimensions. 
 

 

 
Figure 5. Neuroticism scores distribution with 

means per each set of 15 people’s reviews 
 

 

 
Figure 6. Openness to experience scores distribu-
tion with mean scores per each set of 15 people’s 

reviews 

It can be seen that openness to experience 
scores have the highest variability in means 
which suggests that this trait may be the easiest 
to detect. This result is in agreement with Mair-
esse et al. (2007) who had found that openness to 
experience is the easiest trait to model. 

5 Conclusion and future work 

In this paper, we have described the architecture 
of the TWIN Personality-based Recommender 
System. A fundamental tenet of our approach is 
that users will value reviews of like-minded peo-
ple more highly. A critical factor in the success 
of our approach is the ability to determine per-

sonality characteristics (i.e. User Profiles) of re-
viewers using only the texts they write. 

In this paper, we have determined that using a 
set of texts written by individuals who have con-
tributed a large number of reviews, it is possible 
to differentiate personality types, and conse-
quently to match a user with reviews written by 
like-minded people. 

In the future work we are going to compare 
the performance of the other 3 algorithms availa-
ble in the Personality Recognizer to choose the 
one that will provide better results. In order to 
evaluate the TWIN system we are planning the 
experiment that involves clustering (K-Means 
algorithm) of reviews in the collected dataset to 
estimate the percentage of rightly grouped ones. 
 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank James Reilly for his 
helpful comments on this paper. This work has 
been done in the framework of the 
VLC/CAMPUS Microcluster on Multimodal 
Interaction in Intelligent Systems and it  
has been partially funded by the European 
Commission as part of the  
WIQEI IRSES project (grant no. 269180) within 
the FP 7 Marie Curie  
People Framework, by MICINN as part of the 
Text-Enterprise 2.0 project  
(TIN2009-13391-C04-03) within the Plan I+D+i. 
 
References 

Coltheart, M. 1981. The MRC Psycholinguistic 
Database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, 33A(4):497-505. 

Hall M., Frank E., Holmes G., Pfahringer B., Reute-
mann P., Witten I. H. 2009. The WEKA Data Min-
ing Software: An Update. SIGKDD Explorations, 
11(1). 

Heckmann D. 2005. Ubiquitous User Modeling. 
IOS Press. 

Mairesse F., Walker M. A., Mehl M., Moore R. 2007. 
Using Linguistic Cues for the Automatic 
Recognition of Personality in Conversation 
and Text. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Re-
search, 457-500. 

Marmanis H., Babenko D. 2009. Algorithms of the 
intelligent web. Manning Publications. USA. 

78



 

 

Matthews G., Deary I. J., Whiteman M. C. 2009. Per-
sonality Traits. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 

Meloun M., Militky J. 2011. Statistical data analy-
sis: A practical guide. Woodhead Publishing In-
dia. 

Nageswara Rao K., Talwar V. G. 2008. Application 
Domain and Functional Classification of Rec-
ommender Systems – A Servey. DESIDOC Jour-
nal of Library & Information Technology, 
28(3):17-35. 

Nunes M. A. S. N. 2008. Recommender Systems 
based on Personality Traits, PhD thesis. Univer-
sité Montpellier 2. 

O’Connor P. 2010. Managing a Hotel’s Image on 
TripAdvisor. Journal of Hospitality Marketing & 
Management, 19:754-772. 

Ricci F., Rikach L., Shapira B., Kantor P. 2010. Rec-
ommender Systems Handbook. Springer, US. 

Tausczik Y. R., Pennebaker J. W. 2009. The Psycho-
logical Meaning of Words: LIWC and Com-
puterized Text Analysis Methods. Journal of 
Language and Social Psychology, 29(1):24-54. 

 Vermeulen I. E., Seegers D. 2008. Tried and tested: 
The impact of online hotel reviews on consum-
er consideration. Tourism Management, 
30(1):123-127. 

Viney D. 2008. Get to the Top on Google: Tips 
and Techniques to Get Your Site to the Top of 
the Search Engine Rankings -- and Stay There. 
Nicholas Brealey Publishing. 

Witten I. H., Frank E. 2005.  Data Mining: Practi-
cal Machine Learning Tools and Techniques. 
Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann. 

Xiang Z., Gretzel U. 2010. Role of social media in 
online travel information search. Tourism 
Management, 31(2):179-188. 

79


