



















































Recognition and Translation of Arabic Named Entities with NooJ Using a New Representation Model


Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Finite State Methods and Natural Language Processing, pages 134–142,
Blois (France), July 12-15, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Recognition and Translation of Arabic Named Entities with NooJ Using 
a New Representation Model 

 

 

Héla Fehri Kais Haddar 
Laboratory MIRACL, University of Sfax Laboratory MIRACL, University of Sfax 

Route Tunis Km 10 B.P 242, Sakiet Ezziet 
3021 Sfax 

Route Tunis Km 10 B.P 242, Sakiet Ezziet 
3021 Sfax 

hela.fehri@fss.rnu.tn kais.haddar@fss.rnu.tn 

Abdelmajid Ben Hamadou
Laboratory MIRACL, University of Sfax 

Route Tunis Km 10 B.P 242, Sakiet Ezziet 3021 Sfax
abdelmajid.benhamadou@isimsf.rnu.tn 

 
  

 
 
 

Abstract 

Recognition and translation of named 
entities (NEs) are two current research 
topics with regard to the proliferation of 
electronic documents exchanged through 
the Internet. The need to assimilate these 
documents through NLP tools has become 
necessary and interesting. Moreover, the 
formal or semi-formal modeling of these 
NEs may intervene in both processes of 
recognition and translation. Indeed, the 
modeling task makes more reliable the 
constitution of linguistic resources, limits 
the impact of linguistic specificities and 
facilitates transformations from one 
representation to another. In this context, 
we propose an approach of recognition and 
translation based on a representation model 
of Arabic NEs and a set of transducers 
resolving morphological and syntactical 
phenomena. The representation model is 
based on the feature structure independent 
of lexical categories.  

Keywords: Representation Model, NE' 
recognition, NE' translation, Transducer, 
Local grammar. 

1  Introduction 
Recognition and translation of NEs are two current 
research topics with regard to the proliferation of 
electronic documents exchanged through the 
Internet. The need to assimilate these documents 
through NLP tools has become necessary and 
interesting. 

Furthermore, the formal or semi-formal 
modeling of NEs can be involved in recognition 
and translation processes. This modeling task 
allows the constitution of more reliable linguistic 
resources. Indeed, such a modeling can represent 
all the constituents of a NE in a standard manner 
and limit the impact of linguistic specificities. In 
fact, a formal representation of Arabic NEs can 
help, firstly, in the identification of dictionaries 
and grammars required for any NLP application 
and, secondly, in the use of advanced linguistic 
methods of translation (i.e., transfer or pivot 
method). This abstraction level favors the reuse of 
certain linguistic resources. 

134



The elaboration of a formal and generic 
representation of an NE is not an easy task 
because, on the one hand, we have to find a 
representation that takes into consideration the 
concept of recursion and length of NE. In fact, a 
NE can be formed by other NEs. So, its length is 
not known in advance. On the other hand, the 
representation to be proposed should also contain a 
sufficient number of features that can represent any 
NE independently of the domain and grammatical 
category. In other words, the same features must 
satisfy all types of NE. 

Transducers (eventually local grammars) can 
resolve many problems of the NEs and should 
respect hierarchy types of NEs. However the 
connection between these transducers to obtain a 
deep analysis isn't a trivial task. So, a linguistic 
platform like NooJ can help us to do this kind of 
analysis.  

It is in this context that the present work is 
situated. In fact, the main objective is to propose 
an approach of recognition and translation of 
Arabic NEs based on a representation model, a set 
of bilingual dictionaries and a set of transducers 
resolving morphological and syntactical 
phenomena related to the Arabic NEs and 
implemented with the linguistic platform NooJ. To 
reach our objective, we have to offer a 
representation model that takes into account the 
notion of recursion of NEs. We have also to 
specify features that describe any NE 
independently of the domain. Finally, the 
representation should be compatible with the 
linguistic platform NooJ (Silberztein, 2004) chosen 
for the implementation. 

In this paper, we present, firstly, a brief 
overview of the state-of the art. Then, we detail our 
proposed representation model. After that, we give 
a general idea of our resources construction and 
their implementation in the linguistic platform 
NooJ. Finally, the paper concludes with some 
perspectives. 

2  Related Work 
Research on NEs revolves around two 
complementary axes: the first involves the typing 
of NEs while the second concerns the 
identification and translation of NEs. As for the 
identification, the tagging and the translation of 
NEs, they have been implemented for multiple 

languages based on different approaches: linguistic 
(Coates-Stephens, 1993), statistic (Borthwick et 
al., 1998) and hybrid (Mikheev et al., 1998) 
approaches. In what follows, we focus on the 
linguistic approach used for NE processing.  

Regarding the recognition of NEs, we cite the 
work presented in (Friburger, 2002). This work 
allows the extraction of proper names in French. 
The proposed method is based on multiple 
syntactic transformations and some priorities that 
are implemented with transducers. We can cite also 
the work described in (Mesfar, 2007). The 
elaborated method is applied on a biomedical 
domain. Other Arabic works are dealing with the 
recognition of elliptical expressions (Hasni et al., 
2009), compound nouns (Khalfallah et al., 2009), 
broken plurals (Ellouze et al., 2009) and most 
important categories in Arabic script (Shaalan and 
Raza, 2009). All these works that use the linguistic 
platform NooJ can be integrated in the NE 
processing. 

Other works have been dedicated to the 
translation of different structure (e.g., NE) from 
one language to another. We can cite the work 
presented in (Barreiro, 2008) dealing with the 
translation of simple sentences from English to 
Portuguese. Additionally, the work of (Wu, 2008) 
provides a noun translation of French into Chinese. 
The elaborated prototype tests a limited corpus of 
600 French nouns and is experimented with NooJ.  

The literature review shows that the already 
proposed translation approaches are not well 
specified (e.g., lack of abstraction and genre). Each 
one addresses a particular phenomenon without 
taking into account other phenomena. We should 
also mention that there are few works that 
proposed a modeling of NEs for explicitly 
representing the effects of meaning within the NE 
and explaining phenomena like synecdoche and the 
metonymy (Poibeau, 2005). However, these works 
don’t treat the concept of embedded NEs which is 
very important and can help to implement the 
recognition and the translation process of NEs. 

Furthermore, all translations using NooJ 
platform adopt a semi-direct approach of 
translation, in which the recognition task is 
combined with that of translation. Thus, the reuse 
of such work has become limited, which does not 
promote multilingualism.  

135



3  Proposed Model for Representing 
Arabic NEs 

The model that we propose is used to formalize 
and to identify Arabic NEs. This model is inspired 
by formalisms based on structural features like 
Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar (Pollard 
and Sag, 1994). Its features are inspired from the 
concepts "Head and Expansion" introduced by 
(Bourigault, 2002). The essential characteristics of 
the feature structure of the proposed model are: 

• an element of the structure can be 
atomic or complex, 
• an internal structure of an element is 
defined by its attributes and values. 

In what follows, we describe the structure and 
features of our proposed model. 

3.1 Structure and Features of the Proposed 
Model 

Each NE has a type and is composed of two parts: 
one is essential and the other is extensional. The 
essential part is also a NE and has itself essential 
and extensional parts. This proves the recursion for 
an NE. The type of a NE ″Type_EN″ is usually 
indicated by a trigger word. The essential part is 
represented by the feature ″Tête_EN″ (head of NE) 
and the trigger word is represented by the feature 
″Mot_declencheur″. The extensional part 
represents the final form that composes the NE. It 
does not admit a type because it is preceded by a 
lexical item ″Element_EN″ (element of NE) (e.g., 
preposition, special character). Then, it can not be 
considered as a NE but it can contain a NE. Its 
existence or non-existence doesn’t affect the well-
formation of the NE. This part is represented by 
the feature ″Fin_EN″ (end of NE). 

The value of the feature ″Tête_EN″ can be 
atomic or structured. If it is structured, then it is 
composed by the features ″Mot_déclencheur″, 
″Tête_EN″, ″Fin_EN″ and ″Type_EN″. The 
″Mot_déclencheur″ value is simple or composed. 
Indeed, the trigger word can be formed by a word 
or a sequence of words. It can also be empty. The 
″Fin_EN″ value can be atomic or structured. If it is 
structured, then it is composed by the features 
″Element_EN″, ″Tête_EN″ and ″Fin_EN″. It can 
also be empty. The feature ″Type_EN″ value is 
always simple or composed but not empty. In fact, 
it represents one of the categories identified in the 
NE hierarchy. The ″Element_EN″ value is always 

simple. The structure can be equipped with a set of 
principles allowing the well-formed construction 
and the evaluation of NE-representation.  

3.2 Principles of the Proposed Model 
For the presented model, two principles should be 
satisfied and are useful in the recognition phase. 
These principles are used to indicate whether a NE 
is well-formed or not.  

Saturation Principle: A structure is called 
saturated if it can be considered as a well-formed 
NE. That means, it consists of a NE head 
(″Tête_EN″) whose value is not empty. Figure 1 
describes an example of a formal representation 
that satisfies a saturation principle. 
 

 
 

Figure 1: Representation of the word الرياض el 
Riadh 

 
In Figure 1, the value of the feature ″Type_EN″ is 
atomic; it is not empty. Thus, a word الرياض  Riadh 
is considered as a NE whose type is Ville. 

Non-saturation Principle: A structure is called 
unsaturated if it is not a NE and can be completed 
to become a NE. That means, it is formed only by 
a NE end (″Fin_EN″) or if the value of the feature 
″Tête_EN″ is empty. For example, in the word 
 bi Riadh, the value of the feature بالرياض
″Tête_EN″ is empty because this word doesn’t 
have a type. Thus, this word cannot be considered 
as a NE. It doesn’t satisfy the saturation principle. 
However, it should be noted that this word can 
contain a NE.  

The two mentioned principles allow us to avoid 
ambiguity between a NE-word (or set of words) 
and a non NE-word. 

3.3 Illustrative Example 
In this section, we give an example that explains 
how to construct NE representation. So, Figure 2 
gives a formal representation of the NE  ملعب الملك
 Malaab el malik Abd el Aziz عبد العزيزالدولي بالرياض

136



el doali bil Riadh, King Abd el Aziz international 
stadium in Riadh. In this NE, the word بالرياض bil 
Riadh has the function of place complement. Its 
purpose is just to elaborate on the NE. 
Consequently, its elimination doesn’t affect the 
well-formation of this NE. That’s why it will be 
presented by the feature ″Fin_EN″ as follows: 
″Elément_EN″ equals ب bi and ″Tête_EN″ equals 
 Riadh has الرياض Riadh. Let’s note the word الرياض
its proper type without the particle ب bi. For this 
reason, it will be a simple value of the feature 
″Tête_EN″. However, the rest of the NE  ملعب الملك
 Malaab el malik Abd el Aziz el doali عبد العزيز الدولي
has in turn its proper type. It will hence be 
described by the feature ″Tête_EN″ which will be 
structured because this NE contains supplementary 
words. In our NE, the supplementary word is the 
adjective الدولي el doali which has the same role as 
the place complement بالرياض bil Riadh. Therefore, 
it will be put in the ″Fin_EN″. Moreover, the word 
 malaab plays the role of trigger word. What is ملعب
left is the NE الملك عبد العزيز el malik Abd el Aziz 
whose type is person name. In this NE, the word 
 .el malik also plays the role of trigger word الملك
But, the NE عبد العزيز Abd el Aziz has a type of first 
name. So, it will be represented by the feature 
″Tête_EN″ as a simple value since عبد العزيز Abd el 
Aziz doesn’t contain any supplement word. 
Therefore, the mentioned NE is represented in our 
model as follow: 

 

 
 

Figure 2: Example of a NE representation 

In Figure 2, the saturation principle is determined. 
In fact, the value of the ″Tête_EN″ feature is not 
empty. 

Let’s note that the proposed representation is 
applicable independently of the domain. In fact, 
having conducted a study of the location names, 
we noticed that all their NEs have the same 
structure whatever the domain is.  

3.4 Word-to-word Translation Representation 
Word-to-word translation consists to translate each 
feature value composing a NE structure 
representation. This translation is done with 
bilingual dictionaries without any risk of 
information loss. Figure 3 represents an example of 
this phase.  

 
 
Figure 3: Example of a word-to-word translation of 

NE structure 
 
As shown in Figure 3 ((a) and (b)), the word ملعب 
malaab stadium is translated to stade, the word 
 el doali الدولي el malik king to roi, the adjective الملك
international to international and the preposition 
 bi in to de. It is obvious that types keep the same ب
value whatever the language is. 

Let's note that the representation of a word-to-
word translation is not sufficient to generate a well 
formed NE in the target language. In fact, the 

137



translation of the NE in Figure 3 (a)  ملعب الملك عبد
 Malaab el malik Abd el Aziz el العزيزالدولي بالرياض
doali bil Riadh gives in Figure 3 (b) the sequence 
of words "stade du roi Abd el Aziz international à 
Riadh" representing an ill-formed NE because it 
doesn't respect the specificities of the target 
language. Therefore, readjustment rules are 
necessary and should be associated in translation 
process. 

4  NooJ Implementation of the Set of 
Transducers 

The NooJ implementation of our system requires 
two phases process: recognition of Arabic NEs and 
translation in which a transliteration process is 
integrated. Each phase requires the construction of 
its proper transducers.  

4.1 Phase of Recognition  
The proposed representation model helps us to 
identify the necessary resources for the recognition 
and translation of NEs. In fact, each structured 
feature ″Tête_EN″ containing not empty features, 
other than the feature ″Type_EN″, is transformed 
into a local grammar (place name, person name, 
...); whereas, each elementary NE (value of 
″Tête_EN″ feature is atomic) will be transformed 
into a dictionary (city name, ...). 

 From the NE representation in the considered 
model, we have created the following transducer: 

 

 
 

Figure 4: Main transducer of NE' recognition  
 

The transducer of Figure 4 contains three sub-
graphs. Each sub-graph represents a category 
identified in the NE hierarchy, especially in the 
category of Place name. This grammar allows 
recognition of NEs. Each path of each sub-graph 
represents a rule extracted in the study corpus.  

In the recognition phase, we have solved the 
problems related to the Arabic language (e.g., 
agglutination) establishing morphological 
grammars built into the platform NooJ. This phase 
contains 19 graphs respecting the local grammars 
identified in the study corpus. 

4.2 Phase of Translation 
The implementation of the translation phase 
involves two steps as illustrated in Section 4.4: a 
step of word-to-word translation and another more 
detailed taking into account the readjustment rules 
and following the specificities of the target 
language (in our case the French language). In 
what follows, we describe resources designed to 
these two steps. 

Word-to-word Translation: To implement the 
word-to-word translation in the platform NooJ, we 
built a syntactic grammar allowing the translation 
of each word composing a NE with the exception 
of words not found in dictionaries, or can not be 
translated (number, special character, etc.). This 
grammar takes as input the NE list extracted by the 
transducer of Figure 4 allowing the recognition. It 
is described by the transducer of Figure 5. 

 

 
 

Figure 5: Transducer of word-to-word translation 
 

The transducer of Figure 5 takes into account, in a 
NE, the words that keep the same values in the 
target language. These words can correspond to a 
number <NB>, a special character <P> or a word 
not existing in designed dictionaries <!DIC>. The 
sub-graph MOTDIC treats the rest of the words 
(existing in dictionaries) which require a specific 
treatment. For example, if the word to translate is a 
first name, then it keeps the same value in the 
source language; this word will be treated in the 
transliteration process (Fehri et al., 2009).  

Translation with Readjustments: Several 
readjustment rules must be applied to improve the 
word-to-word translation step. These rules have 

138



essentially a relationship with the order of the 
words composing a NE and with the agglutination. 
For instance, on the one hand, if a NE in the source 
language contains an adjective then we have to 
know whether this adjective belongs to the trigger 
word or to the noun that comes just before. For 
example, in the NE ملعب المدينة الدولي  malaab el 
madina el doali stadium of ground city, the 
adjective الدولي el doali ground is singular and 
masculine, the trigger word ملعب malaab stadium  
is also singular and masculine, but the noun المدينة 
el madina city is singular and feminine. We can 
deduce that the adjective الدولي el doali belongs to 
the trigger word ملعب malaab and not to the noun 
 el madina that comes just before. On the المدينة
other hand, if a NE in the source language contains 
a noun then some rules are applied to solve the 
problem of contracted forms in Arabic. For 
example, in the NE ملعب الملك فهد malaab el malik 
Fahd, the noun الملك el malik is singular, masculine 
and definite by the letter ال el, so when we translate 
this noun we should add the preposition ″du″ 
before it. Thus, we obtain stade du roi Fahd 
(international stadium of Fahd) and not stade roi 
Fahd (international stadium Fahd). 

 Readjustment rules are made with syntactic 
local grammars in NooJ. These grammars 
intervene after the word-to-word translation phase. 
In what follows, we give an idea about 
transliteration process integrated in translation 
phase.  

Transliteration process: The transliteration is 
done after having executed all the transducers 
allowing the NE' recognition and translation 
(word-to-word translation or with readjustments). 
In fact, it consists in transliterating all the non-
translated words which are written in the source 
language (Arabic characters) using the appropriate 
resources. In this process, we consider rules 
respecting the chosen transliteration system El 
Qalam and also the transformation rules. These 
rules are implemented with NooJ morphological 
transducers. The transliteration is preceded by a 
voweling phase to avoid some problems. So, the 
word is voweled before its transliteration. 
However, the connection between a vowel 
transducer and transliteration transducer can not be 
done in NooJ; that is why, we resort to use 
noojapply. Noojapply is a command-line program 
which can be called either directly from a "shell" 
script, or from more sophisticated programs 

written in PERL, C++, JAVA, etc. In our work, we 
use C#. The transliteration step is detailed in (Fehri 
et al., 2009). 

5  Experimentation and Evaluation 
The experimentation of our resources is done with 
NooJ. As mentioned above, this platform uses 
(syntactic and morphological) local grammars 
already built. Table 1 gives an idea about 
dictionaries which we added to the resources of 
NooJ. In addition to the dictionaries mentioned in 
Table 1, we use other dictionaries existing in NooJ 
like dictionary of adjectives, nouns and first names 
(Mesfar, 2008). 
 

Dictionaries Number 
of inputs 

Annotation 
in the 

dictionary 
Player Names 18000 N+Joueur 
Team Names 5785 N+Equipe 
Sport Names 337 N+Sport 
Capital and country 
Names 610 

N+Topony
me 

Personality Names 300 N+Perso 
Trigger words  20 N+Dec 
Functions Names 100 N+Fonction 

 
Table 1: Added dictionaries  

 
To these dictionaries, we add some entries 

related to the sport domain. We also add French 
translations of all entries in all mentioned 
dictionaries. Let's note that the first name 
dictionary remains monolingual because its entries 
can be transliterated. To experiment and evaluate 
our work, we have applied our resources to two 
types of corpus: sport and education corpora. We 
started with sport domain since it is the subject of 
our study corpus.  

5.1 Experimentation of Recognition Phase 
To evaluate the recognition phase, we have applied 
our resources to a corpus formed by 4000 texts of 
sport domain (different of the study corpus). This 
corpus is collected from various newspapers (e.g., 
Assabah, al Anwar, al chourou9, al ahram) and 
Wikipedia. It contains 180000 NEs belonging to 
different categories of sport domain (e.g., player 
name, name of sport, sports term).  In these 

139



NEs, there are 40000 NEs belonging to 
the category place name.  These NEs are manually 
identified using NooJ queries. The obtained result 
is given in the NooJ concordance table of Figure 6.  
 

 
 

Figure 6: Concordance table of NE' recognition in 
the sport domain 

 
Let's note that a NE is detected if it satisfies one 

of the paths described by the transducer of Figure 
4. Indeed, a transducer is characterized by an initial 
node and one or many end nodes. If multiple paths 
are verified, we maintain the longest one. The 
obtained results are interpreted by calculating the 
following metrics: Precision, Recall and F-
measure. Results are illustrated in Table 2. 

The values of measures in Table 2 show that 
there are some problems that are not yet 
resolved. Some problems are related to the lack of 
standards for writing proper names (e.g., el 
hamza). This causes a silence. Other problems are 
related to Arabic specific concepts as 
metaphor. For example, we can find a NE in a text 
composed of a trigger word specific to the sport 
domain followed by a famous person name 
followed by a city as ملعب األسد بسوريا Malaab el 
Assad bi Souriya (stadium al Assad in Syria). The 
context where this NE appears is not in the 
objective to cite a stadium name but to show the 
skills of President al-Assad in the cited 

subject. Such problems are rare but cause the 
noise. 

 
 Precision Recall F-measure 

Newspaper 
texts 

(Sport 
domain) 

4000 texts 
(94,5 Mo) 

98% 90% 94% 

 
Table 2: Obtained results 

 
As indicated above, we have also applied our 

resources to the education domain. We have 
collected a corpus composed of 300 texts 
containing university institution names. The 
performance measure of the obtained results gives 
98% of precision, 70% of recall and 82% of F-
measure. We deduce that the silence is increased. 
This is caused by the incompleteness of specific 
dictionaries to this domain and lack of some paths 
in the developed transducers. So our resources are 
applicable regardless of the domain, provided that 
we use the same features adopted in dictionaries 
we have built. It is evident that for reasons specific 
to the domain, we should sometimes add other 
paths and other sub-graphs, but we do not have to 
redo everything. 

5.2 Experimentation of Translation Phase 
The translation phase is applied to the extracted 
Arabic NEs during the recognition phase. Note that 
erroneous results are inherited. Therefore, 
heuristics filtering are necessary before the 
translation process. The obtained results of the 
translation phase are illustrated in Figure 7. As 
shown in this figure, the proper problems of this 
phase involve multiple translations that can be 
assigned to a word. For example, the selected lines 
in Figure 7 represent the NE' translation  ملعب مدينة
 malaab madinat el bacel el الباسل الرياضية بدرعا
riadhiya bi deraa stadium of city Bacel sportive in 
Deraa. In this NE, the word مدينة madina can be 
translated to the word "cité" city or "ville" country. 
NooJ displays all possibilities. In this case, the 
adjective can resolve this ambiguity. In fact, the 
adjective الرياضية el riadhiya sportive is generally 
related to the city and not to the country. Let's note 
that the word "باسل" Bacel remains in the source 

140



language because it is a first name, so it will be 
transliterated later. 

 

Figure 7: Extract of results of word-to-word 
translation 

 
To get a finer translation, we applied the 

readjustment rules that take into account the order 
of the constituents of NEs and the agreement of the 
adjective with the noun for which it is associated.  

Our method provides 97% of well translated 
NEs while ensuring the specificities of the target 
language. The obtained result is promising and 
shows that there are some problems. These 
problems are related to the multiple translations 
assigned to a toponym (e.g., تونس tounis can be 
translated in Tunis or Tunisia). 

After this evaluation, we remark that the 
proposed representation model facilitates the 
construction of the linguistic resources with the 
platform NooJ and the transformation from the 
semi-direct translation to transfer one. Indeed, we 
have separated the NE-recognition of their 
translation. In addition, it helps the promotion to 
the reuse of the needed local grammars. In fact, it 
is sufficient to change the inputs (i.e., dictionaries, 
morphological grammars) of the syntactic 
grammars for the desired results. Thus, for 
example, if we want to translate Arabic NE to 
another language other than French, the 
recognition module can be reused with some 
modifications if necessary (related to the 
specificities of the domain). Moreover, if we want 
to translate NEs from any language into French, 
also translation module can be reused. Indeed, this 

module addresses the specificities of the French 
language.  

6  Conclusion and Perspectives 
In this paper, we have proposed an approach for 
recognition and translation of Arabic NEs 
(eventually NEs from other languages) based on a 
representation model, a set of bilingual dictionaries 
and a set of transducers resolving morphological 
and syntactical phenomena related to the Arabic 
NEs. Besides, we have described the representation 
model structure, its features and principles that 
should be satisfied. We have also given an 
experimentation and evaluation on the sports and 
education domains proving that our resources can 
be reused independently of the domain. The 
experimentation and the evaluation are done in the 
linguistic platform NooJ. The obtained results are 
satisfactory. 

 As perspectives, we try to improve our 
representation model by introducing other features 
related to the semantics. Furthermore, we are 
currently identifying heuristics filtering enabling 
finer NE translation. 

References 
Barreiro A. 2008. Port4NooJ: an open source, ontology-

driven Portuguese linguistic system with applications 
in machine translation. NooJ’08, Budapest. 

Borthwick A. Sterling J. Agichtein, E. and Grishman R. 
1998. NYU: Description of the MENE Named Entity 
System as used in MUC-7. In Proc. of the Seventh 
Message Understanding Conference (MUC-7). 

Bourigault D. 2002. UPERY : un outil d'analyse 
distributionnelle étendue pour la construction 
d’ontologies à partir de corpus. TALN. 

Coates-Stephens S. 1993. The Analysis and Acquisition 
of Proper Names for the Understanding of Free Text. 
In Computers and the Humanities, Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Vol. 26(5-6), Hingham, MA, p. 441-456. 

Ellouze S. Haddar K. and Abdelwahed A. 2009. Etude 
et analyse du pluriel brisé avec la plateforme NooJ. 
Tozeur, Tunisia. 

Fehri, H. Haddar K. and Ben Hamadou A. 2009. 
Translation and Transliteration of Arabic Named 
Entities. LTC Conference, Pologne, pp 275-279. 

Friburger N. 2002. Reconnaissance automatique des 
noms propres. PhD thesis, university of François 
Rabelais. 

141



Hasni E. Haddar K. and Abdelwahed A. 2009. 
Reconnaissance des expressions elliptiques arabes 
avec NOOJ. In proceedings of the 3rd International 
Conference on Arabic Language Processing 
(CITALA’09) sponsored by IEEE Morocco Section, 
4-5 May 2009, Rabat, Morocco, pp 83-88. 

Khalfallah F. Haddar K. and Abdelwahed A. 2009. 
Construction d’un dictionnaire de noms composes en 
arabe. In proceedings of the 3rd International 
Conference on Arabic Language Processing 
(CITALA’09) sponsored by IEEE Morocco Section, 
4-5 May 2009, Rabat, Morocco, pp111-116. 

Mesfar S. 2007. Named Entity Recognition for Arabic 
Using Syntactic grammars. NLDB 2007 Paris, 28-38. 

Mesfar S. 2008. Analyse morpho-syntaxique 
automatique et reconnaissance des entités nommées 
en arabe standard.: Thesis, November 2008, 
University of Franche-Comté. 

Mikheev A. Grover C. and Moens M. 1998. Description 
of the LTG system used for MUC -7. In Proc. of 7th 
Message Understanding Conference (MUC-7), 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/ 894.02/ 
related_projects/muc/. 

Poibeau, T. 2005. Sur le statut référentiel des entités 
nommées. Laboratory of data processing of Paris 
North – CNRS and University Paris 13. 

Pollard C. and Sag I.A. 1994. Head-Driven Phrase 
Structure Grammar. Published by the press in the 
University of Chicago, Edition Golgoldmittu, 
Chicago, LSLI. 

Shaalan K. and Raza H. 2009. NERA: Named Entity 
Recognition for Arabic. Published in Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and 
Technology, Volume 60 Issue 8. 

Silberztein M. 2004. NooJ : an Object-Oriented 
Approach. In INTEX pour la Linguistique et le 
Traitement Automatique des Langues. C. Muller, J. 
Royauté M. Silberztein Eds, book of the MSH 
Ledoux. Presses University of Franche-Comte, pp. 
359-369. 

Wu M. 2008. La traduction automatique français-
chinois pour les groupes nominaux avec NooJ. 
Budapest. 

 

142


