










































Reranking Bilingually Extracted Paraphrases Using Monolingual Distributional Similarity


Proceedings of the GEMS 2011 Workshop on Geometrical Models of Natural Language Semantics, EMNLP 2011, pages 33–42,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Reranking Bilingually Extracted Paraphrases
Using Monolingual Distributional Similarity

Tsz Ping Chan, Chris Callison-Burch and Benjamin Van Durme
Center for Language and Speech Processing, and HLTCOE

Johns Hopkins University

Abstract

This paper improves an existing bilingual
paraphrase extraction technique using mono-
lingual distributional similarity to rerank can-
didate paraphrases. Raw monolingual data
provides a complementary and orthogonal
source of information that lessens the com-
monly observed errors in bilingual pivot-
based methods. Our experiments reveal that
monolingual scoring of bilingually extracted
paraphrases has a significantly stronger cor-
relation with human judgment for grammat-
icality than the probabilities assigned by the
bilingual pivoting method does. The results
also show that monolingual distribution simi-
larity can serve as a threshold for high preci-
sion paraphrase selection.

1 Introduction

Paraphrasing is the rewording of a phrase such
that meaning is preserved. Data-driven paraphrase
acquisition techniques can be categorized by the
type of data that they use (Madnani and Dorr,
2010). Monolingual paraphrasing techniques clus-
ter phrases through statistical characteristics such
as dependency path similarities or distributional co-
occurrence information (Lin and Pantel, 2001; Pasca
and Dienes, 2005). Bilingual paraphrasing tech-
niques use parallel corpora to extract potential para-
phrases by grouping English phrases that share the
same foreign translations (Bannard and Callison-
Burch, 2005). Other efforts blur the lines between
the two, applying techniques from statistical ma-
chine translation to monolingual data or extract-
ing paraphrases from multiple English translations
of the same foreign text (Barzilay and McKeown,
2001; Pang et al., 2003; Quirk et al., 2004).

We exploit both methodologies, applying a
monolingually-derived similarity metric to the out-

put of a pivot-based bilingual paraphrase model. In
this paper we investigate the strengths and weak-
nesses of scoring paraphrases using monolingual
distributional similarity versus the bilingually calcu-
lated paraphrase probability. We show that monolin-
gual cosine similarity calculated on large volumes
of text ranks bilingually-extracted paraphrases bet-
ter than the paraphrase probability originally defined
by Bannard and Callison-Burch (2005). While our
current implementation shows improvement mainly
in grammaticality, other contextual features are ex-
pected to enhance the meaning preservation of para-
phrases. We also show that monolingual scores can
provide a reasonable threshold for picking out high
precision paraphrases.

2 Related Work

2.1 Paraphrase Extraction from Bitexts
Bannard and Callison-Burch (2005) proposed iden-
tifying paraphrases by pivoting through phrases in a
bilingual parallel corpora. Figure 1 illustrates their
paraphrase extraction process. The target phrase,
e.g. thrown into jail, is found in a German-English
parallel corpus. The corresponding foreign phrase
(festgenommen) is identified using word alignment
and phrase extraction techniques from phrase-based
statistical machine translation (Koehn et al., 2003).
Other occurrences of the foreign phrase in the par-
allel corpus may align to a distinct English phrase,
such as jailed. As the original phrase occurs sev-
eral times and aligns with many different foreign
phrases, each of these may align to a variety of other
English paraphrases. Thus, thrown into jail not only
paraphrases as jailed, but also as arrested, detained,
imprisoned, incarcerated, locked up, and so on. Bad
paraphrases, such as maltreated, thrown, cases, cus-
tody, arrest, and protection, may also arise due to
poor word alignment quality and other factors.

33



... letzteWoche wurden in Irland fünf Landwirte festgenommen , weil sie verhindern wollten

... last week five farmers were thrown into jail in Ireland because they resisted ...

...

Zahlreiche Journalisten sind verschwunden oder wurden festgenommen , gefoltert und getötet .

Quite a few journalists have disappeared or have been imprisoned , tortured and killed .

Figure 1: Using a bilingual parallel corpus to extract
paraphrases.

Bannard and Callison-Burch (2005) defined a
paraphrase probability to rank these paraphrase can-
didates, as follows:

ê2 = arg max
e2 6=e1

p(e2|e1) (1)

p(e2|e1) =
∑

f

p(e2, f |e1) (2)

=
∑

f

p(e2|f, e1)p(f |e1) (3)

≈
∑

f

p(e2|f)p(f |e1) (4)

where p(e2|e1) is the paraphrase probability, and
p(e|f) and p(f |e) are translation probabilities from
a statistical translation model.

Anecdotally, this paraphrase probability some-
times seems unable to discriminate between good
and bad paraphrases, so some researchers disregard
it and treat the extracted paraphrases as an unsorted
set (Snover et al., 2010). Callison-Burch (2008)
attempts to improve the ranking by limiting para-
phrases to be the same syntactic type.

We attempt to rerank the paraphrases using other
information. This is similar to the efforts of Zhao
et al. (2008), who made use of multiple resources to
derive feature functions and extract paraphrase ta-
bles. The paraphrase that maximizes a log-linear
combination of various feature functions is then se-
lected as the optimal paraphrase. Feature weights
in the model are optimized by minimizing a phrase
substitution error rate, a measure proposed by the
authors, on a development set.

2.2 Monolingual Distributional Similarity
Prior work has explored the acquisition of para-
phrases using distributional similarity computed

from monolingual resources, such as in the DIRT
results of Lin and Pantel (2001). In these models,
phrases are judged to be similar based on the cosine
distance of their associated context vectors. In some
cases, such as by Lin and Pantel, or the seminal work
of Church and Hanks (1991), distributional context
is defined using frequencies of words appearing in
various syntactic relations with other lexical items.
For example, the nouns apple and orange are con-
textually similar partly because they both often ap-
pear as the object of the verb eat. While syntac-
tic contexts provide strong evidence of distributional
preferences, it is computationally expensive to parse
very large corpora, so it is also common to represent
context vectors with simpler representations like ad-
jacent words and n-grams (Lapata and Keller, 2005;
Bhagat and Ravichandran, 2008; Lin et al., 2010;
Van Durme and Lall, 2010). In these models, ap-
ple and orange might be judged similar because both
tend to be one word to the right of some, and one to
the left of juice.

Here we calculate distributional similarity using a
web-scale n-gram corpus (Brants and Franz, 2006;
Lin et al., 2010). Given both the size of the collec-
tion, and that the n-grams are sub-sentential (the n-
grams are no longer than 5 tokens by design), it was
not feasible to parse, which led to the use of n-gram
contexts. Here we use adjacent unigrams. For each
phrase x we wished to paraphrase, we extracted the
context vector of x from the n-gram collection as
such: every (n-gram, frequency) pair of the form:
(ax, f ), or (xb, f ), gave rise to the (feature, value)
pair: (wi−1=a, f ), or (wi+1=b, f ), respectively. In
order to scale to this size of a collection, we relied
on Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH), as was done
previously by Ravichandran et al. (2005) and Bha-
gat and Ravichandran (2008). To avoid computing
feature vectors explicitly, which can be a memory
intensive bottleneck, we employed the online LSH
variant described by Van Durme and Lall (2010).

This variant, based on the earlier work of Indyk
and Motwani (1998) and Charikar (2002), approxi-
mates the cosine similarity between two feature vec-
tors based on the Hamming distance in a reduced bit-
wise representation. In brief, for the feature vectors
~u, ~v, each of dimension d, then the cosine similarity
is defined as: ~u·~v|~u||~v| . If we project ~u and ~v through
a d by b random matrix populated with draws from

34



huge amount of
BiP SyntBiP BiP-MonoDS
large number of, .33 large number of, .38 huge amount of, 1.0

in large numbers, .11 great number of, .09 large quantity of, .98

great number of, .08 huge amount of, .06 large number of, .98

large numbers of, .06 vast number of, .06 great number of, .97

vast number of, .06 vast number of, .94

huge amount of, .06 in large numbers, .10

large quantity of, .03 large numbers of, .08

Table 1: Paraphrases for huge amount of according to the
bilingual pivoting (BiP), syntactic-constrainted bilingual
pivoting (SyntBiP) translation score and the monolingual
similarity score via LSH (MonoDS), ranked by corre-
sponding scores listed next to each paraphrase. Syntactic
type of the phrase is [JJ+NN+IN].

N(0, 1), then we convert our feature vectors to bit
signatures of length b, by setting each bit of the sig-
nature conditioned on whether or not the respective
projected value is greater than or equal to 0. Given
the bit signatures h(~u) and h(~v), we approximate
cosine with the formula: cos(D(h(~u),h(~v))b π), where
D() is Hamming distance.

3 Ranking Paraphrases
We use several different methods to rank candidate
sets of paraphrases that are extracted from bilingual
parallel corpora. Our three scoring methods are:

• MonoDS – monolingual distributional similar-
ity calculated over the Google n-gram corpus
via LSH, as described in Section 2.2.
• BiP – bilingual pivoting is calculated as in

Equation 4 following Bannard and Callison-
Burch (2005). The translation model probabili-
ties are estimated from a French-English paral-
lel corpus.
• SyntBiP – syntactically-constrained bilingual

pivoting. This refinement to BiP, proposed in
Callison-Burch (2008), constrains paraphrases
to be the same syntactic type as the original
phrase in the pivoting step of the paraphrase ta-
ble construction.

When we use MonoDS to re-score a candidate set,
we indicate which bilingual paraphrase extraction
method was used to extract the candidates as prefix,
as in BiP-MonoDS or SyntBiP-MonoDS.

reluctant
MonoDShand−selected BiP
*willing, .99 not, .56

loath, .98 unwilling, .04

*eager, .98 reluctance, .03

somewhat reluctant, .98 reticent, .03

unable, .98 hesitant, .02

denied access, .98 reticent about, .01

disinclined, .98 reservations, .01

very unwilling, .97 reticence, .01

conducive, .97 hesitate, .01

linked, .97 are reluctant, .01

Table 2: Ordered reranked paraphrase candidates for the
phrase reluctant according to monolingual distributional
similarity (MonoDShand−selected) and bilingual pivoting
paraphrase (BiP) method. Two hand-selected phrases are
labeled with asterisks.

3.1 Example Paraphrase Scores
Table 1 shows the paraphrase candidates for the
phrase huge amount of along with the values for each
of our three scoring methods. Although MonoDS
does not explicitly impose syntactic restrictions, the
syntactic structure of the paraphrase in large num-
bers contributes to the large difference in the left
and right context of the paraphrase and of the orig-
inal phrase. Hence, the paraphrase was assigned a
low score of 0.098 as compared to other paraphrase
candidates with the correct syntactic type. Note that
the SyntBiP produced significantly fewer paraphrase
candidates, since its paraphrase candidates must be
the same syntactic type as the original phrase. Iden-
tity paraphrases are excluded for the rest of the dis-
cussion in this paper.

3.2 Susceptibility to Antonyms
Monolingual distributional similarity is widely
known to conflate words with opposite meaning and
has motivated a large body of prior work on antonym
detection (Lin and Zhao, 2003; Lin and Pantel,
2001; Mohammad et al., 2008a; Mohammad et al.,
2008b; Marneffe et al., 2008; Voorhees, 2008). In
contrast, the antonyms of a phrase are rarely pro-
duced during pivoting of the BiP methods because
they tend not to share the same foreign translations.
Since the reranking framework proposed here be-
gins with paraphrases acquired by the BiP methodol-

35



ogy, MonoDS can considerably enhance the quality
of ranking while sidestepping the antonym problem
that arises from using MonoDS alone.

To support this intuition, an example of a para-
phrase list with inserted hand-selected phrases
ranked by each reranking methods is shown in Ta-
ble 21. Hand-selected antonyms of reluctant are in-
serted into the paraphrase candidates extracted by
BiP before they are reranked by MonoDS. This is
analogous to the case without pre-filtering of para-
phrases by BiP and all phrases are treated equally
by MonoDS alone. BiP cannot rank these hand-
selected paraphrases since, by construction, they do
not share any foreign translation and hence their
paraphrase scores are not defined. As expected from
the drawbacks of monolingual-based statistics, will-
ing and eager are assigned top scores by MonoDS,
although good paraphrases such as somewhat reluc-
tant and disinclined are also ranked highly. This
illustrates how BiP complements the monolingual
reranking technique by providing orthogonal infor-
mation to address the issue of antonyms for Mon-
oDS.

3.3 Implementation Details
For BiP and SyntBiP, the French-English parallel
text from the Europarl corpus (Koehn, 2005) was
used to train the paraphrase model. The parallel
corpus was extracted from proceedings of the Eu-
ropean parliament with a total of about 1.3 million
sentences and close to 97 million words in the En-
glish text. Word alignments were generated with
the Berkeley aligner. For SyntBiP, the English side
of the parallel corpus was parsed using the Stan-
ford parser (Klein and Manning, 2003). The transla-
tion models were trained with Thrax, a grammar ex-
tractor for machine translation (Weese et al., 2011).
Thrax extracts phrase pairs that are labeled with
complex syntactic labels following Zollmann and
Venugopal (2006).

For MonoDS, the web-scale n-gram collection of
Lin et al. (2010) was used to compute the mono-
lingual distributional similarity features, using 512
bits per signature in the resultant LSH projection.
Following Van Durme and Lall (2010), we implic-

1Generating a paraphrase list by MonoDS alone requires
building features for all phrases in the corpus, which is com-
putationally impractical and hence, was not considered here.

itly represented the projection matrix with a pool of
size 10,000. In order to expand the coverage of the
candidates scored by the monolingual method, the
LSH signatures are obtained only for the phrases in
the union set of the phrase-level outputs from the
original and from the syntactically constrained para-
phrase models. Since the n-gram corpus consists
of at most 5-gram and each distributional similar-
ity feature requires a single neighboring token, the
LSH signatures are generated only for phrases that
are 4-gram or less. Phrases that didn’t appear in the
n-grams with at least one feature were discarded.

4 Human Evaluation
The different paraphrase scoring methods were com-
pared through a manual evaluation conducted on
Amazon Mechanical Turk. A set of 100 test phrases
were selected and for each test phrase, five distinct
sentences were randomly sampled to capture the fact
that paraphrases are valid in some contexts but not
others (Szpektor et al., 2007). Judges evaluated the
paraphrase quality through a substitution test: For
each sampled sentence, the test phrase is substituted
with automatically-generated paraphrases. The sen-
tences and the phrases are drawn from the English
side of the Europarl corpus. Judges indicated the
amount of the original meaning preserved by the
paraphrases and the grammaticality of the resulting
sentences. They assigned two values to each sen-
tence using the 5-point scales defined in Callison-
Burch (2008).

The 100 test phrases consisted of 25 unigrams,
25 bigrams, 25 trigrams and 25 4-grams. These 25
phrases were randomly sampled from the paraphrase
table generated by the bilingual pivoting method,
with the following restrictions:
• The phrase must have occurred at least 5 times

in the parallel corpus and must have appeared
in the web-scale n-grams.

• The size of the union of paraphrase candidates
from BiP and SyntBiP must be 10 or more.

4.1 Calculating Correlation
In addition to their average scores on the 5-point
scales, the different paraphrase ranking methods
were quantitatively evaluated by calculating their
correlation with human judgments. Their correla-
tion is calculated using Kendall’s tau coefficient, a

36



Reranking Method Meaning Grammar
BiP 0.14 0.04

BiP-MonoDS 0.14 0.24‡
SyntBiP 0.19 0.08

SyntBip-MonoDS 0.15 0.22‡

SyntBiPmatched 0.20 0.15

SyntBiPmatched-MonoDS 0.17 0.16

SyntBiP* 0.21 0.09

SyntBiP-MonoDS* 0.16 0.22†

Table 3: Kendall’s Tau rank correlation coefficients be-
tween human judgment of meaning and grammaticality
for the different paraphrase scoring methods. Bottom
panel: SyntBiPmatched is the same as SyntBiP except
paraphrases must match with the original phrase in syn-
tactic type. SyntBiP* and MonoDS* are the same as
before except they share the same phrase support with
SyntBiPmatched. (‡: MonoDS outperforms the corre-
sponding BiP reranking at p-value≤0.01, and † at≤0.05)

common measure of correlation between two ranked
lists. Kendall’s tau coefficient ranges between -1 and
1, where 1 indicates a perfect agreement between a
pair of ranked lists.

Since tied rankings occur in the human judgments
and reranking methods, Kendall’s tau b, which ig-
nores pairs with ties, is used in our analysis. An
overall Kendall’s tau coefficient presented in the re-
sults section is calculated by averaging all Kendall’s
tau coefficients of a particular reranking method
over all phrase-sentence combinations.

5 Experimental Results
5.1 Correlation

The Kendall’s tau coefficients for the three para-
phrase ranking methods are reported Table 3. A
total of 100 phrases and 5 sentence per phrase are
selected for the experiment, resulting in a max-
imum support size of 500 for Kendall’s tau co-
efficient calculation. The overall sizes of sup-
port are 500, 335, and 304 for BiP, SyntBiP and
SyntBiPmatched, respectively. The positive values of
Kendall’s tau confirm both monolingual and bilin-
gual approaches for paraphrase reranking are posi-
tively correlated with human judgments overall. For
grammaticality, monolingual distributional simi-
larity reranking correlates stronger with human
judgments than bilingual pivoting methods. For

example, in the top panel, given a paraphrase ta-
ble generated through bilingual pivoting, Kendall’s
tau for monolingual distributional similarity (BiP-
MonoDS) achieves 0.24 while that of the bilin-
gual pivoting ranking (BiP) is only 0.04. Simi-
larly, reranking of the paraphrases extracted with
syntactically-constrained bilingual pivoting shows a
stronger correlation between SyntBiP-MonoDS and
grammar judgments (0.22) than the SyntBiP (0.08).
This result further supports the intuition of distri-
butional similarity being suitable for paraphrase
reranking in terms of grammaticality.

In terms of meaning preservation, the Kendall’s
tau coefficient for MonoDS is often lower than the
bilingual approaches, suggesting that paraphrase
probability from the bilingual approach correlates
better with phrasal meaning than the monolingual
metric. For instance, SyntBiP reaches a Kendall’s
tau of 0.19, which is a slightly stronger correlation
than that of SyntBiP-MonoDS. Although paraphrase
candidates were generated by bilingual pivoting,
distributional similarity depends only on contextual
similarity and does not guarantee paraphrases that
match with the original meaning; whereas Bilingual
pivoting methods are derived based on shared for-
eign translations which associate meaning.

In the bottom panel of Table 3, only paraphrases
of the same syntactic type as the source phrase are
included in the ranked list for Kendall’s tau calcula-
tion. The phrases associated with these paraphrases
are used for calculating Kendall’s tau for the orig-
inal reranking methods (labeled as SyntBiP* and
SyntBiP-MonoDS*). Comparing only the bilingual
methods across panels, syntactic matching increases
the correlation of bilingual pivoting metrics with
human judgments in grammaticality (e.g., 0.15 for
SyntBiPmatched and 0.08 for SyntBiP) but with only
minimal effects on meaning. The maximum values
in the bottom panel for both categories are roughly
the same as that in the corresponding category in
the upper panel ({0.21,0.19} in meaning and {0.22,
0.24} in grammar for lower and upper panels, re-
spectively.) This suggests that syntactic type match-
ing offers similar improvement in grammaticality
as MonoDS, although syntactically-constrained ap-
proaches have more confined paraphrase coverage.

We performed a one-tailed sign test on the
Kendall’s Tau values across phrases to examine

37



Figure 2: Averaged scores in the top K paraphrase can-
didates as a function of K for different reranking metrics.
All methods performs similarly in meaning preservation,
but SyntBiP-MonoDS outperforms other scoring meth-
ods in grammaticality, as shown in the bottom graph.

the statistical significance of the performance gain
due to MonoDS. For grammaticality, except for the
case of syntactic type matching (SyntBiPmatched), p-
values are less than 0.05, confirming the hypothesis
that MonoDS outperforms BiP. The p-value for com-
paring MonoDS and SyntBiPmatched exceeds 0.05,
agreeing with our conclusion from Table 3 that the
two methods perform similarly.

5.2 Thresholding Using MonoDS Scores
One possible use for the paraphrase scores would be
as a cutoff threshold where any paraphrases exceed-
ing that value would be selected. Ideally, this would
retain only high precision paraphrases.

To verify whether scores from each method corre-
spond to human judgments for paraphrases extracted
by BiP, human evaluation scores are averaged for
meaning and grammar within each range of para-
phrase score for BiP and approximate cosine dis-
tance for MonoDS, as shown in Table 4. The BiP
paraphrase score bin sizes are linear in log scale.

BiP Paraphrase Score MonoDS LSH Score

Region M G Region M G

1.00 ≥ x > 0.37 3.6 3.7 1 ≥ x > 0.95 4.0 4.4
0.37 ≥ x > 0.14 3.6 3.7 0.95 ≥ x > 0.9 3.2 4.0
0.14 ≥ x > 0.05 3.4 3.6 0.9 ≥ x > 0.85 3.3 4.0

0.05 ≥ x > 1.8e-2 3.4 3.6 0.85 ≥ x > 0.8 3.3 4.0
1.8e-2 ≥ x > 6.7e-3 3.4 3.6 0.8 ≥ x > 0.7 3.2 3.9
6.7e-3 ≥ x > 2.5e-3 3.2 3.7 0.7 ≥ x > 0.6 3.3 3.8
2.5e-3 ≥ x > 9.1e-4 3.0 3.6 0.6 ≥ x > 0.5 3.1 3.7
9.1e-4 ≥ x > 3.4e-4 3.0 3.8 0.5 ≥ x > 0.4 3.1 3.6
3.4e-4 ≥ x > 1.2e-4 2.6 3.6 0.4 ≥ x > 0.3 3.1 3.5
1.2e-4 ≥ x > 4.5e-5 2.7 3.6 0.3 ≥ x > 0.2 2.9 3.4

x ≤ 4.5e-5 2.5 3.7 0.2 ≥ x > 0.1 3.0 3.3
0.1 ≥ x > 0 2.9 3.2

Table 4: Averaged human judgment scores as a func-
tion of binned paraphrase scores and binned LSH scores.
MonoDS serves as much better thresholding score for ex-
tracting high precision paraphrases.

MonoDS LSH BiP Paraphrase Threshold

Threshold ≥ 0.05 ≥ 0.01 ≥ 6.7e-3

≥ 0.9 4.2 / 4.4 4.1 / 4.4 4.0 / 4.4
≥ 0.8 4.0 / 4.3 3.9 / 4.3 3.9 / 4.2
≥ 0.7 3.9 / 4.1 3.8 / 4.2 3.8 / 4.1

Table 5: Thresholding using both the MonoDS and BiP
scores further improves the average human judgment of
Meaning / Grammar.

Observe that for the BiP paraphrase scores on the
left panel, no trend on the averaged grammar scores
across all score bins is present. While a mild cor-
relation exists between the averaged meaning scores
and the paraphrase scores, the top score region (1> x
≥ 0) corresponds to merely an averaged value of 3.6
on a 5-point scale. Therefore, thresholding on BiP
scores among a set of candidates would not guaran-
tee accurate paraphrases in grammar or meaning.

On the right panel, MonoDS LSH scores on para-
phrase candidates produced by BiP are uniformly
higher in grammar than meaning across all score
bins, similar to the correlation results in Table 3.
The averaged grammar scores decreases monoton-
ically and proportionally to the change in LSH val-
ues. With regard to meaning scores, the averaged
values roughly correspond to the decrease of LSH
values, implying distributional similarity correlates
weakly with human judgment in the meaning preser-

38



vation of paraphrase. Note that the drop in averaged
scores is the largest from the top bin (1≥ x > 0.95)
to the second bin (0.95 ≥ x > 0.9) is the largest
within both meaning and grammar. This suggests
that thresholding on top tiered MonoDS scores
can be a good filter for extracting high precision
paraphrases. BiP scores, by comparison, are not as
useful for thresholding grammaticality.

Additional performance gain attained by combin-
ing the two thresholding are illustrated in Table 5,
where averaged meaning and grammar scores are
listed for each combination of thresholding. At a
threshold of 0.9 for MonoDS LSH score and 0.05
for BiP paraphrase score, the averaged meaning ex-
ceeds the highest value reported in Table 4, whereas
the grammar scores reaches the value in the top bin
in Table 4. General trends of improvement from uti-
lizing the two reranking methods are observed by
comparing Tables 4 and 5.

5.3 Top K Analysis

Figure 2 shows the mean human assigned score
within the top K candidates averaged across all
phrases. Compared across the two categories,
meaning scores have lower range of score and
a more uniform trend of decreasing values as K
grows. In grammaticality, BiP clearly underper-
forms whereas the SyntBiP-MonoDS maintains the
best score among all methods over all values of K.
In addition, a slow drop-off up until K = 4 in the
curve for SyntBiP-MonoDS implies that the quality
of paraphrases remains relatively high going from
top 1 to top 4 candidates.

In applications such as question answering or
search, the order of answers presented is important
because the lower an answer is ranked, the less likely
it would be looked at by a user. Based on this intu-
ition, the paraphrase ranking methods are evaluated
using the maximum human judgment score among
the top K candidates obtained by each method. As
shown in Table 6, when only the top candidate
is considered, the averaged score corresponding to
the monolingual reranking methods are roughly the
same as that to the bilingual methods in meaning, but
as K grows, the bilingual methods outperforms the
monolingual methods. In terms of grammaticality,
scores associated with monolingual reranking meth-
ods are consistently higher than the bilingual meth-

Reranking Method

K BiP BiP-MonoDS SyntBiP SyntBiP-MonoDS

M

1 3.62 3.67 3.58 3.58

3 4.13 4.07 4.13 4.01

5 4.26 4.19 4.20 4.09

10 4.39 4.30 4.25 4.23

G

1 3.83 4.11 4.04 4.23

3 4.22 4.45 4.47 4.54

5 4.38 4.54 4.55 4.62

10 4.52 4.62 4.63 4.67

Table 6: Average of the maximum human evaluation
score from top K candidates for each reranking method.
Support sizes for BiP- and SyntBiP-based metrics are 500
and 335, respectively. (M = Meaning, G = Grammar)

ods but the difference tapers off as K increases. This
suggests that when only limited top paraphrase can-
didates can be evaluated, MonoDS is likely to pro-
vide better quality of results.

6 Detailed Examples

6.1 MonoDS Filters Bad BiP Paraphrases

The examples in the top panel of Table 7 illustrates a
few disadvantages of the bilingual paraphrase scores
and how monolingual reranking complements the
bilingual methods. Translation models based on
bilingual corpora are known to suffer from misalign-
ment of the parallel text (Bannard and Callison-
Burch, 2005), producing incorrect translations that
propagate through in the paraphrase model. This is-
sue is exemplified in the phrase pairs {considerable
changes, caused quite}, {always declared, always
been}, and {significantly affected, known} listed Ta-
ble 7. The paraphrases are clearly unrelated to the
corresponding phrases as evident from the low rank-
ings from human judges. Nonetheless, they were in-
cluded as candidates likely due to misalignment and
were ranked relatively high by BiP metric. For ex-
ample, considerable changes was aligned to modifie
considérablement correctly. However, due to a com-
bination of loose translations and difficulty in align-
ing multiple words that are spread out in a sentence,
the French phrase was inaccurately matched with
caused quite by the aligner, inducing a bad para-
phrase. Note that in these cases LSH produces the
results that agrees with the human rankings.

39



Ranking
Phrase Paraphrase Sizepool Meaning Grammar BiP BiP-MonoDS

significantly affected known 20 19 18.5 1 17

considerable changes caused quite 23 23 23 2.5 23

always declared always been 20 20 20 2 13

hauled delivered 23 7 5.5 21.5 5.0

fiscal burden† taxes 18 13.5 18 6 16
fiscal burden† taxes 18 2 8 6 16
legalise legalize 23 1 1 10 1

to deal properly with address 35 4.5 5.5 4 29.5

you have just stated you have just suggested 31 13.5 8.5 4 30

Table 7: Examples of phrase pair rankings by different reranking methods and human judgments in terms of meaning
and grammar. Higher rank (smaller numbers) corresponds to more favorable paraphrases by the associated metric.
(†: Phrases are listed twice to show the ranking variation when substitutions are evaluated in different sentences.)

6.2 Context Matters
Occasionally, paraphrases are context-dependent,
meaning the relevance of the paraphrase depends on
the context in a sentence. Bilingual methods can
capture limited context through syntactic constraints
if the POS tags of the paraphrases and the sentence
are available, while the distributional similarity met-
ric, in its current implementation, is purely based on
the pattern of co-occurrence with neighboring con-
text n-grams. As a result, LSH scores should be
slightly better at gauging the paraphrases defined by
context, as suggested by some examples in Table 7.
The phrase pair {hauled, delivered} differ slightly
in how they describe the manner that an object is
moved. However, in the context of the following
sentence, they roughly correspond to the same idea:

countries which do not comply with community
legislation should be hauled before the court of
justice and i think mrs palacio will do so .
As a result, out of 23 candidates, human judges

ranked delivered 7 and 5.5 for meaning and gram-
mar, respectively. The monolingual-based metric
also assigns a higher rank to the paraphrase while
BiP puts it near the lowest rank.

Another example of context-dependency is the
phrase pair {fiscal burden, taxes}, which could have
some foreign translations in common. The original
phrase appears in the following sentence:

... the member states can reduce the fiscal burden
consisting of taxes and social contributions .
The paraphrase candidate taxes is no longer ap-

propriate with the consideration of the context sur-

rounding the original phrase. As such, taxes re-
ceived rankings of 13.5, 18 and 16 out of 18
for meaning, grammar, and MonoDS, respectively,
whereas BiP assigns a 6 to the paraphrase. The same
phrase pair but a different sentence, the context in-
duces opposite effects on the paraphrase judgments,
where the paraphrase received 2 and 8 in the two
categories as shown in Table 7:

the economic data for our eu as regards employ-
ment and economic growth are not particularly
good , and , in addition , the fiscal burden in eu-
rope , which is to be borne by the citizen , has
reached an all-time high of 46 % .

Hence, distributional similarity offers additional
advantages over BiP only when the paraphrase ap-
pears in a context that also defines most of the non-
zero dimensions of the LSH signature vector.

The phrase pair {legalise, legalize} exemplifies
the effect of using different corpora to train 2 para-
phrase reranking models as shown in Table 7. Mean-
ing, grammar and MonoDS all received top rank out
of all paraphrases, whereas BiP ranks the paraphrase
10 out of 23. Since the BiP method was trained
with Europarl data, which is dominated by British
English, BiP fails to acknowledge the American
spelling of the same word. On the other hand, dis-
tributional similarity feature vectors were extracted
from the n-gram corpus with different variations of
English, which was informative for paraphrase rank-
ing. This property can be exploited for adaptation of
specific domain of paraphrases selection.

40



6.3 Limitations of MonoDS Implementation

While the monolingual distributional similarity
shows promise as a paraphrase ranking method,
there are a number of additional drawbacks associ-
ated with the implementation.

The method is currently limited to phrases with
up to 4 contiguous words that are present in the
n-gram corpus for LSH feature vector extraction.
Since cosine similarity is a function of the angle
between 2 vectors irrespective of the vector mag-
nitudes, thresholding on low occurrences of higher
n-grams in the corpus construction causes larger n-
grams to suffer from feature sparsity and be sus-
ceptible to noise. A few examples from the exper-
iment demonstrate such scenario. For a phrase to
deal properly with, a paraphrase candidate address
receives rankings of 4.5, 5.5 and 4 out of 35 for
meaning, grammar and BiP, respectively, it is ranked
29.5 by BiP-MonoDS. The two phrases are expected
to have similar neighboring context in regular En-
glish usage, but it might be misrepresented by the
LSH feature vector due to the lack of occurrences of
the 4-gram in the corpus.

Another example of how sparsity affects LSH fea-
ture vectors is the phrase you have just stated. An
acceptable paraphrase you have just suggested was
ranked 13.5, 8.5 and 6.5 out of a total of 31 can-
didates by meaning, grammar and BiP, respectively,
but MonoDS only ranks it at 30. The cosine sim-
ilarity between the phrases are 0.05, which is very
low. However, the only tokens that differentiate the
4-gram phrases, i.e. {stated,suggested}, have a sim-
ilarity score of 0.91. This suggests that even though
the additional words in the phrase don’t alter the
meaning significantly, the feature vectors are mis-
represented due to the sparsity of the 4-gram. This
highlights a weakness of the current implementa-
tion of distributional similarity, namely that context
within a phrase is not considered for larger n-grams.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

We have presented a novel paraphrase ranking met-
ric that assigns a score to paraphrase candidates ac-
cording to their monolingual distributional similar-
ity to the original phrase. While bilingual pivoting-
based paraphrase models provide wide coverage
of paraphrase candidates and syntactic constraints

on the model confines the structural match, addi-
tional contextual similarity information provided by
monolingual semantic statistics increases the accu-
racy of paraphrase ranking within the target lan-
guage. Through a manual evaluation, it was shown
that monolingual distributional scores strongly cor-
relate with human assessment of paraphrase quality
in terms of grammaticality, yet have minimal effects
on meaning preservation of paraphrases.

While we speculated that MonoDS would im-
prove both meaning and grammar scoring for para-
phrases, we found in the results that only gram-
maticality was improved from the monolingual ap-
proach. This is likely due to the choice of how con-
text is represented, which in this case is only single
neighboring words. A consideration for future work
to enhance paraphrasal meaning preservation would
be to explore other contextual representations, such
as syntactic dependency parsing (Lin, 1997), mu-
tual information between co-occurences of phrases
Church and Hanks (1991), or increasing the number
of neighboring words used in n-gram based repre-
sentations.

In future work we will make use of other com-
plementary bilingual and monolingual knowledge
sources by combining other features such as n-gram
length, language model scores, etc. One approach
would be to perform minimum error rate training
similar to Zhao et al. (2008) in which linear weights
of a feature function for a set of paraphrases candi-
date are trained iteratively to minimize the phrasal-
substitution-based error rate. Instead of phrasal sub-
stitution in Zhao’s method, quantitative measure of
correlation with human judgment can be used as
the objective function to be optimized during train-
ing. Other techniques such as SVM-rank (Joachims,
2002) may also be investigated for aggregating re-
sults from multiple ranked lists.

8 Acknowledgements
Thanks to Courtney Napoles for advice regarding
a pilot version of this work. Thanks to Jonathan
Weese, Matt Post and Juri Ganitkevitch for their as-
sistance with Thrax. This research was supported by
the EuroMatrixPlus project funded by the European
Commission (7th Framework Programme), and by
the NSF under grant IIS-0713448. Opinions, inter-
pretations, and conclusions are the authors’ alone.

41



References
Colin Bannard and Chris Callison-Burch. 2005. Para-

phrasing with bilingual parallel corpora. In Proceed-
ings of ACL.

Regina Barzilay and Kathleen McKeown. 2001. Extract-
ing paraphrases from a parallel corpus. In Proceedings
of ACL.

Rahul Bhagat and Deepak Ravichandran. 2008. Large
scale acquisition of paraphrases for learning surface
patterns. In Proceedings of ACL-HLT.

Thorsten Brants and Alex Franz. 2006. Web 1T 5-gram
version 1.

Chris Callison-Burch. 2008. Syntactic constraints on
paraphrases extracted from parallel corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP.

Moses Charikar. 2002. Similarity estimation techniques
from rounding algorithms. In Proceedings of STOC.

Kenneth Church and Patrick Hanks. 1991. Word asso-
ciation norms, mutual information and lexicography.
Computational Linguistics, 6(1):22–29.

Piotr Indyk and Rajeev Motwani. 1998. Approximate
nearest neighbors: towards removing the curse of di-
mensionality. In Proceedings of STOC.

Thorsten Joachims. 2002. Optimizing search engines
using clickthrough data. In Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
ing.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Fast exact
inference with a factored model for natural language
parsing. Advances in NIPS, 15:3–10.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proceed-
ings of HLT/NAACL.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. A parallel corpus for statistical
machine translation. In Proceedings of MT-Summit.

Mirella Lapata and Frank Keller. 2005. Web-based mod-
els for natural language processing. ACM Transac-
tions on Speech and Language Processing, 2(1).

Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. Discovery of infer-
ence rules for question answering. Natural Language
Engineering, 7:343–360.

Dekang Lin and Shaojun Zhao. 2003. Identifying syn-
onyms among distributionally similar words. In Pro-
ceedings of IJCAI-03, pages 1492–1493.

Dekang Lin, Kenneth Church, Heng Ji, Satoshi Sekine,
David Yarowsky, Shane Bergsma, Kailash Patil, Emily
Pitler, Rachel Lathbury, Vikram Rao, Kapil Dalwani,
and Sushant Narsale. 2010. New tools for web-scale
n-grams. In Proceedings of LREC.

Dekang Lin. 1997. Using syntactic dependency as local
context to resolve word sense ambiguity. In Proceed-
ings of ACL.

Nitin Madnani and Bonnie Dorr. 2010. Generating
phrasal and sentential paraphrases: A survey of data-
driven methods. Computational Linguistics, 36(3).

Marie-Catherine De Marneffe, Anna N. Rafferty, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2008. Finding contradic-
tions in text. In Proceedings of ACL 2008.

Saif Mohammad, Bonnie Dorr, and Graeme Hirst.
2008a. Computing word-pair antonymy. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 982–991. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Saif Mohammad, Bonnie J. Dorr, Melissa Egan, Nitin
Madnani, David Zajic, and Jimmy Lin. 2008b. Mul-
tiple alternative sentence compressions and word-pair
antonymy for automatic text summarization and rec-
ognizing textual entailment.

Bo Pang, Kevin Knight, and Daniel Marcu. 2003.
Syntax-based alignment of multiple translations: Ex-
tracting paraphrases and generating new sentences. In
Proceedings of HLT/NAACL.

Marius Pasca and Peter Dienes. 2005. Aligning needles
in a haystack: Paraphrase acquisition across the web.
In Proceedings of IJCNLP, pages 119–130.

Chris Quirk, Chris Brockett, and William Dolan. 2004.
Monolingual machine translation for paraphrase gen-
eration. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 142–149.

Deepak Ravichandran, Patrick Pantel, and Eduard Hovy.
2005. Randomized Algorithms and NLP: Using Lo-
cality Sensitive Hash Functions for High Speed Noun
Clustering. In Proceedings of ACL.

Matthew Snover, Nitin Madnani, Bonnie Dorr, and
Richard Schwartz. 2010. TER-plus: paraphrase,
semantic, and alignment enhancements to translation
edit rate. Machine Translation, 23(2-3):117–127.

Idan Szpektor, Eyal Shnarch, and Ido Dagan. 2007.
Instance-based evaluation of entailment rule acquisi-
tion. In Proceedings of ACL.

Benjamin Van Durme and Ashwin Lall. 2010. Online
generation of locality sensitive hash signatures. In
Proceedings of ACL, Short Papers.

Ellen M. Voorhees. 2008. Contradictions and justifica-
tions: Extensions to the textual entailment task.

Jonathan Weese, Juri Ganitkevitch, Chris Callison-
Burch, Matt Post, and Adam Lopez. 2011. Joshua
3.0: Syntax-based machine translation with the thrax
grammar extractor. EMNLP 2011 - Workshop on sta-
tistical machine translation.

Shiqi Zhao, Cheng Niu, Ming Zhou, Ting Liu, and Sheng
Li. 2008. Combining multiple resources to improve
SMT-based paraphrasing model. In Proceedings of
ACL/HLT.

Andreas Zollmann and Ashish Venugopal. 2006. Syntax
augmented machine translation via chart parsing. In
Proceedings of WMT06.

42


