










































MWU-Aware Part-of-Speech Tagging with a CRF Model and Lexical Resources


Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from Parsing and Generation to the Real World (MWE 2011), pages 49–56,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 23 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

MWU-aware Part-of-Speech Tagging with a CRF model and lexical
resources

Matthieu Constant
Université Paris-Est, LIGM

5, bd Descartes - Champs/Marne
77454 Marne-la-Vallée cedex 2, France

mconstan@univ-mlv.fr

Anthony Sigogne
Université Paris-Est, LIGM

5, bd Descartes - Champs/Marne
77454 Marne-la-Vallée cedex 2, France

sigogne@univ-mlv.fr

Abstract

This paper describes a new part-of-speech tag-
ger including multiword unit (MWU) identifi-
cation. It is based on a Conditional Random
Field model integrating language-independent
features, as well as features computed from
external lexical resources. It was imple-
mented in a finite-state framework composed
of a preliminary finite-state lexical analysis
and a CRF decoding using weighted finite-
state transducer composition. We showed that
our tagger reaches state-of-the-art results for
French in the standard evaluation conditions
(i.e. each multiword unit is already merged in
a single token). The evaluation of the tagger
integrating MWU recognition clearly shows
the interest of incorporating features based on
MWU resources.

1 Introduction

Part-of-speech (POS) tagging reaches excellent
results thanks to powerful discriminative multi-
feature models such as Conditional Random Fields
(Lafferty et al., 2001), Support Vector Machine
(Giménez and Márquez, 2004), Maximum Entropy
(Ratnaparkhi, 1996). Some studies like (Denis and
Sagot, 2009) have shown that featuring these models
by means of external morphosyntactic resources still
improves accuracy. Nevertheless, current taggers
rarely take multiword units such as compound words
into account, whereas they form very frequent lexi-
cal units with strong syntactic and semantic particu-
larities (Sag et al., 2001; Copestake et al., 2002) and
their identification is crucial for applications requir-

ing semantic processing. Indeed, taggers are gen-
erally evaluated on perfectly tokenized texts where
multiword units (MWU) have already been identi-
fied.

Our paper presents a MWU-aware POS tagger
(i.e. a POS tagger including MWU recognition1).
It is based on a Conditional Random Field (CRF)
model that integrates features computed from large-
coverage morphosyntactic lexicons and fine-grained
MWU resources. We implemented it in a finite-state
framework composed of a finite-state lexical ana-
lyzer and a CRF-decoder using weighted transducer
composition.

In section 2, we will first describe statistical tag-
ging based on CRF. Then, in section 3, we will
show how to adapt the tagging models in order to
also identify multiword unit. Next, section 4 will
present the finite-state framework used to implement
the tagger. Section 5 will focus on the description of
our working corpus and the set of lexical resources
used. In section 6, we then evaluate our tagger on
French.

2 Statistical POS tagging with Linear
Chain Conditional Random Fields

Linear chain Conditional Ramdom Fields (CRF) are
discriminative probabilistic models introduced by
(Lafferty et al., 2001) for sequential labelling. Given
an input sequence x = (x1, x2, ..., xN ) and an out-

1This strategy somewhat resembles the popular approach of
joint word segmentation and part-of-speech tagging for Chi-
nese, e.g. (Zhang and Clark, 2008). Moreover, other similar
experiments on the same task for French are reported in (Con-
stant et al., 2011).

49



put sequence of labels y = (y1, y2, ..., yN ), the
model is defined as follows:

Pλ(y|x) =
1

Z(x)
.

N∑

t

K∑

k

λk.fk(t, yt, yt−1, x)

where Z(x) is a normalization factor depending
on x. It is based on K features each of them be-
ing defined by a binary function fk depending on
the current position t in x, the current label yt,
the preceding one yt−1 and the whole input se-
quence x. The feature is activated if a given con-
figuration between t, yt, yt−1 and x is satisfied (i.e.
fk(t, yt, yt−1, x) = 1). Each feature fk is associated
with a weight λk. The weights are the parameters
of the model. They are estimated during the train-
ing process by maximizing the conditional loglikeli-
hood on a set of examples already labeled (training
data). The decoding procedure consists in labelling
a new input sequence with respect to the model, by
maximizing P (y|x) (or minimizing −logP (y|x)).
There exist dynamic programming procedures such
as Viterbi algorithm in order to efficiently explore all
labelling possibilities.

Features are defined by combining different prop-
erties of the tokens in the input sequence and the la-
bels at the current position and the preceding one.
Properties of tokens can be either binary or tex-
tual: e.g. token contains a digit, token is capital-
ized (binary property), form of the token, suffix of
size 2 of the token (textual property). Most tag-
gers exclusively use language-independent proper-
ties – e.g. (Ratnaparkhi, 1996; Toutanova et al.,
2003; Giménez and Márquez, 2004; Tsuruoka et
al., 2009). It is also possible to integrate language-
dependant properties computed from an external
broad-coverage morphosyntactic lexicon, that are
POS tags found in the lexicon for the given token
(e.g. (Denis and Sagot, 2009)). It is of great interest
to deal with unknown words2 as most of them are
covered by the lexicon, and to somewhat filter the
list of candidate tags for each token. We therefore
added to our system a language-dependent property:
a token is associated with the concatenation of its
possible tags in an external lexicon, i.e. the am-
bibuity class of the token (AC).

2Unknown words are words that did not occur in the training
data.

In practice, we can divide features fk in two
families: while unigram features (uk) do not de-
pend on the preceding tag, i.e. fk(t, yt, yt−1, x) =
uk(t, yt, x), bigram features (bk) depend on both
current and preceding tags, i.e. fk(t, yt, yt−1, x) =
bk(t, yt, yt−1, x). In our practical case, bigrams
exlusively depends on the two tags, i.e. they are in-
dependent from the input sequence and the current
position like in the Hidden Markov Model (HMM)3.
Unigram features can be sub-divided into internal
and contextual ones. Internal features provide solely
characteristics of the current token w0: lexical form
(i.e. its character sequence), lowercase form, suf-
fice, prefix, ambiguity classes in the external lexi-
cons, whether it contains a hyphen, a digit, whether
it is capitalized, all capitalized, multiword. Contex-
tual features indicate characteristics of the surround-
ings of the current token: token unigrams at relative
positions -2,-1,+1 and +2 (w−2, w−1, w+1,w+2); to-
ken bigrams w−1w0, w0w+1 and w−1w+1; ambi-
guity classes at relative positions -2,-1,+1 and +2
(AC−2, AC−1, AC+1,AC+2). The different feature
templates used in our tagger are given in table 2.

Internal unigram features
w0 = X &t0 = T
Lowercase form of w0 = L &t0 = T
Prefix of w0 = P with |P | < 5 &t0 = T
Suffix of w0 = S with |S| < 5 &t0 = T
w0 contains a hyphen &t0 = T
w0 contains a digit &t0 = T
w0 is capitalized &t0 = T
w0 is all capital &t0 = T
w0 is capitalized and BOS4 &t0 = T
w0 is multiword &t0 = T
Lexicon tags AC0 of w0 = A & w0 is multiword &t0 = T
Contextual unigram features
wi = X , i ∈ {−2,−1, 1, 2} &t0 = T
wiwj = XY , (j, k) ∈ {(−1, 0), (0, 1), (−1, 1)} &t0 = T
ACi = A & wi is multiword, i ∈ {−2,−1, 1, 2} &t0 = T

Bigram features
t−1 = T ′ &t0 = T

Table 1: Feature templates

3 MWU-aware POS tagging

MWU-aware POS tagging consists in identifying
and labelling lexical units including multiword ones.

3Hidden Markov Models of order n use strong indepen-
dance assumptions: a word only depends on its corresponding
tag, and a tag only depends on its n previous tags. In our case,
n=1.

50



It is somewhat similar to segmentation tasks like
chunking or Named Entity Recognition, that iden-
tify the limits of chunk or Named Entity segments
and classify these segments. By using an IOB5

scheme (Ramshaw and Marcus, 1995), this task is
then equivalent to labelling simple tokens. Each to-
ken is labeled by a tag in the form X+B or X+I,
where X is the POS labelling the lexical unit the to-
ken belongs to. Suffix B indicates that the token is at
the beginning of the lexical unit. Suffix I indicates
an internal position. Suffix O is useless as the end
of a lexical unit corresponds to the beginning of an-
other one (suffix B) or the end of a sentence. Such
procedure therefore determines lexical unit limits, as
well as their POS.

A simple approach is to relabel the training data
in the IOB scheme and to train a new model with the
same feature templates. With such method, most of
multiword units present in the training corpus will
be recognized as such in a new text. The main issue
resides in the identification of unknown multiword
units. It is well known that statistically inferring new
multiword units from a rather small training corpus
is very hard. Most studies in the field prefer finding
methods to automatically extract, from very large
corpus, multiword lexicons, e.g. (Dias, 2003; Caseli
et al., 2010), to be integrated in Natural Language
Processing tools.

In order to improve the number of new multiword
units detected, it is necessary to plug the tagger to
multiword resources (either manually built or auto-
matically extracted). We incorporate new features
computed from such resources. The resources that
we use (cf. section 5) include three exploitable fea-
tures. Each MWU encoded is obligatory assigned
a part-of-speech, and optionally an internal sur-
face structure and a semantic feature. For instance,
the organization name Banque de Chine (Bank of
China) is a proper noun (NPP) with the semantic
feature ORG; the compound noun pouvoir d’achat
(purchasing power) has a syntactic form NPN be-
cause it is composed of a noun (N), a preposition (P)
and a noun (N). By applying these resources to texts,
it is therefore possible to add four new properties
for each token that belongs to a lexical multiword

5I: Inside (segment); O: Outside (segment); B: Beginning
(of segment)

unit: the part-of-speech of the lexical multiword unit
(POS), its internal structure (STRUCT), its semantic
feature (SEM) and its relative position in the IOB
scheme (POSITION). Table 2 shows the encoding
of these properties in an example. The property ex-
traction is performed by a longest-match context-
free lookup in the resources. From these properties,
we use 3 new unigram feature templates shown in
table 3: (1) one combining the MWU part-of-speech
with the relative position; (2) another one depending
on the internal structure and the relative position and
(3) a last one composed of the semantic feature.

FORM POS STRUCT POSITION SEM Translation
un - - O - a
gain - - O - gain
de - - O - of
pouvoir NC NPN B - purchasing
d’ NC NPN I -
achat NC NPN I - power
de - - O - of
celles - - O - the ones
de - - O - of
la - - O - the
Banque NPP - B ORG Bank
de NPP - I ORG of
Chine NPP - I ORG China

Table 2: New token properties depending on Multiword
resources

New internal unigram features

POS0/POSITION0 &t0 = T
STRUCT0/POSITION0 &t0 = T
SEM0 &t0 = T

Table 3: New features based on the MW resources

4 A Finite-state Framework

In this section, we describe how we implemented a
unified Finite-State Framework for our MWU-aware
POS tagger. It is organized in two separate clas-
sical stages: a preliminary resource-based lexical
analyzer followed by a CRF-based decoder. The
lexical analyzer outputs an acyclic finite-state trans-
ducer (noted TFST) representing candidate tagging
sequences for a given input. The decoder is in charge
of selecting the most probable one (i.e. the path in
the TFST which has the best probability).

51



4.1 Weighted finite-state transducers

Finite-state technology is a very powerful machin-
ery for Natural Language Processing (Mohri, 1997;
Kornai, 1999; Karttunen, 2001), and in particu-
lar for POS tagging, e.g. (Roche and Schabes,
1995). It is indeed very convenient because it
has simple factorized representations and interest-
ing well-defined mathematical operations. For in-
stance, weighted finite-state transducers (WFST) are
often used to represent probabilistic models such as
Hidden Markov Models. In that case, they map in-
put sequences into output sequences associated with
weights following a probability semiring (R+,+,×,
0, 1) or a log semiring (R ∪ {−∞,+∞},⊕log,+,
+∞, 0) for numerical stability6. A WFST is a finite-
state automaton which each transition is composed
of an input symbol, an output symbol and a weight.
A path in a WFST is therefore a sequence of consec-
utive transitions of the WFST going from an initial
state to a final state, i.e. it puts a binary relation
between an input sequence and an output sequence
with a weight that is the product of the weights of the
path transitions in a probability semiring (the sum
in the log semiring). Note that a finite-state trans-
ducer is a WFST with no weights. A very nice oper-
ation on WFSTs is composition (Salomaa and Soit-
tola, 1978). Let T1 be a WFST mapping an input
sequence x into an output sequence y with a weight
w1(x, y), and T2 be another WFST mapping a se-
quence y into a sequence z with a weight w2(y, z).
The composition of T1 with T2 results in a WFST T
mapping x into z with a weight w1(x, y).w2(y, z) in
the probability semiring (w1(x, y) + w2(y, z) in the
log semiring).

4.2 Lexical analysis and decoding

The lexical analyzer is driven by lexical resources
represented by finite-state transducers like in (Sil-
berztein, 2000) (cf. section 5) and generates a TFST
containing candidate analyses. Transitions of the
TFST are labeled by a simple token (as input) and
a POS tag (as output). This stage allows for re-
ducing the global ambiguity of the input sentence in
two different ways: (1) tag filtering, i.e. each token

6A semiring K is a 5-tuple (K,⊕,⊗, 0̄, 1̄) where the set K
is equipped with two operations ⊕ and ⊗; 0̄ and 1̄ are their
respective neutral elements. The log semiring is an image of
the probability semiring via the −log function.

is only assigned its possible tags in the lexical re-
sources; (2) segment filtering, i.e. we only keep lex-
ical multiword units present in the resources. This
implies the use of large-coverage and fine-grained
lexical resources.

The decoding stage selects the most probable path
in the TFST. This involves that the TFST should
be weighted by CRF-based probabilities in order
to apply a shortest path algorithm. Our weighing
procedure consists in composing a WFST encoding
the sentence unigram probabilities (unigram WFST)
and a WFST encoding the bigram probabilities (bi-
gram WFST). The two WFSTs are defined over the
log semiring. The unigram WFST is computed from
the TFST. Each transition corresponds to a (xt,yt)
pair at a given position t in the sentence x. So each
transition is weighted by summing the weights of
the unigram features activated at this position. In our
practical case, bigram features are independent from
the sentence x. The bigram WFST can therefore be
constructed once and for all for the whole tagging
process, in the same way as for order-1 HMM tran-
sition diagrams (Nasr and Volanschi, 2005).

5 Linguistic resources

5.1 French TreeBank

The French Treebank (FTB) is a syntactically an-
notated corpus7 of 569,039 tokens (Abeillé et al.,
2003). Each token can be either a punctuation
marker, a number, a simple word or a multiword
unit. At the POS level, it uses a tagset of 14 cate-
gories and 34 sub-categories. This tagset has been
optimized to 29 tags for syntactic parsing (Crabbé
and Candito, 2008) and reused as a standard in a
POS tagging task (Denis and Sagot, 2009). Below
is a sample of the FTB version annotated in POS.

, PONCT ,
soit CC i.e.
une DET a
augmentation NC raise
de P of
1 , 2 DET 1 , 2
% NC %
par rapport au P+D compared with the
mois NC preceding
précédent ADJ month

7It is made of journalistic texts from Le Monde newspaper.

52



Multiword tokens encode multiword units of dif-
ferent types: compound words and named enti-
ties. Compound words mainly include nominals
such as acquis sociaux (social benefits), verbs such
as faire face à (to face) adverbials like dans l’
immédiat (right now), prepositions such as en de-
hors de (beside). Some Named Entities are also en-
coded: organization names like Société suisse de mi-
croélectronique et d’ horlogerie, family names like
Strauss-Kahn, location names like Afrique du Sud
(South Africa) or New York. For the purpose of our
study, this corpus was divided in three parts: 80%
for training (TRAIN), 10% for development (DEV)
and 10% for testing (TEST).

5.2 Lexical resources

The lexical resources are composed of both mor-
phosyntactic dictionaries and strongly lexicalized
local grammars. Firstly, there are two general-
language dictionaries of simple and multiword
forms: DELA (Courtois, 1990; Courtois et al., 1997)
and Lefff (Sagot, 2010). DELA has been devel-
opped by a team of linguists. Lefff has been au-
tomatically acquired and then manually validated.
It also resulted from the merge of different lexical
sources. In addition, we applied specific manually
built lexicons: Prolex (Piton at al., 1999) contain-
ing toponyms ; others including organization names
and first names (Martineau et al., 2009). Figures on
these dictionaries are detailed in table 4.

Name # simple forms #MW forms
DELA 690,619 272,226
Lefff 553,140 26,311
Prolex 25,190 97,925
Organizations 772 587
First names 22,074 2,220

Table 4: Morphosynctatic dictionaries

This set of dictionaries is completed by a library
of strongly lexicalized local grammars (Gross, 1997;
Silberztein, 2000) that recognize different types of
multiword units such as Named Entities (organiza-
tion names, person names, location names, dates),
locative prepositions, numerical determiners. A lo-
cal grammar is a graph representing a recursive
finite-state transducer, which recognizes sequences
belonging to an algebraic language. Practically, they
describe regular grammars and, as a consequence,

can be compiled into equivalent finite-state trans-
ducers. We used a library of 211 graphs. We man-
ually constructed from those available in the online
library GraalWeb (Constant and Watrin, 2007).

5.3 Lexical resources vs. French Treebank

In this section, we compare the content of the re-
sources described above with the encodings in the
FTB-DEV corpus. We observed that around 97,4%
of lexical units encoded in the corpus (excluding
numbers and punctuation markers) are present in our
lexical resources (in particular, 97% are in the dic-
tionaries). While 5% of the tokens are unknown (i.e.
not present in the training corpus), 1.5% of tokens
are unknown and not present in the lexical resources,
which shows that 70% of unknown words are cov-
ered by our lexical resources.

The segmentation task is mainly driven by the
multiword resources. Therefore, they should match
as much as possible with the multiword units en-
coded in the FTB. Nevertheless, this is practically
very hard to achieve because the definition of MWU
can never be the same between different people as
there exist a continuum between compositional and
non-compositional sequences. In our case, we ob-
served that 75.5% of the multiword units in the FTB-
DEV corpus are in the lexical resources (87.5% in-
cluding training lexicon). This means that 12.5%
of the multiword tokens are totally unknown and,
as a consequence, will be hardly recognized. An-
other significant issue is that many multiword units
present in our resources are not encoded in the FTB.
For instance, many Named Entities like dates, per-
son names, mail addresses, complex numbers are ab-
sent. By applying our lexical resources8 in a longest-
match context-free manner with the platform Unitex
(Paumier, 2011), we manually observed that 30% of
the multiword units found were not considered as
such in the FTB-DEV corpus.

6 Experiments and Evaluation

We firstly evaluated our system for standard tag-
ging without MWU segmentation and compare it
with other available statistical taggers that we all
trained on the FTB-TRAIN corpus. We tested the

8We excluded local grammars recognizing dates, person
names and complex numbers.

53



well-known TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994) based on
probabilistic decision trees, as well as TnT (Brants,
2000) implementing second-order Hidden Markov.
We also compared our system with two existing
discriminative taggers: SVMTool (Giménez and
Márquez, 2004) based on Support Vector Models
with language-independent features; MElt (Denis
and Sagot, 2009) based on a Maximum Entropy
model also incorporating language-dependent fea-
ture computed from an external lexicon. The lexicon
used to train and test MElt included all lexical re-
sources9 described in section 5. For our CRF-based
system, we trained two models with CRF++10: (a)
STD using language-independent template features
(i.e. excluding AC-based features); (b) LEX using
all feature templates described in table 2. We note
CRF-STD and CRF-LEX the two related taggers
when no preliminary lexical analysis is performed;
CRF-STD+ and CRF-LEX+ when a lexical analy-
sis is performed. The lexical analysis in our exper-
iment consists in assigning for each token its possi-
ble tags found in the lexical resources11 . Tokens not
found in the resources are assigned all possible tags
in the tagset in order to ensure the system robust-
ness. If no lexical analysis is applied, our system
constructs a TFST representing all possible analyzes
over the tagset. The results obtained on the TEST
corpus are summed up in table 5. Column ACC in-
dicates the tagger accuracy in percentage. We can
observe that our system (CRF-LEX+) outperforms
the other existing taggers, especially MElt whose
authors claimed state-of-the-art results for French.
We can notice the great interest of a lexical analysis
as CRF-STD+ reaches similar results as a MaxEnt
model based on features from an external lexicon.

We then evaluated our MWU-aware tagger
trained on the TRAIN corpus whose complex tokens
have been decomposed in a sequence of simple to-
kens and relabeled in the IOB representation. We
used three different sets of feature templates lead-

9Dictionaries were all put together, as well as with the result
of the application of the local grammars on the corpus.

10CRF++ is an open-source toolkit to train and test CRF mod-
els (http://crfpp.sourceforge.net/). For training, we set the cut-
off threshold for features to 2 and the C value to 1. We also used
the L2 regularization algorithm.

11Practically, as the tagsets of the lexical resources and the
FTB were different, we had to first map tags used in the dictio-
naries into tags belonging to the FTB tagset.

Tagger Model ACC

TnT HMM 96.3
TreeTagger Decision trees 96.4
SVMTool SVM 97.2
CRF-STD CRF 97.4
MElt MaxEnt 97.6
CRF-STD+ CRF 97.6
CRF-LEX CRF 97.7
CRF-LEX+ CRF 97.7

Table 5: Comparison of different taggers for French

ing to three CRF models: CRF-STD,CRF-LEX and
CRF-MWE. The two first ones (STD and LEX) use
the same feature templates as in the previous ex-
periment. MWE includes all feature templates de-
cribed in sections 2 and 3. CRF-MWE+ indicates
that a preliminary lexical analysis is performed be-
fore applying CRF-MWE decoding. The lexical anal-
ysis is achieved by assigning all possible tags of sim-
ple tokens found in our lexical resources, as well as
adding, in the TFST, new transitions corresponding
to MWU segments found in the lexical resources.
We compared the three models with a baseline and
SVMTool that have been learnt on the same training
corpus. The baseline is a simple context-free lookup
in the training MW lexicon, after a standard CRF-
based tagging with no MW segmentation. We eval-
uated each MWU-aware tagger on the decomposed
TEST corpus and computed the f-score, combining
precision and recall12. The results are synthesized
in table 6. The SEG column shows the segmentation
f -score solely taking into account the segment limits
of the identified lexical unit. The TAG column also
accounts for the label assigned. The first observation
is that there is a general drop in the performances for
all taggers, which is not a surprise as regards with
the complexity of MWU recognition (97.7% for the
best standard tagger vs. 94.4% for the best MWU-
aware tagger). Clearly, MWU-aware taggers which
models incorporate features based on external MWU
resources outperform the others. Nevertheless, the
scores for the identification and the tagging of the
MWUs are still rather low: 91%-precision and 71%
recall. We can also see that a preliminary lexical
analysis slightly lower the scores, which is due to

12f-score f = 2pr
p+r

where p is precision and r is recall.

54



missing MWUs in the resources and is a side effect
of missing encodings in the corpus.

Tagger Model TAG SEG

Baseline CRF 91.2 93.6
SVMTool SVM 92.1 94.7
CRF-STD CRF 93.7 95.8
CRF-LEX CRF 93.9 95.9
CRF-MWE CRF 94.4 96.4
CRF-MWE+ CRF 94.3 96.3

Table 6: Evaluation of MWU-aware tagging

With respect to the statistics given in section 5.3,
it appears clearly that the evaluation of MWU-aware
taggers is somewhat biased by the fact that the def-
inition of the multiword units encoded in the FTB
and the ones listed in our lexical resources are not
exactly the same. Nevertheless, this evaluation that
is the first in this context, brings new evidences
on the importance of multiword unit resources for
MWU-aware tagging.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper presented a new part-of-speech tagger in-
cluding multiword unit identification. It is based on
a CRF model integrating language-independent fea-
tures, as well as features computed from external
lexical resources. It was implemented in a finite-
state framework composed of a preliminary finite-
state lexical analysis and a CRF decoding using
weighted finite-state transducer composition. The
tagger is freely available under the LGPL license13.
It allows users to incorporate their own lexicons in
order to easily integrate it in their own applications.

We showed that the tagger reaches state-of-the-art
results for French in the standard evaluation environ-
ment (i.e. each multiword unit is already merged in
a single token). The evaluation of the tagger inte-
grating MWU recognition clearly shows the interest
of incorporating features based on MWU resources.
Nevertheless, as there exist some differences in the
MWU definitions between the lexical resources and
the working corpus, this first experiment requires
further investigations. First of all, we could test our
tagger by incorporating lexicons of MWU automat-
ically extracted from large raw corpora in order to

13http://igm.univ-mlv.fr/˜mconstan/research/software

deal with low recall. We could as well combine the
lexical analyzer with a Named Entity Recognizer.
Another step would be to modify the annotations of
the working corpus in order to cover all MWU types
and to make it more homogeneous with our defini-
tion of MWU. Another future work would be to test
semi-CRF models that are well-suited for segmenta-
tion tasks.

References

A. Abeillé, L. Clément and F. Toussenel. 2003. Building
a treebank for French. in A. Abeillé (ed), Treebanks,
Kluwer, Dordrecht.

T. Brants. 2000. TnT - A Statistical Part-of-Speech Tag-
ger. In Proceedings of the Sixth Applied Natural Lan-
guage Processing Conference (ANLP 2000), 224–231.

H. Caseli, C. Ramisch, M. das Graas Volpe Nunes, A.
Villavicencio. 2010. Alignment-based extraction
of multiword expressions. Language Resources and
Evaluation, Springer, vol. 44(1), 59–77.

M. Constant, I. Tellier, D. Duchier, Y. Dupont, A. Si-
gogne, S. Billot. 2011. Intégrer des connaissances lin-
guistiques dans un CRF : application à l’apprentissage
d’un segmenteur-étiqueteur du français. In Actes de la
Conférence sur le traitement automatique des langues
naturelles (TALN’11).

M. Constant and P. Watrin. 2007. Networking Mul-
tiword Units. In Proceedings of the 6th Interna-
tional Conference on Natural Language Processing
(GoTAL’08), Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence,
Springer-Verlag, vol. 5221: 120 – 125.

A. Copestake, F. Lambeau, A. Villavicencio, F. Bond, T.
Baldwin, I. A. Sag and D. Flickinger. 2002. Multi-
word expressions: linguistic precision and reusability.
In Proceedings of the Third conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’ 02), 1941 – 1947.

B. Courtois. 1990. Un système de dictionnaires
électroniques pour les mots simples du français.
Langue Française, vol. 87: 1941 – 1947.

B. Courtois, M. Garrigues, G. Gross, M. Gross, R.
Jung, M. Mathieu-Colas, A. Monceaux, A. Poncet-
Montange, M. Silberztein, R. Vivés. 1990. Dictio-
nnaire électronique DELAC : les mots composés bi-
naires. Technical report, LADL, University Paris 7,
vol. 56.

B. Crabbé and M. -H. Candito. 2008. Expériences
d’analyse syntaxique statistique du franais. In Pro-
ceedings of Traitement des Langues Naturelles (TALN
2008).

P. Denis et B. Sagot. 2009. Coupling an annotated cor-
pus and a morphosyntactic lexicon for state-of-the-art

55



POS tagging with less human effort. In Proceedings
of the 23rd Pacific Asia Conference on Language, In-
formation and Computation (PACLIC 2009).

G. Dias. 2003. Multiword Unit Hybrid Extraction. In
proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expres-
sions of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association
of Computational Linguistics (ACL 2003), 41–49.

J. Giménez and L. Márquez. 2004. SVMTool: A gen-
eral POS tagger generator based on Support Vector
Machines. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’04).

M. Gross. 2007. The construction of local grammars. In
E. Roche and Y. Schabes (eds.). Finite-State Language
Processing. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. 329–
352

L. Karttunen. 2001. Applications of Finite-State Trans-
ducers in Natural Language Processing. In proceed-
ings of the 5th International Conference on Implemen-
tation and Application of Automata (CIAA 2000). Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science. vol. 2088, Springer,
34–46

A. Kornai (Ed.). 1999. Extended Finite State Models of
Language. Cambridge University Press

J. Lafferty, A. McCallum, and F. Pereira. 2001. Con-
ditional random Fields: Probabilistic models for seg-
menting and labeling sequence data. In Proceedings of
the Eighteenth International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML 2001), 282–289.

C. Martineau, T. Nakamura, L. Varga and Stavroula Voy-
atzi. 2009. Annotation et normalisation des entités
nommées. Arena Romanistica. vol. 4:234–243.

M. Mohri 1997. Finite-state transducers in language
and speech processing. Computational Linguistics 23
(2):269–311.

A. Nasr, A. Volanschi. 2005. Integrating a POS Tagger
and a Chunker Implemented as Weighted Finite State
Machines. Finite-State Methods and Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence, vol. 4002, Springer 167–178.

S. Paumier. 2011. Unitex 2.1 user manual.
http://igm.univ-mlv.fr/˜unitex.

O. Piton, D. Maurel, C. Belleil. 1999. The Prolex Data
Base : Toponyms and gentiles for NLP. In proceedings
of the Third International Workshop on Applications
of Natural Language to Data Bases (NLDB’99), 233–
237.

L. A. Ramshaw and M. P. Marcus. 1995. Text chunking
using transformation-based learning. In Proceedings
of the 3rd Workshop on Very Large Corpora, 88 – 94.

A. Ratnaparkhi. 1996. A maximum entropy model for
part-of-speech tagging. In Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP 1996), 133 – 142.

E. Roche, Y. Schabes. 1995. Deterministic part-of-
speech tagging with finite-state transducers. Compu-
tational Linguistics, MIT Press, vol. 21(2), 227–253

I. A. Sag, T. Baldwin, F. Bond, A. Copestake, D.
Flickinger. 2001. Multiword Expressions: A Pain in
the Neck for NLP. In Proceedings of the 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and
Computational Linguistics (CICLing-2002), 1–15

B. Sagot. 2010. The Lefff, a freely available, accurate
and large-coverage lexicon for French. In Proceed-
ings of the 7th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10).

A. Salomaa, M. Soittola. 1978. Automata-Theoretic As-
pects of Formal Power Series. Springer-Verlag.

H. Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-Speech Tagging
Using Decision Trees. Proceedings of International
Conference on New Methods in Language Processing.

M. Silberztein. 2000. INTEX: an FST toolbox. Theoret-
ical Computer Science, vol. 231 (1): 33–46.

K. Toutanova, D. Klein, C. D. Manning, Y. Yoram
Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-speech tagging
with a cyclic dependency network. Proceedings of
HLT-NAACL 2003, 252 – 259.

Y. Tsuruoka, J. Tsujii, S. Ananiadou. 2009. Fast Full
Parsing by Linear-Chain Conditional Random Fields.
Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (EACL 2009), 790–798.

Y. Zhang, S. Clark. 2008. Joint Word Segmentation and
POS Tagging Using a Single Perceptron. Proceedings
of ACL 2008, 888 – 896.

56


