










































Personal Translator at WMT2011


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 303–308,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Personal Translator at WMT2011 

- A rule-based MTsystem with hybrid components - 

 
 

Vera Aleksić Gregor Thurmair 
Linguatec Gmbh Linguatec Gmbh 

Gottfried-Keller-Str. 12 Gottfried-Keller-Str. 12 
Munich, Germany Munich, Germany 

v.aleksic@linguatec.de g.thurmair@linguatec.de 

 
 

 
 

 

Abstract 

This paper presents the Linguatec 
submission to the WMT 2011 sixth 
workshop on statistical machine 
translation. It describes the architecture of 
our machine translation system ‘Personal 
Translator’ (hereinafter also referred to as 
PT), developed by Linguatec, which is a 
rule-based translation system, enriched by 
statistical approaches. 

We participate for the German-English 
translation direction. For the current 
submission we have chosen the latest 
commercial version of the system, PT14. 
The translation quality improvement for the 
submission was done mainly by lexicon 
tuning:  detection of unknown words, 
extracting of possible translations, partly 
from the wmt11 training corpora, and 
enlarging the lexicon by manually coding 
the chosen transfer candidates. 

1 Introduction 
The origin of the PT technology dates back to the 
80’s when a translation system based on logic 
programming and slot grammars was developed by 
Michael McCord at IBM T.J. Watson Research 
Center. In many years of development the 
translation engine has been driven forward and 
enhanced. Most recently we have added statistical 

approaches for tasks such as erroneous input 
correction, subject area recognition and word 
disambiguation. Today ‘Personal Translator’ is one 
of the leading programs in the translation 
technology field. It is a commercial MT system 
whose product range includes 7 language pairs, i.e. 
14 translation directions, for single users and 
networks. Linguatec is a leading provider of 
language-technology software for office use in 
Germany. In addition to machine translation, we 
develop and provide commercial products in the 
fields of speech recognition and speech synthesis. 
Linguatec is the only company to have won the 
European Information Technology Prize three 
times. 

2 System fundamentals 
Personal Translator is implemented as a modular 
system which basically consists of the following 
components: 

• the grammar, written in Prolog, based on 
the concept of slot grammar 

• the lexicon, administrated in the data base 
internally called TransLexis 

• additional morphological analysers written 
partly in C and C++  

• hybrid (rule-based and statistical) methods 
for word disambiguation, subject area 
recognition and spell-checking 

• a range of pre- and post-processing 
components such as format converters  for 

303



html, pdf, doc, txt and rtf formats, sentence 
splitter, tokeniser, lemmatizer. 

As Personal Translator is a commercial system, 
aiming at providing a complete translator work 
bench and creating added value for users, it 
integrates a wide range of advanced features such 
as:  

• Translation memory system for 
management, creation, analysis and 
maintenance of  TMs, as well as large 
system modules, containing tens of 
thousands of sentence pairs 

• Translation project management tool, 
enabling the user to save and administer all 
important translation settings and project 
relevant options 

• Text to speech functionality to support  
editing and learning processes such as text 
revision/correction in the language(s) 
mastered by the user, or   getting a feeling 
for the correct pronunciation in a foreign 
language, to name just a few. 

2.1 LMT and Slot Grammar 

Personal Translator is based on the LMT (Logic 
programming based Machine Translation). The 
core of LMT uses the principles of slot grammar, 
a grammatical description system developed 
originally by Michael McCord1 at IBM. 

Slot grammar is based on the concept of word 
valence. It is dependency oriented, i.e. each phrase 
has a head word. Each (head) word is characterised 
by slots which represent empty places in its 
grammatical surroundings such as subject, object, 
modifier etc. which can be realised in text or not. 
The slots represent either complements of the 
head word which have to be defined in the lexicon 
or adjuncts which are rather associated with the 
part of speech and defined more generally in the 
grammar rules. The possible slot fillers are 
typified by their morphological, syntactic or 
semantic properties. The analysis of a word is 
finished and the phrase is considered as satisfied if 
the appropriate fillers are found in the text and all 
(obligatory) slots of the word are filled 

                                                             
1 McCord (1989); McCord, Vernth (1992) 

3 Advanced translation features 

There are some well-known restrictions concerning 
the automatic translation process. One of them is 
the ability of most MT systems to operate on only 
one sentence at a time. The same is also true for 
the PT but only to a limited degree. PT integrates 
several methods for semantic and context analysis 
on multi-sentence level and for the identification of 
concepts which are repeated throughout the text.  
This applies in particular to the recognition of 
pronoun references and coreference analysis of 
proper names, as well as subject area recognition 
and neural transfer which are described further 
below. 

3.1 Recognition of pronoun reference 
Pronouns can refer to other words (their 
antecedents) which had occurred in the previous 
text. When translating from German into English 
and vice versa the fact that e.g. the English 
personal pronouns he/she apply only to humans 
and it to all other things, whereas in German 
er/sie/es can refer to any noun, has to be 
considered when searching for appropriate 
translation: 

This is a desk. It is new.  
Dies ist ein Schreibtisch. Er ist neu. 

versus: 
This is a bag. It is new. 
Dies ist eine Tasche. Sie ist neu. 

The user can either select the translation option 
„Automatic recognition of pronoun reference“, 
when translating a continuous text, or deselect it in 
case of translating lists of independent sentences 
(as we did for the current submission). If this 
option is deselected, the PT output for the 
sentences above reads as follows: 

Dies ist ein Schreibtisch. Es ist neu.  
Dies ist eine Tasche. Es ist neu.  

Also the translation of other words in the context 
can benefit from correct pronoun reference 
recognition: 

 The dogs found biscuits. They ate them. 
 Die Hunde fanden Kekse. Sie fraßen sie. 

versus: 
The children found biscuits. They ate them. 
 Die Kinder fanden Kekse. Sie aßen sie. 

The last example demonstrates an improvement in 
the translation of the verb eat which is to be 
translated into German with fressen if its subject is 

304



an animal or with essen if the subject is a human. 
The pronoun they in the first sentence refers to 
dogs (animals), in the second to children (humans) 
respectively. 

3.2 Named entity recognition 
The treatment of proper names is a real challenge 
for machine translation. There is a huge number of 
proper names, even growing constantly if e.g. the 
companies and product names are considered. 
Furthermore, person names are constantly 
changing in their degree of topicality, so it is not of 
much use to have Kohl and Fischer in the lexicon 
when the texts to be translated speak about Merkel 
and Rösler. As such, the proper names are 
unsuitable to be primarily stored in the lexicon. 
The second problem is homography: If a proper 
name is spelled in the same way as a common 
word, it is very likely to be translated by an MT 
system (Brown => Braun; Metzger => Butcher).  

Personal Translator integrates a named entity 
recognition component which runs both: 
• as a pre-processing tool: It puts mark-ups on 

the proper names to exclude them of other 
pre-processing components such as e.g. 
spell checker 

• as part of the translation process, integrated 
into the lexicon and the complete analysis-
transfer-generation process: Morphological 
and syntactic analysis/generation bases 
among other things on semantic roles 
(person, place…), as the proper names have 
special inflection patterns  and specific 
syntactic behaviour (preposition  slots, 
appositions etc.). 

By this, we could achieve an increase in translation 
quality of about 30% for sentences containing 
proper names.2 

3.3 Word sense disambiguation 
Another important issue is the treatment of 
ambiguous words. Most glossaries contain several 
million translations, among them large amounts of 
words with multiple meanings. Traditionally, 
‘Personal Translator’ uses several ways to 
disambiguate ambiguous words and select the most 
proper translation: 
• Interpretion of gender/number and other 

morphosyntactic information: 
                                                             
2 cf. Thurmair (2005) 

der Kiefer (m) = jaw 
die Kiefer (f) = pine 
minute (sg)  = Minute 
minutes (pl) = Protokoll 

• Analysis of slot fillers: 
anmachen (Licht) = turn on (light) 
anmachen (Salat) = prepare (salad) 
anmachen (jmd.) = chat (s.o.) up  
bestehen (auf ) =  insist (on) 
bestehen (aus) = be made (of) 

• Use of orthographic information: 
fest (lower case) = stable, firm 
Fest (capitalised) = celebration 

• Definition of different subject area codes for 
the translations: 
die Mutter (general) = mother 
die Mutter (techn.) = nut 

 

4 Hybrid technology 
All these disambiguation methods are labour-
intensive in terms of manual coding efforts, and 
they require, to a certain extent, user interaction 
(e.g. selecting appropriate options such as subject 
area) that in turn needs reliable knowledge of the 
contents to be translated which is often not the 
case. And not at least, manual setting of the 
disambiguation contexts is not only inefficient but 
also prone to errors.  
For these reasons Linguatec continually tests new, 
innovative solutions to reduce manual coding 
efforts and increase translation quality. Therefore it 
seemed obvious to try to draw statistical 
significant, reliable, and empirically-sound 
information from the immense Linguatec corpus 
and enrich the RMT with this knowledge. Thus an 
innovative hybrid component, which has been filed 
as patent3, has been developed. 

4.1 Neural transfer 
We as humans rarely have problems to distinguish 
between two or more different meanings of a word. 
The decision happens automatically, supported by 
accessing the world knowledge stored in our brains. 
Many efforts have been made to artificially imitate 
these processes. In linguistics, traditionally 
ontologies have been created which aim at 

                                                             
3 cf. Linguatec Patent „Hybrid transfer selection in Machine 
Translation“  US: 11/885.688, EPA: Nr. 05715789.3 

305



reflecting the relations and the hierarchy in the 
nature. In information technology, artificial neural 
networks try to approximate the operation of the 
human brain. Linguatec’s hybrid disambiguation 
model tries to single out the best translation for a 
word by identifying its semantic network.  We call 
it ‘neural transfer’. 

The disambiguation model for the neural 
transfer has been trained on a significant amount of 
different contexts for each lexicon entry with 
multiple translations, where this method could be 
considered as appropriate. Clusters of different 
meanings of words were built manually and 
statistical methods were applied on them in order 
to identify the most distinctive terms in their 
surroundings and represent the results in neural 
networks.  The neural transfer technology has been 
integrated into the PT by modifying the affected 
lexicon entries, and by adding a pre-processing 
component which assigns a semantic net to the 
affected text passage. 

The neural transfer enables the PT to 
‘understand’ the context beyond sentence 
boundaries. Thus it is possible to deliver two 
different translations for the word Gericht (court, 
dish) in absolutely identical sentences, depending 
on the textual context: 

Ich kann mich noch an dieses Gericht erinnern. 
Es hat die Klage meiner Firma auf 
Entschädigung abgewiesen. 
I can still remember this court. It has rejected 
the complaint of my company on reimbursement. 

versus: 
Ich kann mich noch an dieses Gericht erinnern. 
Es war eines dieser Gerichte aus der Küche der 
Balkanländer, mit Gemüse und Knoblauch. 
I can still remember this dish. It was one of 
these dishes from the kitchen of the Balkan 
States with vegetables and garlic. 

The test results showed an improvement of the 
translation quality by about 40% for texts 
containing the affected concepts. 

4.2 Automatic subject area recognition 
In order to overcome the problems mentioned 
above (manual coding effort, required user 
interaction), a component for automatic topic 
identification has been developed and integrated 
into the PT. Its principle works in a similar way to 
neural transfer. The most important difference is 
that the automatic topic identifier assigns the 

recognised subject area to the whole text to be 
translated, whereas the neural transfer can operate 
on the single paragraph level. 

4.3 SmartCorrect 
Regarding the enormous amount of texts to be 
translated, most of which are from internet or other 
unscanned sources, it is not reasonable to expect 
from MT users to keep control of correct spelling. 
Nevertheless, a MT system is only able to translate 
correctly spelled words. For these reasons most 
MT systems, as well as text processing 
programmes, include a spellchecker. The problem 
is that they mostly just identify the typos/spelling 
errors and leave it up to the user to choose the 
correct form from a list of suggestions. This is 
process which requires intensive user interaction 
and experience has taught us, that users are not 
always ready to invest their time. In addition, this 
can only be expected if the text to be corrected 
belongs to the language mastered by the user. 
Therefore Linguatec developed SmartCorrect 
which not only recognises spelling errors in the 
text but also corrects them automatically. Trained 
on very large corpora, the model is likely to detect 
the best variant in nearly all cases. Clever enough, 
it cooperates with the named entities recogniser 
and thus does not identify unknown proper names 
as spelling errors. Entries from the user lexicons 
are also save from SmartCorrect intervention. 
However, a major part of the misspelling 
corrections is already performed in a pre-
processing step, which adopts some proven 
methods4 to identify and correct frequent errors, 
such as letter deletion, insertion, substitution, 
inversion and duplication. 

5 WMT2011 Submission  
We participate for the German-English translation 
direction. Linguatec has not used the training 
corpus because we wanted to submit the results of 
our general purpose MT system. 

The only system tuning consisted of lexicon 
coding. Unknown words were detected 
automatically by analysing the test set. Appropriate 
translations were found, some of them from the 
training corpus. About 200 terms were manually 
coded or imported into the PT lexicon.  

                                                             
4 cf. Habash (2008) 

306



Furthermore, we have observed that the test set 
contained some spelling errors which have been 
corrected by SmartCorrect (ca. 150 misspelling 
corrections were done), for example:  

offiziel => offiziell 
Sympatie => Sympathie 
enhüllten => enthüllten 
bessseren => besseren 
unbwohnbar => unbewohnbar 
zwiwchen => zwischen 
 

Thus, for comparison purposes we translated the 
test set three times: 
• Out-of-the-box PT, without SmartCorrect 
• Out-of-the-box PT, with SmartCorrect 
• Out-of-the-box PT, with SmartCorrect plus 

lexicon adaptation 

The BLEU score in the first run was 17,0. 
Interestingly, the BLEU score of the second run 
did not reflect any improvements caused by 
correction of typos; on the contrary, it declined by 
0,2  from 17,0 to 16,8. However, by manual 
evaluation of sample sentences we gained a more 
positive impression of the results. With the third 
run, after the lexicon coding, a BLEU of 17,1, i.e. a 
minimal increase compared with the firs run, was 
achieved. Here again, the manual inspection of 
random sentences, containing the coded terms, left 
an impression of some more significant 
improvements than measured by BLEU. 

5.1 Conclusion 
Automatic metrics have shown a minimal 
improvement of translation quality. However, the 
manual inspection suggested much more 
significant influences of spelling correction and 
lexicon coding on the translation adequacy and 
sentence structure and consequently on the 
readability of the output than the BLEU score did. 

5.2 Combined system submission by DFKI 
At WMT 2011 our PT will also participate in the 
combined translation task in a combination of rule-
based and SMT systems submitted by the DFKI5. 
 

                                                             
5 Xu et al.(2011) 

6 Outlook 

Simultaneously with the current submission a 
‘hybrid experiment’ was performed: An attempt at 
using SMT methods to improve the transfer 
selection for coding new entries in PT. 

An existing (crawled) parallel corpus in the 
automotive domain was cleaned, segmented by 
Liguatec sentence splitter, sentence-aligned by 
Hunalign (supported by using the Linguatec 
dictionary), word-aligned by GIZA++ and finally 
phrase tables were produced by using Moses. The 
objective was to extract meaningful phrases and 
their translations which are particularly suitable for 
import into the PT lexicon and thus generate a 
glossary. 

First a phrase table filter, based on frequency, 
was applied. Then part of speech information was 
added to both source and target entries as a basis 
for filtering linguistically motivated phrases. A 
glossary was generated. For testing purposes a very 
small set of about 250 terms, namely those which 
were unknown in the PT lexicon, was chosen to be 
imported. On a test corpus of about 320 sentences 
from the automotive domain the translation quality 
improvement, measured by BLEU, turned out to be 
about 3.1% (before coding: 14.87, after coding: 
17.97). 
We will continue researching in that field. 

References  
Bogdan Babych, Anthony Hartley. 2003. Improving 

Machine Translation Quality with Automatic Named 
Entity Recognition. Proc. EACL-EAMT, Budapest. 

Arendse Bernth. 1992. The LMT Book. IBM 
Deutschland Informationssysteme GmbH Scientific 
Center Institute for Logic and Linguistics. 

Nazar Habash. 2008. Four techniqes for Online 
Handling of Out-of-Vocabulary Words in Arabic-
English Statistical Machine Translation. Proceedings 
of ACL-08: HLT, Short Papers (Companion 
Volume), pages 57-60, Columbus, Ohio, USA. 

Roland Kaplan and Joan Bresnan. 1982. Lexical 
functional grammar: A formal system for 
grammatical representation. In Joan Bresnan (Ed.) 
The mental representation of Grammatical Relations. 
MIT Press. 

Michael McCord. 1989. A new version of slot grammar. 
Research report RC 14506, IBM research division, 
Yorktown Heights. 

307



Michael McCord and Arendse Bernth. 1992. Using Slot 
Grammar. IBM Deutschland Informationssysteme 
GmbH Scientific Center Institute for Logic and 
Linguistics. 

Gregor Thurmair. 2004. Using corpus information to 
improve MT quality. In Yuste Rodrigo, Elia (ed) 
Paris: ELRA (European Language Resources 
Association): Proceedings of the Third International 
Workshop on Language Resources for Translation 
Work, Reseach & Training (LR4Trans-III) 

Gregor Thurmair. 2005. Improving MT Quality: 
Towards a Hybrid MT Architecture in the Linguatec 
‘Personal Translator’. International MT Summit X, 
Phuket. Invited paper. 

Gregor Thurmair. 2009. Comparing different 
architectures of hybrid Machine Translation systems. 
Proceedings of the Twelft Machine Translation 
Summit. Ottawa, Canada. p.340-348 

Jia Xu, Xiaojun Zhang, David Vilar, Casey Kennington 
and Hans Uszkoreit. 2011. The DFKI Hybrid 
Machine Translation System for WMT 2011 - On the 
Integration of SMT and RBMT. Submission paper 
for WMT 2011 sixth workshop on statistical machine 
translation. Edinburgh. 

 

308


