










































From Pathways to Biomolecular Events: Opportunities and Challenges


Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL-HLT 2011, pages 105–113,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

From Pathways to Biomolecular Events: Opportunities and Challenges

Tomoko Ohta∗ Sampo Pyysalo∗ Jun’ichi Tsujii†
∗Department of Computer Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan

†Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
{okap,smp}@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp, jtsujii@microsoft.com

Abstract

The construction of pathways is a major fo-
cus of present-day biology. Typical pathways
involve large numbers of entities of various
types whose associations are represented as
reactions involving arbitrary numbers of reac-
tants, outputs and modifiers. Until recently,
few information extraction approaches were
capable of resolving the level of detail in text
required to support the annotation of such
pathway representations. We argue that event
representations of the type popularized by the
BioNLP Shared Task are potentially applica-
ble for pathway annotation support. As a step
toward realizing this possibility, we study the
mapping from a formal pathway representa-
tion to the event representation in order to
identify remaining challenges in event extrac-
tion for pathway annotation support. Follow-
ing initial analysis, we present a detailed study
of protein association and dissociation reac-
tions, proposing a new event class and repre-
sentation for the latter and, as a step toward
its automatic extraction, introduce a manu-
ally annotated resource incorporating the type
among a total of nearly 1300 annotated event
instances. As a further practical contribu-
tion, we introduce the first pathway-to-event
conversion software for SBML/CellDesigner
pathways and discuss the opportunities arising
from the ability to convert the substantial ex-
isting pathway resources to events.

1 Introduction

For most of the previous decade of biomedical in-
formation extraction (IE), efforts have focused on

foundational tasks such as named entity detection
and their database normalization (Krallinger et al.,
2008) and simple IE targets, most commonly bi-
nary entity relations representing associations such
as protein-protein interactions (Pyysalo et al., 2008;
Tikk et al., 2010). In recent years, an increasing
number of resources and methods pursuing more de-
tailed representations of extracted information are
becoming available (Pyysalo et al., 2007; Kim et al.,
2008; Thompson et al., 2009; Björne et al., 2010).
The main thrust of this move toward structured, fine-
grained information extraction falls under the head-
ing of event extraction (Ananiadou et al., 2010), an
approach popularized and represented in particular
by the BioNLP Shared Task (BioNLP ST) (Kim et
al., 2009a; Kim et al., 2011).

While a detailed representation of extracted in-
formation on biomolecular events has several po-
tential applications ranging from semantic search to
database curation support (Ananiadou et al., 2010),
the number of practical applications making use of
this technology has arguably so far been rather lim-
ited. In this study, we pursue in particular the op-
portunities that event extraction holds for pathway
annotation support,1 arguing that the match between

1Throughout this paper, we call the projected task pathway
annotation support. There is no established task with this label,
and we do not envision this to be a specific single task. Rather,
we intend the term to refer to a set of tasks where information
extraction/text mining methods are applied in some role to con-
tribute directly to pathway curation, including, for example, the
identification of specific texts in the literature relevant to anno-
tated reactions, the automatic suggestion of further entities or
reactions to add to a pathway, or even the fully automatic gen-
eration of entire pathways from scratch.

105



representations that biologists employ to capture re-
actions between biomolecules in pathways and the
event representation of the BioNLP ST task makes
pathway-oriented applications a potential “killer ap-
plication” for event extraction technology.

The fit between these representations is not ac-
cidental – the design of the BioNLP ST event rep-
resentation has been informed by that of popular
pathway models – nor is it novel to suggest to sup-
port pathway extraction through information meth-
ods in general (see e.g. (Rzhetsky et al., 2004))
or through event extraction specifically (Oda et al.,
2008). However, our study differs from previous
efforts in two key aspects. First, instead of being
driven by information extraction and defining a rep-
resentation fitting its results, we specifically adopt
the perspective and model of a widely applied stan-
dard database representation and proceed from the
pathway to events in text. Second, while previous
work on event extraction for pathway annotation has
been exploratory in nature or has otherwise had lim-
ited practical impact, we introduce and release a
first software implementation of a conversion from
a standard pathway format to the event format, thus
making a large amount of pathway data available for
use in event extraction and taking a concrete step
toward reliable, routine mappings between the two
representations.

2 Representations and Resources

Before proceeding to consider the mapping between
the two, we first briefly introduce the pathway and
event representations in focus in this study and the
applied pathway resources.

2.1 Pathways

The biomolecular curation community has created
and made available an enormous amount of path-
way resources: for example, as of April 2011, the
Pathguide pathway resource list2 includes references
to 325 pathway-related resources – many of which
are themselves pathway databases containing hun-
dreds of individual models. These resources in-
volve a formidable variety of different, largely inde-
pendently developed formats and representations of
which only few pairs have tools supporting mutual

2http://www.pathguide.org/

conversion. To address the challenges of interoper-
ability that this diversity implies, a number of stan-
dardization efforts for pathway representations have
been introduced.

In this work, we consider two widely adopted
pathway representation formats: Systems Biol-
ogy Markup Language (SBML)3 (Hucka et al.,
2003) and Biological Pathway Exchange (BioPAX)4

(Demir et al., 2010). SBML is an XML-based
machine-readable data exchange format that sup-
ports a formal mathematical representation of chem-
ical reactions (including e.g. kinetic parameters),
allowing biochemical simulation. BioPAX is an
RDF/OWL-based standard language to represent
bio-molecular and cellular networks designed to en-
able data integration, exchange, visualization and
analysis. Despite significantly different choices in
storage format, the represented information content
of the two is broadly compatible. In the follow-
ing, we refer to established correspondences and
mappings when relating the two (see e.g. (Mi and
Thomas, 2009)).

As an interchange format aimed to support a large
variety of specific representations, the SBML stan-
dard itself does not define a fixed set of types of
physical entities or biochemical reactions. However,
the standard defines an extension mechanism allow-
ing additional information, including such types, to
be defined. As specific, fixed types with established
semantics are a requirement for practical conversion
between the different representations, we thus rely
in this work not only on SBML core, but also a min-
imal set of the extensions introduced by the popu-
lar CellDesigner pathway modeling tool (Funahashi
et al., 2008). In the following, we assume through-
out the availability of CellDesigner extensions when
discussing SBML features.

For pathway data, in this study we use the full
set of pathways contained in the Panther and Payao
pathway repositories in SBML form. Panther (Pro-
tein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships)
is a gene function-based classification system that
hosts a large collection of pathways. The Panther
repository consists of 165 pathways, including 153
signaling and 12 metabolic pathways. All pathways

3http://sbml.org
4http://www.biopax.org

106



Figure 1: Illustration of the event representation.

were drawn on CellDesigner by manual curation
and thus include CellDesigner SBML extensions
(Mi and Thomas, 2009). Payao is a community-
based SBML model tagging platform (Matsuoka et
al., 2010) that allows a community to share models,
tag and add comments, and search relevant literature
(Kemper et al., 2010). Currently, 28 models are reg-
istered in Payao. As in Panther, all Payao pathways
include CellDesigner extensions.

2.2 Event Representation

The application of event representations in biomed-
ical IE is a relatively recent development, follow-
ing the introduction of corpus resources annotating
structured, n-ary associations of entities with de-
tailed types (Pyysalo et al., 2007; Kim et al., 2008;
Thompson et al., 2009)) and popularized in particu-
lar by the BioNLP Shared Task (BioNLP ST) events
(Kim et al., 2009b; Kim et al., 2011). In this pa-
per, we use event in the BioNLP ST sense, to refer
specifically to the representation where each event
is assigned a type from a fixed ontology, bound to a
specific expression in text stating its occurrence (the
trigger or text binding), and associated with an ar-
bitrary number of participants (similarly text-bound
entities or other events), for which the roles in which
they are involved in the event are defined from a
fixed small inventory of event argument types (e.g.
Theme, Cause, Site). These concepts are illustrated
in Figure 1.

3 Analysis of Pathway-Event Mapping

We next present an analysis of the relationship be-
tween the two representations, considering features
required from IE systems for efficient support of
pathway annotation support.

We assume throughout that the target on the path-
way side is restricted to the broad, central biologi-
cal content of pathways, excluding information only
related to e.g. simulation support or pathway visual-
ization/layout.

Figure 2: Illustration of a generalized pathway reaction.

3.1 Top-level concepts

Both SBML and BioPAX involve two (largely com-
parable) top-level concepts that form the core of the
representation: entity (species/physical entity) and
reaction (interaction). In the following we focus pri-
marily on entities and reactions, deferring consider-
ation of detailed concepts such as modification state
and compartment localization to Section 3.3.

The concept of a reaction in the considered path-
way representations centrally involves three sets of
entities: reactants, products, and modifiers. As the
names suggest, the reaction produces the set of prod-
uct entities from the reactant entities and is affected
by the modifiers. Figure 2 shows an illustration of a
generalized reaction. Pathway reactions find a rea-
sonably good analogy in events in the event repre-
sentation. While the event representation does not
differentiate “reactants” from “products” in these
terms, the roles assigned to event participants al-
low comparable interpretation. There is no single
concept in the event representation directly compa-
rable to reaction modifiers. However, the semantics
of specific modification types (see Section 3.3) cor-
respond broadly to those of regulation in the event
representation, suggesting that modification be rep-
resented using a separate event of the appropriate
type with the modifying entities participating in the
Cause role (Kim et al., 2008). Figure 3 illustrates the
event structure proposed to correspond to the reac-
tion of Figure 2, with the added assumptions that the
reaction and modification types (unspecified in Fig-
ure 2) are Association (BioPAX:ComplexAssembly)
and Modulation (BioPAX:Control).

107



Figure 3: Illustration of a generalized event structure with four entities and two events (REGULATION and BINDING).
Note that the text is only present as filler to satisfy the requirement that events are bound to specific expressions in
text. The Product role is not a standard role in event representation but newly proposed in this study.

Pathway Event
CellDesigner BioPAX ST’09 ST’11 GENIA

Protein Protein Protein Protein Protein
RNA RNA Protein Protein RNA

AntiSenseRNA RNA Protein Protein RNA
Gene DNA Protein Protein DNA

Simple molecule Small molecule - Chemical Inorganic compound
Ion Small molecule - Chemical Inorganic compound

Drug PhysicalEntity - Chemical Inorganic compound
Hetero/homodimer Complex - - Protein complex

Table 1: Entity type comparison between pathways and events.

The mapping of top-level concepts that we con-
sider thus unifies physical entities in pathways with
the entities of the BioNLP ST representation, and
pathway reaction with event.5

To be able to efficiently support (some aspect of)
pathway annotation through IE, the applied extrac-
tion model should be able, for both entities and reac-
tions, to 1) recognize mentions of all relevant types
of entity/reaction and 2) differentiate between en-
tity/reaction types at the same or finer granularity as
the pathway representation. For example, an IE sys-
tem that does not detect mentions of protein com-
plexes cannot efficiently support aspects of pathway
annotation that involve this type; a system that de-
tects proteins and complexes with no distinction be-
tween the two will be similarly limited. In the fol-
lowing, we consider entity and reaction types sep-
arately to determine to what extent these require-
ments are filled by presently available resources for
event extraction, in particular the GENIA corpus
(Kim et al., 2008) and the BioNLP ST 2009 (Kim
et al., 2009b) and 2011 corpora.

5Pathways and IE/text mining use many of the same terms
with (sometimes subtly) different meanings. We use largely IE
terminology, using e.g. entity instead of species (SBML) and
entity type instead of physical entity class (BioPAX) / species
type (SBML) For the pathway associations, we have adopted
reaction (SBML term) in favor of interaction (BioPAX). With
event, we refer to the BioNLP ST sense of the word; we make
no use of the SBML “event” concept.

3.2 Entities

Table 1 shows a comparison of the primary entity
types between SBML/CellDesigner, BioPAX, and
the event representations. There is significant dif-
ference in the resolution of gene and gene product
types between the pathway representations and that
applied in ST’09 and ST’11: while both pathway
representations and the GENIA corpus differenti-
ate the DNA, RNA and protein forms, the STs fold
the three types into a single one, PROTEIN.6 The
CHEMICAL type defined in ST’11 (ID task) overlaps
largely with BioPAX SMALL MOLECULE, a type
that SBML/CellDesigner further splits into two spe-
cific types, and further partly covers the definition of
the SBML/CellDesigner type Drug. The same holds
(with somewhat less specificity) for GENIA INOR-
GANIC COMPOUND. Finally, although annotated in
GENIA, the category of protein complexes has no
correspondence among the entities considered in the
BioNLP ST representation.

Thus, information extraction systems applying
the core BioNLP ST entity types will entirely lack
coverage for protein complexes and will not be able

6While the term PROTEIN appears to suggest that the class
consists only of protein forms, these entities are in fact anno-
tated in the BioNLP ST data according to the GENIA gene/gene
product guidelines (Ohta et al., 2009) and thus include also
DNA and RNA forms. The type could arguably more accurately
be named GENE OR GENE PRODUCT.

108



Pathway Event
CellDesigner BioPAX ST’09 ST’11 GENIA

State transition BiochemicalReaction (see Table 3)
Truncation BiochemicalReaction Catabolism Catabolism Catabolism

Transcription BiochemicalReaction Transcription Transcription Transcription
Translation BiochemicalReaction - - Translation
Association ComplexAssembly Binding Binding Binding

Dissociation ComplexAssembly - - -
Transport Transport w/reaction Localization Localization Localization

Degradation Degradation Catabolism Catabolism Catabolism
Catalysis Catalysis Positive regulation Positive regulation Positive regulation

Physical stimulation Control Positive regulation Positive regulation Positive regulation
Modulation Control Regulation Regulation Regulation

Trigger Control Positive regulation Positive regulation Positive regulation
Inhibition Control Negative regulation Negative regulation Negative regulation

Table 2: Reaction type comparison between pathways and events.

to fully resolve the detailed type of gene and gene
product types applied in the pathway representa-
tions. While these distinctions exist in the full GE-
NIA corpus, it has not been frequently applied in
event extraction in its complete form and is un-
likely to be adopted over the widely applied ST
resources. Finally, none of the event representa-
tions differentiate the pathway small molecule/drug
types. We discuss the implications of these ambigu-
ities in detail below. By contrast, we note that both
SBML/CellDesigner and BioPAX entity types cover
the scope of the major BioNLP ST types and have
comparable or finer granularity in each case.

3.3 Reactions
Table 2 shows a comparison between the reaction
types of the two considered pathway representations
and those of the BioNLP ST event representation.
The full semantics of the generic reaction type State
transition (BioPAX: BiochemicalReaction) cannot
be resolved from the type alone; we defer discussion
of this type.

Contrary to the event types, we find that for re-
action types even the least comprehensive BioNLP
ST’09 event representation has high coverage of the
pathway reaction types as well as a largely compa-
rable level of granularity in its types. While neither
of the BioNLP ST models defines a TRANSLATION
type, the adoption of the GENIA representation –
matching that for TRANSCRIPTION – for this simple
and relatively rare event type would likely be rela-
tively straightforward. A more substantial omission
in all of the event representations is the lack of a

Dissociation event type. As dissociation is the “re-
verse” reaction of (protein) BINDING and central to
many pathways, its omission from the event model
is both surprising as well as potentially limiting for
applications of event extraction to pathway annota-
tion support.

The detailed resolution of pathway reactions pro-
vided by the event types has implications on the
impact of the ambiguity noted between the sin-
gle type covering genes and gene products in the
event representation as opposed to the distinct
DNA/RNA/protein types applied in the pathways.
Arguably, for many practical cases the specific type
of an entity of the broad gene/gene product type is
unambiguously resolved by the events it participates
in: for example, any gene/gene product that is mod-
ified through phosphorylation (or similar reaction)
is necessarily a protein.7 Similarly, only proteins
will be involved in e.g. localization between nucleus
and cytoplasm. On a more detailed level, BIND-
ING events resolves their arguments in part through
their Site argument: binding to a promoter implies
DNA, while binding to a C-terminus implies pro-
tein. Thus, we can (with some reservation) forward
the argument that it is not necessary to disambiguate
all gene/gene product mentions on the entity level
for pathway annotation support, and that success-
ful event extraction will provide disambiguation in
cases where the distinction matters.

7DNA methylation notwithstanding; the BioNLP ST’11 EPI
task demonstrated that protein and DNA methylation can be dis-
ambiguated on the event type level without entity type distinc-
tions.

109



Pathway Event
SBML/CellDesigner ST’09 ST’11 GENIA

in:Compartment1 → in:Compartment2 Localization Localization Localization
residue:state:∅ → residue:state:Phosphorylated Phosphorylation Phosphorylation Phosphorylation

residue:state:Phosphorylated → residue:state:∅ - Dephosphorylation Dephosphorylation
residue:state:∅ → residue:state:Methylated - Methylation Methylation

residue:state:Methylated → residue:state:∅ - Demethylation Demethylation
residue:state:∅ → residue:state:Ubiquitinated - Ubiquitination Ubiquitination

residue:state:Ubiquitinated → residue:state:∅ - Deubiquitination Deubiquitination
species:state:inactive → species:state:active Positive regulation Positive regulation Positive regulation

species:state:active → species:state:inactive Negative regulation Negative regulation Negative regulation

Table 3: Interpretation and comparison of state transitions.

Finally, the pathway representations de-
fine generic reaction types (State transi-
tion/BiochemicalReaction) that do not alone
have specific interpretations. To resolve the event
involved in these reactions it is necessary to com-
pare the state of the reactants against that of the
matching products. Table 3 shows how specific state
transitions map to event types (this detailed compar-
ison was performed only for SBML/CellDesigner
pathways). We find here a good correspondence for
transitions affecting a single aspect of entity state.
While generic pathway transitions can change any
number of such aspects, we suggest that decomposi-
tion into events where one event corresponds to one
point change in state is a reasonable approximation
of the biological interpretation: for example, a reac-
tion changing one residue state into Methylated and
another into Phosphorylated would map into two
events, METHYLATION and PHOSPHORYLATION.

In summary of the preceding comparison of the
core pathway and event representations, we found
that in addition to additional ambiguity in e.g. gene
and gene product types, the popular BioNLP ST rep-
resentations lack a protein complex type and further
that none of the considered event models define a
(protein) dissociation event. To address these latter
omissions, we present in the following section a case
study of dissociation reactions as a step toward their
automatic extraction. We further noted that pathway
types cover the event types well and have similar or
higher granularity in nearly all instances. This sug-
gests to us that mapping from the pathway repre-
sentation to events is more straightforward than vice
versa. To follow up on these opportunities, we intro-
duce such a mapping in Section 5, in following the
correspondences outlined above.

4 Protein Association and Dissociation

In the analysis presented above, we noted a major re-
action type defined in both considered pathway rep-
resentations that had no equivalent in the event rep-
resentation: dissociation. In this section, we present
a study of this reaction type and its expression as
statements in text through the creation of event-style
annotation for dissociation statements.

4.1 Target data

Among the large set of pathways available, we chose
to focus on the Payao mTOR pathway (Caron et al.,
2010) because it is a large, recently introduced path-
way with high-quality annotations that involves nu-
merous dissociation reactions. The Payao pathways
are further annotated with detailed literature refer-
ences, providing a PubMed citation for nearly each
entity and reaction in the pathway. To acquire texts
for event annotation, we followed the references in
the pathway annotation and retrieved the full set of
PubMed abstracts associated with the pathway, over
400 in total. We then annotated 60 of these abstracts
that were either marked as relevant to dissociation
events in the pathway or were found to include dis-
sociation statements in manual analysis. These ab-
stracts were not included in any previously anno-
tated domain corpus. Further, as we aimed specifi-
cally to be able to identify event structures for which
no previous annotations exist, we could not rely on
(initial) automatic annotation.

4.2 Annotation guidelines

We performed exhaustive manual entity and event
annotation in the event representation for the se-
lected 60 abstracts. For entity annotation, we ini-

110



tially considered adopting the gene/gene product an-
notation guidelines (Ohta et al., 2009) applied in
the BioNLP ST 2009 as well as in the majority
of the 2011 tasks. However, the requirement of
these guidelines to mark only specific gene/protein
names would exclude a substantial number of the
entities marked in the pathway, as many refer to
gene/protein families or groups instead of specific
individual genes or proteins. We thus chose to adopt
the pathway annotation itself for defining the scope
of our entity annotation: we generated a listing of all
the names appearing in the target pathway and an-
notated their mentions, extrapolating from this rich
set of examples to guide us in decisions on how to
annotate references to entities not appearing in the
pathway. For event annotation, we adapted the GE-
NIA event corpus annotation guidelines (Kim et al.,
2008), further developing a specific representation
and guidelines for annotating dissociation events
based on an early iteration of exploratory annotation.

Annotation was performed by a single biology
PhD with extensive experience in event annotation
(TO). While we could thus not directly assess inter-
annotator consistency, we note that our recent com-
parable efforts have been evaluated by comparing
independently created annotations at approximately
90% F-score for entity annotations and approxi-
mately 80% F-score for event annotations (BioNLP
Shared Task primary evaluation criteria) (Pyysalo et
al., 2011; Ohta et al., 2011).

4.3 Representing Association and Dissociation

Based on our analysis of 107 protein dissociation
statements annotated in the corpus and a correspond-
ing study of the “reverse”, statements of protein as-
sociation in the corpus, we propose the following
extensions for the BioNLP ST event representation.
First, the introduction of the event type DISSOCIA-
TION, taking as its primary argument a single Theme
identifying a participating entity of the type COM-
PLEX. Second, we propose the new role type Prod-
uct, in the annotation of DISSOCIATION events an
optional (secondary) argument identifying the PRO-
TEIN entities that are released in the dissociation
event. This argument should be annotated (or ex-
tracted) only when explicitly stated in text. Third,
for symmetry in the representation, more detail in
extracted information, and to have a representation

Figure 4: Examples annotated with the proposed event
representation for DISSOCIATION and BINDING events
with the proposed Product role marking formed complex.

Item Count
Abstract 60

Word 11960
Protein 1483

Complex 201
Event 1284

Table 4: Annotation statistics.

more compatible with the pathway representation
for protein associations, we propose to extend the
representation for BINDING, adding Product as an
optional argument identifying a COMPLEX partici-
pant in BINDING events marking statements of com-
plex formation stating the complex. The extended
event representations are illustrated in Figure 4.

4.4 Annotation statistics

Table 4 presents the statistics of the created annota-
tion. While covering a relatively modest number of
abstracts, the annotation density is very high, relat-
ing perhaps in part to the fact that many of the ref-
erenced documents are reviews condensing a wealth
of information into the abstract.

5 Pathway-to-event conversion

As an additional practical contribution and out-
come of our analysis of the mapping from the path-
way representation to the event representation, we
created software implementing this mapping from
SBML with CellDesigner extensions to the event
representation. This conversion otherwise follows

111



the conventions of the event model, but lacks spe-
cific text bindings for the mentioned entities and
event expressions (triggers). To maximize the appli-
cability of the conversion, we chose to forgo e.g. the
CellDesigner plugin architecture and to instead cre-
ate an entirely standalone software based on python
and libxml2. We tested this conversion on the 165
Panther and 28 Payao pathways to assure its robust-
ness.

Conversion from pathways into the event repre-
sentation opens up a number of opportunities, such
as the ability to directly query large-scale event
repositories (e.g. (Björne et al., 2010)) for specific
pathway reactions. For pathways where reactions
are marked with literature references, conversion
further allows event annotations relevant to specific
documents to be created automatically, sparing man-
ual annotation costs. While such event annotations
will not be bound to specific text expressions, they
could be used through the application of techniques
such as distant supervision (Mintz et al., 2009). As a
first attempt, the conversion introduced in this work
is limited in a number of ways, but we hope it can
serve as a starting point for both wider adoption
of pathway resources for event extraction and fur-
ther research into accurate conversions between the
two. The conversion software, SBML-to-event,
is freely available for research purposes.

6 Discussion and Conclusions

Over the last decade, the bio-community has in-
vested enormous efforts in the construction of de-
tailed models of the function of a large variety of bi-
ological systems in the form of pathways. These ef-
forts toward building systemic understanding of the
functioning of organisms remain a central focus of
present-day biology, and their support through infor-
mation extraction and text mining perhaps the great-
est potential contribution that the biomedical natural
language processing community could make toward
the broader bio-community.

We have argued that while recent developments
in BioNLP are highly promising for approaching
practical support of pathway annotation through in-
formation extraction, the BioNLP community has
not yet made the most of the substantial resources
in the form of existing pathways and that pursu-

ing mapping from pathways to the event represen-
tation might be both more realistic and more fruit-
ful than the other way around. As a first step in
what we hope will lead to broadened understand-
ing of the different perspectives, communication be-
tween the communities, and better uses resources,
we have introduced a fully automatic mapping from
SBML/CellDesigner pathways into the BioNLP ST-
style event representation. As a first effort this map-
ping has many limitations and imperfections that we
hope the BioNLP community will take as a chal-
lenge to do better.

Noting in analysis that dissociation reactions are
not covered in previously proposed event represen-
tations, we also presented a detailed case study fo-
cusing on statements describing protein association
and dissociation reactions in PubMed abstracts rel-
evant to the mTOR pathway. Based on exploratory
annotation, we proposed a novel event class DIS-
SOCIATION, thus taking a step toward covering this
arguably most significant omission in the event rep-
resentation.

The pathway-bound event annotations created
in this study, exhaustive annotation of all rel-
evant entities and events in 60 abstracts, con-
sist in total of annotation identifying nearly
1500 protein and 200 complex mentions and
over 1200 events involving these entities in text.
These annotations are freely available for use
in research at http://www-tsujii.is.s.
u-tokyo.ac.jp/GENIA.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Hiroaki Kitano, Yukiko Mat-
suoka and Samik Ghosh of the Systems Biology In-
stitute for their generosity in providing their time
and expertise in helping us understand the CellDe-
signer and SBML pathway representations. This
work was partially supported by Grant-in-Aid for
Specially Promoted Research (MEXT, Japan).

References

Sophia Ananiadou, Sampo Pyysalo, Jun’ichi Tsujii, and
Douglas B. Kell. 2010. Event extraction for sys-
tems biology by text mining the literature. Trends in
Biotechnology, 28(7):381–390.

112



Jari Björne, Filip Ginter, Sampo Pyysalo, Jun’ichi Tsujii,
and Tapio Salakoski. 2010. Complex event extraction
at PubMed scale. Bioinformatics, 26(12):i382–390.

E. Caron, S. Ghosh, Y. Matsuoka, D. Ashton-Beaucage,
M. Therrien, S. Lemieux, C. Perreault, P.P. Roux, and
H. Kitano. 2010. A comprehensive map of the mTOR
signaling network. Molecular Systems Biology, 6(1).

E. Demir, M.P. Cary, S. Paley, K. Fukuda, C. Lemer,
I. Vastrik, G. Wu, P. D’Eustachio, C. Schaefer, J. Lu-
ciano, et al. 2010. The BioPAX community stan-
dard for pathway data sharing. Nature biotechnology,
28(9):935–942.

A. Funahashi, Y. Matsuoka, A. Jouraku, M. Morohashi,
N. Kikuchi, and H. Kitano. 2008. CellDesigner 3.5:
a versatile modeling tool for biochemical networks.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 96(8):1254–1265.

M. Hucka, A. Finney, H. M. Sauro, H. Bolouri, J. C.
Doyle, and H Kitano et al. 2003. The systems biol-
ogy markup language (SBML): a medium for repre-
sentation and exchange of biochemical network mod-
els. Bioinformatics, 19(4):524–531.

B. Kemper, T. Matsuzaki, Y. Matsuoka, Y. Tsuruoka,
H. Kitano, S. Ananiadou, and J. Tsujii. 2010. Path-
Text: a text mining integrator for biological pathway
visualizations. Bioinformatics, 26(12):i374.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2008.
Corpus annotation for mining biomedical events from
literature. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(10).

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Yoshi-
nobu Kano, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2009a. Overview of
BioNLP’09 shared task on event extraction. In Pro-
ceedings of BioNLP 2009 Shared Task.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Yoshi-
nobu Kano, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2009b. Overview
of BioNLP’09 Shared Task on Event Extraction.
In Proceedings of Natural Language Processing in
Biomedicine (BioNLP) NAACL 2009 Workshop, pages
1–9.

Jin-Dong Kim, Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, Robert
Bossy, Ngan Nguyen, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2011.
Overview of BioNLP Shared Task 2011. In Proceed-
ings of BioNLP 2011.

M. Krallinger, A. Morgan, L. Smith, F. Leitner, L. Tan-
abe, J. Wilbur, L. Hirschman, and A. Valencia.
2008. Evaluation of text-mining systems for biology:
overview of the Second BioCreative community chal-
lenge. Genome biology, 9(Suppl 2):S1.

Y. Matsuoka, S. Ghosh, N. Kikuchi, and H. Kitano. 2010.
Payao: a community platform for SBML pathway
model curation. Bioinformatics, 26(10):1381.

H. Mi and P. Thomas. 2009. PANTHER pathway: an
ontology-based pathway database coupled with data
analysis tools. Methods Mol. Biol, 563:123–140.

Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Daniel Juraf-
sky. 2009. Distant supervision for relation extraction
without labeled data. In Proceedings of ACL’09, pages
1003–1011.

Kanae Oda, Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Daisuke
Okanohara, Takuya Matsuzaki, Yuka Tateisi, and
Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2008. New challenges for text min-
ing: Mapping between text and manually curated path-
ways. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(Suppl 3):S5.

Tomoko Ohta, Jin-Dong Kim, Sampo Pyysalo, Yue
Wang, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2009. Incorporating
GENETAG-style annotation to GENIA corpus. In
Proceedings of BioNLP’09, pages 106–107.

Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2011.
Overview of the Epigenetics and Post-translational
Modifications (EPI) task of BioNLP Shared Task
2011. In Proceedings of BioNLP 2011.

Sampo Pyysalo, Filip Ginter, Juho Heimonen, Jari
Björne, Jorma Boberg, Jouni Järvinen, and Tapio
Salakoski. 2007. BioInfer: A corpus for information
extraction in the biomedical domain. BMC Bioinfor-
matics, 8(50).

Sampo Pyysalo, Antti Airola, Juho Heimonen, and Jari
Björne. 2008. Comparative analysis of five protein-
protein interaction corpora. BMC Bioinformatics,
9(Suppl. 3):S6.

Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, Rafal Rak, Dan Sul-
livan, Chunhong Mao, Chunxia Wang, Bruno So-
bral, Jun’ichi Tsujii, and Sophia Ananiadou. 2011.
Overview of the Infectious Diseases (ID) task of
BioNLP Shared Task 2011. In Proceedings of BioNLP
2011.

Andrey Rzhetsky, Ivan Iossifov, Tomohiro Koike,
Michael Krauthammer, Pauline Kra, Mitzi Morris,
Hong Yu, Pablo Ariel Duboué, Wubin Weng, W. John
Wilbur, Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, and Carol Fried-
man. 2004. GeneWays: A system for extracting, ana-
lyzing, visualizing, and integrating molecular pathway
data. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 37(1):43–53.

Paul Thompson, Syed Iqbal, John McNaught, and Sophia
Ananiadou. 2009. Construction of an annotated
corpus to support biomedical information extraction.
BMC Bioinformatics, 10(1):349.

Domonkos Tikk, Philippe Thomas, Peter Palaga, Jörg
Hakenberg, and Ulf Leser. 2010. A comprehen-
sive benchmark of kernel methods to extract protein-
protein interactions from literature. PLoS Comput
Biol, 6(7):e1000837, 07.

113


