










































The Tenth-Century Cyrillic Manuscript Codex Suprasliensis: the creation of an electronic corpus. UNESCO project (2010-2011)


Proceedings of Language Technologies for Digital Humanities and Cultural Heritage Workshop, pages 57–61,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 16 September 2011.

The Tenth-Century Cyrillic Manuscript Codex Suprasliensis: the 
creation of an electronic corpus 
UNESCO project (2010–2011) 

 
 

Hanne Martine Eckhoff
University of Oslo 

Kanonhallveien 10e 
0585 Oslo 

h.m.eckhoff@ifikk.
uio.no 

David J. Birnbaum 
University of Pittsburgh

Department of Slavic 
Languages and Litera-

tures 
1417 Cathedral of 

Learning 
djbpitt@pitt.edu

Anisava Miltenova 
Bulgarian Academy of 

Sciences 
Institute for Literature 
52 Shipchenski prohod 

am-
iltenova@gmail.com

Tsvetana Dimitrova 
Bulgarian Academy of Sci-

ences 
Bulgarian Language Insti-

tute  
52 Shipchenski prohod 

cvetana@dcl.bas.bg

 

  

Abstract 

This paper presents an overview of principles 
and problems connected with the preparation 
of an electronic edition of the largest Old 
Church Slavonic manuscript, the Codex Su-
prasliensis, in the context of a project funded 
by UNESCO. Specifications of the manu-
script, its history, and previous paper-based 
and electronic editions are discussed, together 
with a strategy for the preparation of a com-
plete digital edition, including newly acquired 
digital images, electronic text, analysis and 
commentaries, parallel Greek text, and up-
dated bibliography. In particular, our paper 
sheds light on automating the morphosyntactic 
annotation of the text and the difficulties that 
had to be resolved in this part of the project. 

1 Introduction 
The UNESCO-funded project The Tenth-Century 
Cyrillic Manuscript Codex Suprasliensis aims at 
digitizing the largest Old Church Slavonic manu-
script, the Codex Suprasliensis 
(http://csup.ilit.bas.bg/). 

This early Cyrillic manuscript has been dated 
to the end of the tenth or the beginning of the 
eleventh century and has been published three 
times on paper (Miklošič, 1851; Severjanov, 
1904; Zaimov and Capaldo, 1982–83). The most 
recent of these, the two-volume edition by Zai-
mov and Capaldo (1982, 1983), was published 
more than two decades ago and contains photo-
graphic images of the entire manuscript; a tran-
scription reproduced from Severjanov, 1904 and 
corrected (not entirely without error) against the 
facsimile; and a Greek text (compiled from mul-
tiple Byzantine sources, which necessarily im-

plies complications in its philological interpreta-
tion; see also Abicht and Schmidt, 1896).  

In section 2, this paper presents information 
about the content, condition, and history of the 
manuscript. Section 3 reviews efforts in digitiza-
tion of the manuscript, and section 4 discusses 
previous electronic editions of the deciphered 
text, reviewing problems with representation and 
availability and solutions adopted by the editors. 
Section 5 gives an overview of the principles of 
application of morphosyntactic annotation condi-
tioned by the chosen annotation tool and strat-
egy. The conclusion in section 6 explores distinc-
tions among the publication of a text, digitization 
of a manuscript, development of language cor-
pora, and a true electronic edition of the text, 
which is the goal of the UNESCO project. 

 

2 The Manuscript 
The Codex Suprasliensis is a Cyrillic manuscript, 
arguably copied at the end of the tenth or the be-
ginning of the eleventh century (Krǎstev and Bo-
jadžiev, 1999). It is the largest extant Old Church 
Slavonic manuscript and it is associated with the 
Preslav literary school.  

The Codex contains twenty-four vitae of 
Christian saints for the month of March and 
twenty-three homilies for the triodion cycle of 
the church year. In content it is a lectionary me-
naeum (or panaegyricon), combined with homi-
lies from the movable Easter cycle, most of 
which written by or attributed to John Chryso-
stom (http://csup.ilit.bas.bg/node/7).  

According to most researchers, the Miscellany 
was not translated as a stable compilation from 
any single Byzantine menological or 
hagiographical manuscript. Rather, it was com-

57



piled from texts translated at different times, long 
before the compilation of the Codex Supraslien-
sis. Presumably, at least one of the sources was 
the Glagolitic Epiphanius homily. Folio 104v of 
the manuscript has a marginal note that reads 
g(ospod)i pomilui retъka amin (‘Lord have 
mercy on Retъk. Amen’), and some researchers 
have suggested that Retъk is the name of a 
scribe.  

The language of the manuscript follows the 
Preslav literary norm of the tenth century. It is 
considered the most representative source of lin-
guistic information about canonic Old Church 
Slavonic because of its size and because it con-
tains texts otherwise unattested in the early me-
diaeval Slavic tradition. The codex is, thus, the 
main source for studying the language, writing, 
and culture of Bulgaria during the Preslav period.  

The Codex Suprasliensis is written on parch-
ment and shows careful writing and craftsman-
ship. It was discovered in 1823 in a Uniate Basil-
ian monastery in Supraśl (then in Lithuania, now 
in Northeastern Poland in the Podlaskie Voi-
vodeship) by Canon Michał Bobrowski. Bo-
browski sent it for study to the Slovenian scholar 
Jernej Kopitar. After Kopitar’s death, the first 
118 folios were donated to the University Li-
brary in Ljubljana, where they are still kept. The 
following 16 leaves were purchased by A. F. By-
čkov in 1856 and are now kept in the Russian 
National Library in St. Petersburg. The remain-
ing 151 leaves were part of the collection of the 
Counts Zamoyski. The last, so-called Warsaw 
part had disappeared during World War II and 
were long considered lost until re-emerging in 
the US. In 1968, those folios were returned to 
Poland, where they are now part of the manu-
script collection of the National Library in War-
saw. 

The Codex Supraslianis has been listed in 
UNESCO’s Memory of the World Register since 
2007. 

3 Digitization 
In the present project, digital images of all three 
parts of the Codex Suprasliensis, currently lo-
cated in repositories in three different countries 
(the National Library in Warsaw, Poland; the 
National Library of Russia in St. Petersburg; and 
the National University Library in Ljubljana, 
Slovenia), were reunited for publication in a sin-
gle electronic edition. The digital images are al-
ready available at http://csup.ilit.bas.bg/galleries. 
The separate publication of the photographic fac-

simile is an interim stage in the project, and the 
photographs will eventually be republished to-
gether with a transcription that will be fully an-
notated, accompanied by commentary and up-
dated bibliography.  

Some previously unknown source materials, 
including some Byzantine originals identified 
only after the publication of the Zaimov and Ca-
paldo edition in the early 1980s, have been used 
in the preparation of the Greek text of the new 
edition. 

Eventually a diplomatic transcription of the 
text of the Codex Suprasliensis will be published 
together with critical apparatus, parallel Greek 
text, vocabulary, and grammatical analysis (in 
the form of corpora annotation). The annotation 
of the electronic corpus is at initial stage, with 
only one piece, namely the Life of St. Paul the 
Simple, completely annotated, and another (the 
Life of St. Paul and St. Juliana) under active 
preparation. 
 
4 Electronic text 
 
The principles of manuscript description follow a 
proposal developed in the context of The Reper-
torium of Old Bulgarian Literature and Letters, 
which includes descriptions, in both English and 
Bulgarian, of some 350 mediaeval Slavic manu-
scripts dated from the eleventh to the beginning 
of the eighteenth century. The Repertorium was 
designed in conformity with important standards 
and guidelines in humanities computing (Mil-
tenova, Boyadzhiev, and Velev, 2000; Birnbaum, 
1996). The description and analysis of the Cyril-
lic manuscripts contain comprehensive data 
drawn de visu from old texts 
(http://clover.slavic.pitt.edu/repertorium/). 

The first electronic version of the Codex Su-
prasliensis was a 7-bit ASCII transliteration pre-
pared under the direction of Jouko Lindstedt and 
distributed by the Corpus Cyrillo-Methodianum 
Helsingiense: An Electronic Corpus of Old 
Church Slavonic Texts (CCMH, 
http://www.helsinki.fi/slaavilaiset/ccmh/) and the 
TITUS project (http://titus.uni-
frankfurt.de/texte/etcs/slav/aksl/suprasl/supra.ht
m). These transcriptions contain numerous errors 
and come completely without context and critical 
apparatus (no images, Greek text, commentary, 
grammatical annotation or analysis, etc.). The 
new edition under development takes the Hel-
sinki transcriptions as a starting point, converts 
the text from ASCII to Unicode, corrects the er-

58



rors, and includes the full range of supporting 
materials listed above. 

A pilot model of an electronic edition of a 
small part of the Codex Suprasliensis with a 
search program was developed in 2008 (Birn-
baum, 2008) at the University of Pittsburgh 
(http://paul.obdurodon.org). This electronic edi-
tion of the Life of St. Paul the Simple was devel-
oped in accord with the procedures and priorities 
described above: it is based on a corrected ver-
sion of the text published by the CCMH, accom-
panied by parallel Greek (from the Zai-
mov/Capaldo edition), a new English translation, 
detailed linguistic commentary, and photo-
graphic facsimiles. Linguistic analysis in the 
commentary conforms to notation developed in 
Oscar Swan’s Old Church Slavic Inflectional 
Morphology (2008). 

There are many collections and editions of 
classical and mediaeval texts (such as the Per-
seus Project, 
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/), but most 
of them are manually annotated. No rule-based 
morphological guesser is currently available for 
Old Church Slavonic, partially because of trou-
blesome orthography, although there is prelimi-
nary finite-state morphology under development 
by Roland Meyer (http://rhssl1.uni-
regensburg.de:8080/OCS/). 

The research project Pragmatic Resources in 
Old Indo-European Languages (PROIEL), 
which aims at developing morphosyntactic 
means for the annotation of and research into the 
information structure in Ancient and Hellenistic 
Greek, Latin, Gothic, Classical Armenian, and 
Old Church Slavonic (Haug and Jøhndal, 2008), 
has developed a statistical morphological guesser 
and a semi-manual syntactic annotation tool sup-
ported by a set of morphology-based rules. The 
corpus to be built for the electronic edition of the 
Codex Suprasliensis will be annotated manually, 
but with the assistance of the morphological 
guesser already developed by the PROIEL pro-
ject and trained for Old Church Slavonic mor-
phology on the Codex Marianus (Haug et al., 
2009). Thus, the Codex Suprasliensis will be an-
notated for morphology, syntax, and other fea-
tures in the PROIEL annotation interface, and the 
information will be exported in XML for incor-
poration into the projected electronic edition. 
 
5 Morphosyntactic Annotation 
 
The morphosyntactic annotation tool to be used 
in the Codex Suprasliensis project is an inte-

grated part of the PROIEL parallel treebank of 
ancient Indo-European languages. The core of 
the treebank is the New Testament in its Greek 
original and its earliest translations into each of 
the other project languages. PROIEL features an 
electronic version of the Codex Marianus fully 
annotated for morphology, syntax, and various 
other linguistic features. It has also been auto-
matically aligned with the Greek Gospels at to-
ken level (Eckhoff and Haug, 2010).  

Test annotation of the Codex Suprasliensis is 
currently in progress. Observations and solutions 
discussed in this section of the paper were drawn 
from the process of annotating of the Life of St 
Paul the Simple and the Life of St. Paul and St. 
Juliana (the annotated text is currently available 
at: http://foni.uio.no:3000/ ).  

The PROIEL annotation tool (available at the 
same site) was developed with certain needs in 
mind:  

When confronted with novel text styles and 
orthographical conventions (different from the 
already annotated Codex Marianus), annotation 
initially is primarily manual, but it becomes in-
creasingly automatic as the tool learns from op-
erator input. Because the annotation for some 
languages, including Old Church Slavonic, is 
being performed on a diplomatic transcription of 
a text with substantial orthographic variation (ra-
ther than on the normalized texts that are used 
more commonly in other disciplinary philologi-
cal traditions), morphological analyzers and syn-
tactic parsers are not available for all of the pro-
ject languages.  

Annotators had to be recruited internationally 
due to the specialized knowledge required. The 
application was, therefore, built to work with 
standards-compliant browsers, which did not 
require the annotators to perform any extra in-
stallation. For the annotators of Old Church Sla-
vonic texts, the tool supports transliterated input, 
obviating the need for a specialized keyboard 
layout interface. 

Texts are imported in a simple XML format, 
where they are split into tokens (words) based on 
spacing, and roughly into sentences based on 
punctuation. After the import and coarse auto-
matic segmentation, the annotation proceeds as 
follows: 

First, there is adjustment of sentence division. 
Since punctuation is not a reliable guide to sen-
tence division in Old Church Slavonic, sentences 
must often be split or merged. 

Second, the imported tokenization must be 
checked and corrected manually. A linguistic 

59



analysis of the text may need to normalize the 
word boundaries of the edition. In particular, 
contractions of prepositions and nouns may need 
to be dissolved. 

Third, morphological annotation and lemmati-
zation are implemented. The PROIEL annotation 
tool provides guesses for morphological features 
and lemmata based on previous reviewed annota-
tions (Haug et al., 2009).  

In the first stages of the annotation of the ini-
tial samples from the Codex Suprasliensis, the 
guesser recognized only 15% of the words on the 
basis of its prior annotation of the Codex Mari-
anus. After annotating 2000 tokens of the Codex 
Suprasliensis, the accuracy of the guessing more 
than tripled, to approximately 50%. The low ini-
tial result and rapid improvement is mostly due 
to the use of diacritics in the Codex Supraslien-
sis, and we are developing an orthographic nor-
malizer that will temporarily strip diacritics to 
facilitate recognition and automated linguistic 
tagging. 

The lemmata were entered with support from a 
transliteration device, which also provides guess-
es based on extant lemmata. The lemmatization 
follows part-of-speech classification. A single 
form may, therefore, belong to several lemmata. 
For example, there are no fewer than four lem-
mata with the form jako: a subjunction, a relative 
adverb, and two regular adverbs that are deemed 
to have sufficiently different functions to be sep-
arated (one meaning ‘as, like’ and the other serv-
ing as an introductory ‘for’). Morphological 
analysis disambiguates the morphological fea-
tures as far as possible based on syntax and con-
text, and the information is further stored in the 
database as a positional tag in the form of a 
string of symbols where each morphological fea-
ture represented by a given symbol has a fixed 
slot (for positional tags, see also Hajič, 2004). 

Fourth, the annotators apply syntactic annota-
tion in an enriched variety of dependency gram-
mar (Haug, 2010). This level relies on overt ele-
ments and makes it possible to keep word order 
information and syntactic analysis in separate 
layers, which is essential in dealing with free-
word-order languages such as Old Church Sla-
vonic and Greek. The syntactic annotation is per-
formed with a simple tool that provides good 
guesses from a set of morphologically based 
rules.  

Fifth comes the review stage, where the mor-
phological and syntactic analysis is reviewed by 
project members, and, when found correct, pub-
lished on the PROIEL website. 

In addition to the morphosyntactic annotation, 
there is an interface for annotating information 
status and anaphoric relations. There is also an 
option for customized tagging at the token, lem-
ma, and sentence level. This option has been 
used to tag semantic features (such as animacy), 
derivational morphology (such as prefixation), 
and textual features (such as direct speech).  

The annotations are all stored in a relational 
database, but may be exported in various XML 
formats. The rich linguistic information provided 
by the PROIEL-style annotation may, thus, be 
interwoven in XML format into an electronic 
text edition that also takes the many textological 
concerns implicit in the Suprasliensis project into 
account. The resulting edition will thus be one 
that can serve a very wide audience with differ-
ent needs and interests.  

6 Conclusion 
The paper outlines the stages in creating an elec-
tronic edition of the Codex Suprasliensis: the 
digitization of the manuscript, preparation of the 
electronic text, and application of morphosyntac-
tic annotation. All of these tasks can constitute 
objectives of separate projects (manuscript dig-
itization; electronic text publication; language 
corpora compilation), but none of them alone 
would be sufficient to produce an electronic edi-
tion of the manuscript. Such an edition depends 
on all of these products, as well as the publica-
tion and annotation of the Byzantine sources, and 
the development of indices, a lexicon, glossary, 
bibliography, and others. The project therefore 
unites the efforts of an international working 
team with members with different but compli-
mentary qualifications for the joint work on the 
edition. The electronic version of the Codex Su-
prasliensis will be freely available under a Crea-
tive Commons BY-NC-SA license. 
 

Reference 
Hajič, Jan. 2004. Disambiguation of Rich Inflection 

(Computational Morphology of Czech). Karolinum 
Charles University Press, Prague. 

Severjanov, S. 1904. Suprasl′skaja rukopis′ [Codex 
Suprasliensis, vol. 1-2]. Pamjatniki staroslavjan-
skago jazyka, volume 1, 1-2. Sanktpeterburg. 

Zaimov, Jordan and Mario Capaldo. 1982. Suprasŭl-
ski ili Retkov sbornik (Codex Supraslinesis or the 
Retkov Manuscript), volume 1, Bulgarian Acad-
emy of Sciences Press, Sofia. 

60



Zaimov, Jordan and Mario Capaldo. 1983. Suprasŭl-
ski ili Retkov sbornik (Codex Supraslinesis or the 
Retkov Manuscript), volume 2, Bulgarian Acad-
emy of Sciences Press, Sofia. 

Swan, Oscar. 2008. Old Church Slavic. Inflectional 
Morphology, volume 1, Berkeley Slavic Special-
ties, Berkeley. 

Miltenova, Anissava, Andrei Boyadzhiev, and Stani-
mir Velev. 2000. Computerized Manuscript Corpus 
Data: Results and Further Development. Bulgarian 
Studies at the Dawn of the 21st Century: a Bulgar-
ian-American Perspective. Sixth Joint Meeting of 
Bulgarian and North American Scholars. Blagoev-
grad, Bulgaria, May 30–June 2, 1999. Gutenberg, 
Sofia, 237–243. 

Birnbaum, David J. 1996.  Standardizing Characters, 
Glyphs, and SGML Entities for Encoding Early 
Cyrillic Writing. Computer Standards and Inter-
faces, 18: 201–52. 

Birnbaum, David J. 2008. Paul the Not-So-Simple. 
Scripta & e-Scripta, 6: 23–45 

Krǎstev, Georgi and Andrej Bojadžiev. 1999. Su-
pras′lski sbornik: problemi na xronologijata i kom-
pozicijata v iztočnoto-pravoslavie i v evropejskata 
kultura. Materiali ot meždunarodnata naučna 
srešta, posvetena na 1100 godišninata ot načaloto 
na Zlatnija vek v bǎlgarskata kultura. Varna, 2–3 
Juli 1993. Guturanov, Sofia, 192–197. 

Miklosich, Fr. 1851. Monumenta linguae pa-
laeoslovenicae e codice Suprasliensis. Vindo-
bonae, 456. 

Abicht, R. and H. Schmidt. 1896. Quellennachweise 
zum Codex Suprasliensis. Archiv für slavische Phi-
lologie, 18: 138-155. 

Haug, Dag. T. T. 2010. PROIEL Guidelines for Anno-
tation: 
http://folk.uio.no/daghaug/syntactic_guidelines.pdf  

Eckhoff, Hanne Martine and Dag Trygve Truslew 
Haug. 2010. Aligning Syntax in Early New Testa-
ment Texts: the PROIEL Corpus. Wiener Slav-
istischer Almanach. 

Haug, Dag T. T., Marius Jøhndal, Hanne Martine 
Eckhoff, Eirik Welo, Mari J. B. Hertzenberg, and 
Angelika Muth. 2009. Computational and Linguis-
tic Issues in Designing a Syntactically Annotated 
Parallel Corpus of Indo-European Languages. 
Traitement Automatique des Langues, volum 50. 

Haug, Dag T. T., and Marius Jøhndal. 2008. Creating 
a Parallel Treebank of the Old Indo-European Bi-
ble Translations. 
http://www.hf.uio.no/ifikk/english/research/project
s/proiel/Activities/proiel/publications/marrakech.p
df 

61


