










































Syntactic transformations for Swiss German dialects


Proceedings of EMNLP 2011, Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 30–38,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Syntactic transformations for Swiss German dialects

Yves Scherrer
LATL

Université de Genève
Geneva, Switzerland

yves.scherrer@unige.ch

Abstract

While most dialectological research so far fo-
cuses on phonetic and lexical phenomena, we
use recent fieldwork in the domain of dia-
lect syntax to guide the development of mul-
tidialectal natural language processing tools.
In particular, we develop a set of rules that
transform Standard German sentence struc-
tures into syntactically valid Swiss German
sentence structures. These rules are sensitive
to the dialect area, so that the dialects of more
than 300 towns are covered. We evaluate the
transformation rules on a Standard German
treebank and obtain accuracy figures of 85%
and above for most rules. We analyze the most
frequent errors and discuss the benefit of these
transformations for various natural language
processing tasks.

1 Introduction

For over a century, dialectological research has fo-
cused on phonetic, lexical and morphological phe-
nomena. It is only recently, since the 1990s, that
syntax has gained the attraction of dialectologists.
As a result, syntactic data from field studies are now
available for many dialect areas. This paper explores
how dialect syntax fieldwork can guide the develop-
ment of multidialectal natural language processing
tools. Our goal is to transform Standard German
sentence structures so that they become syntactically
valid in Swiss German dialects.1

1Here, we do not take into account the phonetic, morpholog-
ical and lexical changes involved in generating the actual Swiss
German word forms. For such a model, see for example Scher-
rer and Rambow (2010a).

These transformations are accomplished by a set
of hand-crafted rules, developed and evaluated on
the basis of the dependency version of the Standard
German TIGER treebank. Ultimately, the rule set
can be used either as a tool for treebank transduction
(i.e. deriving Swiss German treebanks from Stan-
dard German ones), or as the syntactic transfer mod-
ule of a transfer-based machine translation system.

After the discussion of related work (Section 2),
we present the major syntactic differences between
Standard German and Swiss German dialects (Sec-
tion 3). We then show how these differences can
be covered by a set of transformation rules that ap-
ply to syntactically annotated Standard German text,
such as found in treebanks (Section 4). In Section
5, we give some coverage figures and discuss the
most common errors that result from these transfor-
mations. We conclude in Section 6.

2 Related work

One line of research in natural language processing
deals with parsing methods for dialects. Chiang et
al. (2006) argue that it is often easier to manually
create resources that relate a dialect to a standard
language than it is to manually create syntactically
annotated resources for the dialect itself. They in-
vestigate three approaches for parsing the Levantine
dialect of Arabic, one of which consists of transduc-
ing a Standard Arabic treebank into Levantine with
the help of hand-crafted rules. We agree with this
point of view: we devise transformation rules that
relate Swiss German dialects to Standard German.

In the case of closely related languages,2 different
2In any case, it is difficult to establish strict linguistic criteria

30



types of annotation projection have been proposed
to facilitate the creation of treebanks. See Volk and
Samuelsson (2004) for an overview of the problem.

In a rather different approach, Vaillant (2008)
presents a hand-crafted multi-dialect grammar that
conceives of a dialect as some kind of “agreement
feature”. This allows to share identical rules across
dialects and differentiate them only where neces-
sary. We follow a similar approach by linking the
transformation rules to geographical data from re-
cent dialectological fieldwork.

Another line of research is oriented towards ma-
chine translation models for closely related lan-
guages. It is common in this field that minor syn-
tactic differences are dealt with explicitly. Corbı́-
Bellot et al. (2005) present a shallow-transfer sys-
tem for the different Romance languages of Spain.
Structural transfer rules account for gender change
and word reorderings. Another system (Homola and
Kuboň, 2005) covers several Slavonic languages of
Eastern Europe and confirms the necessity of shal-
low parsing except for the most similar language
pair (Czech-Slovak).

In contrast, statistical machine translation systems
have been proposed to translate closely related lan-
guages on a letter-by-letter basis (Vilar et al., 2007;
Tiedemann, 2009). However, the word reordering
capabilities of a common phrase-based model are
still required to obtain reasonable performances.

3 The main syntactic features of Swiss
German dialects

A general description of the linguistic particularities
of Swiss German dialects, including syntax, can be
found, for example, in Lötscher (1983). Some syn-
tactic case studies within the framework of Genera-
tive Grammar are presented in Penner (1995). Cur-
rently, a dialectological survey, under the name of
SADS (Syntaktischer Atlas der deutschen Schweiz),
aims at producing a syntactic atlas of German-
speaking Switzerland (Bucheli and Glaser, 2002).
Some preliminary results of this project are de-
scribed in Klausmann (2006).3

to distinguish “dialects” from “closely related languages”.
3We thank Elvira Glaser and her team for providing us ac-

cess to the SADS database. This work could not have been
carried out without these precious data.

There are two main types of syntactic differences
between Swiss German dialects and Standard Ger-
man. Some of the differences are representative of
the mainly spoken use of Swiss German. They do
not show much interdialectal variation, and they are
also encountered in other spoken varieties of Ger-
man. Other differences are dialectological in nature,
in the sense that they are specific to some subgroups
of Swiss German dialects and usually do not occur
outside of the Alemannic dialect group. This second
type of differences constitutes the main research ob-
ject of the SADS project. In the following subsec-
tions, we will show some examples of both types of
phenomena.

3.1 Features of spoken language

No preterite tense Swiss German dialects do not
have synthetic preterite forms and use (analytic) per-
fect forms instead (1a).4 Transforming a Standard
German preterite form is not trivial: the correct aux-
iliary verb and participle forms have to be generated,
and they have to be inserted at the correct place (in
the right verb bracket).

Standard German pluperfect is handled in the
same way: the inflected preterite auxiliary verb is
transformed into an inflected present auxiliary verb
and an auxiliary participle, while the participle of
the main verb is retained (1b). The resulting con-
struction is called double perfect.

(1) a. Wir gingen ins Kino.
→Wir sind ins Kino gegangen.
‘We went to the cinema.’

b. als er gegangen war
→ als er gegangen gewesen ist
‘when he had gone’

No genitive case Standard German genitive case
is replaced by different means in Swiss German.
Some prepositions (e.g. wegen, während ‘because,
during’) use dative case instead of genitive. Other
prepositions become complex through the addi-
tion of a second preposition von (e.g. innerhalb
‘within’). Verbs requiring a genitive object in Stan-
dard German generally use a dative object in Swiss

4Throughout this paper, the examples are given with Stan-
dard German words, but Swiss German word order. We hope
that this simplifies the reading for Standard German speakers.

31



German unless they are lexically replaced. Geni-
tive appositions are converted to PPs with von ‘of’
in the case of non-human NPs (2a), or to a dative-
possessive construction with human NPs (2b).

(2) a. der Schatzmeister der Partei
→ der Schatzmeister von der Partei
‘the treasurer of the party’

b. das Haus des Lehrers
→ dem Lehrer sein Haus
‘the teacher’s house’,
litt. ‘to the teacher his house’

Determiners with person names A third differ-
ence is the prevalent use of person names with deter-
miners, whereas (written) Standard German avoids
determiners in this context:

(3) a. Hans→ der Hans ‘Hans’
b. Frau Müller→ die Frau Müller ‘Miss M.’

3.2 Dialect-specific features

Verb raising When two or more verbal forms ap-
pear in the right verb bracket, their order is often
reversed with respect to Standard German. Several
cases exist. In Western Swiss dialects, the auxil-
iary verb may precede the participle in subordinate
clauses (4a). In all but Southeastern dialects, the
modal verb precedes the infinitive (4b).

Verb raising also occurs for full verbs with infini-
tival complements, like lassen ‘to let’ (4c). In this
case, the dependencies between lassen and its com-
plements cross those between the main verb and its
complements:

mich einen Apfel lässt essen

Verb projection raising In the same contexts as
above, the main verb extraposes to the right along
with its complements (4d), (4e).

(4) a. dass er gegangen ist
→ dass er ist gegangen
‘that he has gone’

b. dass du einen Apfel essen willst
→ dass du einen Apfel willst essen
‘that you want to eat an apple’

c. dass du mich einen Apfel essen lässt
→ dass du mich einen Apfel lässt essen
‘that you let me eat an apple’

d. dass du einen Apfel essen willst
→ dass du willst einen Apfel essen
‘that you want to eat an apple’

e. dass du mich einen Apfel essen lässt
→ dass du mich lässt einen Apfel essen
‘that you let me eat an apple’

Prepositional dative marking In Central Swiss
dialects, dative objects are introduced by a dummy
preposition i or a (5a). However, this preposition is
not added if the dative noun phrase is already part of
a prepositional phrase (5b).

(5) a. der Mutter→ i/a der Mutter
‘the mother (dative)’

b. mit der Mutter→ mit (*i/a) der Mutter
‘with the mother’

Article doubling In adjective phrases that contain
an intensity adverb like ganz, so ‘very, such’, the de-
terminer occurs either before the adverb as in Stan-
dard German, or after the adverb, or in both posi-
tions, depending on the dialect:

(6) ein ganz lieber Mann
→ ganz ein lieber Mann
→ ein ganz ein lieber Mann
‘a very dear man’

Complementizer in wh-phrases Interrogative
subordinate clauses introduced by verbs like fragen
‘to ask’ may see the complementizer dass attached
after the interrogative adverb or pronoun.

Relative pronouns Nominative and accusative
relative pronouns are substituted in most Swiss Ger-
man dialects by the uninflected particle wo. In da-
tive (7a) or prepositional (7b) contexts, the particle
wo appears together with an inflected personal pro-
noun:

(7) a. dem→ wo . . . ihm
b. mit dem→ wo . . . mit ihm, wo . . . damit

Final clauses Standard German allows non-finite
final clauses with the complementizer um . . . zu ‘in
order to’. In Western dialects, this complementizer

32



is rendered as für . . . z. In Eastern dialects, a single
particle zum is used. An intermediate form zum . . . z
also exists.

Pronoun sequences In a sequence of accusative
and dative pronouns, the accusative usually precedes
in Standard German, whereas the dative precedes in
many Swiss German dialects:

(8) es ihm→ ihm es ‘it to him’

Predicative adjectives In Southwestern dialects,
predicative adjectives agree in gender and number
with the subject:

(9) er / sie / es ist alt
→ er / sie / es ist alter / alte / altes
‘he / she / it is old’

Copredicative adjectives A slightly different
problem is the agreement of copredicative adjec-
tives. A copredicative adjective5 relates as an at-
tribute to a noun phrase, but also to the predicate
of the sentence (see example below). In Northeast-
ern dialects, there is an invariable er-ending6 for all
genders and numbers. In Southern dialects, the co-
predicative adjective agrees in gender and number.
Elsewhere, the uninflected adjective form is used, as
in Standard German.

(10) Sie sollten die Milch warm trinken.
→ Sie sollten die Milch warme Fem.Sg /
warmer Invar trinken.
‘You should drink the milk warm.’

3.3 The SADS data

The SADS survey consists of four written ques-
tionnaires, each of which comprises about 30 ques-
tions about syntactic phenomena like the ones cited
above. They were submitted to 3185 informants in
383 inquiry points.7 For each question, the infor-
mants were asked to write down the variant(s) that
they deemed acceptable in their dialect.

5This phenomenon is also known as depictive secondary
predicate construction.

6This (reconstructed) ending is thought to be a frozen mas-
culine inflection marker; in practice, it is pronounced [@] or [a]
in the corresponding dialects.

7http://www.ds.uzh.ch/dialektsyntax/
eckdaten.html, accessed 8.6.2011.

Figure 1: The three maps show the geographical distribu-
tion of prepositional dative marking with a (top) and with
i (center). The bottom map shows the inquiry points in
which no preposition is added to dative NPs. The maps
are based on SADS question I/7. Larger circles represent
larger proportions of informants considering the respec-
tive variant as the most natural one.

The SADS data give us an overview of the syn-
tactic phenomena and their variants occurring in the
different Swiss German dialects. It is on the basis of
these data that we compiled the list of phenomena
presented above. More importantly, the SADS data
provide us with a mapping from variants to inquiry
points. It suffices thus to implement a small num-
ber of variants (between 1 and 5 for a typical phe-
nomenon) to obtain full coverage of the 383 inquiry
points. Figure 1 shows the geographical distribution
of the three variants of prepositional dative marking.

For a subset of syntactic phenomena, two types of
questions were asked:

33



• Which variants are acceptable in your dialect?

• Which variant do you consider the most natural
one in your dialect?

In the first case, multiple mentions were allowed.
Usually, dialect speakers are very tolerant in accept-
ing also variants that they would not naturally utter
themselves. In this sense, the first set of questions
can be conceived as a geographical model of dialect
perception, while the second set of questions rather
yields a geographical model of dialect production.
According to the task at hand, the transformation
rules can be used with either one of the data sets.

4 Transformation rules

4.1 The Standard German corpus

The transformation rules require morphosyntacti-
cally annotated Standard German input data. There-
fore, we had to choose a specific annotation format
and a specific corpus to test the rules on. We selected
the Standard German TIGER treebank (Brants et
al., 2002), in the CoNLL-style dependency format
(Buchholz and Marsi, 2006; Kübler, 2008).8 This
format allows a compact representation of the syn-
tactic structure. Figure 2 shows a sample sentence,
annotated in this format.

While we use the TIGER corpus for test and eval-
uation purposes in this paper, the rules are aimed to
be sufficiently generic so that they apply correctly
to any other corpus annotated according to the same
guidelines.

4.2 Rule implementation

We have manually created transformation rules for a
dozen of syntactic and morphosyntactic phenomena.
These rules (i) detect a specific syntactic pattern in a
sentence and (ii) modify the position, content and/or
dependency link of the nodes in that pattern. The
rules are implemented in the form of Python scripts.

As an example, let us describe the transformation
rule for article doubling. This rule detects the fol-
lowing syntactic pattern:9

8Thanks to Yannick Versley for making this version avail-
able to us.

9X symbolizes any type of node that possesses an article and
an adjective as dependents. In practice, X usually is a noun.

ART ADV
{ganz, sehr, so. . .}

ADJA X

The rule then produces the three valid Swiss Ger-
man patterns – as said above, the transformation
rules may yield different output structures for dif-
ferent dialects. One of the three variants is identical
to the Standard German structure produced above.
In a second variant, the positions of the article and
the adverb are exchanged without modifying the de-
pendency links:

ADV ART ADJA X

This transformation yields non-projective depen-
dencies (i.e. crossing arcs), which are problematic
for some parsing algorithms. However, the original
TIGER annotations already contain non-projective
dependencies. Thus, there is no additional complex-
ity involved in the resulting Swiss German struc-
tures.

The third variant contains two occurrences of the
determiner, before and after the intensity adverb. We
chose to make both occurrences dependents of the
same head node:

ART ADV ART ADJA X

As mentioned previously, the SADS data tell us
which of the three variants is accepted in which
of the 384 inquiry points. This mapping is non-
deterministic: more than one variant may be ac-
cepted at a given inquiry point.

5 Evaluation

5.1 Corpus frequencies

In order to get an idea of the frequency of the syntac-
tic constructions mentioned in Section 3, we started
by searching the TIGER treebank for the crucial
syntactic patterns. Table 1 shows frequency counts

34



ID FORM LEMMA CPOSTAG POSTAG FEATS HEAD DEPREL
1 für für APPR PREP – 4 PP
2 eine eine ART ART Acc.Sg.Fem 3 DET
3 Statistik Statistik NN N Acc.Sg.Fem 1 PN
4 reicht reichen VVFIN V 3.Sg.Pres.Ind 0 ROOT
5 das das PDS PRO Nom.Sg.Neut 4 SUBJ
6 nicht nicht PTKNEG PTKNEG – 4 ADV
7 . . $. $. – 0 ROOT

Figure 2: Example of a CoNLL-style annotated sentence. Each word (FORM) is numbered (ID), lemmatized
(LEMMA), annotated with two levels of part-of-speech tags (CPOSTAG and POSTAG), annotated with morpho-
logical information (FEATS) and with dependency relations. HEAD indicates the ID of the head word, and DEPREL
indicates the type of dependency relation. For example, the word at position 1 (für) depends on the word at position 4
(reicht) by a PP relation.

Construction Sentences
Preterite tense 13439
Genitive case 15351
Person name determiners 5410
Verb raising 3246
Verb projection raising 2597
Prep. dative marking 2708
Article doubling 61
Compl. in wh-phrases 478
Relative pronouns 4619
Final clauses 629
Pronoun sequences 6
Predicative adjectives 2784
Total TIGER sentences 40000

Table 1: Number of sentences in the TIGER corpus that
trigger the mentioned transformation rule.

of the respective phenomena.10

This preliminary study led us to exclude phe-
nomena that could not be detected reliably because
the morphosyntactic annotations in TIGER were not
precise enough. For example, TIGER does not dis-
tinguish between copredicative (11a) and adverbial
(11b) uses of adjectives. Therefore, it is impossible
to automatically count the number of copredicative
adjectives, let alone perform the necessary dialectal
transformations.

10These figures should be taken with a grain of salt. First, the
TIGER corpus consists of newspaper text, which is hardly rep-
resentative of everyday use of Swiss German dialects. Second,
it is difficult to obtain reliable recall figures without manually
inspecting the entire corpus.

(11) a. Blitzblank hängen die Töpfe an der
Küchenwand.
‘The pots are hanging sparkling clean on
the kitchen wall.’

b. Häufig hängen die Töpfe an der Küchen-
wand.
‘The pots frequently hang on the kitchen
wall.’

5.2 Results

For each syntactic construction, a development set
and a test set were extracted from the TIGER tree-
bank, each of them comprising at most 100 sen-
tences showing that construction. After achieving
fair performance on the development sets, the held-
out test data was manually evaluated.

We did not evaluate the accusative-dative pro-
noun sequences because of their small number of
occurrences. Predicative adjective agreement was
not evaluated because the author did not have native
speaker’s intuitions about this phenomenon.

Table 2 shows the accuracy of the rules on the test
data. Recall that some rules cover different dialec-
tal variants, each of which may show different types
of errors. In consequence, the performance of some
rules is indicated as an interval. Moreover, some di-
alectal variants do not require any syntactic change
of the Standard German source, yielding figures of
100% accuracy.

The evaluation was performed on variants, not on
inquiry points. The mapping between the variants
and the inquiry points is supported by the SADS data
and is not the object of the present evaluation.

35



Construction Accuracy
Preterite tense 89%
Genitive case 85–93%
Person name determiners 80%
Verb raising 96–100%
Verb projection raising 85–100%
Prep. dative marking 93–100%
Article doubling 100%
Compl. in wh-phrases 69–100%
Relative pronouns 86–99%
Final clauses 92–100%

Table 2: This table shows the accuracy of the transforma-
tions, manually evaluated on the test set.

The overall performance of the transformation
rules lies at 85% accuracy and above for most rules.
Four major error types can be distinguished.

Annotation errors The annotation of the TIGER
treebank has been done semi-automatically and is
not exempt of errors, especially in the case of out-
of-vocabulary words. These problems degrade the
performance of rules dealing with proper nouns. In
(12), the first name Traute is wrongly analyzed as a
preterite verb form traute ‘trusted, wedded’, leading
to an erroneous placement of the determiner.

(12) Traute Müller
→ *traute die Müller / die Traute Müller

Imperfect heuristics Some rules rely on a syntac-
tic distinction that is not explicitly encoded in the
TIGER annotation. Therefore, we had to resort to
heuristics, which do not work well in all cases. For
example, the genitive replacement rule needs to dis-
tinguish human from non-human NPs. Likewise,
adding a complementizer to wh-phrases overgener-
ates because the TIGER annotation does not reliably
distinguish between clause-adjoined relative clauses
and interrogative clauses introduced as complement
of the main verb.

Conjunctions Many rules rely on the dependency
relation type (the DEPREL field in Figure 2). Ac-
cording to the CoNLL guidelines, the dependency
type is only encoded in the first conjunct of a con-
junction, but not in the second. As a result, the trans-
formations are often only applied to the first con-

junct. However, it should not be too difficult to han-
dle the most frequent types of conjunctions.

Word order errors Appositions and quotation
marks sometimes interfere with transformation rules
and lead to typographically or syntactically unfor-
tunate sentences. In other cases, the linguistic de-
scription is not very explicit. For example, in the
verb projection raising rule, we found it difficult to
decide which constituents are moved and which are
not. Moving polarity items is sometimes blocked
due to scope effects. Different types of adverbs also
tend to behave differently.

5.3 An example

In the previous section, we evaluated each syntac-
tic transformation rule individually. It is also pos-
sible to apply all rules in cascade. The following
example shows an original Standard German sen-
tence (13a) along with three dialectal variants, ob-
tained by the cascaded application of our transfor-
mation rules. The Mörschwil dialect (Northeast-
ern Switzerland, Canton St. Gallen) shows geni-
tive replacement and relative pronoun replacement
(13b). The Central Swiss dialect of Sempach (Can-
ton Lucerne) additionally shows prepositional dative
marking (13c), while the Guttannen dialect (South-
western Switzerland, Canton Berne) shows an in-
stance of verb raising (13d). All transformations are
underlined. Note again that the transformation rules
only produce Swiss German morphosyntactic struc-
tures, but do not include word-level adaptations. For
illustration, the last example (13e) includes word-
level translations and corresponds thus to the “real”
dialect spoken in Mörschwil.

(13) a. Original: Einen besonderen Stellen-
wert verdient dabei die alarmierende Zahl
junger Menschen, die der PDS ihre
Stimme gegeben haben.
‘Special importance should be paid to the
alarming number of young people who
have given their vote to the PDS.’

b. Mörschwil: Einen besonderen Stellen-
wert verdient dabei die alarmierende Zahl
von jungen Menschen, wo der PDS ihre
Stimme gegeben haben.

c. Sempach: Einen besonderen Stellen-

36



wert verdient dabei die alarmierende Zahl
von jungen Menschen, wo i der PDS ihre
Stimme gegeben haben.

d. Guttannen: Einen besonderen Stellen-
wert verdient dabei die alarmierende Zahl
von jungen Menschen, wo der PDS ihre
Stimme haben gegeben.

e. Mörschwil (“real”): En bsondere Stelle-
wert vedient debii di alarmierend Zahl vo
junge Mensche, wo de PDS iri Stimm ggee
hend.

6 Conclusion and future work

We have shown that a small number of manually
written transformation rules can model the most im-
portant syntactic differences between Standard Ger-
man and Swiss German dialects with high levels of
accuracy. Data of recent dialectological fieldwork
provides us with a list of relevant phenomena and
their respective geographic distribution patterns, so
that we are able to devise the unique combination
of transformation rules for more than 300 inquiry
points.

A large part of current work in natural language
processing deals with inferring linguistic structures
from raw textual data. In our setting, this work
has already been done by the dialectologists: by de-
vising questionnaires of the most important syntac-
tic phenomena, collecting data from native dialect
speakers and synthesizing the results of the survey
in the form of a database. Relying on this work al-
lows us to obtain precise results for a great variety of
dialects, where machine learning techniques would
likely run into data sparseness issues.

The major limitation we found with our ap-
proach is the lacking precision (for our purposes) of
the Standard German treebank annotation. Indeed,
some of the syntactic distinctions that are made in
Swiss German dialects are not relevant from a purely
Standard German point of view, and have therefore
not been distinguished in the annotation. Additional
annotation could be added with the help of semantic
heuristics. For example, in the case of copredicative
adjectives (11), a semantic resource could easily tell
that pots can be sparkling clean but not frequent.

The purpose of our work is twofold. First, the
rule set can be viewed as part of a transfer-based

machine translation system from Standard German
to Swiss German dialects. In this case, one could
use a parser to analyze any Standard German sen-
tence before applying the transformation rules. Sec-
ond, the rules allow to transform the manually anno-
tated sentences of a Standard German treebank in or-
der to automatically derive Swiss German treebanks.
Such treebanks – even if they are of lower quality
than manually annotated ones – could then be used
to train statistical models for Swiss German part-of-
speech tagging or full parsing. Moreover, they could
be used to train statistical machine translation mod-
els to translate out of the dialects into Standard Ger-
man.11

Both lines of research will be tested in future
work. In addition, the rules presented here only deal
with syntactic transformations. Word-level transfor-
mations (phonetic, lexical and morphological adap-
tations) will have to be dealt with by other means.

Furthermore, we would like to test if syntactic
patterns can be used successfully for dialect identi-
fication, as this has been done with lexical and pho-
netic cues in previous work (Scherrer and Rambow,
2010b).

Another aspect of future research concerns the
type of treebank used. The TIGER corpus consists
of newspaper texts, which is hardly a genre fre-
quently used in Swiss German. Spoken language
texts would be more realistic to translate. The TüBa-
D/S treebank (Hinrichs et al., 2000) provides syntac-
tically annotated speech data, but its lack of morpho-
logical annotation and its diverging annotation stan-
dard have prevented its use in our research for the
time being.

References
Sabine Brants, Stefanie Dipper, Silvia Hansen, Wolfgang

Lezius, and George Smith. 2002. The TIGER Tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theories, Sozopol.

Claudia Bucheli and Elvira Glaser. 2002. The syn-
tactic atlas of Swiss German dialects: empirical and

11While nearly all speakers of Swiss German also understand
Standard German, the inverse is not the case. Hence, a ma-
chine translation system would be most useful for the dialect-to-
standard direction. The lack of parallel training data and syntac-
tic resources for the dialect side prevented the creation of such
a system until now.

37



methodological problems. In Sjef Barbiers, Leonie
Cornips, and Susanne van der Kleij, editors, Syntac-
tic Microvariation, volume II. Meertens Institute Elec-
tronic Publications in Linguistics, Amsterdam.

Sabine Buchholz and Erwin Marsi. 2006. CoNLL-X
shared task on multilingual dependency parsing. In
Proceedings of the 10th Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-X), pages 149–
164, New York City.

David Chiang, Mona Diab, Nizar Habash, Owen Ram-
bow, and Safiullah Shareef. 2006. Parsing Arabic di-
alects. In EACL’06: Proceedings of the Eleventh Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Compuational Linguistics, pages 369–376, Trento.

Antonio M. Corbı́-Bellot, Mikel L. Forcada, Sergio Ortiz-
Rojas, Juan Antonio Pérez-Ortiz, Gema Ramı́rez-
Sánchez, Felipe Sánchez-Martı́nez, Iñaki Alegria,
Aingeru Mayor, and Kepa Sarasola. 2005. An open-
source shallow-transfer machine translation engine for
the Romance languages of Spain. In Proceedings of
EAMT’05, pages 79–86, Budapest.

Erhard W. Hinrichs, Julia Bartels, Yasuhiro Kawata, Valia
Kordoni, and Heike Telljohann. 2000. The Tübingen
treebanks for spoken German, English, and Japanese.
In Wolfgang Wahlster, editor, Verbmobil: Foundations
of Speech-to-Speech Translation. Springer, Berlin.

Petr Homola and Vladislav Kuboň. 2005. A machine
translation system into a minority language. In Pro-
ceedings of RANLP’05, Borovets.

Hubert Klausmann, editor. 2006. Raumstrukturen im
Alemannischen. Neugebauer, Graz/Feldkirch.

Sandra Kübler. 2008. The PaGe 2008 shared task on
parsing German. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Parsing German, pages 55–63, Columbus, Ohio.

Andreas Lötscher. 1983. Schweizerdeutsch. Geschichte,
Dialekte, Gebrauch. Huber, Frauenfeld.

Zvi Penner, editor. 1995. Topics in Swiss German Syn-
tax. Peter Lang, Bern.

Yves Scherrer and Owen Rambow. 2010a. Natural lan-
guage processing for the Swiss German dialect area.
In Proceedings of KONVENS’10, Saarbrücken.

Yves Scherrer and Owen Rambow. 2010b. Word-based
dialect identification with georeferenced rules. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP 2010, Cambridge, MA.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2009. Character-based PSMT
for closely related languages. In Proceedings of
EAMT’09, pages 12 – 19, Barcelona.

Pascal Vaillant. 2008. A layered grammar model: Using
tree-adjoining grammars to build a common syntactic
kernel for related dialects. In TAG+9 2008 – The Ninth
International Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars
and Related Formalisms, pages 157–164, Tübingen.

David Vilar, Jan-Thorsten Peter, and Hermann Ney.
2007. Can we translate letters? In Proceedings of the
Second Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 33–39, Prague.

Martin Volk and Yvonne Samuelsson. 2004. Bootstrap-
ping parallel treebanks. In COLING 2004 5th Inter-
national Workshop on Linguistically Interpreted Cor-
pora, pages 63–70, Geneva.

38


