










































Coreference Annotator - A new annotation tool for aligned bilingual corpora


Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing, pages 43–52,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 12-14 September 2011.

Coreference Annotator
A new annotation tool for aligned bilingual corpora

Mara Tsoumari
School of English

Faculty of Philosophy
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki

54 124, P.O. Box 58, Thessaloniki, Greece
mtsoum2@gmail.com, mara@optimum-services.com

Georgios Petasis
Software and Knowledge Engineering Laboratory
Institute of Informatics and Telecommunications

National Centre for Scientific Research (N.C.S.R.) “Demokritos”
GR-153 10, P.O. BOX 60228, Aghia Paraskevi, Athens, Greece

petasis@iit.demokritos.gr

Abstract

This paper presents the main features of an
annotation tool, the Coreference Annota-
tor, which manages bilingual corpora con-
sisting of aligned texts that can be grouped
in collections and subcollections accord-
ing to their topics and discourse. The
tool allows the manual annotation of cer-
tain linguistic items in the source text and
their translation equivalent in the target
text, by entering useful information about
these items based on their context.

1 Introduction

The annotation tool, Coreference Annotator, has
been developed within the framework of wider re-
search in the analysis of parallel texts from a trans-
lation point of view. More specifically, the re-
search attempts a theoretical classification of the
translation of European Union texts in the light of
Relevance Theory (Tsoumari, 2008), and exam-
ines a special use monodirectional bilingual cor-
pus consisting of aligned English (originals/source
texts) and Greek (translations/target texts) ver-
sions of press releases of the European Commis-
sion.

The aim of the annotation tool is for the re-
searcher to trace and annotate manually certain
linguistic items in the source text and their transla-
tion equivalent in the target text, by entering use-
ful information about these items based on their
context. The focus for this study is on identify-
ing discourse markers and conjunctions that ex-
press concession/contrast/adversity in the source

text and then locating their translation equiva-
lent in the target text. To the group of markers
mentioned above, the conjunction ‘and’ has been
added. Cases of omission of source text conjunc-
tions or discourse markers, or addition of conjunc-
tions or discourse markers in the target text are
also marked.

2 Motivation

The scope of the research that motivated the cre-
ation of this tool combines mainly translation, par-
allel corpora (original-source texts and translation-
target texts), semantics, pragmatics, and discourse.
A parallel aligned corpus of press releases of the
European Commission is examined both trans-
lationally and linguistically to reach conclusions
about how certain linguistic items are translated,
potentially reflecting the intention of the authors;
the expectations of the readers; whether intention-
ality and expectations change when moving from
the source text to the target text; and effects from
genre, discourses depending on the topics of the
documents, public sentiment or culture.

2.1 Translation in the EU
There is an intriguing matter in the translation of
European Union documents into all or some of the
official languages of the European Union. On the
one hand, there are rules and regulations govern-
ing the operation of European countries together
as a whole, as a single unity forming the Euro-
pean Union, and EU culture and mentality. On
the other hand, the European countries-member
states maintain their national cultures and mental-
ities. Research has shown that the culture of the

43



EU edifice is different from national cultures, has
a culture of its own, despite the likely blurred bor-
derlines between them (Koskinen, 2001; Koski-
nen, 2004). EU texts and their translation serve
a primary communicative situation, since origi-
nal texts are written to be translated so as to help
EU (source text) authors reach different national
(target) language users. Some of the characteris-
tics of EU texts are that they are often produced
and translated almost at the same time (Koutsivi-
tis, 1994); translation may constitute the starting
point to improve the ‘original’ (Koutsivitis, 2003);
the writers are usually a group of people or a com-
mittee; most source texts are written in English
and to a lesser degree in French and German (three
procedural languages); the authors are not neces-
sarily native speakers of the language they use for
writing; source texts may not always be written in
one language and have special linguistic, syntacti-
cal and stylistic characteristics called Eurojargon,
Eurobabble or Eurospeak (Trosborg, 1997). Thus
the translation process, strategies and methods are
also affected by the particular circumstances of the
production of target texts.

2.2 Press releases of the European
Commission

EU press releases are one of the types of doc-
uments produced in the framework of the Euro-
pean Union and are distinct from non-EU press
releases. The reason is that if we accept that the
European Union has a culture of its own, as Kosk-
inen (2001; Koskinen (2004) argues, then it is only
normal to expect the production of EU culture-
specific texts and genres. EC (European Commis-
sion) press releases are produced under the same
EU-specific conditions as most EU documents are,
i.e. multiple versions drafted and translated at the
same time, non-native speakers drafting the doc-
uments etc. Culture has its own manner to con-
struct and partition reality which is mirrored in its
discourses, that is “modes of talking and thinking
which can become ritualised” (Hatim and Mason,
1990). EU culture is no exception to that. In a
corpus of aligned EC press releases an issue worth
examining is whether the translation is affected by
the different topics and discourses of the press re-
leases.

2.3 Connectives: Relevance theory and
Sentiment analysis

Connectives have been selected to be examined
because they draw attention due to their status.
According to Relevance Theory (Wilson and Sper-
ber, 2002), the author produces his/her speech
in such a way so that the reader will reach the
speaker-intended interpretation with the least pro-
cessing effort. The speaker, in order to achieve
this, makes certain assumptions about the reader’s
background knowledge and, thus, expectations,
and based on these assumptions formulates his/her
discourse. From a relevance-theoretic perspective
(Wilson and Sperber, 1993; Blakemore, 1987),
connectives are not linking items, but devices
whose meaning plays a part in the interpretation
of an utterance. Among the different interpreta-
tions available, the hearer will decide which the
speaker-intended one is, and connectives can fa-
cilitate the elimination of some of the available in-
terpretations in order to achieve optimal relevance
(Rouchota, 1998), i.e. the best possible interpre-
tation for the hearer in terms of processing effort
and effect.

Connectives have also been discussed in senti-
ment analysis. There is research which uses lin-
guistic analysis and techniques to explore the sen-
timent of each sentence or phrase in a document.
Meena and Prabhakar (2007) addressed the effects
of conjunctions and sentence constructions in ex-
tracting sentiments associated with the phrases or
sentences of reviews. Conjunctions are seen as
crucial constituents when determining the polar-
ity of a sentence. They found that, usually, either
they alter the sentiment orientation to the opposite
direction or they enhance the sentiment of the sen-
tence.

Agarwal et al. (2008) involved in automatic sen-
timent analysis at sentence level in movie, car and
book reviews observed that sentence structure has
a fair contribution towards sentiment determina-
tion; conjunctions play a major role in defining
the sentence structure. Their basic assumption is:
“Not all phrases joined by a conjunct have same
level of significance in overall sentiment determi-
nation”.

3 Related tools

Parallel corpora are often used as linguistic re-
sources in translation. Special tools have been de-
signed to facilitate research in translation and mul-

44



tilingual parallel texts.
Callisto is a multilingual, multiplatform tool

providing a set of “annotation services” (Day et
al., 2004). Its standard components are textual
annotation view and a configurable table display.
Some of the tasks performed are automatic content
extraction entity and relation detection, character-
ization and co-reference, temporal phrase normal-
ization, named entity tagging, event and temporal
expression tagging etc.

The IAMTC Project combines already existing
facilities and newly developed ones and has devel-
oped an annotation tool for text manipulation. The
Project involves the creation of multilingual par-
allel corpora with semantic annotation to be used
in natural language applications (Farwell et al.,
2008). Annotation includes dependency parsing,
associating semantic concepts with lexical units,
and assigning theta roles.

MULTEXT (Ide and Véronis, 1994) is a project
involving the development of tools on the basis
of ”software reusability”, and multilingual paral-
lel corpora. It combines NLP and speech, and ex-
amines the possibilities for such a combination by
harmonizing tools and methods from both areas.
The annotation is performed with a segmenter, a
morphological analyser, a part of speech disam-
biguator, an aligner, a prosody tagger, and post-
editing tools. Thus, the annotated data provide in-
formation about syntax, morphology, prosody and
the alignment of parallel texts.

Propbank is a project where a corpus is anno-
tated with semantic roles for verb predicates (Choi
et al., 2010). Annotation is performed with the
help of Jubilee by simultaneously presenting syn-
tactic and semantic information. The process is
facilitated by Cornerstone, a user-friendly xml ed-
itor, customized to allow frame authors to create
and edit frameset files.

Finally, there is ParaConc (Barlow, 2002)
whose main characteristics are an alignment func-
tion, concordance search, search for specific
words and their possible translations, corpus fre-
quency and collocate frequency. But the tool has
no annotating function.

These tools cannot fully meet the particularities
of this research for the reasons discussed next.

4 Need for a new tool

The underlying factor that can bring the above dif-
ferent aspects and approaches together is an an-

notation tool that features certain specific charac-
teristics that are hard to find all in one annotation
tool. Coreference Annotator has those character-
istics. In particular, a) uploading aligned texts al-
ready processed in an efficient alignment tool so as
to achieve maximum alignment performance. The
tool’s ability to have as input aligned documents
allows a corpus builder to use a reliable external
aligner of one’s own choice and then use the an-
notation scheme for the manual annotation of the
aligned corpus; b) depicting the aligned texts in
such an arrangement that each pair of aligned texts
is clearly separated from the other pairs of aligned
texts; each translation unit consisting of the source
text segment and the target text segment in each
pair of aligned texts is clearly and easily detectable
from the other translation units. At the same time,
it keeps its place in the text manifesting coherence
and flow of text meaning in each language; c) al-
lowing the location of possible translation equiva-
lents in context of the instances of the linguistic
items examined, always keeping the source text
item and its target text equivalent in a close, binary
relationship. This unfolds the variety of equiva-
lents an item can have that may be either context
dependent or context independent, and also high-
lights translation procedures and strategies; d) al-
lowing the creation of a comparable profile at sen-
tence level of the source text entry and the target
text equivalent entry by entering accompanying in-
formation based on their context (distribution of
the entries, collocations etc.) in the appropriate
sections and fields of attributes – the source text
entry and its equivalent text entry are seen com-
prehensively as a whole; e) displaying all the at-
tribute sections and fields for each source text en-
try and its target text equivalent with one click
to provide easy access which is important due to
the large amount of data; f) allowing the examina-
tion of the target text in its own right to identify
the cases, if any, of linguistic items under inves-
tigation that are present in the target text without
being a translation equivalent of a source text en-
try; the annotation tool also provides for the cre-
ation of a profile for each target text addition en-
try; g) allowing the correlation of discourse top-
ics with the frequency of the linguistic items and
their translation equivalents in the two languages,
and also with their microenvironments, thanks to
the arrangement of the aligned texts; h) allowing
the correlation of discourse topics, the frequency

45



of the linguistic items and their translation equiv-
alents, and the frequency of the items added in the
target text; i) providing statistics based on the re-
lationship of the source text entry and its target
text equivalent where each result is fully and di-
rectly traceable in the corpus not only in terms
of which pair of aligned texts it is found in but
also in terms of its exact location in the pair, thus
keeping track of text meaning and structure, and
discourse; j) providing detailed statistics which al-
lows the grouping of information of the profile of
the entries for specialized analysis of results; k)
producing tables of statistics exportable to widely
commercial formats e.g. excel for further process-
ing, e.g. SPSS. Such a sophisticated annotation
tool allows multidisciplinary analysis. Finally, the
tool has been implemented as a component of the
Ellogon language engineering platform (Petasis et
al., 2002), making extensive use of its infrastruc-
ture for the easy creation of annotation tools.

5 Corpus of Collections

This tool has been tested with a corpus of English-
Greek press releases issued by the European Com-
mission from 1/1/2007 to 1/1/2009. The cor-
pus was drawn from the electronic text library
of all EU press releases (RAPID)1. The criteria
for text selection of that corpus are the availabil-
ity of a Greek version and the currency of top-
ics. The corpus consists of three thematic col-
lections: the Environment, Agriculture, and Pres-
idency Conclusions, which are further subdivided
into thematic subcollections within each collection
to make transparent the different discourses. The
corpus has been aligned using the WinAlign align-
ment tool – an application of the SDL Trados 2007
suite. Exporting the aligned corpus in plain text
format made it an appropriate input for the anno-
tation tool which has been adapted to accommo-
date such input. The use of a long-standing pro-
fessional alignment tool aims at achieving effec-
tive performance in the segmentation of the paral-
lel texts at the level of equivalent sentences or text
segments, i.e. translation units (SDL, 2007).

6 Annotation scheme

Annotation is conducted by associating attributes
to the linguistic items. The annotation tool con-
tains three sections of attribute fields. The first
section is general and the most frequently used.

1http://europa.eu/rapid/searchAction.do

In the first section, the focus is on the source
text entry (ST EN) and the target text entry (TT
EL) where the latter is considered the translation
equivalent of the former in that context. The ST
EN fields that follow relate to accompanying in-
formation of that token based on the particular
context. The same goes for the TT EL fields.
The next section, TT Addition, involves the ad-
dition of the items in question in the target texts.
The third section, Context, involves the context
of the texts. The original concept of that sec-
tion is an attempt to map the differences emerging
from the translation process between the two texts.
There is great flexibility in designing the annota-
tion scheme since using xml language allows the
creation of different attributes and values or sec-
tions of attributes or the change of the existing at-
tributes and values or sections of attributes.

6.1 Toolbar
The toolbar is on the top of the screen (see Fig-
ure 1) where the collections and the filenames
of the aligned documents of each collection are
found. The arrow icons guide the annotator to the
next or previous document of the collection. Few
more icons facilitate managing the documents.

After selecting a collection and an aligned doc-
ument, on the left side of the tool we can see the
document in an aligned form – one column with
the source text (ST) and one column with the tar-
get text (TT). The aligned document is presented
in translation units, i.e. linked source and target
text segments, with serial numbers for each unit
for easier reference/retrieval when analysing a cor-
pus. Also, to facilitate the visual separation of the
translation units the background colour of the units
alternates between white and light blue.

6.2 First section of attributes – General
On the right side of the tool, the three sections of
attributes are presented. In the first section, the
focus is on the source text entry (ST EN) and the
target text entry (TT EL) where the latter is con-
sidered the translation equivalent of the former in
that context. The ST EN and TT EL fields that fol-
low relate to accompanying information of those
tokens based on the particular context. When there
is an arrow icon on the fields, there is a drop-down
list of attributes to select. When an item is an-
notated the tool highlights it. Different annotated
entries are highlighted with different colours but
each ST EN entry has the same colour with its TT

46



Figure 1: Toolbar and first section of Coreference Annotator – General.

EL equivalent entry. The fields ST EN/TT EL Ex-
pression accommodate cases where the ST EN/TT
EL entries are part of an expression or form a col-
location with the surrounding words. Each entry is
also annotated for its rhetorical relation and cate-
gory in that particular context. The values in these
fields have been selected in relation to the connec-
tives and discourse markers of interest. For cases
where the discourse marker or connective has an-
other function besides the linking one, the value
“0” in the ST/TT Rhetorical Relation fields and
the value “Other” in the ST/TT Category fields
have been provided. There is also provision if a
punctuation mark is in place of a TT EL entry.
The checkbox of the ST/TT Phrase-level connec-
tion provides information about how often the ST
and TT markers/connectives in question link pred-
icates or non-predicates (noun phrases, adjectival
phrases etc.) in their language respectively. Dif-
ference in the type of connection between the ST
EN entry and its TT EL equivalent entry manifests
different syntactic structures, and perhaps partici-
pant roles in the source and target languages. This
in turn may reflect translation strategies e.g. shifts,
transpositions, modulations etc. The ST/TT Posi-
tion fields relate to the distribution of the tokens.
When the ST EN entry and its TT EL equivalent
are seen in parallel and a change in position is

noted, then different thematic and rhematic struc-
tures, and focus may be reflected in the two lan-
guages. Omission of an ST EN entry in the tar-
get text is also checked. The last two fields, “ST
Comment” and “TT Comment”, allow comments
by the annotator of the corpus that can be used ei-
ther in revising or in analysing the corpus annota-
tion.

An example can be a token of the additive con-
junction ‘and’ (see Figure 1): This entry involves
the token ‘and’, highlighted with blue colour in
the translation unit 20. Based on its attributes, it
is a conjunction of addition (ST Rhetorical Rela-
tion = “Addition”), a coordinator in particular (ST
Category = “Coordinator”), and connects phrases
(non-predicates) (“ST Phrase-level Connection”
box checked). The token acting as its equiva-
lent in the target text is και (kae) ‘and’, which is
also a conjunction of addition (TT Rhetorical Re-
lation = “Addition”), a coordinator (TT Category =
“Coordinator”), and connects non-predicates (“TT
Phrase-level Connection” box checked).

6.3 Second section of attributes – TT
Addition

The next section, TT Addition, involves the addi-
tion of the items in question in the target texts (see
Figure 2 – TT Addition). There are similar fields

47



Figure 2: TT Addition.

as in the first section of attributes. Because in this
section of attributes the starting point is the tar-
get text, a couple of extra fields of attributes have
been added: the “TT Rendering of” field which at-
tempts to classify the category of the word/phrase
in the ST, if any, that motivated the addition of
the discourse marker/connective in the TT; the
“TT Analysis/Rendering of Text/Expression” field
where the ST word/phrase is entered. Finally,
there is one more field, ST Clue for Additional TT
EL. Practically, this and the previous field have
a similar function. An example can be found in
translation unit 5 (see Figure 2): According to the
annotation, the TT EL entry και (kae) ‘and’ was
added in translation unit 5, is not used as a con-
junction (TT Rhetorical Relation=0) and performs
a different function from coordination in the struc-
ture of the sentence (TT Category=Other).

6.4 Third section – Context

The third section involves the context of the texts
(see Figure 3). The original concept of that section
is an attempt to map the differences that emerge
from the translation process. These differences
can be grammatical e.g. a change in the tense of a
verb form, semantic e.g. the choice of a slightly/a
lot different semantically TT EL equivalent, prag-
matic e.g. the choice of a completely different ex-

pression in the TT to render ST meaning, or lexical
e.g. the addition or omission of a word/phrase in
one of the two texts. The following pairs of fields
have been designed: ST Verb (or verb phrase) –
TT Verb (or verb phrase), ST Adjective (or adjec-
tival phrase) – TT Adjective (or adjectival phrase),
ST Adverb (or adverbial phrase) – TT Adverb (or
adverbial phrase), ST Other – TT Other. The last
pair involves differences that do not fall under any
of the other pairs. Then the differences recorded
can be evaluated compared with each other based
on which of the two options – ST option or TT
option – is more or less strong in meaning, more
or less informative, more or less appellative, and
more or less affective. Some of these differences
between the two texts are mandatory driven by lan-
guage restrictions, for instance, or optional driven
by cultural preferences, register, politics etc. Ei-
ther way, these differences create an effect to the
reader. So under the ST fields there are two check-
boxes ST More, ST Less and under the TT fields
respectively TT More, TT Less. For each differ-
ence entered the relevant box is checked; ST entry
evaluated as ST More or ST Less and TT equiv-
alent evaluated as TT More or TT Less. There is
one last checkbox in this section, Compensation,
called after the translation strategy. Compensa-
tion refers to making up for the loss of meaning

48



Figure 3: Context.

or effect in some part of the sentence in another
part of that sentence or in a contiguous sentence
(Newmark, 1988). This box is checked when the
difference in context in the two texts is due to the
translation strategy of compensation.

An example can be in translation unit 7 (see
Figure 4): According to the annotation, the ST
phrase ‘This aims to’ in translation unit 7, entered
in the ST Other field is classified as ST Less com-
pared to its TT equivalent phrase Με τη μεταρ-
ρύθμιση επιδιώκεται (Mae ti metarythmisi epid-
ioketai) ‘With the reform it is aimed’. The rea-
son is the act of referring in the English segment
where the demonstrative pronoun ‘This’, a lexi-
calized deictic element or indexical, is clarified
in the Greek segment with the nominal referent
μεταρρύθμιση (metarythmisi) ‘reform’. So the TT
phrase is more informative than the ST phrase. Be-
cause the foregrounded nominal in the TT phrase
Με τη μεταρρύθμιση (Mae ti metarythmisi epid-
ioketai) ‘With the reform it is aimed’ refers to the
pronominal fronted in the ST, this is another fac-
tor which enhances the effect of the referring act
in relation to the transposition between active and
passive voice. Thus, the referring act prevails and
classifies the TT phrase as TT More.

7 Statistics

Detailed statistics tables are produced covering
all possible search criteria. The findings are eas-
ily traceable in the corpus in terms of collection,
aligned text and position of the translation unit
where the item is found in the aligned text. In par-
ticular, three tables are generated. The first table
(see Figure 4) presents all the source text tokens
of interest per aligned document and collection,
their frequency, their translation equivalents along
with their own frequency, and cases of omission
of the source text connectives/discourse markers
in the target text. At the end of each collection,
there is the subtotal of the frequency of source
text connectives/discourse markers and their trans-
lation equivalents. After all the collections have
been examined the table presents the total results
of the total of collections. An important element
is that next to each result there are the numbered
translation units where the source text connec-
tive/discourse marker and its target text equiva-
lent are found. This last feature allows easy re-
trieval of the translation unit, which ensures keep-
ing track of text meaning and structure, and flow
of discourse.

The second table (see Figure 5) presents
grouped data based on the first section of at-

49



Figure 4: Statistics Table 1.

Figure 5: Statistics Table 2.

50



tributes. It includes the elements of the first
statistics table enriched with the accompanying at-
tributes of both source and target text entries. The
results present linearly, focusing on the ST entry –
TT equivalent entry pair, the attributes which ac-
company the pair. Every time an attribute of the
pair changes, there is a different entry in the re-
sults. Again, information on the document, collec-
tion and translation unit where the pairs with the
specific attributes are found satisfies any search
criteria.

The third statistics table involves results from
the second section of attributes – TT Addition. It
follows the rationale of statistics table 2 (Figure 5)
but it focuses only on the target text items that have
been added without being a translation equivalent
of the source text items in question. Statistics for
the third section of attributes about Context has not
been designed yet because this section of attributes
has not been fully tested in the corpus.

8 Conclusion

The Coreference Annotator is an annotation tool
which is user friendly in its operation. It gives
the researcher the advantage of selecting an exter-
nal alignment tool for aligning a corpus of parallel
texts according to his/her needs. It allows great
flexibility in the study of various linguistic items
and the translation process at the same time pro-
viding, therefore, multiple levels of analysis. Thus
the researcher works with a tool that is easily ad-
justable to his/her varied needs in relation with the
annotation of bilingual data.

References
Ritesh Agarwal, T V Prabhakar, and Sugato

Chakrabarty. 2008. “I Know What You Feel”:
Analyzing the Role of Conjunctions in Automatic
Sentiment Analysis. GoTAL, 5221(1):28–39.

Michael Barlow. 2002. ParaConc: concordance soft-
ware for multilingual parallel corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2002),
pages 20–24, Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain,
May 29–31. European Language Resources Associ-
ation.

Diana Blakemore. 1987. Semantic constraints on rele-
vance. Blackwell.

Jinho D. Choi, Claire Bonial, and Martha Palmer.
2010. Multilingual propbank annotation tools: Cor-
nerstone and jubilee. In Proceedings of the NAACL

HLT 2010 Demonstration Session, HLT-DEMO ’10,
pages 13–16, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

David Day, Chad McHenry, Robyn Kozierok, and Lau-
rel Riek. 2004. Callisto : A configurable annotation
workbench. In Maria Teresa Lino, Maria Francisca
Xavier, Fatima Ferreira, Rute Costa, and Raquel
Silva, editors, Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC) 2004, pages 2073–2076, Lisbon, Portugal,
5. ELRA, European Language Resources Associa-
tion.

D. Farwell, S. Helmreich, B. Dorr, R. Green, F. Reeder,
K. Miller, L. Levin, T. Mitamura, E. Hovy, O. Ram-
bow, N. Habash, and A. Siddharthan, 2008. Inter-
lingual Annotation of Multilingual Text Corpora and
FrameNet. Moutin de Gruyter, Berlin.

Basil Hatim and Ian Mason. 1990. Discourse and the
translator. Language in social life series. Longman.

Nancy Ide and Jean Véronis. 1994. Multext: Multi-
lingual text tools and corpora. In Proceedings of the
15th conference on Computational linguistics - Vol-
ume 1, COLING ’94, pages 588–592, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Kaisa Koskinen. 2001. How to research EU transla-
tion? Perspectives, 9(4):293–300.

Kaisa Koskinen. 2004. Shared culture?: Reflec-
tions on recent trends in translation studies. Target,
16(1):143–156.

Vasilis Koutsivitis. 1994. Theoria tis Metafra-
sis. Ellinikes Panepistimiakes Ekdoseis, Athens,
Greece.

Vasilis Koutsivitis. 2003. I proklisi tis polyglossias sti
dievrimeni Evropaiki Enosi. In Speech at the 4th
Conference on Hellenic Language and Terminology,
Athens, Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain, October
30–31 and November 1st.

Arun Meena and T. V. Prabhakar. 2007. Sentence level
sentiment analysis in the presence of conjuncts using
linguistic analysis. In Proceedings of the 29th Eu-
ropean conference on IR research, ECIR’07, pages
573–580, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.

Peter Newmark. 1988. A Textbook of Translation.
Prentice-Hall International, New York.

Georgios Petasis, Vangelis Karkaletsis, Georgios
Paliouras, Ion Androutsopoulos, and Constantine D.
Spyropoulos. 2002. Ellogon: A New Text En-
gineering Platform. In Proceedings of the 3rd In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2002), pages 72–78, Las Palmas,
Canary Islands, Spain, May 29–31. European Lan-
guage Resources Association.

51



Villy Rouchota. 1998. Connectives, coherence and rel-
evance. In Villy Rouchota and Andreas H. Jucker,
editors, Current Issues in Relevance Theory, Prag-
matics & Beyond New Series, volume 58, pages 11–
58. John Benjamins Publishing Company.

SDL International, 2007. WinAlign User Guide 2007.

Anna Trosborg, editor. 1997. Text Typology and Trans-
lation. Benjamins Translation Library, 26. John
Benjamins, Philadelphia.

Mara Tsoumari. 2008. The translation of EU texts
and relevance. In E. Walaszewska, M. Kisielewska-
Krysiuk, A. Korzeniowska, and M. Grzegorzewska,
editors, Relevant Worlds: Current Perspectives on
Language, Translation and Relevance Theory, pages
188–205. Cambridge Scholars Publishing, Newcas-
tle, UK.

Deirdre Wilson and Dan Sperber. 1993. Linguistic
form and relevance. Lingua, 90.

Deirdre Wilson and Dan Sperber. 2002. Relevance
theory. UCL Working Papers. Linguistics, 14.

52


