










































Noisy SMS Machine Translation in Low-Density Languages


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 344–350,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Noisy SMS Machine Translation in Low-Density Languages

Vladimir Eidelman†, Kristy Hollingshead†, and Philip Resnik†‡
†UMIACS Laboratory for Computational Linguistics and Information Processing

‡Department of Linguistics
University of Maryland, College Park

{vlad,hollingk,resnik}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract

This paper presents the system we developed
for the 2011 WMT Haitian Creole–English
SMS featured translation task. Applying stan-
dard statistical machine translation methods to
noisy real-world SMS data in a low-density
language setting such as Haitian Creole poses
a unique set of challenges, which we attempt
to address in this work. Along with techniques
to better exploit the limited available train-
ing data, we explore the benefits of several
methods for alleviating the additional noise
inherent in the SMS and transforming it to
better suite the assumptions of our hierarchi-
cal phrase-based model system. We show
that these methods lead to significant improve-
ments in BLEU score over the baseline.

1 Introduction

For the featured translation task of the Sixth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation, we devel-
oped a system for translating Haitian Creole Emer-
gency SMS messages. Given the nature of the task,
translating text messages that were sent during the
January 2010 earthquake in Haiti to an emergency
response service called Mission 4636, we were not
only faced with the problem of dealing with a low-
density language, but additionally, with noisy, real-
world data in a domain which has thus far received
relatively little attention in statistical machine trans-
lation. We were especially interested in this task be-
cause of the unique set of challenges that it poses
for existing translation systems. We focused our re-
search effort on techniques to better utilize the lim-
ited available training resources, as well as ways in

which we could automatically alleviate and trans-
form the noisy data to our advantage through the
use of automatic punctuation prediction, finite-state
raw-to-clean transduction, and grammar extraction.
All these techniques contributed to improving trans-
lation quality as measured by BLEU score over our
baseline system.

The rest of this paper is structured as follows.
First, we provide a brief overview of our baseline
system in Section 2, followed by an examination of
issues posed by this task and the steps we have taken
to address them in Section 3, and finally we con-
clude with experimental results and additional anal-
ysis.

2 System Overview

Our baseline system is based on a hierarchical
phrase-based translation model, which can formally
be described as a synchronous context-free gram-
mar (SCFG) (Chiang, 2007). Our system is imple-
mented in cdec, an open source framework for align-
ing, training, and decoding with a number of differ-
ent translation models, including SCFGs. (Dyer et
al., 2010). 1 SCFG grammars contain pairs of CFG
rules with aligned nonterminals, where by introduc-
ing these nonterminals into the grammar, such a sys-
tem is able to utilize both word and phrase level re-
ordering to capture the hierarchical structure of lan-
guage. SCFG translation models have been shown
to produce state-of-the-art translation for most lan-
guage pairs, as they are capable of both exploit-
ing lexical information for and efficiently comput-
ing all possible reorderings using a CKY-based de-
coder (Dyer et al., 2009).

1http://cdec-decoder.org

344



One benefit of cdec is the flexibility allowed with
regard to the input format, as it expects either a
string, lattice, or context-free forest, and subse-
quently generates a hypergraph representing the full
translation forest without any pruning. This forest
can now be rescored, by intersecting it with a lan-
guage model for instance, to obtain output transla-
tions. These capabilities of cdec allow us to perform
the experiments described below, which may have
otherwise proven to be quite impractical to carry out
in another system.

The set of features used in our model were the
rule translation relative frequency P (e|f), a target
n-gram language model P (e), lexical translation
probabilities Plex(e|f) and Plex(f |e), a count of the
total number of rules used, a target word penalty,
and a count of the number of times the glue rule
is used. The number of non-terminals allowed in
a synchronous grammar rule was restricted to two,
and the non-terminal span limit was 12 for non-glue
grammars. The hierarchical phrase-based transla-
tion grammar was extracted using a suffix array rule
extractor (Lopez, 2007).

To optimize the feature weights for our model, we
used an implementation of the hypergraph minimum
error rate training (MERT) algorithm (Dyer et al.,
2010; Och, 2003) for training with an arbitrary loss
function. The error function we used was BLEU (Pa-
pineni et al., 2002), and the decoder was configured
to use cube pruning (Huang and Chiang, 2007) with
a limit of 100 candidates at each node.

2.1 Data Preparation

The SMS messages were originally translated by
English speaking volunteers for the purpose of pro-
viding first responders with information and loca-
tions requiring their assistance. As such, in order to
create a suitable parallel training corpus from which
to extract a translation grammar, a number of steps
had to be taken in addition to lowercasing and tok-
enizing both sides of training data. Many of the En-
glish translations had additional notes sections that
were added by the translator to the messages with
either personal notes or further informative remarks.
As these sections do not correspond to any text on
the source side, and would therefore degrade the
alignment process, these had to be identified and re-
moved. Furthermore, the anonymization of the data

resulted in tokens such as firstname and phonenum-
ber which were prevalent and had to be preserved
as they were. Since the total amount of Haitian-
English parallel data provided is quite limited, we
found additional data and augmented the available
set with data gathered by the CrisisCommons group
and made it available to other WMT participants.
The combined training corpus from which we ex-
tracted our grammar consisted of 123,609 sentence
pairs, which was then filtered for length and aligned
using the GIZA++ implementation of IBM Model
4 (Och and Ney, 2003) to obtain one-to-many align-
ments in either direction and symmetrized using the
grow-diag-final-and method (Koehn et al., 2003).

We trained a 5-gram language model using the
SRI language modeling toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) from
the English monolingual News Commentary and
News Crawl language modeling training data pro-
vided for the shared task and the English portion of
the parallel data with modified Kneser-Ney smooth-
ing (Chen and Goodman, 1996). We have previ-
ously found that since the beginnings and ends of
sentences often display unique characteristics that
are not easily captured within the context of the
model, explicitly annotating beginning and end of
sentence markers as part of our translation process
leads to significantly improved performance (Dyer
et al., 2009).

A further difficulty of the task stems from the fact
that there are two versions of the SMS test set, a raw
version, which contains the original messages, and a
clean version which was post-edited by humans. As
the evaluation of the task will consist of translating
these two versions of the test set, our baseline sys-
tem consisted of two systems, one built on the clean
data using the 900 sentences in SMS dev clean to
tune our feature weights, and evaluated using SMS
devtest clean, and one built analogously for the raw
data tuned on the 900 sentences in SMS dev raw and
evaluated on SMS devtest raw. We report results on
these sets as well as the 1274 sentences in the SMS
test set.

3 Experimental Variation

The results produced by the baseline systems are
presented in Table 1. As can be seen, the clean ver-
sion performs on par with the French-English trans-

345



BASELINE
Version Set BLEU TER

clean
dev 30.36 56.04
devtest 28.15 57.45
test 27.97 59.19

raw
dev 25.62 63.27
devtest 24.09 63.82
test 23.33 65.93

Table 1: Baseline system BLEU and TER scores

lation quality in the 2011 WMT shared translation
task,2 and significantly outperforms the raw version,
despite the content of the messages being identical.
This serves to underscore the importance of proper
post-processing of the raw data in order to attempt to
close the performance gap between the two versions.
Through analysis of the raw and clean data we iden-
tified several factors which we believe greatly con-
tribute to the difference in translation output. We
examine punctuation in Section 3.2, grammar post-
processing in Section 3.3, and morphological differ-
ences in Sections 3.4 and 3.5.

3.1 Automatic Resource Confidence Weighting
A practical technique when working with a low-
density language with limited resources is to du-
plicate the same trusted resource multiple times in
the parallel training corpus in order for the transla-
tion probabilities of the duplicated items to be aug-
mented. For instance, if we have confidence in the
entries of the glossary and dictionary, we can dupli-
cate them 10 times in our training data to increase
the associated probabilities. The aim of this strat-
egy is to take advantage of the limited resources and
exploit the reliable ones.

However, what happens if some resources are
more reliable than others? Looking at the provided
resources, we saw that in the Haitisurf dictionary,
the entry for paske is matched with for, while in
glossary-all-fix, paske is matched with because. If
we then consider the training data, we see that in
most cases, paske is in fact translated as because.
Motivated by this type of phenomenon, we em-
ployed an alternative strategy to simple duplication
which allows us to further exploit our prior knowl-
edge.

2http://matrix.statmt.org/matrix

First, we take the previously word-aligned base-
line training corpus and for each sentence pair and
word ei compute the alignment link count c(ei, fj)
over the positions j that ei is aligned with, repeating
for c(fi, ej) in the other direction. Then, we pro-
cess each resource we are considering duplicating,
and augment its score by c(ei, fj) for every pair of
words which was observed in the training data and
is present in the resource. This score is then normal-
ized by the size of the resource, and averaged over
both directions. The outcome of this process is a
score for each resource. Taking these scores on a
log scale and pinning the top score to associate with
20 duplications, the result is a decreasing number of
duplications for each subsequent resources, based on
our confidence in its entries. Thus, every entry in the
resource receives credit, as long as there is evidence
that the entries we have observed are reliable. On
our set of resources, the process produces a score of
17 for the Haitisurf dictionary and 183 for the glos-
sary, which is in line with what we would expect.
It may be that the resources may have entries which
occur in the test set but not in the training data, and
thus we may inadvertently skew our distribution in
a way which negatively impacts our performance,
however, overall we believe it is a sound assumption
that we should bias ourselves toward the more com-
mon occurrences based on the training data, as this
should provide us with a higher translation probabil-
ity from the good resources since the entries are re-
peated more often. Once we obtain a proper weight-
ing scheme for the resources, we construct a new
training corpus, and proceed forward from the align-
ment process.

Table 2 presents the BLEU and TER results of the
standard strategy of duplication against the confi-
dence weighting scheme outlined above. As can be

CONF. WT. X10
Version Set BLEU TER BLEU TER

clean
dev 30.79 55.71 30.61 55.31
devtest 27.92 57.66 28.22 57.06
test 27.97 59.65 27.74 59.34

raw
dev 26.11 62.64 25.72 62.99
devtest 24.16 63.71 24.18 63.71
test 23.66 65.69 23.06 66.78

Table 2: Confidence weighting versus x10 duplication

346



seen, the confidence weighting scheme substantially
outperforms the duplication for the dev set of both
versions, but these improvements do not carry over
to the clean devtest set. Therefore, for the rest of the
experiments presented in the paper, we will use the
confidence weighting scheme for the raw version,
and the standard duplication for the clean version.

3.2 Automatic Punctuation Prediction

Punctuation does not usually cause a problem in
text-based machine translation, but this changes
when venturing into the domain of SMS. Punctua-
tion is very informative to the translation process,
providing essential contextual information, much
as the aforementioned sentence boundary markers.
When this information is lacking, mistakes which
would have otherwise been avoided can be made.
Examining the data, we see there is substantially
more punctuation in the clean set than in the raw.
For example, there are 50% more comma’s in the
clean dev set than in the raw. A problem of lack of
punctuation has been studied in the context of spo-
ken language translation, where punctuation predic-
tion on the source language prior to translation has
been shown to improve performance (Dyer, 2007).
We take an analogous approach here, and train a hid-
den 5-gram model using SRILM on the punctuated
portion of the Haitian side of the parallel data. We
then applied the model to punctuate the raw dev set,
and tuned a system on this punctuated set. How-
ever, the translation performance did not improve.
This may have been do to several factors, including
the limited size of the training set, and the lack of
in-domain punctuated training data. Thus, we ap-
plied a self-training approach. We applied the punc-
tuation model to the SMS training data, which is
only available in the raw format. Once punctuated,
we re-trained our punctuation prediction model, now
including the automatically punctuated SMS data

AUTO-PUNC
Version Set BLEU TER

raw
dev 26.09 62.84
devtest 24.38 64.26
test 23.59 65.91

Table 3: Automatic punctuation prediction results

as part of the punctuation language model training
data. We use this second punctuation prediction
model to predict punctuation for the tuning and eval-
uation sets. We continue by creating a new parallel
training corpus which substitutes the original SMS
training data with the punctuated version, and build
a new translation system from it. The results from
using the self-trained punctuation method are pre-
sented in Table 3. Future experiments on the raw
version are performed using this punctuation.

3.3 Grammar Filtering
Although the grammars of a SCFG model per-
mit high-quality translation, the grammar extraction
procedure extracts many rules which are formally li-
censed by the model, but are otherwise incapable of
helping us produce a good translation. For example,
in this task we know that the token firstname must al-
ways translate as firstname, and never as phonenum-
ber. This refreshing lack of ambiguity allows us to
filter the grammar after extracting it from the train-
ing corpus, removing any grammar rule where these
conditions are not met, prior to decoding. Filtering
removed approximately 5% of the grammar rules.3

Table 4 shows the results of applying grammar fil-
tering to the raw and clean version.

GRAMMAR
Version Set BLEU TER

clean
dev 30.88 54.53
devtest 28.69 56.21
test 28.29 58.78

raw
dev 26.41 62.47
devtest 24.47 63.26
test 23.96 65.82

Table 4: Results of filtering the grammar in a post-
processing step before decoding

3.4 Raw-Clean Segmentation Lattice
As noted above, a major cause of the performance
degradation from the clean to the raw version is re-
lated to the morphological errors in the messages.
Figure 1 presents a segmentation lattice with two
versions of the same sentence; the first being from

3We experimented with more aggressive filtering based
on punctuation and numbers, but translation quality degraded
rapidly.

347



the raw version, and the second from the clean. We
can see that that Ilavach has been broken into two
segments, while ki sou has been combined into one.

Since we do not necessarily know in advance
which segmentation is the correct one for a better
quality translation, it may be of use to be able to
utilize both segmentations and allow the decoder to
learn the appropriate one. In previous work, word
segmentation lattices have been used to address the
problem of productive compounding in morphologi-
cally rich languages, such as German, where mor-
phemes are combined to make words but the or-
thography does not delineate the morpheme bound-
aries. These lattices encode alternative ways of seg-
menting compound words, and allow the decoder
to automatically choose which segmentation is best
for translation, leading to significantly improved re-
sults (Dyer, 2009). As opposed to building word
segmentation lattices from a linguistic morphologi-
cal analysis of a compound word, we propose to uti-
lize the lattice to encode all alternative ways of seg-
menting a word as presented to us in either the clean
or raw versions of a sentence. As the task requires
us to produce separate clean and raw output on the
test set, we tune one system on a lattice built from
the clean and raw dev set, and use the single system
to decode both the clean and raw test set separately.
Table 5 presents the results of using segmentation
lattices.

3.5 Raw-to-Clean Transformation Lattice

As can be seen in Tables 1, 2, and 3, system per-
formance on clean text greatly outperforms system
performance on raw text, with a difference of almost
5 BLEU points. Thus, we explored the possibility of
automatically transforming raw text into clean text,
based on the “parallel” raw and clean texts that were
provided as part of the task.

One standard approach might have been to train

SEG-LATTICE
Version Set BLEU TER

raw
dev 26.17 61.88
devtest 24.64 62.53
test 23.89 65.27

Table 5: Raw-Clean segmentation lattice tuning results

FST-LATTICE
Version Set BLEU TER

raw
dev 26.20 62.15
devtest 24.21 63.45
test 22.56 67.79

Table 6: Raw-to-clean transformation lattice results

a Haitian-to-Haitian MT system to “translate” from
raw text to clean text. However, since the training set
was only available as raw text, and only the dev and
devtest datasets had been cleaned, we clearly did not
have enough data to train a raw-to-clean translation
system. Thus, we created a finite-state transducer
(FST) by aligning the raw dev text to the clean dev
text, on a sentence-by-sentence basis. These raw-to-
clean alignments were created using a simple mini-
mum edit distance algorithm; substitution costs were
calculated according to orthographic match.

One option would be to use the resulting raw-to-
clean transducer to greedily replace each word (or
phrase) in the raw input with the predicted transfor-
mation into clean text. However, such a destructive
replacement method could easily introduce cascad-
ing errors by removing text that might have been
translated correctly. Fortunately, as mentioned in
Section 2, and utilized in the previous section, the
cdec decoder accepts lattices as input. Rather than
replacing raw text with the predicted transformation
into “clean” text, we add a path to the input lat-
tice for each possible transform, for each word and
phrase in the input. We tune a system on a lattice
built from this approach on the dev set, and use the
FST developed from the dev set in order to create
lattices for decoding the devtest and test sets. An
example is shown in Figure 3.4. Note that in this
example, the transformation technique correctly in-
serted new paths for ilavach and ki sou, correctly
retained the single path for zile, but overgenerated
many (incorrect) options for nan. Note, though, that
the original path for nan remains in the lattice, de-
laying the ambiguity resolution until later in the de-
coding process. Results from creating raw-to-clean
transformation lattices are presented in Table 6.

By comparing the results in Table 6 to those in
Table 5, we can see that the noise introduced by the
finite-state transformation process outweighed the

348



1 2
Eske

Éske
3

nou ap kite nou mouri nan zile

4
ila

5Ilavach

vach

6
la 

7
kisou

9

ki 8
okay

10
la

sou

Figure 1: Partial segmentation lattice combining the raw and clean versions of the sentence:
Are you going to let us die on Ile à Vaches which is located close the city of Les Cayes.

15

16

a

m

pa

te

l

17an

nan

lan

nan

18

nanak

19zile

20tant
21ila

22ilavach

nan vach

23
e

24sa
la

lanan 25
ki

26kisou

sou

Figure 2: Partial input lattice for sentence in Figure 3.4, generated using the raw-to-clean transform technique
described in Section 3.5.

gains of adding new phrases for tuning.

4 System Comparison

Table 7 shows the performance on the devtest set
of each of the system variations that we have pre-
sented in this paper. From this table, we can see
that our best-performing system on clean data was
the GRAMMAR system, where the training data was
multiplied by ten as described in Section 3.1, then
the grammar was filtered as described in Section 3.3.
Our performance on clean test data, using this sys-
tem, was 28.29 BLEU and 58.78 TER. Table 7 also
demonstrates that our best-performing system on
raw data was the SEG-LATTICE system, where the
training data was confidence-weighted (Section 3.1),
the grammar was filtered (Section 3.3), punctuation
was automatically added to the raw data as described
in Section 3.2, and the system was tuned on a lattice
created from the raw and clean dev dataset. Our per-
formance on raw test data, using this system, was
23.89 BLEU and 65.27 TER.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we presented our system for the 2011
WMT featured Haitian Creole–English translation
task. In order to improve translation quality of low-
density noisy SMS data, we experimented with a
number of methods that improve performance on
both the clean and raw versions of the data, and help

clean raw
System BLEU TER BLEU TER
BASELINE 28.15 57.45 24.09 63.82
CONF. WT. 27.92 57.66 24.16 63.71
X10 28.22 57.06 24.18 63.71
GRAMMAR 28.69 56.21 24.47 63.26
AUTO-PUNC – – 24.38 64.26
SEG-LATTICE – – 24.64 62.53
FST-LATTICE – – 24.21 63.45

Table 7: Comparison of all systems’ performance on
devtest set

close the gap between the post-edited and real-world
data according to BLEU and TER evaluation. The
methods employed were developed to specifically
address shortcomings we observed in the data, such
as segmentation lattices for morphological ambigu-
ity, confidence weighting for resource utilization,
and punctuation prediction for lack thereof. Overall,
this work emphasizes the feasibility of adapting ex-
isting translation technology to as-yet underexplored
domains, as well as the shortcomings that need to be
addressed in future work in real-world data.

6 Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge partial support
from the DARPA GALE program, No. HR0011-06-
2-001. In addition, the first author was supported by
the NDSEG Fellowship. Any opinions or findings
do not necessarily reflect the view of the sponsors.

349



References

Stanley F. Chen and Joshua Goodman. 1996. An empir-
ical study of smoothing techniques for language mod-
eling. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
310–318.

David Chiang. 2007. Hierarchical phrase-based trans-
lation. In Computational Linguistics, volume 33(2),
pages 201–228.

Chris Dyer, Hendra Setiawan, Yuval Marton, and Philip
Resnik. 2009. The University of Maryland statistical
machine translation system for the Fourth Workshop
on Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the EACL-
2009 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation.

Chris Dyer, Adam Lopez, Juri Ganitkevitch, Jonathan
Weese, Ferhan Ture, Phil Blunsom, Hendra Setiawan,
Vladimir Eidelman, and Philip Resnik. 2010. cdec: A
decoder, alignment, and learning framework for finite-
state and context-free translation models. In Proceed-
ings of ACL System Demonstrations.

Chris Dyer. 2007. The University of Maryland Trans-
lation system for IWSLT 2007. In Proceedings of
IWSLT.

Chris Dyer. 2009. Using a maximum entropy model to
build segmentation lattices for MT. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT.

Liang Huang and David Chiang. 2007. Forest rescoring:
Faster decoding with integrated language models. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation of Computational Linguistics, pages 144–151.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In NAACL
’03: Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics on Human Language Technology,
pages 48–54.

Adam Lopez. 2007. Hierarchical phrase-based trans-
lation with suffix arrays. In Proceedings of EMNLP,
pages 976–985.

Franz Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic com-
parison of various statistical alignment models. In
Computational Linguistics, volume 29(21), pages 19–
51.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 160–167.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of 40th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 311–318.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Intl. Conf. on Spoken Language
Processing.

350


