



















































How Comparable are Parallel Corpora? Measuring the Distribution of General Vocabulary and Connectives


How Comparable are Parallel Corpora?  
Measuring the Distribution of General Vocabulary and Connectives  

 
Bruno Cartoni Sandrine Zufferey Thomas Meyer Andrei Popescu-Belis 

Linguistics Department 
University of Geneva 

2, rue de Candolle 
CH – 1211 Geneva 4 

Linguistics Department 
University of Geneva 

2, rue de Candolle 
CH – 1211 Geneva 4 

Idiap Research Institute 
Rue Marconi 19 

CH – 1920 Martigny  

Idiap Research Institute 
Rue Marconi 19 

CH – 1920 Martigny  

{bruno.cartoni|sandrine.zufferey}@unige.ch {thomas.meyer|andrei.popescu-
belis}@idiap.ch 

 

Abstract 

In this paper, we question the 
homogeneity of a large parallel corpus 
by measuring the similarity between 
various sub-parts. We compare results 
obtained using a general measure of 
lexical similarity based on χ2 and by 
counting the number of discourse 
connectives. We argue that discourse 
connectives provide a more sensitive 
measure, revealing differences that are 
not visible with the general measure. We 
also provide evidence for the existence 
of specific characteristics defining 
translated texts as opposed to non-
translated ones, due to a universal 
tendency for explicitation. 

1 Introduction 

Comparable corpora are often considered as a 
solution to compensate for the lack of parallel 
corpora. Indeed, parallel corpora are still 
perceived as the gold standard resource for many 
multilingual natural language processing 
applications, such as statistical machine 
translation.  

The aim of this paper is to assess the 
homogeneity of the widely used Europarl 
parallel corpus (Koehn 2005) by comparing a 
distributional measure of lexical similarity with 
results focused on a more specific measure, the 
frequency of use of discourse connectives. 
Various perspectives can be taken to assess the 
homogeneity of this corpus. First, we evaluate 

the (dis)similarities between translated and 
original language (Experiment 1) and then the 
(dis)similarities between texts translated from 
different source languages (Experiment 2). 

Analyzing the use of discourse connectives 
such as because and since in English highlights 
important differences between translated and 
original texts. The analysis also reveals 
important differences when comparing, for a 
given language, texts that have been translated 
from various source languages. The different 
distribution of connectives in original vs. 
translated French, as well as across varieties of 
French translated from various source languages 
(English, German, Italian and Spanish), are all 
the more intriguing that they are not matched by 
a distributional difference of the general 
vocabulary in these corpora. We will indeed 
show that a well-known method (Kilgarriff 
2001) designed to compare corpora finds that the 
original French and the various translated 
portions of Europarl are rather similar, 
regardless of their source language. 

The paper is structured as follows: we first 
present related work on the characterization of 
translated text (Section 2). In Section 3, we 
argue that analyzing discourse connectives sheds 
new light on text (dis)similarity. Section 4 
presents the Europarl parallel corpus and its sub-
parts that have been used in our studies, as well 
as the methodology and measures that have been 
applied to assess text similarities. Section 5 
presents our main findings and Section 6 
discusses our results, drawing methodological 
conclusions about the use of parallel corpora. 

78

Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, pages 78–86,
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,

Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics



2 Previous Work 

Existing studies on translated corpora are mainly 
designed to automatically identify the presence 
of so-called “translationese” or “third code”, in 
other words, a text style deemed to be specific to 
translated texts, as in (Baroni and Bernardini 
2005) or in (Ilisei et al. 2010). In the literature, 
many possible characteristics of translationese 
have been identified, such as those listed in 
(Baker 1996): translations are simpler than 
original texts (Laviosa-Braithwaite 1996); 
translations are more explicit than original texts 
due to an increase of cohesion markers (Blum-
Kulka 1986); and the items that are unique in the 
target system (i.e. that do not have exact 
equivalents in the source language) are under-
represented in translations (Tirkkonen-Condit 
2000).  

In the field of natural language processing, 
several studies on parallel corpora have shown 
that when building a statistical machine 
translation system, knowing which texts have 
been originally written in a given language and 
which ones are translations has an impact on the 
quality of the system (Ozdowska 2009). A 
recent study using machine learning has 
confirmed the universal of simplification as a 
feature of translated texts (Ilisei et al. 
2010).Corpora can be compared using similarity 
measures. Most of these measures are based on 
lexical frequency. Kilgariff (2001) provides a 
comprehensive review of the different methods 
for computing similarity. 

In this study, we chose to use the CBDF 
measure (Chi-by-degrees-of-freedom), as 
proposed in (Kilgariff 1997), to assess the 
similarity of our sub-corpora, as explained in 
Section 4.3. We compare this measure with 
another marker of text diversity (connectives), as 
explained in the following section. 

3 Discourse Connectives as Markers of 
Text Diversity 

Discourse connectives like but, because or while 
form a functional category of lexical items that 
are very frequently used to mark coherence 
relations such as explanation or contrast 
between units of text or discourse (e.g. Halliday 
& Hassan 1976; Mann & Thomson 1992; Knott 

& Dale 1994; Sanders 1997). One of the unique 
properties of discourse connectives is that the 
relation they convey can in many cases be 
inferred even when they are removed, as 
illustrated in (1) and (2):  

1 Max fell because Jack pushed him. 
2 Max fell. Jack pushed him.  

The causal relation conveyed by because in 
(1) is also inferable when the connective is 
absent by using world knowledge about the 
possible relation between the fact of pushing 
someone and this person’s fall in (2). In other 
words, contrary to most other lexical items, 
connectives can be used or left out without 
producing ungrammatical results or losing 
important aspects of meaning. At a macro-
textual level, it is however clear that a text 
containing no connective at all would become 
rather difficult to understand. Several psycho-
linguistic studies have indeed stressed the role of 
connectives for processing (Millis & Just 1994; 
Noordman & Blijzer 2000). But the point we 
want to make here is that in most texts or 
discourses, some coherence relations are 
conveyed by the use of connectives while others 
are not, depending on what the author/speaker 
feels necessary to mark explicitly. 

Another consequence of the fact that 
connectives are optional is that their use in 
translation can vary tremendously between the 
source and the target texts. Studies that have 
examined at the use of connectives in translation 
have indeed found that connectives were often 
removed or added in the target texts, and that the 
type of coherence relation conveyed was 
sometimes even modified due to the actual 
choice of connectives in the target system 
(Altenberg 1986; Baker 1993; Lamiroy 1994; 
Halverson 2004). For all these reasons, 
discourse connectives appear to be particularly 
interesting to investigate in relation to corpus 
homogeneity. 

In this study, we focus more particularly on 
the category of causal connectives, that is to say 
connectives such as because and since in 
English. This particular category seemed 
especially appropriate for our purposes for a 
number of reasons. First, causal connectives 
form a well-defined cluster in many languages 
and can be studied comprehensively. Second, 
causal relations are amongst the most basic ones 

79



for human cognition and in consequence causal 
connectives are widely used in almost all text 
types (Sanders & Sweetser 2009). Lastly, causal 
connectives have been found to be more volatile 
in translation than other categories, such as for 
example concessive connectives like but, 
however, etc. (Halverson 2004; Altenberg 1986). 

From a quantitative perspective, function 
words are usually very frequent whereas most 
content words tend to be in the tail of the 
distribution. This provides another reason to 
treat connectives as a key feature for assessing 
text similarities. 

4 Corpora and Methodology 

4.1 Corpora 

Our analysis is based on the Europarl corpus 
(Koehn 2005), a resource initially designed to 
train statistical machine translation systems. 
Europarl is a multilingual corpus that contains 
the minutes of the European Parliament. At the 
parliament, every deputy usually speaks in 
his/her own language, and all statements are 
transcribed, and then translated into the other 
official languages of the European Union (a total 
of 11 languages for this version of the corpus – 
version 5). Based on this data, several parallel 
bilingual corpora can be extracted, but caution is 
necessary because the exact status of every text, 
original or translated, is not always clearly 
stated. However, for a number of statements, a 
specific tag provides this information.  

From this multilingual corpus, we extracted 
for our first experiment two parallel and 
“directional” corpora (En-Fr and Fr-En). By 
“directional” we mean that the original and 
translated texts are clearly identified in these 
corpora. Namely, in the English-French subset, 
the original speeches were made in English 
(presumably mostly by native speakers), and 
then translated into French, while the reverse is 
true for French-English. Still, for many 
applications, these would appear as two 
undifferentiated subsets of an English-French 
parallel corpus.  

Since language tags are scarcely present, we 
automatically gathered all the tag information in 
all the language-specific files, correcting all the 
tags and discarding texts with contradictory 

information. Therefore, these extracted 
directional corpora are made of discontinuous 
sentences, because of the very nature of this 
multilingual corpus. In one single debate, each 
speaker speaks in his/her own language, and 
when extracting statements of one particular 
language, discourse cohesion across speakers is 
lost. However, this has no incidence at the 
global level on the quantitative distribution of 
connectives.  

We have focused our investigation on the 
years 1996 to 1999 of the Europarl corpus. 
Indeed, statistical investigations and information 
gathered at the European Parliament revealed 
that the translation policy had changed over the 
years. The 1996-1999 period appeared to contain 
the most reliable translated data of the whole 
corpus. 

For Experiment 1, we extracted two parallel 
directional corpora made of two languages – 
French and English – in order to compare 
translated and original texts in both languages, 
as shown in Figure 1. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 1 gives the number of tokens in the 
English-French and in the French-English 
parallel directional corpora. 

 
Parallel corpus Token in ST Token in TT 
English-French (EF) 1,412,316 1,583,775 
French-English (FE) 1,257,879 1,188,923 
Table 1: Number of tokens in Source Texts (ST) 

and Translated Texts (TT) of the parallel 
directional corpora. 

 
Following the same methodology, we extracted 
for Experiment 2 other parallel directional 

Figure 1: Parallel and comparable corpora 
extracted from Europarl 

Parallel directional corpora 
Comparable corpora 

Original 
English 

Original 
French 

Translated 
French 

Translated 
English 

80



corpora, again with French as a target language 
(also from the 1996-1999 period), as shown in 
Figure 2. Table 2 presents the sizes of these four 
additional comparable corpora.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parallel corpus Token in ST Token in TT 
German-French (DF) 1,254,531 1,516,634 
Italian-French (IF) 552,242 624,534 
Spanish-French (SF) 597,607 633,918 
Table 2: Number of tokens in Source Texts (ST) 
and Translated Texts (TT) of the three additional 
parallel directional corpora of translated French. 
 

These parallel directional corpora have been 
used as comparable corpora in our study because 
they are written in the same language and are of 
the same genre, but do not have the same 
“status”, since some are original texts while 
others are translations, as shown in . Moreover, 
for comparison purposes, we have also used a 
sub-part of Europarl which was originally 
produced in French (noted OF), corresponding 
to the French part of the French-English corpus 
described in Table 1 

All the experiments described below are 
based on these comparable corpora, i.e. on the 
translated vs. original corpus (for French and 
English) and on the different corpora of 
translated French (with Italian, English, Spanish 
and German as source languages).  

4.2 First Measure: CBDF Measure 

Following a proposal by Kilgarriff (2001), who 
criticizes a number of simpler techniques, we 
have measured corpus similarity by computing 
the χ2 statistic over the 500 most frequent words 

from the two corpora to be compared, which 
were limited to 200,000 words each, so that 
comparison with the values given by Kilgarriff 
was possible. The value was normalized by the 
number of degrees of freedom, which is (500–
1) × (2–1) = 499, hence its name. As shown by 
Kilgarriff with artificially designed corpora, for 
which the similarity level was known in 
advance, the χ2 statistic is a reliable indicator of 
similarity. Moreover, Kilgarriff (2001: Table 10, 
page 260) provides a table with the χ2 values for 
all 66 pairs of 200,000-word corpora selected 
from 12 English corpora, which we will use for 
comparison below. The table also lists internal 
homogeneity values for each corpus, obtained by 
averaging the χ2 statistic over each 200,000-
word corpus split several times in half. In fact, 
as the same method is used for computing both 
similarity and homogeneity, only 100,000-word 
fragments are used for similarity, as stated by 
Kilgarriff. 

The CBDF similarity values between 
100,000-word subsets of Original French (OF), 
French translated from English (EF), from 
Italian (IF), from German (DF), and from 
Spanish (SF) are shown in Table 4 below. 
Taking OF vs. EF as an example, these values 
are computed by summing up, for all of the most 
frequent 500 words in OF+EF, the difference 
between the observed and the expected number 
of occurrences in each of OF and EF, more 
precisely (o – e)2 / e, and then dividing the sum 
by 499. The expected number is simply the 
average of OF and EF occurrences, which is the 
best guess given the observations. The lower the 
result, the closer the two corpora are considered 
to be, in terms of lexical distribution, as shown 
by Kilgarriff (2001). 

For measuring homogeneity, we sliced each 
corpus in 10 equal parts, and computed the score 
by randomly building 10 different corpus 
configurations and calculating the average of the 
values.  

4.3 Second Measure: Counting Connectives 

As explained above, we focused our experiments 
on comparing frequencies of causal connectives. 
For French, our list of items included parce que, 
puisque, car, and étant donné que. For English, 

Figure 2: Parallel and comparable corpora 
for Translated French 

Parallel directional corpora 
Comparable corpora 

Original 
English 

Original 
Italian 

Trans-
lated 

French 

Original 
German 

Original 
Spanish 

Trans-
lated 

French 

Transl-
lated 

French 

Trans-
lated 

French 

81



we included because, since, and given that1. In 
the case of since, we manually annotated its two 
meanings in order to distinguish its causal uses 
from its temporal ones, and retained only its 
causal uses in our counts. 

To count the number of occurrences for each 
causal connective in each sub-part of the corpus, 
we first pre-processed the corpora to transform 
each connective as one word-form (e.g. étant 
donné que became étantdonnéque, and puisqu’ 
became puisque.). Then, we counted each 
connective, and normalized the figures to obtain 
a ratio of connectives per 100,000 tokens. 

Moreover, when comparing French sub-
corpora translated from different source 
languages, we also computed the rank of each 
connective in the frequency list extracted from 
each corpus. Comparing these ranks provided 
important information about their respective 
frequencies.  

We have found that the frequency of each 
connective does not vary significantly 
throughout the corpus (years 1996-1999), which 
tends to prove that the use of connectives does 
not depend crucially on the style of a particular 
speaker or translator.  

5 Results  

This section presents the results of the CBDF 
measure for each corpus (Section 5.1), and 
shows how the frequencies of connectives reveal 
differences between translated and original texts 
(Section 5.2) and between texts translated from 
various source languages (Section 5.3).   

5.1 Text Similarity according to CBDF 

For Experiment 1, we have compared the 
differences between original and translated texts, 
for English and French. The values of CBDF 
similarity resulting from this comparison are 
shown in Table 3. Compared to the different 
scores computed by Kilgarriff, these scores 
indicate that the two pairs of corpora are both 
quite similar.  

                                                           
1  The English causal connective for is more 
difficult to address because of its ambiguity with the 
homographic preposition. However, on a sample of 500 
tokens of for randomly extracted from Europarl, we found 
only two occurrences of the connective for, leading us to 
exclude this connective from our investigation. 

 CBDF 
Original English – Translated English 13.28 
Original French – Translated French 12.28 
Table 3: CBDF between original and translated 

texts 
 

The similarities between sub-corpora of 
French translated from different source 
languages (Experiment 2) are shown in Table 4. 
The values comparing the same portion (e.g. 
OF/OF) indicate the homogeneity score of the 
respective sub-corpus. 

 
 OF EF DF IF SF 

OF 2.64     
EF 6.00 3.34    
DF 5.11 4.83 2.74   
IF 4.88 6.30 4.99 2.86  
SF 5.34 5.43 5.36 4.43 2.22 

Table 4: Values of CBDF (χ2 statistic 
normalized by degrees of freedom) for all pairs 
of source-specific 200,000-word subsets from 

Europarl. The lower the value, the more similar 
the subsets.   

 
Looking at the values in Table 4, we can see 

that the similarity score between OF and EF is 
6.00, which, compared to Kilgarriff’s values for 
British corpora, is lower than all but two of the 
66 pairs of corpora he compared. Most of the 
values observed by Kilgarriff are in fact between 
20 and 40, and the similarity we found for OF 
vs. EF is, for instance, in the same range as the 
one for the journal The Face vs. The Daily 
Mirror, a tabloid, and higher than the similarity 
of two broadsheet newspapers (i.e., they get a 
lower CBDF value). Therefore, we can conclude 
that OF and EF are very similar from a word 
distribution point of view. 

As for the other pairs, they are all in the same 
range of similarity, again much more similar 
than the corpora cited in Kilgarriff’s Table 10. 
Regarding internal comparisons, OF/EF appears 
as the second most dissimilar pair, preceded 
only by IF/EF (French translated from Italian vs. 
from English). The most similar pair is Original 
French vs. French translated from Italian, which 
is not surprising given that the two languages are 
closely related. Also similar to OF/IF are the 
IF/SF and EF/DF pairs, reflecting the similarity 
of translations from related languages. 

82



Homogeneity values are higher than similarity 
values (the χ2 scores are lower). These values 
are again comparable, albeit clearly lower, than 
those found by Kilgarriff, and presumably 
account for the lower variety of parliamentary 
discourse. Still, these values are similar to those 
of the most homogeneous subset used by 
Kilgarriff, the Dictionary of National Biography 
(1.86) or the Computergram (2.20). 

Figures on the distribution of connectives, 
presented in the next section, tend to show that 
these sub-corpora are however not as similar as 
they may seem at a first view.  

5.2 Text Similarities Measured with the 
Use of Causal Connectives: 
Experiment 1 

In Experiment 1, we highlight the differences in 
the use of causal connectives between original 
English and translated English. Figure 3 shows 
the discrepancy between the use of the same 
connectives in original and translated texts. 
Among these connectives, since is the only truly 
ambiguous word. We have therefore also 
evaluated the proportion of causal uses of since 
among all the uses of the word since. In original 
English, this proportion is 31.8% and doubles in 
translated English to reach 67.7%. 

 

 
Figure 3: Ratio connectives/100,000 tokens in 

original and translated English. 
 
These figures show that original and 

translated texts differ, at least in terms of the 

number of causal connectives they contain. 
While because seems equally used in original 
and translated English, since and given that are 
used three times more frequently in translated 
than in original texts. This variability is also 
noticeable when comparing original and 
translated uses of French connectives, as shown 
in Figure 4.  

 
Figure 4: Ratio connectives/100’000 tokens in 

original and translated French. 
 

For French, while car seems to be equally 
used in both sub-parts of the corpus, parce que 
is used twice less frequently in translated than in 
original texts. This discrepancy is even bigger in 
the case of puisque, which is used five times less 
frequently in translated than in original texts. 
The reverse phenomenon is observed for étant 
donné que, which is used four times more 
frequently in translated than in original texts.  

By looking at the translation of every 
connective, we were able to count the number of 
connectives inserted in the target language, that 
is to say when there was a connective in the 
target system but no connective in the original 
text. Conversely, we have also counted the 
number of connectives removed in the target 
text, when a connective in the source language 
was not translated at all. Overall, we found that 
connectives were inserted much more often than 
removed during the process of translation. In the 
case of English as a target language, 65 
connectives were inserted while 35 were 

83



removed. In the case of French, 46 connectives 
were inserted while 11 were removed.  

5.3 Text similarities measured by the use of 
causal connectives: Experiment 2 

When comparing the number of occurrences of 
French causal connectives across texts translated 
from different languages, the differences are 
striking. Indeed, every source language seems to 
increase the use of one specific connective in the 
French translations.  

Figure 5 presents the ratio of connectives per 
100’000 token. The data compares the use of 
connectives in French translated from English, 
Italian, Spanish and German.  

 

 
Figure 5: Connectives per 100,000 tokens in 
French texts translated from various source 

languages (for each connective, from left to right 
OF, EF, IF, DF, SF) 

 
Table 5 provides the rank of every connective 

in the word frequency list (sorted by decreasing 
frequency) computed for each sub-corpus. Grey 
cells indicate the most frequent connective in 
each sub-corpus. 
 
 
 
 

 OF EF IF DF SF 
parce que 115 292 99 159 87 
car 136 172 201 82 85 
puisque 235 1070 601 886 790 
étant donné que 3882 1368 2104 1450 459 

Table 5: Rank of the connectives in word 
frequency list for each corpus. Note that the 

order varies with the source language. 
 

These figures show that the distribution of 
every connective differs radically according to 
the source language. Every source language 
seems to increase the use of one specific 
connective. When German is the source 
language, car is used twice more often than 
when English or Italian are the source 
languages. When Italian is the source language, 
parce que is used twice as often and when 
English is the source language, étant donné que 
is again used twice as often. Overall, puisque is 
the only connective that does not seem to be 
enhanced by any of the source languages, which 
confirms some prior linguistic analyses of this 
item, showing that puisque does not have exact 
equivalents in other close languages (Degand 
2004; Zufferey to appear).  

6 Discussion 

We have compared the use of discourse 
connectives in different sub-parts of the 
Europarl parallel corpus with the use of general 
vocabulary, as computed by a measure of lexical 
homogeneity. Our main finding is that even 
though the lexical measure showed the similarity 
of these sub-parts, the use of discourse 
connectives varied tremendously between the 
various sub-parts of our corpus. 

One of the reasons why connectives show 
more variability than many other lexical items is 
that they are almost always optional. In other 
words, as argued in Section 3, for every 
individual use of a connective, the translator has 
the option to use another connective in the target 
language or to leave the coherence relation it 
conveys implicit. Coherence marking is 
therefore a global rather than a local textual 
strategy. 

Given that connectives can be used or left out 
without producing ungrammatical results, 
studying their variability between comparable 
corpora provides interesting indications about 

84



their global homogeneity. The significant 
variability that we report between comparable 
(monolingual) sub-parts of the Europarl corpus 
indicates that they are not as homogeneous as 
global lexical measures like the CBDF tend to 
indicate. In other words, the various sub-parts of 
the corpus are not equivalents of one another for 
all purposes, and should not be used as such 
without caution. These differences were 
noticeable both by the different number of every 
connective used in every sub-part of the corpus, 
but also by the rather different frequency rank 
that was measured for every one of them in these 
same sub-parts. 

From a translation perspective, our study also 
provides some further confirmation for the 
existence of specific characteristics that define 
translated texts (i.e. “translationese” or “third 
code”). More specifically, our study 
corroborates the explicitation hypothesis (Blum-
Kulka 1986), positing that translated texts are 
more explicit than original ones due to an 
increase of cohesion markers. Connectives are 
part of the lexical markers that contribute to 
textual coherence, and we found that they are 
indeed more numerous in translated than in 
original texts. For English as a target language, 
translators have inserted twice as many 
connectives as they have removed. For French, 
this proportion raises to four times more 
insertions than omissions.  

However, our data also indicates that the 
source language has an important influence on 
the nature of its translation. Indeed, for the use 
of connectives, we report important variations 
between texts translated into French from 
various source languages. More interestingly 
still, every source language triggered the use of 
one specific connective over the others. This 
connective was always specific to one particular 
source language. 

It is also noteworthy that the similarity 
between texts translated into French, as 
measured with the CBDF, is greater when the 
source languages are typologically related. In 
our corpora of translated French, we found that 
texts were more similar when comparing the 
portion translated from Spanish and Italian 
(Romance languages) and when comparing texts 
translated from English and German (Germanic 
languages). This result makes intuitive sense and 

provides further confirmation of the reliability of 
this measure to assess global similarity between 
portions of texts. 

7 Conclusion 

The Europarl corpus is mostly used in NLP 
research without taking into account the 
direction of translation, in other words, without 
knowing which texts were originally produced 
in one language and which ones are translations. 
The experiments reported in this paper show that 
this status has a crucial influence of the nature of 
texts and should therefore be considered. 
Moreover, we have shown that translated texts 
from different source languages are not 
homogeneous either, therefore there is no unique 
translationese, and we identified some 
characteristics that vary according to the source 
language. 

Our study also indicates that global measures 
of corpus similarity are not always sensitive 
enough to detect all forms of lexical variation, 
notably in the use of discourse connectives. 
However, the variability observed in the use of 
these items should not be discarded, both 
because of their rather frequent use and because 
they form an important aspect of textual 
strategies involving cohesion. 

Acknowledgments 

This study was partially funded by the Swiss 
National Science Foundation through the 
COMTIS Sinergia project 
(www.idiap.ch/comtis). The authors would 
particularly like to thank Adam Kilgarriff for his 
explanations regarding the CBDF measure.  

References  

Altenberg Bengt. 1986. Contrastive linking in spoken 
and written English. In Tottie G. & Bäcklund U. 
(Eds.), English in Speech and writing: a 
symposium. Uppsala, 13-40. 

Baker Mona. 1993. In Other Words. A coursebook on 
translation. Routledge, London/New York. 

Baker Mona. 1996. Corpus-based translation studies: 
The challenges that lie ahead. In Somers H. (Ed.) 
Terminology, LSP and Translation. Studies in 
language engineering in honour of Juan C. Sager. 
John Benjamins, Amsterdam, 175-186. 

85



Baroni Marco and Bernardini Silvia. 2006. A new 
approach to the study of translationese: Machine-
learning the difference between original and 
translated text. Literary and Linguistic Computing 
21(3). 259-274 

Degand Liesbeth. 2004. Contrastive analyses, 
translation and speaker involvement: the case of 
puisque and aangezien. In Achard, M. & Kemmer, 
S. (Eds.), Language, Culture and Mind. The 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 251-270. 

Halliday Michael and Hasan Ruqaiya. 1976. Cohesion 
in English. Longman, London 

Halverson Sandra. 2004. Connectives as a translation 
problem. In Kittel, H. et al. (Eds.) An International 
Encyclopedia of Translation Studies. Walter de 
Gruyter, Berlin/New York, 562-572. 

Ilisei Iustina, Inkpen Diana, Corpas Pastor Gloria and 
Mitkov Russlan. 2010 Identification of 
Translationese: A Machine Learning Approach. In 
Gelbukh, A. (Ed), Computational Linguistics and 
Intelligent Text Processing Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science. Springer, Berlin / Heidelberg, 
503-511 

Kilgarriff Adam. 2001. Comparing Corpora. Intl. 
Journal of Corpus Linguistics 6(1): 1-37. 

Kilgariff Adam. 1997. Using word frequency lists to 
measure corpus homogeneity and similarity 
between corpora. In Fifth ACL Workshop on Very 
Large Corpora, Beijing. 

Knott Alistair and Dale Robert. 1994. Using 
linguistic phenomena to motivate a set of 
coherence relations. Discourse processes 18(1), 
35-62. 

Koehn Philipp. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for 
Statistical Machine Translation, MT Summit 2005. 

Lamiroy Beatrice. 1994. Pragmatic connectives and 
L2 acquisition. The case of French and Dutch. 
Pragmatics 4(2), 183-201. 

Laviosa-Braithwaite Sara. 1996. The English 
Comparable Corpus (ECC): A Resource and a 
Methodology for the Empirical Study of 
Translation. PhD Thesis, Manchester, UMIST. 

 
Mann William and Thomson Sandra. 1992. 

Relational Discourse Structure: A Comparison of 
Approaches to Structuring Text by 'Contrast'. In 
Hwang S. & Merrifield W. (Eds.), Language in 
Context: Essays for Robert E. Longacre. SIL, 
Dallas, 19-45. 

Millis Keith & Just Marcel. 1994. The influence of 
connectives on sentence comprehension. Journal 
of Memory and Language 33 (1): 128-147. 

New Boris, Pallier Christophe, Brysbaert Marc, Ferr 
Ludovic and Holloway Royal. 2004. Lexique~2: A 
New French Lexical Database. Behavior Research 
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36 (3): 516-
524.  

Noordman Leo and de Blijzer Femke. 2000. On the 
processing of causal relations. In E. Couper-
Kuhlen & B. Kortmann (Eds.) Cause, Condition, 
Concession, Contrast. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin. 
35-56. 

Ozdowska Sylvia. 2009. Données bilingues pour la 
TAS français-anglais : impact de la langue source 
et direction de traduction originales sur la qualité 
de la traduction. Proceedings of Traitement 
Automatique des Langues Naturelles, TALN'09, 
Senlis, France. 

Sanders Ted. 1997. Semantic and pragmatic sources 
of coherence: On the categorization of coherence 
relations in context. Discourse Processes 24: 119–
147. 

Sanders Ted and Sweetser Eve (Eds) 2009. Causal 
Categories in Discourse and Cognition. Mouton de 
Gruyter, Berlin. 

Tirkkonen-Condit Sonja. 2000. In search of 
translation universals: non-equivalence or 
« unique » items in a corpus test. Paper presented 
at the UMIST/UCL Research Models in 
Translation Studies Conference, Manchester, UK, 
April 2000. 

Zufferey Sandrine to appear. “Car, parce que, 
puisque” Revisited. Three empirical studies on 
French causal connectives. Journal of Pragmatics. 

 
 
 

86


