















































Philippine Languages Online Corpora: Status, issues, and prospects


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 59–62,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 12 and 13, 2011.

Philippine Languages Online Corpora:  Status, issues, and prospects 

 

 

Shirley Dita 

Department of English and Applied 

Linguistics, De La Salle University, 

Manila 

shirley.dita@gmail.com 

Rachel Edita O. Roxas 

Center for Human Language Technol-

ogies, College of Computer Studies, 

De La Salle University, Manila 

rachel.roxas@delasalle.ph 

 

  

 

Abstract 

This paper presents the work being done so far 

on the building of online corpus for Philippine 

languages.  As for the status, the Philippine 

Languages Online Corpora (PLOC) now 

boasts a 250,000-word written corpus of the 

eight major languages in the archipelago.  

Some of the issues confronting the corpus 

building and future directions for this project 

are likewise discussed in this paper. 

1 Introduction 

The 171 living Philippine languages have been 

the subject of linguistic investigations and de-

scriptions all over the world (see Liao 2006; 

Quakenbush 2005; Reid 1981; inter alia). As 

there are controversial and interesting features of 

Philippine-type languages that are distinct from 

other Austronesian languages, Philippinists have 

focused on the different features of Philippine 

languages over the years. For instance, Brainard 

(1994) has looked at voice and ergativity; or the 

focus system (see Barlaan 1986); or case system 

(see Ramos 1997); and recently, Dita (2010) on 

pronominal system.  But even with a considera-

ble overlap in syntax and morphology, there is a 

wide range of typological variety found among 

the more than one hundred Philippine languages 

(Reid & Liao 2004). And since the plethora of 

research in Philippine linguistics has been done 

by non-Filipinos and/or non-Philippine residents, 

authors have utilized various means to get hold 

of data on Philippine languages.  The methodo-

logical approaches of previous studies on lan-

guage description can be summed up to three:  1) 

researchers come to the Philippines and stay in 

the place where the language is spoken for a 

time; 2) researchers work with a native speaker 

of the language who currently resides abroad 

(close to the researchers); and 3) researchers use 

printed or published materials about the language 

of interest.  It is against this scenario that build-

ing a corpus of Philippine languages was concep-

tualized.   

In Dita, Roxas, & Inventado (2009), the de-

sign and scope of the first phase of the corpus 

building were described.  As was mentioned, the 

primary consideration of the data collection was 

the comparability of the texts in the languages 

included.    Hence, the first phase of the project 

included a rather limited text type and category, 

that is, only written texts with two categories:  

literary and religious.  Although there was a plan 

then to include journalistic and academic texts, it 

has been observed that not all languages have 

these text types. 

In what follows, we will describe the second 

phase of the Philippine Languages Online Corpo-

ra (henceforth, PLOC), and its current status in 

terms of data collection and analysis, its distin-

guishing features, and the issues encountered in 

the corpus building.  Recommendations and fu-

ture prospects are then outlined towards the end 

of the paper. 

2 Architecture and Parameters 

The initial idea was to pattern PLOC after the 

International Corpus of English where every va-

riety includes a one million-word collection of 

both written and spoken texts.  And as Dita et al. 

(2009) have emphasized, the first phase of the 

project faced serious time constraints.  This led 

to the decision to include the most popular kind 

of text in any Philippine language:  religious and 

literary texts. 

2.1 Size and Scope 

The standing goal of the project is to provide a 

comparable corpus of as many Philippine lan-

59



guages as possible.  To be able to do this, the 

first phase of the project consisted of the four top 

languages of the Philippines (Tagalog, Cebuano, 

Ilocano, and Hiligaynon) and the Filipino Sign 

Language (FSL).  The second phase includes the 

next four top languages (Bikol, Kapampangan, 

Pangasinense, and Waray-waray).  Hence, the 

project now consists of the eight major languages 

in the Philippines and the FSL.  

 

Language 

Native 

Speakers 

(Millions) 

Percentage 

of 

Population 

Tagalog 17 24.0 

Cebuano 15 21.0 

Ilocano 8 11.0 

Hiligaynon 

(3 dialects) 

7 10.0 

Bicolano 

(5 dialects) 

3.5 7.0 

Waray-waray 2.4 4.6 

Kapampangan 1.9 3.7 

Pangasinan 1.1 2.3 

Maguindanao 

(2 dialects) 

1 1.7 

Total 56.9 87 

Table 1.  The major Philippine languages 

 

Initially, there was a plan to pattern the PLOC 

after the structure and design of the International 

Corpus of English (ICE) project.  As reported by 

Bautista (2004), the Philippine component of the 

International Corpus of English (ICE-PHI) which 

is composed of over one million words 

(1,106,778 words, to be exact) of spoken and 

written English,  is the first mega-word electron-

ic corpus produced in the Philippines.  The 

PLOC is envisioned to be the first multi-million-

word electronic and online corpora of Philippine 

languages. But as there are more languages in-

cluded in the project, the 1 million size was re-

duced to 250,000 words for each language, and 

the written and spoken was reduced to written 

only.   

To date, PLOC only has the written genre and 

has two types of writing so far:  religious and 

literary.  Hence, for each language included, 

there are 100,000 words of religious texts and 

another 150,000 literary texts.  Although the lim-

itation of the data poses drawbacks, it is the 

comparability of the data that was taken into ac-

count. 
 

2.2 Some Issues 

The collection of texts had its own share of chal-

lenges.  Even with the advancement of technolo-

gy or the availability of OCRs, the kind of texts 

needed for the corpora could hardly be scanned.  

Religious and literary texts are usually the oldest 

existing literature on any given language.  Some 

of these texts had to be manually encoded, proof-

read, verified by a native speaker, tagged for 

corpus use, then uploaded.  In most cases, a par-

ticular language has more literary text than reli-

gious while in some cases, there are more reli-

gious than literary.  It is in this case that texts 

need to be carefully chosen to avoid corpus dis-

proportion.   

One of the inevitable limitations of the corpo-

ra is the issue of representativeness.  As earlier 

mentioned, the scope of texts for PLOC only in-

cludes religious and literary which is very specif-

ic.  Although a corpus, as Leech (1991) puts it, is 

ideally a representative of the language variety it 

is supposed to represent, the PLOC do not claim 

any representativeness of the languages included.  

But even with this limitation, the corpora still 

promise to be reliable bases for any linguistic 

investigation or analysis of Philippine languages. 

2.3 Corpus Tagging 

After the data is encoded, verified, and proof-

read, the next stage is the corpus tagging.  In cas-

es where the data exhibit some formatting styles 

such as texts in boldface, italics, or underline, the 

codes <b></b>, <i></i>, <u></u> are placed 

before and after the texts which are boldfaced, 

italicized, and underlined, respectively.  For spe-

cial characters, the following are used: 

<pd></pd> for non-end of sentence and 

<lbl></lbl> for special labels such as bible vers-

es.   As far as the data is concerned, these tags 

are sufficient to cover the special formatting 

styles and characters found in the documents. 

3 Corpus Processing and Tools  

3.1 Online Repository 

One distinguishing feature of PLOC is its being 

accessible online, unlike most corpora where 

they are distributed separately.  The data reposi-

tory is called Palito, a Tagalog term which liter-

ally means ‘stick’.  The online repository re-

quires a username and password which can be 

requested from the website master(s) upon veri-

fication of identity.  Users can either upload or 

download a document, both subject to the ap-

60



proval of the webmaster.  For users who want to 

contribute to the existing corpus, they send in 

their documents, the webmaster verifies accuracy 

and genuineness of the data then uploads them to 

the online repository.  The repository automati-

cally indexes the documents so they can easily be 

tracked.  Palito can be accessed through the fol-

lowing link: ccs.dlsu.edu.ph:8086/Palito 

 

 

 

 
Figure 1.  Screenshot of Palito’s front page 

 

3.2 Features of Palito 

Another feature of the repository is its internal 

browser.  For users who want to search for a par-

ticular document, such as short story or song, 

users are to click the ‘document’ icon then type 

in the specific name of the document.  All files 

under this category or name are then displayed. 

 

 
Figure 2.  Palito’s internal browser 

 

For the word frequency feature, the search key is 

simply typed in the ‘filter words’.  After which, 

the results are displayed which makes it more 

convenient for users who are interested in the 

distribution of a particular lexical item across the 

documents.  As can be seen in figure 3, the re-

sults display the results in descending order, 

from the files with the most number of the key-

word to the least.  

                         

 
Figure 3.  Palito’s word frequency feature 

 

Finally, Palito is equipped with concordance 

which generates a list of the occurrences of a 

specific word under search.  The concordance r 

is an indispensable tool for any corpus as it con-

veniently displays all occurrences of the keyword 

in the entire collection.  Figure 4 shows how 

concordance works for PLOC. 

 

               

 
Figure 5.  A screenshot of Palito’s concordancer 

 

Aside from the data in the Philippine corpus, the 

software tools will also aid language researchers 

everywhere in analyzing the Philippine lan-

guages, such as comparing different usages of 

the same word, analyzing collocates, and finding 

and analyzing phrases and idioms. 

 

4 Conclusion  

This paper has presented the work done so far 

in the building of the PLOC.  As Dita et al. 

(2009) have reported, there were many things to 

consider in conceptualizing the first phase of the 

project.  And since the primary consideration 

was the comparability of texts in different lan-

guages, the scope was rather limited to written 

genre in general, and to literary and religious 

texts, in particular.  The second phase of the pro-

ject has so far completed a 2-million word corpus 

of the eight major Philippine languages (Taga-

61



log, Cebuano, Ilocano, Hiligaynon, Bicol, Ka-

pampangan, Pangasinense, and Waray).  In 

summary, the present PLOC now contains a 

250,000-word written texts of the eight major 

languages in the Philippines. 

There are many plans for the expansion of the 

PLOC.  First, we plan to collect a 250,000-word 

counterpart in spoken texts.  The spoken texts 

will consist of dialogues and monologues: face-

to-face conversations for dialogues and speeches 

or radio/tv commentaries for monologues.  Se-

cond, we plan to extend the coverage of written 

texts by including journalistic writing and other 

‘creative’ writings such as advertisements, inter-

net texts and the like.  The plan is to get a one 

million-word of written and spoken corpus, for 

every language.  If this is achieved, the expan-

sion for the PLOC is to include as many Philip-

pine languages as possible.  When all these plans 

are achieved, there will be more chances of com-

paring features cross-linguistically, following the 

classic works of Blake (1906), Tsuchida, Yama-

da, Constantino, & Moriguchi (1989), and Con-

stantino (1965), to name a few. 

The PLOC, as it is envisioned to be, will make 

a significant contribution to Philippine linguis-

tics.  Doing linguistics by then, to quote Bautista 

(2004),  would mean “sitting in one’s armchair 

and introspecting and thinking of sample sen-

tences to exemplify particular structures” (p. 1), 

as opposed to going through the laborious task of 

fieldwork to collect data from different inform-

ants. 

 

Acknowledgments 
This project has been partially funded by the Na-

tional Commission for Culture and the Arts, Phil-

ippine Government. 

References  

D. Biber, S. Condrad, and R. Reppen. 1998.  Corpus 

linguistics:  Investigating language structure and 

use.  Cambridge:  CUP. 

E. Constantino.  1965. The sentence patterns of twen-

ty-six Philippine languages.  Lingua 15, 71-124. 

F. R. Blake. 1906.  Contributions to comparative Phil-

ippine grammar (Part 1).  Journal of the American 

Oriental Society 27, 317-396. 

G. Leech. 1991. The state of the art in corpus linguis-

tics. In K. Ajmer & B. Altenberg (Eds.), English 

Corpus Linguistics: Linguistic Studies in Honor of 

Jan Svartvik, (pp. 8-29). London: Longman. 

H. Liao.  2006.  Philippine linguistics:  The state-of-

the-art 1981-2005.  Paper presented at the Annual 

Lecture of the Andrew Gonzalez, FSC Distin-

guished Professorial Chair in Linguistics and Lan-

guage Education on March 4, 2006.  De La Salle 

University, Manila, Philippines.  

 

J. S. Quakenbush. 2005.  Philippine linguistics from 

an SIL perspective:  Trends and prospects.  In H. 

Liao & C.R.G. Rubino (Eds.), Current issues in 

Philippine linguistics and anthropology:  Parangal 

kay Lawrence A. Reid (pp. 3-27).  Manila:  Lin-

guistic Society of the Philippines and SIL Philip-

pines. 

L. Reid.  1981.  Philippine linguistics:  The state of 

the art:  1970-1980.  In D. V. Hart (Ed.), Philippine 

studies:  Political science, economics, and linguis-

tics (pp. 212-273).  DeKalb:  Center for Southeast 

Asian Studies, Northern Illinois University. 

L. Reid and H. Liao. 2004. A brief syntactic typology 

of Philippine languages. Language and Linguistics 

5(2), 433-490. 

M. L. S. Bautista.  2004. An Overview of the Philip-

pine Component of the International Corpus of 

English (ICE-PHI). Asian Englishes, 7(2), 8-26. 

P. M. Lewis. (Ed.) 2009. Ethnologue: Languages of 

the world (16
th

 ed.) Dallas, Tex.: SIL  

           International. Online ver-

sion: http://www.ethnologue.com/ 

R. Barlaan. 1986.  Some major aspects of the focus 

system in Isnag.  Ph.D. dissertation, University of 

Texas at Arlington. 

Shigeru. Tsuchida, Y. Yamada, E. Constantino, and 

T. Moriguchi.  (1989). Batanic languages:  Lists of 

sentences for grammatical features.  Tokyo:  The 

University of Tokyo. 

Shirley. N. Dita. 2010. A morphosyntactic analysis of 

the pronominal system of Philippine languages. 

Proceedings of the 24th Pacific Asia Conference in 

Language, Information & Computation (pp. 45-59). 

Tokyo: Waseda University Press. 

Shirley. N. Dita, R.E.O Roxas, and P. Inventado.  

2009.  Building Online Corpora of Philippine Lan-

guages. Proceedings of the Twenty-third Pacific 

Asia Conference on Language, Information and 

Computation, 646-653. 

S. Brainard.  1994.  Voice and ergativity in Karao.  

Ph.D. dissertation, University of Oregon. 

T. V. Ramos.  1997.  Case system of Tagalog verbs.  

Ph.D. dissertation, University of Hawaii. 

 

62


