










































Using lexical and corpus resources for augmenting the AAC-lexicon


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 120–127,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using lexical and corpus resources for augmenting the AAC lexicon

Katarina Heimann Mühlenbock
Dept of Swedish Language
University of Gothenburg

Gothenburg
katarina.heimann.muhlenbock@gu.se

Mats Lundälv
Dart

Queen Silvia Children’s Hospital
Gothenburg

mats.lundalv@vgregion.se

Abstract

A corpus of easy-to-read texts in combination
with a base vocabulary pool for Swedish was
used in order to build a basic vocabulary. The
coverage of these entries by symbols in an ex-
isting AAC database was then assessed. We
finally suggest a method for enriching the ex-
pressive power of the AAC language by com-
bining existing symbols and in this way illus-
trate additional concepts.

1 Introduction

A considerable proportion of the population, among
1.3 % of all individuals (Beukelman and Mirenda,
2005) are affected by severe communication dis-
orders, making them more or less unable to use
written and/or spoken language. Different language
supportive aids for these persons have evolved over
the years, mainly as graphical systems contain-
ing symbols and pictures, simplified supportive
signing (derived from sign language vocabulary),
or a combination of these, possibly comprising
speech synthesis and speech recognition. All these
supportive measures and methods are referred to
as Augmentative and Alternative Communication
(AAC).

A vocabulary comprising 20,878 lemma or base
forms from different sources was analysed in terms
of frequency and dispersion. The primary issue
in this study was to analyse to what extent the
concepts in the main AAC symbol databases mirror
the vocabulary needed to produce and understand
everyday Swedish language. Another goal was to
investigate the possibility of extending the AAC

symbol databases by combining separate basic
words from the vocabulary into compounds.

2 Background

A fundamental aspect for participation in the soci-
ety is the possibility to acquire information and to
communicate. For the majority of citizens, getting
information on every-day issues is hardly a task en-
tailing any specific problems. There is, however,
a substantial number of persons who have substan-
tial difficulties to benefit from ordinary written and
spoken sources, being dependent upon other modali-
ties, either to express themselves, or as a support for
interpretation, or both. For this purpose, AAC re-
sources in the shape of pictures and symbols have
been designed for use in low-tech solutions such
as communication books and boards, and high-level
technologies such as computer programs and eye-
tracking devices. AAC resources at hand are, how-
ever, burdened by two major problems. First, man-
ual production requires much effort and time. New
concepts have to be identified and a uniform agree-
ment has to be reached among different parties on
how to visually present the concept. Second, ac-
cessibility in the sense of a consumer’s or devel-
oper’s possibility and freedom to use available re-
sources, is strongly restricted by distribution, copy-
right and licensing issues. Different projects have
been carried out with the goal to develop and im-
plement some suggested open standards for syntac-
tic and semantic encoding of AAC material. The
European IST project WWAAC (World Wide Aug-
mentative & Alternative Communication, 2004) was

120



a pan-european initiative to make the web more ac-
cessible for a wide range of persons with language
and/or cognitive impairments.

An essential part of language lies within its ambi-
guity on the lexical as well as structural level. When
it comes to computerized processing, semantic vari-
ation between word forms, morphological relation-
ships within different word forms, and multiword
items claim specific handling, especially when en-
riching an existing vocabulary with new entries. In
fact, comparing wordlists and frequencies from dif-
ferent sources is a task affected by a couple of com-
plications. One problem encountered in a compara-
tive study of word frequencies is how a word is de-
fined, which in fact has been put under debate by
for instance Gardner (2007). In the present study,
we consider the lemma, i.e. the look up form of a
word, to be the key unit. The idea behind the use of
lemma frequencies as units of study is that the hu-
man mental or computational processing of lemmas
and inflected forms profit from each other, which is
in favour of a theory implying that a morphological
decomposition takes place for the recognition of in-
flected forms.

Knowledge of the vocabulary is an essential part
of both conveying and understanding messages, ver-
bally as well as non-verbally. Together with the sys-
tem of rules generating grammatical combinations,
the words in the vocabulary contribute to the infinite
expressive power of language. With a narrow vo-
cabulary, the possible means to produce and achieve
adequate information decreases. Researchers have
attempted to identify lists of words that could be in-
cluded in a core vocabulary (Thorndike and Lorge,
1944), (Spache, March 1953) and more specifically
for people who use AAC (Balandin and Iacono,
1998), (Banajee et al., 2003). There have also been
efforts to investigate how much of the vocabulary a
person needs to know in order to grasp the content
of written texts without having to struggle with iso-
lated, unknown words (Hirsch and Nation, 1992). In
the latter study, a list of around 2,000 high frequency
words of English, compiled by West (1953), was
used in order to investigate if knowledge of these
words was actually sufficient for reading unsimpli-
fied short novels. It was found that a person with
this restricted vocabulary was familiar with about
90-92% of the total words. It is worth noting that

the word frequency counts here reflect the number
of times a word pertaining to a certain word family
occurs in a text. The idea behind a word family is
that inflected and regulary derived forms of a known
base word can also be considered as known words if
the affixes are known. This implies that nouns, ad-
verbs, verbs and adjectives sharing a common base
will be treated as one word, contrary to the lexico-
graphical traditions (for Swedish), where the lemma
or base form is the conventional unit of study.

With this in mind, it follows that a database con-
taining a core vocabulary of a language has to con-
tain enough information for identification of differ-
ent lexemes. For our purposes in this study, it was
also necessary to add another source of information
in order to retrieve the semantic identifiers for sub-
sequent illustration of different concepts into AAC
symbols.

3 Experimental design

A corpus of easy-to-read texts and children’s fiction
was used in order to retrieve candidates for inclusion
into a database of basic Swedish. The hypothesis is
that by using a corpus of plain texts produced with
the aim of being easy to understand, we can derive
appropriate data for further statistical analysis of
which words or word forms are to be considered
as pertaining to a basic vocabulary. The candidates
retrieved by excerption of high-frequency lemmas
from the corpus were subsequently compared to
the base-form words in a Swedish base vocabulary,
where the lemmas obtaining the highest rank in
both sets were integrated into a database of core
vocabulary. The AAC symbol coverage of these
database entries was then assessed by addressing an
existing AAC symbol database. Finally, attempts
were made to expand the existing AAC vocabulary
through a semantic analysis of new words, simple
as well as compounds, and in that way make it
possible to illustrate new concepts.

4 Material

The material used comprise corpora as well as lex-
ica. Some of the resources are freely available from
the public domain, while other are used under spe-
cific permissions.

121



4.1 AAC material
Pictures and symbols aiding language and commu-
nication have been developed over decades. Some of
the symbol systems have a visual structure that sup-
ports different parts of speech. For this study, the
Widgit symbols library (Widgit Software, 2011) and
vocabulary in Swedish (preliminary version 11) was
used, covering around 11,000 symbols and 64,000
words (including synonyms and inflected forms).
Some of the symbols are produced in order to illus-
trate different concepts rather than isolated words,
which to some extent had a negative impact on the
comparison of different wordlists. The focus of in-
terest has been on content words, i.e. nouns, verbs,
adjectives and adverbs, since the functional words
normally don’t appear as independent items. In to-
tal, a wordlist of 20,907 entries was extracted, nor-
mally the lemma form. Proper nouns and numbers
were excluded in the study.

4.2 Corpora
4.2.1 LäSBarT

The primary corpus material for this study is LäS-
BarT, an acronym for Lättläst Svenska och Barnbok-
stext ’Easy-to-read Swedish and Children’s fiction
Texts’ (Mühlenbock, 2008). It is a specialized cor-
pus of 1.3 million tokens, compiled with the objec-
tive to mirror simple vocabulary and syntax. The
main text types include works from different do-
mains and genres, such as fiction, official documents
from the government, parliament, county council,
municipality and daily news. The common denomi-
nator for all the texts is that they are all intended to
be read by persons that do not fully master everyday
Swedish language.

The size of the corpus, 1.3 million tokens, was
compensated for by making text representativeness
be decisive during compilation. The supply of easy-
to-read material is limited and subsequently, the
variation range is quite narrow. Contrary to many
other writing tasks, the production of easy-to-read
text is elicited by a specific need from the soci-
ety and we cannot expect a large variety of genres.
Three genres of easy-to-read texts were identified
for obtaining a representative sample, namely fic-
tion, news and community information, which for
the target group of readers can be regarded as being

a balanced corpus.

4.2.2 SUC 2.0
SUC 2.0 is a balanced corpus of 1 million words

in written Swedish, originating from the 1990’s. It
is designed according to the Brown corpus (Fran-
cis and Kucera, 1979) and LOB corpus (Johansson
et al., 1978) principles, which means that it consists
of 500 samples of text with a length of about 2,000
words each. The state-of-the-art markup language at
the time of compilation was SGML, and this anno-
tation schema is kept also in the acctual, revised ver-
sion. All entries are annotated with parts-of-speech,
morphological analysis and lemma, or rather base
form. The corpus is also provided with a wide range
of structural tags and functionally interpreted tags,
according to the TEI standards Sperberg, (Consor-
tium, TEI, 2007).

At the lexeme level, about 23% of the SUC corpus
is covered by nouns, while verbs amounts to 17%,
adjectives to 9%, proper nouns to 4%, adverbs to
9%, prepositions 12%, conjunctions 8%, numbers
2%, pronouns 10% and determiners to 6% of the
total words. The total vocabulary has 69,371 base
forms.

4.3 Lexica
4.3.1 LäSBarT wordlist

The wordlist obtained from the LäSBarT cor-
pus, LäSBarT-listan (henceforward referred to as
LBL) contains 22,041 lemmas in total, covering
43,364 lexemes, proper nouns excluded. It contains
information about lexical frequency, baseform,
part-of-speech tag, and lemma/lexeme form. The
lemma/lexeme information tells us that a word like
sticka has three different lemma/lexeme forms,
namely sticka.1 for the noun sticka ’splinter;
knitting needle’, and sticka.2 or sticka.3 for the two
different verb lexemes with the meanings ’prick,
sting; put’ and ’knit’, respectively. This information
is necessary for further semantic disambiguation of
polysemous words.

The overall part-of-speech distribution is listed in
Table 1. In this study, 2,277 verbs, 14,856 nouns,
2,715 adjectives and 1,030 adverbs were extracted
for further analysis.

122



Part-of-speech % lemmas % lexemes
Nouns 67.4 20.1
Verbs 10.1 25.3
Adjectives 12.3 6.2
Adverbs 4.7 10.0
Prepositions 0.4 17.4
Conjunctions 0.1 7.1
Pronouns 1.2 12.6
Determiners 0.1 4.0

Table 1: POS-distribution in LBL

It is interesting to note a large discrepancy in ver-
bal representation between SUC (17 %) and LäS-
BarT (25 %). The most probable explanation to this
is the tendency among authors of easy-to-read texts
to paraphrase a complicated sentence by two or more
simpler ones, each necessitating a new head verb.

4.3.2 The Swedish Base Vocabulary Pool
The Swedish base lemma vocabulary pool (hence-

forward referred to as SBV) (Forsbom, 2006) is de-
rived from the SUC corpus. The units of the SBV are
the base forms from SUC annotation disambiguated
for part-of-speech. This means for example that a
polysemous and homonymous word pertaining to
different parts-of-speech such as a noun and a verb is
represented both as its nominal and its verbal form.
No information is, however, given at the lexeme or
semantic level. The version presently used contains
8,215 entries, where the lemmas are ranked accord-
ing to relative frequency weighted with dispersion,
i.e. how evenly spread-out they are across the sub-
corpora. Instead of using frequency alone, the for-
mula for adjusted frequency calculation was used
(Rosengren, 1972):

AF = (
n

∑
i=1

√
dixi)

2

where
AF = adjusted frequency
di = relative size of category i
xi = frequency in category i
n = number of categories

The SBV was used as reference material for the
comparison of dispersion of word base forms to
LäSBarT.

4.3.3 SALDO
SALDO (Borin and Forsberg, 2009) is a mod-

ern Swedish semantic and morphological lexicon.
The organization differs in a fundamental way from
the widely used lexical-semantic database Princeton
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), even though both are
based on psycholinguistic principles. While Prince-
ton WordNet and its descendant Swedish Word-
Net (Viberg et al., 2002), are organized in en-
coded concepts in terms of sets of synonyms, called
synsets, the associative relations between the entries
in SALDO are based on metaphorical kinships that
are specified as strictly hierarchical structures. Ev-
ery entry in SALDO must have a mother, which in
practice often is either a hyperonym or a synonym.
At the top of the hierarchy is an artificial most cen-
tral entry, the PRIM, which is used as the mother
of 50 semantically unrelated entries. In this way, all
entries become totally integrated into a single rooted
tree without cycles.

5 Comparative results

The lemma forms of 2,277 verbs (Fig. 1), 14,856
nouns (Fig. 2), 2,715 adjectives (Fig. 3) and 1,030
adverbs (Fig. 4) in LBL were compared against the
SBV in order to obtain lemmas occurring in both
lists, i.e. the intersection of two high-frequency and
evenly distributed sets of words in the two corpora
LäSBarT and SUC. This yielded a remaining set of
961 verbs, 2,390 nouns, 692 adjectives and 425 ad-
verbs, illustrated as the top two rectangles of each
figure. In order to analyse to what extent the AAC
symbols really supported this basic vocabulary, an
additional comparison was made, focusing on the
intersection of words with and without symbol cov-
erage in the two sets. It turned out that as much as
95 % (916 out of 961) of the verbs present in both
LBL and SBV also were represented by symbols.
For nouns, the corresponding ratio was 76 %, and
for adjectives and adverbs 71 % and 60 %, respec-
tively. Figures 1-4 illustrate the overall ratios.

123



5.1 Verbs
Adjusted frequency of the 44 verbs not represented
in the symbol database ranged between 14.97 and
1.38, implying a moderate dispersion and frequency.
In addition, the majority were compounds with an
adverb or preposition as prefix, predominantly com-
posite particle verbs. Authors of easy-to-read texts
normally avoid composite particle verbs and prefer
to use a paraphrase or synonym, since the former
lexical structure can be perceived as old-fashioned
and therefore difficult to understand. Furthermore,
as many as 29 of the verbs lemmas were hapax
words.

Some interesting features must also be mentioned
regarding the verbal semantic fields of the words not
supported by symbols. Many of the verbs seem to
fall into a group of socially motivated actions, such
as bestraffa ’punish’, fängsla ’imprison’, beordra
’command’, and uppfostra ’educate/rear’, all with a
rather stern tone.

Figure 1: Overall ratio of LäSBarT verbs, presence
in SBV and symbol coverage

5.2 Nouns
We found that 24 % of the noun lemmas in LBL and
SBV lacked symbol coverage, and that there was
a wide range in adjusted frequency, varying from

232.84 down to 1.06. Without making any formal
categorization, it is clear that the words with highest
adjusted frequency are abstract words, such as sam-
band ’connection’, brist ’lack’, sammanhang ’con-
text’, and allvar ’seriousness’. Some of the nouns
are meaningful only as elements of multiword ex-
pressions, such as skull ’sake’ or vis ’manner’, while
others seem to be ephemeral words from news re-
ports. One third are hapax, and 24 % of all are com-
pound nouns.

Figure 2: Overall ratio of LäSBarT nouns, presence
in SBV and symbol coverage

5.3 Adjectives and adverbs
For adjectives, the proportion of lemmas without
symbol coverage was as high as 29 %, while 40 %
of the adverbs lacked symbol support. Differences
in part-of-speech tagging for the two corpora, at the
procedural as well as the annotational level, might
however have influenced these results. Verb partici-
ples are for instance often subject to inconsistent
tagging.

6 Augmenting the AAC lexicon

The next step was to investigate to what extent
SALDO could be of assistance when augmenting

124



Figure 3: Overall ratio of LäSBarT adjectives, pres-
ence in SBV and symbol coverage

the AAC lexicon with additional concepts. Another
interesting question concerned the feasibility of
decomposing compounds into simplex words, each
analysed against SALDO and provided with infor-
mation necessary for correct symbol representation.
Each entry in the set of lemmas present in both
LBL and SBV, but without representation in the
symbol lexicon, was compared against SALDO.
As the concepts in SALDO are related by the
mother-child relation, we could get the necessary
lexical-semantic associations for further analysis
of probable candidates for symbol representation.
These could be either existing symbols, related as
hyperonyms or synonyms, or a combination of two
or more concepts.

As was stated earlier, a rather high proportion
of noun lemmas missing in the symbol database
were characterized as abstract nouns. We have
for instance the noun lemma kapitel ’chapter’,
which had an adjusted frequency of 105.71 in SBV
and a relative frequency of 1.03 × 10−4 in LBL.
From our core vocabulary database we get that the
only existing entry is identified as kapitel 1/1, i.e.

Figure 4: Overall ratio of LäSBarT adverbs, pres-
ence in SBV and symbol coverage

lemma identifier 1 and lexeme identifier 1. The
next step is to consult SALDO, where a look-up
of kapitel gives two matches: kapitel..1 with the
semantic descriptors avsnitt + bok ’section + book’,
and kapitel..2, with the semantic descriptor kyrka
’church’. Given the fact that in the primary corpus
material, the word is unambigous, we allowed to
illustrate the concept just by combining the symbols
for avsnitt ’section’ and bok ’book’, both existing in
the AAC database.

Concerning ompound nouns, which made up
the largest portion of lemmas occurring only in
LBL and not in SBV, (66 % of the 14,856 noun
lemmas), decomposition into simplex words made
it possible to achieve information enough for
further elaboration into symbol representations. An
example, illustrating this procedure, is the word
huvudkontor ’head office’. It is not present in the
symbol vocabulary, but we find it directly by a
look-up in SALDO with the semantic descriptors
kontor ’office’ and främst ’major’, both with symbol
coverage in the database.

The last example is another compound noun,
affärsägare ’shop owner’, a word that does not exist
in SALDO. The compound analysis tells that this
word has two constituents with a linking morpheme,

125



namely affär+s+ägare. Since we already have the
symbol illustrating the most common concept for
affär in the primary corpus material, we use that.
There is, however, no symbol in the database for
ägare. Turning to SALDO,the word ägare ’owner’
has only one descriptor äga ’to own’. We are
now able to illustrate this concept by two symbols
in combination, namely affär and äga, which by
further analysis could possibly be extended to
person ’person’ + äga ’to own’ + affär ’shop’.

As mentioned earlier, the few verbs not existing
in the symbol database were generally either hapax,
or particle verbs. Even if we regard the hapax
words in LBL as peripheral in the easy-to-read
genre, the fact that they exist in the SBV make them
candidates for further analysis and inclusion into an
augmented symbol lexicon. For nouns, the situation
is largely the same. In general, they have a higher
relative frequency, in average 8.0 × 10−6, and only
one third of the total are hapax words. Adjectives
and adverbs in this set of words have a mean relative
frequency in LäSBarT of 1.0 × 10−5 and 4.4 × 10−5,
respectively. For adjectives, the hapax ratio was 30
% and for adverbs 20 %.

7 Conclusions

We found this to be a good way to produce a core vo-
cabulary for Swedish. The suitability of this method
was ensured not only by the fact that the ingoing en-
tries were to be found in a corpus of simple texts,
but also that they had a high degree of frequency
and dispersion in a corpus balanced for genre and
domain. It also turned out the the symbol cover-
age of these entries in the AAC language studied
was impressively high for verbs (95 %), lower for
nouns (76 %) and adjectives (71 %), and consider-
ably lower for adverbs (60 %). This is completely in
accordance with what we expected, since the basic
verbs play a major role in communication. The fact
that the nouns to a higher degree lack symbol sup-
port, was compensated for by the circumstance that
a relatively high amount of entries could be found in
or derived by information in a semantic lexicon.
Given that the results in this study are based on only
one of several symbol languages, we would like to
extend the research also to these, at first hand Bliss

and more of the pictorial systems, such as PCS.

References
Susan Balandin and T. Iacono. 1998. A few well-chosen

words. Augmentative and Alternative Communica-
tion, 14:147–161.

Meher Banajee, Cynthia Dicarlo, and Sarintha Buras
Stricklin. 2003. Core vocabulary determination for
toddlers. Augmentative and Alternative Communica-
tion, 19(2):67–73.

D Beukelman and P Mirenda. 2005. Augmentative and
alternative communication: Supporting children and
adults with complex communication needs. Paul H.
Brookes, Baltimore, 3rd edition.

Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2009. All in the fam-
ily: A comparison of saldo and wordnet. In Pro-
ceedings of the Nodalida 2009 Workshop on WordNets
and other Lexical Semantic Resources - between Lexi-
cal Semantics, Lexicography, Terminology and Formal
Ontologies, Odense.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. A semantic network of en-
glish - the mother of all wordnets. Computers and the
Humanities, 32:209–220.

Eva Forsbom. 2006. A swedish base vocabulary pool.
In Swedish Language Technology conference, Gothen-
burg.

W. Nelson Francis and Henry Kucera. 1979. Man-
ual of information to accompany a standard corpus of
present-day edited american english for use with dig-
ital computers. Technical report, Department of Lin-
guistics, Brown University.

Dee Gardner. 2007. Validating the construct of word in
applied corpus-based vocabulary research: A critical
survey. Applied Linguistics, 28(2):241–265.

David Hirsch and Paul Nation. 1992. What vocabulary
size is needed to read unsimplified texts for pleasure?
Reading in a Foreign Language, 8(2):689–696.

Stig Johansson, G. Leech, and H. Goodluck. 1978.
Manual of information to accompany the lancaster-
oslo/bergen corpus of british english, for use with dig-
ital computers. Technical report, Unversity of Oslo.

Katarina Mühlenbock. 2008. Readable, legible or plain
words - presentation of an easy-to-read swedish cor-
pus. In Anju Saxena and Åke Viberg, editors, Multilin-
gualism, Proceedings of the 23rd Scandinavian Con-
ference of Linguistics, Studia Linguistica Upsaliensia,
ISSN 1652-1336; 8, pages 325–327, Uppsala, Swe-
den. Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis.

Inger Rosengren. 1972. Ein Frekvenzwörterbuch der
deutschen Zeitungssprache. GWK Gleerup, Lund.

George Spache. March, 1953. A new readability for-
mula for primary-grade reading materials. Elementary
School Journal, LIII:410–413.

126



TEI Consortium. 2007. TEI P5: Guidelines for Elec-
tronic Text Encoding and Interchange. TEI Consor-
tium, p5 edition.

Edward L. Thorndike and I. Lorge. 1944. The teacher’s
word book of 30,000 words. Columbia University
Press, New York.

Åke Viberg, K Lindmark, A Lindvall, and I Mellenius.
2002. The swedish wordnet project. In Proceedings
of Euralex 2002, pages 407–412, Copenhagen Univer-
sity.

M. West. 1953. A General Service List of English Words.
Longman, London.

Widgit Software. 2011. Widgit homepage.
http://www.widgit.com.

World Wide Augmentative & Alternative Communica-
tion. 2004. Communication is not a privilege. Tech-
nical report.

127


