




















Linguistic Motivation in Automatic Sentence Alignment of Parallel
Corpora: the Case of Danish-Bulgarian and English-Bulgarian

Angel Genov and Georgi Iliev
Department of Computational Linguistics, Institute for Bulgarian

Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
52 Shipchenski prohod, bl. 17, Sofia 1113, Bulgaria

{angel,georgi}@dcl.bas.bg

Abstract

We report the results from a sentence-
alignment experiment on Danish-
Bulgarian and English-Bulgarian parallel
texts applying a method based in part on
linguistic motivations as implemented in
the TCA2 aligner. Since the presence of
cognates has a bearing on the alignment
score of candidate sentences we attempt
to bridge the gap between source and
target languages by transliteration of
the Bulgarian text, written originally in
Cyrillic. An improvement in F1-measure
is achieved in both cases.

1 Background

Parallel language resources are fundamental to
some of the leading empirical methods in natural
language processing today, and machine transla-
tion in particular. Due to economic and political
considerations until now little attention has been
paid to the availability and quality of parallel texts
when it comes to so-called medium density lan-
guages, as defined in (Varga et al., 2005). A ma-
jor development in this regard has been the release
of the JRC-Acquis Multilingual Parallel Corpus
(Steinberger et al., 2006) but a brief investigation
of the aligned versions of the JRC-Acquis for the
language pairs at hand fails to convince us of the
quality of alignment in the corpus in its current
state. However, due to the lack of a reference par-
allel text to perform evaluation, this intuition can
neither be confirmed nor rejected at present.

In an attempt to achieve better clarity and pro-
vide a basis for further evaluation and comparison,
we performed a sentence-alignment experiment on
a Danish-Bulgarian and an English-Bulgarian par-
allel corpus, where translation has taken place in
the indicated direction.

2 Alignment Method

Unlike the alignment methods adopted for the
purposes of the JRC-Acquis, where a language-
independent approach was needed to achieve cov-
erage of most official EU languages, we chose to
apply a partially linguistically motivated method
to sentence alignment, as implemented in the
Translation Corpus Aligner (TCA) 2 (Hofland and
Johansson, 2006). The TCA2 is a GUI sentence
alignment tool which calculates alignments on the
basis of sentence length, a bilingual dictionary of
anchor words, and the presence of (near) identical
proper names and numbers and cognates in align-
ment candidates. It is a new implementation of a
program which was used, among other things, for
the alignment of the English-Norwegian Parallel
Corpus (Johansson et al., 1996).

3 Corpora

For English-Bulgarian alignment we used the
“1984” parallel corpus developed as part of the
MULTEXT-East project (Erjavec, 2010), and pro-
vided by the MULTEXT-East Consortium under
a research license. It contains a richly anno-
tated hand-aligned parallel text. For our purposes
we stripped the English-Bulgarian parallel text of
George Orwell’s “1984” of all annotation which
was not relevant to sentence alignment. Thus the
version of the “1984” corpus we used contains
only XML tags marking sentence boundaries. The
English text contains 6737 sentence units, and the
Bulgarian text contains 6707 sentence units.

For Danish-Bulgarian alignment we used the
original text of Thomas Rathsack’s “Jæger – i krig
med eliten” (Commando – Fighting With the Elite)
published by Politiken’s Internet edition on 16
September 2009 (Rathsack, 2009). The Bulgar-
ian translation was provided for research purposes
by the respective Bulgarian publisher. The sen-
tence boundaries in the two texts were initially

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 328–331



determined automatically. The resulting sentence
boundaries were post edited and sentences were
aligned by hand. The parallel corpus thus cre-
ated contains XML tags marking sentence bound-
aries only. The Danish text contains 4483 sentence
units, and the Bulgarian text contains 4565 sen-
tence units.

We are not aware of previous work in the evalu-
ation of sentence alignment as regards the Danish-
Bulgarian language pair.

4 Language-Dependent Input

The TCA2 uses a bilingual dictionary of anchor
words whose presence improves the alignment
score of candidate sentences. TCA results re-
ported in previous work (Santos and Oksefjell,
2000) have been based on anchor lists of approxi-
mately 1000 entries. In the experiment at hand we
followed a resource-light strategy, which means
we tried to keep the manual input at minimum,
while preserving language-dependency.

The heuristics applied in compiling the bilin-
gual dictionaries involved counting the number of
occurrences of individual lemmas in the respec-
tive Bulgarian texts, disregarding any stop words,
and selecting some of the most frequent nominals
(that is nouns, adjectives, numerals and pronouns).
To them we added some “polar” adverbs (such as
“always” and “never”), some time words and the
names of the twelve months of the year. The re-
spective anchor lists contain 116 entries each.

One special feature of the TCA2 is the use of
multiple variants in one and the same anchor en-
try, as well as the Kleene star, allowing us to cover
a number of morphological and orthographic vari-
ations, as otherwise the number of anchor entries
would have exploded, in particular in the Danish
and the Bulgarian anchor lists.

DA-BG 2*,to*,begge,både/2*,два*,две*,дву*

EN-BG woman,women/жена*,жени*

Table 1: Sample anchor word entries

It is possible that defining dictionary entries by
means of the Kleene star could increase the num-
ber of false positives disproportionately, but that is
not confirmed by the reported results.

5 Transliteration

An important element of the TCA2 tool is the as-
signment of a score to alignment candidates based
on the presence of cognates (Simard et al., 1992)
in them – words that are spelled identically or sim-
ilarly in the source and target language. Both
source languages use the Latin alphabet, whereas
Bulgarian is written in Cyrillic. That fact effec-
tively prevents any attempt at basing an alignment
score on cognates, which we found to be subopti-
mal in the case of the TCA2 aligner.

A clear solution lies in the fact that Bulgarian
spelling is mostly phonetic. Thus we were able
to apply a straightforward transliteration method
to convert the entire target text into Latin charac-
ters to explore the ability to use cognates in order
to improve sentence alignment of the two paral-
lel corpora. The transliteration method so adopted
preserves the original length of the Bulgarian text
as far as possible and does not take into account
the specifics of the source language.

English original:

How often, or on what system, the
Thought Police plugged in on any
individual wire was guesswork.

Bulgarian original:

Можеше само да се правят
предположения колко често и
по какъв принцип Полицията
на мисълта се включва в
индивидуалните системи.

Bulgarian transliterated:

Mojeshe samo da se praviat predpolo-
jeniia kolko chesto i po kakav prin-
cip Policiiata na misalta se vkliuchva v
individualnite sistemi.

Example 1: Cognates identified upon
transliteration of the target text

It can be seen from Example 1 above that cognates
become evident by applying even a crude translit-
eration approach.

6 Evaluation Method

In order to evaluate the performance of the TCA2
we apply the standard metrics of recall, precision
and F1-measure (Jurafsky and Martin, 2008) to the

329

Linguistic Motivation in Automatic Sentence Alignment of Parallel Corpora: the Case of
Danish-Bulgarian and English-Bulgarian

329



output of the automatic aligner against the hand-
aligned “gold standards”, calculated as shown in
Example 2 below:

Precision = number of correct align-
ments / number of proposed alignments

Recall = number of correct alignments /
number of reference alignments

F1-measure = 2 * Recall * Precision /
(Recall + Precision)

Example 2: Calculation of precision,
recall and F1-measure

It should be noted that the manually aligned cor-
pora do not contain any 0-1 or 1-0 alignments,
whereas TCA2 allows 0-1 and 1-0 alignments and
such alignments are present in the TCA2 auto-
matic output. Other possible alignments are 1-1,
1-2, 2-1.

7 Results

We performed a total of 3 runs of the TCA2 aligner
on each language pair, gradually enhancing the
linguistic input in the system, as follows:

1st run: sentence-delimited source and target
texts, no anchor words, no transliteration of the
target text.

2ndrun: sentence-delimited source and target
texts, anchor words, no transliteration of the tar-
get text.

3rd run: sentence-delimited source and target
texts, anchor words, transliteration of the target
text.

The results are summarized in Table 2 below:

DA-BG, “Jæger – i krig med eliten”

Precision Recall F1-measure

1st run 93.96 93.83 93.9

2nd run 97.23 97.12 97.17

3rd run 98.39 98.12 98.26

EN-BG, “1984”

Precision Recall F1-measure

1st run 61.52 63.41 62.45

2nd run 87.77 89.17 88.46

3rd run 91.52 92.33 91.92

Table 2: Evaluation results

8 Discussion of Results

As expected, there was an improvement in all three
metrics on each of the first three stages. It must
be noted that the weights of different alignment
criteria have not been optimized for the specific
language pairs at hand, which means that further
improvement may be expected. Most notable at
present is the 26% improvement in F1-measure of
the English-Bulgarian alignment caused by the en-
hancement of the TCA2 system with an anchor
list, irrespective of the limited size of the list (116
entries in total). It could be argued that the Danish-
Bulgarian improvement on the 2nd run is as signif-
icant because the higher F1-measure on the 1st run
could be accounted for by the presence of many
military terms and English words and expressions
which were preserved in the Bulgarian translation
of “Jæger – i krig med eliten”, which in turn were
treated as cognates / proper names by the TCA2
aligner already on the first run.

Most interesting is probably the improvement
caused by the transliteration of the Bulgarian text.
One disadvantage of phonetic spelling in Bulgar-
ian is that it fails to preserve the original spelling
of loan words, thus reducing the number of actual
cognates in the text. We expect that by fine-tuning
the transliteration rules dependent on the language
pair in order to “anglicize” or “danify” the target
language, respectively, following the philosophy
of (Hana and Feldman, 2004), as applied to Rus-
sian and Czech, we could achieve further improve-
ment in sentence alignment based on cognates.
However, this will be the subject of a separate de-
tailed study.

9 Conclusion and Future Work

We have shown that by investing a minimum
amount of effort we can achieve significant im-
provement in the partially linguistically motivated
approach to sentence alignment of the TCA2
aligner, bringing its performance, as expressed by
the F1-measure, well above 90 per cent in the case
of Danish-Bulgarian, and above 90 per cent in the
case of English-Bulgarian alignment. By applying
a simple transliteration approach to the Bulgarian
target we were able to achieve additional improve-
ment of TCA2’s performance.

Unlike the evaluation described in (Santos and
Oksefjell, 2000), our main purpose was to explore
the feasibility of applying a language-dependent
method in sentence alignment to parallel texts

330

Angel Genov and Georgi Iliev

330



where Bulgarian is the target language, not so
much as to evaluate the performance of the TCA2
program itself. One difficulty which is not an is-
sue in other alignment tasks, and which we ad-
dressed successfully, was the need to bridge the
gap between the Cyrillic and the Latin alphabets.
Furthermore, while the English-Portuguese evalu-
ation was based on proofreading the results (and
only those that were not 1-to-1 correspondencies),
the Danish-Bulgarian and the English-Bulgarian
alignments were evaluated on the basis of a gold
standard which allowed us to calculate the im-
provement in a traditional manner, by way of the
F1-measure.

Driven by those preliminary results we intend to
investigate the systematic differences occurring in
the spelling of some loan words in Bulgarian from
a morphological perspective. The results of the in-
vestigation could then be encoded in the form of
language-specific transliteration rules to achieve
further improvement in the performance of lin-
guistically motivated sentence-alignment meth-
ods.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Knut Hofland and the team at
the University of Bergen for making the TCA2
program available to us.

This work was supported by the Mathematical
Logic and Computational Linguistics: Develop-
ment and Permeation (2009-2011) Project. The
financial support is granted under Contract No.
BG051PO001-3.3.04/27 of 28 August 2009.

References
Tomaz Erjavec. 2010. MULTEXT-East Version 4:

Multilingual Morphosyntactic Specifications, Lex-
icons and Corpora. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Con-
ference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard,
Joseph Mariani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, Mike
Rosner, and Daniel Tapias, editors, Proceedings
of the Seventh conference on International Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Val-
letta, Malta, May, 19-21. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Jiri Hana and Anna Feldman. 2004. Portable Lan-
guage Technology: Russian via Czech. In Proceed-
ings from the Midwest Computational Linguistics
Colloquium, June 25-26, 2004, Bloomington, Indi-
ana.

Knut Hofland and Stig Johansson. 2006. The Trans-
lation Corpus Aligner: A program for alignment of

paralell texts. In Stig Johansson and Signe Oksef-
jell, editors, Corpora and Cross-linguistic Research.
Theory, Method, and Case Studies, number 24 in
Language and Computers: Studies in practical Lin-
guistics, pages 87–100. Rodopi, Amsterdam – At-
lanta.

Stig Johansson, Jarle Ebeling, and Humanities Bergen.
1996. Coding and Aligning the English-Norwegian
Parallel Corpus. In B. Altenberg K. Aijmer and
M. Johansson, editors, Languages in Contrast:
Papers from a Symposium on Text-based Cross-
linguistic Studies (Lund, 4-5 March 1994), pages
87–112, Lund. Lund University Press.

Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2008. Speech
and Language Processing (2nd Edition) (Prentice
Hall Series in Artificial Intelligence). Prentice Hall,
2 edition.

Thomas Rathsack. 2009. Jæger – i krig med eliten.
http://www.politiken.dk, September, 16.

Diana Santos and Signe Oksefjell. 2000. An evalu-
ation of the translation corpus aligner, with special
reference to the language pair English-Portuguese.
In Proceedings of the 12th Nordisk datalingvis-
tikkdager, Trondheim, Department of Linguistics,
NTNU.

Michel Simard, George F. Foster, and Pierre Isabelle.
1992. Using Cognates to Align Sentences in Bilin-
gual Corpora. In Proceedings of the Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on Theoretical and Methodologi-
cal Issues in Machine Translation, pages 67–81.

Ralf Steinberger, Bruno Pouliquen, Anna Widiger,
Camelia Ignat, Tomaz Erjavec, Dan Tufis, and
Daniel Varga. 2006. The JRC-Acquis: A multi-
lingual aligned parallel corpus with 20+ languages.
CoRR, abs/cs/0609058.

Dániel Varga, László Németh, Péter Halácsy, András
Kornai, Viktor Trón, and Viktor Nagy. 2005. Par-
allel corpora for medium density languages. In
Proceedings of the Recent Advances in Natural
Language Processing 2005 Conference. RANLP,
Borovets., pages 590–596, Bulgaria.

331

Linguistic Motivation in Automatic Sentence Alignment of Parallel Corpora: the Case of
Danish-Bulgarian and English-Bulgarian

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


