










































The StringNet Lexico-Grammatical Knowledgebase and its Applications


Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from Parsing and Generation to the Real World (MWE 2011), pages 128–130,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 23 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

The StringNet Lexico-Grammatical  

Knowledgebase and its Applications 

 

David Wible Nai-Lung Tsao 
National Central University 

No.300, Jhongda Rd. 

Jhongli City, Taoyuan County 32001, Taiwan 
wible@stringnet.org beaktsao@stringnet.org 

 

Abstract 

This demo introduces a suite of web-based 

English lexical knowledge resources, called 

StringNet and StringNet Navigator 

(http://nav.stringnet.org), designed to 

provide access to the immense territory of 

multiword expressions that falls between 

what the lexical entries encode in lexicons 

on the one hand and what productive 

grammar rules cover on the other. 

StringNet’s content consists of 1.6 billion 

hybrid n-grams, strings in which word 

forms and parts of speech grams can co-

occur. Subordinate and super-ordinate 

relations among hybrid n-grams are 

indexed, making StringNet a navigable 

web rather than a list. Applications include 

error detection and correction tools and 

web browser-based tools that detect 

patterns in the webpages that a user 

browses. 

1 Introduction and Background 

This demo introduces a suite of web-based English 

lexical knowledge resources, called StringNet and 

StringNet Navigator (http://nav.stringnet.org), 

which have been designed to give lexicographers,  

translators, language teachers and language 

learners direct access to the immense territory of 

multiword expressions, more specifically to the 

lexical patterning that falls in the gap between 

dictionaries and grammar books.  

MWEs are widely recognized in two different 

research communities as posing persistent 

problems, specifically in the fields of 

computational linguistics and human language 

learning and pedagogy.  

In computational linguistics, MWEs are 

notorious as a “pain in the neck” (Sag et al 2002; 

Baldwin et al 2004; Villavicencio et al 2005; inter 

alia). The high proportion of MWEs with non-

canonical structures lead to parse failures and their 

non-compositional or only partially compositional 

semantics raise difficult choices between which 

ones to store whole and which ones to construct as 

needed. Perhaps above all, this massive family of 

expressions resists any unified treatment since they 

constitute a heterogeneous mix of regularity and 

idiomicity (Fillmore et al 1988).  

The other area where they famously cause 

difficulties is in human language learning and 

teaching, and largely for reasons parallel to those 

that make them hard for NLP. They resist 

understanding or production by general rules or 

composition, and they constitute an unpredictable 

mix of productivity and idiomicity. 
The StringNet lexico-grammatical knowledge-

base has been designed to capture this 

heterogeneity of MWEs by virtue of its unique 

content and structure. These we describe in turn 

below. 

2 StringNet Content: Hybrid N-grams 

The content of StringNet consists of a special 

breed of n-grams which we call hybrid n-grams 

(Tsao and Wible 2009; Wible and Tsao 2010). 

Unlike traditional n-grams, there are four different 

categories of gram type. From specific to general 

(or abstract) these four are: specific word forms 

(enjoyed and enjoys would be two distinct word 

forms); lexemes (enjoy, including all its 

inflectional variations, enjoyed, enjoys, etc); rough 

POS categories (V, N, etc); and fine-grained POS 

categories (verbs are distinguished as VVn, VVd, 

VVt, etc.). A hybrid n-gram can consist of any 

sequence from any of these four categories with 

128



our stipulation that one of the grams must be a 

word form or lexeme (to insure that all hybrid n-

grams are lexically anchored). A traditional bi-

gram such as enjoyed hiking can be described by 

16 distinct hybrid n-grams, such as enjoyed VVg, 

enjoy VVg, enjoy hike, and so on. A traditional 5-

gram, such as kept a close eye on has 1024 hybrid 

n-gram variants (4
5
), e.g., keep a close eye on; kept 

a [Adj] eye on; keep a close [N][Prep]; and so on. 

We have extracted all hybrid n-grams ranging in 

length from bigrams to 8-grams that are attested at 

least five times in BNC. StringNet’s content thus 

consists of 1.6 billion hybrid n-grams (including 

traditional n-grams), each indexed to its attested 

instances in BNC. 

3 Structure and Navigation 

Rather than a list of hybrid n-grams, StringNet is a 

structured net. Hybrid n-grams can stand in sub-

ordinate or super-ordinate relation to each other 

(we refer to these as parent/child relations). For 

example, the hybrid tri-gram consider yourselves 

lucky has among its many parents the more 

inclusive consider [prn rflx] lucky; which in turn 

has among its parents the even more general 

consider [prn rflx] [Adj] and [V] [prn rflx] lucky 

and so on. We index all of these relations within 

the entire set of hybrid n-grams. 

StringNet Navigator is the Web interface 

(shown in Figure 1) for navigating this massive, 

structured lexico-grammatical knowledgebase of 

English MWEs. Queries are as simple as 

submitting a Google query. A query of the noun 

trouble immediately shows users (say, language 

learners) subtle but important patterns such as take 

the trouble [to-V] and go to the trouble of [VVg] 

(shown in Figure 2). Submitting mistake yields 

make the mistake of [VVg] and it would be a 

mistake [to-V]. StringNet Navigator also accepts 

multiword queries, returning all hybrid n-grams 

where the submitted words or the submitted words 

and POSs co-occur. For all queries, clicking on any 

pattern given in the results will display all the 

attested example sentences with that pattern from 

BNC. Each listed pattern for a query also gives 

links to that pattern’s parents and children or to its 

expansion (longer version) or contraction (shorter 

version) (See Figure 2). 

4 Some Applications 

Among the many sorts of knowledge that 

StringNet renders tractable is the degree of 

frozenness or substitutability available for any 

MWE. Thus, not only does a query of the noun eye 

yield the string keep a close eye on. Navigating 

upward reveals that close and eye in this string can 

be replaced (keep a close watch on; keep a careful 

eye on; keep a tight grip on; keep a firm hold on, 

etc), but also that, in this same frame keep a 

[Adj][N] on, the verb slot occupied by keep is 

basically unsubstitutable, essentially serving as a 

lexical anchor to this expression. Thus, due to its 

structure as a net, StringNet makes it possible to 

glean the degree and location(s) of the frozenness 

or substitutability of an MWE. 

4.1 Error Checking 

Automatic error detection and correction is a 

rapidly growing area of application in 

computational linguistics (See Leacock et al 2010 

for a recent book-length review). StringNet 

supports a novel approach to this area of work. The 

flexibility afforded by hybrid n-grams makes it 

possible to capture patterns that involve subtle 

combinations of lexical specificity or generality for 

different grams within the same string. For 

example, running StringNet on BNC data shows 

that ‘enjoy hiking’ is best captured as an instance 

of the lexeme enjoy followed by a verb in –ing 

form: enjoy Vvg. For error checking this makes it 

possible to overcome sparseness. Thus, while BNC 

has no tokens of either ‘enjoy spelunking’ or 

‘enjoy to spelunk,’ we can distinguish between 

them nevertheless and detect that the former is 

correct and the latter is an error.  The wide range of 

error types that can be handled by a single 

algorithm run on StringNet will be shown in the 

demo. 

4.2 Browser-based Tools 

Other tools include a toolbar that can be installed 

on the user’s own web browser (Wible et al 2011), 

from which the system can detect lexical patterns 

in the text of the web pages the user freely browses. 

A “Query Doctor” on the toolbar detects errors in 

multiword queries (submitting ‘in my point of 

view’ triggers the suggestion: ‘from my point of 

view’).

129



 
Figure 1: StringNet Navigator front page. 

 

 
Figure 2: Top 2 search results for “trouble”  

 

5 Conclusion 

Future areas of application for StringNet include 

machine translation (e.g., detecting semi-

compositional constructions); detection of similar 

and confusable words for learners, document 

similarity using hybrid n-grams as features, and 

StringNet Builder for generating StringNets from 

corpora of languages other than English and from 

domain-specific corpora. 

Acknowledgments 

The work described in this paper was partially 

supported by the grants from the National Science 

Council, Taiwan (Project Nos. 99-2631-H-008-

004-  and 98-2511-S-008-002-MY2). 

References  

Timothy Baldwin, Emily M. Bender, Dan Flickinger, 

Ara Kim and Stephan Oepen. 2004. Road-testing the 

English Resource Grammar over the British National 

Corpus. In Proceedings of the Fourth International 

Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation 

(LREC 2004), Lisbon, Portugal, pp. 2047-2050. 

Charles J. Fillmore, Paul Kay, and Mary Katherine 

O’Connor. 1988. Regularity and Idiomaticity in 

Grammatical Constructions: the Case of Let Alone. 

Language 64: 501–538. 

Claudia Leacock, Martin Chodorow, Michael Gamon, 

and Joel Tetreault, 2010. Automated Grammatical 

Error Detection for Language Learners. Morgan and 

Claypool Publishers. 

Ivan Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann 

Copestake, Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword 

expressions: A pain in the neck for NLP. In 

Proceedings of the 3
rd
 International Conference on 

Intelligent Text Processing and Computational 

Linguistics (CICLing-2002), Mexico City, Mexico, 

pp. 1-15. 

Nai-Lung Tsao and David Wible. 2009. A Method for 

Unsupervised Broad-Coverage Lexical Error 

Detection and Correction.  The NAACL Workshop on 

Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational 

Applications, Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. 

Aline Villavicencio, Francis Bond, Anna Korhonen,  

and Diana McCarthy. 2005. Introduction to the 

Special Issue on Multiword Expressions: Having a 

Crack at a Hard Nut. Computer Speech & Language 

19(4): 365-377. 

David Wible and Nai-Lung Tsao. 2010. StringNet as a 

Computational Resource for Discovering and 

Investigating Linguistic Constructions. The NAACL 

Workshop on Extracting and Using Constructions in 

Computational Linguistics, Los Angeles, June 2010. 

David Wible, Anne Li-E Liu and Nai-Lung Tsao. 2011. 

A Browser-based Approach to Incidental 

Individualization of Vocabulary Learning. Journal of 

Computer Assisted Learning, in press, early view.  

130


