










































What does it mean to communicate (not) emotionally?


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 94–100,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

What does it mean to communicate (not) emotionally? 

 
Jan-Oliver Wülfing 

Fraunhofer Centre Birlinghoven IZB 
Schloß Birlinghoven 

D-53754 Sankt Augustin 
jan-oliver.wuelfing 
@izb.fraunhofer.de 

Lisa Hoffmann 
Fraunhofer Institute for 

Applied Information Technology FIT 
Schloß Birlinghoven 

D-53754 Sankt Augustin 
lisa.hoffmann@fit.fraunhofer.de 

 

 

Abstract 

Communication is an essential part of our life. 
Though, not only communication is the key – 
it is all about emotional (prosodic) 
communication. Due to empirical research, 
people, who are augmentative communicators 
and speak with a voice output communication 
aid, want to express their emotions in the 
same way as everybody else – it is one of their 
deepest interests (Portnuff, 2006; Hoffmann 
and Wülfing, 2010). So far, current devices 
lack the opportunity of emotional utterances. 
This circumstance leads not only to a huge 
usability deficit, but furthermore, it is an 
obstacle to develop emotional competence and 
to behave as well as regulate one´s emotion 
adequately (Blackstone and Wilkins, 2009). 
This article aims to increase the sensitivity for 
the importance of emotional communication. 
Furthermore, it tries to give first suggestions 
for implementing an usable device that 
supports users with a voice output 
communication aid to express emotional 
utterances. This could be done by using 
phrase-generation, as mentiond by 
Vanderheyden and Pennigton (1998).  

1 Introduction 

One can hardly imagine how it would be to 
communicate without an emotional output. If we 
talk to each other, every conversation is influenced 
by our emotions. Sometimes we want to hide our 
feelings; however, more often we want to send an 
underlying message with our prosodic utterance. 
For example, imagine someone goes for a walk 

with their best friend, the sun is shining and the 
birds are chirping – this kind of situation and the 
feeling it evokes will probably be reflected by their 
prosodic utterance: “Dude, it`s awesome weather 
today!” Or imagine furthermore, the same person 
gets into a fight with this friend while walking in 
the sun; it certainly must not be pointed out that the 
emotion and therefore the reaction would differ. 
Though, communication and emotion seem 
inevitably associated, it is still not possible for 
people with complex communication needs to talk 
emotionally, since current voice output 
communication aids (VOCA) do not offer prosodic 
speech output. A circumstance that leads to several 
drawbacks; starting with disadvantages in social 
and academic arrangements.  

1.1 What is a prosodic utterance? 
Prosodic utterances are the key for daily 
communication processes. They depend on the 
emotion, i.e. it is reflected by an utterance through 
the pitch, the rhythm, and the volume of the voice. 
These differences are called prosody and, hence, it 
is possible to express very different types of 
emotions. Prosodic utterances influence the 
behaviour of the listener (Strom, 1998). The one 
and the same utterance can differ in their meaning. 
A good example of this is irony or subtle 
utterances. They may or may not be serious 
depending also on their prosodic features.  Either 
way, the listener is going to react and this reaction 
relies not only on the accurate comprehension but 
also on the prosody of the speaker´s intended 
utterance (Battachi et al., 1997). In the case of 
augmentative communicators and their use of a 

94



VOCA, these aspects are not fully fulfilled. Instead 
of underlining their utterances with one or more 
prosodic features in order to convey their emotions 
to the listener, they must transcribe their current 
emotion in text input of the VOCA. In turn, the 
VOCA renders this in a monotonic, mostly 
synthetic voice output, which leads to two 
objections: 

Firstly, the listener misinterprets the augmented 
communicator´s utterance, which may have 
dramatically effects for a follow-up conversation. 
Secondly, the listener becomes just bored and the 
conversation does not last long. In both ways, the 
augmented communicator´s situation becomes 
worse, since it influences their social environments 
and, thus, themselves (Balandin, 2005). 

2 Emotional competence as a  
pre-condition for social participation 

Emotions are seen to be an essential factor of 
social communication. To be a part of social 
relationships, it is necessary to develop emotional 
competence in some kind. Janke (2008) postulates 
emotional competence as the ability to express and 
regulate the own emotions and, furthermore, it 
describes the ability to understand emotions – the 
own one´s and other one´s. However, without the 
possibility to talk emotionally, it is hard to develop 
emotional competence. Research, in fact, has 
shown that users of a VOCA often have deficits in 
this area which leads to difficulties in forming 
relationships and the adequate emotion regulation 
is influenced as well (Brinton and Fujiki, 2009; 
Blackstone and Wilkins, 2009). Furthermore, there 
is a significant correlation between children´s 
emotional knowledge and the degree of peer 
popularity (Janke, 2008). Brinton and Fujiki (2009) 
even suggest that emotional competence has 
impact on academic learning. Due to the fact that 
the development of emotional competence is 
learned in day-to-day interactions with other 
people and that emotional utterances are a 
necessary pre-condition for exactly these 
interactions, it becomes clear that the development 
of a VOCA which does support prosodic 
communication would be an important factor for 
increasing the user´s Quality of Life. Among other 
things, it includes warm interpersonal relationships     
and academic achievements.  

2.1 Development of social behaviour 
Recent psychological theories focus on mutual-
information processing systems for explaining 
social behaviour. Strack and Deutsch (2004) 
postulate two determinants to guide one´s decision- 
making: the reflective and the impulsive system. 
Though, both systems are interacting, they are 
different in their characteristics and functioning. 
The reflecting system is rather rational; it includes 
knowledge about facts and (social) values on 
which it bases its decision. The impulsive system, 
on the other hand, is lacking rational reasoning. It 
is rather impulsive, quick, and affected by 
motivational factors. Whereas the impulsive 
system is part of every decision making process, 
the reflective system is not. As, for instance, it 
needs more cognitive resources while operating 
and is easily disturbed.   

When transferring the model onto emotional 
processing and electronic communication aids, it 
appears that alternative communicators are 
challenged in both, the impulsive and the reflective 
system. By definition, emotions are impulsive, 
quick, and the decisions based on them are often 
lacking rational reason. Thus, most of the time, 
emotional behaviour is driven by the impulsive 
system. Due to slow input-rates, users of a VOCA, 
indeed, are not able to communicate their emotions 
quickly and impulsively. They have to rely on the 
reflecting system. In some cases one might argue 
that this is the better opportunity as impulsive 
emotional utterances are regretted at times. On that 
account children learn that in some situations it is 
important to not follow their (inappropriate) 
impulsive behaviour while growing up (Blackstone 
and Wilkins, 2009). But due to the fact that 
alternative communicators are often disadvantaged 
in developing appropriate emotional behaviour 
(Brinton and Fujiki, 2009; Blackstone and Wilkins, 
2009), it is also difficult to provide an adequate 
basis of knowledge for the reflective system. Thus, 
in particular for children, is important to 
communicate impulsively as it also strengthens the 
ability to make rational choices. Taking Strack´ 
and Deutsch´s theory (2004) into account it 
becomes clear that for the purpose of impulsive 
reactions an intended prosodic VOCA requires a 
possibility for a fast input-rate. 

 

95



 

 

 
 

3 Usability deficits 

Empirical research in Usability Engineering shows 
that users of a VOCA claim for emotional 
communication (Hoffmann and Wülfing, 2010). 
Though, they typically honour the prospects given 
by the devices, they still describe the missing 
opportunity to talk emotionally (Portnuff, 2006; 
Hoffmann and Wülfing, 2010). If we take 
Maslow´s (1970) ‘Hierarchy of Needs’ into 
account, it is indeed not surprising that people, 
who have complex communication needs, want to 
talk in a very normal way. Maslow´s purpose is to 
show that every human being has specific needs. 
These needs are ordered hierarchically. The lowest 
frame depicts physiological needs like nutrition, 
sex, and the activity of the autonomous nervous 
system which are mostly involuntary (e.g. 
breathing). Then, the next layer symbolises all the 
aspects of safety. If these needs are fulfilled, it 
comes to friendship and love needs, those include 
emotional talk, social relationships, and emotional 
competence. His hierarchy underlines the 
assumption that a communication without prosody 
is acceptable but not satisfying, since emotional 
talk is an essential factor for being part of social 
relationships. Here, we go one step forward, 
because if we say that a product must be usable as  

 
 

 
 

 
described in ISO 9241-11 (1998), it must also be 
satisfying. The ISO standard defines Usability as: 
“The extent to which a product can be used by 
specified users to achieve specified goals with 
effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction in a 
specified context of use.” The effectiveness means 
the accuracy in achieving the specific goal. 
Efficiency is time and effort the user needs for the 
achievement. And, satisfaction is the positive 
attitude towards the system. The three aspects are 
arranged hierarchically as shown in figure 2. 
Taking this definition into account and extending it 
on electronic communication aids, it becomes clear 
that the missing possibility for emotional 
communication can not only be seen as a 
satisfactory-failure but also as an effective-failure: 
the user is not able to achieve their goal accurately. 
Imagine, for instance, a human being cannot move 
because they have a significant impairment.  The 
person is sitting in a wheelchair in one corner of a 
room and has a VOCA mounted on the wheelchair. 
Via the device the user asks the people in the room 
to move their chair, however, no one listens and 
helps due to the monotonous voice. In this scenario 
the VOCA fails and the user is not able to achieve 
their goal. The device, therefore, is not effective. 
But would this happen if the VOCA would have a 
prosodic voice output? We believe that this would 

Fig. 1: The origin of prosodic utterances  which reflects the emotional state.  Internal and external 
factors have  both influence on the emotion and cognition development as well as on the  

utterance itself. 

96



not happen. With a prosodic voice it is possible to 
get attention more easily. In a normal situation, if 
we could use our voice, we would rather become 
angry more and more if no one listens to us. Our 
cadence would unveil our emotion (Scherer and 
Banse, 1991) and, hence, would underline our 
intention. For augmented communicators, this 
would be an important step forward to not only 
communicate the semantic content of their 
utterances, but also the emotion underlying those. 
The actual relevance of the made-up scenario 
above is also supported by VOCA user Collin 
Portnuff. He claimed in a speech, given in 2006, a 
device capable of shouting to gain attention in 
certain situations (Portnuff, 2006). 

 

Fig. 2:  Hierarchical steps of Usability based on 
 ISO 9241-11 (1998) 

 
 
 
The elimination of the uability deficit described 
above would also strengthen the user´s position in 
a communication and most likely the duration of a 
communication. We all love more to talk to people 
whose voice contains prosodic features than to face 
anyone whose voice is rather monotonous. Due to 
the fact that human beings are empathic, we like to 
have an impression of the opposite´s emotion. And 
how do we get such an impression? Through the 
mimic, gesture, and the tone of voice. So, an 
emotional device is a Win-Win situation: The 
listener can respond adequately and the speaker 
can express his intention through a verbal prosodic 
utterance. It becomes clear that even from the 
listener´s point of view it is easier and more 
comfortable to have a conversation with an 
augmented communicator who has a prosodic 
VOCA, since it would fulfil at least some 
constraints of a fluent conversation (Todman and 
Alm, 2003). Or as Collin Portnuff (2006) puts it: 
“And when you help someone communicate, you 

are not just helping that person, but all the people 
with whom he or she interacts.“ 

4 Often heard criticism 

Often heard criticism about a prosodic speech 
output of a VOCA typically embraces the 
following three aspects: 

a. Emotional conversation would increase the 
input rate,  

b. emotional utterances are not possible 
without a synthetic voice that supports 
emotional output and 

c. emotions and emotional conversations are 
too complex to work on a VOCA. 

Even though these aspects are not to be dismissed, 
we assume that it is possible to find proper 
solutions for each of them. 
a. Increasing input rate: The speech generic 
device of a VOCA with a specific prosodic tool 
should enable the possibility of an emotional 
conversation without increasing the input time. 
Instead, emotional utterances will extend the 
duration of a conversation. So far augmentative 
communicators use their VOCA often to 
communicate common needs as “I´m hungry” or to 
answer simple yes-/no-questions (Blackstone and 
Wilkins, 2009). Lasting conversations as for 
example talking about a film watched just before at 
a cinema and the experienced emotions while 
doing so are rather rare. In the latter kind of 
conversations emotional utterances are very 
important, since a lack of them would shorten a 
conversation dramatically. Also one can guess that 
the user´s need to have an emotional equipped 
VOCA is higher than the expense of one more 
additional keystroke. Nevertheless it is important 
to keep any additional effort to the lowest to truly 
fulfil the user´s requirements. However, the 
missing lasting conversations are to be seen as a 
gap in the Quality of Life. In order to bridge this 
gap along with the gaps mentioned above (e.g. the 
missing emotional competence and Usability 
deficits) the development of a VOCA, that does 
support prosodic communication, seems inevitable. 
b. Synthetic voice: Starting with a prototype of 
VOCA, the emotional utterances can easily be 
pronounced naturally instead of using synthesized 

97



speech, since emotional speech is rather limited in 
current VOCAs (Higginbotham, 2010). 
Nonetheless, there has been some notable efforts in 
recent years (e.g. CereProc Ltd.1). They make use 
of what they call ‘Emotional Continum’. It is 
possible to simulate a wide range of underlying 
emotions of the voice. Or, if we look at the work of 
the World Wide Web Consortium, they currently 
work on the EmotionML (2011) which should 
facilitate synthetic voices to become annotated 
with emotional tags. So, it is to assume that in the 
near future emotional synthetic utterances will be 
possible. In the meantime, however, a natural 
recorded voice of an actor is an acceptable solution 
as current existing synthetic voices are often 
experienced as alien (Hoffmann and Wülfing, 
2010). Furthermore, user experience shows some 
people find it difficult to listen to the same 
intonations given by the devices while the meaning 
of the words change (Portnuff, 2006), a problem 
that can be solved by using natural voice output.  
c. Complexity: In order to limit the complexity of 
such a formation, it is necessary to start with 
isolating a reasonable amount of emotions. It is 
also important to not use indifferent emotions, as 
for example cold anger and panic fear, as people 
seem to have problems distinguishing them (Banse 
and Scherer, 1996) which may lead to frustration 
in conversations later on. The three emotions 
happiness, anger, and sadness are quite different in 
their prosody. Thus, a listener can recognise them 
very well, as Burkhardt (2001) mentioned. They 
belong to the so-called basic emotions as well 
(Ekman, 1999). Therefore, it seems to be a 
reasonable choice to choose them for a start-up 
project. Another possibility to lower the 
complexity is to attach the emotions to certain 
situations; this restricts the context of utterances. 

5 Initial approaches 

The proposed project aims at a spontaneous 
emotional communication in context-specific 
situations for VOCA users. This includes the idea 
of identifying a user-specific and context-specific 
vocabulary based on phrase-generation. As shown 
above there are certain requirements for an 
authentic emotional communication: Any 
emotional utterance consists of its semantic 
                                                             
1 www.cereproc.com (accessed 06/24/2011) 

content, its prosodic characteristic, and a certain 
degree of impulsiveness. The presented initial 
approaches keep these requirements in mind as 
well as the beforehand mentioned criticism. It is 
important to note that these initial approaches are 
first propositions which are based on current 
knowledge. Possibly some adjustments need to be 
made in the development of the prosodic VOCA in 
order to keep the device truly usable.  
Yet, based on current experiences we propose a 
system where users firstly select their emotion and 
secondly compose the prosodic utterance, since the 
emotion does typically not change after each 
utterance. Thus, the user does not need to change 
the prosodic filter option every time. In this way, 
the input-rate will not enhance unnecessarily as 
often criticised. To render the possibility of 
impulsive, spontaneous, and agile communication, 
the prosodic VOCA needs to support the user with 
a sample of potential utterances fitting the user´s 
emotion in the specific situation. Therefore, the 
development of a phrased-based vocabulary is 
necessary. It is important to guarantee the validity 
of the possible utterances given by the device as 
otherwise they will not be perceived authentic. 
That is why the potential samples of utterances 
must not be chosen at random. Instead they should 
be based on empirical settings. This will be done 
by investigating specific contexts and identifying 
emotional phrases given by a specific 
subpopulation. The probability enhances that the 
device offers the user an utterance which he or she 
actually needs in the specific situation by using 
empirical based methods. The established 
vocabulary should be user-specific by all means. 
There are age-based differences in the way people 
speak and express their emotions. A user-specific 
vocabulary needs to keep these age-differences in 
mind for identifying phrases that fit the 
phraseology of specific users. Therefore, the 
sample of potential utterances should also be based 
on colloquial speech. This is a good example in 
order to enrich a conversation more lively and 
ongoing. In particular, colloquial speech enables 
the augmentative communicators to be perceived 
more authentic by their social environment. It also 
supports the user in developing emotional 
competence using impulsive speech. In turn the 
environment´s feedback increases the adequate  

98



 
 

 

handling of emotions in specific situations (s. Fig. 
3). In addition to the possibility of using the 
utterances given by the device the user still needs 
the alternative to form contents individually. A 
prosodic VOCA does not aim at depriving the 
users of the power to speak independently. It rather 
serves as an adequate support in order to enhance 
the promptness of a statement which is an 
important requirement for an authentic 
conversation. As already mentioned, natural 
recorded voices could be used for the potential 
utterances as an alternative to synthetic speech 
output. However, it is important to note that the 
utterances must resemble the appropriate prosody. 
Hence, the pitch, the rhythm, and the volume of the 
voice need to fit the content of the utterance. 
Sorrow e.g. should be presented rather quiet while 
enragement requires a higher sound level.  
All things considered, it becomes clear that the 
development of a prosodic VOCA goes along with 
some important requirements that reflect the user´s 
needs. In order to develop a device, which supports 
these needs, the Usability has to be seen as an 
essential factor. Thus, it is important to include the 
user throughout the whole process of developing. 
A constraint for designing usable devices that fit 
the Usability definition is the ISO standard 9241-
11 (1998). This kind of Usability-Setting include 
interviews with users and when indicated a 
monitoring with a ‘Thinking aloud-‘method, which 
helps to formalise specific usability problems with 
the specific system in that specific context. 

 
 

 

Summarised, the requirements for a prosodic 
VOCA should be based on: 

• phrase-generation  
• specific contexts 
• appropriate emotions 
• user-specific phraseology 
• adequate prosody 
• usability standards 

To validate these and additional assumptions for a 
specific sample of users, they must be confirmed in 
an emprical setting. A frist step was done by 
showing the importance of emotional utterances 
for augmented communicators (Hoffmann and 
Wülfing, 2010).  

6 Conclusion 

Emotional communication is an essential part of 
everyday life - this is true for people with and 
without disabilities. Lacking the opportunity of 
talking emotional means to miss out many aspects 
of a fulfilling life, since emotional output has an 
enormous impact on social relationships, the 
developing of emotional competence, and even on 
academic achievements. Furthermore, this 
circumstance leads to a huge usability deficit. 
Augmented communicators´ own expressiveness 
of emotions by gesture and mimic means is limited 
and prosodic communication is not possible, yet. 
Precisely because, prosodic VOCA is a real 

Fig. 3: Model of emotional communication using a prosodic Voice Output Communication Aid which 
allows  the listener an appropriate emotional response to the speaker`s (augmented communicator)  

intented message. 

99



innovation. It gives people with complex 
communications needs the opportunity to express 
themselves emotionally. It would encourage their 
participation in social life and, thus, also their 
Quality of Life. Still, there is a lot of criticism 
involving this topic, however, with adequate 
methods and ideas it does seem possible that some 
day in the future users of a VOCA will be able to 
communicate emotionally. 

References 
Susan Balandin (2005). Ageing and AAC: Start early, 

age well! In Jens Boenisch and Karin Otto (eds.), 
Leben im Dialog – Unterstützte Kommunikation über 
die gesamte Lebensspanne (466-478). Von Loeper, 
Karlsruhe. 

 
Marco W. Battachi, Thomas Suslow, and Margherita 

Renna (1997). Emotion & Sprache – Zur Definition 
der Emotion und ihren Beziehungen zu kognitiven 
Prozessen, dem Gedächtnis und der Sprache. Peter 
Lang, Frankfurt a.M. 

 
Rainer Banse and Klaus R. Scherer (1996). Acoustic 

profiles in vocal emotion expression. In: Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 70(3), 614-636. 

 
Sarah W. Blackstone and David P. Wilkins (2009). 

Exploring the Importance of Emotional Competence 
in Children With Complex Communication Needs. 
In: Perspectives on Augmentative and Alternative 
Communication, 18, 78-87. 

 
Felix Burkhardt (2001). Simulation emotionaler 

Sprechweise mit Sprachsyntheseverfahren. In: Reihe 
Berichte aus der Kommunikationstechnik. Shaker, 
Aachen. 

 
Bonnie Brinton and Martin Fujiki (2009). Meet me 

more than half way: Emotional competence in 
conversation using AAC. In: Perspectives on 
Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 18, 
73-77. 

 
Paul Ekman  (1999). Basic Emotions. In: Tim Dalgleish 

and Mick Power (Eds.), Handbook of Cognition and 
Emotion. John Wiley & Sons, Sussex, U.K. 

 
Emotion Markup Language 1.0 (2011) W3C working 

draft. http://www.w3.org/TR/2011/WD-emotionml-
20110407/ (accessed 06/24/2011). 

 
 

Jeffrey Higginbotham (2010). Humanizing Vox 
Artificialis: The Role of Speech Synthesis in 
Augmentative and Alternative Communication. In: 
John Mullennix and Steven Stern (Eds.), Computer 
Synthesized Speech Technologies – Tools for Aiding 
Impairment (50-70). IGI Global, Hershey, PA. 

 
Lisa Hoffmann and Jan-O. Wülfing (2010). Usability of 

Electronic Communication Aids in the Light of Daily 
Use. In: Proceedings of the 14th Biennial Conference 
of the International Society for Augmentative and 
Alternative Communication (259). Barcelona, Spain 

 
ISO 9241-11 (1998). Ergonomic requirements for office 

work with visual display terminals (VDTs) – Part 11: 
Guidance on usability. 

 
Bettina Janke (2008). Emotionswissen und 

Sozialkompetenz von Kindern im Alter von drei bis 
zehn Jahren. In: Empirische Pädagogik, 22(2), 127-
144. 

 
Abraham H. Maslow (1970). Motivation and 

Personality. Harper & Row, New York, NY. 
 
Colin Portnuff (2006). AAC: A user´s perspective. 

Webcast available as part of the AAC-RERC 
Webcast Series. http://aac-rerc.psu.edu/index-
8121.php.html (accessed 03/30/2011). 

 
Klaus R. Scherer, Rainer Banse, Harald G. Wallbott, 

and Thomas Goldbeck (1991). Vocal Cues in 
Emotion Encoding and Decoding. In: Motivation and 
Emotion, 15(2), 123-148. 

 
Fritz Strack and Roland Deutsch (2004). Reflective and 

Impulsive Determinants of Social Behavior. In: 
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8(3), 
220-247. 

 
Volker F. Strom (1998). Automatische Erkennung von 

Satzmodus, Akzentuierung und Phrasengrenzen. PhD 
thesis, University of Bonn. 

 
John Todman and Norman Alm (2003). Modelling 

conversational pragmatics in communications aids. 
In: Journal of Pragmatics, 35, 523-538. 

 
Peter B. Vanderheyden and Christopher A. Pennigton 

(1998). An Augmentative Communication Interface 
Based on Conversational Schemata. In: Vibhu O. 
Mittal, Holly A. Yanco, John Aronis, Richard C. 
Simpson and Richard Simpson (Eds.): Assistive 
Technology and AI, LNAI 1458, 109-125. 

100


