















































Analyzing Emotional Statements - Roles of General and Physiological Variables


Proceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment Analysis where AI meets Psychology (SAAIP), IJCNLP 2011, pages 59–67,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 13, 2011.

Analyzing Emotional Statements – Roles of General and Physiological 
Variables 

 
 

Dipankar Das 
Computer Science & Engineering  

Department, Jadavpur University, India   
dipankar.dipnil2005@gmail.com

Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 
Computer Science & Engineering  

Department, Jadavpur University, India  
sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.com 

 
  

 

Abstract 

 

The present task collects different statistics of 
emotions based on the combinations of general 
variables (intensity, timing and longevity) and 
physiological variables (psycho-physiological 
arousals) from the situational statements of 
the ISEAR (International Survey on Emotion 
Antecedents and Reactions) dataset. The indi-
vidual as well as combinational roles of differ-
ent variables are analyzed. Some interesting 
observations and insights are found with re-
spect to emotions. The statements of similar 
emotions are clustered according to different 
combinations of the variables. Each of the 
statements of a cluster is passed through two 
types of emotion tagging systems, a lexicon 
based baseline system followed by a super-
vised system. Due to the difficulty of incorpo-
rating knowledge regarding physiological va-
riables, the supervised system only considers 
the roles of general variables from textual 
statements. The roles of the general variables 
are played by intensifiers, modifiers and expli-
citly specified temporal and causal discourse 
markers. The evaluation indicates that the su-
pervised system based on general variables 
produces satisfactory results in identifying 
emotions. 

1 Introduction 
There exist several frameworks from various 
fields of academic study, such as cognitive sci-
ence, linguistics and psychology that can inform 
and augment analyses of sentiment, opinion and 
emotion (Read and Caroll, 2010). Emotion is a 
complex psycho-physiological experience of an 
individual's state of mind as interacting with bio-
chemical (internal) and environmental (external) 
influences. In humans, emotion fundamentally 

involves physiological arousal, expressive beha-
viors and conscious experience (Myers, 2004). 
Emotions, of course, are not linguistic ob-
jects/entities. However the most convenient 
access to emotions is through the language 
(Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004). Natural lan-
guage texts not only contain informative con-
tents, but also some attitudinal private informa-
tion including emotions. But, the identification of 
emotions from texts is not an easy task due to its 
restricted access in case of objective observation 
or verification (Quirk et al., 2007). Moreover, 
the same textual content can be presented with 
different emotional slants (Grefenstette et al., 
2004). Ekman (1993), for instance, derived a list 
of six basic emotions from subjects’ facial ex-
pressions which Strapparava and Mihalcea 
(2007) employed as classes in an affect recogni-
tion task. There are several other theories on 
emotion classes. But, the debate is concerned 
with some basic and complex categories, where 
the complex emotions could arise from cultural 
conditioning or association combined with the 
basic emotions.  

In the present task, the corpus is obtained from 
the International Survey of Emotion Antecedents 
and Reactions (ISEAR) dataset (Scherer, 2005). 
The survey was conducted in 1990s across 37 
countries and had almost about 3000 respon-
dents. This dataset contains psychological state-
ments of about 3~4 sentences pre-classified into 
seven categories of emotion (anger, disgust, fear, 
guilt, joy, sadness and shame). The respondents 
were instructed to describe a situation or event in 
which they felt the emotion. Thus, we have clus-
tered the situational statements into their corre-
sponding emotion classes based on three general 
and three physiological variables. The intensity 
(INTS), timing (WHEN) and longevity (LONG) 
of the feeling were considered as general vari-
ables whereas Ergotropic Arousal (ERGO) (e.g., 

59



change in breathing, heart beating faster etc.), 
Trophotropic Arousal (TROPHO) (e.g., lump in 
throat, crying etc.) and Felt temperature (TEM-
PER) (e.g., feeling hot, warm, cold/shiver) pro-
posed by Gellhorn (1970) have been considered 
as physiological variables.  

The individual statistics based on general and 
physiological variables show various interesting 
insights of the variables from the perspective of 
emotion (e.g., low intensity for emotion classes 
of shame and guilt and high for joy, fear and 
sadness). The statistics that are acquired based 
on the combinations of different variables also 
elicit some crucial properties for a comparative 
analysis of emotions (e.g., people feel warm and 
lump in throat in case of joyous situation). 
Therefore, the statements containing one or more 
sentences are clustered into the seven emotion 
classes according to different combinations of 
the general and physiological variables.  

The sentences are then passed through the pre-
processing steps followed by the identification of 
emotional words based on the WordNet Affect 
lists (Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004). The word 
level emotion tags are assigned as sentence and 
statement level emotion tags. Multiple emotion 
tags assigned by the system for each of the 
statements are compared against its correspond-
ing single annotated emotion tag. The baseline 
system based on WordNet Affect lists achieves 
the average Precision, Recall and F-Score values 
of 58%, 47.4% and 50.6% respectively on 5120 
sentences with respect to five emotion classes.  

The word as well as phrase level emotion ex-
pressions are identified using Support Vector 
Machine (SVM) based supervised system (Das 
and Bandyopadhyay, 2010). The system achieves 
average Precision, Recall and F-Score values of 
69%, 45.8% and 55.05% respectively. The sen-
tential emotion tags are assigned based on the 
identified emotional expressions and intensity 
clues. Two types of explicit discourse markers 
such as temporal (e.g., ‘when’ ‘while’) and 
causal (e.g., ‘as’, ‘because’) are employed for 
identifying emotions at statement level. It has 
been found that the incorporation of the intensity 
and discourse level clues improves the Precision 
(70.04%), Recall (65.3%) and F-Score (68.03%) 
values respectively. The errors are due to the 
problem in identifying the textual clues in sup-
port of the physiological variables. But, it has 
been observed that the general variables play the 
significant roles in identifying emotions.  

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 describes the related work. The statis-

tics of emotions based on various general and 
physiological variables are discussed in Section 
3. The baseline and supervised systems for emo-
tion identification are described in Section 4. 
Evaluation results along with error analysis are 
specified in Section 5. Finally Section 6 con-
cludes the paper. 

2 Related Work  
The characterization of the words and phrases 
according to their emotive tones was attempted 
by several researchers (Turney, 2002). Following 
the terminology proposed by (Wiebe et al., 
2005), subjectivity analysis focuses on the auto-
matic identification of private states, such as 
opinions, emotions, sentiments, evaluations, be-
liefs and speculations in natural language. Natu-
ral language domains such as News (Strapparava 
and Mihalcea, 2007) and Blogs (Mishne and 
Rijke, 2006) are also becoming a popular, com-
municative and informative repository of text 
based emotional contents in the Web 2.0 for min-
ing and summarizing opinion at word, sentence 
and document level granularities (Ku et al., 
2006). The model proposed in (Neviarouskaya et 
al., 2007) processes symbolic cues and employs 
NLP techniques to estimate the affects in text. 
Machine learning techniques were used either to 
predict text-based emotions based on the SNoW 
learning architecture (Alm et al., 2005) or to 
identify the mood of the authors during reading 
and writing (Yang et al., 2009).  

The ISEAR corpus was used in (Boldrini et 
al., 2010) for the experiments concerning emo-
tional expressions and fine-grained analysis of 
affect in text. Their aim was to build the subjec-
tivity expression models and they did not explore 
the intensity or physiological variables in case of 
identifying emotions.  

Psychiatric query document retrieval can assist 
individuals to locate query documents relevant to 
their depression-related problems efficiently and 
effectively (Yeh et. al., 2008). A DSM-IV based 
screening tool for Adult psychiatric disorders in 
Indian Rural health Centre has been discussed in 
(Chattopadhyay, 2006). One promising related 
task in the of emotion and psychology literature 
has been proposed in (Yu et al., 2007). The au-
thors use high-level topic information extracted 
from consultation documents that include nega-
tive life events, depressive symptoms and seman-
tic relations between symptoms to identify the 
similarities between the documents correspond-
ing to a query.  

60



3 Analysis of Emotion Variables 

3.1 Roles of the General Variables 
Emotions generally appear in natural language 
texts along with intensity (INTS). Four different 
types of intensity (not very, moderately intense, 
intense and very intense) are annotated in the 
ISEAR dataset. The other two emotion variables 
that are closely associated with intensity are tim-
ing (WHEN) and longevity (LONG) of the emo-
tional feeling. Four different values were as-
signed for the timing (e.g., days ago, weeks ago, 
months ago, years ago) in the dataset. Similarly, 
four values were assigned for the longevity (a 
few minutes, an hour, several hours, a day or 
more). These variables are termed as general va-
riables in our present discussion. 

In case of identifying emotions, the last two 
variables (timing and longevity) in association 
with intensity play the important roles rather than 
their individual appearances. Hence, the state-
ments of the dataset are clustered into seven 
emotion classes based on the intensity variable 
alone and the combined relation of intensity with 
timing and longevity. The frequencies of the 
emotional statements in each of the emotion 
classes based on intensity, the combinations of 
intensity with timing and longevity are shown in 
Figure 1, Figure 2 and Figure 3 respectively. 

 It has been observed that emotions vary along 
with intensity but the variations of the emotion 
classes are not similar from the perspective of 
intensity. From the frequency information as 
shown in Figure 1, it is found that intensity is 
comparatively high in sadness, fear, joy and an-
ger but is low in case of guilt, disgust and shame.  

 

 
 
Figure 1: Frequencies of instances (Emotion 
Statements) in seven emotion classes based on 
Intensity (INTS).   

 
We have mentioned earlier that intensity plays 

a crucial role in association with the timing and 

longevity for identifying different emotional 
slants. The variations of emotions with respect to 
different combinations of intensity and timing are 
shown in Figure 2. The events that have taken 
place usually before a year elicit sadness and 
fear with very high intensity and shame and guilt 
with relatively moderate intensity. In case of very 
intense events, shame increases exponentially 
with respect to time.  

 

 
 
Figure 2: Frequencies of instances (Emotion 
Statements) in seven emotion classes based on 
Intensity (INTS) and Timing (WHEN) [INTS ~ 
WHEN] 

 
On the other hand, the intensity also varies 

with longevity or duration of the emotional feel-
ing. The frequencies of different emotions based 
on the combination of intensity and longevity are 
shown in Figure 3. The emotions that persist 
with very high intensity for several years in com-
parison with other emotions are sadness and joy.  
The moderately intense emotions that persist for 
several months or years are shame and guilt. In 
case of low intensity, guilt emotion persists for 
longer time in comparison with other emotions. 

 

 
 
Figure 3: Frequencies of instances (Emotion 
Statements) in seven emotion classes based on 
Intensity (INTS) and Longevity (LONG) [INTS 
~ LONG] 

61



3.2 Roles of the Physiological Variables 
It is observed that not only the intensity but some 
physiological variables also help in identifying 
the emotions. Three  types of symptoms or 
arousals namely, Ergotropic Arousal (ERGO) 
(e.g., change in breathing, heart beating faster, 
muscles tensing/trembling and perspiring/moist 
hands), Trophotropic Arousal (TROPHO) (e.g., 
lump in throat, stomach troubles and crying/ 
sobbing) and felt temperature (TEMPER) (e.g., 
feeling cold/shivering, feeling warm/pleasant, 
feeling hot/cheeks burning) as proposed by Gell-
horn (1970) are mentioned in the ISEAR corpus. 
The symptoms are termed as physiological va-
riables for studying the nature of emotions. The 
frequencies of the emotional statements in each 
of the emotion classes based on the individual 
physiological variables are shown in Figure 4, 
Figure 5 and Figure 6 respectively. Their combi-
nations are shown in Figure 7, Figure 8 and Fig-
ure 9 respectively. 
    It is observed from Figure 4 that, in case of 
fear and anger, the heart beat becomes faster 
and muscles are tensed. But, the perspiring along 
with moist hands are the noticeable symptoms 
that differentiate fear from any other emotions. 
Change in breathing is faster in case of anger, 
joy and shame.  
 

 
 
Figure 4: Frequencies of instances (Emotion 
Statements) in seven emotion classes based on 
Ergotropic Arousal (ERGO) 
 

One crucial fact can be recognized if we 
analyse the impact of Trophotropic variables 
from the perspective of sadness (as shown in 
Figure 5). Stomach troubles and crying/sobbing 
are recognized as the general symptoms for 
sadness. The lump in throat is low for sadness 
but high for joy. Stomach troubles are low for joy 
but persist more or less in all other emotions 
such as anger, disgust, fear, shame and guilt. The 

frequency information also identifies the support 
of crying/sobbing for fear in addition to sadness.  
 

 
 

Figure 5: Frequencies of instances (Emotion 
Statements) in seven emotion classes based on 
Trophotropic Arousal (TROPHO)  
 

The other important physiological variable 
that helps in identifying the nature of emotions is 
felt temperature (as shown in Figure 6). People 
feel warm and pleasant in case joy only. Any 
kind of temperature symptom is observed in joy 
rather than other emotions. The symptom of hot 
feeling and cheeks burning are the distinguisha-
ble symptoms for identifying shame and anger. It 
is also found that people feel cold and even shiv-
er in case of fear and sadness. 
 

 
 
Figure 6: Frequencies of instances (Emotion 
Statements) in seven emotion classes based on 
Felt temperature (TEMPER)  
 

Though the characteristic curves for different 
emotions are equivalent and similar with respect 
to the combination of Ergotropic and Tropho-
tropic variables (as shown in Figure 7), the slight 
distinctions prevail for fear, joy and sadness. The 
heart beating fastens and muscles are tensed 
along with lump in throat in case of fear and 
sadness. Perspiring and lump in throat also hap-
pen in fear emotion.  
 

62



 
Figure 7: Frequencies of instances (Emotion 
Statements) in seven emotion classes based on 
Ergotropic (ERGO) and Trophotropic (TRO-
PHO) Arousals 
 
   Figure 8 shows the impact of the Ergotropic 
variables along with felt temperature in characte-
rizing different emotions. It is observed that the 
change in breathing and faster heart beating 
with warm feeling is identified as the distin-
guishing features for joy. People generally feel 
hot and experience tensed muscles in case of 
sadness whereas they feel cold and perspire in 
fear. 
    

 
 
Figure 8: Frequencies of instances (Emotion 
Statements) in seven emotion classes based on 
Ergotropic Arousal (ERGO) and Felt tempera-
ture (TEMPER)  
 
    The frequencies based on the combination of 
Trophotropic Arousal and felt temperature for 
identifying emotions are shown in Figure 9. 
Warm feeling and lump in throat are generally 
seen in case of joy whereas hot feeling is ob-
served in case of shame and sadness. Stomach 
troubles and cold feeling are identified as the 
general symptoms for sadness and fear.   
 
 

 
 
Figure 9: Frequencies of instances (Emotion 
Statements) in seven emotion classes based on 
Trophotropic Arousal (TROPHO) and Felt tem-
perature (TEMPER) 

4 Emotion Tagging  
While analyzing the interdependent and interac-
tive roles between emotions and the variables it 
is observed that the identification of the textual 
clues related to the physiological variables is dif-
ficult. On the other hand, the textual hints related 
to emotions (e.g., intensifiers, modifiers etc.) and 
the general variables are also taken into consid-
eration for developing the emotion tagging sys-
tems. Each of the sentences is passed through 
two different systems, a lexicon based baseline 
system followed by machine learning based su-
pervised system. The baseline system aims to 
identify emotions without including any know-
ledge of the textual clues related to the general 
variables whereas the supervised system identi-
fies emotions by incorporating the hints that are 
explicitly present in the text and are related to the 
variables.  

The corpus obtained from the International 
Survey of Emotion Antecedents and Reactions 
(ISEAR) dataset (Scherer, 2005) contains the 
psychological statements of seven different emo-
tions. Thus, we have clustered the statements 
into seven emotion classes based on the combi-
nations of different variables and employed them 
for identifying emotions.  

4.1 Clustering of Emotional Statements 
The emotional statements are clustered based on 
the individual and combinational appearances 
from the perspective of general and physiological 
variables. In our present attempt, only the unary 
and binary combinations of the variables are 
considered for clustering the statements.   

The frequencies or the number of statements 
in each cluster are shown in the figures 1 through 
5. A total of 12 different clusters are identified 

63



for six individual variables and their combina-
tions. But, our next motivation is to automatical-
ly recognize the emotions from each of the 
statements of a cluster. Each of the statements 
generally contains 3~4 sentences on an average. 
Therefore, we have passed each of the sentences 
of a cluster for sentence level emotion tagging.  

4.2 Preprocessing  
A set of standard preprocessing techniques is 
carried out, viz., tokenizing, stemming and stop 
word removal for each of the statements of a 
cluster. Tools provided by Rapidminer’s text 
plugin1 were used for these tasks.  

4.3 Lexicon based Baseline Model 
The emotion word lists, WordNet Affect (Strap-
parava and Valitutti, 2004) is available for only 
Ekman’s (1993) six basic emotions (anger, dis-
gust, fear, joy, sadnesss and surprise) in English. 
But, no such wordlist is available for the emo-
tions like shame and guilt. Therefore, in our 
present attempt, we have only focused on the 
Ekman’s five emotions (anger, disgust, fear, joy 
and sadness) that are present in the ISEAR data-
set. The five lists of WordNet Affect are used to 
obtain the affect words that are present in the 
emotional expressions. These affect words in 
turn contribute towards identifying the sentential 
and statement level emotion tags.  
    The algorithm is that, if a word in a statement 
is present in any of the WordNet Affect lists; the 
statement is tagged with the emotion label cor-
responding to that affect list. But, if no word is 
found in any of the five lists, each word of the 
statement is passed through the morphological 
process to identify its root form which is again 
searched in the WordNet Affect lists. If the root 
form is found in any of the five WordNet Affect 
lists, the statement is tagged accordingly. Other-
wise, the statement is tagged as non-emotional or 
neutral. A single statement is tagged with mul-
tiple emotions based on the affect words con-
tained in that statement. But, the evaluation has 
been carried out with respect to the single anno-
tated emotion. The Recall of the system has been 
calculated if at least one of the Ekman’s five 
emotions is assigned by the system and the Pre-
cision has been calculated if any of the system 
assigned emotions matches with the annotated 
emotion. 

                                                 
1 http://rapid-i.com/content/blogcategory/38/69/ 

4.4 SVM based Supervised Model 

The Support Vector Machine (SVM) (Cortes and 
Vapnik, 1995) based supervised framework has 
been used to extract the emotional expressions as 
well as to tag the sentences with emotions. Con-
sidering the approach described in (Das and 
Bandyopadhyay, 2010), the emotion tagging is 
done at statement level. For emotional expres-
sions, the task is to label any of the five emotion 
tags to a single word or a sequence of words in a 
sentence. Other words are tagged as neutral. Fi-
nally, the statement level emotion tagging is car-
ried out based on the emotional expressions 
along with intensity and other discourse level 
clues.  
    The identification of the basic features is 
straightforward. This includes the identification 
of Emotion/Affect Words of WordNet Affect, 
Parts-of-Speech (verb, noun, adjective and ad-
verb) (Das and Bandyopadhyay, 2010). But, it is 
difficult to identify the textual clues in support of 
the physiological variables. Thus, the intensity 
feature along with temporal and causal discourse 
markers is employed in the supervised system to 
compensate the roles of the general variables.   
    Intensity Clues: The Intensity clues are the 
Intensifiers that are identified by the Stanford 
dependency relations amod() (adjectival modifi-
er), advmod() (adverbial modifier), JJ (adjective) 
and RB (adverb). If the intensifier is found in the 
SentiWordNet (Baccianella et al., 2010), then the 
positive and negative scores of the intensifier are 
retrieved from the SentiWordNet (Baccianella et 
al., 2010). The intensifier is classified as either 
positive (pos) (INTFpos) or negative (neg) 
(INTFneg) for which the average retrieved score is 
higher.  
    Punctuation Symbols, Capitalized Phrases, 
Conjuncts and Negations are also employed as 
features during the training and the testing. The 
following discourse level features play an impor-
tant role in identifying the emotions at statement 
level. 

Discourse Clues: The present task aims to 
identify only the explicit discourse markers that 
are tagged by conjunctive_() or mark_() type de-
pendency relations of the parsed constituents 
(e.g. as, because, while, whereas). Two types of 
discourse markers are identified, temporal and 
causal. 

Temporal Markers (TM): The explicit tempor-
al markers (when, while, before, after, for a year 
etc.) are identified from the prepositional depen-
dency relations [prep()]. 

64



Causal Markers (CM): The lists for causal 
verbs are prepared by processing the XML files 
of English VerbNet (Kipper-Schuler, 2005). If a 
class contains any frame with semantic type as 
Cause, we collect the member verbs from that 
XML class file. The list contains a total of 250 
causal verbs (e.g., cause, happen, occur etc.). 

Different unigram and bi-gram context fea-
tures (word, POS tag, Intensifier, negation) and 
their combinations were generated from the 
training corpus. We have included some strate-
gies and features as considered in (Das and Ban-
dyopadhyay, 2010) to improve the performance 
of the supervised system. The strategies and fea-
tures include the application of Information Gain 
Based Pruning (IGBP), Admissible Tag Se-
quence (ATS), Class Splitting technique and 
Emotional Composition features.  

5 Evaluation 
The ISEAR dataset contains the emotional 
statements that in turn contain the emotional sen-
tences. Thus, all the sentential emotion tags are 
considered as the potential candidates for their 
corresponding emotional statement. The standard 
metrics, Precision (Prec.), Recall (Rec.) and F-
Score (FS) have been considered for evaluation 
of the statement level emotion tagging.  

The evaluation of the baseline model is 
straightforward. The baseline system assigns 
each of the statements with multiple emotion 
tags. Therefore, an error analysis has been con-
ducted with the help of confusion matrix as 
shown in Table 1. A close investigation of the 
evaluation results suggests that the errors are 
mostly due to the uneven distribution between 
joy and other emotion tags.  The crucial feature 
of the lexicon based baseline system is that it 
achieves an average 50.6% F-Score with respect 
to the five emotion classes. But, the system suf-
fers due to the coverage of some affect lists (e.g., 
disgust, anger).  

 
Class anger    disgust    fear     joy    sadness  
anger      
disgust     
fear    
joy 
sadness 

246            5          16       133      65  
  35        229          21       141      55  
  23           25       315       124    101 
    8             3            6      422      18 
  14             8          10      213    212 

 
Table 1. Confusion matrix for Baseline Model 

for five emotion classes 
 

    The supervised system assigns a single emo-
tion tag to each statement. Thus, the similarity 
measures are considered for evaluating the 
statements contained in each of the clusters. The 
results with respect to five emotion classes for 
the baseline and supervised systems are shown in 
Table 2. It has been observed that supervised 
system outperforms the baseline system signifi-
cantly.  
 
Emotion 
Class 

      Baseline Supervised 
Prec.   Rec.   FS Prec.   Rec.   FS 

anger      
disgust     
fear    
 joy 
sadness 

.52      .45      .48 

.47      .46      .46 

.53      .57      .55 

.92      .44      .59 

.46      .45      .45 

.65        .52     .59 

.60        .55     .57 

.71        .80     .76 

.94        .62     .74 

.55        .60     .57 
 
Table 2. Precision (Prec.), Recall (Rec.) and F-

score (FS) of the Baseline and Supervised Mod-
els for five emotion classes 

 
Therefore, the supervised system has been 

employed to identify the emotions from the emo-
tional statements of the clusters. The results are 
shown in Table 3 for each of the clusters that are 
either based on an individual variable or the 
combinations of variables.   

 
Cluster 
(#5120 sentences each) 

Supervised 
Prec.    Rec.     FS 

INTS  
INTS ~ WHEN 
INTS ~ LONG 
ERGO 
TROPHO 
TEMPER 
ERGO ~ TRPHO 
ERGO ~ TEMPER 
TROPHO ~ TEMPER 

0.87     0.75     0.81 
0.76     0.63     0.70 
0.72     0.69     0.71 
0.67     0.62     0.64 
0.65     0.58     0.61 
0.68     0.55     0.60 
0.64     0.65     0.64 
0.59     0.53     0.56 
0.61     0.57     0.59 

 
Table 3. Average Precision (Prec.), Recall 

(Rec.) and F-Score (FS) of the Supervised Model 
with respect to five emotion classes for different 
clusters  

 
It is found that the incorporation of intensity 

and discourse level textual clues into the super-
vised system improves the performance in identi-
fying the potential emotion tags. But, like gener-
al intensity, the clues for the physiological va-
riables (e.g., Temperature, Arousals) do not ap-
pear explicitly in text. A close investigation eli-
cits the fact that the absence of textual hints re-

65



lated to general variables fails to capture the 
emotions from the statements that contain high 
values of physiological variables. But, it can be 
concluded that, in absence of the physiological 
variables, the supervised system identifies the 
emotions by only capturing the textual clues re-
lated to general variables. 

6  Conclusion 

The work reported in the paper has presented 
different frequency statistics and observations 
with respect to emotions that are based on the 
three general variables such as intensity, timing 
and longevity as well as three physiological 
arousals. The present work also describes two 
different frameworks for emotion tagging, a lexi-
con based baseline model followed by a SVM 
based supervised model. The incorporation of 
intensity and discourse level temporal and causal 
textual clues yields higher performance than the 
baseline system using single words alone. Future 
work will focus on devising a method for simi-
larity pattern acquisition from the statements of 
each emotion cluster. The similarity measures 
will thus help to recognize other implicit symp-
toms of emotions from textual contents.  

Acknowledgments 
The work reported in this paper is supported by a 
grant from the India-Japan Cooperative Pro-
gramme (DST-JST) 2009 Research project enti-
tled “Sentiment Analysis where AI meets Psy-
chology” funded by Department of Science and 
Technology (DST), Government of India. 

References  
Alm, C. O., Roth, D. and Sproat, R. 2005. Emotions 

from text: machine learning for text-based emo-
tion prediction. HLT-EMNLP, pp. 579 - 586 

Baccianella Stefano, Esuli Andrea and Sebastiani Fa-
brizio. 2010. SentiWordNet 3.0: An Enhanced Lex-
ical Re-source for Sentiment Analysis and Opinion 
Mining. Language Resources and Evaluation, 
pp. 2200-2204. 

Chattopadhyay S., 2006. Psyconsultant I: A DSM-IV-
Based Screening Tool For Adult Psychiatric Dis-
orders In Indian Rural Health Center. The Internet 
Journal of Medical Informatics, 3( 1). 

Cortes C. and V. Vapnik. 1995. Support-Vector Net-
work. Machine Learning, 20, pp. 273–297. 

Das, D. and Bandyopadhyay, S. 2010. Identifying 
Emotional Expressions, Intensities and Sentential 

Emotion Tags using A Supervised Framework. 
24th PACLIC, Japan. 

Ekman, P.1993. Facial expression and emotion. 
American Psychologist, 48(4):384–392. 

Gellhorn E. 1970. The emotions and the ergotropic 
and trophotropic systems. Psychological Re-
search, 34(1):67-94, DOI: 10.1007/BF00422863 

Grefenstette Gregory, Yan Qu, James G. Shanahan, 
and David A. Evans. 2004. Coupling niche brows-
ers and affect analysis for an opinion mining appli-
cation.  RIAO-04, pp. 186–194 

Kipper-Schuler, K. 2005.  VerbNet: A broad-
coverage, comprehensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. the-
sis, Computer and Information Science Dept., Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. 

Ku, L. W., Liang, Y. T. and Chen, H. H. 2006. Opi-
nion extraction, summarization and tracking in 
news and blog corpora. AAAI-2006 Spring Sym-
posium on Computational Approaches to Ana-
lyzing Weblogs, AAAI Technical Report, pp. 
100-107. 

Mishne, G. and Rijke, M. de. 2006. MoodViews: 
Tools for Blog Mood Analysis. AAAI-2006 
Spring Symposium on Computational Ap-
proaches to Analyzing Weblogs, AAAI Tech-
nical Report. 

Myers, David G. 2004. Theories of Emotion. Psy-
chology: Seventh Edition, New York, NY: Worth 
Publishers, pp. 500. 

Neviarouskaya, A., Prendinger, H., and Ishizuka, M. 
2007. Narrowing the Social Gap among People In-
volved in Global Dialog: Automatic Emotion De-
tection in Blog Posts. International Conference 
on Weblogs and  Social Media. 

Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S. Leech, G. and Svartvik, J. 
1985. A Comprehensive Grammar of the English 
Language. Longman.  

Read Jonathon and Caroll John. 2010. Annotating 
expressions of Appraisal in English. Language 
Resource and Evaluation. 

Scherer K. R. 2005. What are emotions? And how 
canthey be measured? Social Science Informa-
tion, 44(4):693–727. 

Strapparava, C. and Valitutti, A. 2004. Wordnet-
affect: an affective extension of wordnet. Lan-
guage Resource and Evaluation. 

Strapparava, C. and Mihalcea, R. 2007. SemEval-
2007 Task 14: Affective Text. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 

Turney, P.D. 2002. Thumbs Up or Thumbs Down? 
Semantic Orientation Applied to Unsupervised 

66



Classification of Reviews. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pp.417- 424. 

Wiebe, J., Wilson, T. and Cardie, C. 2005. Annotating 
expressions of opinions and emotions in language.  
Language Resource and Evaluation, 39(2-
3):165-210. 

Yang, C., Lin, K. H. Y., and Chen, H. H. 2009. Writer 
Meets Reader: Emotion Analysis of Social Media 
from both the Writer's and Reader's Perspectives. 
009 IEEE/WIC/ACM, pp. 287-290. 

Yeh Jui-Feng, Chung-Hsien Wu, Liang-Chih Yu, Yu-
Sheng Lai. 2008. Extended probabilistic HAL with 
close temporal association for psychiatric query 
document retrieval.  ACM Trans on Information  
System, 27(1). 

Yu Liang-Chih, Chung-Hsien Wu, Chin-Yew Lin, 
Eduard Hovy and Chia-Ling Lin. 2007. Topic 
Analysis for Psychiatric Document Retrieval. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 
1024-1031. 

67


