















































Different Input Systems for Different Devices


Proceedings of the Workshop on Advances in Text Input Methods (WTIM 2011), pages 26–30,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 13, 2011.

Figure 1: Character Level NLP Applications 

Different Input Systems for Different Devices 

Optimized Urdu Touch-Screen Keypad Designs 

Asad Habib, Masakazu Iwatate, Masayuki Asahara and Yuji Matsumoto 

Graduate School of Information Science 

Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Nara, Japan. 

{habib-a,masakazu-i,masayu-a,matsu}@is.naist.jp 

 

Abstract 

We live in the age of touch screen gadgets. The 

future trends also show promising growth for 

them. Currently available input systems devel-

oped for standard PCs have room for improve-

ment in efficiency, visibility and usability etc. 

particularly for Perso-Arabic scripts e.g., Urdu. 

In addition, small touch screen devices expose 

users to health hazards. We put forth Ergonom-

ics in prime focus to reduce potential health 

hazards. We proposed distinct touch-screen 

keypads for different devices that are practically 

applicable for fast, correct and easy composing. 

We computed the estimated input time and tap-

counts using automated procedure to compare 

contemporary keypads with our proposed key-

pads. Our experiments on a considerably large 

Urdu corpus reveal results of ample signifi-

cance. Our optimization technique for arrange-

ment of alphabets and unique interface for data 

input is extendable and equally applicable to 

other natural languages. 

1 Introduction 

NLP has numerous applications at the “Char-

acters level” as shown by Figure 1. These in-

clude Romanization, Transliteration, Script Gen-

eration, Input System and/or Interface Designs 

etc. This research targets on the Interface De-

signs. We have come up with novel keyboard 

and keypads for text input on various types of 

touch-screen devices such as mobile phones, tab-

let PCs and completely touch screen PCs.   

Urdu is the 2nd largest Arabic script language 

according to the number of speakers (Lewis and 

M. Paul, 2009; Weber 1999). However its little 

presence on the internet does not qualify its rank. 

Among its major causes is the limited platform 

support and meager interface designs for com-

posing write-ups in Urdu. Designing optimized 

Urdu keypads for small screen widgets is a knot-

ty problem since Urdu has a relatively large al-

phabet set. Various sources and/or authors report 

different number of letters in Urdu letter set i.e. 

38 to 58 (Ijaz and Hussain, 2007; Malik et al. 

1997; Habib et al. 2010). Arabic loan low fre-

quency Ligatures and Diacritics are Used in reli-

gious texts. Ligatures are fixed blocks of letters 

each represented by a Unicode. Diacritics are 

small macrons like characters used for correct 

pronunciation of letters in a word.  

We used unigram and bigram frequencies in a 

large corpus and developed novel Urdu touch-

screen keypads as shown in Figures 2, 4 and 5. 

Letters with highest unigram frequencies are se-

lected as base letters of our keypad for small 

touch-screen devices as shown in Figure 2. Ar-

rangement of letters is based on their bigram fre-

quencies. Figure 3 illustrates its mechanism of 

displaying the hidden high frequency neighbor-

ing letters when a key is pressed. On the contrary, 

the keypad in Figure 4 is ordered and based on 

type-face shape property of individual letters. 

This keypad is designed for tablet PCs but it can 

also be used in smaller devices. Unigram letter 

frequencies are also used in arrangement of keys 

for large touch screen systems such that the 

highest frequency letters are typed by the strong-

est typing fingers. Experiments revealed promis-

ing results; explained in section 3.1.  

At present, more and more data is being gen-

erated and uploaded using touch-screen smart 

gadgets that come in various shapes and screen 

sizes such as tablet PCs and mobile phones etc. 

Recently, there have been zero button touch 

screen laptop systems in the market e.g., the 

Acer ICONIA.  The current trends and types of 

new gadgets being introduced in the market sug-

26



Table 1: Multi-tap input table for T9 keypads 

 

gest the growth of touch screen systems in the 

days to come.  

Different interfaces suit different devices for 

users composing different natural languages. Full 

keyboard replica designs with base and shift ver-

sions e.g., QWERTY and Dvorak etc. cause usa-

bility as well as visibility problems; hence not 

viable for small touch-screen systems. Besides, 

small screen devices bring about health hazards 

to the user. Eyesight weakness, RSI (Repetitive 

Strain Injuries) and CTS (Carpal Tunnel Syn-

drome) etc. are only a few health hazards caused 

by the technology/devices that we use.  

For example, in case of eyesight, the closer ob-

jects put greater strain on muscles converging the 

eyes retina (Ankrum, 1996). Stress on conver-

gence system of eyes is crucial factor for strain 

(Jaschinski-Kruza, 1988; NASA, 1995) Thus we 

need to keep hygiene in prime focus during design 

and development of input systems, particularly for 

small touch-screen devices. We tried to develop 

touch-screen keypads that would be health friend-

ly having much visibility and usability coupled 

with crafty arrangement of keys that is ideal for 

fast, correct, easy and efficient composing.  

2 Proposed Keypads 

2.1 Motivation for new keypad designs 

Apart from the conventional QWERTY and 

Dvorak keyboards, there are a number of key-

pads used for text entry e.g., Muti-tap, odometer-

like, touch-and-flick, Septambic keyer and 

Twiddler etc. (Wigdor, 2004).  

Existing on-screen Urdu keyboard is replica of 

Microsoft Windows QWERTY type keyboard. 

For Mobile phones, Multi-tap T9 replica keypads 

are in use. The working of existing Urdu Multi-

tap keypad is explained in the Table 1. The col-

umns show the characters that will be typed 

when the corresponding key (numeral in row 

header) is tapped/pressed a specified number of 

times.  

 

VII VI V IV III II I Tap/Key 

 2 ب پ ت ۃ ٹ ث 

 3 ا آ ؤ ۂ ء ئ 

 4 س ش ص ض   

 5 د ڈ ذ ر ڑ ز ژ

 6 ج چ ح خ   

 7 ن و ھ ی ے ۓ 

 8 ف ق ک گ ل م ں

 9 ط ظ ع غ   

 

Full sized QWERTY like keyboards are not 

feasible for touch screen devices, in particular 

devices with small screen where limited screen 

area needs to be used astutely. This issue be-

comes more challenging when we design key-

pads for languages with a large number of alpha-

bets. The trade-off issues in size and position of 

keyboard, editor, and buttons etc. require great 

care at design time. A good design must comply 

with the five principles of Ergonomics; safety, 

comfort, ease of use, productivity/performance 

and aesthetics (Karwowski, 2006).  

Keeping the above points in view, we propose 

the following two keypads for small size touch 

screen devices and one keypad for large size 

touch screen devices.  

2.2 Proposed keypad for small size touch 
screen devices (Smart phones) 

Figure 2 shows the base image of proposed 

frequency-based keypad for touch screen mobile 

phones. The individual characters are selected 

based on their unigram frequencies in 55-million 

characters corpus. The arrangement of characters 

is done on the basis of their corresponding bi-

gram neighborhood frequencies. The letters in 

the base version, as shown in Figure 2, are not 

arranged in alphabetical order in Urdu. For the 

sake of easy understanding, all the remaining 

Urdu letters are shown in small font on the corre-

sponding edges of each button. The button on the 

lower left will be used for space, delete, carriage 

return and changing language etc. Similarly the 

three diamond-like small buttons can be used for 

showing the extremely low frequency ligatures, 

diacritics and for numeric characters.  

Comparison statistics of various keypads have 

been tabulated in section 3.1. The base form of 

keypad shows the most frequently used Urdu 

letters. The bigram neighborhood statistics reveal 

that this non-alphabetic arrangement of Urdu 

letters alone gives additional 17% improvement 

in composing Urdu text. Other statistics related 

to comparison of different keypads are explained 

in section 3.1.   
 

 

 

 
 

Figure 2: Proposed keypad for touch-screen 

mobile phone 

 

27



Figure 5: Urdu letters with their corre-

sponding positions on QWERTY keyboard 

 

 

Figure 4: Proposed keypad for Tablet PCs 

 

In the event of a “button press” a single button 

can expand up to 8 neighbors showing the 8 new 

letters. These 8 letters consist of 4 horizontal and 

vertical neighbors and 4 diagonal neighbors. Be-

ginners will need to look at the screen to select 

the correct neighboring letter. However experi-

enced users can “touch type” in order to type 

their desired letter(s). The individual button sizes 

are big enough for blind touch and/or thumb typ-

ing. The size of buttons and their dimensions are 

flexible and can be adjusted according to the de-

vice on which the keypad is to be deployed. The 

event of a “button press” is illustrated in Figure 3.   
 

 
 

Horizontal and Vertical 

Neighbors 

Diagonal Neighbors 

 

 

2.3 Proposed keypad for middle size touch 
screen devices (Tablet PCs) 

Urdu letters can be grouped based on their 

shapes and their alphabetical order can still be 

preserved. The similar shaped letters have been 

grouped on a single button in our proposed key-

pad for Tablet PCs as shown in Figure 4.  

There are 10 buttons for typing Urdu that 

show the corresponding letters in native alpha-

betical order with some letters shown on the edg-

es of buttons.  All the letter typing buttons are 

shown on a single row called the home row. Un-

like hardware keyboards, it is very difficult to 

return fingers to exactly the same position on a 

touch-screen keypad. Thus we arranged all the 

letters on a single row so that the user doesn’t 

need to lift the entire hand in order to type a let-

ter. The user will keep both hands all the time 

above the single/home row. The user just needs 

to touch and flick in order to type a certain letter. 

The little finger of right hand will type the 

rightmost button on the keypad while the little 

finger of the left hand will be used to type the 

leftmost button on the keypad. The four middle 

buttons will be typed using the index fingers of 

both hands. The reason for this is that the index 

fingers are the strongest typing fingers 

(Krestensson, 2009).  

The lower row includes some special buttons 

such as Lig (Ligatures) and Diac (Diacritics).  

2.4 Proposed keypad for large size touch 
screen devices (PCs) 

Figure 5 shows our frequency based full key-

board layout. The current layout of Urdu key-

board used in touch screen devices is a replica of 

Microsoft Windows OSK (On-Screen Keyboard) 

with standard base and shift versions. Urdu has 

no concept of lower and upper case alphabets. 

 

The contemporary OSK keyboard has room 

for improvement in that some high frequency 

letters are typed in combination of Shift-key, the 

last thing a user will need. Similarly, the 

keys/buttons arrangement is not frequency based. 

We propose frequency based full keyboard lay-

out as shown in Figure 5. Along with other pro-

posed keypads, its detailed performance exami-

nation with human subjects will be done in near 

future. However the new layout has eliminated 

the Shift version of Microsoft Windows replica. 

We also re-arranged the position of keys based 

on the frequencies of individual letters such that 

the most frequent letters should be typed by the 

strongest typing finger i.e. the index finger.  

Additional issues related only to the touch-

screen keyboards such as the inter-keys distance 

will also be investigated and proper accommo-

dating solutions would be put forward. Similarly 

Figure 3: Illustration of a button press event  

 

28



the neighborhood of some standard keys might 

also be required to change. One such example is 

the neighboring keys of the “Backspace/Delete” 

and the “Enter/Return” keys.   

3. Experiment 

We carried out experiments on a general gen-

re corpus of size 15,594,403 words. We estimat-

ed the performance of proposed keypads for 

small touch-screen and Table PCs. Existing 

Touch-screen systems start word prediction as 

soon as the user types the first letter. For words 

with length up to two letters, this seems to bring 

hardly any improvement to the typing speed. On 

the contrary, it makes the system more complex 

and larger in size putting more load on CPU. We 

recommend that word prediction should start af-

ter the second letter has been typed by the user. 

Out of 15,594,403 words, 4,784,234 words are 

less than or equal to two letters in length. Hence 

for the experiments of this study, we used a re-

duced corpus of size 10,810,169 words. In prac-

tice it is faster to type on touch-screen than on 

multi-tap systems. Research that studies compar-

ing the performance of touch screen and multi-

tap systems could not be found. Thus for this 

study, we assumed “a touch” equal to the “a tap”.  

3.1 Comparison  

We compared the performance of proposed 

keypads with the existing counterparts. The re-

duced corpus size and assumption of 

“touch=tap=1 sec” puts the bias in favor of the 

existing systems. However, we still achieved re-

sults that show substantial improvement over the 

existing systems. The comparison of time required 

to type the corpus using existing Multi-tap and our 

proposed keypads are tabulated in Table 2.  
 

 Multi-tap 

(existing) 

Touch 

Screen 

Tablet PC 

Seconds 263,380,598 135,249,436 120,096,926 

Days 3048.4 1565.4 1390 

 

 
 Multi-tap 

(existing) 

Touch 

Screen 

Tablet 

PC 

 170,580,560 80,818,830 73,242,564 

Improve-

ment 

 
52.62% 57.06% 

 

The comparison of the number of 

taps/touches has been summarized in Table 3.  

 

Table 4 shows the comparison on keypad 

sizes between the existing and proposed keypad 

layouts. The table shows that all the Urdu letters 

can be typed using reduced size keypads with 

almost half number of touch-taps. Hence the 

proposed keypads are more suitable for fast and 

time saving text input. 

 

 Multi-tap 

(existing) 

Touch 

Screen 

Tablet PC 

 154 83 80 

Improve-

ment 

 
46.10% 48.05% 

 

4. Conclusion  

We proposed different types of keyboard and 

keypads for different types of touch-screen de-

vices. The comparison analysis shows promising 

results. In addition to considerable improvement 

over existing keypads, our proposed designs are 

flexible because the size and dimensions of key-

pads, buttons, and editors can be adjusted ac-

cording to the device on which the keypad is de-

ployed. Similarly our keypads offer greater usa-

bility because Urdu letters include all the letters 

of Arabic and Persian. Hence these layouts are 

equally usable by the Arabic and Persian users. 

The keypads are optimized for Urdu but with 

minor additions, our input systems are extendible 

to other Perso-Arabic languages as well. Our op-

timization technique for arrangement of alpha-

bets and unique interface for data input will be 

extendable and equally applicable to other natu-

ral languages and various sizes of touch screen 

devices. 

5. Future directions  

We intend to carry out thorough testing of our 

keypads by human subjects. We shall perform 

evaluations for our keypad for large size touch 

screen devices also. Additionally, we want to 

extend our keypads to include other Perso-Arabic 

languages such as Punjabi, Pashto, Dari and 

Potohari etc. Another possibility to exploit this 

study can be in the design of single finger oper-

ated keypad and single hand operated keyboard 

for touch screen devices.  
Table 3: Comparison of number of taps/touches 

required to type the corpus 
 

Table 2: Comparison of time required to type the corpus 

 

 

 

 

Table 4: Comparison of Keypad sizes 

 

 

29



References  

Asad Habib, Masayuki Asahara, Yuji Matsumoto and 

Kohei Ozaki. 2010. JaPak IEOU: Japan-

Pakistan`s Input English Output Urdu (A Case 

Sensitive Proposed Standard Input System for 

Perso-Arabic Script clients). In prodeedings of 

ICIET. Karachi.  

Mark D. Dunlop and Finbarr Taylor. 2009. Tactile 

Feedback for Predictive Text Entry. In pro-

ceedings of Conference on Human Factors in 

Computing Systems Boston. MA. USA.  

A. Malik, L. Besacier, C. Boitet and P. 

Bhattacharyya. 2009. A hybrid Model for Urdu 

Hindi Tranliteration”, In proceedings of 
ACL-IJCNLP, Suntec, Singapore. 

M.Ijaz and S.Hussain. 2007. Corpus Based Urdu 

Lexicon Development.  In proceedings of CLT07. 
Pakistan. 

Ankrum, D.R., (1996). Viewing Distance at Com-

puter Workstations, Workplace Ergonomics, Sep-
tember. pp. 10-13. 

Jaschinski-Kruza, W. 1988. Visual strain during 

VDU work: the effect of viewing distance and 

dark focus. Ergonomics, 31, 10, 1449 - 1465 

M.Amer, M.Abid. A.Habib and M.N. Ali. 2009. 

Corps based mapping of Urdu characters for 

cell phones. CLT 09. Lahore.  

Lewis, M. Paul (ed.), 2009. Ethnologue: Languages 

of the World, Sixteenth edition. Dallas, Tex.: SIL 
International. Online version: 

http://www.ethnologue.org/ethno_docs/distribution.as

p?by=size  (Retrieved on July 22, 2011).  

 

NASA, 1995, NASA-STD-3000, Man Systems Inte-

gration Standards. National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration: Houston 

Leonard J. West. 1998. The Standard and Dvorak 

Keyboards Revisited:  Direct Measures of 
Speed. Technical report, Santa Fe Institute 

Daniel J. Wigdor. 2004. Chording and Tilting For 

Rapid, Unambiguous Text Entry to Mobile 

Phones. University of Toronto.  

W Karwowski. 2006. Handbook of human factors 

and ergonomics, Chapter-1. Wiley Online Li-
brary.  

Unicode. 1991-2001. Unicode Standard version. 
Online version: 

http://unicode.org/charts/PDF/U0600.pdf  

(Retrived on July 23, 2011).  

P. O. Krestensson. Winter 2009. Five Challenges 

for Intelligent Text Entry Methods. In proceed-
ings of Association for the Advancement of Artifi-

cial Intelligence. 

K. Knight and J. Graehl. 1998. Machine Translit-

eration. University of Southern California. 

George Weber. 1999. The World's 10 most influen-

tial Languages. American Association of Teach-
ers of French (ATTF), National Bulletin, vol. 24, 

3:22-28 

http://www.andaman.org/BOOK/reprints/weber/re

p-weber.htm  (Retrieved on July 23, 2011).   

30


