










































A Combination of Topic Models with Max-margin Learning for Relation Detection


Proceedings of the TextGraphs-6 Workshop, pages 1–9,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 19-24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Combination of Topic Models with Max-margin Learning for Relation
Detection

Dingcheng Li
University of Minnesota
Twin Cities, MN 55455

lixxx345@umn.edu

Swapna Somasundaran
Siemens Corporate Research

Princeton, NJ 08540
swapna.somasundaran@siemens.com

Amit Chakraborty
Siemens Corporate Research

Princeton, NJ 08540
amit.chakraborty@siemens.com

Abstract

This paper proposes a novel application of
a supervised topic model to do entity rela-
tion detection (ERD). We adapt Maximum En-
tropy Discriminant Latent Dirichlet Alloca-
tion (MEDLDA) with mixed membership for
relation detection. The ERD task is refor-
mulated to fit into the topic modeling frame-
work. Our approach combines the benefits of
both, maximum-likelihood estimation (MLE)
and max-margin estimation (MME), and the
mixed membership formulation enables the
system to incorporate heterogeneous features.
We incorporate different features into the sys-
tem and perform experiments on the ACE
2005 corpus. Our approach achieves better
overall performance for precision, recall and
Fmeasure metrics as compared to SVM-based
and LLDA-based models.

1 Introduction

Entity relation detection (ERD) aims at finding rela-
tions between pairs of Named Entities (NEs) in text.
Availability of annotated corpora (NIST, 2003; Dod-
dington et al., 2004) and introduction of shared tasks
(e.g. (Farkas et al., 2010; Carreras and Màrquez,
2005)) has spurred a large amount of research in this
field in recent times. Researchers have used super-
vised and semi-supervised approaches (Hasegawa et
al., 2004; Mintz et al., 2009; Jiang, 2009), and ex-
plored rich features (Kambhatla, 2004), kernel de-
sign (Culotta and Sorensen, 2004; Zhou et al., 2005;
Bunescu and Mooney, 2005; Qian et al., 2008) and
inference algorithms (Chan and Roth, 2011), to de-
tect predefined relations between NEs.

In this work, we explore if and how the latent se-
mantics of the text can help in detecting entity rela-
tions. For this, we adapt the Latent Dirichlet Alloca-
tion (LDA) approach to solve the ERD task. Specif-
ically, we present a ERD system based on Maxi-
mum Entropy Discriminant Latent Dirichlet Alloca-
tion (MEDLDA). MEDLDA (Zhu et al., 2009), is
an extension of Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
that combines capability of capturing latent seman-
tics with the discriminative capabilities of SVM.

There are a number of challenges in employing
the LDA framework for ERD. Latent Dirichlet Allo-
cation and its supervised extensions such as Labeled
LDA (LLDA) (Ramage et al., 2009) and supervised
LDA (sLDA) (Blei and McAuliffe, 2008) are pow-
erful generative models that capture the underlying
semantics of texts. However, they have trouble dis-
covering marginal classes and easily employing rich
feature sets, both of which are important for ERD.
We overcome the first drawback by employing a
MEDLDA framework, which integrates maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) and maximum margin
estimation (MME). Specifically, it is a combination
of sLDA and support vector machines (SVMs). Fur-
ther, in order to employ rich and heterogeneous fea-
tures we introduce a separate exponential family dis-
tribution for each feature, similar to (Shan et al.,
2009), into our MEDLDA model.

We formulate the relation detection task within
the topic model framework as follows. Pairs of NE
mentions1 and the text between them is considered

1Adopting the terminology used in the Automatic Context
Extraction (ACE) program (NIST, 2003), specific NE instances
are called mentions.

1



as mini-document. Each mini-document has a re-
lation type (analogous to the response variable in
the supervised topic model). The topic model in-
fers the topic (relation type) distribution of the mini-
documents. The supervised topic model discovers
a latent topic representation of the mini-documents
and a response parameter distribution. The topic
representation is discovered with observed response
variables during training. During testing, the topic
distribution of each mini-document can form a pre-
diction of the relation types.

We carry out experiments to measure the effec-
tiveness of our approach and compare it to SVM-
based and LLDA-based models, as well as to a pre-
vious work using the same corpora. We also mea-
sure and analyze the effectiveness of incorporating
different features in our model relative to other mod-
els. Our approach exhibits better overall precision,
recall and Fmeasure than baseline systems. We also
find that the MEDLDA-based approach shows con-
sistent capability for incorporation and improvement
due to a variety of heterogeneous features.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We
describe the proposed model in Section 2 and the
features that we explore in this work in Section 3.
Section 4 describes the data, experiments, results
and analyses. We discuss the related work in Sec-
tion 5 before concluding in Section 6.

2 MEDLDA for Relation Detection

MEDLDA is an extension of LDA proposed by Zhu,
Ahmed and Xing (2009). LDA is itself unsuper-
vised and the results are often hard to interpret.
However, with the addition of supervised informa-
tion (such as response variables), the resulting topic
models have much better predictive power for classi-
fication and regression. In our work, we use relation
annotations from the ACE (ACE, 2000 2005) corpus
to provide the supervision. NE pairs within a sen-
tence, and the text between them are considered as
a mini-document. Each mini-document is assumed
to be composed of a set of topics. The topic model
trained with these mini-documents given their rela-
tion type label can generate topics biased toward re-
lation types. Thus, the trained topic model will have
good predictive power on relation types.

We first describe the MEDLDA model from (Zhu

et al., 2009) and then describe how we adapt it for
relation detection using mixed membership exten-
sions.

2.1 MEDLDA

Figure 1: MEDLDA

The MEDLDA model described in (Zhu et al.,
2009) is illustrated in Figure 12.

Here, α is a k-dimensional parameter of a Dirich-
let distribution, β1:k are the parameters for k compo-
nent distribution over the words. Each component
refers to a topic. In a collection of documents D,
each document w1:N is generated from a sequence
of topics z1:N . θ is a k-dimensional topic distribu-
tion variable, which is sampled from a Dirichlet dis-
tribution Dir(α). Like common LDAs, MEDLDA
uses independence assumption for a finite set of ran-
dom variables z1, ..., zn which are independent and
identically distributed, conditioned on the parame-
ter θ. Like sLDA, MEDLDA is a supervised model.
A response variable Y connected to each document
is added for incorporating supervised side informa-
tion. The supervised side information is expected
to make MEDLDA topic discoveries more inter-
pretable. Zhu, Ahmed and Xing’s (2009) MEDLDA
model can be used in both regression and classifi-
cation. Concretely, Y is drawn from η1:c, a c k-
dimensional vector which can be derived from suit-
able statistical model. In our work, c is the num-
ber of relation types. Note that the plate diagram
for MEDLDA is quite similar to sLDA (Blei and
McAuliffe, 2008). But there is a difference – sLDA
focuses on building regression models, and thus the
response variable Y in sLDA is generated by a nor-
mal distribution.

Based on the plate diagram, the joint distribution
of latent and observable variables for our MEDLDA-

2(Zhu et al., 2009) do not have this plate digram in their
paper; rather, we create this illustration from the description of
their model.

2



based relation detection is given by

p(θ, z,w,y|α, β1:k, η1:c)

=

D∏
d=1

p(θd|α)×
( N∏
n=1

p(zdn|θd)p(wdn|zdn, β1:k)
)

× p(yd|zd1:dN , η1:c) (1)

Another important difference from sLDA lies in
the fact that MEDLDA does joint learning with both
MME and MLE. The joint learning is done in two
stages, unsupervised topic discovery and multi-class
classification (we refer the reader to (Zhu et al.,
2009) for details). During training, EM algorithms
are utilized to infer the posterior distribution of the
hidden variables θ, z and η. In testing, the trained
models are used to predict relation types y.

2.2 Mixed Membership MEDLDA
Although the MEDLDA model described above can
be applied to the relation detection and classification
task, a few modifications are necessary before it can
be effective in predicting relation types. Mainly, a

Figure 2: Mixed Membership MEDLDA
limitation of LDA or other existing topic models is
the difficulty in incorporating rich features. This is
because LDA is designed to handle data points with
homogeneous features such as words. But for rela-
tion detection, like many other NLP tasks, it is im-
portant to have the flexibility of incorporating part-
of-speech tags, named entities, grammatical depen-
dencies and other linguistic features. We overcome
this limitation by introducing a separate exponential
family distribution for each feature similar to (Shan
et al., 2009). Thus, our MEDLDA-based relation
detection model is really a mixed-member Bayesian
network. Figure 2 illustrates our model with this ex-
tension.

Figure 2 is very similar to Figure 1; the only dif-
ference is that the topic component number k is now

kN . The generative process for each document this
model is as follows:

1. Sample a component proportion θd ∼
Dirichlet(α),

2. For each feature like word, part-of-speech,
named entity in the document,

(a) For n ∈ {1, ..., N}, sample zdn = i ∼
Discrete(θd)

(b) For n ∈ {1,...,N}, sample wdn ∼
P (wdn|βdni)

3. Sample the relation type label
from a softmax(z̄,η) where yd ∼
softmax(

exp(ηTh z̄)∑c−1
h=1 exp(η

T
h z̄)

)

In the sampling, index i is the number of the topic
component which ranges from 1 : k. P (wdn|βdni) in
2(b) is an exponential family distribution where i is
from 1...k. Note that now we have βdni rather than
only βdi since we have drawn separate distributions
for each word (or feature) n.

Now, our MEDLDA-based relation-detection
model can integrate diverse features of different
types or the same features with different parameters.

Following the generative process, parameter es-
timation and inferences can be made with either
Gibbs sampling or variational methods. We use vari-
ational methods since we adapt MEDLDA package3

to mixed-membership MEDLDA and train relation
detection models.

2.3 Relation Detection

With the generative process, inference and parame-
ter estimation in place, we are ready to perform rela-
tion detection. The first step is to perform variational
inference given the testing instances.

In classification, we estimate the probability of
the relation type given topics and the response pa-
rameters, i.e. p(yd|zd1:dN , η1:c−1). With variational
approximation, we can derive the prediction rule as
F (y, z1:N , η) = η

T f(y, z̄) where f(y, z̄) is a fea-
ture vector. Now, SVM can be used to derive the

3this package is downloaded from
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/j̃unzhu/medlda.htm

3



prediction rule. The final prediction can be general-
ized exactly the same as Zhu, Ahmed and Xing (Zhu
et al., 2009):

ŷ = argmaxyE[η
T f(y, Z̄)|α, β] (2)

3 Features

We explore the effectiveness of incorporating fea-
tures into our systems as well as the baselines. For
this, we construct feature sets similar to Jiang and
Zhai (2007) and Zhou (2005). Three kinds of fea-
tures are employed:

1. BOW The Bag of Words (BOW) feature cap-
tures all the words in our mini-document. It
comprises of the words of the two NE mentions
and the words between them.

2. SYN The SYN features are constructed to cap-
ture syntactic, semantic and structural infor-
mation of the mini-document. They include
features such as HM1 (the head word of the
first mention), HM2 (the head word of the sec-
ond mention), ET1, ET2, M1 and M2 (Entity
types and mention types of the two mentions
involved), #MB (number of other mentions in
between the two mentions), #WB (number of
words in between the two mentions).

3. COMP The COMP features are composite fea-
tures that are similar to SYN, but they addition-
ally capture language order and dependencies
between the features mentioned above. These
include features such as HM1HM2 (combining
head word of mention 1 and head word of men-
tion 2) , ET12 (combinations of mention entity
type), ML12 (combination of mention levels),
M1InM2 or M2InM1 (flag indicating whether
M2/M1 is included in M1/M2).

The main intuitions behind employing composite
features, COMP, are as follows. First, they capture
the ordering information. The ordering of words are
not captured by BOW. That is, BOW features as-
sume exchangeability. This works for models based
on random or seeded sampling (e.g. LDA) – as long
as words sampled are associated with a topic, the
hidden topics of the documents can be discovered.
In the case of ERD, this assumption might work

with symmetric relations. However, when the rela-
tions are asymmetric, ordering information is impor-
tant. Composite features such as HM1HM2 encodes
what mention head word precedes the other. Second,
features such as M1InM2 or M2InM1 capture token
dependencies. Besides exchangeability, LDA-based
models also assume that words are conditionally in-
dependent. Consequently, the system cannot capture
the knowledge that some mentions may be included
in other mentions. By constructing features such as
M1InM2 or M2InM1, we encode the dependency in-
formation explicitly.

4 Experiments

As MEDLDA is a combination of maximum mar-
gin principle with maximum likelihood estimation
for topic modes, we compare it with two baseline
systems. The first, SVM, uses only the maximum
margin principle, while the second, LLDA, uses only
maximum likelihood estimation for topic modeling.

4.1 Data
We use the ACE corpus (Phase 2, 2005) for eval-
uation. The ACE corpus has annotations for both
entities and relations. The corpus has six major re-
lations types, 23 subtypes and 7 entity types. In this
work, we focus only on the six high-level relation
types listed in Table 1. In addition to the the 6 ma-
jor types, we have an additional category, no relation
(NO-REL), that exists between entities that are not
related.

The data for our experiments consists of pairs of
NEs from a sentence, and the gold standard annota-
tion of their relation type (or NO-REL). All relations
in the ACE corpus are intra-sentential and hence we
do not create NE pairs that cross sentence bound-
aries. Also, almost all positive instances are within
two mentions of each other. Hence, we create NE
pairs for only those NEs that have at most 2 interven-
ing NEs in between. This gives us a total of 38,342
relation instances of which 32,640 are negative in-
stances (NO-REL) and 5702 are positive relation in-
stances belonging to one of the 6 categories.

4.2 Experimental Setup
We use 80% of the instances for training and 20%
for testing. The topic numbers and the penalty pa-
rameter of the cost function C are first determined

4



Major Type Definition Example

ART artifact
User, owner, inventor or the makers of the Kursk
manufacturer

GEN-AFF
citizen, resident, religion, U.S. Companies
ethnicity and organization-location

ORG-AFF
employment, founder, ownership, The CEO of Siemens

(Org-affiliation) sports-affiliation, investor-shareholder
student-alumni and membership

PART-WHOLE geographical, subsidiary and so on a branch of U.S bank

PER-SOC
business, family and a spokesman for the senator

(person-social) lasting personal relationship
PHYS (physical) located or near a military base in Germany

Table 1: Relation types for ACE 05 corpus

for each of the models (wherever applicable) using
the training data. Best parameters are determined
for the three conditions: 1) BOW features alone
BOW, 2) BOW plus SYN features (PlusSYN) and 3)
BOW plus SYN and COMP features (PlusCOMP).
All systems achieved their overall best performance
with PlusCOMP features (see Section 4.4 for a de-
tailed analysis).

4.2.1 MEDLDA

The number of topics are determined using the
equation 2K0 + K1 following Zhu, Ahmed and
Xing (2009) and K1 = 2K0. K0 is the number
of topics per class and K1 is the number of topics
shared by all relation types. The choice of topics is
based on the intuition that the shared component K1
should use all class labels to model common latent
structure while non-overlapping components should
model specific characteristics data from each class.
The ratio of topics is based on the understanding that
shared topics may be more than topics of each class.
The specific numbers do not produce much variation
in the final results. We experimented with the fol-
lowing number of topics: 20, 40, 70, 80, 90, 100,
110. BOW, PlusSYN, and PlusCOMP configura-
tions obtain the best performance for 90 topics, 80
topics, and 70 topics respectively.

Since SVMs are employed in the MEDLDA im-
plementation, we need to determine the penalty pa-
rameter of the cost function, C. We used 5 fold cross-
validation to locate the parameter C. The best values
for C are 25, 28, 30 respectively for BOW, PlusSYN

and PlusCOMP configurations. We used a linear
kernel as it is the most commonly used kernel for
text classification tasks. Since MEDLDA is run by
sampling, the result may be different each time. We
ran it 5 times for each setting and took the average
as the final results.

4.2.2 LLDA and SVM
The setting of topics for LLDA is similar to

MEDLDA. As LLDA is also run by sampling, we
ran it 5 times for each setting and took the average
as the final results. In SVMlight, a grid search tool
is provided to locate the the best value for parame-
ter C. The best C for all three conditions was found
to be 1. All other settings for the two models are
similar to those of MEDLDA.

4.3 Results

Prec% Rec% F%
SVM 53.2 35.2 40.3
LLDA 28.3 51.6 36.6

MEDLDA 57.8 53.2 55.4

Table 2: Overall performance of the 3 systems

We present the results of the three systems built
using PlusCOMP, as all systems achieved their best
overall performance using these features. Table 2 re-
ports the precision, recall and Fmeasure of the three
systems averaged across all 7 categories (the best
numbers for each metric are highlighted in bold).
Here we see that MEDLDA outperforms LLDA and

5



Labels
SVM LLDA MEDLDA

Pre% Rec% F% Pre% Rec% F% Pre% Rec% F%
ART 30 8 14 1.5 33 3 49 36 41

GEN-AFF 53 48 50 3 32 6 40 39 40
ORG-AFF 55 35 43 59 58 59 53 59 56

PART-WHOLE 39 08 14 31 82 45 44 52 48
PER-SOC 50 17 25 7 92 13 73 76 75

PHYS 55 35 43 26 47 33 56 19 29
NO-REL 90 95 93 70 17 27 89 91 90

Table 3: Multi-class Classification Results with PlusCOMP for SVM, LLDA and MEDLDA for the six ACE 05
categories and NO-REL

SVM across all metrics. Specifically, there is a 15
percentage point improvement in Fmeasure over the
best performing baseline. This result indicates that
our approach of combining topic model with max-
margin learning is effective for relation detection.

Now, looking at the results for each individual
relationship category (see Table 3; the best num-
bers for each category and metric are highlighted
in bold) we see that the Fmeasure for MEDLDA is
better than that for SVM for 4 out of the 6 ACE re-
lation types; and better than the Fmeasure obtained
by LLDA for all relation types except ORG-AFF.
Specifically, comparing with the best performing
baseline, MEDLDA produces a Fmeasure improve-
ment 27 percentage points for ART, 3 percentage
points for PART-WHOLE and 50 percentage points
for PER-SOC. Also, for four of the six ACE rela-
tion types, MEDLDA achieves the best precision.
Even in the cases where MEDLDA is not the best
performer for a relation category, its performance is
not very poor (unlike, for example, SVM for PART-
WHOLE and LLDA for ART, respectively).

Interestingly, the NO-REL category reveals a
sharp contrast in the performance of SVM and
LLDA. NO-REL is a difficult, catch-all category
that is a mixture of data with diverse distributions.
This is a category where maximum-margin learning
is more effective than maximum-likelihood estima-
tion. Notice that MEDLDA achieves performance
close to SVM for this category. This is because,
even though both LLDA and MEDLDA model hid-
den topics and then employ discovered hidden topics
to predict relation types, MEDLDA does joint infer-
ence of MLE and MME. This joint inference helps

to improve the detection of NO-REL.
Finally, we also compare our system’s results (us-

ing PlusCOMP features) with the results of previ-
ous research on the same corpus (Khayyamian et al.,
2009). They use similar experimental settings: ev-
ery pair of entities within a sentence is regarded to
involve a negative relation instance unless it is anno-
tated as positive in the corpus. A similar filter (they
use a distance filter) is used to sift out unrelated neg-
ative instances. Their train/test ratio of data split is
also the same as ours.

Khayyamian, Mirroshandel and Abolhas-
sani (2009) employ state-of-art kernel methods
developed by Collins and Duffy (2002) and only
report Fmeasures over the six ACE relation types.
For clarity, we reproduce their results in Table 4
and repeat MEDLDA Fmeasures from Table 3 in
the last column. The last row (Overall) reports the
macro-averages computed over all relation types for
each system. Here we see that overall, MEDLDA
outperforms all kernels. MEDLDA also performs
better than the best kernel for four of the six relation
types.

4.4 Analysis

As mentioned previously, all three systems achieved
their overall best performance with PlusCOMP fea-
tures. Here, we analyze if informative features are
consistently useful and if the systems can harness
the informative features consistently across all re-
lation types. Figures 3, 4 and 5 illustrate the F-
measures for SVM, LLDA and MEDLDA respec-
tively for the three conditions: BOW, PlusSYN and
PlusCOMP.

6



Labels CD’01 AAP AAPD TSAAPD-0 TSAAPD-01 MEDLDA
ART% 51 49 50 48 47 41

GEN-AFF % 9 10 12 11 11 40
ORG-AFF % 43 43 43 43 45 56

PART-WHOLE % 30 28 29 30 28 48
PER-SOC % 62 58 70 63 73 75

PHYS % 32 36 29 33 33 29
Overall (Avg) 38 37 39 38 40 48

Table 4: F-measures for every kernel in (Khayyamian et al., 2009) and MEDLDA

Figure 3: SVM Fmeausres for 3 feature conditions

Figure 4: LLDA Fmeausres for 3 feature conditions

Figure 5: MEDLDA Fmeausres for 3 feature conditions

Let us first look at the best systems (based on
Fmeasure) for each of the six ACE relation types
in Table 3, and look at what feature set pro-

duces the best result for that system and relation.
MEDLDA is the best performer for ART, PART-
WHOLE and PER-SOC in Table 3. Figure 5 re-
veals that MEDLDA’s best performance for these re-
lation types are obtained using PlusCOMP features.
Similarly SVM obtains the best Fmeasure for GEN-
AFF and PHYS relations and Figure 3 shows that
SVM achieves its best performance for these cate-
gories using PlusCOMP. We also see a similar trend
with LLDA and the ORG-AFF relation type. These
results corroborate intuition from previous research
that informative features are important for relation
type recognition. The only exception to this is the
performance of SVM for NO-REL. This is not sur-
prising, as the features we use are focused on deter-
mining true relation types and NO-REL is a mixture
of all cases (and features) where relations do not ex-
ist.

Further analysis of the figures reveal that even
though there is a general trend towards better per-
formance with addition of more informative fea-
tures, not all systems show consistent improvements
across all relation types with the addition of com-
posite features. That is, some systems get degraded
performance due to feature addition. For example,
in Figure 3, we see that the SVM with PlusCOMP
features is outperformed by SVM with PlusSYN for
ART and SVM with BOW for NO-REL. The gains
from features are also inconsistent in the case of
LLDA (Figure 4). While the LLDA system with
PlusSYN features always improves over the one us-
ing BOW, the performance drops considerably when
using PlusCOMP features for ART and GEN-AFF.
On the other hand, MEDLDA (see Figure 5) shows
more consistent improvement for all relation types
with the addition of more complex features. Also,

7



the gains are more substantial. This is encouraging
and opens up avenues for further exploration.

5 Related Work

Previous research has explored various methods and
features for relationship detection and mining. Ker-
nel methods have been popularly used for rela-
tion detection. Some examples are are dependency
tree kernels (Culotta and Sorensen, 2004), short-
est dependency path kernels (Bunescu and Mooney,
2005), and more recently, convolution tree kernels
(Zhao and Grishman, 2005; Zhang et al., 2006)
context-sensitive convolution tree kernels (Zhou et
al., 2007) and dynamic syntax tree kernels (Qian et
al., 2008). Kernel methods for relation extraction
focus on representing and capturing the structured
information of the text between the entities. In our
MEDLDA model, instead of computing distances
between subtrees, we sample topics based on their
distributions. The sampling is not only on the (mini)
document level, but also on the word level or on the
syntactic or semantic level. Our model focuses on
addressing the underlying semantics more directly
than typical kernel-based methods.

Chan and Roth (2011) employ constraints us-
ing an integer linear programming (ILP) framework.
Using this, they apply rich linguistic and knowledge-
based constraints based on coreference annotations,
a hierarchy of relations, syntacto-semantic structure,
and knowledge from Wikipedia. In our work, we
focus on capturing the latent semantics of the text
between the NEs.

A variety of features have been explored for ERD
in previous research (Zhou et al., 2005; Zhou et al.,
2008; Jiang and Zhai, 2007; Miller et al., 2000).
Syntactic features such as POS tags and dependency
path between entities; semantic features such as
Word-Net relations, semantic parse trees and types
of NEs; and structural features such as which entity
came first in the sentence have been found useful for
ERD. We too observe the utility of informative fea-
tures for this task. However, exploration of the fea-
ture space is not the main focus of this work. Rather,
our focus is on whether the models are capable of
incorporating rich features. A fuller exploration of
rich heterogeneous features is the focus of our fu-
ture work.

A closely related task is that of relation min-
ing and discovery, where unsupervised, semi-
supervised approaches have been effectively em-
ployed (Hasegawa et al., 2004; Mintz et al., 2009;
Jiang, 2009). For example, Hasegawa et al. (2004)
use clustering and entity type information, while
Mintz et al. (2009) employ distant supervision. Our
ERD task is different from these as we focus on
classifying the relation types into predefined relation
types in the ACE05 corpus.

Topic models have been applied previously for a
number of NLP tasks (e.g. (Lin et al., 2006; Titov
and McDonald, 2008). LDAs have also been em-
ployed to reduce feature dimensions in relation de-
tection systems (Hachey, 2006). However, to the
best of our knowledge, this is the first work to make
use of topic models to perform relation detection.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this work, we presented a system for en-
tity relation detection based on mixed-membership
MEDLDA. Our approach was motivated by the idea
that combination of max margin and maximum like-
lihood can help to improve relation detection task.
For this, we adapted the existing work on MEDLDA
and mixed membership models and formulated ERD
as a topic detection task. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this is the first work to make full use of topic
models for relation detection.

Our experiments show that the proposed approach
achieves better overall performance than SVM-
based and LLDA-based approaches across all met-
rics. We also experimented with different features
and the effectiveness of the different models for har-
nessing these features. Our analysis show that our
MEDLDA-based approach is able to effectively and
consistently incorporate informative features.

As a model that incorporates maximum-
likelihood, maximum-margin and mixed mem-
bership learning, MEDLDA has the potential of
incorporating rich kernel functions or conditional
topic random fields (CTRF) (Zhu and Xing, 2010).
These are some of the promising directions for our
future exploration.

8



References
ACE. 2000-2005. Automatic Content Extraction.

http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Projects/ACE/.
D.M. Blei and J. McAuliffe. 2008. Supervised topic

models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 20:121–128.

R.C. Bunescu and R.J. Mooney. 2005. A shortest path
dependency kernel for relation extraction. In HLT &
EMNLP.

X. Carreras and L. Màrquez. 2005. Introduction to the
CoNLL-2005 shared task: Semantic role labeling. In
CONLL, pages 152–164. ACL.

Y. Chan and D. Roth. 2011. Exploiting syntactico-
semantic structures for relation extraction. In ACL.

M. Collins and N. Duffy. 2002. Convolution kernels for
natural language. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, 1:625–632.

A. Culotta and J. Sorensen. 2004. Dependency tree
kernels for relation extraction. In Proceedings of the
42nd Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, page 423. ACL.

G. Doddington, A. Mitchell, M. Przybocki, L. Ramshaw,
S. Strassel, and R. Weischedel. 2004. The auto-
matic content extraction (ACE) program–tasks, data,
and evaluation. In Proceedings of LREC, volume 4,
pages 837–840.

R. Farkas, V. Vincze, G. Móra, J. Csirik, and G. Szarvas.
2010. The CoNLL-2010 Shared Task: Learning to De-
tect Hedges and their Scope in Natural Language Text.
In CoNLL-2010, pages 1–12.

B. Hachey. 2006. Comparison of similarity models for
the relation discovery task. In COLING & ACL 2006,
page 25.

T Hasegawa, S Sekine, and Ralph Grishman. 2004. Dis-
covering relations among named entities from large
corpora. In 42nd ACL.

J. Jiang and C.X. Zhai. 2007. A systematic explo-
ration of the feature space for relation extraction. In
NAACL/HLT, pages 113–120.

J. Jiang. 2009. Multi-task transfer learning for weakly-
supervised relation extraction. In 47th ACL & 4th
AFNLP, pages 1012–1020. ACL.

N. Kambhatla. 2004. Combining lexical, syntactic, and
semantic features with maximum entropy models for
extracting relations. In ACL 2004 Interactive poster
and demonstration sessions.

M. Khayyamian, S.A. Mirroshandel, and H. Abolhassani.
2009. Syntactic tree-based relation extraction using a
generalization of Collins and Duffy convolution tree
kernel. In HLT/NAACL,: Student Research Workshop.

Wei-Hao Lin, Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and
Alexander Hauptmann. 2006. Which side are you on?

Identifying perspectives at the document and sentence
levels. In CoNLL-2006.

S. Miller, H. Fox, L. Ramshaw, and R. Weischedel. 2000.
A novel use of statistical parsing to extract information
from text. In NAACL.

M Mintz, S Bills, R Snow, and D Jurafsky. 2009. Dis-
tant supervision for relation extraction without labeled
data. In 47th ACL & 4th AFNLP.

US NIST. 2003. The ACE 2003 Evaluation Plan. US Na-
tional Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST),
pages 2003–08.

L. Qian, G. Zhou, F. Kong, Q. Zhu, and P. Qian. 2008.
Exploiting constituent dependencies for tree kernel-
based semantic relation extraction. In 22nd ACL.

D. Ramage, D. Hall, R. Nallapati, and C.D. Manning.
2009. Labeled LDA: A supervised topic model for
credit attribution in multi-labeled corpora. In EMNLP.

H. Shan, A. Banerjee, and N.C. Oza. 2009. Discrim-
inative Mixed-membership Models. In ICDM, pages
466–475. IEEE.

Ivan Titov and Ryan McDonald. 2008. A joint model of
text and aspect ratings for sentiment summarization.
In ACL-08: HLT.

M. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Su, and G. Zhou. 2006. A com-
posite kernel to extract relations between entities with
both flat and structured features. In 21st ICCL & 44th
ACL.

S. Zhao and R. Grishman. 2005. Extracting relations
with integrated information using kernel methods. In
43rd ACL.

G Zhou, S. Jian, Z. Jie, and Z. Min. 2005. Exploring
various knowledge in relation extraction. In In 43rd
ACL.

G Zhou, M. Zhang, D.H. Ji, and Q Zhu. 2007. Tree
kernel-based relation extraction with context-sensitive
structured parse tree information. In EMNLP/CoNLL-
2007, pages 728–736.

G.D. Zhou, M. Zhang, D.H. Ji, and Q.M. Zhu. 2008.
Hierarchical learning strategy in semantic relation ex-
traction. Information Processing & Management,
44(3):1008–1021.

J. Zhu and E.P. Xing. 2010. Conditional Topic Random
Fields. In ICML. ACM.

J. Zhu, A. Ahmed, and E.P. Xing. 2009. MedLDA: max-
imum margin supervised topic models for regression
and classification. In ICML, pages 1257–1264. ACM.

9


