



















































Putting a Value on Comparable Data


Putting a Value on Comparable Data 
 

Kevin Knight 

USC Information Sciences Institute 

4676 Admiralty Way 

Marina del Rey, CA, 90292 USA 
knight@isi.edu 

 

Invited Talk 

 

 
Abstract 

 

Machine translation began in 1947 with an 

influential memo by Warren Weaver.  In that 

memo, Weaver noted that human code-breakers 

could transform ciphers into natural language 

(e.g., into Turkish)  

 without access to parallel 
ciphertext/plaintext data, and  

 without knowing the plaintext 
language’s syntax and semantics.   

Simple word- and letter-statistics seemed to be 

enough for the task.  Weaver then predicted that 

such statistical methods could also solve a 

tougher problem, namely language translation.   

This raises the question: can sufficient 

translation knowledge be derived from 

comparable (non-parallel) data? 

 In this talk, I will discuss initial work in 

treating foreign language as a code for English, 

where we assume the code to involve both word 

substitutions and word transpositions.  In doing 

so, I will quantitatively estimate the value of 

non-parallel data, versus parallel data, in terms 

of end-to-end accuracy of trained translation 

systems.  Because we still know very little about 

solving word-based codes, I will also describe 

successful techniques and lessons from the 

realm of letter-based ciphers, where the non-

parallel resources are (1) enciphered text, and (2) 

unrelated plaintext.  As an example, I will 

describe how we decoded the Copiale cipher 

with limited “computer-like” knowledge of the 

plaintext language.   

 The talk will wrap up with challenges in 

exploiting comparable data at all levels: letters, 

words, phrases, syntax, and semantics. 

 

1

Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, page 1,
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,

Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics


