















































Web-based Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, page 1,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 8-12, 2011.

Web-based Machine Translation

Haifeng Wang
Baidu

Beijing, 100085, China
wanghaifeng@baidu.com

1 Abstract

Machine translation (MT) has been studied for
more than 60 years. World-Wide-Web offers more
opportunities to MT. We could try to crawl more
web data to train the MT system. But we have
to filter the very noisy web data. There are
many potential web-based applications for MT,
such as translation of web-page, translation of in-
stant message, translation of SNS, translation of e-
commerce, mobile translation, etc. To make better
use of the web data, and to produce better web-
based MT applications, we should also adapt the
MT methods to the web scenario. In this talk,
I will introduce our work on web-based machine
translation.

2 Biography

Dr. WANG Haifeng a senior scientist at Baidu,
and a visiting professor at Harbin Institute of Tech-
nology. At Baidu, he is the head of Baidu’s NLP
department, and the advisor of its speech team,
the technical leader of its recommendation & per-
sonalization team, and one of the core members
of Baidu’s technology committee. He received
his PhD in computer science from Harbin Insti-
tute of Technology in 1999. He worked as an
associate researcher at Microsoft Research China
1999 2000, a research scientist at iSilk.com (Hong
Kong) 20002002, and chief research scientist and
deputy director at Toshiba (China) R&D Center
till Jan. 2010. He has authored more than 70 NLP
papers, including 13 full papers in ACL main con-
ferences. His research interests span a wide range
of topics including: MT (SMT, RBMT, EBMT,
TM and hybrid methods), parsing, generation,
grammar induction, paraphrase, collocation ex-
traction, SRL, WSD, LM, recommendation, per-
sonalization, speech and search. He has served
as program chair, area chair, tutorial chair, work-
shop chair, industry track chair and PC members

for numerous NLP conferences including ACL,
SIGIR, NAACL, EMNLP, COLING and IJCNLP,
etc. He also serves as associate editor of ACM
TALIP, guest editor of ACM TIST. He is the Vice-
President-Elect of the ACL.

1


