










































Building the multilingual TUT parallel treebank


Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing, pages 19–28,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 12-14 September 2011.

Building the multilingual TUT parallel treebank

Manuela Sanguinetti
Università di Torino

manuela.sanguinetti@studenti.unito.it

Cristina Bosco
Dipartimento di Informatica,

Università di Torino
bosco@di.unito.it

Abstract

The paper introduces an ongoing project
for the development of a parallel treebank
for Italian, English and French annotated
in the pure dependency format of the Turin
University Treebank, i.e. Parallel–TUT.
We hypothesize that the major features
of this annotation format can be of some
help in addressing the typical issues re-
lated to parallel corpora, e.g. alignment
at various levels. Therefore, benefitting
from the tools previously used for TUT,
we applied the TUT format to a multilin-
gual sample set of sentences from the JRC-
Acquis Multilingual Parallel Corpus and
the whole text of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights.

1 Introduction

Parallel corpora are currently considered among
the crucial resources both for a variety of NLP
tasks, e.g. machine translation and cross-lingual
information extraction, and for research in the
field of translation studies and contrastive linguis-
tics with respect to terminology and syntax in par-
ticular.
Since the utility of parallel corpora is increased by
forms of annotation which make explicit the lin-
guistic knowledge involved in the raw data, paral-
lel treebanks have proved to be valuable resources
for a number of purposes (see e.g. (Ahrenberg et
al., 2010; Grimes et al., 2010; Rios et al., 2009)).
As far as translation studies are concerned, the
FuSe project (Cyrus, 2006), for example, aims at
studying translation shifts in an English-German
corpus annotated with regard to the predicate-
argument structure, while the LinEs parallel tree-
bank for Swedish and English (Ahrenberg, 2007)
focuses on this aspect by means of complete align-
ments of segment pairs. As for contributes to the

improvement of machine translation quality (both
rule-based and statistical), a few examples are pro-
vided by SMULTRON (Volk et al., 2010), with a
constituency-based parallel treebank for English,
German and Swedish; the Prague Czech-English
Dependecy Treebank (Čmejrek et al., 2004); the
Copenhagen Dependency Treebank1 for Danish,
English, German, Italian and Spanish; and the
Swedish-Turkish Parallel Treebank (Megyesi et
al., 2008).

In this paper, we introduce a new parallel
treebank for Italian, English and French, hence-
forth Parallel–TUT. The annotation schema for
this new resource is that of the Turin University
Treebank (TUT), which has been applied in a
dependency-based treebank used for training
of parsing systems and as reference for the
evaluation campaigns for Italian parsing. By
featuring a rich set of grammatical relations, it
shows a representation centered on the predicate-
argument structure, a linguistic knowledge that is
proximate to semantics and underlies syntax and
morphology, essential for the efficient processing
of human language. We developed our project
also in order to test the hypothesis that this kind
of knowledge, and thus the schema representing
it, can be useful also in bridging the differences
among languages, e.g. in translation.
Therefore, as far as the annotation of the Parallel–
TUT corpus is concerned, our approach consists
in extending and applying the same tools designed
for Italian, within the TUT project, to two other
languages, i.e. English and French. The result
is the extension of the same format and relations
for all the languages of the new parallel corpora,
with the same granularity in the representation
of the linguistic knowledge. On the one hand,
this is motivated by the fact that, as suggested
in (Paulussen and Macken, 2010), the use of

1http://code.google.com/p/copenhagen-
dependency-treebank/

19



different annotating tools and formats for each
monolingual corpus may have a negative impact
on the following exploitation and processing
of corpora, such as alignment at various levels.
On the other hand, the literature shows several
examples of application to different languages of
formats originally developed for a given language,
by using the same features of the native format to
address new linguistic phenomena encountered
in the other languages. For instance, the format
of the Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT),
developed for Czech, has been afterwards applied
to Arabic (Hajič and Zemánek, 2003), or the Penn
Treebank format, which has been applied e.g. to
Chinese2 and Arabic3. An especially relevant
side effect of the application of such kind of
methodology consists in increasing the portability
across languages of NLP tools and in making
available data useful for the comparison and study
of models and strategies underlying NLP tools
when applied to different languages.
The work presented here aims at going beyond
the creation of a parallel treebank where Italian
language is included. It aims, in fact, at extending
and applying a single treebank schema to other
languages, and study how the schema can be
meaningfully used to address issues typically
related to parallel corpora, e.g. alignment at
various levels. The focus of this work is therefore
the format of the treebank and the consequence of
the application of this format on a parallel corpus.

The remainder of the paper is structured as fol-
lows. The next section describes the TUT anno-
tation schema while Section 3 shows the content
and size of the corpus on which the schema has
been applied. Section 4 describes the annotation
process for the three monolingual corpora, while
Section 5 shows the alignment issues related to
the effects of applying the TUT format to English
and French. Finally, we discuss the current state
of the project, analyze the future developments of
Parallel–TUT and briefly summarize the project.

2 The Turin University Treebank: the
resource and its annotation schema

TUT is a resource developed in the last
ten years by the Natural Language Pro-
cessing group of the University of Turin

2See http://www.cis.upenn.edu/˜chinese/
3See http://www.ircs.upenn.edu/arabic/

(http://www.di.unito.it/˜tutreeb/).
It currently consists in more than 102,000 anno-
tated tokens (around 3,500 sentences).

The treebank annotation is automatically per-
formed by the Turin University Linguistic En-
vironment (henceforth TULE4) (Lesmo et al.,
2002; Lesmo, 2007; Lesmo, 2009) and then semi-
automatically checked in order to recover errors
in the morphological and syntactic annotation.
TULE is a rule-based dependency parsing system
which includes also the modules needed for tok-
enization, PoS tagging and morphological analy-
sis, as well as parsing. The parsing module pro-
duces a projective dependency tree for each given
sentence in input. In the last evaluation campaign
for Italian parsing, held in 2009 (Bosco et al.,
2009b), TULE achieved the best scores currently
at the state of the art (Labelled Attachment Score
88.73), which are very close to the scores known
for English parsing.
The core of the treebank is a dependency-based
annotation scheme (on which we will focus in this
paper), but the resource has been also enriched by
the converted versions of all the annotated data
in a Penn-like format (Bosco, 2007), in a Com-
binatory Categorial Grammar format (Bos et al.,
2009)5 and in other constituency-based annota-
tions. This results both in an increased quality of
the annotated material and portability of the re-
source. Beyond allowing the training of parsing
systems, TUT has been used as a testbed for eval-
uation campaigns (Bosco et al., 2007; Bosco et al.,
2009a; Bosco et al., 2009b) and analyses of pars-
ing models’ performance with respect to varia-
tion in tag sets, paradigms and annotation schemes
(Bosco and Lavelli, 2010).
As far as the native annotation schema is con-
cerned, a typical TUT tree shows a pure depen-
dency format centered upon the notion of argu-
ment structure and applies the major principles of
the Word Grammar theoretical framework (Hud-
son, 1984). This is mirrored, for instance, in
the annotation of Determiners and Prepositions,
which are represented in TUT trees as comple-
mentizers of Nouns or Verbs. For instance, in fig-
ure 1 the tree for the sentence NEWS-355 from
TUT, i.e. ”L’accordo si è spezzato per tre motivi
principali” (The agreement has been broken for
three main reasons)6, shows the features of the an-

4http://www.tule.di.unito.it/
5http://www.di.unito.it/˜tutreeb/CCG-TUT/
6English translations of the Italian examples are literal

20



L’

accordo

si è

spezzato

per

tre

motivi

principali

VERB-SUBJ

                  DET+QUANTIF-
ARG

DET+DEF-ARG PREP-ARG

PREP-RMOD-
                  REASONCAUSE

              ADJC+QUALIF-
RMOD

AUX+
PASSIVE

VERB-
EMPTYCOMPL

Figure 1: Sentence NEWS–355 of TUT.

notation schema. In particular, we see the role of
complementizer played by Determiners (i.e. the
article ”L’” (The) and the numeral ”tre” (three))
and Prepositions (i.e. ”per (for)).
By contrast, the native TUT scheme exploits
also some representational tools which are non–
standard in dependency-based annotations, i.e.
null elements, in order to deal with particular
structures. In particular, null elements are used
for pro–drops and missing subject (e.g. equi),
long distance dependencies and elliptical struc-
tures. These phenomena are quite common in Ital-
ian, a morphologically rich language where verbal
inflection leads to a widespread diffusion of the
pro–drop phenomenon and to a relatively free or-
der of words and constituents. For instance, the
subject deletion is very common with tensed verbs
in declarative clauses, as confirmed by the data in
TUT corpora, where this phenomenon occurs an
average of 0.28 times per sentence7.
On the one hand, an advantage in using null el-
ements in the annotation is that they permit de-
pendency trees to be without crossing edges and
projective structures also for non–projective sen-
tences. On the other hand, by using null elements
it is possible to give an explicit representation also
of parts of the argument structure that can be miss-
ing, but crucial for some task. For instance, in ma-
chine translation, if the source language allows ar-
gument deletion and the target language does not,
in order to make possible for the system to handle
the translation, it is crucial that in the source lan-
guage the dropped argument is explicitly marked.
An alike situation can happen in a translation from

and s, they thus may appear awkward in English.
7But the frequency of pro–drop varies from 0.17 to 0.64

times per sentence according to the text genre included in the
treebank.

Italian to English or French, where, on the con-
trary, the subject is always lexically realized in
tensed clauses.
For what concerns the dependency relations that
label the tree edges, TUT exploits a rich set of
grammatical items designed to represent a variety
of linguistic information according to three dif-
ferent perspectives, i.e. morphology, functional
syntax and semantics. The main idea is that a
single layer, the one describing the relations be-
tween words, can represent linguistic knowledge
that is proximate to semantics and underlies syn-
tax and morphology, i.e. the predicate-argument
structure of events and states, which has proven es-
sential for efficient processing of human language.
Therefore, each relation label can in principle in-
clude three components, i.e. morpho-syntactic,
functional-syntactic and syntactic-semantic, but
can be made more or less specialized, including
from only one (i.e. the functional-syntactic) to
three of them (see e.g. (Bosco and Lavelli, 2010)
for more details). For instance, the relation used
for the annotation of the Prepositional modifiers
in figure 1, i.e. PREP-RMOD-REASONCAUSE
(which includes all the three components), can
be reduced to PREP-RMOD (which includes only
the first two components) or to RMOD (which in-
cludes only the functional-syntactic component).
This variable degree of specificity is a useful
means for the human annotator in that it meets
his/her different degree of confidence about a
given relation. Moreover, it can also be applied
in particular tasks in order to increase the com-
parability of TUT with other existing resources,
by exploiting the amount of linguistic information
more adequate for the comparison, e.g. in terms of
number of relations.
Last but not least, as Italian requires, the TUT for-
mat provides an extended morphological tag set
including all the categories and features needed to
describe morphologically rich languages. This tag
set allowed therefore for an accurate description
both for French, whose morphological richness re-
sembles that of Italian, and English, which is mor-
phologically poorer.
Observing related works, we think that the TUT
schema can be a good candidate for the devel-
opment of a parallel treebank for various rea-
sons. First of all, it is oriented to the represen-
tation of the predicate-argument structure, a kind
of information that can be useful as a pivot for

21



the alignment in translation, but is also crucial
in tasks such as Information Extraction. As ob-
served above, both the dependency core and the
inventory of null elements introduced in the an-
notation schema of TUT contribute to a more ac-
curate representation under this respect. Second,
this schema gives the means for the development
of annotations at various degrees of specificity of
grammatical relations, thus extending the compa-
rability and compatibility with other existing re-
sources. Finally, another aspect to be taken into
account is the availability of automatic tools for
the conversion of the native TUT format in other
constituency-based representations, among which
the most known and used format in the world (i.e.
that of the Penn Treebank), and in a Combina-
tory Categorial Grammar format too, which is a
semantic-oriented representation.
In the next sections we describe the parallel corpus
on which we have applied the TUT format for the
development of the Parallel-TUT.

3 The data in the Parallel–TUT

The Parallel–TUT currently comprises a small set
of sample texts, which have been annotated in
order to assess our methodology and test our hy-
pothesis. They are organized in two sub-corpora,
as outlined in Table 1.

The first sub-corpus consists of about 50 sen-
tences extracted from the JRC-Acquis multilin-
gual parallel corpus8 (Steinberger et al., 2006)
for each of the three languages involved in the
Parallel–TUT. In particular, the sentences for Ital-
ian are shared by TUT and the corpus used within
the French parsing evaluation campaign Passage9,
respectively in Italian version annotated in the
TUT format, and in French version annotated
in the EASy format. The English counterpart
of the corpus was retrieved from English sec-
tion of the JRC-Acquis corpus. We will refer
to these data as JRCAcquis–ITA, JRCAcquis–
FR and JRCAcquis–EN, respectively for Italian,
French and English.
The second sub-corpus, which will be referred
as UDHR–ITA, UDHR–FR and UDHR–EN, in-
cludes the entire text of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, as available in the official Web

8See http://langtech.jrc.it/JRC-Acquis.
html, http://optima.jrc.it/Acquis/

9http://atoll.inria.fr/passage/index.
en.html.

page of the UN Office of the High Commissioner
of Human Rights10, and consists of about 76 sen-
tences for each language.

Corpus sentences tokens
JRCAcquis–ITA 50 2,205
JRCAcquis–FR 52 2,297
JRCAcquis–EN 50 1,895
UDHR–ITA 76 2,387
UDHR–FR 77 2,537
UDHR–EN 77 2,293
total 382 13,614

Table 1: Corpus overview.

For what concerns the texts of the JRCAcquis
corpus in particular, they were selected because
of their availability in two different annotation
formats developed by two independent research
groups, as mentioned above. Moreover, choosing
texts from legal documents, we benefitted from the
expertise in the field of legal language processing
acquired within the TUT project11. Last but not
least, the data included in our corpus are repre-
sentative of the development of raw text parallel
corpora developed in the last decades, e.g. from
the European Community. Nevertheless, we know
that analyses based on such kind of unbalanced
material may lead to misleading results if applied
in general context, as the syntax in this corpus is
typical of a quite particular kind of documents.
This will be taken into account in the further de-
velopment of our corpus.
In general, our selection of texts includes raw ma-
terials which are in translation relation to each
other, and free of Intellectual Property Rights
problems, which allows us to release treebank data
under an open license.

4 Treebank Development

Except for the Italian part of the first sub-corpus
of the Parallel–TUT, i.e. JRCAcquis–ITA (which
was already available in the annotated version12

as described above), for the English and French
counterparts, as well as for the entire second

10See http://www.ohchr.org/EN/UDHR/Pages/
SearchByLang.aspx

11Around the 30% of TUT data are extracted from legal
texts, i.e. the Codice Civile and the Costituzione Italiana.

12Available from the TUT Web page at
http://www.di.unito.it/˜tutreeb/ (EUDIR
Section)

22



sub-corpus (UDHR), we processed the texts
following the same strategies applied in the TUT
project and using the same tools both for parsing
and checking.
Being the original materials in XML format (eg.
texts collected in the JRC multilingual corpus)
or directly exctracted from a Web page, the first
step was to clean up files from noisy data (eg.
markups) and to convert them to plain text files
with UTF-8 encoding. In this way, texts can be
exploited for our further linguistic analyses.
Despite other parallel treebanks, where mono-
lingual corpora were processed independently
with different tools (cf. (Megyesi et al., 2008)),
or created from already existing monolingual
treebanks (cf.(Klyueva and Mareček, 2010)), the
texts of our collection were analyzed from scratch
with the same tool, i.e. TULE. Although TULE
supports in principle linguistic analysis in several
languages (English in particular, but also French,
Spanish, Catalan and Hindi), its output quality
achieves satisfactory results mostly for Italian,
since it has been extensively tested in the devel-
opment of the Italian treebank TUT. Since TULE
is a rule-based parser, the annotation phase for
English and French therefore entailed alternating
steps of rules insertion in TULE and automatic
analysis, until an acceptable output was produced.
Rule-insertion steps included mainly the enrich-
ment of lexical knowledge, e.g. insertion of new
lexical entries (including proper nouns, named
entities, compounds and locutions), modifications
in the suffix tables, and new disambiguation rules
for linguistic phenomena previously unseen in
Italian. A typical example of such phenomena
is the English genitive for regular plural nouns
( -s’). Since in Italian (and French too) the
apostrophe is normally considered a graphic sign
indicating an elision, during the automatic analy-
sis, tokenization in particular, it is kept attached
to the previous token. The English possessive
case, however, is normally isolated and treated
as a single token. Its recognition in this form
by the TULE tokenizer has therefore requested
the integration of a new condition in the set of
disambiguation rules. Other types of intervention
focused on the syntactic representation of those
phenomena that distinguish the two languages
from Italian. For example, the French superlatives
formed by the definite article and plus/moins
follow a word order which is quite different from

that of the Italian superlatives: it was therefore
necessary to modify the representation scheme
already present in the TUT annotation guidelines
for Italian. The treatment of the expletive subject
(ie. a purely syntactic subject, not semantically
realized), which is a common occurrence both in
English and French, but not in Italian (where, as
we said, the subject can be omitted) also required
the inclusion of additional labels in the annotation
schema.
The whole procedure above described had a
twofold goal: to improve the output quality of
TULE for English and French, and, as a result, to
reduce to a feasible extent manual intervention of
human annotators in future annotation work.
Because of the current small size of the corpus and
the consequently limited training on English and
French of our tools, we expect that a considerable
amount of manual intervention (eg. enriching the
knowledge base of the parsing system) will be
necessary also in the next step of the development
of our parallel treebank. In fact, the variety of
new syntactic structures encountered so far in
English and French data is quite small, and the
probability that the treebank could miss some
syntactic phenomena is high.

The relatively lower quality of the output of
TULE for English and French with respect to
Italian (as reported in Section 6) made the final
stage of manual correction crucial to verify that
linguistic phenomena were annotated appropri-
ately and consistently. In this stage, the same tools
used in the development of TUT were exploited.
For instance, for displaying the dependency trees,
the viewerTULETUT Java graphical interface
was used, thus allowing the observation of the
structures in a more readable graphic form.

It is known that the conversion of dependency
trees into phrase structures is in itself a compara-
tive test of the adequateness of the involved rep-
resentation formats with reference to the features
of the language and the quality and consistency of
annotation (Musillo and Sima’an, 2002). There-
fore, some preliminary experiment was also per-
formed by applying to the English and French data
the procedures for the conversion in the Penn Tree-
bank format developed for Italian. The results
are promising in particular for English, as we ex-
pected, since this is the reference language for the

23



Penn format. For French the conversion should be
further refined by including in the Penn format the
representation of particular phenomena.
As far as the annotation phase of the Parallel–TUT
is concerned, it can be currently considered as con-
cluded and the corpus will be soon released and
made available for research purpose. In the next
section, we describe the alignment phase which is
the less advanced part of the project, currently un-
der development.

5 Aligning the Parallel–TUT

Several techniques have been developed and made
available for aligning texts at various granulari-
ties. They vary from document-structure to sen-
tence, word, phrases or dependency subtrees (see
e.g. (Wu, 2010; Li et al., 2010)).
Each level implies several and different issues that
are currently in part unresolved also because does
not exist an objective and universally shared no-
tion of correspondence between sentence units.
For instance, it is difficult to decide which words
in a given target string correspond to which words
in its source string (especially where idiomatic ex-
pressions are involved) and often, an alignment in-
cludes effects such as reorderings, omissions, in-
sertions (Och and Ney, 2003).
Moreover, tools implementing aligment tech-
niques are often designed with reference to some
particular kind of annotation and schema, and can-
not be applied to different formats, such as TUT.
This is currently the major limit of the project that
should be addressed in the next future. In fact,
even if in our project we are interested in the align-
ment at various levels, we applied until now only
some preliminary form of alignment, and the most
of the time devoted to this part of the Parallel–TUT
project has been spent in the analysis and report of
the issues raised by our data.
First of all, the Parallel-TUT has been developed
taking into account the issues related to the align-
ment at sentence and word level. Therefore, af-
ter the linguistic annotation, a further step has
been the detection of lexical and structural cor-
respondences between language pairs. As for the
sentence level, the alignment was performed with
Omega Aligner13, a simple Python script used for
the alignment of translation units within Computer
Aided Translation (CAT) systems. The files pro-
duced conform to the Translation Memory eX-

13http://www.omegat.org/en/resources.html

change (TMX) standard, an XML-compliant for-
matting standard normally used for storing and ex-
changing translation memories among CAT sys-
tems. Since the script expects the same number
of segments in the source and target texts, some
pre-processing was required, in order to avoid mis-
matches, in particular for punctuation marks.
As for the word alignment, considering the current
absence of a tool which was compatible with the
TUT format, the process was performed only pre-
liminarily, using empirical methods, mainly in or-
der to develop alignment guidelines that can drive
the development of a tool suitable for such a task
in the future. We observed that the alignment is
made easier by the fact that languages are anno-
tated using the same format, and because of TUT
format strategy for the annotation of idiomatic ex-
pressions or compound words, which consists in
splitting them in one line for each lexical word. In
order to keep alignments as fine-grained as pos-
sible, two link types were designed to capture lin-
guistic correspondences: exact and fuzzy. The for-
mer is used to identify complete and minimal se-
mantic translation units, and the latter to indicate
valid translation pairs (including all those cases of
translation shifts). However, untranslated words,
incorrect or deeply divergent translations are left
unaligned.
At the same time, we chose to link correspon-
dences at a structural level too, so that paral-
lelisms between pairs of syntactic trees (or sub-
trees) could be easily detected and studied. In re-
cent years, in fact, a number of syntactically moti-
vated approaches to statistical machine translation
have been proposed which focused on the fact that
syntactic constituents tend to move as units with
systematic differences in the word order of the lan-
guages involved (Zhang and Gildea, 2004). In the
case of Parallel–TUT, a syntactically motivated
alignment may be driven by the argument structure
as annotated according to the TUT format. In par-
ticular, we planned to implement forms of align-
ment based on (a selection of the major) grammat-
ical relations that are involved in the predicate ar-
gument structure, as figure 2 shows. We hypothe-
size that the features of the annotation schema of
TUT can be of some help for the alignment at this
granularity. Nevertheless, these features and the
richness of the annotation schema of TUT are cur-
rently the major limits in the application of a stan-
dard tool for the alignment of the Parallel-TUT.

24



!
Figure 2: A sample of Italian-French alignment at dependency relation level in Parallel–TUT, for a
fragment of the sentence ”Ogni individuo ha diritto alla vita” (UDHR–ITA–20) – ”Tout individu a droit
à la vie” (UDHR–FR–19), corresponding to the UDHR–EN–21 for English: ”Everyone has the right to
life”.

6 Discussion and future work

In this section we discuss the implications of ap-
plying the TUT format to English and French for
the development of Parallel–TUT.
The first aspect we focused on, while evaluating
our methodology and its effects, was the parser
output, the type of errors produced and their in-
vestigation.
After the work phase described in Section 4,
TULE, when evaluated according to its preci-
sion in building and labelling dependency trees,
reached an error rate of around 9% for Italian, but
15,6% for English and 17,8% for French.
Errors detected during manual correction mainly
dealt with tokenization and, to a larger extent,
morphological analysis and Part of Speech tag-

ging. This is maybe due to an incorrect applica-
tion of disambiguation rules by the parser or to a
lack of information about the lexical items in the
TULE dictionary. As a result, these errors deeply
affected the parser performance, and, despite rule-
insertion operations, its output quality for English
and French languages is still lower if compared to
Italian. This suggests that further improvements in
the system are required.
In addition to these errors, two other types have
been identified. For their special character, we
could define them as as “ language-dependent”
and “genre-dependent” errors. In the first case,
errors have to do with the distinctive feature of
each language. The most frequent phenomenon
(among those encountered in our corpus) included

25



in the former is that of the pre-modification in En-
glish, ie. all those cases of noun phrases where
one or more units preceding the head of the phrase
are syntactic modifiers of the head itself14 struc-
tured in a hierarchic order. Since Italian language
prefers post-modification, a parser trained for such
linguistic patterns, in most cases, is unable to rec-
ognize the appropriate syntactic order between the
units of the pre-modification.
As for the second type of errors, defined here as
“genre-dependent”, we include all those cases of
errors directly attributable to the genre of the texts
collected and analyzed in our small corpus. As
we said, the collection comprises legal documents,
where the recurrence of complex and ambiguous
syntactic constructions (a feature shared by the
three languages considered) is quite common. The
high number of embedded prepositional phrases,
subordinate clauses and parentheticals contributes
to the lowering of the output quality.
As for the application of the TUT format and
schema to the other two languages, distinctive
features of these linguistic systems result in a
lack of an appropriate structural representation,
for which new relational labels were introduced,
as described in Section 4. We tackled this prob-
lem with the two-fold goal of providing a coherent
framework of annotation (like for Italian15), and
taking into account the linguistic peculiarities of
each language. This was made possible by a num-
ber of factors. First, the choice of a dependency
(rather than constituent) structure better suits for
both morphologically rich languages (such as Ital-
ian and French) and morphologically simpler ones
(English). Moreover, the richness of relations pro-
vided in the TUT scheme, in addition to the use of
null elements, which is another feature of the TUT
format, allows a flexible annotation and the cover-
age of those linguistic phenomena which distin-
guish French and English from Italian (to name a
few, the relative superlative in French, or the pos-
sessive case in English, as already mentioned in
Section 4).

14This can be noticed, in the annotated texts, by the higher
frequency of nominal modifiers (expressed by the NOUN-
RMOD label) in English texts, rather than in the French and
Italian sub-parts of the corpus; the occurences of such relation
are 103 in English texts, 25 in the French and 17 in the Italian
ones, covering respectively 2.5%, 0.5% and 0.4% of the total
amount of relational labels.

15See the linguistic notes of TUT at
http://www.di.unito.it/ tutreeb/docu
ments/noteling-engl-15-11-08.pdf

As said at the beginning, the Parallel–TUT is cur-
rently an ongoing project, and the aim of the
present work is mainly at raising and investigat-
ing issues related to its development. Neverthe-
less, in this phase of our project we observed that
using the same format, and the TUT format in par-
ticular, has proved useful in the detection of sim-
ilarities during the alignment phase at all the lev-
els currently taken into account. The decision to
adopt the same annotation scheme and grammat-
ical description for the three languages can also
contribute to the comparison of grammatical pat-
terns.
As for future development of this work, a number
of issues must be further pursued.
First of all, by taking into account the directions
collected in the alignment guidelines developed
during this first phase of the Parallel–TUT project,
we will address the development and the integra-
tion of suitable tools, in particular for the align-
ment at the predicative structure level and for dis-
playing such kind of information.
Secondly, considering the opportunity of convert-
ing TUT into a Penn-like format, we can ex-
tend the conversion to our parallel treebank as
well, in order to develop alignment procedures
also for phrases and information expressed in
constituency-based formats.
Thirdly, in order to address the languages involved
beyond the limits of a toy domain, it is crucial to
enlarge the corpus of the Parallel–TUT. On the one
hand, applying to a larger corpus our methodol-
ogy to a larger corpus will give us the opportu-
nity for addressing a larger and more meaningful
set of linguistic phenomena typical of French and
English, thouh not represented in Italian. On the
other hand, this will allow more detailed analyses,
like e.g. in (Ahrenberg, 2010), not affected by the
sparseness of data that can be currently detected
using our small corpus.
Finally, we observe that currently our corpus cov-
ers a selection of texts from a specific linguis-
tic subfield broadly corresponding to legal lan-
guage; one of the main future tasks should there-
fore consist not only in extending the size of the
annotated corpus, but also in orienting to a more
balanced direction its further development, com-
prising different sources, e.g. technical and spe-
cialized texts, fiction, newspapers (Paulussen and
Macken, 2010).

26



7 Conclusions

In this paper we presented preliminary results in
the creation of Parallel–TUT, a multilingual paral-
lel treebank for Italian, English and French repre-
sented in the format of the Italian resource TUT.
The project mainly aims at testing the hypothesis
that the annotation schema and the knowledge an-
notated in the TUT format can be useful also to ad-
dress the issues related to parallel corpora. There-
fore, the same parsing system and the tools used
for the improvement of the quality of the data an-
notated within TUT have been extended and ap-
plied to the other two languages.
Although this attempt has produced encouraging
results, the project is currently ongoing and we
presented several directions for its further devel-
opment, extension and improvement.

References
L. Ahrenberg, J. Tiedemann, and M. Volk, editors.

2010. Proceedings of the Workshop on Annota-
tion and Exploitation of Parallel Corpora (AEPC).
NEALT, Tartu.

L. Ahrenberg. 2007. LinEs: an English-Swedish Par-
allel Treebank. In Proceedings of the 16th Nordic
Conference on Computational Linguistics (NODAL-
IDA ’07), Tartu.

L. Ahrenberg. 2010. Clause restructuring in English-
Swedish translation. In Proceedings of the (AEPC),
Tartu.

J. Bos, C. Bosco, and A. Mazzei. 2009. Converting a
dependency treebank to a Categorial Grammar tree-
bank for Italian. In Proceedings of the 8th workshop
on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT-8), Mi-
lan.

C. Bosco and A. Lavelli. 2010. Annotation schema-
oriented validation for dependency parsing evalua-
tion. In Proceedings of the 9th workshop on Tree-
banks and Linguistic Theories (TLT-9), Tartu.

C. Bosco, A. Mazzei, and V. Lombardo. 2007. Evalita
Parsing Task: an analysis of the first parsing system
contest for Italian. Intelligenza artificiale, 2(IV).

C. Bosco, A. Mazzei, and V. Lombardo. 2009a.
Evalita’09 Parsing Task: constituency parsers and
the Penn format for Italian. In Proceedings of
Evalita’09, Reggio Emilia.

C. Bosco, S. Montemagni, A. Mazzei, V. Lombardo,
F. Dell’Orletta, and A. Lenci. 2009b. Evalita’09
Parsing Task: comparing dependency parsers and
treebanks. In Proceedings of Evalita’09, Reggio
Emilia.

C. Bosco. 2007. Multiple-step treebank conversion:
from dependency to Penn format. In Proceedings
of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop (LAW) at
ACL’07, Prague.

L. Cyrus. 2006. Building a Resource for Study-
ing Translation Shifts. In Proceedings of Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC’06),
Genova.

S. Grimes, X. Li, A. Bies, S. Kulick, X. Ma, and
S. Strassel. 2010. Creating arabic-english parallel
word-aligned treebank corpora at LDC. In Proceed-
ings of Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence (LREC’10), Malta.

J. Hajič and P. Zemánek. 2003. Prague Arabic Depen-
dency Treebank: Development in data and tools. In
Proceedings of NEMLAR the NEMLAR Conference
on Arabic Language Resources and Tools, Cairo.

R. Hudson. 1984. Word grammar. Basil Blackwell,
Oxford and New York.

N. Klyueva and D. Mareček. 2010. Towards Parallel
Czech-Russian Dependency Treebank. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Annotation and Exploita-
tion of Parallel Corpora (AEPC), Tartu.

L. Lesmo, V. Lombardo, and C. Bosco. 2002. Tree-
bank development: the TUT approach. In Proceed-
ings of ICON02, Mumbay.

L. Lesmo. 2007. The rule-based parser of the NLP
group of the University of Torino. Intelligenza arti-
ficiale, 2(IV).

L. Lesmo. 2009. The Turin University Parser at
Evalita 2009. In Proceedings of Evalita’09, Reggio
Emilia.

X. Li, S. Strassel, S. Grimes, S. Ismael, X. Ma, N. Ge,
A. Bies, N. Xue, and M. Maamouri. 2010. Par-
allel aligned treebank corpora at LDC: Methodol-
ogy, annotation and integration. In Proceedings of
Workshop on Annotation and Exploitation of Paral-
lel Corpora (AEPC), Tartu.

B. Megyesi, B. Dahlqvist, E. Pettersson, and J. Nivre.
2008. Swedish-Turkish Parallel Treebank. In Pro-
ceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference (LREC’08), Marrakech.

G. Musillo and K. Sima’an. 2002. Towards com-
paring parsers from different linguistic frameworks.
An information theoretic approach. In Proceed-
ings of Workshop Beyond PARSEVAL - Towards im-
proved evaluation measures for parsing systems at
the LREC’02, Las Palmas.

F. J. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A systematic comparison
of various statistical alignment models. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 29(1).

27



H. Paulussen and L. Macken. 2010. Annotating
the Dutch Parallel Corpus. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Annotation and Exploitation of Paral-
lel Corpora (AEPC), Tartu.

A. Rios, A. Ghring, and M. Volk. 2009. A Quechua–
Spanish parallel treebank. In Proceedings of 7th
Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories
(TLT-7), Groningen.

R. Steinberger, B. Pouliquen, A. Widiger, C. Ignat,
T. Erjavec, D. Tufiş, and D Varga. 2006. The
JRC-Acquis: A multilingual aligned parallel corpus
with 20+ languages. In Proceedings of Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC’06),
Genova.

M. Čmejrek, J. Hajič, and V. Kuboň. 2004. Prague
Czech-English Dependency Treebank: Syntactically
Annotated Resources for Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of EAMT 10th Annual Conference, Bu-
dapest.

M. Volk, A. Göhring, T. Marek, and Y. Samuelsson.
2010. SMULTRON (version 3.0) - The Stock-
holm MULtilingual parallel TReebank. An English-
French-German-Spanish-Swedish parallel treebank
with sub-sentential alignments.

D. Wu. 2010. Alignment. In Handbook of NLP. Chap-
mand and Hale/CRC Press.

H. Zhang and D. Gildea. 2004. Syntax-based align-
ment: Supervised or unsupervised? In Proceedings
of COLING’04, Geneve.

28


