










































Wider Context by Using Bilingual Language Models in Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 198–206,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Wider Context by Using Bilingual Language Models in Machine Translation

Jan Niehues1, Teresa Herrmann1, Stephan Vogel2 and Alex Waibel1,2
1Institute for Anthropomatics, KIT - Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany

2 Language Techonolgies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
1firstname.lastname@kit.edu 2lastname@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

In past Evaluations for Machine Translation of
European Languages, it could be shown that
the translation performance of SMT systems
can be increased by integrating a bilingual lan-
guage model into a phrase-based SMT system.
In the bilingual language model, target words
with their aligned source words build the to-
kens of an n-gram based language model. We
analyzed the effect of bilingual language mod-
els and show where they could help to bet-
ter model the translation process. We could
show improvements of translation quality on
German-to-English and Arabic-to-English. In
addition, for the Arabic-to-English task, train-
ing an extra bilingual language model on the
POS tags instead of the surface word forms
led to further improvements.

1 Introduction

In many state-of-the art SMT systems, the phrase-
based (Koehn et al., 2003) approach is used. In
this approach, instead of building the translation by
translating word by word, sequences of source and
target words, so-called phrase pairs, are used as the
basic translation unit. A table of correspondences
between source and target phrases forms the transla-
tion model in this approach. Target language fluency
is modeled by a language model storing monolin-
gual n-gram occurrences. A log-linear combination
of these main models as well as additional features
is used to score the different translation hypotheses.
Then the decoder searches for the translation with
the highest score.

A different approach to SMT is to use a stochas-
tic finite state transducer based on bilingual n-
grams (Casacuberta and Vidal, 2004). This ap-
proach was for example successfully applied by Al-
lauzen et al. (2010) on the French-English trans-
lation task. In this so-called n-gram approach the
translation model is trained by using an n-gram lan-
guage model of pairs of source and target words,
called tuples. While the phrase-based approach cap-
tures only bilingual context within the phrase pairs,
in the n-gram approach the n-gram model trained on
the tuples is used to capture bilingual context be-
tween the tuples. As in the phrase-based approach,
the translation model can also be combined with ad-
ditional models like, for example, language models
using log-linear combination.

Inspired by the n-gram-based approach, we in-
troduce a bilingual language model that extends
the translation model of the phrase-based SMT ap-
proach by providing bilingual word context. In ad-
dition to the bilingual word context, this approach
enables us also to integrate a bilingual context based
on part of speech (POS) into the translation model.
When using phrase pairs it is complicated to use
different kinds of bilingual contexts, since the con-
text of the POS-based phrase pairs should be bigger
than the word-based ones to make the most use of
them. But there is no straightforward way to inte-
grate phrase pairs of different lengths into the trans-
lation model in the phrase-based approach, while it
is quite easy to use n-gram models with different
context lengths on the tuples. We show how we can
use bilingual POS-based language models to capture
longer bilingual context in phrase-based translation

198



systems.
This paper is structured in the following way: In

the next section, we will present some related work.
Afterwards, in Section 3, a motivation for using the
bilingual language model will be given. In the fol-
lowing section the bilingual language model is de-
scribed in detail. In Section 5, the results and an
analysis of the translation results is given, followed
by a conclusion.

2 Related Work

The n-gram approach presented in Mariño et al.
(2006) has been derived from the work of Casacu-
berta and Vidal (2004), which used finite state trans-
ducers for statistical machine translation. In this ap-
proach, units of source and target words are used as
basic translation units. Then the translation model is
implemented as an n-gram model over the tuples. As
it is also done in phrase-based translations, the dif-
ferent translations are scored by a log-linear combi-
nation of the translation model and additional mod-
els.

Crego and Yvon (2010) extended the approach to
be able to handle different word factors. They used
factored language models introduced by Bilmes and
Kirchhoff (2003) to integrate different word factors
into the translation process. In contrast, we use a
log-linear combination of language models on dif-
ferent factors in our approach.

A first approach of integrating the idea presented
in the n-gram approach into phrase-based machine
translation was described in Matusov et al. (2006).
In contrast to our work, they used the bilingual units
as defined in the original approach and they did not
use additional word factors.

Hasan et al. (2008) used lexicalized triplets to in-
troduce bilingual context into the translation pro-
cess. These triplets include source words from out-
side the phrase and form and additional probability
p(f |e, e′) that modifies the conventional word prob-
ability of f given e depending on trigger words e′ in
the sentence enabling a context-based translation of
ambiguous phrases.

Other approaches address this problem by inte-
grating word sense disambiguation engines into a
phrase-based SMT system. In Chan and Ng (2007)
a classifier exploits information such as local col-

locations, parts-of-speech or surrounding words to
determine the lexical choice of target words, while
Carpuat and Wu (2007) use rich context features
based on position, syntax and local collocations to
dynamically adapt the lexicons for each sentence
and facilitate the choice of longer phrases.

In this work we present a method to extend the
locally limited context of phrase pairs and n-grams
by using bilingual language models. We keep the
phrase-based approach as the main SMT framework
and introduce an n-gram language model trained in a
similar way as the one used in the finite state trans-
ducer approach as an additional feature in the log-
linear model.

3 Motivation

To motivate the introduction of the bilingual lan-
guage model, we will analyze the bilingual context
that is used when selecting the target words. In a
phrase-based system, this context is limited by the
phrase boundaries. No bilingual information outside
the phrase pair is used for selecting the target word.
The effect can be shown in the following example
sentence:

Ein gemeinsames Merkmal aller extremen
Rechten in Europa ist ihr Rassismus
und die Tatsache, dass sie das Einwan-
derungsproblem als politischen Hebel be-
nutzen.

Using our phrase-based SMT system, we get the
following segmentation into phrases on the source
side: ein gemeinsames, Merkmal, aller, extremen
Rechten. That means, that the translation of Merk-
mal is not influenced by the source words gemein-
sames or aller.

However, apart from this segmentation, other
phrases could have been conceivable for building a
translation:
ein, ein gemeinsames, ein gemeinsames Merk-
mal, gemeinsames, gemeinsames Merkmal, Merk-
mal aller, aller, extremen, extremen Rechten and
Rechten.

As shown in Figure 1 the translation for the
first three words ein gemeinsames Merkmal into a
common feature can be created by segmenting it
into ein gemeinsames and Merkmal as done by the

199



Figure 1: Alternative Segmentations

phrase-based system or by segmenting it into ein and
gemeinsames Merkmal. In the phrase-based system,
the decoder cannot make use of the fact that both
segmentation variants lead to the same translation,
but has to select one and use only this information
for scoring the hypothesis.

Consequently, if the first segmentation is cho-
sen, the fact that gemeinsames is translated to com-
mon does effect the translation of Merkmal only by
means of the language model, but no bilingual con-
text can be carried over the segmentation bound-
aries.

To overcome this drawback of the phrase-based
approach, we introduce a bilingual language model
into the phrase-based SMT system. Table 1 shows
the source and target words and demonstrates how
the bilingual phrases are constructed and how the
source context stays available over segment bound-
aries in the calculation of the language model score
for the sentence. For example, when calculating the
language model score for the word feature P ( fea-
ture_Merkmal | common_gemeinsames) we can see
that through the bilingual tokens not only the previ-
ous target word but also the previous source word is
known and can influence the translation even though
it is in a different segment.

4 Bilingual Language Model

The bilingual language model is a standard n-gram-
based language model trained on bilingual tokens in-
stead of simple words. These bilingual tokens are
motivated by the tuples used in n-gram approaches
to machine translation. We use different basic units
for the n-gram model compared to the n-gram ap-
proach, in order to be able to integrate them into a
phrase-based translation system.

In this context, a bilingual token consists of a tar-
get word and all source words that it is aligned to.
More formally, given a sentence pair eI1 = e1...eI

and fJ1 = f1...fJ and the corresponding word align-
ment A = {(i, j)} the following tokens are created:

tj = {fj} ∪ {ei|(i, j) ∈ A} (1)

Therefore, the number of bilingual tokens in a
sentence equals the number of target words. If a
source word is aligned to two target words like the
word aller in the example sentence, two bilingual to-
kens are created: all_aller and the_aller. If, in con-
trast, a target word is aligned to two source words,
only one bilingual token is created consisting of the
target word and both source words.

The existence of unaligned words is handled in
the following way. If a target word is not aligned
to any source word, the corresponding bilingual to-
ken consists only of the target word. In contrast, if a
source word is not aligned to any word in the target
language sentence, this word is ignored in the bilin-
gual language model.

Using this definition of bilingual tokens the trans-
lation probability of source and target sentence and
the word alignment is then defined by:

p(eI1, f
J
1 , A) =

J∏
j=1

P (tj |tj−1...tj−n) (2)

This probability is then used in the log-linear com-
bination of a phrase-based translation system as an
additional feature. It is worth mentioning that al-
though it is modeled like a conventional language
model, the bilingual language model is an extension
to the translation model, since the translation for the
source words is modeled and not the fluency of the
target text.

To train the model a corpus of bilingual tokens can
be created in a straightforward way. In the genera-
tion of this corpus the order of the target words de-
fines the order of the bilingual tokens. Then we can
use the common language modeling tools to train
the bilingual language model. As it was done for
the normal language model, we used Kneser-Ney
smoothing.

4.1 Comparison to Tuples

While the bilingual tokens are motivated by the tu-
ples in the n-gram approach, there are quite some
differences. They are mainly due to the fact that the

200



Source Target Bi-word LM Prob
ein a a_ein P(a_ein | <s>)

gemeinsames common common_gemeinsames P(common_gemeinsames | a_ein, <s>)
Merkmal feature feature_Merkmal P(feature_Merkmal | common_gemeinsames)

of of_ P(of_ | feature_Merkmal)
aller all all_aller P(all_aller | of_)
aller the the_aller P(the_aller | all_aller, of_)

extremen extreme extreme_extremen P(extreme_extremen)
Rechten right right_Rechten P(right_Rechten | extreme_extremen)

Table 1: Example Sentence: Segmentation and Bilingual Tokens

tuples are also used to guide the search in the n-gram
approach, while the search in the phrase-based ap-
proach is guided by the phrase pairs and the bilin-
gual tokens are only used as an additional feature in
scoring.

While no word inside a tuple can be aligned to
a word outside the tuple, the bilingual tokens are
created based on the target words. Consequently,
source words of one bilingual token can also be
aligned to target words inside another bilingual to-
ken. Therefore, we do not have the problems of em-
bedded words, where there is no independent trans-
lation probability.

Since we do not create a a monotonic segmenta-
tion of the bilingual sentence, but only use the seg-
mentation according to the target word order, it is
not clear where to put source words, which have no
correspondence on the target side. As mentioned be-
fore, they are ignored in the model.

But an advantage of this approach is that we have
no problem handling unaligned target words. We
just create bilingual tokens with an empty source
side. Here, the placing order of the unaligned tar-
get words is guided by the segmentation into phrase
pairs.

Furthermore, we need no additional pruning of
the vocabulary due to computation cost, since this is
already done by the pruning of the phrase pairs. In
our phrase-based system, we allow only for twenty
translations of one source phrase.

4.2 Comparison to Phrase Pairs

Using the definition of the bilingual language model,
we can again have a look at the introductory example
sentence. We saw that when translating the phrase

ein gemeinsames Merkmal using a phrase-based sys-
tem, the translation of gemeinsames into common
can only be influenced by either the preceeding ein
# a or by the succeeding Merkmal # feature, but
not by both of them at the same time, since either
the phrase ein gemeinsames or the phrase gemein-
sames Merkmal has to be chosen when segmenting
the source sentence for translation. If we now look
at the context that can be used when translating this
segment applying the bilingual language model, we
see that the translation of gemeinsames into com-
mon is on the one hand influenced by the translation
of the token ein # a within the bilingual language
model probability P (common_gemeinsames | a_ein,
<s>).

On the other hand, it is also influenced by the
translation of the word Merkmal into feature en-
coded into the probability P (feature_Merkmal |
common_gemeinsames). In contrast to the phrase-
based translation model, this additional model is ca-
pable of using context information from both sides
to score the translation hypothesis. In this way,
when building the target sentence, the information
of aligned source words can be considered even be-
yond phrase boundaries.

4.3 POS-based Bilingual Language Models

When translating with the phrase-based approach,
the decoder evaluates different hypotheses with dif-
ferent segmentations of the source sentence into
phrases. The segmentation depends on available
phrase pair combinations but for one hypothesis
translation the segmentation into phrases is fixed.
This leads to problems, when integrating parallel
POS-based information. Since the amount of differ-

201



ent POS tags in a language is very small compared to
the number of words in a language, we could man-
age much longer phrase pairs based on POS tags
compared to the possible length of phrase pairs on
the word level.

In a phrase-based translation system the average
phrase length is often around two words. For POS
sequences, in contrast, sequences of 4 tokens can
often be matched. Consequently, this information
can only help, if a different segmentation could be
chosen for POS-based phrases and for word-based
phrases. Unfortunately, there is no straightforward
way to integrate this into the decoder.

If we now look at how the bilingual language
model is applied, it is much easier to integrate the
POS-based information. In addition to the bilin-
gual token for every target word we can generate a
bilingual token based on the POS information of the
source and target words. Using this bilingual POS
token, we can train an additional bilingual POS-
based language model and apply it during transla-
tion. In this case it is no longer problematic if the
context of the POS-based bilingual language model
is longer than the one based on the word informa-
tion, because word and POS sequences are scored
separately by two different language models which
cover different n-gram lengths.

The training of the bilingual POS language model
is straightforward. We can build the corpus of bilin-
gual POS tokens based on the parallel corpus of
POS tags generated by running a POS tagger over
both source and target side of the initial parallel cor-
pus and the alignment information for the respective
words in the text corpora.

During decoding, we then also need to know the
POS tag for every source and target word. Since
we build the sentence incrementally, we cannot use
the tagger directly. Instead, we store also the POS
source and target sequences during the phrase ex-
traction. When creating the bilingual phrase pair
with POS information, there might be different pos-
sibilities of POS sequences for the source and target
phrases. But we keep only the most probable one for
each phrase pair. For the Arabic-to-English trans-
lation task, we compared the generated target tags
with the tags created by the tagger on the automatic
translations. They are different on less than 5% of
the words.

Using the alignment information as well as the
source and target POS sequences we can then create
the POS-based bilingual tokens for every phrase pair
and store it in addition to the normal phrase pairs.
At decoding time, the most frequent POS tags in the
bilingual phrases are used as tags for the input sen-
tence and the translation is done based on the bilin-
gual POS tokens built from these tags together with
their alignment information.

5 Results

We evaluated and analyzed the influence of the bilin-
gual language model on different languages. On
the one hand, we measured the performance of the
bilingual language model on German-to-English on
the News translation task. On the other hand, we
evaluated the approach on the Arabic-to-English di-
rection on News and Web data. Additionally, we
present the impact of the bilingual language model
on the English-to-German, German-to-English and
French-to-English systems with which we partici-
pated in the WMT 2011.

5.1 System Description

The German-to-English translation system was
trained on the European Parliament corpus, News
Commentary corpus and small amounts of addi-
tional Web data. The data was preprocessed and
compound splitting was applied. Afterwards the dis-
criminative word alignment approach as described
in (Niehues and Vogel, 2008) was applied to gener-
ate the alignments between source and target words.
The phrase table was built using the scripts from the
Moses package (Koehn et al., 2007). The language
model was trained on the target side of the paral-
lel data as well as on additional monolingual News
data. The translation model as well as the language
model was adapted towards the target domain in a
log-linear way.

The Arabic-to-English system was trained us-
ing GALE Arabic data, which contains 6.1M sen-
tences. The word alignment is generated using
EMDC, which is a combination of a discriminative
approach and the IBM Models as described in Gao
et al. (2010). The phrase table is generated using
Chaski as described in Gao and Vogel (2010). The
language model data we trained on the GIGAWord

202



V3 data plus BBN English data. After splitting the
corpus according to sources, individual models were
trained. Then the individual models were interpo-
lated to minimize the perplexity on the MT03/MT04
data.

For both tasks the reordering was performed as a
preprocessing step using POS information from the
TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994) for German and using
the Amira Tagger (Diab, 2009) for Arabic. For Ara-
bic the approach described in Rottmann and Vogel
(2007) was used covering short-range reorderings.
For the German-to-English translation task the ex-
tended approach described in Niehues et al. (2009)
was used to cover also the long-range reorderings
typical when translating between German and En-
glish.

For both directions an in-house phrase-based de-
coder (Vogel, 2003) was used to generate the transla-
tion hypotheses and the optimization was performed
using MER training. The performance on the test-
sets were measured in case-insensitive BLEU and
TER scores.

5.2 German to English

We evaluated the approach on two different test sets
from the News Commentary domain. The first con-
sists of 2000 sentences with one reference. It will
be referred to as Test 1. The second test set consists
of 1000 sentences with two references and will be
called Test 2.

5.2.1 Translation Quality
In Tables 2 and 3 the results for translation per-

formance on the German-to-English translation task
are summarized.

As it can been seen, the improvements of transla-
tion quality vary considerably between the two dif-
ferent test sets. While using the bilingual language
model improves the translation by only 0.15 BLEU
and 0.21 TER points on Test 1, the improvement on
Test 2 is nearly 1 BLEU point and 0.5 TER points.

5.2.2 Context Length
One intention of using the bilingual language

model is its capability to capture the bilingual con-
texts in a different way. To see, whether additional
bilingual context is used during decoding, we ana-
lyzed the context used by the phrase pairs and by

the n-gram bilingual language model.
However, a comparison of the different context

lengths is not straightforward. The context of an n-
gram language model is normally described by the
average length of applied n-grams. For phrase pairs,
normally the average target phrase pair length (avg.
Target PL) is used as an indicator for the size of the
context. And these two numbers cannot be com-
pared directly.

To be able to compare the context used by the
phrase pairs to the context used in the n-gram lan-
guage model, we calculated the average left context
that is used for every target word where the word
itself is included, i.e. the context of a single word
is 1. In case of the bilingual language model the
score for the average left context is exactly the aver-
age length of applied n-grams in a given translation.
For phrase pairs the average left context can be cal-
culated in the following way: A phrase pair of length
1 gets a left context score of 1. In a phrase pair of
length 2, the first word has a left context score of 1,
since it is not influenced by any target word to the
left. The second word in that phrase pair gets a left
context count of 2, because it is influenced by the
first word in the phrase. Correspondingly, the left
context score of a phrase pair of length 3 is 6 (com-
posed of the score 1 for the first word, score 2 for
the second word and score 3 for the third word). To
get the average left context for the whole translation,
the context scores of all phrases are summed up and
divided by the number of words in the translation.

The scores for the average left contexts for the two
test sets are shown in Tables 2 and 3. They are called
avg. PP Left Context. As it can be seen, the con-
text used by the bilingual n-gram language model is
longer than the one by the phrase pairs. The average
n-gram length increases from 1.58 and 1.57, respec-
tively to 2.21 and 2.18 for the two given test sets.

If we compare the average n-gram length of the
bilingual language model to the one of the target
language model, the n-gram length of the first is of
course smaller, since the number of possible bilin-
gual tokens is higher than the number of possible
monolingual words. This can also be seen when
looking at the perplexities of the two language mod-
els on the generated translations. While the perplex-
ity of the target language model is 99 and 101 on
Test 1 and 2, respectively, the perplexity of the bilin-

203



gual language model is 512 and 538.

Metric No BiLM BiLM
BLEU 30.37 30.52
TER 50.27 50.06
avg. Target PL 1.66 1.66
avg. PP Left Context 1.57 1.58
avg. Target LM N-Gram 3.28 3.27
avg. BiLM N-Gram 2.21

Table 2: German-to-English results (Test 1)

Metric No BiLM BiLM
BLEU 44.16 45.09
TER 41.02 40.52
avg. Target PL 1.65 1.65
avg. PP Left Context 1.56 1.57
avg. Target LM N-Gram 3.25 3.23
avg. BiLM N-Gram 2.18

Table 3: German-to-English results (Test 2)

5.2.3 Overlapping Context
An additional advantage of the n-gram-based ap-

proach is the possibility to have overlapping con-
text. If we would always use phrase pairs of length
2 only half of the adjacent words would influence
each other in the translation. The others are only
influenced by the other target words through the lan-
guage model. If we in contrast would have a bilin-
gual language model which uses an n-gram length
of 2, this means that every choice of word influences
the previous and the following word.

To analyze this influence, we counted how many
borders of phrase pairs are covered by a bilingual
n-gram. For Test 1, 16783 of the 27785 borders
between phrase pairs are covered by a bilingual n-
gram. For Test 2, 9995 of 16735 borders are cov-
ered. Consequently, in both cases at around 60 per-
cent of the borders additional information can be
used by the bilingual n-gram language model.

5.2.4 Bilingual N-Gram Length
For the German-to-English translation task we

performed an additional experiment comparing dif-
ferent n-gram lengths of the bilingual language

BiLM Length aNGL BLEU TER
No 30.37 50.27
1 1 29.67 49.73
2 1.78 30.36 50.05
3 2.11 30.47 50.08
4 2.21 30.52 50.06
5 2.23 30.52 50.07
6 2.24 30.52 50.07

Table 4: Different N-Gram Lengths (Test 1)

BiLM Length aNGL BLEU TER
No 44.16 41.02
1 1 44.22 40.53
2 1.78 45.11 40.38
3 2.09 45.18 40.51
4 2.18 45.09 40.52
5 2.21 45.10 40.52
6 2.21 45.10 40.52

Table 5: Different N-Gram Lengths (Test 2)

model. To ensure comparability between the exper-
iments and avoid additional noise due to different
optimization results, we did not perform separate
optimization runs for for each of the system vari-
ants with different n-gram length, but used the same
scaling factors for all of them. Of course, the sys-
tem using no bilingual language model was trained
independently. In Tables 4 and 5 we can see that the
length of the actually applied n-grams as well as the
BLEU score increased until the bilingual language
model reaches an order of 4. For higher order bilin-
gual language models, nearly no additional n-grams
can be found in the language models. Also the trans-
lation quality does not increase further when using
longer n-grams.

5.3 Arabic to English

The Arabic-to-English system was optimized on the
MT06 data. As test set the Rosetta in-house test set
DEV07-nw (News) and wb (Web Data) was used.

The results for the Arabic-to-English translation
task are summarized in Tables 6 and 7. The perfor-
mance was tested on two different domains, transla-
tion of News and Web documents. On both tasks,
the translation could be improved by more than 1

204



BLEU point. Measuring the performance in TER
also shows an improvement by 0.7 and 0.5 points.

By adding a POS-based bilingual language
model, the performance could be improved further.
An additional gain of 0.2 BLEU points and decrease
of 0.3 points in TER could be reached. Conse-
quently, an overall improvement of up to 1.7 BLEU
points could be achieved by integrating two bilin-
gual language models, one based on surface word
forms and one based on parts-of-speech.

System
Dev Test

BLEU TER BLEU
NoBiLM 48.42 40.77 52.05
+ BiLM 49.29 40.04 53.51
+ POS BiLM 49.56 39.85 53.71

Table 6: Results on Arabic to English: Translation of
News

System
Dev Test

BLEU TER BLEU
NoBiLM 48.42 47.14 41.90
+ BiLM 49.29 46.66 43.12
+ POS BiLM 49.56 46.40 43.28

Table 7: Results on Arabic to English: Translation of
Web documents

As it was done for the German-to-English system,
we also compared the context used by the different
models for this translation direction. The results are
summarized in Table 8 for the News test set and in
Table 9 for the translation of Web data. It can be seen
like it was for the other language pair that the context
used in the bilingual language model is bigger than
the one used by the phrase-based translation model.

Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that shorter
phrase pairs are used, when using the POS-based
bilingual language model. Both bilingual language
models seem to model the context quite good, so that
less long phrase pairs are needed to build the trans-
lation. Instead, the more frequent short phrases can
be used to generate the translation.

5.4 Shared Translation Task @ WMT2011
The bilingual language model was included in 3
systems built for the WMT2011 Shared Translation

Metric No BiLM POS BiLM
BLEU 52.05 53.51 53.71
avg. Target PL 2.12 2.03 1.79
avg. PP Left Context 1.92 1.85 1.69
avg. BiLM N-Gram 2.66 2.65
avg. POS BiLM 4.91

Table 8: Bilingual Context in Arabic-to-English results
(News)

Metric No BiLM POS BiLM
BLEU 41.90 43.12 43.28
avg. Target PL 1.82 1.80 1.57
avg. PP Left Context 1.72 1.69 1.53
avg. BiLM N-Gram 2.33 2.31
avg. POS BiLM 4.49

Table 9: Bilingual Context in Arabic-to-English results
(Web data)

Task evaluation. A phrase-based system similar to
the one described before for the German-to-English
results was used. A detailed system description can
be found in Herrmann et al. (2011). The results are
summarized in Table 10. The performance of com-
petitive systems could be improved in all three lan-
guages by up to 0.4 BLEU points.

Language Pair No BiLM BiLM
German-English 24.12 24.52
English-German 16.89 17.01
French-English 28.17 28.34

Table 10: Preformance of Bilingual language model at
WMT2011

6 Conclusion

In this work we showed how a feature of the n-gram-
based approach can be integrated into a phrase-
based statistical translation system. We performed
a detailed analysis on how this influences the scor-
ing of the translation system. We could show im-
provements on a variety of translation tasks cover-
ing different languages and domains. Furthermore,
we could show that additional bilingual context in-
formation is used.

Furthermore, the additional feature can easily be

205



extended to additional word factors such as part-of-
speech, which showed improvements for the Arabic-
to-English translation task.

Acknowledgments

This work was realized as part of the Quaero Pro-
gramme, funded by OSEO, French State agency for
innovation.

References

Alexandre Allauzen, Josep M. Crego, İlknur Durgar El-
Kahlout, and François Yvon. 2010. LIMSI’s Statisti-
cal Translation Systems for WMT’10. In Fifth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT 2010),
Uppsala, Sweden.

Jeff A. Bilmes and Katrin Kirchhoff. 2003. Fac-
tored language models and generalized parallel back-
off. In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics on Human Language Technol-
ogy, pages 4–6, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Marine Carpuat and Dekai Wu. 2007. Improving Statis-
tical Machine Translation using Word Sense Disam-
biguation. In In The 2007 Joint Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning.

Francisco Casacuberta and Enrique Vidal. 2004. Ma-
chine Translation with Inferred Stochastic Finite-State
Transducers. Comput. Linguist., 30:205–225, June.

Yee Seng Chan and Hwee Tou Ng. 2007. Word Sense
Disambiguation improves Statistical Machine Trans-
lation. In In 45th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL-07, pages 33–40.

Josep M. Crego and François Yvon. 2010. Factored
bilingual n-gram language models for statistical ma-
chine translation. Machine Translation, 24, June.

Mona Diab. 2009. Second Generation Tools (AMIRA
2.0): Fast and Robust Tokenization, POS tagging, and
Base Phrase Chunking. In Proc. of the Second Interna-
tional Conference on Arabic Language Resources and
Tools, Cairo, Egypt, April.

Qin Gao and Stephan Vogel. 2010. Training Phrase-
Based Machine Translation Models on the Cloud:
Open Source Machine Translation Toolkit Chaski. In
The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics No.
93.

Qin Gao, Francisco Guzman, and Stephan Vogel.
2010. EMDC: A Semi-supervised Approach for Word
Alignment. In Proc. of the 23rd International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics, Beijing, China.

Saša Hasan, Juri Ganitkevitch, Hermann Ney, and Jesús
Andrés-Ferrer. 2008. Triplet Lexicon Models for Sta-
tistical Machine Translation. In Proc. of Conference
on Empirical Methods in NLP, Honolulu, USA.

Teresa Herrmann, Mohammed Mediani, Jan Niehues,
and Alex Waibel. 2011. The Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology Translation Systems for the WMT 2011.
In Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(WMT 2011), Edinbugh, U.K.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical Phrase-Based Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics on Human Language Technology, pages 48–
54, Edmonton, Canada.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source
Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation. In ACL
2007, Demonstration Session, Prague, Czech Repub-
lic, June 23.

José B. Mariño, Rafael E. Banchs, Josep M. Crego, Adrià
de Gispert, Patrik Lambert, José A. R. Fonollosa, and
Marta R. Costa-jussà. 2006. N-gram-based machine
translation. Comput. Linguist., 32, December.

Evgeny Matusov, Richard Zens, David Vilar, Arne
Mauser, Maja Popović, Saša Hasan, and Hermann
Ney. 2006. The rwth machine translation system. In
TC-STAR Workshop on Speech-to-Speech Translation,
pages 31–36, Barcelona, Spain, June.

Jan Niehues and Stephan Vogel. 2008. Discriminative
Word Alignment via Alignment Matrix Modeling. In
Proc. of Third ACL Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, Columbus, USA.

Jan Niehues, Teresa Herrmann, Muntsin Kolss, and Alex
Waibel. 2009. The Universität Karlsruhe Translation
System for the EACL-WMT 2009. In Fourth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT 2009),
Athens, Greece.

Kay Rottmann and Stephan Vogel. 2007. Word Reorder-
ing in Statistical Machine Translation with a POS-
Based Distortion Model. In TMI, Skövde, Sweden.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-Speech Tag-
ging Using Decision Trees. In International Con-
ference on New Methods in Language Processing,
Manchester, UK.

Stephan Vogel. 2003. SMT Decoder Dissected: Word
Reordering. In Int. Conf. on Natural Language Pro-
cessing and Knowledge Engineering, Beijing, China.

206


