










































An Unsupervised Alignment Algorithm for Text Simplification Corpus Construction


Workshop on Monolingual Text-To-Text Generation, pages 20–26,

Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 20–26,
Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Unsupervised Alignment Algorithm for Text Simplification Corpus
Construction

Stefan Bott
TALN Research Group

Universitat Pompeu Fabra
C/Tanger 122 - Barcelona - 08018

Spain
stefan.bott@upf.edu

Horacio Saggion
TALN Research Group

Universitat Pompeu Fabra
C/Tanger 122 - Barcelona - 08018

Spain
horacio.saggion@upf.edu

Abstract

We present a method for the sentence-level
alignment of short simplified text to the orig-
inal text from which they were adapted. Our
goal is to align a medium-sized corpus of par-
allel text, consisting of short news texts in
Spanish with their simplified counterpart. No
training data is available for this task, so we
have to rely on unsupervised learning. In con-
trast to bilingual sentence alignment, in this
task we can exploit the fact that the probability
of sentence correspondence can be estimated
from lexical similarity between sentences. We
show that the algoithm employed performs
better than a baseline which approaches the
problem with a TF*IDF sentence similarity
metric. The alignment algorithm is being used
for the creation of a corpus for the study of
text simplification in the Spanish language.

1 Introduction

Text simplification is the process of transforming a
text into an equivalent which is more understand-
able for a target user. This simplification is bene-
ficial for many groups of readers, such as language
learners, elderly persons and people with other spe-
cial reading and comprehension necessities. Simpli-
fied texts are characterized by a simple and direct
style and a smaller vocabulary which substitutes in-
frequent and otherwise difficult words (such as long
composite nouns, technical terms, neologisms and
abstract concepts) by simpler corresponding expres-
sions. Usually unnecessary details are omitted. An-
other characteristic trait of simplified texts is that
usually only one main idea is expressed by a single

sentence. This also means that in the simplification
process complex sentences are often split into sev-
eral smaller sentences.

The availability of a sentence-aligned corpus
of original texts and their simplifications is of
paramount importance for the study of simplifica-
tion and for developing an automatic text simplifi-
cation system. The different strategies that human
editors employ to simplify texts are varied and have
the effect that individual parts of the resulting text
may either become shorter or longer than the orig-
inal text. An editor may, for example, delete de-
tailed information, making the text shorter. Or she
may split complex sentences into various smaller
sentences. As a result, simplified texts tend to be-
come shorter than the source, but often the number
of sentences increases. Not all of the information
presented in the original needs to be preserved but in
general all of the information in the simplified text
stems from the source text.

The need to align parallel texts arises from a larger
need to create a medium size corpus which will al-
low the study of the editing process of simplifying
text, as well as to serve as a gold standard to evalu-
ate a text simplification system.

Sentence alignment for simplified texts is related
to, but different from, the alignment of bilingual text
and also from the alignment of summaries to an orig-
inal text. Since the alignment of simplified sentences
is a case of monolingual alignment the lexical sim-
ilarity between two corresponding sentences can be
taken as an indicator of correspondence.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2
briefly introduces text simplification which contex-

20



tualises this piece of research and Section 3 dis-
cusses some related work. In Section 4 we briefly
describe the texts we are working with and in Sec-
tion 5 we present the alignment algorithm. Section 6
presents the details of the experiment and its results.
Finally, section 7 gives a concluding discussion and
an outlook on future work.

2 Text Simplification

The simplification of written documents by humans
has the objective of making texts more accessible to
people with a linguistic handicap, however manual
simplification of written documents is very expen-
sive. If one considers people who cannot read doc-
uments with heavy information load or documents
from authorities or governmental sources the percent
of need for simplification is estimated at around 25%
of the population, it is therefore of great importance
to develop methods and tools to tackle this problem.
Automatic text simplification, the task of transform-
ing a given text into an ”equivalent” which is less
complex in vocabulary and form, aims at reducing
the efforts and costs associated with human simpli-
fication. In addition to transforming texts into their
simplification for human consumption, text simpli-
fication has other advantages since simpler texts can
be processed more efficiently by different natural
language processing processors such as parsers and
used in applications such as machine translation, in-
formation extraction, question answering, and text
summarization.

Early attempts to text simplification were based
on rule-based methods where rules were designed
following linguistic intuitions (Chandrasekar et al.,
1996). Steps in the process included linguistic text
analysis (including parsing) and pattern matching
and transformation steps. Other computational mod-
els of text simplification included processes of anal-
ysis, transformation, and phrase re-generation (Sid-
dharthan, 2002) also using rule-based techniques.
In the PSET project (Carroll et al., 1998) the pro-
posal is for a news simplification system for aphasic
readers and particular attention is paid to linguistic
phenomena such as passive constructions and coref-
erence which are difficult to deal with by people
with disabilities. The PorSimples project (Aluı́sio et
al., 2008) has looked into simplification of the Por-

tuguese language. The methodology consisted in the
creation of a corpus of simplification at two different
levels and on the use of the corpus to train a deci-
sion procedure for simplification based on linguistic
features. Simplification decisions about whether to
simplify a text or sentence have been studied fol-
lowing rule-based paradigms (Chandrasekar et al.,
1996) or trainable systems (Petersen and Ostendorf,
2007) where a corpus of texts and their simplifica-
tions becomes necessary. Some resources are avail-
able for the English language such as parallel cor-
pora created or studied in various projects (Barzilay
and Elhadad, 2003; Feng et al., 2009; Petersen and
Ostendorf, 2007; Quirk et al., 2004); however there
is no parallel Spanish corpus available for research
into text simplification. The algorithms to be pre-
sented here will be used to create such resource.

3 Related Work

The problem of sentence alignment was first tack-
led in the context of statistical machine translation.
Gale and Church (1993) proposed a dynamic pro-
gramming algorithm for the sentence-level align-
ment of translations that exploited two facts: the
length of translated sentences roughly corresponds
to the length of the original sentences and the se-
quence of sentences in translated text largely corre-
sponds to the original order of sentences. With this
simple approach they reached a high degree of accu-
racy.

Within the field of monolingual sentence align-
ment a large part of the work has concentrated on the
alignment between text summaries and the source
texts they summarize. Jing (2002) present an al-
gorithm which aligns strings of words to pieces of
text in an original document using a Hidden Markov
Model. This approach is very specific to summary
texts, concretely such summaries which have been
produced by a “cut and paste” process. A work
which is more closely related to our task is pre-
sented in Barzilay and Elhadad (2003). They carried
out an experiment on two different versions of the
Encyclopedia Britannica (the regular version and
the Britannica Elementary) and aligned sentences
in a four-step procedure: They clustered paragraphs
into ’topic’ groups, then they trained a binary clas-
sifier (aligned or not aligned) for paragraph pairs

21



on a handcrafted set of sentence alignments. Af-
ter that they grouped all paragraphs of unseen text
pairs into the same topic clusters as in the first step
and aligned the texts on the paragraph level, al-
lowing for multiple matches. Finally they aligned
the sentences within the already aligned paragraphs.
Their similarity measure, both for paragraphs and
sentences, was based on cosine distance of word
overlap. Nelken and Shieber (2006) improve over
Barzilay and Elhadad’s work: They use the same
data set, but they base their similarity measure for
aligning sentences on a TF*IDF score. Although
this score can be obtained without any training, they
apply logistic regression on these scores and train
two parameters of this regression model on the train-
ing data. Both of these approaches can be tuned by
parameter settings, which results in a trade-off be-
tween precision and recall. Barzilay and Elhadad
report a precision of 76.9% when the recall reaches
55.8%. Nelken and Shieber raise this value to 83.1%
with the same recall level and show that TF*IDF is
a much better sentence similarity measure. Zhu et
al. (2010) even report a precision of 91.3% (at the
same fixed recall value of 55.8%) for the alignment
of simple English Wikipedia articles to the English
Wikipedia counterparts using Nelken and Shieber’s
TF*IDF score, but their alignment was part of a
larger problem setting and they do not discuss fur-
ther details.

We consider that our task is not directly compara-
ble to this previous work: the texts we are working
with are direct simplifications of the source texts. So
we can assume that all information in the simplified
text must stem from the original text. In addition we
can make the simplifying assumption that there are
one-to-many, but no many-to-one relations between
source sentences and simplified sentences, a simpli-
fication which largely holds for our corpus. This
means that all target sentences must find at least one
alignment to a source sentence, but not vice versa.
Nelken and Shieber make the interesting observa-
tion that dynamic programming, as used by Gale
and Church (1991) fails to work in the monolingual
case. Their test data consisted of pairs of encyclo-
pedia articles which presented a large intersection
of factual information, but which was not necessar-
ily presented in the same order. The corpus we are
working with, however, largely preserves the order

in which information is presented.

4 Dataset

We are working with a corpus of 200 news arti-
cles in Spanish covering the following topics: Na-
tional News, Society, International News and Cul-
ture. Each of the texts is being adapted by the DILES
Research Group from Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid (Anula, 2007). Original and adapted ex-
amples of texts in Spanish can be seen in Figure 1
(the texts are adaptations carried out by DILES for
Revista “La Plaza”). The texts are being processed
using part-of-speech tagging, named entity recogni-
tion, and parsing in order to create an automatically
annotated corpus. The bi-texts are first aligned us-
ing the tools to be described in this paper and then
post-edited with the help of a bi-text editor provided
in the GATE framework (Cunningham et al., 2002).
Figure 2 shows the texts in the alignment editor.
This tool is however insufficient for our purposes
since it does not provide mechanisms for uploading
the alignments produced outside the GATE frame-
work and for producing stand-alone versions of the
bi-texts; we have therefore extended the functionali-
ties of the tool for the purpose of corpus creation.

5 Algorithm

Our algorithm is based on two intuitions about sim-
plified texts (as found in our corpus): As repeatedly
observed sentences in simplified texts use similar
words to those in the original sentences that they
stem from (even if some of the words may have
undergone lexical simplification). The second ob-
servation is very specific to our data: the order in
which information is presented in simplified texts
roughly corresponds to the order of the information
in the source text. So sentences which are close to
each other in simplified texts correspond to original
sentences which are also close to each other in the
source text. In many cases, two adjacent simplified
sentences even correspond to one single sentence in
the source text. This leads us to apply a simple Hid-
den Markov Model which allows for a sequential
classification.

Firstly, we define an alignment as a pair of sen-
tences as

〈source senti, target sentj〉,

22



Original Text Adapted Text
Un Plan Global desde tu hogar
El Programa GAP (Global Action Plan) es una iniciativa
que se desarrolla en distintos paı́ses y que pretende dis-
minuir las emisiones de CO2, principales causantes del
cambio climático y avanzar hacia hábitos más sostenibles
en aspectos como el consumo de agua y energı́a, la
movilidad o la gestión de los residuos domésticos.
San Sebastián de los Reyes se ha adherido a este Pro-
grama.
Toda la información disponible para actuar desde el
hogar en la construcción de un mundo más sostenible se
puede encontrar en ssreyes.org o programagap.es.

Un Plan Global desde tu hogar
San Sebastián de los Reyes se ha unido al Plan de Acción
Global (GAP).
El Plan es una iniciativa para luchar contra el cambio
climático desde tu casa.
Los objetivos del Plan son:
Disminuir nuestros gastos domésticos de agua y energı́a.
Reducir los efectos dañinos que producimos en el planeta
con nuestros residuos.
Mejorar la calidad de vida de nuestra ciudad.
Tienes más información en ssreyes.org y en programa-
gap.es.
Apúntate al programa GAP y descárgate los manuales
con las propuestas para conservar el planeta.

Figure 1: Original Full Document and Easy-to-Read Version

Figure 2: The Alignment Editor with Text and Adaptation

where a target sentence belongs to the simplified
text and the source sentence belongs to the original
sentence. Applying standard Bayesian decomposi-
tion, the probability of an alignment to a given target
text can be calculated as follows:

P (alignn1 |target sentm1 ) =
P (alignn1 )P (target sent

m
1 |align

n
1 )

P (target sentm1 )

Since P (target sentm1 ) is constant we can calcu-
late the most probable alignment sequence âlign as
follows:

âlign =
arg maxP (alignn1 ) P (target sent

m
1 |alignn1 ) =

arg max
∏

n
i=1P (aligni,j)P (target sentj |aligni,j)

This leaves us with two measures: a measure

of sentence similarity (the probability of alignment
proper) and a measure of consistency, under the as-
sumption that a consistent simplified text presents
the information in the same order as it is presented
in the source text. In order to determine âlign, we
apply the Viterbi algorithm (Viterbi, 1967).

Sentence similarity can be calculated as follows:

P (wordl1|target sentj) =∏
l
k=1

P (target sentj |wordk)P (target sentj)
P (wordk)

where wordl1 is the sequence of words in the
source sentence i and l is the length of sentence i.

This similarity measure is different from both
word overlap cosine distance and TF*IDF. It is,
however, similar to TF*IDF in that it penalizes

23



words which are frequent in the source text and
boosts the score for less frequent words. In addi-
tion we eliminated a short list of stopwords from the
calculation, but this has no significant effect on the
general performance.

Note that P (wordk) may correspond to a MLE
of 0 since simplified texts often use different (and
simpler) words and add connectors, conjunctions
and the like. For this reason we have to recalcu-
late P (wordk) according to a distortion probability
α. Distortion is taken here as the process of word
insertion or lexical changes. α is a small constant,
which could be determined empirically, but since no
training data is available we estimated α for our ex-
periment and set it by hand to a value of 0.0075.
Even if we had to estimate α we found that the per-
formance of the system is robust regarding its value:
even for unrealistic values like 0.0001 and 0.1 the
performance only drops by two percent points.

P (wordk|distortion) =
(1 − α)P (wordk) + α(1 − P (wordk))

For the consistency measure we made the
Markov assumption that each alignment aligni,j
only depends on the proceeding alignment
aligni−1,j′ . We assume that this is the proba-
bility of a distance d between the corresponding
sentences of source senti−1 and source senti, i.e.
P (source senti|aligni−1,j−k) for each possible
jump distance k. Since long jumps are relatively
rare, we used a normalized even probability dis-
tribution for all jump lengths greater than 2 and
smaller than -1.

Since we have no training data, we have to ini-
tially set these probabilities by hand. We do this
by assuming that all jump distances k in the range
between -1 and 2 are distributed evenly and larger
jump distances have an accumulated probability
mass corresponding to one of the local jump dis-
tances. Although this model for sentence transitions
is apparently oversimplistic and gives a very bad es-
timate for each P (source senti|aligni−1,j−k), the
probabilities for P (alignn1 ) give a counterweight to
these bad estimates. What we can expect is, that af-
ter running the aligner once, using very unreliable
transitions probability estimates, the output of the
aligner is a set of alignments with an implicit align-
ment sequence. Taking this alignment sequence, we

can calculate new maximum likelihood estimates for
each jump distance P (source senti|aligni−1,j−k)
again, and we can expect that these new estimates
are much better than the original ones.

For this reason we apply the Viterbi classifier it-
eratively: The first iteration employs the hand set
values. Then we run the classifier and determine
the values for P (source senti|aligni−1,j−k) on its
output. Then we run the classifier again, with the
new model and so on. Interestingly values for
P (source senti|aligni−1,j−k) emerge after as little
as two iterations. After the first iteration, precision
already lies only 1.2 percent points and recall 1.3
points below the stable values. We will comment on
this finding in Section 7.

6 Experiment and Results

Our goal is to align a larger corpus of Spanish short
news texts with their simplified counterparts. At the
moment, however, we only have a small sample of
this corpus available. The size of this corpus sam-
ple is 1840 words of simplified text (145 sentences)
which correspond to 2456 (110 sentences) of source
text. We manually created a gold standard which in-
cludes all the correct alignments between simplified
and source sentences. The results of the classifier
were calculated against this gold standard.

As a baseline we used a TF*IDF score based
method which chooses for each sentence in the sim-
plified text the sentence with the minimal word vec-
tor distance. The procedure is as follows: each sen-
tence in the original and simplified document is rep-
resented in the vector space model using a term vec-
tor (Saggion, 2008). Each term (e.g. token) is wei-
thed using as TF the frequency of the term in the
document and IDF = log(N + 1/Mt + 1) where Mt
is the number of sentences 1 containing t and N is
the number of sentences in the corpus (counts are
obtained from the set of documents to align). As
similarity metric between vectors we use the cosine
of the angle between the two vectors given in the
following formula:

1The relevant unit for the calculation of IDF (the D in IDF)
here is the sentence, not the document as in information re-
trieval.

24



cosine(s1, s2) =
∑n

i=1 wi,s1 ∗ wi,s2√∑n
i=1(wi,s1)2 ∗

√∑n
i=1(wi,s2)2

Here s1 and s2 are the sentence vectors and wi,sk
is the weight of term i in sentence sk. We align all
simplified sentences (i.e. for the time being no cut-
off has been used to identify new material in the sim-
plified text).

For the calculation of the first baseline we calcu-
late IDF over the sentences in whole corpus. Nelken
and Shieber (2006) argue that that the relevant unit
for this calculation should be each document for the
following reason: Some words are much more fre-
quent in some texts than they are in others. For ex-
ample the word unicorn is relatively infrequent in
English and it it may also be infrequent in a given
colletion of texts. So this word is highly discrimina-
tive and it’s IDF will be relatively high. In a specific
text about imagenary creatures, however, the same
word unicorn may be much more frequent and hence
it’s discrimiative power is much lower. For this rea-
son we calcuated a second baseline, where we cal-
culate the IDF only on the sentences of the relevanct
texts.

Results of aligning all sentences in our sample
corpus using both the baseline and the HMM algo-
rithms are given in Table 6.

precision recall
HMM aligner 82.4% 80.9%
alignment only 81.13% 79.63%
TF*IDF + transitions 76.1% 73.5%
TF*IDF (document) 75.47% 74.07%
TF*IDF (full corpus) 62.2% 61.1%

If we compare these results to those presented by
Nelken and Shieber (2006), we can observe that we
obtain a comparable precision, but the recall im-
proves dramatically from 55.8% (with their specific
feature setting) to 82.4%. Our TF*IDF baselines
are not directly comparable comparable to Nelken
and Shieber’s results. The reason why we can-
not compare our results directly is that Nelken and
Shieber use supervised learning in order to optimize
the transformation of TF*IDF scores into probabili-
ties and we had no training data available.

We included the additional scores for our system,
when no transition probabilities are included in the

calculation of the optimal alignment sequence and
the score comes only from the probabilies of our
clalculation of lexical similarity between sentences
(alignment only). These scores show that a large part
of the good performance comes from lexical similar-
ity and sequencial classification only give an addi-
tional final boost, a fact which was already observed
by Nelken and Shieber. We also attribute the fact
that the system alrives at stable values after two it-
erations to the same efect: lexical similarity seems
to have a much bigger effect on the general perfor-
mance. Still our probability-based similarity meas-
sure clearly outperforms the TF*IDF baselines.

7 Discussion and Outlook

We have argued above that our task is not directly
comparable to Nelken and Shieber’s alignment of
two versions of Encyclopedia articles. First of all,
the texts we are working with are simplified texts in
a much stricter sense: they are the result of an edit-
ing process which turns a source text into a simpli-
fied version. This allows us to use sequential classi-
fication which is usually not successful for mono-
lingual sentence alignment. This helps especially
in the case of simplified sentences which have been
largely re-written with simpler vocabulary. These
cases would normally be hard to align correctly. Al-
though it could be argued that the characteristics of
such genuinely simplified text makes the alignment
task somewhat easier, we would like to stress that
the alignment method we present makes no use of
any kind of training data, in contrast to Barzilay and
Elhadad (2003) and, to a minor extent, Nelken and
Shieber (2006).

Although we started out from a very specific need
to align a corpus with reliably simplified news arti-
cles, we are confident that our approach can be ap-
plied in other circumstances. For future work we
are planning to apply this algorithm in combina-
tion of a version of Barzilay and Elhadad’s macro-
alignment and use sequential classification only for
the alignment of sentences within already aligned
paragraphs. This would make our work directly
comparable. We are also planning to test our algo-
rithm, especially the sentence similarity measure it
uses, on data which is similar the data Barzilay and
Elhadad (and also Nelken and Shieber) used in their

25



experiment.
Finally, the alignment tool will be used to

sentence-align a medium-sized parallel Spanish cor-
pus of news and their adaptations that will be a much
needed resource for the study of text simplification
and other natural language processing applications.
Since the size of the corpus we have available at
the moment is relatively modest, we are also investi-
gating alternative resources which could allow us to
create a larger parallel corpus.

Acknowledgments

We thank three anonymous reviewers for their com-
ments and suggestions which help improve the fi-
nal version of this paper. The research described
in this paper arises from a Spanish research project
called Simplext: An automatic system for text sim-
plification (http://www.simplext.es). Sim-
plext is led by Technosite and partially funded by
the Ministry of Industry, Tourism and Trade of the
Government of Spain, by means of the National
Plan of Scientific Research, Development and Tech-
nological Innovation (I+D+i), within strategic Ac-
tion of Telecommunications and Information Soci-
ety (Avanza Competitiveness, with file number TSI-
020302-2010-84). We thanks the Department of In-
formation and Communication Technologies at UPF
for their support. We are grateful to Programa
Ramón y Cajal from Ministerio de Ciencia e Inno-
vación, Spain.

References
Sandra M. Aluı́sio, Lucia Specia, Thiago Alexan-

dre Salgueiro Pardo, Erick Galani Maziero, and Re-
nata Pontin de Mattos Fortes. 2008. Towards brazil-
ian portuguese automatic text simplification systems.
In ACM Symposium on Document Engineering, pages
240–248.

A. Anula. 2007. Tipos de textos, complejidad lingüı́stica
y facilicitación lectora. In Actas del Sexto Congreso
de Hispanistas de Asia, pages 45–61.

Regina Barzilay and Noemi Elhadad. 2003. Sentence
alignment for monolingual comparable corpora. In
In Proceedings of the 2003 conference on Empirical
methods in natural language processing, pages 25–32.

John Carroll, Guido Minnen, Yvonne Canning, Siobhan
Devlin, and John Tait. 1998. Practical simplification
of english newspaper text to assist aphasic readers. In

In Proc. of AAAI-98 Workshop on Integrating Artificial
Intelligence and Assistive Technology, pages 7–10.

Raman Chandrasekar, Christine Doran, and Bangalore
Srinivas. 1996. Motivations and methods for text sim-
plification. In COLING, pages 1041–1044.

H. Cunningham, D. Maynard, K. Bontcheva, and
V. Tablan. 2002. GATE: A framework and graphi-
cal development environment for robust NLP tools and
applications. In Proceedings of the 40th Anniversary
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Lijun Feng, Noemie Elhadad, and Matt Huenerfauth.
2009. Cognitively motivated features for readability
assessment. In EACL, pages 229–237.

William A. Gale and Kenneth W. Church. 1993. A
program for aligning sentences in bilingual corpora.
Computational Linguistics.

Hongyan Jing. 2002. Using hidden markov modeling to
decompose human-written summaries. Comput. Lin-
guist., 28:527–543, December.

Rani Nelken and Stuart M. Shieber. 2006. Towards ro-
bust context-sensitive sentence alignment for monolin-
gual corpora. In In 11th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Sarah E. Petersen and Mari Ostendorf. 2007. Text sim-
plification for language learners: a corpus analysis. In
In Proc. of Workshop on Speech and Language Tech-
nology for Education.

Chris Quirk, Chris Brockett, and William Dolan. 2004.
Monolingual machine translation for paraphrase gen-
eration. In In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 142–149.

H. Saggion. 2008. SUMMA: A Robust and Adapt-
able Summarization Tool. Traitement Automatique
des Langues, 49(2):103–125.

Advaith Siddharthan. 2002. An architecture for a text
simplification system. In In LEC 02: Proceedings of
the Language Engineering Conference (LEC02, pages
64–71.

A. Viterbi. 1967. Error bounds for convolutional codes
and an asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 13:260–
269.

Zhemin Zhu, Delphine Bernhard, and Iryna Gurevych.
2010. A monolingual tree-based translation model for
sentence simplification. In Proceedings of The 23rd
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 1353–1361, Beijing, China, Aug.

26


