










































Analyzing the Dynamic Evolution of Hashtags on Twitter: a Language-Based Approach


Proceedings of the Workshop on Language in Social Media (LSM 2011), pages 58–65,
Portland, Oregon, 23 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Analyzing the Dynamic Evolution of Hashtags on Twitter:  
a Language-Based Approach 

 
Evandro Cunha1 Gabriel Magno1 Giovanni Comarela1 

Virgilio Almeida1 Marcos André Gonçalves1 Fabrício Benevenuto2 
1Computer Science Department, Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Brazil 

2Computer Science Department, Federal University of Ouro Preto (UFOP), Brazil 
{evandrocunha, magno, giovannicomarela,  
virgilio, mgoncalv, fabricio}@dcc.ufmg.br 

 
 

Abstract 

Hashtags are used in Twitter to classify 
messages, propagate ideas and also to promote 
specific topics and people. In this paper, we 
present a linguistic-inspired study of how these 
tags are created, used and disseminated by the 
members of information networks. We study 
the propagation of hashtags in Twitter grounded 
on models for the analysis of the spread of 
linguistic innovations in speech communities, 
that is, in groups of people whose members 
linguistically influence each other. Differently 
from traditional linguistic studies, though, we 
consider the evolution of terms in a live and 
rapidly evolving stream of content, which can 
be analyzed in its entirety. In our experimental 
results, using a large collection crawled from 
Twitter, we were able to identify some 
interesting aspects – similar to those found in 
studies of (offline) speech – that led us to 
believe that hashtags may effectively serve as 
models for characterizing the propagation of 
linguistic forms, including: (1) the existence of 
a “preferential attachment process”, that makes 
the few most common terms ever more popular, 
and (2) the relationship between the length of a 
tag and its frequency of use. The understanding 
of formation patterns of successful hashtags in 
Twitter can be useful to increase the 
effectiveness of real-time streaming search 
algorithms. 

1 Introduction 

The use of hashtags is a way to categorize 
messages posted on Twitter, an important social 
networking and microblogging service with 175 
million registered users (Twitter, 2010), according 

to the topic of the message. They can be used not 
only to add context and metadata to the posts, but 
also for promotion and publicity. By simply adding 
a hash symbol (#) before a string of letters, 
numerical digits or underscore signs (_), it is 
possible to tag a message, helping other users to 
find tweets that have a common topic. Hashtags 
allow users to create communities of people 
interested in the same topic by making it easier for 
them to find and share information related to it 
(Kricfalusi, 2009). Figure 1 shows an example of 
query for the tag “#basketball”, which returns the 
newest tweets with this hashtag. 
 

 
Figure 1. Example of query for a hashtag on Twitter. 
Hashtags are not case-sensitive, thus “#basketball” also 
returns “#Basketball”, for example. Tweets with the 
term “basketball” (without the hash symbol) do not 
appear in a search for hashtags. 

58



As hashtags are created by the users 
themselves, a new social event can lead to the 
simultaneous emergence of several different tags, 
each one generated by a different user. They can 
either be accepted by other members of the 
network or not. In this manner, some propagate 
and thrive, while others die immediately after birth 
and are restricted to a few messages. 

Similarly, lexical innovations occur when new 
terms are added to the lexicon of a language, either 
through the creation of new words, the reuse of 
existing words or the loan from other languages, 
for example. An innovation tends to come from 
one speaker, who proposes it to other members of 
his speech community – i.e., to whom he is 
connected in a network of linguistic contacts and 
influences. Afterwards, these speakers make a 
cultural selection of the innovation, accepting it or 
rejecting it. 

In the context of the network theory, Figure 2 
indicates two moments of a novelty’s propagation 
process: the precise time of the innovation (left) 
and a later point (right), when some individuals 
have accepted the innovation, while others, 
although possibly knowing it, didn’t. An 
innovative linguistic form can get, for some 
reason, some prestige, and maybe speakers begin 
to use it, taking it under certain circumstances and 
transforming it into a variation of the previously 
hegemonic form. 
 

 
Figure 2. Subgraphs from our Twitter dataset showing 
two distinct moments in the process of spreading an 
innovation. The black nodes indicate individuals who 
joined the innovation (in this case, the hashtag 
#musicmonday) at a given moment; the white ones 
indicate individuals who didn’t. The links represent 
follower relationship. 
 

The diffusion of innovations, be they linguistic, 
behavioral, technological, etc., occurs through a 
cascade in which the network members, 
consciously or not, make choices, taking into 

account a number of factors that determine which 
forms, behaviors or technologies are more 
advantageous to be adopted in a given moment 
(Easley and Kleinberg, 2010). 

An important question in the field of linguistics 
is: how can an initially rare variant spread to an 
entire linguistic network, or speech community 
(Sapir, 1921)? How does the linguistic change take 
out (Silva, 2006)? This change, consisting in the 
dissemination of less common variants to much of 
the network or even across the entire network, can 
be seen as an unexpected fact. However, it occurs. 
Thus, to better understand the phenomenon of 
language change, it seems essential to understand 
the propagation behavior of innovative forms. 
Understanding how these forms spread – how and 
where they are born, who are the major 
disseminators, which network features allow 
greater dissemination – is the main objective of our 
research group. 

In this work, we examine aspects of the 
dissemination of hashtags in Twitter, aiming at 
understanding the process of propagation of 
innovative hashtags in light of linguistic theories. 
The utilization of an online social network’s 
dataset allows the review of a linguistic system in 
its entirety, thereby eliminating the need to work 
with sampling. It also allows the verification of 
temporal propagation, enabling a more precise 
understanding of the path followed by innovations 
in the network. 

Here, we seek to answer mostly two questions: 
(1) does the distribution of the hashtags in 
frequency rankings follow some pattern, as the 
words in the lexicon of a language? (2) Is the 
length of a hashtag a factor that influences to its 
success or failure? Our assumption is that 
identifying linguistic features related to the 
creation and usage of hashtags in Twitter may raise 
awareness about individuals’ tagging behavior 
over networks, which is an interesting topic in the 
field of Network Sciences, Sociology and Social 
Psychology. Beyond that, this kind of analysis 
should be interesting to optimize tag 
recommendation systems not only on Twitter, but 
on many other online environments, and to 
increase the effectiveness of real-time streaming 
search algorithms. 

In the next section, we will discuss related 
works in Linguistics and in Computer Science. We 
try to always keep contact with linguistic theories, 

59



as we believe that complex issues, involving many 
aspects together, can be better analyzed through a 
multidisciplinary approach. The following sections 
cover discussions and the empirical research that 
was conducted during this study. 

2 Related work 

Much has been written about linguistic 
innovations, language variation and language 
change since Weinreich et al. (1968), which is 
considered one of the ground works for 
sociolinguistics. More recently, Troutman et al. 
(2008) conducted a study with the purpose of 
simulating language change in a speech 
community. They built a computational model 
based on characteristics from language users and 
from social network structures and tested it in 
different scenarios,  obtaining a probabilistic 
model that captures many of the key features of 
language change. Our work extends the traditional 
way of conducting research on sociolinguistics as 
we used a corpus of non-natural language data and 
even so we found compatible results to the ones 
obtained from natural language data.  

Kwak et al. (2010) were the first to study in a 
quantitative way the topological characteristics of 
Twitter, information diffusion on it and its power 
as a new medium of information sharing. Their 
analyses are in some way related to the ones we 
perform here. Chew and Eysenbach (2010) led a 
study that investigated the keywords “swine flu” 
and “H1N1” on Twitter during the 2009 H1N1 
pandemic. The goals of this work were to monitor 
the use of these terms over time, to conduct a 
content analysis of tweets and to validate Twitter 
as a trend-tracking tool. They found the existence 
of variability in the use of the terms, which is a 
constitutive aspect of human language. Our 
findings complement, with more focus on the 
linguistic approach, what they have discovered, 
revealing new aspects that can link the creation of 
hashtags to linguistic innovations. 

Romero et al. (2011) studied the mechanics of 
information diffusion on Twitter. They analyzed 
the phenomenon of the spread of hashtags, but 
focusing on the variations of the diffusion features 
across different topics. Their work introduces the 
measures “stickiness” – the probability of adoption 
of one hashtag based on the number of exposures – 
and “persistence” – which captures how rapidly the 

influence curve decays. We analyze hashtags as 
well, but in a different perspective, concentrating 
on the characteristics that they may have in 
common with natural language. 

3 Dataset and methodology 

In our study, we use a dataset consisting of about 2 
billion follow links among almost 55 million users. 
Twitter allowed the collection of data for each 
existing user, including their social connections, 
and all the tweets they ever posted. Out of all 
users, about 8% of the profiles were set private by 
the users themselves, and only authorized 
followers could view their tweets. We ignore these 
users in our analysis. In total, we analyzed more 
than 1.7 billion tweets posted between July 2006 
and August 2009. For a comprehensive description 
of the data collected we refer the reader to Cha et 
al. (2010). 

As, in some of our analysis, we intend to 
compare features of the variation of hashtags to 
linguistic variation, we must find interchangeable 
hashtags, i.e., different tags used with the same 
purpose, to characterize messages on the same 
topic. This corresponds to the basic feature of 
variant linguistic forms, which are used by 
different speakers, or at different moments, to 
name the same object, action etc. Aiming to find 
interchangeable hashtags, we collected tweets on 
specific topics. In this way, we could verify the 
existence of different hashtags used to categorize 
messages that could be grouped into one category. 
For example, hashtags like #michaeljackson #mj, 
#jackson, among many others, refer to the same 
subject and in a managed environment they would 
probably be condensed under only one tag. 

We selected three relevant topics of this period, 
namely: Michael Jackson (the singer’s death has 
been widely reported in the social networks), 
Swine Flu (the epidemic of H1N1 was a major 
issue of 2009), and Music Monday (this topic is 
related to a very successful campaign in favor of 
posting tweets related to music on Mondays). 
Then, we built one minor base for each one of the 
topics: MJ (referring to Michael Jackson), SF 
(referring to Swine Flu) and MM (referring to 
Music Monday). These bases were formed by 
filtering tweets that: (1) included at least one 
hashtag and (2) included at least one of the 
following terms that we considered related to the 

60



topics: “michael jackson” (for the base MJ), 
“swine flu” or “#swineflu” (for the base SF), and 
“#musicmonday” (for the base MM). 
Consequently, in the base MJ, for example, we 
gathered all the tweets that included the term 
“michael jackson” and that had at least one 
hashtag, even if this tag had no direct relationship 
with the topic. 

Table 1 presents data from each base: number 
of tweets posted, number of users who posted 
tweets, number of follow links among users of the 
base and number of different hashtags used in the 
tweets of the base.  
 

Table 1. Summary information about the bases built. 

4 Comparing Twitter to a natural 
linguistic system 

The directionality of both networks we are 
studying, i.e. Twitter and speech communities, in 
addition to the resemblance between the creation 
of hashtags and linguistic innovations, is an 
important similarity between these systems. It led 
to the hypothesis that these structures would have 
more issues in common. 

In this section, we discuss these qualitative 
similarities, in order to justify the following 
quantitative comparisons.  

4.1 Hashtags and linguistic innovations 

A linguistic innovation can be described as any 
change in any existing language system (Breivik 
and Jahr, 1989). In linguistics, to say that there was 
an innovation means that there was a modification, 
a transformation, in any part of the language – 
phonetics, phonology, syntax, semantics etc. This 
novelty is neither degeneration, nor an 
improvement: language changes and evolves, as a 
living being, in order to adapt itself to the society 
in which it is inserted. 

We use linguistic knowledge to analyze and 
explain phenomena related to the creation, usage 
and dissemination of hashtags. We see similarities 
between these two systems: like linguistic 
innovations, new hashtags are created by 

individuals when they feel the need to categorize 
their messages with a term not yet used for this 
purpose. This reflects the speaker’s need to create 
a term, for example, to name an object or an action 
that he/she was not acquainted with in the offline 
world. 

Just like hashtags can fail and be used only 
once, a linguistic innovation may not exceed the 
boundaries of its creator’s language. An innovation 
can be used in a specific situation and fall into 
oblivion, like many linguistic forms which are lost 
without even being recorded. 

4.2 Directionality of the graphs 

Twitter’s network can be described as a directed 
graph. On this social network, relations between 
users are not necessarily symmetrical, which 
means that it is possible for someone to follow 
another person without being followed by him/her. 
This is very clear when we talk about celebrities 
who have millions of followers, but at the same 
time follow only a few users. 

This characteristic corresponds to the general 
absence of directionality of offline social networks. 
Not only on Twitter the edges can go one-way: in 
the “real world”, we are somehow connected to 
celebrities, athletes and famous politicians, and we 
hear what they say. We are all part of the same 
speech community, in the sense that a celebrity is 
able to influence the way we use language. 
However, they certainly do not even know who we 
are: it is like on Twitter’s graph, where we follow 
them, but they do not follow us. 

5 Rich-get-richer phenomenon and Zipf’s 
law 

Easley and Kleinberg (2010) characterize what is 
known as “rich-get-richer phenomenon” or 
“preferential attachment process”: in some 
systems, the popularity of the most common items 
tends to increase faster than the popularity of the 
less common ones. It generates a further spread of 
the forms that achieve a certain prestige. 

Zipf (1949) examined and confirmed that the 
frequency of words in English and in other 
languages follow a power law. Aiming to verify if 
any kind of pattern is followed in the tags 
distribution, we analyzed our data from Twitter. 

Tables 2 and 3 display information on the 
distribution of hashtags in each of the bases 

Base Tweets Users Follow links 
Different 
hashtags 

MJ 221,128 91,176 3,171,118 19,679 
SF 295,333 83,211 5,806,407 17,196 

MM 835,883 196,411 7,136,213 16,005 

61



studied. By “i-tweet hashtags”, we mean the 
hashtags that appear in at most i tweets. They are 
the less common ones. By “j-tweet hashtags”, we 
mean the hashtags that appear in at least j tweets, 
that is, the most popular ones. 
 

Table 2. Distribution of less common hashtags of each 
base. 

Table 3. Distribution of most popular hashtags of each 
base. 
 

The percentage of hashtags according to the 
number of tweets in which they appear are 
remarkably very similar in the three bases. It seems 
to confirm the possible existence of a “rich-get-
richer” pattern: few hashtags – the most popular 
ones – are used in most of the tweets, while the 
vast majority of them are used in only a few posts. 
Table 2 shows that around 60% of hashtags are 
used only once in tweets of the respective base, i.e. 
do not propagate to the rest of the network; around 
90% of them are not used more than ten times, 
which shows that the great part of the hashtags get 
restricted to only one user or to a very small 
community of users. 

On the other hand, just like Zipf (1949) showed 
for natural languages, the most used hashtags get 
very high frequencies of use. Table 4 shows data 
from the three most used hashtags in each of the 
bases and makes clear that, also on Twitter, a 
person´s behavior depends on the choices made by 
other people (Easley and Kleinberg, 2010). 

Complementing these data, Figure 3 associates 
the position of a hashtag in a popularity ranking 
(based on the number of times that a hashtag has 
been used) to the volume of tweets in which it 
appears. A plot in log-log coordinates, where x is a 
rank of a tag in the frequency table and y is the 
total number of the tag’s occurrences in tweets, 
shows that the distribution of hashtags on Twitter 
also follow the general trend of a Zipfian 

distribuction, appearing approximately linear on 
log-log plot. 

Table 4. Data from the most used hashtags of each base. 
Below each hashtag are given the number of times it 
was used and the percentage that it represents of the 
total use of hashtags in the base. 

 

 
Figure 3. A log-log plot showing volume of tweets in 
which the hashtag was used vs. its position in a 
popularity ranking.  

 
Only three values on the left, which refer to 

tags that occupy the top positions in the frequency 
ranking (and thus were used more often), are not 
well described by the interpolations: the most 
frequent tag on MM base and the two most 
frequent ones on SF base. This is due to the very 
high usage of these hashtags: #musicmonday 
appeared in almost 830,000 tweets of its base; 
#swineflu, in more than 230,000; and #h1n1, in 
more than 70,000. The other values, however, 
show that this is a very good fitting model for our 
purposes. 

It is interesting to notice the similarity of results 
despite being completely different topics. Even the 

% of i-tweet hashtags inside the base Base 
i=1 i=2 i=10 

MJ 59% 72% 88% 
SF 59% 73% 92% 

MM 60% 74% 91% 

number of j-tweet hashtags inside the base Base 
j=10,000 j=5,000 j=1,000 

MJ 3 6 28 
SF 3 4 14 

MM 2 3 28 

Base Most used 2nd most used 3rd most used 

MJ 
#michaeljackson 

35,861 
12.3% 

#michael 
27,298 
9.3% 

#mj 
16,758 
5.7% 

SF 
#swineflu 
230,457 
51.5% 

#h1n1 
70,693 
15.8% 

#swine 
12,444 
2.8% 

MM 
#musicmonday 

824,778 
79.7% 

#musicmondays 
11,770 
1.1% 

#music 
5,106 
0.5% 

62



slopes of the interpolation curves are similar, 
varying from -1.037 to -1.163. 

6 Hashtag length and frequency 

Each word or phrase spoken by someone tells a 
story and reflects characteristics of this individual 
and his/her group. According to the Theory of 
Language Variation and Change (Weinreich et al., 
1968; Labov, 1995, 2001), lexical choice is the 
result of a series of social interactions that make up 
and form, little by little, the individual speech. 
Naturally, these interactions and influences are so 
subtle that we ourselves hardly realize them: 
gender, age, location, social role, hierarchical 
position in an organization – all this reflects the 
way we use language in various situations of 
everyday life. Understanding what makes speakers 
choose one of the forms in variation, in certain 
situations, is one of the goals of Sociolinguistics.  

In addition to these social factors that influence 
the way we express ourselves, described by Labov 
(2001), there are also many strictly linguistic 
factors which perform such influence, as Labov 
(1995) presents. One of these factors seems to be 
the length of the words, as noted by Zipf (1935) 
and analyzed by Sigurd et al. (2004). 

Zipf (1935) suggests that the length of a word 
tends to bear an inverse relationship, not 
necessarily proportionate, to its relative frequency. 
Sigurd et al. (2004) analyze data from different 
text genres in English and Swedish and corroborate 
the hypothesis, showing that longer words tend to 
be avoided, presumably because they are 
uneconomic. 

Given this evidence, and considering the 
concern of Twitter users to save space, since the 
maximum size of each tweet is 140 characters, we 
investigate whether the length of a hashtag is one 
of the strictly linguistic factors that influence on 
their success or failure. 

In order to carry out this analysis, we compared 
the length of the most popular hashtags in each of 
the bases with the less popular ones. We noticed 
that the most popular ones are simple, direct and 
short; on the other hand, among those with little 
utilization, many are formed by long strings of 
characters. Table 5 displays preliminary 
information about the length of hashtags and 
popularity and shows that hashtags formed by 15 

or more characters are not present among the most 
used tags. 

Table 6 lists the average length, in number of 
characters, of different groups of hashtags, divided 
according to their positions in the ranking of 
frequency of each base. 
 

Table 5. Confrontation of most common hashtags and 
most common 15-character hashtags. In front of each 
hashtag is given the number of times it was used in 
tweets of the base. 
 

Table 6. Average length of the most and the less popular 
hashtags. The samples with the less popular hashtags 
were formed by 50 randomly selected hashtags among 
those which appeared only in one tweet of each base. 

 
In all of the bases, the average length of the 

most popular hashtags is considerably lower to the 
average length of the less popular ones. Figure 4 
compares data from Table 6, including information 
about standard deviation. It is clear that the 
differences between the lengths of the few most 
popular tags are not relevant, as the average 
lengths of the k most popular tags, with 
k={10,20,30,40,50}, are roughly similar and do not 
follow a fixed pattern. However, the comparison 
with 1-tweet hashtags (less popular ones) shows 
important differences which led us to believe that 
the length of a hashtag may be an internal factor – 
or a strictly linguistic factor – that determines the 
success or the failure of tags on Twitter, even if 
more accurate study is needed at this point. 

Most common 
hashtags  

(number of tweets) 

Most common hashtags 
with 15 or more characters 

(number of tweets) 
#michaeljackson (35,861) 
#michael (27,298) 
#mj (16,758) 

#nothingpersonal (962) 
#iwillneverforget (912) 
#thankyoumichael (690) 

#swineflu (230,457) 
#h1n1 (70,693) 
#swine (12,444) 

#swinefluhatesyou (1,056) 
#crapnamesforpubs (145) 
#superhappyfunflu (124) 

#musicmonday (824,778) 
#musicmondays (11,770) 
#music (5,106) 

#musicmondayhttp (540) 
#fatpeoplearesexier (471) 
#crapurbanlegends (23) 

Average length of... 

...the k most popular hashtags Topic 

k=10 k=20 k=30 k=40 k=50 

...the less 
popular 
hashtags 

MJ 7.1 6.85 7.8 8.02 7.74 10.16 
SF 5.3 7.35 7.17 7.2 7.04 10.3 

MM 9.5 8.4 7.27 6.4 5.92 11.66 

63



This reflects the small number of hashtags 
composed of complete sentences (such as 
#mileycometobrazil, #herewegoagain and many 
others) occupying good positions in the popularity 
rankings. Their low standard of success can be 
attributed to some reasons besides their increased 
length, such as: (1) sentences admit high rate of 
variation (e.g. #thankyoumichael, #thanksmj, 
#michaeljacksonthanks), which reduces the 
frequency of each of the competing forms; (2) 
sentences are more difficult to memorize, as they 
may accept different word orders; and (3) in 
sentences, it seems to be more prone to 
misspellings (as in #thanktyoumichael), maybe 
because of the apparent difficulty of reading the 
terms without the ordinary spaces between them 
(we believe that it is easier to notice the 
misspelling in "thankt you michael" than in 
"thanktyoumichael", though this is an assumption 
that must be verified through more extensive work 
in Psycholinguistics and Applied Linguistics). 
 

 
Figure 4. Average number of characters of the most 
popular hashtags and of a randomly selected sample of 
50 less common tags. 
 

7 Underscores in hashtags 

We conducted an analysis to check the influence of 
the only sign allowed in the formation of hashtags 
besides letters and numbers: the underscore (_). In 
all the bases, the use of the sign _ led the hashtags 
to low popularity rankings: #michael_jackson 
reached position 248 in its base, with only 128 
tweets; #swine_flu reached position 67 in its base, 

with no more than 246 tweets; #music_monday 
wasn’t even used. Table 7 shows the use of sign _ 
in hashtags. Here, we call a “_-hashtag” any 
hashtag in which has been used the sign _. 
 

Table 7. Distribution of hashtags containing the sign 
“_”. 
 
 We can observe that almost all of the _-hashtags 
have lower positions in the popularity rankings: at 
least 97% of them are used in 10 or less tweets, 
which seems to indicate rejection to this sign. Once 
again, the distributions corresponding to each of 
the bases are similar, suggesting a uniform 
behavior across the whole network. 

8 Conclusion 

This paper examines, through a language-based 
approach, some issues concerning the formation 
and the usage of hashtags on Twitter. We proposed 
that linguistic theory could be used to formulate 
hypothesis on online systems like Twitter and our 
analysis showed not only qualitative, but also 
quantitative similarities between offline and online 
speech communities. 

We revealed interesting aspects about the 
distribution of hashtags according to their 
popularity, associating it to the distribution of 
words in frequency rankings. We also went further 
on the question suggested by Romero et al. (2011), 
who proposed to consider what distinguishes a 
hashtag that spreads widely from one that fails to 
attract attention: we could find that the tag’s 
length, for example, is one of these factors. This 
kind of analysis can be a useful tool for tag 
recommendation systems in different 
environments, but there are a number of other 
aspects which can be considered in future work 
and that can collaborate to the study of human 
tagging behavior. 

 

 

% of _-hashtags among i-tweet 
hashtags Base 

Number 
of _-

hashtags  i=2 i=10 
MJ 251 (1.2%) 89% 97% 
SF 155 (0.9%) 87% 97% 

MM 143 (0.9%) 89% 98% 

64



References 

Breivik, L.E., and Jahr, E.H. (Eds.) 1989. Language 
change: Contributions to the study of its causes. 
Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 

Cha, M., Haddadi, H., Benevenuto, F., and Gummadi, 
K.P. (2010). Measuring user influence in Twitter: 
The million follower fallacy. Int’l AAAI Conference 
on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM’10). 
Washington DC, USA. 

Chew C., and Eysenbach G. 2010. Pandemics in the age 
of Twitter: Content analysis of tweets during the 
2009 H1N1 outbreak. PLoS ONE 5(11): e14118.  
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014118 

Easley, D., and Kleinberg, J. 2010. Networks, crowds, 
and markets: Reasoning about a highly connected 
world. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Kricfalusi, E. 2009. The Twitter hash tag: What is it and 
how do you use it? Retrieved from 
http://tinyurl.com/bw85z2 

Kwak, H., Lee, C., Park, H., and Moon, S. 2010. What 
is Twitter, a social network or a news media? 
International World Wide Web Conference (WWW 
2010). Raleigh, USA. 

Labov, W. 1995. Principles of linguistic change: 
Internal factors. Reprint. Oxford/Cambridge: 
Blackwell.  

Labov, W. 2001. Principles of linguistic change: Social 
factors. Oxford/Cambridge: Blackwell. 

Romero, D., Meeder, B., and Kleinberg, J. 2011. 
Differences in the mechanics of information 
diffusion across topics: Idioms, political hashtags, 
and complex contagion on Twitter. International 
World Wide Web Conference (WWW 2011). 
Hyderabad, India. 

Sapir, E. 1921. Language: An introduction to the study 
of speech. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World. 

Sigurd, B., Eeg-Olofsson M., and Van de Weijer, J. 
2004. World length, sentence length and frequency – 
Zipf revisited. Studia Linguistica 58(1), (pp.37-52). 
Oxford/Malden: Blackwell. 

Silva, L.G. 2006. A dimensão sociolingüística do Atlas 
Lingüístico do Brasil. Anais da VIII Semana de 
Letras da Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto. Ouro 
Preto, Brazil: Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto. 

Troutman, C., Clark, B., and Goldrick, M. 2008. Social 
networks and intraspeaker variation during periods of 
language change. Proceedings of the 31st Annual 
Penn Linguistics Colloquium. (pp.325-338). 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania. 

Twitter, 2010. About Twitter: A few Twitter facts. 
Retrieved from http://twitter.com/about. 

Weinreich, U., Labov, W., and Herzog, M. 1968. 
Empirical foundations for a theory of language 
change. In Lehmann W., and Malkiel Y. (Eds.), 
Directions for historical linguistics (pp.97-195). 
Austin: University of Texas Press. 

Zipf, G.K. 1935 (reprinted 1965). The psycho-biology of 
language. Cambridge: MIT Press. 

Zipf, G.K. 1949. Human behavior and the principle of 
least effort. Cambridge: Addison-Wesley. 

65


