










































Towards a Probabilistic Model for Lexical Entailment


Proceedings of the TextInfer 2011 Workshop on Textual Entailment, EMNLP 2011, pages 10–19,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards a Probabilistic Model for Lexical Entailment

Eyal Shnarch
Computer Science Department

Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel

shey@cs.biu.ac.il

Jacob Goldberger
School of Engineering

Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel

goldbej@eng.biu.ac.il

Ido Dagan
Computer Science Department

Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel

dagan@cs.biu.ac.il

Abstract

While modeling entailment at the lexical-level
is a prominent task, addressed by most textual
entailment systems, it has been approached
mostly by heuristic methods, neglecting some
of its important aspects. We present a prob-
abilistic approach for this task which cov-
ers aspects such as differentiating various re-
sources by their reliability levels, considering
the length of the entailed sentence, the num-
ber of its covered terms and the existence of
multiple evidence for the entailment of a term.
The impact of our model components is vali-
dated by evaluations, which also show that its
performance is in line with the best published
entailment systems.

1 Introduction

Textual Entailment was proposed as a generic
paradigm for applied semantic inference (Dagan et
al., 2006). Given two textual fragments, termed hy-
pothesis (H) and text (T ), the text is said to textually
entail the hypothesis (T→H) if a person reading the
text can infer the meaning of the hypothesis. Since it
was first introduced, the six rounds of the Recogniz-
ing Textual Entailment (RTE) challenges1 have be-
come a standard benchmark for entailment systems.

Entailment systems apply various techniques to
tackle this task, including logical inference (Tatu
and Moldovan, 2007; MacCartney and Manning,
2007), semantic analysis (Burchardt et al., 2007)
and syntactic parsing (Bar-Haim et al., 2008; Wang

1http://www.nist.gov/tac/

et al., 2009). Inference at these levels usually re-
quires substantial processing and resources, aim-
ing at high performance. Nevertheless, simple lex-
ical level entailment systems pose strong baselines
which most complex entailment systems did not out-
perform (Mirkin et al., 2009a; Majumdar and Bhat-
tacharyya, 2010). Additionally, within a complex
system, lexical entailment modeling is one of the
most effective component. Finally, the simpler lex-
ical approach can be used in cases where complex
systems cannot be used, e.g. when there is no parser
for a targeted language.

For these reasons lexical entailment systems are
widely used. They derive sentence-level entailment
decision base on lexical-level entailment evidence.
Typically, this is done by quantifying the degree of
lexical coverage of the hypothesis terms by the text
terms (where a term may be multi-word). A hy-
pothesis term is covered by a text term if either they
are identical (possibly at the stem or lemma level)
or there is a lexical entailment rule suggesting the
entailment of the former by the latter. Such rules
are derived from lexical semantic resources, such
as WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), which capture lexi-
cal entailment relations.

Common heuristics for quantifying the degree of
coverage are setting a threshold on the percentage
of coverage of H’s terms (Majumdar and Bhat-
tacharyya, 2010), counting the absolute number of
uncovered terms (Clark and Harrison, 2010), or ap-
plying an Information Retrieval-style vector space
similarity score (MacKinlay and Baldwin, 2009).
Other works (Corley and Mihalcea, 2005; Zanzotto
and Moschitti, 2006) have applied heuristic formu-

10



las to estimate the similarity between text fragments
based on a similarity function between their terms.

The above mentioned methods do not capture sev-
eral important aspects of entailment. Such aspects
include the varying reliability levels of entailment
resources and the impact of rule chaining and multi-
ple evidence on entailment likelihood. An additional
observation from these and other systems is that
their performance improves only moderately when
utilizing lexical-semantic resources2.

We believe that the textual entailment field would
benefit from more principled models for various en-
tailment phenomena. In this work we formulate a
concrete generative probabilistic modeling frame-
work that captures the basic aspects of lexical entail-
ment. A first step in this direction was proposed in
Shnarch et al. (2011) (a short paper), where we pre-
sented a base model with a somewhat complicated
and difficult to estimate extension to handle cover-
age. This paper extends that work to a more mature
model with new extensions.

We first consider the “logical” structure of lexical
entailment reasoning and then interpret it in proba-
bilistic terms. Over this base model we suggest sev-
eral extensions whose significance is then assessed
by our evaluations. Learning the parameters of a
lexical model poses a challenge since there are no
lexical-level entailment annotations. We do, how-
ever, have sentence-level annotations available for
the RTE data sets. To bridge this gap, we formu-
late an instance of the EM algorithm (Dempster et
al., 1977) to estimate hidden lexical-level entailment
parameters from sentence-level annotations.

Overall, we suggest that the main contribution of
this paper is in presenting a probabilistic model for
lexical entailment. Such a model can better integrate
entailment indicators and has the advantage of being
able to utilize well-founded probabilistic methods
such as the EM algorithm. Our model’s performance
is in line with the best entailment systems, while
opening up directions for future improvements.

2 Background

We next review several entailment systems, mostly
those that work at the lexical level and in particular

2See ablation tests reports in http://aclweb.org/aclwiki/ in-
dex.php?title=RTE Knowledge Resources#Ablation Tests

those with which we compare our results on the RTE
data sets.

The 5th Recognizing Textual Entailment chal-
lenge (RTE-5) introduced a new pilot task (Ben-
tivogli et al., 2009) which became the main task in
RTE-6 (Bentivogli et al., 2010). In this task the goal
is to find all sentences that entail each hypothesis in
a given document cluster. This task’s data sets re-
flect a natural distribution of entailments in a corpus
and demonstrate a more realistic scenario than the
earlier RTE challenges.

As reviewed in the following paragraphs there are
several characteristic in common to most entailment
systems: (1) lexical resources have a minimal im-
pact on their performance, (2) they heuristically uti-
lize lexical resources, and (3) there is no principled
method for making the final entailment decision.

The best performing system of RTE-5 was pre-
sented by Mirkin et. al (2009a). It applies super-
vised classifiers over a parse tree representations to
identify entailment. They reported that utilizing lex-
ical resources only slightly improved their perfor-
mance.

MacKinlay and Baldwin (2009) presented the
best lexical-level system at RTE-5. They use a vec-
tor space method to measure the lexical overlap be-
tween the text and the hypothesis. Since usually
texts of RTE are longer than their corresponding hy-
potheses, the standard cosine similarity score came
out lower than expected. To overcome this prob-
lem they suggested a simple ad-hoc variant of the
cosine similarity score which removed from the text
all terms which did not appear in the correspond-
ing hypothesis. While this heuristic improved per-
formance considerably, they reported a decrease in
performance when utilizing synonym and derivation
relations from WordNet.

On the RTE-6 data set, the syntactic-based sys-
tem of Jia et. al (2010) achieved the best results,
only slightly higher than the lexical-level system
of (Majumdar and Bhattacharyya, 2010). The lat-
ter utilized several resources for matching hypoth-
esis terms with text terms: WordNet, VerbOcean
(Chklovski and Pantel, 2004), utilizing two of its
relations, as well as an acronym database, num-
ber matching module, co-reference resolution and
named entity recognition tools. Their final entail-
ment decision was based on a threshold over the

11



number of matched hypothesis terms. They found
out that hypotheses of different length require dif-
ferent thresholds.

While the above systems measure the number of
hypothesis terms matched by the text, Clark and
Harrison (2010) based their entailment decision on
the number of mismatched hypothesis terms. They
utilized both WordNet and the DIRT paraphrase
database (Lin and Pantel, 2001). With WordNet,
they used one set of relations to identify the concept
of a term while another set of relations was used to
identify entailment between concepts. Their results
were inconclusive about the overall effect of DIRT
while WordNet produced a net benefit in most con-
figurations. They have noticed that setting a global
threshold for the entailment decision, decreased per-
formance for some topics of the RTE-6 data set.
Therefore, they tuned a varying threshold for each
topic based on an idiosyncracy of the data, by which
the total number of entailments per topic is approxi-
mately a constant.

Glickman et al. (2005) presented a simple model
that recasted the lexical entailment task as a variant
of text classification and estimated entailment prob-
abilities solely from co-occurrence statistics. Their
model did not utilize any lexical resources.

In contrary to these systems, our model shows
improvement when utilizing high quality resources
such as WordNet and the CatVar (Categorial Varia-
tion) database (Habash and Dorr, 2003). As Majum-
dar and Bhattacharyya (2010), our model considers
the impact of hypothesis length, however it does not
require the tuning of a unique threshold for each
length. Finally, most of the above systems do not
differentiate between the various lexical resources
they use, even though it is known that resources re-
liability vary considerably (Mirkin et al., 2009b).
Our probabilistic model, on the other hand, learns
a unique reliability parameter for each resource it
utilizes. As mentioned above, this work extends the
base model in (Shnarch et al., 2011), which is de-
scribed in the next section.

3 A Probabilistic Model

We aim at obtaining a probabilistic score for the like-
lihood that the hypothesis terms are entailed by the
terms of the text. There are several prominent as-

crowd  surround  Jaguar

Text

Hypothesis

hjhj hnhn

t1t1 titi tmtm

t'

Resource1

ch
ain

yy

OROR

50 people surround car

OR OR

social

group

Resource1

OR

Resource1Resource3

Resource2

h1h1

Resource1
MATCH

MATCHResource3

Resource2

UNCOVERED

Figure 1: Left: the base model of entailing a hypothesis from
a text; Right: a concrete example for it (stop-words removed).
Edges in the upper part of the diagram represent entailment
rules. Rules compose chains through AND gates (omitted for
visual clarity). Chains are gathered by OR gates to entail terms,
and the final entailment decision y is the result of their AND
gate.

pects of entailment, mostly neglected by previous
lexical methods, which our model aims to capture:
(1) the reliability variability of different lexical re-
sources; (2) the effect of the length of transitive rule
application chain on the likelihood of its validity;
and (3) addressing cases of multiple entailment evi-
dence when entailing a term.

3.1 The Base Model

Our base model follows the one presented in
(Shnarch et al., 2011), which is described here in
detail to make the current paper self contained.

3.1.1 Entailment generation process
We first specify the process by which a decision

of lexical entailment between T andH using knowl-
edge resources should be determined, as illustrated
in Figure 1 (a general description on the left and
a concrete example on the right). There are two
ways by which a term h ∈ H is entailed by a term
t ∈ T . A direct MATCH is the case in which t and
h are identical terms (possibly at the stem or lemma
level). Alternatively, lexical entailment can be es-
tablished based on knowledge of entailing lexical-

12



semantic relations, such as synonyms, hypernyms
and morphological derivations, available in lexical
resources. These relations provide lexical entail-
ment rules, e.g. Jaguar → car. We denote the re-
source which provided the rule r by R(r).

It should be noticed at this point that such rules
specify a lexical entailment relation that might hold
for some (T,H) pairs but not necessarily for all
pairs, e.g. the rule Jaguar → car does not hold
in the wildlife context. Thus, the application of an
available rule to infer lexical entailment in a given
(T,H) pair might be either valid or invalid. We note
here the difference between covering a term and en-
tailing it. A term is covered when the available re-
sources suggest its entailment. However, since a rule
application may be invalid for the particular (T,H)
context, a term is entailed only if there is a valid rule
application from T to it.

Entailment is a transitive relation, therefore rules
may compose transitive chains that connect t to h
via intermediate term(s) t′ (e.g. crowd → social
group → people). For a chain to be valid for the
current (T,H) pair, all its composing rule applica-
tions should be valid for this pair. This corresponds
to a logical AND gate (omitted in Figure 1 for visual
clarity) which takes as input the validity values (1/0)
of the individual rule applications.

Next, multiple chains may connect t to h (as for
ti and hj in Figure 1) or connect several terms in
T to h (as t1 and ti are indicating the entailment of
hj in Figure 1), thus providing multiple evidence for
h’s entailment. For a term h to be entailed by T it
is enough that at least one of the chains from T to
h would be valid. This condition is realized in the
model by an OR gate. Finally, for T to lexically en-
tail H it is usually assumed that every h∈H should
be entailed by T (Glickman et al., 2006). Therefore,
the final decision follows an AND gate combining
the entailment decisions for all hypothesis terms.
Thus, the 1-bit outcome of this gate y corresponds
to the sentence-level entailment status.

3.1.2 Probabilistic Setting
When assessing entailment for (T,H) pair, we do

not know for sure which rule applications are valid.
Taking a probabilistic perspective, we assume a pa-
rameter θR for each resourceR, denoting its reliabil-
ity, i.e. the prior probability that applying a rule from

R for an arbitrary (T,H) pair corresponds to valid
entailment3. Under this perspective, direct MATCHs
are considered as rules coming from a special “re-
source”, for which θMATCH is expected to be close to
1. Additionally, there could be a term h which is not
covered by any of the resources at hand, whose cov-
erage is inevitably incomplete. We assume that each
such h is covered by a single rule coming from a
dummy resource called UNCOVERED, while expect-
ing θUNCOVERED to be relatively small. Based on the
θR values we can now estimate, for each entailment
inference step in Figure 1, the probability that this
step is valid (the corresponding bit is 1).

Equations (1) - (3) correspond to the three steps in
calculating the probability for entailing a hypothesis.

p(t c−→ h) =
∏
r∈c

p(L r−→ R) =
∏
r∈c

θR(r) (1)

p(T→h) =1−p(T9h)=1−
∏

c∈C(h)

[1−p(t c−→ h)] (2)

p(T→H) =
∏
h∈H

p(T→h) (3)

First, Eq. (1) specifies the probability of a partic-
ular chain c, connecting a text term t to a hypothesis
term h, to correspond to a valid entailment between
t and h. This event is denoted by t c−→h and its prob-
ability is the joint probability that the applications
of all rules r ∈ c are valid. Note that every rule r
in a chain c connects two terms, its left-hand-side L
and its right-hand-side R. The left-hand-side of the
first rule in c is t∈ T and the right-hand-side of the
last rule in it is h ∈ H . Let us denote the event of
a valid rule application by L r−→R. Since a-priori a
rule r is valid with probability θR(r), and assuming
independence of all r∈c, we obtain Eq. (1).

Next, Eq. (2) utilizes Eq. (1) to specify the prob-
ability that T entails h (at least by one chain). Let
C(h) denote the set of chains which suggest the en-
tailment of h. The requested probability is equal to
1 minus the probability of the complement event,
that is, T does not entail h by any chain. The lat-
ter probability is the product of probabilities that all

3Modeling a conditional probability for the validity of r,
which considers contextual aspects of r’s validity in the current
(T, H) context, is beyond the scope of this paper (see discus-
sion in Section 6)

13



chains c∈C(h) are not valid (again assuming inde-
pendence of chains).

Finally, Eq. (3) gives the probability that T entails
all of H (T → H), assuming independence of H’s
terms. This is the probability that every h ∈ H is
entailed by T , as specified by Eq. (2).

Altogether, these formulas fall out of the standard
probabilistic estimate for the output of AND and OR
gates when assuming independence amongst their
input bits.

As can be seen, the base model distinguishes
varying resource reliabilities, as captured by θR, de-
creases entailment probability as rule chain grows,
having more elements in the product of Eq. (1), and
increases it when entailment of a term is supported
by multiple chains with more inputs to the OR gate.
Next we describe two extensions for this base model
which address additional important phenomena of
lexical entailment.

3.2 Relaxing the AND Gate
Based on term-level decisions for the entailment of
each h ∈ H , the model has to produce a sentence-
level decision of T → H . In the model described so
far, for T to entailH it must entail all its terms. This
demand is realized by the AND gate at the bottom of
Figure 1. In practice, this demand is too strict, and
we would like to leave some option for entailing H
even if not every h∈H is entailed. Thus, it is desired
to relax this strict demand enforced by the AND gate
in the model.

OR

AND

b1

OR

xn

bn

x1

Noisy-AND

y

Figure 2: A noisy-AND gate

The Noisy-AND model (Pearl, 1988), depicted in
Figure 2, is a soft probabilistic version of the AND
gate, which is often used to describe the interaction
between causes and their common effect. In this
variation, each one of the binary inputs b1, ..., bn of
the AND gate is first joined with a “noise” bit xi by
an OR gate. Each “noise” bit is 1 with probability p,
which is the parameter of the gate. The output bit y

is defined as:

y = (b1 ∨ x1) ∧ (b2 ∨ x2) ∧ · · · ∧ (bn ∨ xn)

and the conditional probability for it to be 1 is:

p(y = 1|b1, ..., bn, n) =
n∏
i=1

p(1−bi) = p(n−
∑

i bi)

If all the binary input values are 1, the output is de-
terministically 1. Otherwise, the probability that the
output is 1 is proportional to the number of ones in
the input, where the distribution depends on the pa-
rameter p. In case p = 0 the model reduces to the
regular AND.

In our model we replace the final strict AND with
a noisy-AND, thus increasing the probability of T to
entail H , to account for the fact that sometimes H
might be entailed from T even though some h ∈H
is not directly entailed.

The input size n for the noisy-AND is the length
of the hypotheses and therefore it varies from H to
H . Had we used the same model parameter p for all
lengths, the probability to output 1 would have de-
pended solely on the number of 0 bits in the input
without considering the number of ones. For exam-
ple, the probability to entail a hypothesis with 10
terms given that 8 of them are entailed by T (and 2
are not) is p2. The same probability is obtained for a
hypothesis of length 3 with a single entailed term.
We, however, expect the former to have a higher
probability since a larger portion of its terms is en-
tailed by T .

There are many ways to incorporate the length of
a hypothesis into the noisy-AND model in order to
normalize its parameter. The approach we take is
defining a separate parameter pn for each hypothesis

length n such that pn = θ
1
n
NA, where θNA becomes

the underlying parameter value of the noisy-AND,
i.e.

p(y = 1|b1, ..., bn, n) = p(n−
∑
bi)

n = θ
n−

∑
bi

n
NA

This way, if non of the hypothesis terms is entailed,
the probability for its entailment is θNA, indepen-
dent of its length:

p(y = 1|0, 0, ..., 0, n) = pnn = θNA

14



As can be seen from Figure 1, replacing the final
AND gate by a noisy-AND gate is equivalent to
adding an additional chain to the OR gate of each
hypothesis term. Therefore we update Eq. (2) to:

p(T → h) =1− p(T 9 h)

=1− [(1− θ
1
n
NA) ·

∏
c∈C(h)

[1− p(t c−→ h)]]

(2∗)

In the length-normalized noisy-AND model the
value of the parameter p becomes higher for longer
hypotheses. This increases the probability to entail
such hypotheses, compensating for the lower proba-
bility to strictly entail all of their terms.

3.3 Considering Coverage Level
The second extension of the base model follows our
observation that the prior validity likelihood for a
rule application, increases as more of H’s terms are
covered by the available resources. In other words,
if we have a hypothesis H1 with k covered terms
and a hypothesis H2 in which only j < k terms are
covered, then an arbitrary rule application for H1 is
more likely to be valid than an arbitrary rule appli-
cation for H2.

We chose to model this phenomenon by normal-
izing the reliability θR of each resource according
to the number of covered terms in H . The normal-
ization is done in a similar manner to the length-
normalized noisy-AND described above, obtaining
a modified version of Eq. (1):

p(t c−→ h) =
∏
r∈c

θ
1

#covered

R(r) (1
∗)

As a results, the larger the number of covered terms
is, the larger θR values our model uses and, in total,
the entailment probability increases.

To sum up, we have presented the base model,
providing a probabilistic estimate for the entailment
status in our generation process specified in 3.1.
Two extensions were then suggested: one that re-
laxes the strict AND gate and normalizes this re-
laxation by the length of the hypothesis; the second
extension adjusts the validity of rule applications as
a function of the number of the hypothesis covered
terms. Overall, our full model combines both exten-
sions over the base probabilistic model.

4 Parameter Estimation

The difficulty in estimating the θR values from train-
ing data arises because these are term-level param-
eters while the RTE-training entailment annotation
is given for the sentence-level, each (T,H) pair in
the training is annotated as either entailing or not.
Therefore, we use an instance of the EM algorithm
(Dempster et al., 1977) to estimate these hidden pa-
rameters.

4.1 E-Step
In the E-step, for each application of a rule r in a
chain c for h∈H in a training pair (T,H), we com-
pute whcr(T,H), the posterior probability that the
rule application was valid given the training annota-
tion:

whcr(T,H) =


p(L r−→R|T→H) if T→H

p(L r−→R|T 9H) if T 9H
(4)

where the two cases refer to whether the training pair
is annotated as entailing or non-entailing. For sim-
plicity, we write whcr when the (T,H) context is
clear.

The E-step can be efficiently computed using
dynamic programming as follows; For each train-
ing pair (T,H) we first compute the probability
p(T → H) and keep all the intermediate computa-
tions (Eq. (1)- (3)). Then, the two cases of Eq. (4),
elaborated next, can be computed from these expres-
sions. For computing Eq. (4) in the case that T→H
we have:

p(L r−→ R|T→H) = p(L r−→ R|T → h) =
p(T→h|L r−→ R)p(L r−→R)

p(T→h)

The first equality holds since when T entails H ev-
ery h ∈ H is entailed by it. Then we apply Bayes’
rule. We have already computed the denominator
(Eq. (2)), p(L r−→ R) ≡ θR(r) and it can be shown4
that:

p(T→h|L r−→R) = 1− p(T9h)
1− p(t c−→h)

· (1− p(t
c−→h)

θR(r)
)

(5)
4The first and second denominators reduce elements from

the products in Eq. 2 and Eq. 1 correspondingly

15



where c is the chain which contains the rule r.
For computing Eq. (4), in the second case, that

T 9H , we have:

p(L r−→R|T 9H) = p(T 9H|L
r−→R)p(L r−→R)

p(T 9H)

In analogy to Eq. (5) it can be shown that

p(T 9H|L r−→R) = 1−p(T→H)
p(T→h)

·p(T→h|L r−→R)

(6)
while the expression for p(T→h|L r−→R) appears in
Eq. (5).

This efficient computation scheme is an instance
of the belief-propagation algorithm (Pearl, 1988) ap-
plied to the entailment process, which is a loop-free
directed graph (Bayesian network).

4.2 M-Step
In the M-step we need to maximize the EM auxiliary
function Q(θ) where θ is the set of all resources re-
liability values. Applying the derivation of the aux-
iliary function to our model (first without the exten-
sions) we obtain:

Q(θ) =
∑
T,H

∑
h∈H

∑
c∈C(h)

∑
r∈c

(whcr log θR(r) +

(1− whcr) log(1− θR(r)))

We next denote by nR the total number of applica-
tions of rules from resource R in the training data.
We can maximize Q(θ) for each R separately to ob-
tain the M-step parameter-updating formula:

θR =
1
nR

∑
T,H

∑
h∈H

∑
c∈C(h)

∑
r∈c|R(r)=R

whcr (7)

The updated parameter value averages the posterior
probability that rules from resource R have been
validly applied, across all its utilizations in the train-
ing data.

4.3 EM for the Extended Model
In case we normalize the noisy-AND parameter by
the hypothesis length, for each length we use a dif-
ferent parameter value for the noisy-AND and we
cannot simply merge the information from all the
training pairs (T,H). To find the optimal param-
eter value for θNA, we need to maximize the fol-
lowing expression (the derivation of the auxiliary

function to the hypothesis-length-normalized noisy-
AND “resource”):

Q(θNA) =
∑
T,H

∑
h∈H

(whNA log(θ
1
n
NA) +

(1− whNA) log(1− θ
1
n
NA)) (8)

where n is the length of H , θNA is the parameter
value of the noisy-AND model andwhNA is the pos-
terior probability that the noisy-AND was used to
validly entail the term h5, i.e.

whNA(T,H) =


p(T NA−−→h|T→H) if T→H

p(T NA−−→h|T 9H) if T 9H

The two cases of the above equation are similar to
Eq. (4) and can be efficiently computed in analogy
to Eq. (5) and Eq. (6).

There is no close-form expression for the param-
eter value θNA that maximizes expression (8). Since
θNA∈[0, 1] is a scalar parameter, we can find θNA
value that maximizes Q(θNA) using an exhaustive
grid search on the interval [0, 1], in each iteration of
the M-step. Alternatively, for an iterative procedure
to maximize expression (8), see Appendix A.

In the same manner we address the normalization
of the reliability θR of each resourcesR by the num-
ber of H’s covered terms. Expression (8) becomes:

Q(θR) =
∑
T,H

∑
h∈H

∑
c∈C(h)

∑
r∈c|R(r)=R

(whcr log(θcovR ) + (1− whcr) log(1− θcovR ))

were 1cov is the number of H terms which are cov-
ered. We can find the θR that maximizes this equa-
tion in one of the methods described above.

5 Evaluation and Results

For our evaluation we use the RTE-5 pilot task and
the RTE-6 main task data sets described in Sec-
tion 2. In our system, sentences are tokenized and
stripped of stop words and terms are tagged for part-
of-speech and lemmatized. We utilized two lexical
resources, WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) and CatVar

5In contrary to Eq. 4, here there is no specific t ∈ T that
entails h, therefore we write T NA−−→h

16



(Habash and Dorr, 2003). From WordNet we took as
entailment rules synonyms, derivations, hyponyms
and meronyms of the first senses of T and H terms.
CatVar is a database of clusters of uninflected words
(lexemes) and their categorial (i.e. part-of-speech)
variants (e.g. announce (verb), announcer and an-
nouncement(noun) and announced (adjective)). We
deduce an entailment relation between any two lex-
emes in the same cluster. Model’s parameters were
estimated from the development set, taken as train-
ing. Based on these parameters, the entailment prob-
ability was estimated for each pair (T,H) in the test
set, and the classification threshold was tuned by
classification over the development set.

We next present our evaluation results. First we
investigate the impact of utilizing lexical resources
and of chaining rules. In section 5.2 we evaluate the
contribution of each extension of the base model and
in Section 5.3 we compare our performance to that
of state-of-the-art entailment systems.

5.1 Resources and Rule-Chaining Impact

As mentioned in Section 2, in the RTE data sets it
is hard to show more than a moderate improvement
when utilizing lexical resources. Our analysis as-
cribes this fact to the relatively small amount of rule
applications in both data sets. For instance, in RTE-
6 there are 10 times more direct matches of identi-
cal terms than WordNet and CatVar rule applications
combined, while in RTE-5 this ratio is 6. As a result
the impact of rule applications can be easily shad-
owed by the large amount of direct matches.

Table 1 presents the performance of our (full)
model when utilizing no resources at all, WordNet,
CatVar and both, with chains of a single step. We
also considered rule chains of length up to 4 and
present here the results of 2 chaining steps with
WordNet-2 and (WordNet+CatVar)-2.

Overall, despite the low level of rule applications,
we see that incorporating lexical resources in our
model significantly6 and quite consistently improves
performance over using no resources at all. Natu-
rally, the optimal combination of resources may vary
somewhat across the data sets.

In RTE-6 WordNet-2 significantly improved per-

6All significant results in this section are according to Mc-
Nemar’s test with p < 0.01 unless stated otherwise

formance over the single-stepped WordNet. How-
ever, mostly chaining did not help, suggesting the
need for future work to improve chain modeling in
our framework.

Model
F1%

RTE-5 RTE-6

no resources 41.6 44.9
WordNet 45.8 44.6
WordNet-2 45.7 45.5
CatVar 46.9 45.6
WordNet + CatVar 48.3 45.6
(WordNet + CatVar)-2 47.1 44.0

Table 1: Evaluation of the impact of resources and chaining.

5.2 Model Components impact

We next assess the impact of each of our proposed
extensions to the base probabilistic model. To that
end, we incorporate WordNet+CatVar (our best con-
figuration above) as resources for the base model
(Section 3.1) and compare it with the noisy-AND
extension (Eq. (2∗)), the covered-norm extension
which normalizes the resource reliability parame-
ter by the number of covered terms (Eq. (1∗)) and
the full model which combines both extensions. Ta-
ble 2 presents the results: both noisy-AND and
covered-norm extensions significantly increase F1
over the base model (by 4.5-8.4 points). This scale
of improvement was observed with all resources and
chain-length combinations. In both data sets, the
combination of noisy-AND and covered-norm ex-
tensions in the full model significantly outperforms
each of them separately7, showing their complemen-
tary nature. We also observed that applying noisy-
AND without the hypothesis length normalization
hardly improved performance over the base model,
emphasising the importance of considering hypothe-
sis length. Overall, we can see that both base model
extensions improve performance.

Table 3 illustrates a set of maximum likelihood
parameters that yielded our best results (full model).
The parameter value indicates the learnt reliability
of the corresponding resource.

7With the following exception: in RTE-5 the full model is
better than the noisy-AND extension with significance of only
p = 0.06

17



Model
F1%

RTE-5 RTE-6

base model 36.2 38.5
noisy-AND 44.6 43.1
covered-norm 42.8 44.7
full model 48.3 45.6

Table 2: Impact of model components.

θMATCH θWORDNET θCATVAR θUNCOVERED θNA
0.80 0.70 0.65 0.17 0.05

Table 3: A parameter set of the full model which maximizes
the likelihood of the training set.

5.3 Comparison to Prior Art

Finally, in Table 4, we put these results in the con-
text of the best published results on the RTE task.
We compare our model to the average of the best
runs of all systems, the best and second best per-
forming lexical systems and the best full system of
each challenge. For both data sets our model is situ-
ated high above the average system. For the RTE-6
data set, our model’s performance is third best with
Majumdar and Bhattacharyya (2010) being the only
lexical-level system which outperforms it. However,
their system utilized additional processing that we
did not, such as named entity recognition and co-
reference resolution8. On the RTE-5 data set our
model outperforms any other published result.

Model
F1%

RTE-5 RTE-6

full model 48.3 45.6
avg. of all systems 30.5 33.8
2nd best lexical system 40.3a 44.0b

best lexical system 44.4c 47.6d

best full system 45.6c 48.0e

Table 4: Comparison to RTE-5 and RTE-6 best entailment
systems: (a)(MacKinlay and Baldwin, 2009), (b)(Clark and
Harrison, 2010), (c)(Mirkin et al., 2009a)(2 submitted runs),
(d)(Majumdar and Bhattacharyya, 2010) and (e)(Jia et al.,
2010).

8We note that the submitted run which outperformed our re-
sult utilized a threshold which was a manual modification of the
threshold obtained systematically in another run. The latter run
achieved F1 of 42.4% which is below our result.

We conclude that our probabilistic model demon-
strates quality results which are also consistent,
without applying heuristic methods of the kinds re-
viewed in Section 2

6 Conclusions and Future Work

We presented, a probabilistic model for lexical en-
tailment whose innovations are in (1) considering
each lexical resource separately by associating an
individual reliability value for it, (2) considering the
existence of multiple evidence for term entailment
and its impact on entailment assessment, (3) setting
forth a probabilistic method to relax the strict de-
mand that all hypothesis terms must be entailed, and
(4) taking account of the number of covered terms in
modeling entailment reliability.

We addressed the impact of the various compo-
nents of our model and showed that its performance
is in line with the best state-of-the-art inference sys-
tems. Future work is still needed to reflect the im-
pact of transitivity. We consider replacing the AND
gate on the rules of a chain by a noisy-AND, to relax
its strict demand that all its input rules must be valid.
Additionally, we would like to integrate Contextual
Preferences (Szpektor et al., 2008) and other works
on Selectional Preference (Erk and Pado, 2010) to
verify the validity of the application of a rule in a
specific (T,H) context. We also intend to explore
the contribution of our model within a complex sys-
tem that integrates multiple levels of inference as
well as its contribution for other applications, such
as Passage Retrieval.

References
Roy Bar-Haim, Jonathan Berant, Ido Dagan, Iddo Green-

tal, Shachar Mirkin, Eyal Shnarch, and Idan Szpektor.
2008. Efficient semantic deduction and approximate
matching over compact parse forests. In Proc. of TAC.

Luisa Bentivogli, Ido Dagan, Hoa Trang Dang, Danilo
Giampiccolo, and Bernardo Magnini. 2009. The fifth
PASCAL recognizing textual entailment challenge. In
Proc. of TAC.

Luisa Bentivogli, Peter Clark, Ido Dagan, Hoa Trang
Dang, and Danilo Giampiccolo. 2010. The sixth
PASCAL recognizing textual entailment challenge. In
Proc. of TAC.

Aljoscha Burchardt, Nils Reiter, Stefan Thater, and
Anette Frank. 2007. A semantic approach to textual

18



entailment: System evaluation and task analysis. In
Proc. of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual En-
tailment and Paraphrasing.

Timothy Chklovski and Patrick Pantel. 2004. Verbo-
cean: Mining the web for fine-grained semantic verb
relations. In Proc. of EMNLP.

Peter Clark and Phil Harrison. 2010. BLUE-Lite: a
knowledge-based lexical entailment system for RTE6.
In Proc. of TAC.

Courtney Corley and Rada Mihalcea. 2005. Measuring
the semantic similarity of texts. In Proc. of the ACL
Workshop on Empirical Modeling of Semantic Equiv-
alence and Entailment.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The PASCAL recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol-
ume 3944, pages 177–190.

A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin. 1977.
Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM
algorithm. Journal of the royal statistical society, se-
ries [B], 39(1):1–38.

Katrin Erk and Sebastian Pado. 2010. Exemplar-based
models for word meaning in context. In Proc. of the
ACL.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database (Language, Speech, and Com-
munication). The MIT Press.

Oren Glickman, Ido Dagan, and Moshe Koppel. 2005. A
probabilistic classification approach for lexical textual
entailment. In Proc. of AAAI.

Oren Glickman, Eyal Shnarch, and Ido Dagan. 2006.
Lexical reference: a semantic matching subtask. In
Proceedings of the EMNLP.

Nizar Habash and Bonnie Dorr. 2003. A categorial vari-
ation database for english. In Proc. of NAACL.

Houping Jia, Xiaojiang Huang, Tengfei Ma, Xiaojun
Wan, and Jianguo Xiao. 2010. PKUTM participation
at TAC 2010 RTE and summarization track. In Proc.
of TAC.

Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. Discovery of infer-
ence rules for question answering. Natural Language
Engineering, 7:343–360.

Bill MacCartney and Christopher D. Manning. 2007.
Natural logic for textual inference. In Proc. of the
ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and
Paraphrasing.

Andrew MacKinlay and Timothy Baldwin. 2009. A
baseline approach to the RTE5 search pilot. In Proc.
of TAC.

Debarghya Majumdar and Pushpak Bhattacharyya.
2010. Lexical based text entailment system for main
task of RTE6. In Proc. of TAC.

Shachar Mirkin, Roy Bar-Haim, Jonathan Berant, Ido
Dagan, Eyal Shnarch, Asher Stern, and Idan Szpektor.
2009a. Addressing discourse and document structure
in the RTE search task. In Proc. of TAC.

Shachar Mirkin, Ido Dagan, and Eyal Shnarch. 2009b.
Evaluating the inferential utility of lexical-semantic re-
sources. In Proc. of EACL.

Judea Pearl. 1988. Probabilistic reasoning in intelli-
gent systems: networks of plausible inference. Morgan
Kaufmann.

Eyal Shnarch, Jacob Goldberger, and Ido Dagan. 2011.
A probabilistic modeling framework for lexical entail-
ment. In Proc. of ACL, pages 558–563.

Idan Szpektor, Ido Dagan, Roy Bar-Haim, and Jacob
Goldberger. 2008. Contextual preferences. In Proc.
of ACL-08: HLT.

Marta Tatu and Dan Moldovan. 2007. COGEX at RTE
3. In Proc. of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual
Entailment and Paraphrasing.

Rui Wang, Yi Zhang, and Guenter Neumann. 2009. A
joint syntactic-semantic representation for recognizing
textual relatedness. In Proc. of TAC.

Fabio Massimo Zanzotto and Alessandro Moschitti.
2006. Automatic learning of textual entailments with
cross-pair similarities. In Proc. of ACL.

A Appendix: An Iterative Procedure to
Maximize Q(θNA)

There is no close-form expression for the parameter
value θNA that maximizes expression (8) from Sec-
tion 4.3. Instead we can apply the following iterative
procedure. The derivative of Q(θNA) is:

dQ(θNA)
dθNA

=
∑( l·whNA

θNA
−

(1−whNA)l·θ
(l−1)
NA

1− θlNA

)

where 1l is the hypothesis length and the summation
is over all terms h in the training set. Setting this
derivative to zero yields an equation which the opti-
mal value satisfies:

θNA =
∑
l·whNA∑ (1−whNA)l·θ(l−1)NA
1−θlNA

(9)

Eq. (9) can be utilized as a heuristic iterative proce-
dure to find the optimal value of θNA:

θNA ←
∑
l·whNA∑ (1−whNA)l·θ(l−1)NA
1−θlNA

19


