










































Language Technology Support for Semantic Annotation of Icono-graphic Descriptions


Proceedings of Language Technologies for Digital Humanities and Cultural Heritage Workshop, pages 51–56,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 16 September 2011.

Language Technology Support for Semantic Annotation 
of Iconographic Descriptions

Kamenka Staykova
IICT, BAS, Bulgaria

staykova@iinf.bas.bg

Gennady Agre
IICT, BAS, Bulgaria
agre@iinf.bas.bg

Kiril Simov
IICT, BAS, Bulgaria

kivs@bultreebank.org

Petya Osenova
IICT, BAS, Bulgaria 

petya@bultreebank.org

Abstract

The paper describes an approach for semantic 
annotation of multimedia objects implemented 
for the purposes of SINUS Project1. Semantic 
annotations are supported by semantic annota-
tion models based on ontological presentation 
of  knowledge  concerning  Bulgarian  Icono-
graphy. The process of semantic annotation in-
cludes  automated  data-lifting  procedure  and 
user-directed approach. The paper pays atten-
tion to a specific variant  of the semantic an-
notation process directed by the user - applica-
tion of Language Technologies for semi-auto-
mated  creation  of  semantic  text  annotations 
(tags)  based on analysis  of  descriptive  texts. 
The ‘ontology-to-text’ approach has been ad-
apted to the needs of the iconographic domain. 
Initial  experiments are established to support 
the user during the process of manual semantic 
annotations in the context of SINUS environ-
ment.

1 Introduction

The main  objective  of  the  research  project  SI-
NUS is to provide a semantic technology-based 
environment facilitating development of Techno-
logy-Enhanced  Learning  (TEL)  applications, 
which are able  to reuse existing heterogeneous 
software systems. The SINUS environment has a 
service  oriented  architecture  allowing  unified 
representation and use of heterogeneous systems 
as Web services. The environment is tested on a 
use case, which applies the basic TEL principles 
to  the  process  of  Learning-by-Authoring 
(Dochev and Agre, 2009).  The domain of Bul-
garian Iconography is chosen for constructing a 
SINUS Project scenario, since it provides an in-

1 “Semantic Technologies for Web Services and Techno-
logy Enhanced Learning” (SINUS) sinus.iinf.bas.bg

teresting  example  of  TEL  in  humanities.  The 
scenario requires an intensive use of multimedia 
objects  stored in  existing heterogeneous digital 
libraries.
In the  SINUS environment  a  TEL-oriented ap-
plication  is  created  hierarchically,  starting  by 
converting an autonomous system for storing and 
retrieving a multimedia data (digital library) to a 
Web service, then transforming this service into 
a semantically-oriented digital library facilitated 
by Web services and ontologies, and finally, ex-
tending the library into a learning system based 
on service oriented architecture.
   The current paper presents the processes of se-
mantic  annotation  of  multimedia  objects  (MO) 
implemented in the SINUS environment. Section 
2 describes the basic decisions taken for organiz-
ing such annotations. Section 3 presents the first 
attempts to apply language technologies in order 
to  develop  a  user-directed  approach  for  semi-
automatic creation of annotations. Section 4 dis-
cusses the future work.

2 Semantic  Annotation  of  Multimedia 
Objects in SINUS Project

The domain of Bulgarian Iconography is a fruit-
ful field to show how different multimedia docu-
ments (the digital photos of iconographic works, 
texts, video records, etc.) could be used in TEL 
applications.  The  multimedia  resources  for  SI-
NUS demo-examples come from the Multimedia 
Digital  Library  “Virtual  Encyclopedia  of  East-
Christian Art” described in (Pavlova-Draganova 
et al., 2007) and  marked as “the Library” from 
here  on.  Its  content  is  accessible  via  a  special 
Web service  developed in the  SINUS environ-
ment.

51



2.1 Resources of Semantic Annotation

The Objects of semantic annotation in SINUS 
project  are  multimedia  objects  presenting  in-
formation in digital form about icons, wall-paint-
ings, miniatures and other iconographical works; 
also pictures and different  texts concerning the 
iconographical works; information about authors, 
places, dating periods, religious characters and so 
on. The Library uses a fixed annotation schema 
for organizing all the resources and the available 
data. In order to allow more  flexible and deep 
reasoning  about  the  iconographical  knowledge, 
the SINUS semantic space extends that schema 
to present the knowledge in a formalized, onto-
logy-like manner. 
The  Ontologies. SINUSBasic  Ontology  is  the 
main conceptual model  of the SINUS semantic 
space. The fixed annotation schema of the Lib-
rary is taken as a ground for creating this onto-
logy, in order access to be provided to the Lib-
rary from an upper, semantic level. However, the 
SINUSBasic Ontology itself (with minor excep-
tions) is created following the main principles of 
the standard SIDOC-CRM (Crofts et al., 2010). 
The  SINUSBasic  Ontology  is  implemented  in 
OWL and comprises 58 classes, 38 object prop-
erties and 28 data-type properties. Main classes 
are:  Iconographical  Object with its  sub-classes 
Icon,  Wall-Painting,  Miniature,  Mosaic,  Vitrage 
and so on,  Author,  Iconographical Scene,  Char-
acter,  Iconographical Technique,  Base Material 
and so on. 
The SINUS semantic space contains the so called 
“specialized ontologies”, which encode experts’ 
knowledge on particular aspect of the Bulgarian 
Iconography domain. It is assumed that special-
ized  ontologies  represent  additional,  more  spe-
cialized domain knowledge that is not contained 
in the “basic” Library. For example, the special-
ized ontology on religious characters  gives  ac-
cess  to  such  notions  as  Canonical  Character, 
Apostle,  Hierarch, etc., the specialized ontology 
on iconographical technology gives access to no-
tions as  Soft Material,  Solid Material,  Lacquer-
ing,  Resin,  Primer,  Plaster,  etc.  At  the  current 
stage of work the SINUSSpec Technology onto-
logy  is  implemented  in  OWL  and  could  be 
loaded into SINUS semantic space on demand. 
The ontology contains 16 classes, 14 object prop-
erties and 45 ontological individuals. Some con-
cepts  of  the  SINUSSpec  Technology  ontology 
represent  extensions  of  concepts  introduced  in 
SINUSBasic ontology, and in this way basic do-
main  ontology  and  specialized  ontologies  are 

linked. For example, the root ontological concept 
of SINUSBasic Ontology is  Iconographical Ob-
ject.  Such  concepts  as  Author,  Iconographical 
School,  Collection are used as root-concepts in 
SINUSSpec Technology ontology. 
Basic Semantic Annotation Model (Basic SAM) 
is presented in the picture bellow.

Ic
on

og
ra

ph
ica

l O
bj

ec
t

Id
en

tif
ica

tio
n

Te
ch

no
lo

gy

De
sc

rip
tio

n

Title

Iconographical School

Ic
on

og
ra

ph
ica

l S
ce

ne

Ch
ar

ac
te

r

Co
nd

itio
n 

St
at

e

Ba
se

 M
at

er
ia

l

Object Location

Identification Notes

Ic
on

og
ra

ph
ica

l T
ec

hn
iq

ue
 

De
sc

rip
tio

n

Ic
on

og
ra

ph
ica

l T
ec

hn
iq

ue

Object Location 
(Creation)

Object Date

Dimensions

Ba
se

op

op

op

op
op

op

op dp

dp

dp

dp

op

op
op

op
op

op

Author

op

Ba
se

 D
es

cr
ip

tio
n

op

Some  of  the  links  between  concepts  represent 
object  properties,  others  –  datatype  properties. 
Some  of  the  object  properties  are  realized  as 
chains of 2 or 3 properties. Many of the datatype 
properties lead to textual data providing access to 
the descriptive texts collected in the Library. 
Extended Semantic Annotation Model  (Exten-
ded  SAM) adds  14  new  features  to  the  Basic 
SAM of Iconographical  Object  individuals.  All 
these  additional  features  are  supported  by  SI-
NUSSpec  Technology  ontology  as  properties. 
For example, such features are:  base_has_com-
ponent,  gilding_has_type,  laquering_has_even-
ness,  primer_has_filler, etc. In this  way the in-
stances of  Iconographical Object,  class defined 
in SINUSBasic ontology, is linked to concepts of 
Primer, Gilding, Lacquering, Filler, etc., defined 
in SINUSSpec Technology ontology.
Semantic  Repository.  SINUS environment  em-
ploys  SESAME RDF Semantic Repository that 
provides sufficient reasoning and standard func-
tionalities of  semantic repositories for realizing 
the SINUS scenario. All repository functionalit-
ies are accessible through the SINUS User Inter-
face.

2.2 Search Process 

The semantic annotation of MO in SINUS is or-
ganized as a two step process: at the first step a 
MO  of  interest  should  be  found,  and  at  the 
second step the desired new annotations should 

52



be added (manually or semi-automatically) to the 
object description. Semantic search of multime-
dia objects starts with preparing a “natural lan-
guage”-like  query,  which is  constructed on the 
base of described above SINUS ontologies and 
presented  in  user-friendly  graphical  way.  The 
query is  automatically transformed into SPAR-
QL form, which is sent to the Extended Search 
Engine – a special component of the SINUS en-
vironment responsible for searching the informa-
tion in the SINUS repositories. The component 
“lowers” the corresponding part of the query to 
the Library and then “lifts” the answer represen-
ted at the semantic level to the semantic reposit-
ory,  where  the  whole  SPARQL  query  is  ex-
ecuted.  Practically,  during this data lifting pro-
cess some data from the Library is transformed 
to several SINUSBasic Ontology individuals that 
are added to ontologies stored in the semantic re-
pository. The search result, which usually is a set 
of (identifiers to) multimedia objects, is presen-
ted to the user via the SINUS User Interface.  

2.3 Semantic Annotation Process

Additional semantic annotations of MO made  
by the user are also supported. This user-directed 
semantic  annotation  process  allows  the user  to 
add some new (specialized) annotation features 
to existing MO annotations or to create “basic” 
annotations for a new MO. The extension to the 
basic annotation model  is supported by the SI-
NUSSpec Technology ontology presented above. 
The process of user-directed semantic annotation 
has  the  following steps  enabled by the SINUS 
User Interface:
1. All properties of a concrete object selected by 
the user are displayed. The number of properties 
depends on special ontologies the user is going to 
use  for  creating the annotations.  Each property 
could be displayed with particular value (known 
annotation) or the value could be still unknown. 
In such case, a list of possible values of the prop-
erty  (stored  in  the  corresponding  ontology)  is 
proposed as options to the user. 
2. The user can either change a displayed value 
of a selected property (if this annotation has been 
created earlier by him or semi-automatically) or 
the user can create a new annotation by selecting 
a value from the corresponding list, if the current 
value of this property is empty. 
3.  After completing the annotation process and 
the user can save the new annotations in the SI-
NUS semantic repository. 
Opportunities for semi-automatic semantic an-
notation by use of descriptive texts analysis. The 

semantic annotation model of MO contains sev-
eral links to descriptive texts concerning the MO. 
For example, each individual of the class Base of 
SINUSBasic Ontology is connected through the 
datatype  property  has_Base_Description to  the 
particular text kept in the Library. An example of 
a  short  text  describing the base of  a particular 
Iconographical Object is given bellow. 
BG: Основата е от иглолистна дървесина с 
два кошака, добре запазена. Гипсов 
грунд, нанесен тънко и равномерно.
EN:  The  base  is  of  softwood  with  two 
keys,  well  kept.  Plaster  ground  coat, 
applied thinly and evenly.

Most of the descriptive texts contain a lot of ter-
minological notions of a particular domain and 
many of the terms are defined in the correspond-
ing  specialized  ontologies.  The  main  idea  of 
semi-automatic  semantic  annotations  is  to  help 
substantially the user in his/her attempt to annot-
ate MO with notions presented in Extended Se-
mantic Annotation Model.  The support consists 
of access to preliminary created semantically an-
notated  texts,  which  makes  some  (ontological) 
notions visible and sensitive, and also “technic-
ally” prepared to be used further in the process of 
used-directed semantic annotation. 
The (preliminary)  semantic annotations of texts 
are created off-line and stored in such a way that 
they can be seen as indexes to MO and used for 
on-line searching and retrieving the objects. The 
text  annotation  procedure  is  implemented  as  a 
special Web service accessible from the SINUS 
environment. The output of this process is a set 
of XML files, so in order to use them in the SI-
NUS  environment  they  have  to  be  accessible 
during the on-line  process  of  creating new an-
notations. The annotations (tags) in the texts are 
treated as parts of preliminary semantic annota-
tions of particular MO. They could be acknow-
ledged, extended or denied by the user during the 
semantic  annotation  process.  The  annotations 
suggested in texts are shown to the user as “de-
fault” values of the corresponding properties of 
the  MO.  SINUS  platform  has  to  be  equipped 
with a special procedure that “translates” the an-
notated text into form of Extended Semantic An-
notation Model. 
The task of text annotation could be formulated 
in this way:  given an ontology and text,  return 
annotated text, which is sensitive to the ontolo-
gical notions. This general task is known as On-
tology-to-Text relation  and  is  still  a  research 
challenge in the crossroad of Language Techno-

53



logies  and  Semantic  Technologies.  Language 
Technologies operate with specific methods and 
tools to annotate text documents semantically. 

3 Semantic Text Annotation for SINUS 
Project 

Semantic text annotation presented here is based 
on  a  model  of  Ontology-to-Text relation  de-
veloped within (Simov & Osenova, 2007; Simov 
& Osenova,  2008).  Ontology-to-Text relation is 
defined with the help of two intermediate com-
ponents:  (terminological)  lexicon  and  concept 
annotation grammar.
The lexicon plays twofold role. First, it interre-
lates the concepts in the ontology to the lexical 
knowledge used by the grammar in order to re-
cognize  the  role  of  the  concepts  in  the  text. 
Second, the lexicon represents the main interface 
between the user and the ontology. This interface 
allows the ontology to be navigated or represen-
ted in a natural for the user way.  For example, 
the concepts and relations might be named with 
terms used by the stakeholders in their everyday 
activities and in their own natural language. This 
could be considered as a first step to a contextu-
alized usage of the ontology in a sense that the 
ontology  could  be  viewed  through  different 
terms depending on the context. For example, the 
material  names  will  vary  from  very  specific 
terms within the domain of iconography to more 
common names used when a set of icons are ex-
hibited to a wider audience. As the image depicts 
it, the lexical items contain the following inform-
ation: a term, contextual information determining 
the context of the term usage, grammatical fea-
tures determining the syntactic realization within 
the text. In the current implementation of the lex-
icons the contextual information is simplified to 
two values, common term and others.

The second component  of the  Ontology-to-Text 
relation,  the  concept  annotation  grammar,  is 

ideally considered as an extension of a general 
language deep grammar which is adapted to the 
concept annotation task. Minimally,  the concept 
annotation grammar consists of a chunk grammar 
for  concept  annotation  and  (sense)  disambigu-
ation rules. The following picture demonstrates 
this part of the Ontology-to-Text relation.

The chunk grammar for each term in the lexicon 
contains at least one grammar rule for recogni-
tion of the term. As a preprocessing step we con-
sider  annotation with grammatical  features  and 
lemmatization  of  the  text.  The  disambiguation 
rules exploit the local context in terms of gram-
matical  features,  semantic  annotation  and  syn-
tactic structure, and also the global context, such 
as topic of the text, discourse segmentation, etc. 
Currently we have implemented chunk grammars 
for Bulgarian and English.
For the implementation of the annotation gram-
mar  we  rely  on  the  grammar  facilities  of  the 
CLaRK System (Simov et al., 2001). The struc-
ture of each grammar rule in CLaRK is defined 
by the following DTD fragment:
<!ELEMENT line (LC?, RE, RC?, RM, Com-
ment?) >

<!ELEMENT LC (#PCDATA)>

<!ELEMENT RC (#PCDATA)>

<!ELEMENT RE (#PCDATA)>

<!ELEMENT RM (#PCDATA)>

<!ELEMENT Comment (#PCDATA)>

Each rule is represented as a line element. The 
rule consists of regular expression (RE) and cat-
egory (RM = return markup). The regular expres-
sion  is  evaluated  over  the  content  of  a  given 
XML element and could recognize tokens and/or 
annotated data. The return markup is represented 
as an XML fragment which is substituted for the 
recognized  part  of  the  content  of  the  element. 
Additionally, the user could use regular expres-

54



sions to restrict the context in which the regular 
expression is evaluated successfully. The LC ele-
ment  contains  a  regular  expression  for  the  left 
context and the RC for the right one. The element 
Comment  is for human use. The application of 
the grammar  is governed by  Xpath expressions 
which provide additional mechanism for accurate 
annotation of a given XML document. Thus, the 
CLaRK  grammar  is  a  good  choice  for  imple-
mentation of the initial annotation grammar.
The creation of the actual annotation grammars 
started with the terms in the lexicons for Bulgari-
an and English. Each term was lemmatized and 
the lemmatized form of the term was converted 
into regular expression of grammar rules. Each 
concept related to the term is stored in the return 
markup of the corresponding rule. Thus, if a term 
is ambiguous, then the corresponding rule in the 
grammar  contains  reference to  all  concepts  re-
lated to the term.
The  relation  Ontology-to-Text implemented  in 
this way provides facilities for solving different 
tasks,  such  as  ontological  search  (including 
cross-lingual  search),  ontology browsing,  onto-
logy learning.  In  order  to  support  multilingual 
access to semantic annotations we could imple-
ment the relation for several languages using the 
same ontology as starting point. In this way we 
implement  a  mapping  between  the  lexicons  in 
different languages and also comparable annota-
tion of texts in them.
Within SINUS Project we have started the imple-
mentation of the Ontology-to-Text relation on the 
basis of  the terms  included in the ontology.  In 
contrast  to past  applications where the concept 
grammars  included  only  the  concepts  them-
selves, here also properties have been added. The 
relation from these terms to conceptual informa-
tion is represented in two ways – direct terms for 
a given concept and terms for some property of a 
given concept. In order to keep this information 
within the annotation we keep it  in the model. 
Thus, we annotated not only concrete concepts, 
but  also  fragments  of  conceptual  information 
comprising a property and a concept (in the do-
main or the range of the property).  In this way 
we provide annotation appropriate for future re-
cognition of relations in the text.
The terms extracted from the ontology are lem-
matized  by  the  Bulgarian  Morphological  Lex-
icon. The lemmatized versions of the terms are 
converted  automatically  into  CLaRK  regular 
grammars  which  are  used  for  the  actual  docu-
ment annotation. In the following we present the 
example text from above annotated by the sys-

tem. The actual annotation is done by the follow-
ing format:

<OntoAnnotation>
… Term …
    <OntoFragment>
      … Ontology Fragment
    </OntoFragment>
</OntoAnnotation>

The Term is presented as a sequence of <tok> 
elements for each token of the term. Each token 
is  annotated  with  the  appropriate  grammatical 
features. These features are used in the concept 
annotation grammars. The Ontology Fragment is 
represented by a set of <class> and <property> 
elements. Both kinds of elements have attribute 
@uri which represents the corresponding class or 
property  identifier.  This  attribute  is  obligatory. 
Additionally  the  <property>  element  has  @do-
main,  @range  and  @value  attribute.  They  de-
termine the domain, range and the value of the 
attribute when recognized uniquely from the on-
tology and the annotation within the text. Bellow 
is given the resulting annotation for a part of our 
text example.
Two  terms  are  recognized  in  the  text  extract: 
Основа (Base) and Дървесина (Wood). The first 
is annotated with one class and two properties, 
the second – with two classes and one property. 
The property in the second case received also a 
concrete value  дърво (wood). At later stage the 
user can add a statement that the base, mentioned 
in the text, is made of  wood. The user interven-
tion is important in cases when the text contains 
ambiguity. The sublanguage of descriptive texts 
from the Library gives us the possibility to write 
rules for automatic addition of such statements in 
the future.

<OntoAnnotation>

  <tok ana="Ncfsd"> </tok>Основата
  <OntoFragment>

   <class uri="sinus:OWLClass_Base"/>

   <property 

      domain="sinus:OWLClass_Base" 

      range="sinus:OWLClass_Primer" 

      uri="sinus:OWLObjectProperty_base_

has_Component"/>

  <property domain="sinus:OWLClass_Base" 

      range="owl:DataRange"         

      uri="sinus:OWLDataProperty_base_ha

s_Cloth"/>

    </OntoFragment>

</OntoAnnotation>

    <tok ana="Vxitf-r3s">e</tok>

55



  <tok ana="R"> </tok>от
  <tok ana="Afsi"> </tok>иглолистна
<OntoAnnotation>

  <tok ana="Ncfsi"> </tok>дървесина
  <OntoFragment>

    <class uri="sinus:OWLClass_BaseMa-

terial"/>

    <class uri="sinus:OWLClass_SolidMa-

terial"/>

    <property range="owl:DataRange" 

      uri="sinus:OWLDataProperty_baseMa-

terial_has_Name"

      value=" o"/>дърв
  </OntoFragment>

</OntoAnnotation>

A Web service is implemented for the text an-
notation purposes. The input to it is a plain text. 
The output is an XML document according to the 
above format.  The communication of Web ser-
vice  is  made  possible  with  the  adoption  of  a 
RESTfull approach to the service communication 
with a simple but effective use of output XML 
files. In future the Web service will be integrated 
in the overall architecture of SINUS platform in-
teracting directly with the Library and semantic 
repository.

4 Future Work 

The experiment to support the user during the se-
mantic annotation process with information ex-
tracted from texts is established to estimate the 
efforts against the benefits, and price of prelimin-
ary work on texts. The process of texts tagging 
(semantic text annotation) is applied for purposes 
of particular use-case suggested by SINUS plat-
form for Bulgarian texts. The future work on SI-
NUS project includes the usage of the pre-pre-
pared annotations in texts and extensive tests on 
the semantic annotation process. The results will 
be analyzed in detail and compared to some re-
lated  works  as  those  reported  in  (Hare  et  al., 
2006),  (Ossenbruggen et  al.,  2007)  and others. 
Another interesting topic arising here is the mul-
tilinguality  and  possible  cross-references  if  the 
experiment  is  provided  with  texts  in  different 
languages (English, for example). 

Acknowledgments
The research is  supported by the National  Sci-
ence Fund of Bulgaria under the project No. D-
002-189.

References 
Crofts N., Doerr M., Gill T., Stead S., Stiff M. (edit-

ors).  2010.  Definition of  the  CIDOC Conceptual  
Reference Model. 

Dochev  D.,  Agre  G.  2009.  Towards Semantic  Web  
Enhanced Learning,  In  Proceedings.  of  Int.  Con-
ference on Knowledge Management and Informa-
tion Sharing, Madeira, pp. 212-217. 

Hare, J. S., Sinclair, P. A. S., Lewis, P. H., Martinez, 
K.,  Enser,  P.  G.  B.  and  Sandom,  C.  J.  2006. 
Bridging the Semantic Gap in Multimedia Inform-
ation  Retrieval:  Top-down  and  Bottom-up  ap-
proach,. In: Mastering the Gap: From Information 
Extraction  to  Semantic  Representation,  3rd 
European  Semantic  Web  Conference,  Budva, 
Montenegro.

Ossenbruggen J., Amin A., Hardman L., Hildebrand 
M., Assem M., Omelayenko B., Schreiber G., Tor-
dai A., de Boer V., Wielinga B., Wielemaker J., de 
Niet M., Taekema J., van Orsouw M.-F., and Tees-
ing  A.  2007.  Searching  and  Annotating  Virtual  
Heritage  Collections  with  Semantic-Web  Tech-
niques, In: Museums and the Web, pp.11-14.

Pavlova-Draganova  L.,  Georgiev  V.,  Draganov  L. 
2007.  Virtual Encyclopaedia  of  Bulgarian Icono-
graphy, Information Technologies and Knowledge, 
vol.1, №3, pp. 267-271. 

Simov K., Z. Peev, M. Kouylekov, A. Simov, M. Di-
mitrov,  A.  Kiryakov.  2001.  CLaRK  -  an  XML-
based System for Corpora Development. In: Proc. 
of  the  Corpus  Linguistics  2001  Conference,  pp. 
558-560.

Simov K. and P. Osenova. 2007. Applying Ontology-
Based  Lexicons  to  the  Semantic  Annotation  of  
Learning  Objects.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  Work-
shop on NLP and Knowledge Represenattion for 
eLearning Environments, RANLP-2007, pp. 49-55.

Simov K. and P. Osenova. 2008. Language Resources  
and Tools  for  Ontology-Based  Semantic  Annota-
tion, In: Proceedings of  OntoLex 2008 Workshop 
at LREC 2008, eds. Al. Oltramari, L. Prévot, Chu-
Ren Huang, P. Buitelaar, P. Vossen, pp. 9-13.

56


