










































Stanfords Multi-Pass Sieve Coreference Resolution System at the CoNLL-2011 Shared Task


Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning: Shared Task, pages 28–34,
Portland, Oregon, 23-24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Stanford’s Multi-Pass Sieve Coreference Resolution System at the
CoNLL-2011 Shared Task

Heeyoung Lee, Yves Peirsman, Angel Chang, Nathanael Chambers,
Mihai Surdeanu, Dan Jurafsky

Stanford NLP Group
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305

{heeyoung,peirsman,angelx,natec,mihais,jurafsky}@stanford.edu

Abstract

This paper details the coreference resolution
system submitted by Stanford at the CoNLL-
2011 shared task. Our system is a collection
of deterministic coreference resolution mod-
els that incorporate lexical, syntactic, seman-
tic, and discourse information. All these mod-
els use global document-level information by
sharing mention attributes, such as gender and
number, across mentions in the same cluster.
We participated in both the open and closed
tracks and submitted results using both pre-
dicted and gold mentions. Our system was
ranked first in both tracks, with a score of 57.8
in the closed track and 58.3 in the open track.

1 Introduction

This paper describes the coreference resolution sys-
tem used by Stanford at the CoNLL-2011 shared
task (Pradhan et al., 2011). Our system extends
the multi-pass sieve system of Raghunathan et
al. (2010), which applies tiers of deterministic coref-
erence models one at a time from highest to lowest
precision. Each tier builds on the entity clusters con-
structed by previous models in the sieve, guarantee-
ing that stronger features are given precedence over
weaker ones. Furthermore, this model propagates
global information by sharing attributes (e.g., gender
and number) across mentions in the same cluster.

We made three considerable extensions to the
Raghunathan et al. (2010) model. First, we added
five additional sieves, the majority of which address
the semantic similarity between mentions, e.g., us-
ing WordNet distance, and shallow discourse under-

standing, e.g., linking speakers to compatible pro-
nouns. Second, we incorporated a mention detection
sieve at the beginning of the processing flow. This
sieve filters our syntactic constituents unlikely to be
mentions using a simple set of rules on top of the
syntactic analysis of text. And lastly, we added a
post-processing step, which guarantees that the out-
put of our system is compatible with the shared task
and OntoNotes specifications (Hovy et al., 2006;
Pradhan et al., 2007).

Using this system, we participated in both the
closed1 and open2 tracks, using both predicted and
gold mentions. Using predicted mentions, our sys-
tem had an overall score of 57.8 in the closed track
and 58.3 in the open track. These were the top scores
in both tracks. Using gold mentions, our system
scored 60.7 in the closed track in 61.4 in the open
track.

We describe the architecture of our entire system
in Section 2. In Section 3 we show the results of sev-
eral experiments, which compare the impact of the
various features in our system, and analyze the per-
formance drop as we switch from gold mentions and
annotations (named entity mentions and parse trees)
to predicted information. We also report in this sec-
tion our official results in the testing partition.

1Only the provided data can be used, i.e., WordNet and gen-
der gazetteer.

2Any external knowledge source can be used. We used
additional animacy, gender, demonym, and country and states
gazetteers.

28



2 System Architecture

Our system consists of three main stages: mention
detection, followed by coreference resolution, and
finally, post-processing. In the first stage, mentions
are extracted and relevant information about men-
tions, e.g., gender and number, is prepared for the
next step. The second stage implements the ac-
tual coreference resolution of the identified men-
tions. Sieves in this stage are sorted from highest
to lowest precision. For example, the first sieve (i.e.,
highest precision) requires an exact string match be-
tween a mention and its antecedent, whereas the
last one (i.e., lowest precision) implements pronom-
inal coreference resolution. Post-processing is per-
formed to adjust our output to the task specific con-
straints, e.g., removing singletons.

It is important to note that the first system stage,
i.e., the mention detection sieve, favors recall heav-
ily, whereas the second stage, which includes the ac-
tual coreference resolution sieves, is precision ori-
ented. Our results show that this design lead to
state-of-the-art performance despite the simplicity
of the individual components. This strategy has
been successfully used before for information ex-
traction, e.g., in the BioNLP 2009 event extraction
shared task (Kim et al., 2009), several of the top sys-
tems had a first high-recall component to identify
event anchors, followed by high-precision classi-
fiers, which identified event arguments and removed
unlikely event candidates (Björne et al., 2009). In
the coreference resolution space, several works have
shown that applying a list of rules from highest to
lowest precision is beneficial for coreference reso-
lution (Baldwin, 1997; Raghunathan el al., 2010).
However, we believe we are the first to show that this
high-recall/high-precision strategy yields competi-
tive results for the complete task of coreference res-
olution, i.e., including mention detection and both
nominal and pronominal coreference.

2.1 Mention Detection Sieve

In our particular setup, the recall of the mention de-
tection component is more important than its preci-
sion, because any missed mentions are guaranteed
to affect the final score, but spurious mentions may
not impact the overall score if they are left as sin-
gletons, which are discarded by our post-processing

step. Therefore, our mention detection algorithm fo-
cuses on attaining high recall rather than high preci-
sion. We achieve our goal based on the list of sieves
sorted by recall (from highest to lowest). Each sieve
uses syntactic parse trees, identified named entity
mentions, and a few manually written patterns based
on heuristics and OntoNotes specifications (Hovy et
al., 2006; Pradhan et al., 2007). In the first and
highest recall sieve, we mark all noun phrase (NP),
possessive pronoun, and named entity mentions in
each sentence as candidate mentions. In the follow-
ing sieves, we remove from this set all mentions that
match any of the exclusion rules below:

1. We remove a mention if a larger mention with
the same head word exists, e.g., we remove The
five insurance companies in The five insurance
companies approved to be established this time.

2. We discard numeric entities such as percents,
money, cardinals, and quantities, e.g., 9%,
$10, 000, Tens of thousands, 100 miles.

3. We remove mentions with partitive or quanti-
fier expressions, e.g., a total of 177 projects.

4. We remove pleonastic it pronouns, detected us-
ing a set of known expressions, e.g., It is possi-
ble that.

5. We discard adjectival forms of nations, e.g.,
American.

6. We remove stop words in a predetermined list
of 8 words, e.g., there, ltd., hmm.

Note that the above rules extract both mentions in
appositive and copulative relations, e.g., [[Yongkang
Zhou] , the general manager] or [Mr. Savoca] had
been [a consultant. . . ]. These relations are not an-
notated in the OntoNotes corpus, e.g., in the text
[[Yongkang Zhou] , the general manager], only the
larger mention is annotated. However, appositive
and copulative relations provide useful (and highly
precise) information to our coreference sieves. For
this reason, we keep these mentions as candidates,
and remove them later during post-processing.

2.2 Mention Processing
Once mentions are extracted, we sort them by sen-
tence number, and left-to-right breadth-first traversal

29



order in syntactic trees in the same sentence (Hobbs,
1977). We select for resolution only the first men-
tions in each cluster,3 for two reasons: (a) the first
mention tends to be better defined (Fox, 1993),
which provides a richer environment for feature ex-
traction; and (b) it has fewer antecedent candidates,
which means fewer opportunities to make a mis-
take. For example, given the following ordered list
of mentions, {m11, m22, m23, m34, m15, m26}, where
the subscript indicates textual order and the super-
script indicates cluster id, our model will attempt
to resolve only m22 and m

3
4. Furthermore, we dis-

card first mentions that start with indefinite pronouns
(e.g., some, other) or indefinite articles (e.g., a, an)
if they have no antecedents that have the exact same
string extents.

For each selected mention mi, all previous men-
tions mi−1, . . . , m1 become antecedent candidates.
All sieves traverse the candidate list until they find
a coreferent antecedent according to their criteria
or reach the end of the list. Crucially, when com-
paring two mentions, our approach uses informa-
tion from the entire clusters that contain these men-
tions instead of using just information local to the
corresponding mentions. Specifically, mentions in
a cluster share their attributes (e.g., number, gen-
der, animacy) between them so coreference decision
are better informed. For example, if a cluster con-
tains two mentions: a group of students, which is
singular, and five students, which is plural,
the number attribute of the entire cluster becomes
singular or plural, which allows it to match
other mentions that are both singular and plural.
Please see (Raghunathan et al., 2010) for more de-
tails.

2.3 Coreference Resolution Sieves

2.3.1 Core System
The core of our coreference resolution system is

an incremental extension of the system described in
Raghunathan et al. (2010). Our core model includes
two new sieves that address nominal mentions and
are inserted based on their precision in a held-out
corpus (see Table 1 for the complete list of sieves
deployed in our system). Since these two sieves use

3We initialize the clusters as singletons and grow them pro-
gressively in each sieve.

Ordered sieves
1. Mention Detection Sieve
2. Discourse Processing Sieve
3. Exact String Match Sieve
4. Relaxed String Match Sieve
5. Precise Constructs Sieve (e.g., appositives)
6-8. Strict Head Matching Sieves A-C
9. Proper Head Word Match Sieve
10. Alias Sieve
11. Relaxed Head Matching Sieve
12. Lexical Chain Sieve
13. Pronouns Sieve

Table 1: The sieves in our system; sieves new to this pa-
per are in bold.

simple lexical constraints without semantic informa-
tion, we consider them part of the baseline model.
Relaxed String Match: This sieve considers two
nominal mentions as coreferent if the strings ob-
tained by dropping the text following their head
words are identical, e.g., [Clinton] and [Clinton,
whose term ends in January].
Proper Head Word Match: This sieve marks two
mentions headed by proper nouns as coreferent if
they have the same head word and satisfy the fol-
lowing constraints:

Not i-within-i - same as Raghunathan et al. (2010).

No location mismatches - the modifiers of two men-
tions cannot contain different location named entities,
other proper nouns, or spatial modifiers. For example,
[Lebanon] and [southern Lebanon] are not coreferent.

No numeric mismatches - the second mention cannot
have a number that does not appear in the antecedent, e.g.,
[people] and [around 200 people] are not coreferent.

In addition to the above, a few more rules are
added to get better performance for predicted men-
tions.

Pronoun distance - sentence distance between a pronoun
and its antecedent cannot be larger than 3.

Bare plurals - bare plurals are generic and cannot have a
coreferent antecedent.

2.3.2 Semantic-Similarity Sieves
We first extend the above system with two

new sieves that exploit semantics from WordNet,
Wikipedia infoboxes, and Freebase records, drawing
on previous coreference work using these databases
(Ng & Cardie, 2002; Daumé & Marcu, 2005;
Ponzetto & Strube, 2006; Ng, 2007; Yang & Su,

30



2007; Bengston & Roth, 2008; Huang et al., 2009;
inter alia). Since the input to a sieve is a collection of
mention clusters built by the previous (more precise)
sieves, we need to link mention clusters (rather than
individual mentions) to records in these three knowl-
edge bases. The following steps generate a query for
these resources from a mention cluster.

First, we select the most representative mention
in a cluster by preferring mentions headed by proper
nouns to mentions headed by common nouns, and
nominal mentions to pronominal ones. In case of
ties, we select the longer string. For example, the
mention selected from the cluster {President George
W. Bush, president, he} is President George W.
Bush. Second, if this mention returns nothing from
the knowledge bases, we implement the following
query relaxation algorithm: (a) remove the text fol-
lowing the mention head word; (b) select the lowest
noun phrase (NP) in the parse tree that includes the
mention head word; (c) use the longest proper noun
(NNP*) sequence that ends with the head word; (d)
select the head word. For example, the query pres-
ident Bill Clinton, whose term ends in January is
successively changed to president Bill Clinton, then
Bill Clinton, and finally Clinton. If multiple records
are returned, we keep the top two for Wikipedia and
Freebase, and all synsets for WordNet.

Alias Sieve
This sieve addresses name aliases, which are de-

tected as follows. Two mentions headed by proper
nouns are marked as aliases (and stored in the same
entity cluster) if they appear in the same Wikipedia
infobox or Freebase record in either the ‘name’ or
‘alias’ field, or they appear in the same synset in
WordNet. As an example, this sieve correctly de-
tects America Online and AOL as aliases. We also
tested the utility of Wikipedia categories, but found
little gain over morpho-syntactic features.

Lexical Chain Sieve
This sieve marks two nominal mentions as coref-

erent if they are linked by a WordNet lexical chain
that traverses hypernymy or synonymy relations. We
use all synsets for each mention, but restrict it to
mentions that are at most three sentences apart, and
lexical chains of length at most four. This sieve cor-
rectly links Britain with country, and plane with air-

craft.
To increase the precision of the above two sieves,

we use additional constraints before two mentions
can match: attribute agreement (number, gender, an-
imacy, named entity labels), no i-within-i, no loca-
tion or numeric mismatches (as in Section 2.3.1),
and we do not use the abstract entity synset in Word-
Net, except in chains that include ‘organization’.

2.3.3 Discourse Processing Sieve
This sieve matches speakers to compatible pro-

nouns, using shallow discourse understanding to
handle quotations and conversation transcripts. Al-
though more complex discourse constraints have
been proposed, it has been difficult to show improve-
ments (Tetreault & Allen, 2003; 2004).

We begin by identifying speakers within text. In
non-conversational text, we use a simple heuristic
that searches for the subjects of reporting verbs (e.g.,
say) in the same sentence or neighboring sentences
to a quotation. In conversational text, speaker infor-
mation is provided in the dataset.

The extracted speakers then allow us to imple-
ment the following sieve heuristics:

• 〈I〉s4 assigned to the same speaker are coreferent.

• 〈you〉s with the same speaker are coreferent.

• The speaker and 〈I〉s in her text are coreferent.

For example, I, my, and she in the following sen-
tence are coreferent: “[I] voted for [Nader] because
[he] was most aligned with [my] values,” [she] said.

In addition to the above sieve, we impose speaker
constraints on decisions made by subsequent sieves:

• The speaker and a mention which is not 〈I〉 in the
speaker’s utterance cannot be coreferent.

• Two 〈I〉s (or two 〈you〉s, or two 〈we〉s) assigned to
different speakers cannot be coreferent.

• Two different person pronouns by the same speaker
cannot be coreferent.

• Nominal mentions cannot be coreferent with 〈I〉,
〈you〉, or 〈we〉 in the same turn or quotation.

• In conversations, 〈you〉 can corefer only with the
previous speaker.

For example, [my] and [he] are not coreferent in the
above example (third constraint).

4We define 〈I〉 as ’I’, ’my’, ’me’, or ’mine’, 〈we〉 as first
person plural pronouns, and 〈you〉 as second person pronouns.

31



Annotations Coref R P F1
Gold Before 92.8 37.7 53.6
Gold After 75.1 70.1 72.6

Not gold Before 87.9 35.6 50.7
Not gold After 71.7 68.4 70.0

Table 2: Performance of the mention detection compo-
nent, before and after coreference resolution, with both
gold and actual linguistic annotations.

2.4 Post Processing

To guarantee that the output of our system matches
the shared task requirements and the OntoNotes
annotation specification, we implement two post-
processing steps:

• We discard singleton clusters.

• We discard the mention that appears later in
text in appositive and copulative relations. For
example, in the text [[Yongkang Zhou] , the
general manager] or [Mr. Savoca] had been
[a consultant. . . ], the mentions Yongkang Zhou
and a consultant. . . are removed in this stage.

3 Results and Discussion

Table 2 shows the performance of our mention de-
tection algorithm. We show results before and after
coreference resolution and post-processing (when
singleton mentions are removed). We also list re-
sults with gold and predicted linguistic annotations
(i.e., syntactic parses and named entity recognition).
The table shows that the recall of our approach is
92.8% (if gold annotations are used) or 87.9% (with
predicted annotations). In both cases, precision is
low because our algorithm generates many spurious
mentions due to its local nature. However, as the ta-
ble indicates, many of these mentions are removed
during post-processing, because they are assigned
to singleton clusters during coreference resolution.
The two main causes for our recall errors are lack
of recognition of event mentions (e.g., verbal men-
tions such as growing) and parsing errors. Parsing
errors often introduce incorrect mention boundaries,
which yield both recall and precision errors. For
example, our system generates the predicted men-
tion, the working meeting of the ”863 Program” to-
day, for the gold mention the working meeting of the

”863 Program”. Due to this boundary mismatch,
all mentions found to be coreferent with this pre-
dicted mention are counted as precision errors, and
all mentions in the same coreference cluster with the
gold mention are counted as recall errors.

Table 3 lists the results of our end-to-end system
on the development partition. “External Resources”,
which were used only in the open track, includes: (a)
a hand-built list of genders of first names that we cre-
ated, incorporating frequent names from census lists
and other sources, (b) an animacy list (Ji and Lin,
2009), (c) a country and state gazetteer, and (d) a de-
monym list. “Discourse” stands for the sieve intro-
duced in Section 2.3.3. “Semantics” stands for the
sieves presented in Section 2.3.2. The table shows
that the discourse sieve yields an improvement of
almost 2 points to the overall score (row 1 versus
3), and external resources contribute 0.5 points. On
the other hand, the semantic sieves do not help (row
3 versus 4). The latter result contradicts our initial
experiments, where we measured a minor improve-
ment when these sieves were enabled and gold men-
tions were used. Our hypothesis is that, when pre-
dicted mentions are used, the semantic sieves are
more likely to link spurious mentions to existing
clusters, thus introducing precision errors. This sug-
gests that a different tuning of the sieve parameters
is required for the predicted mention scenario. For
this reason, we did not use the semantic sieves for
our submission. Hence, rows 2 and 3 in the table
show the performance of our official submission in
the development set, in the closed and open tracks
respectively.

The last three rows in Table 3 give insight on the
impact of gold information. This analysis indicates
that using gold linguistic annotation yields an im-
provement of only 2 points. This implies that the
quality of current linguistic processors is sufficient
for the task of coreference resolution. On the other
hand, using gold mentions raises the overall score by
15 points. This clearly indicates that pipeline archi-
tectures where mentions are identified first are inad-
equate for this task, and that coreference resolution
might benefit from the joint modeling of mentions
and coreference chains.

Finally, Table 4 lists our results on the held-out
testing partition. Note that in this dataset, the gold
mentions included singletons and generic mentions

32



Components MUC B3 CEAFE BLANC
ER D S GA GM R P F1 R P F1 R P F1 R P F1 avg F1√

58.8 56.5 57.6 68.0 68.7 68.4 44.8 47.1 45.9 68.8 73.5 70.9 57.3√
59.1 57.5 58.3 69.2 71.0 70.1 46.5 48.1 47.3 72.2 78.1 74.8 58.6√ √
60.1 59.5 59.8 69.5 71.9 70.7 46.5 47.1 46.8 73.8 78.6 76.0 59.1√ √ √
60.3 58.5 59.4 69.9 71.1 70.5 45.6 47.3 46.4 73.9 78.2 75.8 58.8√ √ √
63.8 61.5 62.7 71.4 72.3 71.9 47.1 49.5 48.3 75.6 79.6 77.5 61.0√ √ √
73.6 90.0 81.0 69.8 89.2 78.3 79.4 52.5 63.2 79.1 89.2 83.2 74.2√ √ √ √
74.0 90.1 81.3 70.2 89.3 78.6 79.7 53.1 63.7 79.5 89.6 83.6 74.5

Table 3: Comparison between various configurations of our system. ER, D, S stand for External Resources, Discourse,
and Semantics sieves. GA and GM stand for Gold Annotations, and Gold Mentions. The top part of the table shows
results using only predicted annotations and mentions, whereas the bottom part shows results of experiments with gold
information. Avg F1 is the arithmetic mean of MUC, B3, and CEAFE. We used the development partition for these
experiments.

MUC B3 CEAFE BLANC
Track Gold Mention Boundaries R P F1 R P F1 R P F1 R P F1 avg F1
Close Not Gold 61.8 57.5 59.6 68.4 68.2 68.3 43.4 47.8 45.5 70.6 76.2 73.0 57.8
Open Not Gold 62.8 59.3 61.0 68.9 69.0 68.9 43.3 46.8 45.0 71.9 76.6 74.0 58.3
Close Gold 65.9 62.1 63.9 69.5 70.6 70.0 46.3 50.5 48.3 72.0 78.6 74.8 60.7
Open Gold 66.9 63.9 65.4 70.1 71.5 70.8 46.3 49.6 47.9 73.4 79.0 75.8 61.4

Table 4: Results on the official test set.

as well, whereas in development (lines 6 and 7 in Ta-
ble 3), gold mentions included only mentions part of
an actual coreference chain. This explains the large
difference between, say, line 6 in Table 3 and line 4
in Table 4.

Our scores are comparable to previously reported
state-of-the-art results for coreference resolution
with predicted mentions. For example, Haghighi
and Klein (2010) compare four state-of-the-art sys-
tems on three different corpora and report B3 scores
between 63 and 77 points. While the corpora used
in (Haghighi and Klein, 2010) are different from the
one in this shared task, our result of 68 B3 suggests
that our system’s performance is competitive. In this
task, our submissions in both the open and the closed
track obtained the highest scores.

4 Conclusion

In this work we showed how a competitive end-to-
end coreference resolution system can be built using
only deterministic models (or sieves). Our approach
starts with a high-recall mention detection compo-
nent, which identifies mentions using only syntactic
information and named entity boundaries, followed
by a battery of high-precision deterministic corefer-
ence sieves, applied one at a time from highest to
lowest precision. These models incorporate lexical,
syntactic, semantic, and discourse information, and

have access to document-level information (i.e., we
share mention attributes across clusters as they are
built). For this shared task, we extended our ex-
isting system with new sieves that model shallow
discourse (i.e., speaker identification) and seman-
tics (lexical chains and alias detection). Our results
demonstrate that, despite their simplicity, determin-
istic models for coreference resolution obtain com-
petitive results, e.g., we obtained the highest scores
in both the closed and open tracks (57.8 and 58.3
respectively). The code used for this shared task is
publicly released.5

Acknowledgments

We thank the shared task organizers for their effort.
This material is based upon work supported by

the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) under
prime contract no. FA8750-09-C-0181. Any opin-
ions, findings, and conclusion or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the view of the Air
Force Research Laboratory (AFRL).

5See http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/
dcoref.shtml for the standalone coreference resolution
system and http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/
corenlp.shtml for Stanford’s suite of natural language
processing tools, which includes this coreference resolution
system.

33



References

B. Baldwin. 1997. CogNIAC: high precision corefer-
ence with limited knowledge and linguistic resources.
In Proceedings of a Workshop on Operational Factors
in Practical, Robust Anaphora Resolution for Unre-
stricted Texts.

E. Bengston & D. Roth. 2008. Understanding the value
of features for coreference resolution. In EMNLP.

Jari Björne, Juho Heimonen, Filip Ginter, Antti Airola,
Tapio Pahikkala, and Tapio Salakoski. 2009. Ex-
tracting Complex Biological Events with Rich Graph-
Based Feature Sets. Proceedings of the Workshop on
BioNLP: Shared Task.

H. Daumé III and D. Marcu. 2005. A large-scale ex-
ploration of effective global features for a joint entity
detection and tracking model. In EMNLP-HLT.

B. A. Fox 1993. Discourse structure and anaphora:
written and conversational English. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

A. Haghighi and D. Klein. 2010. Coreference resolution
in a modular, entity-centered model. In Proc. of HLT-
NAACL.

E. Hovy, M. Marcus, M. Palmer, L. Ramshaw, and R.
Weischedel 2006. OntoNotes: The 90% Solution. In
HLT/NAACL.

Z. Huang, G. Zeng, W. Xu, and A. Celikyilmaz 2009.
Accurate semantic class classifier for coreference res-
olution. In EMNLP.

J.R. Hobbs. 1977. Resolving pronoun references. Lin-
gua.

H. Ji and D. Lin. 2009. Gender and animacy knowl-
edge discovery from web-scale n-grams for unsuper-
vised person mention detection. In PACLIC.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Yoshi-
nobu Kano, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2009. Overview
of the BioNLP’09 Shared Task on Event Extrac-
tion. Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2009 Work-
shop on Natural Language Processing in Biomedicine
(BioNLP’09).

V. Ng 2007. Semantic Class Induction and Coreference
Resolution. In ACL.

V. Ng and C. Cardie. 2002. Improving Machine Learn-
ing Approaches to Coreference Resolution. in ACL
2002

S. Ponzetto and M. Strube. 2006. Exploiting semantic
role labeling, Wordnet and Wikipedia for coreference
resolution. Proceedings of NAACL.

Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw, Ralph Weischedel,
Jessica MacBride, and Linnea Micciulla. 2007. Unre-
stricted Coreference: Indentifying Entities and Events
in OntoNotes. In Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Semantic Computing (ICSC).

Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw, Mitchell Marcus,
Martha Palmer, Ralph Weischedel, and Nianwen Xue.
2011. CoNLL-2011 Shared Task: Modeling Unre-
stricted Coreference in OntoNotes. In Proceedings
of the Fifteenth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL 2011).

K. Raghunathan, H. Lee, S. Rangarajan, N. Chambers,
M. Surdeanu, D. Jurafsky, and C. Manning 2010.
A Multi-Pass Sieve for Coreference Resolution. In
EMNLP.

J. Tetreault and J. Allen. 2003. An Empirical Evalua-
tion of Pronoun Resolution and Clausal Structure. In
Proceedings of the 2003 International Symposium on
Reference Resolution.

J. Tetreault and J. Allen. 2004. Dialogue Structure and
Pronoun Resolution. In DAARC.

X. Yang and J. Su. 2007. Coreference Resolution Us-
ing Semantic Relatedness Information from Automat-
ically Discovered Patterns. In ACL.

34


