




















Semantic Search in Literature as an e-Humanities Research Tool:
CONPLISIT – Consumption Patterns and Life-Style in 19th Century

Swedish Literature
Lars Borin,1 Markus Forsberg,1 Christer Ahlberger2

1Språkbanken, Department of Swedish
2Department of Historical Studies
University of Gothenburg, Sweden
lars.borin@svenska.gu.se
markus.forsberg@gu.se

christer.ahlberger@history.gu.se

Abstract

We present our ongoing work on language
technology-based e-science in the humani-
ties, with a focus on text-based research in
the historical sciences. Currently, we are
working on the adaptation and integration
of lexical resources representing different
historical stages of Swedish into a lexi-
cal and morphological toolbox that will al-
low us to develop semantically oriented
text search applications for historical re-
search on Swedish text. We describe a se-
mantic search prototype which was built
using REST web services from this tool-
box as components, and which has been
evaluated by historians interested in using
digitized 19th century novels as primary
data for an historical investigation of the
emerging consumer society in 19th cen-
tury Sweden.

1 Introduction

Språkbanken1 (the Swedish Language Bank), is a
research unit at the University of Gothenburg in
Sweden. It was established with government fund-
ing in 1975 as a national center with a remit to col-
lect, process and store Swedish text corpora (i.e.,
large systematically compiled text collections). It
also aims at making linguistic data extracted from
the corpora and other linguistic resources, such as
electronic lexicons and term lists, as well as the
tools developed in-house for the purposes of lin-
guistic processing of text, available to researchers
and to the public.

Språkbanken’s activities have traditionally been
aimed at supporting (Swedish) linguistic research,

1<http://spraakbanken.gu.se>

but over the last few years we have become in-
creasingly interested in the potential of the lan-
guage technology tools and language resources
that we develop and maintain in Språkbanken for
forming key components in a general e-science in-
frastructure for the humanities, social sciences and
education, and not just linguistic research.

Currently, we are working on the adaptation and
integration of lexical resources representing dif-
ferent historical stages of Swedish into a lexical
and morphological toolbox that will allow us to
develop semantically oriented text search applica-
tions for historical research on Swedish text. More
specifically, the work we are presenting here is
a project named CONPLISIT, Consumption pat-
terns and life-style in Swedish literature, which
is a collaboration with historians at our university
and with the literature digitization initiative Litter-
aturbanken (see section 2.3 below), and the aim
of which is to develop semantic search tools for
investigating the emergence of the modern con-
sumer society in Sweden using contemporary lit-
erary sources (Ahlberger, 2009).

To this end, we are currently extending and
merging two lexical resources, SALDO and Dalin,
and connecting them to the search API of Litter-
aturbanken.

The rest of this presentation is organized as fol-
lows. In section 2, we describe the existing lan-
guage resources and tools that we have utilized
and in some cases enhanced in order to accom-
plish our goals. Section 3 contains a description of
the prototype semantic search application for his-
torical research. In section 4, we report on the first
user test of the application. In section 5 we sum
up our work so far and outline our plans for future
work.

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 58–65



2 Existing language resources and tools

2.1 SALDO: a semantic lexical resource for
present-day Swedish

SALDO (Borin, 2005; Borin and Forsberg, 2009;
Borin et al., 2008; Borin and Forsberg, 2008), or
SAL version 2, is a free modern Swedish semantic
and morphological lexicon intended for language
technology applications. The lexicon is available
under a Creative Commons Attribute-Share Alike
license and LGPL 3.0.

SALDO started its life as Svenskt association-
slexikon (Lönngren, 1992) – ‘The Swedish As-
sociative Thesaurus’, a so far relatively unknown
Swedish thesaurus with an unusual semantic or-
ganization, reminiscent of, but different from that
of WordNet (Borin and Forsberg, 2009). SAL
has been published in paper form in two reports,
from the Center for Computational Linguistics
(Lönngren, 1998), and the Department of Linguis-
tics (Lönngren, 1992), both at Uppsala University.
Additionally, the headwords and their basic se-
mantic characterizations have been available elec-
tronically, in the form of text files, from the very
beginning.

The history of SAL has been documented by
Lönngren (Lönngren, 1989) and Borin (Borin,
2005). Initially, text corpora were used as sources
of the vocabulary which went into SAL, e.g., a
Swedish textbook for foreigners and a corpus of
popular-scientific articles. A small encyclopedia
and some other sources provided the large num-
ber (over 3,000) of proper names found in SAL.
Eventually, a list of the headwords from Svensk or-
dbok (SO, 1986) was acquired from the NLP and
Lexicology Unit at the University of Gothenburg,
and the second paper edition of SAL (Lönngren,
1992) contained 71,750 entries. At the time of
writing, SALDO contains slightly over 104,000
entries, and new entries are added almost daily.

The central semantic relation of SALDO is as-
sociation, a “non-classical” lexical-semantic rela-
tion (Morris and Hirst, 2004). SALDO describes
all words semantically, not only the open word
classes. By way of illustration, figure 1 shows the
semantic ‘neighbors’ (rendered in blue/non-bold)
in SALDO of the word telefon ‘telephone (noun)’.
It is associated i.a. with words like samtala ‘hold
a conversation’, telefonledes ‘by phone’, pulsval
‘pulse dialling’, ringa ‘call (verb’, mobiltelefon
‘mobile phone’, the proper name Bell, and many

others, as shown in figure 1.2

We soon realized that in order to be useful
in language technology applications, SAL would
have to be provided at least with part-of-speech
and inflectional morphological information – both
entirely absent from SAL in its original form – and
SALDO was created. The morphological compo-
nent of SALDO has been defined using Functional
Morphology (FM) (Forsberg and Ranta, 2004;
Forsberg, 2007), a tool that provides a develop-
ment environment for computational morpholo-
gies. It is a tool with a flexible language for defin-
ing morphological rules together with a platform
for testing, which is used to fend off resource
degradation during development. Furthermore, it
has a rich export system, targetting around 20 for-
mats, and supports both (compound) analysis and
synthesis.

SALDO is, as one of its distribution channels,
published as REST web services, updated daily.
Web services provide clean interfaces and instant
updates, but are restricted to small amounts of data
because of network latency. Presently available
web services include incremental fullform lookup,
semantic lookup, compound analysis, and an in-
flection engine service.3

2.2 Dalin: a lexical resource for 19th century
Swedish

A.F. Dalin: Ordbok öfver svenska språket (1850–
1855) (Dalin, 1853 1855) is a dictionary that has
been digitized at our research unit, and is the start-
ing point for our work on 19th century Swedish.

The language of Dalin – Late Modern Swedish
according to the traditional linguistic periodization
of Swedish used by Swedish linguists – is close to
the modern language of SALDO, where the dif-
ferences are in minor spelling variations, such as
the use of the letter <f> instead of <v>, some
morphological differences, such as inflection of
verbs in person and number, completely absent in
Present-Day Swedish. Moreover, there is a differ-
ence in the vocabulary, since the vocabulary of a
dictionary reflects of the society it was produced
in, e.g., many of the words in Dalin have to do ei-
ther with agriculture or with religious matters.

We have created a morphology for Dalin by
adapting the morphological component developed
for SALDO. With a comparatively small effort we

2From <http://spraakbanken.gu.se/ws/saldo-ws/lid/
html/telefon..1>

3See <http://spraakbanken.gu.se/eng/saldo>

59

Semantic search in literature as an e-Humanities research tool: CONPLISIT — Consumption
patterns and life-style in 19th century Swedish literature

59



Figure 1: Semantic neighbors (rendered in blue/non-bold) of telefon ‘telephone (n)’ in SALDO

have been able to provide most of the entries with
an inflectional pattern based on the inflectional
information provided in Dalin. However, the in-
flectional information in Dalin is underspecified,
which means that there are erroneous word forms
that we need to weed out. Also, the remainder of
the entries will require a considerably larger effort,
since part of the 19th century inflectional patterns
cannot be automatically or almost automatically
created by adaptation of the modern inflections;
this holds for inter alia many pronouns and strong
verbs. These comprise central, high-frequency vo-
cabulary, important in practical text processing ap-
plications.

The linking of Dalin to SALDO has been done
by analyzing modernized headwords of the en-
tries in Dalin using SALDO. Connecting on the
entry level is a first, over-generating, approxima-
tion, since the senses of Dalin is given within an
entry. For the linking we were able to reuse an
existing resource, as a manual spelling translation
for the entries in Dalin had been made in an ear-
lier project in our department and preserved in a
database, which by a stroke of good luck still ex-
isted in one of our servers.

Since the vocabulary of Dalin reflects another
time and another societal structure, many of its

content words are not in SALDO. However, in a
large number of cases they are compound words
where the constituents of the compound are in
SALDO. An example could be the headword
bäfverhund with a modern spelling bäverhund
‘beaver dog’, meaning a dog used for hunting
beavers, a word that would normally not find
its way into a modern lexical resource – since
the practice it refers to is no longer pursued
– and adding the word to the modern resource
would be unsatisfactory, since to a modern reader
bäverhund would at most be a completely trans-
parent compound, meaning ‘a dog in some way
connected to beavers’, but without the convention-
alized or lexicalized meaning the word had earlier.

In cases like this we instead choose another
approach for linking the resources. Even though
bäverhund is not in SALDO, both bäver ‘beaver’
and hund ‘dog’ are, so we use SALDO to do a
compound analysis of bäverhund to bäver+hund,
and link with respect to the head of the compound,
i.e., hund.

The resulting entry for bäfverhund, which is
analogous to the other linked entries in Dalin, is
summarized in the table below. Every dictionary
entry has been given an persistent identifier, here
bäfverhund..e.1. We have the headword, its mod-

60

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg and Christer Ahlberger

60



ern spelling, the inflectional information in Dalin,
m. 2., and the paradigm identifier it has been as-
sociated to, nn 2m ulf. The paradigm identifier to-
gether with the headword defines the inflection ta-
ble. Finally, we have the connection to the sense
identifier in SALDO, hund..1.

headword modern pos paradigm
bäfverhund bäverhund nn nn 2m ulf
gram. desc. saldo id
m. 2. hund..1 bäfverhund..e.1

Dalin contains many verb entries consisting
of prefix plus verb written as one word, which
in Present-Day Swedish generally correspond to
phrasal verbs, i.e., verb plus separate particle/ ad-
verb. E.g., påspäda ‘add to’, where på ‘on, onto’ is
the particle, would in modern Swedish be a phrasal
verb, späda på, or in its more common short form,
spä på. We deal with these cases by allowing ad-
verbs as the first constituent of a compound, given
that the head of the compound is a verb. For exam-
ple:

headword modern pos paradigm
påspäda påspäda vb vb 2a ärfva
gram. desc. saldo id
v. a. 2. spä på..1 påspäda..e.1

There is still much work to be done on the 19th
century resource, but it is now in such a shape that
we have been able to harvest the fruits of its cre-
ation, and the semantic search discussed in this ar-
ticle is one such fruit.

2.3 Litteraturbanken: a digital repository of
classical Swedish fiction

Litteraturbanken4 (the Swedish Literature Bank)
is a national cultural heritage project financed by
the Swedish Academy. It aims at making available
online the full text of classical works of Swedish
literature, in manually proofread digital versions
of critical editions intended to be suitable for lit-
erary research and for the teaching of literature.
There is also abundant commissioned ancillary
material on its website, such as author presenta-
tions, bibliographies, and thematic essays about
authorships, genres or periods, written by experts
in each field. Currently, Litteraturbanken holds a
bit less than 300 works in a fully searchable XML
format (a variant of TEI P5), and about as much
again in facsimile (image) and pdf format.

4<http://litteraturbanken.se/>

Similarly to many other literature digitization
initiatives, most of the works in Litteraturbanken
are such for which copyright has expired (under
Swedish law this means that more than 70 years
must have passed since the death of the author).
At present, the bulk of the texts are from the 18th,
19th and early 20th centuries. However, there is
also an agreement with the national organizations
representing authors’ intellectual property rights,
allowing the inclusion of modern works according
to a uniform royalty payment scheme.

The Litteraturbanken website provides a (string/
orthographic word) search function where search
results are shown in a traditional concordance for-
mat, with links to the corresponding location in
the digital full-text versions of the texts. How-
ever, there are also separate search (web service)
APIs, both for displaying the results in the normal
HTML format, and for retrieving a list of search
hits for further processing.

3 Building a semantic search prototype

All the components needed for semantic search in
19th century literature are now at our disposal. A
prototype was designed jointly by the language
technology researchers in Språkbanken and the
historians involved in the project. This was delib-
erately a low-stakes effort, since we would not like
to put a lot of effort into a prototype which then
would turn out not to be what the users desired.
Our web service infrastructure supports this kind
of rapid prototyping, which often becomes sim-
ply a matter of designing a couple of simple web
pages acting as a kind of ‘glue’ joining REST web
services which provide the needed functionality.
Occasionally a new web service will have to be
implemented, but it is our experience that in com-
parison to developing monolithic client-side ap-
plications, this web-service based approach allows
very rapid construction and testing of quite sophis-
ticated prototypes. Once the prototyping phase is
over, it may turn out that this kind of architecture
will not scale to meet production requirements due
to, e.g., the inevitable network latency inherent in
a web service setup. This is a separate problem,
however, and its existence does in no way invali-
date this approach to prototyping.

The semantic relation we decided to build a pro-
totype around is the md1 relation, which is the set
of word senses at distance one from a target word
sense in SALDO, i.e., semantically close senses.

61

Semantic search in literature as an e-Humanities research tool: CONPLISIT — Consumption
patterns and life-style in 19th century Swedish literature

61



The general idea behind the semantic search is
the following: we look up up an input word form in
the two morphologies of SALDO and Dalin. The
SALDO senses associated to the input word form
are collected, and all lexical entries in Dalin con-
nected to these senses are listed.

The figure 2 shows the result of a search
of the word form soffa5 ‘sofa’, where there is
only one sense identifier soffa..1,6 connected
to two entries in Dalin, hvilosoffa..e.1
and soffa..e.1. Note that hvilosoffa has
been connected to soffa..1 through the com-
pound analysis of its modernized form, vilo+soffa
‘rest+sofa’. Clicking on either soffa..e.1 or
hvilosoffa..e.1 gives a fullform search in
Litteraturbanken.

There is only one md1 for both soffa and
hvilosoffa, given by the connection to soffa..1.

Figure 3 shows soffa..1’s md1,7 where we
can observe semantically related words such as
säng ‘bed’ and kanapé ‘couch’, but also some
erroneous ones due to the fact that the word
byrå is homonymous, meaning both ‘bureau’ and
‘dresser’. Clicking on any of the words in md1
gives a fullform search in Litteraturbanken.

Figure 4 shows the result of clicking on relater-
ade ord8 ‘related words’, which is a concordance
search of the words in md1. The words are linked
to the place in Litteraturbanken where they occur.

4 Semantic search in historical research:
Practical evaluation

The historians involved in the project have been
interested primarily in investigating changing con-
sumption patterns during the first half of the 19th
century. Sweden was during this period undergo-
ing a rapid integration into the emerging world
capitalist economy. A fundamental part if this in-
tegration process was a profound change in pat-
terns of consumption among ordinary people. This
change in consumption patterns is the focus of
the historical research questions addressed in the
CONPLISIT project. Earlier research on this topic
has utilized sources such as probate inventories
and tax registers. Today we have a reasonably

5<http://http://spraakbanken.gu.se/ws/dalin-ws/fl/
html/soffa>

6The HTML rendering hides the suffix ’..1’.
7<http://http://spraakbanken.gu.se/ws/dalin-ws/

md1/html/soffa..1>
8<http://http://spraakbanken.gu.se/ws/dalin-ws/lb/

html/250/soffa..1>

good knowledge of the use of new commodities
among social groups, sexes and age groups. On the
other hand we still have very little knowledge of
the contexts in which the new commodities were
used. The methods and source material hitherto
used in historical studies of emerging and chang-
ing consumption patterns simply has not allowed
us to fully analyze and interpret the contexts of use
of specific consumer items.

Hence, the research program of which our
project forms a part has as one of its specific goals
to develop new methods by the use of literature
during the period 1830–1860 as a main source
for understanding the context of consumption in
this period. The prototype semantic search appli-
cation is one such new method, which has under-
gone a small-scale formative evaluation conducted
by two historians involved in the project. We now
turn to the main impressions of this evaluation.

The historians initially searched for words like
porslin ‘porcelain, china’, spegel ‘mirror’, möbel
‘piece of furniture’, klocka ‘clock, watch’ and so
on. These items are example of the new way of
living among average people. The novels also pro-
vide a context, which is how, why and by whom
the new consumer items were used. The aim is to
study the new way of life mirrored in contempo-
rary literature and analyze the descriptions in the
texts against what we know of actual consumption
from other sources. Another important task for the
research program is to reconstruct the new world-
view and life-style of the emerging modern citi-
zen.

The historians found the semantic search to be a
good way of finding alternative search words that
one would normally not think of, and it provides
an overview of the variation in vocabulary choice.
In this respect, it saves time and effort. An exam-
ple is the search word soffa ‘sofa’, where the word
ottoman ‘ottoman’ is one of the suggested words.
This word had not occurred to the historians, and
moreover provided an interesting surprise, since a
search showed, contrary to expectation, that it is
mainly used by authors in the late 19th century.

However, in some cases, such as for the search
words porslin ‘porcelain, china’ and tapet ‘wallpa-
per’, there are many proposed words that are hard
to consider relevant in the context, which was par-
ticularly true for the word tapet, where many of the
related words are compounds with the head vägg
‘wall’, a word normally unrelated to consumption.

62

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg and Christer Ahlberger

62



Figure 2: Word form lookup of soffa ‘sofa’

Figure 3: Words semantically related to soffa ’sofa’

Figure 4: Related word search

63

Semantic search in literature as an e-Humanities research tool: CONPLISIT — Consumption
patterns and life-style in 19th century Swedish literature

63



The words that are proposed but get no hits in
Litteraturbanken are in many cases especially in-
teresting, since they define a set of words denoting
items that may not have existed at the time, or were
too uncommon, or just not interesting enough for
the author. An example is fickspegel ‘pocket mir-
ror’ that is mentioned in the literature, but only in
the late 19th century. Since pocket mirrors where
common already in the early 19th century, it raises
the question why no writer mentioned them, espe-
cially in contrast to words such as tapet ‘wallpa-
per’ and gardin ‘curtain’, that show another pat-
tern.

The function relaterade ord ‘related words’ that
gives a search for all words in md1 was judged by
the historians as potentially very useful, but many
irrelevant hits tended to drown the relevant ones.
However, if it would be possible to remove some
of the words before the search, it would make a
good exploratory tool.

One of the strongest requirements by the histo-
rians was the addition of chronological informa-
tion, i.e., enrichment of the metadata available for
the works in Litteraturbanken, and the possibil-
ity to limit the search with respect to chronolog-
ical information, as well as sort the search results
chronologically by publication year.

5 Summary and future work

Summing up, in the CONPLISIT project so far we
have accomplished the following:

• We have built a prototype semantic search ap-
plication for 19th century Swedish text. This
was possible to accomplish in reasonable
time – even quite quickly – since we were
able to reuse several existing language re-
sources and tools through their standardized
REST web service APIs, and only needed to
provide simple HTML pages as ‘glue’ for the
prototype application.

• We have conducted a small formative evalua-
tion of this search application with historians
involved in the project, who represent one in-
tended end-user category. The results of the
evaluation were encouraging, and indicated
some directions for further development.-

• We would like to claim that we have been
able to show how language resources and
tools can be used with good effect for build-
ing new research tools for humanities schol-
ars.

Given what we have already accomplished or
are in the midst of carrying out, as well as the kinds
of resources and expertise that we can bring to
bear on the problem of language technology sup-
port for historical studies, there are some lines of
research that are more natural than others for con-
tinuing our work:

• We have until now only tried one kind of
semantic relation – that available already in
SALDO – so a natural next step is to ex-
periment with other relations. The lexical re-
sources used in the CONPLISIT project are
developed within the framework of a larger
lexical project, Swedish FrameNet++.9 As
part of the larger project, we are also develop-
ing a Swedish wordnet. Because of the way
our infrastructure is built, the wordnet rela-
tions will be only a web service away once
the wordnet is in place.

• One of the strongest wishes on the part of the
historians was to be able to search Litteratur-
banken’s works chronologically, by publica-
tion year. This requires that the correspond-
ing metadata are added to Litteraturbanken,
something which is on their agenda anyway.

• Obviously, user interface issues have taken
second place in our work so far, and as the
functionality of successive prototypes comes
closer to fulfilling the basic requirements of
the users, user interface design will become
increasingly important.

• An interesting question is how to find good
and convincing use cases where more so-
phisticated linguistic information would be
required, e.g. named entity information or
grammatical information such as part of
speech or syntactic function.10

9See <http://http://spraakbanken.gu.se/eng/swefn>
10There are some indications in the literature that deeper

linguistic processing of historical documents can be of help
to humanities scholars (Rayson et al., 2007; Pilz et al., 2008).

On the other hand, and at the shallow end of the linguistic-
processing scale, one anonymous reviewer pointed out the
usefulness for large-scale investigations of historical texts of
extremely knowledge-light approaches inspired by informa-
tion retrieval technology, such as that of Michel et al. (2011),
who investigate n-gram statistics in the enormous database
collected in the Google Books project.

64

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg and Christer Ahlberger

64



Acknowledgements

The research presented here was supported by
the Swedish Research Council (the project Safe-
guarding the future of Språkbanken 2008–2010,
VR dnr 2007-7430), the University of Gothenburg
through its support of Språkbanken (the Swedish
Language Bank), and CLARIN through its support
of the CONPLISIT collaboration.

References
Christer Ahlberger. 2009. Consumption patterns and

life-style in Swedish literature – novels 1830-1860
(CONPLISIT). CLARIN collaboration proposal,
April.

Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2008. Saldo
1.0 (svenskt associationslexikon version 2).
Språkbanken, Göteborgs universitet.

Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2009. All in the
family: A comparison of SALDO and WordNet.
Odense.

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Lennart Lönngren.
2008. The hunting of the BLARK – SALDO, a
freely available lexical database for Swedish lan-
guage technology. In Joakim Nivre, Mats Dahllöf,
and Beata Megyesi, editors, Resourceful language
technology. Festschrift in honor of Anna Sågvall
Hein, number 7 in Acta Universitatis Upsalien-
sis: Studia Linguistica Upsaliensia, pages 21–32.
Uppsala University, Department of Linguistics and
Philology, Uppsala.

Lars Borin. 2005. Mannen är faderns mormor: Svenskt
associationslexikon reinkarnerat. LexicoNordica,
12:39–54.

Anders Fredrik Dalin. 1853–1855. Ordbok öfver sven-
ska språket. Vol. I–II. Stockholm.

Markus Forsberg and Aarne Ranta. 2004. Functional
morphology. In ICFP’04. Proceedings of the ninth
ACM SIGPLAN international conference of func-
tional programming, Snowbird, Utah. ACM.

Markus Forsberg. 2007. Three Tools for Language
Processing: BNF Converter, Functional Morphol-
ogy, and Extract. Ph.D. thesis, Göteborg University
and Chalmers University of Technology.

Lennart Lönngren. 1989. Svenskt associationslexikon:
Rapport från ett projekt inom datorstödd lexiko-
grafi. Centrum för datorlingvistik. Uppsala univer-
sitet. UCDL-R-89-1.

Lennart Lönngren. 1992. Svenskt associationslexikon.
Del I-IV. Institutionen för lingvistik. Uppsala uni-
versitet.

Lennart Lönngren. 1998. A Swedish associative the-
saurus. In Euralex ’98 proceedings, Vol. 2, pages
467–474.

Jean-Baptiste Michel, Yuan Kui Shen, Aviva Presser
Aiden, Adrian Veres, Matthew K. Gray, The
Google Books Team, Joseph P. Pickett and1
Dale Hoiberg, Dan Clancy, Peter Norvig, Jon
Orwant, Steven Pinker, Martin A. Nowak, and
Erez Lieberman Aiden. 2011. Quantitative analy-
sis of culture using millions of digitized books. Sci-
ence, 331(176):176–182.

Jane Morris and Graeme Hirst. 2004. Non-classical
lexical semantic relations. In Dan Moldovan and
Roxana Girju, editors, HLT-NAACL 2004: Workshop
on Computational Lexical Semantics, pages 46–51,
Boston. ACL.

T. Pilz, A. Ernst-Gerlach, S. Kempken, Paul Rayson,
and Dawn Archer. 2008. The identification of
spelling variants in English and German historical
texts: Manual or automatic? Literary and Linguist
Computing, 23:65–72.

Paul Rayson, Dawn Archer, A. Baron, J. Culpeper, and
N. Smith. 2007. Tagging the bard: Evaluating the
accuracy of a modern POS tagger on Early Modern
English corpora. In Proceedings of Corpus Linguis-
tics 2007, Birmingham. University of Birmingham.

SO. 1986. Svensk ordbok. Esselte Studium, Stock-
holm.

65

Semantic search in literature as an e-Humanities research tool: CONPLISIT — Consumption
patterns and life-style in 19th century Swedish literature

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


