










































OWL/DL formalization of the MULTEXT-East morphosyntactic specifications


Proceedings of the Fifth Law Workshop (LAW V), pages 11–20,
Portland, Oregon, 23-24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

OWL/DL formalization of the MULTEXT-East morphosyntactic
specifications

Christian Chiarcos
University of Potsdam, Germany
chiarcos@uni-potsdam.de

Tomaž Erjavec
Jožef Stefan Institute, Slovenia
tomaz.erjavec@ijs.si

Abstract

This paper describes the modeling of
the morphosyntactic annotations of the
MULTEXT-East corpora and lexicons as
an OWL/DL ontology. Formalizing anno-
tation schemes in OWL/DL has the advan-
tages of enabling formally specifying in-
terrelationships between the various fea-
tures and making logical inferences based
on the relationships between them. We
show that this approach provides us with
a top-down perspective on a large set of
morphosyntactic specifications for multi-
ple languages, and that this perspective
helps to identify and to resolve concep-
tual problems in the original specifications.
Furthermore, the ontological modeling al-
lows us to link the MULTEXT-East spe-
cifications with repositories of annotation
terminology such as the General Ontol-
ogy of Linguistics Descriptions or the ISO
TC37/SC4 Data Category Registry.

1 Introduction

In the last 15 years, the heterogeneity of linguis-
tic annotations has been identified as a key prob-
lem limiting the interoperability and reusabil-
ity of NLP tools and linguistic data collections.
The multitude of linguistic tagsets complicates
the combination of NLP modules within a sin-
gle pipeline; similar problems exist in language
documentation, typology and corpus linguistics,
where researchers are interested to access and
query data collections on a homogeneous termi-
nological basis.

One way to enhance the consistency of lin-
guistic annotations is to provide explicit seman-
tics for tags by grounding annotations in termino-
logy repositories such as the General Ontology
of Linguistics Descriptions (Farrar and Langen-
doen, 2003, GOLD) or the ISO TC37/SC4 Data
Category Registry (Kemps-Snijders et al., 2009,
ISOcat). Reference definitions provide an inter-
lingua that allows the mapping of linguistic an-
notations from annotation scheme A to scheme
B. This application requires linking annotation
schemes with the terminological repository. This
relation can be formalized within the Linked Data
paradigm (Berners-Lee, 2006), which requires
the use of uniform resource identifiers (URIs),
the hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP), standard
representation formats (such as RDF) and links to
other URIs. Here, we propose a formalization of
this linking in OWL/DL, a notational variant of
the Description Logic SHOIN (D) that builds
on RDF and Linked Data.

Another way to enhance the consistency of
linguistic annotations is to make use of cross-
linguistic meta schemes or annotation standards,
such as EAGLES (Leech and Wilson, 1996). The
problem is that these enforce the use of the same
categories across multiple languages, and this
may be inappropriate for historically and geo-
graphically unrelated languages. For specific lin-
guistic and historical regions, the application of
standardization approaches has, however, been
performed with great success, e.g., for Western
(Leech and Wilson, 1996) and Eastern Europe
(Erjavec et al., 2003) or the Indian subcontinent
(Baskaran et al., 2008).

11



In this paper, we illustrate differences and
commonalities of both approaches by creating
an OWL/DL terminology repository from the
MULTEXT-East (MTE) specifications (Erjavec
et al., 2003; Erjavec, 2010), which define features
for the morphosyntactic level of linguistic de-
scription, instantiate them for 16 languages and
provide morphosyntactic tagsets for these lan-
guages. The specifications are a part of the MTE
resources, which also include lexicons and an an-
notated parallel corpus that use these morphosyn-
tactic tagsets.

The encoding of the MTE specifications fol-
lows the Text Encoding Initiative Guidelines, TEI
P5 (TEI Consortium, 2007), and this paper con-
centrates on developing a semi-automatic pro-
cedure for converting them from TEI XML to
OWL. While TEI is more appropriate for author-
ing the specifications and displaying them in a
book-oriented format, the OWL encoding has the
advantages of enabling formally specifying inter-
relationships between the various features (con-
cepts, or classes) and making logical inferences
based on the relationships between them, useful
in mediating between different tagsets and tools
(Chiarcos, 2008).

2 The MULTEXT-East (MTE)
Morphosyntactic Specifications

The MTE morphosyntactic specifications define
attributes and values used for word-level syntac-
tic annotation, i.e., they provide a formal gram-
mar for the morphosyntactic properties of the lan-
guages covered. The specifications also contain
commentary, bibliography, notes, etc. Follow-
ing the original MULTEXT proposal (Ide and
Véronis, 1994), the specifications define 14 cat-
egories (parts of speech), and for each its at-
tributes, their values, and the languages that every
attribute-value pair is appropriate for. The mor-
phosyntactic specifications also define the map-
ping between the feature structures and mor-
phosyntactic descriptions (MSDs). MSDs are
compact strings used as tags for corpus annota-
tion and in the morphosyntactic lexicons. For
example, the MSD Ncmsn is equivalent to the

feature structure consisting of the attribute-value
pairs Noun, Type=common, Gender=masculine,
Number=singular, Case=nominative.

The specifications currently cover 16 lan-
guages, in particular: Bulgarian, Croatian,
Czech, English, Estonian, Hungarian, Macedo-
nian, Persian, Polish, Resian, Romanian, Rus-
sian, Serbian, Slovak, Slovene, and Ukrainian.
For a number of these languages the specifica-
tions have become a de-facto standard and, for
some, the MTE lexicons and corpora are still the
only publicly available datasets for this level of
linguistic description.1

Table 1 lists the defined categories and gives
the number of distinct attributes, attribute-value
pairs and the number of MTE languages which
distinguish the category. The feature-set is quite
large, as many of the languages covered have
very rich inflection, are typologically different
(inflectional, agglutinating), but also have inde-
pendent traditions of linguistic description; this
also leads to similar phenomena sometimes be-
ing expressed by different means (see Sect. 4.3).

Category Code Atts Att-Vals Langs
Noun N 14 68 16
Verb V 17 74 16
Adjective A 17 79 16
Pronoun P 19 97 16
Determiner D 10 32 3
Article T 6 23 3
Adverb R 7 28 16
Adposition S 4 12 16
Conjunction C 7 21 16
Numeral M 13 81 16
Particle Q 3 17 12
Interjection I 2 4 16
Abbreviation Y 5 35 16
Residual X 1 3 16

Table 1: MULTEXT categories with the number
of MULTEXT-East defined attributes, attribute-value
pairs and languages.

The specifications are encoded as a TEI doc-
ument, consisting of an introductory part, the
Common and the Language Specific Specifica-
tions, the latter two organized into tables by the

1The MTE specifications, as well as the other MTE re-
sources, are available from the Web page of the project at
http://nl.ijs.si/ME/.

12



<table n="msd.cat" xml:lang="en">
<head>Common specifications for Noun</head>
<row role="type">
<cell role="position">0</cell>
<cell role="name">CATEGORY</cell>
<cell role="value">Noun</cell>
<cell role="code">N</cell>
<cell role="lang">en</cell>
<cell role="lang">ro</cell>
<cell role="lang">sl</cell>
...

</row>
<row role="attribute">
<cell role="position">1</cell>
<cell role="name">Type</cell>
<cell>

<table>
<row role="value">

<cell role="name">common</cell>
<cell role="code">c</cell>
<cell role="lang">en</cell>
...

Figure 1: Common table for Noun

14 defined categories.
Figure 1 gives the start of the Common table

for Noun. It first gives the category, the lan-
guages that distinguish it, and then its attributes
with their values; the meaning of a particular row
or cell is given by its role attribute. As with the
category, each attribute-value is also qualified by
the languages that make use of the feature. Note
that MTE is a positional tagset that specifies the
position of the attribute in the MSD string, and
the one-letter code of its value, so that Nc would
correspond to Noun, Type=common.

The language-specific sections also contain ta-
bles for each category, which are similar to the
common tables in that they repeat the attributes
and their values, although only those appropri-
ate for the language. The language-specific ta-
bles can also contain localization information,
i.e., the names of the categories, attributes, their
values and codes in the particular language, in
addition to English. This enables expressing the
feature structures and MSDs either in English or
in the language in question. Furthermore, each
language-specific section can also contain an in-
dex listing all valid MSDs. This index is aug-
mented with frequency information and exam-
ples of usage drawn for a corpus.

In addition to the source TEI P5 XML, the

MTE specifications are delivered in various de-
rived formats, in particular HTML for reading
and as tabular files, which map the MSD tagset
into various feature decompositions.

3 Linking annotation schemes with
terminology repositories

3.1 Linguistic terminology initiatives

There have been, by now, several approaches
to develop terminology repositories and data
category registries for language resources, sys-
tems for mapping between diverse (morphosyn-
tactic) vocabularies and for integrating annota-
tions from different tools and tagsets, ranging
from early texts on annotation standards (Bakker
et al., 1993; Leech and Wilson, 1996) over re-
lational models and concept hierarchies (Bickel
and Nichols, 2002; Rosen, 2010) to more formal
specifications in OWL/RDF (or with OWL/RDF
export), e.g., the already mentioned GOLD and
ISOcat, OntoTag (Aguado de Cea et al., 2002)
or the Typological Database System ontology
(Saulwick et al., 2005).

Despite their common level of representation
these efforts have not yet converged into a unified
and generally accepted ontology of linguistic an-
notation terminology and there is still a consider-
able amount of disagreement between their def-
initions. As these repositories nevertheless play
an important role in their respective communi-
ties, it is desirable to link the MTE specifications
with the most representative of them, notably
with GOLD and the morphosyntactic profile of
ISOcat. As we argue below, different design de-
cisions in the terminology repositories make it
necessary to use a linking formalism that is capa-
ble of expressing both disjunctions and conjunc-
tions of concepts. For this reason, we propose the
application of OWL/DL.

By representing the MTE specifications, the
repositories, and the linking between them as
separate OWL/DL models, we follow the archi-
tectural concept of the OLiA architecture (Chiar-
cos, 2008), see Sect. 5.

13



3.2 Annotation mapping

The classic approach to link annotations with ref-
erence concepts is to specify rules that define a
direct mapping (Zeman, 2008). It is, however,
not always possible to find a 1:1 mapping.

One problem is conceptual overlap: A com-
mon noun may occur as a part of a proper name,
e.g., German Palais ‘baroque-style palace’ in
Neues Palais lit. ‘new palace’, a Prussian royal
palace in Potsdam/Germany. Palais is thus both a
proper noun (in its function), and a common noun
(in its form). Such conceptual overlap is some-
times represented with a specialized tag, e.g., in
the TIGER scheme (Brants and Hansen, 2002).
ISOcat (like other terminological repositories)
does currently not provide the corresponding hy-
brid category, so that Palais is to be linked to both
properNoun/DC-1371 and commonNoun/DC-
1256 if the information carried by the original
annotation is to be preserved. Contractions pose
similar problems: English gonna combines going
(PTB tag VBG, Marcus et al., 1994) and to (TO).
If whitespace tokenization is applied, both tags
need to be assigned to the same token.

A related problem is the representation of am-
biguity: The SUSANNE (Sampson, 1995) tag
ICSt applies to English after both as a prepo-
sition and as a subordinating conjunction. The
corresponding ISOcat category is thus either
preposition/DC-1366 or subordinating
Conjunction/DC-1393. Without additional
disambiguation, ICSt needs to be linked to both
data categories.

Technically, such problems can be solved with
a 1:n mapping between annotations and refer-
ence concepts. Yet, overlap/contraction and am-
biguity differ in their meaning: While overlap-
ping/contracted categories are in the intersec-
tion (⊓) of reference categories, ambiguous cate-
gories are in their join (⊔). This difference is rel-
evant for subsequent processing, e.g., to decide
whether disambiguation is necessary. A mapping
approach, however, fails to distinguish ⊓ and ⊔.

The linking between reference categories and
annotations requires a formalism that can distin-
guish intersection and join operators. A less ex-

pressive linking formalism that makes use of a
1:1 (or 1:n) mapping between annotation con-
cepts and reference concepts can lead to inconsis-
tencies when mapping annotation concepts from
an annotation scheme A to an annotation scheme
B if these use the same terms with slightly deviat-
ing definitions, as noted, for example, by Garabı́k
et al. (2009) for MTE.

3.3 Annotation linking with OWL/DL

OWL/DL is a formalism that supports the nec-
essary operators and flexibility. Reference con-
cepts and annotation concepts are formalized
as OWL classes and the linking between them
can be represented by rdfs:subClassOf (⊑).
OWL/DL provides owl:intersectionOf (⊓),
owl:unionOf (⊔) and owl:complementOf
(¬) operators and it allows the definition of prop-
erties and restrictions on the respective concepts.
As an example, the MTE Definiteness=definite
refers to either a clitic determiner or (⊔) to the
‘definite conjunction’ of Hungarian verbs. More
precisely, it is in the intersection between these
and (⊓) a category for ambiguous feature values
(Sect. 4.3).

An OWL/DL-based formalization has the ad-
ditional advantage that it can be linked with exist-
ing terminology repositories that are available in
OWL or RDF, e.g., GOLD or ISOcat (Chiarcos,
2010). The linking to other terminology reposi-
tories will be subject of subsequent research. In
this paper, we focus on the development of an
OWL/DL representation of MTE morphosyntac-
tic specifications that represents a necessary pre-
condition for OWL/DL-based annotation linking.

4 Building the MTE ontology

We built the MTE ontology2 in a three-step sce-
nario: first, a preliminary OWL/DL model of the
common MTE specifications was created (Sect.
4.1); we then built language-specific subontolo-
gies and linked them to the common ontology
(Sect. 4.2); finally, the outcome of this process

2All MTE ontologies are available under
http://nl.ijs.si/ME/owl/ under a Creative
Commons Attribution licence (CC BY 3.0).

14



was discussed with a group of experts and revised
(Sect. 4.3).

4.1 Common specifications

Following the methodology described by Chiar-
cos (2008), the structure of the MTE ontology
was derived from the original documentation.
The initial ontology skeleton was created auto-
matically (the organization of the specifications
was exploited to develop an XSLT script that
mapped TEI XML to OWL), but subsequently
manually augmented with descriptions and ex-
amples found in the individual languages.

1. Two top-level concepts Morphosyn-
tacticCategory and Morphosyntac-
ticFeature represent root elements of
the MTE ontology. An object property
hasFeature maps a Morphosyntac-
ticCategory onto one or multiple
MorphosyntacticFeature values.

2. All MSD categories are subconcepts of
MorphosyntacticCategory, e.g., Noun,
Verb, Adjective, etc.

3. For every category, the MTE attribute
Type was used to infer subcategories, e.g.,
the concept ExclamativePronoun (⊑
Pronoun) for Pronoun/Type=exclamative.

4. From more specialized type attributes
(e.g., Wh Type, Coord Type, Sub Type,
and Referent Type), additional subcate-
gories were induced at the next deeper
level, e.g., SimpleCoordinatingCon-
junction (⊑ CoordinatingConjunc-
tion) from Conjunction/Type=coordina-
ting, Coord Type=simple.

5. All remaining attributes are subconcepts
of MorphosyntacticFeature, e.g.,
Aspect, Case, etc.

6. For every subconcept of Morphosyntac-
ticFeature (e.g., Aspect) a corres-
ponding hasFeature subproperty (e.g.,
hasAspect) was introduced, with the mor-
phosyntactic feature as its range and the join

of morphosyntactic categories it can cooc-
cur with as its domain. An additional con-
straint restricts its cardinality to at most 1.

7. All attribute values are represented as
subclasses of the corresponding at-
tribute concept, e.g., AbessiveCase (for
Case=abessive) as a subconcept of Case.3

8. Every concept was automatically aug-
mented with a list of up to 10 examples for
every language which were drawn from the
language-specific MSD index.

4.2 Language-specific subontologies

Having represented the common MTE specifica-
tions in OWL, we decided to represent the an-
notation scheme for every language in a separate
OWL model, and to make use of the OWL im-
port mechanism to link it with the common spe-
cifications. The language-specific subontologies
do not specify their own taxonomy, but rather
inherit the concepts and properties of the com-
mon model. Unlike the common model, they in-
clude individuals that provide information about
the tags (MSDs) used for this particular language.

Every individual corresponds to an MSD tag.
We use data properties of the OLiA system on-
tology4 to indicate its string realization (e.g.,
system:hasTag ‘Ncmsn’) and the designator
of its annotation layer (e.g., system:hasTier
‘pos’). Additionally, rdfs:comment elements
contain all examples of the original MSD speci-
fications.

In accordance to the specified annotation val-
ues, every individual is defined as an instance
of the corresponding MorphosyntacticCate-
gory (e.g., Noun) and MorphosyntacticFea-
ture (e.g., SingularNumber) from the com-
mon specifications. Additionally, for every Mor-
phosyntacticFeature (e.g., Number, the su-
perconcept of SingularNumber), it is assigned

3This ontology does not contain individuals. In our
approach, individuals represent feature bundles in the
language-specific subontologies, corresponding to the indi-
vidual MSD tags. (or, in other application scenarios, the
token that the tag is applied to).

4http://nachhalt.sfb632.uni-potsdam.de/
owl/system.owl, prefix system

15



<mte:Noun rdf:ID="Ncmsn_sl">
<system:hasTag>Ncmsn</system:hasTag>
<system:hasTier>pos</system:hasTier>
<rdf:type
rdf:resource="...#CommonNoun"/>

<rdf:type
rdf:resource="...#MasculineGender"/>

<rdf:type
rdf:resource="...#SingularNumber"/>

<rdf:type
rdf:resource="...#NominativeCase"/>

<mte:hasGender rdf:resource="#Ncmsg_sl"/>
<mte:hasNumber rdf:resource="#Ncmsg_sl"/>
<mte:hasCase rdf:resource="#Ncmsg_sl"/>
<rdfs:comment>e.g., cas, svet, denar, ...

</mte:Noun>

Figure 2: MSD Ncmsn in the Slovene subontology

itself as target of the corresponding object prop-
erty (e.g., hasNumber).

Figure 2 shows the subontology entry for the
tag Ncmsn in the Slovene subontology. The indi-
vidual could thus be retrieved with the following
queries for “singular noun”:

(1) Noun and hasNumber some
SingularNumber

(2) Noun and SingularNumber

The language-specific subontologies were fully
automatically created from the TEI XML using
XSLT scripts. During the revision of the com-
mon specifications, these scripts were updated
and reapplied.

4.3 Revision of the initial OWL model

After the automatic conversion from XML to
OWL the resulting ontology skeleton of the
common specifications was manually augmented
with descriptions, explanations and selected
examples from the language-specific MTE spe-
cifications. Furthermore, concept names with ab-
breviated or redundant names were adjusted, e.g.,
the concept CorrelatCoordConjunction
(Coord Type=correlat) was expanded to
CorrelativeCoordinatingConjunction,
and DefiniteDefiniteness (Definite-
ness=definite) was simplified to Definite.
Finally, if one attribute value represents a
specialization of another, the former was
recast as a subconcept of the latter (e.g.,
CliticProximalDeterminer ⊑ CliticDe-

finiteDeterminer).
Moreover, a number of potential problems

were identified. Some of them could be ad-
dressed by consulting MTE-related publications
(Qasemizadeh and Rahimi, 2006; Dimitrova et
al., 2009; Derzhanski and Kotsyba, 2009), but
most were solved with the help of the original
authors of the MTE specifications and an open
discussion with these experts over a mailing list.

The problems fall in two general classes:
(a) terminological problems, and (b) conceptual
problems. By terminological problems we mean
that a term required a more precise definition
than provided in the MTE specifications; con-
ceptual problems pertain to design decisions in
a positional tagset (overload: the same annota-
tion refers to two different phenomena in dif-
ferent languages) and to artifacts of the creation
process of the MTE specifications (redundancies:
the same phenomenon is represented in different
ways for different languages). Figure 3 shows
a fragment of the MTE ontology that showed all
types of conceptual problems as described below.

Terminological problems include the use of
non-standard or language-specific terminology
(e.g., Clitic=burkinostka for conventional collo-
cations in Polish, or Case=essive-formal for Hun-
garian), and the need to understand design deci-
sions that were necessary for language-specific
phenomena (e.g., Numeral/Class=definite34 for
Czech and Polish quantifiers with the same pat-
terns of agreement as the numerals 3 and 4).

In the course of the revision, most non-
standard terms were replaced with conven-
tional, language-independent concept names, and
language-specific phenomena were documented
by adding relevant excerpts from discussions or
literature as owl:versionInfo.

For a few concepts, no language-independent
characterization could be found. For exam-
ple, Numeral/Form=m form refers to numer-
als with the suffix -ma in Bulgarian (a special
form of the numerals ‘2’ to ‘7’ for persons of
masculine gender). In the ontology, the con-
cept MFormNumeral is preserved, but it is con-
strained so that every instance matches the fol-

16



lowing OWL/DL expression:
(3) CardinalNumber and hasAnimacy some

Animate and hasGender some Masculine

Attribute overload means that one attribute
groups together unrelated phenomena from dif-
ferent languages. In a positional tagset, attribute
overload is a natural strategy to achieve compact
and yet expressive tags. As every attribute re-
quires its own position in the tag, the length of
MSD tags grows with the number of attributes.
Overload thus reduces tag complexity. To an on-
tological model, however, these complexity con-
siderations do not apply, whereas proper concep-
tual differentiations are strongly encouraged.

We thus decided to disentangle the various
senses of overloaded attributes. For example, the
MorphosyntacticFeature Definiteness,
is split up in three subconcepts (cf. Fig. 3).

CliticDeterminerType: presence of a post-
fixed article of Romanian, Bulgarian and
Persian nouns and adjectives.

ReductionFeature: the difference between
full and reduced adjectives in many Slavic
languages.

PersonOfObject: the so-called ‘definite con-
jugation’ of Hungarian verbs.

Value overload has a similar meaning to at-
tribute overload. Definiteness=definite, for ex-
ample, can refer to a clitic definite determiner
(a CliticDeterminerType in Romanian and
Bulgarian), to a clitic determiner that expresses
specificity (a CliticDeterminerType in Per-
sian), or to a verb with a definite 3rd-person di-
rect object (a PersonOfObject in Hungarian).

In the ontology, this is represented by defin-
ing Definite as a subconcept of the owl:join
(⊔) of CliticDefiniteDeterminer, Cli-
ticSpecificDeterminer and PersonOfOb-
ject. Additional concepts, e.g., Ambigu-
ousDefinitenessFeature, were created to
anchor ambiguous concepts like Definite in
the taxonomy (see Fig. 3).

Redundancy: For many languages, the MTE
specifications were created in a bottom-up fash-
ion, where existing NLP tools and lexicons were

Figure 3: Definiteness in the MTE ontology

integrated with a pre-existing taxonomy of an-
notation categories. Language-specific features
were introduced when necessary, but sometimes
in different ways for the same phenomenon in
closely related languages. The MTE specifica-
tions thus comprise a certain degree of redun-
dancy.

For example, the distinction between full and
reduced adjectives in Slavic languages is ex-
pressed differently: For Czech, reduced adjec-
tives are marked by Formation=nominal, but for
Polish by Definiteness=short-art.

In the ontology, such redundancies are re-
solved by owl:equivalentClass statements,
marked by ≡ in Fig. 3.

5 Summary and Discussion

We have described the semi-automatic creation
of an ontological model of the MTE morphosyn-
tactic specifications for 16 different languages.
Such a model may be fruitfully applied in
various ways, e.g., within an NLP pipeline that
uses ontological specifications of annotations
rather than their string representations (Buyko
et al., 2008; Hellmann, 2010). The ontolog-
ical modeling may serve also as a first step
towards an ontology-based documentation of
the annotations within a corpus query system
(Rehm et al., 2007; Chiarcos et al., 2008),

17



or even the ontological modeling of entire
corpora (Burchardt et al., 2008; Hellmann et
al., 2010) and lexicons (Martin et al., 2009).
As an interesting side-effect of the OWL con-
version of the entire body of MTE resources,
they could be easily integrated with existing
lexical-semantic resources as Linked Data, e.g.,
OWL/RDF versions of WordNet (Gangemi et
al., 2003), which are currently being assem-
bled by various initiatives, e.g., in the context
of the LOD2 project (http://lod2.eu)
and by the Open Linguistics Working
Group at the OpenKnowledge Foundation
(http://linguistics.okfn.org).

Another very important element is that the on-
tological modeling of the MTE annotations al-
lows it to be interpreted in terms of existing
repositories of annotation terminology such as
ISOcat and GOLD. A bridge between these ter-
minology repositories and the MTE ontology
may be developed, for example, by integrat-
ing the ontology in an architecture of modular
ontologies such as the Ontologies of Linguis-
tic Annotations (Chiarcos, 2008, OLiA), where
the linking between annotations and terminology
repositories is mediated by a so-called ‘Refer-
ence Model’ that serves as an interface between
different levels of representation.

The MTE ontology will be integrated in this
model as an annotation model, i.e., its concepts
will be defined as subconcepts of concepts of the
OLiA Reference Model and thereby inherit the
linking with GOLD (Chiarcos et al., 2008) and
ISOcat (Chiarcos, 2010). The linking with these
standard repositories increases the comparability
of MTE annotations and it serves an important
documentation function.

More important than merely potential applica-
tions of the MTE ontology, however, is that its
creation provides us with a new, global perspec-
tive on the MTE specifications. A number of
internal inconsistencies could be identified and
strategies for their resolution (or formalization)
were developed. Redundancies and overload
were documented, and we further added expert
definitions of controversial or non-standard con-

cepts. When used as a documentation, these spe-
cifications may prevent misunderstandings with
respect to the meaning of the actual annotations.
For later versions of the MTE morphosyntactic
specifications, they may even guide the refactor-
ing of the annotation scheme.

The result of the development process de-
scribed above is a prototype, that has to be aug-
mented with definitions for non-controversial and
well-understood concepts, which can be derived
from the linking with OLiA, GOLD and ISOcat.

As for its language type, our strategy to resolve
overload requires OWL/DL (owl:join). With-
out value overload and redundancy, the ontology
would be OWL/Lite, as were the initial ontolo-
gies (Sect. 4.1 and Sect. 4.2). However, the cur-
rent modeling is still sufficiently restricted to al-
low the application of reasoners, thereby open-
ing up the possibility to use SemanticWeb tech-
nologies on MTE data, to connect it with other
sources of information and to draw inferences
from such Linked Data.

We would also like to point out that the conver-
sion of the MTE specifications to OWL required
relatively little effort. The total time required
for conversion (without the revision phase) took
approximately four days of work for a compu-
tational linguist familiar with OWL and part-of-
speech tagsets in general (the most labor-intense
part were discussions and literature consultation
during the revision phase). Given the complexity
of the MTE specifications (a highly elaborate set
of morphosyntactic specifications for 16 typolog-
ically diverse languages and with more than thou-
sand tags for many of the languages), this may be
regarded an upper limit for the time necessary to
create OWL models for annotation schemes.

We have thus not only shown that the ontolog-
ical modeling of annotation schemes is possible
and that it allows us to use our data in novel ways
and to perform consistency control, but also that
this was achievable with relatively low efforts in
time and personnel.

18



Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the members of
the mocky-l mailing list for their invaluable in-
put; all errors in the paper remain our own. The
research on linguistic ontologies described in this
paper was partially funded by the German Re-
search Foundation (DFG) in the context of the
Collaborative Research Center (SFB) 632.

References

Guadalupe Aguado de Cea, Inmaculada Álvarez de
Mon-Rego, Antonio Pareja-Lora, and Rosario
Plaza-Arteche. 2002. OntoTag: A semantic web
page linguistic annotation model. In Proceedings
of the ECAI 2002 Workshop on Semantic Author-
ing, Annotation and Knowledge Markup, Lyon,
France, July.

Dik Bakker, Osten Dahl, Martin Haspelmath, Maria
Koptjevskaja-Tamm, Christian Lehmann, and
Anna Siewierska. 1993. EUROTYP guidelines.
Technical report, European Science Foundation
Programme in Language Typology.

S. Kalika Bali Baskaran, Tanmoy Bhattacharya,
Pushpak Bhattacharyya, Monojit Choudhury,
Girish Nath Jha, S. Rajendran, K. Saravanan,
L. Sobha, and KVS Subbarao. 2008. Designing
a common POS-tagset framework for Indian
languages. In 6th Workshop on Asian Language
Resources, pages 89–92, Hyderabad, India.

Tim Berners-Lee. 2006. Design issues: Linked data.
http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/
LinkedData.html (May 11, 2011).

Balthasar Bickel and Johanna Nichols. 2002. Autoty-
pologizing databases and their use in fieldwork. In
Proceedings of the LREC 2002 Workshop on Re-
sources and Tools in Field Linguistics, Las Palmas,
Spain, May.

Sabine Brants and Silvia Hansen. 2002. Develop-
ments in the TIGER annotation scheme and their
realization in the corpus. In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2002), pages 1643–1649,
Las Palmas, Spain, May.

Aljoscha Burchardt, Sebastian Padó, Dennis Spohr,
Anette Frank, and Ulrich Heid. 2008. Formal-
ising Multi-layer Corpora in OWL/DL – Lexicon
Modelling, Querying and Consistency Control. In
Proceedings of the 3rd International Joint Confer-
ence on NLP (IJCNLP 2008), Hyderabad, India,
January.

Ekaterina Buyko, Christian Chiarcos, and Antonio
Pareja-Lora. 2008. Ontology-based interface spec-
ifications for a NLP pipeline architecture. In Pro-
ceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2008),
Marrakech, Morocco, May.

Christian Chiarcos, Stefanie Dipper, Michael Götze,
Ulf Leser, Anke Lüdeling, Julia Ritz, and Manfred
Stede. 2008. A flexible framework for integrat-
ing annotations from different tools and tag sets.
Traitement Automatique des Langues (TAL), 49(2).

Christian Chiarcos. 2008. An ontology of linguis-
tic annotations. LDV Forum, 23(1):1–16. Foun-
dations of Ontologies in Text Technology, Part II:
Applications.

Christian Chiarcos. 2010. Grounding an ontology
of linguistic annotations in the Data Category Reg-
istry. In Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop
on Language Resource and Language Technology
Standards (LR&LTS 2010), Valetta, Malta, May.

Ivan Derzhanski and Natalia Kotsyba. 2009. To-
wards a consistent morphological tagset for Slavic
languages: Extending MULTEXT-East for Polish,
Ukrainian and Belarusian. In Mondilex Third Open
Workshop, pages 9–26, Bratislava, Slovakia, April.

Ludmila Dimitrova, Radovan Garabı́k, and Daniela
Majchráková. 2009. Comparing Bulgarian
and Slovak Multext-East morphology tagset. In
Mondilex Second Open Workshop: Organization
and Development of Digital Lexical Resources,
pages 38–46, Kyiv, Ukraine, February.

Tomaž Erjavec, Cvetana Krstev, Vladimı́r Petkevič,
Kiril Simov, Marko Tadić, and Duško Vitas. 2003.
The MULTEXT-East Morphosyntactic Specifica-
tions for Slavic Languages. In Proceedings of the
EACL 2003 Workshop on Morphological Process-
ing of Slavic Languages, pages 25–32.

Tomaž Erjavec. 2010. MULTEXT-East Version 4:
Multilingual Morphosyntactic Specifications, Lex-
icons and Corpora. In Proceedings of the 7th Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2010), Valetta, Malta, May.

Scott Farrar and D. Terence Langendoen. 2003. A
linguistic ontology for the semantic web. Glot In-
ternational, 7(3):97–100.

Aldo Gangemi, Roberto Navigli, and Paola Velardi.
2003. The OntoWordNet project: Extension and
axiomatization of conceptual relations in Word-
Net. In R. Meersman and Z. Tari, editors, Procee-
dings of On the Move to Meaningful Internet Sys-
tems (OTM 2003), pages 820–838, Catania, Italy,
November.

19



Radovan Garabı́k, Daniela Majchráková, and Lud-
mila Dimitrova. 2009. Comparing Bulgarian and
Slovak MULTEXT-East morphology tagset. In
Mondilex Second Open Workshop: Organization
and Development of Digital Lexical Resources,
pages 38–46, Kyiv, Ukraine. Dovira Publishing
House.

Sebastian Hellmann, Jörg Unbehauen, Christian
Chiarcos, and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo. 2010.
The TIGER Corpus Navigator. In Proceedings
of the 9th International Workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theories (TLT 2010), pages 91–102,
Tartu, Estonia, December.

Sebastian Hellmann. 2010. The semantic gap of for-
malized meaning. In Proceedings of the 7th Ex-
tended Semantic Web Conference (ESWC 2010),
Heraklion, Greece, May 30th – June 3rd.

Nancy Ide and Jean Véronis. 1994. MULTEXT
(Multilingual Tools and Corpora). In Proceedings
of the 15th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING 1994), pages 90–96,
Kyoto.

Marc Kemps-Snijders, Menzo Windhouwer, Peter
Wittenburg, and Sue Ellen Wright. 2009. ISO-
cat: remodelling metadata for language resources.
International Journal of Metadata, Semantics and
Ontologies, 4(4):261–276.

Geoffrey Leech and Andrew Wilson. 1996.
Recommendations for the Morphosyntac-
tic Annotation of Corpora. EAGLES Re-
port EAG–TCWG–MAC/R, ILC, Pisa.
http://www.ilc.cnr.it/EAGLES96/
annotate/ (May 11, 2011).

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1994. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Fabienne Martin, Dennis Spohr, and Achim Stein.
2009. Representing a resource of formal lexical-
semantic descriptions in the Web Ontology Lan-
guage. Journal for Language Technology and
Computational Linguistics, 21:1–22.

Behrang Qasemizadeh and Saeed Rahimi. 2006.
Persian in MULTEXT-East framework. In Tapio
Salakoski, Filip Ginter, Sampo Pyysalo, and Tapio
Pahikkala, editors, Advances in Natural Language
Processing, Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on NLP (FinTAL 2006), pages 541–
551, Turku, Finland, August.

Georg Rehm, Richard Eckart, and Christian Chiar-
cos. 2007. An OWL-and XQuery-based mech-
anism for the retrieval of linguistic patterns from

XML-corpora. In Proceedings of Recent Advances
in Natural Language Processing (RANLP 2007),
Borovets, Bulgaria, September.

Alexandr Rosen. 2010. Mediating between incom-
patible tagsets. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Annotation and Exploitation of Parallel Corpora
(AEPC), pages 53–62, Tartu, Estonia, December.

Geoffrey Sampson. 1995. English for the computer:
The SUSANNE corpus and analytic scheme. Ox-
ford University Press.

Adam Saulwick, Menzo Windhouwer, Alexis Dimi-
triadis, and Rob Goedemans. 2005. Distributed
tasking in ontology mediated integration of typo-
logical databases for linguistic research. In Procee-
dings of the 17th Conference on Advanced Infor-
mation Systems Engineering (CAiSE 2005), Porto,
Portugal, June.

TEI Consortium, editor. 2007. TEI P5: Guidelines
for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. TEI
Consortium.

Daniel Zeman. 2008. Reusable tagset conversion us-
ing tagset drivers. In Proceedings of the 6th Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2008), Marrakech, Morocco,
May.

20


