










































Testing the Robustness of Online Word Segmentation: Effects of Linguistic Diversity and Phonetic Variation


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics, pages 1–9,
Portland, Oregon, June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Testing the Robustness of Online Word Segmentation:
Effects of Linguistic Diversity and Phonetic Variation

Luc Boruta1,2, Sharon Peperkamp2, Benoı̂t Crabbé1, and Emmanuel Dupoux2
1 Univ. Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, ALPAGE, UMR-I 001 INRIA, F-75205, Paris, France

2 LSCP–DEC, École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales, École Normale Supérieure,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, F-75005, Paris, France

luc.boruta@inria.fr, peperkamp@ens.fr, benoit.crabbe@inria.fr, emmanuel.dupoux@gmail.com

Abstract

Models of the acquisition of word segmen-
tation are typically evaluated using phonem-
ically transcribed corpora. Accordingly, they
implicitly assume that children know how to
undo phonetic variation when they learn to ex-
tract words from speech. Moreover, whereas
models of language acquisition should per-
form similarly across languages, evaluation
is often limited to English samples. Us-
ing child-directed corpora of English, French
and Japanese, we evaluate the performance
of state-of-the-art statistical models given in-
puts where phonetic variation has not been re-
duced. To do so, we measure segmentation
robustness across different levels of segmen-
tal variation, simulating systematic allophonic
variation or errors in phoneme recognition.
We show that these models do not resist an in-
crease in such variations and do not generalize
to typologically different languages. From the
perspective of early language acquisition, the
results strengthen the hypothesis according to
which phonological knowledge is acquired in
large part before the construction of a lexicon.

1 Introduction

Speech contains very few explicit boundaries be-
tween linguistic units: silent pauses often mark ut-
terance boundaries, but boundaries between smaller
units (e.g. words) are absent most of the time. Pro-
cedures by which infants could develop word seg-
mentation strategies have been discussed at length,
from both a psycholinguistic and a computational
point of view. Many models relying on statistical

information have been proposed, and some of them
exhibit satisfactory performance: MBDP-1 (Brent,
1999), NGS-u (Venkataraman, 2001) and DP (Gold-
water, Griffiths and Johnson, 2009) can be consid-
ered state-of-the-art. Though there is evidence that
prosodic, phonotactic and coarticulation cues may
count more than statistics (Johnson and Jusczyk,
2001), it is still a matter of interest to know how
much can be learned without linguistic cues. To use
Venkataraman’s words, we are interested in “the per-
formance of bare-bones statistical models.”

The aforementioned computational simulations
have two major downsides. First, all models of
language acquisition should generalize to typolog-
ically different languages; however, the word seg-
mentation experiments mentioned above have never
been carried out on phonemically transcribed, child-
directed speech in languages other than English.
Second, these experiments use phonemically tran-
scribed corpora as the input and, as such, make the
implicit simplifying assumption that, when children
learn to segment speech into words, they have al-
ready learned phonological rules and know how to
reduce the inherent variability in speech to a finite
(and rather small) number of abstract categories: the
phonemes. Rytting, Brew and Fosler-Lussier (2010)
addressed this issue and replaced the usual phone-
mic input with probability vectors over a finite set
of symbols. Still, this set of symbols is limited to
the phonemic inventory of the language: the reduc-
tion of phonetic variation is taken for granted. In
other words, previous simulations evaluated the per-
formance of the models given idealized input but of-
fered no guarantee as to the performance of the mod-

1



els on realistic input.
We present a comparative survey that evaluates

the extent to which state-of-the-art statistical models
of word segmentation resist segmental variation. To
do so, we designed a parametric benchmark where
more and more variation was gradually introduced
into phonemic corpora of child-directed speech.
Phonetic variation was simulated applying context-
dependent allophonic rules to phonemic corpora.
Other corpora in which noise was created by ran-
dom phoneme substitutions were used as controls.
Furthermore, to draw language-independent conclu-
sions, we used corpora from three typologically dif-
ferent languages: English, French and Japanese.

2 Robustness benchmark

2.1 Word segmentation models

The segmentation task can be summarized as fol-
lows: given a corpus of utterances in which word
boundaries have been deleted, the model has to put
them back. Though we did not challenge the usual
idealization that children are able to segment speech
into discrete, phoneme-sized units, modeling lan-
guage acquisition imposes significant constraints on
the models (Brent, 1999; Gambell and Yang, 2004):
they must generalize to different (if not all) lan-
guages, start without any knowledge specific to a
particular language, learn in an unsupervised man-
ner and, most importantly, operate incrementally.

Online learning is a sound desideratum for any
model of language acquisition: indeed, human
language-processors do not wait, in Brent’s words,
“until the corpus of all utterances they will ever
hear becomes available”. Therefore, we favored an
‘infant-plausible’ setting and only considered on-
line word segmentation models, namely MBDP-1
(Brent, 1999) and NGS-u (Venkataraman, 2001).
Even if DP (Goldwater et al., 2009) was shown to
be more flexible than both MBDP-1 and NGS-u,
we did not include Goldwater et al.’s batch model,
nor recent online variants by Pearl et al. (in press),
in the benchmark. All aforementioned models rely
on word n-grams statistics and have similar perfor-
mance, but MBDP-1 and NGS-u are minimally suf-
ficient in providing an quantitative evaluation of how
cross-linguistic and/or segmental variation impact
the models’ performance. We added two random

segmentation models as baselines. The four models
are described below.

2.1.1 MBDP-1

The first model is Heinz’s implementation of
Brent’s MBDP-1 (Brent, 1999; Heinz, 2006). The
general idea is that the best segmentation of an ut-
terance can be inferred from the best segmentation
of the whole corpus. However, explicitly search-
ing the space of all possible segmentations of the
corpus dramatically increases the model’s computa-
tional complexity. The implementation thus uses an
incremental approach: when the ith utterance is pro-
cessed, the model computes the best segmentation of
the corpus up to the ith utterance included, assuming
the segmentation of the first i−1 utterances is fixed.

2.1.2 NGS-u

This unigram model was described and imple-
mented by Venkataraman (2001). MBDP-1’s prob-
lems of complexity were circumvented using an in-
trinsically incremental n-gram approach. The strat-
egy is to find the most probable word sequence for
each utterance, according to information acquired
while processing previous utterances. In the end,
the segmentation of the entire corpus is the con-
catenation of each utterance’s best segmentation. It
is worth noting that NGS-u satisfies all three con-
straints proposed by Brent: strict incrementality,
non-supervision and universality.

2.1.3 Random

This dummy model rewrites its input, uniformly
choosing after each segment whether to insert a
word boundary or not. It defines a chance line at
and below which models can be considered ineffi-
cient. The only constraint is that no empty word is
allowed, hence no consecutive boundaries.

2.1.4 Random+

The second baseline is weakly supervised: though
each utterance is segmented at uniformly-chosen
random locations, the correct number of word
boundaries is given. This differs from Brent’s base-
line, which was given the correct number of bound-
aries to insert in the entire corpus. As before, con-
secutive boundaries are forbidden.

2



English French Japanese
Tokens Types Tokens Types Tokens Types

U 9,790 5,921 10,000 7,660 10,000 6,315
W 33,399 1,321 51,069 1,893 26,609 4,112
P 95,809 50 121,486 35 102,997 49

Table 1: Elementary corpus statistics, including number
of utterances (U), words (W) and phonemes (P).

2.2 Corpora

The three corpora we used were derived from tran-
scribed adult-child verbal interactions collected in
the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2000). For
each sample, elementary textual statistics are pre-
sented in Table 1. The English corpus contains
9790 utterances from the Bernstein–Ratner corpus
that were automatically transcribed and manually
corrected by Brent and Cartwright (1996). It has
been used in many word segmentation experiments
(Brent, 1999; Venkataraman, 2001; Batchelder,
2002; Fleck, 2008; Goldwater et al., 2009; among
others) and can be considered a de facto standard.
The French and the Japanese corpora were both
made by Le Calvez (2007), the former by automati-
cally transcribing the Champaud, Leveillé and Ron-
dal corpora, the latter by automatically transcribing
the Ishii and Noji corpora from rōmaji to phonemes.
To get samples comparable in size to the English
corpus, 10,000 utterances were selected at random
in each of Le Calvez’s corpora. All transcription
choices made by the authors in terms of phonemic
inventory and word segmentation were respected.1

2.3 Variation sources

The main effect of the transformations we applied
to the phonemic corpora was the increase in the av-
erage number of word forms per word. We refer to
this quantity, similar to a type-token ratio, as the cor-
pora’s lexical complexity. As allophonic variation
is context-dependent, the increase in lexical com-
plexity is, in this condition, limited by the phono-
tactic constraints of the language: the fewer con-
texts a phoneme appears in, the fewer contextual al-
lophones it can have. By contrast, the upper limit
is much higher in the control condition, as phoneme

1Some transcription choices made by Brent and Cartwright
are questionable (Blanchard and Heinz, 2008). Yet, we used the
canonical version of the corpus for the sake of comparability.

substitutions are context-free.
From a computational point of view, the applica-

tion of allophonic rules increases both the number of
symbols in the alphabet and, as a byproduct, the lex-
ical complexity. Obviously, when any kind of noise
or variation is added, there is less information in the
data to learn from. We can therefore presume that
the probability mass will be scattered, and that as a
consequence, statistical models relying on word n-
grams statistics will do worse than with phonemic
inputs. Yet, we are interested in quantifying how
such interference impacts the models’ performance.

2.3.1 Allophonic variation
In this experiment, we were interested in the per-

formance of online segmentation models given rich
phonetic transcriptions, i.e. the input children pro-
cess before the acquisition of allophonic rules. Con-
sider the following rule that applies in French:

/r/ →

{
[X] before a voiceless consonant
[K] otherwise

The application of this rule creates two contextual
variants for /kanar/ (canard, ‘duck’): [kanaK Zon]
(canard jaune, ‘yellow duck’) and [kanaX flotÃ] (ca-
nard flottant, ‘floating duck’). Before learning the
rule, children have to store both [kanaK] and [kanaX]
in their emerging lexicon as they are not yet able to
undo allophonic variation and construct a single lex-
ical entry: /kanar/.

Daland and Pierrehumbert (2010) compared the
performance of a phonotactic segmentation model
using canonical phonemic transcripts and transcripts
implementing conversational reduction processes.
They found that incorporating pronunciation vari-
ation has a mild negative impact on performance.
However, they used adult-directed speech. Even if,
as they argue, reduced adult-directed speech may
present a worst-case scenario for infants (compared
to hyperarticulated child-direct speech), it offers no
quantitative evaluation of the models’ performance
using child-directed speech.

Because of the lack of phonetically transcribed
child-directed speech data, we emulated rich tran-
scriptions applying allophonic rules to the phonemic
corpora. To do so, we represented the internal struc-
ture of the phonemes in terms of articulatory fea-
tures and used the algorithm described by Boruta

3



(2011) to create artificial allophonic grammars of
different sizes containing assimilatory rules whose
application contexts span phonologically similar
contexts of the target phoneme. Compared to Da-
land and Pierrehumbert’s manual inspection of the
transcripts, this automatic approach gives us a finer
control on the degree of pronunciation variation.
The rules were then applied to our phonemic cor-
pora, thus systematizing coarticulation between ad-
jacent segments. We made two simplifying assump-
tions about the nature of the rules. First, all al-
lophonic rules we generated are of the type p →
a / c where a phoneme p is realized as its allo-
phone a before context c. Thus, we did not model
rules with left-hand or bilateral contexts. Second,
we ensured that no two allophonic rules introduced
the same allophone (as in English flapping, where
both /t/ and /d/ have an allophone [R]), using parent
annotation: each phone is marked by the phoneme
it is derived from (e.g. [R]/t/ and [R]/d/). This was
done to avoid probability mass derived from differ-
ent phonemes merging onto common symbols.

The amount of variation in the corpora is de-
termined by the average number of allophones per
phoneme. We refer to this quantity as the corpora’s
allophonic complexity. Thus, at minimal allophonic
complexity, each phoneme has only one possible re-
alization (i.e. phonemic transcription), whereas at
maximal allophonic complexity, each phoneme has
as many realizations as attested contexts. For each
language, the range of attested lexical and allo-
phonic complexities obtained using Boruta’s (2011)
algorithm are reported in Figure 1.

2.3.2 Phoneme substitutions
Allophonic variation is not the only type of varia-

tion that may interfere with word segmentation. In-
deed, the aforementioned simulations assumed that
all phonemes are recognized with 100% accuracy,
but —due to factors such as noise or speech rate—
human processors may mishear words. In this con-
trol condition, we examined the models’ perfor-
mance on corpora in which some phonemes were
replaced by others. Thus, substitutions increase the
corpus’ lexical complexity without increasing the
number of symbols: phoneme misrecognitions give
a straightforward baseline against which to compare
the models’ performance when allophonic variation

5 10 15 20

1.
0

1.
5

2.
0

2.
5

3.
0

3.
5

4.
0

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● English
French
Japanese

Figure 1: Lexical complexity (the average number of
word forms per word) as a function of allophonic com-
plexity (the average number of allophones per phoneme).

has not been reduced. Such corpora can be consid-
ered the output of a hypothetical imperfect speech-
to-phoneme system or a winner-take-all scalar re-
duction of Rytting et al.’s (2010) probability vectors.

We used a straightforward model of phoneme
misrecognition: substitutions are based neither on
a confusion matrix (Nakadai et al., 2007) nor on
phoneme similarity. Starting from the phonemic
corpus, we generated 10 additional corpora con-
trolling the proportion of misrecognized phonemes,
ranging from 0 (perfect recognition) to 1 (constant
error) in increments of 0.1. A noise intensity of n
means that each phoneme has probability n of being
rewritten by another phoneme. The random choice
of the substitution phoneme is weighted by the rela-
tive frequencies of the phonemes in the corpus. The
probability P (p → x) that a phoneme x rewrites a
phoneme p is defined as

P (p→ x) =

1− n if p = xn(f(x) + f(p)
|P| − 1

)
otherwise

where n is the noise intensity, f(x) the relative fre-
quency of phoneme x in the corpus andP the phone-
mic inventory of the language.

4



2.4 Evaluation

We used Venkataraman’s (2001) implementation of
the now-standard evaluation protocol proposed by
Brent (1999) and then extended by Goldwater et al.
(2009). Obviously, orthographic words are not the
optimal target for a model of language acquisition.
Yet, in line with previously reported experiments,
we used the orthographic segmentation as the stan-
dard of correct segmentation.

2.4.1 Scoring
For each model, we report (as percentages) the

following scores as functions of the lexical complex-
ity of the corpus:

• Ps, Rs, Fs: precision, recall and F -score on
word segmentation as defined by Brent;

• Pl, Rl, Fl: precision, recall and F -score on the
induced lexicon of word types: let L be the
standard lexicon and L′ the one discovered by
the algorithm, we define Pl = |L ∩ L′|/|L′|,
Rl = |L∩L′|/|L| and Fl = 2·Pl ·Rl/(Pl+Rl).

The difference between scoring the segmenta-
tion and the lexicon can be exemplified consider-
ing the utterance [@wUdÙ2kwUdÙ2kwUd] (a wood-
chuck would chuck wood). If it is segmented as
[@ wUdÙ2k wUd Ù2k wUd], both the segmentation
and the induced lexicon are correct. By contrast, if
it is segmented as [@ wUd Ù2k wUdÙ2k wUd], the
lexicon is still accurate while the word segmentation
is incorrect. A good segmentation inevitably yields a
good lexicon, but the reverse is not necessarily true.

2.4.2 k-shuffle cross-validation
As the segmental variation procedures and the

segmentation baselines are non-deterministic pro-
cesses, all scores were averaged over multiple simu-
lations. Moreover, as MBDP-1 and NGS-u operate
incrementally, their output is conditioned by the or-
der in which utterances are processed. To lessen the
influence of the utterance order, we shuffled the cor-
pora for each simulation. Testing all permutations of
the corpora for each combination of parameter val-
ues is computationally intractable. Thus, scores re-
ported below were averaged over three distinct sim-
ulations with shuffled corpora.

JP
FR

E
N

a. Segmentation F−score

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

JP
FR

E
N

b. Lexicon F−score

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

MBDP−1
NGS−u
Random+

Random

Figure 2: Cross-linguistic performance of MBDP-1 and
NGS-u on child-directed phonemic corpora in English
(EN), French (FR) and Japanese (JP).

3 Results and discussion

3.1 Cross-linguistic evaluation

Performance of the segmentation models2 on phone-
mic corpora is presented in Figure 1 in terms of Fs-
and Fl-score (upper and lower panel, respectively).
We were able to replicate previous results on En-
glish by Brent and Venkataraman almost exactly; the
small difference, less than one percent, was probably
caused by the use of different implementations.

From a cross-linguistic point of view, the main
observation is that these models do not seem
to generalize to typologically different languages.
Whereas MBDP-1 and NGS-u’s Fs value is 69%
for English, it is only 54% for French and 41% for
Japanese. Similar observations can be made for Fl.
Purely statistical strategies seem to be particularly
ineffective on our Japanese sample: inserting word
boundaries at random yields a better lexicon than us-
ing probabilistic models.

A crude way to determine whether a word seg-
mentation model tends to break words apart (over-
segmentation) or to cluster various words in a single
chunk (under-segmentation) is to compare the aver-
age word length (AWL) in its output to the AWL in
the standard segmentation. If the output’s AWL is
greater than the standard’s, then the output is under-
segmented, and vice versa. Even if NGS-u produces

2The full table of scores for each language, variation source,
and segmentation model was not included due to space limita-
tions. It is available upon request from the first author.

5



shorter words than MBDP-1, both models exhibit,
once again, similar within-language behaviors. En-
glish was slightly under-segmented by MBDP-1 and
over-segmented by NGS-u: ouputs’ AWL are re-
spectively 3.1 and 2.7, while the standard is 2.9.
Our results are consistent with what Goldwater et al.
(2009) observed for DP: error analysis shows that
both MBDP-1 and NGS-u also break off frequent
English morphological affixes, namely /IN/ (-ing)
and /s,z/ (-s). As for French, AWL values suggest
the corpus was under-segmented: 3.1 for MBDP-1’s
output and 2.9 for NGS-u’s, while the standard is
2.4. On the contrary, Japanese was heavily over-
segmented: many monophonemic words emerged
and, whereas the standard AWL is 3.9, the ouputs’
AWL is 2.7 for both models.

Over-segmentation may be correlated to the num-
ber of syllable types in the language: English
and French phonotactics allow consonantal clusters,
bringing the number of syllable types to a few thou-
sands. By contrast, Japanese has a much simpler
syllabic structure and less syllable types which, as
a consequence, are often repeated and may (incor-
rectly) be considered as words by statistical mod-
els. The fact that the models do worse for French
and Japanese is not especially surprising: both lan-
guages have many more affixal morphemes than En-
glish. Consider French, where the lexical autonomy
of clitics is questionable: whereas /s/ (s’ or c’) or
/k/ (qu’) are highly frequent words in our ortho-
graphic standard, many errors are due to the aggluti-
nation of these clitics to the following word. These
are counted as segmentation errors, but should they?

Furthermore, none of the segmentation models
we benchmarked exhibit similar performance across
languages: invariably, they perform better on En-
glish. There may be a correlation between the per-
formance of segmentation models and the percent-
age of word hapaxes, i.e. words which occur only
once in the corpus: the English, French and Japanese
corpora contain 31.7%, 37.1% and 60.7% of word
hapaxes, respectively. The more words tend to occur
only once, the less MBDP-1, NGS-u and DP per-
form on segmentation. This is consistent with the
usual assumption that infants use familiar words to
find new ones. It may also be the case that these
models are not implicitly tuned to English, but that
the contribution of statistical cues to word segmen-

tation differs across languages. In French, for exam-
ple, stress invariably marks the end of a word (al-
though the end of a word is not necessarily marked
by stress). By contrast, there are languages like
English or Spanish where stress is less predictable:
children cannot rely solely on this cue to extract
words and may thus have to give more weight to
statistics.

3.2 Robustness to segmental variation

The performance of MBDP-1, NGS-u and the two
baselines on inputs altered by segmental variation
is presented in Figure 2.3 The first general observa-
tion is that, as predicted, MBDP-1 and NGS-u do not
seem to resist an increase in lexical complexity. In
the case of allophonic variation, their performance
is inversely related to the corpora’s allophonic com-
plexity. However, as suggested by the change in
the graphs’ slope, performance for English seems
to stabilize at 2 word forms per word. Similar ob-
servations can be made for French and Japanese on
which the performance of the models is even worse:
Fl values are below chance at 1.7 and 3 variants per
word for Japanese and French, respectively; like-
wise, Fs is below chance at 1.5 for Japanese and
2.5 for French. Phoneme substitutions also impede
the performance of MBDP-1 and NGS-u: the more
phonemes are substituted, the more difficult it be-
comes for the algorithms to learn how to insert word
boundaries. Furthemore, Fl is below chance for
complexities greater than 4 for French, and approx-
imately 2.5 for Japanese. It is worth noting that, in
both conditions, the models exhibit similar within-
language performance as the complexity increases.

The potential lexicon that can be built by com-
bining segments into words may account for the
discrepancy between the two conditions, as it is in
fact the models’ search space. In the control con-
dition, substituting phonemes does not increase its
size. However, the likelihood of a given phoneme in
a given word being replaced by the same substitu-
tion phoneme decreases as words get longer. Thus,
the proportion of hapax increases, making statisti-
cal segmentation harder to achieve. By contrast, the

3For the control condition, we did not graph scores for noise
intensities greater than 0.2: 80% accuracy is comparable to the
error rates of state-of-the-art systems in speaker-independent,
continuous speech recognition (Makhoul and Schwartz, 1995).

6



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

10
20

30
40

50
60

70
a. English: segmentation F−score

Se
gm

en
ta

tio
n 

F−
sc

or
e

●

●

●

●
●

● ●
●

●

●

●

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

10
20

30
40

50
60

70

b. English: lexicon F−score

L
ex

ic
on

 F
−

sc
or

e

● MBDP−1
NGS−u
Random+

Random

Allophony
Substitutions

●

●

●
●

●
●

● ●

●

●

●

1 2 3 4 5 6

10
20

30
40

50
60

c. French: segmentation F−score

Se
gm

en
ta

tio
n 

F−
sc

or
e

●

●

●

● ●

●

●
● ●

●

●

●

1 2 3 4 5 6

10
20

30
40

50
60

d. French: lexicon F−score

L
ex

ic
on

 F
−

sc
or

e

●
●

●

● ●
● ● ●

●

●

●

●

1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0

10
20

30
40

50

e. Japanese: segmentation F−score

Se
gm

en
ta

tio
n 

F−
sc

or
e

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0

10
20

30
40

50

f. Japanese: lexicon F−score

L
ex

ic
on

 F
−

sc
or

e

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Figure 3: Fs-score (left column) and Fl-score (right column) as functions of the lexical complexity, i.e. the number of
word forms per word, in the English (top row), French (middle row) and Japanese (bottom row) corpora.

7



application of allophonic rules increases the number
of objects to build words with; as a consequence, the
size of the potential lexicon explodes.

As neither MBDP-1 nor NGS-u is designed to
handle noise, the results are unsurprising. Indeed,
any word form found by these models will be incor-
porated in the lexicon: if [læNgwIÙ] and [læNgwIÃ]
are both found in the corpus, these variants will be
included as is in the lexicon. There is no mechanism
for ‘explaining away’ data that appear to have been
generated by systematic variation or random noise.
It is an open issue for future research to create ro-
bust models of word segmentation that can handle
segmental variation.

4 Conclusions

We have shown, first, that online statistical mod-
els of word segmentation that rely on word n-gram
statistics do not generalize to typologically differ-
ent languages. As opposed to French and Japanese,
English seems to be easier to segment using only
statistical information. Such differences in perfor-
mance from one language to another emphasize the
relevance of cross-linguistic studies: any conclusion
drawn from the monolingual evaluation of a model
of language acquisition should be considered with
all proper reservations. Second, our results quan-
tify how imperfect, though realistic, inputs impact
MBDP-1’s and NGS-u’s performance. Indeed, both
models become less and less efficient in discover-
ing words in transcribed child-directed speech as
the number of variants per word increases: though
the performance drop we observed is not surpris-
ing, it is worth noting that both models are less ef-
ficient than random procedures at about twenty al-
lophones per phoneme. However, the number of
context-dependent allophones we introduced is far
less than what is used by state-of-the-art models of
speech recognition (Makhoul and Schwartz, 1995).

To our knowledge, there is no computational
model of word segmentation that both respects the
constraints imposed on a human learner and accom-
modates noise. This highlights the complexity of
early language acquisition: while no accurate lex-
icon can be learned without a good segmentation
strategy, state-of-the-art models fail to deliver good
segmentations in non-idealized settings. Our re-

sults also emphasize the importance of other cues
for word segmentation: statistical learning may be
helpful or necessary for word segmentation, but it is
unlikely that it is sufficient.

The mediocre performance of the models
strengthens the hypotheses that phonological
knowledge is acquired in large part before the
construction of a lexicon (Jusczyk, 1997), or that
allophonic rules and word segmentations could be
acquired jointly (so that neither is a prerequisite
for the other): children cannot extract words from
fluent speech without knowing how to undo at least
part of contextual variation. Thus, the knowledge
of allophonic rules seems to be a prerequisite for
accurate segmentation. Recent simulations of word
segmentation and lexical induction suggest that
using phonological knowledge (Venkataraman,
2001; Blanchard and Heinz, 2008), modeling
morphophonological structure (Johnson, 2008) or
preserving subsegmental variation (Rytting et al.,
2010) invariably increases performance. Vice
versa, Martin et al. (submitted) have shown that the
algorithm proposed by Peperkamp et al. (2006) for
undoing allophonic variation crashes in the face of
realistic input (i.e. many allophones), and that it
can be saved if it has approximate knowledge of
word boundaries. Further research is needed, at
both an experimental and a computational level, to
explore the performance and suitability of an online
model that combines the acquisition of allophonic
variation with that of word segmentation.

References

E. Batchelder. 2002. Bootstrapping the lexicon: a com-
putational model of infant speech segmentation. Cog-
nition, 83:167–206.

D. Blanchard and J. Heinz. 2008. Improving word seg-
mentation by simultaneously learning phonotactics. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Natural Language
Learning, pages 65–72.

L. Boruta. 2011. A note on the generation of allophonic
rules. Technical Report 0401, INRIA.

M. R. Brent and T. A. Cartwright. 1996. Distributional
regularity and phonotactic constraints are useful for
segmentation. Cognition, 61:93–125.

M. R. Brent. 1999. An efficient, probabilistically sound
algorithm for segmentation and word discovery. Ma-
chine Learning, 34(1–3):71–105.

8



R. Daland and J. B. Pierrehumbert. 2010. Learn-
ing diphone-based segmentation. Cognitive Science,
35(1):119–155.

M. Fleck. 2008. Lexicalized phonotactic word segmen-
tation. In Proceedings of ACL-2008, pages 130–138.

T. Gambell and C. Yang. 2004. Statistics learning and
universal grammar: Modeling word segmentation. In
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics.

S. Goldwater, T. L. Griffiths, and M. Johnson. 2009. A
bayesian framework for word segmentation: exploring
the effects of context. Cognition, 112(1):21–54.

J. Heinz. 2006. MBDP-1, OCaml implementation. Re-
trieved from http://phonology.cogsci.udel.edu/∼heinz/
on January 26, 2009.

E. K. Johnson and P. W. Jusczyk. 2001. Word segmenta-
tion by 8-month-olds: When speech cues count more
than statistics. Journal of Memory and Language,
44:548–567.

M. Johnson. 2008. Unsupervised word segmentation for
Sesotho using adaptor grammars. In Proceedings of
the 10th Meeting of ACL SIGMORPHON, pages 20–
27.

P. Jusczyk. 1997. The Discovery of Spoken Language.
MIT Press.

R. Le Calvez. 2007. Approche computationnelle de
l’acquisition précoce des phonèmes. Ph.D. thesis,
UPMC.

B. MacWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES Project: Tools
for Analyzing Talk. Lawrence Elbraum Associates.

J. Makhoul and R. Schwartz. 1995. State of the art in
continuous speech recognition. PNAS, 92:9956–9963.

A. Martin, S. Peperkamp, and E. Dupoux. Submitted.
Learning phonemes with a pseudo-lexicon.

K. Nakadai, R. Sumiya, M. Nakano, K. Ichige, Y. Hi-
rose, and H. Tsujino. 2007. The design of phoneme
grouping for coarse phoneme recognition. In IEA/AIE,
pages 905–914.

L. Pearl, Sh. Goldwater, and M. Steyvers. In press. On-
line learning mechanisms for bayesian models of word
segmentation. Research on Language and Computa-
tion.

S. Peperkamp, R. Le Calvez, J. P. Nadal, and E. Dupoux.
2006. The acquisition of allophonic rules: statisti-
cal learning with linguistic constraints. Cognition,
101(3):B31–B41.

C. A. Rytting, C. Brew, and E. Fosler-Lussier. 2010.
Segmenting words from natural speech: subsegmen-
tal variation in segmental cues. Journal of Child Lan-
guage, 37:513–543.

A. Venkataraman. 2001. A statistical model for word
discovery in transcribed speech. Computational Lin-
guistics, 27(3):351–372.

9


