










































A Comparable Corpus Based on Aligned Multilingual Ontologies


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Multilingual Modeling, pages 25–31,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Comparable Corpus Based on Aligned Multilingual Ontologies

Roger Granada
PUCRS (Brazil)

roger.granada@acad.pucrs.br

Lucelene Lopes
PUCRS (Brazil)

lucelene.lopes@pucrs.br

Carlos Ramisch
University of Grenoble (France)
ceramisch@inf.ufrgs.br

Cassia Trojahn
University of Grenoble (France)
cassia.trojahn@inria.fr

Renata Vieira
PUCRS (Brazil)

renata.vieira@pucrs.br

Aline Villavicencio
UFRGS (Brazil)

alinev@gmail.com

Abstract

In this paper we present a methodology for
building comparable corpus, using multilin-
gual ontologies of a scpecific domain. This
resource can be exploited to foster research on
multilingual corpus-based ontology learning,
population and matching. The building re-
source process is exemplified by the construc-
tion of annotated comparable corpora in En-
glish, Portuguese, and French. The corpora,
from the conference organization domain, are
built using the multilingual ontology concept
labels as seeds for crawling relevant docu-
ments from the web through a search engine.
Using ontologies allows a better coverage of
the domain. The main goal of this paper is
to describe the design methodology followed
by the creation of the corpora. We present a
preliminary evaluation and discuss their char-
acteristics and potential applications.

1 Introduction

Ontological resources provide a symbolic model of
the concepts of a scientific, technical or general
domain (e.g. Chemistry, automotive industry, aca-
demic conferences), and of how these concepts are
related to one another. However, ontology creation
is labour intensive and error prone, and its mainte-
nance is crucial for ensuring the accuracy and util-
ity of a given resource. In multilingual contexts, it
is hard to keep the coherence among ontologies de-
scribed in different languages and to align them ac-
curately. These difficulties motivate the use of semi-
automatic approaches for cross-lingual ontology en-
richment and population, along with intensive reuse

and interoperability between ontologies. For that, it
is crucial to have domain-specific corpora available,
or the means of automatically gathering them.

Therefore, this paper describes an ontology-based
approach for the generation of multilingual compa-
rable corpora. We use a set of multilingual domain-
dependent ontologies, which cover different aspects
of the conference domain. These ontologies provide
the seeds for building the domain specific corpora
from the web. Using high-level background knowl-
edge expressed in concepts and relations, which are
represented as natural language descriptions in the
labels of the ontologies, allow focused web crawl-
ing with a semantic and contextual coverage of the
domain. This approach makes web crawling more
precise, which is crucial when exploiting the web as
a huge corpus.

Our motivation is the need of such resources
in tasks related to semi-automatic ontology cre-
ation and maintenance in multilingual domains.
We exemplify our methodology focusing on the
construction of three corpora, one in English,
one in Portuguese, and one in French. This
effort is done in the context of a larger re-
search project which aims at investigating meth-
ods for the construction of lexical resources, in-
tegrating multilingual lexica and ontologies, fo-
cusing on collaborative and automatic techniques
(http://cameleon.imag.fr/xwiki/bin/view/Main/).

In the next section, we present some relevant re-
lated work (§2). This is followed by a description
of the methodology used to build the corpora (§3).
Finally, the application example expressed by the
resulting corpora are evaluated (§4) and discussed

25



(§5). We conclude by outlining their future applica-
tions (§ 6).

2 Related Work

Web as corpus (WAC) approaches have been suc-
cessfully adopted in many cases where data sparse-
ness plays a major limiting role, either in specific
linguistic constructions and words in a language
(e.g. compounds and multiword expressions), or for
less resourced languages in general1.

For instance, Grefenstette (1999) uses WAC for
machine translation of compounds from French into
English, Keller et al. (2002) for adjective-noun,
noun-noun and verb-object bigram discovery, and
Kim and Nakov (2011) for compound interpretation.
Although a corpus derived from the web may con-
tain noise, the sheer size of data available should
compensate for that. Baroni and Ueyama (2006)
discuss in details the process of corpus construc-
tion from web pages for both generic and domain-
specific corpora. In particular, they focus on the
cleaning process applied to filter the crawled web
pages. Much of the methodology applied in our
work is similar to their proposed approach (see §3).

Moreover, when access to parallel corpora is lim-
ited, comparable corpora can minimize data sparse-
ness, as discussed by Skadina et al. (2010). They
create bilingual comparable corpora for a variety of
languages, including under-resourced ones, with 1
million words per language. This is used as ba-
sis for the definition of metrics for comparability of
texts. Forsyth and Sharoff (2011) compile compa-
rable corpora for terminological lexicon construc-
tion. An initial verification of monolingual compa-
rability is done by partitioning the crawled collec-
tion into groups. Those are further extended through
the identification of representative archetypal texts
to be used as seeds for finding documents of the
same type.

Comparable corpora is a very active research sub-
ject, being in the core of several European projects
(e.g. TTC2, Accurat3). Nonetheless, to date most of

1Kilgarriff (2007) warns about the dangers of statistics heav-
ily based on a search engine. However, since we use the down-
loaded texts of web pages instead of search engine count esti-
mators, this does not affect the results obtained in this work.

2www.ttc-project.eu
3www.accurat-project.eu

the research on comparable corpora seems to focus
on lexicographic tasks (Forsyth and Sharoff, 2011;
Sharoff, 2006), bilingual lexicon extraction (Morin
and Prochasson, 2011), and more generally on ma-
chine translation and related applications (Ion et al.,
2011). Likewise, there is much to be gained from
the potential mutual benefits of comparable corpora
and ontology-related tasks.

Regarding multilingually aligned ontologies, very
few data sets have been made available for use in
the research community. Examples include the vlcr4

and the mldirectory5 datasets. The former con-
tains a reduced set of alignments between the the-
saurus of the Netherlands Institute for Sound and
Vision and two other resources, English WordNet
and DBpedia. The latter consists of a set of align-
ments between web site directories in English and
in Japanese. However, these data sets provide sub-
sets of bilingual alignments and are not fully pub-
licly available. The MultiFarm dataset6, a multilin-
gual version of the OntoFarm dataset (Šváb et al.,
2005), has been designed in order to overcome the
lack of multilingual aligned ontologies. MultiFarm
is composed of a set of seven ontologies that cover
the different aspects of the domain of organizing sci-
entific conferences. We have used this dataset as the
basis for generating our corpora.

3 Methodology

The main contribution of this paper is the proposal
of the methodology to build corpora. This sec-
tion describes the proposed methodology present-
ing our own corpus crawler, but also its application
to construct three corpora, in English, Portuguese,
and French. These corpora are constructed from the
MultiFarm dataset.

3.1 Tools and Resources
Instead of using an off-the-shelf web corpus tool
such as BootCaT (Baroni and Bernardini, 2004), we
implemented our own corpus crawler. This allowed
us to have more control on query and corpus con-
struction process. Even though our corpus construc-

4www.cs.vu.nl/˜laurah/oaei/2009
5oaei.ontologymatching.org/2008/

mldirectory
6web.informatik.uni-mannheim.de/

multifarm

26



tion strategy is similar to the one implemented in
BootCaT, there are some significant practical issues
to take into account, such as:

• The predominance of multiword keywords;
• The use of the fixed keyword conference;
• The expert tuning of the cleaning process;
• The use of a long term support search AP[b].

Besides, BootCaT uses the Bing search API,
which will no longer work in 2012. As our work
is part of a long-term project, we preferred to use
Google’s search API as part of the University Re-
search Program.

The set of seed domain concepts comes from
the MultiFarm dataset. Seven ontologies from the
OntoFarm project (Table 1), together with the align-
ments between them, have been translated from En-
glish into eight languages (Chinese, Czech, Dutch,
French, German, Portuguese, Russian, and Span-
ish). As shown in Table 1, the ontologies differ
in numbers of classes, properties, and in their log-
ical expressivity. Overall, the ontologies have a high
variance with respect to structure and size and they
were based upon three types of resources:

• actual conferences and their web pages (type
‘web’),

• actual software tools for conference organisa-
tion support (type ‘tool’), and

• experience of people with personal participa-
tion in organisation of actual conferences (type
‘insider’).

Currently, our comparable corpus generation ap-
proach focuses on a subset of languages, namely En-
glish (en), Portuguese (pt) and French (fr). The
labels of the ontology concepts, like conference and
call for papers, are used to generate queries and re-
trieve the pages in our corpus. In the current imple-
mentation, the structure and relational properties of
the ontologies were ignored. Concept labels were
our choice of seed keywords since we intended to
have comparable, heterogeneous and multilingual
domain resources. This means that we need a corpus
and an ontology referring to the same set of terms or
concepts. We want to ensure that the concept labels

Name Type C DP OP

Ekaw insider 74 0 33
Sofsem insider 60 18 46
Sigkdd web 49 11 17
Iasted web 140 3 38

ConfTool tool 38 23 13
Cmt tool 36 10 49
Edas tool 104 20 30

Table 1: Ontologies from the OntoFarm dataset in terms
of number of classes (C), datatype properties (DP) and
object properties (OP).

are present in the corresponding natural language,
textual sources. This combination of resources is es-
sential for our goals, which involve problems such as
ontology learning and enriching from corpus. Thus,
the original ontology can serve as a reference for
automatically extracted resources. Moreover, we
intend to use the corpus as an additional resource
for ontology (multilingual) matching, and again the
presence of the labels in the corpus is of great rele-
vance.

3.2 Crawling and Preprocessing

In each language, a concept label that occurs in
two or more ontologies provides a seed keyword
for query construction. This results in 49 en key-
words, 54 pt keywords and 43 fr keywords. Be-
cause many of our keywords are formed by more
than one word (average length of keywords is re-
spectively 1.42, 1.81 and 1.91 words), we combine
three keywords regardless of their sizes to form a
query. The first keyword is static, and corresponds
to the word conference in each language. The query
set is thus formed by permuting keywords two by
two and concatenating the static keyword to them
(e.g. conference reviewer program committee). This
results in 1 × 48 × 47 = 2, 256 en queries, 2,756
pt queries and 1,892 fr queries. Average query
length is 3.83 words for en, 4.62 words for pt and
4.91 words for fr. This methodology is in line with
the work of Sharoff (2006), who suggests to build
queries by combining 4 keywords and downloading
the top 10 URLs returned for each query.

The top 10 results returned by Google’s search

27



API7 are downloaded and cleaned. Duplicate URLs
are automatically removed. We did not filter out
URLs coming from social networks or Wikipedia
pages because they are not frequent in the corpus.
Results in formats other than html pages (like .doc
and .pdf documents) are ignored. The first clean-
ing step is the extraction of raw text from the html
pages. In some cases, the page must be discarded for
containing malformed html which our page cleaner
is not able to parse. In the future, we intend to im-
prove the robustness of the HTML parser.

3.3 Filtering and Linguistic Annotation

After being downloaded and converted to raw text,
each page undergoes a two-step processing. In the
first step, markup characters as interpunctuation,
quotation marks, etc. are removed leaving only let-
ters, numbers and punctuation. Further heuristics
are applied to remove very short sentences (less than
3 words), email addresses, URLs and dates, since
the main purpose of the corpus is related to concept,
instance and relations extraction. Finally, heuristics
to filter out page menus and footnotes are included,
leaving only the text of the body of the page. The
raw version of the text still contains those expres-
sions in case they are needed for other purposes.

In the second step, the text undergoes linguistic
annotation, where sentences are automatically lem-
matized, POS tagged and parsed. Three well-known
parsers were employed: Stanford parser (Klein and
Manning, 2003) for texts in English, PALAVRAS
(Bick, 2000) for texts in Portuguese, and Berkeley
parser (Petrov et al., 2006) for texts in French.

4 Evaluation

The characteristics of the resulting corpora are sum-
marized in tables 2 and 3. Column D of table 2
shows that the number of documents retrieved is
much higher in en than in pt and fr, and this is
not proportional to the number of queries (Q). In-
deed, if we look in table 3 at the average ratio of
documents retrieved per query (D/Q), the en queries
return much more documents than queries in other
languages. This indicates that the search engine re-
turns more distinct results in en and more duplicate
URLs in fr and in pt. The high discrepancy in

7research.google.com/university/search

Q D W token W type

en 2,256 10,127 15,852,650 459,501
pt 2,756 5,342 12,876,344 405,623
fr 1,892 5,154 9,482,156 362,548

Table 2: Raw corpus dimensions: number of queries (Q),
documents (D), and words (W).

D/Q S/D W/S TTR

en 4.49 110.59 14.15 2.90%
pt 1.94 120.08 20.07 3.15%
fr 2.72 115.63 15.91 3.82%

Table 3: Raw corpus statistics: average documents per
query (D/Q), sentences per document (S/D), words per
sentence (W/S) and type-token ration (TTR).

the number of documents has a direct impact in the
size of the corpus in each language. However, this
is counterbalanced by the average longer documents
(S/D) and longer sentences (W/S) in pt and frwith
respect to en. The raw corpus contains from 9.48
million words in fr, 12.88 million words in pt to
15.85 million words in en, constituting a large re-
source for research on ontology-related tasks.

A preliminary semi-automated analysis of the cor-
pus quality was made by extracting the top-100 most
frequent n-grams and unigrams for each language.
Using the parsed corpora, the extraction of the top-
100 most frequent n-grams for each language fo-
cused on the most frequent noun phrases composed
by at least two words. The lists with the top-100
most frequent unigrams was generated by extract-
ing the most frequent nouns contained in the parsed
corpus for each language. Four annotators manually
judged the semantic adherence of these lists to the
conference domain.

We are aware that semantic adherence is a vague
notion, and not a straightforward binary classifica-
tion problem. However, such a vague notion was
considered useful at this point of the research, which
is ongoing work, to give us an initial indication
of the quality of the resulting corpus. Examples
of what we consider adherent terms are appel á
communication (call for papers), conference pro-
gram and texto completo (complete text), examples

28



# of adherent terms
Lower Upper

en words 46 85
en n-grams 57 94
fr words 21 69
fr n-grams 24 45
pt words 32 70
pt n-grams 11 45

Table 4: Number of words and n-grams judged as seman-
tically adherent to the domain.

of nonadherent terms extracted from the corpus were
produits chimiques (chemical products), following
case, projeto de lei (law project). In the three lan-
guages, the annotation of terms included misparsed
and mistagged words (ad hoc), places and dates typ-
ical of the genre (but not necessarily of the domain),
general-purpose terms frequent in conference web-
sites (email, website) and person names.

Table 4 shows the results of the annotation. The
lower bound considers an n-gram as semantically
adherent if all the judges agree on it. The upper
bound, on the other hand, considers as relevant n-
grams all those for which at least one of the four
judges rated it as relevant. As a result of our anal-
ysis, we found indications that the English corpus
was more adherent, followed by French and Por-
tuguese. This can be explained by the fact that
the amount of internet content is larger for English,
and that the number of international conferences
is higher than national conferences adopting Por-
tuguese and French as their official languages. We
considered the adherence of Portuguese and French
corpora rather low. There are indications that mate-
rial related to political meetings, law and public in-
stitutions was also retrieved on the basis of the seed
terms.

The next step in our evaluation is verifying its
comparable nature, by counting the proportion of
translatable words. Thus, we will use existing bilin-
gual dictionaries and measure the rank correlation of
equivalent words in each language pair.

5 Discussion

The first version of the corpus containing the to-
tality of the raw pages, the tools used to process

them, and a sample of 1,000 annotated texts for
each language are freely available for download at
the CAMELEON project website8. For the raw
files, each page is represented by an URL, a lan-
guage code, a title, a snippet and the text of the
page segmented into paragraphs, as in the original
HTML file. A companion log file contains informa-
tion about the download dates and queries used to re-
trieve each URL. The processed files contain the fil-
tered and parsed texts. The annotation format varies
for each language according to the parser used. The
final version of this resource will be available with
the totality of pages parsed.

Since the texts were extracted from web pages,
there is room for improvement concerning some im-
portant issues in effective corpus cleaning. Some of
these issues were dealt with as described in the § 3,
but other issues are still open and are good candi-
dates for future refinements. Examples already fore-
seen are the removal of foreign words, special char-
acters, and usual web page expressions like “site un-
der construction”, “follow us on twitter”, and “click
here to download”. However, the relevance of some
of these issues depends on the target application. For
some domains, foreign expressions may be genuine
part of the vocabulary (e.g. parking or weekend in
colloquial French and deadline in Portuguese), and
as such, should be kept, while for other domains
these expressions may need to be removed, since
they do not really belong to the domain. Therefore,
the decision of whether to implement these filters
or not, and to deal with truly multilingual texts, de-
pends on the target application.

Another aspect that was not taken into account in
this preliminary version is related to the use of the
relations between concepts in the ontologies to guide
the construction of the queries. Exploiting the con-
textual and semantic information expressed in these
relations may have an impact in the set of retrieved
documents and will be exploited in future versions
of the corpus.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper has described an ontology-based ap-
proach for the generation of a multilingual compara-

8cameleon.imag.fr/xwiki/bin/view/Main/
Resources

29



ble corpus in English, Portuguese and French. The
corpus constructed and discussed here is an impor-
tant resource for ontology learning research, freely
available to the research community. The work on
term extraction that we are doing for the initial as-
sessment of the corpus is indeed the initial step to-
wards more ambitious research goals such as multi-
lingual ontology learning and matching in the con-
text of our long-term research project.

The initial ontologies (originally built by hand)
and resulting corpora can serve as a reference, a re-
search resource, for information extraction tasks re-
lated to ontology learning (term extraction, concept
formation, instantiation, etc). The resource also al-
lows the investigation of ontology enriching tech-
niques, due to dynamic and open-ended nature of
language, by which relevant terms found in the cor-
pus may not be part of the original ontology. We can
also assess the frequencies (relevance) of the labels
of the ontology element with respect to the corpus,
thus assessing the quality of the ontology itself. An-
other research that can be developed on the basis of
our resource is to evaluate the usefulness of a corpus
in the improvement of existing multilingual ontol-
ogy matching techniques9.

Regarding to our own crawler implementation,
we plan to work on its evaluation by using other
web crawlers, as BootCaT, and compare both ap-
proaches, specially on what concerns the use of on-
tologies.

From the point of view of NLP, several techniques
can be compared showing the impact of adopting
different tools in terms of depth of analysis, from
POS tagging to parsing. This is also an important re-
source for comparable corpora research, which can
be exploited for other tasks such as natural language
translation and ontology-based translation. So far
this corpus contains English, Portuguese and French
versions, but the ontology data set includes 8 lan-
guages, to which this corpus may be extended in the
future.

9An advantage of this resource is that the Multilingual Onto-
Farm is to be included in the OAEI (Ontology Alignment Eval-
uation Initiative) evaluation campaign.

References

Marco Baroni and Silvia Bernardini. 2004. BootcaT:
Bootstrapping corpora and terms from the web. In
Proc. of the Fourth LREC (LREC 2004), Lisbon, Por-
tugal, May. ELRA.

Marco Baroni and Motoko Ueyama. 2006. Building
general- and special-purpose corpora by web crawling.
In Proceedings of the 13th NIJL International Sympo-
sium on Language Corpora: Their Compilation and
Application, pages 31–40.

Eckhard Bick. 2000. The parsing system Palavras.
Aarhus University Press.

Richard Forsyth and Serge Sharoff. 2011. From crawled
collections to comparable corpora: an approach based
on automatic archetype identification. In Proc. of Cor-
pus Linguistics Conference, Birmingham, UK.

Gregory Grefenstette. 1999. The World Wide Web as a
resource for example-based machine translation tasks.
In Proc. of the Twenty-First Translating and the Com-
puter, London, UK, Nov. ASLIB.

Radu Ion, Alexandru Ceauşu, and Elena Irimia. 2011.
An expectation maximization algorithm for textual
unit alignment. In Zweigenbaum et al. (Zweigenbaum
et al., 2011), pages 128–135.

Frank Keller, Maria Lapata, and Olga Ourioupina. 2002.
Using the Web to overcome data sparseness. In Jan
Hajič and Yuji Matsumoto, editors, Proc. of the 2002
EMNLP (EMNLP 2002), pages 230–237, Philadel-
phia, PA, USA, Jul. ACL.

Adam Kilgarriff. 2007. Googleology is bad science.
Comp. Ling., 33(1):147–151.

Su Nam Kim and Preslav Nakov. 2011. Large-scale noun
compound interpretation using bootstrapping and the
web as a corpus. In Proc. of the 2011 EMNLP
(EMNLP 2011), pages 648–658, Edinburgh, Scotland,
UK, Jul. ACL.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accurate
unlexicalized parsing. In Proc. of the 41st ACL (ACL
2003), pages 423–430, Sapporo, Japan, Jul. ACL.

Emmanuel Morin and Emmanuel Prochasson. 2011.
Bilingual lexicon extraction from comparable corpora
enhanced with parallel corpora. In Zweigenbaum et al.
(Zweigenbaum et al., 2011), pages 27–34.

Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux, and Dan
Klein. 2006. Learning accurate, compact, and inter-
pretable tree annotation. In Proc. of the 21st COLING
and 44th ACL (COLING/ACL 2006), pages 433–440,
Sidney, Australia, Jul. ACL.

Serge Sharoff, 2006. Creating general-purpose cor-
pora using automated search engine queries. Gedit,
Bologna, Italy.

30



Inguna Skadina, Ahmed Aker, Voula Giouli, Dan Tufiş,
Robert Gaizauskas, Madara Mieirina, and Nikos Mas-
tropavlos. 2010. A Collection of Comparable Cor-
pora for Under-resourced Languages. In Inguna Skad-
ina and Andrejs Vasiljevs, editors, Frontiers in Artifi-
cial Intelligence and Applications, volume 219, pages
161–168, Riga, Latvia, Oct. IOS Press.

Ondřej Šváb, Vojtěch Svátek, Petr Berka, Dušan Rak,
and Petr Tomášek. 2005. Ontofarm: Towards an ex-
perimental collection of parallel ontologies. In Poster
Track of ISWC 2005.

Pierre Zweigenbaum, Reinhard Rapp, and Serge Sharoff,
editors. 2011. Proc.of the 4th Workshop on Building
and Using Comparable Corpora: Comparable Cor-
pora and the Web (BUCC 2011), Portland, OR, USA,
Jun. ACL.

31


