










































Towards a Predicate-Argument Evaluation for MT


Proceedings of SSST-6, Sixth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 30–38,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards a Predicate-Argument Evaluation for MT

Ondřej Bojarα, Dekai Wuβ
α Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
β HKUST, Human Language Technology Center,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

bojar@ufal.mff.cuni.cz, dekai@cs.ust.hk

Abstract

HMEANT (Lo and Wu, 2011a) is a man-
ual MT evaluation technique that focuses on
predicate-argument structure of the sentence.
We relate HMEANT to an established lin-
guistic theory, highlighting the possibilities of
reusing existing knowledge and resources for
interpreting and automating HMEANT. We
apply HMEANT to a new language, Czech
in particular, by evaluating a set of English-
to-Czech MT systems. HMEANT proves to
correlate with manual rankings at the sentence
level better than a range of automatic met-
rics. However, the main contribution of this
paper is the identification of several issues
of HMEANT annotation and our proposal on
how to resolve them.

1 Introduction

Manual evaluation of machine translation output is
a tricky enterprise. It has been long recognized
that different evaluation techniques lead to different
outcomes, e.g. Blanchon et al. (2004) mention an
evaluation carried out in 1972 where the very same
Russian-to-English MT outputs were scored 4.5 out
of the maximum 5 points by prospective users of
the system but only 1 out of 5 by teachers of En-
glish. Throughout the years, many techniques were
explored with more or less of a success.

The two-scale scoring for adequacy and fluency
used in NIST evaluation has been abandoned by
some evaluation campaigns, most notably the WMT
shared task series, see Koehn and Monz (2006)

through Callison-Burch et al. (2012)1. Since 2008,
WMT uses a simple relative ranking of MT out-
puts as its primary manual evaluation technique:
the annotator is presented with up to 5 MT out-
puts for a given input sentence and the task is to
rank them from best to worst (ties allowed) on what-
ever criteria he or she deems appropriate. While this
single-scale relative ranking is perhaps faster to an-
notate and reaches a higher inter- and intra-annotator
agreement than the (absolute) fluency and adequacy
(Callison-Burch et al., 2007), the technique and its
evaluation are still far from satisfactory. Bojar et
al. (2011) observe several discrepancies in the in-
terpretation of the rankings, partly due to the high
load on human annotators (the comparison of sev-
eral long sentences at once, among other issues) but
partly also due to technicalities of the calculation.

Lo and Wu (2011a) present an interesting evalua-
tion technique called MEANT (or HMEANT if car-
ried out by humans), the core of which lies in as-
sessing whether the key elements in the predicate-
argument structure of the sentence have been pre-
served. In other words, lay annotators are check-
ing, if they recognize who did what to whom, when,
where and why from the MT outputs and whether
the respective role fillers convey the same meaning
as in the reference translation. HMEANT has been
shown to correlate reasonably well with manual ad-
equacy and ranking evaluations. It is relatively fast
and should lend itself to full automatization. On
the other hand, HMEANT was so far tested only on
translation into English and with just three compet-
ing MT systems.

1http://www.statmt.org/wmt06 till wmt12

30



In this work, we extend the application of
HMEANT to evaluating MT into Czech, a mor-
phologically rich language with relatively free word
order. The paper is structured as follows: Sec-
tion 2 presents the technical details of HMEANT
and relates HMEANT to an established linguistic
theory that underlies the Prague dependency tree-
banks (Hajič et al., 2006; Hajič et al., 2012) and
several other works. We also suggest possible ben-
efits of this coupling such as the reuse of tools. In
Section 3, we describe the setup and results of our
HMEANT experiment. Since this is the first time
HMEANT is applied to a new language, Section 4
constitutes the main contribution of this work. We
point out at several problems of HMEANT and pro-
pose a remedy, the empirical evaluation of which
however remains for future work. Section 5 con-
cludes our observations.

2 Relating HMEANT and Valency Theory
of FGD

2.1 HMEANT Annotation Procedure

HMEANT is designed to be simple and fast. The
annotation consists of two steps: (1) semantic role
labelling, SRL in the sequel, and (2) alignment of
roles between the hypothesis and the reference.

The annotation guidelines are deliberately mini-
malistic, so that even inexpert people can learn them
quickly. The complete guidelines for SRL are given
in Figure 1 and it takes less than 15 minutes to train
an unskilled person.

In the alignment task, the annotators first indicate
which frames in the reference and the hypothesis
correspond to each other. In the second step, they
align all matching role fillers to each other and also
mark the translation as “Correct” or “Partial”.

The HMEANT calculation then evaluates the f-
score of the predicates and their role fillers in a given
sentence. An important aspect of the calculation is
that unmatched predicates with all their role fillers
are excluded from the calculation.

2.2 Functional Generative Description

The core ideas of HMEANT follow the case gram-
mar (Fillmore, 1968) or PropBank (Palmer et al.,
2005) and can be also directly related to an estab-
lished linguistic theory which was primarily devel-

Semantic frames summarize a sentence using a simple event
structure that captures essential parts of the meaning like
”who did what to whom, when, where, why and how”.
Phrases or clauses that express meanings can be identified as
playing a particular semantic role in the sentence. In other
words, semantic frames are the systematic abstraction of the
meanings in a sentence.
The following is the list of the semantic roles to be used in
HMEANT evaluation:

Agent (who) Action (did)
Experiencer or Patient (what) Benefactive (whom)

Temporal (when) Locative (where)
Purpose (why) Manner (how)

Degree or Extent (how) Modal (how) [may, should, ...]
Negation (how) [not] Other adverbial argument (how)

You may consider the Action predicate to be the central
event, while the other roles modify the Action to give a more
detailed description of the event. Each semantic frame con-
tains exactly one Action and any number of other roles.
Please note that the Action predicate must be exactly ONE
single word.
There may be multiple semantic frames in one sentence, be-
cause a sentence may be constructed to describe multiple
events and each semantic frame captures only one event.

Figure 1: Semantic role labeling guidelines of HMEANT.

oped for Czech, namely the Functional Generative
Description (Sgall, 1967; Sgall et al., 1986). The
theory defines so-called “tectogrammatical” layer (t-
layer). At the t-layer, each sentence is represented as
a dependency tree with just content words as sepa-
rate nodes. All auxiliary words are “hidden” into
attributes of the corresponding t-nodes. Moreover,
ellipsis is restored to some extent, so e.g. dropped
subject pronouns do have a corresponding t-node.

An important element of FGD is the valency the-
ory (Panevová, 1980) which introduces empirical
linguistic tests to distinguish between what other
theories would call complements vs. adjuncts and
postulates the relationship between the set of verb
modifiers as observed in the sentence and the set of
valency slots that should be listed in a valency dic-
tionary. This aspect could provide a further refine-
ment of HMEANT, e.g. weighing complements and
adjuncts differently.

FGD has been thoroughly tested and refined dur-
ing the development of the Prague Dependency
Treebank (Hajič et al., 2006)2 and the parallel
Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank (Hajič

2http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/

31



et al., 2012)3. Note that the latter is a translation
of all the 49k sentences of the Penn Treebank WSJ
section. Both English and Czech sentences are man-
ually annotated at the tectogrammatical layer, where
the English layer is based on the Penn annotation
and manually adapted for t-layer. Both languages in-
clude their respective valency lexicons and the work
on a bilingual valency lexicon is being developed
(Šindlerová and Bojar, 2010).

A range of automatic tools to convert plain text up
to the t-layer exist for both English and Czech. Most
of them are now part of the Treex platform (Popel
and Žabokrtský, 2010)4 and they were successfully
used in automatic annotation of 15 million parallel
sentences (Bojar et al., 2012)5 as well as other NLP
tasks including English-to-Czech MT. Recently, sig-
nificant effort was also invested in parsing not quite
correct output of MT systems into Czech for the
purposes of rule-based grammar correction (Rosa et
al., 2012). Establishing the automatic pipeline for
MEANT should be relatively easy with these tools
at hand.

2.3 HMEANT vs. FGD Valency

The formulation of HMEANT in terms of FGD is
straightforward: it is the f-score of matched t-nodes
for predicates and the subtrees of their immediate
dependents in the t-trees of the hypothesis and the
reference.

HMEANT uses a simple web-based annotation
interface which operates on the surface form of the
sentence. Annotators mark the predicate and their
complementations as contiguous spans in the sen-
tence. While this seems natural when we want
lay people to annotate, it brings some problems,
see Section 4. A linguistically adequate interface
would allow to mark tectogrammatical nodes and
subtrees in the t-layer, however, the customizable
editor TrEd6 used for manual annotation of t-layer
is too heavy for our purposes both in terms of speed
and complexity of user interface.

Perhaps the best option we plan to investigate in
future research is a mixed approach: the interface
would display only the text version of the sentence

3http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pcedt2.0/
4http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/treex/
5http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/czeng/
6http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/tred/

HMEANT 0.2833
METEOR 0.2167
WER 0.1708
CDER 0.1375
NIST 0.1167
TER 0.1167
PER 0.0208
BLEU 0.0125

Table 1: Kendall’s τ for sentence-level correlation with
human rankings.

but it would internally know the (automatic) t-layer
structure. Selecting any word that corresponds to
the t-node of a verb would automatically extend the
selection to all other belongings of the t-node, i.e.
all auxiliaries of the verb. For role fillers, select-
ing any word from the role filler would select the
whole t-layer subtree. In order to handle errors in
the automatic t-layer annotation, the interface would
certainly need to allow manual selection and de-
selection of words, providing valuable feedback to
the automatic tools.

3 An Experiment in English-Czech MT
Evaluation

In this first study, we selected 50 sentences from the
English-to-Czech WMT12 manual evaluation. The
sentences were chosen to overlap with the standard
WMT ranking procedure (see Section 3.1) as much
as possible.

In total, 13 MT systems participated in this trans-
lation direction. We allocated 14 annotators (one
annotator for the SRL of the reference) so that no-
body saw the same sentence translated by more sys-
tems. The hypotheses were shuffled so every annota-
tor got samples from all systems as well as the refer-
ence. Unfortunately, time constraints and the large
number of MT systems prevented us from collect-
ing overlapping annotations, so we cannot evaluate
inter-annotator agreement.

Following Lo and Wu (2011a) and Callison-
Burch et al. (2012), we report Kendall’s τ rank cor-
relation coefficients for sentence-level rankings as
provided by a range of automatic metrics and our
HMEANT. The gold standard are the manual WMT
rankings. See Table 1.

32



We see that HMEANT achieves a better correla-
tion than all the tested automatic metrics, although
in absolute terms, the correlation is not very high.
Lo and Wu (2011b) report τ for HMEANT of up to
0.49 and Lo and Wu (2011a) observe τ in the range
0.33 to 0.43. These figures are not comparable to our
result for several reasons: we evaluated 13 and not
just 3 MT systems, the gold standard for us are over-
all system rankings, not just adequacy judgments as
for Lo and Wu (2011b), and we evaluate translation
to Czech, not English. Callison-Burch et al. (2012)
report τ for several automatic metrics on the whole
WMT12 English-to-Czech dataset, the best of which
correlates at τ = 0.18. The only common metric is
METEOR and it reaches 0.16 on the whole WMT12
set.7 In line with our observation, Czech-to-English
correlations reported by Callison-Burch et al. (2012)
are higher: the best metric achieves 0.28 and aver-
ages 0.25 across four source languages.

The overall low sentence-level correlation of
our HMEANT and WMT12 rankings is obviously
caused to some extent by the problems we identi-
fied, see Section 4 below. On the other hand, it is
quite possible that the WMT-style rankings taken as
the gold standard are of a disputable quality them-
selves, see Section 3.1 or the detailed report on inter-
annotator agreement and a long discussion on inter-
preting the rankings in Callison-Burch et al. (2012).
Last but not least, it is likely that HMEANT and
manual ranking simply measure different properties
of MT outputs. The Kendall’s τ is thus not an ulti-
mate meta-evaluation metric for us.

3.1 WMT-Style Rankings
This section illustrates some issues with the WMT
rankings when used for system-level evaluation. Ob-
viously, at the sentence level, the rankings can be-
have differently but the system-level evaluation ben-
efits from a large number of manual labels.

In the WMT-style rankings, humans are provided
with no more than 5 system outputs for a given sen-
tence at once. The task is to rank these 5 systems
relatively to each other, ties allowed.

Following Bojar et al. (2011), we report three
possible evaluation regimes (or “interpretations”) of

7It is possible that Callison-Burch et al. (2012) use some-
what different METEOR settings apart from the different subset
of the data.

these 5-fold rankings to obtain system-level scores.
The first step is shared: all pairwise comparisons
implied by the 5-fold ranking are extracted. For
each system, we then report the percentage of cases
where the system won the pairwise comparison. Our
default interpretation is to exclude all ties from the
calculation, labelled “Ties Ignored”, i.e. winswins + losses .
The former WMT interpretation (up to 2011) was to
include ties in both the numerator and the denomi-
nator, i.e. wins + tieswins+ties+losses denoted “≥ Others”. WMT
summary paper also reports “> Others” where the
ties are included in the denominator only, thus giv-
ing credit to systems that are different.

As we see in Table 2, each of the interpretations
leads to different rankings of the systems. More im-
portantly, the underlying set of sentences also affects
the result. For instance, the system ONLINEA jumps
to the second position in “Ties Ignored” if we con-
sider only the 50 sentences used in our HMEANT
evaluation. To some extent, the differences are
caused by the lower number of observations. While
“All-No Ties” is based on 2893±134 pairwise com-
parisons per system, “50-No Ties” is based on just
186±30 observations. Moreover, not all systems
came up among the 5 ranked systems for a given
sentence. In our 50 sentences, only 7.3±2.1 systems
were compared per sentence. On the full set of sen-
tences, this figure drops to 5.9±1.7.

4 Problems of HMEANT Annotation

We asked our annotators to take notes and report
any problems. On the positive side, some annota-
tors familiar with the WMT ranking evaluation felt
that in both phases of HMEANT, they “knew what
they were doing and why”. In the ranking task, it
is unfortunately quite common that the annotator is
asked to rank incomparably bad hypotheses. In such
cases, the annotator probably tries to follow some
subjective and unspoken criteria, which often leads
to a lower in inter- and intra-annotator agreement.

On the negative side, we observed many problems
of the current version of HMEANT, and we propose
a remedy for all of them. We disregard minor tech-
nical issues of the annotation interface and focus on
the design decisions. The only technical limitation
worth mentioning was the inability to return to pre-
vious sentences. In some cases, this even caused the

33



Interpretation Ties Ignored ≥ Others > Others
Sentences All 50 All 50 All 50
cu-depfix 66.4 72.5 73.0 77.5 53.3 59.4
onlineB 63.0 61.4 70.5 69.3 50.3 49.0
uedin-wmt12 55.8 60.3 63.6 66.3 46.0 o 51.1
cu-tamch-boj 55.6 54.6 o 64.7 62.1 44.2 45.7
cu-bojar 2012 54.3 53.2 o 64.1 o 62.2 42.6 43.0
CU TectoMT 53.1 o 54.9 60.5 59.8 o 44.6 o 49.0
onlineA 52.9 o 61.4 o 60.8 o 66.7 o 44.0 o 53.0
pctrans2010 47.7 o 54.1 55.1 o 60.1 40.9 o 47.1
commercial2 46.0 51.3 54.6 59.5 38.7 42.7
cu-poor-comb 44.1 41.6 o 54.7 50.5 35.7 35.2
uk-dan-moses 43.5 33.2 53.4 44.2 o 35.9 27.7
SFU 36.1 31.0 46.8 43.0 30.0 25.6
jhu-hiero 32.2 26.7 43.2 36.0 27.0 23.3

Table 2: WMT12 system-level ranking results in three different evaluation regimes evaluated either on all sentences
or just the 50 sentences that were subject to our HMEANT annotation. The table is sorted along the first column and
the symbol “o” in other columns marks items out of sequence.

annotators to skip parts of the annotation altogether,
because they clicked Next Sentence instead of the
Next Frame button.

Note that the impact of the problems on the final
HMEANT reliability varies. What causes just minor
hesitations in the SRL phase can lead to complete
annotation failures in the Alignment phase and vice
versa. We list the problems in decreasing severity,
based on our observations as well as the number of
annotators who complained about the given issue.

4.1 Vague SRL Guidelines
The first group of problems is caused by the SRL
guidelines being (deliberately) too succinct and de-
veloped primarily for English.

Complex predicates. Out of the many possible
cases where predicates are described using several
words, SRL guidelines mention just modal verbs and
reserve a label for them (assuming that the main verb
will be chosen as the Action, i.e. the predicate it-
self). This goes against the syntactic properties of
Czech and other languages, where the modal verb is
the one that conjugates and it is only complemented
by the content verb in infinitive. Some annotators
thus decided to mark such cases as a pair of nested
frames.

The problem becomes more apparent for other
classes of verbs, such as phasic verbs (e.g. “to be-

gin”), which naturally lead to nested frames.

A specific problem for Czech mentioned by al-
most all annotators, was the copula verb “to be”.
Here, the meaning-bearing element is actually the
adjective that follows (e.g. “to be glad to . . . ”).
HMEANT forced the annotators to use e.g. the Ex-
periencer slot for the non-verbal part of this complex
predicate. In the negated form, “nenı́ (is not)”, some
annotators even marked the copula as Negation and
the non-verbal part as the Action.

No verb at all. HMEANT does not permit to an-
notate frames with no predicate. There are however
at least two frequent cases that deserve this option:
(1) the whole sentence can be a nominal construc-
tion such as the title of a section, and (2) an MT
system may erroneously omit the verb, while the re-
maining slot fillers are understandable and the whole
meaning of the sentence can be also guessed. Giving
no credit to such a sentence at all seems too strict. In
some cases, it was possible for the annotators to find
a substitute word for the Action role, e.g. a noun that
should have been translated as the verb.

A related issue was caused by the uncertainty to
what extent the frame annotation should go. There
are many nouns derived from verbs that also bear va-
lency. FGD acknowledges this and valency lexicons
for Czech do include also many of such nouns. If the

34



Reference Oblečky musı́me vystřı́hat z časopisů
Gloss clothes we-must cut from magazines
Roles Experiencer Modal Action Locative
Meaning We must cut the clothes (assuming paper toys) from magazines
Hypothesis Musı́me vyřı́znout oblečenı́ z časopisů
Gloss We-must cut clothes from magazines
Roles Modal Action Experiencer

Figure 2: An example of PP-attachment mismatch. While it is (almost) obvious from the word order of the reference
that the preposition phrase “z časopisů” is a separate filler, it was marked as part of the Experiencer role in the
hypothesis. In the alignment phase, there is no way to align the single Experiencer slot of the hypothesis onto the two
slots (Experiencer, Locative) if the reference.

instructions are not clear in this respect, it is quite
possible that one annotator creates frames for such
nouns and the other does not, causing a mismatch in
the Alignment phase.

PP-attachment. The problem of attaching prepo-
sitional phrases to verbs or to other noun phrases
is well acknowledged in many languages including
English and Czech. See an example in Figure 2.

A complete solution of the problem in the SRL
phase will never be possible, because there are nat-
urally ambiguous cases where each annotator can
prefer a different reading. However, the Align-
ment phase should be somehow prepared for the in-
evitable mismatches.

Unclear role labels. Insufficient role labels.
The set of role labels of HMEANT is very simple
compared to the set of edge labels (called “func-
tors”) in the tectogrammatical annotation. Several
annotators mentioned that the HMEANT roleset is
hard to use especially for passive constructions or
verbs with a secondary object.

Because the final HMEANT calculation requires
aligned fillers to match in their role labels, the agree-
ment on role labels is important. We suggest experi-
menting also with a variant of HMEANT that would
disregard the labels altogether.

Other problematic cases are sentences where sev-
eral role fillers appear to belong to the same type,
e.g. Locative: “Byl převezen (He was transported)
| do nemocnice (to the hospital) | v záchranném vr-
tulnı́ku (in a helicopter)”. While it is semantically
obvious that the hospital is not in the helicopter, so
this is not a PP-attachment problem, some annota-
tors still mark both Locatives jointly as a single slot,
causing the same slot mismatch. It is also possible

that the annotator has actually assigned the Locative
label twice but the annotation interface interpreted
all the words as belonging to one filler only.

Coreference. The SRL guidelines are not specific
on handling of slot fillers realized as pronouns (or
even dropped pronouns). If we consider a sentence
like “It is the man who wins”, it is not clear which
words should be marked as the Agent of the Action
“wins”. There are three candidates, all equally cor-
rect from the purely semantic point of view: “it”,
“the man” and “who”.

A natural choice would be to select the closest
word referring to the respective object, however, in
constructions of complex verbs or in pro-drop lan-
guages the object may not be explicitly stated in
the syntactically closest position. Depending on the
annotators’ decisions, this can lead to a mismatch
in the number of slots in the subsequent Alignment
phase.

Other problems. Some annotators mentioned a
few other problems. One of them were paratactic
constructions: the frame-labelling procedure does
not allow to distinguish between sentences like “It
is windy and it rains” vs. “It is windy but it rains”,
because neither “and” nor “but” are a slot filler. Sim-
ilarly, expressions like “for example” do not seem to
constitute a slot filler but still somehow refine the
meaning of the sentence and should be preserved in
the translation.

One annotator suggested that the importance of
the SRL phase should be emphasized and the anno-
tators should be pushed towards annotating as much
as they can, e.g. also by highlighting all verbs in
the sentence, in order to provide enough frames and
fillers to align in the second phase.

35



Reference Opilý řidič těžce zraněn
Gloss A drunken driver seriously injured
Roles Agent Extent Action
Meaning A drunken driver is seriously injured.
Hypothesis Opilý řidič vážně zranil
Gloss A drunken driver seriously injured (active form)
Roles Agent Extent Action
Meaning A drunken driver seriously injured (someone).

Figure 3: A mismatch of the meanings of the predicates. Other roles in the frames match perfectly.

The following sections describe problems of the
Alignment phase.

4.2 Correctness of the Predicate

HMEANT alignment phase allows the annotators to
either align or not align a pair of frames. There is
no option to indicate that the match of the predicates
themselves is somewhat incorrect. Once the predi-
cates are aligned, the user can only match individual
fillers, possibly penalizing partial mismatches.

Figure 3 illustrates this issue on a real example
from our data. Once the annotator decides to align
the frames, there is no way to indicate that the mean-
ing was reversed by the translation.

What native speakers of Czech also feel is that
the MT output in Figure 3 is incomplete, an Ex-
periencer is missing. A similar example from the
data is the hypothesis “Svědek oznámil policii. (The
witness informed/announced the police.)” The verb
“oznámit (inform/announce)” in Czech requires the
message (perhaps the Experiencer in the HMEANT
terminology), similarly to the English “announce”
but unlike “inform”. The valency theory of FGD for-
mally describes the problem as a missing slot filler
and given a valency dictionary, such errors can be
even identified automatically.

On the other hand, it should be noted that a mis-
match in the predicate alone does not mean that the
translation is incorrect. An example in our data was
the phrase “dokud se současné uměnı́ nedočkalo ve
Vı́dni nového stánku” vs. “než současné uměnı́ ve
Vı́dni dostalo nový domov”. Both versions mean
“until contemporary art in Vienna was given a new
home” but due to the different conjunction chosen
(“dokud/než, till/until”), one of the verbs has to be
negated.

4.3 Need for M:N Frame Alignment
The majority of our annotators complained that
complex predicates such as phasal verbs or copula
constructions as well as muddled MT output with
no verb often render the frame matching impossi-
ble. If the reference and the hypothesis differ in the
number of frames, then it is also almost certain that
the role fillers observed in the two sentences will be
distributed differently among the frames, prohibiting
filler alignment.

A viable solution would be allow merging of
frames during the Alignment phase, which is equiva-
lent to allowing many-to-many alignment of frames.
The sets of role fillers would be simply unioned, im-
proving the chance for filler alignment.

4.4 Need for M:N Slot Alignment
Inherent ambiguities like PP-attachment or spuri-
ous differences in SRL prevent from 1-1 slot align-
ment rather frequently. A solution would be to allow
many-to-many alignments of slot fillers.

4.5 Partial Adequacy vs. Partial Fluency
The original HMEANT Alignment guidelines say to
mark an aligned slot pair as Correct or Partial match.
(Mismatching slots should not be aligned at all.) A
Partial match is described as:

Role fillers in MT express part of the
meaning of the aligned role fillers in the
reference translation. Do NOT penalize
extra meaning unless it belongs in other
role fillers in the reference translation.

The second sentence of the instructions is prob-
ably aimed at cases where the MT expresses more
than the reference does, which is possible because

36



the translator may have removed part of the content
or because the source and the reference are both not
quite literal translations from a third language. A
clarifying example of this case in the instructions is
highly desirable.

What our annotators noticed were cases where the
translation was semantically adequate but contained
e.g. an agreement mismatch or another grammar er-
ror. The instructions should exemplify, if this is to
be treated as a Correct or Partial match. Optionally,
the Partial match could be split into three separate
cases: partially inadequate, partially disfluent, and
partially inadequate and disfluent.

4.6 Summary of Suggested HMEANT Fixes
To summarize the observations above, our experi-
ence with HMEANT was overall positive, but we
propose several changes in the design to improve the
reliability of the annotations:

SRL Phase:

• The SRL guidelines should be kept as simple as
they are, but more examples and especially ex-
amples of incorrect MT output should be pro-
vided.

• The Action should be allowed to consist of sev-
eral words, including non-adjacent ones.

• The possibility of using automatic t-layer anno-
tation tools should be explored, at least to pre-
annotate which words form a multi-word pred-
icate or role filler.

Alignment Phase:

• The annotator must be able to indicate a partial
or incorrect match of the predicates themselves.

• Both frames as well as fillers should support
M:N alignment to overcome a range of natu-
rally appearing as well as spurious mismatches
in the two SRL annotations.

• Examples of anaphoric expressions should be
included in the guidelines, stressing that any el-
ement of the anaphora chain should be treated
as an appropriate representant of the role filler.

• The Partial match could distinguish between
an error in adequacy or fluency, or rather, the

Alignment guidelines should explicitly provide
examples of both types and ask the annotators
to disregard the difference.

Technical Changes:

• The annotators need to be able to go back
within each phase. (The division between
the SRL and Alignment phases should be pre-
served.)

We do not expect any of the proposed changes to
negatively impact annotation time. Actually, some
speedup may be obtained from the suggested pre-
annotation and also from a reduced hesitation of the
annotators in the alignment phase thanks to the M:N
alignment possibility.

5 Conclusion

We applied HMEANT, a technique for manual eval-
uation of MT quality based on predicate-argument
structure, to a new language, Czech. The experiment
confirmed that HMEANT is applicable in this set-
ting, outperforming automatic metrics in sentence-
level correlation with manual rankings.

During our annotation, we identified a range of
problems in the current HMEANT design. We thus
propose a few modifications to the technique and
also suggest backing HMEANT with a linguistic
theory of deep syntax, opening the avenue to au-
tomating the metric using available tools.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our annotators for all the com-
ments and also Chi-kiu Lo, Karteek Addanki, Anand
Karthik Tumuluru, and Avishek Kumar Thakur for ad-
ministering the annotation interface. This work was sup-
ported by the project EuroMatrixPlus (FP7-ICT-2007-
3-231720 of the EU and 7E09003+7E11051 of the
Czech Republic) and the Czech Science Foundation
grants P406/11/1499 and P406/10/P259 (Ondřej Bo-
jar); and by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) under BOLT contract no. HR0011-12-
C-0016, and GALE contract nos. HR0011-06-C-0022
and HR0011-06-C-0023; by the European Union under
the FP7 grant agreement no. 287658; and by the Hong
Kong Research Grants Council (RGC) research grant
GRF621008 (Dekai Wu). Any opinions, findings and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this mate-
rial are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the RGC, EU, or DARPA.

37



References
Hervé Blanchon, Christian Boitet, and Laurent Besacier.

2004. Spoken Dialogue Translation Systems Evalua-
tion: Results, New Trends, Problems and Proposals.
In Proceedings of International Conference on Spoken
Language Processing ICSLP 2004, Jeju Island, Korea,
October.

Ondřej Bojar, Miloš Ercegovčević, Martin Popel, and
Omar Zaidan. 2011. A Grain of Salt for the WMT
Manual Evaluation. In Proceedings of the Sixth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 1–11,
Edinburgh, Scotland, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Ondřej Bojar, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Ondřej Dušek, Pe-
tra Galuščáková, Martin Majliš, David Mareček, Jiřı́
Maršı́k, Michal Novák, Martin Popel, and Aleš Tam-
chyna. 2012. The Joy of Parallelism with CzEng 1.0.
In Proceedings of the Eighth International Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC’12), Is-
tanbul, Turkey, May. ELRA, European Language Re-
sources Association. In print.

Chris Callison-Burch, Cameron Fordyce, Philipp Koehn,
Christof Monz, and Josh Schroeder. 2007. (Meta-)
Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
the Second Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, pages 136–158, Prague, Czech Republic, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
Matt Post, Radu Soricut, and Lucia Specia. 2012.
Findings of the 2012 workshop on statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation, Montreal, Canada,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1968. The Case for Case. In E. Bach
and R. Harms, editors, Universals in Linguistic The-
ory, pages 1–90. New York.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila Panevová, Petr Sgall,
Ondřej Bojar, Silvie Cinková, Eva Fučı́ková, Marie
Mikulová, Petr Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jiřı́ Semecký,
Jana Šindlerová, Jan Štěpánek, Josef Toman, Zdeňka
Urešová, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2012. Announc-
ing Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank 2.0.
In Proceedings of the Eighth International Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC’12), Is-
tanbul, Turkey, May. ELRA, European Language Re-
sources Association. In print.

Jan Hajič, Jarmila Panevová, Eva Hajičová, Petr
Sgall, Petr Pajas, Jan Štěpánek, Jiřı́ Havelka, Marie
Mikulová, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, and Magda Ševčı́ková
Razı́mová. 2006. Prague Dependency Treebank 2.0.
LDC2006T01, ISBN: 1-58563-370-4.

Philipp Koehn and Christof Monz. 2006. Manual and au-
tomatic evaluation of machine translation between eu-

ropean languages. In Proceedings on the Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation, pages 102–121, New
York City, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Chi-kiu Lo and Dekai Wu. 2011a. Meant: An inexpen-
sive, high-accuracy, semi-automatic metric for evalu-
ating translation utility based on semantic roles. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 220–229, Portland, Ore-
gon, USA, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Chi-kiu Lo and Dekai Wu. 2011b. Structured vs. flat
semantic role representations for machine translation
evaluation. In Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on
Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Trans-
lation, SSST-5, pages 10–20, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Cor-
pus of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

Jarmila Panevová. 1980. Formy a funkce ve stavbě české
věty [Forms and functions in the structure of the Czech
sentence]. Academia, Prague, Czech Republic.

Martin Popel and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2010. TectoMT:
Modular NLP Framework. In Hrafn Loftsson, Eirikur
Rögnvaldsson, and Sigrun Helgadottir, editors, Lec-
ture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Proceedings of the
7th International Conference on Advances in Natu-
ral Language Processing (IceTAL 2010), volume 6233
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 293–
304, Berlin / Heidelberg. Iceland Centre for Language
Technology (ICLT), Springer.

Rudolf Rosa, David Mareček, and Ondřej Dušek. 2012.
DEPFIX: A System for Automatic Correction of
Czech MT Outputs. In Proceedings of the Seventh
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, Mon-
treal, Canada, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics. Submitted.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajičová, and Jarmila Panevová. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence and Its Semantic and
Pragmatic Aspects. Academia/Reidel Publishing
Company, Prague, Czech Republic/Dordrecht, Nether-
lands.

Petr Sgall. 1967. Generativnı́ popis jazyka a česká dek-
linace. Academia, Prague, Czech Republic.

Jana Šindlerová and Ondřej Bojar. 2010. Building
a Bilingual ValLex Using Treebank Token Align-
ment: First Observations. In Proceedings of the Sev-
enth International Language Resources and Evalua-
tion (LREC’10), pages 304–309, Valletta, Malta, May.
ELRA, European Language Resources Association.

38


