










































How do Negation and Modality Impact on Opinions?


Proceedings of the ACL-2012 Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational Linguistics (ExProM-2012),
pages 10–18, Jeju, Republic of Korea, 13 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

How do Negation and Modality Impact on Opinions?

Farah Benamara1 Baptiste Chardon1,2 Yannick Mathieu3 Vladimir Popescu1 Nicholas Asher1
1 IRIT, Univ. Toulouse, France
{benamara,popescu,asher}@irit.fr

2 Synapse Développement, Toulouse, France
baptiste.chardon@synapse-fr.com

3 LLF-CNRS, Paris, France
yannick.mathieu@linguist.jussieu.fr

Abstract

In this paper, we propose to study the effects
of negation and modality on opinion expres-
sions. Based on linguistic experiments in-
formed by native speakers, we distill these ef-
fects according to the type of modality and
negation. We show that each type has a spe-
cific effect on the opinion expression in its
scope: both on the polarity and the strength for
negation, and on the strength and/or the degree
of certainty for modality. The empirical re-
sults reported in this paper provide a basis for
future opinion analysis systems that have to
compute the sentiment orientation at the sen-
tence or at the clause level. The methodology
we used for deriving this basis was applied
for French but it can be easily instantiated for
other languages like English.

1 Introduction

Negation and modality are complex linguistic phe-
nomena widely studied in philosophy, logic and lin-
guistics. From an NLP perspective, their analy-
sis has recently become a new research area. In
fact, they can be beneficial to several NLP appli-
cations needing deep language understanding, such
as sentiment analysis, textual entailment, dialogue
systems and question answering. Handling negation
and modality in NLP applications roughly involves
two sub-tasks: (i) identifying these expressions and
their scope and (ii) analyzing their effect on mean-
ing and how this effect can help to improve text un-
derstanding. In this paper, we deal with the second
task focusing on fine-grained sentiment analysis of
French opinion texts.

Negation and modality function as operators mod-
ifying the meaning of the phrases in their scope.
Negation can be used to deny or reject statements.
It is grammatically expressed via a variety of forms:
using prefixes (“un-”, “il-”), suffixes (“-less”), nega-
tor words, such as ”not” and negative polarity items
(NPIs), which are words or idioms that appear in
negative sentences, but not in their affirmative coun-
terparts, or in questions, but not in assertions, for
example “any”, “anything”, “ever”. Negation can
also be expressed using some nouns or verbs where
negation is part of their lexical semantics (as “abate”
and “eliminate”), or expressed implicitly without us-
ing any negative words, as in “this restaurant was
below my expectations”. Modality can be used to
express possibility, necessity, permission, obligation
or desire. It is grammatically expressed via adver-
bial phrases (“maybe”, “certainly”), conditional ver-
bal moods and some verbs (“must”, “can”, “may”).
Adjectives and nouns can also express modality (e.g.
”a probable cause”).

Negation and modality can aggregate in a va-
riety of ways: (1) multiple negatives, e.g, “This
restaurant never fails to disappoint on flavor”. In
some languages, double negatives cancel the effect
of negation, while in negative-concord languages
like French, double negations usually intensify the
effect of negation. (2) cumulative modalities, as in
“You definitely must see this movie” and (3) both
negation and modality, as in “you should not go see
this movie”.

Several reports have shown that negations and
modalities are sentiment-relevant (Wiegand et al.,
2010). Kennedy and Inkpen (2006) point out that

10



negations are more sentiment-relevant than dimin-
ishers. Wilson et al. (2009) show that modalities as
well as negations are good cues for opinion identifi-
cation. Given that the sentiment-relevance of nega-
tions and modalities is an established fact, this paper
aims to go further by exploring how this relevance is
distilled according to the semantics of each operator.

To this end, we first study several taxonomies
along with their associated categories of both modal-
ity and negation given by the linguistic literature.
Among these categories, we decide to choose the
categories of (Godard, to appear) for negations. For
modalities, we rely on the categories of (Larreya,
2004) and (Portner, 2009). We thus distinguish
three types of negation: negative operators, negative
quantifiers and lexical negations and three types of
modality: buletic, epistemic and deontic. We show
that each type has a specific effect on the opinion
expression in its scope: both on the polarity and
the strength for negation, and on the strength and/or
the degree of certainty for modality. These effects
are structured as a set of hypotheses that we empiri-
cally validated via several linguistic experiments in-
formed by native speakers. This evaluation method-
ology has already been used in sentiment analysis.
Greene and Resnik (2009) chose psycholinguistic
methods for assessing the connection between sen-
tence structure and implicit sentiment. Taboada et
al. (2011) used Mechanical Turk to check subjective
dictionaries for consistency.

The empirical results reported in this paper pro-
vide a basis for future opinion analysis systems that
have to compute the sentiment orientation at the sen-
tence or at the clause level. The methodology we
used for deriving this basis was applied for French
but it can be easily instantiated for other languages
like English. In this paper, all examples are in
French along with their direct translation in English.
Note however that there are substantial semantic dif-
ferences between the two languages.

2 Related Work

2.1 Negation in Sentiment Analysis

Research efforts using negation in sentiment anal-
ysis can be grouped according to three main crite-
ria: the effect of negation on opinion expressions,
the types of negation used and the method employed

to update the prior polarity of opinion expressions.
According to the first criterion, most approaches

treat negation as polarity reversal (Polanyi and Za-
enen, 2006; Wilson et al., 2005; Moilanen and Pul-
man, 2007; Choi and Cardie, 2008). However, nega-
tion cannot be reduced to reversing polarity. For ex-
ample, if we assume that the score of the adjective
“excellent” is +3, then the opinion score in “this stu-
dent is not excellent” cannot be -3. It rather means
that the student is not good enough. Hence, dealing
with negation requires to go beyond polarity rever-
sal. Liu and Seneff (2009) propose a linear additive
model that treats negations as modifying adverbs. In
the same way, in (Taboada et al., 2011), the negation
of an opinion expression shifts the value of its score
to the opposite polarity by a fixed amount. Thus a +2
adjective is negated to a -2, but the negation of a very
negative adjective is only slightly positive. Based
on (Taboada et al., 2011)’s shift model, Yessenalina
and Cardie (2011) propose to represent each word
as a matrix and combine words using iterated ma-
trix multiplication, which allows for modeling both
additive (for negations) and multiplicative (for in-
tensifiers) semantic effects. In our framework, we
assume, as in (Liu and Seneff, 2009) and (Taboada
et al., 2011), that negation affects both the polarity
and the strength of an opinion expression. However,
unlike other studies, we distill that effect depending
on the type of the negation.

Two main types of negation were studied in
the literature: negators such as “not” and content
word negators such as “eliminate” (Choi and Cardie,
2008). Wilson et al. (2009) also consider negators
and in addition distinguish between positive polarity
shifters and negative polarity shifters since they only
reverse a particular polarity type. Few studies take
into account other types of negation. Among them,
Taboada et al. (2011) treat NPIs (as well as modali-
ties) as “irrealis blockers” by ignoring the semantic
orientation of the word in their scope. For example,
the opinion word “good” will just be ignored in “any
good movie in this theater”. We think that ignoring
NPIs is not suitable and a more accurate analysis is
needed. In addition, to our knowledge, no studies
have investigated the effect of multiple negatives on
opinions.

Finally, methods dealing with negation can be
classified into three categories (Wiegand et al.,

11



2010). In the shallow approach, negation is embed-
ded into a bag-of-words model which is then used
by supervised machine-learning algorithms for po-
larity classification (Pang et al.2002; Ng et al. 2006).
This method, rather simple, seems linguistically in-
accurate and increases the feature space with more
sparse features. The second approach concerns a
local contextual analysis of valence shifter terms
where negation modifies the prior scores of those
terms (Taboada et al., 2011; Wilson et al., 2009).
The last approach uses semantic composition where
the polarities of words within the sentence are aggre-
gated (Moilanen and Pulman, 2007). In this paper,
we provide a way of treating negation and modality
in a semantic composition framework.

2.2 Modality in Sentiment Analysis

In sentiment analysis, the presence of modalities can
be used as a feature in a machine learning setting
for sentence-level opinion classification. Among the
few research efforts in this direction, Wilson et al.
(2009) use a list of modal words. In (Kobayakawa
et al., 2009), modalities are defined in a flat taxon-
omy: request, recommendation, desire, will, judg-
ment, etc. According to the reported results, the gain
brought by the modalities seems difficult to assess.
However, to our knowledge, no work has investi-
gated how modality impacts on opinions.

In NLP, modality is less addressed than other lin-
guistic operators, such as negations. Most of the
computational studies involving modality are fo-
cused on: (i) building annotated resources in terms
of factuality information and (ii) uncertainty mod-
eling and hedge detection in texts. Among anno-
tated resources, we cite the FactBank corpus (Saurı́
and Pustejovsky, 2009) and the BioScope corpus
(Vincze et al., 2008). In the second research strand,
the efforts go from detecting uncertainty in texts
(Rubin, 2010), to finding hedges and their scopes
in specialized corpora (Vincze et al., 2008; Gan-
ter and Strube, 2009; Zhao et al., 2010). However,
there is only partial overlapping between hedges and
modal constructions. Hedges are linguistic means
whereby the authors show that they cannot back
their opinions with facts. Thus, hedges include
certain modal constructions (especially epistemic),
along with other markers such as indirect speech,
e.g., “According to certain researchers,...”. On the

other hand, there are modal constructions which are
not hedges, e.g. when expressing a factual possibil-
ity, without uncertainty on behalf of the speaker, e.g.
may in “These insects may play a part in the repro-
duction of plants as well”.

3 Dealing with Negation

Negation has been well studied in linguistics (Horn,
1989; Swart, 2010; Giannakidou, 2011). For
French, we cite (Muller, 1991; Moeschler, 1992;
Corblin and Tovena, 2003) and (Godard, to ap-
pear)’s work as part of the “Grande Grammaire
du français” project (Abeillé and Godard, 2010).
Our treatment of negation is based on the lexical-
syntactic classification of (Godard, to appear) that
distinguishes three types of negation in French:

• Negative operators, denoted by NEG: they
are the adverbs “pas” (“not”), “plus” (“no
more”), “non” (“no one”), the preposition
“sans” (“without”) and the conjunction “ni”
(“neither”). These operators always appear
alone in the sentence and they cannot be com-
bined with each other.

• Negative quantifiers, denoted by NEG quant,
express both a negation and a quantifica-
tion. They are, for example, the nouns
and pronouns “aucun” (“none”), “nul” (“no”),
“personne” (“nobody”), “rien” (“nothing”)
and the adverbs “jamais” (“never”) and
“aucunement”/“nullement” (“in no way”).
Neg quant have three main properties: (i)
they can occur in positive sentences (that is not
negated), particularly in interrogatives, when
they are employed as indefinite or when they
appear after the relative pronoun “que” (“that”)
(ii) in negative contexts, they are always associ-
ated to the adverb “ne” (“not”) and (iii) they can
be combined with each other as well as with
negative operators. Here are some examples
of this type of negation extracted form our cor-
pus: “on ne s’ennuie jamais” (“you will never
be bored”), “je ne recommande cette série à
personne” (“I do not recommend this movie to
anyone”).

• Lexical negations denoted by NEG lex which
are implicit negative words, such as “manque

12



de” (“lack of”), “absence de”(“absence of”),
“carence” (“deficiency”), “manquer de” (“to
lack”), “ dénué de” (“deprived of”). NEG lex
can be combined with each other as well as
with the two previous types of negation.

This classification does not cover words such as
few or only, since we consider them as weak inten-
sifiers (strength diminishers) rather than negations.

For each opinion expression exp, OP(exp)
indicates that the expression exp is in the
scope of the negation OP ∈ NEG, NEG quant,
NEG lex. Multiple negations are denoted by
OP i(OP j((exp))). In French, there are at
most three negative words in a multiple negative.
However, this case is relatively rare in opinion texts;
this is why, we only deal with two negatives. Usu-
ally, multiple negatives preserve polarity, except for
those composed of NEG lex and NEG quant or
NEG which cancel the effect of NEG lex. For ex-
ample, in “manque de goût” (“lack of taste”), i.e
NEG lex(taste), the polarity is negative, while
in “il ne manque pas de goût” (roughly, “no lack of
taste”), i.e. NEG(NEG lex(taste)), the opin-
ion is positive. This property was also observed
in (Rowan et al., 2006). Thus, multiple negatives
preserving negation concern the following combina-
tions:
NEG quant(NEG quant(exp)),
NEG quant(NEG(exp)),
NEG(NEG quant(exp)).

We analyse the frequency of our negation cate-
gories in a corpus of French opinion texts. We use a
manually built subjective lexicon (Benamara et al.,
2011) that contains 95 modalities and 21 negations.
An analysis of a corpus of 26132 French movie re-
views (about 863 TV series) extracted from the al-
lociné web site1 shows that around 26 % of reviews
contain NPIs and/or multiple negations.

3.1 Hypotheses
The effects of each negation type are based on the
following hypotheses:

N1.a The negation always reverses the polarity
of an opinion expression, that is a positive opinion
expression becomes negative when in the scope of

1http://www.allocine.fr

a negation. For example, “exceptionnel” (“excep-
tional”) and “pas exceptionnel” (“not exceptional”).

N1.b The strength of an opinion expression in the
scope of a negation, is not greater than of the opin-
ion expression alone. For example, for the adjec-
tive “exceptionnel” (“exceptional”), the strength of
its negation, that is “pas exceptionnel” (“not excep-
tional”), is lower.

N2. The strength of an expression when in the
scope of a NEG quant is greater than when in the
scope of a NEG. For instance: “jamais exceptionnel”
(“never exceptional”) is stronger than “pas excep-
tionnel” (“not exceptional”).

N3. NEG lex has the same effect as NEG, as for
lack of taste and no taste.

N4. The strength of an expression when in the
scope of multiple negatives is greater than when in
the scope of each negation alone. For example, “plus
jamais bon” (“no longer ever good”) is stronger than
“plus bon” (“no longer good”).

3.2 The experimental setup

The previous hypotheses have been empirically val-
idated by volunteer subjects through two protocols:
Protocol 1 for N1.a and N1.b, and Protocol 2 for N2
to N4 2.

Both protocols are based on a set of questions that
we built so that: (1) they reflect the most frequent
linguistic structures found in our corpus, and (2)
they do not contain words or expressions on which
people have prior opinions for/against. In addition,
the number of questions within each protocol was
designed so that we ensure a trade-off between the
amount of data needed for proving our hypotheses
and the quality of the data, subjects have to remain
focused in order to avoid errors due to tiredness.

Protocol 1. A set of six questions are shown to
subjects. In each question, an opinionated sentence
is presented, along with its negation using negative
operators, as in “This student is brilliant” and “This
student is not brilliant”. The strengths of the opin-
ions vary from one question to another on a dis-
crete scale. Several types of scales have been used
in sentiment analysis research, going from continu-
ous scales (Benamara et al., 2007) to discrete ones

2They are respectively available at:
http://goo.gl/CQzKy and http://goo.gl/YnZPS.

13



Figure 1: Empirical validation of N1 to N4.

(Taboada et al., 2011). Since our negation hypothe-
ses have to be evaluated against human subjects, the
chosen length of the scale has to ensure a trade-off
between a fine-grained categorisation of subjective
words and the reliability of this categorisation with
respect to human judgments. We thus use in our
framework a discrete 7-point scale, going from −3
(which corresponds to “extremely negative” opin-
ions) to +3 (for “extremely positive” ones) to quan-
tify the strength of an opinion expression. Note that
0 corresponds to cases where in the absence of any
context, the opinion expression can be neither posi-
tive nor negative. A set of 81 native French speakers
were asked to indicate the strength of each sentence
in a question on the same 7-point scale.

Protocol 2. Eight questions are shown. Each
question contains a pair of sentences: one contain-
ing a negative operator, the other having either a
negative quantifier or a lexical negation, or multi-
ple negatives, as in “This student is not brilliant”
and “This student is never brilliant”. Subjects are
asked to compare the strengths of the sentences in
each pair. A set of 96 native French speakers partic-
ipated in this study.

3.3 Results

The results of these assessments are shown in Fig-
ure 1, as the average agreement and disagreement
between the subjects’ answers and our hypotheses.
The results show that all four hypotheses are vali-
dated. For N1.a, we obtain an average agreement of
90.7 % when excluding the answers corresponding
to the strength 0 (20.37 % of all answers). We note
that for opinion strengths from −1 to +2 (that is,
“mildly negative” to “very positive” opinions), N1.a
is 100 % verified. The same trend is observed for−2

(“very negative”) and +3 opinion strengths (87.8 %
and 93 % agreement, respectively). However, for
“extremely negative” opinions, e.g., “l’acteur est
nullisime” (“the actor is worthless”), we observe that
only 48.8 % of subjects reverse its polarity. The re-
sults for N1.b are shown in Table 1. The rows cor-
respond to opinion strenghts given by subjects for
sentences without negation and the columns, and the
subjects’ answers to the same sentences, this time
negated. In this table, we discarded the row for
the subjects’ answers to the 0-strength original sen-
tences (without negation) because the number of in-
stances was very low.

+3 +2 +1 0 -1 -2 -3
+3 0 0 4.7 32.9 58.9 3.5 0
+2 0 0 0 4.9 82.0 13.1 0
+1 0 0 0 0 84.3 14.5 1.2
-1 0 0 62.5 37.5 0 0 0
-2 0 1.2 51.9 39.5 7.4 0 0
-3 0 1.4 26.4 43.0 23.6 5.6 0

Table 1: Results (in percents) for N1.b

We observe that the hypothesis N1.b is verified
for all configurations of strengths. In addition, a
non-negligible percentage of the subjects assign a 0
strength to the negation of all negative opinion ex-
pressions. This is particularly salient for extremely
negative expressions. The same goes for extremely
positive expressions.

N2 is verified at 67 %. This might me because the
gap between the strength of NEG quant (exp)
and NEG(exp) is rather small.

N3 is verified at 43 %. This low result reflects the
fact that, as expected, for “lack of” (i.e., “manque
de”, very frequent in French movie reviews) N3 is
not validated: 81 % of the subjects consider the
opinion in the scope of this lexical negation to be
less negative than the opinion in the scope of the
negative operator “not”. This disparity in the results
show that a thorougher study has to be undertaken in
order to better distill the effect of lexical negations
on opinion expressions.

Finally, N4 is verified at almost 64 %. The
disagreement comes from the question testing the
effect of the NEG quant (NEG quant) com-
bination. We think this might come from the

14



fact that NEG quant already boosts the strength
of an opinion expression, hence adding more
NEG quant does not necessarily yield an even
stronger opinion expression.

4 Dealing with Modality

Drawing partly on (Portner, 2009) and on (Larreya,
2004) for French, we have chosen to split modality
in three categories:

• buletic, denoted by Mod B – it indicates the
speaker’s desires/wishes. This type of modality
is expressed via a closed set of verbs denoting
hope e.g. “I wish he were kind”.

• epistemic, denoted by Mod E – it indicates the
speaker’s belief in the propositional content he
asserts. It is expressed via doubt, possibil-
ity or necessity adverbs, such as “peut-être”
(“perhaps”), “décidément” (“definitely”), “cer-
tainement” (“certainly”), etc., and via the verbs
“devoir” (“have to”), “falloir” (“need to/must”)
and “pouvoir” (“may/can”), e.g. “The movie
might be good”,

• deontic, denoted by Mod D – it indicates a
possibility or an obligation (with their con-
trapositives, impossibility and permission, re-
spectively). It is only expressed via the same
modal verbs as for epistemic modality, but with
a deontic reading, e.g., “You must go see the
movie”.

Note that this classification takes into account
neither evidential usage of modality nor epistemic
modalities expressed in conditional verb moods
since these usages are less frequent in our corpus.

Just like for negations, we project these categories
on our corpus of French movie reviews and we ob-
serve that 53 % of the reviews contain at least one
modal construction. In addition, the most frequent
modals in those reviews are in decreasing order of
occurrence: the epistemic and deontic verbs “de-
voir” and “pouvoir”, buletic modal verbs and epis-
temic adverbs.

Unlike for negations, for the moment we do not
take into account cumulative effects of modalities on
an opinion expression, like in: “You definitely must

see the movie!” as well as combination of negations
and modalities.

We consider that each modal expression has a se-
mantic effect on opinions. Unlike negation, this ef-
fect is not on both the polarity and the strength of
opinions, but only on their strength – for instance,
the strength of the recommendation “You must go
see the movie, it’s a blast” is greater than for “Go
see the movie, it’s a blast”, and certainty degree –
for instance, “This movie is definitely good” has a
greater certainty than “This movie is good”. In our
framework, the strength is discretized on a three-
level scale, going from 1 (minimal strength) to 3
(maximal strength). The certainty degree also has
three possible values, in line with standard literature
(Lyons, 1977; Saurı́ and Pustejovsky, 2009): pos-
sible, probable and certain. However, we consider
that, in an opinion analysis context, the frontier be-
tween the first two values is rather vague, hence we
conflate them into a value that we denote by uncer-
tain. We thus obtain two certainty degrees, from
which we built a three-level scale, by inserting be-
tween these values a “default” certainty degree for
all expressions which are neither a modal nor in the
scope of a modal.

4.1 Hypotheses
We will now specify the semantic effect of each
modality type, on the strength and/or certainty de-
gree of the opinion expressions. These effects are
structured as a set of six hypotheses:

M1. Mod B alters the certainty degree of opinion
expressions in its scope. Thus, the certainty degree
of an opinion expression in the scope of a Mod B
is weaker than the certainty degree of the opinion
expression itself. e.g. in “I hope this movie is funny”
there is less certainty than in “This movie is funny”.

M2.1 Mod E alters the certainty degree of opinion
expressions in its scope. For adverbial Mod E, this
degree is altered according to the certainty of the re-
spective adverb: if the latter is uncertain, then the
certainty of the opinion in the scope of the adverb is
reduced; otherwise, the certainty is augmented. For
instance, “Le film est probablement bon” (“Proba-
bly the film is good”) is less certain than “Le film est
bon” (“The film is good”), which is, in turn, less cer-
tain than “Le film est décidément bon” (“The film is
definitely good”).

15



M2.2 The certainty of opinion expressions when
in the scope of a verbal Mod E is always lower than
when alone. It varies according to the certainty of
the respective verb, from pouvoir – lowest certainty,
to devoir and falloir – greater certainty. For instance,
the certainty of “Le film peut être bon” (“the film
might be good”) is lower than of “Le film doit être
bon” (“the film must be good”), which, in turn, is
lower than of “Le film est bon” (“the film is good”).

M2.3 The certainty degrees of opinion expres-
sions in the scope of epistemic devoir and falloir are
the same.

M3.1 Mod D alters the strength of opinion expres-
sions in its scope. Hence, strength varies according
to the verb: pouvoir reduces the strength of the opin-
ion, whereas devoir and falloir boost it.

M3.2 The strengths of opinion expressions in the
scope of deontic devoir and falloir are the same.

4.2 The experimental setup
We empirically validated the previous hypotheses
through the same methodology as for negation. We
designed three protocols, Protocol 1 for M1, Proto-
col 2 for M2.1 to M2.3, and Protocol 3 for M3.1 and
M3.2.

Protocol 1. In this protocol, five questions are
proposed. In one of them, the subject is presented
an opinionated sentence without modality. In each
of the other questions, we present a subjective sen-
tence with buletic modality. For each question, we
then ask the subject to specify whether the author of
the sentence has an established opinion (positive or
negative), e.g., “I saw this movie yesterday. I hope
it will be a blockbuster.”, or “The movie is interest-
ing.”, or hasn’t an established opinion yet “I hope
this movie is interesting”. 78 native French speakers
participated in this protocol.

Protocol 2. Eight questions are proposed to sub-
jects. In each question we present an opinionated
sentence. The first one is a sentence without modal-
ity, e.g. “The movie is good”. Each of the other
sentences contains an epistemic modality of differ-
ent certainty degree, either “uncertain” or “certain”.
111 native French speakers were asked whether the
modal sentence was less, more or as certain as the
sentence without modality.

Protocol 3. Four questions are presented. In each
question we show a pair of opinionated sentences:

Figure 2: Empirical validation of M1 to M3.2.

one sentence without modality, and another one with
a deontic modality, as in “Go see this movie, it
is good” and “You should go see this movie, it is
good”. We ask subjects compare the strengths of the
sentences in each pair. A set of 78 native French
speakers participated in this study.

4.3 Results
We show the results of these assessments in Figure
2. M1 is validated at 86.5 %. More specifically,
when the phrase in the scope of the buletic modality
denotes an event, all subjects consider it to vehic-
ulate an opinion. This, in French at least, usually
corresponds to an implicit opinion3. Moreover, ac-
cording to all subjects, buletic modality cancels the
opinion in its scope, when the phrase expressing the
latter denotes a state. Therefore, subjective words
do not make sentences like “I hope her husband is
kind” opinionated.

M2.1 is validated at around 72 % for both cer-
tainty degrees (“certain” and “uncertain”), which
shows that, in addition to polarity and strength, cer-
tainty is a relevant feature of an opinion expres-
sion. Concerning M2.2, almost 79 % of the subjects
validated that a phrase when outscoped by “pou-
voir” is less certain than when outscoped by “de-
voir”, whereas only 23 % of them consider that “de-
voir” lowers the certainty degree of the phrase in its
scope. M2.3 is validated at around 57 % overall
since for “devoir” (“have to”) and “falloir” (“need
to”/“must”) subjects considered them as having the

3Implicit opinions, also called opinionated sentences (Liu,
2010), are sentences that express positive or negative opinions
and do not contain any explicit subjective clues. Here are some
examples: “The movie is not bad, although some persons left
the auditorium” or “Laborious and copy/paste of the first part”.

16



same effect.
M3.1 is validated to a lesser extent: 54 %. 62.5 %

of the subjects agreed with the hypothesis that deon-
tic “pouvoir” (“may”/“can”) reduces the strength of
the opinion in its scope. This might be explained by
the ambiguity between deontic and epistemic read-
ings of these three verbs. The strengths of “devoir”
and “falloir” are deemed identical (M3.2) at 60 %.
The rest of 40 % are evenly split between “devoir”
being stronger than “falloir” and vice versa.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we showed that the effects of modality
and negation on opinion expressions in their scope
depend on the type of these operators. Based on a
set of protocols, we empirically validated that nega-
tion affects both polarity and strength, and that neg-
ative quantifiers and multiple negations boost the
strength of the negation. We also empirically vali-
date that modality affects the strength, in case of de-
ontic modality, and the certainty degree for buletic
and epistemic modality. Our approach is novel in
two ways:

• Our treatment of negation goes beyond the ap-
proaches of (Wilson et al., 2009)(Taboada et
al., 2011) and (Liu and Seneff, 2009) since we
propose a specific treatment for negative polar-
ity items and for multiple negatives. In addi-
tion, our results for negative operators confirm,
as in (Taboada et al., 2011) and (Liu and Seneff,
2009), that the strength of an opinion expres-
sion in the scope of a negation, is not greater
than of the opinion expression alone.

• For modality, to our knowledge, our approach
is the first study dealing with the semantics of
modality for sentiment analysis.

The empirical results reported in this paper pro-
vide a basis for future opinion analysis systems that
have to compute the sentiment orientation at the sen-
tence or at the clause level.

In further work, we plan to study the effect of
cumulative modalities, as in “you definitely must
see this movie”, and of co-occurring negation and
modality, as in “ you should not go see this movie”,
on opinion expressions. We also plan to evaluate
to what extent our empirical results extrapolate to

other languages. Finally, we will plug our results
to a computational model in order to determine the
contextual polarity of opinion expressions at the sen-
tence or clause level.

Acknowledgement

This work was supported by a DGA-RAPID project
under grant number 0102906143. We also thank all
the volunteers for participating in the experiments.

References
Anne Abeillé and Danièle Godard. 2010. The grande

grammaire du français project. In Proceedings of
LREC’10.

Farah Benamara, Carmine Cesarano, Antonio Picariello,
Diego Reforgiato, and V. S. Subrahmanian. 2007.
Sentiment analysis: Adjectives and adverbs are better
than adjectives alone. In Proceedings of ICWSM.

Farah Benamara, Baptiste Chardon, Yannick Mathieu,
and Vladimir Popescu. 2011. Towards context-based
subjectivity analysis. In Proceedings of 5th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 1180–1188.

Yejin Choi and Claire Cardie. 2008. Learning with
compositional semantics as structural inference for
subsentential sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of
EMNLP’08, pages 793–801.

Francis Corblin and Lucia Tovena. 2003. L’expression
de la négation dans les langues romanes. In D. Go-
dard., editor, Les langues romanes : problèmes de la
phrase simple. Paris: CNRS Editions.

V. Ganter and M. Strube. 2009. Finding hedges by chas-
ing weasels: Hedge detection using wikipedia tags and
shallow linguistic features. In Proceedings of ACL-
IJCNLP’09, pages 173–176.

Anastasia Giannakidou. 2011. Positive polarity items
and negative polarity items: variation, licensing, and
compositionality. Semantics: An International Hand-
book of Natural Language Meaning.

Danièle Godard. to appear. Les négateurs. In La Grande
Grammaire du français, chapter 10.

Stephan Greene and Philip Resnik. 2009. More than
words: Syntactic packaging and implicit sentiment. In
Proceedings of HLT-NAACL’09, pages 503–511.

Laurence Horn. 1989. A natural history of negation.
University of Chicago Press.

Alistair Kennedy and Diana Inkpen. 2006. Sentiment
classification of movie and product reviews using con-
textual valence shifters. Computational Intelligence,
22(2):110–125.

17



Takeshi S. Kobayakawa, Tadashi Kumano, Hideki
Tanaka, Naoaki Okazaki, Jin-Dong Kim, and Jun ichi
Tsujii. 2009. Opinion classification with tree kernel
svm using linguistic modality analysis. In Proceed-
ings of CIKM’09, pages 1791–1794.

Paul Larreya. 2004. L’expression de la modalité en
français et en anglais (domaine verbal). Revue belge
de philologie et d’histoire, 82(3):733–762.

Jingjing Liu and Stephanie Seneff. 2009. Review senti-
ment scoring via a parse-and-paraphrase paradigm. In
Proceedings of EMNLP’09, pages 161–169.

Bing Liu. 2010. Sentiment analysis and subjectivity. In
Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau, editors, Hand-
book of Natural Language Processing, Second Edi-
tion. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group, Boca Ra-
ton, FL.

J. Lyons. 1977. Semantics. vol. 2. Cambridge University
Press.

Jacques Moeschler. 1992. The pragmatic aspects of lin-
guistic negation: Speech act, argumentation and prag-
matic inference. Argumentation, 6(1):51–76.

Karo Moilanen and Stephen Pulman. 2007. Sentiment
composition. In Proceedings of RANLP’07, pages
378–382.

Claude Muller. 1991. La négation en français. Syntaxe,
sémantique et éléments de comparaison avec les autres
langues romanes:. Droz, Genève.

Livia Polanyi and Annie Zaenen. 2006. Contextual va-
lence shifters. In Computing Attitude and Affect in
Text: Theory and Applications, The Information Re-
trieval Series, pages 1–10. Springer-Verlag.

Paul Portner. 2009. Modality, volume 1. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, USA.

Nairn Rowan, Cleo Condoravdi, and Lauri Karttunen.
2006. Computing relative polarity for textual infer-
ence. In Proceedings of ICoS-5.

Victoria Rubin. 2010. Epistemic modality: From uncer-
tainty to certainty in the context of information seeking
as interactions with texts. Information Processing and
Management, 46(5):533–540.

Roser Saurı́ and James Pustejovsky. 2009. FactBank:
a corpus annotated with event factuality. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 43(3):227–268.

Henriette De Swart. 2010. Expression and interpreta-
tion of negation. An OT typology. Studies in Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory, 77.

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, Kimberly
Voll, and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-based meth-
ods for sentiment analysis. Computational Linguis-
tics, 37:267–307.

V. Vincze, G. Szarvas, R. Farkas, G. Móra, and J. Csirik.
2008. The bioscope corpus: biomedical texts anno-
tated for uncertainty, negation and their scopes. BMC
bioinformatics, 9(Suppl 11):S9.

Michael Wiegand, Alexandra Balahur, Benjamin Roth,
Dietrich Klakow, and Andrés Montoyo. 2010. A sur-
vey on the role of negation in sentiment analysis. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Specu-
lation in Natural Language Processing, pages 60–68.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of HLT’05, pages
347–354.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2009. Recognizing contextual polarity: An explo-
ration of features for phrase-level sentiment analysis.
Computational Linguistics, 35(3):399–433.

Ainur Yessenalina and Claire Cardie. 2011. Composi-
tional matrix-space models for sentiment analysis. In
Proceedings of EMNLP’11, pages 172–182.

Q. Zhao, C. Sun, B. Liu, and Y. Cheng. 2010. Learning
to detect hedges and their scope using crf. In Proceed-
ings of CoNLL’10, pages 100–105.

18


