










































Blogging birds: Generating narratives about reintroduced species to promote public engagement


INLG 2012 Proceedings of the 7th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 120–124,
Utica, May 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Blogging birds: Generating narratives about reintroduced species to
promote public engagement

Advaith Siddharthan, Matthew Green, Kees van Deemter, Chris Mellish & René van der Wal
{advaith, mjgreen, k.vdeemter, c.mellish, r.vanderwal}@abdn.ac.uk

University of Aberdeen

Abstract

This paper proposes the use of NLG to en-
hance public engagement during the course of
species reintroductions. We examine whether
ecological insights can be effectively commu-
nicated through blogs about satellite-tagged
individuals, and whether such blogs can help
create a positive perception of the species in
readers’ minds, a requirement for successful
reintroduction. We then discuss the impli-
cations for NLG systems that generate blogs
from satellite-tag data.

1 Introduction

Conservation of wildlife is an objective to which
considerable effort is devoted by governments and
NGOs across the world. A variety of web-based
approaches can help make the natural world more
accessible to the public, which in turn may trans-
late into greater public support for nature conserva-
tion initiatives. The present paper explores the role
of Natural Language Generation (NLG) in bringing
up-to-date information about wild animals in their
natural environment to nature enthusiasts.

We focus on the reintroduction of the red kite
to the UK. This member of the raptor family was
once widespread in the UK, but prolonged and in-
tense persecution led to its near extinction. Since
1989, efforts have been ongoing to reintroduce this
species in various locations across the country. We
are working together with one of the largest na-
ture conservation charities in Europe to use NLG
for public engagement around a small number of
satellite-tagged reintroduced red kites.

The public engagement activities surrounding this
reintroduction initiative have two subtly different

objectives: (i) to communicate ecological insights to
increase awareness about the species, and (ii) to cre-
ate a positive image of the reintroduced species to
harness public support for the reintroduction. Cur-
rently, data from these satellite tags are being used
by the charity to manually create blogs such as:

...Ruby (Carrbridge) had an interesting flight
down to Loch Duntelchaig via Dochfour on
the 6th March before flying back to the
Drumsmittal area, spending the 10th March in
the Loch Ussie area (possibly also attracted by
the feeding potential there!) and then back to
Drumsmittal for the 13th...

Such blogs are used by schools which have
adopted individual kites, and pupils can read these
texts alongside a map plotting the GPS locations of
‘their’ kite. As can already be seen from the above,
there is currently little ecological information about
the species in these blogs. Because of the perceived
importance of education to the success of reintro-
ductions, there is a clear desire to include more eco-
logical insights. Yet, time and resource limitations
have prevented the charity from doing so; they per-
ceive the writing of such blogs already as very time
consuming, and indeed, rather mundane.

In this paper, we explore the use of blogs based on
satellite tag data for communicating ecological in-
sights and creating a positive image of a species. We
consider both aspects, deemed essential for a suc-
cessful species reintroduction, and focus on how the
blogs can be made more informative than those cur-
rently being written by the charity.

2 Related work

Data-to-text systems (e.g., Goldberg et al. (1994);
Theune et al. (2001); Portet et al. (2009)) have typ-

120



(a) (b)

Figure 1: Plot of (a) distance from nest as a function of time, and (b) clusters of visited locations.

ically been used to generate summaries of technical
data for professionals, such as engineers, nurses and
oil rig workers. There is some work on the use of
data-to-text for lay audiences; e.g., generating nar-
ratives from sensor data for automotive (Reddington
et al., 2011) and environmental (Molina et al., 2011)
applications, generating personal narratives to help
children with complex communication needs (Black
et al., 2010), and summarising neonatal intensive
care data for parents (Mahamood et al., 2008).

Our application differs from the above-mentioned
data-to-text applications, in that we aim to gener-
ate inspiring as well as informative texts. It bears
some resemblance to NLG systems that offer “info-
tainment”, such as Dial Your Disc (Van Deemter and
Odijk, 1997) and Ilex (O’Donnell et al., 2001). In
fact, Dial Your Disc, which generates spoken mono-
logues about classical music, focused emphatically
on generating engaging texts, and achieved linguis-
tic variation through the use of recursive, syntacti-
cally structured templates (see also, Theune et al.
(2001)). We intend to extend a data-to-text system
in similar ways, using ecological insights to make
narratives engaging for non-experts.

3 Overall Goals

Our overall aim is to bring satellite tagged animals
(in this case study, red kites) “to life” by construct-
ing narratives around their patterns of movement.
We require individual locations of a bird to be ex-
plained in the context of its wider spatial use, and

the ecological interpretations thereof. This paper has
the following goals:

1. To illustrate how satellite tag data can be analysed to
identify behavioural patterns for use in generating
blogs (content selection);

2. To test whether blogs written by an ecologist based
on such data analysis can be used to educate as well
as create a positive perception of the species;

3. To investigate the challenges for NLG in automat-
ing the generation of such blogs.

4 Data analysis for identifying behaviours

From an NLG perspective, our interest in automat-
ing the generation of blogs from satellite tag data
is in making these narratives more interesting, by
using the data to illustrate key aspects of red kite
behaviour. To illustrate how we can relate the data
to behaviours, we provide two graphical views of
GPS fixes from a tagged red kite. Fig. 1(a) shows
how far a focal kite is located from its nest over the
course of a year. We propose to use such data to con-
struct narratives around ecological insights regard-
ing the exploratory behaviours of red kites during
their first year after fledgling. Fig. 1(b) shows the
same GPS data, but now spatially, thereby plotting
latitude against longitude of all fixes without regard
to time. This portrayal highlights the kite’s favoured
locations (indicated in different colours based on a
MATLAB cluster analysis which automatically esti-
mates the parameters of a Gaussian mixture model,

121



even when clusters overlap substantially), as well as
its broad range.

These plots illustrate two key aspects of kite be-
haviour: exploration and site-fidelity (the presence
of favoured locations that the kite tends to return to).
In addition, we are interested in communicating var-
ious feeding behaviours as well as that, unlike many
other birds of prey, red kites are social birds, often
found in groups. Feeding and social behaviours can-
not be directly identified from the data. However,
they can often be inferred; for instance, a red kite
spending its time by the side of a main road is likely
to be looking to scavenge on road kill.

5 Study on engaging readers using blogs

We now report a study that explores whether such
ecological insights can be effectively communicated
through blogs constructed around an individual of
the species, and whether such blogs can help create a
positive perception of the species in a reader’s mind.

This study was based on a text manually con-
structed by an ecologist based on five weeks of
data such as in Fig 1 from a red kite named “Red
Baroness”. For this study, the data was mapped onto
a simplified world with seven features: a lake, a
shoreline, fields, a road, a moor, a forest and a river.
A sample of the text is shown in Figure 2 for illus-
tration.

Week 2: How different the pattern of movements
of Red Baroness was this week! On Monday, she
shot off past Bleak Moor, on her longest journey
so far north-east of the lake. She appeared not to
find much of interest there, and on the next day
she was observed combing the edges of Green
Park, possibly in search of a group of birds rest-
ing in the top half of the trees. The bird was
clearly restless however, as on Thursday she was
observed following River Rapid, downstream for
further than she had been last month, finally stop-
ping when she reached Blue Lake again.

Figure 2: Sample material showing week 2 from the five
week blog

5.1 Experimental Design

80 participants were shown the material: a five week
blog on the movements of the focal red kite, named

Red Baroness, alongside a picture of a red kite and a
schematic map marking the seven features of inter-
est. Participants were students at the University of
Aberdeen. The experiment was conducted in a lab in
a supervised setting. After reading and returning the
blog, each participant was asked to (a) summarise
the blog they had just read in 5 lines, (b) state what
they found most interesting, and (c) state what they
did not like about the blog. These textual responses
were manually coded for whether the four behaviour
types (site fidelity, exploration, feeding and social)
were identified by each participant.

To gauge the participants’ perceptions of the kite,
we used two methods. First, we asked the participant
to answer four questions that tested various aspects
of their willingness to engage with red kite conser-
vation:

Q1 Would you be willing to contribute money to a char-
ity that tries to protect kites?

Q2 The use of rat poison also leads to the death of kites
that feed on the bodies of these rats. Would you be
willing to sign a campaign against rat poison?

Q3 Should governments allocate more money than they
do currently to protect kites from extinction?

Q4 Write your email if you wish to be sent more blogs.

Further to this, participants were asked to assess
the red kite’s personality. We follow (Gosling et al.,
2003), who use the 44 question Big Five Inventory
(BFI) (John et al., 1991; John et al., 2008) to as-
sess the personality of dogs. We are interested in
whether readers did assign personalities to the red
kite in the blog and, if so, what these personality
profiles looked like.

5.2 Results
We now analyse the extent to which our participants
were informed about red kite ecology as well as how
willing they were to engage with conservation ef-
forts and how they perceived the species.

5.2.1 Informativeness
More than half the participants identified feed-

ing behaviour (61%) and social (54%) behaviour.
The other two ecological concepts were not men-
tioned explicitly in the blog that participants read,
but needed to be inferred. Around a quarter of par-
ticipants managed to infer the notion of site fidelity

122



(23%), the most difficult of the concepts, and 41%
inferred exploratory behaviour.

5.2.2 Engagement
39% provided their email address to receive fur-

ther blogs (the only real commitment), and an equal
number expressed willingness to contribute money
for red kite conservation efforts. 85% expressed
willingness to sign a campaign against rat poisoning,
and 61% wanted increased government spending for
red kite conservation.

We detected a correlation between re-
call/inference of behaviours and willingness to
engage (plotting total number of behaviours re-
called/inferred by each participant against the total
number of engagement questions answered affirma-
tively, rpearson = 0.31; p < 0.005; n = 80). One
interpretation of this result is that greater insights
into the life of this bird has positively influenced
the reader’s perceptions of it. Further qualitative
studies are needed to substantiate this, but we view
this result as evidence in favour of incorporating
ecological insights into the blogs.

5.2.3 Perception
Table 1 shows the big five personality traits as-

signed to Red Baroness by participants. The BFI is
constructed such that being non-committal about the
44 trait questions would result in scores of 3. The
ability of readers to assign human personality traits
(significantly different from 3.0) to the red kite indi-
cates a willingness to anthromorphise the bird. The
last column shows the average personality of 21 year
old humans (from Srivastava et al. (2003)), which is
the same age group as our participants. The values
for extroversion, agreeableness and conscientious-
ness are very similar, and the kite has lower neu-
roticism and openness.

6 Implications for NLG

The above study indicates that it is possible to use
narratives based on satellite tag data to communi-
cate ecological insights as well as create a positive
perception of the species in the readers’ minds. To
generate texts that are fluent and engaging enough
that readers will be both informed and entertained
by them poses challenges that are sharply differ-
ent from the ones facing most data-to-text systems,

Trait Red Kite Conf. Int. 21 yo
Extroversion 3.28 3.07–3.48 3.25
Agreeableness 3.64 3.47–3.80 3.64
Conscientiousness 3.48 3.26–3.69 3.45
Neuroticism 2.60 2.41–2.80 3.32
Openness 3.29 3.11–3.47 3.92

Table 1: Big five personality traits of Red Baroness with
99.9% confidence intervals, compared to average 21 year
olds (6076 people) (Srivastava et al., 2003)

whose primary purpose is to offer decision support.
Our goals are more similar to those of Dial Your
Disc (Van Deemter and Odijk, 1997), with the added
requirement that texts should be easy to read. For
instance, ecological concepts (such as site fidelity)
could be communicated by explicitly defining them.
However, we would prefer these to be inferred from
more engaging narratives.

The blogs currently created by the charity (cf.
Section 1) are, stripped down to their essence, a se-
quence of locations. We propose to interlay these
sequences of locations with descriptions of red kite
behaviours, broadly categorised as fidelity, explo-
ration, feeding or social. Algorithm 1 outlines the
planning process. We have developed an initial pro-
totype that implements this for our simplified world.
Using template based generation, we can automati-
cally generate blogs such as the following for arbi-
trary sequences of locations in our simplified world:

This week Red Baroness continued to feel like
stretching her wings. On Monday she was
seen in the fields by the lake, calling out to
other kites. On Tuesday and Wednesday she
stayed along the road, looking for roadkill on
the country lanes. On Thursday she returned
to the fields by the lake – clearly there was
plenty to eat there.

To scale this up to the real world, work is in
progress to augment our data analysis component by
using a variety of GIS data to map geo-coordinates
to habitat, terrain and demographic features from
which we can identify relevant kite behaviours.

Our remaining challenges are to (a) compile a
large list of red kite behaviours, (b) use paraphras-
ing approaches to create variety in descriptions of
behaviour and (c) develop means to interweave more

123



1. Identify place names of interest to the user among
the many GIS locations frequented by the red kite

2. For each place of interest (ordered by time):

(a) describe place in terms of relevant geographi-
cal features

(b) describe one or two behaviours (feeding or so-
cial) associated with any of these features

(c) make a reference to any exploratory behaviour
or site fidelity if identified from previous se-
quence.

Algorithm 1: Generate a blog about a red kite

complex behaviours, such as mating, into the narra-
tives. There is ongoing interdisciplinary work into
each of the above. Variation is likely to be critical to
the endeavour as these blogs are aimed at engaging
the reader, not just at presenting information. This
can be achieved both by expanding the range of be-
haviours we describe, and the range of ways we can
realise these through language.

7 Conclusions

This paper reports a study that informs the appli-
cation of NLG technologies to conservation efforts
centred around public engagement. We report on
findings which indicate that it is possible to use nar-
ratives loosely based on satellite tag data to com-
municate ecological insights as well as to create a
positive perception of the species in readers’ minds.
This informs an approach to automating the creation
of blogs from satellite-tagged red kites by interleav-
ing sequences of locations with descriptions of be-
haviour. A proof of concept system has been devel-
oped for a simplified world, and is in the process of
being scaled up to the real world, using GIS data.

Acknowledgments

This research is supported by an award made by
the RCUK Digital Economy programme to the
dot.rural Digital Economy Hub; award reference:
EP/G066051/1.

References

R. Black, J. Reddington, E. Reiter, N. Tintarev, and
A. Waller. 2010. Using nlg and sensors to support

personal narrative for children with complex commu-
nication needs. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT
2010 Workshop on Speech and Language Processing
for Assistive Technologies, pages 1–9. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

E. Goldberg, N. Driedger, and R.I. Kittredge. 1994. Us-
ing natural-language processing to produce weather
forecasts. IEEE Expert, 9(2):45–53.

S.D. Gosling, V.S.Y. Kwan, and O.P. John. 2003. A
dog’s got personality: a cross-species comparative
approach to personality judgments in dogs and hu-
mans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
85(6):1161.

O.P. John, E.M. Donahue, and R.L. Kentle. 1991. The
big five inventoryversions 4a and 54. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley, Institute of Personality
and Social Research.

O.P. John, L.P. Naumann, and C.J. Soto. 2008. Paradigm
shift to the integrative big five trait taxonomy. Hand-
book of personality: Theory and research, pages 114–
158.

S. Mahamood, E. Reiter, and C. Mellish. 2008. Neona-
tal intensive care information for parents an affec-
tive approach. In Computer-Based Medical Systems,
2008. CBMS’08. 21st IEEE International Symposium
on, pages 461–463. IEEE.

M. Molina, A. Stent, and E. Parodi. 2011. Generating
automated news to explain the meaning of sensor data.
Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis X, pages 282–
293.

M. O’Donnell, C. Mellish, J. Oberlander, and A. Knott.
2001. Ilex: an architecture for a dynamic hypertext
generation system. Natural Language Engineering,
7(3):225–250.

F. Portet, E. Reiter, A. Gatt, J. Hunter, S. Sripada,
Y. Freer, and C. Sykes. 2009. Automatic generation of
textual summaries from neonatal intensive care data.
Artificial Intelligence, 173(7-8):789–816.

J. Reddington, E. Reiter, N. Tintarev, R. Black, and
A. Waller. 2011. “Hands Busy, Eyes Busy”: Generat-
ing Stories from Sensor Data for Automotive applica-
tions. In Proceedings of IUI Workshop on Multimodal
Interfaces for Automotive Applications.

S. Srivastava, O.P. John, S.D. Gosling, and J. Potter.
2003. Development of personality in early and middle
adulthood: Set like plaster or persistent change?. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(5):1041.

M. Theune, E. Klabbers, J.R. de Pijper, E. Krahmer, and
J. Odijk. 2001. From data to speech: a general ap-
proach. Natural Language Engineering, 7(01):47–86.

K. Van Deemter and J. Odijk. 1997. Context modeling
and the generation of spoken discourse. Speech Com-
munication, 21(1-2):101–121.

124


