










































Towards a computational approach to literary text analysis


Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 97–104,
Montréal, Canada, June 8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards a computational approach to literary text analysis

Antonio Roque
Computer Science Department

University of California, Los Angeles
antonio@roque-brown.net

Abstract

We consider several types of literary-theoretic ap-
proaches to literary text analysis; we describe sev-
eral concepts from Computational Linguistics and 
Artificial Intelligence that could be used to model 
and support them.

1 Problem Statement

Consider the first sentence of the novel Finnegan's  
Wake (Joyce, 1939):

riverrun, past Eve and Adam's,  from swerve of 
shore to bend of bay, brings us by a commodius 
vicus of recirculation back to Howth Castle and 
Environs.

To computationally analyze this sentence as literat-
ure, we must understand that its meaning is more 
than the combination of its semantic components. 
The  rubric  of  "who  did  what  to  whom,  when, 
where, and why" will at best lead us only to under-
stand that somewhere, probably in Ireland, a river 
is flowing.

Some  obvious  low-level  tasks  to  improve  our 
reading  include:  exploring  the  meaning  of  non-
standard  capitalization  and  spacing,  as  in 
"riverrun";  resolving allusions,  such as  "Eve and 
Adam's," and considering the significance of vari-
ations from common phrasings1;; identifying allit-
erated phrases such as "swerve of shore" and "bend 
of  bay"  and considering their  effect;  recognizing 
tone shifts such as "commodius vicus of recircula-
1 For example, the quotation-delimited phrase "Adam and 
Eve" returns over 12 million Google results but "Eve and 
Adam" only returns around 200,000 (as of March 28, 2012.)

tion," and resolving any allusions they may indic-
ate; identifying the significance of named entities 
such as "Howth Castle and Environs"2; exploring 
the effect of the line's syntax on reception, as de-
scribed by writing scholars (Tufte, 2006).

But becoming absorbed in these admittedly in-
teresting questions threatens to distract us from the 
larger  questions  that  literary  theorists  have  been 
studying for over a century.   Those questions in-
clude:

• what interpretation is  the "gold standard" 
by which others should be judged?  Is it 
the meaning intended by the author?  Is it 
the significance of the text to the readers 
(and if so, which readers?)  Or is the mean-
ing  of  a  literary  text  inherent  in  how  it 
takes part in a system and process of lan-
guage use?

• what metrics can tell us whether one inter-
pretation is better than another?

• how should we model the literary text as it 
relates to the larger body of language use, 
which includes both literary and nonliter-
ary texts as well as everyday situated lan-
guage use by intelligent agents?  What fea-
tures are necessary and sufficient to repres-
ent  the  way  meaning  (both  literary  and 
non-literary)  is  created  and  established 
among language-using populations?  How 
is this meaning tied both to an intelligent 

2 For example: do they have an appearance or other attribute 
that would commonly be brought to mind? Are there associ-
ations that would normally be suggested to members of a giv-
en community of language use?  cf. the significance of the 
Watergate office complex in American communities of polit-
ical discourse.

97



agent's  abstract  beliefs  as  well  as  that 
agent's  moment-to-moment  understanding 
of its environment?

The wording of these questions is slanted to sug-
gest their utility to computational linguistics.  First, 
we may want to know how much of the meaning of 
a literary text comes from the author as opposed to 
from our situated interpretation of the text or from 
a  language  system3.   Second,  evaluation  metrics 
would help us determine whether or not the per-
formance  of  an automated literary system is  im-
proving.  Finally,  we would benefit  from the ex-
planations of a computational model  of a literary 
text's meaning as it emerges from the situated read-
ing of an authored artifact in the context of a multi-
agent  language system;  if  nothing  else,  it  would 
tell us how to design algorithms that both consume 
and produce literary artifacts in human-like ways.

2 Approach

Computationally, the questions in Section 1 are 
likely to be answered over the course of decades 
rather than years.  Contemporary relevant research 
from the fields of Computational Linguistics (CL) 
and Artificial Intelligence (AI) includes: semantic 
analysis of narratives (Elson and McKeown, 2009, 
Finlayson,  2011);  summarizing  fiction  (Mani, 
2005; Kazantseva and Szpakowicz, 2010) and per-
forming information-extraction on fiction (Elson et 
al,  2010); modeling affect and reader-response in 
narrative  (Mani,  2010;  McQuiggan,  2010;  Mo-
hammad, 2011; Francisco et al., 2011); properties 
of narrative such as novelty (Peinado et al., 2010) 
and irony (Utsumi, 2004); models of discourse in 
narrative (Polanyi et al., 2004; Goyal et al., 2010); 
computational models of aesthetic creativity (Ger-
vás et al., 2009); and the automatic generation of 
prose (Callaway and Lester, 2002) and poetry (Ma-
nurung, 2003; Gervás, 2007; Greene et al., 2010).

However,  these  disparate  research  traditions 
consider questions closer to the low-level tasks de-
scribed in Section 1 than to the theoretical ques-
tions  of  interpretation  ranking,  evaluation,  and 
computational modeling of meaningful human lan-

3 We may be interested in user modeling of the author, versus 
modeling our own interpretative techniques, versus perform-
ing sentiment analysis on a particular community of language 
use, for example.

guage use.  This is possibly because of the empiric-
al methods which have become dominant in AI/CL 
in recent  history (Cohen,  1995).   A field whose 
methods are tuned to empirical evaluation will nat-
urally shy from an area with few clear empirical 
tasks, whose humanities practitioners are likely to 
indulge  in  analyses  assuming  human  levels  of 
knowledge and language-processing capabilities.

Because of this we will turn instead for inspira-
tion  from  the  digital  humanities (Schreibman, 
2004).   With  its  roots  in  humanities  computing 
(Hockey, 2004) which constituted the earliest use 
of computers in the humanities, digital humanities 
took shape with the advent of the Internet.  Digital 
humanities researchers currently apply computers 
to research questions such as authorship attribution 
(Jockers  and  Witten,  2010),  statistical  word-use 
analysis (Burrows, 2004), and the development of 
resources for classical lexicography (Bamman and 
Crane, 2009), often collaborating with statisticians 
or computer scientists.  

Digital  humanities  has  always  had  detractors 
among  more  traditional  humanities  scholars,  but 
scholars sympathetic to the overall goals of digital 
humanities  have  also  critiqued some  of  its  prac-
tices.   Consider the technological  constraints im-
posed by projects in which texts are digitized, an-
notated,  and  statistically  analyzed.   Those  con-
straints make tacit assumptions about the objectiv-
ity of knowledge and the transparency of its trans-
mission (Drucker, 2009).  Those assumptions may 
be contrary to a literary theorist's understanding of 
how literary text analysis actually works.  

For  example,  in  the  case  of  scholar/artist  Jo-
hanna Drucker, knowledge is seen as partial, sub-
jective,  and  situated.  Subjectivity  in  this  context 
has two components: a point of view inscribed in 
the possible interpretations of a work, and "inflec-
tion, the marked presence of affect and specificity, 
registered as the trace of difference, that inheres in 
material expressions" (Drucker, 2009). To Druck-
er, subjectivity of knowledge is evident in the fact 
that  interpretation  occurs  in  modeling,  encoding, 
processing, and accessing knowledge.  

Drucker's focus is on humanities tools in digital 
contexts rather than digital tools in humanities con-
texts.  We will proceed in a similar spirit, consider-
ing the tasks and approaches of literary text analys-
is as practiced by literary theorists and considering 
what  kinds of  models  and approaches from con-
temporary AI/CL research they might find useful, 

98



rather than starting with the tasks and approaches 
that AI/CL researchers are most familiar with and 
asking how they can be applied to literary text ana-
lysis.  

As a specific goal to guide our thought, we will 
adopt a statement  from another scholar who em-
phasizes the importance of keeping the humanities 
central to computational text analysis.  In Reading 
Machines:  Toward  an  Algorithmic  Criticism, 
Stephen Ramsay develops the notion of adapting 
the constraints imposed by computation to inten-
tionally create "those heightened subjectivities ne-
cessary for critical work" (Ramsay, 2011).  While 
doing so, Ramsay states that from a humanist's per-
spective:

Tools that can adjudicate the hermeneutical para-
meters of human reading experiences - tools that 
can tell you whether an interpretation is permiss-
ible - stretch considerably beyond the most am-
bitious fantasies of artificial intelligence.

The rest of this paper will attempt to respond to 
Ramsay's  claim  by  developing  such  ambitious 
fantasies.  We will strive to consider literary text 
analysis as it is understood by literary theorists of 
recent history, and we will describe how represent-
ative processes from each of these theories could 
be modeled computationally using techniques from 
the AI/CL research communities.

3 Literary Text Analysis

3.1  Expressive Realism
Human judgments on the nature of literature and 

the way literature is  best  read have changed fre-
quently since classical times.  The last century in 
particular has provided numerous, often contradict-
ory,  notions  of  how  we  should  determine  the 
meaning of a story, leaving us with no consensus. 
Even within a school of thought there may be sig-
nificant  differences  of  opinion,  and evaluation is 
typically no more empirical  than how persuasive 
the interpretation of a given text may be.  Still, we 
may  identify  certain  key  ideas  and  use  them to 
imagine ways they could involve computation.

We may begin by considering  expressive real-
ism,  an  approach  to  literary  theory  which  de-
veloped in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, 
and is a combination of the classical Aristotelian 

notions of art as mimesis (reproducing reality) and 
the Romantic-era view of poetry as an outpouring 
of  strong  emotions  produced by an  artist  whose 
percepts  and  affective  processing  are  unusually 
well-tuned4 (Belsey, 1980).  The task of the reader 
in this formulation is  to faithfully create in their 
minds the realities being represented by the work, 
and to enrich themselves by following the thoughts 
and feelings that the artist experienced.  

Computationally, we may frame this as a know-
ledge engineering task: the writer is a subject mat-
ter  expert  in  perceiving  the  world,  and  has  de-
veloped knowledge about the world and innovative 
ways of emotionally relating to the world. The lit-
erary critic's task is to identify which writers have 
produced  knowledge  and  affective  relationships 
that are most worth adopting.  The reader's task is 
to be guided by the critics to the best writers, and 
then strive to adopt those writers' knowledge and 
affective relations as their own.  

It may seem difficult to perform such a task with 
a text such as Finnegan's Wake, which is not easy 
to  translate  into  propositions.   But  consider  a 
writer's understanding of what happens when read-
ing expressive realist fiction (Gardner, 1991):

If  we  carefully  inspect  our  experience  as  we 
read, we discover that the importance of physical 
detail is that it creates for us a kind of dream, a 
rich and vivid play in the mind.  We read a few 
words at the beginning of a book or the particu-
lar story, and suddenly we find ourselves seeing 
not  only  words  on  a  page  but  a  train  moving 
through Russia, an old Italian crying, or a farm-
house battered by rain.

Gardner  describes  fiction as  producing an im-
mersive  experience  in  which  the  reader's  sensa-
tions  are  empathically  aligned with  those  of  the 
writer.  This alignment produces an understanding 
unlike that of propositional knowledge: 

[The writer] at the very least should be sure he 
understands the common objection summed up 
in the old saw "Show, don't tell." The reason, of 
course,  is  that  set  beside  the  complex  thought 
achieved  by  drama,  explanation  is  thin  gruel, 

4 Belsey, who is critical of this approach, quotes the poet Wil-
liam Wordsworth's view of artists as  "possessed of more than 
usual organic sensibility."  In fact, Wordsworth believed a 
Poet was "endowed with more lively sensibility; more enthusi-
asm and tenderness, who has a greater knowledge of human 
nature, and a more comprehensive soul, than are supposed to 
be common among mankind..." (Wordsworth, 1802.)

99



hence boring. ... After our [reading] experience, 
which can be intense if the writer is a good one, 
we know why the character leaves when finally 
she walks out the door.  We know in a way al-
most too subtle for words...

The  subtletly  described  by  Gardner's  explains 
how a text such as  Finnegan's Wake may be read 
without recourse to a detailed exegesis producing 
propositional  content.   The reader  need only be-
come suggestible to the text, and allow themselves 
to experience the "complex thought" suggested by 
the  writer.   Of  course,  this  "intense"  experience 
may  lead  one  to  a  further  study  of  the  writer's 
mind-set, which would then create an even fuller 
understanding of that writer's approach.  

Such a  description may seem like an unlikely 
candidate  for  computational  modeling,  but  con-
sider the neurolinguistic implications of models of 
the  mirror  neuron  system  (Rizzolatti  and 
Craighero, 2004): hypothetically, a reader's neural 
structure might  literally copy that  of  the writer's, 
provided the stimulus of the text.  In this way we 
might  model  the  transmission  of  knowledge  "al-
most too subtle for words."

3.2  New Criticism
Later literary theories found expressive realism 

problematic  in  various  ways.   For  example,  the 
Anglo-American New Criticism defined the inten-
tional fallacy, which states that "the design or in-
tention of the author is neither available nor desir-
able as a standard for judging the success of a work 
of  literary  art"  (Wimsatt  and  Beardsley,  1954)5. 
Wimsatt and Beardsley proposed to avoid "author 
psychology" by focusing on the  internal evidence 
of the text, which they defined as 

public evidence which is discovered through the 
semantics and syntax of a poem, through our ha-
bitual knowledge of the language, through gram-
mars, dictionaries, and all the literature which is 
the source of dictionaries, in general through all 
that makes a language and culture...

The  language  knowledge  and  resources  were 
used to identify the "technique of art".  New Critic 

5 Note that Wimsatt and Beardsley did not not deny the schol-
arly value of "literary biography," and New Critic John Crowe 
Ransom stated "Without [historical studies] what could we 
make of Chaucer, for instance?" (Ransom, 1938)  New Critics 
merely believed that close readings of the text should take 
precedence during literary text analysis.

John Crowe Ransom provided examples  of  what 
devices should  be  used  in  analyzing  poetry 
(Ransom, 1938): 

its metric; its inversions; solecisms, lapses from 
the  prose  norm  of  language,  and  from  close 
prose logic; its tropes; its fictions, or inventions, 
by which  it  secures  'aesthetic  distance'  and  re-
moves itself from history...

However,  these  devices  were  not  studied  for 
their own sake.  Ransom continued: "the superior 
critic  is  not  content  with  the  compilation  of  the 
separate devices; the suggest to him a much more 
general  question."   The  question  in  this  case  is 
"what [the poem] is trying to represent" and why it 
does so using those particular devices.  This was 
worth understanding because the New Critics be-
lieved that "great works of literature are vessels in 
which humane values survive" (Selden and Wid-
dowson, 1993) and which reinforce those values in 
the diligent reader.

Computationally, the list of language resources 
described  by  Wimsatt  and  Beardsley  recalls  the 
corpus- and knowledge-based resources promoted 
by textbook approaches to CL (Jurafsky and Mar-
tin, 2000).  The low-level tasks in analyzing  Fin-
negan's Wake described in Section 1 align with the 
New  Critical  identification  of  literary  devices. 
Much of the CL/AI research described in Section 2 
is in this vein.

However,  to  create  a  complete  computational 
model of literary reading from this perspective we 
would also need a model of the types of "humane 
values" that New Critics revered.  Unfortunately, 
the  New  Critics  themselves  did  not  explicitly 
provide such a model, as doing so was considered 
irrelevant.  But we ourselves could adapt a compu-
tational model of culture to develop a representa-
tion  of  the  New  Critic's  cultural  values.  AI  re-
searchers develop computational model of culture 
by,  for  example,  implementing  Cultural  Schema 
Theory and Appraisal Theory in cognitive architec-
tures to describe how culture emerges from an in-
dividual's cognitive processes (Taylor et al., 2007). 
There  is  room here  to  adapt  the  system of  per-
ceived  affordances  (Gorniak  and  Roy,  2006)  in 
which language understanding is represented as the 
process  of  filtering  real-world  devices  in  a  way 
analogous  to  how the  New Critics  filter  literary 
devices.

100



3.3  Russian Formalism
The New Criticism developed independently of 

Russian  formalism,  which  similarly  focused  on 
the text and the literary devices present, rather than 
the author's intentions or the context of the text's 
production.  Because of this, most of the computa-
tional  representations  used  in  discussion  of  the 
New Critics could also be applied to the Russian 
formalists.

However,  unlike the New Critics,  the  Russian 
formalists  believed   that  art  existed  to  create  a 
sense of defamiliarization: 

art exists that one may recover the sensation of 
life; it exists to make one feel things... The tech-
nique  of  art  is  to  make objects  'unfamiliar,'  to 
make  forms  difficult,  to  increase  the  difficulty 
and length of perception because the process of 
perception is an aesthetic end in itself and must 
be prolonged.  Art is a way of experiencing the  
artfulness of an object: the object is not import-
ant.6

The defamiliarizing force of literature is easy to 
see  in  a  text  such  as  Finnegan's  Wake,  whose 
second sentence reads:

Sir  Tristram,  violer  d'amores,  fr'over  the  short 
sea, had passencore rearrived from North Armor-
ica on this side the scraggy isthmus of Europe 
Minor to wielderfight his penisolate war: nor had 
topsawyer's rocks by the stream Oconee exagger-
ated  themselse  to  Laurens  County's  gorgios 
while  they  went  doublin  their  mumper  all  the 
time:  nor  avoice  from  afire  bellowsed  mishe 
mishe to tauftauf thuartpeatrick: not yet, though 
venissoon after, had a kidscad buttended a bland 
old isaac:  not  yet,  though all's  fair  in  vanessy, 
were  sosie sesthers  wroth with twone nathand-
joe.

This is not a text that can easily be read rapidly. 
A more methodical reading is most obviously re-
warded by the portmanteaux (which are created by 
combining words in new ways) along with the oth-
er literary devices.  Computationally, as before this 
can be seen as another set of devices to be auto-
matically processed.  However it may be more pro-
ductive to see this as an example of how writers 
strive to invent new devices and combine devices 
in new ways, which may be resistant to automated 

6 First published in 1917, this translation is from (Shlovsky, 
1988).  Emphasis from the original.

analyses.  From this perspective, defamiliarization 
has its effect on the computational linguist who is 
developing the algorithms.  The perception of the 
researcher is thus shifted and prolonged, creating 
in them a recovery of the sensation for language.

3.4  Structuralism and Post-Structuralism
Linguist  Roman  Jakobson  was  central  figure  in 
both  Russian  formalism  and  structuralism,  two 
mutually influential schools of thought.  A key dif-
ference between the two is their understanding of 
the  relation between aesthetic  products  and their 
cultural context.  To Russian formalists (as well as 
to  New  Critics),  literary  text  existed  apart  from 
other  cultural  phenomena,  whereas  structuralism 
provided a formal  framework which studied sys-
tems of arbitrary signs which could be built at dif-
ferent  levels,  (Schleifer,  1993)  so  that  literary 
structures could be built with reference to cultural 
structures.

With roots in the semiotics of linguist Ferdinand 
de  Saussure  and  of  philosopher  Charles  Sanders 
Peirce,  structuralism aimed  at  systematically  un-
covering the way that meaning arises from systems 
of signs forming linguistic elements such as sen-
tences and paragraphs as well as higher levels of 
narrative discourse.

Continued scholarship on structuralism exposed 
a  number  of difficulties.   Besides  its  lack of  in-
terest  in  individual  cases  or  in  the  way systems 
change over time, the arbitrary nature of structural-
ist signs contradicted its aspirations to systematic 
representation (Schleifer,  1993).  This was lever-
aged by philosopher Jacques Derrida, who argued 
that one could not study structures from "outside," 
in the way that an objective study requires.  

Derrida  was  a  post-structuralist,  who  used 
structuralism as a starting point but did not limit 
themselves with structuralism's constraints. Anoth-
er  post-structuralist,  literary  theorist  Roland 
Barthes, used the phrase  death of the author in a 
way reminiscent of the New Critics' intentional fal-
lacy.  Barthes, however, used the the arbitrariness 
of signs to go beyond the New Critics and reject 
the existence of any "ultimate meaning" of a text. 
Barthes  saw  the  source  of  understanding  as  the 
reader:

[A]  text  consists  of  multiple  writings,  issuing 
from several cultures and entering into dialogue 
with each  other,  into parody,  into contestation; 

101



but there is one place where this multiplicity is 
collected, united, and this place is not the author, 
as we have hitherto said it was, but the reader... 
(Barthes, 1967)

To Barthes, readers are not important in terms of 
their  personal  history or  their  state  of  mind,  but 
rather that they are the one who "holds gathered 
into a single field all the paths of which the text is 
constituted." (Barthes, 1967)  In other words, the 
text's  meaning  is  dependent  on  the  structures  of 
signs  in  which  the  reader  exists.   And  because 
signs  are  arbitrary,  the  reading produced by any 
reader must likewise be arbitrary, at least in terms 
of any objective measure of quality.

Another post-structuralist, psychologist Jacques 
Lacan, maintained that humans entered systems of 
signs in which they found or were provided roles, 
such  as  child/parent  or  male/female  (Selden  and 
Widdowson, 1993).  This process is directed by the 
unconscious, and the only way it is able to take on 
comprehensible meaning is in expression through a 
system of language signs.

These are but a few of the influential structural-
ist and post-structuralist scholars, but they suffice 
to consider applicable computational techniques.

We  begin  by  considering  the  concept  of  lan-
guage as a complex adaptive system (Beckner et 
al., 2009).  This provides a model that brings to-
gether  language,  interpretation,  and  intelligent 
agents (Steels, 2007) in a way that allows experi-
ments with both sets of software agents and lan-
guage-using robots (Steels, 2006).  As in the struc-
turalist view, meaningful language use is depend-
ent on complex systems involving signification.  

But  this  complex  system  is  made  up  of  lan-
guage-using agents, who must work together to de-
termine norms as well as actually use language for 
real-world tasks and abstract reasoning.  The mod-
el must work not only at the system level, but also 
at the individual level. CL/AI research in societal 
grounding (DeVault et al., 2006), dialogue ground-
ing (Traum, 1994), semantic alignment (Pickering 
and  Garrod,  2004),  and  relational  agency (Bick-
more and Picard, 2005) provide ways of represent-
ing how populations of agents use language mean-
ingfully,  and how pairs of  human-like intelligent 
agents  coordinate  language in  situated dialogues, 
while  developing social  relationships.   As in  the 
Lacanian  subject,  these  agents  are  created  or 
trained  in  terms  of  their  difference  or  similarity 

from the other agents, adopting and being defined 
by their roles in the structured societies of agents.

When considering  Finnegan's Wake, an intelli-
gent  agent  would  bring  with  it  an  algorithm for 
identifying features in stories, as well as resources 
such as language model data and its model of the 
role it fits in its social structures.  Reading the text, 
the agent identifies literary devices that it uses as 
affordances to react with its emotions and its social 
perceptions, as well as to weigh the semantics of 
the text.  When reading the text, the agent's inter-
pretation of the story will be based on its gendered 
identity and personal history.  In this way, the liter-
ary analysis of the agent is highly dependent on its 
sense of identity, as well as the localized nature of 
its language resources.

4  Conclusions

We began by describing some of the larger ques-
tions that literary theorists have been working with 
for over a century.  We described some ideas from 
the  digital  humanities,  including  an  expressed 
skepticism  in  artificial  intelligence's  ability  to 
model human-like readings of literary texts.  In re-
sponse to that skepticism, we have described sever-
al major approaches to literary text  analysis,  and 
for each we have suggested ways in which state-of-
the-art CL/AI techniques could be applied to mod-
el or support their approach.

Of course this is by no means an exhaustive sur-
vey of either literary theoretical approaches or ap-
plicable  CL/AI  techniques.   Rather,  we  are  sug-
gesting that a great number of possibilities remain 
unexplored between the two.

References 
David  Bamman  and  Gregory  Crane.  2009.  Computa-

tional Linguistics and Classical Lexicography, Digit-
al Humanities Quarterly, Volume 3 Number 1.

Roland Barthes.  1967.  The Death of the Author.  As-
pen.  No. 5-6.

Clay Beckner, Nick C. Ellis, Richard Blythe, John Hol-
land,  Joan  Bybee,  Jinyun  Ke,  Morten  H.  Christi-
ansen,  Diane Larsen-Freeman,  William Croft,  Tom 
Schoenemann. 2009.  Language Is a Complex Adapt-
ive  System:  Position  Paper.   Language  Learning, 
59:Suppl 1, December 2009, pp 1-26.

Catherine Belsey.  1980.  Critical Practice.  Routledge. 
London, UK.

102



Timothy Bickmore  and Rosalind Picard.  2005. Estab-
lishing and maintaining long-term human-computer 
relationships.  ACM Transactions  on  Computer-Hu-
man Interaction (ToCHI).

John Burrows.  2004.  Textual Analysis. In A Compan-
ion  to  Digital  Humanities,  ed.  S.   Schreibman,  R. 
Siemens, and J. Unsworth, Oxford:  Blackwell  Pub-
lishing.

Charles B. Callaway and James C. Lester.  2002.  Nar-
rative  Prose  Generation,  Artificial  Intelligence. 
Volume 139 Issue 2, Elsevier Science Publishers Ltd. 
Essex, UK 

Paul R. Cohen.  1995.  Empirical Methods for Artificial  
Intelligence.  Bradford Books.  Cambridge, MA.

David DeVault, Iris Oved, and Matthew Stone.   2006. 
Societal Grounding is Essential to Meaningful Lan-
guage Use.  In  Proceedings of the Twenty-First Na-
tional  Conference  on Artificial  Intelligence  (AAAI-
06)

Johanna  Drucker.  2009.  SpecLab:  Digital  Aesthetics  
and  Projects  in  Speculative  Computing.  University 
Of Chicago Press.

David  K.  Elson,  Nicholas  Dames,  Kathleen  R.  McK-
eown. 2010. Extracting Social Networks from Liter-
ary Fiction. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics  
(ACL 2010), Uppsala, Sweden

David K. Elson and Kathleen R. McKeown.  2009.  Ex-
tending and Evaluating a Platform for Story Under-
standing.  Papers from the 2009 AAAI Spring Sym-
posium: Intelligent Narrative Technologies II.   The 
AAAI Press, Menlo Park, California.

Mark A. Finlayson. 2011. Corpus Annotation in Service 
of Intelligent Narrative Technologies, Proceedings of  
the 4th Workshop on Intelligent Narrative Technolo-
gies, Stanford, CA.

Virginia Francisco, Raquel Hervás,  Federico Peinado, 
and Pablo Gervás.  2011.  EmoTales: creating a cor-
pus of folk tales with emotional annotations.  Lan-
guage Resources & Evaluation.

John Gardner.  1991.  The Art of Fiction: Notes on Craft  
for Young Writers.  Vintage, New York, NY.

Pablo  Gervás.  2009.  Computational  Approaches  to 
Storytelling and Creativity.  AI Magazine, Fall, p 49-
62.

Pablo Gervás, Raquel Hervás, Jason R Robinson. 2007. 
"Difficulties  and  Challenges  in  Automatic  Poem 
Generation: Five Years of Research at UCM". in Pa-
pers presented at e-poetry 2007, Université Paris8.

Peter Gorniak and Deb Roy.  2007.  Situated Language 
Understanding  as  Filtering  Perceived  Affordances. 
Cognitive Science, Volume 31, Issue 2, pages 197–
231.

Amit Goyal, Ellen Riloff, Hal Daumé, III.  2010.  Auto-
matically producing plot unit representations for nar-
rative text.  In  Proceedings of the 2010 Conference  

on  Empirical  Methods  in  Natural  Language  Pro-
cessing.

Erica  Greene,  Tugba  Bodrumlu,  and  Kevin  Knight. 
2010.  Automatic Analysis of Rhythmic Poetry with 
Applications to Generation and Translation.  In Pro-
ceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 524–533.

Susan Hockey. 2004. The History of Humanities Com-
puting.  In  A  Companion  to  Digital  Humanities. 
Blackwell, Oxford, UK. 

Matthew L.  Jockers  and Daniela M. Witten, 2010 "A 
comparative study of machine learning methods for 
authorship attribution", Literary and Linguistic Com-
puting  25(2):215-223

James  Joyce.   1939.   Finnegan's  Wake.   Faber  and 
Faber, London, UK.

Daniel  Jurafsky and James  H.  Martin.   2000.  Speech  
and  Language  Processing. Pearson  Prentice  Hall. 
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.

Anna Kazantseva and Stan Szpakowicz. 2010. Summar-
izing  Short  Stories.  In  Computational  Linguistics, 
36(1), pp. 71-109.

Scott W. McQuiggan, Jennifer L. Robison, and James 
C.  Lester.  2010.   Affective  Transitions  in  Narrat-
ive-Centered Learning Environments.  In Education-
al Technology & Society. 13 (1): 40–53.

Inderjeet Mani. 2005. Narrative Summarization. Journ-
al Traitement automatique des langues (TAL): Spe-
cial  issue  on Context:  Automatic Text  Summariza-
tion. 

Inderjeet  Mani.  2010.  Predicting  Reader  Response  in 
Narrative.  In  Proceedings of the Intelligent Narrat-
ive Technologies III Workshop.

Hisar  Maruli  Manurung.  2003.  An  Evolutionary  Al-
gorithm Approach to Poetry Generation. PhD thesis, 
University of Edinburgh. College of Science and En-
gineering. School of Informatics.

Saif Mohammad.  2011.  From Once Upon a Time to 
Happily  Ever  After:  Tracking  Emotions  in  Novels 
and  Fairy  Tales,  In  Proceedings  of  the  ACL 2011 
Workshop  on  Language  Technology  for  Cultural  
Heritage,  Social  Sciences,  and  Humanities  (LaT-
eCH), June, Portland, OR.

Federico  Peinado,  Virginia  Francisco,  Raquel  Hervás, 
Pablo Gervás.  2010.  Assessing the Novelty of Com-
puter-Generated Narratives Using Empirical Metrics. 
Minds & Machines, 20:565–588.

Martin J. Pickering and Simon Garrod. 2004.  Towards 
a  mechanistic  Psychology  of  dialogue.  Behavioral  
and Brain Sciences, 27:169-22.

Livia Polanyi, Chris Culy, Martin van den Berg, Gian 
Lorenzo Thione, David Ahn, 2004.  Sentential Struc-
ture and Discourse Parsing.  In ACL2004 - Workshop  
on Discourse Annotation.

103



Stephen Ramsay.  2011.  Reading machines: Towards 
an  Algorithmic  Criticism.   University  of  Illinois 
Press, Urbana, IL

John Crowe Ransom.  1938.  Criticism, Inc.  Antholo-
gized in  The Norton Anthology of  Theory  & Criti-
cism.  2010.  WW Norton & Company, New York, 
NY.

Giacomo  Rizzolatti  and  Laila  Craighero.  2004.  The 
Mirror Neuron System.  In  Annual Review of Neur-
oscience. 27:169–92.

Ronald Schleifer.  1993.  Structuralism.  in  The Johns  
Hopkins  Guide  to  Literary  Theory  and  Criticism. 
Michael  Groden  and  Martin  Kreiswirth,  eds.   The 
Johns Hopkins University Press.  Baltimore, USA.

Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, John Unsworth, eds. 
2004.  A Companion to Digital Humanities.  Black-
well, Oxford, UK. 

Raman  Selden  and  Peter  Widdowson.   1993.   A 
Reader's  Guide  to  Contemporary  Literary  Theory. 
University Press of Kentucky.  Lexington, KY.

Luc Steels.  2006.  How to do experiments in artificial 
language evolution and why.  Proceedings of the 6th  
International  Conference  on  the  Evolution  of  Lan-
guage.  pp 323-332.

Luc  Steels.   2007.  Language  Originated  in  Social 
Brains.  Social Brain Matters: Stances of Neurobio-
logy  of  Social  Cognition,  pages  223-242,  Editions 
Rodopi. Amsterdam NL.

Glenn  Taylor,  Michael  Quist,  Steve  Furtwangler,  and 
Keith  Knudsen.  2007.  Toward  a  Hybrid  Cultural  
Cognitive Architecture. CogSci Workshop on Culture 
and Cognition.

David  Traum.   1994.   A  Computational  Theory  of  
Grounding  in  Natural  Language Conversation,  TR 
545 and Ph.D. Thesis, Computer Science Dept., U. 
Rochester, NY.

Virginia Tufte. 2006. Artful Sentences: Syntax as Style. 
Graphics Press, Chesire, CT.

Akira Utsumi. 2004. Stylistic and Contextual Effects in 
Irony Processing. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual  
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.

W.K. Wimsatt,  Jr.,  and Monroe  C.  Beardsley.   1954. 
The  Intentional  Fallacy.  From  The  Verbal  Icon:  
Studies in the Meaning of Poetry.  University of Ken-
tucky Press, Lexington, KY.

William Wordsworth. 1802.  Preface to Lyrical Ballads. 
Anthologized in The Norton Anthology of Theory & 
Criticism.  2010.   WW Norton  & Company,  New 
York, NY.

104


