










































Distributional techniques for philosophical enquiry


Proceedings of the 6th EACL Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 45–54,
Avignon, France, 24 April 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Distributional techniques for philosophical enquiry

Aurélie Herbelot
Institut für Linguistik
Universität Potsdam

Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24-25
14476 Golm, Germany

aurelie.herbelot@cantab.net

Eva von Redecker
Institut für Philosophie
Humboldt Universität
Unter den Linden 6

10099 Berlin, Germany
redeckee@hu-berlin.de

Johanna Müller
Institut für Philosophie
Humboldt Universität
Unter den Linden 6

10099 Berlin, Germany
johannammueller@gmail.com

Abstract

This paper illustrates the use of distribu-
tional techniques, as investigated in compu-
tational semantics, for supplying data from
large-scale corpora to areas of the human-
ities which focus on the analysis of con-
cepts. We suggest that the distributional no-
tion of ‘characteristic context’ can be seen
as evidence for some representative tenden-
cies of general discourse. We present a case
study where distributional data is used by
philosophers working in the areas of gen-
der studies and intersectionality as confir-
mation of certain trends described in pre-
vious work. Further, we highlight that dif-
ferent models of phrasal distributions can
be compared to support the claim of inter-
sectionality theory that ‘there is more to a
phrase than the intersection of its parts’.

1 Introduction

Research in the social sciences rely heavily on lin-
guistic analysis. Since what came to be called the
‘linguistic turn’ (Rorty, 1967) researchers across
all humanities subjects have been highly aware of
the fact that our access to the world, let alone cul-
tural artefacts, is mediated by language and cast
in our conceptual scheme.

Guided by the theory originating in Wittgen-
stein’s Philosophical Investigations (1953), one
of the basic assumptions in contemporary analytic
philosophy is now that the meaning of words is
given by their usage in ordinary language. Con-
ceptual analysis, i.e. the process of making ex-
plicit the rules that guide the applicability of a cer-
tain term, consequently forms a major occupation
of the philosophical profession. The method ex-
emplified by the French philosopher Michel Fou-

cault – discourse analysis – has become paradig-
matic in the social sciences and cultural studies
and constitutes a diachronic, historical version of
the linguistic turn. One of the fundamental as-
sumptions of this approach is that different eras
produce different frameworks (or ‘episteme’ in
Foucault’s terminology; see Foucault 1970) for
understanding reality. Such frameworks manifest
themselves as discursive patterns or specific for-
mulations. According to Foucault, social power
and the silencing of deviating utterances guaran-
tee the temporary stability of a particular social
regime. A similar methodology was pursued by
the ‘Cambridge School’ of political theorists and
historians, who tried to trace back the emergence
of concepts like ‘state’ or ‘liberty’ not only to the
ideas of a few canonical thinkers but to the or-
dinary use of those terms at the time (hence this
approach is called ‘contextualism’, see Pocock
1975; Skinner 1998).

So far, such research has relied both on ex-
tensive manual work and on linguistic introspec-
tion. Manual methods, however, have clear draw-
backs: they are time-consuming, expensive and
likely to introduce bias in the data. This paper
suggests that distributional techniques, as used
in computational lexical semantics, may hold the
key to automating the process of discourse analy-
sis just described. We present a case study in phi-
losophy, where two standard problems (the anal-
ysis of power in gender structures and the is-
sue of so-called intersectionality) are reviewed
in the light of distributional data. Not only do
the produced distributions offer a rational way
to highlight characteristic relationships between
concepts, using an amount of data far greater than
what could be annotated manually, but we show

45



that building on the relatively recent and novel re-
search in composing distributions (Clark and Pul-
man, 2007), we can computationally illustrate the
main thesis advocated by researchers on intersec-
tionality.

This paper has a slightly unconventional for-
mat. We hope to exemplify a certain type of possi-
ble collaboration between computational linguis-
tics and the humanities, which is less about pro-
viding an application to solve a particular prob-
lem than about drawing parallels between certain
linguistic representations, known to have certain
properties, and humanities-based theories. We
felt that a fair amount of philosophical back-
ground was needed to show the relevance of our
system’s data to the particular type of investiga-
tion presented here. Therefore, a comprehensive
philosophical introduction is given in §2. We then
describe the system and corpus underpinning our
research (§3 and 4) and discuss the theoretical as-
pects of lexical composition from a computational
point of view, drawing parallels with the philo-
sophical theory of intersectionality. Sections 5
and 6 discuss the worth of the data from a philo-
sophical point of view.

2 Two philosophical problems

2.1 Gender and power

For a feminist philosopher, as for many people
working in critical theory, the aim of research
is twofold. First, to understand a given social
structure, as for example the dynamics of gen-
der relations and identities; second, to transform
that structure towards greater freedom and equal-
ity. From its formation as an academic discipline
in the second half of the 20th century onwards,
one of the main concerns of feminist theory has
been to show how social and institutional (man-
made) factors have shaped what we are some-
times inclined to see as ‘normal’ or ‘natural’ gen-
der identities. This approach is called social con-
structivism, because it ascribes the causal role for
how gender identities emerge to processes of so-
cial construction. A prototypical example of this
viewpoint, Simone de Beauvoir’s famous claim
that one is not born a woman but becomes one
(Beauvoir, 1949) led to the distinction between bi-
ological ‘sex’ and social ‘gender’. Such work has
created an interest in the historical contingencies
which decide what counts as a properly mascu-

line or feminine identity. But while competing bi-
ologistic explanations of gender differences natu-
rally have something they can point to (neurones,
genes, or anatomy) social constructivist theories
have sometimes lacked hard evidence for their
claims. As a result, there has been a constant re-
currence of theories claiming one natural cause
for all aspects of gendered behaviour – and this,
despite the fact that every single one has been
proved wrong by the scientific community (Fine,
2010).

This state of affairs delineates a desideratum
for feminist philosophy: giving more evidence
of the cultural factors which instill gendered be-
haviour and associations in humans. While a lot
of the cultural information concerning gender is
visual (cinema, magazine covers, advertisement,
etc), and the ways to initiating people into specific
codes of gendered behavior can be non-verbal, the
content of our notions of gender are vastly repre-
sented in text. Following this insight, Simone de
Beauvoir reviewed a corpus of five modern nov-
els to extract the characteristic aspects of what she
coined the ‘condition feminine’ (Beauvoir, 1949).
More recently, Judith Butler (1990) tried to ex-
plain how the use of certain concepts – gender,
sex, desire, sexual practice – and associated no-
tions were consolidating the dominant, binary dis-
tinction between masculinity and femininity.

The studies just mentioned, though central to
their field, can always be met with suspicion. Ob-
jections such as This is not how I use the word
or You simply looked at books that distorted the
understanding of the phenomenon in question can
only be met on the grounds of large-scale data.
As a result, there have been attempts in historical
research to produce statistical databases on gen-
dered distributions. Hausen (1976), for example,
focused on the turn of the 18th century in Ger-
many, when a particular modern bourgeois under-
standing of gender roles is said to have emerged
together with a new organisation of labour. How-
ever, the manual tasks involved in preparing such
data are time-consuming and tedious and conse-
quently, this type of work still has a limited cov-
erage. We want to argue in this paper that entrust-
ing the production of such resources to computa-
tional corpus linguistics would a) provide the on-
going philosophical investigation with an appro-
priate amount of data and b) help overcome the
issues linked to the selective nature of the sources

46



a human reader might choose as relevant.

2.2 Intersectionality

Coined by the legal scientist Kimberlé Crenshaw
(1991), the term intersectionality has spread into
the humanites and social sciences as a perspec-
tive which has widened the scope of research on
inequality and oppression within social contexts.

Scientists working with the intersectional per-
spective claim that the combination (intersection)
of various forms of inequality (for example be-
ing black in a white dominated environment or
being a women in an environment dominated by
men) makes a qualitative difference not only to
the self-perception/identity of social actors, but
also to the way they are addressed through poli-
tics, legislation and other instiutions (Ngan-Ling
Chow, 2011).

The founding case out of which Kimberlé
Crenshaw developed the concept of intersection-
ality was a law suit that black women filed against
the hiring policy of General Motors. Within
the traditionally race and gender segregated au-
tomobile industry, women were only allowed to
work in customer service or other office jobs
while African-Americans were confined to fac-
tory work. As a consequence, African-American
women faced the problem of being denied both
office jobs and factory work. The women filed a
lawsuit for discrimination. But the case was dis-
missed on the grounds that the plaintiffs hadn’t
been able to proof that they had been discrim-
inated for either racial or sexist reasons. This
case demonstrated our general additive under-
standing of discrimination: we act against sex-
ism and we act against racism but we fail to ad-
dress cases where they interact. The court was un-
able to take this interaction into account and Cren-
shaw made the case for a reform of the US anti-
discrimination-law, which was based on the situ-
ation of white women in gender-dependent cases
and of men in race-dependent cases.

So the aim of intersectionality is to localise
and make visible discrimination that traditional
thought cannot conceive of, in particular where
various forms of oppression or inequality over-
lap. The claim is that social categories can only
be explained in relation to other categories that
define us as social beings within a society. For
instance, what it means to be in the situation of
a black woman can only be gauged in relation to

the political, cultural, socio-economic, religious,
etc. background of that woman, and not with
respect to being a woman or being a person of
colour in isolation. Indeed, these different fac-
tors can override, exacerbate, conflict with each
other, or simply run in parallel when they come
to interact. Additionally, intersectionality also re-
minds us that the meaning of social categories
also depends on historical eras. This proliferation
of factors increases the complexity a researcher
is confronted with to a point where it is doubt-
ful whether the intersectional perspective can be
transformed into a manageable methodology at
all. Dealing with this level of complexity using
automatically produced data might be of help on
two levels:

1. the synchronic level, at which the intersec-
tionality researcher seeks to grasp the qual-
itative differences between the concepts of,
say, woman and black woman.

2. the diachronic level, at which historians
working with intersectionality research con-
ceptual change over texts from various eras.

In this work, we concentrate on the conceptual
aspects of the synchronic level. In what follows,
we will attempt to show that the intersectional ap-
proach can indeed be illustrated by the linguistic
data obtained from a large contemporary corpus.

3 A distributional semantics system

3.1 Distributional semantics

Presented as a complement to model-theoretic se-
mantics, distributional semantics aims to repre-
sent lexical meaning as a function of the con-
texts in which a given word appears (Wittgen-
stein, 1953; see also Harris, 1954, credited with
the ‘distributional hypothesis’ which states that
words which are similar in meaning occur in sim-
ilar contexts).

Following this idea, some work in computa-
tional linguistics (starting with Harper, 1965) has
been devoted to building and evaluating models
which represent words as distributions, i.e., vec-
tors in a multidimensional space where each di-
mension corresponds to a potential context for a
lexical item (Curran, 2003). The notion of con-
text itself has been studied to try and determine
which representations work best for various tasks.

47



Word windows (Lund and Burgess, 1996), depen-
dencies (Padó and Lapata, 2007) and syntactic re-
lations (Grefenstette, 1994) have been proposed.

In our work, we use as context the words
appearing in the same sentence as the query.
This simple model is attractive from the point
of view of using distributional techniques across
the wide range of texts considered by humani-
ties researchers. It ensures that a corpus is pro-
cessable as long as it is digitalised – regardless
of the language it is written in and the era it be-
longs to. Given that resources for parsing rare
languages and older states of modern languages
are still scarce, the word-based model has the ad-
vantage of flexibility.

Another issue in producing distributions relates
to weighing the various dimensions. A number of
possibilities have been suggested. Binary mod-
els attribute a weight of 1 to a context if it co-
occurs at least once with the term that the distribu-
tion must represent, and 0 otherwise. Frequency-
based models use as weights the number of co-
occurrences of a particular context with the term
under consideration. More complex models use
functions like mutual information, which attempt
to represent how ‘characteristic’ a particular con-
text is for the term rather than how ‘frequent’
it is in conjunction with that term. The notion
of a characteristic context is particularly impor-
tant to us, as we wish to provide conceptual rep-
resentations (distributions) which mirror what a
‘standard’ individual would associate with a given
word. To achieve this, frequency models are not
sufficient. Words like do, also, new, etc co-occur
with many terms but are in no meaningful rela-
tion with those terms. Instead, we want to choose
a function which gives high weights to contexts
that appear frequently with the term to be mod-
elled and not very frequently with other terms.
By doing this, we will have a way to describe
salient associations for a particular concept. In
§3.3, we will spell out such a function, borrowed
from Mitchell and Lapata (2010).

3.2 Intersectionality in linguistic terms

It has been suggested that in order to integrate
distributional semantics with model theoretic for-
malisms, methods should be found to compose
the distributions of single words (Clark and Pul-
man, 2007). It is clear that the representation of
carnivorous mammal in formal semantics can be

written as carnivorous′(x)∧mammal′(x) but it is
less clear how the lexical semantics of the phrase
should be described in distributional terms.

The work done so far on distributional com-
positionality has focused on finding equivalents
for the well-known formal semantics notion of
intersection. All models assume that the inter-
sective composition of two elements should re-
turn a distribution, i.e. a lexical meaning, which
is made of the individual distributions, or mean-
ings, of those elements. But there are differences
in how those models are evaluated. Two cate-
gories can be drawn: models designed to emu-
late the distribution of the resulting phrase itself,
as it would be observed given a large enough cor-
pus (Guevara, 2010 and 2011; Baroni and Zam-
parelli, 2010), and those which only focus on
the composition operation and try to produce an
adequate representation of the semantic intersec-
tion of the phrase’s components, independently
from the phrasal distribution (Mitchell and La-
pata, 2010; Grefenstette and Sadrzadeh, 2011).
The former, which we will refer to as phrasal
models are trained and evaluated against phrases’
distributions while the latter, intersective models,
call for task-based evaluations (for instance, sim-
ilarity ratings: see Mitchell and Lapata, 2010).

We argue that phrasal and intersective models
are bound to produce different aspects of mean-
ing. Consider, for instance, the phrase big city.
Principles of semantic intersection tell us that a
big city is a city which is big. This is a correct
statement and one which should come out of the
composition of the big distribution and the city
distribution1. But arguably, there is more to the
meaning of the phrase (see Partee, 1994, for a
discussion of non-intersective adjectival phrases).
We expect people to readily associate concepts
like loud, underground, light, show, crowd to the
idea of a big city. Our hypothesis is that this
‘extra’ (non-intersective) meaning can be clearly
observed in phrasal distributions while it is, in
some sense, ‘hidden’ in distributions which are
the result of a purely intersective operation (be-
cause the entire distributions of the two compo-
nents are used, and not just the contexts relevant
to the particular association of big and city).

This observation, made at the linguistic level,

1For the sake of this argument, we will ignore the sugges-
tion that the gradable adjective might affect the intersective
status of the phrase

48



is also the foundation of intersectionality theory.
The argument, presented in Section 2, is that the
prejudices attached to black women, for instance,
(that is, the way that the concept black woman
is understood and used) are different from the
simple combination of the prejudices attached to
black people and women separately. So although
it is correct to say that a black woman is a woman
who is black (in the relevant sense of black), the
concept reaches further.

If the basic tenet of intersectionality theory
holds, and if we accept that distributions are a
valuable approximation of lexical meaning, we
would expect that the phrasal distribution of,
say, black woman would significantly differ from
its compositional distribution. Further, such a
significant difference would also have linguistic
relevance, as it would indicate the need to take
phrasal distributions into account when ‘comput-
ing meaning’ via distributional techniques. Both
phrasal models and intersective models could be
said to contribute to a complete and accurate rep-
resentation.

In Section 6, we will make a first step in in-
vestigating this issue by thoroughly analysing the
phrasal and compositional distributions of black
woman.

3.3 System description

The two systems we use in this paper have the
same basis. They produce a distribution for a
phrase based on a raw Wikipedia2 snapshot, pre-
processed to remove the wiki markup (Flickinger
et al, 2010). Distributions are vectors in a space
S made of 10000 dimensions which correspond
to the 10000 most frequent words in the corpus.
The distribution of a word or phrase in the corpus
is taken to be the collection of all words that co-
occur with that word or phrase within a single sen-
tence (we use a list of stop words to discard func-
tion words, etc). The weight of each co-occurring
term in the distribution is given by a function bor-
rowed from Mitchell and Lapata (2010):

wi(t) =
p(ci|t)
p(ci)

=
freqci,t ∗ freqall
freqt ∗ freqci

(1)

where wi(t) is the weight of word t for dimension
i, freqci,t is the count of the co-occurrences of a

2http://www.wikipedia.org/

context word ci with t, freqall is the total num-
ber of words in the corpus, freqt and freqci are
respectively t and ci’s frequencies in the corpus.

We choose an intersective model based on mul-
tiplication, as this operation has been shown to
give excellent results in previous experiments
(Erk and Padó, 2008; Mitchell and Lapata, 2010):
the distributions of the two components of the
phrase are multiplied in a point-wise fashion to
give the final distribution. This corresponds to the
model p=u�v of Mitchell and Lapata.

As for the phrasal model, the final distribution
is simply the distribution obtained from looking
at the co-occurrences for the phrase itself.

The data passed on to the philosophers for fur-
ther consideration takes the form of a list of the
100 most ‘characteristic’ contexts for the query,
that is, the 100 words with heighest weights in the
distribution, filtered as described in §3.3.1.

3.3.1 Filtering the results

One potential issue with our implementation
is that words belonging to frequent named enti-
ties end up in the top characteristic contexts for
the query. So for instance, wonder is one of the
most characteristic contexts for woman because
of the comic character Wonder Woman. Arguably,
such contexts should only be retrieved if they
are as significant in their ‘non-name’ form as in
their named entity form (e.g. if the string won-
der woman was significantly more frequent than
Wonder Woman, there would be a case for retain-
ing it in the results). We filter the relevant named
entities out using the following heuristic:

1. We call the query q and its capitalised ver-
sion Q. Let c1...cn be the top characteristic
contexts for q and C1...Cn their capitalised
equivalent.

2. For each context ck in c1...cn:

(a) We compute the corpus frequencies of
the patterns qck, ckq, qwck and ckwq,
where w is an intervening word. sk is
the sum of those frequencies.

(b) Similarly, we compute the corpus fre-
quencies of the patterns QCk, CkQ,
QwCk and CkwQ, where w is an in-
tervening word. Sk is the sum of those
frequencies.

49



(c) r is the ratio Sk/sk. If r is over a cer-
tain threshold t, we remove ck from the
characteristic contexts list.

In our experiments, we use t = 0.6. This
threshold allows us to successfully remove many
spurious contexts. For example, wonder and
spider are deleted from the results for woman
(among others) and isle3, elephant and iron from
the results for man.

4 The corpus

The number of experiments that can be devised
using distributional techniques is only limited by
the number of digitalised corpora available to re-
searchers in the humanities. It is easy to imag-
ine a range of comparative studies showing the
conceptual differences highlighted by the use of
a word or phrase at various times, in various
countries, or in various communities. The aim
of this study is to analyse the discursive use of
some concepts over a fairly large sample. We
chose the English Wikipedia4 as our corpus be-
cause of its size and because of its large contrib-
utor base (around 34,000 ‘active editors’ in De-
cember 20115). Wikipedia’s encyclopedic content
also makes it less explicitly biased than raw Inter-
net text, although we have to be aware of implicit
bias: most of Wikipedia’s contributors are male
and the encyclopedia’s content is heavily skewed
towards items of popular culture (Cohen, 2011).
The latter point is unproblematic as long as it is
acknowledged in the discussion of the results.

In the next two sections, we analyse the dis-
tributions obtained for the phrases man, woman,
black woman and Asian woman. It is worth men-
tioning that more data was extracted from our cor-
pus, which, due to space constraints, we will not
discuss here. The broad claims made with respect
to the above four noun phrases, however, are con-
sistent with the rest of our observations.

5 Discussing gender

This section discusses the produced distribu-
tions from the perspective of gender theory. The
aim of the discussion is to illustrate the type of

3As in Isle of Man
4http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main Page
5http://stats.wikimedia.org/EN/SummaryEN.htm

information that may be relevant for discourse
analysis. Note that it follows the philosophical
methodology highlighted in Haslanger (2005) for
conceptual analysis.

Table 1 shows the most characteristic contexts
for woman and man, after filtering. There are
three levels on which the data discussed here
could be usefully interpreted within feminist re-
search – the conceptual, the constructivist and the
deconstructivist. We will concentrate on the first
two.

In recent years a strong trend in Gender Studies
has emphasised that our investigations shouldn’t
repeat the historical bias which regards men as
‘universal’ (or default) and women as ‘particular’,
as a specific ‘other’ to be investigated (Honegger,
1991). An advantage of our automatically pro-
duced data is that it returns just as much material
to focus on the cultural fabrication of masculinity
as on that of femininity. The male position proves
to indeed carry a broader variety of seemingly
non-gendered contexts, for instance, wise, inno-
cent, sin, fat, courage, salvation, genius, worthy
and rescued – none of which is characteristic of
woman. But what is most striking is the strong oc-
currence of military contexts. We find enlisted at
the top of the list, followed by wounded, IRA, of-
ficers, militia, regiments, garrison, platoons, ca-
sualties, recruits and diverse military ranks. It
is sometimes unclear what counts as ‘military-
related’ (see killing, brave). We would have to
go back to the original text to investigate this. But
we see here very clearly how attributes that rank
high when it comes to defining stereotypical mas-
culinity and might be thought as ‘general’ charac-
teristics clearly owe their prominence to the mili-
tary cluster. The characteristic contexts list seems
to give distilled evidence to what has as yet still
only been partly analyzed in socio-historical re-
search, namely how the norms of masculinity are
to a large extent of military descent (for the Ger-
man context see Frevert, 2001). Brave, angry,
courage, cruel are all things that Wikipedia – just
like popular imagination – won’t associate with
women.

The meaning of woman seems to revolve
around the three interrelated clusters of reproduc-
tion, sex and love. Pregnant and pregnancy rank
very high, as well as reproduction-related terms
such as abortion, children and mothers. There
are more sexual terms (sexually, sexual, sexual-

50



Woman Man
women, woman, pregnant, feminist, abortion,
womens, men, husbands, elderly, pregnancy, sex-
ually, rape, breast, gender, equality, minorities,
lesbian, wives, beautiful, attractive, pornogra-
phy, dressed, sexual, marry, sexuality, dress, est.,
wear, young, sex, african-american, naked, com-
fort, homosexual, discrimination, priesthood,
womens, violence, loved, children, clothes,
man, male, marriages, hair, mysterious, wearing,
homeless, loves, boyfriend, wore, her., ladies,
mistress, lover, attitudes, hiv, advancement, re-
lationships, homosexuality, wealthy, mothers,
worn, murdered, ordained, mortal, unnamed,
girls, depicts, slavery, lonely, female, equal, can-
cer, goddess, roles, abuse, kidnapped, priests,
portrayal, witch, divorce, screening, clothing,
murders, husband, romantic, forbidden, loose,
excluded

men, man, enlisted, women, wise, homosex-
ual, wounded, gay, woman, dressed, young, el-
derly, ira, homeless, wives, brave, angry, offi-
cers, marry, marched, sexually, wealthy, killed,
wounds, innocent, militia, homosexuality, mans,
mysterious, god, tin, elves, mortal, ladies, wear-
ing, priesthood, sin, con, courage, fat, equal-
ity, numbering, regiments, garrison, numbered,
brotherhood, murdered, rape, lonely, platoon,
casualties, knew, recruits, reinforcements, re-
cruited, blind, loved, sexual, sex, thousand,
mask, clothes, salvation, commanded, loves,
lover, sick, detachment, genius, cruel, gender,
killing, col., lt., drunk, worthy, tall, flank, con-
victed, surrendered, contingent, rescued, naked

Table 1: Most characteristic contexts for woman and man, after filtering

ity, sex) in the characteristic list for woman and
mentions of loved, loves, lover are higher up than
in the results obtained for man. Further, a va-
riety of terms, mostly absent from the man list,
create a close link between femininity and rela-
tionality: husband(s), marriage (though, further
down, divorce comes up too), boyfriend and re-
lationships. While beautiful, attractive, comfort
and romantic might at least suggest that positive
sentiments are attached to the inbuilt feminine re-
lationality, another set of female contexts high-
lights the very vulnerability inscribed in the clus-
ter around intimacy: rape, pornography, violence,
slavery, abuse, kidnapped quantitatively capture a
correlation between relationality, sexuality and vi-
olence which characterises the use of the lexeme
woman.

Another set of exclusively feminine concepts
which at first sight seem to create interesting sin-
gular contexts – breast, comfort, hair, HIV, can-
cer – are united by reference to a physicality that
seems, apart from the wounds apparently con-
tracted in war, peculiarly absent in man. Such
clustering sheds light on the fact that certain asso-
ciations ‘stick’ to women and not to men. Though
it takes two to marry or divorce and have chil-
dren, those exclusively form contexts for woman.
Most dramatically, this can be observed when it
comes to rape. Though the majority of cases im-

ply a male perpetrator, rape is very high up, in
12th position, in the female list (that is before any
mention of love), while it is returned as character-
istic of men only to the extent that loneliness or
brotherhood are, at rank 49.

These observations highlight the kind of as-
sociations implicitly present in discursive data –
whether retrieved by machines or humans. We do
not learn how matters are ‘in fact’ but simply in-
tegrate the linguistic patterns most characteristic
for a certain phenomenon. This, again, does have
tremendous effects on reality – so-called ‘con-
structive’ effects. Indeed, when it comes to phe-
nomena that touch on human self-understanding,
discourse implies more than a mirror of mean-
ing. It partakes in the making of real identities.
It provides the material people craft their self-
understanding from and model their behavior af-
ter. It is this very effect of our characteristic usage
of language which prompts social philosophers to
ascribe ‘power’ to language.

6 Discussing intersectionality

Table 2 shows the most characteristic con-
texts for the phrase black woman after filtering,
as given by the intersective and phrasal mod-
els. We should point out that the phrase black

51



Multiplicative model Phrasal model
stripes, makeup, pepper, hole, racial, white,
woman, spots, races, women, whites, holes,
colours, belt, shirt, african-american, pale, yel-
low, wears, powder, coloured, wear, wore,
colour, dressed, racism, leather, colors, hair, col-
ored, trim, shorts, silk, throat, patch, jacket,
dress, metal, scarlet, worn, grey, wearing, shoes,
purple, native, gray, breast, slaves, color, vein,
tail, hat, painted, uniforms, collar, dark, coat, fur,
olive, bear, boots, paint, red, lined, canadiens,
predominantly, slavery

racism, feminist, women’s, slavery, negro, ide-
ology, tyler, filmmaker, african-american, ain’t,
elderly, whites, nursing, patricia, abbott, glo-
ria, freeman, terrestrial, shirley, profession, ju-
lia, abortion, diane, possibilities, argues, re-
union, hiv, blacks, inability, indies, sexually,
giuseppe, perry, vince, portraits, prevention, bea-
con, gender, attractive, tucker, fountain, riley,
beck, comfortable, stern, paradise, twist, anthol-
ogy, brave, protective, lesbian, domestic, feared,
breast, collective, barbara, liberation, racial, rosa,
riot, aunt, equality, rape, lawyers, playwright,
white, argued, documentary, carol, isn’t, expe-
riences, witch, men, spoke, slaves, depicted,
teenage, photos, resident, lifestyle, aids, com-
mons, slave, freedom, exploitation, clerk, tired,
romantic, harlem, celebrate, quran, interred, star-
gate, alvin, ada, katherine, immense

Table 2: Most characteristic contexts for black woman. Multiplicative and phrasal model, after filtering

woman/women only occurs 384 times in our cor-
pus, so the vector obtained through the phrasal
model suffers from some data sparsity problems.6

In particular, overall infrequent events are given
high weights by our algorithm, resulting in a rel-
atively high number of surnames being present in
the produced vector. Despite this issue, a num-
ber of observations can be made, which agree
with both our linguistic and philosophical expec-
tations.

We first considered to what extent the phrasal
and multiplicative models emphasised the char-
acteristics already present in their compo-
nents’distributions. We found that the top con-
texts for the phrasal distribution of black woman
only overlap 17 times with the top contexts of
woman and 9 times with the top contexts for
black. The multiplicative model produces an
overlap of only 12 items with woman but 64 with
black.7 This highlights a large conceptual differ-

6We should add that this small number of occurrences
is in itself significant, and mirrors problems of social
marginalisation. We note that the phrase African-American
woman/women is even sparser, with 236 occurrences in our
corpus.

7The weights in the black vector clearly override those
from the woman vector. Mitchell and Lapata (2010) discuss
possible improvements to the multiplicative model which in-
volve putting a positive weight on the noun component when
performing the composition.

ence between the phrase seen as a single entity
and its components. In contrast, the composition
of the constituents via the multiplicative model re-
turns a distribution fairly close to the distribution
of those constituents.

We looked next at the characteristic contexts
that were particular to each representation. We
found that the phrasal model vector presents 73
terms which are absent from the top contexts
for black and woman. In contrast, none of the
terms in the top contexts of the multiplied vec-
tor is specific to the composed phrase: all of
them are either highly characteristic of black or
woman (e.g. racial, African-American and breast,
dress).8 This indicates that the salient contexts for
the phrase are very different from the associations
commonly made with its constituents.

Finally, we observed that the vector obtained
through the phrasal model only overlaps 8 times
with the composed one. The shared words are
racial, white, whites, African-American, racism,
breast, slaves and slavery. Again, we can con-
clude from this that the two representations cap-
ture very different aspect of meaning, although
they both retrieve some high-level associations
with the concept of race and race-related history.

8Because our system does not perform any sense disam-
biguation, we return contexts such as pepper for black pep-
per, hole for black hole, etc.

52



From the point of view of intersectionality, our
results confirm the basic claim of the theory: there
are cases where the discourse on individuals be-
longing to two different social groups is radically
different than the discourse pertaining to those so-
cial groups taken separately.

In addition, the data supports further arguments
made by intersectionality researchers. In particu-
lar, comparing the distributions for woman, black
woman and Asian woman9 shows that colour or
ethnicity has a crucial impact on how women are
represented. Looking at woman, the word rape
appears at position 12, but it appears much fur-
ther down the list in black woman and not at all in
Asian woman. At the same time the word nurs-
ing is only associated with black women while
pornography hits position number 3, shortly fol-
lowed by exotic and passive when we look at
Asian woman. These three words do not occur
in the top contexts for woman or black woman.
This indicates that we are getting results concern-
ing sexuality which depend on ‘ethnical’ connota-
tion: white women are shown as victims of abuse
(rape), black women as responsible for nursing,
and Asian women represented as passive and ob-
jects of pornography.

Just looking at this data (and there would be
a lot more to analyse) we can find a connection
with what the latest historical research working
with intersectionality has brought to light: his-
torians have shown that the historical discourse
on prostitution has increased and reinforced racist
stereotypes and prejudices. Whyte (2012) shows,
(looking at the ‘white slavery’ panic of the early
twentieth century which is a key point in the his-
tory of prostitution) that the construction of the
white, innocent victim of prostitution is central to
the creation of the myth of the ‘white slavery’ in
many ways and that it has shaped the construction
and understanding of contemporary human traf-
ficking. The broader history of slavery (partic-
ularly in the North American context) forms the
backdrop for ‘writing out’ women of colour as
victims of sexual violence. This is appropriately
illustrated by our data.

9Due to space constraints, we are not showing the distri-
bution of Asian woman.

7 Conclusion

This paper sought to demonstrate that linguistic
representations of the type used in distributional
semantics may provide useful data to humanities
researchers who analyse discursive trends. We
presented a case study involving two subfields of
philosophy: gender theory and intersectionality.

We hope to have shown that a) distributional
data is a useful representation of social phenom-
ena which have been described by theorists and
social scientists but never linguistically observed
on a large scale b) this data lends itself to a fine-
grained analysis of such phenomena, as exem-
plified by the discussions in §5 and §6. Further,
we have highlighted that the philosophical theory
of intersectionality can be illustrated, at least for
some concepts, via a quantitative analysis of the
output of different distributional models. We sug-
gest that this observation should be investigated
further from the point of view of computational
linguistics: there may be some aspect of mean-
ing which is not expressed by those distributional
compositional models that do not take phrasal dis-
tributions into account (i.e. additive, multiplica-
tive, circular convolution models).

A natural extension of this work would be to
design experiments focusing on particular types
of discourse and corpora, and pursue conceptual
analysis at the diachronic level. This presupposes
the existence of digitalised corpora which may not
be available at this point in time. Efforts should
therefore be made to acquire the needed data. We
leave this as future work.

Acknowledgments

This work was in part enabled by an Alexander
von Humboldt Fellowship for Postdoctoral Re-
searchers awarded to the first author. We would
like to thank the Alexander von Humboldt Foun-
dation for their financial support.

References
Marco Baroni and Roberto Zamparelli. 2010. Nouns

are vectors, adjectives are matrices: Represent-
ing adjective-noun constructions in semantic space.
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP10).

Simone de Beauvoir. 1949. Le deuxième sexe. Galli-
mard, Paris.

53



Judith Butler. 1990. Gender Trouble. Feminism and
the Subversion of Identity. Routledge, New York.

Stephen Clark and Stephen Pulman. 2007. Combin-
ing Symbolic and Distributional Models of Mean-
ing. Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on
Quantum Interaction, pp.52–55. Stanford, CA.

Noam Cohen. 2011. Define Gender Gap? Look Up
Wikipedias Contributor List. The New York Times,
31 January 2011, pp.A1 New York edition.

Kimberlé Crenshaw. 1991. Mapping the Mar-
gins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Vio-
lence against Women of Color. Stanford Law Re-
view, 43:6, pp. 1241–1299.

James Curran. 2003. From Distributional to Semantic
Similarity. PhD dissertation. Institute for Commu-
nicating and Collaborative Systems. School of In-
formatics. University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.

Katrin Erk and Sebastian Padó. 2008. A Structured
Vector Space Model for Word Meaning in Context.
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing. Hon-
olulu, HI.

Cordelia Fine. 2008. Delusions of Gender. The Real
Science Behind Sex Differences. Icon Books. Lon-
don.

Dan Flickinger and Stephan Oepen and Gisle Ytrestol
2010. WikiWoods: Syntacto-Semantic Annotation
for English Wikipedia. Proceedings of the Seventh
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC10).

Michel Foucault. 1966. Les mots et les choses. Galli-
mard, Paris.

Ute Frevert. 2001. Die kasernierte Nation. Militrdi-
enst und Zivilgesellschaft in Deutschland. Beck,
Munich.

Edward Grefenstette and Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh.
2011. Experimental Support for a Categorical
Compositional Distributional Model of Meaning.
Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
1394–1404. Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.

Gregory Grefenstette. 1994. Explorations in Au-
tomatic Thesaurus Discovery. Kluwer Academic
Publishers.

Emiliano Guevara. 2010. A Regression Model of
Adjective-Noun Compositionality in Distributional
Semantics. Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on
Geometrical Models of Natural Language Seman-
tics, ACL 2010, pp. 33–37. Uppsala, Sweden.

Emiliano Guevara. 2011. Computing Semantic Com-
positionality in Distributional Semantics. Proceed-
ings of the Ninth International Conference on Com-
putational Semantics (IWCS 2011), pp. 135–144.
Oxford, England, UK.

Kenneth E. Harper. 1965. Measurement of similar-
ity between nouns. Proceedings of the 1965 con-
ference on Computational linguistics (COLING 65),
pp. 1–23. Bonn, Germany.

Zelig Harris. 1954. Distributional Structure. Word,
10(2-3):146–162.

Sally Haslanger. 2005. What Are We Talking About?
The Semantics and Politics of Social Kinds Hypa-
tia, 20:10–26.

Karin Hausen. 1976. Die Polarisierung der
“Geschlechtscharaktere”. Eine Spiegelung der
Dissoziation von Erwerbs- und Familienleben.
Sozialgeschichte der Familie in der Neuzeit Eu-
ropas. Conze and Werner, Editors, pp. 363–393
Klett-Cotta, Stuttgart.

Claudia Honegger. 1991. Die Ordnung der
Geschlechter: Die Wissenschaften vom Menschen
und das Weib, 17501850. Campus, Frankfurt am
Main and New York.

Kevin Lund and Curt Burgess. 1996. Producing
high-dimensional semantic spaces from lexical co-
occurrence. Behavior Research Methods, Instru-
mentation, and Computers, 28, pp. 203–208.

Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Composition
in Distributional Models of Semantics. Cognitive
Science, 34(2010):1388–1429.

Esther Ngan-Ling Chow. 2011. Analyzing Gender,
Intersectionality, and multiple inequalities: global,
transnational and local contexts. Esther Ngan-Ling
Chow, Marcia Texler Segal and Tan Lin, Editors.
Emerald Group Publishing.

Sebastian Padó and Mirella Lapata. 2007.
Dependency-based construction of semantic
space models. Computational Linguistics, 33(2),
161–199.

Barbara Partee. 1994. Lexical Semantics and Compo-
sitionality Invitation to Cognitive Science, second
edition. Part I: Language. Daniel Osherson, Gen-
eral Editor. Lila Gleitman and Mark Liberman, Ed-
itors. MIT Press.

John G.A. Pocock. 1975. The Machiavellian moment.
Florentine political thought and the Atlantic repub-
lican tradition. Princeton University Press, Prince-
ton, NJ.

Richard Rorty. 1967. The Linguistic Turn: Recent Es-
says in Philosophical Method. Richard Rorty, Edi-
tor. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Quentin Skinner. 1998. Liberty before liberalism.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Dominic Widdows. 2008. Semantic Vector Products:
Some Initial Investigations. Second AAAI Sympo-
sium on Quantum Interaction. Oxford, UK.

Christine Whyte. 2012. Praise be, prostitutes as the
women we are not – Using intersectionality to anal-
yse race, class and gender in history. Intersektion-
alität und Kritik. Vera Kallenberg, Jennifer Meyer,
Johanna M. Müller, Editors. Wiesdaben. Forthcom-
ing.

Ludwig Wittgenstein. 1953. Philosophische Unter-
suchungen. Blackwell, Oxford, UK.

54


