



















































Discourse Analysis of Sanskrit texts


Proceedings of the Workshop on Advances in Discourse Analysis and its Computational Aspects (ADACA), pages 1–16,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Discourse Analysis of Sanskrit texts

Amba Kulkarni and Monali Das
Department of Sanskrit Studies, University of Hyderabad

apksh@uohyd.ernet.in, monactc.85@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
The last decade has seen rigorous activities in the field of Sanskrit computational linguistics
pertaining to word level and sentence level analysis. In this paper we point out the need of
special treatment for Sanskrit at discourse level owing to specific trends in Sanskrit in the
production of its literature ranging over two millennia. We present a tagset for inter-sentential
analysis followed by a brief account of discourse level relations accounting the sub-topic and
topic level analysis, as discussed in the Indian literature illustrating an application of these to a
text in the domain of vyākaran. a (grammar).

KEYWORDS: Discourse analysis, Sanskrit, Saṅgati.

1



1 Introduction

Sanskrit, the classical language of India, has a huge collection of literature in almost all
branches of knowledge – astronomy, mathematics, logic, philosophy, medicine, technology,
dramatics, literature, poetics – to name a few. It was the medium of communications for all
serious discourses and scholarly communications till recent times. This resulted in continuous
production of literature in Sanskrit in various branches of knowledge systems of human
endeavour for almost over 2 millennia. The total corpus of Sanskrit is almost 100 times those
in Greek and Latin put together. However, the picture changed completely in the last two
centuries. The traditional learning methods are replaced by the Western learning systems. As a
consequence the knowledge in Sanskrit texts is inaccessible to the modern Indian scholars.

The main reasons behind the difficulty in accessing Sanskrit texts are:

• Sanskrit is influenced by the oral tradition, and hence the Sanskrit texts are continuous
strings of characters without any punctuation marks or word or sentence boundaries. The
characters at the juncture of boundary undergo euphonic changes making it difficult to
‘guess’ the boundaries.

• Sanskrit is very rich in morphology and is inflectional. This also makes it difficult to
remember various inflections of a word, which differ with the last character of the word
and its gender.

• Though a substantial vocabulary in modern Indian languages is from Sanskrit, there have
been cases of meaning shifts, meaning expansion and meaning reduction. This makes
it difficult for an Indian to understand the Sanskrit texts faithfully, unless he knows the
original meaning of the words.

• Another important aspect is the presentation of texts. There are various trends in the
Sanskrit literature. One of them is that of nested commentaries. The original text which
is in a cryptic sūtra form, is commented upon by later scholars for more clarification. In
order to clarify a content in this commentary another commentary would follow, and this
continues leading to nested commentaries (see Appendix A for an example). Since the
modern scholars are trained in modern learning methodologies they find it difficult to get
familiar with the structure and decide the boundaries of various topics and sub topics,
and thereby understand the texts.

1.1 Discourse Analysis in Indian Grammatical Tradition

The rich tradition of linguistics in India is more than two millennia old. Pān. ini’s (around 500
B.C.) contribution to the grammar is as important a milestone in the development as that of
Euclid in case of development of geometry in Europe (Staal, 1965). The discussions on the
problem of meaning and the process of understanding the texts by philosophers like Bhartr.hari,
Gaṅgeśa, and Kumārilabhat.t.a resulted into three distinct schools of thought. With an aim to
understanding the Vedas these schools developed the theories of verbal cognition - Śābdabodha.
These schools differ mainly in the chief qualificand of the cognition, however more or less they
agree on various other relations at gross level. These three schools are Vyākaran. a (Grammar),
Nyāya (Logic) and Mı̄māṁsā (Exegesis). Grammarians deal with the syntactic analysis to a
considerable depth. Logicians and Mı̄māṁsakas discuss various constraints such as Akāṅks. ā
(expectancy), Yogyatā (mutual compatibility) and Sannidhi (proximity) to filter out nonsensical

2



analysis. In his seminal attempt to describe the relation between word and its meaning, a
logician Gadādhara (Śāstri, 1929) has provided the meanings of various pronouns and rules for
tracing their antecedents. The Mı̄māṁsakas further discuss various types of discourse relations
called Saṅgatis for checking the consistency and coherence of the text. The coherence is tested
at various levels viz.

(a) Śāstra saṅgati : The coherence at the level of the subject.

(b) Adhyāya saṅgati : The coherence at the level of a chapter or a book.

(c) Pāda saṅgati : The coherence at the level of a section.

(d) Adhikaran. a saṅgati : The coherence at the level of a topic.

Each topic can further have one or more sub-topics, each sub-topic can have one or more
paragraphs and a paragraph may consist of one or more sentences. Thus the topic level analysis
involves following steps:

(i) Sentential analysis : Establishing relations among words in a sentence.

(ii) Paragraph level analysis : Identifying inter-sentential relations based on either explicit or
implicit connectives.

(iii) Sub-topic level analysis : Establishing relations between the successive paragraphs showing
the consistency of the argument leading to a sub-topic.

(iv) Topic level analysis : Topic level analysis shows the relevance of each sub-topic towards
the goal of the main topic and thus the coherence.

1.2 Computational Discourse Analysis

With the emergence of computational linguistics, it is now possible to build tools which can
assist a scholar in accessing Sanskrit texts, reducing his learning time. The Computational
Linguistic tools are centered around the Western Linguistic theories and hence remain suited for
English and other European Languages. Sanskrit is morphologically rich and is dominated by
oral tradition. This results in Sanskrit text as a continuous string of characters, merging not only
the word boundaries but sometimes the sentence boundaries as well. This therefore poses a big
challenge to the computational processing of Sanskrit texts, requiring new innovative methods
to handle segmentation taking into account euphonic changes effectively. As a result we see that
much of the Sanskrit computational work is still at the level of word analysis and segmentation
(Huet, 2009; Hellwig, 2009; Kumar et al., 2010). The rich inflectional morphology further
makes the constituency parsers inappropriate for syntactic analysis of a sentence. While for
positional languages such as English, the information of the relation between words is coded in
positions and hence the constituent structures makes sense, for inflectionally rich languages like
Sanskrit, the information of the relation is in the inflectional suffixes, which in turn allows for
flexible word order, and thereby the dependency structure is more appropriate to represent the
semantics expressed through the suffixes. A full fledged constraint parser using the concepts
of Ākāṅks.ā (expectancy) and Sannidhi (proximity) has been developed by (Kulkarni et al.,
2010). This parser handles some inter-sentential relations as well, and the work on anaphora
resolution has just begun. Thus the work on discourse analysis for Sanskrit is yet in its infancy.

3



On the other hand we see major efforts at the level of discourse analysis in English and other
European languages. Halliday and Hasan (1976) articulated the discourse theory and discussed
about cohesion in discourse. Two main discourse structures were proposed viz. tree structure
(Mann and Thompson, 1987) and graph (Wolf and Gibson, 2005). The prominent discourse
theories are Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST), Linguistics Discourse Model (LDM), Discourse
GraphBank (DG), and Discourse-Lexicalized Tree Adjoining Grammar (D-LTAG).

RST (Mann and Thompson, 1987) associates discourse relation with discourse structure. Here
discourse units relate two adjacent units by discourse relations. In RST the proposed structure
is a tree. Discourse structure is modelled by schemas where leaves are elementary discourse
units – non-overlapping text spans and discourse relation holds between daughters of the same
non-terminal node.

LDM (Polanyi, 1988) deals with discourse structure in the form of a tree. It differs from RST in
distinguishing discourse structure from discourse interpretation. The discourse structure comes
from the context free rules i.e. parent is interpreted as the interpretation of its children and the
relationship between them.

In DG (Wolf and Gibson, 2005) discourse units are related to both adjacent and non-adjacent
units. It was observed that crossing dependencies and nodes with multiple parents appear
in texts vastly while RST does not allow these. In order to overcome these problems, graph
representation was proposed by DG.

D-LTAG (Webber et al., 2001) builds on the observation that discourse connectives have both
the syntactic as well as semantic function in the discourse. It considers discourse relations
triggered by lexical elements. In D-LTAG, the predicates (verbs) are discourse connectives.

Webber and Joshi further proposed a tagset (Webber and Joshi, 2012) for annotating a corpus
for discourse. This tagset is used to annotate the Penn Discourse Treebank. This tagset is neutral
and does not make any assumptions about the form of the overall discourse structure of text.
In addition to marking the arguments for both explicit as well as implicit connectives, it also
marks senses and attribution of each discourse connective.

In the recent years there have also been efforts to deal with the coherence at the level of topic
(Webber, 2006; Webber and Joshi, 2012).

All these computational models for discourse analysis are centered around English and other
European languages. They are not appropriate to handle morphologically rich and more or
less free word order language like Sanskrit with a special discourse structure of scientific and
philosophical texts. Further, India has a strong grammatical tradition. So it is natural to look at
this tradition for building computational models rather than trying to ‘fit in’ available models
for Sanskrit.

In this paper we present a framework for discourse analysis in Sanskrit. The second section
presents a brief report on the set of relations used for developing a Dependency Tree bank of
Sanskrit corpus. The third section lists various inter-sentential relations for paragraph level
analysis, discussed in Sanskrit literature. The fourth section provides a brief report on the
Saṅgatis (relations) needed for analysing the inter-relations between paragraphs describing the
same sub-topic. The fifth section lists the Saṅgatis used by the Indian logicians to establish the
coherence and then we illustrate with an example how these Saṅgatis are useful for proper
understanding of a text. Then we give a brief outline of three major trends in the production of
scientific literature, and the current status of Sanskrit computational tools.

4



2 Sentence Level Analysis

In the traditional learning schools, the sentence level analysis is introduced at a tender age
of 9 or 10 immediately after the students have memorized Śabdarūpa (noun-word forms),
dhātupāt.ha (verbal forms) and Amarakośa (a thesaurus). Then the students are taught one
chapter of Raghuvam. śa of Kālidāsa to imbibe in them the methodology of analysing the text.
There are two prominant approaches viz Dan. d. ānvaya (also known as anvayamukh̄ı) and
Khan. d. ānvaya (also known as kathambhūtin̄ı). In the first aproach the teacher arranges all
the words in prose order. In the second approach, on the other hand, the teacher gives the
basic skeleton of a sentence and fills in other details by asking questions.1 These questions are
centered around the heads seeking their various modifiers. This later method of analysis is more
close to the modern dependency parsing credited to (Tesnière, 1959). The dependency relations
in Sanskrit have been proposed and thoroughly examined by the generations of scholars over
a period of more than 2 millennia. Thus we are fortunate to have a well defined, time tested
tagset for Sanskrit, unlike other languages such as English where special efforts were put in as
described in PARC (King et al., 2003), Stanford dependency manual (M. Marneffe and Manning,
2006) etc. for defining the set of relations. Various relations described in the traditional
grammar books have been compiled and classified by (Ramakrishnamacharyulu, 2009) under
the two broad headings viz. inter- sentential and intra-sentential relations. This work provided
a starting point for developing guidelines (Ramakrishnamacharyulu et al., 2011) for annotation
of Sanskrit texts at kāraka (syntactico-semantic relations) level and also for the development of
an automatic parser for Sanskrit. This tagset was further examined for the appropriateness of
the granularity (Kulkarni and Ramakrishnamacharyulu, 2013). And a set of 31 relations were
selected from among the 90 relations proposed in the original proposal. The reduction in the
number of rules was to avoid the fine-grain distinction involving extra-linguistic knowledge. A
constraint based parser2 is developed to parse the Sanskrit sentences using these relations. A
dependency tree bank of around 30K words is also annotated using this scheme.

3 Paragraph Level Analysis

The relations in the tag-set proposed by (Ramakrishnamacharyulu, 2009) contain intra-
sentential relations as well. Some of the connectives connecting two sentences are single while
most of them are parallel connectives or pairs. Each of these connectives takes two arguments.
The relations are binary in nature except those indicated by the conjunctive and disjunctive
particles. We follow the naiyāyikas (Indian Logicians) canonical form to represent the relations.
In a sentence ‘Rama sleeps’, Rama is the agent of an activity of sleeping. This is represented as
in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Convention for labelling relations

Note the direction of the arrowhead. This is interpreted as ‘Rama’ has an agent-hood condi-
tioned/determined by an activity of sleeping.

In case of inter-sentential connectives, the two arguments, following logicians convention again,

1A very good illustration of these approaches is given in Tubb and Boose (2007).
2http://sanskrit.uohyd.ernet.in/scl/SHMT/shmt.html

5



are named by the general terms anuyogika3 (combining) and pratiyoḡı (having a counter part).
So, if C is the connective connecting two sentences S1 and S2 then the general structure is
represented as in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Discourse structure with single connective
When there are two parallel connectives C1 and C2 connecting S1 and S2 then the relation
between them is represented as in Figure 3.

Figure 3: Discourse structure with paired connectives
Here R binds C1 and C2. The relation of the connectives with the sentence is through the main
verbs. The sentences are further parsed as dependency trees. In case of paired connectives,
we find instances of using either of the connectives or both. For example, in case of a paired
connective ‘yadi-tarhi’ (if-then), we find instances of use of only ‘yadi’ (if), only ‘tarhi’ (then)
and instances of both ‘yadi-tarhi’ (if-then). When only one of them is used in a sentence then
the structure in Figure 3 collapses to that in Figure 2.

We present below various inter-sentential connectives in Sanskrit with an example for each.
They are : yadi, tarhi, cet, tarhi-eva, yadyapi, tathāpi, athāpi, evamapi, yatah. , tatah. , yasmāt,
tasmāt, atah. , atha, anantaram, api-ca, kiṁ-ca, kintu, parantu. We illustrate below one example
of each type.

1. Cet (If/provided) [See Figure 4] :
Sanskrit : Tvam icchasi cet aham bhavatah. gr.ham āgamis.yāmi.
Gloss : You desire provided I your house will_come.
English : Provided you desire I will come to your house.

2. Yadi Tarhi (If-then) [See Figure 5] :
Sanskrit : yadi bhavān icchati tarhi aham bhavatah. gr.ham āgamis.yāmi.
Gloss : If you wish then I your house will_come.
English : If you wish then I will come to your house.

It is possible that this sentence may be written with either of the connectives viz. only
yadi or only tarhi. In that case the parse structure will be similar to the one in figure 4.

For the remaining examples, only if the relations differ we present a diagram.

3S2 is the anuyogi. So if the arrowhead is pointing towards S2 the name of the relation would have been anuyogi.
In this diagram, the arrowhead is pointing towards C, and hence the name of the relation is inverse of anuyogi, i.e.
anuyogika.

6



Figure 4: Cet

Figure 5: Yadi Tarhi

3. Yadyapi tathāpi (Even though, still):
Sanskrit : yadyapi ayaṁ bahu prayāsaṁ kr.tavān tathāpi par̄ıks.āyām tu anutt̄ırn. ah. .
Gloss : Even-though he lot tried still examination failed.
English : Even-though he tried very hard, still he failed in the examination.

4. Athāpi (Hence) :
Sanskrit : par̄ıks.āyām aham anutt̄ırn. ah. athāpi punah. likhis.ye.
Gloss : in_examination I failed hence again will_write.
English : I failed in the exam, hence I will attempt again.

7



5. Yatah. , Tatah. (Because-hence) :
Sanskrit : yatah. ayam samaye na āgatah. tatah. par̄ıks.āyāṁ na anumatah. .
Gloss: because he in_ time not came hence in_exam not permitted.
English:Because he did not arrive in time, he was not permitted to write the exam.

6. Atah. (Therefore) :
Sanskrit : ayam samaye na āgatah. atah. par̄ıks.āyāṁ na anumatah. .
Gloss : He in_time not came therefore in_exam not permitted.
English : He did not arrive in time therefore he was not permitted to write the exam.

7. Atha (Then) :
Sanskrit : prathamam ahaṁ śr.n. omi atha likhāmi.
Gloss : First I listen then write.
English : First I will listen and then will write.

8. Apica (And also) :
Sanskrit : bhiks.ām at.a apica gāṁ ānaya.
Gloss : alms ask and also cow bring.
English : Seek for alms and also bring cows.

9. Kintu/Parantu (But) :
Sanskrit : gajendrah. t̄ıvram prayatnam_akarot kintu nakra-
grahāt na muktah. .
Gloss : gajendra lot tried but from_crocodile_jaw not es-
cape.
English : Gajendra tried a lot but could not escape from the jaw of the crocodile.

10. Pūrvakāl̄ıkatvam (Preceding action):[see Figure 6]
Sanskrit uses a non-finite verb to indicate preceding action.

Sanskrit : rāmah. dugdhaṁ p̄ıtvā śālāṁ gacchati.
Gloss : rama milk after_drinking school goes.
English : Ram goes to school after drinking milk.

Figure 6: Pūrvakāl̄ıkatvam

11. Prayojanam (Purpose of the main activity) :[see Figure 7]
Sanskrit : aham bhavantaṁ mama gr.he bhoktum āhvayāmi.
Gloss : I you my in_house to_have_food invite.
English : I invite you to my house for lunch/dinner.

12. Samānakāl̄ıkatvam (Simultaneity) :[see Figure 8]
Sanskrit : bālakah. jalam piban gacchati.
Gloss : boy water drinking goes.
English : The boy drinks water while going.

8



Figure 7: Prayojanam

Figure 8: Samānakāl̄ıkatvam

In this tagging scheme we have neither deciphered the sense of the connectives nor did we
decipher the relations expressed by the two arguments. In Ramakrishnamacharyulu 2009, these
relations are classified further into 9 sub-headings as below.

1. Hetuhetumadbhāvah. (cause effect relationship) : yatah. , tatah. , yasmāt, tasmāt, atah. .

2. Asāphalyam (failure) : kintu.

3. Anantarakāl̄ınatvam (following action) : atha.

4. Kāran. asatve’api kāryābhāvah. / kāran. ābhāve’api kāryotpattih. (non-productive effort or
product without cause) : yadyapi, tathāpi, athāpi.

5. Pratibandhah. (conditional) : yadi, tarhi, cet, tarhyeva.

6. Samuccayah. (conjunction) : ca, apica, kiñca.

7. Pūrvakāl̄ıkatvam : The non-finite verb form ending with suffix ktvā ‘adverbial participial’.

8. Prayojanam (Purpose of the main activity) : The non-finite verb form ending with suffix
tumun ‘to-infinitive’.

9. Samānakāl̄ıkatvam (Simultaneity) : The non-finite verb form ending with suffix Śatr. and
Śānac ‘present participle’.

In addition there are cases where the anaphora is used to indicate the simultaneity of events
and the relation between events taking place in the same locus.

The analysis till this level is driven more by syntax and lexicon. The semantics is involved only
to rule out incompatible parses.

9



4 Sub-Topic Level Analysis

Within each of the sub-topics, various paragraphs (each consisting of one or more sub-
paragraphs) are connected by certain relations. The Mı̄māmsakas (exegesists) discuss 6 inter-
paragraph relations in the text Jaimin̄ıya Nyāyamālā Vistara by Mādhavācārya. These relations
are as follows.

1. Āks.epa (Objection)

2. Dr.s.t.ānta (Example)

3. Pratyudāharan. a (Counter-example)

4. Prāsaṅgika (Corollary)

5. Upodghāta (Pre-requisite)

6. Apavāda (Exception)

These relations differ for different types of texts. For example, a commentary on Pān. ini’s
As.t.ādhyāȳı by Patañjali has a different structure. The dominant structure, as observed in the
commentary on a sūtra 2.1.1 ‘samarthah. padavidhih.

4’ consists of the following relations.

1. Praśna – question

2. Āks.epa – objection

3. Samādhāna – justification

4. Uttara – answer

5. Vyākhyā – elaboration

Appendix B gives a small snapshot of these relations. To a certain extent some of these relations
such as Praśna, Āks.epa and Samādhāna are identifiable with the lexical cues (Tātāchārya,
2005; Tubb and Boose, 2007). Since these relations are different for different sets of texts, it is
necessary to compile these various sets before we develop any discourse analysis tagset.

5 Topic Level Analysis

Six relations among topics, called Saṅgatis are proposed in Indian tradition. They are (Śāstri,
1916):

1. Prasaṅga - Corollary.

2. Upodghāta - Pre-requisite.

3. Hetutā - Causal dependence.

4. Avasara - Provide an opportunity for further inquiry.

5. Nirvāhakaikya - The adjacent sections have a common end.

6. Kāryaikya - The adjacent sections are joint causal factors of a common effect.
4A compound is formed between the words which are mutually meaning-compatible.

10



5.1 Structure of Commentary on P2.1.1

Here we apply these Saṅgatis to reveal the underlying structure of a text in Grammar. The text
selected is a commentary by patañjali on the sūtra Samarthah. padavidhih. (2.1.1) from Pān. ini’s
As.t.ādhyāȳı. The commentary consists of 213 paragraphs grouped into 14 topics as listed below.

(1) The meaning of the words in the sūtra explaining the derivational morphology.
Here only one word vidhi is discussed. The commentator did not find it necessary to
comment on the other words.

(2) Type of sūtra.
The sūtras in Pān. ini’s As.t.ādhyāȳı are classified into 6 types. Since it is not obvious from
the sūtra to what type it belongs to, the commentator comments on its type and reasons
thereof.

(3) Purpose of this rule with determined type.
These three steps have the common goal of explaining the sūtra at hand. After this, the
commentator explains this sūtra systematically.

(4) Different characteristics of semantic connection (samartha).

(5) The first meaning of samartha viz. ekārth̄ıbhāva ‘single integrated meaning’ is examined.

(6) Various properties of single integrated meaning are examined.

(7) Meaning of vr. tti ‘formation of new morphemes’ giving single integrated meaning are dealt
with.

(8) Possibility of the second meaning vyapeks. ā of the word ‘samartha’ are ruled out.

(9) Definition of a sentence where vyapeks. ā is prominent.

(10) Role of sāmarthya ‘compatibility’ in compound formation.

(11) Purpose behind the use of the second word padavidhih. .

(12) Objection that the sūtra is meaningless is refuted.

(13) Rules for compound formation following syntactic agreement are explained.

(14) Rules for deciding the gender and number of a compound.

These 14 topics are related to each other by one of the above 6 Saṅgatis. Figure 9 shows the
relations among the topics.

6 Adhyāya Level Analysis

Among the scientific literature in Sanskrit we find three distinct trends. One is sūtra - bhās.ya -
t.̄ıkā - t.ippan. i popularly known as Bhās.ya paramparā. Here the original text is in the form of
sūtras (cryptic aphorisms). This is followed by a commentary explaining the sūtras, optionally
followed by an explanation (t.̄ıkā), a note (t.ippan. i) etc. The commentaries may be nested,
i.e. there is a commentary on the original sūtras and then commentary on this commentary,
and further commentary on the sub-commentaries and so on. At each stage the number

11



Figure 9: Discourse Structure of the commentary on "Samarthah. Padavidhih. "

of commentaries may be more than one. The sūtras as well as the commentaries and sub-
commentaries follow a certain discourse structure.

Another trend is where the original text establishes a theory, and the later scholars write
criticisms on it attacking the original view and proposing a new view. This trend is known as
khan. d. ana-man. d. ana paramparā. And there can be a series of such texts criticizing the previous
theory in the series and proposing a new theory. The structure of these texts then leads to a tree
structure, where the siblings indicate different criticisms of the same text leading to different
view points.

The third trend is to write prakaran. a granthas (books dealing with a specific important topic
among several topics discussed in the texts in sūtra form). These books are thus related to the
original sūtra texts, but also have their own nested commentaries.

The grammar of these discourse structures then necessarily differ.

7 Towards Computability

In this paper we have described various level of analysis the tradition is following in order
to understand the Sanskrit texts. Based on the available literature, a tagging scheme for
dependency analysis and a dependency parser are developed. This parser is further enhanced
to handle the anaphora and inter-sentential relations as well. Sanskrit has an advantage of
having a huge corpus in the form of printed texts, with important literary works well analysed
at various levels through commentaries. These works should be useful for further identifying
the cues for establishing various saṅgatis. It is well known that different interpretations of the
same text have resulted in different Indian philosophical schools. For interpretations we need
an objective analysis of the text. We also need to have all possible interpretations presented
in a nut-shell. With the help of computational tools now it is possible to explore all the
possible interpretations of a given text at various stages of analysis systematically and present
it in a concise form leaving the task of interpretation to the user. For example an expression
‘nais.adharājagatyā’ from the ‘Nalacaritam’ (biography of Nala) has 6 different interpretations
as described in the commentaries. The current tools help a student of Sanskrit to understand
these various interpretations (Varalakshmi, 2013) in a systematic way. With the availability

12



of a discourse level analysis, in future it should be then possible to understand how different
interpretations emerge from the same text with different combinations of analysis at various
stages.

References

Ganeri, J. and Miri, M. (2010). Sanskrit Philosophical Commentary. Journal of The Indian
Council of Philosophical Research, Vol. 27:187–207.

Hellwig, O. (2009). Extracting Dependency Trees from Sanskrit Texts. In Kulkarni, A. and Huet,
G., editors, Proceedings, Third International Sanskrit Computational Linguistics Symposium,
pages 106–115. Springer-Verlag, LNAI 5406.

Huet, G. (2009). Formal structure of Sanskrit text: Requirements analysis for a mechanical
Sanskrit processor. In Huet, G., Kulkarni, A., and Scharf, P., editors, Sanskrit Computational
Linguistics 1 & 2. Springer-Verlag, LNAI 5402.

Joshi, S. D. (1968). Patañjali’s Vyākaran. a Mahābhās.ya Samarthāhnika (P 2.1.1) Edited with
Translation and Explanatory Notes. Center of Advanced Study in Sanskrit, Poona, first edition.

King, T. H., Crouch, R., Riezler, S., Dalrymple, M., and Kaplan, R. (2003). The PARC
700 dependency bank. In Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on Linguistically
Interpreted Corpora (LINC-03).

Kulkarni, A., Pokar, S., and Shukl, D. (2010). Designing a Constraint Based Parser for Sanskrit.
In Jha, G. N., editor, Proceedings, Fourth International Sanskrit Computational Linguistics
Symposium, pages 70–90. Springer-Verlag, LNAI 6465.

Kulkarni, A. and Ramakrishnamacharyulu, K. V. (2013). Parsing Sanskrit Texts : Some Relation
Specific Issues. In Proceedings, Fifth Sanskrit Computational Linguistics Symposium. D. K.
Publisher.

Kulkarni, A., Shukl, D., and Pokar, S. (2012). Mathematical Modeling of Ākāṅks.ā and Sannidhi
for Parsing Sanskrit. 15th World Sanskrit Conference, Delhi.

Kumar, A., Mittal, V., and Kulkarni, A. (2010). Sanskrit compound processor. In Jha, G. N., edi-
tor, Proceedings, Fourth International Sanskrit Computational Linguistics Symposium. Springer-
Verlag, LNAI 6465.

M. Marneffe, B. M. and Manning, C. D. (2006). Generating typed dependency parses from
phrase structure parses. In The fifth international conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, LREC 2006, Italy.

Mann, W. C. and Thompson, S. A. (1987). Rhetorical Structure Theory : A Theory of Text
Organization (Reprinted from The Structure of Discourse). ISI Reprint series 87–190.

Polanyi, L. (1988). A formal model of discourse structure. Journal of Pragmatics, 12:601–638.

Prasad, R., Miltsakaki, E., Dinesh, N., Lee, A., Joshi, A., Robaldo, L., and Webber, B. (2007).
The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0 Annotation Manual.

Ramakrishnamacharyulu, K. V. (2009). Annotating Sanskrit Texts Based on Sābdabodha
Systems. In Kulkarni, A. and Huet, G., editors, Proceedings, Third International Sanskrit
Computational Linguistics Symposium, pages 26–39. Springer-Verlag, LNAI 5406.

13



Ramakrishnamacharyulu, K. V., Pokar, S., Shukl, D., and Kulkarni, A. (2011). Annotation
Scheme for Kaaraka level tagging and guidelines.

Śāstri, A. (1916). Kārikāval̄ı with the commentaries Muktāval̄ı, Dinakar̄ı, Rāmarudr̄ı (edited
with footnotes by Ananta Śāstri), page 286–287. Nirn. aya Sāgara Press, Bombay.

Śāstri, G. D. (1929). Śaktivāda with Vivr. ti commentary by Harinātha Tarka Siddhānta
Bhat.t.āchārya, edited with critical notes. Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, Benares.

Śr̄i J̄ivānanda Vidyāsāgar Bhat.t.ācārya (1989). Śr̄i Mādhavācāryaviracita Jaiminīya
Nyāyamālāvistarah. . Kr.s.n. adās Academy, Varanasi.

Staal, F. (1965). Euclid and Pan. ini. Philosophy of East and West, 15:99–116.

Tātāchārya, N. S. R. (2005). Śābdabodhamīmām. sā: The sentence and its significance Part-I to V.
Institute of Pondicherry and Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan, New Delhi.

Tesnière, L., editor (1959). Éléments de Syntaxe Structurale. Klincksieck, Paris.

Tubb, G. A. and Boose, E. R. (2007). Scholastic Sanskrit: A Manual for Students. Columbia
University, New York.

Varalakshmi, K. (2013). Śles.a Alaṅkāra - A Challenge for Testing Sanskrit Analytical Tools. In
Proceedings, Fifth Sanskrit Computational Linguistics Symposium. D. K. Publisher.

Webber, B. (2006). Accounting For Discourse Relations : Constituency and Dependency.
Festschrift for Ron Kaplan.

Webber, B. and Joshi, A. (2012). Discourse Structure and Computation : Past, Present and
Future. In Proceedings of the ACL-2012 Special Workshop on Rediscovering 50 Years of Discoveries.

Webber, B., Joshi, A., Sarkar, A., Prasad, R., Miltsakaki, E., and Forbes, K. (2001). D-LTAG
System - Discourse Parsing with a Lexicalized Tree Adjoining Grammar. In Kruijff-Korbayová,
I. and Steedman, M., editors, Workshop on Information Structure, Discourse Structure and
Discourse Semantics.

Wolf, F. and Gibson, E. (2005). Representing discourse coherence: a corpus-based study.
Computational Linguistics, 31:249–287.

A Nested Commentaries
This is an introductory section of a prakaran. a grantha Vaiyākaran. a-siddhānta-laghu-mañjūs.ā
with a commentary Ratnaprabhā by Sabhāpati Upādhyāya.
We show below the original text, followed by the commentary, as it appears in the printed text.

Original : tatra vākyasphot.o mukhyo loke tasyaivārthabodhakatvāttenaivārthasamāpteśca,
gloss : There, the process of understanding the meaning of a sentence is primary. This process
has the property of conveying the meaning and therefore it itself leads to the completion of
meaning.
Commentary : tatreti nirdhāran. e saptamı̄, tathā ca siddhāntaghat.akovākyasphot.o mukhya
ityarthah. . *bodhakatvāditi – yadyapyāntarasphot.asyaiva vācakatvasya siddhāntayis.yamān. atayā

14



vāhyasya padasamūharūpavākyasya na vācakatvam. tathāpi tattādātmyāpannatvena
tasyāpi tattvam. bodhyam. *tenaiva – vākyenaiva. *arthasamāpteriti vākyasyaiva
nirākāṅks.ārthabodhakatvenārthasya pūrn. atvānnirākāṅks.atvāditi yāvat.

If this piece is presented in this way, it is difficult to follow the commentary. We present below
the original text segmented and commentary split into several footnotes placed at relevant
places.

Segmented : tatra5 vākyasphot.ah. mukhyah. loke tasya eva artha bodhakatvāt
6 tena eva7 artha

samāpteh. ca,
8

We observe that this makes it easy to read and understand the texts, since now we can ‘see’ the
underlying structure. But we cannot use this technique further since nesting of footnotes after a
certain limit becomes unwieldy. The current hyper text technology however makes it easy to
present this text in the form of hyper text with links, allowing a smooth representation of the
nested commentaries.

B Original text of Mahābhās.ya with relations among the
paragraphs

This is the 4th sub-topic from the commentary by Patañjali on P2.1.1. The relations are marked
manually, originally in the Nirn. aya sāgara edition of the mahābhās.ya which was further
enhanced by Joshi in his edition (Joshi, 1968). The numbers indicate the serial number of
paragraphs from the beginning of the commentary on P2.1.1.

Sub-Topic starts: atha sāmarthyalaks.an. abhedanirūpan. ādhikaran. am
(Now starts the section in which the different characteristic of semantic connection are exam-
ined.)

Relation: praśnabhās.yam (question)
41. atha kriyamān. e’api samarthagrahan. e samarthamityucyate kim. samartham. nāma |
(Now, apart from the question whether (the word) samartha should be mentioned in P. 2.1.1
(or not), (when) you say samartha, what do you really mean by samartha?)

Relation: samādhānavārttikam (justification)
Vārttika: pr.thagarthānāmekārth̄ıbhāvah. samarthavacanam ||1 ||
(The word samartha (means) single integrated meaning of words which (when uncompounded)
have separate meanings (of their own).)

Relation: vyākhyābhās.yam (elaboration)
42. pr.thagarthānām padānāmekārth̄ıbhāvah. samarthamityucyate |
((When) we say samartha, (it means) single integrated meaning of words which (when uncom-
pounded) have separate meanings (of their own).)

5tatreti nirdhāran. e saptamı̄, tathā ca siddhāntaghat.akovākyasphot.o mukhya ityarthah. .
6bodhakatvāditi – yadyapyāntarasphot.asyaiva vācakatvasya siddhāntayis.yamān. atayā vāhyasya

padasamūharūpavākyasya na vācakatvam. tathāpi tattādātmyāpannatvena tasyāpi tattvam. bodhyam.
7tenaiva – vākyenaiva.
8arthasamāpteriti vākyasyaiva nirākāṅks.ārthabodhakatvenārthasya pūrn. atvānnirākāṅks.atvāditi yāvat.

15



Relation: praśnabhās.yam (question)
43. kva punah. pr.thagarthāni kvaikārthāni |
(But where (do words) have separate meanings (of their own), (and) where (do they) have a
single meaning?)

Relation: uttarabhās.yam (answer)
44. vākye pr.thagarthāni|rājñah. purus.a iti|samāse punarekārthāni rājapurus.a iti |
(In the uncompounded word group (words) have separate meaning (of their own), like in rājñah.
purus.ah. : ‘king’s man’. But in a compound, (words) have a single meaning, like rājapurus.ah. :
‘king-man’.)

Relation: āks.epabhās.yam (objection)
45. kimucyate pr.thagarthān̄ıti yāvatā rājñah. purus.a ān̄ıyatāmityukte rājapurus.a ān̄ıyate
rājapurus.a iti ca sa eva |
(What do you say: ‘(words) having separate meanings (of their own)’? Because when we say:
‘let the king’s man be brought’, the king-man is brought. And (when we say): ‘(let) the king-man
(be brought)’, the same (man is brought).)

Relation: samādhānabhās.yam (justification)
46. nāpi brūmo’anyasyānayanam. bhavat̄ıti|
(We do not say at all that a different person is brought.)

Sub-topic ends: iti sāmarthyalaks.an. abhedanirūpan. ādhikaran. am
(Here ends the section in which the different characteristics of semantic connection are exam-
ined.)

16


