










































English-Korean Named Entity Transliteration Using Substring Alignment and Re-ranking Methods


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 57–60,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

English-Korean Named Entity Transliteration Using Substring
Alignment and Re-ranking Methods

Chun-Kai Wu† Yu-Chun Wang‡ Richard Tzong-Han Tsai†
†Department of Computer Science and Engineering,

Yuan Ze University, Taiwan
‡Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering,

National Taiwan University, Taiwan
s983301@mail.yzu.edu.tw d97023@csie.ntu.edu.tw

thtsai@saturn.yzu.edu.tw

Abstract

In this paper, we describe our approach
to English-to-Korean transliteration task in
NEWS 2012. Our system mainly consists
of two components: an letter-to-phoneme
alignment with m2m-aligner,and translitera-
tion training model DirecTL-p. We construct
different parameter settings to train several
transliteration models. Then, we use two re-
ranking methods to select the best transliter-
ation among the prediction results from the
different models. One re-ranking method is
based on the co-occurrence of the translitera-
tion pair in the web corpora. The other one is
the JLIS-Reranking method which is based on
the features from the alignment results. Our
standard and non-standard runs achieves 0.398
and 0.458 in top-1 accuracy in the generation
task.

1 Introduction

Named entity translation is a key problem in many
NLP research fields such as machine translation,
cross-language information retrieval, and question
answering. Most name entity translation is based on
transliteration, which is a method to map phonemes
or graphemes from source language into target lan-
guage. Therefore, named entity transliteration sys-
tem is important for translation.

In the shared task, we focus on English-Korean
transliteration. We consider to transform the translit-
eration task into a sequential labeling problem. We
adopt m2m-aligner and DirecTL-p (Jiampojamarn et
al., 2010) to do substring mapping and translitera-
tion predicting, respectively. With this approach (Ji-

ampojamarn et al., 2010) achieved promising results
on NEWS 2010 transliteration tasks. In order to im-
prove the transliteration performance, we also apply
several ranking techniques to select the best Korean
transliteration.

This paper is organized as following. In section
2 we describe the main approach we use including
how we deal with the data, the alignment and train-
ing methods and our re-ranking techniques. In sec-
tion 3, we show and discuss our results on English-
Korean transliteration task. And finally the conclu-
sion is in section 4.

2 Our Approach

In this section, we describe our approach for
English-Korean transliteration which comprises the
following steps:

1. Pre-processing

2. Letter-to-phoneme alignment

3. DirecTL-p training

4. Re-ranking results

2.1 Pre-processing
Korean writing system, namely Hangul, is alphabet-
ical. However, unlike western writing system with
Latin alphabets, Korean alphabet is composed into
syllabic blocks. Each Korean syllabic block repre-
sent a syllable which has three components: initial
consonant, medial vowel and optionally final con-
sonant. Korean has 14 initial consonants, 10 medial
vowels, and 7 final consonants. For instance, the syl-
labic block “신” (sin) is composed with three letters:

57



a initial consonant “ㅅ” (s), a medial vowel “ㅣ” (i),
and a final consonant “ㄴ” (n).

For transliteration from English to Korean , we
have to break each Korean syllabic blocks into two
or three Korean letters. Then, we convert these Ko-
rean letters into Roman letters according to Revised
Romanization of Korean for convenient processing.

2.2 Letter-to-phoneme Alignment
After obtaining English and Romanized Korean
name entity pair, we generate the alignment between
each pair by using m2m-aligner.

Since English orthography might not reflect its ac-
tual phonological forms, it makes one-to-one char-
acter alignment between English and Korean not
practical.

Compared with traditional one-to-one alignment,
the m2m-aligner overcomes two problems: One is
double letters where two letters are mapped to one
phoneme. English may use several characters for
one phoneme which is presented in one letter in Ko-
rean, such as “ch” to “ㅊ” and “oo” to “ㅜ”. How-
ever, one-to-one alignment only allows one letter to
be mapped to one phoneme, so it must have to add
an null phoneme to achieve one-to-one alignment.
It may interfere with the transliteration prediction
model.

The other problem is double phonemes problem
where one letter is mapped to two phonemes. For
example, the letter “x” in the English name entity
“Texas” corresponds to two letters “ㄱ” and “ㅅ”
in Korean. Besides, some English letters in the
word might not be pronounced, like “k” in the En-
glish word “knight”. We can eliminate this by pre-
processing the data to find out double phonemes and
merge them into single phoneme. Or we can add
an null letter to it, but this may also disturb the pre-
diction model. While performing alignments, m2m
aligner allows us to set up the maximum length sub-
string in source language (with the parameter x) and
in target language (with the parameter y). Thus,
when aligning, we set both parameter x and y to two
because we think there are at most 2 English letters
mapped to 2 Korean letters. To capture more double
phonemes, we also have another parameter set with
x = 1 and y = 2.

As mentioned in previous section, Korean syl-
labic block is composed of three or two letters. In

order to cover more possible alignments, we con-
struct another alignment configurations to take null
consonant into consideration. Consequently, for any
Korean syllabic block containing two Korean letters
will be converted into three Roman letters with the
third one being a predefined Roman letter represent-
ing null consonant. We also have two set of param-
eters for this change, that is x = 2, y = 3 and x = 1
,y = 3. The reason we increase both y by one is that
there are three Korean letters for each word.

2.3 DirecTL-p Training

With aligned English-Korean pairs, we can train
our transliteration model. We apply DirecTL-p (Ji-
ampojamarn et al., 2008) for our training and testing
task. We train the transliteration models with differ-
ent alignment parameter settings individually men-
tioned in section 2.2.

2.4 Re-ranking Results

Because we train several transliteration models with
different alignment parameters, we have to combine
the results from different models. Therefore, the
re-ranking method is necessary to select the best
transliteration result. For re-ranking, we propose
two approaches.

1. Web-based re-ranking

2. JLIS-Reranking

2.4.1 Web-based re-ranking
The first re-ranking method is based on the oc-

currence of transliterations in the web corpora. We
send each English-Korean transliteration pair gen-
erated by our transliteration models to Google web
search engine to get the co-occurrence count of the
pair in the retrieval results. But the result number
may vary a lot, most of them will get millions of
results while some will only get a few hundred.

2.4.2 JLIS-Reranking
In addition to web-based re-ranking approach, we

also adopt JLIS-Reranking (Chang et al., 2010) to
re-rank our results for the standard run. For an
English-Korean transliteration pair, we can mea-
sure if they are actual transliteration of each other
by observing the alignment between them. Since

58



Table 1: Results on development data.

Run Accuracy Mean F-score MRR MAPref
1 (x = 2, y = 2) 0.488 0.727 0.488 0.488
2 (x = 1, y = 2) 0.494 0.730 0.494 0.494
3 (x = 1, y = 3, with null consonant) 0.452 0.713 0.452 0.452
4 (x = 2, y = 3, with null consonant) 0.474 0.720 0.474 0.473
Web-based Reranking 0.536 0.754 0.563 0.536
JLIS-Reranking 0.500 0.737 0.500 0.500

Table 2: Results on test data

Run Accuracy Mean F-score MRR MAPref
Standard (JLIS-Reranking) 0.398 0.731 0.398 0.397
Non-standard (Web-based reranking) 0.458 0.757 0.484 0.458

DirecTL-p model outputs a file containing the align-
ment of each result, there are some features in the
results that we can use for re-ranking. In our re-
ranking approach, there are three features used in
the process: source grapheme chain feature, target
grapheme chain feature and syllable consistent fea-
ture. These three feature are proposed in (Song et
al., 2010).

Source grapheme chain feature: This feature
can tell us that how the source characters are aligned.
Take “A|D|A|M” for example, we will get three
chains which are A|D, D|A and A|M. With this fea-
ture we may know the alignment in the source lan-
guage.

Target grapheme chain feature: Similar to the
above feature, it tell us how the target characters are
aligned. Take “NG:A:n|D|A|M” for example, which
is the Korean transliteration of ADAM, we will get
three chains which are n|D, D|A and A|M. With this
feature we may know the alignment in the target lan-
guage. “n” is the predefined null consonant.

Syllable consistent feature: We use this feature
to measure syllable counts in both English and Ko-
rean. For English, we apply an Perl module1 to mea-
sure the syllable counts. And for Korean, we simply
count the number of syllabic blocks. This feature
may guard our results, since a wrong prediction may
not have the same number of syllable.

1http://search.cpan.org/˜gregfast/
Lingua-EN-Syllable-0.251/Syllable.pm

Other than the feature vectors created by above
features, there is one important field when training
the re-ranker, performance measure. For this field,
we give it 1 when we predict a correct result other-
wise we give it 0 since we think it is useless to get a
partially correct result.

3 Result

To measure the transliteration models with different
alignment parameters and the re-ranking methods,
we construct several runs for experiments as follows.

• Run 1: m2m-aligner with parameters x = 2
and y = 2.

• Run 2: m2m-aligner with parameters x = 1
and y = 2.

• Run 3: m2m-aligner with parameters x = 1
and y = 3 and add null consonants in the Ko-
rean romanized representation.

• Run 4: m2m-aligner with parameters x = 2
and y = 3 and add null consonants in the Ko-
rean romanized representation.

• Web-based reranking: re-rank the results from
run 1 to 4 based on Google search results.

• JLIS-Reranking: re-rank the results from run 1
to 4 based on JLIS-rerakning features.

Table 1 shows our results on the development
data. As we can see in this table, Run 2 is better than
Run 1 by 6 NEs. It may be that the data in develop

59



set are double phonemes. And we also observe that
both Run 1 and Run 2 is better than Run 3 and Run
4, the reason may be that the extra null consonant
distract the performance of the prediction model.

From the results, it shows that our re-ranking
methods can actually improve transliteration.
Reranking based on web corpora can achieve better
accuracy compared with web-based reranking.
The JLIS-Reranking method slightly improve the
accuracy. It could be that the features we use
are not enough to capture the alignment between
English-Korean NE pair.

Because the runs with re-ranking achieving bet-
ter results, we submit the result on the test data with
JLIS-Reranking as the standard run, and the result
with the web-based re-ranking as the non-standard
run for our final results. The results on the test data
set are shown in table 2. The results also shows that
the web-based re-ranking can achieve the best accu-
racy up to 0.458.

4 Conclusion

In this paper, we describe our approach to English-
Korean named entity transliteration task for NEWS
2012. First, we decompose Korean word into Ko-
rean letters and then romanize them into sequential
Roman letters. Since a Korean word may not contain
the final consonant, we also create some alignment
results with the null consonant in romanized Korean
representations. After preprocessing the training
data, we use m2m-aligner to get the alignments from
English to Korean. Next, we train several translitera-
tion models based on DirecTL-p with the alignments
from the m2m-aligner. Finally, we propose two
re-ranking methods. One is web-based re-ranking
with Google search engine. We send the English
NE and its Korean transliteration pair our model
generates to Google to get the co-occurrence count
to re-rank the results. The other method is JLIS-
reranking based on three features from the alignment
results, including source grapheme chain feature,
target grapheme chain feature, and syllable consis-
tent feature. In the experiment results, our method
achieves the good accuracy up to 0.398 in the stan-
dard run and 0.458 in non-standard run. Our results
show that the transliteration model with a web-based
re-ranking method can achieve better accuracy in

English-Korean transliteration.

References
Ming-Wei Chang, Vivek Srikumar, Dan Goldwas-ser, and

Dan Roth. 2010. Structured output learning with indi-
rect supervision. Proceeding of the International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ICML).

Sittichai Jiampojamarn, Grzegorz Kondrak, and Tarek
Sherif. 2007. Applying many-to-many alignments
and hidden markov models to letter-to-phoneme con-
version. Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 372–379.

Sittichai Jiampojamarn, Colin Cherry, and Grzegorz
Kondrak. 2008. Joint processing and discriminative
training for letter-to-phoneme conversion. Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 905–912.

Sittichai Jiampojamarn, Kenneth Dwyer, Shane Bergsma,
Aditya Bhargava, Qing Dou, Mi-Young Kim, and
Grzegorz Kondrak. 2010. Transliteration generation
and mining with limited training resources. Proceed-
ings of the 2010 Named Entities Workshop, ACL 2010,
pages 39–47.

Yan Song, Chunyu Kit, and Hai Zhao. 2010. Reranking
with multiple features for better transliteration. Pro-
ceedings of the 2010 Named Entities Work-shop, ACL
2010, pages 62–65.

60


