










































Incremental Spoken Dialogue Systems: Tools and Data


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Future directions and needs in the Spoken Dialog Community: Tools and Data, pages 15–16,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Incremental Spoken Dialogue Systems: Tools and Data

Helen Hastie, Oliver Lemon, Nina Dethlefs
The Interaction Lab, School of Mathematics and Computer Science

Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK EH14 4AS
h.hastie, o.lemon, n.s.dethlefs@hw.ac.uk

Abstract

Strict-turn taking models of dialogue do not
accurately model human incremental process-
ing, where users can process partial input and
plan partial utterances in parallel. We discuss
the current state of the art in incremental sys-
tems and propose tools and data required for
further advances in the field of Incremental
Spoken Dialogue Systems.

1 Incremental Spoken Dialogue Systems

For Spoken Dialogue Systems (SDS) to be more fre-
quently adopted, advances in the state-of-the-art are
necessary to enable highly responsive and conversa-
tional systems. Traditionally, the unit of speech has
been a whole utterance with strict, rigid turn-taking
determined by a voice-activity detector. However,
a large body of psycholinguistic literature indicates
that human-human interaction is in fact incremen-
tal (Tanenhaus and Brown-Schmidt, 2008; Levelt,
1989). Using a whole utterance as the unit of choice
makes dialogues longer, unnatural and stilted and ul-
timately interferes with a user’s ability to focus on
their goal (Allen et al., 2001).

A new generation of Incremental SDS (ISDS) are
being developed that deal with ‘micro-turns’ (sub-
utterance processing units) resulting in dialogues
that are more fluid and responsive. Recent work
has shown that processing smaller ‘chunks’ of input
and output can improve the user experience (Aist et
al., 2007; Skantze and Schlangen, 2009; Buss et al.,
2010; Baumann et al., 2011; Selfridge et al., 2011).
Incrementality enables the system designer to model

several dialogue phenomena that play a vital role
in human discourse (Levelt, 1989) but have so far
been absent from systems. These include more
natural turn-taking through rapid system responses,
grounding through the generation of backchannels
and feedback, and barge-ins (from both user and sys-
tem). In addition, corrections and self-corrections
through constant monitoring of user and system ut-
terances play an important role, enabling the system
to recover smoothly from a recognition error or a
change in user’s preferences. Some examples of the
phenomena we are targeting are given in Figure 1.

Parlance, a FP7 EC project1, is currently develop-
ing incremental systems for English and Mandarin.
The goal of Parlance is to develop mobile, interac-
tive, ‘hyper-local’ search through speech. Recent
trends in Information Retrieval are towards incre-
mental, interactive search. Spoken dialogue systems
can provide a truly natural medium for this type of
search, in particular for people on the move.

2 Tools and Data

The emphasis of the Parlance project is on data-
driven techniques for ISDS, thereby addressing the
problem of a lack of data for system develop-
ment. Although incremental dialogue phenomena
described in Figure 1 have been observed in human-
human dialogue, more task-based data is needed. It
is challenging to fabricate a situation where users
produce incremental discourse phenomena as in Fig-
ure 1 frequently and in a natural manner. Wizard-

1http://www.parlance-project.eu

15



Backchannels (when the user pauses)
USR I want Italian food [500 ms] in the centre of town . . .
SYS uh-huh
SYS OK. I found 24 Italian restaurants in the city centre. The
restaurant Roma is in the medium price range,. . .

Self-correction (the system made a mistake)
USR I want Italian food in the centre of town . . .
SYS OK. I found 35 Indian restaurants . . .
USR No, I want Italian.
SYS oh sorry . . .
SYS I have 24 Italian restaurants in the city centre . . .

Holding the floor
USR I want cheap Italian food . . .
SYS ok let me see
SYS I have 3 cheap Italian places . . .

Figure 1: Incremental phenomena observed in human-
human dialogue that systems should be able to model.

of-Oz experiments can be used to collect data from
the system side, but user-initiated phenomena, such
as the user changing his/her mind are more difficult
to instigate. Therefore, data collections of naturally
occurring incremental phenomena in human-human
settings will be essential for further development of
incremental systems. Such data can inform user sim-
ulations which provide means of training stochastic
SDS with less initial data and can compensate for
data sparsity. For example, in Dethlefs et al. (2012)
the user simulation can change its mind and react to
different NLG strategies such as giving information
with partial input or waiting for complete input from
the user. Both the academic community and industry
would benefit from open access data, such as will be
collected in the Parlance project and made available
to the dialogue community2. There would also need
to be a clear path from academic research on ISDS
to industry standards such as VoiceXML to facilitate
adoption.

Various components and techniques of ISDS are
needed to handle ‘micro-turns’. Challenges here
include recognizing and understanding partial user
input and back-channels; micro-turn dialogue man-
agement that can decide when to back-channel, self-
correct and hold-the-floor; incremental NLG that
can generate output while the user is still talking;

2As was done for CLASSiC project data at:
http://www.macs.hw.ac.uk/iLabArchive/CLASSiCProject/Data/login.php

and finally more flexible TTS that can handle barge-
in and understand when it has been interrupted.

In summary, in order to achieve highly natural,
responsive incremental systems, we propose using
data-driven techniques, for which the main issue is
lack of data. Carefully crafted task-based human-
human data collection and WoZ studies, user simu-
lations, shared data archives, and upgraded industry
standards are required for future work in this field.

Acknowledgments

The research leading to this work has received fund-
ing from the EC’s FP7 programme: (FP7/2011-14)
under grant agreement no. 287615 (PARLANCE).

References

Gregory Aist, James Allen, Ellen Campana, Lucian
Galescu, Carlos Gomez Gallo, Scott Stoness, Mary
Swift, and Michael Tanenhaus. 2007. Software ar-
chitectures for incremental understanding of human
speech. In Proceedings of SemDial / DECALOG.

James Allen, George Ferguson, and Amanda Stent. 2001.
An Architecture For More Realistic Conversational
Systems. In Proc. of Intelligent User Interfaces.

Timo Baumann, Okko Buss, and David Schlangen. 2011.
Evaluation and Optimisation of Incremental Proces-
sors. Dialogue and Discourse, 2(1).

Okko Buss, Timo Baumann, and David Schlangen. 2010.
Collaborating on Utterances with a Spoken Dialogue
Systen Using an ISU-based Approach to Incremental
Dialogue Management. In Proc. of SIGDIAL.

Nina Dethlefs, Helen Hastie, Verena Rieser, and Oliver
Lemon. 2012. Optimising Incremental Generation
for Spoken Dialogue Systems: Reducing the Need for
Fillers. In Proc of INLG, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Willem Levelt. 1989. Speaking: From Intenion to Artic-
ulation. MIT Press.

Ethan Selfridge, Iker Arizmendi, Peter Heeman, and Ja-
son Williams. 2011. Stability and Accuracy in Incre-
mental Speech Recognition. In Proc. of SigDial.

Gabriel Skantze and David Schlangen. 2009. Incremen-
tal Dialogue Processing in a Micro-Domain. In Proc.
of EACL, Athens, Greece.

M.K. Tanenhaus and S. Brown-Schmidt. 2008. Lan-
guage processing in the natural world. In B.C.M
Moore, L.K. Tyler, and W.D. Marslen-Wilson, edi-
tors, The perception of speech: from sound to meaning,
pages 1105–1122.

16


