










































Head Finalization Reordering for Chinese-to-Japanese Machine Translation


Proceedings of SSST-6, Sixth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 57–66,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Head Finalization Reordering for Chinese-to-Japanese
Machine Translation

Han Dan+ Katsuhito Sudoh‡ Xianchao Wu‡∗

Kevin Duh‡† Hajime Tsukada‡ Masaaki Nagata‡
+The Graduate University For Advanced Studies, Tokyo, Japan
‡NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation

+handan@nii.ac.jp, ∗wuxianchao@baidu.com, †kevinduh@is.naist.jp
‡{sudoh.katsuhito, tsukada.hajime, nagata.masaaki}@lab.ntt.co.jp

Abstract

In Statistical Machine Translation, reorder-
ing rules have proved useful in extracting
bilingual phrases and in decoding during
translation between languages that are struc-
turally different. Linguistically motivated
rules have been incorporated into Chinese-
to-English (Wang et al., 2007) and English-
to-Japanese (Isozaki et al., 2010b) transla-
tion with significant gains to the statistical
translation system. Here, we carry out a lin-
guistic analysis of the Chinese-to-Japanese
translation problem and propose one of the
first reordering rules for this language pair.
Experimental results show substantially im-
provements (from 20.70 to 23.17 BLEU)
when head-finalization rules based on HPSG
parses are used, and further gains (to 24.14
BLEU) were obtained using more refined
rules.

1 Introduction

In state-of-the-art Statistical Machine Translation
(SMT) systems, bilingual phrases are the main
building blocks for constructing a translation given
a sentence from a source language. To extract
those bilingual phrases from a parallel corpus,
the first step is to discover the implicit word-
to-word correspondences between bilingual sen-
tences (Brown et al., 1993). Then, a symmetriza-
tion matrix is built (Och and Ney, 2004) by us-
ing word-to-word alignments, and a wide variety

∗Now at Baidu Japan Inc.
† Now at Nara Institute of Science and Technology

(NAIST)

of heuristics can be used to extract the bilingual
phrases (Zens et al., 2002; Koehn et al., 2003).

This method performs relatively well when the
source and the target languages have similar word
order, as in the case of French, Spanish, and En-
glish. However, when translating between lan-
guages with very different structures, as in the case
of English and Japanese, or Japanese and Chinese,
the quality of extracted bilingual phrases and the
overall translation quality diminishes.

In the latter scenario, a simple but effective strat-
egy to cope with this problem is to reorder the
words of sentences in one language so that it re-
sembles the word order of another language (Wu
et al., 2011; Isozaki et al., 2010b). The advan-
tages of this strategy are two fold. The first ad-
vantage is at the decoding stage, since it enables
the translation to be constructed almost monoton-
ically. The second advantage is at the training
stage, since automatically estimated word-to-word
alignments are likely to be more accurate and sym-
metrization matrices reveal more evident bilingual
phrases, leading to the extraction of better quality
bilingual phrases and cleaner phrase tables.

In this work, we focus on Chinese-to-Japanese
translation, motivated by the increasing interaction
between these two countries and the need to im-
prove direct machine translation without using a
pivot language. Despite the countries’ close cul-
tural relationship, their languages significantly dif-
fer in terms of syntax, which poses a severe diffi-
culty in statistical machine translation. The syntac-
tic relationship of this language pair has not been
carefully studied before in the machine translation

57



field, and our work aims to contribute in this direc-
tion as follows:

• We present a detailed syntactic analysis of
several reordering issues in Chinese-Japanese
translation using the information provided by
an HPSG-based deep parser.

• We introduce novel reordering rules based on
head-finalization and linguistically inspired
refinements to make words in Chinese sen-
tences resemble Japanese word order. We em-
pirically show its effectiveness (e.g. 20.70 to
24.23 BLEU improvement).

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 in-
troduces the background and gives an overview of
similar techniques related to this work. Section 3
describes the proposed method in detail. Exper-
imental evaluation of the performance of the pro-
posed method is described in section 4. There is an
error analysis on the obtained results in section 5.
Conclusions and a short description on future work
derived from this research are given in the final
section.

2 Background

2.1 Head Finalization

The structure of languages can be characterized
by phrase structures. The head of a phrase is the
word that determines the syntactic category of the
phrase, and its modifiers (also called dependents)
are the rest of the words within the phrase. In En-
glish, the head of a phrase can be usually found
before its modifiers. For that reason, English is
called a head-initial language (Cook and Newson,
1988). Japanese, on the other hand, is head-final
language (Fukui, 1992), since the head of a phrase
always appears after its modifiers.

In certain applications, as in the case of ma-
chine translation, word reordering can be a promis-
ing strategy to ease the task when working with
languages with different phrase structures like En-
glish and Japanese. Head Finalization is a success-
ful syntax-based reordering method designed to re-
order sentences from a head-initial language to re-
semble the word order in sentences from a head-
final language (Isozaki et al., 2010b). The essence

of this rule is to move the syntactic heads to the
end of its dependency by swapping child nodes in
a phrase structure tree when the head child appears
before the dependent child.

Isozaki et al. (2010b) proposed a simple method
of Head Finalization, by using an HPSG-based
deep parser for English (Miyao and Tsujii, 2008)
to obtain phrase structures and head information.
The score results from several mainstream evalua-
tion methods indicated that the translation quality
had been improved; the scores of Word Error Rate
(WER) and Translation Edit Rate (TER) (Snover
et al., 2006) had especially been greatly reduced.

2.2 Chinese Deep Parsing

Syntax-based reordering methods need parsed sen-
tences as input. Isozaki et al. (2010b) used Enju,
an HPSG-based deep parser for English, but they
also discussed using other types of parsers, such
as word dependency parsers and Penn Treebank-
style parsers. However, to use word dependency
parsers, they needed an additional heuristic rule to
recover phrase structures, and Penn Treebank-style
parsers are problematic because they output flat
phrase structures (i.e. a phrase may have multiple
dependents, which causes a problem of reorder-
ing within a phrase). Consequently, compared to
different types of parsers, Head-Final English per-
forms the best on the basis of English Enju’s pars-
ing result.

In this paper, we follow their observation, and
use the HPSG-based parser for Chinese (Chinese
Enju) (Yu et al., 2011) for Chinese syntactic pars-
ing. Since Chinese Enju is based on the same pars-
ing model as English Enju, it provides rich syn-
tactic information including phrase structures and
syntactic/semantic heads.

Figure 1 shows an example of an XML output
from Chinese Enju for the sentence “wo (I) qu (go
to) dongjing (Tokyo) he (and) jingdu (Ky-
oto).” The label <cons> and <tok> represent
the non-terminal nodes and terminal nodes, respec-
tively. Each node is identified by a unique “id”
and has several attributes. The attribute “head”
indicates which child node is the syntactic head.
In this figure, <head=“c4” id=“c3”> means that
the node that has id=“c4” is the syntactic head of
the node that has id=“c3”.

58



Figure 1: An XML output for a Chinese sentence from
Chinese Enju. For clarity, we only draw information
related to the phrase structure and the heads.

2.3 Related Work

Reordering is a popular strategy for improving
machine translation quality when source and tar-
get languages are structurally very different. Re-
searchers have approached the reordering problem
in multiple ways. The most basic idea is pre-
ordering (Xia and McCord, 2004; Collins et al.,
2005), that is, to do reordering during preprocess-
ing time, where the source side of the training and
development data and sentences from a source lan-
guage that have to be translated are first reordered
to ease the training and the translation, respec-
tively. In (Xu et al., 2009), authors used a depen-
dency parser to introduce manually created pre-
ordering rules to reorder English sentences when
translating into five different SOV(Subject-Object-
Verb) languages. Other authors (Genzel, 2010; Wu
et al., 2011) use automatically generated rules in-
duced from parallel data. Tillmann (2004) used a
lexical reordering model, and Galley et al. (2004)
followed a syntactic-based model.

In this work, however, we are centered in the
design of manual rules inspired by the Head Final-
ization (HF) reordering (Isozaki et al., 2010b). HF
reordering is one of the simplest methods for pre-
ordering that significantly improves word align-
ments and leads to a better translation quality. Al-

though the method is limited to translation where
the target language is head-final, it requires neither
training data nor fine-tuning. To our knowledge,
HF is the best method to reorder languages when
translating into head-final languages like Japanese.

The implementation of HF method for English-
to-Japanese translation appears to work well. A
reasonable explanation for this is the close match
between the concept of “head” in this language
pair. However, for Chinese-to-Japanese, there are
differences in the definitions of numbers of impor-
tant syntactic concepts, including the definition of
the syntactic head. We concluded that the diffi-
culties we encountered in using HF to Chinese-to-
Japanese translation were the result of these differ-
ences in the definition of “head”. As we believe
that such differences are also likely to be observed
in other language pairs, the present work is gener-
ally important for head-initial to head-final trans-
lation as it shows a systematic linguistic analysis
that consistently improves the effectivity of the HF
method.

3 Syntax-based Reordering Rules

This section describes our method for syntax-
based reordering for Chinese-to-Japanese transla-
tion. We start by introducing Head Finalization
for Chinese (HFC), which is a simple adaptation
of Isozaki et al. (2010b)’s method for English-to-
Japanese translation. However, we found that this
simple method has problems when applied to Chi-
nese, due to peculiarities in Chinese syntax. In
Section 3.2, we analyze several distinctive cases of
the problem in detail. And following this analysis,
Section 3.3 proposes a refinement of the original
HFC, with a couple of exception rules for reorder-
ing.

3.1 Head Finalization for Chinese (HFC)

Since Chinese and English are both known to be
head-initial languages1, the reordering rule intro-
duced in (Isozaki et al., 2010b) ideally would re-
order Chinese sentences to follow the word order

1As Gao (2008) summarized, whether Chinese is a head-
initial or a head-final language is open for debate. Neverthe-
less, we take the view that most Chinese sentence structures
are head-initial since the written form of Chinese mainly be-
haves as an head-initial language.

59



Figure 2: Simple example for Head-Final Chinese. The left figure shows the parsing tree of the original sentence
and its English translation. The right figure shows the reordered sentence along with its Japanese translation.
( “*” indicate the syntactic head).

of their Japanese counterparts.
Figure 2 shows an example of a head finalized

Chinese sentence based on the output from Chi-
nese Enju shown in Figure 1. Notice that the
coordination exception rule described in (Isozaki
et al., 2010b) also applies to Chinese reordering.
This exception rule says that child nodes are not
swapped if the node is a coordination2. Another
exception rule is for punctuation symbols, which
are also preserved in their original order. In this
case, as can be seen in the example in Figure 2, the
nodes of c3, c6, and c8 had not been swapped with
their dependency. In this account, only the verb
“qu” had been moved to the end of the sentence,
following the same word order as its Japanese
translation.

3.2 Discrepancies in Head Definition

Head Finalization relies on the idea that head-
dependent relations are largely consistent among
different languages while word orders are differ-
ent. However, in Chinese, there has been much
debate on the definition of head3, possibly because
Chinese has fewer surface syntactic features than
other languages like English and Japanese. This
causes some discrepancies between the definitions

2Coordination is easily detected in the output of
Enju; it is marked by the attributes xcat="COOD" or
schema="coord-left/right" as shown in Figure 1.

3In this paper, we only consider the syntactic head.

of the head in Chinese and Japanese, which leads
to undesirable reordering of Chinese sentences.
Specifically, in preliminary experiments we ob-
served unexpected reorderings that are caused by
the differences in the head definitions, which we
describe below.

3.2.1 Aspect Particle

Although Chinese has no syntactic tense marker,
three aspect particles following verbs can be used
to identify the tense semantically. They are “le0”
(did), “zhe0” (doing), and “guo4” (done), and
their counterparts in Japanese are “ta”, “teiru”,
and “ta”, respectively. Both the first word and
third word can represent the past tense, but the
third one is more often used in the past perfect.

The Chinese parser4 treated aspect particles as
dependents of verbs, whereas their Japanese coun-
terparts are identified as the head. For exam-
ple in Table 15, “qu” (go) and “guo” (done)
aligned with “i” and “tta”, respectively. How-
ever, since “guo” is treated as a dependent of
“qu”, by directly implementing the Head Final
Chinese (HFC), the sentence will be reordered like

4The discussions in this section presuppose the syntactic
analysis done by Chinese Enju, but most of the analysis is
consistent with the common explanation for Chinese syntax.

5English translation (En); Chinese original sentence
(Ch); reordered Chinese by Head-Final Chinese (HFC); re-
ordered Chinese by Refined Head-Final Chinese (R-HFC)
and Japanese translation (Ja).

60



HFC in Table 1, which does not follow the word
order of the Japanese (Ja) translation. In contrast,
the reordered sentence from refined-HFC (R-HFC)
can be translated monotonically.

En I have been to Tokyo.
Ch wo qu guo dongjing.

HFC wo dongjing guo qu.
R-HFC wo dongjing qu guo.

Ja watashi (wa) Tokyo (ni) i tta.

Table 1: An example for Aspect Particle. Best word
alignment Ja-Ch (En): “watashi” – “wo”(I); “Tokyo” –
“dongjing” (Tokyo); “i” – “qu” (been); “tta” – “guo”
(have).

3.2.2 Adverbial Modifier ‘bu4’

Both in Chinese and Japanese, verb phrase mod-
ifiers typically occur in pre-verbal positions, espe-
cially when the modifiers are adverbs. Since ad-
verbial modifiers are dependents in both Chinese
and Japanese, head finalization works perfectly for
them. However, there is an exceptional adverb,
“bu4”, which means negation and is usually trans-
lated into “nai”, which is always at the end of the
sentence in Japanese and thus is the head. For ex-
ample in Table 2, the word “kan” (watch) will be
identified as the head and the word “bu” is its de-
pendent; on the contrary, in the Japanese transla-
tion (Ja), the word “nai”, which is aligned with
“bu”, will be identified as the head. Therefore,
the Head Final Chinese is not in the same order,
but the reordered sentence by R-HFC obtained the
same order with the Japanese translation.

En I do not watch TV.
Ch wo bu kan dianshi.

HFC wo dianshi bu kan.
R-HFC wo dianshi kan bu.

Ja watashi (wa) terebi (wo) mi nai.

Table 2: An example for Adverbial Modifier bu4.
Best word alignment Ja-Ch (En): “watashi” – “wo” (I);
“terebi” – “dianshi” (TV); “mi” – “kan” (watch); “nai”
– “bu” (do not).

3.2.3 Sentence-final Particle

Sentence-final particles often appear at the end
of a sentence to express a speaker’s attitude:
e.g. “ba0, a0” in Chinese, and “naa, nee” in
Japanese. Although they appear in the same posi-
tion in both Chinese and Japanese, in accordance
with the differences of head definition, they are
identified as the dependent in Chinese while they
are the head in Japanese. For example in Table 3,
since “a0” was identified as the dependent, it had
been reordered to the beginning of the sentence
while its Japanese translation “nee” is at the end
of the sentence as the head. Likewise, by refining
the HFC, we can improve the word alignment.

En It is good weather.
Ch tianqi zhenhao a.

HFC a tianqi zhenhao.
R-HFC tianqi zhenhao a.

Ja ii tennki desu nee.

Table 3: An example for Sentence-final Particle.
Best word alignment Ja-Ch (En): “tennki” – “tianqi”
(weather); “ii” – “zhenhao” (good); “nee” – “a’ (None).

3.2.4 Et cetera

In Chinese, there are two expressions for rep-
resenting the meaning of “and other things” with
one Chinese character: “deng3” and “deng3
deng3”, which are both identified as dependent
of a noun. In contrast, in Japanese, “nado” is al-
ways the head because it appears as the right-most
word in a noun phrase. Table 4 shows an example.

En Fruits include apples, etc.
Ch shuiguo baokuo pingguo deng.

HFC shuiguo deng pingguo baokuo.
R-HFC shuiguo pingguo deng baokuo.

Ja kudamono (wa) ringo nado (wo)
fukunde iru.

Table 4: An example for Et cetera. Best word alignment
Ja-Ch (En): “kudamono” – “shuiguo” (Fruits); “ringo”
– “pingguo” (apples); “nado” – “deng” (etc.); “fukunde
iru” – “baokuo” (include).

61



AS Aspect particle
SP Sentence-final particle
ETC et cetera (i.e. deng3 and deng3 deng3)
IJ Interjection
PU Punctuation
CC Coordinating conjunction

Table 5: The list of POSs for exception reordering rules

3.3 Refinement of HFC

In the preceding sections, we have discussed syn-
tactic constructions that cause wrong application
of Head Finalization to Chinese sentences. Fol-
lowing the observations, we propose a method to
improve the original Head Finalization reordering
rule to obtain better alignment with Japanese.

The idea is simple: we define a list of POSs,
and when we find one of them as a dependent
child of the node, we do not apply reordering. Ta-
ble 5 shows the list of POSs we define in the cur-
rent implementation6. While interjections are not
discussed in detail, we should obviously not re-
order to interjections because they are position-
independent. The rules for PU and CC are ba-
sically equivalent to the exception rules proposed
by (Isozaki et al., 2010b).

4 Experiments

The corpus we used as training data comes
from the China Workshop on Machine Transla-
tion (CWMT) (Zhao et al., 2011). This is a
Japanese-Chinese parallel corpus in the news do-
main, containing 281, 322 sentence pairs. We also
collected another Japanese-Chinese parallel cor-
pus from news containing 529, 769 sentences and
merged it with the CWMT corpus to create an ex-
tended version of the CWMT corpus. We will re-
fer to this corpus as “CWMT ext.” We split an in-
verted multi-reference set into a development and a
test set containing 1, 000 sentences each. In these
two sets, the Chinese input was different, but the
Japanese reference was identical. We think that
this split does not pose any severe problem to the
comparison fairness of the experiment, since no
new phrases are added during tuning and the ex-
perimental conditions remain equal for all tested

6The POSs are from Penn Chinese Treebank.

Ch Ja

CWMT

Sentences 282K
Run. words 2.5M 3.2M
Avg. sent. leng. 8.8 11.5
Vocabulary 102K 42K

CWMT ext.

Sentences 811K
Run. words 14.7M 17M
Avg. sent. leng. 18.1 20.9
Vocabulary 249K 95K

Dev.

Sentences 1000
Run. words 29.9K 35.7K
Avg. sent. leng. 29.9 35.7
OoV w.r.t. CWMT 485 106
OoV w.r.t. CWMT ext. 244 53

Test

Sentences 1000
Run. words 25.8K 35.7K
Avg. sent. leng. 25.8 35.7
OoV w.r.t. CWMT 456 106
OoV w.r.t. CWMT ext. 228 53

Table 6: Characteristics of CWMT and extended
CWMT Chinese-Japanese corpus. Dev. stands for De-
velopment, OoV for “Out of Vocabulary” words, K for
thousands of elements, and M for millions of elements.
Data statistics were collected after tokenizing.

methods. Detailed Corpus statistics can be found
in Table 6.

To parse Chinese sentences, we used Chinese
Enju (Yu et al., 2010), an HPSG-based parser
trained with the Chinese HPSG treebank converted
from Penn Chinese Treebank. Chinese Enju re-
quires segmented and POS-tagged sentences to
do parsing. We used the Stanford Chinese seg-
menter (Chang et al., 2008) and Stanford POS-
tagger (Toutanova et al., 2003) to obtain the seg-
mentation and POS-tagging of the Chinese side of
the training, development, and test sets.

The baseline system was trained following
the instructions of recent SMT evaluation cam-
paigns (Callison-Burch et al., 2010) by using the
MT toolkit Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) in its de-
fault configuration. Phrase pairs were extracted
from symmetrized word alignments and distor-
tions generated by GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003)
using the combination of heuristics “grow-diag-
final-and” and “msd-bidirectional-fe”. The lan-
guage model was a 5-gram language model es-
timated on the target side of the parallel cor-
pora by using the modified Kneser-Ney smooth-
ing (Chen and Goodman, 1999) implemented in

62



the SRILM (Stolcke, 2002) toolkit. The weights
of the log-linear combination of feature functions
were estimated by using MERT (Och, 2003) on the
development set described in Table 6.

The effectiveness of the reorderings proposed
in Section 3.3 was assessed by using two preci-
sion metrics and two error metrics on translation
quality. The first evaluation metric is BLEU (Pap-
ineni et al., 2002), a very common accuracy metric
in SMT that measures N -gram precision, with a
penalty for too short sentences. The second eval-
uation metric was RIBES (Isozaki et al., 2010a), a
recent precision metric used to evaluate translation
quality between structurally different languages. It
uses notions on rank correlation coefficients and
precision measures. The third evaluation metric is
TER (Snover et al., 2006), another error metric that
computes the minimum number of edits required
to convert translated sentences into its correspond-
ing references. Possible edits include insertion,
deletion, substitution of single words, and shifts of
word sequences. The fourth evaluation metric is
WER, an error metric inspired in the Levenshtein
distance at word level. BLEU, WER, and TER
were used to provide a sense of comparison but
they do not significantly penalize long-range word
order errors. For this reason, RIBES was used to
account for this aspect of translation quality.

The baseline system was trained and tuned us-
ing the same configuration setup described in this
section, but no reordering rule was implemented at
the preprocessing stage.

Three systems have been run to translate the test
set for comparison when the systems were trained
using the two training data sets. They are the
baseline system, the system consisting in the naı̈ve
implementation of HF reordering, and the system
with refined HFC reordering rules. Assessment of
translation quality can be found in Table 7.

As can be observed in Table 7, the translation
quality, as measured by precision and error met-
rics, was consistently and significantly increased
when the HFC reordering rule was used and was
significantly improved further when the refinement
proposed in this work was used. Specifically, the
BLEU score increased from 19.94 to 20.79 when
the CWMT corpus was used, and from 23.17 to
24.14 when the extended CWMT corpus was used.

AS SP ETC IJ PU COOD
3.8% 0.8% 1.3% 0.0%* 21.0% 38.3%

Table 8: Weighted recall of each exception rule during
reordering on CWMT ext. training data, dev data, and
test data. (* actual value 0.0016%.)

Table 8 shows the recall of each exception rule
listed in Section 3, and was computed by counting
the times an exception rule was triggered divided
by the number of times the head finalization rule
applied. Data was collected for CWMT ext. train-
ing, dev and test sets. Although the exception rules
related to aspect particles, Et cetera, sentence-final
particles and interjections have a comparatively
lower frequency of application than punctuation
or coordination exception rules, the improvements
they led to are significant.

5 Error Analysis

In Section 3 we have analyzed syntactic differ-
ences between Chinese and Japanese that led to
the design of an effective refinement. A manual
error analysis of the results of our refined reorder-
ing rules showed that some more reordering issues
remain and, although they are not side effects of
our proposed rule, they are worth mentioning in
this separate section.

5.1 Serial Verb Construction

Serial verb construction is a phenomenon occur-
ring in Chinese, where several verbs are put to-
gether as one unit without any conjunction be-
tween them. The relationship between these
verbs can be progressive or parallel. Apparently,
Japanese has a largely corresponding construc-
tion, which indicates that no reordering should
be applied. An example to illustrate this fact in
Chinese is “weishi (maintain) shenhua (deepen)
zhongriguanxi (Japan-China relations) de
(of) gaishan (improvement) jidiao (basic
tone).”7 The two verbs “weishi” (in Japanese,
iji) and “shenhua” (in Japanese, shinka) are
used together, and they follow the same order as
in Japanese: “nicchukankei (Japan-China re-

7English translation: Maintain and deepen the improved
basic tone of Japan-China relations.

63



CWMT CWMT ext.
BLEU RIBES TER WER BLEU RIBES TER WER

baseline 16.74 71.24 70.86 77.45 20.70 74.21 66.10 72.36
HFC 19.94 73.49 65.19 71.39 23.17 75.35 61.38 67.74
refined HFC 20.79 75.09 64.91 70.39 24.14 77.17 59.67 65.31

Table 7: Evaluation of translation quality of a test set when CWMT and CWMT extended corpus were used for
training. Results are given in terms of BLEU, RIBES, TER, and WER for baseline, head finalization, and proposed
refinement of head finalization reordering rules.

lations) no (of) kaizan (improvement) kityo
(basic tone) wo iji (maintain) shinka (deepen)
suru (do).”

5.2 Complementizer

A “complementizer” is a particle used to intro-
duce a complement. In English, a very common
complementizer is the word “that” when making a
clausal complement, while in Chinese it can de-
note other types of word, such as verbs, adjec-
tives or quantifiers. The complementizer is iden-
tified as the dependent of the verb that it modi-
fies. For instance, a Chinese sentence: “wo (I)
mang wan le (have finished the work).” This
can be translated into Japanese: “watashi (I) wa
shigoto (work) wo owa tta (have finished).” In
Chinese, the verb “mang” is the head while “wan”
is the complementizer, and its Japanese counter-
part “owa tta” has the same word order.

However, during the reordering, “mang” will be
placed at the end of the sentence and “wan” in the
beginning, leading to an inconsistency with respect
to the Japanese translation where the complemen-
tizer “tta” is the head.

5.3 Verbal Nominalization and Nounal
Verbalization

As discussed by Guo (2009), compared to English
and Japanese, Chinese has little inflectional mor-
phology, that is, no inflection to denote tense, case,
etc. Thus, words are extremely flexible, making
verb nominalization and noun verbalization appear
frequently and commonly without any conjugation
or declension. As a result, it is difficult to do dis-
ambiguation during POS tagging and parsing. For
example, the Chinese word “kaifa” may have
two syntactic functions: verb (develop) and noun
(development). Thus, it is difficult to reliably tag

without considering the context. In contrast, in
Japanese, “suru” can be used to identify verbs.
For example, “kaihatu suru” (develop) is a
verb and “kaihatu” (development) is a noun.
This ambiguity is prone to not only POS tagging
error but also parsing error, and thus affects the
identification of heads, which may lead to incor-
rect reordering.

5.4 Adverbial Modifier

Unlike the adverb “bu4” we discussed in Sec-
tion 3.2, the ordinary adverbial modifier comes
directly before the verb it modifies both in Chi-
nese and Japanese, but not in English. Nev-
ertheless, in accordance with the principle of
identifying the head for Chinese, the adverb
will be treated as the dependent and it will
not be reordered following the verb it modi-
fied. As a result, the alignment between adverbs
and verbs is non-monotonic. This can be ob-
served in the Chinese sentence “guojia (coun-
try) yanli (severely) chufa (penalize) jiage
(price) weifa (violation) xingwei (behavior)”8,
and its Japanese translation: “kuni (country) wa
kakaku (price) no ihou (violation) koui (be-
havior) wo kibisiku (severely) syobatu (penal-
ize).” Both in Chinese and Japanese, the adverbial
modifier “yanli” and “kibisiku” are directly
in front of the verb “chufa” and “syobatu”, re-
spectively. However, the verb in Chinese is identi-
fied as the head and will be reordered to the end of
the sentence without the adverb.

8English translation: The country severely penalizes vio-
lations of price restrictions.

64



5.5 POS tagging and Parsing Errors

There were word reordering issues not caused
solely by differences in syntactic structures. Here
we summarize two that are difficult to remedy dur-
ing reordering and that are hard to avoid since re-
ordering rules are highly dependent on the tagger
and parser.

• POS tagging errors

In Chinese, for example, the word “Iran”
was tagged as “VV” or “JJ” instead of “NR”.
This led to identifying “Iran” as a head in
accordance with the head definition in Chi-
nese, and it was reordered undesirably.

• Parsing errors

For example, in the Chinese verb phrase
“touzi (invest) 20 yi (200 million)
meiyuan (dollars)”, “20” and “yi” were
identified as dependent of “touzi” and
“meiyuan”, respectively, which led to an
unsuitable reordering for posterior word
alignment.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In the present work, we have proposed novel
Chinese-to-Japanese reordering rules inspired
in (Isozaki et al., 2010b) based on linguistic analy-
sis on Chinese HPSG and differences among Chi-
nese and Japanese. Although a simple implemen-
tation of HF to reorder Chinese sentences per-
forms well, translation quality was substantially
improved further by including linguistic knowl-
edge into the refinement of the reordering rules.

In Section 5, we found more patterns on reorder-
ing issues when reordering Chinese sentences to
resemble Japanese word order. The extraction of
those patterns and their effective implementation
may lead to further improvements in translation
quality, so we are planning to explore this possi-
bility.

In this work, syntactic information from a deep
parser has been used to reorder words better. We
believe that using semantic information can fur-
ther increase the expressive power of reordering
rules. With that objective, Chinese Enju can be
used since it provides the semantic head of nodes

and can interpret sentences by using their semantic
dependency.

Acknowledgments

This work was mainly developed during an intern-
ship at NTT Communication Science Laborato-
ries. We would like to thank Prof. Yusuke Miyao
for his invaluable support on this work.

References

P.F. Brown, S.A. Della Pietra, V.J. Della Pietra, and
R.L. Mercer. 1993. The mathematics of ma-
chine translation. In Computational Linguistics, vol-
ume 19, pages 263–311, June.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
Kay Peterson, and Omar Zaidan, editors. 2010. Pro-
ceedings of the joint 5th workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation and MetricsMATR. Association
for Computational Linguistics, July.

Pi-Chuan Chang, Michel Galley, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2008. Optimizing Chinese word seg-
mentation for machine translation performance. In
Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on SMT, pages
224–232, Columbus, Ohio. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Stanley F. Chen and Joshua Goodman. 1999. An
empirical study of smoothing techniques for lan-
guage modeling. Computer Speech and Language,
4(13):359–393.

Michael Collins, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona Kučerová.
2005. Clause restructuring for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL ’05, pages 531–540, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Vivian James Cook and Mark Newson. 1988. Chom-
sky’s Universal Grammar: An introduction. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.

Naoki Fukui. 1992. Theory of Projection in Syntax.
CSLI Publisher and Kuroshio Publisher.

Michel Galley, Mark Hopkins, Kevin Knight, and
Daniel Marcu. 2004. Whats in a translation rule?
In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL.

Qian Gao. 2008. Word order in mandarin: Reading and
speaking. In Proceedings of the 20th North Ameri-
can Conference on Chinese Linguistics (NACCL-20),
volume 2, pages 611–626.

Dmitriy Genzel. 2010. Automatically learning source-
side reordering rules for large scale machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, COLING ’10,

65



pages 376–384, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Yuqing Guo. 2009. Treebank-based acquisition of
Chinese LFG resources for parsing and generation.
Ph.D. thesis, Dublin City University.

Hideki Isozaki, Tsutomu Hirao, Kevin Duh, Katsuhito
Sudoh, and Hajime Tsukada. 2010a. Automatic
evaluation of translation quality for distant language
pairs. In Proceedings of Empirical Methods on Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP).

Hideki Isozaki, Katsuhito Sudoh, Hajime Tsukada, and
Kevin Duh. 2010b. Head finalization: A simple re-
ordering rule for sov languages. In Proceedings of
WMTMetricsMATR, pages 244–251.

P. Koehn, F. J. Och, and D. Marcu. 2003. Sta-
tistical phrase-based translation. In Proceedings
HLT/NAACL’03, pages 48–54.

Philipp Koehn et al. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings
of the ACL Demo and Poster Sessions, 2007, pages
177–180, June 25–27.

Yusuke Miyao and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2008. Feature for-
est models for probabilistic hpsg parsing. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34:35–80, March.

F. J. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A systematic comparison
of various statistical alignment models. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2004. The align-
ment template approach to statistical machine trans-
lation. Computational Linguistics.

Franz J. Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
41st annual conference of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 2003, pages 160–167, July 7–
12.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: A method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th annual conference of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 2002, pages 311–318, July 6–
12.

Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, Lin-
nea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A study of
translation edit rate with targeted human annotation.
In Proceedings of Association for Machine Transla-
tion in the Americas, pages 223–231.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM – an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the 7th
international conference on Spoken Language Pro-
cessing, 2002, pages 901–904, September 16–20.

Christoph Tillmann. 2004. A unigram orientation
model for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of HLT-NAACL 2004: Short Papers, HLT-
NAACL-Short ’04, pages 101–104, Stroudsburg,

PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-
speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network.
In Proceedings OF HLT-NAACL, pages 252–259.

Chao Wang, Michael Collins, and Philipp Koehn.
2007. Chinese syntactic reordering for statistical
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2007
Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 737–
745, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Xianchao Wu, Katsuhito Sudoh, Kevin Duh, Hajime
Tsukada, and Masaaki Nagata. 2011. Extracting
pre-ordering rules from predicate-argument struc-
tures. In Proceedings of 5th International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing, pages 29–
37, Chiang Mai, Thailand, November. Asian Feder-
ation of Natural Language Processing.

Fei Xia and Michael McCord. 2004. Improving a sta-
tistical mt system with automatically learned rewrite
patterns. In Proceedings of the 20th international
conference on Computational Linguistics, COLING
’04, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Peng Xu, Jaeho Kang, Michael Ringgaard, and Franz
Och. 2009. Using a dependency parser to improve
smt for subject-object-verb languages. In Proceed-
ings of Human Language Technologies: The 2009
Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
NAACL ’09, pages 245–253, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Kun Yu, Yusuke Miyao, Xiangli Wang, Takuya Mat-
suzaki, and Jun ichi Tsujii. 2010. Semi-
automatically developing chinese hpsg grammar
from the penn chinese treebank for deep parsing. In
COLING (Posters)’10, pages 1417–1425.

Kun Yu, Yusuke Miyao, Takuya Matsuzaki, Xiangli
Wang, and Junichi Tsujii. 2011. Analysis of the dif-
ficulties in chinese deep parsing. In Proceedings of
the 12th International Conference on Parsing Tech-
nologies, pages 48–57.

R. Zens, F.J. Och, and H. Ney. 2002. Phrase-based
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
KI’02, pages 18–32.

Hong-Mei Zhao, Ya-Juan Lv, Guo-Sheng Ben, Yun
Huang, and Qun Liu. 2011. Evaluation report
for the 7th china workshop on machine translation
(cwmt2011). The 7th China Workshop on Machine
Translation (CWMT2011).

66


