



















































Resolution for Pronouns in Tamil Using CRF


Proceedings of the Workshop on Machine Translation and Parsing in Indian Languages (MTPIL-2012), pages 103–112,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Resolution for Pronouns in Tamil Using CRF
Akilandeswari, A and  Sobha, Lalitha Devi

AU-KBC Research Center, MIT Campus of Anna University
Chennai,India

akila@au-kbc.org, sobha@au-kbc.org

ABSTRACT

The main goal of this paper is to develop an automatic anaphora resolution system for Tamil. 
Here we present the complete analysis of pronominals in Tamil discourse.  We have analysed 
manually the corpus which contain Tamil pronominal aval, avan, atu and its suffixes. Using the  
analysis we come up with set of features to identify the anaphoric pronouns and its antecedents.  
We used the machine learning algorithm, Conditional Random Fields to this problem. The results  
are encouraging. 

KEYWORDS : anaphora, pronoun, antecedent, pronominal, machine learning, conditional random 
fields. 

103



1 Introduction

Anaphora resolution is an important  task in  natural language processing applications 
such as Information Retrieval, Information Extraction, Question Answering system, Text 
summarization etc. The process of finding the antecedent of an anaphor is anaphora resolution. 
Anaphora is the reference that point to the previous item. Antecedent is the entity to which the 
anaphor refers. The Tamil  pronominals are 'avan', 'aval' and 'atu' are  the third person singular 
pronouns. 'atu' is third person singular neuter pronoun. The relation that is established between a 
pronoun and its antecedent helps to provide more information that can be extracted. Here we use 
conditional random fields (CRFs) to resolve this task, the results are encouraging.

2 Previous Work

Anaphora resolution is one of the difficult problems in the field of NLP. It is an area  
well researched for many languages in the last few decades. There are several approaches used in  
resolving pronominal such as rule based, knowledge based and machine learning.

One of the early works in pronominal resolution is by Hobb's naive approach, which 
relies on semantic information (Hobbs. J,1978). Carter with Wilkas' common sense inference 
theory came up with a system (Carter. D,1987). Carbonell and Brown's introduced an approach 
of combining the multiple knowledge system (Carbonell. J.  G. & Brown. R .D, 1988). The 
initial approaches, where broadly classified as knowledge poor and rich approach.  Syntax based 
approach by Hobb (naive approach), centering theory based approaches (Joshi, A. K. & Kuhn. 
S, 1979; Joshi, A. K. & Weinstein.S, 1981) and factor/indicator based approach such as Lappin 
and Leass’  method of identifying the antecedent using a set of salience factors and weights 
associated to it. This approach requires deep syntactic analysis. Ruslan Mitkov introduced two 
approaches based on set of indicators, MOA (Mitkov’s Original Approach) and MARS 
(Mitkov’s Anaphora Resolution System) (Mitkov. R,1998). These indicators return a value based 
on certain aspects of the context in which the anaphor and the possible antecedent can occur. The 
return values range from -1 to 2. MOA does not make use of syntactic analysis, whereas MARS 
system makes use of shallow dependency analysis. 

There are very few works done in anaphora resolution with respect to Indian Languages. 
Some of the works done are VASISTH a rule based system which works with shallow parsing 
and exploits the rich morphology in Indian languages for identifying the antecedent for anaphors 
(Sobha.L & Patnaik.B.N, 1999). (Sobha.L, 2007) used salience measure for resolving 
pronominals in  Tamil. (Murthi.K.N, 2007) have looked into the anaphora  resolution in Tamil, 
using Machine Learning technique: Linear Regression and compared it with salience  factors. 
Dhar worked on “A method for pronominal anaphora resolution in Bengali (Dhar.A & Garain.U, 
2008; Sobha.L & Pralayankar.P, 2008) worked on  "Algorithm for Anaphor Resolution in 
Sanskrit".  Resolving Pronominal Anaphora in Hindi Using Hobb’s   Algorithm was done by 
Kamalesh Dutta. 

In ICON 2011, NLP tool contest on Anaphora Resolution for Indian Languages was 
held.  The tool  contest  considered the languages  such as  Bengali,  Hindi, Odiya,  Marathi  and 
Tamil. In each language different methods was approached by the participants.

104



3 Anaphora In Tamil

Tamil belongs to south Dravidian family of languages. It has post-positions. It is 
nominative-accusative language like the other Dravidian languages. The subject of Tamil 
sentence is mostly nominative. There are constructions with certain verbs that require dative 
subjects and possessive subjects. Tamil has PNG (person, number and gender) agreement. A 
pronoun must agree in number, gender and person with antecedent. There are many types of 
anaphora. The types are pronominal anaphora, possessive anaphora, reflexive anaphora, 
demonstrative anaphora, relative anaphora. Generally anaphors have antecedents which we say 
as  anaphoric. Anaphors which is not having antecedent in the text or does not refer any text 
before is non-anaphoric. We have taken Tamil pronominals He - avan, She - aval, It – atu and its 
suffixes. Let us classify the Tamil pronominals as reflexive pronoun, possessive pronoun and 
non-possessive pronoun. They are given below.

Reflexive Pronominals:

Himself  avane
 he+e(clitic marker)

avaNAka
he+benefactive

Herself avaLe
 she+e(clitic marker)

avaLAka
he+benefactive

Itself atuve
It+e(clitic marker) 

atAka
It+benefactive

ate
It+e(clitic marker) 

The reflexive pronoun has two morphemes 'e' clitic marker and 'aaka' benefactive case 
marker.

Posessive Pronominals:

His avanutaiya
he+possessive

avanatu
he+possessive

avanin
he+possessive

Her avalutaiya
 she+possessive

avalatu
she+possessive

avalin she+possessive

Its  athanutaiya
It+posseseive

athanatu
It+posseseive

athanin
It+posseseive

athan
Its

Non-posessive Pronominals for (avan, aval):

avanukku  -  He+dat,  avaLukku  -  she+dat. Similarly aval, avaL and atu is suffixed 
with case markers such as accusative,locative sociative,ablative, instrumental  are considered to 
be non-possessive pronominal.

3.1 Examples for Tamil Pronominals
Example 1:
   In this example, anaphora and antecedent are residing in the same sentence.
    {piimani    cenru    ciRaippattu}  NF {pinpu     krishnan   avanaii     kaapaaRRinaar.}MCL
     Bhiman    went     caught prisoned     after        Krishnan   he+acc      rescued
     'Bhiman caught prison, after Krishnan rescued him.'

105



In the above example  the antecedent  is piimani , which is subject and nominative. 
proper noun of previous clause. Even though krishnan is the nominative proper noun which is 
immediate to the anaphor avanai, krishnan cannot be the antecedent. A proper noun which is 
followed by a pronoun with or without case marker, cannot be the antecedent for the pronoun 
except in the case of example 8.

Example 2:
   In this example, there are two sentences 2.0 and 2.1. The anaphora is in 2.0 sentence and the 
antecedent is in previous sentence 2.1.
2.1 Intirajiti   RamarooTu   yutatil tooRRuppooi}NF {ivitatil         ampikaiyai            vazhipaaTu
     Indirajith      Ramar+soc   war+loc     lost            this place+loc   ampikay+acc       worshipped
     ceytaan.}MCL
     done+3msg
     'Indirajith lost in the war when fought with Ramar, he worshipped goddess in this place'.
2.0 {avani  pinnar   mooTcam        aTaintaan.}MCL
       He         after       wisdom       reached+3sgm
        'After he got wisdom'.

In the above example the antecedent is Intirajiti , which is subject and nominative 
proper noun in the previous sentence to the anaphor. Even though RamaroTu is a proper noun 
with sociative case marker, it cannot be the antecedent. The  proper noun Intirajiti  with 
nominative case marker is the most probable antecedent. avani.is the nominative anaphor.

Example 3:
3.3 {Raamanj    aluvalakattiLiruntu     viitirku    vantu,}NF {Siitaavaii   paartan.}MCL
        Raman          office+loc+ abl      home+dat   come            sita+acc    saw+3sgm
        'Raman came from the office and saw Sita'.
3.2 {avaLi tanakuu uTampu  cariyillai  enRu connataal}CON {avaLaii   maruthuvamanaikku
        She     her+dat    health   not good     is    told+ins              she+acc       hospital+dat
        azhaittu   cenraan.}MCL
        taken       went+3sgm
       ' He took her to hospital, because she said that she is not feeling well.'
3.1 {pookum   vazhiyil}RP{ Siitaavini    toozhi,   Giita       etiril            vanthaaL}MCL
        Going     way+loc           sita+gen     friend    geetha    opposite        came+3sgf
        'On the way Sita's friend Gita came.'
3.0 {pinnar viiTiRku     vantavuTan, avanj  avaLukkui  roTTiyum  paalum  tayaar       ceytu      
       After     home+dat     came           he    she+dat      roti+um    milk      made       prepared
       koTuttan.} MCL
       give+3sgm
      'After coming  home he prepared bread and milk  for her.'

In this example, in the 3.0  sentence there are two pronouns avan and avaLukku. 
Eventhough avaLukku refers Siitaavini , Gita is the nominative proper noun which could be the 
most probable antecedent according salience factor. Still ambiguity remains whether the 
antecedent is Gita or  Siitaavini . In  sentence  3.2  Raman is a subject , which is dropped. Hence 
avani  in the sentence 3.0 which refers to Raman which is in the 3.3 sentence. 

106



Example 4:
4.1 Ramani   aluvalagathil  iruntu    viTTiRku       vanthu}NF {kuzhantaikaLotuj
      Raman      office+loc     from     home+dat       come               children+soc
      viLaiyaaTinaan.}MCL
       played+sgm
      'Raman came from office and played with children.'
4.0 {avani   avarkaLotuj    viLayaaTiviTTu} NF {avarkaLukkuj      inippu      koTuttaan.}MCL
        He         their+soc          played                           them                  sweet     gave+3sgm
       'After he played with them, he gave sweets to them.'

According to  the agreement of person, number and gender, here in this example 
particularly the number i.e singular or plural is distinguished between avan and avarkal. And also 
in the above example if we replace kuzhantaikaL as kuzhantai, the gender, number  variation is 
there.  For kuzhantaikaL  – neuter, plural, 3  and its possible pronoun is avarkaL.
           For kuzhantai         – neuter, singular, 3 and its possible pronouns are atan, atu, atarku..

3.2 Examples for 'atu'
Example 5: 
5.1 {Naakaraajar  muulastaanatil innum   oru naakami   uyiroTu irukkiRatu.} MCL
        Naakarajar     temple+loc        still      one snake       alive       be+3n.
       ‘Still a snake is alive in Nakarajar temple’.
5.0 {atui  atikkaTi paktarkaLukku kaaTchi     tarukiRatu}RP {enpatu kuRippTattakkatu.} MCL
         It       often      deovotee+dat   dharshan  give+3sn                is            remarkable
        ‘It is remarkable that it often gives its appearance to devotees’

In the above example the anaphor atu refers the antecedent which is animate and non-
human living being, a noun phrase in the previous sentence.

Example 6:
     {piRaku poonkuzhali,  ”cakravarttikku uTampu  cukamillai enRu collkiRaarkalei,}COM 
          After  poonkuzhali      king+dat           health        not good   be          told+3pl                
     {atui         unmaitaanee?” enraal.}MCL
        it             true?                said+3sgf
     ‘After that Poonkuzhali said , “Everybody is telling king is not well”, is it true?.’
      Anaphor - atui,  Antecedent - Immediate complement clause

From the analysis of  'atu', it refers noun phrase such as place, object, animals, events or 
reasons, or sometimes behaves as deictic. atu refers noun phrases but sometimes it does not 
refers noun phrase instead it refers an event, reasons, a statement etc ... when it is followed by, 
atu+adverb, atu+postposition etc. 

eg: atu kaarNamaaka
       It        because+ben
       'Because of it'.
Similarly, some  examples are, atu een?/ It why?, atu pola /It like, atu polave/It like+e(clitic 
marker).

 From these examples we concluded that the antecedent is a noun phrase, or verb phrase or 
combination of both. The noun phrase kind of antecedents are either subject with case markers 
nominative or dative or possessive in Tamil. The noun phrase antecedents are taken for our work 

107



to resolve. The analysis of 'atu' reveals that its antecedents are mostly events or reasons which 
consists of  noun phrase and verb phrase. Also it refers noun phrase. From the analysis, we found 
a set of features to build a system for anaphora resolution. 

4 Our Methodology

 In this task we have taken five sentences above from the anaphor occurred sentence and 
applied the salience measures and few other text information as our features to train our system. 
In machine learning technique feature identification is very vital part to give best systems. The 
features we used are discussed below.

4.1 Features for anaphora resolution
The corpus is manually analysed and features were identified. The features are classified 

into six categories such as word, POS, chunk, syntactic information, clause, Named Entity 
Recognition. The syntactic information consists of word category,gender,number,person. The 
detailed features given in train and test file are sentence recency, subject emphasis, object, proper 
noun, case of noun phrase, case of anaphor, current clause where anaphor occurs, immediate 
clause and non-immediate clause of anaphor of the sentence, whether a proper noun followed by 
a pronoun? and NE.

Since from our analysis, the pronominal avan or aval always refers some person, 
ultimately a proper noun. avan or aval are the pronoun which are always traverse  backward 
from the current sentence and to other previous sentence to found the antecedent. During the 
traverse it may also refers the same person as pronoun like

(Antecedent)   NNP     NN (PRP)    NN(PRP)   PRP (anaphor)
                            Sita  avaluteya     avalukku    aval
  pacu/naakam/penna   athanuteya     atharkku    atu
  cow/snake/pen

Hence it is observed that subject or object which is  noun or proper noun in the sentence 
or clause could be the most probable antecedents for the pronoun.  From the analysis we can 
conclude that, in Indian languages, a nominative noun phrase, a possessive noun phrase with a 
nominative head and a dative noun phrase could be a subject of a sentence. So we have three 
types of subject nouns and in that, the most common  the  nominative noun. Hence nominative 
proper noun is given a very high score of 80 and the other two are given a score of 50 each. An 
NP with accusative case gets the next highest score of 40. NPs with other case markings (N. 
other) get a score of 30.The current sentence in which the pronoun occurs gets a score of 50 and 
this gets reduced by 10 for each preceding sentence.

S.no Features Definitions

1 Current Sentence Sentence under consideration

2 Current Clause Clause in which the anaphor occurs
3 Immediate clause Clause next to the current clause
4 Non-Immediate clause Neither an immediate nor a current clause
5 NNP/NN-Nom Any proper noun/noun nominative

108



6. NNP/NN-Poss Any proper noun/noun possessive
7 NNP/NN-Dat Any proper noun/noun Dative
8 NNP/NN-acc Any proper noun/noun accusative
9 NNP followed by any pronoun 

with or without case marker?
 NNP followed by immediately by pronoun 
with any of the case marker?

Table 1 – Features

The example 7 illustrates the case where the pronominal occurring after the proper noun 
which is the subject of the sentence cannot have it as the antecedent for the pronominal. Only if 
such a pronominal is reflexive then it is possible to have the subject as the antecedent. This rule 
has exceptional case where the pronominal avanai or avalai acts as a reflexive. Example 8 
illustrates the exceptional case.

Example 7:
         KrishNan   avanai        azhaitaan.
         Krishnan    he+acc         called+3sgm
         'Krishnan called him'

         In this example avanai it never refers Krishnan, an immediate pronoun. 

Example 8:
          KrishNan  avanai      maaRRikoNTtaan
          Krishnan   he+acc     change+do+3sgm
          'Krishnan  changed  himself.'

In the case of reflexive sentence as in the above example, KrishNan is a nominative 
proper noun which is followed by anaphor avanai with accusative case marker,  refers KrishNan. 
Here krishnan talks about himself. So here avanai refers KrishNan.

5 Corpus

The corpora we have considered for this work is from the web. We have taken the web data 
from tourism domain which consists 10000 sentences. Annotation guidelines are formulated and 
tagged with the following guidelines. To annotate the corpus with anaphor and antecedents with 
index, we used an annotation tool, PALinkA. We have considered both anaphor and antecedent 
as markables. For annotations, first anaphor and antecedent should be marked as markables and 
if it is anaphoric, link is established between these two markables. Finally all the possible 
anaphor and antecedents are tagged with index. 

6 Machine Learning Algorithm

6.1 Conditional Random Fields
CRF++ is toolkits designed for generic purpose and are  applied to a variety of  NLP 

tasks. The machine learning method of CRFs was chosen to do our experiments, because of its 
flexibility to build linguistic rules. CRFs can contain number of feature functions. The advantage 

109



of CRFs is that it can model not only sequential data, but also non-linear data. Since the task of 
extraction of antecedents is syntactic and semantic task, CRFs is appropriate for this purpose.

Our Algorithm:
Step1: Input the corpus.
Step2: Preprocess the corpus, tagged with POS, Chunk, word category, gender, number, person, 
suffix, case markers, Clause Information and Named Entity Recognition.
Step3: Tag the Anaphor and the Antecedent using PALinkA tool.
Step4: Identify the features and given to CRF.
Step5: Train and test both the Train corpus and Test corpus with the features identified in CRF.

7 Result and Discussion

7.1 Ten-fold Experiment:
                We have taken the tourism corpus from web of 10000 sentences. The total numbers of  
words are 93102 and we split this word corpus equally into 10 equal files. Randomly we have 
taken  8  files  for  Training  (74482  words)  and  2  (18620  words)  files  for  testing  with  all 
combinations of files. The first corpus consists of 945 pronouns. The training data consists of 
829 pronouns and the testing data consists of 116 pronouns. The results are given below.

S.no Total no 
anaphora in 
training

Total no 
anaphora in 
testing

System 
tagged 

System tagged 
correctly

Recall Precision

1 794 149 147 123 88.55% 83.67%
2 769 174 173 140 80.45% 80.92%
3 782 171 168 142 83.04% 84.52%
4 798 145 143 122 84.14% 85.31%
5 766 177 176 140 79.09% 79.84%
6 652 291 289 242 83.16% 83.73%
7 613 330 318 261 79.09% 82.07%
8 738 205 196 162 79.02% 82.65%
9 827 116 112 91 78.44% 81.25%
10 815 128 123 99 77.34% 80.48%

Average 80.63% 82.44%

Table 2 – Tenfold Experiment results

8 Conclusion and future work 

This work considered all kind of pronominals for resolution. This work requires further 
analysis and fine tuning of the features.  Still there are lot of challenges in anaphora in discourse 
structure. And resolution of pronominals is very much needed for all natural language processing 
applications.

References
Carter, D.(1987) Interpreting anaphors in natural language texts. Chisester: Ellis Horwood ltd.

110



Hobbs, J. (1978) Resolving pronoun references. Lingua 44, 339—352.

10. Mitkov, R. (1998) Robust pronoun resolution with limited knowledge. In: 17th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING’ 98/ACL’98), Montreal, Canada, pp. 869—
875.

Jha, G.N., Sobha, L, Mishra, D., Singh, S.K., Pralayankar, P. (2008) Anaphors in Sanskrit In: 
Proc. Second Workshop on Anaphora Resolution Johansson, C.(Ed.).

Dhar, A. and Garain, U. (2008) A method for pronominal anaphora resolution in Bengali In: 
proc.  6th Int. Conf. on Natural Language Processing (ICON) at Pune, India, December.

Lappin, S. and Leass, H. J. (1994) An algorithm for pronominal anaphora resolution. 
Computational Linguistics 20 (4), 535—561.

Joshi, A. K. and Kuhn, S. (1979) Centered logic: The role of entity centered sentence 
representation in natural language inferencing. In: International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence.

Joshi, A. K. and Weinstein. S (1981) Control of inference: Role of some aspects of discourse 
structure - centering. In: International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 385--387. 

Lafferty, J., McCallum, A. and Pereira, F. (2001) Conditional random fields: Probabilistic 
models for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In: 18th International Conference on 
Machine Learning,  pp .282--289. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, USA.

Murthi, N.K.N., Sobha, L., Muthukumari, B. (2007) Pronominal Resolution in Tamil Using 
Machine Learning Approach The First Workshop on Anaphora Resolution (WAR I), Ed Christer 
Johansson, Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 15 Angerton Gardens, Newcastle, NE5 2JA, UK 
pp.39-50.

Orasan, C. (2003)  PALinkA: a highly customizable tool for discourse annotation. In: proc. 4th 
SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialog, Sapporo, Japan, 5 – 6 July, pp. 39 – 43.

Sobha, L., Patnaik, B.N. (1999) VASISTH- An Anaphora Resolution System Unpublished 
Doctoral dissertation. Mahatma Gandhi University,Kottayam,Kerala.

Sobha, L., Pralayankar, P. (2008) Algorithm for Anaphor Resolution in Sanskrit  In: Proc. 2nd 
Sanskrit Computational Linguistics Symposium, Brown University, USA 

Sobha, L. (2007) Resolution of Pronominals in Tamil, Computing Theory and Application, The 
IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, pp. 475-79 .

Carbonell, J. G. and Brown, R. D. (1988) Anaphora resolution: A multi-strategy approach. In: 
12th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, 96--101. 

111




