










































Statistical User Simulation for Spoken Dialogue Systems: What for, Which Data, Which Future?


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Future directions and needs in the Spoken Dialog Community: Tools and Data, pages 9–10,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Statistical User Simulation for Spoken Dialogue Systems:
What for, Which Data, Which Future? ∗

Olivier Pietquin
SUPELEC - UMI 2958 (GeorgiaTech - CNRS)

2 rue Edouard Belin
57070 Metz - France

olivier.pietquin@supelec.fr

Abstract

There has been a lot of interest for user sim-
ulation in the field of spoken dialogue sys-
tems during the last decades. User simulation
was first proposed to assess the performance
of SDS before a public release. Since the late
90’s, user simulation is also used for dialogue
management optimisation. In this position pa-
per, we focus on statistical methods for user
simulation, their main advantages and draw-
backs. We initiate a reflection about the util-
ity of such methods and give some insights of
what their future should be.

1 Introduction

User simulation for Spoken Dialogue Systems
(SDS) aims at generating artificial interactions sup-
posed to be representative of what would be an ac-
tual dialogue between a human user and a given
dialogue system. User simulation is thus different
from user modeling which is often included into the
systems to infer user goals from observable clues
(user’s utterances, intonations etc.) (Zukerman and
Albrecht, 2001). In this paper we focus on statistical
methods for user simulation, that is methods purely
based on data and statistical models and not cogni-
tive models. Also, we only address user simulations
working at the intention level, that is generating dia-
log acts and not speech or natural language (Schatz-
mann et al., 2006). User modeling, used to infer user
intentions in dialogue systems is not addressed.

∗This work as been partially funded by the INTERREG IVa
project ALLEGRO and the Région Lorraine

The aim of user simulation was initially to as-
sess the performance of a SDS before a public re-
lease (Eckert et al., 1997). Given a performance
metric and a simulation method, the natural idea of
automatically optimizing SDS (using reinforcement
learning RL) appeared in the literature in the late
90’s (Levin et al., 2000).

2 Is user simulation useful?

Initially, SDS optimisation required a lot of data be-
cause of inefficiency of RL algorithms, justifying
the use of simulation. In recent years, sample effi-
cient RL methods were applied to SDS optimization.
This allows learning optimal dialogue strategies di-
rectly from batches of data collected between sub-
optimal systems and actual users (Li et al., 2009;
Pietquin et al., 2011b) but also from online interac-
tions (Pietquin et al., 2011a; Gasic et al., 2011). Do
we have to conclude that user simulation is useless?

3 Do we need to train models?

It is commonly admitted that learning parameters of
user simulation models is hard because most of vari-
ables are hidden (user goal, mental states etc.) and
tricky to annotate. This is why current user simula-
tors are trainable but rarely trained (Pietquin, 2006;
Schatzmann et al., 2007). Do we really need to train
user simulation models? If so, which data and anno-
tation schemes do we need?

4 Does simulation reach the target?

User simulation aims at reproducing plausible inter-
actions but in contexts that were not seen in the data

9



collected to train the model. It is generally hard to
assess the quality of such models. Especially, it is
hard to find a single metric to assess user simulation
performances (Pietquin and Hastie, 2011). Also, it
has been shown that user simulation affects a lot the
result of SDS strategy optimisation (Schatzmann et
al., 2005). What should be assessed? Statistical
consistency, ability to generalize, ability to generate
sequences of interactions similar to real dialogues,
ability to produce optimal strategies by RL? If one
wants to learn an optimal simulation model, there is
a need for a single optimality criterion.

5 What’s the future of user simulation for
SDS?

Whatever the use one wants to make of user simula-
tion (learning or assessment for SDS), the future of
this research field relies probably on a redefinition of
the role of user simulation. So far, user simulation
is seen as a generative systems, generating dialog
acts according to the context. Current user simula-
tion models are therefore based on a large amount of
conditional probabilities which are hard to learn, and
the training (if there is one) requires a lot of prior
knowledge, the introduction of smoothing parame-
ters etc.

We believe that user simulation should be rede-
fined as a sequential decision making problem in
which a user tries to reach a goal in a natural and ef-
ficient way, helped by an artificial agent (the SDS).
One major difference between this vision and the
common probabilistic one is that it takes into ac-
count the fact that human users adapt their behav-
ior to the performances and the strategy of the SDS.
This can be called “co-adaptation” between human
users and artificial systems and justifies that user
simulation should still be studied.

Recently, user simulation models based on inverse
reinforcement learning have been proposed (Chan-
dramohan et al., 2011). In this framework, a user
is modeled as optimizing it’s behavior according
to some unknown reward which is inferred from
recorded data. This might be an answer to the co-
adaptation problem. Yet, is user simulation still use-
ful in this framework? Knowing the reward of the
user, do we still need simulation or is it possible to
compute directly an optimal dialogue strategy?

References
S. Chandramohan, M. Geist, F. Lefèvre, and O. Pietquin.

2011. User Simulation in Dialogue Systems using In-
verse Reinforcement Learning. In Proc. of Interspeech
2011, Florence (Italy).

W. Eckert, E. Levin, and R. Pieraccini. 1997. User
Modeling for Spoken Dialogue System Evaluation. In
Proc. of ASRU’97, Santa Barbara (USA).

M. Gasic, F. Jurcicek, B. Thomson, K. Yu, and S. Young.
2011. On-line policy optimisation of spoken dialogue
systems via live interaction with human subjects”. In
Proc. of ASRU 2011, Hawaii (USA).

E. Levin, R. Pieraccini, and W. Eckert. 2000. A Stochas-
tic Model of Human-Machine Interaction for learning
dialog Strategies. IEEE Transactions on Speech and
Audio Processing, 8:11–23.

L. Li, S. Balakrishnan, and J. Williams. 2009. Reinforce-
ment Learning for Dialog Management using Least-
Squares Policy Iteration and Fast Feature Selection. In
Proc. of InterSpeech’09, Brighton (UK).

O. Pietquin and H. Hastie. 2011. A survey on metrics for
the evaluation of user simulations. Knowledge Engi-
neering Review.

O. Pietquin, M. Geist, and S. Chandramohan. 2011a.
Sample Efficient On-line Learning of Optimal Dia-
logue Policies with Kalman Temporal Differences. In
Proc. of IJCAI 2011, Barcelona, Spain.

O. Pietquin, M. Geist, S. Chandramohan, and H. Frezza-
Buet. 2011b. Sample-Efficient Batch Reinforce-
ment Learning for Dialogue Management Optimiza-
tion. ACM Transactions on Speech and Language Pro-
cessing, 7(3):7:1–7:21, May.

O. Pietquin. 2006. Consistent goal-directed user model
for realistic man-machine task-oriented spoken dia-
logue simulation. In ICME’06, Toronto (Canada).

J. Schatzmann, M.Stuttle, K. Weilhammer, and S. Young.
2005. Effects of the user model on simulation-based
learning of dialogue strategies. In Proc. of ASRU’05.

J. Schatzmann, K. Weilhammer, M. Stuttle, and
S. Young. 2006. A survey of statistical user simula-
tion techniques for reinforcement-learning of dialogue
management strategies. Knowledge Engineering Re-
view, vol. 21(2), pp. 97–126.

J. Schatzmann, B. Thomson, K. Weilhammer, H. Ye, and
S. Young. 2007. Agenda-based User Simulation for
Bootstrapping a POMDP Dialogue System. In Proc.
of HLT NAACL.

I. Zukerman and D. Albrecht. 2001. Predictive statistical
models for user modeling. User Modeling and User-
Adapted Interaction, 11(1-2):5–18. invited paper.

10


