










































Trend Analysis in Harper's Bazaar


Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 84–87,
Montréal, Canada, June 8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Trend Analysis in Harper’s Bazaar

Sophie Kushkuley, B.S.
Brandeis University

415 South St
Waltham, MA 02453, USA
sophiek@brandeis.edu

Abstract

Topic modeling of fashion trends were ana-
lyzed using the MALLET toolkit. Harper’s
Bazaar magazines from 1860-1899 were used
(freely available online). This resulted in
20 topics with 4 characterizing words each.
Trends over time were analyzed in several dif-
ferent ways using 100-topics and 20-topics.

1 Introduction

Using trend analysis to extract topics from a fashion
magazine may finally put to rest the question of
the cyclicality of fashion. Entire issues of Harper’s
Bazaar from the 19th century are freely available
online [1]. Preliminary data analysis using the
NLTK toolkit in Python [2] did not yield promising
results. Bigram collocations were extracted for
the first three years of data. The collocations
were extracted on a monthly basis, however the
bigrams were extremely non-specific and contained
no relevant information. Topic modeling is the
natural choice for large amounts of historical data,
so this was the strategy implemented for the second
attempt. Extracting this data and applying the
MALLET toolkit [3] for topic modeling provided
a good start and a novel way of looking at fashion
trends.

2 Data Extraction

For every year from 1867 through 1900 roughly 52
volumes (one volume per week) per year of Harper’s
Bazaar are available in text format online. Most

volumes from 1867 - 1899 contain an article enti-
tled ‘New York Fashions’. For consistency, this is
the article that was scraped from every volume for
the purposes of topic modeling. Volumes from year
1890 only go up to April 28th and do not contain
the ‘New York Fashions’ article, hence 1890 was
excluded from the analysis. 1867 was a short year
as well, volumes started in November. A Python
script was used to extract the articles from every vol-
ume, however, the data is not entirely uniform and
contains errors. Despite significant post-processing,
noise in the data has caused some imprecision.

3 Topic Modeling

MALLET uses latent Dirichlet allocation [5] to pro-
duce a topic distribution over any given text. Stop
words were removed automatically, and a distribu-
tion of a user specified number of topics was pro-
duced together with a user specified number of topic
keys associated with every topic.

3.1 100-Topic Model

First, 100 topics were distributed over all the data,
each with 4 topic keys. Many of the resulting topics
were uninformative (e.g. ‘cost made black ladies’
and ‘good made make great’). Below is a sample of
the topic keys for the first 20 topics:

black satin green jet; trimmed satin skirt dress;
skirt made skirts hips; silk black long jet; brown gray
blue dark; white tulle dress low; worn ladies young
made; de black white soie; flannel worn warm skirts;
dress costumes white blue; blue pink white pale;
satin velvet lace brocade; price shown centre set;
plain figures shown designs; yard cents sold cost ;

84



capes back long jackets; cambric tucks linen french;
girls years white children; costumes costume style
trimming; collar high pointed front.

Figure 1: Occurrences of topic by year: first 10

At first, the topic with the highest percentage for
each volume was chosen, along with its topic keys.
Then every year for which this is the number one
topic was found. Some topics will be associated
with the same year a number of times, because each
year contains roughly 52 volumes each of which has
a topic distribution. The number of times each year
shows up in each number one topic was counted and
plotted (Figure 1). This allows one to see which top-
ics are strongly correlated with a particular year or
set of years, and from here it may be possible to de-
duce which topics are most representative of trends
by year.

Some keys (e.g. ‘cost made black ladies’) are very
general, uninformative and infrequent. Others occur
several times in one year and not in any other year
(e.g. ‘costumes costume style trimming’). Then
there are topics that occur frequently over a short
range of years (e.g. ‘dresses skirt plain wool’). And
still other, such as ‘fur seal skin black’ that occur in-
frequently over a vast range of years, vs those that
occur infrequently over a short range of years, ‘flan-
nel worn warm skirts’.

The most relevant topics are the ones that occur
frequently over a short range of time. These are top-
ics that may be representative of trends, and it would
be helpful to plot the distribution of such topics over
time.

3.2 20-Topic Model

Due to the large amount of data generated by the
100-topic model, a 20-topic model was generated
to provide a more thorough analysis of the data.
Twenty topics are more easy to manually look at,
and 20 is not too few topics but it’s also not an over-
whelmingly large number of topics. For each of the
20 topics 4 topic keys were generated. Below is the
list of all 20 topic keys:

fur seal black long; made gown skirt gowns; hair
ladies made worn; yard price cents suits; velvet cloth
red made; made girls waist dresses; crape black
mourning worn; white dress dresses silk; white lace
blue made; satin lace black jet; skirt front back side;
silver gold diamonds large; black blue color brown;
designs wood cost small; worn suits white black;
stripes colors blue designs; text px hearth td; bonnets
crown hats brim; silk long made back; back waist
sleeves skirt.

It is evident that one topic (‘text px hearth td’) is
due to bad post processing, so it has been thrown out
from further analyses. Topics in the 20-topic model
have much higher counts than those in the 100-topic
model. This might lead to less fine-grained topics
for the data. Some topics clearly stand out as having
a very high frequency for a short range of years (e.g.
‘made gown skirt gowns’).

Next, the distribution of a sample of topics was
plotted by year. This was done by following each
topic separately over time; the percent of the topic
in the distribution for each year was plotted by year.
Since every year has many topic distributions (cor-
responding to each of the 52 volumes per year for
most years) a bootstrapping sampling method was
performed to determine the percentage associated
with a specific topic and year. Bootstrapping pro-
vides the advantage of a weighted average that cor-
rectly preserves the original distribution. A percent
from the topic percent-pool for the year was chosen
randomly 1,000 times and averaged to produce one
single percent associated with that topic and year.

The most frequently occurring topics are ‘Silk
long made back’; ‘Skirt front back side’; ‘Velvet
cloth red made’; ‘White lace blue made’; ‘Yard price
cents suits’; ‘Made gown skirt gowns’; ‘Back waist
sleeves skirt’; ‘Black blue color brown’).

Four of these topic percentages are plotted by year

85



Figure 2: Topics by year

(Figure 2). This yields a view of the topics in which
specific trends can be spotted based on frequency
(e.g. long and silk items peaked around 1872-1882,
velvet and red characteristics peaked around 1882-
1887). In addition, a certain amount of cyclicality
can be seen in Figure 2. Two of the topics have a
topic key in common, ‘back’. The first topic ‘silk
long made back’ peaks around 1877, and ‘back waist
sleeves skirt’ peaks around 1895, and these two top-
ics have a topic key in common, ‘back’. Given a
context, meaning can be found in such trending top-
ics.

3.3 Project Refinement

It appears that the topic keys generated by the 100-
topic model are more relevant and contain more
information than those generated by the 20-topic
model. On the other hand the 20-topic model is sim-
pler to analyze. Therefore, inspired by the work on
Martha Ballard’s diary [4] another model was gen-
erated with 20 topic keys for each of 20 topics.

Figure 3: Trend-predicting topics by year

These labels were plotted by year, and topics with
the most movement are shown (Figure 3). There
are trends here that clearly stand out, but there does
not seem to be enough data to follow the trends
through to the end. Certain topics rise in popular-
ity and fall again, however, it is impossible to know
from 30 years of data if they rise again further in
time. Similarly to the 20-topic model with 4 topic
keys, many topics stand out due to their cyclic na-
ture. However unlike the 4-topic keys model, rises
and dips in frequency are more dramatic, suggest-
ing that more topic keys leads to a more thorough
analysis of trends.

An additional analysis was performed using not
only the most highly probable topic associated with
every year but the top three such topics. The num-
ber of occurrences of the top three topics of every
month were counted and divided by the total num-
ber of months to obtain a percent of occurrence for
the year. A heat map was then generated for this data
(Figure 4). Some specific trends are discernible, and
even a potentially cyclic topic (topic 7 is frequent in
1867 and resurfaced in 1896).

Figure 4: Heat map of topic occurrence by year

The high frequency topics are presented below.
Types of garments, accessories, colors, materials
and fabric stylings have been highlited:

0 black yard silk wide dress price worn half gros
sold fringe folds trimming grain cents inches yards
trimmed centre amp

1 made gown gowns lace black silk worn white
style wear put satin trimmed waist fashion effect
great year smart women

7 skirt front belt skirts waist cut narrow side
back long material short ruffles bands band flounce
trimmed trimming full upper

9 silk black skirt dresses basque back long front

86



side pleating trimmed pleated flounces pleatings
dress apron polonaise plain trimming sleeves

16 suits worn made ladies cost gray suit blue
stylish amp imported fashion shown linen brown
garment soft yard cents braid

17 skirt dresses made waist front full side plain
red dress drapery foot wool skirts line gathered
surah pleats basque vest

18 satin red lace gold plush colors beads velvet
large made small brocaded plain trimmings em-
broidery imported great shown shades dark

19 black sleeves waist gowns skirt silk back rib-
bon satin full front white collar large green bodice
belt yellow foot gown

These topics include many descriptive terms (in
bold) that could depict broad scale fashion trends.
Highlighted topic keys describe real trends and pro-
vide a starting point for further analysis. Not surpris-
ingly, frequent topics coincide with the most highly
peaking and oscillating topics in Figure 3. These fre-
quent topics also depict more fashion trends, as de-
fined by the categories mentioned above. For exam-
ple, below is a non-frequent topic, and it does not in-
clude a single topic key that falls into the categories
defined above:

2 hair head price natural cents large fancy pretty
long ladies hand lady box made cards dolls water
children good dressed.

4 Conclusion

Topic modeling for 19th century magazine data does
not automatically yield relevant topics that can be
plotted and analyzed. Extensive post-processing and
generalization is necessary for useful results. It is
important to correctly classify topic keys and iden-
tify useless topics.

It seems to be the case that more topics and more
topic keys yield better results; which may then be
obtained by carefully sorting through the 100-topic
model and categorizing topic keys into topic labels,
then plotting them by year to analyze trends. It may
be possible with more detailed analyses to deduce
topic keys that are cyclic in nature when put in con-
text (e.g. ‘back’ in Figure 2). A heat map can be a
good way to weed out uninteresting topics. It also
provides an excellent visualization method for the
rise and fall of topics, as well as topic cyclicality.

Based on these highlighted topics, it is interesting
to group the topic keys by characteristic (e.g., color,
article of clothing, construction, technique, material
etc).

Trends have been discerned in this analysis, and
with this wealth of freely available data specific
fashion trends can be searched for and analyzed.

5 Future Work

The fashion trend analysis of the 19th century ac-
cording to Harper’s Bazaar presented here is incom-
plete. Further refinement of the topics will yield the
identification of more specific trends that can then
be analyzed over time.

Honing in on specific topic categories (e.g. ar-
ticles of clothing, materials, colors and styles) can
help illuminate trends. Topic analysis can then be
performed for every category for a cross-sectional
view of trends.

Post-processing of the keys is another necessary
step to focus in on trends. For example, stemming
the topic keys is necessary to avoid repetitive keys.

Additional data will also be helpful to fully ana-
lyze trends and assess cyclicality. Shared topic keys
among the topics may provide insight into the prob-
lem, if a method of linking them contextually can be
deduced.

This paper provides an initial insight into fashion
trends using topic modeling with MALLET, but it
also leaves room for further directed analyses.

References
1. Albert R. Mann Library. 2012. Home Economics

Archive: Research, Tradition and History (HEARTH).
Ithaca, NY: Albert R. Mann Library, Cornell Univer-
sity. http://hearth.library.cornell.edu (Version January
2005).

2. Bird, Steven. NLTK: Natural Language Toolkit.
http://www.nltk.org/.

3. McCallum, Andrew Kachites. 2002. MAL-
LET: A Machine Learning for Language Toolkit.
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.

4. Cameron Blevins. 2010. historying.
Topic Modeling Martha Ballard’s Diary,
http://historying.org/2010/04/01/topic-modeling-
martha-ballards-diary/.

5. Blei, David M. Ng, Andrew Y. Jordan, Michael I.
2003. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research 3 (2003) 993-1022.

87


