



















































Assessment of Answers: Online Subjective Examination


Proceedings of the Workshop on Question Answering for Complex Domains, pages 47–56,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Assessment of Answers: Online Subjective Examination  

Asmita Dhokrat1, Gite Hanumant R 2, C.Namrata Mahender3 
(1) (2) (3) DEPT. OF .COMPUTER SCIENCE AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY,  

Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University, Aurangabad, MS, India 
asmita.dhokrat@gmail.com, hanumantgitecsit@gmail.com, 

nam.mah@gmail.com  

ABSTRACT 

Question answering is a specified form of information retrieval. Our work comes under closed 
domain question answering. We are working on assessment of answer for online subjective 
examination. Examination and evaluation are part of every course module so are even in online 
examination, objective based examination are already available but subjective examination are in 
need of time as subjective assessment is considered as best way of evaluation of ones subject 
understanding & knowledge. In our paper we have discussed two issues related to the answer 
method i.e. length & paraphrasing. And have obtained a pattern extraction by creating a sequence 
for a given answer. Our system has a centralized file system which includes the reference 
material as well as the model answer for questions. These are used for matching and evaluating a 
candidate’s answer.  For every correct answer a confidence factor of being positive is assigned 
when the required selective pattern of candidates answer matches with the model answer. 

 
KEYWORDS:  Online Subjective Examination, Paraphrase, Evaluation process 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

47



1 Question Answering 

Question Answering is a specialized form of information retrieval. Given a collection of 
documents, a Question Answering system attempts to retrieve correct answers to questions posed 
in natural language.   

Open-domain question answering requires question answering systems to be able to answer 
questions about any conceivable topic. Such systems cannot, therefore, rely on hand crafted 
domain specific knowledge to find and extract the correct answers. 

Closed-domain question answering deals with questions under a specific domain (for example, 
medicine or automotive maintenance), and can be seen as an easier task because NLP systems 
can exploit domain-specific knowledge frequently formalized in ontologies. Alternatively, 
closed-domain might refer to a situation where only a limited type of questions are accepted, such 
as questions asking for descriptive rather than procedural information. Our system also comes 
under closed domain QA where we are supposed for accessing online based subjective 
examination. 

2 Subjective Examination 

Subjective examination has been a major way of evaluating a candidate’s knowledge & 
understanding about on course or subject in traditional education system for centuries (Minsu 
Jang et al. 2007). Every university has its own examination pattern based on subjective 
examination. So in this global era of web based education. We need to consider such examination 
done online (Hanumant R. Gite, C.Namrata Mahender 2012). 

Generally the questions may be considered in the following forms. 

 Define: explain the meaning and (often) provide an appropriate example 
 Describe / illustrate: present the main points with clear examples that enhance the 

discussion 
 Differentiate / distinguish: present the differences between two things 
 Discuss / explain: present the main points, facts, and details of a topic; give reasons  
 Enumerate / List / Identify / Outline: write a list of the main points with brief explanations  
 Interpret: present your analysis of the topic using facts and reasoning 
 Justify / Prove: present evidence and reasons that support the topic 
 Summarize: briefly state the main ideas in an organized manner 
 Trace: state the main points in logical or chronological order 

In this paper we have discussed two issues related to examination & a simple Psycho based 
solution is provided. 

3 Online Subjective Examination 

Our system works on an attempt to consider candidates answer by extracting the required 
intentional part of an answer to a prescribed template or model answer already provided in the 
Question answering framework. 

48



There is always an urge to justify an answer is appropriate or not. That is we have to find the 
confidence level for a given answer, by comparing it to the model answer. That is every word in 
an answer does not play an important role while evaluation process. To justify such case we have 
consider answer in one sentence. 

3.1 Question Processing Module 
 The question type, usually based on a taxonomy of possible questions already coded into the 

system;  
 The expected answer type, through some shallow semantic processing of the question; and  
 The question focus, which represents the main information that is required to answer the 

user’s question. 

These steps allow the question processing module to finally pass a set of query terms to the 
Paragraph Indexing module, which uses them to perform the information retrieval. 

3.2 Answer Processing  
The Answer Processing module is responsible for identifying and extracting the emphasized 
words which are responsible for the response of the answer.    

3.2.1 Answer Identification 

The use of a part-of-speech tagger (e.g., Python POS tagger) can help to enable recognition of 
answer candidates within identified model answer. Answer candidates can be ranked based on 
measures of distance between keywords, numbers of keywords matched and other similar 
heuristic metrics. 

3.2.2 Answer Extraction 

Once an answer has been identified, the shallow parsing performed is leveraged to extract only 
the relevant word or phrase in answer to the question.   

3.2.3 Answer Correctness  

Confidence in the correctness of an answer can be increased in a number of ways. One way is to 
use a lexical resource like WordNet (Synonyms) to verify that a candidate response was of the 
correct answer type. 

3.3 One line answer 
In our system we are paying attention for answer accessing majorly by considering length and 
paraphrasing. One line answer or Define may have a sentence which may have 10 words or 15 
words as per the writing style of the candidates so we cannot fix single line answer with fixed 
number of words used. So only point to be find single sentence is to find the full stop.  

For e.g. one line answer, expressed in different mode or synonym based answer etc. (where s is 
stands for original and t is for its paraphrase) 

o  s. Tom purchased a Honda from John. 
o  t. Tom bought a Honda from John. 
o  s. It was a Honda that John sold to Tom. 

49



o  t. John sold a Honda to Tom. 
o  s. Tom bought a Honda from John. 
o  t. John sold a Honda to Tom(Atsushi Fujita 2005) 

Answer can be stated in an ‘n’ way but few words only have intended meaning for the particular 
answer. Some issues in such answer. 

o Such words may have replaced by its synonyms.  
o The sentence is paraphrased. 

For considering a bit more complexity of an answer we have also performed processing on 
multiline answer. Here the reflection or impact of paraphrasing can be seen more clearly. 

3.4  Multi line answer 
Same case is with answer the question is detail or Brief. We cannot fix the size of paragraphs or 
pages. Generally a restriction of words will be provided so every answer has to be in the given 
length, but still there is a huge range for example single sentence answers we may say can have 
almost 20 words i.e. we can answer it with a single word to 20 words and all are valid, only more 
than 20 words will not be considered as desirable answer. 

E.g. what does distributed operating system manages? 
o A distributed operating system manages a group of independent computers and 

makes them appear to be a single computer. 
o A distributed operating system handles a set of autonomous computer also makes 

them emerge to be a single system. 
o A set of independent systems are integrated to make them appear to be single 

computer. 

3.5 Paraphrasing 
In our work may be single line answering or multiline following points in paraphrasing are 
focused during the evaluating process. 

Paraphrasing (synonym based, lexical / structural based, alteration based)  

 Paraphrasing of common nouns to their synonyms 
 Paraphrasing of common nouns to their definition statements 
 Paraphrasing of verbs to their synonyms 
 Paraphrasing of verbs to their definition statements 

We are paying more focus on the intention answer compared to the focus of question. We tend 
towards the expected answer as per the requirement of the focused issue or the object. Following 
table 1 shows the focused or intended portion or words in a few answers in our system. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50



TABLE 1 – Answers with emphasized words 

 
 
 

Question 
No. 

Keywords Right answer Wrong Answer  

Q1 manages/handle 
computer/CPU/processor/system 
 between/among 
user/client 

5 5 

Q2 Quick/fast/rapid/ immediate 
Predictable/knowable 
Response/reply/ reaction/ answer 
Events/action 

8 2 

Q3 group/cluster/set 
 independent/self 
computer/CPU/processor/system 
 make/create/build 
 appear/become visible/show 
single/distinct  
computer/CPU/processor/system 

8 2 

Q4 Program/ agenda/ plan 
in/during 
execution/ finishing/ completion 

10 0 

Q5 some/few/various/several 
event/result/occurrence/interrupt 
 occur/happen/takes place 

7 3 
 
 

Q6 some/few/various/several 
process/procedure/course/method  
running/executes 
at/by/on 
all/every 
utilization/use/operation 

6 4 

Q7 select/few/various/several 
processes/procedure/course/method    
queues/row/line 

7 3 

Q8 compact/solid 
extremely/very/tremendously  
efficient/capable/able 
by/via/through 
design/plan/intend 

3 7 

51



4 Representation of intended answer 

A question can be assumed in many ways as per the candidate understanding and the strength of 
vocabulary plus the expressive nature of the candidate. As an answer to be correct can take any 
form but the intended meaning should not change, the way of answers are paraphrased for an 
intended answer for representing the importance of word in a particular answer and the number 
of ways of answering, we have chosen a simple state transition diagram to represent the answer, 
for e.g. following question 

Question:- 

What is main objective of real time operating system? 

Has such expected answer as per the reference material provided. 

Answer:- 

1. Quick predictable response to events. 
2. Return correct result within time constraints. 
3. Responds to input instantly.  
4.  Response time very short.  

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

FIGURE 1– State transition diagram 

5 Our system 

The candidates are taken as a text file and separately stored under a folder which is unique for 
each candidate. 

We maintain a centralized file system where the reference materials and the model answer for 
each question is kept. 

5.1 The Evaluation process 
The candidate answer is first extracted from the file and a sequence state transition is generated 
i.e. nothing but a state transition diagram using the given input for example. 

As we have conducted exam on ten candidates for twelve questions, we had a verity of cases to 
adhere the paraphrased answer. 

In general the process start with POS tree along with sequence extraction of the candidate answer 
which is compared with the model answer. 

52



If exact terms are found in candidates answer as per the model answer & its key terms it is 
evaluated as correct else we try to find the key terms which are there in the model answer and are 
part of candidates answer then its semantic analysis is done using a word net dictionary that 
provides the density of each word in a given sequence, if that get a match for more than 50% 
words in a sentence it is also termed as correct else declared as wrong. 

This density of words are keywords of the answer which are stored in our key terms those are the 
words which are given high confidence so that they are to be considers as positive words to 
reflect the correct meaning to the answer. 

A sample answer of 10 candidates is given in table 2 for the question “When the process does 
goes into waiting state?” 

TABLE 2 – Paraphrased answer for given question. 

Candidate. 
No. 

Candidate Answer Answer 
Right/ Wrong 

Reason 

1 When the execution time of process gets 
complete the process goes to waiting state. 

Wrong Meaning 
Change 

2 When some events to occur after running 
state then process go in waiting state. 

Right -- 

3 When process is ready to execution and it 
has to wait for some event then it goes to 
waiting state. 

Right -- 

4 The processes go in waiting state. When 
for some event to occur such as an I/O 
completion or reception of a signal. 

Right -- 

5 When process is in running as some intrupt 
are created then process is waiting state. 

Wrong Spell 
Mistake 

After automatically correcting using Word 
Net dictionary  

Right  Correct 

6 The process is waiting for some event to 
occur [I/O completion or reception of a 
signal] 

Right -- 

7 The process go in waiting for some events 
to occur (such as I/O completion or 
reception of a signal) 

Right -- 

8 Waiting for some events to occur. Right  
9 --- Wrong  Not 

Attempted  
10 A process executes it changes state as we 

know that process task. As if process is 
executed and process is waiting for some 
events to occur then we can say that the 
process is in waiting state. 

Right -- 

53



From 10 candidates stated, three were wrong. Candidate 1 answer was incorrect due to 
semantically be different from the model answer, while a Candidate 5 answer has spell mistakes. 
But using word net option it can be automating corrected by providing semantically same answer 
and candidate 9 has not attempted the answer thus to be taken as wrong answer. 

For verifying the answer for its appropriateness a confidence factor was provided for each 
answer, as per the sequence of pattern match found between the candidate and model answer. If 
the density of matching is more than or equal to 50% then the answer was termed to be correct 
and it is known as positive confidence else a negative confidence is provide for the mismatched 
and the answer is termed to be wrong.  

Following table 3 shows the confidence factor for the evaluated answer. 

TABLE 3 – Answers with confidence level 

Q 
No. 

Model Answer Right 
Answer 

Wrong 
Answer 

Positive 
confidence  

Negative 
confidence 

Q.1 Software that handles computer 
hardware, Intermediator 
between user hardware, 

5 5 50% 50% 

Q.2 quick predictable response to 
events 

8 2 80% 20% 

Q.3 Group independent computers 
make them appear to single 
computer 

8 2 80% 20% 

Q.4 A process is a the unit of work 
in a system, Process is a 
program in execution 

10 0 
 

100% 0% 

Q.5 The process is waiting for some 
event to occur 

7 3 70% 30% 

Q.6 Some process running at all 
times to maximize CPU 
utilization. 

6 4 60% 40% 

Q.7 Job, ready, device, waiting, i/o, 
priority 

6 4 60% 40% 

Q.8 Selecting processes from these 
queues, A process is migrates 
between various scheduling 
queues throughout its lifetime. 

8 
 
 

2 80% 20% 

Q.9 Windows CE, Minix 3 10 0 100% 0% 
Q.10 Interrupts 10 0 100% 0% 
Q.11 Compact and efficient by 

design, They are designed to 
operate on small machines like 
PDAs with less autonomy. 

7 3 70% 30% 

Q.12 Kernel 9 0 90% 10% 

54



In our sample set of questions descriptive and describe type of questions were not considered. 
The overall efficiency of evaluation for our sample set was found to be 70%. 

Conclusion  

Online subjective examination is need of time. It is too complex due to the expressive power, 
vocabulary used and understanding of the subject is involved of every individual and all this 
causes large variations in the writing style of an answer person to person. Thus variation of 
length words, form of sentence all matters while evaluating the answer. Online examination is a 
type of closed domain question answering as it limited to course applied. In our work we have 
focused on the intended part of answer required to verify a particular answer as correct. Word has 
great emphasis in our system, POS tagging was also performed while extraction of words for 
better accuracy.  

Overall performance of our system was found to be 70%. Major constraint of our system is brief, 
short note, described in detail, discussed type of question including mathematical formulas, 
diagrams, examples were not considering as a part of question answering. 

References 
Atsushi Fujita(2005), Automatic Generation of Syntactically Well-formed and Semantically 
Appropriate Paraphrases, Doctoral thesis submitted at Department of Information Processing, 
Graduate School of Information Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology March 2005 

Hanumant R. Gite, C.Namrata Mahender (2012), Representation of Model Answer: Online 
Subjective Examination System, National conference NC3IT2012 Sinhgad, Institute of 
Computer Sciences Pandharpur. 

Minsu Jang, Joo-Chan Sohn, Hyun Kyu Cho(2007), Automated Question Answering using 
Semantic Web Services, IEEE Asia-Pacific Services Computing Conference. 2007 

Yuan, Zhenming, et al.(2006), A Web-Based Examination and Evaluation System for Computer 
Education, Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society, 2006 

55




