










































Framework for the Development of Spoken Dialogue System based on Collaboratively Constructed Semantic Resources


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Future directions and needs in the Spoken Dialog Community: Tools and Data, pages 25–28,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Framework for the Development of Spoken Dialogue System 

based on Collaboratively Constructed Semantic Resources 

 

 

Masahiro Araki       Daisuke Takegoshi 
Department of Information Science 

Kyoto Institute of Technology 

Matsugasaki Sakyo-ku Kyoto 6068585 Japan 

araki@kit.ac.jp 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Abstract 

We herein introduce our project of realizing a 

framework for the development of a spoken 

dialogue system based on collaboratively con-

structed semantic resources. We demonstrate 

that a semantic Web-oriented approach based 

on collaboratively constructed semantic re-

sources significantly reduces troublesome rule 

descriptions and complex configurations, 

which are caused by the previous relational 

database-based approach, in the development 

process of spoken dialogue systems. In addi-

tion, we show that the proposed framework 

enables multilingual spoken dialogue system 

development due to clear separation of model, 

view and controller components. 

1 Introduction 

In recent years, some large scale repositories of 

collaboratively constructed semantic resources 
(CSRs), such as Freebase1 , are available online. 

Those semantically structured data enable more 

precise search than simple text matching (e.g. 

"Find a dental clinic near Kyoto station opens at 

Saturday night.") and more complex search than 

simple query to relational database (RDB) (e.g. a 

query "Find machine learning books written by a 

researcher of NLP." needs cross search on a book 

                                                           
1 http://www.freebase.com/ 

DB and a researcher DB). Since search conditions 

of such queries to the structured data become com-

plex, natural language, especially speech, for smart 

phone and tablet PC, is a promising method of que-

ry input. 

There are some previous researches on convert-

ing natural language input to the query of struc-

tured data (Lopez et al., 2006) (Tablan et al., 2008). 

These researches basically concentrated on the in-

put sentence analysis and the query construction. If 

the developer want to apply existing natural lan-

guage understanding methods to spoken dialogue 

system (SDS) for structured data search, there re-

mains fair amount of components that need to be 

implemented, such as speech input component, 

dialogue flow management, backend interface, etc. 

In order to realize a development environment 

of SDS for structured data search, we designed a 

data model driven framework for rapid prototyping 

of SDS based on CSRs. The proposed framework 

can be regarded as an extension of existing Rails 

framework of Web application to (1) enabling 

speech interaction and (2) utilizing a benefit of 

CSRs. By using CSRs and the extended Rails 

framework, the troublesome definitions of rules 

and templates for SDS prototyping can be reduced 

significantly compared with the ordinary RDB-

based approach.  

As this data model driven approach is independ-

ent of language for interaction, the proposed 

framework has a capability of easily implementing 

multilingual SDS. 

25



The remainder of the present paper is organized 

as follows. Section 2 describes the proposed ap-

proach to a data modeling driven development 

process for SDS based on CSRs and explains the 

automatic construction of the spoken query under-

standing component. Section 3 demonstrates the 

multilingual capability of the proposed framework. 

In Section 4, the present paper is concluded, and a 

discussion of future research is presented. 

2 Data modeling driven approach based 
on CSRs 

2.1 Object-oriented SDS development 

framework 

We previously proposed a data modeling driven 

framework for rapid prototyping of SDS (Araki 

2011). We designed a class library that is based on 

class hierarchy and attribute definitions of an exist-

ing semantic Web ontology, i.e., Schema.org2. This 

class library is used as a base class of an applica-

tion-specific class definition. An example of class 

definition is shown in Figure 1. 
 

 
Figure 1: Example of class definition. 

 

In this example, the "MyBook" class inherits all 

of the attributes of the "Book" class of Schema.org 

in the same manner as object-oriented program-

ming languages. The developer can limit the at-

tributes that are used in the target application by 

listing them in the constraints section of the class 

definition. On the other hand, the developer can 

add additional attributes (ranking attributes as the 

type of Integer, which is not defined in original 

"Book" class) in the definition of the class. 

The task type and dialogue initiative type are in-

dicated as annotations at the beginning of the class 

                                                           
2 http://schama.org/ 

definition. In this example, the task type is DB 

search and the initiative type is user initiative. This 

information is used in generating the controller 

code (state transition code, which is equivalent to 

Figure 2) and view codes of the target SDS. 

 

Input
query

Display
result

Help

submit

help

modify
query

exit

Home

 
Figure 2: Control flow of the DB search task. 

 

Using Grails3, which is a Rails Web application 

framework, the proposed framework generates the 

dialogue controller code of the indicated task type 

and the view codes, which have speech interaction 

capability on the HTML5 code from this class def-

inition. The overall concept of the data modeling 

driven framework is shown in Figure 3. 
 

Data model
definition

Mix-in of
traits

embed
application
logic

State
definition

generate

convert

Grails

Data model
definition

Groovy

generate

HTML5
code

Model

Controller

View

 
Figure 3: Overview of the data modeling driven 

SDS development framework. 

2.2 Using CSRs 

The disadvantage of our previous framework, de-

scribed in the previous subsection, is the high de-

pendence on the dictation performance of the 

speech recognition component. The automatically 

generated HTML5 code invokes dictation API, 

irrespective of the state of the dialogue and initia-

tive type. In order to improve speech recognition 

accuracy, grammar rules (in system initiative dia-

logue) and/or the use of a task/domain-dependent 

language model (in mixed/user initiative dialogue) 

                                                           
3 http://grails.org/ 

@DBSearch 

@SystemInitiative 

class MyBook extends Book { 

  Integer ranking 

  static constraints = { 

    name(onsearch:"like") 

    author(onsearch:"like") 

    publisher() 

    ranking(number:true) 

  } 

} 

26



are key factors. In our previous framework, the 

developer had to prepare these ASR-related com-

ponents using language resources, which are be-

yond the proposed data-driven framework. 

In order to overcome this defect, we add the 

Freebase class library, which is based on large-

scale CSRs, because Freebase already includes the 

contents of the data. These contents and a large-

scale Web corpus facilitate the construction of 

grammar rules and a language model that is specif-

ic to the target task/domain. 

For example, the Film class of Freebase has 

more than 191 thousand entries (as of May 2012), 

most of which have information about directors, 

cast members, genres, etc. These real data can be 

used as resources to improve ASR accuracy. 

In system initiative type dialogue, the contents 

of each attribute of the target class can construct 

word entries of the grammar rule for each attribute 

slot. For example, the grammar rule for the user's 

response to "Which genre of movie are you search-

ing for?" can be constructed from the contents of 

the genres attribute of the Film class. We imple-

mented a generator of the set of content words 

specified in the data model definition from the data 

of Freebase. The generator is embedded as one 

component of the proposed framework. 

In the mixed/user initiative type tasks, since 

content words and functional words make up the 

user's utterance, we need a language model for 

speech recognition and a semantic frame extractor 

for the construction of query to semantic data. We 

designed and implemented a language model gen-

erator and a semantic frame extractor using a func-

tional expression dictionary that corresponds to the 

attributes of Freebase (Araki submitted). The flow 

of the language model generation is shown in Fig-

ure 4. 

Freebase
data

Web
corpus

Data model
definition

content
words

in-domain
entries

domain
dependent

LM

example
sentences

 
Figure 4: Construction process of LM. 

2.3 Helper application for data definition 

In order to facilitate the data-model definition pro-

cess, we implemented a helper application called 

MrailsBuilder. A screenshot of one phase of the 

definition process is shown in Figure 5, which 

shows the necessary slots for data definition in the 

GUI and a list of properties once the developer 

selects the parent class of the target class. 

 

 
Figure 5: Screenshot of MrailsBuilder. 

3 Multilingual extension of the framework 

With the internationalization capability of the 

Grails base framework and multilingual data re-

sources provided as CSRs, we can generate a mul-

tilingual SDS from the data model definition. All 

of the language-dependent information is stored in 

separated property files and is called at the time of 

the dynamic view code generation process in the 

interaction, as shown in Figure 6. 

 

Please input 
search 

conditions.

Book of AI.

Below items are 
found.

 
 

Figure 6: Example of realized interaction. 

27



We also implemented a contents extractor from 

Freebase data. In Freebase, each class (called 

"type") belongs to one domain. For example, the 

"Dish" type belongs to the "Food & Drink" domain 

(see Figure 7). Although it assigned to a two-level 

hierarchy, each type has no inherited properties. 

Therefore, it is easy for Freebase data to represent 

a set of property values as a string instead of a uni-

form resource identifier (URI). Each instance has 

the name property and its value is written in Eng-

lish. For some instances, it also has the name de-

scription in another language with the language 

code. Therefore, we can extract the name of the 

instance in various languages. 

 

• Books
• Business
• Film
• Food&Drink
• ...

Domain

• Ingredient
• Restaurant
• Dish
• ...

Type

• 2,421 Instances
• Properties

Dish

Property Expected Type

Type of dish /food/type_of_dish

Cuisine /dining/cuisine

Typical ingredients /food/ingredient

Recipes /food/recipe

 
Figure 7: Domain and type of Freebase. 

 

The input of the contents extractor is the model 

definition code as in Figure 1 and the language 

code (e.g., "ja" for Japanese). As an example, the 

"MyDish" class is defined as shown in Figure 8. 

 

 
Figure 8: Model definition of the "MyDish" class. 

 

The contents extractor outputs the instance rec-

ords of the given language code and this instance 

can be used for LM generator explained in section 

2.2. For example, the extracted words in the case 

of "de" (German) is shown in Figures 9. 

 
Figure 9: German contents of the "MyDish" class. 

4 Conclusions and future research 

We have proposed a framework for development 

of a SDS on CSRs and have explained rapid con-

struction method of spoken query understanding 

component and showed its multilingual capability. 

In future research, we plan to evaluate the quan-

titative productivity of the proposed framework. 

Acknowledgments 

The present research was supported in part by the 

Ministry of Education, Science, Sports, and Cul-

ture through a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research 

(C), 22500153, 2010. 

References  

Masahiro Araki and Yuko Mizukami. 2011. Develop-

ment of a Data-driven Framework for Multimodal In-

teractive Systems. In Proc. of IWSDS 2011, 91-101. 

Masahiro Araki and Daisuke Takegoshi. accepted. A 

Rapid Development Framework for Multilingual 

Spoken Dialogue Systems. In Proc. of IEEE 

COMPSAC 2012. 

Masahiro Araki. submitted. An Automatic Construction 

Method of Spoken Query Understanding Component 

from Data Model Definition.  

Vanessa Lopez, Enrico Motta, and Victoria S. Uren. 

2006, AquaLog: An ontology-driven Question An-

swering System to interface the Semantic Web. In 

Proc. of HLT-NAACL 2006, 269-272. 

Valentin Tablan, Danica Damljanovic, and Kalina 

Bontcheva. 2008, A natural language query interface 

to structured information. In Proc. of the 5h Europe-

an Semantic Web Conference (ESWC 2008). 

@DBSearch 

@UserInitiative 

class MyDish extends Dish { 

  static constraints = { 

    name() 

    type_of_dish1(nullable:true) 

    cuisine(nullable:true) 

    ingredients(nullable:true) 

    recipes(nullable:true) 

  } 

} 

28


