










































Extending and Scaling up the Chinese Treebank Annotation


Proceedings of the Second CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference on Chinese Language Processing, pages 27–34,
Tianjin, China, 20-21 DEC. 2012

Extending and Scaling up the Chinese Treebank Annotation 
 
 
 

                            Xiuhong Zhang, Nianwen Xue 
                       Brandeis University 
                 Waltham, MA 02453, USA 
             {xhzhang,xuen}@brandeis.edu 

 
 

 
 
Abstract 
 
We discuss on-going efforts to scale up the Chinese 
Treebank annotation and extending Chinese tree-
banking to informal genres like conversational 
speech, news groups and weblogs, as well as dis-
cussion forums. The original Chinese Treebank an-
notation scheme was designed for formal genres 
such as newswire and magazine articles, where the 
language is very formal and each document is care-
fully edited. When moving to informal genres, we 
can no longer assume that the data is error-free and 
we have to extend the annotation scheme to account 
for disfluencies. We show that the disfluencies can 
be characterized into a finite set of categories, con-
sistent with what has been reported in theoretical 
linguistic literature. Treebanking is also a time-
consuming process that requires extensive linguistic 
training from annotators, and the limited pool of 
qualified treebankers is a major obstacle for large-
scale treebanking efforts. To address bottleneck, we 
implemented a procedure that decomposes the tree-
banking process into five self-contained steps. In so 
doing, we reduced the cognitive load on the annota-
tors at each step and thus enlarged the annotator 
pool, and we show that we are able to increase the 
throughput by 30%. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.  Introduction 
 
Large-scale treebanks [13,16] have proved to 
be instrumental in advancing the state of the art 
in syntactic parsing, a fundamental technology 
in Natural Language Processing. Early tree-
banking efforts started with the annotation of 
carefully edited textual data such as Wall Street 
Journal articles (Penn Treebank) and Xinhua 
newswire articles (Chinese Treebank) where 
the data can be assumed to be error-free. There 
is a growing need, however, for annotated data 
in informal genres, which include conversa-
tional speech, news groups, web blogs, and 
online discussion forums. Annotation of such 
informal genres requires substantial extension 
to the original annotation guidelines to cover 
new linguistic (and sometimes non-linguistic) 
phenomena. We show that while these new 
linguistic phenomena are diverse, they have 
clear patterns that can be characterized and 
classified, a pre-requisite to successful annota-
tion. 
Treebanking is a time-consuming process 
and scaling up treebanking efforts while 
maintaining annotation quality is always a 
challenge. This is because it takes a long 
time to train new treebankers and they have 
to have significant prior formal linguistic 
training to be able to understand the gram-
matical formalisms and make the necessary 
linguistic distinctions between different 
types of linguistic structures. These require-
ments severely limit the pool of qualified 
treebankers, making it difficult to scale up an 
annotation effort simply by hiring more 
qualified annotators, even if cost is not a fac-
tor. In reality, cost is another factor that has 
to be considered. 

27



We address this challenge by decomposing the 
treebanking process into smaller, self-contained 
tasks, which reduces the cognitive load on the an-
notators so that more annotators can participate 
without having to understand all aspects of the 
treebanking annotation efforts. This is in keeping 
with the trend of using crowd-sourcing to quickly 
collect large amount of annotated data using plat-
forms such as Mechanic Turk, although we did not 
go as far, as there has been no evidence thus far for 
successful treebanking effort by using a large num-
ber of minimally trained annotators, to the best of 
our knowledge. What we sought is a middle ground 
between crowd sourcing and the traditional tree-
banking practice of using highly trained annotators. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section 2, we give a brief overview of the Chinese 
Treebank annotation scheme. Section 3 describes 
characteristics of informal genres and how the new 
phenomena are treated in our revised annotation 
scheme. In Section 4 we present our new workflow 
that decomposes our annotation task into smaller, 
self-contained tasks. We also discuss advantages of 
such an approach and problems that still exist. Sec-
tion 5 presents some relevant statistics and Section 
6 discusses related work. Section 7 concludes our 
paper. 
 
2 An overview of the existing Chinese 

Treebank annotation framework  
 
The Chinese Treebank (CTB) is a fully segmented, 
part-of-speech (POS) tagged, and syntactically 
bracketed Chinese corpus annotated in a phrase 
structure framework [16]. The CTB adopts the 
same architectural and representation framework 
used by the Penn Treebank [13], as is natural given 
the success of the Penn Treebank annotation style 
and the affinity of the research groups. Just like the 
Penn Treebank, the CTB has three layers of anno-
tation: word segmentation / tokenization, part-of-
speech (POS) tagging, and syntactic bracketing. 
There are three sets of guidelines [17,18,19], one 
for each layer, and the syntactic bracketing guide-
lines are by far the most complex among the three. 
At the part-of-speech tagging layer, each word to-
ken in the corpus is assigned one of the 34 tags in 
the CTB POS tagset. At the syntactic bracketing 
level, the CTB annotation framework uses three 
types of formal devices to represent the syntactic 
structure of a sentence. They include labeled 
brackets for representing constituents (See Appen-
dix 1 for a list of phrase labels), function categories 
for representing the grammatical functions in the 
form of dash tags attached to the phrase label, and 

empty categories and traces that represent phono-
logical null elements and long-distance dependen-
cies. An example taken from the Penn Chinese 
Treebank is presented below, and this example has 
all three elements. 
 
(1) 
(IP-HLN (NP-SBJ (NN 经济/economics)  
                                        (NN 专家/expert))  
                (VP (VV 提出/propose)  
                        (NP-OBJ (CP-APP (IP (NP-SBJ (-NONE- pro))  
                        (VP (ADVP (AD 进一步/further))  
             (VP (VV 扩大/expand)  
                     (NP-OBJ (NP-PN (NR 
海南/Hainan))  

      
                (PP (P 对/toward)  
      
                            (NP (NN 外/outside)))  
      
      
                      
(NP (NN 开放/open))))))  

    (DEC 的/DE))  
                                          (NP (NN 系列/series)  
                         (NN 建议/recommendation))))) 
“Economic experts proposed a series of recommendations to further 
expand the opening of Hainan to the outside.” 
 
The original CTB was annotated in two stages. The 
first stage is the word segmentation/POS tagging 
stage where Chinese sentences are segmented into 
words and each word token is assigned a POS tag. 
The second stage is the syntactic bracketing stages, 
where each constituent is grouped together and 
assigned a phrase label. Where appropriate, one or 
more functional tag is appended to the phrase label 
and empty categories are added. 
 
3 Extending the Chinese Treebank 

annotation to informal genres  
 
The original CTB annotation scheme [2] was de-
signed for genres such as newswire and maga-
zines, where the language is very formal and 
each document is carefully edited. As we move to 
informal genres such as forum discussions, web 
blogs, online instant chatting, telephone phone 
conversations and so on, we encounter many new 
phenomena that have to be accounted for. These 
include typographic errors, incomplete sentences, 
non-speech elements such as background noises 
that are recorded in transcriptions of speech, dis-
fluent (and yet understandable) utterances. These 
new phenomena fall into two broad categories: 
non-linguistic phenomena such as typographical 
errors that are introduced due to haste and care-
lessness, and linguistic phenomena such as disflu-
encies in conversational speech where a speaker 

28



has to repair the utterance s/he produced under the 
time pressure. We discuss these broad categories 
and how they are treated in our annotation frame-
work in the next two subsections.  As of this writ-
ing, we have annotated over 400,000 words in the 
informal genre based on the extended annotation 
guidelines. 
 
3.1 Typographical errors and non-speech 

elements  
 
Typographical errors do not have a linguistic ex-
planation, and they are produced due to careless-
ness, fatigue, or haste on the part of the authors or 
transcribers. Because we adhere to the practice of 
“not altering the source data and only adding anno-
tation” in the annotation process, we add tags at 
both the part-of-speech tagging and syntactic 
bracketing levels to mark up these errors where 
appropriate. 
The first type of typographic error is mis-spelled 
Chinese characters. Since words with this type of 
typographic error usually can still be interpreted, 
we segment and POS-tag them as if we were anno-
tating their correct counterpart. For example, we 
annotate 幸口开河 as if it were 信口开河. We treat 
it as one word and label it as VV at the POS level. 
We do NOT change the original characters in the 
text, as a matter of principle. 
 
 
(2) 幸(信)口开河/VV 
talk irresponsibly “talk 
irresponsibly” 
 
The second type of typographic error is characters 
written in the wrong order. It is different from the 
first type in that the word boundaries are messed up 
and cannot be segmented and POS-tagged as if it 
were correct. In this case we add a new POS tag 
NOI (“Noise”) to tag the messed up parts and 
group the entire string as TYPO, a phrase label: 
 
(3) (TYPO 事/NOI 类/NOI 各/NOI 故/NOI)  
 

? type       each       ?  
Correct:各/DT 类/M      事故/NN 
 

every   type       accident 
 
“all sorts of accidents” 
The mechanical errors are random and cannot be 
fully anticipated, so broad encompassing catego-
ries such as NOI (POS tag), TYPO (phrase label) 

are used to label them. 
We also added a phrase label SKIP to mark up 
sequences of non-speech elements, indicating that 
this portion can be ignored when the text is inter-
preted. Non-speech elements include background 
noises recorded in speech transcripts, boundary 
markers and so on. 
 
3.2 New linguistic phenomena in informal 

genres  
 
There are also a large number of new linguistic 
phenomena that cannot be accommodated by the 
original annotation framework, and these include 
incomplete sentences, embedded speech, fillers and 
other types of disfluencies. These are linguistic 
issues whose cognitive processes and pragmatic 
effects have been widely discussed in the literature 
[3] [4] [5] [6] [7]. Based on the studies of these 
issues in the literature, we added 4 phrase labels 
and 2 functional tags to account for them. 
 
Incomplete utterances (INC) 
In informal genres, especially in conversational 
speech, there are often incomplete utterances. To 
label such utterances, we added the phase label 
INC to the original annotation scheme. INC is a 
label for root nodes only, similar to FRAG, IP, CP 
in the original guidelines. It is different from 
FRAG in that the latter is semantically complete 
even though it does not have the typical structure 
of a sentence. Utterances marked INC are incom-
plete both in its syntactic structure and in its se-
mantic interpretation. (4) is an example. 
(4） 
(INC (CP-CND (ADVP (CS 如果/if))  

    (IP (NP-SBJ (PN他们/they))  
     (VP (VV来/come)))) 

           (PU ，) 
            (ADVP (AD那/then)  
            (NP-SBJ (PN我/I)  
           (VP-UNF (ADVP (AD就/then))))))      
 
“If they come, then I will …” 
 
Fillers (FLR) 
In conversational speech, the speaker often needs 
to think about what s/he wants to say and use fill-
ers to buy her/him some time. The linguistic devic-
es s/he uses for this purpose are called fillers. Fill-
ers do not have a significant role to play in the syn-
tactic structure of a sentence and they do not add to 
the semantic content of a sentence either. Fillers 
form a close set because there are only a finite 
number of them, but there is little restriction on 
where they can occur in the sentence. Fillers in 

29



Chinese include “嗯/um, uh-huh” , “呃/Ugh”, “唔 
/oh”, “啊/Ah”, “这个/Eh”, “那个/Eh”, etc. 
 
(5) 
(IP (NP-SBJ (PN 你/you)) 
      (VP (ADVP (AD 多/more)) 
             (FLR (INF 那个/that one)) 
             (VP (VV 长/grow) 
    (NP-OBJ (QP (CLP (M 个/CL))) 
         (NP (NN 心眼儿/mind))))))  
“You should be more mindful.” 
 
Disfluency (DFL) 
In conversational speech, a speaker often has to 
repeat what s/he has just said, or abandon what 
s/he just said and restart with revised content. This 
is a phenomenon called repair in speech literature. 
There is extensive literature on speech repairs 
[8][9][13]. Typically, a speech repair instance can 
be characterized as a template that consists of a 
reparandum and an alteration [13]. The reparan-
dum is the speech sequence that is erroneous or 
inappropriate, while the alteration represents the 
correction of the problematic sequence. The altera-
tion can delete from, add to, substitute for, or re-
peat the problematic sequence. Or it can be a fresh 
restart that has little resemblance to the problemat-
ic sequence. The alteration is essential to the com-
pleteness of the syntactic structure of a sentence, 
while the reparandum, like fillers, can be consid-
ered to be “extra” material. We label such extra 
material with the phrase label DFL. The idea is 
that when such extra material is stripped, the re-
maining structure is a syntactically well-formed 
sentence. 
(6a) Repetition 
(IP  (PP-TMP (P 到/up to)  
                     (NP (NT 现在/now)))  
        (FLR (SP 啊/Ah))  
        (PU ，)  
       (NP-SBJ (-NONE- pro))  
      (VP (DFL (VP (ADVP (AD 已经/already))  
                              (VP (VE 有/have))))  
               (PU ，)  
              (ADVP (AD 已经/already))  
               (VP (VE 有/have)  
                       (IP-OBJ (NP-SBJ  (DNP  (DNP (QP (CD 七百多万
/more than 7 million))                                     (DEG 的))   
                                             (DNP (NP (NN 个人/individual travelling
游))  
                                                        (DEG 的))  
                                               (NP (NN 旅客/visitors))))   
                                      (VP (VV 来/come)  
                                             (NP-PN-OBJ (NR 香港/Hongkong))))))) 
“Up to now, there have been, have been more than 7 million individual 
visitors visiting Hongkong.” 
 
(6b) Substitution 
( (NP-Q (SPK [Speaker_A1]) 
 (DFL (NT 昨天/yesterday)) 

 (FLR (IJ 哎/ah)) 
 (PU ,) 
 (NP (NT 今天/today)) 
 (SP 啊/Ah) 
 (PU ?))) 
 
“Yesterday, (you mean) today?” 
 
(6c) Restart 
( (CP-Q (SPK [Speaker_A]) 
 (INTJ (NN 咯/um)) 
 (PU ,) 
 (DFL (ADVP (INF 那/then)) 
      (NP-SBJ (PN 它/it)) 
      (VP-UNF (ADVP (AD 怎么/how come)))) 
 (PU ,) 
 (IP (NP-SBJ (-NONE- pro))  
     (VP (ADVP (AD 不/not)) 
  (VP (VV 知道/know) 
      (NP-OBJ (DP (DT 怎么/how)) 
       (QP (CLP (M 回/Classifer))) 
       (NP (NN 事儿/matter)))))) 
 (SP 啊/Ah) 
 (PU .))) 
 
  “Uh, then how come it, I don’t know what the matter is.” 
 
Embedded utterances (MBD) 
Embedded utterances are cases where the utterance 
of one speaker is embedded in the utterance of an-
other speaker. This happens when one speaker in-
terrupts when another speaker has not finished 
his/her sentence. The embedded utterances are 
usually short comments that indicate consent, etc. 
 
 
(7) 
(SPK [Speaker_A]) 
 (CP (IP (CP-ADV (IP (NP-SBJ (-NONE- pro))  
         (VP (ADVP (CS 一/at first)) 
      (VP (VV 开始/begin)))) 
     (SP 吧/ba)) 
    (PU ,) 
    (MBD (INTJ (SPK [Speaker_B]) 
        (IJ 啊/Ah) 
        (PU ,))) 
    (SPK [Speaker_A]) 
    (CP (IP (NP-SBJ (PN 他/he)) 
     (VP (VV 要/want) 
         (VP (VP (VV 做/do) 
          (NP-OBJ (NN 科学
/science) 
           (NN 研究
/research))) 
      (VP (VV 用/use))))) 
        (SP 的/DE)) 
    (PU ,) 
    (DFL (IP (NP-SBJ (-NONE- pro)) 
      (VP-UNF (VC 是/BE) 
       (PP (P 用/by means of) 
           (NP (PN 我/I))))) 
         (DEG 的/DE)) 
    (PU ,) 
    (CP (IP (NP-SBJ (-NONE- pro))  
     (VP (VC 是/BE) 
         (IP-PRD (NP-SBJ (PN 我/I)) 

30



          (VP (MSP 去/go) 
       (VP (VV 申
请/apply)))))) 
        (SP 的/DE)))) 
“Speaker A: ‘At first’ 
  Speaker B: ‘Ah’  
  Speaker A: ‘He wanted to use it for scientific research.  He used 
mine, it’s me who applied for it.’” 
 
In addition to the new phrase labels above, we have 
also added two new functional tags (-DIS,-UNF). –
DIS represents discourse markers and – UNF de-
notes incomplete phrases in a syntactic parse. –
UNF is different from INC in that INC is a root 
node label (label for the entire sentence) while –
UNF is functional tag indicating a non-root node 
label is incomplete. In general, functional tags can 
be attached to any phrase label to provide addition-
al information. A constituent bearing the -  
UNF tag can be a NP, VP, etc.. A constituent bear-
ing the –DIS tag is usually an adverbial phrase 
(ADVP), although it can be other types of phrases. 
 
-DIS: functional tag indicating discourse 
marker 
 
In spoken discourse, some lexical items demon-
strate the discourse function of linking two stretch-
es of discourse, with their original semantic mean-
ings weakened or ‘bleached’ [10] [11]. They serve 
to indicate that an adverbial phrase functions as a 
discourse marker rather than an indicator of time, 
location, manner, reason and so on. The following 
is an example of discourse markers: 
“就是说/that is to say” （sometimes for further 
clarification, but often indicates that the speaker 
has got something to say) 
 
(8) 
(CP (IP (CP-CND (IP (ADVP (AD 所以/so)) 
        (NP-SBJ (PN 你/you)) 
        (VP (ADVP (AD 要是/if)) 
     (VP (VV 回来/return)))) 
    (SP 的话/if)) 
   (NP-SBJ (PN 你/you)) 
   (VP (ADVP (AD 就/then)) 
       (VP (VV 可以/can) 
    (VP (VV 知道/know) 
        (PU ,) 
        (IP-OBJ (ADVP-DIS (AD 就是说/that’s to 
say)) 
         (PU ,) 
         (FLR (INF 这/this)) 
         (NP-SBJ (DP (PN 那些/those)) 
          (NP (NN 东西/stuff))) 
         (FLR (SP 啊/Ah)) 
         (PU ,) 
         (VP (PP-ADV (P 跟/with) 
       (NP (PN 他
/him))) 
      (VP (VV 对路/fit)))))))) 

      (SP 啦/la) 
      (PU .)) 
 
“So if you come back, then you know, that’s to say, those stuff fit 
him.’” 
 
-UNF: Functional tag indicating unfinished 
constituent 
 
(9) 
(INC (CP-CND (ADVP (CS 如果))  

    (IP (NP-SBJ (PN他们))  
     (VP (VV来)))) 

(PU ，) 
 (ADVP (AD那)  

(NP-SBJ (PN我)  
(VP-UNF (ADVP (AD就))))))  
“If they come, then I will …” 
 
For the sake of completeness, the revised tagsets 
(phrase labels and functional tags) for the Chinese 
Treebank are presented in Tables 1 and 2 respec-
tively, with new tags marked by *. 
 
 
 
Label Description Label Description 
ADJP Adjective LCP Localizer 

 phrase  phrase 
ADVP Adverb LST List marker 

 phrase   
CLP Classifier *MBD Embedded 

 phrase  utterance 
CP Clause IP Simple 

 headed by a  clause 
 complementi   
 Zer   
*DFL Disfluency NP Noun 

   phrase 
DNP Phrase PP Prepositiona 

 formed by  l phrase 
 “XP+DEG”   
DP Determiner PRN Parenthetica 

 Phrase  l 
DVP Phrase QP Quantifier 

 formed by  phrase 
 “XP+DEV”   
*FLR Filler *SKIP Skip 
FRAG Fragment *TYPO Typographic 

   error 
*INC Incomplete UCP Unlike 

   coordination 
IP Simple VP verbphrase 

 sentence   
LCP Localizer   

 Phrase   

31



Table 1: revised phrase labels. * indicates new 
labels 
Function tags 
Tag Description Tag Description 
ADV Adverbial MNR Manner 
APP Appositive OBJ Direct object 
BNF Beneficiary PN Proper noun 

   phrase 
CND Condition PRD Predicate 
DIR Direction PRP Purpose or 

   reason 
 

*DIS Discourse Q Question 
 connective   
EXT Extent SBJ Subject 
FOC Focus TMP Temporal 
HLN Headline TPC Topic 
IJ Interjective TTL Title 
IMP Imperative *UNF Incomplete 

   phrase 
IO Indirect VOC Vocative 

 Object   
LGS Logical WH Wh-phrase 

 subject   
LOC Locative   
Table 2: Revised functional tags. * indicates 
new tags 
4 Scaling up the CTB annota-

tion by broadening the anno-
tator pool  

The original Chinese Treebank was annotated in 
two stages: the word segmentation/POS tagging 
stage and the syntactic bracketing stage. In the 
word segmentation/POS-tagging stage, an annota-
tor adds word boundaries and POS tags to words in 
a corpus. In the bracketing stage, an annotator 
groups the constituents and organizes them into a 
hierarchical structure, adding functional categories 
and empty categories to the syntactic structure of a 
sentence, following a set of treebanking guidelines 
that are close to 200 pages [20]. 
 
Moving to informal genres and scaling up the anno-
tation effort magnify two challenges in Chinese 
Treebanking. The first one is that in informal gen-
res, the rules for using punctuation marks are very 
loose, and in conversational speech, punctuations 
are of course not used at all and they are added later 
on by transcribers. These lead to unreliable sen-
tence boundaries if we follow the standard practice 
of using periods, question marks and exclamation 
marks as markers of sentence boundary. Another 
challenge is that as we increase the volume of an-

notation, we need more trained treebankers. Train-
ing a treebanker takes a long time and treebankers 
have to come with extensive formal linguistic 
training to begin with. 
 
To meet these challenges, we implemented a new 
workflow that consists of five stages, illustrated 
graphically in Figure 1. The new workflow de-
composes the treebanking process into five self-
contained steps, namely, sentence boundary detec-
tion, word segmentation/POS tagging, constituent 
grouping, functional category and empty category 
annotation, and post-processing and validation. 
Compared with the original Chinese Treebank 
workflow, we added a sentence boundary detection 
stage where we perform sentence segmentation. 
More importantly, we decomposed the bracketing 
stage, the most difficult aspect of treebanking, into 
two steps. The first step is to group the constituents 
of a sentence into a hierarchical structure. This step 
produces a bare-bone syntactic parse for a sen-
tence. In the second step, we add functional tags 
and empty categories to the bare-bone structure to 
produce a full parse. 
 
 
 
 
 
             
         Figure 1: Annotation work flow 
 
The purpose of the new workflow is to reduce the 
cognitive load of the annotators and thus increase 
the pool of qualified annotators. Treebankers now 
do not all have to understand all aspects of tree-
banking. Some treebankers can concentrate on 
grouping the constituents correctly and others can 
focus on the functional tags and empty categories. 
This is in keeping with the spirit of crowdsourcing 
[12], the essence of which is to design annotation 
tasks in a way that increases the annotator pool so 
that minimally trained annotators can work on 
them. Our new workflow can be viewed as a small 
step in that direction. As a result of this new work-
flow, four treebankers rather than two can work on 
this project.  We did an internal performance eval-
uation about the amount of data we are able to an-
notate per week, and compared to our work rate 
prior to the introduction of the new work flow, our 
speed accelerated by 30% with more consistency 
and accuracy. 
The new workflow also allow cross-checking be-
tween different layers of annotation. Treebankers 
working on the bare-bone structure can check er-

32



rors in word segmentation and POS tagging, and 
treebankers working on functional tags and empty 
categories can check the bare-bone structures. The 
new workflow also opens up more opportunities for 
automation. Automatic pre-processing was per-
formed at each step. Sentence-segmented data is 
automatically word segmented and POS-tagged 
using a word segmenter/POS-tagged we developed 
in-house [14] before they are manually corrected. 
Word segmented and POS-tagged data is then au-
tomatically parsed using the Berkeley parser re-
trained on available Chinese Treebank data. Final-
ly, we developed a simple rule-based tool that au-
tomatically adds functional tags and empty catego-
ries to the bare-bone parses before they are correct-
ed. 
 
5    Some relevant statistics 
 
Our raw texts include newswire, magazine articles, 
broadcast news, broadcast conversations, and web-
logs.  As of this writing, we have annotated over 
400,000 words in the informal genre based on the 
extended annotation guidelines.  Here is some sta-
tistics based on an analysis of 461 files with 
396,874 words: 
 
label occurrences 
DFL tags 2819 
FLR tags 1854 
INC tags 637 
TYPO tags 13 
SKIP tags 281 
MBD tags 167 
-DIS tags 150 
-UNF tags 924 
 
 
6     Related work 
 
The success of the Penn Treebank [15] has spurred 
the development of a large number of treebanks in 
many different languages, but most of the early 
treebanking efforts are directed at the formal gen-
res. Specific to Chinese, there are number of signif-
icant treebanking efforts (Sinica Treebank and 
Tsinghua Treebank), but the Chinese Treebank is 
one of the early ones. There are relatively few ef-
forts directed at annotating informal genres. The 
Switchboard Corpus is one notable exception [17]. 
It is a speech corpus annotated following guidelines 
that extend the Penn Treebank annotation guide-
lines. To the best of our knowledge, there is no 
similar annotation in Chinese. 

 
7     Conclusion 
 
We presented our effort to extend the Chinese 
Treebank annotation to informal genres, and in the 
process, we extended the Chinese Treebank anno-
tation guidelines to account for new linguistic 
phenomena, which include typographic errors and 
disfluent speech. We also presented a new work-
flow aimed at scaling up the current treebanking 
effort. The new workflow decomposes the com-
plex treebanking into more manageable subtasks. 
In doing so, it reduces the cognitive load on tree-
bankers and thus increases the annotator pool. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We gratefully acknowledge the effort of our anno-
tators. This work is funded by the DAPRA via con-
tract HR0011-11-C-0145 entitled “Linguistic Re-
sources for Multilingual Processing”.  All opinions 
expressed here are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of DARPA.  
 
References 
 
[1] Nancy Ide, Laurent Romary, International standard 
for a linguistic annotation framework,  SEALTS ’03 
Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL 2003 workshop of 
Software engineering and architecture of language tech-
nology systems – Volume 8 Pages 25-30 
  
[2] Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu-Dong Chiou and Martha 
Palmer. 2005. The Penn Chinese Treebank: Phrase 
Structure Annotation of a Large Corpus. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, Volume 11 / Issue 02 / June 2005 , 
pp 207-238 
- 
[3] Yan Wang, 2011. A Discourse-Pragmatic Functional 
Study of the Discourse Markers Japanese Ano and Chi-
nese Nage. Intercultural Communication Studies XX: 2 
(2011) 
  
[4] Arnold, J. E., and M. K. Tanenhaus. in press. Disflu-
ency effects in comprehension: How new information 
can become accessible. The processing and acquisition 
of reference, ed. by E.Gibson and N. Perlmutter. MIT 
Press 
   
[5] Blackmer, E. R., and J. L. Mitton. 1991. Theories of 
monitoring and the timing of repairs in spontaneous 
speech. Cognition 39.173-194. 
  
[6] Bortfeld, H., S. D. Leon, J. E. Bloom, M. F. Scho-
ber, and S. E. Brennan. 2001. Disfluency rates in spon-
taneous speech: Effects of age, relationship, topic, role, 
and gender. Language and Speech 44.123-147. 
 

33



[7] Shriberg, E. 1996. Disfluencies in Switchboard. Pro-
ceedings, International Conference on Spoken Language 
Processing, Addendum, 11-14. Philedephia 
 
[8] Lin, Che-kuang, et al., 2005 Important and New Fea-
tures with Analysis for Disfluency Interruption Point 
(IP) Detection in Spontaneous Mandarin Speech. Pro-
ceedings of DiSS’05, Disfluency in Spontaneous Speech 
Workshop 
  
[9] Georgila, Kallirroi, et al., 2010 Cross-Domain 
Speech Disfluency Detection. ACL  
 
[10] Biq, Yung-O. 2001. The Grammaticalization of 
Jiushi and Jiushishuo in Mandarin Chinese. Concentric: 
Studies in English Literature and Linguistics 27. 53-74. 
  
[11] Su, Lily I-wen. 1998. Conversational coherence: 
The use of ranhou in Chinese spoken discourse. In Shu-
anfan Huang (ed.), Selected papers from the second in-
ternational symposium on languages in Taiwan, 167-
181. Taipei: Crane 
 
[12]  Crowdsourcing Translation: Professional Quality 
from Non-Professionals. Omar Zaidan and Chris Calli-
son-Burch, 2011. In Proceedings ACL-2011. 
 
[13] Tseng, S.-C. 2006. Repairs in Mandarin conversa-
tion. Journal of Chinese Linguistics 34(1): 80-120. 
 
[14] Nianwen Xue. 2003. Chinese Word Segmentation 
as Character Tagging. International Journal of Computa-
tional Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing, 
8(1):29-48. 
 
[15] Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann  Marcinkiewicz,
 and Beatrice Santorini. 1993.  Building a large 
annotated corpus of English:  the penn treebank. 
Comput. Linguist. 19, 2 (June  1993), 313­‐330.  
  
[16]  Nianwen Xue, Fu­‐Dong Chiou and Martha  
Palmer, 2002, Building a Large­‐Scale Annotated  
Chinese Corpus. In Proceedings of the 19th.  Interna-
tional Conference on Computational  Linguistics 
(COLING 2002), Taipei, Taiwan, 2002.  
  
[17] Godfrey, J. J., Holliman, E. C., and McDaniel,
  J.,  “SWITCHBOARD: Telephone speech corpus 
for  research and development,” Proc. IEEE Int. 
Conf.  Acoust. Speech Sig. Proc., pp. 517­‐520, 
1992.  
 
[18] Xia, Fei. 2000a. The Segmentation  Guidelines 
for the Penn Chinese Treebank 3.0.  University of 
Pennsylvania Technical Report,  IRCS00­‐06  
 

[19] Xia, Fei. 2000b. The POS Tagging Guidelines  
for the Penn Chinese Treebank 3.0. University of  
Pennsylvania Technical Report, IRCS00­‐07  
 
[20] Xue, Nianwen and Fei Xia. 2000. The  Syn-
tactic Bracketing Guidelines for the Penn  Chinese 
Treebank 3.0. University of  Pennsylvania Technical
 Report, IRCS00­‐08  

34


