










































A Computational Model of Memory, Attention, and Word Learning


In: R. Levy & D. Reitter (Eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics (CMCL 2012), pages 80–89,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Computational Model of Memory, Attention, and Word Learning

Aida Nematzadeh, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson
Department of Computer Science

University of Toronto
{aida,afsaneh,suzanne}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

There is considerable evidence that people
generally learn items better when the presen-
tation of items is distributed over a period of
time (the spacing effect). We hypothesize that
both forgetting and attention to novelty play
a role in the spacing effect in word learning.
We build an incremental probabilistic compu-
tational model of word learning that incorpo-
rates a forgetting and attentional mechanism.
Our model accounts for experimental results
on children as well as several patterns ob-
served in adults.

1 Memory, Attention, and Word Learning

Learning the meaning of words is an important com-
ponent of language acquisition, and an extremely
challenging task faced by young children (e.g.,
Carey, 1978; Bloom, 2000). Much psycholinguis-
tic research has investigated the mechanisms under-
lying early word learning, and the factors that may
facilitate or hinder this process (e.g., Quine, 1960;
Markman and Wachtel, 1988; Golinkoff et al., 1992;
Carpenter et al., 1998). Computational modeling has
been critical in this endeavor, by giving precise ac-
counts of the possible processes and influences in-
volved (e.g., Siskind, 1996; Regier, 2005; Yu, 2005;
Fazly et al., 2010). However, computational models
of word learning have generally not given sufficient
attention to the broader interactions of language ac-
quisition with other aspects of cognition and cogni-
tive development.

Memory limitations and attentional mechanisms
are of particular interest, with recent computational
studies reconfirming their important role in aspects

of word learning. For example, Frank et al. (2010)
show that memory limitations are key to matching
human performance in a model of word segmenta-
tion, while Smith et al. (2010) further demonstrate
how attention plays a role in word learning by form-
ing the basis for abstracting over the input. But
much potential remains for computational modeling
to contribute to a better understanding of the role of
memory and attention in word learning.

One area where there is much experimental evi-
dence relevant to these interactions is in the investi-
gation of the spacing effect in learning (Ebbinghaus,
1885; Glenberg, 1979; Dempster, 1996; Cepeda
et al., 2006). The observation is that people gen-
erally show better learning when the presentations
of the target items to be learned are “spaced” — i.e.,
distributed over a period of time — instead of be-
ing “massed” — i.e., presented together one after
the other. Investigations of the spacing effect often
use a word learning task as the target learning event,
and such studies have looked at the performance of
adults as well as children (Glenberg, 1976; Pavlik
and Anderson, 2005; Vlach et al., 2008). While
this work involves controlled laboratory conditions,
the spacing effect is very robust across domains and
tasks (Dempster, 1989), suggesting that the underly-
ing cognitive processes likely play a role in natural
conditions of word learning as well.

Hypothesized explanations for the spacing effect
have included both memory limitations and atten-
tion. For example, many researchers assume that the
process of forgetting is responsible for the improved
performance in the spaced presentation: Because
participants forget more of what they have learned
in the longer interval, they learn more from sub-
sequent presentations (Melton, 1967; Jacoby, 1978;

80



Cuddy and Jacoby, 1982). However, the precise re-
lation between forgetting and improved learning has
not been made clear. It has also been proposed that
subjects attend more to items in the spaced presen-
tation because accessing less recent (more novel)
items in memory requires more effort or attention
(Hintzman, 1974). However, the precise attentional
mechanism at work in the spacing experiments is not
completely understood.

While such proposals have been discussed for
many years, to our knowledge, there is as yet no de-
tailed computational model of the precise manner in
which forgetting and attention to novelty play a role
in the spacing effect. Moreover, while mathemat-
ical models of the effect help to clarify its proper-
ties (Pavlik and Anderson, 2005), it is very impor-
tant to situate these general cognitive mechanisms
within a model of word learning in order to under-
stand clearly how these various processes might in-
teract in the natural word learning setting.

We address this gap by considering memory con-
straints and attentional mechanisms in the context
of a computational model of word-meaning acquisi-
tion. Specifically, we change an existing probabilis-
tic incremental model of word learning (Fazly et al.,
2010) by integrating two new factors: (i) a forgetting
mechanism that causes the learned associations be-
tween words and meanings to decay over time; and
(ii) a mechanism that simulates the effects of atten-
tion to novelty on in-the-moment learning. The re-
sult is a more cognitively plausible word learning
model that includes a precise formulation of both
forgetting and attention to novelty. In simulations
using this new model, we show that a possible ex-
planation for the spacing effect is the interplay of
these two mechanisms, neither of which on its own
can account for the effect.

2 The Computational Model

We extend the model of Fazly et al. (2010) — hence-
forth referred to as FAS10 — by integrating new
functionality to capture forgetting and attention to
novelty. The model of FAS10 is an appropriate start-
ing point for our study because it is an incremen-
tal model of word learning that learns probabilis-
tic associations between words and their semantic
properties from naturalistic data. Nonetheless, the

model assumes equal attention to all words and ob-
jects present in the input, and, although incremental,
it has a perfect memory for the internal represen-
tation of each processed input. Hence, as we will
show, it is incapable of simulating the spacing ef-
fects observed in humans.

2.1 The FAS10 Model

The input to the model is a sequence of utterances (a
set of words), each paired with a scene representa-
tion (a set of semantic features, representing what is
perceived when the words are heard), as in:

Utterance: { she, drinks, milk }
Scene: { ANIMATE, PERSON, FEMALE, CONSUME,

DRINK, SUBSTANCE, FOOD, DAIRY-PRODUCT }

For each word, the model of FAS10 learns a proba-
bility distribution over all possible features, p(.|w),
called the meaning probability of the word. Before
processing any input, all features are equally likely
for a word, and the word’s meaning probability is
uniform over all features. At each time step t, an
input utterance–scene pair (similar to the above
example) is processed. For each word w and seman-
tic feature f in the input pair, an alignment score,
at(w| f ), is calculated that specifies how strongly
the w– f pair are associated at time t. The alignment
score in FAS10 uses the meaning probabilities of
all the words in the utterance, which reflect the
knowledge of the model of word meanings up to
that point, as in:

at(w|f ) =
pt−1(f |w)

∑
w′∈Ut

pt−1(f |w′)
(1)

where pt−1( f |w) is the probability of f being part of
the meaning of word w at time t−1.

In the FAS10 model, pt(.|w) is then updated for
all the words in the utterance, using the accumulated
evidence from all prior and current co-occurrences
of w– f pairs. Specifically, an association score is
defined between a word and a feature, assoct(w, f ),
which is a summation of all the alignments for that
w and f up to time t.1 This association score is then
normalized using a smoothed version of the follow-

1In FAS10, assoct(w, f ) = assoct−1(w, f )+at(w| f ).
81



ing to yield pt( f |w):

pt( f |w) =
assoct( f , w)

∑
f ′∈M

assoct( f ′, w)
(2)

where M is the set of all observed features.
There are two observations to make about the

FAS10 model in the context of our desire to explore
attention and forgetting mechanisms in word learn-
ing. First, the calculation of alignments at(w| f ) in
Eqn. (1) treats all words equally, without special at-
tention to any particular item(s) in the input. Sec-
ond, the assoct( f ,w) term in Eqn. (2) encodes per-
fect memory of all calculated alignments since it is a
simple accumulated sum. These properties motivate
the changes to the formulation of the model that we
describe next.

2.2 Adding Attention to Novelty to the Model
As noted just above, the FAS10 model lacks any
mechanism to focus attention on certain words, as is
suggested by theories on the spacing effect (Hintz-
man, 1974). One robust observation in studies on
attention is that people attend to new items in a
learning scenario more than other items, leading to
improved learning of the novel items (e.g., Snyder
et al., 2008; MacPherson and Moore, 2010; Horst
et al., 2011). We thus model the effect of attention
to novelty when calculating alignments in our new
model: attention to a more novel word increases the
strength of its alignment with a feature — and con-
sequently the learned word–feature association —
compared to the alignment of a less novel word.

We modify the original alignment formulation of
FAS10 to incorporate a multiplicative novelty term
as follows (cf. Eqn. (1)):

at(w, f ) =
pt(f |w)

∑
w′∈Ut

pt(f |w′)
∗noveltyt(w) (3)

where noveltyt(w) specifies the degree of novelty of
a word as a simple inverse function of recency. That
is, we assume that the more recently a word has been
observed by the model, the less novel it appears to
the model. Given a word w at time t that was last
observed at time tlastw , we calculate noveltyt(w) as:

noveltyt(w) = 1− recency(t, tlastw) (4)

where recency(t, tlastw) is inversely proportional
to the difference between t and tlastw . We set
novelty(w) to be 1 for the first exposure of the word.

2.3 Adding a Forgetting Mechanism to the
Model

Given the observation above (see end of Section 2.1)
that assoct(w, f ) embeds perfect memory in the
FAS10 model, we add a forgetting mechanism by re-
formulating assoct(w, f ) to incorporate a decay over
time of the component alignments at(w| f ). In or-
der to take a cognitively plausible approach to calcu-
lating this function, we observe that assoct(w, f ) in
FAS10 serves a similar function to activation in the
ACT-R model of memory (Anderson and Lebiere,
1998). In ACT-R, activation of an item is the sum
of individual memory strengthenings for that item,
just as assoct(w, f ) is a sum of individual align-
ment strengths for the pair (w, f ). A crucial dif-
ference is that memory strengthenings in ACT-R
undergo decay. Specifically, activation of an item
m after t presentations is calculated as: act(m)t =
ln(∑tt ′=1 1/(t−t ′)d), where t ′ is the time of each pre-
sentation, and d is a constant decay parameter.

We adapt this formulation for assoct(w, f ) with
the following changes: First, in the act formula, the
constant 1 in the numerator is the basic strength of
each presentation to memory. In our model, this
is not a constant but rather the strength of align-
ment, at(w| f ). Second, we assume that stronger
alignments should be more entrenched in memory
and thus decay more slowly than weaker alignments.
Thus, each alignment undergoes a decay which is
dependent on the strength of the alignment rather
than a constant decay d. We thus define assoct(w, f )
to be:

assoct( f ,w) = ln(
t

∑
t ′=1

at ′(w| f )
(t− t ′)dat′

) (5)

where the decay for each alignment dat′ is:

dat′ =
d

at ′(w| f )
(6)

where d is a constant parameter. Note that the dat′
decreases as at ′(w| f ) increases.

82



apple: { FOOD:1, SOLID:.72, PRODUCE:.63,
EDIBLE-FRUIT:.32, PLANT-PART:.22,
PHYSICAL-ENTITY:.17, WHOLE:.06, · · · }

Figure 1: True meaning features & scores for apple.

3 Input Generation

The input data consists of a set of utterances paired
with their corresponding scene representations. The
utterances are taken from the child-directed speech
(CDS) portion of the Manchester corpus (Theakston
et al., 2001), from CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000),
which includes transcripts of conversations with 12
British children, ages 1;8 to 3;0. Every utterance
is considered as a bag of lemmatized words. Half of
the data is used as the development set, and the other
half in the final experiments.

Because no manually-annotated semantic repre-
sentation is available for any such large corpus of
CDS, we use the approach of Nematzadeh et al.
(2012) to generate scene representations. For each
utterance a scene representation is generated artifi-
cially, by first creating an input-generation lexicon
that contains the true meaning (t(w)) of all the words
(w) in our corpus. The true meaning is a vector
of semantic features and their assigned scores (Fig-
ure 1). The semantic features for a word, depend-
ing on its part of speech, are chosen from different
sources such as WordNet.2 The score of each feature
is calculated automatically to give a higher value to
the more specific features (such as FRUIT for apple),
rather than more general features (like PHYSICAL-
ENTITY for apple).

To generate the scene representation S of an utter-
ance U, we probabilistically sample a subset of fea-
tures from the features in t(w) for each word w ∈U.
Thus, in each occurrence of w some of its features
are missing from the scene, resulting in an imper-
fect sampling. This imperfect sampling allows us to
simulate noise and uncertainty in the input, as well
as the uncertainty of a child in determining the rele-
vant meaning elements in a scene. The scene S is the
union of all the features sampled for all the words in
the utterance. We note that the input-generation lex-
icon is only used in creating input corpora that are
naturalistic (based on child-directed speech), and not
in the learning of the model.

2http://wordnet.princeton.edu

4 Experiments

First, we examine the overall word learning be-
haviour in our new model. Then we look at spacing
effects in the learning of novel words. In both these
experiments, we compare the behavior of our model
with the model of FAS10 to clearly illustrate the ef-
fects of forgetting and attention to novelty in the new
model. Next we turn to further experiments explor-
ing in more detail the interaction of forgetting and
attention to novelty in producing spacing effects.

4.1 Word Learning over Time
Generally, the model of FAS10 has increasing com-
prehension of words as it is exposed to more input
over time. In our model, we expect attention to nov-
elty to facilitate word learning, by focusing more
on newly observed words, whereas forgetting is ex-
pected to hinder learning. We need to see if the new
model is able to learn words effectively when sub-
ject to the combined effects of these two influences.

To measure how well a word w is learned in each
model, we compare its learned meaning l(w) (a vec-
tor holding the values of the meaning probability
p(.|w)) to its true meaning t(w) (see Section 3):

acq(w) = sim(l(w), t(w)) (7)

where sim is the cosine similarity between the two
meaning vectors, t(w) and l(w). The better the
model learns the meaning of w, the closer l(w)
would get to t(w), and the higher the value of sim
would become. To evaluate the overall behaviour of
a model, at each point in time, we average the acq
score of all the words that the model has seen.

We train each model on 10,000 input utterance–
scene pairs and compare their patterns of word learn-
ing over time (Figure 2).3 We can see that in the
original model, the average acq score is mostly in-
creasing over time before leveling off. Our model,
starts at a higher average acq score compared to
FAS10’s model, since the effect of attention to nov-
elty is stronger than the effect of forgetting in early
stages of training. There is a sharp decrease in the
acq scores after the early training stage, which then
levels off. The early decrease in acq scores oc-
curs because many of the words the model is ex-

3The constant decay parameter d in Eqn. (6) is set to 0.03 in
this experiment.

83



Figure 2: Average acq score of the words over time, for
our model and FAS10’s model.

posed to early on are not learned very well initially,
and so forgetting occurs at a higher rate during that
stage. The model subsequently stabilizes, and the
acq scores level off although at a lower absolute
level than the FAS10 model. Note that when com-
paring these two models, we are interested in the
pattern of learning; in particular, we need to en-
sure that our new word learning model will even-
tually stabilize as expected. Our model stabilizes
at a lower average acq score since unlike FAS10’s
model, it does not implement a perfect memory.

4.2 The Spacing Effect in Novel Word
Learning

Vlach et al. (2008) performed an experiment to in-
vestigate the effect of presentation spacing in learn-
ing novel word–object pairs in three-year-old chil-
dren. Each pair was presented 3 times in each of
two settings, either consecutively (massed presenta-
tion), or with a short play interval between each pre-
sentation (spaced presentation). Children were then
asked to identify the correct object corresponding to
the novel word. The number of correct responses
was significantly higher when the pairs were in the
spaced presentation compared to the massed presen-
tation. This result clearly demonstrates the spacing
effect in novel word learning in children.

Experiments on the spacing effect in adults have
typically examined and compared different amounts
of time between the spaced presentations, which we
refer to as the spacing interval. Another important
parameter in such studies is the time period between
the last training trial and the test trial(s), which we

refer to as the retention interval (Glenberg, 1976;
Bahrick and Phelps, 1987; Pavlik and Anderson,
2005). Since the experiment of Vlach et al. (2008)
was designed for very young children, the proce-
dures were kept simple and did not vary these two
parameters. We design an experiment similar to that
of Vlach et al. (2008) to examine the effect of spac-
ing in our model, but extend it to also study the role
of various spacing and retention intervals, for com-
parison to earlier adult studies.

4.2.1 Experimental Setup
First, the model is trained on 100 utterance–scene

pairs to simulate the operation of normal word learn-
ing prior to the experiment.4 Then a randomly
picked novel word (nw) that did not appear in the
training trials is introduced to the model in 3 teach-
ing trials, similar to Vlach et al.’s (2008) experiment.
For each teaching trial, nw is added to a different ut-
terance, and its probabilistically-generated meaning
representation (see Section 3) is added to the corre-
sponding scene. We add nw to an utterance–scene
pair from our corpus to simulate the presentation of
the novel word during the natural interaction with
the child in the experimental setting.

The spacing interval between each of these 3
teaching trials is varied from 0 to 29 utterances, re-
sulting in 30 different simulations for each nw. For
example, when the spacing interval is 5, there are
5 utterances between each presentation of nw. A
spacing of 0 utterances yields the massed presenta-
tion. We run the experiment for 20 randomly-chosen
novel words to ensure that the pattern of the results
is not related to the meaning representation of a spe-
cific word.

For each spacing interval, we look at the acq score
of the novel word at two points in time, to simu-
late two retention intervals: One immediately after
the last presentation of the novel word (imm condi-
tion) and one at a later point in time (lat condition).
By looking at these two conditions, we can further
observe the effect of forgetting in our model, since
the decay in the model’s memory would be more se-
vere in the lat condition, compared to the imm con-
dition.5 The results reported here for each spacing

4In the experiments of Section 4.2.2 and Section 4.3, the
constant decay parameter d is equal to 0.04.

5Recall that each point of time in our model corresponds to

84



Figure 3: Average acq score of novel words over spacing
intervals, in our model and FAS10’s model.

interval average the acq scores of all the novel words
at the corresponding points in time.

4.2.2 The Basic Spacing Effect Results
Figure 3 shows the results of the simulations in

our model and the FAS10 model. We assume that
very small spacing intervals (but greater than 0)
correspond to the spaced presentation in the Vlach
et al. (2008) experiments, while a spacing of 0 cor-
responds to the massed presentation. In the FAS10
model, the average acq score of words does not
change with spacing, and there is no difference be-
tween the imm and lat conditions, confirming that
this model fails to mimic the observed spacing ef-
fects. By contrast, in our model the average acq
score is greater in the small spacing intervals (1-
3) than in the massed presentation, mimicking the
Vlach et al. (2008) results on children. This happens
because a nw appears more novel with larger spacing
intervals between each of its presentations resulting
in stronger alignments.

We can see two other interesting patterns in our
model: First, the average acq score of words for all
spacing intervals is greater in the imm condition than
in the lat condition. This occurs because there is
more forgetting in the model over the longer reten-
tion interval of lat. Second, in both conditions the
average acq score initially increases from a massed
presentation to the smaller spacing intervals. How-
ever, at spacing intervals between about 3 and 5,

processing an input pair. The acq score in the imm condition is
calculated at time t, which is immediately after the last presen-
tation of nw. The lat condition corresponds to t +20.

the acq score begins to decrease as spacing intervals
grow larger. As explained earlier, the initial increase
in acq scores for small spacing intervals results from
novelty of the words in a spaced presentation. How-
ever, for bigger spacing intervals the effect of nov-
elty is swamped by the much greater degree of for-
getting after a bigger spacing interval.

Although Vlach et al. (2008) did not vary their
spacing and retention intervals, other spacing effect
studies on adults have done so. For example, Glen-
berg (1976) presented adults with word pairs to learn
under varying spacing intervals, and tested them af-
ter several different retention intervals (his experi-
ment 1). Our pattern of results in Figure 3 is in line
with his results. In particular, he found a nonmono-
tonic pattern of spacing similar to the pattern in our
model: learning of pairs was improved with increas-
ing spacing intervals up to a point, but there was a
decrease in performance for larger spacing intervals.
Also, the proportion of recalled pairs decreased for
longer retention intervals, similar to our lower per-
formance in the lat condition.

4.3 The Role of Forgetting and Attention
To fully understand the role as well as the neces-
sity of, both forgetting and attention to novelty in
our results, we test two other models under the same
conditions as the previous spacing experiment: (a) a
model with our mechanism for attention to novelty
but not forgetting, and (b) a model with our forget-
ting mechanism but no attention to novelty; see Fig-
ure 4 and Figure 5, respectively.

In the model that attends to novelty but does not
incorporate a memory decay mechanism (Figure 4),
the average acq score consistently increases as spac-
ing intervals grow bigger. This occurs because the
novel words appear more novel following bigger
spacing intervals, and thus attract more alignment
strength. Since the model does not forget, there is
no difference between the immediate (imm) and later
(lat) retention intervals. This pattern does not match
the spacing effect patterns of people, suggesting that
forgetting is a necessary aspect of our model’s abil-
ity to do so in the previous section.

On the other hand, in the model with forgetting
but no attentional mechanism (Figure 5), we see two
different behaviors in the imm and lat conditions. In
the imm condition, the average acq score decreases

85



Figure 4: Average acq score of the novel words over spac-
ing intervals, for the model with novelty but without for-
getting.

Figure 5: Average acq score of the novel words over spac-
ing intervals, for the model with forgetting but without
novelty.

consistently over spacing intervals. This is as ex-
pected, because the greater time between presenta-
tions means a greater degree of forgetting. Specif-
ically, the alignment scores decay more between
presentations of the word to be learned, given the
greater passage of time in larger spacing intervals.
The weaker alignments then lead to lower acq scores
in this condition.

Paradoxically, although this effect on learning
also holds in the lat condition, another factor is at
play, leading to better performance than in the imm
condition at all spacing intervals. Here the greater
retention interval — the time between the last learn-
ing presentation and the test time — leads to greater
forgetting in a manner that instead improves the acq
scores. Consider that the meaning representation

for a word includes some probability mass assigned
to irrelevant features — i.e., those features that oc-
curred in an utterance–scene pair with the word but
are not part of its true meaning. Because such fea-
tures generally have lower probability than relevant
features (which are observed more consistently with
a word), a longer retention interval leads to them de-
caying more than the relevant features. Thus the lat
condition enables the model to better focus on the
features relevant to a word.

In conclusion, neither attention to novelty nor for-
getting alone achieves the pattern typical of the spac-
ing effects in people that our model shows in the
lower two plots in Figure 3. Hence we conclude that
both factors are necessary to our account, suggesting
that it is an interaction between the two that accounts
for people’s behaviour.

4.4 The “Spacing Crossover Interaction”

In our model with attention to novelty and forgetting
(see Section 4.2), the average acq score was always
better in the imm condition than the lat condition.
However, researchers have observed other patterns
in spacing experiments. A particularly interesting
pattern found in some studies is that the plots of the
results for earlier and later retention intervals cross
as the spacing intervals are increased. That is, with
smaller spacing intervals, a shorter retention inter-
val (such as our imm condition) leads to better re-
sults, but with larger spacing intervals, a longer re-
tention interval (such as our lat condition) leads to
better results (Bahrick, 1979; Pavlik and Anderson,
2005). This interaction of spacing and retention in-
tervals results in a pattern referred to as the spacing
crossover interaction (Pavlik and Anderson, 2005).
This pattern is different from Glenberg’s (1976) ex-
periment and from the pattern of results shown ear-
lier for our model (Figure 3).

We looked at an experiment in which the spac-
ing crossover pattern was observed: Pavlik and An-
derson (2005) taught Japanese–English pairs to sub-
jects, varying the spacing and retention intervals.
One difference we noticed between the experiment
of Pavlik and Anderson (2005) and Glenberg (1976)
was that in the former, the presentation period of the
stimulus was 5 seconds, whereas in the latter, it was
3 seconds. We hypothesize that the difference be-
tween the amount of time for the presentation peri-

86



Figure 6: Average acq score of the novel words over spac-
ing intervals

ods might explain the different spacing patterns in
these experiments.

We currently cannot model presentation time di-
rectly in our model, since having access to an in-
put longer does not change its computation of align-
ments between words and features. However, we
can indirectly model a difference in presentation
time by modifying the amount of memory decay:
We assume that when an item is presented longer, it
is learned better and therefore subject to less forget-
ting. We run the spacing experiment with a smaller
forgetting parameter to model the longer presenta-
tion period used in Pavlik and Anderson’s (2005)
versus Glenberg (1976).6

Our results using the decreased level of forgetting,
given in Figure 6, show the expected crossover inter-
action between the retention and spacing intervals:
for smaller spacing intervals, the acq scores are bet-
ter in the imm condition, whereas for larger spacing
intervals, they are better in the lat condition. Thus,
our model suggests an explanation for the observed
crossover: in tasks which strengthen the learning of
the target item — and thus lessen the effect of forget-
ting — we expect to see a benefit of later retention
trials in experiments with people.

5 General Discussion and Future Work

The spacing effect (where people learn items better
when multiple presentations are spread over time)
has been studied extensively and is found to be ro-
bust over different types of tasks and domains. Many

6Here, the decay parameter is set to 0.03.

experiments have examined the spacing effect in the
context of word learning and other similar tasks.
Particularly, in a recent study of Vlach et al. (2008),
young children demonstrated a spacing effect in a
novel word learning task.

We use computational modeling to show that by
changing a probabilistic associative model of word
learning to include both a forgetting and attentional
mechanism, the new model can account not only for
the child data, but for various patterns of spacing ef-
fect data in adults. Specifically, our model shows the
nonmonotonic pattern of spacing observed in the ex-
perimental data, where learning improves in shorter
spacing intervals, but worsens in bigger spacing in-
tervals. Our model can also replicate the observed
cross-over interaction between spacing and retention
intervals: for smaller spacing intervals, performance
is better when tested after a shorter retention inter-
val, whereas for bigger spacing intervals, it is better
after longer retention intervals. Finally, our results
confirm that by modelling word learning as a stan-
dalone development process, we cannot account for
the spacing effect. Instead, it is important to con-
sider word learning in the context of fundamental
cognitive processes of memory and attention.

Much remains to be investigated in our model.
For example, most human experiments examine the
effect of frequency of presentations of target items.
Also, the range of retention intervals that has been
studied is greater than what we have considered
here. In the future, we plan to study the effect of
these two parameters. In addition, with our current
model, the amount of time an item is presented to
the learner does not play a role. We can also re-
formulate our alignment mechanism to incorporate
a notion of the amount of time to consider an item
to be learned. Another interesting future direction,
especially in the context of word learning, is to de-
velop a more complete attentional mechanism, that
considers different parameters such as social cues
and linguistic cues. Finally, we will study the role
of forgetting and attention in modelling other rele-
vant experimental data (e.g., Kachergis et al., 2009;
Vlach and Sandhofer, 2010).

87



References

John .R. Anderson and Christian Lebiere. 1998. The
atomic components of thought. Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates.

Harry P. Bahrick. 1979. Maintenance of knowl-
edge: Questions about memory we forgot to ask.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
108(3):296–308.

Harry P. Bahrick and Elizabeth Phelps. 1987. Reten-
tion of Spanish vocabulary over 8 years. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 13(2):344–349.

Paul Bloom. 2000. How Children Learn the Mean-
ings of Words. MIT Press.

Susan Carey. 1978. The child as word learner. In
M. Halle, J. Bresnan, and G. A. Miller, editors,
Linguistic Theory and Psychological Reality. The
MIT Press.

Malinda Carpenter, Katherine Nagell, Michael
Tomasello, George Butterworth, and Chris
Moore. 1998. Social cognition, joint attention,
and communicative competence from 9 to 15
months of age. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 63(4).

Nicholas J. Cepeda, Harold Pashler, Edward Vul,
John T. Wixted, and Doug Rohrer. 2006. Dis-
tributed practice in verbal recall tasks: A review
and quantitative synthesis. Psychological Bul-
letin, 132(3):354 – 380.

Lauren J. Cuddy and Larry L. Jacoby. 1982. When
forgetting helps memory: an analysis of repetition
effects. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 21(4):451 – 467.

Frank Dempster. 1989. Spacing effects and their im-
plications for theory and practice. Educational
Psychology Review, 1:309–330.

Frank N. Dempster. 1996. Distributing and manag-
ing the conditions of encoding and practice. Mem-
ory, pages 317–344.

Hermann Ebbinghaus. 1885. Memory: A contri-
bution to experimental psychology. New York,
Teachers College, Columbia University.

Afsaneh Fazly, Afra Alishahi, and Suzanne Steven-
son. 2010. A probabilistic computational model

of cross-situational word learning. Cognitive Sci-
ence, 34(6):1017–1063.

Michael C. Frank, Sharon Goldwater, Thomas L.
Griffiths, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. 2010. Mod-
eling human performance in statistical word seg-
menation. Cognition, 117:107–125.

Arthur Glenberg. 1979. Component-levels theory of
the effects of spacing of repetitions on recall and
recognition. Memory and Cognition, 7:95–112.

Arthur M. Glenberg. 1976. Monotonic and non-
monotonic lag effects in paired-associate and
recognition memory paradigms. Journal of Ver-
bal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 15(1).

Roberta M. Golinkoff, Kathy Hirsh-Pasek, Leslie M.
Bailey, and Neil R. Wegner. 1992. Young chil-
dren and adults use lexical principles to learn new
nouns. Developmental Psychology, 28(1):99–
108.

Douglas L. Hintzman. 1974. Theoretical implica-
tions of the spacing effect.

Jessica S. Horst, Larissa K. Samuelson, Sarah C.
Kucker, and Bob McMurray. 2011. Whats new?
children prefer novelty in referent selection. Cog-
nition, 118(2):234 – 244.

Larry L. Jacoby. 1978. On interpreting the effects
of repetition: Solving a problem versus remem-
bering a solution. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 17(6):649 – 667.

George Kachergis, Chen Yu, and Richard Shiffrin.
2009. Temporal contiguity in cross-situational
statistical learning.

Amy C. MacPherson and Chris Moore. 2010. Un-
derstanding interest in the second year of life. In-
fancy, 15(3):324–335.

Brian MacWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES Project:
Tools for Analyzing Talk, volume 2: The
Database. Erlbaum, 3rd edition.

Ellen M. Markman and Gwyn F. Wachtel. 1988.
Children’s use of mutual exclusivity to constrain
the meanings of words. Cognitive Psychology,
20:121–157.

Arthur W. Melton. 1967. Repetition and retrieval
from memory. Science, 158:532.

88



Aida Nematzadeh, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne
Stevenson. 2012. Interaction of word learning and
semantic category formation in late talking. In
Proc. of CogSci’12. To appear.

Philip I. Pavlik and John R. Anderson. 2005. Prac-
tice and forgetting effects on vocabulary memory:
An activationbased model of the spacing effect.
Cognitive Science, 29:559–586.

W.V.O. Quine. 1960. Word and Object. MIT Press.

Terry Regier. 2005. The emergence of words: At-
tentional learning in form and meaning. Cognitive
Science, 29:819–865.

Jeffery Mark Siskind. 1996. A computational study
of cross-situational techniques for learning word-
to-meaning mappings. Cognition, 61:39–91.

Linda B Smith, Eliana Colunga, and Hanako
Yoshida. 2010. Knowledge as process:
Contextually-cued attention and early word
learning. Cogn Sci, 34(7):1287–314.

Kelly A. Snyder, Michael P. BlanK, and chad J. Mar-
solek. 2008. What form of memory underlies nov-
elty preferences? Psychological Bulletin and Re-
view, 15(2):315 – 321.

Anna L. Theakston, Elena V. Lieven, Julian M. Pine,
and Caroline F. Rowland. 2001. The role of per-
formance limitations in the acquisition of verb–
argument structure: An alternative account. J. of
Child Language, 28:127–152.

Haley A Vlach and Catherine M Sandhofer. 2010.
Desirable difficulties in cross-situational word
learning.

Haley A. Vlach, Catherine M. Sandhofer, and Nate
Kornell. 2008. The Spacing Effect in Children’s
Memory and Category Induction. Cognition,
109(1):163–167, October.

Chen Yu. 2005. The emergence of links between
lexical acquisition and object categorization: A
computational study. Connection Science, 17(3–
4):381–397.

89


