










































Lexical Semantics and Distribution of Suffixes - A Visual Analysis


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Joint Workshop of LINGVIS & UNCLH, pages 7–15,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 24 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Lexical Semantics and Distribution of Suffixes — A Visual Analysis

Christian Rohrdantz1 Andreas Niekler2 Annette Hautli1 Miriam Butt1 Daniel A. Keim1

1 University of Konstanz
first.last@uni-konstanz.de

2Leipzig University of Applied Sciences
aniekler@fbm.htwk-leipzig.de

Abstract

We present a quantitative investigation of
the cross-linguistic usage of some (rel-
atively) newly minted derivational mor-
phemes. In particular, we examine the lexi-
cal semantic content expressed by three suf-
fixes originating in English: -gate, -geddon
and -athon. Using data from newspa-
pers, we look at the distribution and lex-
ical semantic usage of these morphemes
not only within English, but across sev-
eral languages and also across time, with
a time-depth of 20 years. The occurrence
of these suffixes in available corpora are
comparatively rare, however, by investigat-
ing huge amounts of data, we are able to
arrive at interesting insights into the dis-
tribution, meaning and spread of the suf-
fixes. Processing and understanding the
huge amounts of data is accomplished via
visualization methods that allow the pre-
sentation of an overall distributional pic-
ture, with further details and different types
of perspectives available on demand.

1 Introduction

It is well-known that parts of a compound can be-
gin to lead an additional life as derivational suf-
fixes, or even as stand-alone items. A famous
example is burger, which is now used to denote
a food-item (e.g., burger, cheese burger, veggie
burger) and is originally from the word Ham-
burger, which designates a person from the Ger-
man city of Hamburg. These morphemes are gen-
erally known as cranberry morphemes (because
of the prolific use of cran). Some other examples
are -(o)nomics, -(o)mat or (o)rama.

While it is well-known that this morpholog-
ical process exists, it is less clear what condi-

tions trigger it and how the coinage “catches” on
to become a regular part of a language. Given
the current availability of huge amounts of dig-
ital data, we decided to investigate whether we
could gain an insight into the use and spread of
some of these morphemes via quantitative meth-
ods, thereby confirming our intuitions.

Furthermore, we decided to focus not just on
the use of the cranberry morphemes in their lan-
guage of origin, but also on their use and spread in
other languages. In particular, we want to model
the contexts in which these suffixes are used to
coin new words and how these neologisms trans-
port to other languages. We chose to look at the
following three morphemes: -gate, -geddon and
-athon because they tend to be used in “newswor-
thy” contexts and are therefore likely to appear
in newswire and newspaper corpora, which are
available to us in large amounts.

This paper describes work in progress, where
we visually analyze the lexical semantics and use
of the three suffixes -gate, -geddon and -athon.
We were able to add some time-depth to our in-
vestigation via an analysis of the New York Times
corpus from 1987–2007. This means that while
we cannot pin-point the first occurrence and fur-
ther spread of the morpheme uses, we can gain
some idea as to their historical development.

Given that the amount of data we analyze is
huge, we use methods from Visual Analytics in
order to make the vast amount of information gen-
erated from the computational models easily ac-
cessible to the human eye and mind.

We proceed as follows: After a review of re-
lated work in Section 2, we describe our study in
Section 3 and discuss the visual analysis in Sec-
tion 4. In a case study we compare the meaning of

7



words with the suffix -gate to other semantically
related words (4.1) based on an optimized topic
model. We also develop, customize and apply vi-
sualizations to investigate the productivity of new
suffixes and their spread across news sources and
languages (4.2). We conclude with Section 5.

2 Related Work

As already mentioned, the coinage and spread of
new suffixes is well-known in theoretical linguis-
tics. However, linguists are generally not sure
what effects exactly are involved in the process
(Baayen, 1992; Plag, 1999). We are not aware of
any other computational work on cranberry mor-
phemes. Work by Lüdeling and Evert (2005) on
the German non-medical suffix -itis is closest to
this paper; however, the type of the morpheme in-
vestigated is different and their focus is mainly on
productivity. We concentrate more on the lexi-
cal semantic content of the suffixes, look at them
across languages in bigger corpora to investigate
their distribution and use and provide a layer of
visual analysis.

One question we asked ourselves is whether
we could predict from the context the likelihood
of the suffixes -gate, -geddon and -athon and
whether one can identify the lexical semantic con-
tent of the suffixes more precisely. This task can
be formulated as a topic modeling problem for
which we chose to employ Latent Dirichlet Al-
location (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003). It has recently
been used to perform word sense induction from
small word contexts (e.g. Brody (2009)) and has
also proven successful when detecting changes in
word meanings over time on small word contexts
in diachronic corpora (Rohrdantz et al., 2011).

We applied an optimized topic model and com-
bined the statistical results with methods from
Visual Analytics. Visual Analytics is based on
the tight coupling of algorithms for automatic
data analysis and interactive visual components
(Thomas and Cook, 2005; Keim et al., 2010). The
idea is to exploit human perceptive abilities to
support the detection of interesting patterns (see
Card et al. (1999) for details). Examples for visu-
alizations used previously to investigate linguis-
tic questions are Mayer et al. (2010a) on vowel
harmony, Mayer et al. (2010b) on consonant pat-
terns, Honkela et al. (1995) on syntactic cate-
gories, Rohrdantz et al. (2011) on lexical seman-
tics across time.

We also used visualizations to look at cross-
linguistic use and productivity of the suffixes.
Prominent theoretical work on the productivity of
morphemes has been done by Baayen (1992) and
Plag (1999), most computational approaches have
worked on English due to the availability of large
enough corpora (Nishimoto, 2004). To the best of
our knowledge, no large-scale quantitative study
has been performed which takes into account both
the diachronic as well as the cross-linguistic di-
mension of the development.

3 Our Approach

3.1 Research Questions & Analysis Tasks

The object of research are three productive suf-
fixes, namely -gate, geddon and -athon. What
these suffixes have in common is that they trig-
ger neologisms in various languages and all of
them seem to carry some lexical semantic infor-
mation. Whereas -gate, which was coined by the
Watergate affair, is used for scandalous events or
affairs, -geddon seems to denote a similar con-
cept but more of a disastrous event, building on its
original use in the bible. Usually, -athon, coming
from marathon, denotes a long-lasting event. We
assume that the lexical semantic content of these
suffixes can be modeled with standard topic mod-
els.

3.2 Data & Statistics

Our investigations are based on two different data
sets, one is a diachronic news corpus, the New
York Times Annotated Corpus1 containing 1.8
million newspaper articles from 1987 to 2007. To
generate the second data set, we performed an on-
line scan of the EMM news service,2 which links
to multilingual news articles from all over the
world and enriches them with metada (Atkinson
and der Goot, 2009; Krstajic et al., 2010). Be-
tween May 2009 and January 2012, we scanned
about eleven million news articles in English,
German and French.

For both data sources, we extract a context of
25 words before and after the word under inves-
tigation, together with its timestamp. In the case
of the EMM data, we also save information on the
news source, the source country and the language
of the article. In a manual postprocessing step, we

1http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/
2http://emm.newsexplorer.eu/

8



clean the dataset from words ending in the suffixes
by coincidence, many of which are proper names
of persons and locations.

From the EMM metadata, we can attribute the
employment of the suffixes to the countries they
were used in. Table 1 shows the figures for the
-gate suffix, what language it was used in, and
its country of origin. We can see that the suffix
was used in many countries and different world
regions between May 2009 and January 2012.

Lang. Country
English GB (1142), USA (840), Ireland

(364), Pakistan (275), South Africa
(190), India (131), Australia (129),
Canada (117), Zimbabwe (73)

French France (2089), Switzerland (429),
Belgium (108), Senegal (30)

German Germany (493), Switzerland (151),
Austria (151)

Table 1: Usage of the suffix -gate in different lan-
guages/countries. For each language only the coun-
tries with the most occurrences are listed.

Among the total 7,500 -gate appearances,
Rubygate – the affair of Italian’s ex prime min-
ister Silvio Berlusconi with an under-aged girl
from Morocco – was the most frequent word with
1558 matches, followed by Angolagate with 1025
matches and Climategate with 752 matches. The
NYT corpus has 1,000 matches of -gate words,
the top ones were Iraqgate with 148, Travelgate
with 122, and Irangate with 105 matches. The
frequency of -geddon and -athon was much lower.

3.3 Topic Modeling

The task of the topic modeling in this paper is to
discover meaning relationships between our the
suffixes and semantically related words, i.e. we
want to determine from the word contexts whether
-gate words share context features with words
such as scandal or affair. For this task, we use
LDA, which describes a generative hierarchical
Bayesian model that relates the words and doc-
uments within a corpus through a latent variable.
The interpretation of this latent variable could be
seen as topics that are responsible for the usage
of words within the documents. Within the LDA
framework we can describe the generation of a
document by the following process

1. draw K multinomials φk ∝ Dir(βk), one for

each topic k

2. for each document d, d = 1, . . . , D

(a) draw multinomial θd ∝ Dir(αd)
(b) for each word wdn in document d, n =

1, . . . , Nd
i. draw a topic zdn ∝
Multinomial(θd)

ii. draw a wordwdn from p(wdn|φzdn),
the multinomial probability condi-
tioned on topic zdn

Following this generative process we identify the
hidden variables for every document in a corpus
by computing the posterior distribution:

p(θ, φ, z|w, α, β) = p(θ, φ, z,w|α, β)
p(w|α, β)

. (1)

Exact inference for this posterior distribution
is not tractable and we use collapsed Gibbs sam-
pling as in Griffiths and Steyver (2004). We com-
pute the posterior distribution over all variables
and model parameters instead of inferring θ and
φ directly. The Gibbs sampling procedure sam-
ples a topic zdn for each word in all documents
of the corpus. This procedure is iterated until
the approximated posterior distribution does not
change the likelihood of the model with more it-
erations. As a result we get a sampled topic zdn
for each word in the corpus and can trace θ and
φ. For our problem we can use the counts of zdn,
the count of words belonging to a topic, for each
document in combination with the timestamps to
see which word in question appears how often in
a specific topic in which time slice. This allows
us to observe the usage of a word within a cer-
tain timespan. The hidden variable φ can be in-
terpreted as a matrix having the conditional prob-
ability p(wi|zk) at the matrix position φi,k. This
means that every column vector in φ is a probabil-
ity distribution over the whole vocabulary. These
distributions can be seen as topics since they de-
scribe a mixture of words with exact probabilities.
Having those distributions at hand we can analyze
which words occur significantly often in the same
topic or semantic context.

The purpose of the LDA model is to analyze the
latent structure of the passages extracted from the
NYT corpus. We decided to use the contexts of
Watergate, scandal, affair, crisis, controversy in
combination with the suffix -gate. We can then

9



0
 = so

ciety, art, cu
ltu

re
 

So
cie

ty, A
rt, 

an
d

 C
u

ltu
re

 

W
ate

rgate
 

Eco
n

o
m

y 

Fo
re

ign
 

P
o

licy 

D
o

m
e

stic 
P

o
licy 

Sp
o

rts 

So
cie

ty, A
rt, 

an
d

 C
u

ltu
re

 

W
ate

rgate
 

Eco
n

o
m

y 

Fo
re

ign
 

P
o

licy 

D
o

m
e

stic 
P

o
licy 

Sp
o

rts 

1
9

8
7

 
1

9
8

8
 

1
9

8
9

 
1

9
9

0
 

1
9

9
1

 
1

9
9

2
 

1
9

9
3

 
1

9
9

4
 

1
9

9
5

 
1

9
9

6
 

1
9

9
7

 

1
9

9
8

 
1

9
9

9
 

2
0

0
0

 
2

0
0

1
 

2
0

0
2

 
2

0
0

3
 

2
0

0
4

 
2

0
0

5
 

2
0

0
6

 
2

0
0

7
 

Figure 1: The diachronic distribution of the words under investigation over the 6 topics learned from the New
York Times Corpus.

10



see where these terms co-occur and hence what
the semantic context is. We infer a model which
consists of six topics under the assumption that if
the word senses of the six words given above do
not overlap at all, there should not be more than
six senses to analyze. The fixed parameter K in
the model leads us to an optimization problem of
the hyper-parameter β. The hyper-parameter α
is not as important as β since it scales the topic
per document mixture. For that reason we do not
optimize α explicitly. We rather estimate the opti-
mal value after optimizing the value for β. Since
the β parameter is of crucial impact to the gener-
ation of the hidden variable φ and thus the topics,
we need to find the optimal hyper-parameter that
generalizes the model to the given data. Most ap-
proaches show that one can optimize the model
for fixed parameters α and β when testing mod-
els with different values for K as in (Griffiths and
Steyver, 2004). Since we are fixing K we must
test the dataset for an optimal model given differ-
ent values for β. This can be done by utilizing
the model perplexity (Blei et al., 2003) and thus
maximizing the likelihood of a test dataset from
the same corpus.

In our experiment we used a relatively small
number of topics and we expected a large number
of words aligned to a topic.

4 Visual Analytics

4.1 Topic Modeling

The topics extracted from the NYT corpus by the
model described in Section 3.3 was further inves-
tigated with respect to the correlation between the
lexical semantic content of the suffixed words and
a development over time. For this purpose we de-
signed a pixel visualization (see Figure 1), map-
ping the data facets to the visual variables as fol-
lows: The data is divided according to the topics
mapping each topic to one horizontal band. The
descriptive words of a topic as found by LDA are
listed above its band. In addition, each topic is
manually assigned an interpretive label. These la-
bels are at the far left of a topic band.

Each topic band is further subdivided according
to the words under investigation. Under the label
“gate-aggregated”, all words with -gate suffixes
(except Watergate) are summarized. The bands
are aligned with a time axis and vertically divided
into cells, each cell representing one week of data.

The cell color indicates whether the correspond-
ing word under investigation occurred within the
corresponding topic in the corresponding week.
The black color means that there was no such oc-
currence, whereas the brightest white is assigned
to the cell of the week where most occurrences
(max) of a word under investigation are found,
independent from the topic. Other occurrence
counts are colored in grey tones according to a lin-
ear mapping into the normalized color range from
black=0 to white=max. Note that the normaliza-
tion depends on the word under investigation, i.e.
is relative to its maximal occurrence.

In Figure 1, the data has to be split into two
chunks to fit the page. The upper part shows the
years from 1987 to 1997 and the lower part from
1997 to 2007. There are several possibilities for
user interaction: A semantic zoom allows the data
to be displayed in different levels of time granu-
larity, e.g. day, week, month, year. By mousing
over a cell, the underlying text passages are dis-
played in a tooltip.

Findings Figure 1 shows that the topics are
dominated by different words under investiga-
tion, i.e. the words under investigation cannot be
clearly separated into self-contained meanings.
This mixture indicates that the words under
investigation have similar meanings, but that
in different contexts they are used in different
combinations:
1. Society, Art, and Culture: This seems to be
the most general topic with the broadest usage of
the words under investigation. The descriptive
terms show that it is a lot about interpersonal re-
lations and dominated by “affair”. In 1989/1990
the play Mastergate becomes visible in the
“gate-aggregated” band.
2. Economy: This topic is strongly related to
“crisis” and apart from the moderate frequency
of “scandal”, other words are rarely used in this
context. Apparently, financial scandals were
usually not described attaching the suffix “-gate”
in the years between 1987 and 2007.
3. Foreign Policy: This is another topic domi-
nated by “crisis”, with moderate occurrences of
“controversy”. Some “gate-words” also appear.
4. Sports: Here, “controversy” is the dominating
element, with a raised frequency of “affair” and
small frequency of “scandal”. Again, “gate-
words” appear from time to time, with a slightly

11



increased frequency towards the end.
5. Domestic Politics: The dominant words are
“controversy” and “crisis”. It’s noteworthy that
“controversy” is a lot more frequent here than
for Foreign Policy. Especially in the last years
“gate-words” appeared from time to time.

In sum, we find that there are preferred contexts
in which -gate is used, namely mainly in topics to
do with society, art and culture and that topics to
do with the economy, -gate is hardly used. The
lexical semantic content of -gate seems to be most
closely linked to the word affair.

4.2 Productivity

The cases of suffixation presented above should
also be considered from the standpoint of mor-
phological productivity. For Baayen (1992), mor-
phological productivity is a complex phenomenon
in which factors like the structure of the lan-
guage, its processing complexities and social con-
ventions mingle. Whereas he focuses on the the
correlation between productivity and frequency,
we can take into account another variable for pro-
ductivity. In particular, we can consider the num-
ber of newspapers that use a certain term. This
will normalize the measures usually taken in that
a term like “Watergate”, which is highly frequent
and mentioned in a variety of sources is more
productive than a term that occurs frequently, but
only in one source. Using this methodology we
can at least partly circumvent the problem of pro-
ductivity effects that are merely based on the spe-
cific style of one particular newspaper.

First, we visually evaluate the productivity of
the different suffixes plotting the sum of different
coinages against time, see Figure 2. As can be ex-
pected, in all three cases there is a steeper slope in
the beginning of the monitored period. This is an
artifact because all older coinages that had been
around before the monitoring started will be ob-
served for the first time. As more time passes all
plots show a linear overall trend, indicating that
the rate with which new coinages appear remains
somewhat constant. Yet, there are some local os-
cillations in the rate that become more visible in
the plots of -geddon- and -athon-coinages, which
are in general much more infrequent than -gate-
coinages. It can be concluded that over the last
two and a half years the suffixes kept their rate
of productivity in English, German, and French

newswire texts fairly constant.
To investigate the cross-linguistic productivity

of the new coinages we customized a visualiza-
tion with the Tableau software.3 Figure 3 shows
the appearances of the 15 most frequent -gate-
coinages across the three languages over time.
Along the y-axis the data is divided according to
-gate-coinages and languages, whereas the x-axis
encodes the time. Whenever a certain coinage ap-
pears in a certain language at a certain point in
time, a colored triangle is plotted to the corre-
sponding position. The color redundantly encodes
the language for easier interpretation.

Figure 3 shows many interesting patterns. The
most salient patterns can be summarized as:
1. No language barrier: The top -gate-coinages
belong to scandals that are of international
interest and once they are coined in English they
immediately spread to the other languages, see
Rubygate, Climategate, Cablegate, Antennagate,
and Crashgate. Only in the case of Angolagate
and Karachigate there is a certain delay in the
spread, possibly due to the fact that it was coined
in French first and initially did not achieve the
same attention as coinages in English.
2. Pertinacity partly depends on language:
Some -gate-coinages re-appear over and over
again only in individual languages. This espe-
cially holds for words that were coined before
the monitoring started, e.g. Sachsgate, Oilgate,
Troopergate, and Travelgate which all persist in
English. Examples can be found for other lan-
guages, e.g. Angolagate for French. Interestingly,
in German Nipplegate persists over the whole
monitored period, but only in German, and even
outperforms its German spelling Nippelgate.
3. Some coinages are special: Some of the
recent coinages such as Memogate, Asiagate, and
Weinergate reach an extremely high frequency
within very short time ranges, but can be found
almost exclusively in English. These will be
subject of further investigation in Section 4.2.1.
It has to be noted that many of the infrequent
coinages appear only once and are never adopted.

4.2.1 Spread across News Sources and
Countries

Figure 3 clearly shows that Memogate is heav-
ily mentioned within English speaking news

3http://www.tableausoftware.com/

12



Su
m

 o
f 

d
if

fe
re

n
t 

co
in

ag
e

s 

Su
m

 o
f 

d
if

fe
re

n
t 

co
in

ag
e

s 

Su
m

 o
f 

d
if

fe
re

n
t 

co
in

ag
e

s 

days days days 

Different geddon-coinages over time Different athon-coinages over time Different gate-coinages over time 

Figure 2: The number of different coinages containing the suffixes under investigation (on the y-axis) plotted
against the number of days passed during the monitoring process (on the x-axis)

Data used 
in Figure 4 

Figure 3: The appearances of the 15 most frequent -gate coinages over time and across the different languages

13



Figure 4: Detailed analysis of the Memogate cluster highlighted in Figure 3 using alternative visual mappings:
Sequence of spread over different countries and news sources.

sources within a short time range. We developed
a further visualization that shows how these men-
tions sequentially distribute over different news
sources and countries. In Figure 4 each article
mentioning Memogate is represented by a col-
ored icon. The y-axis position encodes the news
source, the x-axis position encodes the temporal
order of the occurrences. Note that exact time
differences are omitted to make the display more
compact. The shape of an icon indicates the lan-
guage of the article; Circles (English) heavily
dominate. The color encodes the country of origin
of the news source, here green (Pakistan), yellow
(India), and purple (USA) dominate.
Findings: While the first three mentions of
Memogate could be found in British and Amer-
ican Newspapers, early on it was adopted by
http://tribune.com.pk/ in Pakistan (fourth line
from the top) and used so heavily that it kept being
adopted and became constantly used by further
sources from Pakistan and also India. Apparently,
individual sources may have a huge influence on
the spread of a new coinage.

5 Future work and conclusion

We have presented initial experiments with re-
spect to the application of topic modeling and vi-
sualization to gain a better understanding of de-
velopments in morphological coinage and lexical
semantics. We investigated three relatively new
productive suffixes, namely -gate, -geddon, and
-athon based on their occurrences in newswire
data. Even though our data set was huge, the oc-
currences of the suffixes are comparatively rare

and so we only had enough data for -gate to inves-
tigate the contexts it occurs in with an optimized
topic modeling. The results indicate that it is used
in broader contexts than affair, with which it is
most related. Different domains of usage could be
distinguished, even though a clear development
over time could not be detected based the NYT
corpus. Investigating the multilingual newswire
data it became evident that all three suffixes un-
der investigation have a relatively stable rate of
appearance. Many more different -gate-coinages
could be found, though. We could observe that
-gate was usually attached to one specific single
event, and especially in many of the less frequent
coinages the suffix was combined with proper
names of persons, institutions, or locations. In
contrast, -athon and -mageddon coinages seem to
be easier to generalize. For example, the two most
widely spread coinages Snowmageddon and Car-
mageddon, while initially referring to a certain
snow storm and a certain traffic jam, have been
applied to further such events and can be found
listed in resources such as the Urban Dictionary.4

In conclusion, we demonstrated that visual
analyses can help to gain insight and generate new
hypotheses about the behavior of the distribution
and use of new morphemes. In our future research
we aim to investigate how much the success of a
certain coinage depends on the event as such and
its news dynamics, and what role linguistic fea-
tures like e.g. phonology (two vs. three syllables,
etc.) might play.

4http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Carmageddon

14



Acknowledgments

This work has partly been funded by the Research
Initiative “Computational Analysis of Linguistic
Development” at the University of Konstanz and
by the German Research Society (DFG) under the
grant GK-1042, Explorative Analysis and Visu-
alization of Large Information Spaces, Konstanz.
The authors would like to thank Volker Rehberg
for his programming support and Thomas Mayer
for comments on previous versions of the paper.

References

Martin Atkinson and Erik Van der Goot. 2009. Near
real time information mining in multilingual news.
In Juan Quemada, Gonzalo León, Yoëlle S. Maarek,
and Wolfgang Nejdl, editors, Proceedings of the
18th International Conference on World Wide Web,
WWW 2009, Madrid, Spain, April 20-24, 2009,
pages 1153–1154.

R. Harald Baayen. 1992. On frequency, transparency,
and productivity. Yearbook of Morphology, pages
181–208.

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 3:993–1022.

Samuel Brody and Mirella Lapata. 2009. Bayesian
word sense induction. In Proceedings of the 12th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, EACL ’09,
pages 103–111, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Stuart K. Card, Jock D. Mackinlay, and Ben Shneider-
man, editors. 1999. Readings in information visu-
alization: using vision to think. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.

Thomas L. Griffiths and Mark Steyver. 2004. Find-
ing scientific topics. In Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 101, pages 5228–5235.

Timo Honkela, Ville Pulkki, and Teuvo Kohonen.
1995. Contextual relations of words in grimm tales,
analyzed by self-organizing map. In Proceedings of
International Conference on Artificial Neural Net-
works (ICANN-95), pages 3–7.

Daniel A. Keim, Joern Kohlhammer, Geoffrey Ellis,
and Florian Mansmann, editors. 2010. Mastering
The Information Age - Solving Problems with Visual
Analytics. Goslar: Eurographics.

Milos Krstajic, Florian Mansmann, Andreas Stoffel,
Martin Atkinson, and Daniel A. Keim. 2010. Pro-
cessing Online News Streams for Large-Scale Se-
mantic Analysis. In Proceedings of the 1st Inter-
national Workshop on Data Engineering meets the
Semantic Web (DESWeb 2010).

Anke Lüdeling and Stefan Evert. 2005. The emer-
gence of productive non-medical -itis. corpus ev-
idence and qualitative analysis. In S. Kepser
and M. Reis, editors, Linguistic Evidence. Empir-
ical, Theoretical, and Computational Perspectives,
pages 351–370. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

Thomas Mayer, Christian Rohrdantz, Miriam Butt,
Frans Plank, and Daniel Keim. 2010a. Visualiz-
ing vowel harmony. Journal of Linguistic Issues in
Language Technology (LiLT), 4(2).

Thomas Mayer, Christian Rohrdantz, Frans Plank,
Peter Bak, Miriam Butt, and Daniel A. Keim.
2010b. Consonant co-occurrence in stems across
languages: Automatic analysis and visualization of
a phonotactic constraint. In Proceedings of the ACL
2010 Workshop on NLP and Linguistics: Finding
the Common Ground (NLPLING 2010), pages 67–
75.

Eiji Nishimoto. 2004. Defining new words in corpus
data: Productivity of english suffixes in the british
national corpus. In 26th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society.

Ingo Plag. 1999. Morphological productivity. Struc-
tural constraints in English derivation. Berlin/New
York: Mouton de Gruyter.

Christian Rohrdantz, Annette Hautli, Thomas Mayer,
Miriam Butt, Daniel A. Keim, and Frans Plank.
2011. Towards tracking semantic change by vi-
sual analytics. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Langauge Technologies (ACL-
HLT ’11): shortpapers, pages 305–310, Portland,
Oregon. Association for Computational Linguistics.

James J. Thomas and Kristin A. Cook. 2005. Illu-
minating the Path The Research and Development
Agenda for Visual Analytics. National Visualization
and Analytics Center.

15


