



















































Verb interpretation for basic action types: annotation, ontology induction and creation of prototypical scenes


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex-III), pages 69–80,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Verb Interpretation for Basic Action Types: Annotation, 
Ontology Induction and Creation of Prototypical Scenes 

Francesca Frontini, Irene De Felice, Fahad Khan, Irene Russo, Monica 
Monachini1   Gloria Gagliardi, Alessandro Panunzi2 

(1) ILC CNR Pisa, {francesca.frontini, irene.defelice, fahad.khan, irene.russo, monica.monachini} 
@ilc.cnr.it  

(2) University of Florence, gloria.gagliardi@unifi.it 

ABSTRACT 

In the last 20 years dictionaries and lexicographic resources such as WordNet have started to be 
enriched with multimodal content. Short videos depicting basic actions support the user’s need 
(especially in second language acquisition) to fully understand the range of applicability of verbs. 
The IMAGACT project has among its results a repository of action verbs ontologically organised 
around prototypical action scenes in the form of both video recordings and 3D animations. The 
creation of the IMAGACT ontology, which consists in deriving action types from corpus 
instances of action verbs, intra and cross linguistically validating them and producing the 
prototypical scenes thereof, is the preliminary step for the creation of a resouce that users can 
browse by verb, learning how to match different action prototypes with the correct verbs in the 
target language. The mapping of IMAGACT types onto WordNet synsets allows for a mutual 
enrichment of both resources. 

Interpretazione dei verbi per tipi azionali di base: annotazione, 
induzione di ontologia e creazione di scene prototipiche 

Negli ultimi venti anni dizionari e risorse lessicografiche come WordNet sono stati arricchiti con 
contenuto multimediale. Brevi video in grado di rappresentare azioni di base supportano i bisogni 
degli utenti (in particolar modo per quanto riguarda l' acquisizione della seconda lingua) nel 
comprendere l' ambito di applicabilità dei verbi. Il progetto IMAGACT ha tra i suoi risultati una 
base di dati di verbi d'azione ontologicamente organizzati e raffiguranti scene che riproducono 
azioni prototipiche sottoforma di registrazioni video e animazioni 3D. La creazione dell' 
ontologia IMAGACT che consiste nella derivazione di tipi azionali da istanze di verbi d'azione 
estratte da un corpus, nella loro validazione intra e crosslinguisticamente e nella conseguente 
produzione di scene prototipiche, è il passaggio preliminare per la creazione di una risorsa che gli 
utenti possono consultare partendo dal verbo, imparando come alllineare differenti prototipi 
d'azione con il verbo corretto nella lingua da apprendere. Il mapping dei tipi di IMAGACT sui 
synsets di WordNet consente un arricchimento reciproco di entrambe le risorse.   
 

KEYWORDS : ontology of actions, lexical resource, 3D animations 
KEYWORDS IN ITALIAN : ontologia di azioni, risorse lessicali, animazioni 3D 
 

69



1 Introduction 

In the last 20 years dictionaries and lexicographic resources such as WordNet have started to be 
enriched with multimodal content (e.g. pictorial illustrations, animations, videos, audio files). 
Pictures are effective in conveying the meaning of denotative words such as concrete nouns, 
while for abstract relations (instantiated by prepositional meanings) schematic illustrations can 
depict several semantic properties. Conveying the meaning of verbs with static representations is 
not possible; for such cases the use of animations and videos has been proposed (see Stein 1991 
cited in Lew 2010). Short videos depicting basic actions support the user’s need (especially in 
second language acquisition) to fully understand the range of applicability of verbs i.e. to start 
with a mental image of an action and from this image find out the L2 verb(s) that can be used to 
predicate that action. This process involves semantic and pragmatic comparisons that occur in the 
mind of the learner, with considerations respecting the type of movement involved, the 
instrument/tool that can be used, the duration, the strength of the movement etc.  

In this paper we introduce the IMAGACT project and its results: a repository of action verbs 
ontologically organised around prototypical action scenes in the form of both video recordings 
and 3D animations. The focus of IMAGACT is on action verbs, because in all language 
modalities they bear basic information that should be processed in order to make sense of a 
sentence. Especially in speech, they are the most frequent structuring elements (Moneglia and 
Panunzi, 2007), but unfortunately no one-to-one correspondence can be established between an 
action verb, conceived as a lexical entry, and an action type, conceived as an ontological entity. 

In order to bridge this gap 500 English and Italian action verbs have been analysed in their 
different contexts of use in corpora and grouped into action types according to their internal 
variation. Types representing the same prototypical actions are then gathered together under the 
same scene and represented in 3D animations, generated ad hoc which thus illustrate the different 
uses of action verbs across languages (see Figure 1).  

For instance, the English verb to roll can refer to qualitatively different actions. In some uses the 
agent  changes the form of the object (B and 1), in some other uses the agent moves himself in 
space (C and  2), and in other cases, the agent moves the object in space, applying a force to it (D 
and 3): 

(1)                John rolls the poster into a tube. 
(2)                John rolls onto his side. 
(3)                John rolls the barrel. 
In short, different action types occur in the above examples. This judgment is confirmed by the 
productivity of each action type. Despite the fact that the predicate is applied to different objects, 
humans are able to judge whether the same action is performed or not by reading a set of 
sentences: 

(1a)  John  rolls the poster / his sleeve/ the pants up. 
(2a)  John /Mary / the horse rolls. 
(3a)  John rolls the barrel / the cylinder. 
 

 

 

70



FIGURE 1 - Cross-linguistic gallery of scenes representing the variation of to roll, arrotolare and 
rotolare 

In other words, to roll has several interpretations corresponding to the different action types, and 
none of these types can be considered more appropriate than the others in characterizing the 
meaning of the verb. Each one could be a prototypic instance of the verb (Givon, 1986). 

We call general verbs all natural language action verbs that share this property. In the case of 
general verbs, ordinary language does not mirror the ontology of action and the lemma does not 
specify the referred ontological entity. As shown by Figure 1, the different types of a general verb 
may map onto different verbs in other languages. This causes huge problems for second language 
acquisition since each language categorises the space of action in its own way. Figure 1 is an 
example of the relation of English and Italian verbal entries with respect to the same continuum. 

The targets of the IMAGACT resource are L2 learners of the supported languages (focus on 
Italian) who can browse the resource by verb, learning how to match different action prototypes 
with the correct verbs in the target language. 

In the following paragraphs we shall describe the procedure for the creation of the IMAGACT 
ontology, which consists in deriving action types from corpus instances of action verbs, intra and 
cross linguistically validating them and producing the prototypical scenes thereof. Criteria 

71



applied for the creation of prototypical scenes will also be investigated. Finally, the possibility of 
mapping of IMAGACT types onto WordNet synsets, thus allowing for a mutual enrichment of 
both resources. We will end with conclusions and ideas for future work. 

2 Related Works 

The importance of providing visual support for lexical and ontological resources is becoming 
more and more evident. Ontologies like SUMO1 provide links to pictures from external sources 
(often Wikimedia) to add a visual illustration of many of its concepts. DBpedia also contains 
links to pictures, which are already part of the information derived from each Wikipedia entry. 
Image-net2 goes even further, presenting itself as a veritable image database organised according 
to the WordNet hierarchy. 

In traditional dictionaries words are explained with words, using a definition or an equivalent 
word (for bilingual dictionaries); definitions as paraphrases of lexical units through syntactic 
construction (with or without examples) are common also in lexical resources such as WordNet. 
In electronic dictionaries a wide usage of other means (such as pictorial illustrations, pictures, 
animations, videos, audio files) is possible and paves the way for multimodal lexicographic 
resources. If pictorial illustrations are effective for nouns (in particular for plants, animals and 
common objects), their utility for complex actions and the abstract or figurative meaning of 
words is less predictable. Adamska-Sałaciak (2008) (working on lexicography from a cognitive 
linguistics perspective) suggests that the inclusion of schematic graphs to represent the meaning 
of prepositions in dictionaries is useful. Animated illustrations are effective because they provide 
user-friendly representation of stages or the progression of an action and, together with videos, 
constitute the better modality for presenting verbal meanings, even if this is still an 
underinvestigated issue. Video sequences can convey information about situational contexts but 
are rather costly in terms of storage space and their realization is not easy (i.e. several semiotic 
principles should be followed for their realization). 

Yet in all these resources entries are linguistically or conceptually motivated. Images are linked 
to concepts, synsets or lexical entries, which provide the hierarchical structure to the resource. 
None has, to our knowledge, attempted to do the inverse; that is to build a veritable visual 
ontology, where the types are visually represented, and semantic and lexical information is 
dependent to visual types. In the IMAGACT ontology each type is represented by a prototypical 
scene, specifically one produced with 3D animation techniques in order to describe in a salient 
way one prototypical action. 

3 The IMAGACT project 

The IMAGACT project uses both corpus-based and competence-based methodologies for 
simultaneous extraction of a language independent action inventory from spontaneous speech 
corpora of different languages. 

The IMAGACT infrastructure faces key issues in ontology building. It grounds productive 
translation relations since it distinguishes the primary usage of verbs from their metaphorical or 
                                                        
1sigma.ontologyportal.org:4010/sigma/Browse.jsp?lang=EnglishLanguage&flang=SUO- 
KIF&kb=SUMO&term=Pump 
2 www.image-net.org 

72



phraseological extensions; it allows easy identification of types in the variation, it is cross-
linguistic in nature, it derives from the actual use of language but it can be freely extended to 
other languages through competence-based judgments and it is therefore suitable for filling gaps 
in lexical resources. 

The IMAGACT database focuses on high frequency action verbs, which can provide sufficient 
variation in spoken corpora; i.e. roughly 500 verbs referring to actions which represent the full 
basic action oriented verbal lexicon. In order to maximize the probability of occurrence of 
relevant action types, IMAGACT identifies the variation of this set in parallel on two spoken 
corpora: 

 a 2 million word English corpus, taken from the British National Corpus; 

 a collection of spoken Italian corpora with 1.6 million words in total (LABLITA corpus, 
Cresti and Moneglia, 2005; LIP, De Mauro et al., 1993; CLIPS corpus). 

3.1 The IMAGACT annotation framework 
The annotation procedure is structured into two main steps, standardization & clustering of 
occurrences and types annotation & assessment, accomplished by annotators with the assistance 
of a supervisor. The first task is to examine and interpret verb occurrences in the oral context, 
which is frequently fragmented and may not provide enough semantic evidence for an immediate 
interpretation. To this end the infrastructure allows the annotator to read the larger context of the 
verbal occurrence in order to grasp the meaning (Figure 2 presents two of the occurrences of to 
roll in the corpus). The annotator represents the referred action with a simple sentence in a 
standard form for easy processing. This sentence must be in the positive form, in the third person, 
present tense, active voice and must fill the essential argument positions of the verb (possible 
specifiers that are useful in grasping the meaning are placed in square brackets). Basic level 
expressions (Rosch 1978) are preferred or otherwise a proper name is used and word order in 
sentences must be linear, with no embedding and/or distance relationships. 

Crucially, along with the standardization, the annotator assigns each occurrence to a “variation 
class” thus determining whether or not it conveys the verb’s meaning. This is what we mean by a 
PRIMARY occurrence. This task is accomplished through a synthetic judgment which exploits 
the semantic competence of the annotator (Cresswell 1978) and is given in conjunction with 
Wittgenstein’s hypothesis on how word extensions can be learned (Wittgenstein 1953). The 
occurrence is judged PRIMARY according to two main operational criteria: a) it refers to a 
physical action; b) it can be presented to somebody who does not know the meaning of the verb 
V, by asserting that “the referred action and similar events are what we intend with V”. 

73



 
FIGURE 2 - Verb occurrence and Standardization box 

The occurrence is judged MARKED otherwise, as with “John rolls the words in his mind”.  

Only occurrences assigned to the PRIMARY variation class make up the set of Action Types 
stored in the ontology. To this end they must be clustered into families which constitute the 
productive variation of the verb predicate. The workflow thus requires the  examination of the 
full set of standardized primary occurrences recorded in the corpus, whose meaning is now clear. 

The infrastructure is designed to allow the annotator to create types ensuring both cognitive 
similarity among their events and pragmatic differences between them. The overall criterion for 
type creation is to keep granularity to its minimal level, assigning instances to the same type as 
long as they fit with one “best example”. Clustered sentences should be similar as regards: 

 the possibility to extend the occurrence by way of similarity with the virtual image 
provided by the best example (Cognitive Constraint); 

 “equivalent verbs applied in their proper meaning” i.e. the synset (Fellbaum 1998) 
(Linguistic Constraints); 

 involved Action schema. 
 
Among the occurrences the annotator chooses the most representative as best examples of the 
recorded variation, creates types headed by one (or more) best example(s), and assigns each 
individual standardization to a type by dragging and dropping. The infrastructure assists the 
annotator in the task by showing the types that have been created so far and the equivalent verbs 
used to differentiate them. 

The assigned instances can be shown by type and best example according to the annotator’s 
needs. The infrastructure also provides functionality for making easy revisions to hypotheses (by 
showing instances not yet assigned, showing all instances, the verification of Marked variation, 
editing/merging/splitting types etc.). 

74



The approach underlying the annotation strategy does not require a priori any inter-annotator 
agreement in this core task, which is strongly underdetermined, and  rather relies on a supervised 
process of revision. 

Once all occurrences have been processed, negotiation with a supervisor leads to a consensus on 
the minimal granularity of the action types extended by the verb in its corpus occurrences. The 
verification criteria are practical: the supervisor verifies for each type that it cannot be referred to 
as an instance of another without losing internal cohesion. The operational test checks if it is 
understandable that the native speaker is referring to the event by pointing to the prototype. The 
supervisor considers the pragmatic relevance of these judgments and keeps the granularity 
accordingly. 

The relation to images of prototypical scenes provides a challenging question in restricting 
granularity to a minimal family resemblance set: “can you specify the action referred to by one 
type as something like the best example of another?”. Granularity is kept when this is not 
reasonable. 

Once types are verified the infrastructure presents the annotator with the “Types Annotation & 
Assessment” interface. Conversely, in this task the annotator assesses that all instances gathered 
within each type can indeed be extensions of its best example(s), thus validating its consistency. 
Those that aren't are assigned to other types. 

 

FIGURE 3 - Types Annotation and Assessment 

The assessment runs in parallel with the annotation of the main linguistic features of a type. More 
best examples can be added in order to represent all the thematic structures of a verb which 
satisfies that interpretation. As shown in Figure 3 the thematic grid must be filled, by writing 
each argument in a separate cell and selecting a role-label from the adjacent combo-box. The tag-

75



set for thematic role annotation is constituted by a restricted set of labels derived from current 
practices in computational lexicons. We are using Palmer’s Tagset in VerbNet  with adaptations. 

Each best example is also annotated with an aspectual class which is assigned by means of the 
Imperfective Paradox Test (Dowty, 1979). Aspect can assume three values: event, process or 
state. Sentences that are judged peripheral instances of the type can be marked, thus identifying 
fuzziness in pragmatic boundaries. The annotation procedure ends when all proper occurrences of 
a verb have been assessed. The annotator produces a “script” for each type and delivers the verb 
annotation to the supervisor for cross-linguistic mapping. 

3.1.1 Description of the methodology of interlinguistic validation 

The direct representation of actions through scenes that can be interpreted independently of 
language allows the mapping of lexicons from different languages onto the same cross-linguistic 
ontology.  

Working with data coming from more than one language corpus, IMAGACT must produce a 
language independent type inventory. For instance, in the case of to roll action types must be 
consistent with those extended by the Italian verb rotolare/arrolotolare, which in principle could 
be roughly equivalent. Therefore the supervisor will face two lists of types independently derived 
from corpora annotation. In this scenario, setting the cross-linguistic relations among verbal 
entries relies on the identification of a strict similarity between the Types that have been 
identified (and not through the active writing of a definition). The task is mapping similar types 
onto one prototypic scene that they can be an instance of. 

Figure 1 roughly sketches the main types derived from the annotation of to roll and rotolare / 
arrotolare and their mapping onto scenes. The supervisor should recognize for instance, that type 
2 of to roll  and type 1 of rotolare are instances of the same prototype. The supervisor will 
accordingly produce a scene (scene C here). Cross-linguistic mapping allows us to predict 
relevant information which does not emerge from simple corpus annotation. For instance some 
types of rotolare may never occur in the English corpus, but native English speakers can 
recognize from the scene that they too are a possible extension of to roll. The mapping of the 
verb onto that type will therefore be established, providing competence based information. 
Mappings are not always possible: in this case the native speaker recognizes that T1 of to roll 
cannot be extended by rotolare while arrotolare is applicable. In other words the infrastructure 
and the methodology embodied in it allow the identification of the pragmatic universe of action 
and of how different languages parse it. This result is obtained in a Wittgenstein-like scenario 
without the comparison of definitions. The use of prototypic images bypasses this complex 
problem and permits the identification of the focal pragmatic variation of general verbs and their 
differentials in different languages. 

Notice that this first mapping is performed on the basis of Types only. Its productivity must be 
then validated at the level of each single instance. A second step of interlinguistic validation 
consists in asking mother tongue informants what verb(s) should be applied in their language to 
each scene and whether the verb(s) is applicable to the set of English/Italian sentences headed by 
that scene. 

Crucially, the informant will verify whether or not the choice is correct for all arguments 
retrieved from the corpus and assigned to that type and in doing so will verify to which extent the 
pragmatic concepts stored in the ontology are productive i.e. they permit generalizations at a 

76



cross-linguistic level. This means that in IMAGACT a concept is valid for cross-linguistic 
reference to action if, independently of the language, the verb that is applied to the prototypic 
instance can also be applied to all sentences gathered in it. 

The cross linguistic validation is performed in parallel on English and Italian sentences gathered 
within each entry and it generates a data set of parallel sentences. A competence based extension 
to other languages (Spanish and Chinese Mandarin) is also in progress, and consists in 
identifying a verb in the target language for each type of the source language and verifying the 
applicability to all instances in the target language, without actually producing sentences in the 
target language. 

The interlinguistic validation of types is a very crucial phase of the IMAGACT project. 
Distinguishing families of usages of general verbs from the granular variations allows us to 
discover productive cross-linguistic relations, thus validating the ontology entries in the real 
world. 

4 From words to videos: methodology 

Once types of actions referred to by action verbs have been identified and the scripts have been 
produced for the best examples, with cross-linguistic equivalences established, the supervisor 
produces a prototypical scene. 

Actors perform the action described in the script or an equivalent action. The scene is recorded 
according to the following requirements, which are intended to reduce ambiguity and to trigger 
the preferred interpretation: 

 Use of real-world objects instead of abstract/generic forms 

 Minimal, necessary background information 

 The scene is produced as an uninterrupted shot (“long take”) 

 The action is performed with its usual temporal span (no slow-motion) 

 The sequence is edited to focus on the sole relevant nucleus of the performed action (3-7 
seconds) 

The semiotic relevance of each scene and its capacity to elicit the appropriate verb is scrutinized 
by more than three experts before storage in the database. 

Subsequently a 3D animation is created from the videos, in order to make the scene even less 
ambiguous. The animation software used for the production of 3D videos is Autodesk MAYA3.  

An animation must be equivalent to the real scene for what concerns its possible interpretation, 
but not necessarily equivalent with respect to the used objects. 

5 Mapping IMAGACT onto WordNet 

We are currently dealing with another task, that is to establish a link between IMAGACT and 
WordNet. 

                                                        
3 The output format is H.264/mpeg-4, with framesize 1024*576. 

77



WordNet is one of the best-known lexical resources and it contains one of the most complete 
verbal ontologies of any lexical resource, not only in terms of lexical entries, but also for the 
number of relations among verbs (hyponymy/hypernymy, troponymy, entailment). It is therefore 
very useful to investigate how IMAGACT maps onto WordNet. A mapping of both resources 
would lead to a reciprocal enrichment of several aspects: for instance IMAGACT does not show 
semantic relations among verbs, nor does it use definitions/glosses to define actions or action 
types, while WordNet does; on the other side WordNet does not distinguish between primary and 
marked senses, often confusing proper uses with metaphorical or idiomatical ones. Furthermore, 
WordNet defines horizontal relations among senses (synsets) with glosses, while IMAGACT 
uses scenes to represent the event type which different verbs can refer to in similar contexts 
(equivalent verb classes). So in case of perfect matching between an action type and a synset, 
IMAGACT videos would be enriched by WN glosses, and WN glosses could be more intuitively 
understood if visually represented. 

It is also important to stress that WordNets have been now produced for many languages (and 
sometimes connected one to another: see for example EuroWordNet, GlobalWordNet projects). 
This would allow in the future the extension of the mapping to new languages, once they have 
been implemented in IMAGACT. Furthermore, we can imagine that if different WordNet 
ontologies are mapped onto the same IMAGACT interlinguistical ontology, they will be 
automatically linked one to another, and this will be of great benefit to the multilingual projects 
cited above. 

As we said above the ontology of action types has already been completed by extracting data 
from Italian corpus annotation, therefore a first mapping of Italian action types onto ItalWordNet 
senses has been attempted. For every IMAGACT action verb, we compared the action types with 
the senses of the corresponding ItalWordNet lexical entry and with their related synsets. 

We have already mapped about 150 Italian action types onto ItalWordNet. In some cases, 
especially when the verb refers to a very specific action (e.g. stirare, to iron) or it has a strong 
prototypical meaning (e.g. camminare, to walk), as often happens with activity verbs, the verb 
has only one IMAGACT action type and only one (or very few) ItalWordNet senses. On many 
occasions it is possible to map a type onto a sense only excluding WordNet senses clearly 
referring to marked uses (metaphorical, idiomatic, etc.). With general verbs some difficulties 
emerge: sometimes an action type perfectly matches a WordNet sense or synset, but sometimes 
synsets are more generic than action types (and a best match may be found with hyponyms, if 
present). So the relations linking IMAGACT action types and ItalWordNet senses are the 
following: semantic equivalence, when a type perfectly matches a sense (ItalWordNet gloss 
perfectly describes the content of the video); otherwise, imperfect match, when the relation is one 
of subsumption (one type subsuming two or more senses, or two or more types being subsumed 
by one sense). We cannot exclude, a priori, the null relation (when a type cannot be related to any 
sense), but far we have not run into this.  

Part of our future work will be to complete the mapping and to implement in IMAGACT, for 
each action type, an ItalWordNet direct link. We will also apply the same metodology to map 
English action types onto WordNet. 

78



6 Conclusions and future work 

The key innovation of IMAGACT is to provide a methodology which exploits the language 
independent capacity to appreciate similarities among scenes, distinguishing the identification of 
action types from their definition. By focusing its attention on action verbs, IMAGACT provides 
an interesting modality of presentation for their basic meaning distinctions; the navigation and 
search strategies are particularly promising for access to verbal meaning. 

After its first delivery the IMAGACT infrastructure will grow freely as a function of its 
competence-based implementation in an open set of languages. The Interlinguistic Action 
Ontology DB will be available through the Internet as a web resource. The annotation 
infrastructure will be open source. We foresee that the infrastructure will have to cope with three 
main scenarios. The user may ask for: 

a) the set of verbs of a target language that can be applied to a given action (language 
independent scenario); 

b) the differential between the actions referred to by one verb in his own language and the actions 
referred to by a target verb in another language (distinguish the lexical properties of the target 
language in L2 acquisition); 

c) the set of action types referred to by one or more action verbs in a given language (focusing on 
the lexical properties of action verbs). 

The main NLP use foreseen for IMAGACT annotated data is word sense disambiguation. The 
resource will be tested in language acquisition and assisted translation scenarios; it will also be 
the starting point for the development of neuropsychological test batteries for the assessment of 
semantic knowledge4. Moreover the Ontology contains a large amount of information on actions 
potentially useful for ambient intelligence and for the modeling of artificial systems aimed at 
interacting in the natural environment on the basis of natural language instructions. 

Acknowledgments  
The IMAGACT project has been funded in Italy within the PAR/FAS program of the Tuscan 
Region and it is undertaken by the University of Florence, ILC-CNR, Pisa, and the University of 
Siena. 

References 
British National Corpus, version 3 (BNC XML Edition). 2007. Distributed by Oxford 
University Computing Services URL: http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/ 

CLIPS Corpus. URL: http://www.clips.unina.it  

C-ORALROM http://catalog.elra.info/product_info.php?products_id=757 

Adamska-Sałaciak, A. 2008. Prepositions in Dictionaries for Foreign Learners: A Cognitive 
Linguistic Look. Bernal, E. and J. DeCesaris (Eds.). 2008: 1477-1485. 

Cresswell M. F. 1978 Semantic Competence in F. Guenthner, M. Guenthner-Reutter, Meaning 
and translation. NY University Press: New York, 9-28 

                                                        
4 There is a PhD thesis to be written on this topic.  

79



De Mauro T., Mancini F., Vedovelli M., Voghera M. 1993. Lessico di frequenza dell'italiano 
parlato (LIP). Milano: ETASLIBRI. 

Fellbaum, Ch. (ed.) 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. Cambridge: MIT Press. 

Lew, Robert. 2010. ‘New ways of indicating meaning in electronic dictionaries: hope or hype?’ 
In: Zhang, Yihua (ed.), Learner's Lexicography and Second Language Teaching Shanghai: 
Shanghai Foreign Language Education Press. 387-404. 

Rosch, E. 1978. Principles of Categorization. In E. Rosch & B.B. Lloyd (eds), Cognition and 
Categorization. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum, 27–48. 

Wittgenstein, L. 1953. Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell. 

80


