



















































Korean NLP2RDF Resources


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 1–10,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Korean NLP2RDF Resources

YoungG yun Hahm1 Kyung taeLim1 YoonYongun2

Jung yeul Park3 Ke y − Sun Choi1,2
(1) Division of Web Science and Technology, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea

(2) Departmentt of Computer Science, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
(3) Les Editions an Amzer Vak, Lannion, France

1,2{hahmyg, kyungtaelim, yoon,
kschoi}@kaist.ac.kr 3park@amzer-vak.fr

Abstract
The aim of Linked Open Data (LOD) is to improve information management and integration by
enhancing accessibility to the existing various forms of open data. The goal of this paper is to make
Korean resources linkable entities. By using NLP tools, which are suggested in this paper, Korean
texts are converted to RDF resources and they can be connected with other RDF triples. It is worth
noticing that to the best of our knowledge there is a few of publicy available Korean NLP tools. For
this reason, the Korean NLP platform presented here will be available as open source. And it is
shown in this paper that the result of this NLP platform can be used as Linked Data entities.

Keywords: Korean Natural Language Processing, NLP2RDF, Linked Open Data.

1



1 Introduction
Research on Linked Open Data (LOD)1 on the Web is relatively new, but it is rapidly growing
nowadays. The aim of LOD is to improve information management and integration by enhancing
accessibility to the existing various formats of open data. To ease the integration of data from
different sources, it is desirable to use standards (Bizer et al., 2009) such as the W3C Resource
Description Framework (RDF).

There is a huge amount of unstructured text in many languages in web pages. Traditionally, these
web pages have been interlinked using hyperlinks. However, researchers in the domain of the
semantic web are focusing on data and resources, rather than web pages. In the context of semantic
web, such resources are usually modelled as RDF triples (Bauer and Kaltenböck, 2011).

This paper aims to describe an NLP platform presented in (Rezk et al., 2012), but focuses on the
Korean language processing. Such detailed desciption was missing in (Rezk et al., 2012). In (Rezk
et al., 2012) the authors present a novel framework to acquire entities from unstructured Korean
text and describe them as RDF resoruces. The main contributions of this paper are as follows: (1)
Describing in detail how to build an open Korean NLP platform which produces POS tag, CFG and
DG parsing results from one-time input; and (2) Providing further details on how to convert NLP
outputs to the RDF. The goals of this converting are to achieve universal interoperability between
the results of several NLP tools, and make Korean resource to linkable entities.

Existing Korean NLP tools, such as a morphological analyser and a syntactic parser, are reused
and merged. The Sejong corpus and its POS tagset (Korean Language Institue, 2012) are used as
training data. In this case the output provides RDF so entities which tokenized morpheme units have
an identifier URI and can be link with existing RDF stores from the LOD-cloud. Especially, entities
can be mapped with subjects in DBpedia triples.

Section 2 surveys previous work on Korean NLP and linked data. The Korean NLP platform is
described with a more detailed explanation in section 3. Section 4 provides some new details on
how to convert the NLP output to RDF and how to link entities with Wikipedia pages, and some
tries to link entities with Wikipedia page. We discuss a conclusion in Section 5.

2 Related Work
A prime example of an NLP platform which put out RDF outputs for linked data is Stanford
Core-NLP2. Stanford Core-NLP puts out various NLP analysis results like POS tagging, CFG
parsing, DG parsing and so on for one-time input. And, by using wrapper3 which implemented by
the NLP2RDF4 project team, those results are converted to RDF in compliance with NIF.

Actually, sharing results in Korean NLP fields is still in its early stage. Researches on Korean parsers
have been focused on DG parsing e.g. (Chung, 2004) because Korean word order is relatively free
compared to other languages. Phrase-structured Sejong Treebank is transformed into the form of DG
in (Choi and Palmer, 2011). Research for CFG parsing by using Sejong Treebank has progressed
(Choi et al., 2012), but it is not active and disclosure of its research results and it also true that the
lack of interoperability because a variety of tools put out different format results.

In English the minimal unit for parsing is a word, but, in Korean, eojeol is a basic space unit
1http://lod2.eu
2http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/corenlp.shtml
3http://nlp2rdf.org/implementations/stanford-corenlp
4http://nlp2rdf.org

2



Figure 1: An example morpheme analysing Korean sentences by using HanNanum

which separated from another eojeol with white-space. An eojeol is a word or its variant word form
agglutinated with grammatical affixes, and eojeols are separated by white space as in English written
texts (Choi et al., 2011). Each morpheme is represented by its own POS tag so the morphological
analyser is required as pre-processing for the parser. There are some existing researches about that
issue and a few tools are opened already such as HanNanum (Park et al., 2010).

Research for Link Discovery issue is still on-going and there are some results such as LIMES5 and
DBpedia Spotlight6. Out research, such as the study of flows, attempts to outline an alternative
reading of the link discovery issue. Inspiring entities are converted to RDF triples which have an
URI by using our NLP platform; there are also some attempts to make links for these triples with
Wikipedia page.

3 Korean Natural Language Processing Platform
Various results formats from NLP tools cause obstructive problems. So there are needs to implement
one platform get one-time input. This paper describes efforts to make Korean NLP platform, and
make them available as open sources. An existing morphological analyser and a syntactic parser are
used and integrated in this way. Since some deficiency has been brought up, further improvement
will be conducted.

And the goal of this NLP platform in this paper is that extracting entities and finding the relation
between each entity from Korean resources. Morphological analyser and parser is used for this work.
Details are explained in follow subsections and section 4.

3.1 Morphological Analyser
The Korean parser presented in section 3.2 requires morphologically tokenized sentences as its
input. For example, English words separated by whitespace are minimal analysis units. A Korean
space unit eojeol is combined with multiple morphemes. So, morphological analyser is required for
splitting these morhemes from eojeol. There are two reasons: 1) most parsers consider a word which
are separated by white-space as the unit of parsing. 2) For our goal, acquiring entities from Korean
text. By this work, noun-tagged words can be splitted with grammatical affixes so that each word
can be entities which some stacks of LOD-cloud.

As an element of Korean NLP2RDF resources, a morphological analyser, HanNanum7 developed
5http://aksw.org/projects/limes
6http://dbpedia.org/spotlight
7http://sourceforge.net/projects/hannanum

3



Figure 2: An example phrese structured output

Figure 3: An example DG results

by KAIST Semantic Web Research Center8 is employed. HanNanum was developed in C in 1999,
and re-implemented in Java in 2010. It is an NLP tool which can be used independently, and include
a POS tagger. HanNanum is divided into three parts depending on the level of analysis.

1. Pre-processing: Sentence boundary recognition, filtering, auto-spacing and stemming.

2. Morphological Analysis: Generate all possible morphological analysis results from each
eojeol.

3. POS tagging: Assign POS tags by selecting the most probabilistic results.

HanNanum has two problems as a morphological analyser: 1) dated dictionary, 2) excessive analysis
for josa (‘postpostion’). The dated dictionary causes a lot of unknown words and might assign
wrong POS tags. It amplifies eventual parsing errors. Too finely analysed josa can reate unnecessary
ambiguities.

3.2 Phrase structure parser
(Choi et al., 2012) experiments with existing parsers (Stanford, Berkeley and Bikel) using the
Sejong Treebank, and found out that the Berkeley parser yields the best performance. For this work,
pre-processing and transforming Sejong Treebank research go on in a parallel way. Morphological
analysis results from HanNanum are used as input to Korean Berkeley parser. Resource for Han-
Nanum and the Korean Berkeley parser is open and available at the web page9 . Specially, input
system is modified for user convenience. Figure 2 shows input and phrase structured output of
Korean Berkeley parser, and converted into DG results is shown Figure 3.

3.3 DG parser
There is no available Korean corpora which DG parsing can be trained. For this reason, using
algorithms from (Choi, 2010), we develop a tool which converts CFG parsing results to the DG

8http://semanticweb.kaist.ac.kr
9http://semanticweb.kaist.ac.kr/home/index.php/KoreanParser

4



format. Our Korean NLP platform can return DG results from the CFG result. For example, Figure 3
“나/NP+는/JX” is an NP_SBJ (subject noun phrase) and dependent on “3.가/VV+s다/EF+./SF” Our
overall performance is about 72% on F1-score and it remains future work to improve performance.
DG parser results show the relation between each entity in Korean texts.

4 Converting NLP outputs to RDF
Meaning of natural language processing results by converting to RDF is two-fold: 1) Universal
Interoperability can be ensured, and 2) entities which be acquired from NLP tools can be linkable
with LOD-cloud. This work can be able by using string URI in RDF and details are elaborate in
4.1.2.

The Korean NLP result format is different from NLP tool result format for other languages with
the point of view in structure and vocabulary. To solve this heterogeneity problem, RDF is used to
describe meta-data. It could be the basis of interoperability for NLP tools.

Also, for the semantic web, efforts to link RDF triples with the LOD-cloud are explained in this
paper, by converting data from the web to RDF. Entities with document level URI can be linked
with DBpedia entities with conceptual level URI.

4.1 Universal Interoperability
This section summarizes the NLP2RDF system presented in (Rezk et al., 2012). We focus on the
methodology of the system to describe its resources. The results of the NLP tools depend on the
used POS tag set, training set and their applications. To resolve this heterogeneity, discussion for
NIF (Hellmann et al., 2012; Rizzo et al., 2012) is underway in NLP2RDF as a sub-project of LOD2.
NIF suggests a standard for several different NLP outputs. Korean NLP results are also different
from other NLP application results based on other languages. So these metadata (for the results of
NLP tools) are described by using interoperable RDF. Ontology for Korean POS tags is defined,
and the whole process is complying with the specifications of NIF. The results from Section 3 are
converted to RDF triples.

4.1.1 Ontology for Korean Linguistic Annotations

The Ontologies of Linguistic Annotation (OLiA) (Chiarcos, 2012) are used to describe POS tags,
which are different between languages. In Korean, the Sejong POS tagset and the KAIST POS tagset
(Choi et al., 1994) are used for POS tagging. OLiA are offering an annotation model for Penn tag
set10 which is mainly used in English.

In the Penn tagset annotation model, POS tag information is the subpart structure of Linguistic
Annotation domain. And OLiA are offering linking model also which is mapped between Penn
annotation model and OLiA reference model. In this linking model, OLiA information is the
subpart structure of Linguistic Concept domain and it is mapped with the POS tag set information.
We made Sejong tagset anotation model and linking model which mapped into OLiA reference
model for universal interoperability. And this models are posted at webpage11. Figure 4 shows the
correspondence between Sejong POS tags and concepts in the OLiA reference model. The KAIST
POS tagset will be also interoperable in our future work.

10http://nachhalt.sfb632.uni-potsdam.de/owl/penn.owl
11http://semanticweb.kaist.ac.kr/nlp2rdf/resource/

5



Figure 4: Correspondence between Sejong tags and concepts in OLiA

4.1.2 String URI

The advantage of specifying URIs for each entity (results of NLP) is two-fold: 1) entities can be
described with RDF, and 2) entities can be linked-able with other RDF triples. Our goal is not only
focusing on getting universal interoperability for NLP output, but also making links with LOD-cloud
for Korean resources from the text. Therefore, specifying an URI for each entity is an important
task.

Each noun is a morpheme unit, so URIs specification works on morpheme units. Recognized entities
by morphological analysing are URI specified so that it is used as ’Subject’ in RDF triples. And
morpheme unit entities, especially nouns, can be used as some stacks for LOD-cloud. This will be
explained in Section 4.2.

NIF provides two URI schemes: The offset and context-hash based schemes. The Hash-based URI
is used for our Korean NLP platform results.

Figure 5 shows an example about URI specification for Korean word.

6



Figure 5: An example URI specification for Korean word

4.2 Linking Korean Resources with the LOD-cloud
Each of the morphemes obtained by NLP tools appears in RDF as entities with a POS tag and
an URI. Actually this URI is at document level. Entities which appear in sentences have limited
meaning in a sentence, document, text, or web page, and the described RDF information is just POS
and grammatical role. These entities are isolated and restrictive.

Producing RDF from NLP results makes entities get an URI so they can be linkable. With these
URIs we can link entities with RDF resources LOD-cloud, for example, DBpedia. We assume that
entities of DBpedia have conceptual level URI and reliable information enough as a collective
intelligence.

Our goal is to link Korean resources converted to RDF by NLP tools to stacks of the LOD-cloud.
For example, some system can show the grammatical role of entities and DBpedia triple information.
First step for this goal is to make links for entities to the Korean Wikipedia pages. The purpose of
this work is the first step in the progress of experimenting Link Discovery for Korean. Our approach
first accesses NLP results which obtains all nouns. We then query the Noun class using the data
property anchor of to get the string. System checks the Wikipedia page for such a string. If a page
exists, a link is created for the Wikipedia page. That is why we use a Wikipedia page because
DBpedia always shows always page even there are no information for strings.

This system has been implemented on the web site (Semantic Web Research Center, 2012), available
to anyone. This web site provides the following two functions: 1) Return a variety NLP results
such as morpological analysing, CFG and DG parsing from one input text; 2) Make Links to Korea
Wikipedia pages for each entity which noun-tagged words.

Here on link discovery of Korean resource, two issues are still remaining:

1. Efficient algorithms for approaches to DBpedia.

2. Using synonym relations.

Our current link discovery method is just string matching with Levenshtein distance. This method
is simple; there are many limitations to finding links this way. As many other approaches such as
LIMES, we need to develop efficient and adequate an algorithm for Korean.

Using synonym relations can be an alternative way to extend the capabilities of the link discovery
approach. CoreNet (Choi, 2003) will be considered as pertinent resources for this issue.

5 Conclusion and Future Work
The focus of this study is two-fold: First, we developed the Korean NLP platform which returns a
variety of NLP result outputs from one-time input, and make it publicly available. However, further
improvement for Korean NLP tools is required for Link discovery. In particular the morpheme

7



analyser should be modified. Second, we provided further details on how results of NLP tools are
mapped into RDF. It is worth noticing that the RDF triples generated in this framework follow
the NIF standard. In particular, the Sejong tagset linking model is built and used for universal
interoperability for Korean NLP. Moreover, resolving the link discovery issue will be our future
work.

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by the Industrial Technology International Cooperation Program
(FT-1102, Creating Knowledge out of Interlinked Data) of MKE/KIAT.

References
Bauer, F. and Kaltenböck, M. (2011). Linked Open Data: The Essentials. Edition
mono/monochrom, Vienna.

Bizer, C., Heath, T., and Berners-Lee, T. (2009). Linked data - the story so far. Journal on Semantic
Web and Information Systems (IJSWIS); Special Issue on Linked Data, 5(3):1–22.

Chiarcos, C. (2012). Ontologies of linguistic annotation: Survey and perspectives. In Chair),
N. C. C., Choukri, K., Declerck, T., Doğan, M. U., Maegaard, B., Mariani, J., Odijk, J., and
Piperidis, S., editors, Proceedings of the Eight International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’12), Istanbul, Turkey. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Choi, D., Park, J., and Choi, K.-S. (2012). Korean treebank transformation for parser training.
In Proceedings of the ACL 2012 Joint Workshop on Statistical Parsing and Semantic Processing
of Morphologically Rich Languages, pages 78–88, Jeju, Republic of Korea. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Choi, J. D. and Palmer, M. (2011). Statistical dependency parsing in korean: From corpus
generation to automatic parsing. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Statistical Parsing of
Morphologically Rich Languages, pages 1–11, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Choi, K.-S. (2003). CoreNet: Chinese-japanese-korean wordnet with shared semantic hierarchy.
In Proceedings of Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Engineering, pages 767–770.

Choi, K.-S., Han, Y. S., Han, Y. G., and Kwon, O. W. (1994). Kaist tree bank project for korean:
Present and future development. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Sharable Natural
Language Resources, pages 7–14.

Choi, K.-S., Isahara, H., and Sun, M. (2011). Language resource management - Word segmentation
of written texts - Part 2: Word segmentation for Chinese, Japanese and Korean, ISO 24614-2.

Choi, Jinho D.; Palmer, M. (2010). Robust constituent-to-dependency conversion for english. In
Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT’9),
pages 55–66, Tartu, Estonia.

Chung, H. (2004). Statistical Korean Dependency Parsing Model based on the Surface Contextual
Information. PhD thesis, Korea University.

8



Hellmann, S., Lehmann, J., and Auer, S. (2012). Linked-data aware uri schemes for referencing
text fragments. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Knowledge Engineering
and Knowledge Management (EKAW2012), Galway City, Ireland.

Park, S., Choi, D., Kim, E., and Choi, K.-S. (2010). A plug-in component-based korean morpho-
logical analyzer. In Proceedings of HCLT2010, pages 197–201.

Rezk, M., Park, J., Yoon, Y., Lim, K., Larsen, J., Hahm, Y., and Choi, K.-S. (2012). Korean Linked
Data on the Web: From Text to RDF. In Proceedings of JIST2012:Joint International Semantic
Technology Conference, Nara, Japan.

Rizzo, G., Troncy, R., Hellmann, S., and Bruemmer, M. (2012). NERD meets NIF: Lifting NLP
extraction results to the linked data cloud. In LDOW 2012, 5th Workshop on Linked Data on the
Web, April 16, 2012, Lyon, France, Lyon, FRANCE.

Semantic Web Research Center (2012). Korean NLP2RDF demo site,
http://semanticweb.kaist.ac.kr/nlp2rdf, KAIST.

9




