










































Transferring Frames: Utilization of Linked Lexical Resources


NAACL-HLT Workshop on the Induction of Linguistic Structure, pages 8–15,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Transferring Frames: Utilization of Linked Lexical Resources

Lars Borin
Markus Forsberg

Richard Johansson
Kaarlo Voionmaa

University of Gothenburg
first.last@svenska.gu.se

Kristiina Muhonen
Tanja Purtonen

University of Helsinki
first.last@helsinki.fi

Abstract

In our experiment, we evaluate the transfer-
ability of frames from Swedish to Finnish in
parallel corpora. We evaluate both the theo-
retical possibility of transferring frames and
the possibility of performing it using avail-
able lexical resources. We add the frame in-
formation to an extract of the Swedish side
of the Kotus and JRC-Acquis corpora using
an automatic frame labeler and copy it to the
Finnish side. We focus on evaluating the re-
sults to get an estimation on how often the
parallel sentences can be said to express the
same frame. This sheds light on the questions:
Are the same situations in the two languages
expressed using different frames, i.e. are the
frames transferable even in theory? How well
can the frame information of running text be
transferred from one language to another?

1 Introduction

To our knowledge, there is no ongoing effort to cre-
ate a framenet for Finnish. This experiment gives in-
formation on whether it is feasible to build a prelimi-
nary framenet for Finnish by transferring the frames
with their lexical units from Swedish. The building
of semantically annotated language resources from
scratch is a costly and time consuming effort. In
this experiment, we test the feasibility of utilizing
Swedish and Finnish lexical resources for building a
Finnish framenet.

Transferring lexical units from Swedish to
Finnish is possible because of the wordnet connec-
tions of both languages: both the Swedish wordnet
and the Finnish wordnet are linked to the Princeton

wordnet. This connection is described in more detail
in Section 2.

We evaluate the transferability of the frames and
their lexical units from Swedish to Finnish. In the
evaluation, we use Swedish–Finnish parallel corpora
to see whether the same sentence is expressed using
the same frames in both languages. Using parallel
corpora, we can evaluate not only the theoretically
similar content of frames in two different languages,
but also their use in actual texts.

The idea of semantic role transfer across paral-
lel corpora is not novel (see Section 2.3), but to our
knowledge, the use of linked lexical resources pro-
posed here is. The language pair Swedish–Finnish
is also one for which this methodology has not
been attempted earlier. With our experiment we
can see whether transferring the frame information
from Swedish to Finnish could work, given that the
languages are not demonstrably related, and struc-
turally quite different. The work presented here
consequently provides a data point for the evalua-
tion of the language-independence of this kind of
methodology, which can arguably only be convinc-
ingly demonstrated by actually attempting to apply it
on a range of typologically diverse languages (Ben-
der, 2011).

From a more practical point of view, there may
well be as much Finnish–Swedish as Finnish–
English parallel data, since Finnish and Swedish
are the two official languages of Finland, and all
public documents must by law be available in both
languages, and for practical reasons also a large
amount of other texts. In addition, despite their non-
relatedness and large structural differences, the two

8



languages have a long history of contact and bilin-
gualism. Finnish has borrowed words and struc-
tures from Swedish on a large scale, and the lexi-
cal semantics of the two languages have converged
in many domains. This means that we may expect
frames to transfer well across the two languages,
whereas the structural differences may make us
more pessimistic about the transferability of frame
elements.

2 Language Resources

2.1 Wordnet Connections

Wordnets are lexical databases that group words of
a language into synonym sets – or synsets – each
synset supposedly expressing one distinct concept in
the language. Wordnets further provide general def-
initions of the synsets, and encode the semantic rela-
tions between the synsets. Typically they are mono-
lingual, but efforts have been made to produce mul-
tilingual wordnets as well; see e.g. Vossen (1998).

FinnWordNet (Lindén and Carlson, 2010) is a
wordnet for Finnish that complies with the format
of the Princeton WordNet (PWN) (Fellbaum, 1998).
It was built by translating the Princeton WordNet 3.0
synsets into Finnish by human translators. It is open
source and contains 117 000 synsets. The Finnish
translations were inserted into the PWN structure re-
sulting in a bilingual lexical database.

SweFN++ is an integrated open-source lexical
resource for Swedish (Borin et al., 2010; Borin,
2010). It includes the Swedish framenet (SweFN)
and Swesaurus, a Swedish wordnet. The wordnet
has been semi-automatically assembled from freely
available Swedish lexical resources (Borin and Fors-
berg, 2011), and part of it has been linked to the Core
WordNet, a 5000-synset subset of PWN. All re-
sources in SweFN++ are linked together on the word
sense level using the persistent sense identifiers of
the SweFN++ pivot resource SALDO, a large-scale
lexical-semantic resource (Borin et al., 2008; Borin
and Forsberg, 2009). Using these links, we can col-
lect a set of 434 frames and 2 694 word senses that
have a direct PWN – Swedish wordnet – SweFN
– FinnWordNet connection. Using these connec-
tions, we can transfer the frame information of the
words from Swedish to Finnish. We used the Korp
pipeline (Borin et al., 2012) to analyze the Swedish

part of the parallel text to get hold of the SALDO
sense identifiers. The analysis is not able to distin-
guish senses that do not differentiate themselves for-
mally (by different word forms or morphosyntactic
descriptions).

2.2 Framenet and the Semantic Labeler

Framenets are lexical databases that define seman-
tic relations. The best-known framenet is Berkeley
FrameNet which is based on the theory of frame se-
mantics (Fillmore, 1976). SweFN is built using the
same principles as the Berkeley Framenet (Ruppen-
hofer et al., 2006) of English. The frames are mostly
the same as in English.

In the experiment, we use an automatic seman-
tic role labeler for Swedish, developed by Johansson
et al. (2012). The labeler is based on the Swedish
framenet and it uses the same frame and frame ele-
ment labels.

2.3 Related Work

From a methodological point of view, the first
question to ask should be whether the semantic
frames are meaningful in both languages: for in-
stance, if the Swedish FrameNet has defined a frame
SELF_MOTION and a list of associated frame ele-
ments (SELF_MOVER, GOAL, PATH etc.), does it
make sense to define an identical frame in a Finnish
FrameNet? This question has been studied by Padó
(2007) for English–German and English–French,
and although most frames were cross-linguistically
meaningful, a number of interesting discrepancies
were found. Whether the number of discrepancies is
higher in a pair of more typologically different lan-
guages is an important question.

As far as we are aware, there has been no previ-
ous attempt in using multilingual WordNets or simi-
lar lexicons when deriving lexical units in frames in
new languages. The WordNet–FrameNet combina-
tion has seen some use in monolingual applications:
for instance, Burchardt et al. (2005) and Johansson
and Nugues (2007) attempted to extend the coverage
of FrameNet by making use of WordNet. Padó and
Lapata (2005a) used word alignment in sentence-
aligned parallel corpora to find possible lexical units
in new languages.

There have been several studies of the feasibil-
ity of automatically producing the role-semantic an-

9



notation in new languages, although never for lan-
guages as structurally dissimilar as Swedish and
Finnish. Padó and Lapata (2005b) projected anno-
tation from English to German, and Johansson and
Nugues (2006) implemented a complete pipeline for
English–Swedish by (1) automatic annotation on the
English side; (2) annotation transfer; and (3) training
a Swedish semantic role labeler using the automati-
cally produced annotation.

3 Frames from Swedish to Finnish

3.1 Outline of the Experiment

We start off by locating such Swedish word senses
that are both represented in SweFN and linked to
PWN in two Finnish–Swedish parallel corpora. The
sentences that include such a word make up the eval-
uation data set. After this, the Swedish half is en-
riched with frame labels using the framenet-based
semantic role labeler for Swedish.

After running the semantic labeler on the evalu-
ation data, we pick the 20 most commonly occur-
ring frames from both corpora. For each of the
most common frames, we pick the 6 first occur-
rences for closer scrutiny. Due to the differing na-
ture of Swedish and Finnish, we make one change
before selecting the 20 most frequent frames: We ex-
clude the frame which is evoked (erroneously) only
by the Swedish indefinite articles en/ett – homony-
mous with the numeral ‘one’– among the 6 first oc-
currences. We take the 21st most frequent frame in-
stead because there are no articles in Finnish. To
sum up, the frames under examination are selected
based on the frequency of the frame, and the sen-
tences including the frame are selected in the order
in which they occur.

After picking 120 (6 x 20) sentences from both
corpora, the correctness of the semantic labeler is
manually checked. A linguist marks the correctness
of both the frame and the frame element label. At
this stage, the linguist does not consider the trans-
ferability of the frame, but merely checks the output
of the automatic role labeler, marking the frame and
the frame element either correct or incorrect. E.g
problematic analyses caused by polysemous words
are marked incorrect. We check the output of the
labeler before analyzing the transferability of the
frames because if the frame information is incorrect

in the Swedish text to begin with, there is no point
in transferring it to Finnish.

After checking the Swedish frame information,
the Swedish–Finnish parallel sentences are com-
pared. Two native Finnish speakers estimate,
whether the frame and frame element label is trans-
ferable to Finnish or not. Because FrameNet is
based on Frame Semantics (Fillmore, 1976), accord-
ing to which the meanings of most words can best be
understood by a description of a situation, the work-
ing hypothesis is that the semantic frames should be
more or less language neutral. Hence, the semantic
frame we assign for a certain situation in Swedish,
should be transferable to Finnish.

In addition to the theoretical frame transferability,
we also report the practical applicability of the trans-
fer via the wordnet connections. We check whether
the Swedish word is expressed in the Finnish par-
allel corpus with a word that has a direct link from
the Swedish wordnet to the Finnish wordnet via the
Princeton Wordnet. If there is no direct Wordnet link
from the Swedish word to the Finnish one, we re-
port whether the Finnish word used in the sentence
and the Finnish word linked to the Swedish word via
wordnets are in the same synset.

In sum, we manually evaluate whether the 20
most commonly occurring frames of the Swedish
test sentences are the same in the equivalent Finnish
sentences. After reporting whether the frames are
equivalent in both languages, we evaluate, how
many of the frame element labels can be transferred
to Finnish.

3.2 The Test Corpora

Presumably, transferability of the frames between
parallel corpora depends on the translation of the
corpus. Our hypothesis is that if the translator
follows the original expression very carefully, the
frames can be more similar than in a more freely
translated text. To see whether the transferability of
the frames varies according to a corpus, we used two
test corpora.

The test corpora consist of extracts from the
JRC-Acquis Corpus (Steinberger et al., 2006) and
the KOTUS Swedish–Finnish Parallel Corpus (Re-
search Institute for the Languages of Finland, 2004).
Both are Swedish–Finnish parallel corpora that are
sentence aligned. In both corpora, the text type is

10



formal: the former is a collection of legislative text
and the latter consists of press releases of different
Finnish companies.

4 Results

The evaluation consists of three parts: First and
foremost, we concentrate on estimating whether the
frame used in Swedish can be transferred to Finnish
even in theory. These results are presented in Sec-
tion 4.1. If the sentence is expressed using the same
frames, we also report how many of the frame ele-
ments encoded correctly in Swedish are realized in
Finnish (Section 4.2). In Section 4.3, we discuss the
possibility of transferring the frames via the word-
net connections. The results for the two different
corpora are presented separately enabling us to see
whether the text type impacts frame transferring.

4.1 Possibility of Transferring Frames

In Tables 1 and 2, the first column lists the 20 most
frequent frames of the evaluation corpora. The sec-
ond column shows that for all 20 frames, we took
the first six Swedish occurrences. The third column
shows how many of the Swedish frame labels are
correct. Finally, the right-most column portrays how
many of the correct Swedish frames can be trans-
ferred to Finnish. The result we are mostly inter-
ested in is the difference between the third and the
fourth columns.

As can be seen from Tables 1 and 2, most of
the correct labels for Swedish are transferable to
Finnish. In the JRC-Acquis corpus, the semantic la-
beler succeeded in 75%, and 72% of the frame la-
bels can be transferred to Finnish. The correspond-
ing success rates for the Kotus corpus are 80% and
72%.

Many of the words that are not correctly labeled
in Swedish occur in idiomatic expressions, and by
chance, some idioms are so frequent in the corpus
that they end up to our evaluation corpus. E.g. the
idiom träda i kraft / astua voimaan / come into effect
is expressed in the same way in both Swedish and
Finnish (lit. ‘tread into force’). In both languages, a
verb usually belonging to the frame SELF_MOTION
is used in this idiom, but in the idiom, the meaning
of it cannot be said to be expressing self motion.

Some sentences in which the frames are consid-

Frame N Correct Correct
in Swe in Fin

Being_necessary 6 6 6
Calendric_unit 6 6 6
Capability 6 3 3
Coming_to_believe 6 0 0
Commitment 6 6 6
Deciding 6 6 6
Dimension 6 5 4
Leadership 6 6 6
Part_orientational 6 4 4
Political_locales 6 6 6
Possession 6 2 1
Questioning 6 1 1
Removing 6 6 6
Request 6 6 6
Scrutiny 6 6 6
Self_motion 6 0 0
Substance 6 4 4
Suitability 6 6 5
Text 6 5 5
Using 6 6 5
Total (N) 120 90 86
Total (%) 100 75 72

Table 1: Frames from the JRC-Acquis Corpus

Frame N Correct Correct
in Swe in Fin

Assistance 6 6 6
Attempt_suasion 6 6 6
Becoming 6 6 3
Business 6 6 6
Calendric_unit 6 6 6
Capability 6 3 3
Change_position_ 6 6 5
on_a_scale_increase
Commitment 6 5 5
Create_physical_artwork 6 0 0
Create_representation 6 1 1
Deciding 6 6 6
Dimension 6 3 2
Employing 6 6 6
Leadership 6 4 4
Measure_duration 6 6 6
People 6 6 6
Possession 6 3 1
Relative_time 6 5 5
Supporting 6 6 2
Transfer 6 6 6
Total (N) 120 96 85
Total (%) 100 80 72

Table 2: Frames from the Kotus Corpus

11



ered non-transferable already on a theoretical level
are expressed in Finnish completely without the
frame, as demonstrated in Example (1) and (2).

(1) Tillväxten
growth

var
was

dock
still

mindre
smaller

än
than

det
the

ursprungliga
original

målet.
goal.

Still, growth was lower than what was the origi-
nal goal.

(2) Se
it

jäi
remained

kuitenkin
still

alkuperäistä
original

tavoitetta
goal

heikommaksi.
weaker.

However, it remained weaker than what was the
original goal.

In the Swedish example (1), the word mindre
‘smaller’ is used when expressing the decrease of
economical growth. The word mindre fits the frame
DIMENSION, but it is used in a figurative way. The
Finnish parallel sentence could be expressed us-
ing the direct translation pienempi ‘smaller’ but the
translation is different. Mindre in the Finnish Ko-
tus corpus is translated as heikompi ‘weaker’, which
is not expressing dimension even in a metaphorical
way.

When focusing only on the correct Swedish la-
bels, transferring frames seems to be beneficial, as
reported in Table 3. The success rate of a theoretical
possibility to use Swedish as a source language for
Finnish frames is 92%.

Correct Transferable Success %
Frames Frames

Kotus 90 86 96%
JRC-A 96 85 89%
Total 186 171 92%

Table 3: The Success Rate of Frame Transfer

Table 3 sums up the comparison of the two cor-
pora. The difference (7%) between the corpora is
not remarkable, so based on these test corpora, the
impact of the translation type is not big. In other
words, in both corpora, the correct Swedish frames
can be transferred to Finnish successfully.

4.2 Success of Transferring Frame Elements

When the sentence is expressed using the same
frames in both languages, we also report, how many

of the frame elements encoded correctly in Swedish
are realized in Finnish. These results are presented
in Tables 4 and 5. The numbers show how benefi-
cial it is to transfer the frame element labels of the
Swedish semantic labeler to Finnish.

The most common frame elements of the Swedish
corpora are listed in the first column. We scrutinize
such elements in detail which occur in the corpora
at least four times. The rest are added up and pre-
sented on the last lines of the tables. The second
column shows the frequency of the frame element,
while the third column gives the number of correct
frame element labels in the Swedish corpora. The
last column shows the number of transferable frame
elements.

As can be seen from Table 6 that sums up the re-
sults of the frame element transfer, frame element la-
bels do not transfer from Swedish to Finnish as well
as the frame labels. The success rate of the frame
transfer is 92%, where as the frame elements can be
successfully transferred in 83% of the cases.

In the Kotus corpus, 75% of the frame element la-
bels are transferable. However, there is a difference
between the two corpora: In the JRC-Acquis corpus,
91% of the elements can be transferred to Finnish.

4.3 Transferring Frames via Wordnets

Next we report how many of the Swedish frame-
evoking words are expressed using such words that
have the same wordnet identifier in Finnish. If the
parallel sentences are not expressed using words that
are equivalent in the wordnets, we examine whether
the words are in equivalent synsets. This informa-
tion is needed when estimating the usefulness of lex-
ical resources and their internal links in the frame
transferring.

In Tables 7 and 8, the first row displays the total
number of frame-evoking words. The second row
shows how many of the frames are transferable to
Finnish even in theory. The numbers on the third
row reflect the possibility of using the WordNet con-
nections in frame transferring; this number shows
how many of the words under examination are ex-
pressed both in Swedish and in Finnish with the
equivalent wordnet words. The fourth row shows
how many of the words are not directly linked with
each other but are located in equivalent synsets. On
the fifth row, we report how many of the words are

12



Frame N Correct Correct
Element in Swe in Fin
Entity 9 8 5
Speaker 8 2 2
Item 7 3 2
Theme 6 4 4
Supported 6 2 0
Recipient 6 5 5
Place 6 2 2
Whole 5 3 3
Landmark_occasion 5 5 5
Count 5 5 5
Content 5 4 4
Time_of_creation 4 0 0
Time 4 4 3
Supporter 4 1 1
Employer 4 0 0
Cognizer 4 4 4
Agent 4 2 2
Other (32 FEs) 60 35 20
Total (N) 152 89 67
Total (%) 100 59 44

Table 4: Frame Elements from the Kotus Corpus

Frame N Correct Correct
Element in Swe in Fin
Time 10 6 9
Speaker 9 2 2
Entity 9 7 5
Instrument 7 4 4
Theme 6 6 5
Evaluee 6 6 5
Ground 5 4 3
Final_category 5 5 4
Decision 5 2 2
Topic 4 0 0
Leader 4 2 2
Landmark_occasion 4 3 3
Dependent 4 4 3
Author 4 1 1
Other (32 FEs) 66 44 39
Total (N) 148 96 87
Total (%) 66 65 58

Table 5: Frame Elements from the JRC-Acquis Corpus

Correct Transferable Success %
Frame E. Frame E.

Kotus 89 67 75%
JRC-A 96 87 91%
Total 185 154 83%

Table 6: The Success Rate of Frame Element Transfer

Frame-evoking words 120
Transferable to Finnish 85
Same word as in FWN 37
In the same synset 2
Could be in the same synset 31

Table 7: Wordnet Links in the Kotus Corpus

Frame-evoking words 120
Transferable to Finnish 86
Same word as in FWN 41
In the same synset 0
Could be in the same synset 16

Table 8: Wordnet Links in the JRC-Acquis Corpus

synonyms of the word in question and could there-
fore be located in the same synset in the wordnets.

As can be seen in Tables 7 and 8, only 46% (37/85
and 41/86) of the theoretically transferable words
can be transferred to Finnish directly using the word-
net links. Our hypothesis was that we could get bet-
ter results when looking at all the words in a synset.
This appears to be a wrong assumption: There are
only 2 words that come from the same synset that
are not equivalent words used in the translations.

The numbers on the fifth rows are remarkably big,
especially when compared to the number of real-
ized synonyms on the fourth row. These 47 words
could (or should) be located in the same synset as the
words in question. If the wordnets were complete,
i.e. if all words that could be in the same synset
were in the same synset, the theoretically transfer-
able LUs would be 82% (70/85) and 65% (56/86).

5 Conclusion and Future Work

The main point of the experiment was to see if build-
ing a preliminary Finnish framenet and labeling se-
mantic roles for Finnish using Swedish resources
is feasible at all. In particular, we wanted to see
whether the same situations are expressed using the
same frames in both languages and whether it is pos-
sible to transfer the frames and frame elements with
their lexical units from one language to the other.

In our experiment, we have evaluated how well
the frames and frame elements can be transferred
from a Swedish corpus to its Finnish parallel corpus.
We have shown that in theory, 92% of the correct
Swedish frame labels and 83% of the correct frame

13



element labels can be transferred to Finnish.
We also investigated whether linked wordnets

could be used for the transfer of frame-evoking
words between Swedish and Finnish. The results
here are more ambiguous, however. On the one
hand, only about half of the words could be linked
in this way. On the other hand, it turns out that this
in part is because of many synsets being incomplete
in these wordnets which are still under construction.
Thus we should not dismiss out of hand the useful-
ness of lexical-semantic resources such as wordnets
for the task of cross-language frame transfer, but
rather explore further how the knowledge encoded
in them could be best put to use.

The result of our experiment encourages us to find
ways of performing frame transfer automatically.
This can be accomplished using a word aligned par-
allel corpus for Swedish and Finnish. The automatic
word alignment of Finnish is generally seen as a
complicated task because of the free constituent or-
der and rich morphology of Finnish. However, our
future work is to examine the success of using au-
tomatic word alignment, e.g. Giza++, in automat-
ically transferring the frame information from one
language to another.

Acknowledgements

The research presented here was supported by the
Swedish Research Council (the project Swedish
Framenet++, VR dnr 2010-6013) and by the Uni-
versity of Gothenburg through its support of the
Centre for Language Technology and its support of
Språkbanken (the Swedish Language Bank). The
work on linking the Swedish wordnet to the Prince-
ton Core WordNet was conducted with funding by
the European Commission through its support of
the META-NORD project under the ICT PSP Pro-
gramme, grant agreement no 270899. We would like
to thank the anonymous reviewers for their construc-
tive comments and Jyrki Niemi for his valuable help
with FinnWordNet.

References

Emily M. Bender. 2011. On achieving and evaluating
language-independence in NLP. Linguistic Issues in
Language Technology, 6(3).

Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2009. All in the fam-
ily: A comparison of SALDO and WordNet. In Pro-
ceedings of the Nodalida 2009 Workshop on WordNets
and other Lexical Semantic Resources – between Lexi-
cal Semantics, Lexicography, Terminology and Formal
Ontologies, Odense, Denmark.

Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2011. Swesaurus – ett
svenskt ordnät med fria tyglar. LexicoNordica, 18:17–
39.

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Lennart Lönngren.
2008. The hunting of the BLARK – SALDO, a freely
available lexical database for Swedish language tech-
nology. In Joakim Nivre, Mats Dahllöf, and Beata
Megyesi, editors, Resourceful language technology.
Festschrift in honor of Anna Sågvall Hein, number 7
in Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis: Studia Linguistica
Upsaliensia, pages 21–32. Uppsala University, Depart-
ment of Linguistics and Philology, Uppsala.

Lars Borin, Dana Dannélls, Markus Forsberg,
Maria Toporowska Gronostaj, and Dimitrios Kokki-
nakis. 2010. The past meets the present in the
Swedish FrameNet++. In Proc. of EURALEX, pages
269–281, Leeuwarden. EURALEX.

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Johan Roxendal. 2012.
Korp – the corpus infrastructure of Språkbanken. In
Proceedings of LREC 2012.

Lars Borin. 2010. Med Zipf mot framtiden – en inte-
grerad lexikonresurs för svensk språkteknologi. Lexi-
coNordica, 17:35–54.

Aljoscha Burchardt, Katrin Erk, and Anette Frank. 2005.
A WordNet detour to FrameNet. In Proceedings of the
GLDV 2005 workshop GermaNet II, Bonn, Germany.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. Kluwer The MIT Press.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1976. Frame semantics and the na-
ture of language. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences: Conference on the Origin and Development
of Language and Speech, 280(1):20–32.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2006. A
FrameNet-based semantic role labeler for Swedish. In
Proc. of Coling/ACL.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2007. Using
WordNet to extend FrameNet coverage. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Building Frame-semantic Re-
sources for Scandinavian and Baltic Languages, at
NODALIDA, pages 27–30, Tartu, Estonia.

Richard Johansson, Karin Friberg Heppin, and Dimitrios
Kokkinakis. 2012. Semantic role labeling with the
Swedish FrameNet. In Proceedings of LREC-2012.

Krister Lindén and Lauri Carlson. 2010. FinnWordNet –
WordNet på finska via översättning. LexicoNordica –
Nordic Journal of Lexicography, 17:119–140.

14



Sebastian Padó and Mirella Lapata. 2005a. Cross-
lingual bootstrapping for semantic lexicons: The case
of Framenet. In Proceedings of AAAI-05, pages 1087–
1092, Pittsburgh, United States.

Sebastian Padó and Mirella Lapata. 2005b. Cross-
linguistic projection of role-semantic information. In
Proceedings of Human Language Technology Confer-
ence and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 859–866, Vancouver,
Canada.

Sebastian Padó. 2007. Translational equivalence
and cross-lingual parallelism: The case of FrameNet
frames. In Proceedings of the NODALIDA Workshop
on Building Frame Semantics Resources for Scandina-
vian and Baltic Languages, Tartu, Estonia.

Research Institute for the Languages of Finland. 2004.
KFSPC: KOTUS Swedish-Finnish Parallel Corpus.
http://www.csc.fi/kielipankki.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R. L.
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson, and Jan Scheffczyk.
2006. FrameNet II: Extended theory and practice. Un-
published Manuscript.

Ralf Steinberger, Bruno Pouliquen, Anna Widiger,
Camelia Ignat, Tomaž Erjavec, Dan Tufiş, and Dániel
Varga. 2006. The JRC-Acquis: A multilingual
aligned parallel corpus with 20+ languages. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC), pages 2142–
2147.

Piek Vossen, editor. 1998. EuroWordNet: a multilingual
database with lexical semantic networks for European
Languages. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

15


