










































Phrase Model Training for Statistical Machine Translation with Word Lattices of Preprocessing Alternatives


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 450–459,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Phrase Model Training for Statistical Machine Translation with
Word Lattices of Preprocessing Alternatives

Joern Wuebker and Hermann Ney
Human Language Technology and Pattern Recognition Group

RWTH Aachen University
Aachen, Germany

{wuebker,ney}@cs.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract

In statistical machine translation, word lattices
are used to represent the ambiguities in the
preprocessing of the source sentence, such as
word segmentation for Chinese or morpholog-
ical analysis for German. Several approaches
have been proposed to define the probability
of different paths through the lattice with ex-
ternal tools like word segmenters, or by apply-
ing indicator features. We introduce a novel
lattice design, which explicitly distinguishes
between different preprocessing alternatives
for the source sentence. It allows us to make
use of specific features for each preprocess-
ing type and to lexicalize the choice of lattice
path directly in the phrase translation model.
We argue that forced alignment training can
be used to learn lattice path and phrase trans-
lation model simultaneously. On the news-
commentary portion of the German→English
WMT 2011 task we can show moderate im-
provements of up to 0.6% BLEU over a state-
of-the-art baseline system.

1 Introduction

The application of statistical machine translation
(SMT) to word lattice input was first introduced for
the translation of speech recognition output. Rather
than translating the single-best transcription, the
speech recognition system encodes all possible tran-
scriptions and their probabilities within a word lat-
tice, which is then used as input for the machine
translation system (Ney, 1999; Matusov et al., 2005;
Bertoldi et al., 2007).

Since then, several groups have adapted this ap-
proach to model ambiguities in representing the
source language with lattices and were able to re-
port improvements over their respective baselines.
The probabilities for different paths through the lat-
tice are usually modeled by assigning probabilities
to arcs as a byproduct of the lattice generation or
by defining binary indicator features. Applying the
first method only makes sense if the lattice construc-
tion is based on a single, comprehensive probabilis-
tic method, like a Chinese word segmentation model
as is used by Xu et al. (2005). In applications like
the one described by Dyer et al. (2008), where sev-
eral different segmenters for Chinese are combined
to create the lattice, this is not possible. Also, our
intuition suggests that simply defining indicator fea-
tures for each of the segmenters may not be ideal, if
we assume that there is not a single best segmenter,
but rather that for different data instances a different
one works best.

In this paper, we propose to model the lattice
path implicitly within the phrase translation model.
We introduce a novel lattice design, which explic-
itly distinguishes between different ways of prepro-
cessing the source sentence. It enables us to define
specific binary features for each preprocessing type
and to learn lexicalized lattice path probabilities and
the phrase translation model simultaneously with a
forced alignment training procedure.

To train the phrase translation model, most state-
of-the-art SMT systems rely on heuristic phrase ex-
traction from a word-aligned training corpus. Us-
ing a modified version of the translation decoder to

450



force-align the training data provides a more consis-
tent way of training. Wuebker et al. (2010) intro-
duce a leave-one-out method which can overcome
the over-fitting effects inherent to this training pro-
cedure (DeNero et al., 2006). The authors report this
to yield both a significantly smaller phrase table and
higher translation quality than the heuristic phrase
extraction.

We argue that applying forced alignment train-
ing helps to exploit the full potential of word lattice
translation. The effects of the training on lattice in-
put are analyzed on the news-commentary portion of
the German→English WMT 2011 task. Our results
show moderate improvements of up to 0.6% BLEU
over the baseline.

This paper is organized as follows: We will re-
view related work in Section 2, describe the decoder
in Section 3 and present our novel lattice design in
Section 4. The phrase training algorithm is intro-
duced in Section 5, and Section 6 gives a detailed
account of the experimental setup and discusses the
results. Finally, our findings are summarized in Sec-
tion 7.

2 Related work

Word lattices have been used for machine transla-
tion of text in a variety of ways. Dyer et al. (2008)
use it to encode different Chinese word segmenta-
tions or Arabic morphological analyses. For the
phrase-based model, they report improvements of
up to 0.9% BLEU for Chinese→English and 1.6%
BLEU for Arabic→English over the respective sin-
gle best word segmented and morphologically ana-
lyzed source. These results are achieved without an
explicit way of modeling probabilities for different
paths within the lattice. The training of the phrase
model is done by generating one version of the train-
ing data for each segmentation method or morpho-
logical analysis. The word alignments are trained
separately, and are then concatenated for phrase ex-
traction. Our work differs from (Dyer et al., 2008) in
that we explicitly distinguish the various preprocess-
ing types in the lattice so that we can define specific
path features and lexicalize the lattice path probabil-
ities within the phrase model.

In (Xu et al., 2005) the probability of a segmen-

tation, as given by the Chinese word segmentation
model, and the translation model are combined into
a global decision rule. This is done by weighting
the lattice edges with a source language model. The
authors report an improvement of 1.5% BLEU over
translation of the single best segmentation with a
phrase-based SMT system.

Dyer (2009) introduces a maximum entropy
model for compound word splitting, which he
uses to create word lattices for translation in-
put. He shows improvements in German-English,
Hungarian-English and Turkish-English over state-
of-the-art baselines.

For the German→English WMT 2010 task, Hard-
meier et al. (2010) encode the morphological re-
duction and decompounding of the German surface
form as alternative paths in a word lattice. They
show improvements of roughly 0.5% BLEU over the
baseline. A binary indicator feature is added to the
log-linear framework for the alternative edges. Ad-
ditionally, they integrate long-range reorderings of
the source sentence into the lattice, in order to match
the word order of the English language, which yields
another improvement of up to 0.5% BLEU.

Niehues and Kolss (2009) also use lattices to en-
code different alternative reorderings of the source
sentence which results in an improvement of
2.0% BLEU over the baseline on the WMT 2008
German→English task.

Onishi et al. (2010) propose a method of modeling
paraphrases in a lattice. They perform experiments
on the English→Japanese and English→Chinese
IWSLT 2007 tasks, and report improvements of
1.1% and 0.9% BLEU over a paraphrase-augmented
baseline.

Schroeder et al. (2009) generalize usage of lattices
to combine input from multiple source languages.

Factored translation models (Koehn and Hoang,
2007) approach the idea of integrating annotation
into translation from the opposite direction. Where
lattices allow the decoder to choose a single level of
annotation as translation source, factored models are
designed to jointly translate several annotation lev-
els (factors). Thus, they are more suited to integrate
low-level annotation that by itself does not provide
sufficient information for accurate translation, like

451



part-of-speech tags, gender, etc. On the other hand,
they require a one-to-one correspondence between
the factors, which makes them unsuitable to model
word segmentation or decompounding.

The problem of performing real training for the
phrase translation model has been approached in a
number of different ways in the past. The first one,
to the best of our knowledge, was the joint proba-
bility phrase model presented by Marcu and Wong
(2002). It is shown to perform slightly inferior to
the standard heuristic phrase extraction from word
alignments by Koehn et al. (2003).

A detailed analysis of the inherent over-fitting
problems when training a generative phrase model
with the EM algorithm is given in (DeNero et al.,
2006). These findings are in principle confirmed by
Moore and Quirk (2007) who, however, can show
that their model is less sensitive to reducing compu-
tational resources than the state-of-the-art heuristic.

Birch et al. (2006) and DeNero et al. (2008)
present alternative training procedures for the joint
model introduced by Marcu and Wong (2002),
which are shown to improve its performance.

In (Mylonakis and Sima’an, 2008) a phrase model
is described, whose training procedure is designed
to counteract the inherent over-fitting problem by in-
cluding prior probabilities based on Inversion Trans-
duction Grammar and smoothing as learning objec-
tive. It yields a small improvement over a standard
phrase-based baseline.

Ferrer and Juan (2009) present an approach,
where the phrase model is trained by a semi-hidden
Markov model.

In this work we apply the phrase training method
introduced by Wuebker et al. (2010), where the
phrase translation model of a fully competitive SMT
system is trained in a generative way. The key to
avoiding the over-fitting effects described by DeN-
ero et al. (2006) is their novel leave-one-out proce-
dure.

3 Decoding

3.1 Phrase-based translation

We use a standard phrase-based decoder which
searches for the best translation êÎ1 for a given input

sentence fJ1 by maximizing the posterior probability

êÎ1 = arg max
I,eI1

Pr(eI1|fJ1 ). (1)

Generalizing the noisy channel approach (Brown
et al., 1990) and making use of the maximum ap-
proximation (Viterbi), the decoder directly mod-
els the posterior probability by a log-linear combi-
nation of several feature functions hm(eI1, s

K
1 , f

J
1 )

weighted with scaling factors λm, which results in
the decision rule (Och and Ney, 2004)

êÎ1 = arg max
I,eI1,K,s

K
1

{
M∑

m=1

λmhm(e
I
1, s

K
1 , f

J
1 )

}
. (2)

Here, sK1 denotes the segmentation of e
I
1 and f

J
1

into K phrase-pairs and their alignment. The fea-
tures used are the language model, phrase translation
and lexical smoothing models in both directions,
word and phrase penalty and a simple distance-
based reordering penalty.

3.2 Lattice translation

For lattice input we generalize Equation 2 to also
maximize over the set of sentences F(L) encoded
by a given source word lattice L:

êÎ1 =

arg max
I,eI1,K,s

K
1 ,f

J
1 ∈F(L)

{
M∑

m=1

λmhm(e
I
1, s

K
1 , f

J
1 )

}
(3)

Note that in this formulation there are no prob-
abilities assigned to the arcs of L. We define ad-
ditional binary indicator features hm and lexical-
ize path probabilities by encoding the path into the
word identities. To translate lattice input, we adapt
the standard phrase-based decoding algorithm as de-
scribed in (Matusov et al., 2008). The decoder keeps
track of the covered slots, which represent the topo-
logical order of the nodes, rather than the covered
words. When expanding a hypothesis, it has to be
verified that there is no overlap between the covered
nodes and that a path exists from start to goal node,

452



Pakistans Streitkräfte - wiederholt Ziel von Selbstmordattentätern - sind demoralisiert .

Pakistan Streit Kraft

Streit Kräfte

selbst Mord Attentat

Selbst Mord Attentätern

sein demoralisierenLemma

Surface

Compound

0 1

2

2

3 4 5 6 7

8 9

8 9

10 11 12 13 14

Pakistans Streitkräfte - wiederholt Ziel von Selbstmordattentätern - sind demoralisiert .

Pakistan Streit Kraft

Streit Kräfte

selbst Mord Attentat

Selbst Mord Attentätern

sein demoralisierenLemma

Surface

Compound

0 1

2

2

3 4 5 6 7

8 9

8 9

10 11 12 13 14

Pakistans

-

wiederholt Ziel von

- 

sind demoralisiert

.

- - .

wiederholt Ziel von

Figure 1: Top: Slim lattice. Bottom: Full lattice. The sentence is taken from the training data. The three layers
Surface, Compound and Lemma are separated with dashed lines. Nodes are labeled with slot information. Slots are
ordered horizontally, layers vertically.

which passes through all covered nodes. In prac-
tice, when considering a possible expansion cover-
ing slots j′, ..., j′′ with start and end states n′ and
n′′, we make sure that the following two conditions
hold:

• n′ is reachable from the lattice node that cor-
responds to the nearest already covered slot to
the left of j′.

• The node that corresponds to the nearest al-
ready covered slot to the right of j′′ is reachable
from n′′.

It was noted by Dyer et al. (2008) that the stan-
dard distance-based reordering model needs to be
redefined for lattice input. We define the distortion
penalty as the difference in slot number. Using the
shortest path within the lattice is reported to have
better performance in (Dyer et al., 2008), however
we did not implement it due to time constraints.

4 Lattice design

We construct lattices from three different prepro-
cessing variants of the German source side of the
data. The surface form is the standard tokenization
of the source sentence. The word compounds are
produced by the frequency-based compound split-
ting method described in (Koehn and Knight, 2003),
applied to the tokenized sentence. From the com-
pound split sentence we produce the lemma of the

German words by applying the TreeTagger toolkit
(Schmid, 1995). Each of the different preprocess-
ing variants is assigned a separate layer within the
lattice. For the phrase model, word identities are de-
fined by both the word and its layer. In this way, the
phrase model can assign different scores to phrases
in different layers, allowing it to guide the search to-
wards a specific layer for each word. In practice, this
is done by annotating words with a unique identifier
for each layer. For example, the word sein from the
lemmatized layer will be written as LEM.sein within
both the data and the phrase table. If sein appears in
the surface form layer, it will be written as SUR.sein
and is treated as a different word. SUR is the identi-
fier for the compound layer.

We experiment with two different lattice designs.
In the full lattice, all three layers are included for
each source word in surface form. The slim lattice
only includes arcs for the lemma layer if it differs
from the surface form, and only includes arcs for the
compound layer if it differs from both surface form
and lemma. Figure 1 shows a slim and a full lattice
for the same training data sentence.

For each layer, we add two indicator features to
the phrase table: One binary feature which is set
to 1 if the phrase is taken from this layer, and one
feature which is equal to the number of words from
this layer. This results in six additional feature func-
tions, whose weights are optimized jointly with the
standard features described in Section 3.1. We will

453



denote them as layer features.

5 Phrase translation model training

To train the phrase model, we use a modified version
of the translation decoder to force-align the training
data. We apply the method described in (Wuebker et
al., 2010), but with word lattices on the source side.
To avoid over-fitting, we use their cross-validation
technique, which is described as a low-cost alterna-
tive to leave-one-out. For cross-validation we seg-
ment the training data into batches containing 5000
sentences. For each batch, the phrase table is up-
dated by reducing the phrase counts by the local
counts produced by the current batch in the previ-
ous training iteration. For the first iteration, we per-
form the standard phrase extraction separately for
each batch to produce the local counts. Singleton
phrases are assigned the probability β(|f̃ |+|ẽ|) with
the source and target phrase lengths |f̃ | and |ẽ| and
fixed β = e−5 (length-based leave-one-out). Sen-
tences for which the decoder is not able to find an
alignment are discarded (about 4% for our experi-
ments). To estimate the probabilities of the phrase
model, we count all phrase pairs used in training
within an n-best list (equally weighted). The trans-
lation probability for a phrase pair (f̃ , ẽ) is estimated
as

pFA(ẽ|f̃) =
CFA(f̃ , ẽ)

Cmon(f̃)
, (4)

where CFA(f̃ , ẽ) is the count of the phrase pair
(f̃ , ẽ) in the force-aligned training data. In order to
learn the lattice path along with the phrase transla-
tion probabilities, we make the following modifica-
tion to the original formulation in (Wuebker et al.,
2010). The denominator Cmon(f̃) is the count of
f̃ in the target side of the training data, rather than
using the real marginal counts. This means that it
is independent of the training procedure, and can be
computed by ignoring one side of the training data
and performing a simple n-gram count on the other.
In this way the model learns to prefer lattice paths
which are taken more often in training. For exam-
ple, if the phrase (LEM.Streit LEM.Kraft) is used
to align the sentence from Figure 1, Cmon(f̃) will

be increased for f̃ = (SUR.Streitkräfte) and f̃ =
(SPL.Streit SPL.Kräfte) without affecting their joint
counts. This leads to a lower probability for these
phrases, which is not the case if marginal counts
are used. Note that on the source side we have one
training corpus for each lattice layer, which are con-
catenated to compute Cmon(f̃). The size of the n-
best lists used in this work is fixed to 20000. Using
smaller n-best lists was tested, but seems to have dis-
advantages for the application to lattices. After re-
estimation of the phrase model, the feature weights
are optimized again.

In order to achieve a good coverage of the train-
ing data, we allow the decoder to generate backoff
phrases. If a source phrase consisting of a single
word does not have any translation candidates left
after the bilingual phrase matching, one phrase pair
is added to the translation candidates for each word
in the target sentence. The backoff phrases are as-
signed a fixed probability γ = e−12. Note that this
is smaller than the probability the phrase would be
assigned according to the length-based leave-one-
out heuristic, leading to a preference of singleton
phrases over backoff phrases. The lexical smooth-
ing models are applied in the usual way to both sin-
gleton and backoff phrases. After each sentence, the
backoff phrases are discarded. However, in the ex-
periments for this work, introducing backoff phrases
only increases the coverage from 95.8% to 96.2% of
the sentences.

6 Experimental evaluation

6.1 Experimental setup

Our experiments are carried out on the news-
commentary portion of the German→English data
provided for the EMNLP 2011 Sixth Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT 2011).∗

We use newstest2008 as development set and
newstest2009 and newstest2010 as unseen
test sets. The word alignments are produced with
GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003). To optimize the log-
linear parameters, the Downhill-Simplex algorithm
(Nelder and Mead, 1965) is applied with BLEU (Pa-
pineni et al., 2002) as optimization criterion. The

∗http://www.statmt.org/wmt11

454



German English
Surface Compound Lemma

Train Sentences 136K
Running Words 3.4M 3.5M 3.3M
Vocabulary Size 118K 81K 52K 57K

newstest2008 Sentences 2051
Running Words 48K 50K 50K
Vocabulary Size 10.3K 9.7K 7.3K 8.1K

OOVs (Running Words) 3041 2092 1742 2070
newstest2009 Sentences 2525

Running Words 63K 66K 66K
Vocabulary Size 12.2K 11.4K 8.4K 9.4K

OOVs (Running Words) 4058 2885 2400 2729
newstest2010 Sentences 2489

Running Words 62K 65K 62K
Vocabulary Size 12.3K 11.4K 8.5K 9.2K

OOVs (Running Words) 4357 2952 2565 2742

Table 1: Corpus Statistics for the WMT 2011 news-commentary data, the development set (newstest2008) and
the two test sets (newstest2009, newstest2010). For the source side, three different preprocessing alternatives
are included: Surface, Compound and Lemma.

language model is a standard 4-gram LM with mod-
ified Kneser-Ney smoothing (Chen and Goodman,
1998) produced with the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke,
2002). It is trained on the full bilingual data and
parts of the monolingual News crawl corpus pro-
vided for WMT 2011. Numbers are replaced with
a single category symbol in a separate preprocess-
ing step and we apply the long-range part-of-speech
based reordering rules proposed by (Popović and
Ney, 2006).

Table 1 shows statistics for the bilingual training
data and the development and test corpora for the
three different German preprocessing alternatives.
It can be seen that both compound splitting and
lemmatization reduce the vocabulary size and num-
ber of out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words. Results are
measured in BLEU and TER (Snover et al., 2006),
which are computed case-insensitively with a single
reference.

6.2 Baseline experiments

To get an overview over the effects of the different
preprocessing alternatives for the German source,
we built three baseline systems, one for each prepro-

cessing type. The phrase tables are extracted heuris-
tically in the standard way from the word-aligned
training data. Additionally, we performed phrase
training for the compound split version of the data.
The results are shown in Table 2. When moving
from the Surface to the Compound layer, we observe
improvements of up to 1.0% in BLEU and 1.1% in
TER. Reducing the morphological richness further
(Lemma) leads to a clear performance drop. Appli-
cation of phrase training on the compound split data
yields a small degradation in TER on all data sets and
in BLEU on newstest2010. We assume that this
is due to the small size of the training data and its
heterogeneity, which makes it hard for the decoder
to find good phrase alignments.

6.3 Lattice experiments: Heuristic extraction

We generated both slim and full lattices for all data
sets. Similar to (Dyer et al., 2008), we concate-
nate the three training data sets and their word align-
ments to extract the phrases. Note that this only pro-
duces single-layer phrases. It can be seen in Table
2 that without the application of layer features the
slim lattice slightly outperforms the full lattice. In-

455



newstest2008 newstest2009 newstest2010
BLEU

[%]
TER

[%]
BLEU

[%]
TER

[%]
BLEU

[%]
TER

[%]

Baseline Surface 19.5 64.6 18.6 64.4 20.6 62.8
Compounds 20.5 63.5 19.1 63.5 21.1 61.9

FA Compounds 20.5 63.9 19.1 63.8 20.9 62.3
Lemma 19.2 65.4 18.2 65.2 19.9 63.9

Slim Lattice without layer feat. 19.9 64.4 18.9 64.1 20.8 62.6
(heuristic) with layer feat. 20.5 63.8 19.4 63.9 21.0 62.4
Full Lattice without layer feat. 19.8 64.6 18.7 64.2 20.6 62.8
(heuristic) with layer feat. 20.4 64.0 19.5 63.8 21.3 62.3
Full Lattice without layer feat. 20.0 64.3 19.3 64.1 20.8 62.6
(FA w/o layer feat.) with layer feat. 20.2 64.3 19.1 64.2 20.7 62.8
Full Lattice without layer feat. 20.5 63.7 19.5 63.6 21.3 62.1
(FA w/ layer feat.) with layer feat. 20.7 63.6 19.7 63.4 21.4 61.8

Table 2: Results on the German-English WMT 2011 data. Scores are computed case-insensitively for BLEU [%]
and TER [%]. We evaluate performance of the baseline systems, one for each of the three different encodings, with
both slim and full lattices using heuristic phrase extraction and with full lattices using forced alignment phrase model
training (FA). All lattice systems are evaluated with and without layer features. The best scores in each column are in
boldface, statistically significant improvement over the Compounds baseline is marked with blue color.

troducing layer features boosts the performance for
both lattice types. However, the performance in-
crease is considerably larger for the full lattice sys-
tems, which now outperform the slim lattice systems
on newstest2009 and newstest2010. Com-
pared to the Compounds baseline, the full lattice
system with layer features shows a small improve-
ment of up to 0.4% BLEU on newstest2009 and
newstest2010, but a degradation in TER.

6.4 Lattice experiments: Phrase training

The experiments on phrase training are setup as fol-
lows. The phrase table is initialized with the stan-
dard extraction and is identical to the one used for
the experiments in Section 6.3. The log-linear scal-
ing factors used in training are the optimized param-
eters on the corresponding lattice, also taken from
the experiments described in Section 6.3. The forced
alignment procedure was run for one iteration. Fur-
ther iterations were tested, but did not give any im-
provements.

The phrase training was performed on the full lat-
tice design. The reason for this is that we want the
system to learn all possible phrases. Even if there is
no difference in wording between the layers in train-

ing, the additional phrases could be useful for un-
seen test data. The training was performed both with
and without layer features. The resulting systems
were also optimized with and without layer features,
resulting in four different setups.

From the results in Table 2 it is clear that phrase
training without layer features does not have the
desired effect. Even if we apply layer features to
the system trained without them, we do not reach
the performance of the best standard lattice system.
We conclude that, without these indicator features,
the standard lattice system does not produce good
phrase alignments.

When the layer features are applied for both train-
ing and translation, we observe improvements of up
to 0.2% in BLEU and 0.5% in TER over the corre-
sponding standard lattice system. The gap between
the systems with and without layer features is much
smaller than for the heuristically trained lattices.
This indicates that our goal of encoding the best lat-
tice path directly in the phrase model was at least
partially achieved. However, in order to exceed the
performance of our state-of-the-art baseline on both
measures, the layer features are still needed within
the phrase training procedure and for translation. Al-

456



source Das Warten hat gedauert mehr als NUM Minuten, was im Fall einer Straße, wo
werden erwartet NUM Menschen, ist unverständlich.

reference The wait lasted more than NUM minutes, something incomprehensible for a race
where you expect more than NUM people.

lattice (heuristic) The wait has taken more than NUM minutes, which in the case of a street, where
NUM people are expected to be, can’t understand it.

lattice (FA) The wait has taken more than NUM minutes, which in the case of a street, where
expected NUM people, is incomprehensible.

Figure 2: Example sentence from the newstest2009 data set. The faulty phrase in the heuristic lattice translation
is marked in boldface.

together, our phrase trained lattice approach outper-
forms the state-of-the-art baseline on all three data
sets by up to 0.6% BLEU. On newstest2009,
this result is statistically significant with 95% confi-
dence according to the bootstrap resampling method
described by Koehn (2004).

For a direct comparison between the heuristic and
phrase-trained full lattice systems, we manually in-
spected the optimized log-linear parameter values
for the layer features. We observe that for the stan-
dard lattices, paths through the lemmatized layer are
heavily penalized. In the phrase trained lattice setup,
the penalty is much smaller. As a result, the num-
ber of words from the Lemma layer used for transla-
tion of the newstest2009 data set is increased by
49% from 1828 to 2715 words. However, a manual
inspection of the translations reveals that the main
improvement seems to come from a better choice
of phrases from the Compound layer. More specif-
ically, the used phrases tend to be shorter – the av-
erage phrase length of Compound layer phrases is
1.5 words for both the baseline and the heuristic lat-
tice system. In the phrase trained lattice system, it
is 1.3 words. An example is given in Figure 2. We
focus on the end of the sentence, where the heuris-
tic system uses the rather disfluent phrase (ist unver-
ständlich. # can’t understand it.), whereas the forced
alignment trained system applies the three phrases
(ist # is), (unverständlich # incomprehensible) and
(. # .).

This effect can be explained by the leave-one-out
procedure. As lemmatized phrases usually map to
several phrases in the other layers, their count is gen-
erally higher. Application of leave-one-out, which
reduces the counts of all phrases extracted from the

current sentence by a fixed value, therefore has a
stronger penalizing effect on Surface and Compound
layer phrases. In the extreme case, phrases which are
singletons in the Compound layer are unlikely to be
used at all in training, if the corresponding phrase
in the Lemma layer has a higher count. While this
rarely leads to the competing lemmatized phrases
being used in free translation, it allows for shorter,
more general phrases from the more expressive lay-
ers to be applied. Indeed, the ’bad’ phrase (ist unver-
ständlich. # can’t understand it.) from the example
in Figure 2 is a singleton.

7 Conclusion and future work

In this work we apply a forced alignment phrase
training technique to input word lattices in SMT for
the first time. The goal of encoding better lattice
path probabilities directly into the phrase model was
at least partially successful. The proposed method
outperforms our baseline by up to 0.6% BLEU. To
achieve this, we presented a novel lattice design,
which distinguishes between different layers, for
which we can define separate indicator features. Al-
though these layer features are still necessary for the
final system to improve over state-of-the-art perfor-
mance, they are less important than in the heuristi-
cally trained setup.

One advantage of our approach is its adaptability
to a variety of scenarios. In future work, we plan
to apply it to additional language pairs. Arabic and
Chinese on the source side, where the layers could
represent different word segmentations, seem a nat-
ural choice. We also hope to be able to leverage
larger training data sets. As a natural extension we
plan to allow learning of cross-layer phrases. Fur-

457



ther, applying this framework to lattices modeling
different reorderings could be an interesting direc-
tion.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially realized as part of the
Quaero Programme, funded by OSEO, French State
agency for innovation, and also partially funded by
the European Union under the FP7 project T4ME
Net, Contract No. 249119.

References

N. Bertoldi, R. Zens, and M. Federico. 2007. Speech
translation by confusion network decoding. In Pro-
ceedings of ICASSP 2007, pages 1297–1300, Hon-
olulu, Hawaii, April.

Alexandra Birch, Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne,
and Philipp Koehn. 2006. Constraining the phrase-
based, joint probability statistical translation model. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pages 154–157, Jun.

Peter F. Brown, John Cocke, Stephen A. Della Pietra,
Vincent J. Della Pietra, Fredrick Jelinek, John D. Laf-
ferty, Robert L. Mercer, and Paul S. Roossin. 1990. A
statistical approach to machine translation. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 16:79–85, June.

Stanley F. Chen and Joshua Goodman. 1998. An empir-
ical study of smoothing techniques for language mod-
eling. Technical Report TR-10-98, Computer Science
Group, Harvard University, Aug.

John DeNero, Dan Gillick, James Zhang, and Dan Klein.
2006. Why Generative Phrase Models Underperform
Surface Heuristics. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 31–38, New
York City, June.

John DeNero, Alexandre Buchard-Côté, and Dan Klein.
2008. Sampling Alignment Structure under a Bayesian
Translation Model. In Proceedings of the 2008 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 314–323, Honolulu, October.

C. Dyer, S. Muresan, and P. Resnik. 2008. Generaliz-
ing word lattice translation. In Proceedings of Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 1012–1020, Columbus, Ohio, June.

Chris Dyer. 2009. Using a maximum entropy model
to build segmentation lattices for mt. In Proceedings
of the 2009 Annual Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the ACL, pages 406–414, Boulder, Col-
orado, June.

Jesús-Andrés Ferrer and Alfons Juan. 2009. A phrase-
based hidden semi-markov approach to machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of European Association for
Machine Translation (EAMT), Barcelona, Spain, May.
European Association for Machine Translation.

C. Hardmeier, A. Bisazza, and M. Federico. 2010. FBK
at WMT 2010: Word Lattices for Morphological Re-
duction and Chunk-based Reordering. In Proceedings
of the Joint 5th Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation and MetricsMATR, pages 88–92, Uppsala, Swe-
den, July.

Philipp Koehn and Hieu Hoang. 2007. Factored trans-
lation models. In In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 868–876.

P. Koehn and K. Knight. 2003. Empirical Methods
for Compound Splitting. In Proceedings of European
Chapter of the ACL (EACL 2009), pages 187–194.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2003 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics on Human Language Technology - Volume 1, pages
48–54, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn. 2004. Statistical Significance Tests
for Machine Translation Evaluation. pages 388–395,
Barcelona, Spain, July.

Daniel Marcu and William Wong. 2002. A phrase-based,
joint probability model for statistical machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
2002), July.

E. Matusov, H. Ney, and R. Schlüter. 2005. Phrase-
based translation of speech recognizer word lattices us-
ing loglinear model combination. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Under-
standing Workshop (ASRU), pages 110–115, San Juan,
Puerto Rico.

Evgeny Matusov, Björn Hoffmeister, and Hermann Ney.
2008. ASR Word Lattice Translation with Exhaustive
Reordering is Possible. In Interspeech, pages 2342–
2345, Brisbane, Australia, September.

Robert C. Moore and Chris Quirk. 2007. An iteratively-
trained segmentation-free phrase translation model for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Second Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 112–119, Prague, June.

Markos Mylonakis and Khalil Sima’an. 2008. Phrase
Translation Probabilities with ITG Priors and Smooth-
ing as Learning Objective. In Proceedings of the 2008
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 630–639, Honolulu, October.

458



J.A. Nelder and R. Mead. 1965. The Downhill Simplex
Method. Computer Journal, 7:308.

H. Ney. 1999. Speech translation: Coupling of recog-
nition and translation. In Proceedings of IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), pages 517–520, Phoenix, Ari-
zona, USA, March.

Jan Niehues and Muntsin Kolss. 2009. A POS-Based
Model for Long-Range Reorderings in SMT. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 206–214, Athens, Greece,
March.

F.J. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A Systematic Comparison of
Various Statistical Alignment Models. Computational
Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2004. The align-
ment template approach to statistical machine transla-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 30(4):417–449, De-
cember.

T. Onishi, M. Utiyama, and E. Sumita. 2010. Paraphrase
lattice for statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers, pages
1–5, Uppsala, Sweden, July.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evalua-
tion of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 311–318, Morristown, NJ, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

M. Popović and H. Ney. 2006. POS-based Word Re-
orderings for Statistical Machine Translation. In Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation, pages 1278–1283.

H. Schmid. 1995. Improvements in Part-of-Speech Tag-
ging with an Application to German. In Proceedings
of the ACL SIGDAT-Workshop, pages 47–50, Dublin,
Ireland, March.

Josh Schroeder, Trevor Cohn, and Philipp Koehn. 2009.
Word lattices for multi-source translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter
of the ACL, pages 719–727, Athens, Greece.

Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Rich Schwartz, Linnea
Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A study of trans-
lation edit rate with targeted human annotation. In
Proc. of AMTA, pages 223–231, Aug.

A. Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an extensible language mod-
eling toolkit. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Spoken Language
Processing, volume 2, pages 901 – 904, Denver, Col-
orado, USA, September.

Joern Wuebker, Arne Mauser, and Hermann Ney. 2010.
Training phrase translation models with leaving-one-
out. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the
Assoc. for Computational Linguistics, pages 475–484,
Uppsala, Sweden, July.

Jia Xu, Evgeny Matusov, Richard Zens, and Hermann
Ney. 2005. Integrated chinese word segmentation in
statistical machine translation. In International Work-
shop on Spoken Language Translation, pages 141–147,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA, October.

459


