










































A Joint Named Entity Recognition and Entity Linking System


Proceedings of the Workshop on Innovative Hybrid Approaches to the Processing of Textual Data (Hybrid2012), EACL 2012, pages 52–60,
Avignon, France, April 23 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Joint Named Entity Recognition and Entity Linking System

Rosa Stern,1,2 Benoı̂t Sagot1 and Frédéric Béchet3
1Alpage, INRIA & Univ. Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité / F-75013 Paris, France

2AFP-Medialab / F-75002 Paris, France
3Univ. Aix Marseille, LIF-CNRS / Marseille, France

Abstract

We present a joint system for named entity
recognition (NER) and entity linking (EL),
allowing for named entities mentions ex-
tracted from textual data to be matched to
uniquely identifiable entities. Our approach
relies on combined NER modules which
transfer the disambiguation step to the EL
component, where referential knowledge
about entities can be used to select a correct
entity reading. Hybridation is a main fea-
ture of our system, as we have performed
experiments combining two types of NER,
based respectively on symbolic and statis-
tical techniques. Furthermore, the statisti-
cal EL module relies on entity knowledge
acquired over a large news corpus using a
simple rule-base disambiguation tool. An
implementation of our system is described,
along with experiments and evaluation re-
sults on French news wires. Linking ac-
curacy reaches up to 87%, and the NER F-
score up to 83%.

1 Introduction

1.1 Textual and Referential Aspects of
Entities

In this work we present a system designed for the
extraction of entities from textual data. Named
entities (NEs), which include person, location,
company or organization names1 must therefore
be detected using named entity recognition (NER)
techniques. In addition to this detection based
on their surface forms, NEs can be identified by
mapping them to the actual entity they denote,
in order for these extractions to constitute use-
ful and complete information. However, because

1The set of possible named entities varies from restric-
tive, as in our case, to wide definitions; it can also include
dates, event names, historical periods, etc.

of name variation, which can be surfacic or en-
cyclopedic, an entity can be denoted by several
mentions (e.g., Bruce Springsteen, Springsteen,
the Boss); conversely, due to name ambiguity, a
single mention can denote several distinct entities
(Orange is the name of 22 locations in the world;
in French, M. Obama can denote both the US
president Barack Obama (M. is an abbreviation of
Monsieur ’Mr’) or his spouse Michelle Obama; in
this case ambiguity is caused by variation). Even
in the case of unambiguous mentions, a clear link
should be established between the surface men-
tion and a uniquely identifiable entity, which is
achieved by entity linking (EL) techniques.

1.2 Entity Approach and Related Work

In order to obtain referenced entities from raw
textual input, we introduce a system based on
the joint application of named entity recognition
(NER) and entity linking (EL), where the NER out-
put is given to the linking component as a set of
possible mentions, preserving a number of am-
biguous readings. The linking process must there-
after evaluate which readings are the most proba-
ble, based on the most likely entity matches in-
ferred from a similarity measure with the context.

NER has been widely addressed by symbolic,
statistical as well as hybrid approaches. Its major
part in information extraction (IE) and other NLP
applications has been stated and encouraged by
several editions of evaluation campaigns such
as MUC (Marsh and Perzanowski, 1998),
the CoNLL-2003 NER shared task
(Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder, 2003) or
ACE (Doddington et al., 2004), where NER
systems show near-human performances for
the English language. Our system aims at
benefitting from both symbolic and statistical
NER techniques, which have proven efficient

52



but not necessarily over the same type of data
and with different precision/recall tradeoff. NER
considers the surface form of entities; some
type disambiguation and name normalization
can follow the detection to improve the result
precision but do not provide referential infor-
mation, which can be useful in IE applications.
EL achieves the association of NER results with
uniquely identified entities, by relying on an
entity repository, available to the extraction
system and defined beforehand in order to serve
as a target for mention linking. Knowledge about
entities is gathered in a dedicated knowledge base
(KB) to evaluate each entity’s similarity to a given
context. After the task of EL was initiated with
Wikipedia-based works on entity disambiguation,
in particular by Cucerzan (2007) and Bunescu
and Pasca (2006), numerous systems have been
developed, encouraged by the TAC 2009 KB
population task (McNamee and Dang, 2009).
Most often in EL, Wikipedia serves both as an
entity repository (the set of articles referring to
entities) and as a KB about entities (derived from
Wikipedia infoboxes and articles which contain
text, metadata such as categories and hyperlinks).
Zhang et al. (2010) show how Wikipedia, by
providing a large annotated corpus of linked
ambiguous entity mentions, pertains efficiently
to the EL task. Evaluated EL systems at TAC
report a top accuracy rate of 0.80 on English data
(McNamee et al., 2010).

Entities that are unknown to the reference
database, called out-of-base entities, are also con-
sidered by EL, when a given mention refers to
an entity absent from the available Wikipedia ar-
ticles. This is addressed by various methods,
such as setting a threshold of minimal similarity
for an entity selection (Bunescu and Pasca, 2006),
or training a separate binary classifier to judge
whether the returned top candidate is the actual
denotation (Zheng et al., 2010). Our approach
of this issue is closely related to the method of
Dredze et al. in (2010), where the out-of-base en-
tity is considered as another entry to rank.

Our task differs from EL configurations out-
lined previously, in that its target is entity extrac-
tion from raw news wires from the news agency
Agence France Presse (AFP), and not only link-
ing relying on gold NER annotations: the input
of the linking system is the result of an auto-
matic NER step, which will produce errors of var-

ious kinds. In particular, spans erroneously de-
tected as NEs will have to be discarded by our EL
system. This case, which we call not-an-entity,
contitute an additional type of special situations,
together with out-of-base entities but specific to
our setting. This issue, as well as others of our
task specificities, will be discussed in this paper.
In particular, we use resources partially based on
Wikipedia but not limited to it, and we experiment
on the building of a domain specific entity KB in-
stead of Wikipedia.

Section 2 presents the resources used through-
out our system, namely an entity repository and
an entity KB acquired over a large corpus of news
wires, used in the final linking step. Section 3
states the principles on which the NER compo-
nents of our system relies, and introduces the two
existing NER modules used in our joint architec-
ture. The EL component and the methodology ap-
plied are presented in section 4. Section 5 illus-
trates this methodology with a number of experi-
ments and evaluation results.

2 Entity Resources

Our system relies on two large-scale resources
which are very different in nature:

• the entity database Aleda, automatically
extracted from the French Wikipedia and
Geonames;

• a knowledge base extracted from a large cor-
pus of AFP news wires, with distributional
and contextual information about automati-
cally detected entites.

2.1 Aleda

The Aleda entity repository2 is the result of an ex-
traction process from freely available resources
(Sagot and Stern, 2012). We used the French
Aleda databased, extracted the French Wikipedia3

and Geonames4. In its current development, it pro-
vides a generic and wide coverage entity resource
accessible via a database. Each entity in Aleda is
associated with a range of attributes, either refer-
ential (e.g., the type of the entity among Person,
Location, Organization and Company, the popu-
lation for a location or the gender of a person, etc.)

2Aleda is part of the Alexina project and freely available
at https://gforge.inria.fr/projects/alexina/.

3www.fr.wikipedia.org
4www.geonames.org

53



or formal, like the entity’s URI from Wikipedia or
Geonames; this enables to uniquely identify each
entry as a Web resource.

Moreover, a range of possible variants (men-
tions when used in textual content) are associ-
ated to entities entries. Aleda’s variants include
each entity’s canonical name, Geonames location
labels, Wikipedia redirection and disambiguation
pages aliases, as well as dynamically computed
variants for person names, based in particular on
their first/middle/last name structure. The French
Aleda used in this work comprises 870,000 entity
references, associated with 1,885,000 variants.

The main informative attributes assigned to
each entity in Aleda are listed and illustrated by
examples of entries in Tab. 1. The popularity at-
tribute is given by an approximation based on the
length of the entity’s article or the entity’s popu-
lation, from Wikipedia and Geonames entries re-
spectively. Table 1 also details the structure of
Aleda’s variants entries, each of them associated
with one or several entities in the base.

Unlike most EL systems, Wikipedia is not the
entity base we use in the present work; rather,
we rely on the autonomous Aleda database. The
collect of knowledge about entities and their us-
age in context will also differ in that our target
data are news wires, for which the adaptability of
Wikipedia can be questioned.

2.2 Knowledge Acquisition over AFP news

The linking process relies on knowledge about en-
tities, which can be acquired from their usage in
context and stored in a dedicated KB. AFP news
wires, like Wikipedia articles, have their own
structure and formal metadata: while Wikipedia
articles each have a title referring to an entity, ob-
ject or notion, a set of categories, hyperlinks, etc.,
AFP news wires have a headline and are tagged
with a subject (such as Politics or Culture) and
several keywords (such as cinema, inflation or
G8), as well as information about the date, time
and location of production. Moreover, the distri-
bution of entities over news wires can be expected
to be significantly different from Wikipedia, in
particular w.r.t. uniformity, since a small set of
entities forms the majority of occurrences. Our
particular context can thus justify the need for a
domain specific KB.

As opposed to Wikipedia where entities are
identifiable by hyperlinks, AFP corpora provide

no such indications. Wikipedia is in fact a corpus
where entity mentions are clearly and uniquely
linked, whereas this is what we aim at achiev-
ing over AFP’s raw textual data. The acquisi-
tion of domain specific knowledge about enti-
ties from AFP corpora must circumvent this lack
of indications. In this perspective we use an
implementation of a naive linker described in
(Stern and Sagot, 2010). For the main part, this
system is based on heuristics favoring popular en-
tities in cases of ambiguities. An evaluation of
this system showed good accuracy of entity link-
ing (0.90) over the subset of correctly detected en-
tity mentions:5 on the evaluation data, the result-
ing NER reached a precision of 0.86 and a recall
of 0.80. Therefore we rely on the good accuracy
of this system to identify entities in our corpus,
bearing in mind that it will however include cases
of false detections, while knowledge will not be
available on missed entities. It can be observed
that by doing so, we aim at performing a form of
co-training of a new system, based on supervised
machine learning. In particular, we aim at pro-
viding a more portable and systematic method for
EL than the heuristics-based naive linker which
is highly dependent on a particular NER system,
SXPipe/NP, described later on in section 3.2.

The knowledge acquisition was conducted over
a large corpus of news wires (200,000 news items
of the years 2009, 2010 and part of 2011). For
each occurrence of an entity identified as such by
the naive linker, the following features are col-
lected, updated and stored in the KB at the en-
tity level: (i) entity total occurrences and occur-
rences with a particular mention; (ii) entity oc-
currence with a news item topics and keywords,
most salient words, date and location; (iii) entity
co-occurrence with other entity mentions in the
news item. These features are collected for both
entities identified by the naive linker as Aleda’s
entities and mentions recognized by NER pat-
tern based rules; the latter account for out-of-
base entities, approximated by a cluster of all
mentions whose normalization returns the same
string. For instance, if the mentions John Smith
and J. Smith were detected in a document but not
linked to an entity in Aleda, it would be assumed

5This subset is defined by a strict span and type correct
detection, and among the sole entities for which a match in
Aleda or outside of it was identified; the evaluation data is
presented in section 5.1.

54



Entities
ID Type CanonicalName Popularity URI
20013 Loc Kingdom of Spain 46M geon:2510769
10063 Per Michael Jordan 245 wp:Michael Jordan
20056 Loc Orange (California) 136K geon:5379513
10039 Comp Orange 90 wp:Orange (entreprise)
Variants
ID Variant FirstName MidName LastName
20013 Espagne – – –
10063 Jordan – – Jordan
10029 George Walker Bush George Walker Bush
10039 Orange – – –
20056 Orange – – –

Table 1: Structure of Entities Entries and Variants in Aleda

that they co-refer to an entity whose normalized
name would be John Smith; this anonymous en-
tity would therefore be stored and identified via
this normalized name in the KB, along with its oc-
currence information.

3 NER Component

3.1 Principles

One challenging subtask of NER is the correct de-
tection of entity mentions spans among several
ambiguous readings of a segment. The other usual
subtask of NER consists in the labeling or classi-
fication of each identified mention with a type; in
our system, this functionality is used as an indica-
tion rather than a final attribute of the denoted en-
tity. The type assigned to each mention will in the
end be the one associated with the matching en-
tity. The segment Paris Hilton can for instance be
split in two consecutive entity mentions, Paris and
Hilton, or be read as a single one. Whether one
reading or the other is more likely can be inferred
from knowledge about entities possibly denoted
by each of these three mentions: depending on the
considered document’s topic, it can be more prob-
able for this segment to be read as the mention
Paris Hilton, denoting the celebrity, rather than
the sequence of two mentions denoting the cap-
ital of France and the hotel company. Based on
this consideration, our system relies on the ability
of the NER module to preserve multiple readings
in its output, in order to postpone to the linker the
appropriate decisions for ambiguous cases. Two
NER systems fitted with this ability are used in our
architecture.

Figure 1: Ambiguous NER output for the segment
Paris Hilton in SXPipe/NP

3.2 Symbolic NER: SXPipe/NP

NP is part of the SXPipe surface processing chain
(Sagot and Boullier, 2008). It is based on a se-
ries of recognition rules and on a large coverage
lexicon of possible entity variants, derived from
the Aleda entity repository presented in section
2.1. As an SXPipe component, NP formalizes the
text input in the form of directed acyclic graphs
(DAGs), in which each possible entity mention
is represented as a distinct transition, as illus-
trated in Figure 1. Possible mentions are labeled
with types among Person, Location, Organization
and Company, based on the information available
about the entity variant in Aleda and on the type
of the rule applied for the recognition.

Figure 1 also shows how an alternative transi-
tion is added to each mention reading of a seg-
ment, in order to account for a possible non-entity
reading (i.e., for a false match returned by the
NER module). When evaluating the adequacy of
each reading, the following EL module will in
fact consider a special not-an-entity candidate as
a possible match for each mention, and select it
as the most probable if competing entity readings
prove insufficiently adequate w.r.t. the considered
context.

55



3.3 Statistical NER: LIANE

The statistical NER system LIANE
(Bechet and Charton, 2010) is based on (i) a
generative HMM-based process used to predict
part-of-speech and semantic labels among Per-
son, Location, Organization and Product for each
input word6, and (ii) a discriminative CRF-based
process to determine the entity mentions’ spans
and overall type. The HMM and CRF models
are learnt over the ESTER corpus, consisting in
several hundreds of hours of transcribed radio
broadcast (Galliano et al., 2009), annotated with
the BIO format (table 2). The output of LIANE

investiture NFS O
aujourd’hui ADV B-TIME
à PREPADE O
Bamako LOC B-LOC
Mali LOC B-LOC

Table 2: BIO annotation for LIANE training

consists in an n-best lists of possible entity
mentions, along with a confidence score assigned
to each result. Therefore it also provides several
readings of some text segments, with alternatives
of entity mention readings.

As shown in (Bechet and Charton, 2010), the
learning model of LIANE makes it particularly
robust to difficult conditions such as non capital-
ization and allows for a good recall rate on various
types of data. This is in opposition with manually
handcrafted systems such as SXPipe/NP, which
can reach high precision rates over the develop-
ment data but prove less robust otherwise. These
considerations, as well as the benefits of a coop-
erations between these two types of systems are
explored in (Béchet et al., 2011).

By coupling LIANE and SXPipe/NP to perform
the NER step of our architecture, we expect to
benefit from each system’s best predictions and
improving the precision and recall rates. This
is achieved by not enforcing disambiguation of
spans and types at the NER level but by transfer-
ring this possible source of errors to the linking
step, which will rely on entity knowledge rather
than mere surface forms to determine the best
readings, along with the association of mentions
with entity references.

6For the purpose of type consistency across both NER
modules, the NP type Company is merged with Organiza-
tion, and the LIANE mentions typed as Product are ignored
since they are not yet supported by the overall architecture.

Figure 2: Possible readings of the segment Paris
Hilton and ordered candidates

4 Linking Component

4.1 Methodology for Best Reading Selection

As previously outlined, the purpose of our joint
architecture is to infer best entity readings from
contextual similarity between entities and docu-
ments rather than at the surface level during NER.
The linking component will therefore process am-
biguous NER outputs in the following way, illus-
trated by Fig. 2.

1. For each mention returned by the NER mod-
ule, we aim at finding the best fitting entity
w.r.t. the context of the mention occurrence,
i.e., at the document level. This results in
a list of candidate entities associated with
each mention. This candidates set always in-
cludes the not-an-entity candidate in order to
account for possible false matches returned
by the NER modules.

2. The list of candidates is ordered using a
pointwise ranking model, based on the max-
imum entropy classifier megam.7 The best
scored candidate is returned as a match for
the mention; it can be either an entity present
in Aleda, i.e., a known entity, or an anony-
mous entity, seen during the KB acquisition
but not resolved to a known reference and
identified by a normalized name, or the spe-
cial not-an-entity candidate, which discards
the given mention as an entity denotation.

3. Each reading is assigned a score depending
on the best candidates’ scores in the reading.

The key steps of this process are the selection
of candidates for each mention, which must reach
a sufficient recall in order to ensure the reference
resolution, and the building of the feature vec-
tor for each mention/entity pair, which will be
evaluated by the candidate ranker to return the

7http://www.cs.utah.edu/˜hal/megam/

56



most adequate entity as a match for the mention.
Throughout this process, the issues usually raised
by EL must be considered, in particular the ability
for the model to learn cases of out-of-base enti-
ties, which our system addresses by forming a set
of candidates not only from the entity reference
base (i.e., Aleda), but also from the dedicated KB
where anonymous entities are also collected. Fur-
thermore, unlike the general configuration of EL
tasks, such as the TAC KB population task (sec-
tion 1.2), our input data does not consist in men-
tions to be linked but in multiple possibilities of
mention readings, which adds to our particular
case the need to identify false matches among the
queries made to the linker module.

4.2 Candidates Selection

For each mention detected in the NER output, the
mention string or variant is sent as a query to
the Aleda database. Entity entries associated with
the given variant are returned as candidates. The
set of retrieved entities, possibly empty, consti-
tutes the candidate set for the mention. Because
the knowledge acquisition included the extraction
of unreferenced entities identified by normalized
names (section 2.2), we can send the normaliza-
tion of the mention as an additional query to our
KB. If a corresponding anonymous entity is re-
turned, we can create an anonymous candidate
and add it to the candidate set. Anonymous candi-
dates account for the possibility of an out-of-base
entity denoted by the given mention, with respec-
tively some and no information about the potential
entity they might stand for. Finally, the set is aug-
mented with the special not-an-entity candidate.

4.3 Features for Candidates Ranking

For each pair formed by the considered mention
and each entity from the candidate set, we com-
pute a feature vector which will be used by our
model for assessing the probability that it repre-
sents a correct mention/entity linking. The vec-
tor contains attributes pertaining to the mention,
the candidate and the document themselves, and
to the relations existing between them.
Entity attributes Entity attributes present in
Aleda and the KB are used as features: Aleda pro-
vides the entity type, a popularity indication and
the number of variants associated with the entity.
We retrieve from the KB the entity frequency over
the corpus used for knowledge acquisition.

Mention attributes At the mention level, the
feature set considers the absence or presence of
the mention as a variant in Aleda (for any en-
tity), its occurrence frequency in the document,
and whether similar variants, possibly indicating
name variation of the same entity, are present in
the document (similar variants can have a string
equal to the mention’s string, longer or shorter
than the mention’s string, included in the men-
tion’s string or including it). In the case of a
mention returned by LIANE, the associated con-
fidence score is also included in the feature set.
Entity/mention relation The comparison be-
tween the surface form of the entity’s canonical
name and the mention gives a similarity rate fea-
ture. Also considered as features are the relative
occurrence frequency of the entity w.r.t. the whole
candidate set, the existence of the mention as a
variant for the entity in Aleda, the presence of
the candidate’s type (retrieved from Aleda) in the
possible mention types provided by the NER. The
KB indicates frequency of its occurrences with the
considered mention, which adds another feature.
Document/entity similarity Document metadata
(in particular topics and keywords) are inherited
by the mention and can thus characterize the en-
tity/mention pair. Equivalent information was col-
lected for entities and stored in the KB, which al-
lows to compute a cosine similarity between the
document and the candidate. Moreover, the most
salient words of the document are compared to the
ones most frequently associated with the entity in
the KB. Several atomic and combined features are
derived from these similarity measures.

Other features pertain to the NER output con-
figuration, as well as possible false matches:
NER combined information One of the two
available NER modules is selected as the base
provider for entity mentions. For each mention
which is also returned by the second NER mod-
ule, a feature is instanciated accordingly.
Non-entity features In order to predict cases of
not-an-entity readings of a mention, we use a
generic lexicon of French forms (Sagot, 2010)
where we check for the existence of the mention’s
variant, both with and without capitalization. If
the mention’s variant is the first word of the sen-
tence, this information is added as a feature.

These features represent attributes of the en-
tity/mention pair which can either have a boolean
value (such as variant presence or absence in

57



Aleda) or range throughout numerical values
(e.g., entity frequencies vary from 0 to 201,599).
In the latter case, values are discretized. All fea-
tures in our model are therefore boolean.

4.4 Best Candidate Selection

Given the feature vector instanciated for an (can-
didate entity, mention) pair, our model assigns it a
score. All candidates in the subset are then ranked
accordingly and the first candidate is returned as
the match for the current mention/entity linking.
Anonymous and not-an-entity candidates, as de-
fined earlier and accounting respectively for po-
tential out-of-base entity linking and NER false
matches, are included in this ranking process.

4.5 Ranking of Readings

The last step of our task consists in the ranking
of multiple readings and has yet to be achieved in
order to obtain an output where entity mentions
are linked to adequate entities. In the case of a
reading consisting in a single transition, i.e., a sin-
gle mention, the score is equal to the best candi-
date’s score. In case of multiple transitions and
mentions, the score is the minimum among the
best candidates’ scores, which makes a low entity
match probability in a mention sequence penaliz-
ing for the whole reading. Cases of false matches
returned by the NER module can therefore be dis-
carded as such in this step, if an overall non-entity
reading of the whole path receives a higher score
than the other entity predictions.

5 Experiments and Evaluation

5.1 Training and Evaluation Data

We use a gold corpus of 96 AFP news items in-
tended for both NER and EL purposes: the manual
annotation includes mention boundaries as well as
an entity identifier for each mention, correspond-
ing to an Aleda entry when present or the normal-
ized name of the entity otherwise. This allows for
the model learning to take into account cases of
out-of-base entities. This corpus contains 1,476
mentions, 437 distinct Aleda’s entries and 173 en-
tities absent from Aleda. All news items in this
corpus are dated May and June 2009.

In order for the model to learn from cases of
not-an-entity, the training examples were aug-
mented with false matches from the NER step, as-
sociated with this special candidate and the pos-

itive class prediction, while other possible candi-
dates were associated with the negative class. Us-
ing a 10-fold cross-validation, we used this corpus
for both training and evaluation of our joint NER
and EL system.

It should be observed that the learning step con-
cerns the ranking of candidates for a given men-
tion and context, while the final purpose of our
system is the ranking of multiple readings of sen-
tences, which takes place after the application of
our ranking model for mention candidates. Thus
our system is evaluated according to its ability to
choose the right reading, considering both NER re-
call and precision and EL accuracy, and not only
the latter.

5.2 Task Specificities

As outlined in section 1.2, the input for the stan-
dard EL task consists in sets of entity mentions
from a number of documents, sent as queries to a
linking system. Our current task differs in that we
aim at both the extraction and the linking of enti-
ties in our target corpus, which consists in unan-
notated news wires. Therefore, the results of our
system are comparable to previous work when
considering a setting where the NER output is in
fact the gold annotation of our evaluation data,
i.e., when all mention queries should be linked to
an entity. Without modifying the parameters of
our system (i.e., no deactivation of false matches
predictions), we obtain an accuracy of 0.76, in
comparison with a TAC top accuracy of 0.80 and
a median accuracy of 0.70 on English data.8

It is important to observe that our data con-
sists only in journalistic content, as opposed to the
TAC dataset which included various types of cor-
pora. This difference can lead to unequally diffi-
culty levels w.r.t. the EL task, since NER and EL
in journalistic texts, and in particular news wires,
tend to be easier than on other types of corpora.
This comes among other things from the fact that
a small number of popular entities constitute the
majority of NE mention occurrences.

In most systems, EL is performed over noisy

8As explained previously, these figures, as well as the
ones presented later on, cannot be compared with the 0.90
score obtained by the naive linker which we used for the en-
tity KB acquisition. This score is obtained only on mentions
identified by the SXPipe/NP system with the correct span and
type, whereas our system does not consider the mention type
as a contraint for the linking process, and on correct identifi-
cation of a match in or outside of Aleda.

58



Setting NER EL Joint NER+EL
Precision Recall f-measure Accuracy Precision Recall f-measure

SXPipe/NP 0.849 0.768 0.806 0.871 0.669 0.740 0.702
LIANE 0.786 0.891 0.835 0.820 0.730 0.645 0.685
SXPipe/NP- NL 0.775 0.726 0.750 0.875 0.635 0.678 0.656
LIANE- NL 0.782 0.886 0.831 0.818 0.725 0.640 0.680
SXPipe/NP & 2 0.812 0.747 0.778 0.869 0.649 0.705 0.676
LIANE & SXPipe/NP 0.803 0.776 0.789 0.859 0.667 0.689 0.678

Table 3: Joint NER and EL results. Each EL accuracy covers a different set of correctly detected mentions

NER output and participates to the final decisions
about NEs extractions. Therefore the ability of
our system to correctly detect entity mentions in
news content is estimated by computing its pre-
cision, recall and f-measure.9 The EL accuracy,
i.e., the rate of correctly linked mentions, is mea-
sured over the subset of mentions whose reading
was adequately selected by the final ranking. The
evaluation of our system has been conducted over
the corpus described previously with settings pre-
sented in the next section.

5.3 Settings and results

We used each of the two available NER modules
as a provider for entity mentions, either on its
own or together with the second system, used
as an indicator. For each of these settings, we
tried a modified setting in which the prediction
of the naive linker (NL) used to build the en-
tity KB (section 2.2) was added as a feature to
each mention/candidate pair (settings SXPipe/NP-
NL and LIANE-NL). These experiments’ results
are reported in Table 3 and are given in terms of:

• NER precision, recall and f-measure;

• EL accuracy over correctly recognized enti-
ties; therefore, the different figures in col-
umn EL Accuracy are not directly compara-
ble to one another, as they are not obtained
over the same set of mentions;

• joint NER+EL precision, recall and f-
measure; the precision/recall is computed as
the product of the NER precision/recall by the
EL accuracy.

9Only mention boundaries are considered for NER evalu-
ation, while other settings require correct type identification
for validating a fully correct detection. In our case, NER is
not a final step, and entity typing is derived from the entity
linking result.

As expected, SXPipe/NP performs better as far
as NER precision is concerned, and LIANE per-
forms better as far as NER recall is concerned.
However, the way we implemented hybridation
at the NER level does not seem to bring improve-
ments. Using the output of the naive linker as a
feature leads to similar or slightly lower NER pre-
cision and recall. Finally, it is difficult to draw
clear-cut comparative conclusions at this stage
concerning the joint NER +EL task.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

We have described and evaluated various settings
for a joint NER and EL system which relies on the
NER systems SXPipe/NP and LIANE for the NER
step. The EL step relies on a hybrid model, i.e., a
statistical model trained on a manually annotated
corpus. It uses features extracted from a large cor-
pus automatically annotated and where entity dis-
ambiguations and matches were computed using
a basic heuristic tool. The results given in the pre-
vious section show that the joint model allows for
good NER results over French data. The impact of
the hybridation of the two NER modules over the
EL task should be further evaluated. In particu-
lar, we should investigate the situations where an
mention was incorrectly detected (e.g., the span is
not fully correct) although the EL module linked it
with the correct entity. Moreover, a detailed eval-
uation of out-of-base linkings vs. linking in Aleda
remains to be performed.

In the future, we aim at exploring various addi-
tional features in the EL system, in particular more
combinations of the current features. The adapta-
tion of our learning model to NER combinations
should also be improved. Finally, a larger set of
training data should be considered. This shall be-
come possible with the recent manual annotation
of a half-million word French journalistic corpus.

59



References

F. Bechet and E Charton. 2010. Unsupervised knowl-
edge acquisition for extracting named entities from
speech. In 2010 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing.

R. Bunescu and M. Pasca. 2006. Using encyclope-
dic knowledge for named entity disambiguation. In
Proceedings of EACL, volume 6, pages 9–16.

F. Béchet, B. Sagot, and R. Stern. 2011.
Coopération de méthodes statistiques et sym-
boliques pour l’adaptation non-supervisée d’un
système d’étiquetage en entités nommées. In Actes
de la Conférence TALN 2011, Montpellier, France.

S. Cucerzan. 2007. Large-scale named entity disam-
biguation based on wikipedia data. In Proceedings
of EMNLP-CoNLL, volume 2007, pages 708–716.

G. Doddington, A. Mitchell, M. Przybocki,
L. Ramshaw, S. Strassel, and R. Weischedel.
2004. The automatic content extraction (ace)
program-tasks, data, and evaluation. In Proceed-
ings of LREC - Volume 4, pages 837–840.

M. Dredze, P. McNamee, D. Rao, A. Gerber, and
T. Finin. 2010. Entity disambiguation for knowl-
edge base population. In Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 277–285.

S. Galliano, G. Gravier, and L. Chaubard. 2009. The
Ester 2 Evaluation Campaign for the Rich Tran-
scription of French Radio Broadcasts. In Inter-
speech 2009.

E. Marsh and D. Perzanowski. 1998. Muc-7 eval-
uation of ie technology: Overview of results. In
Proceedings of the Seventh Message Understanding
Conference (MUC-7) - Volume 20.

P. McNamee and H.T. Dang. 2009. Overview of the
tac 2009 knowledge base population track. In Text
Analysis Conference (TAC).

P. McNamee, H.T. Dang, H. Simpson, P. Schone, and
S.M. Strassel. 2010. An evaluation of technologies
for knowledge base population. Proc. LREC2010.

B. Sagot and P. Boullier. 2008. SXPipe 2 : ar-
chitecture pour le traitement présyntaxique de cor-
pus bruts. Traitement Automatique des Langues
(T.A.L.), 49(2):155–188.

B. Sagot and R. Stern. 2012. Aleda, a free large-
scale entity database for French. In Proceedings of
LREC. To appear.

B. Sagot. 2010. The Lefff , a freely available and
large-coverage morphological and syntactic lexicon
for French. In Proceedings of the 7th Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC’10),
Vallette, Malta.

R. Stern and B. Sagot. 2010. Détection et résolution
d’entités nommées dans des dépêches d’agence.
In Actes de la Conférence TALN 2010, Montréal,
Canada.

E. F. Tjong Kim Sang and F. De Meulder. 2003. In-
troduction to the conll-2003 shared task: Language-
independent named entity recognition. In Proceed-
ings of CoNLL, pages 142–147, Edmonton, Canada.

W. Zhang, J. Su, C.L. Tan, and W.T. Wang. 2010. En-
tity linking leveraging: automatically generated an-
notation. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages
1290–1298.

Z. Zheng, F. Li, M. Huang, and X. Zhu. 2010. Learn-
ing to link entities with knowledge base. In Human
Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 483–491.

60


