



















































Dialogue Act Recognition using Reweighted Speaker Adaptation


Proceedings of the 13th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL), pages 118–125,
Seoul, South Korea, 5-6 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Dialogue Act Recognition using Reweighted Speaker Adaptation

Congkai Sun
Institute for Creative

Technologies
12015 Waterfront Drive

Playa Vista, CA 90094-2536
csun@ict.usc.edu

Louis-Philippe Morency
Institute for Creative

Technologies
12015 Waterfront Drive

Playa Vista, CA 90094-2536
morency@ict.usc.edu

Abstract

In this work we study the effectiveness of
speaker adaptation for dialogue act recogni-
tion in multiparty meetings. First, we analyze
idiosyncracy in dialogue verbal acts by quali-
tatively studying the differences and conflicts
among speakers and by quantitively compar-
ing speaker-specific models. Based on these
observations, we propose a new approach for
dialogue act recognition based on reweighted
domain adaptation which effectively balance
the influence of speaker specific and other
speakers’ data. Our experiments on a real-
world meeting dataset show that with even
only 200 speaker-specific annotated dialogue
acts, the performances on dialogue act recog-
nition are significantly improved when com-
pared to several baseline algorithms. To our
knowledge, this work is the first 1 to tackle this
promising research direction of speaker adap-
tation for dialogue act recogntion.

1 Introduction

By representing a higher level intention of utterances
during human conversation, dialogue act labels are
being used to enrich the information provided by
spoken words (Stolcke et al., 2000). Dialogue act
recognition is a preliminary step towards deep dia-
logue understanding. It plays a key role in the de-
sign of dialogue systems. Besides, Fernandez et al.
(2008) find certain dialogue acts are important cues
for detecting decisions in Multi-party dialogue. In

1This paper is an extended version of a poster presented at
SemDial 2011, with new experiments and deeper analysis.

Ranganath et al. (2009), dialogue acts are used as
important features for flirt detection.

Automatic dialogue act recognition is still an ac-
tive research topic. The conventional approach is to
train one generic classifier using a large corpus of
annotated utterances. One aspect that makes it so
challenging is that people can express the same idea
(or speech act) using a very different set of spoken
words. Even more, people can mean different things
with the exact same spoken words. These idiosyn-
cratic differences in dialogue acts make the learning
of generic classifiers extremely challenging. Luck-
ily, in many applications such as face-to-face meet-
ings or tele-immersion, we have access to archives
of previous interactions with the same participants.
From these archives, a small subset of spoken utter-
ances can be efficiently annotated. As we will later
show in our experiments, even a small number of an-
notated utterances can make a significant difference.

In this paper, we propose a new approach for
dialogue act recognition based on reweighted do-
main adaptation which effectively balance the influ-
ence of speaker specific and other speakers’ data.
By treating each speaker as one domain, we point
out the connection between training speaker spe-
cific dialogue act classifier and supervised domain
adaptation problem. We analyze idiosyncracy in
dialogue verbal acts by qualitatively studying the
differences and conflicts among speakers and by
quantitively comparing speaker-specific models. We
present an extensive set of experiments studying the
effect of speaker adaptation on dialogue act recogn-
tion in multi-party meetings using the ICSI-MRDA
dataset (Shriberg, 2004).

118



The following section presents related work on di-
alogue act recognition and domain adaptation. Sec-
tion 3 describes the ICSI-MRDA (Shriberg, 2004)
dataset which is used in all our experiments. Sec-
tion 4 analyze idiosyncracy in dialogue acts, both
qualitatively and quantitatively. Section 5 ex-
plains our reweighting-based speaker adaptation al-
gorithm. Section 6 contains all experiments to prove
the applicability of speaker adaptation to dialogue
act recognition. Finally, inspired by the promising
results, Section 8 describes some future directions.

2 Previous Work

Automatic dialogue act recognition has been an im-
portant problem in the past decades. Different dia-
logue act labeling standards and datasets have been
provided, including Switchboard-DAMSL (Stolcke
et al., 2000), ICSI-MRDA (Shriberg, 2004) and
AMI (Carletta, 2007). Stolcke et al (2000) is one
of the first work using machine learning technique
(HMM) to automatically segment and recognize di-
alogue acts. Rangarajan et al. (2009) demonstrated
well-designed prosodic n-gram features are very
helpful for Dialogue Act recognition in Maximum
Entropy model. And Ang et al (2005) explored
joint segmentation and dialogue act classification for
speech from ICSI.

Domain adaptation is a popular problem in natu-
ral language processing community due to the spar-
sity of labeled data. Jiang (Jiang, 2007) breaks
the analysis of domain adaptation problem into dis-
tributional differences in instances and classifica-
tion functions between source and target data. In
Daume’s work (2007) several domain adaptation al-
gorithms are described. Our speaker adaptation al-
gorithm is inspired by the reweighting-based adap-
tation algorithm introduced in this paper.

Recently, dialogue act adaptation has been getting
a lot of attention. Tur et al. (2006) successfully use
Switchboard-DAMSL to help dialogue act recogni-
tion in ICSI-MRDA. Promising results have been
obtained by using a regression model to combine the
model weights obtained by training on Switchboard-
DAMSL and ICSI-MRDA respectively. Following
the work by Tur et al. (2006), Guz et al. (2009) fur-
ther studied the effectiveness of dialogue act domain
adaptation in cascaded dialogue act segmentation

and recognition system, their results prove adapta-
tion in the intermediate step (segmentation) are also
very helpful for the final output (recognition). Jeong
et al (2009) use semi-supervised boosting algorithm
to leverage labeled data from Switchboard-DAMSL
and ICSI-MRDA to help dialogue act recognition in
email and forums. Margolis et.al (2010) use a struc-
tural correspondence learning technique to adapt di-
alogue act recognition on automatic translated Span-
ish genre with the help of Switchboard-DAMSL and
ICSI-MRDA. Kolar et al. (2007) explores the dif-
ference among speakers for dialogue act segmenta-
tion in ICSI-MRDA dataset. Similar to the approach
taken in Tur et al. (2006), adaptation is performed
through the combination of generic speaker inde-
pendent Language Model and other speakers’ Lan-
guage Model. Significant improvements have been
obtained for most of the selected speakers.

All these previous papers focused on adapting di-
alogue act models between domains and did not
address the person-specific adaptation. The only
exception was Kolar et al. (2007) who explored
speaker-specific dialogue act segmentation. To our
knowledge, this paper is the first work to analyze the
effectiveness of speaker adaptation for dialogue act
recognition.

3 ICSI-MRDA Corpus

Different Dialogue Act labeling standards and
datasets have been provided in recent years, in-
cluding Switchboard-DAMSL (Stolcke et al., 2000),
ICSI-MRDA (Shriberg, 2004) and AMI (Carletta,
2007). ICSI-MRDA is the dataset for our exper-
iments because many of its meetings contain the
same speakers, thus making it more suitable for our
speaker adaptation study. The tagset in ICSI-MRDA
is adapted from DAMSL standard (damsl, 1997) by
allowing multiple tags per dialogue act. Each dia-
logue act in ICSI-MRDA has one general tag and
multiple specific tags.

ICSI-MRDA consists of 75 meetings, each
roughly an hour long. There are five categories of
meetings (three of which we are actively using in
our experiments) : Bed is about the discussion of
natural language processing and neural theories of
language, Bmr is for the discussion on ICSI meeting
corpus, Bro is on speech recognition topics and Bns

119



ID Tag Type Nb. Meetings Nb. DAs
1 mn015 Bed 15 6228
2 me010 Bed 11 5309
3 me013 Bmr 25 9753
4 mn017 Bmr 15 4059
5 fe016 Bmr 18 5500
6 me018 Bro 20 4263
7 me013 Bro 22 11928

Table 1: The 7 speakers from ICSI-MRDA dataset used
in our experiments. The table lists: the Speaker ID, orig-
inal speaker tag, the type of meeting selected for this
speaker, the number of meetings this speaker participated
and the total number of dialogue acts by this speaker.

is about network and architecture. The last category
is varies which contains all other topics.

From these 75 meetings, there are 53 unique
speakers in total, and an average of about 6 speakers
per meeting. 7 speakers2 having more than 4, 000
dialogue acts are selected for our adaptation experi-
ments. Table 1 shows the details of our 7 selected
speakers. From the word transcriptions, we cre-
ated an extended list of linguistic features per ut-
terance. From the 7 selected speakers, we com-
puted 14653 unigram features, 158884 bigram fea-
tures and 400025 trigram features.

Following the work of Shriberg et al. (2004), we
use the 5 general tags in our experiments:

• Disruption indicates the current Dialogue Act
is interrupted.

• Back Channel are utterances which are not
made directly by a speaker as a response and
do not function in a way that elicits a response
either.

• Floor Mechanism are dialogue acts for grab-
bing or maintaining the floor.

• Question is for eliciting listener feed back.

• And finally, unless an utterance is completely
indecipherable or else can be further described
by a general tag, then its default status is State-
ment.

Our dataset consisted of 47040 dialogue acts. The
distribution of Dialogue Act is shown in Table 2.

2speaker me013 is split into me013-Bmr and me013-Bro to
avoid the difference introduced by meeting types.

Tag proportion
Disruption 14.73%

Back Channel 10.20%
Floor Mechanism 12.40%

Question 7.20%
Statement 55.46%

Table 2: Distribution of dialogue acts in our dataset.

4 Idiosyncrasy in Dialogue Acts

Our goal is to create a dialogue act recognition al-
gorithm that can adapt to specific speakers. Some
important questions must be studied before creat-
ing such algorithm. The first obvious one is: do
speakers really differ in their choice of words and
associated dialogue acts? Do we really see a vari-
ability on how people express their dialogue in-
tent? If the answers are yes, then we will expect
that learning a dialogue act recognizer from speaker-
specific utterances should always outperform a rec-
ognizer learned from someone else data. Section 4.1
presents a comparative experiment addressing these
questions.

To better understand the results from this com-
parative experiment, we also performed a quali-
tative analysis presented in Section 4.2 where we
look more closely at the differences between speak-
ers. These two qualitative and quantitative analysis
are building block for our adaptation algorithm pre-
sented in Section 5.

4.1 Speaker-Specific Recognizers

An important assumption when performing speaker
adaptation (or more generally domain adaptation)
is that data coming from the same speaker should
be similar than data coming from another person.
In other words, a recognizer trained on a speaker
should perform better (when tested on the same per-
son) than a recognizer trained on another speaker.
We designed an experiment to test this hypothesis.

We learned 7 speaker-specific recognizers, one
for each speaker (see Table 1). We then tested all
these recognizers on new utterances from the same
7 speakers. We looked the recognition performance
when (1) the recognizer was trained on the same
person and (2) when the recognizer was trained on
a different person. This experiments quantitatively

120



Figure 1: Effect of same-speaker data on dialogue act
recognition. We compare two approaches: (1) when a
recognizer is trained on the same person and tested on
new utterances from the same person, and (2) when the
recognizer was trained on another speaker (same test set).
We vary the amount of training data to be 200, 500,
1000, 1500 and 2000 dialogue acts. In all cases, using
speaker-specific recognizer outperforms recognizer from
other speakers.

analyze the the difference among speakers. The ex-
perimental methodology used in this experiment is
the same as the other experiments described in this
paper (see Section 6). We use the Maximum En-
tropy model(MaxEnt) for all dialogue act recogniz-
ers (Ratnaparkhi, 1996). Please refer to Section 6.2
for more details about the experimental methodol-
ogy.

Figure 1 compares the average performances
when testing on the same speaker or on some other
speaker. We vary the number of training data for
each speaker to be 200, 500, 1000, 1500 and 2000
dialogue acts. For all five cases, the recognizers
trained on the same speaker outperforms the aver-
age performance when using a recognizer from an
other person. Thus speaker specific dialogue acts
adaptation fits the assumption of domain adaptation
problems.

4.2 Speakers Differences

To better understand the problem, we look more
closely at the differences among speakers and their
use of dialogue acts. We analyze the problem
induced by speaker idiosyncrasy in dialogue acts.
During our qualitative analysis of the ICSI-MRDA
dataset, we identified three major differences ex-
plaining the performances observed in the previous

sections: dialogue act conflicts, word distribution
and dialogue act label distribution. We describe
these three differences with some examples:

Conflicts: These differences happen when two
speakers intended to express different meanings
while speaking the exact same utterance. To exam-
plify these conflicts, we computed mutual informa-
tion between a specific utterance and all dialogue act
labels. We find interesting examples where for ex-
emple the word right is the most important cue for
dialogue act question when spoken by me013-Bmr,
while right is also an important cue for dialogue act
back-channel for speaker me010-Bed. These exam-
ples suggest that conflicts exist among speakers and
simply trying to learn one generic model may not
be able to handle these conflicts. The generic model
will learn what most people mean with this utter-
ance, which may be the wrong prediction for our
specific speaker.

Word distribution: People have their own vocab-
ulary. Although many words are the same, how of-
ten one person use each word will vary. Although we
may not have direct conflict here, the problem can
also be serious. The learning algorithm may mis-
leadingly focus on optimizing the weights for certain
words which are not important(e.g., words that oc-
cur more often in other speakers’ dialogue acts than
his/her own) while under-estimating the important
words for this speaker. This observation suggests
that our adaptation should take into account word
distribution.

Label Distribution: Another interesting observa-
tion is to look at the distribution of dialogue act la-
bels for different speakers. Table 2 shows the aver-
age distribution over all 7 speakers. When looking
more closely at each speaker, we find some interest-
ing differences. For example, speaker 1 made state-
ments 61% of the time while speaker 4 made 49% of
the time. While this difference may not look signif-
icant, these changes can definitely affect the recog-
nition performance. So the adaptation model should
also take into account the dialogue act label distri-
bution.

5 Reweighted Speaker Adaptation

Based on the observations described in the previous
sections, we implement a simple reweighting-based

121



domain adaptation algorithm mentioned in (Daume,
2007) based on Maximum Entropy model (MaxEnt)
(Ratnaparkhi, 1996). MaxEnt model is a popular
and efficient discriminative model which can effec-
tively accommodate large numbers of features. All
the unigram, bigram and trigram features are used
as input to the maxEnt model, the output is the di-
alogue act label. MaxEnt model maximizes the log
conditional likelihood of all samples:

Loss =

N∑

1

log(p(yn|xn)) (1)

where N is the number of samples for the training
data. xn represents the feature of the nth sample and
yn is the label. The conditional likelihood is defined
as

p(y|x) = exp(
∑

i

λifi(x, y))/Z(x) (2)

where Z(x) is the normalization factor and fi(x, y)
are the n-gram features described in Section 3.

When applied to our problem of speaker adapta-
tion, the reweighting adaptation model can be for-
mally defined as

Loss = w
S∑

n=1

log(p(yn|xn))+
O∑

m=1

log(p(ym|xm))

(3)
where S is the number of labeled speaker-specific
dialogue acts, O is the number for other speakers’
labeled dialogue acts. For each speaker, we train
one speaker-specific classifier by varying the distri-
bution of training data. We reweight the importance
of speaker specific dialogue acts versus other speak-
ers’ labeled dialogue acts in the training data. The
optimal weight parameter w is automatically esti-
mated through validation.

It is worth mentioning a specific instance of the
reweighting adaptation algorithm. When w is set to
1, the reweighting adaptation algorithm is equivalent
to simply training a MaxEnt model by putting the
speaker-specific and generic data samples together
as training data. In our experiments, we will com-
pare the reweighting adaptation approach with this
simpler approach, referred as constant adaptation.

6 Experiments

Our goal is to get one model specifically adapted
for each speaker. We first describes 4 different ap-
proaches to be compared in the experiments, and
section 6.2 explains our experimental methodology.

6.1 4 Approaches
In these experiments, we compare our approach,
called reweighted adaptation, with three more
conventional approaches: speaker-specific only,
Generic and Constant adaptation.

• Speaker Specific Only For this approach, we
train the dialogue act recognizer using training
sentences from the same speaker used during
testing.

• Generic In this case, we train the dialogue act
recognizer using utterances from all speakers
other than the speaker used during testing.

• Constant Adaptation For this approach, we
train the dialogue act recognizer using all
speakers, including the speaker who will later
be used for testing. All utterances have the
same weight in this case.

• Reweighted Adaptation This is our proposed
approach. As described in Section 5, we train
our dialogue act recognizer using all speakers
but reweight the utterances from the speaker
who will later be used for testing.

6.2 Methodology
In all the following experiments we use MaxEnt
models as defined in Section 5. L2 regularization
is used for MaxEnt to avoid overfitting. The optimal
regularization parameter was automatically selected
during validation. The following regularization pa-
rameters were used: 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10 , 100, 1000 and
0 (no regularization). All the unigram, bigram and
trigram features are used in the maxEnt model. The
labels are the five dialogue act tags described in Sec-
tion 3.

All experiments were performed using hold-out
testing and hold-out validation. Both validation
and test sets consisted of 1000 dialogue acts. The
training sets contained only utterances from meet-
ings that were not in the validation set of test set.

122



Train Data 200 500 1000 1500 2000
Speaker-specific

Only 64.07 65.99 68.51 69.99 71.06
Constant

adaptation model 76.81 76.96 77.00 77.23 77.53
Our reweighted

adaptation model 78.17 78.29 78.67 78.74 78.47

Table 3: Average results among all 7 speakers when train
with different combinations of speaker specific data and
other speakers’ data. The number of speaker specific data
is varied from 200, 500, 1000, 1500 to 2000.

In many of our experiments, we analyzed the ef-
fect of training set size on the recognition perfor-
mance. The speaker-specific data size varied from
200, 500, 1000, 1500 and 2000 dialogue acts respec-
tively. When training our reweighting adaptation al-
gorithm described in Section 5, we used the follow-
ing weights: 10, 30, 50, 75, and 100. The optimal
weight factor was selected automatically during val-
idation.

7 Results

In this section we present our approaches to study
the importance of speaker adaptation for dialogue
act recognition. All following results are calculated
based on the overall tag accuracies. We designed
three series of experiments for this study:

• Generic Recognizer (Section 7.1)

• Sparsity in speaker-specific data (Section 7.2)

• Effectiveness of Constant Adaptation (Sec-
tion 7.3)

• Performance of the reweighting algorithm
(Section 7.4)

7.1 Generic Recognizer
The first result we get is on average, for each speaker
when we use all other speaker’s data for training,
then test on speaker- specific test data. The perfor-
mance of this generic recognizer is 76.76% is the
baseline we try to improve when adding speaker-
specific data into consideration. 3

3The performance of our generic model is comparable to the
results from Ang et al (2005) when you take into consideration
that we used only 47,040 dialogue acts in our experiments (i.e.,
dialogue acts from our 7 speakers) which is a small fraction
compared with Ang et al (2005) .

7.2 Sparsity of speaker-specific data

A second result is the performance when only us-
ing speaker-specific data. The row Speaker Specific
Only in Table 3 shows the average results among
all speakers when for each speaker, we train us-
ing only data from the same speaker. The number
of speaker-specific training data we tried are 200,
500, 1000, 1500, and 2000 respectively. Even with
2000 speaker-specific dialogue acts for training, the
best accuracy is 71.06% which is lower than 76.76%
when using generic recognizer. Given the challenge
in getting 2000 speaker-specific annotated dialogue
acts, we are looking at a different approach where
we need less speaker-specific data.

7.3 Results of Constant Adaptation

The most straightforward way to combine other
speakers’ data is to directly add them with speaker-
specific data as train. We refer to this approach
as constant adaptation. The row Constant Adap-
tation in Table 3 shows the average results among
all speakers when for each speaker, we combine
the speaker-specific data directly with the all other
speaker’s data. In our experiments, we varied the
amount of speaker-specific data included to be 200,
500, 1000, 1500, and 2000 respectively. For all
7 speakers, the performance can always been im-
proved by including speaker-specific data with all
other speakers’ data for training. Furthermore, the
more speaker specific data added, the better perfor-
mance we get.

7.4 Results of Reweighting Algorithm

Finally, in this section we describe the results for
a simple adaptation algorithm based on reweight-
ing, as described in Section 5. Following the same
methodology as previous experiments, we vary the
amount of speaker-specific data to be 200, 500,
1000, 1500 and 2000. The best reweighting factor is
selected through validation on speaker-specific val-
idation data described in section 6.2. The results of
all 7 speakers from Reweighting algorithm when we
vary the amount of speaker-specific data are shown
in Figure 3.

We analyze the influence of the weighting factor
on our speaker adaptation by plotting the recogni-
tion performance for different weights. Figure 4 il-

123



Figure 2: The average results among all 7 speakers when
train with different combinations of speaker specific data
and other speakers’ data are displayed. In both Constant
adaptation and Reweighted adaptation models the num-
ber of speaker specific data are varied from 200, 500,
1000, 1500 to 2000. In Generic model, only all other
speakers’ data are used for training data.

Figure 3: Reweighting algorithm for all 7 Individual
Speakers when varying the amount of training data to be
0, 200, 500, 1000, 1500 and 2000.

lustrates the influence of the weight factor on three
speaker adaptation cases: None, 500 and 2000. In
this case, None represent the Constant Adaptation.
We observe the following trend: with more speaker-
specific data, the optimal reweighting factor is also
lower. This confirms that our reweighting algorithm
finds the right balance between speaker-specific data
and generic data.

Figure 2 and the row Reweighted Adaptation
from Table 3 shows the effectiveness of reweight-
ing algorithm. Results shows that even this sim-
ple algorithm can efficiently balance the influence
of speaker specific data and other speakers’ data and

0 20 40 60 80 100
0.765

0.77

0.775

0.78

0.785

0.79

 

 
None
500
2000

Figure 4: Average results of Reweighting among all 7
speakers when the amount of speaker specific data is 0,
500, 2000

give significantly improved results. And most sur-
prisingly, even with only 200 speaker specific data
the reweighting algorithm can give very promising
results.

8 Conclusion

In this work we analyze the effectiveness of speaker
adaptation for dialogue act recognition. A simple
reweighting algorithm is shown to give promising
improvement on several baseline algorithms even
with only 200 speaker-specific dialogue acts. This
paper is a first step toward automatic adaptation for
dialogue act recognition. Inspired by the promising
results from the simple reweighting algorithm, we
plan to evaluate other domain adaptation techniques
such as Daume’s feature-based approach (2007). It
will also be interesting to consider the unlabeled
data from each speaker when performing dialogue
act recognition.

Acknowledgments

This material is based upon work supported by
the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
1118018 and the U.S. Army Research, Develop-
ment, and Engineering Command (RDECOM). The
content does not necessarily reflect the position or
the policy of the Government, and no official en-
dorsement should be inferred.

124



References

Jeremy Ang, Yang Liu, Elizabeth Shriberg 2005. Au-
tomatic Dialog Act Segmentation and Classification in
Multiparty Meetings. ICASSP.

Jean Carletta. 2007. Unleashing the killer corpus: expe-
riences in creating the multi-everything AMI Meeting
Corpus. Language Resources and Evaluation, 41(2):
181-190

Mark Core and James Allen. 1997. Working Notes:
AAAI Fall Symposium. HLT-NAACL SIGDIAL Work-
shop.

Hal Daumé III. 2007. Frustratingly Easy Domain Adap-
tation. Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Raquel Fernandez, Matthew Frampton, Patrick Ehlen,
Matthew Purver and Stanley Peters. 2008. Mod-
elling and Detecting Decisions in Multi-Party Dia-
logue. Proceedings of the 9th SIGdial Workshop on
Discourse and Dialogue.

Umit Guz, Gokhan Tur, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, and Se-
bastien Cuendet. 2009. Cascaded model adaptation
for dialog act segmentation and tagging. Computer
Speech & Language, 24(2):289–306.

Minwoo Jeong, Chin-Yew Lin and Gary Lee. 2009.
Semi-supervised speech act recognition in emails and
forums. The 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods
on Natural Language Processing.

Jing Jiang and ChengXiang Zhai. 2007. Instance weight-
ing for domain adaptation in NLP. Proceedings of the
45th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Jachym Kolar, Yang Liu, and Elizabeth Shriberg. 2007.
Speaker Adaptation of Language Models for Auto-
matic Dialog Act Segmentation of Meetings. Inter-
speech, 339–373.

Anna Margolis, Karen Livescu, Mari Ostendorf. 2010.
Semi-supervised domain adaptation for automatic di-
alog act tagging. ACL 2010 Workshop on Domain
Adaptation for Natural Language Processing.

Rajesh Ranganath, Dan Jurafsky, and Dan McFarland.
2009. It’s Not You, it’s Me: Detecting Flirting and its
Misperception in Speed-Dates. The 2009 Conference
on Empirical Methods on Natural Language Process-
ing.

Vivek Rangarajan, Srinivas Bangaloreb and Shrikanth
Narayanana. 2009. Combining lexical, syntactic and
prosodic cues for improved online dialog act tagging.
Computer Speech and Language, 23(4): 407-422

Adwait Ratnaparkhi. 1996. A maximum entropy model
for part-of-speech tagging. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing.

Elizabeth Shriberg, Raj Dhillon, Sonali Bhagat, Jeremy
Ang and Hannah Carvey. 2004. The ICSI Meeting
Recorder Dialog Act (MRDA) Corpus. HLT-NAACL
SIGDIAL Workshop.

Andreas Stolcke, Klaus Ries, Noah Coccaro, Elizabeth
Shriberg, Rebecca Bates, Daniel Jurafsky, Paul Tay-
lor, Rachel Martin, Carol V. Ess-dykema and Marie
Meteer. 2000. Dialogue Act Modeling for Automatic
Tagging and Recognition of Conversational Speech.
Computational Linguistics, 26:339-373.

Gokhan Tur, Umit Guz and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. 2006.
Model Adaptation For Dialogue Act Tagging. Spoken
Language Technology Workshop.

125


