










































Towards Automatic Lexical Simplification in Spanish: An Empirical Study


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Predicting and Improving Text Readability for target reader populations (PITR 2012)., pages 8–16,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards Automatic Lexical Simplification in Spanish: An Empirical Study

Biljana Drndarević and Horacio Saggion
Universitat Pompeu Fabra

Department of Information and Communication Technologies
C/ Tanger, 122-140

08018 Barcelona, Spain
{biljana.drndarevic,horacio.saggion}@upf.edu

Abstract

In this paper we present the results of the anal-
ysis of a parallel corpus of original and simpli-
fied texts in Spanish, gathered for the purpose
of developing an automatic simplification sys-
tem for this language. The system is intended
for individuals with cognitive disabilities who
experience difficulties reading and interpret-
ing informative texts. We here concentrate
on lexical simplification operations applied by
human editors on the basis of which we derive
a set of rules to be implemented automatically.
We have so far addressed the issue of lexical
units substitution, with special attention to re-
porting verbs and adjectives of nationality; in-
sertion of definitions; simplification of numer-
ical expressions; and simplification of named
entities.

1 Introduction

In the highly digitalized 21st century sharing infor-
mation via Internet has become not only common-
place but also essential. Yet, there are still a large
number of people who are denied this fundamental
human right – access to information. In 2006 the UN
conducted an audit with the aim of testing the state
of accessibility of the leading websites around the
world. The results were rather disappointing, with
only three out of 100 tested web pages achieving
basic accessibility status. It is therefore clear that
one of the priorities for the future is working on en-
abling inclusion of all the groups that are currently
marginalised and denied equal access to information
as the rest of the population.

Written information available online is far too of-
ten presented in a way that is perceived as incom-
prehensible to individuals with cognitive disabili-
ties. It is therefore necessary to simplify the com-
plex textual content in order to make it more acces-
sible. However, manual simplification is too time-
consuming and little cost-effective so as to yield suf-
ficient amount of simplified reading material in a
satisfactory time frame. Hence, the need and in-
terest arise to develop automatic or semi-automatic
simplification tools that would (partially) substitute
humans in carrying out this laborious task.

Our project is one such aspiration. Our goal is to
offer an automated text simplification tool for Span-
ish, targeted at readers with cognitive disabilities.
We delimit our research to simplification of infor-
mative texts and news articles. So far we have fo-
cused primarily on syntactic simplification, with an
already implemented module currently in the test
stage (Bott and Saggion, 2012b). The present work,
however, deals with lexical simplification and is cen-
tred around a corpus analysis, a preparatory stage for
the development of a separate lexical module in the
future.

Earlier work already establishes the importance of
lexical changes for text simplification (Carroll et al.,
1998; Caseli et al., 2009; De Belder et al., 2010).
Upon examining a parallel corpus consisting of orig-
inal and manually simplified newspaper articles in
Spanish, we have found that by far the most com-
mon type of changes applied by human editors are
precisely lexical changes, accounting for 17.48% of
all annotated operations (Bott and Saggion, 2012a).
Words perceived as more complicated are replaced

8



by their simpler synonyms. A recurring example
is that of reporting verbs. Corpus analysis shows a
clear tendency towards replacing all reporting verbs
such as advertir (warn), afirmar (declare), explicar
(explain), etc. with the ubiquitous decir (say). Sen-
tences 1 (original) and 2 (simplified) illustrate the
said phenomenon (translated into English):

1. It is important that we continue working on the
means that promote the access of the disabled
to cultural content, she explained.

2. The Minister of Culture said that she is work-
ing towards granting the disabled access to cul-
tural content.

We therefore document all cases of lexical change
observed in the corpus and try to extract rules for
their automatic implementation. The remainder of
this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 ad-
dresses the related work in the field; in Section 3 we
describe the experimental setting and the process of
obtaining the parallel corpus used in the study, while
Section 4 provides a more detailed insight into the
kind of lexical simplifications observed. We con-
clude in Section 5 and outline our future work.

2 Related Work

Text simplification has so far been approached with
two different aims. One is to offer simplified ver-
sions of original text to human readers, such as
foreign language learners (Petersen and Ostendorf,
2007; Medero and Ostendorf, 2011); aphasic peo-
ple (Devlin and Unthank, 2006); low literacy in-
dividuals (Specia, 2010) and others. On the other
hand, simplified text is seen as input for further nat-
ural language processing to enhance its proficiency,
e.g. in machine translation or information retrieval
tools (Klebanov et al., 2004). The earliest simplifi-
cation systems employed a rule-based approach and
focused on syntactic structure of the text (Chan-
drasekar et al., 1996). The PSET project (Carroll et
al., 1998) dealt with simplification of news articles
in English for aphasic readers. Together with syn-
tactic analysis and transformations similar to those
of Chandrasekar et al. (1996), they employed lexi-
cal simplification based on looking up synonyms in
WordNet and extracting Kucera-Francis frequency

from the Oxford Psycholinguistic Database (Quin-
lan, 1992). Therefore, the most frequent of a set of
synonyms for every content word of the input text
was chosen to appear in its simplified version.

The above approach to lexical simplification has
been repeated in a number of works (Lal and Ruger,
2002; Burstein et al., 2007). Bautista et al. (2009)
also rely on a dictionary of synonyms, but their crite-
rion for choosing the most appropriate one is word-
length rather than frequency. Caseli et al. (2009)
analyse lexical operations on a parallel corpus of
original and manually simplified texts in Portuguese,
using lists of simple words and discourse markers as
resources. Bautista et al. (2011) focused on numeri-
cal expressions as one particular problem of lexical
simplification and suggested the use of hedges as a
means of dealing with complex numerical content.

Given the fact that many words tend to be poly-
semic, attempts have been made to address this is-
sue so as to provide more accurate, context-aware
lexical substitution. De Belder et al. (2010) were
the first to employ word sense disambiguation tech-
niques in order to capture contextual information,
while Biran et al. (2011) apply an unsupervised
method for learning pairs of complex and simple
synonyms based on an unaligned corpus of texts
from the original Wikipedia and Simple English
Wikipedia.

3 Experimental Setting

We have gathered a corpus consisting of 200 in-
formative texts in Spanish, obtained from the news
agency Servimedia. The articles have been clas-
sified into four categories: national news, interna-
tional news, society and culture. We then obtained
simplified versions of the said texts, courtesy of the
DILES (Discurso y Lengua Española) group of the
Autonomous University of Madrid. Simplifications
have been applied manually, by trained human ed-
itors, following easy-to-read guidelines suggested
by Anula (2009), (2008). We are interested to see
how these guidelines are applied in practice, as well
as how human editors naturally deal with cases not
treated by the guidelines in sufficient detail.

The corpus has been automatically annotated us-
ing part-of-speech tagging, named entity recognition
and parsing (Padró et al., 2010). Furthermore, a text

9



aligning algorithm based on Hidden Markov Mod-
els (Bott and Saggion, 2011) has been applied to ob-
tain sentence-level alignments. The automatic align-
ments have then been manually corrected through a
graphical editing tool within the GATE framework
(Cunningham et al., 2002). A total of 570 sentences
have been aligned (246 in original and 324 in sim-
ple texts), with the following correlations between
them: one to one, one to many or many to one, as
well as cases where there is no correlation (cases of
content reduction through summarisation or infor-
mation expansion through the introduction of defini-
tions). The alignments facilitate the observation of
the corpus, particularly cases where entire sentences
have been eliminated or inserted.

A parallel corpus thus aligned enables us to en-
gage in data analysis as well as possibly carry out
machine learning experiments to treat specific prob-
lems we have so far detected. We have documented
all simplification operations used by human editors
and placed them in eight major categories applied at
various linguistic levels (individual words, phrases
or sentences). The operations are change, delete, in-
sert, split, proximization, re-order, select and join,
listed in the decreasing order of their relative fre-
quency in the corpus. Among these are the changes
that are either rather idiosyncratic or involve com-
plex inferential processes proper to humans but not
machines. Sentence 1 (original) and paragraph 2
(simplified) are an example (translated into English):

1. Around 390,000 people have returned to their
homes after being forced to evacuate due to
floods caused by monsoon rains last summer in
Pakistan.

2. Last summer it rained a lot in Pakistan. The
rain flooded the fields and the houses. That is
to say, the water covered the houses and the
fields. For this reason a lot of people left their
homes in Pakistan. Now these people return to
their homes.

Sentences in bold are examples of information ex-
pansion which is difficult to implement automati-
cally. The concept of flood is obviously perceived
as complicated. However, instead of offering a defi-
nition taken out of a dictionary and applicable to any
context (as in the example further below), the writer

explains what happened in this particular instance,
relying on their common knowledge and inferential
thinking. It is obvious that such conclusions cannot
be drawn by computers. What can be done is insert
a definition of a difficult term, as in the following
example:

1. The Red Cross asks for almost one million eu-
ros for the 500,000 Vietnamese affected by the
floods.

2. The Red Cross asks for one million euros for
Vietnam. The Red Cross is an organization
that helps people and countries around the
world.

After documenting all the operations and analysing
their nature and frequency, we have finally decided
to focus on the automatic treatment of the following:
lexical simplification, deletions, split operations, in-
version of direct speech and the insertion of defini-
tions. In the next section, we concentrate on oper-
ations applied at the lexical level, with the aim of
drawing conclusions about the nature of lexical sim-
plification carried out by trained editors and the pos-
sibility of their automatic implementation in the fu-
ture.

4 Data Analysis

We have so far obtained forty simplifications and our
goal is to shortly acquire simplified versions of all
200 texts. A variety of lexical operations have been
observed in the corpus, which go far beyond sim-
ple substitution of one lexical unit with its simpler
equivalent. In order to describe the nature of these
changes, we have categorized them as follows:

• substitutions of one lexical unit with its simpler
synonym;

• insertion of definitions of difficult terms and
concepts;

• simplification of numerical expressions;

• simplification of named entities;

• elimination of nominalisation;

• rewording of idioms and collocations; and

• rewording of metaphorically used expressions.

10



4.1 Lexical substitution

We have documented 84 cases where one lexical
unit has been substituted with its simpler synonym.
These words make up our lexical substitution ta-
ble (LST), gathered for the purpose of data analy-
sis. The table contains the lemma of the original
(O) word, its simple (S) equivalent and additional in-
formation about either the original word, the simple
word or the nature of the simplification, such as pol-
ysemy, hyponym ⇒ hypernym, metaphor, etc. Ta-
ble 1 is an excerpt.

Original Simple Commentary
impartir pronunciar polysemy
informar decir reporting verb
inmigrante extranjero hyponym⇒ hypernym
letras literatura polysemy

Table 1: An excerpt from the Lexical Substitution Table

To analyse the relationship between the sets of O-
S words, we have concentrated on their frequency of
use and length (both in characters and syllables).

4.1.1 Word frequency
For every word in the LST, we consulted its fre-

quency in a dictionary developed for the purposes of
our project by the DILES group and based on the
Referential Corpus of Contemporary Spanish (Cor-
pus de Referencia del Español Actual, CREA)1. We
have found that for 54.76% of the words, the fre-
quency of the simple word is higher than the fre-
quency of its original equivalent; in 30.95% of the
cases, the frequency is the same; only 3.57% of the
simple words have lower frequency than the corre-
sponding original ones; and in 10.71% of the cases
it was impossible to analyse the frequency since the
original word was a multi-word expression not in-
cluded in the dictionary, as is the case with complex
conjunctions like sin embargo (however) or pese a
(despite).

As can be appreciated, in a high number of cases
O and S words have the same frequency of use ac-
cording to CREA. In an intent to rationalise this
phenomenon, we have counted the number of times
each of these words appears in the totality of orig-
inal and simple texts. In more than half of the O-

1http://corpus.rae.es/creanet.html

S pairs the simple word is more common than its
original equivalent, not only in the simplified texts,
where it is expected to abound, but also in the orig-
inal ones. This difference in the frequency of use
in actual texts and the CREA database could be ex-
plained by the specificity of the genre of the texts in
our corpus, where certain words are expected to be
recurrent, and the genre-neutral language of CREA
on the other hand. Out of the remaining 44.5% of
the cases, where O words are more abundant than S
words, five out of fourteen may have been used for
stylistic purposes. One good example is the use of
varied reporting verbs, such as afirmar (confirm) or
anunciar (announce), instead of uniformly using de-
cir (say). Six in fourteen of the same group are pol-
ysemic words possibly used in contexts other than
the one where the simplification was recorded. Such
is the example of the word artı́culo, substituted with
cosa where it meant thing. However, it also occurs
with its second meaning (article: a piece of writing)
where it cannot be substituted with cosa.

What can be concluded so far is that frequency is
a relatively good indicator of the word difficulty, al-
beit not the only one, as seen by a large number of
cases when the pairs of O-S words have the same
frequency. For that reason we analyse word length
in Section 4.1.2. Polysemy and style are also seen
as important factors at the time of deciding on the
choice of the synonym to replace a difficult word.
Whereas style is a factor we currently do not intend
to treat computationally, we cannot but recognize
the impact that polysemy has on the quality and ac-
curacy of the output text. Consider the example of
another pair of words in our lexical substitution ta-
ble: impresión ⇒ influencia, in the following pair
of original (1) and simplified (2) sentences:

1. Su propia sede ya da testimonio de la “im-
presión profunda” que la ciudad andaluza dejó
en el pintor.
Its very setting testifies to the profound influ-
ence of the Andalusian town on the painter.

2. En esa casa también se ve la influencia de
Granada.
The influence of Granada is also visible in that
house.

In the given context, the two words are perfect syn-

11



onyms. However, in expressions such as tengo la
impresión que (I am under the impression that), the
word impresión cannot be substituted with influen-
cia. We have found that around 35% of all the orig-
inal words in the LST are polysemic. We therefore
believe it is necessary to include a word sense dis-
ambiguation approach as part of the lexical simplifi-
cation component of our system in the future.

4.1.2 Word Length
Table 2 summarizes the findings relative to the

word length of the original and simple words in the
LST, where syll. stands for syllable and char. for
character.

Type of relationship Percentage
S has fewer syll. than O 57.85%
S has more syll. than O 17.85%
S has the same number of syll. as O 25%
S has fewer char. than O 66.66%
S has more char. than O 23.8%
S has the same number of char. as O 9.52%

Table 2: Word length of original and simple words

The average word length in the totality of origi-
nal texts is 4.81 characters, while the simplified texts
contain words of average length of 4.76 characters.
We have also found that the original and simplified
texts have roughly the same number of short words
(up to 5 characters) and medium length words (6-10
characters), while the original texts are more satu-
rated in long words (more than 11 characters) than
the simplified ones (5.91% in original and 3.64%
in simplified texts). Going back to the words from
the LST which had the same frequency according
to CREA, we found that around 80% of these were
pairs where the simple word had fewer syllables than
the original one. This leads us to the conclusion that
there is a strong preference for shorter words and
that word length is to be combined with frequency
when deciding among a set of possible synonyms to
replace a difficult word.

4.2 Transformation rules

Upon close observation of our data, we have derived
a set of preliminary simplification rules that apply
to lexical units substitution. These rules concern re-
porting verbs and adjectives of nationality, and will

be addressed in that order.
In the twenty pairs of aligned texts nine differ-

ent reporting verbs are used. All nine of them
have been substituted with decir (say) at least once,
amounting to eleven instances of such substitutions.
Three verbs from the same set appear in simplified
texts without change. On the whole, we perceive
a strong tendency towards using a simple verb like
say when reporting direct speech. Our intention is
to build a lexicon of reporting verbs in Spanish and
complement it with grammatical rules so as to en-
able accurate lexical substitution of these items of
vocabulary. Simple substitution of one lexical unit
with another is not always possible due to syntactic
constraints, as illustrated in the following example:

1. El juez advirtió al duque que podrı́a provocar la
citación de la Infanta.
The judge warned the Duke that he might cause
the Princess to be subpoenaed.

2. Murió cientı́fico que advirtió sobre deterioro de
la capa de ozono.
The scientist who warned about the deteriora-
tion of the ozone layer died.

In the first case the verb advertir is used as part of the
structure [advertir a X que], in English [warn some-
body that]. The verb decir easily fits this structure
without disturbing the grammaticality of the sen-
tence. In the second instance, however, the reporting
verb is used with the preposition and an indirect ob-
ject, a structure where the insertion of decir would
be fatal for the grammaticality of the output. We be-
lieve that the implementation of this rule would be
a worthwhile effort, given that informative texts of-
ten abound in direct speech that could be relatively
easily simplified so as to enhance readability.

As for adjectives of nationality, we have no-
ticed a strong preference for the use of periphrastic
structure instead of denominal adjective denoting
nationality. Thus, a simple adjective is replaced
with the construction [de < COUNTRY >], e.g.
el gobierno pakistanı́ (the Pakistani government)
is replaced by el gobierno de Pakistán (the gov-
ernment of Pakistan). The same rule is applied
to instances of nominalised nationality adjectives.
In these cases the structure [ArtDef + Adj]2 be-

2ArtDef: definite article, Adj: adjective

12



comes [ArtDef + persona + de + < COUNTRY >],
e.g: los pakistanı́es ⇒ las personas de Pakistán
(the Pakistani⇒ the people from Pakistan). In only
five instances the adjective was preferred. Twice it
was español (Spanish), which were the only two in-
stances of the expression of this nationality. This
leads us to the conclusion that español is sufficiently
widespread and therefore simple enough and would
not need to be substituted with its periphrastic equiv-
alent. Norteamericano (North American) was used
twice, therefore being slightly more acceptable than
estadounidense (of/from the United States), which
is always replaced by de Estados Unidos. The re-
maining is the one instance of egipcio (Egyptian),
otherwise replaced by de Egipto.

Based on the observations, our hypothesis is that
more common nationality adjectives, such as Span-
ish, and possibly also English or French need not be
modified. Norteamericano or estadounidense how-
ever common are possibly perceived as complicated
due to their length. In order to derive a definite rule,
we would need to carry out a more detailed analy-
sis on a richer corpus to determine how frequency of
use and length of these adjectives correlate.

4.3 Insertion of definitions

Definitions of difficult terms are found in 57.5% of
all texts we have analysed. Around 70% of these
are definitions of named entities, such as El Greco,
Amnesty International, Guantanamo and others. In
addition to these, difficult lexical units, and even ex-
pressions, are explained by means of a definition.
Thus, a (prison) cell is defined as a room in a prison,
and the prisoner of conscience as a person put in
prison for his ideas. In order to deal with named
entity definitions, we intend to investigate the meth-
ods for the look-up of such definitions in the future.
To solve the problem of defining difficult individual
lexical units, one solution is to target those words
with the lowest frequency rate and in the absence
of an adequate simpler synonym insert a definition
from a monolingual dictionary, given the availabil-
ity of such resources (the definition itself might need
to be simplified).

4.4 Numerical expressions

Our analysis shows that the treatment of numerical
expressions should have a significant place in our

simplification system, given their abundance in the
kind of texts our system is mainly intended for, and
a wide variety of simplification solutions observed
by examining the parallel corpus. Even though by
far the most common operation is elimination (in
the process of summarization), there are a number
of other recurrent operations. The most common of
these are explained below for the purpose of illus-
tration, given that the totality of the rules is beyond
the scope of this paper. We separately address nu-
merical expressions forming part of a date and other
instances of using numbers and numerals.

The following are the rules concerning numerical
expressions in dates:

1. en < YEAR >⇒ en el año < YEAR >
en 2010⇒ en el año 2010

2. Years in parenthesis are eliminated (this opera-
tion has been applied in 100% of the cases dur-
ing manual simplification):
El Greco (1541–1614)⇒ El Greco

3. In expressions containing the name and/or the
day of the month, irrespective of whether it is
followed by a year, the information relative to
the month (i.e. name or name and day) is elim-
inated (applied in around 85% of the cases):
en septiembre 2010 ⇒ en el año 2010
el 3 de mayo⇒ ∅

As for other numerical expressions, the most
common rules and most uniformly applied are the
following:

1. Replacing a word with a figure:
cinco dı́as⇒ 5 dı́as

2. Rounding of big numbers:
más de 540.000 personas ⇒ medio millón de
personas

3. Rounding by elimination of decimal points:
Cerca de 1,9 millones de casas ⇒ 2 millones
de casas

4. Simplification of noun phrases containing two
numerals in plural and the preposition of by
eliminating the first numeral:
cientos de miles de personas ⇒ miles de per-
sonas

13



5. Substitution of words denoting a certain num-
ber of years (such as decade or centenary) by
the corresponding number:
IV centenario de su nacimiento⇒ 400 años de
su nacimiento

6. The thousands and millions in big numbers are
expressed by means of a word, rather than a
figure:
17.000 casas⇒ 17 mil casas

We are currently working on implementing a nu-
merical expression simplification module based on
rounding and rewording rules derived from our cor-
pus and previous study in the field (Bautista et al.,
2011).

4.5 Named Entities

As with numerical expressions, the majority of
named entities are eliminated as a result of sum-
marization. Only those names that are relative to
the theme of the text in question and which tend to
appear throughout the article are kept. In the case
of these examples, we have observed the follow-
ing operations: abbreviation; disabbreviation; using
full name instead of the surname alone, customary
in newspaper articles; expanding the noun phrase
[ArtDef + NCom]3 with the name of the referent; re-
placing the noun phrase [ArtDef + NCom] with the
name of the referent; inversion of the constituents
in the structures where a professional title is fol-
lowed by the name of its holder in apposition; and
a handful of other, less frequent changes. Table 3
summarizes the most common operations and illus-
trates them with examples from the corpus. As can
be observed, some NE are written as acronyms while
others are disabbreviated. It would be interesting to
analyse in the future whether the length and the rel-
ative frequency of the words that make up these ex-
pressions are a factor, or these are simply examples
of arbitrary choices made by human editors lacking
more specific guidelines.

While to decide how to deal with names of organ-
isations that may possibly be abbreviated we would
need a larger corpus more saturated in these exam-
ples, there are a number of rules ready to be imple-
mented. Such is the case of personal names, where

3NCom: common noun

almost 90% of the names appearing in simplified
texts contain both name and surname as opposed to
first name alone. The same is true of the order of
name and title, where in 100% of such examples the
name is preferred in the initial position. As for ex-
panding the named entity with a common noun (the
painter Pablo Picasso), we have recorded this op-
eration in only 15% of the personal names used in
S texts. We do, however, notice a pattern — this
kind of operation is applied at the first mention of the
name, where the common noun acts as an additional
defining element. It is an interesting phenomenon to
be further researched.

4.6 Other simplification tendencies

Human editors have opted for a number of other sim-
plification solutions which are either difficult or im-
possible to implement computationally. The elimi-
nation of nominalisations is an example of the for-
mer. Whereas common in the journalistic genre, hu-
man simplifications show a very strong tendency to-
wards substituting the combination of the support
verb and a deverbal noun with the corresponding
verb alone, as in the example:

1. La financiación ha sido realizada por la Gener-
alitat Valenciana.
The funding has been provided by the Valencian
Government.

2. La Generalitat Valenciana ha financiado la in-
vestigación.
The Valencian Government has financed the re-
search.

The expression realizar una financiación (provide
funding) from the original sentence (1) has been sub-
stituted by the verb financiar (to fund) in the simpli-
fied version (2). Twenty other instances of this kind
of operation have been recorded, thus making it an
issue to be readdressed in the future.

What is also to be addressed is the treatment of
set expressions such as idioms and collocations. Al-
though not excessively abundant in the current ver-
sion of our corpus, we hypothesise that the simpli-
fication of such expressions could considerably en-
hance the readability of the text and the research of
the issue could, therefore, prove beneficial, provided

14



Original Simple Operation Type
Comité Español de Representates
de Personas con Discapacidad

CERMI abbreviation

el PSOE el Partido Socialista Obrero
Español

disabbreviation

Gonzales-Sinde Angeles Gonzales-Sinde full name
el artista el artista Pablo Picasso NCom+NE
la ciudad andaluza Granada NCom⇒ NE
La ministra de Defensa, Carme
Chacón

Carme Chacón, ministra de De-
fensa

NCom,NE⇒ NE,NCom

Table 3: Named Entities Substitution Examples

the availability of the necessary resources for Span-
ish.

On the other hand, an example of common hu-
man simplification tactics which is out of reach for
a computational system is rewording of metaphori-
cally used expressions. Thus, un gigante de la es-
cena (a giant on stage) is changed into un actor ex-
traordinario (an extraordinary actor). Such exam-
ples point out to the limitations automatic simplifi-
cation systems are bound to possess.

5 Conclusions and future work

In the present paper we have concentrated on the
analysis of lexical changes observed in a parallel
corpus of original and simplified texts in Spanish.
We have categorized all the operations into substitu-
tion of lexical units; insertion of definitions of diffi-
cult terms and concepts; simplification of numerical
expressions; simplification of named entities; and
different cases of rewording. Analysis suggests that
frequency in combination with word length is the
necessary combination of factors to consider when
deciding on the choice among a set of synonyms to
replace a difficult input word. On the other hand, a
high number of polysemic input words underline the
importance of including word sense disambiguation
as part of the lexical substitution module.

Based on the available data, we have so far de-
rived a set of rules concerning reporting verbs, ad-
jectives of nationality, numerical expressions and
named entities, all of which are to be further de-
veloped and implemented in the future. Numeri-
cal expressions in particular are given an important
place in our system and more in-depth analysis is
being carried out. We are working on rounding of
big numbers and the use of modifiers in the simplifi-
cation of these expressions. A number of issues are

still to be tackled, such as elimination of nominali-
sation and simplification of multi-word expressions.
The ultimate goal is to implement the lexical mod-
ule as part of a larger architecture of the system for
automatic text simplification for Spanish.

Acknowledgements

The present study is part of a Spanish research
project entitled Simplext: An automatic system for
text simplification (http://www.simplext.
es). Simplext is led by Technosite and partially
funded by the Ministry of Industry, Tourism and
Trade of the Government of Spain, through the Na-
tional Plan for Scientific Research, Development
and Technological Innovation (I+D+i), within the
strategic Action of Telecommunications and Infor-
mation Society (Avanza Competitiveness, with the
file number TSI-020302-2010-84). We are grate-
ful to the fellowship RYC-2009-04291 from Pro-
grama Ramón y Cajal 2009, Ministerio de Economı́a
y Competitividad, Secretarı́a de Estado de Investi-
gación, Desarrollo e Innovación, Spain.

References

A. Anula. 2008. Lecturas adaptadas a la enseñanza del
español como l2: variables lingüı́sticas para la deter-
minación del nivel de legibilidad. In La evaluación en
el aprendizaje y la enseñanza del español como LE/L2.

A. Anula. 2009. Tipos de textos, complejidad lingüı́stica
y facilicitación lectora. In Actas del Sexto Congreso
de Hispanistas de Asia, pages 45–61.

S. Bautista, P. Gervás, and R.I. Madrid. 2009. Feasi-
bility analysis for semiautomatic conversion of text to
improve readability. In The Second International Con-
ference on Information and Communication Technolo-
gies and Accessibility.

15



S. Bautista, R. Hervás, P. Gervás, R. Power, and
S. Williams. 2011. How to make numerical in-
formation accessible: Experimental identification of
simplification strategies. In Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction, Lisbon, Portugal.

O. Biran, S. Brody, and N. Elhadad. 2011. Putting it
simply: a context-aware approach to lexical simpli-
fication. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, pages 496–501, Port-
land, Oregon, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

S. Bott and H. Saggion. 2011. An unsupervised align-
ment algorithm for text simplification corpus construc-
tion. In ACL Workshop on Monolingual Text-to-Text
Generation, Portland, USA, June 2011. ACL, ACL.

Stefan Bott and H. Saggion. 2012a. Text simplifica-
tion tools for spanish. In Proceedings of Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference, 2012.

Stefan Bott and Horacio Saggion. 2012b. A hybrid sys-
tem for spanish text simplification. In Third Work-
shop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive
Technologies (SLPAT), Montreal, Canada.

J. Burstein, J. Shore, J. Sabatini, Yong-Won Lee, and
M. Ventura. 2007. The automated text adaptation tool.
In HLT-NAACL (Demonstrations), pages 3–4.

J. Carroll, G. Minnen, Y. Canning, S. Devlin, and J. Tait.
1998. Practical simplification of english newspaper
text to assist aphasic readers. In Proc. of AAAI-98
Workshop on Integrating Artificial Intelligence and As-
sistive Technology, pages 7–10.

H. M. Caseli, T. F. Pereira, L. Specia, Thiago A. S. Pardo,
C. Gasperin, and S. M. Aluı́sio. 2009. Building a
brazilian portuguese parallel corpus of original and
simplified texts. In 10th Conference on Intelligent Text
PRocessing and Computational Linguistics (CICLing
2009).

R. Chandrasekar, D. Doran, and B. Srinivas. 1996. Mo-
tivations and methods for text simplification. In COL-
ING, pages 1041–1044.

H. Cunningham, D. Maynard, K. Bontcheva, and
V. Tablan. 2002. GATE: A framework and graphi-
cal development environment for robust NLP tools and
applications. In Proceedings of the 40th Anniversary
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

J. De Belder, K. Deschacht, and Marie-Francine Moens.
2010. Lexical simplification. In Proceedings of
Itec2010 : 1st International Conference on Interdisci-
plinary Research on Technology, Education and Com-
munication.

S. Devlin and G. Unthank. 2006. Helping aphasic people
process online information. In Proceedings of the 8th

international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Com-
puters and accessibility, Assets ’06, pages 225–226,
New York, NY, USA.

B. B. Klebanov, K. Knight, and D. Marcu. 2004. Text
simplification for information-seeking applications. In
On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 735–747.

P. Lal and S. Ruger. 2002. Extract-based summarization
with simplification. In Proceedings of the ACL 2002
Automatic Summarization / DUC 2002 Workshop.

J. Medero and M. Ostendorf. 2011. Identifying targets
for syntactic simplification.

Ll. Padró, M. Collado, S. Reese, M. Lloberes, and
I. Castellón. 2010. Freeling 2.1: Five years of open-
source language processing tools. In Proceedings of
the Seventh International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta.

S. E. Petersen and M. Ostendorf. 2007. Text simplifica-
tion for language learners: a corpus analysis. In Proc.
of Workshop on Speech and Language Technology for
Education.

P. Quinlan. 1992. The Oxford Psycholinguistic
Database. Oxford University Press.

Lucia Specia. 2010. Translating from complex to simpli-
fied sentences. In Proceedings of the 9th international
conference on Computational Processing of the Por-
tuguese Language, pages 30–39, Berlin, Heidelberg.

16


