



















































Toward an amazigh language processing


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on South and Southeast Asian Natural Language Processing (SANLP), pages 173–180,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Toward an amazigh language processing 

Fatima Zahra NEJME1   Siham BOULAKNADEL2   Driss ABOUTAJDINE1 
(1) GSCM-LRIT, Université Mohamed V, BP 1014 Agdal-Rabat, Maroc  

(2) IRCAM, Avenue Allal El Fassi, Madinat Al Irfane, Rabat-Instituts, Maroc 

Fatimazahra.nejme@gmail.com, Boulaknadel@ircam.ma, 
aboutaj@fsr.ac.ma 

ABSTRACT 

Since antiquity, the Amazigh heritage is expanding from generation to generation. In the aim of 
safeguarding it from being threatened of disappearance, it seems opportune to equip this language 
of necessary means to confront the stakes of access to the domain of New Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT). In this context, and in the perspective to build tools and 
linguistic resources for the automatic processing of Amazigh language, we develop a lexicon and 
morphological rules using finite state technology within the linguistic developmental 
environment Nooj to parse amazigh texts.  

Vers un traitement automatique de la langue Amazighe  
Depuis l’antiquité, le patrimoine Amazighe est  en expansion  de génération en génération. Dans 
l’objectif de sauvegarder, exploiter ce patrimoine et éviter qu’il soit menacé de disparition, il 
semble opportun d’équiper cette langue de moyens nécessaires pour affronter les enjeux d'accès 
au  domaine des nouvelles  technologies de l'information et de la communication (NTIC) qui 
s’avère primordial  pour  promouvoir et informatiser cette langue.  Dans ce contexte, et  dans les 
perspectives de développer  des outils et des ressources linguistiques pour le traitement 
automatique de cette langue, nous avons entrepris d’utiliser la plateforme d’ingénierie 
linguistique  NooJ afin de créer un module pour la langue Amazighe standard (Ameur et al., 
2004a). Notre premier objectif est l'analyse des textes Amazighe. A cet effet, nous commençons 
par la formalisation du vocabulaire Amazighe (Nom, Verbe et Particules). Dans cet article nous 
nous intéresserons à la formalisation de deux catégories, nom et de particules, permettant de 
générer à partir d'une entrée lexicale son genre (masculin, féminin), son nombre (singulier, 
pluriel) et son état (libre, annexion). Enfin, nous développons un dictionnaire électronique afin de 
l'utiliser, d'une part, pour tester nos règles de flexions et d'autre part pour l'analyse lexicale des 
textes Amazighe.   

KEYWORDS: Amazigh language, NooJ, Natural language processing, Less-resourced language, 
lexical analysis, inflectional morphology, flexional grammar, dictionary.  

KEYWORDS IN L2 : La langue Amazighe, NooJ, Traitement automatique des langues naturelles, 
langue peu dotée, analyse lexicale, morphologie flexionnelle, grammaire flexionnelle,  
dictionnaire. 

 
 

173



Introduction  
The Amazigh language in Morocco is considered as a prominent constituent of the Moroccan 
culture and this by its richness and originality. However it has been long discarded otherwise 
neglected as a source of enrichment cultural. Nevertheless, due to the creation of the Royal 
Institute of Amazigh Culture (IRCAM)1, this language has been introduced in the public domain 
including administration, media also in the educational system in collaboration with ministries. It 
has enjoyed its proper coding in the Unicode Standard (Andries, 2008; Zenkouar, 2008), an 
official spelling (Ameur et al., 2006a), appropriate standards for keyboard realization and 
linguistic structures that are being developed with a phased approach (Ameur et al., 2006b; 
Boukhris et al., 2008). This process was initiated by the standardization, vocabularies 
construction (Kamel, 2006; Ameur et al., 2009a; Ameur et al., 2006a; Ameur et al., 2009b), 
Alphabetical Arrangement (Outahajala, 2007), spelling standardization (Ameur et al., 2006a) and 
development of rules grammar (Boukhris et al., 2008).  

However, this not sufficient for a less-resourced language (Berment, 2004) as the Amazigh to 
join the well-resourced language in information and Communication Technologies, mainly due to 
the lack of already available language processing resources and tools. Therefore, a set of 
scientific and linguistic research are undertaken to remedy to the current situation. These 
researches are divided, on the one hand, on researches that are concentrated on optical character 
recognition (OCR) (Amrouch et al., 2010; Es Saady et al., 2010; Fakir et al., 2009), and in the 
other hand, on those that are focused on natural language processing (Iazzi and Outahajala, 2008; 
Ataa Allah and Jaa, 2009; Boulaknadel, 2009; Ataa Allah and Boulaknadel, 2010; Outahajala et 
al., 2010; Boulaknadel and Ataa Allah, 2011), which constitute the priority components of 
researches. 

In this context, the present work deals with ongoing research efforts to build tools and linguistic 
resources for the Amazigh language. Our first main objective is to develop a morphological 
analyzer to parse amazigh texts. For this purpose, we begin by building a morphological analyzer 
for Amazigh nouns, implemented using the Finite State Technology within the linguistic 
developmental environment Nooj. 

This paper is structured around five main sections: the first present a description of the Amazigh 
language particularities. The second expose the automatic Amazigh language processing, which 
includes an overview of NooJ environment, and the formalization of a set of rules. While the last 
section is dedicated to the conclusion and perspectives. 

Amazigh language particularities 
The Amazigh language also known as Berber or Tamazight (ⵜ ⴰ ⵎ ⴰ ⵣ ⵉ ⵖ ⵜ  [tamazight]), is 
belonged to the African branch of the Afro-Asiatic language family, also referred to as Hamito-
Semitic in the literature (Greenberg, 1966; Ouakrim, 1995). It is currently presented in a dozen 
countries ranging from Morocco, with 50% of the overall population2 (Boukous, 1995), to Egypt, 
passing through Algeria with 25%, the Tunisia, Mauritania, Libya, Niger and the Mali (Chaker, 
2003).  

                                                        
1 Institution responsible for the preservation of heritage and the promotion of the Moroccan Amazigh culture and 
its development (see http://www.ircam.ma/). 
2 It present the Amazigh population largest in number. 

174



In Morocco, we distinguish between three major Amazigh dialects. Tarifit is spoken in northern 
Morocco, Tamazight in the Middle Atlas and south-eastern Morocco, and Tashelhit in south-
western Morocco and the High Atlas. 

Today, the current situation of the Amazigh language is at a pivotal point. It holds co-official 
status in Morocco. Its morphology as lexical standardization process is still underway. At present, 
it represents the model taught in must schools and used on media and official papers published in 
Morocco. 

Amazigh morphology 

The Amazigh language presents a rich and complex morphology whose words can be classified 
into three morphosyntactic categories which we cite: the noun, the verb and particles (Boukhris et 
al., 2008; Ameur et al., 2004b). Practically, nouns and verbs are the base of the Amazigh 
morphology and the more important categories to focus on, as others can be derived from them. 
In this paper, we are interested in noun morphology. 

1. Noun characteristics 

The noun in the Amazigh language is always composed of one word between two spaces and 
formed from a root and a pattern. It is characterized by gender (masculine or feminine), number 
(singular or plural), and state (free or construct) (Boukhris et al., 2008). 

Gender: the Amazigh noun is characterized by one of grammatical gender: masculine or 
feminine. 

 The masculine noun: begins with one of the initial vowels: ⴰ  [a], ⵉ  [i] or ⵓ  [u]. 
However, there are some exceptions as: ⵉ ⵎ ⵎ ⴰ  [imma] “(my) mother”. 

 The feminine noun: is marked with the circumfix ⵜ .... ⵜ  [t....t]. However, there are 
some exceptions such as nouns which have only the initial ⵜ  [t] or the final ⵜ  [t] of 
morpheme of the feminine: ⵜ ⴰ ⴷ ⵍ ⴰ  [tadla] “the sheaf”, ⵕⵕⵎ ⵓ ⵢ ⵜ  [ṛṛmuyt] “the 
fatigue”. 

Number: the noun, masculine or feminine, has a singular and plural. This latter has four forms: 
the external plural, broken plural, mixed plural and plural in ⵉ ⴷ  [id]. 

 The external plural: is formed by an alternation of the first vowel ⴰ /ⵉ  [a/i] accompanied 
by a suffixation of ⵏ  [n] or one of its variants. 

 The broken plural: involves a change in the vowels of the noun. 

 The mixed plural: is formed by vowels’ change accompanied, sometimes by the use of 
the suffixation by ⵏ [n]. 

 The plural in ⵉ ⴷ  [id]: this kind of plural is obtained by ⵉ ⴷ  [id] prefixing. It is applied 
to a set of nouns including: nouns with an initial consonant, proper nouns, parent nouns, 
compound nouns, numerals, as well as borrowed nouns. 

State: we distinguish between two states: the free state and the construct one. 

 The free state: is unmarked. The noun is in free state if it is: a single word isolated from 
any syntactic context, a direct object, or a complement of the predictive particle ⴷ  [d]. 

175



 The construct state: involves a variation of the initial vowel. In case of masculine nouns, 
it takes one of the following forms: initial vowel alternation ⴰ [a] /ⵓ [u] or adding of 
ⵡ [w]; adding of ⵢ [y] to the nouns of vowel  ⵉ  [i]. For the feminine nouns, it consists to 
drop the initial vowel or maintaining of this vowel. 

Automatic Amazigh language processing: development and evaluation 
Nooj platform 

NooJ3 , released in 2002 by Max Silberztein (Silberztein, 2007), is a linguistic development 
platform that provides a set of tools and methodologies for formalizing and developing a set of 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications. It presents a package of finite state tools that 
integrates a broad spectrum of computational technology from finite state automata to 
augmented/recursive transition networks. Thus, it presents a complete platform for formalizing 
various types of textual phenomena (orthography, lexical and productive morphology, local, 
structural and transformational syntax). For each of these formalization levels, NooJ propose a 
methodology, one or more formalisms, tools, software development and a corresponding parser 
that can be used to test each piece of the linguistic formalization over large corpora.  

Given these advantages, we have undertaken to adopt NooJ for formalization, description and 
analysis of Amazigh language for building a module for that language. We begin our work by the 
formalization of the Amazigh language vocabulary. This formalization is described and stored 
into inflectional grammars, and can recognize all the corresponding inflected forms. To test these 
grammars, we built an electronic dictionary in which the lexical entries are attached to a set of 
linguistic information automatically generate using inflectional grammars which will be used for 
lexical analysis of texts. 

Development of the lexicon 
As part of developing a NooJ module for the Amazigh language, we elaborate our dictionary for 
Amazigh nouns based on a set of lexicons: Taifi dictionary (Taifi, 1988), amazigh vocabulary 
(Ameur et al., 2006b), and vocabulary of media (Ameur et al., 2009a).Our dictionary contains, 
currently, 5210 lexical entries which consist of: 4542 simple nouns, 424 proper nouns, 200 Non-
inflected nouns and 44 numerals which are given with their plural form, feminine correspondent 
and annexation state. Our inflected dictionary, calculated after the compilation of the dictionary, 
encounters 19,597 entries. Thus, we get from each lexical entry all forms related to it. 

Morphological rules implementation 

This study presents the formalization of the noun category in the NooJ platform. For this, a set of 
rules has been defined allowing to generate from a each entry, its inflectional information: 
gender, number and state.   

The formalization is based on the use of certain generic commands predefined such as:  

- <LW> move at the beginning of Lemma,  

- <RW> move at the end of Lemma,  

- <S> delete current character,  

                                                        
3 See http://www.nooj4nlp.net/  for information of NooJ. 

176



- <B> delete last character,  

- <L> go left, 

- <R> go right, 

 Gender  

To formalize the gender we built this rule that generates from a masculine entry its feminine 
correspondent. The rule is to add the discontinuous morpheme ⵜ  [t] at the beginning and at the 
end of the noun. 

The rules in Nooj Explanation                       Examples 
<LW>ⵜ <RW>ⵜ /f+s This rule adds "ⵜ " at the 

beginning and at the end. 
ⵉ ⵙ ⵍ ⵉ  [isli] “married” ->  
ⵜ ⵉ ⵙ ⵍ ⵉ ⵜ    [tislit] “married”. 

TABLE 1 – Example of a gender rule. 

 Number  

For the amazigh plural, we have many plural forms which are generally unpredictable due to 
Amazigh complex morphology. To formalize these plural types, we have have relied on the 
works of Boukhris (Boukhris et al., 2008) and those of Oulhaj (Oulhaj, 2000). We searched 
formal rules to unify the calculation of plural forms. According to these works and to an heuristic 
study of the nouns in the Taifi dictionary and those of amazigh language vocabulary, we have 
raised, at this moment, 303 classes which 97 classes is for the external plural, 99 for the broken 
plural, 104 for the mixed plural and 3 classes for the plural in ⵉ ⴷ  [id]. Each word could be 
associated with, at least, one flexional class. Thereafter, we provided some examples of rules for 
each of plural types.  

- The external plural 

The rules in Nooj Explanation                       Examples 
<LW>ⵉ <S><RW>ⵜ ⵏ /m+p The initial vowel is 

transformed into ⵉ  and the 
suffix ⵜ ⵏ  [tn] is add at the 
end of the noun. 

ⴰ ⵙ ⵉ ⵔ ⴰ  [asira] “desk” -> 
ⵉ ⵙ ⵉ ⵔ ⴰ ⵜ ⵏ  [isiratn] 

TABLE 2 –  Plural forms for the masculine nouns beginning and ends with ⴰ  [a]. 

- The broken plural 

The rules in Nooj Explanation                       Examples 
<LW>ⵉ <S><RW><L>ⴰ /m+p The rule changes the 

initial vowel into ⵉ  [i] 
and include ⴰ  [a] before 
the final consonant. 

ⴰ ⵣⴳ ⵣ ⵍ [azgzl] abbreviation” 
-> ⵉ ⵣⴳ ⵣ ⴰ ⵍ  [izgzal] 

TABLE 3 –  Plural forms for the nouns in VCn form. 

- The mixed plural 

 

177



The rules in Nooj Explanation                       Examples 
<LW>ⵉ <S><RW>ⵏ <L2>ⵉ /m+p The rule change the initial 

vowel into ⵉ  [i], include the 
vowel ⵉ  [i] before the last 
consonant and add  a suffix 
ⵏ  [n] at the end of the noun. 

ⴰ ⵃ ⵓ ⴷ ⵔ [aḥudr] “fait de 
se pencher” -> 
ⵉ ⵃ ⵓ ⴷ ⵉ ⵔ ⵏ  [iḥudirn] 

TABLE 4 –  Example of plural forms for the masculine nouns. 

- The plural in in ⵉ ⴷ  [id] 
The rules in Nooj Explanation                       Examples 
<LW>ⵉ ⴷ " "/m+p The rule adds ⵉⴷ [id] before the 

noun. 
ⴱⵓ ⵜ ⴳⵔⴰ  [butgra] “tortoise” -> 
ⵉⴷ ⴱⵓ ⵜ ⴳⵔⴰ  [id butgra] 

TABLE 5 –  Example of plural in ⵉ ⴷ   [id]. 

 State  

The rules in Nooj Explanation                       Examples 
<LW><R><B>ⵓ /EA+m The rule deletes the initial 

vowel and adds ⵓ  [u] at the 
beginig of the noun. 

ⴰ ⴼ ⵉ ⵔ ⴰ ⵙ  [afiras] “pear” -> 
ⵓ ⴼ ⵉ ⵔ ⴰ ⵙ  [ufiras] 

 TABLE 6 –  Example of plural in ⵉ ⴷ   [id]. 

Evaluation 

We conducted our experimentation on a sample of texts for story children. By applying our 
morphological grammars and our dictionary on text, we obtained the following results: 

 
FIGURE 11 – Example of lexical analysis of Amazigh text 

The text contains 778 nouns. After performing lexical analysis we identified a total of 686 
occurrences of nouns recognized and well annotated (1837 annotations). However, a total of 92 
occurrences expressing unknowns nouns. This experiment shows that only 8% of the unknowns 
nouns that do not belong to our dictionary. 

178



Conclusion and future works 
In this paper, we try to restore the Amazigh language and culture and give it more visibility 
nationally and internationally through developing tools and resources necessary for its 
computational processing. Our aim to work on a morphological analyzer for Amazigh came from 
this scarcity of computational framework, a morphological analyzer being one of the fundamental 
tools in many NLP tasks. However, we build a morphological analyzer for Amazigh nouns, 
implemented using the Finite State Technology within the linguistic developmental environment 
Nooj. Amazigh morphological analyzer for nouns is an underway work and further development 
must be performed to make it a complete one. However, our analyzer achieves over 92% correct 
results in the analysis of 778 nouns extracted from the corpus.  

For future work we planed to:  

- Enlarge the lexicon to include nouns from other  dialects,  

- Include other part of speech in the morphological analyzer, 

- Construct a corpus of texts to evaluate the out-of-vocabulary rate of our dictionary. 

References 
Ameur M., Boumalk A.  (DIR)  (2004a).  Standardisation de l’amazighe, Actes du séminaire 
organisé par le Centre de l’Aménagement Linguistique à Rabat, 8-9 décembre 2003, Publication 
de l’Institut Royal de la Culture Amazighe, Série : Colloques et séminaires. 

Ameur M., Bouhjar A., Boukhris F., Boukouss A., Boumalk A., Elmedlaoui M.,  Iazzi E., Souifi 
H. (2004b). Initiation à la langue amazighe. Rabat, Maroc: IRCAM. 

Ameur M., Bouhjar A., Boukhris F., Boukouss A., Boumalk A., Elmedlaoui M.,  Iazzi E.  
(2006a). Graphie et orthographe de l’amazighe. Rabat, Maroc : IRCAM. 

Ameur M., Bouhjar A., Boukhris F., Elmedlaoui M., Iazzi E. (2006b).  Vocabulaire de la 
langue amazighe (Français-Amazighe).  série : Lexiques N°1, IRCAM, Rabat, Maroc. 

Ameur M., Bouhjar A., Boumalk A., El Azrak N., Laabdelaoui R. (2009a).  Vocabulaire des 
médias (Français-Amazighe-Anglais-Arabe). série : Lexiques N°3, IRCAM, Rabat, Maroc. 

Ameur M., Bouhjar A., Boumalk A., El Azrak N., Laabdelaoui R. (2009b).  Vocabulaire 
grammatical. série : Lexiques N°5, IRCAM, Rabat, Maroc. 

Amrouch M., Rachidi A., El Yassa M., Mammass D. (2010). Handwritten Amazigh Character 
Recognition Based On Hidden Markov Models. International Journal on Graphics, Vision and 
Image Processing. 10(5), pp.11--18. 

Andries P. (2008). Unicode 5.0 en pratique, Codage des caractères et internationalisation des 
logiciels et des documents. Dunod, France, Collection InfoPro. 

Ataa Allah F., Jaa H,. (2009). Etiquetage morphosyntaxique : Outil d’assistance dédié à la 
langue amazighe. In Proceedings of the 1er Symposium international sur le traitement 
automatique de la culture amazighe, Agadir, Morocco, pp. 110- -119. 

Ataa Allah F., Boulaknadel S. (2010). Online Amazigh Concordancer. In Proceedings of 
International Symposium on Image Video Communications and Mobile Networks. Rabat, 
Maroc. 

179



Berment V. (2004). Méthodes pour informatiser des langues et des groupes de langues peu 
dotées, Thèse de doctorat de l’Université J. Fourier - Grenoble I, France. 

Boukhris  F.,  Boumalk  A.,  Elmoujahid  E.,  Souifi  H.  (2008).  La nouvelle grammaire de 
l'amazighe. Rabat, Maroc: IRCAM. 

Boukous A. (1995), Société, langues et cultures au Maroc: Enjeux symboliques, Casablanca, 
Najah El Jadida. 

Boulaknadel S. (2009). Amazigh ConCorde: an appropriate concordance for Amazigh. In 
Proceedings of the 1er Symposium international sur le traitement automatique de la culture 
amazighe, Agadir, Morocco, pp. 176--182. 

Boulaknadel S., Ataa Allah F. (2011). Building a standard Amazigh corpus.  In Proceedings of 
the International Conference on Intelligent Human Computer Interaction. Prague, Tchec. 

Chaker S. (2003), Le berbère, Actes des langues de France, 215-227. 

Es Saady Y., Rachidi A., El Yassa M., Mammas D. (2010). Printed Amazigh Character 
Recognition by a Syntactic Approach using Finite Automata.  International Journal on Graphics, 
Vision and Image Processing, 10(2), pp.1--8. 

Fakir M., Bouikhalene B., Moro K. (2009). Skeletonization methods evaluation for the 
recognition of printed tifinaghe characters. In Proceedings of the 1er Symposium International 
sur le Traitement Automatique de la Culture Amazighe. Agadir, Morocco, pp. 33--47. 

Greenberg J. (1966).  The Languages of Africa. The Hague.   

Iazzi E., Outahajala M. (2008). Amazigh Data Base.  In Proceedings of HLT & NLP Workshop 
within the Arabic world: Arabic language and local languages processing status updates and 
prospects. Marrakech, Morocco, pp. 36--39. 

Kamel S. (2006). Lexique Amazighe de géologie. Rabat, Maroc: IRCAM. 

Max S. (2007). An Alternative Approach to Tagging. NLDB 2007: 1-11 

Ouakrim O. (1995). Fonética y fonología del Bereber, Survey at the University of Autònoma de 
Barcelona. 

Oulhaj L. (2000). Grammaire du Tamazight. Imprimerie Najah El Jadida. 

Outahajala M. (2007). Les normes de tri, Du clavier et Unicode. La typographie entre les 
domaines de l’art et de l’informatique. Rabat, Morocco, pp. 223--237. 

Outahajala M., Zekouar L., Rosso P., Martí M.A. (2010). Tagging Amazigh with AnCoraPipe. 
In Proceeding of the Workshop on Language Resources and Human Language Technology for 
Semitic Languages. Valletta, Malta, pp. 52--56. 

Taifi M. (1988). Le lexique berbère (parlers du Maroc central). 

Zenkouar L. (2008). Normes des technologies de l’information pour l’ancrage de l’écriture 
amazighe. Etudes et documents berbères. 27, pp. 159--172. 

180


