










































Machine Learning for Hybrid Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 312–316,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Machine Learning for Hybrid Machine Translation

Sabine Hunsicker
DFKI GmbH

Language Technology Lab
Saarbrücken, Germany

sabine.hunsicker@dfki.de

Chen Yu
DFKI GmbH

Language Technology Lab
Saarbrücken, Germany
yu.chen@dfki.de

Christian Federmann
DFKI GmbH

Language Technology Lab
Saarbrücken, Germany
cfedermann@dfki.de

Abstract

We describe a substitution-based system for
hybrid machine translation (MT) that has been
extended with machine learning components
controlling its phrase selection. The approach
is based on a rule-based MT (RBMT) system
which creates template translations. Based
on the rule-based generation parse tree and
target-to-target alignments, we identify the set
of “interesting” translation candidates from
one or more translation engines which could
be substituted into our translation templates.
The substitution process is either controlled by
the output from a binary classifier trained on
feature vectors from the different MT engines,
or it is depending on weights for the decision
factors, which have been tuned using MERT.
We are able to observe improvements in terms
of BLEU scores over a baseline version of the
hybrid system.

1 Introduction

In recent years, machine translation (MT) systems
have achieved increasingly better translation quality.
Still each paradigm has its own challenges: while
statistical MT (SMT) systems suffer from a lack of
grammatical structure, resulting in ungrammatical
sentences, RBMT systems have to deal with a lack
of lexical coverage. Hybrid architectures intend to
combine the advantages of the individual paradigms
to achieve an overall better translation.

Federmann et al. (2010) and Federmann and Hun-
sicker (2011) have shown that using a substitution-
based approach can improve the translation quality
of a baseline RBMT system. Our submission to

WMT12 is a new, improved version following these
approaches. The output of an RBMT engine serves
as our translation backbone, and we substitute noun
phrases by translations mined from other systems.

2 System Architecture

Our hybrid MT system combines translation output
from:

a) the Lucy RBMT system, described in more
detail in (Alonso and Thurmair, 2003);

b) the Linguatec RBMT system (Aleksic and
Thurmair, 2011);

c) Moses (Koehn et al., 2007);

d) Joshua (Li et al., 2009).

Lucy provides us with the translation skeleton,
which is described in more detail in Section 2.2
while systems b)–d) are aligned to this translation
template and mined for substitution candidates. We
give more detailed information on these systems in
Section 2.3.

2.1 Basic Approach

We first identify “interesting” phrases inside the
rule-based translation and then compute the most
probable correspondences in the translation output
from the other systems. For the resulting phrases,
we apply a factored substitution method that decides
whether the original RBMT phrase should be kept or
rather be replaced by one of the candidate phrases.
A schematic overview of our hybrid system and its
main components is given in Figure 1.

312



Figure 1: Schematic overview of the architecture of our
substitution-based, hybrid MT system.

In previous years, it turned out that the alignment
of the candidate translations to the source contained
too many errors. In this version of our system, we
thus changed the alignment method that connects the
other translations. Only the rule-based template is
aligned to the source. As we make use of the Lucy
RBMT analysis parse trees, this alignment is very
good. The other translations are now connected to
the rule-based template using a confusion network
approach. This also reduces computational efforts,
as we now can compute the substitution candidates
directly from the template without detouring over
the source. During system training and tuning, this
new approach has resulted in a reduced number of
erroneous alignment links.

Additionally, we also changed our set of decision
factors, increasing their total number. Whereas an
older version of this system only used four factors,
we now consider the following twelve factors:

1. frequency: frequency of a given candidate
phrase compared to total number of candidates
for the current phrase;

2. LM(phrase): language model (LM) score of
the phrase;

3. LM(phrase+1): phrase with right-context;

4. LM(phrase-1): phrase with left-context;

5. Part-of-speech match?: checks if the part-of-
speech tags of the left/right context match the
current candidate phrase’s context;

6. LM(pos) LM score for part-of-speech (PoS);

7. LM(pos+1) PoS with right-context;

8. LM(pos-1) PoS with left-context;

9. Lemma checks if the lemma of the candidate
phrase fits the reference;

10. LM(lemma) LM score for the lemma;

11. LM(lemma+1) lemma with right-context;

12. LM(lemma-1) lemma with left-context.

The language model was trained using the SRILM
toolkit (Stolcke, 2002), on the EuroParl (Koehn,
2005) corpus, and lemmatised or part-of-speech
tagged versions, respectively. We used the Tree-
Tagger (Schmid, 1994) for lemmatisation as well as
part-of-speech tagging.

The substitution algorithm itself was also adapted.
We investigated two machine learning approaches.
In the previous version, the system used a hand-
written decision tree to perform the substitution:

1. the first of the two new approaches consisted
of machine learning this decision tree from
annotated data;

2. the second approach was to assign a weight to
each factor and using MERT tuning of these
weights on a development set.

Both approaches are described in more detail later in
Section 2.4.

2.2 Rule-Based Translation Templates

The Lucy RBMT system provides us with parse tree
structures for each of the three phases of its transfer-
based translation approach: analysis, transfer and
generation. Out of these structures, we can extract
linguistic phrases which later represent the “slots”
for substitution. Previous work has shown that these
structures are of a good grammatical quality due to
the grammar Lucy uses.

313



2.3 Substitution Candidate Translations

Whereas in our previous work, we solely relied on
candidates retrieved from SMT systems, this time
we also included an additional RBMT system into
the architecture. Knowing that statistical systems
make similar errors, we hope to balance out this fact
by exploiting also a system of a different paradigm,
namely RBMT.

To create the statistical translations, we used state-
of-the-art SMT systems. Both our Moses and Joshua
systems were trained on the EuroParl corpus and
News Commentary1 training data. We performed
tuning on the “newstest2011” data set using MERT.

We compile alignments between translations
with the alignment module of MANY (Barrault,
2010). This module uses a modified version of
TERp (Snover et al., 2009) and a set of different
costs to create the best alignment between any two
given sentences. In our case, each single candidate
translation is aligned to the translation template that
has been produced by the Lucy RBMT system. As
we do not use the source in this alignment tech-
nique, we can use any translation system, regardless
of whether this system provides us with a source-to-
target alignment.

In earlier versions of this system, we compiled the
source-to-target alignments for the candidate trans-
lations using GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003), but
these alignments contained many errors. By using
target-to-target alignments, we are able to reduce the
amount of those errors which is, of course, preferred.

2.4 Substitution Approaches

Using the parse tree structures provided by Lucy, we
extract “interesting” phrases for substitution. This
includes noun phrases of various complexity, then
simple verb phrases consisting of only the main
verb, and finally adjective phrases. Through the
target-to-target alignments we identify and collect
the set of potential substitution candidates. Phrase
substitution can be performed using two methods.

2.4.1 Machine-Learned Decision Tree
Previous work used hand-crafted rules. These are

now replaced by a classifier which was trained on
annotated data. Our training set D can formally be

1Available at http://www.statmt.org/wmt12/

represented as

D = {(xi, yi)|xi ∈ Rp, yi ∈ {−1, 1}}ni=1 (1)

where each xi represents the feature vector for some
sentence i while the yi value contains the annotated
class information. We use a binary classification
scheme, simply defining 1 as “good” and −1 as
“bad” translations.

In order to make use of machine (ML) learn-
ing methods such as decision trees (Breiman et al.,
1984), Support Vector Machines (Vapnik, 1995),
or the Perceptron (Rosenblatt, 1958) algorithm, we
have to prepare our training set with a sufficiently
large amount of annotated training instances.

To create the training data set, we computed the
feature vectors and all possible substitution candi-
dates for the WMT12 “newstest2011” development
set. Human annotators were then given the task to
assign to each candidate whether it was a “good” or
a “bad” substitution. We used Appraise (Federmann,
2010) for the annotation, and collected a set of
24,996 labeled training instances with the help of six
human annotators. Table 1 gives an overview of the
data sets characteristics. The decision tree learned
from this data replaces the hand-crafted rules.

2.4.2 Weights Tuned with MERT
Another approach we followed was to assign

weights to the chosen decision factors and to use
Minimal Error Rate Training to get the best weights.
Using the twelve factors described in Section 2.1,
we assign uniformly distributed weights and create
n-best lists. Each n-best lists contains a total of
n+2 hypotheses, with n being the number of candi-
date systems. It contains the Lucy template trans-
lations, the hybrid translation using the best can-
didates as well as a hypothesis for each candidate
system. In the latter translation, each potential can-
didate for substitution is selected and replaces the
original sub phrase in the baseline. The n-best list is

Translation Candidates

Total “good” “bad”

Count 24,996 10,666 14,330

Table 1: Training data set characteristics

314



Hybrid Systems Baseline Systems

Baseline +Decision Tree +MERT Lucy Linguatec Joshua Moses

BLEU 13.9 14.2 14.3 14.0 14.7 14.6 15.9
BLEU-cased 13.5 13.8 13.9 13.7 14.2 13.5 14.9
TER 0.776 0.773 0.768 0.774 0.775 0.772 0.774

Table 2: Experimental results for all component and hybrid systems applied to the WMT12 “newstest2012” test set
data for language pair English→German.

sorted by the final score of the feature vectors mak-
ing up each hypothesis. We used Z-MERT (Zaidan,
2009) to optimise the set of feature weights on the
“newstest2011” development set.

3 Evaluation

Using the “newstest2012” test set, we created base-
line translations for the four MT systems used in our
hybrid system. Then we performed three runs of our
hybrid system:

a) a baseline run, using the factors and uniformly
distributed weights;

b) a run using the weights trained on the develop-
ment set;

c) a run using the decision tree learned from an-
notated data.

Table 2 shows the results for automatic metrics’
scores. Besides BLEU (Papineni et al., 2001), we
also report its case-sensitive variant, BLEU-cased,
and TER (Snover et al., 2006) scores.

Comparing the scores, we see that both advanced
hybrid methods perform better than the original,
baseline hybrid as well as the Lucy baseline system.
The MERT approach performs slightly better than
the decision tree. This proves that using machine-
learning to adapt the substitution approach results in
better translation quality.

Other baseline systems, however, still outperform
the hybrid systems. In part this is due to the fact that
we are preserving the basic structure of the RBMT
translation and do not reorder the new hybrid trans-
lation. To improve the hybrid approach further, there
is more research required.

4 Conclusion and Outlook

In this paper, we have described how machine-
learning approaches can be used to improve the
phrase substitution component of a hybrid machine
translation system.

We reported on two different approaches, the first
using a binary classifier learned from annotated data,
and the second using feature weights tuned with
MERT. Both systems achieved improved automatic
metrics’ scores on the WMT12 “newstest2012” test
set for the language pair English→German.

Future work will have to investigate ways how to
achieve a closer integration of the individual base-
line translations. This might be done by also taking
into account reordering of the linguistic phrases as
shown in the tree structures. We will also need to
examine the differences between the classifier and
MERT approach, to see whether we can integrate
them to improve the selection process even further.

Also, we have to further evaluate the machine
learning performance via, e.g., cross-validation-
based tuning, to improve the prediction rate of the
classifier model. We intend to explore other machine
learning techniques such as SVMs as well.

Acknowledgments

This work has been funded under the Seventh
Framework Programme for Research and Techno-
logical Development of the European Commission
through the T4ME contract (grant agreement no.:
249119). It was also supported by the EuroMatrix-
Plus project (IST-231720). We are grateful to the
anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback.
Special thanks go to Hervé Saint-Amand for help
with fixing the automated metrics scores.

315



References
Vera Aleksic and Gregor Thurmair. 2011. Personal

Translator at WMT 2011. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
303–308, Edinburgh, Scotland, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Juan A. Alonso and Gregor Thurmair. 2003. The Com-
prendium Translator System. In Proceedings of the
Ninth Machine Translation Summit.

Loı̈c Barrault. 2010. MANY : Open Source Machine
Translation System Combination. Prague Bulletin
of Mathematical Linguistics, Special Issue on Open
Source Tools for Machine Translation, 93:147–155,
January.

L. Breiman, J. Friedman, R. Olshen, and C. Stone. 1984.
Classification and Regression Trees. Wadsworth and
Brooks, Monterey, CA.

Christian Federmann and Sabine Hunsicker. 2011.
Stochastic parse tree selection for an existing rbmt sys-
tem. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine Translation, pages 351–357, Edin-
burgh, Scotland, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Christian Federmann, Andreas Eisele, Yu Chen, Sabine
Hunsicker, Jia Xu, and Hans Uszkoreit. 2010. Fur-
ther experiments with shallow hybrid mt systems. In
Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation and MetricsMATR, pages 77–81,
Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Christian Federmann. 2010. Appraise: An Open-Source
Toolkit for Manual Phrase-Based Evaluation of Trans-
lations. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair),
Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani,
Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, Mike Rosner, and Daniel
Tapias, editors, Proceedings of the Seventh Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta, May. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA).

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source
Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL Demo and Poster Sessions, pages
177–180. Association for Computational Linguistics,
June.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the
MT Summit 2005.

Zhifei Li, Chris Callison-Burch, Chris Dyer, Sanjeev
Khudanpur, Lane Schwartz, Wren Thornton, Jonathan

Weese, and Omar Zaidan. 2009. Joshua: An Open
Source Toolkit for Parsing-Based Machine Transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine Translation, pages 135–139, Athens,
Greece, March. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Evgeny Matusov, Nicola Ueffing, and Hermann Ney.
2006. Computing Consensus Translation from Multi-
ple Machine Translation Systems Using Enhanced Hy-
potheses Alignment. In Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 33–40, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, April. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A Systematic
Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment Models.
Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51, March.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2001. Bleu: a Method for Automatic Eval-
uation of Machine Translation. IBM Research Report
RC22176(W0109-022), IBM.

F. Rosenblatt. 1958. The Perceptron: A Probabilistic
Model for Information Storage and Organization in the
Brain. Psychological Review, 65:386–408.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-Speech Tag-
ging Using Decision Trees. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on New Methods in Language
Processing, Manchester, UK.

Toby Segaran. 2007. Programming Collective In-
telligence: Building Smart Web 2.0 Applications.
O’Reilly, Beijing.

Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, Lin-
nea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A Study of
Translation Edit Rate with Targeted Human Annota-
tion. In Proceedings of the Conference of the Associ-
ation for Machine Translation in the Americas, pages
223–231.

Matthew Snover, Nitin Madnani, Bonnie Dorr, and
Richard Schwartz. 2009. Fluency, Adequacy, or
HTER? Exploring Different Human Judgments with
a Tunable MT Metric. In Proceedings of the Fourth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation at the
12th Meeting of the European Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (EACL-2009),
Athens, Greece, March.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - An Extensible Lan-
guage Modeling Toolkit. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Spoken Language Processing,
pages 257–286, November.

V. N. Vapnik. 1995. The Nature of Statistical Learning
Theory. Springer, New York.

Omar F. Zaidan. 2009. Z-MERT: A fully configurable
open source tool for minimum error rate training of
machine translation systems. The Prague Bulletin of
Mathematical Linguistics, 91:79–88, January.

316


