










































DFKI's SMT System for WMT 2012


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 382–387,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

DFKI’s SMT System for WMT 2012

David Vilar
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI GmbH)

Language Technology Lab
Berlin, Germany

david.vilar@dfki.de

Abstract

We describe DFKI’s statistical based submis-
sion to the 2012 WMT evaluation. The sub-
mission is based on the freely available ma-
chine translation toolkit Jane, which supports
phrase-based and hierarchical phrase-based
translation models. Different setups have been
tested and combined using a sentence selec-
tion method.

1 Introduction

In this paper we present DFKI’s submission for
the 2012 MT shared task based on statistical ap-
proaches. We use a variety of phrase-based and hi-
erarchical phrase-based translation systems with dif-
ferent configurations and enhancements and com-
pare their performance. The output of the systems
are later combined using a sentence selection mech-
anism. Somewhat disappointingly the sentence se-
lection hardly improves over the best single system.

DFKI participated in the German to English and
English to German translation tasks. Technical
problems however hindered a more complete system
for this last translation direction.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 re-
ports on the different single systems that we built for
this shared task. Section 3 describes the sentence se-
lection mechanism used for combining the output of
the different systems. Section 4 concludes the paper.

2 Single Systems

For all our setups we used the Jane toolkit (Vi-
lar et al., 2010a), which in its current version sup-

ports both phrase-based and hierarchical phrase-
based translation models. In this Section we present
the different settings that we used for the task.

The bilingual training data used for training all
systems was the combination of the provided Eu-
roparl and News data. We also used two baseline 4-
gram language models trained on the same Europarl
training data and on the enhanced News Commen-
tary monolingual training data. The newstest2010
dataset was used for optimization of the systems.

2.1 Phrase-based System
The first system is a baseline phrase-based system
trained on the available bilingual training data. Word
alignments is trained using GIZA++ (Och and Ney,
2003), phrase extraction is performed with Jane us-
ing standard settings, i.e. maximum source phrase
length 6, maximum target phrase length 12, count
features, etc. Consult the Jane documentation for
more details. For reordering the standard distance-
based reordering model is computed. Scaling factors
are trained using MERT on n-best lists.

2.1.1 Verb reorderings
Following (Popović and Ney, 2006), for German

to English translation, we perform verb reordering
by first POS-tagging the source sentence and after-
wards applying hand-defined rules. This includes
rules for reordering verbs in subordinate clauses and
participles.

2.1.2 Moore LM
Moore and Lewis (2010) propose a method for

filtering large quantities of out-of-domain language-
model training data by comparing the cross-entropy

382



of an in-domain language model and an out-of-
domain language model trained on a random sam-
pling of the data. We followed this approach to filter
the news-crawl corpora provided the organizers. By
experimenting on the development set we decided
to use a 4-gram language model trained on 15M fil-
tered sentences (the original data comprising over
30M sentences).

2.2 Hierarchical System
We also trained a hierarchical system on the same
data as the phrase-based system, and also tried the
additional language model trained according to Sec-
tion 2.1.2, as well as the verb reorderings described
in Section 2.1.1.

2.2.1 Poor Man’s Syntax
Vilar et al. (2010b) propose a “syntax-based” ap-

proach similar to (Venugopal et al., 2009), but us-
ing automatic clustering methods instead of linguis-
tic parsing for defining the non-terminals used in the
resulting grammar. The main idea of the method is
to cluster the words (mimicking the concept of Part-
of-Speech tagging), performing a phrase extraction
pass using the word classes instead of the actual
words and performing another clustering on the
phrase level (corresponding to the linguistic classes
in a parse tree).

2.2.2 Lightly-Supervised Training
Huck et al. (2011) propose to augment the mono-

lingual training data by translating available addi-
tional monolingual data with an existing translation
system. We adapt this approach by translating the
data selected according to Section 2.1.2 with the
phrase-based translation system described in Sec-
tion 2.1, and use this additional data to expand the
bilingual data available for training the hierarchical
phrase-based system.1

2.3 Experimental Results
Table 1 shows the results obtained for the German
to English translation direction on the newstest2011
dataset. The baseline phrase-based system obtains a

1The decision of which system to use to produce the addi-
tional training material follows mainly a practical reason. As
the hierarchical model is more costly to train and at decoding
time, we chose the phrase-based system as the generating sys-
tem.

BLEU score of 18.2%. The verb reorderings achieve
an improvement of 0.6% BLEU, and adding the ad-
ditional language model obtains an additional 1.6%
BLEU improvement.

The hierarchical system baseline achieves a bet-
ter BLEU score than the baseline PBT system, and
is comparable to the PBT system with additional re-
orderings. In fact, adding the verb reorderings to
the hierarchical system slightly degrades its perfor-
mance. This indicates that the hierarchical model is
able to reflect the verb reorderings necessary for this
translation direction. Adding the bigger language
model of Section 2.1.2 also obtains a nice improve-
ment of 1.4% BLEU for this system. On the other
hand and somewhat disappointingly, the lightly su-
pervised training and the poor man’s syntax ap-
proach are not able to improve translation quality.

For the English to German translation direction
we encountered some technical problems, and we
were not able to perform as many experiments as for
the opposite direction. The results are shown in Ta-
ble 2 and show similar trends as for the German to
English direction, except that the hierarchical sys-
tem in this case does not outperform the PBT base-
line.

3 Sentence Selection

In this section we will describe the system combi-
nation method based on sentence selection that we
used for combining the output of the systems de-
scribed in Section 2. This approach was tried suc-
cessfully in (Vilar et al., 2011).

We use a log-linear model for computing the
scores of the different translation hypotheses, gen-
erated by all the systems described in Section 2, i.e.
those listed in Tables 1 and 2. The model scaling
factors are computed using a standard MERT run
on the newstest2011 dataset, optimizing for BLEU.
This is comparable to the usual approach used for
rescoring n-best lists generated by a single system,
and has been used previously for sentence selection
purposes (see (Hildebrand and Vogel, 2008) which
uses a very similar approach to our own). Note that
no system dependent features like translation prob-
abilities were computed, as we wanted to keep the
system general.

We will list the features we compute for each of

383



System BLEU[%]

PBT Baseline 18.2
PBT + Reordering 18.8
PBT + Reordering + Moore LM 20.4
Hierarchical Baseline 18.7
Hierarchical + Moore LM 20.1
Hierarchical + Moore LM + Lightly Supervised 19.8
Poor Man’s Syntax 18.6
Hierarchical + Reordering 18.5

Table 1: Translation results for the different single systems, German to English.

System BLEU[%]

PBT Baseline 12.4
Hierarchical Baseline 11.6
Hierarchical + Moore LM 13.1
Poor Man’s Syntax 11.6

Table 2: Translation results for the different single systems, English to German

the systems. We have used features that try to focus
on characteristics that humans may use to evaluate a
system.

3.1 Cross System BLEU

BLEU was introduced in (Papineni et al., 2002)
and it has been shown to have a high correlation
with human judgement. In spite of its shortcom-
ings (Callison-Burch et al., 2006), it has been con-
sidered the standard automatic measure in the devel-
opment of SMT systems (with new measures being
added to it, but not substituting it, see for e.g. (Cer
et al., 2010)).

Of course, the main problem of using the BLEU
score as a feature for sentence selection in a real-
life scenario is that we do not have the references
available. We overcame this issue by generating
a custom set of references for each system, using
the other systems as gold translations. This is of
course inexact, but n-grams that appear on the out-
put of different systems can be expected to be more
probable to be correct, and BLEU calculated this
way gives us a measure of this agreement. This ap-
proach can be considered related to n-gram poste-
riors (Zens and Ney, 2006) or minimum Bayes risk
decoding (e.g. (Ehling et al., 2007)) in the context of

n-best rescoring, but applied without prior weight-
ing (unavailable directly) and more focused on the
evaluation interpretation.

We generated two features based on this idea.
The first one is computed at the system level, i.e. it
is the same for each sentence produced by a sys-
tem and serves as a kind of prior weight similar
to the one used in other system combination meth-
ods (e.g. (Matusov et al., 2008)). The other feature
was computed at the sentence level. For this we used
the smoothed version of BLEU proposed in (Lin and
Och, 2004), again using the output of the rest of
the systems as pseudo-reference. As optimization
on BLEU often tends to generate short translations,
we also include a word penalty feature.

3.2 Error Analysis Features

It is safe to assume that a human judge will try
to choose those translations which contain the least
amount of errors, both in terms of content and gram-
maticality. A classification of errors for machine
translation systems has been proposed in (Vilar et
al., 2006), and (Popović and Ney, 2011) presents
how to compute a subset of these error categories au-
tomatically. The basic idea is to extend the familiar
Word Error Rate (WER) and Position independent

384



word Error Rate (PER) measures on word and base-
form2 levels to identify the different kind of errors.
For our system we included following features:

Extra Word Errors (EXTer) Extra words in the
hypothesis not present in the references.

Inflection Errors (hINFer) Words with wrong in-
flection. Computed comparing word-level er-
rors and base-form-level errors.

Lexical Errors (hLEXer) Wrong lexical choices
in the hypothesis with respect to the references.

Reordering Errors (hRer) Wrong word order in
the hypothesis.

Missing Words (MISer) Words present in the ref-
erence that are missing in the hypothesis.

All these features are computed using the open
source Hjerson3 tool (Popović, 2011), which also
outputs the standard WER metric, which we added
as an additional feature.

As was the case in Section 3.1, for computing
these measures we do not have a reference available,
and thus we use the rest of the systems as pseudo-
references. This has the interesting effect that some
“errors” are actually beneficial for the performance
of the system. For example, it is known that sys-
tems optimised on the BLEU metric tend to produce
short hypotheses. In this sense, the extra words con-
sidered as errors by the EXTer measure may be ac-
tually beneficial for the overall performance of the
system.

3.3 IBM1 Scores

IBM1-like scores on the sentence level are known to
perform well for the rescoring of n-best lists from
a single system (see e.g. (Hasan et al., 2007)). Ad-
ditionally, they have been shown in (Popovic et al.,
2011) to correlate well with human judgement for
evaluation purposes. We thus include them as addi-
tional features.

2Computed using the TreeTagger tool (http://www.ims.uni-
stuttgart.de/projekte/corplex/TreeTagger/)

3The abbreviations for the features are taken over directly
from the output of the tool.

De-En En-De

Best System 20.4 13.1
Worst System 18.2 11.6
Sentence Selection 20.9 13.3

Table 3: Sentence selection results

3.4 Additional Language Model

We used a 5-gram language model trained on the
whole news-crawl corpus as an additional model for
rescoring. We used a different language model as the
one described in Section 2.1.2 as not to favor those
systems that already included it at decoding time.

3.5 Experimental Results

The sentence selection improved a little bit over the
best single system for German to English transla-
tion, but hardly so for English to German, as shown
in Table 3. For English to German this can be due to
the small amount of systems that were available for
the sentence selection system. Note also that these
results are measured on the same corpus the system
was trained on, so we expect the improvement on
unseen test data to be even smaller. Nevertheless the
sentence selection system constituted our final sub-
mission for the MT task.

4 Conclusions

For this year’s evaluation DFKI used a statistical
system based around the Jane machine translation
toolkit (Vilar et al., 2010a), working in its two
modalities: phrase-based and hierarchical phrase-
based models. Different enhancements were tried
in addition to the baseline configuration: POS-based
verb reordering, monolingual data selection, poor
man’s syntax and lightly supervised training, with
mixed results.

A sentence selection mechanism has later been
applied in order to combine the output of the dif-
ferent configurations. Although encouraging results
had been obtained in (Vilar et al., 2011), for this task
we found only a small improvement. This may be
due to the strong similarity of the systems, as they
are basically trained on the same data. In (Vilar et
al., 2011) the training data was varied across the sys-
tems, which may have produced a bigger variety in

385



the translation outputs that can be of advantage for
the selection mechanism. This is an issue that should
be explored in more detail for further work.

We also plan to do a comparison with system
combination approaches where new hypotheses can
be generated (instead of selecting one from a pre-
defined set), and study under which conditions each
approach is more suited than the other.

5 Acknowledgements

This work was done with the support of the
TaraXŰ Project4, financed by TSB Technologies-
tiftung Berlin-Zukunftsfonds Berlin, co-financed by
the European Union-European fund for regional de-
velopment.

References

Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and Philipp
Koehn. 2006. Re-evaluating the Role of Bleu in
Machine Translation Research. In Proc. of the 11th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 249–256,
Trento, Italy, April.

Daniel Cer, Christopher D. Manning, and Daniel Juraf-
sky. 2010. The best lexical metric for phrase-based
statistical mt system optimization. In Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, HLT ’10, pages 555–563,
Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Nicola Ehling, Richard Zens, and Hermann Ney. 2007.
Minimum Bayes risk decoding for BLEU. In Annual
Meeting of the Assoc. for Computational Linguistics,
pages 101–104, Prague, Czech Republic, June.

Saša Hasan, Richard Zens, and Hermann Ney. 2007. Are
very large N-best lists useful for SMT? In Human
Language Technology Conf. / North American Chap-
ter of the Assoc. for Computational Linguistics Annual
Meeting, pages 57–60, Rochester, NY, April. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

A.S. Hildebrand and S. Vogel. 2008. Combination of
machine translation systems via hypothesis selection
from combined n-best lists. In MT at work: Proc. of
the Eighth Conference of the Association for Machine
Translation in the Americas, pages 254–261.

Matthias Huck, David Vilar, Daniel Stein, and Hermann
Ney. 2011. Lightly-Supervised Training for Hier-
archical Phrase-Based Machine Translation. In The
4http://taraxu.dfki.de

EMNLP 2011 Workshop on Unsupervised Learning in
NLP, Edinburgh, UK, July.

Chin-Yew Lin and Franz Josef Och. 2004. ORANGE:
a Method for Evaluating Automatic Evaluation Met-
rics for Machine Translation. In Proc. of the 20th in-
ternational conference on Computational Linguistics,
COLING ’04, Geneva, Switzerland.

Evgeny Matusov, Gregor Leusch, Rafael E. Banchs,
Nicola Bertoldi, Daniel Dechelotte, Marcello Fed-
erico, Muntsin Kolss, Young-Suk Lee, Jose B. Marino,
Matthias Paulik, Salim Roukos, Holger Schwenk,
and Hermann Ney. 2008. System combination for
machine translation of spoken and written language.
IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language
Processing, 16(7):1222–1237, September.

R.C. Moore and W. Lewis. 2010. Intelligent selection of
language model training data. In Proceedings of the
ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers, pages 220–224.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A Systematic
Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment Models.
Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51, March.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a Method for Automatic Eval-
uation of Machine Translation. In Proc. of the 41st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 311–318, Philadelphia, Pennsylva-
nia, USA, July.

Maja Popović and Hermann Ney. 2006. POS-based word
reorderings for statistical machine translation. In In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, pages 1278–1283, Genoa, Italy, May.

Maja Popović and Hermann Ney. 2011. Towards Au-
tomatic Error Analysis of Machine Translation Out-
put. Computational Linguistics, 37(4):657–688, De-
cember.

Maja Popovic, David Vilar, Eleftherios Avramidis, and
Aljoscha Burchardt. 2011. Evaluation without ref-
erences: Ibm1 scores as evaluation metrics. In Proc.
of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation, pages 99–103. Association for Computational
Linguistics, July.

Maja Popović. 2011. Hjerson: An Open Source Tool
for Automatic Error Classification of Machine Trans-
lation Output. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical
Linguistics, pages 59–68.

Ashish Venugopal, Andreas Zollmann, Noah A. Smith,
and Stephan Vogel. 2009. Preference Grammars:
Softening Syntactic Constraints to Improve Statisti-
cal Machine Translation. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 236–244, Boulder,
Colorado, USA, June.

386



David Vilar, Jia Xu, Luis Fernando D’Haro, and Her-
mann Ney. 2006. Error Analysis of Machine Transla-
tion Output. In International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, pages 697–702, Genoa,
Italy, May.

David Vilar, Daniel Stein, Matthias Huck, and Hermann
Ney. 2010a. Jane: Open Source Hierarchical Transla-
tion, Extended with Reordering and Lexicon Models.
In Proc. of the Joint Fifth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation and MetricsMATR, pages 262–270,
Uppsala, Sweden, July.

David Vilar, Daniel Stein, Stephan Peitz, and Hermann
Ney. 2010b. If I Only Had a Parser: Poor Man’s
Syntax for Hierarchical Machine Translation. In Inter-
national Workshop on Spoken Language Translation,
pages 345–352, Paris, France, December.

David Vilar, Eleftherios Avramidis, Maja Popović, and
Sabine Hunsicker. 2011. Dfki’s sc and mt submis-
sions to iwslt 2011. In International Workshop on Spo-
ken Language Translation, San Francisco, CA, USA,
December.

R. Zens and H. Ney. 2006. N-gram Posterior Proba-
bilities for Statistical Machine Translation. In Human
Language Technology Conf. / North American Chap-
ter of the Assoc. for Computational Linguistics Annual
Meeting (HLT-NAACL), Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 72–77, New York City, June.

387


