



















































An Approach to Discourse Parsing using Sangati and Rhetorical Structure Theory


Proceedings of the Workshop on Machine Translation and Parsing in Indian Languages (MTPIL-2012), pages 73–82,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

An Approach to Discourse Parsing using sangati and 
Rhetorical Structure Theory  

Subalalitha C N, Ranjani Parthasarathi 
Dept of IST, 

Anna University, Chennai – 600 025  
subalalitha@gmail.com, rp@annauniv.edu  

ABSTRACT 

Sanskrit literature has many nuggets that could be applied to modern linguistic applications. One 
such nugget is the concept of sangati. Sangati expresses continuity and proper positioning of 
piece of text which is similar to the modern Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST). We propose two 
discourse parsers namely sangati based discourse parser and RST-Sangati  based discourse 
parser. The proposed discourse parsers are extensions of the existing RST based discourse parser. 
We have used Naive Bayes probabilistic classifier for discourse relation and sangati labelling. 
We have tested our discourse parsers using 500 Tamil tourism domain specific documents and 21 
RST- Discourse Tree (RST-DT) English documents. We have compared the performance of both 
the proposed discourse parsers and observed that when RST and sangati are used in union,  the 
performance of the discourse parser is  better. Also, we have done a performance comparison 
with two existing discourse parsers and have shown better performance.  

Keywords: sangati, Discourse parser, Rhetorical Structure Theory, Universal Networking 
Language 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

73



1. Introduction 

With the massive increase in documents in World Wide Web (WWW), the knowledge 
present in those documents needs to be managed properly. Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) is 
a well known text representation technique that represents the knowledge present in the text using 
semantic relations known as discourse relations (Mann et al, 1988).  RST captures the coherence 
between the text using the discourse relations. Similar to RST, in Sanskrit literature, a concept 
known as sangati exists which expresses continuity between texts. Using sangati and RST, in 
this paper, we propose two discourse parsers namely, sangati based discourse parser and RST-
Sangati based discourse parser. Both the discourse parsers are extensions of our previous work 
on RST based discourse parser (Subalalitha et al, 2011).  Consequently, we have compared RST 
and sangati and have observed that RST and sangati complement each other and provide better 
performance when used together.  

In RST, given a text document, a graphical structure/tree structure is constructed, where 
nodes represent texts and edges represent the discourse relations. The text connected by discourse 
relations falls into two categories namely Nucleus and Satellites. Nucleus expresses the salient 
part of the text, whereas the satellite contains the additional information about the nucleus. The 
Nucleus, Satellite and the discourse relation form the smallest discourse unit known as 
Elementary Discourse Unit (EDU). We denote the pattern or the structure formed by a nucleus, 
satellite and the discourse relation, as NRS sequence in this paper. Figure 1 shows the Nucleus, 
Satellite and the discourse relation connecting them (NRS sequence) for an English sentence 
given in Example 1. 

Example 1: If you come to my school tomorrow, you can meet my teacher 

 

FIGURE 1- NRS sequence for Example 1    

 On the other hand, sangatis are defined as the content that induces the desire to know 
what is being said next in text (Madhava Charya, 1989). Sangatis are typically used in the 
explanation of s̄tra -based texts. s̄tras express content in crisp, short statements;  adhikaran̅a 
(sub-topic) is the organization of a set of related s̄tras. A set of adhikaran̅as form a p̄da 
(section), and a set of p̄das form an adhȳya (chapter). s̄tras being cryptic in nature need to be 
explained. The explanation is normally organized at the level of adhikaran̅a. An adhikaran̅a is 
said to have five components, namely, subject of discussion, doubt/ambiguity in understanding 
the subject, sangati for this discussion, opponent’s view and the proponent’s (proposed) view.  
Of these, sangati is explained at various levels. At the s̄tra level in terms of how this s̄tra  is 
related to the previous s̄tra; at the adhikaran̅a level as to how this s̄tra is relevant to the 
adhikaran̅a, at the p̄da level as to how it is relevant to that p̄da and so on. Similarly, sangati is 
discussed between adhikaran̅as, and between p̄das as well. Examples of sangatis include 
upodgh̄ta, apav̄da, ̄ḳepa and pr̄sangika. Figure 2 illustrates, upodgata sangati describing 
text on cancer. upodgh̄ta links the introductory part of any text, to its respective explanatory 
part of the text.  

74



 

 

FIGURE 2-Usage of upodgh̄ta sangati 

 This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the work related to discourse 
parsing. Section 3 illustrates the power of sangatis in representing text and about the proposed 
sangati based discourse parser; explains the comparison of RST and sangati and describes the 
RST-Sangati based discourse parser. Section 4 provides the evaluation of the discourse parsers. 
Conclusions and reference section follow section 4.  

2 Related Work 

 Many techniques have been proposed for discourse parsing. Marcu et have come up 
with an unsupervised approach that identifies five discourse relations namely, Contrast, 
Explanation, Evidence, Condition and Elaboration al (Marcu et al, 2002).  They have used 
discourse markers and frequently co-occurring word pairs to identify the discourse relations. 
Hassan et al have designed a rule based discourse parser for Arabic language and they have used 
cues to identify the discourse relations (Hassan et al, 2008). Using cue phrases, many discourse 
parsing techniques have been proposed in various languages namely, Mandarin (Songren, 1985), 
Spanish (Lorraine, 1986),  Thai (Sithipoun et al, 2010), and Bengali (Dipankar Das et al, 2010). 
Recently, Hugo Hernault et al have come up with a discourse parser named HILDA that labels 
discourse relations using Support Vector Machines (SVM) (Hernault et al, 2010). It has also been 
claimed that HILDA is computationally more efficient than the earlier techniques on discourse 
parsing proposed by Reitter (Reitter, 2003) Baldridge et al (Baldridge et al, 2005). HILDA uses 
lexical and syntactic features trained by the SVM classifier. SVM has been used both as a binary 
classifier as well as a multi class classifier for discourse parsing.  

 As stated previously, the discourse parser discussed in this paper is the extension of our 
previous work on language independent discourse structure framework using Universal 
Networking Language (UNL) (Subalalitha et al, 2011). UNL is a computer language that enables 
computers to process information and knowledge across the language barriers. Given a sentence, 
UNL represents it as graph, with nodes as concepts and UNL relations as edges which is known 
as Enconversion (Enconversion Specifications, 2009). There are 46 UNL relations identified by 
UNDL. Obj (Object), agt (Agent), plc (Place) are few UNL relations. For instance, for the 
sentence shown in Example 2, the agent concept, “Ram (iof>person)” and the verb concept, “kill 
(icl> action)” are connected by the UNL relation, “agt” and the object concept, “Ravana 
(iof> person)” is connected to the verb concept by the UNL relation, “obj”. 

Example 2: Ram killed Ravana  

 In the existing RST based discourse parser, the NRS sequences are identified by 
exploring the similarities that exist between UNL relations and discourse relations relations 
(Subalalitha et al, 2011). Also by using UNL, the discourse structure formed, becomes language 
independent which is first of its kind. This paper proposes a similar language independent 
discourse parser that identifies sangatis using UNL. The details of sangatis and how they are 
used to build a discourse structure is discussed in the next section.  

75



3.  RST-Sangati: A comparison: 

 While comparing RST based discourse relations with sangati, both representations are 
unique in their own way.  Table 1 shows the list of sangatis considered along with their English 
meaning and explanation. Also, discourse relations that are similar and equivalent are listed. Like 
discourse relations certain sangatis are multi nuclear which is mentioned in the table. 

S.No Sangati 
Equivalent and Similar Discourse Relations 

Equivalent 

Discourse 
Relation 

Similar 

Discourse 
Relation 

Explanation 

1 
Upodgh̄ta 
( Introduction) 

Preparation - 
upodgh̄ta sangati gives an 
introduction of the text. 
Preparation discourse relation 
prepares the reader to expect and 
interpret the text to be presented. 

2 
apav̄da 
( Exception) 
(multi nuclear) 

- Contrast 
apav̄da sangati  indicates an 
exceptional Scenario.  
Contrast discourse  relation may 
indicate an exceptional scenario but 
not always 

3 
̄ḳepa 
( Objection) 
(multi nuclear) 

- Contrast 
̄ḳepa sangati  indicates an 
objectional  statement.  
Contrast discourse  relation may 
indicate an objectionable statement but 
not always 

4 
pr̄sangika 
( Related) 
(multi nuclear) 

- - 
pr̄sangika  is a unique sangati and 
does not have an equivalent or similar 
discourse relation 

5 
utt̄na 
( Arises) 
(multi nuclear) 

- 

 

Antithesis 
utt̄na sangati  indicates a new issue 
related to the text.  
Antithesis  discourse  relation may 
indicate a new issue but not always 

6 
sthiri̅karạa 
( Strengthen) - Justification 

sthiri̅karạa sangati  indicates a 
strengthening  text supporting the topic 
in focus new issue related to the text.  
Justification  discourse  relation may 
indicate a supporting reasons but the 
supporting reason may not be  a 
strengthening reasoning  always 

7 ̄tideś́ika 
( Transference) 
(multi nuclear) 

- - 
̄tideś́ika is a unique sangati and does 
not have a similar or equivalent 
discourse relation. 

8 pratyavasthana 
( Re-instate) - -  

pratyavasthana is a unique sangati and 
does not have a similar or equivalent 
discourse relation. 

76



TABLE 1- A comparison between sangatis and Discourse Relations 

It can be observed from the Table 1 that, most of sangatis are unique and specific to a 
scenario. A discourse relation can be mapped to one more scenarios. For instance, the scenario 
linked by an Elaboration discourse relation may be an explanation, additional information or it 
may be a strengthening statement to the scenario.  Whereas, distinct sangatis  are available to 
handle the different scenarios handled by the  Elaboration discourse relation. For instance, if the 
additional information of a scenario is just an added information but related to the scenario, it can 
be linked by pra̅sȧgika sangathi. If the explanatory text denotes an example or a counter 
example, it can be linked by ḍ̣̣anta and pratyudharạa  sangatis. If the explanatory text 
describes the speciality of the scenario, it can be linked by viśẹa  sangati. On the other side, there 
are unique RST based discourse relations as well.  This paper considers the list of RST based 
discourse relations considered by Mann et al (1988).  It is observed that, there are many discourse 
relations that handle various scenarios which is not possible with sangatis. Concession, 
Evaluation, Background are some of the unique discourse relations. Also apart from the list of 
sangatis discussed here, there are more number of sangatis that need to be explored. For clausal 
level discourse analysis, discourse relations are more effective than sangatis. Whereas, sangatis 
go well beyond clause level. So for an efficient and complete discourse parsing, discourse 
relations and sangatis need to be used in union. The next section discusses how these sangatis are 
identified.   

3. 2 Identifying Sangatis: 

 The sangati based discourse parser makes use of only UNL to identify the sangatis 
whereas, the RST-Sangati  based discourse parser makes use of  both UNL and RST based 
discourse relations to identify sangatis. This section illustrates about the sangati based discourse 
parser.  

3.2.1 Sangati Based Discourse Parser: 

           The UNL components such as semantic constraints and UNL relations are used in 
combination to identify the sangatis. This is similar to the identification of RST based discourse 
relations done in the existing work (Subalalitha et al, 2011). For example, in the sentences given 

9 ḍ̣̣anta  
( Example) 

- Elaboration 
ḍ̣̣anta sangati  indicates an example 
Scenario  
Elaboration  discourse  relation may 
indicate an example scenario but not 
always. 

10 
pratyudharạa  
(Counter 
Example) 

- Contrast 
pratyudharạa sangati  indicates an 
counter  example scenario  
Contrast discourse relation may 
indicate a counter example scenario 
but not always. 

11 
Anantara 
(Follows) 
(multi nuclear) 

Sequence - 
anantara sangati links the texts in 
sequence similar to the Sequence 
discourse relation 

12 
viśẹa  
(Special Case) 

- 

 

Elaboration 
viśẹa sangati  explains a speciality.  
Elaboration discourse relation may 
describe a specialty but not always. 

77



in the Example 3, the pra̅sȧgika sangathi is identified from the UNL relations and UNL concept 
similarity that exists between the UNL graphs constructed for each sentence. 

Example 3: I went to Chennai last Friday. Travelling to Chennai during Fridays is terrific.  

 The rules for identifying sangatis using UNL components are given in Table 2. The 
rules provide the seed feature set for seven sangatis. The additional features for each sangati are 
learnt using Naive Bayes Probabilistic classifier whose details is given in the next section. 

S.No. Sangati Rules 
1 upaj̄vya Presence of iof, nam and met  UNL relations in Satellite along with UNL 

concept/ semantic constraint similarity between Nucleus and Satellite UNL 
graphs  

2 ̄tideś́ika  UNL graph similarity between the nuclei in terms of concepts, except the 
main subject. 

3 anantara Presence of Seq UNL relation in one of the nuclei UNL graphs. Also used 
as default relation for tourism documents. 

4 viśẹa Presence of Cue such as “speciality”, “uniqueness” in satellite UNL 
graph+ UNL relation “pos” in nucleus UNL graph. 

5 pra̅sȧgika Presence of identical UNL relations and with UNL concept/ semantic 
constraint similarity between two nuclei UNL graphs.  

6 upodgh̄ta Presence of UNL concept that is connected to the verb frequently in the 
document UNL graph which becomes the nucleus and the rest of the text 
becomes the satellite. 

7 ḍ̣̣anta Presence of iof UNL relation in the UNL graphs in the satellite UNL 
graphs  along with UNL concept/ semantic constraint similarity between 
the nucleus and satellite UNL graphs. 

TABLE 2- Rules for identifying sangatis using UNL  

3.2.2 Learning with Naïve Bayes Probabilistic classification 

 For a set of text documents, sangati representation of the texts is constructed using the 
seed features listed in Table 2, which forms the training set. Learning of new features using 
Naive bayes probabilistic classifier is discussed below. For a sangati Si, the nuclei and satellites 
connected by it are used as the context. Let Sedu denote the set of sangatis listed in table 2. 

a) For each sangati Siϵ Sedu, all the nuclei sub graphs connected by Si are extracted from the 
training set.  

b) The nuclei sub graphs extracted at step 1 contains a set of UNL relations in them. These 
UNL relations are considered as the context window from which the additional features 
could be learnt. For instance, if m number of nuclei sub graphs is extracted for sangati 
Si, m number of series of UNL relations is extracted. These series indicate possible 
additional features that could signal sangati Si apart from the seed feature(s) listed in 
table 2.  

c) Let us denote the additional features as fi, where i ranges from 0 to m. Bayesian 
probabilities P (fi/Si )  are computed for all features.     

d) Total Probability,                                               and the average probability , 

Probavg =Probtot /m are calculated. 


mi

i

SifiP
0

tot )/(Prob

78



e) The features whose probabilities are more than the Probavg are chosen as additional 
features that could signal the sangati Si. 

f) In the testing phase, the classifier tries to match the features present in the nuclei sub 
graphs with the seed features and the additional features learnt and identify the sangati. 

3.3 RST-Sangati   Based Discourse Parser 

 The RST-Sangati based discourse parser identifies both sangatis and RST based 
discourse relations using UNL and RST.  The rules for identifying sangatis using UNL and RST 
are given in Table 3. 

S 
No 

Sangati Rules 

1 upaj̄vya Presence of Elaboration and Means or Re-instate discourse relations in  the 
satellite UNL graph  along with UNL concept/ semantic constraint similarity 
between the nucleus and satellite UNL graphs. 

2 utt̄na Presence of Contrast and Antithesis discourse relations in NRS sequence 
along with UNL concept/ semantic constraint similarity. 

3 ̄tideś́ika  UNL graph similarity in terms of concepts, except the main subject concept 
between the nuclei UNL graphs. 

4 anantara Presence of Sequence discourse relation in one of the nucleus UNL graph. 
Also used as default relation for tourism documents. 

5 viśẹa Presence of Cue such as “speciality”, “uniqueness” in satellite UNL graph + 
UNL relation “pos” in nucleus UNL graph. 

6 pra̅sȧgika Presence of identical UNL/Discourse relations between the nuclei UNL 
graphs. 

7 upodgh̄ta Presence of UNL concept that is connected to the verb frequently in the 
document UNL graph which becomes the nucleus UNL graph and rest of the 
text becomes the satellite. 

8 ḍ̣̣anta Presence of Elaboration discourse relation in the satellite UNL graph along 
with UNL concept/ semantic constraint similarity between the nucleus and 
satellite UNL graphs. 

TABLE 3- Rules for identifying sangatis using RST and UNL 

Since the input documents are tourism domain specific, the rules also lean towards the 
same domain. Like sangati based discourse parser, these rules are used as seed feature set and 
more features for each sangati are learnt using Naive Bayes probabilistic learning. Finally, a 
language independent discourse structure using discourse relations and sangatis is given as 
output, which can be used as background for many NLP applications.  

4 Evaluation 

 We have tested our sangati based discourse parser and RST-Sangati   based discourse 
parser using 500 Tamil tourism domain documents as training data and freely available 21 RST-
Discourse Tree (RST-DT) files as test data. By using both Tamil and English text documents, we 
have shown the language independent quality of our discourse parsers. We have also made a 
comparison with RST based discourse parser. Table 4 lists the Precision, Recall and F-score of 
the RST, sangati and RST-Sangati discourse parsers.  

79



Factors RST based discourse 
parser 

Sangati based 
discourse parser 

RST-Sangati  based 
parser. 

Precision 91.19% 74.62% 96% 
Recall 68% 57.3% 87.99% 

F-score 79% 64.84% 93.36% 

TABLE 4 -Precision, Recall and F-score of RST, sangati and  RST-Sangati   discourse parser 

It can be seen that, the RST –Sangati based parser shows higher precision, recall and f-
score values compared to RST based discourse parser and sangati based discourse parser. This is 
due to the fact that in RST based discourse parser, the  complex coherent relations  beyond clause 
level is not captured b the RST based discourse relations  and similarly in sangati based discourse 
parser, the simple coherent relations at clausal and sentence level is not captured by sangatis . 
Also, it can be observed that the RST based discourse parser shows better performance than 
sangati based discourse parser. This is due to the expository texts used as the corpus where more 
RST based discourse relations are observed than sangatis. It can be seen that, the proposed RST-
Sangati   based discourse parser identifies only eight sangatis that are specific to tourism domain. 
Also, the proposed discourse parser provides a very basic text representation model which needs 
to be enhanced by analyzing various genres of texts containing arguments and stories. 

Conclusions  

  A discourse parser that identifies NRS sequences based on RST and sangati has been 
presented in this paper. sangatis as per Sanskrit literature expresses continuity between s̄tra 
based texts. Sangatis are similar to discourse relations that connect coherent parts of the text. 
sangatis can connect more complex discourse units which is difficult with discourse relations. 
We have proposed two discourse parsers namely sangati based discourse parser which identifies 
only sangatis and a RST-Sangati based discourse parser which identifies both RST based 
discourse relations and sangatis. The sangati based discourse parsers uses only UNL to identify 
sangatis whereas, the RST-Sangati based discourse parser uses both UNL and discourse relations 
to identify sangatis. It is observed that RST and sangati complement each other well so better 
performance is obtained when they are used together than when used alone. The discourse 
structure built by the proposed discourse parser can be a back bone for many NLP applications 
such as QA, IR and IE systems.  

References 

J. Baldridge and A. Lascarides (2005):. Probabilistic head-driven parsing for discourse 
structure. In Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Computational Natural Language 
Learning, 2005 volume 96, page 103. 

Cui, Songren (1985).. Comparing Structures of Essays in Chinese and English Mastres 
Thesis, U.C.L.A. 

Daniel Marcu and Abdessamad Echiha (2002).  . An Unsupervised Approach to Recognizing 
Discourse Relations In  Computational Linguistics (ACL), Philadelphia, pp. 368-375. 

Dipankar Das, Sivaji Bandyopadhyay (2010). Labeling Emotion in Bengali Blog Corpus-A 
fine Grained Tagging at Sentence Level In Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Asian 
Language Resources, pages 47–55.  

80



Enconverter Specifications,  UNL center, UNDL Foundation, 2009. 

Hassan I. Mathkour, Ameur A. Touir and Waleed A. Al-Sanea (2008). Parsing Arabic Texts 
Using Rhetorical Structure Theory. In Journal of Computer Science 4 (9): 713-720. 

Hugo Hernault, Helmut Prendinger. David A. duVerle, Mitsuru Ishizuka (2010).HILDA: A 
Discourse Parser Using Support Vector Machine Classification (2010). In Dialogue and 
Discourse 1(3) 1-33 doi: 10.5087/dad.2010.003. 

Kump Lorraine. Structuring Narrative text in a Second Language (1986). descriptive of 
Rhetoric and Grammar Phd Thesis,University of California Los Angeles. 
Madhava Charya (1989). Jaiminiya Nyaya Mala Vistara.  Chankhamba Sanskrit Pratishthan. 

Mann, W.C., & Thompson, S.A ( 1988 ). Rhetorical Structure Theory: Toward a functional 
theory of text organization. In Text (3). 243-281. 

D. Reitter (2003).Rhetorical Analysis with Rich-Feature Support Vector Models. 
Unpublished Master’s thesis, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany , 2003.  

Somnuk Sithipoun , Om sornil (2010).  Thai Rhetorical Structure Analysis. International 
Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,Vol. 7, No. 1. 

Subalalitha C.N and Ranjani Parthasarathi (2011). A Language Independent Rhetorical 
Structure Framework Using Universal Networking Language. Proceedings of fifth Indian 
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2011 page no-1427-1440. 

The Universal Networking Language (UNL) Specifications (2009),  UNL center, UNDL 
Foundation.  

 

 

 

81




