










































QA: from Turing Test to Intelligent Information Service


Proceedings of the Second CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference on Chinese Language Processing, page 1,
Tianjin, China, 20-21 DEC. 2012

QA: from Turing Test to Intelligent Information Service 

 
 

Xiaoyan Zhu 
Tsinghua University 

Beijing, China. 
 zxy-dcs@tsinghua.edu.cn 

 

Abstract 

 

In the history of Artificial Intelligence (AI), Turing Test, a question answering imitation game was proposed to 
determine whether the computer system has intelligence. It becomes the ultimate goal to answer all the natural 
language questions for generations of AI researchers. In the past century, AI changed tremendously from its the-
ories to its applications, while with this goal unchanged. Especially in the past 20 years, along with the develop-
ment of the Internet, computers have the ability to acquire, store and process huge volumes of data, which makes 
the AI-related techniques deeply involve themselves in the domain of intelligent information processing. On one 
hand, Question Answering develops in theories, models and methods with the combination of the large scale 
data processing. On the other hand, the next-generation information service engines are expected to integrate 
Question Answering as an important part to retrieve and display information, where knowledge is important for 
information accumulation, understanding and serving. This presentation will present the history and develop-
ment of the Question Answering, its related key technologies and applications in the background of big data and 
AI.  

QA: 从图灵测试到智能信息服务 
 
        图灵实验（Turing Test）可知,回答自然问题的能力有史以来就是衡量计算机系统是否具有
智能的基本标准。半个世纪以来，人工智能从理念到内容发生了巨大的变化，尤其是近 20 年
来随着互联网产业的发展，大规模数据获取和计算能力的提高使得人工智能的相关技术在智能

信息处理领域中得到了充分体现。 一方面，人工智能和大规模数据处理的结合，对于问答系
统在理论、模型和方法上都有了质的飞跃和发展，另一方面，在下一代信息服务引擎的发展理

念中，问答系统也成为信息获取与展现的重要手段，知识也成为网络信息积累与服务的重要支

撑。本报告将介绍问答系统的发展历史与现状，以及相关的关键技术与应用。 
 

About the Speaker 
Xiaoyan Zhu, professor, she got bachelor degree at University of Science and Technology Beijing in 
1982, master degree at Kobe University in 1987, and Ph. D. degree at Nagoya Institute of Technology, 
Japan in 1990. She is teaching at Tsinghua University since 1993. She is director of state key lab of 
intelligent technology and systems, director of Tsinghua-HP Joint research center and the director of 
Tsinghua-Waterloo Joint research center, Tsinghua University. She is International Research Chair 
holder of IDRC, Canada, from 2009. She was deputy head of Department of Computer Science and 
Technology, Tsinghua University from 2004-2007. Her research interests include intelligent infor-
mation processing, machine learning, natural language processing, query and answering system and 
bioinformatics. She has authored more than 100 peer-reviewed articles in leading international confer-
ences including SIGKDD, IJCAI, AAAI, ACL, ICDM, CIKM, COLING, and journals including Int. J. 
Medical Informatics, Bioinformatics, BMC Bioinformatics, Genome Biology and IEEE Trans. on 
SMC. 
 

1


