










































Building a Chinese Lexical Taxonomy


Proceedings of the Second CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference on Chinese Language Processing, pages 18–26,
Tianjin, China, 20-21 DEC. 2012

 

Building a Chinese Lexical Taxonomy 

Xiaopeng Bai, Nianwen Xue 
Department of Computer Science, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA 02453 

{xpbai, xuen}@brandeis.edu 
  

 
 

Abstract 

In this paper, we present a Chinese lexical 
taxonomy, a hierarchically organization of 
Chinese lexical classes of nouns, verbs and 
adjectives. We first describe the structure 
of this taxonomy and then present the 
methods we used to build it. The distinctive 
characteristics of this lexical taxonomy are: 
1) we use definition frame to describe each 
lexical class, as well as its members, 2) the 
lexical classes for nouns, verbs and 
adjectives are inter-connected. We also 
compare this taxonomy with the Chinese 
Proposition Bank, to look for possible 
ways to link these two independently 
developed language resources. 

1 Introduction 
A lexical semantic taxonomy is a hierarchical 
organization of lexical semantic classes. Such a 
taxonomy is a useful resource for Natural 
Language Processing, because it groups word 
senses into lexical semantic classes by their shared 
lexical meaning, and produces a finite set of lexical 
semantic classes. Since the lexical classes capture 
the shared meaning of individual senses, they can 
be used as a tagset to annotate words in a natural 
language corpus, which can then be used to train 
automatic lexical semantic classifiers. Compared 
with words sense disambiguation, where senses 
have to be defined for each word, classifying 
words based on their lexical classes is a more 
general task. The advantage is that there is no need 
to train classifiers for each individual word, as is 
typically the case for word sense disambiguation 
systems. 
    Building lexical semantic resources and systems 
has attracted much interest in the NLP and lexical 
semantics communities. (Picca et al., 2007, 
Ciaramita & Johnson, 2003) described a corpus 

annotated with the upper level synsets of WordNet 
(Fellbaum, 1998). (Gao et al, 2005) used lexical 
classes from Tongyici Cilin (Mei et al., 1983) for 
Chinese document retrieval, and (Tian et al, 2010) 
used the same resource to compute Chinese word 
similarity. One main drawback of these two lexical 
classification systems is that because the criteria 
for the lexical classification is not explicitly 
spelled out, when there is an out-of-vocabulary 
(OOV) sense, it is hard to determine its appropriate 
membership without going back to their original 
developers. Without explicit criteria, it is hard to 
ensure consistency when a new lexical taxonomy 
is established or an old one is extended. One 
desideratum in lexical taxonomy creation is 
consistency. Ideally, when a new word sense is put 
in taxonomy, different lexicographers/annotators 
should come up with the same class. This is also 
the biggest challenge in taxonomy/ontology 
development, and the key is to address this is to 
come up with concrete and explicit criteria that 
different lexicographers/annotators can follow so 
that there is no need to go back to the original 
creators every time a new word sense needs to be 
added to the taxonomy. 
    The rest of the article is organized as follows. In 
Section 2, we provide a brief review of related 
work. In Section 3, we present the structure and 
size of the current CLT as well as the corpus that is 
annotated with the lexical classes of the CLT. In 
Section 4, we show syntactic performances, 
semantic roles and selectional constraints are used 
to create the definition frame of each class. 
Comparison of CLT and Chinese Propbank (CPB) 
is performed in Section 5, and possible ways to 
link CLT to CPB are discussed in section 6. 

2 Related Work 
There have been several past efforts to produce 
(Chinese) lexical taxonomies aimed to provide 
lexical knowledge for NLP tasks (Chen, 1998; 
Chen, 2001; Wang etc., 2003).  (Wang et al, 2003) 

18



 

used lexical classes to describe word sense in 
SKCC (Semantic Knowledge Base of 
Contemporary Chinese), along with syntactic and 
argument structure features.  
  WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). Gather senses with 
similar lexical meaning according to one or more 
dictionaries, and the lexical classes (synset in WN) 
are generated based on the judgment of word sense 
similarity. The judgment of similarity between 
word senses is depend on either the sense 
definition in dictionary or the intuition of 
developer. Such method is easy to use, but could 
be suffered with inconsistency among sense 
definitions (from different dictionaries) and 
different developers/annotators. It doesn’t cost 
much at the initial stage of building taxonomy, but 
causes significant high cost to maintaining and 
expanding. 
  HowNet (Dong & Dong, 2006). HowNet uses 
“meaning primitives” (sememe in HN) as tagset to 
describe word senses, the computing of sense 
similarity and the generating of lexical classes can 
be automatically done. There is inconsistency 
problem encountered when adapting this method in 
such aspect: creating “meaning primitives” and 
expanding them in the future; selecting proper 
“meaning primitives” for defining word senses in 
consistent way. 
  As we argued in Section 1, a concrete definition 
for each class in a lexical taxonomy is required to 
ensure consistency. However, current Chinese 
lexical taxonomies generally do not provide such 
definitions. People have to create and extend their 
taxonomies by using dictionaries or the taxonomy 
made by other researchers, or by relying on their 
own intuition. Our work differs from others in that 
we use concrete linguistic features to define lexical 
classes. These class definitions can be used to 
extend the taxonomy by other researchers when 
new word senses need to be added to the taxonomy. 

3 Status of CLT 
In this section, we describe the structure and scale 
of the CLT taxonomy, as well as the corpus 
annotated with the lexical classes of this taxonomy. 

3.1 Structure of CLT 
CLT is a hierarchical structure formed by lexical 
classes, and each lexical class is a set of word 
senses that have shared lexical meaning and 

linguistic features. Currently we have three sub-
taxonomies for nouns, verbs and adjectives 
respectively. Each sub-taxonomy has one root 
class, which dominates any number of terminal and 
non-terminal lexical classes. A given class can 
have one parent, one or more sisters and one or 
more children. Terminal classes do not have 
children. Table 1 shows part of the verb taxonomy 
in CLT. 
1 自主变化 (self changing) 
1.1 过程 (process) 
――1.1.1 存现 (exist): 出土, 出现 
――1.1.2 位移 (move): 流入, 上升 
――1.1.3 变化 (transform): 消融, 变化 
1.2 状态 (status) 
――1.2.1 境遇 (situation) 
―――1.2.1.1 情绪 (emotion): 费心, 感恩 
―――1.2.1.2  生理状态 (physical situation): 打鼾, 
咳 
―――1.2.1.3 其他 (other): 见鬼, 失礼 
――1.2.2 自然现象 (natural phenomenon): 结冰, 降
温 
――1.2.3  一般状态 (circumstance): 无力, 作罢 
――1.2.4 运动 (motion): 摆动, 翻卷 
1.3 经历 (experience) 
――1.3.1 经历 (experience): 处身, 拘泥 
――1.3.2 感知意向 (attitude): 向往, 对得起 
――1.3.3 所有 (possess): 装有, 有着 
――1.3.4 影响 (influence): 震撼, 照耀 
――1.3.5 产生 (generate): 组成, 泛起 

Table 1: part of verb taxonomy 
 

  In table 1, node “1 自主变化 (self changing)” is a 
non-terminal class that has three children: “1.1 过
程 (process)”, “1.2 状态 (status)” and “1.3 经历 
(experience)”. These three classes are also non-
terminal classes. They are sisters that inherit all the 
features of their parent “1 自主变化  (self 
changing)”, and they also have some unique 
features of their own that distinguish themselves 
from one another. Classes “1.1.1 存现 (exist)”, 
“1.1.2 位移 (move)” and “1.1.3 变化 (transform)” 
are terminal classes, because they have no child, 
and they are sisters. “1.2.2 自然现象  (natural 
phenomenon)” is a terminal class, while its brother, 
“1.2.1 境遇 (situation)” is a non-terminal class, 
since it has three children. The depth of taxonomy 
is not even, and among sister classes, some classes 
might be terminal nodes while others might be 

19



 

non-terminal classes. Only terminal node classes 
contain word senses, while non-terminal classes 
have only the definition of the class, which we will 
discuss in detail in Section 4. 

3.2 Scale of CLT 
The members of each terminal class are word 
senses.  The sense entries from Xiandai Hanyu 
Cidian (XH, 5th edition, Commercial Press, China) 
are our starting point. Different word senses of a 
polysemous word may be grouped together into the 
same lexical class or put into different lexical 
classes. For example, verb 落 has two senses in the 
XH Dictionary. One is the action of things 
dropping as a result of gravity, as in 树叶落下 
(“The leaves dropped on the ground”). Another 
denotes the action of descending, as in飞机落地 
(“The aircraft landed”). These two senses are 
grouped into the same lexical class “1.1.2 位移 
(move)”. 1357 word types in corpus are 
polysemous and have more than one sense and are 
classified into different lexical classes. 
  There are 33480 word types and 46934 sense 
entries in the CLT that belong to 153 terminal 
classes.  
  Noun taxonomy. 25801 noun senses are grouped 
into 97 terminal classes. The maximum depth of 
the noun taxonomy is 5. Table 2 is part of noun 
taxonomy. 

1 具体物 (concrete) 
――1.1 生物 (living creature) 
―――1.1.1 人 (human) 
――――1.1.1.1 身份 (identification): 学生, 冠军 
――――1.1.1.2 关系 (relative): 司令, 科长 
――――1.1.1.3 超人 (superman): 观音, 上帝 
――――1.1.1.4 其他 (other): 汉人, 小伙子 
―――1.1.2 动物 (animal) 
――――1.1.2.1 兽 (beast): 狗, 老虎 
――――1.1.2.2 鸟 (bird): 麻雀, 大雁 
――――1.1.2.3 鱼 (fish): 鲤鱼, 青蛙 
――――1.1.2.4 虫 (insect): 蜈蚣, 苍蝇 
――――1.1.2.5 微生物 (micro living): 结核菌, 
酵母 
―――1.1.3 植物 (botany) 
――――1.1.3.1 草木 (plant): 常青藤, 报春花 
――――1.1.3.2 果实 (fruit): 银杏果, 鸭梨 
―――1.1.4 群体 (group) 
――――1.1.4.1 机构 (institute): 总统府, 医学院 
――――1.1.4.2 团体 (organization): 训练团, 媒

体 
――――1.1.4.3 其他 (other): 猪群, 人类 
―――1.1.5 生物部分 part 
――――1.1.5.1 肢体 (body): 触手, 右腿 
――――1.1.5.2 器官 (organ): 小肠, 五脏 
――――1.1.5.3 其他 (other): 落叶, 鹅毛 
――1.2 非生物 (non-living creature) 
 

Table 2: part of noun taxonomy 
 
  Verb taxonomy. 15920 verb senses are grouped 
into 37 terminal classes. The maximum depth is 4. 
Table 1 shows part of verb taxonomy. 
  Adjective taxonomy. The adjective senses 
taxonomy is the smallest. There are 5213 adjective 
senses in 19 terminal classes. Table 3 is part of 
adjective taxonomy. 

1 生物属性值 (attribute value of living creature) 
――1.1 生理 (physiological): 年轻, 疲劳 
――1.2 心理 (mental): 困, 反感 
――1.3 品性 (ethic): 酸, 清高 
――1.4 状况 (situation): 背运, 没出息 
2 其他属性值 (other attribute value) 
――2.1 物理 (physical) 
―――2.1.1 可度量值 (measurable): 深, 粗 
―――2.1.2 不可度量值 (unmeasurable): 黏, 松 
――2.2 内容值 (content): 深, 粗犷 
――2.3 状态值 (situation): 顺, 袅袅 
――2.4 其他 (other): 毒, 经济 
3 方式事件值 (attribute of behavior and event): 正
面, 自动 
4 时空值 (attribute of spatio-temporal) 
――4.1 时间值 (temporal): 原先, 悠久 
――4.2 空间值 (spatio): 浩渺, 闹哄哄 

Table 3: part of adjective taxonomy 
   

3.3 Corpus Annotation 
We also used the CLT to annotate a Chinese text 
corpus. The corpus we annotated is called the 
Chinese Sense Corpus, which consists of texts of 
Chinese textbooks. The corpus has 2,008 texts, 
51,343 word types, 1,475,913 word tokens, and 
2,186,853 character instances. The corpus is 
developed by National University of Singapore 
(Singapore), Commercial Press (China) and Peking 
University (China). We also used this corpus to 
extract the linguistic features to help create the 
sense classes. 

20



 

4 Definition Frame for CLT 
According to (B. Levin, 1993), the syntactic 
behaviors of word are determined by the meaning 
of the word. Therefore, we assume that senses with 
similar syntactic behaviors or other linguistics 
features (e.g. argument structure), can be 
considered as in one lexical class. Table 4 shows 
the definition frame of verb lexical classes “1.1.1 
存现 (exist)” and “1.1.2 位移 (move)” and table 5 
is the definition frame of noun class “2.1.3 生理属
性值 (physiological attribute)”. 

1.1.1 存现 (exist) (v.) 
Syntactic performance: + subject, + object 
Argument structure: subject: Theme, Location; 
object: Theme, Location 
Selectional restriction: N.A 
1.1.2 位移 (move) (v.) 
Syntactic performance: + subject, + object 
Argument structure: subject: Theme; object: 
Location 
Selectional restriction: N.A 
 

Table 4: verb classes “1.1.1 存现 (exist)” and “1.1.2 位
移 (move)” 

 
2.1.3 生理属性值 (physiological attribute) (n.) 
Syntactic performance:  *modifier 
Semantic role: subject: Theme; object: Content, 
Experiencer 
Selectional restriction: in modifier-head 
structure, the modifier can only be nouns of 
Living Creature 

Table 5: definition frame of noun class “2.1.3 生理属性
值 (physiological attribute)” 

 

4.1 Linguistic Features in Definition Frame 
There are three components in the definition frame, 
and each one presents a type of linguistic features 
of word sense: 
  Syntactic performance. Each sense is eligible to 
occupy certain syntactic positions in sentence. 
Senses in the same lexical classes have similar 
syntactic performances. We have syntactic frames 
to test the syntactic performances of word senses. 
For example, “verb (object)” frame is used to test 
whether a verb sense takes object. “verb (head)” is 
used to test whether a verb sense occupies 
adverbial position. “noun (head)” tests whether a 
noun sense occupies modifier position. “(head) 

adjective” tests whether a adjective occupies 
complement position. In table 4, operator “+” 
means “takes”, both “1.1.1 存现 (exist)” and “1.1.2 
位移 (move)” take subject and object. Operator 
“*” means “cannot occupy”, senses of “2.1.3 生理
属性值  (physiological attribute)” class cannot 
occupy the modifier position in “noun (head)” 
frame. 
  Argument structure/ semantic role. For verb 
senses, those in the same lexical class may share 
same argument structure: same number of 
arguments and same semantic roles. For noun 
senses, it concerns what specific semantic roles a 
noun sense acts. We have a scheme to identify the 
number of arguments that verb sense governs, and 
a semantic roles list noun acts.  
  The identification of arguments of a word sense is 
based on its syntactic frame. If a particular noun 
sense can be in the subject or object position, we 
identify the semantic roles of the noun sense in the 
positions. Notice that it is possible for a syntactic 
position to have more than one type of arguments. 
In table 4, since both “1.1.1 存现 (exist)” and 
“1.1.2 位移 (move)” take a subject and an object, 
the semantic roles of their arguments are identified 
in these positions.  That is why we specify the 
syntactic positions before the semantic role labels. 
These two verb classes have similar syntactic 
behaviors and selectional restrictions, but they are 
distinguished from each other by their argument 
structure. 
  We have 10 semantic roles for arguments: Agent, 
Theme, Patient, Experiencer, Participant, Result, 
Content, Instrument, Time, and Location.  
  Selectional restrictions. Also known as semantic 
preferences, selectional restriction denotes 
semantic constrains between word senses within a 
syntactic constructions.  
  The definition frame is set of linguistic features 
for creating lexical classes and identifying which 
class a particular word sense should be assigned to. 
There are three components in each definition 
frame, and they are used sequentially. If the 
syntactic features can be used to create sub-classes, 
or assign a particular word sense to a proper lexical 
class, we will not use argument structure and 
selectional restriction features. In other words, 
syntactic structures are given precedence over the 
other two types of features. 

21



 

  Some of the selectional restriction features are 
lexical classes in the CLT. For the “2.1.3 生理属
性值 (physiological attribute)” class, it takes noun 
class “1.1 生物 (living creature)” as a selectional 
restriction. From a particular lexical class, we can 
trace other lexical classes via the lexical class tags 
in definition frame of that class. This makes the 
lexical classes inter-connected, a point we will 
discuss in greater detail in Section 4.3. 

4.2 How Definition Frame Works 
In this subsection we present three examples to 
show how a definition frame works. Example 1 
shows how to use definition frames to distinguish 
different senses. Example 2 shows how the senses 
of a polysemous word are determined to belong to 
one lexical class. Sample 3 shows how senses of a 
polysemous word are determined to belong to 
different lexical classes. 
Example 1: distinguishing word senses. Sample 
members from verb class “1.1.1 存现 (exist)” and 
“1.1.2 位移 (move)” to show how senses belong 
together, and how they are separated to different 
classes. Table 6 gives some member senses of 
these two classes: 

1.1.1 存现 (exist) (v.) 
出土 (to be excavated), 充满 (fulfill), 出现 
(appear), 发生(happen) 
1.1.2 位移 (move) (v.) 
通过(1, pass), 上升(1, raise), 后退 (fall back), 
落入 (fall into) 
Table 6: sample senses (the number inside the 

parentheses indicates the sense number from XH) 
 
  For these 8 verb senses, they all take both subject 
and object: 
1) [这件 文物]/subject 出土 [于 龙门石窟]/object 

the antique excavate Yu Longmen Shiku. 
The antique is excavated in Longmen Shiku. 

2) [难闻的味道]/subject 充满 了 [房间]/object 
smelly De scent fulfill Le room 
The room is fulfilled with smelly scent. 

3) [太阳]/subject 出现 [在 东方]/object 
sun appear at east 
The sun appeared from the east. 

4) [事故]/subject 发生 [在 南京路]/object 
accident happen at Nanjing Road 
The accident is happened at Nanjing Road. 

5) [火车]/subject 通过 [隧道]/object 

train pass tunnel 
The train passed the tunnel. 

6) [飞机]/subject 上升 [到 高空]/object 
aircraft raise to high altitude 
The aircraft has raised to high altitude. 

7) [洪水]/subject 后退 [到 警戒线 以外]/object 
flood fall back to alarm line behind 
The flood has fallen back behind the alarm line. 

8) [树叶]/subject 落入 [水中]/object 
leaf fall into water inside 
The leaf is falling into the water. 

  In examples 1) to 8), the semantic role of the 
argument in the subject position is Theme, and the 
semantic role of the argument in the object position 
is Location. That’s why the 8 senses are in verb 
class “1.1 过程  (process)”. For 1) to 4), the 
semantic role of the argument in the subject 
position can be Location, and Theme for the 
argument in the object position (see example 1a) to 
4a)), while this is illegal for 5) to 8) (see 5a) to 8a)): 
1a) [龙门石窟 ]/subject 出土  了  [这件  文
物]/object 

Longmen Shiku excavate Le the antique 
The antique is excavated in Longmen Shiku 

2a) [房间]/subject 充满 了 [难闻 的 味道]/object 
room fulfill Le smelly De scent 
The room is fulfilled with smelly scent. 

3a) [东方]/subject 出现 了 [太阳]/object 
east appear Le sun 
The sun appeared from the east. 

4a) [南京路]/subject 发生 了 [事故]/object 
Nanjing Road happen Le accident 
The accident is happened at Nanjing Road. 

5a) *[隧道]/subject 通过 [火车]/object 
        tunnel pass train 
6a) *[高空]/subject 升上 [飞机]/aircraft 
        high altitude raise to aircraft 
7a) *[警戒线]/subject 以外 后退 [洪水]/object 
        alarm line behind fall back flood 
8a) *[水中]/subject 落入 [树叶]/object 
        water fall into leaf 
  Since the position of arguments of 通过, 上升, 后
退 and 落入 cannot exchange (as which is legal to 
出土, 充满, 出现 and 发生), they are put in class 
“1.1.2 位移 (move)”, while出土, 充满, 出现 and 
发生 are classified into “1.1.1 存现 (exist)”. 

22



 

Example 2: senses of a polysemous word go to 
one lexical class. Chinese noun 阿姨 has three 
senses according to XH: 
阿姨 (n.) 
1. 母亲的姐妹 (sisters of mother, aunt) 
2. 和母亲年龄差不多大的女性  (ladies at 
mother’s age) 
3. 保姆 (babysitter or maid) 

Table 7: sense definitions of 阿姨 from XH 
 
  The three senses of 阿姨 denote human being, so 
they go to noun class “1.1.1 人 (human)”, and we 
should choose each sense a lexical class from the 
children of “1.1.1 人 (human)”. The candidates are 
“1.1.1.1 身份  (identification)”, “1.1.1.2 关系 
(relative)”, “1.1.1.3 超人 (superman)” and “1.1.1.4 
其他  (other)”. We first exclude “1.1.1.3 超人 
(superman)”, which denotes fictional human, like 
上帝 (God), 菩萨 (Buddha). If the senses cannot 
fit definition frame of either “1.1.1.1 身 份 
(identification)” or “1.1.1.2 关系 (relative)”, then 
they will be put into “1.1.1.4 其他  (other)”. 
Therefore, we need to test the senses only in the 
definition frames of “1.1.1.1 身份 (identification)” 
and “1.1.1.2 关系 (relative)”. Table 8 and 9 are 
definition frames of “1.1.1.1 身份 (identification)”, 
“1.1.1.2 关系 (relative)”: 

1.1.1.1 身份 (identification) (n.) 
Syntactic performance: subject, object, 
modifier, head 
Semantic roles: Agent, Theme, Experiencer, 
Patient, Participant 
Selectional restrictions: if occupy head position 
of “modifier-head” structure, the modifier can 
be nouns of country, city, organization. 

Table 8: definition frame of “1.1.1.1 身份 
(identification)” 

 
1.1.1.2 关系 (relative) (n.) 
Syntactic performance: subject, object, 
modifier, head, parenthesis 
Semantic roles: Agent, Theme, Experiencer, 
Patient, Participant 
Selectional restrictions: if occupy head position 
of “modifier-head” structure, the modifier can 
be people’s name 

Table 9: definition frame of “1.1.1.2 关系 (relative)” 
 

  The three senses of 阿姨 can be used as “title for 
people” in a sentence, for people to call other 
people. And if they occur in the head position of a 
“modifier-head” structure, the modifier can be 
people’s names, but not names of countries, cities 
or organizations: 
9) 张 阿姨 

zhang aunt/lady/maid 
Mrs. Zhang/ Aunt Zhang 

9a) *中国 阿姨／北京 阿姨／大学 阿姨 
China aunt/ Beijing aunt/ university aunt 

  According to definition frame of “1.1.1.2 关系 
(relative)”, three senses of 阿姨 should be put into 
this class.  
Example 3: senses of a polysemous word go to 
different lexical classes. In XH, Chinese verb 爆
发 has two senses: 

爆发 (v.) 
1. 火山的岩浆冲破地壳，向四外迸出 
(volcanic eruption) 
2. 突然发生 (suddenly happen) 

Table 10: sense definitions of 爆发 
 
  For the argument of the subject of either of the 
senses, the semantic roles are Theme, thus both of 
them are fallen into class “1 自主变化  (self 
changing)”. Syntactically, sense 1 of 爆发  is 
intransitive, i.e. it cannot take object: 
10) 火山 爆发 了 

volcano erupt LE 
The volcano is erupting. 

10a) *爆发 [火山]/object 了 
erupt volcano LE 

  While sense 2 is transitive: 
11) [多个 城市]/subject 爆发 [抗议 活动]/object 

several city suddenly happened protest event 
Protests are suddenly happened in several 

cities. 
  According to the definition frame of sub-classes 
of “1 自主变化  (self changing)”, “1.2 状态 
(status)” is for intransitive verb senses, “1.1 过程 
(process)” and “1.3 经历  (experience)” are for 
transitive senses. Therefore, sense 1 of 爆发 falls 
into either “1.1 过程  (process)” or “1.3 经历 
(experience)”, and sense 2 falls into “1.2 状态 
(status)”. 
  The subject of sense 2 is specific to volcano, 
which is a kind of geographic entity. According to 

23



 

the selectional restrictions of sub-classes of “1.2 状
态  (status)”, only “1.2.2 自然现象  (natural 
phenomenon)” requires geographic entity for the 
subject, so the lexical class for sense 2 of 爆发 is 
“1.2.2 自然现象 (natural phenomenon)”. 
  For sense 1, the semantic roles of arguments of 
subject and object are Theme and Location, and it 
barely takes other roles. Semantic roles required by 
“1.3 经历  (experience)” are Theme, Patient, 
Content, Result and Experiencer, thus sense 1 of 
爆发 is not belong to “1.3 经历 (experience)”. 
Additionally, the positions of the arguments of 
sense 1 are exchangeable, which matches the 
definition frame of “1.1.1 存现 (exist)”, so sense 1 
of 爆发 is grouped into class “1.1.1 存现 (exist)”. 

4.3 Inter-Connectivity of Classes 
The classes in sub-taxonomies are inter-connected, 
via the selectional restriction part of the definition 
frame of lexical classes. For example, the 
selectional restriction part of definition frame of 
“1.1.1 人 (human)”: 

1.1.1 人 (human) (n.) 
Syntactic performance: …… 
Semantic roles: …… 
Selectional restrictions:  
When occupying subject position in “subject-
predicate” structure, requires predicates 
denoting: verb senses of social act, intended 
mental act; 
When occupying head position in “modifier-
head” structure, requires modifiers denoting: 
noun senses of institute or organization, or 
adjective senses of human physiological, mental 
or social features. 

Table 11: the selectional restriction part of definition 
frame of “1.1.1 人 (human)” 

 
  According to the selectional restrictions, senses of 
“1.1.1 人 (human)” collocate with verb senses of 
social act or intended mental act, noun senses of 
institute or organization, adjective senses of human 
physiological, mental or social features. Most of 
these senses can match classes in the taxonomy. 
There are verb classes “3.1.2 社会行为 (social 
behavior)”, “3.3 社会活动 (social act)” denoting 
the meaning of social act, “3.4 心理活动 (mental 
act)” denoting intended meaning of intended 
mental act. We have noun classes with institution 
and organization meanings: “1.1.4.1 机 构 

(institute)” and “1.1.4.2 团体 (organization)”. And 
there are adjective classes “1.2 心理  (mental)” 
denoting human mental features, and “1.3 品性 
(ethic)” denoting human social features. So, noun 
class “1.1.1 人 (human)” is connected with verb 
classes “3.1.2 社会行为 (social behavior)”, “3.3 社
会活动 (social act)” and “3.4 心理活动 (mental 
act)”, and with adjective classes “1.2 心 理 
(mental)” and “1.3 品性 (ethic)”. 

4.4 Complications 
The motivation we use definition frame in building 
lexical taxonomy is to ensure the consistency for 
identifying lexical classes for word senses. The 
definition frame is a schema we follow when 
trying to assign a particular word sense to  a proper 
lexical class and we want it to play an essential 
role in building and extending lexical taxonomy, 
but there are complications as a result of the 
morphological processes in Chinese. 
  The morphology structure of a word can mirror 
the syntactic structure of a phrase at the syntactic 
level, and this creates difficulties when classifying 
the words. For example, according to the definition 
frame of noun class “2.1 属性 (attribute)”, senses 
belonging  to this class denote a kind of attribute of 
entities and cannot be the subject by itself in a 
“subject-predicate” structure. For example, 颜色 
(color) belongs to this class, the sentence 颜色 很 
好看  (color is beautiful) cannot be understood 
unless we add “host word” to form “modifier-
head” structure to specify “whose/what thing’s 
color is beautiful”. So, 衣服 的 颜色 很 好看 
(color of the cloth is beautiful) is interpretable, 
because the “host word” 衣服 is added forming 
“modifier-head” structure 衣服 的 颜色 (color of 
the cloth). In some cases, such the “host word” is a 
morpheme of a word. For example, in 月色 (“color 
of the moon”), the morpheme 月(“moon”) is the 
“host word” of 色 (“color”), so for the sense 月色, 
it breaks the syntactic performance rule in 
definition frame, therefore we cannot treat 月色 as 
member of “2.1 属性  (attribute)”. But lexical 
semantically, 月色 denotes a particular attribute of 
moon, it doesn’t make any sense if we do not put 
月色 in “2.1 属性 (attribute)”. Such cases also 
happen for verb senses, and some verb senses have 

24



 

an object morpheme, like 拜师  (to become a 
student to a mentor), 播音 (broadcast). 

5 Linkability of CLT and CPB 
Propbank is a corpus that annotates predicates with 
argument labels. It is based on Treebank, where the 
syntactic trees present the syntactic relations 
between a predicate and its arguments. Verb senses 
in Propbank are called “framesets”, which are 
defined based on the argument structure of a 
predicate. Annotation of the arguments of a verb 
sense follows the framesets of the sense. Chinese 
Propbank (CPB) (Xue and Palmer, 2009) is based 
on the Chinese Treebank (Xue et al, 2005). 
  As one type of features for formally describing 
the lexical semantic meaning of a word sense, 
argument structure plays essential role in the CLT 
as well. CLT uses semantic roles of arguments 
globally, which is a major difference between CLT 
and CPB. Table 12 presents a sample of frameset 
of the verb “爱”. 

    <id>爱</id> 
    <frameset cdef="" edef="" id="f1"> 
        <role argnum="0" argrole="love giver"/> 
        <role argnum="1" argrole="thing, person loved"/> 
        <frame> 

<mapping> 
                <V/> 
                <mapitem src="sbj" trg="arg0"/> 
                <mapitem src="npobj" trg="arg1"/> 
            <comment/> 
</mapping> 

Table 12: sample of frameset of “爱” 
 
  The “argrole” field is the semantic role of 
argument, which in CPB is individually for each 
frameset. There is not a global list of semantic 
roles for the CPB, as shown in table 12. Verb sense 
is described by selectional restrictions that are 
similar to noun lexical classes in the CLT. For 
“爱” in Table 12 , ARG0 is “love giver”, which 
can be nouns denoting people; ARG1 is 
“thing/person loved”, which can be entities or 
person. The lacking of global semantic role list 
makes the verb senses in CPB are isolated from 
each other and are not connected. 
  Although CLT and CPB are independently 
developed language resources, lexical meanings of 
verb in both are represented by argument structure. 
Therefore, we believe CLT and CPB are linkable 
by replacing CPB’s semantic roles with CLT’s.  

6 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this paper, we presented the Chinese Lexical 
Taxonomy, and the Chinese Sense Corpus 
annotated with the lexical classes in the taxonomy. 
Each lexical class in CLT is described via a 
definition frame, which is collection of linguistic 
features. We show the definition frame reduces the 
possible inconsistency that may happen in 
taxonomy creation. Compared to WordNet and 
HowNet style, CLT is being unique on the way we 
create it. The methodology creating CLT enables 
its predictivity for the possible lexical classes of an 
OOV word sense. It also maintains the inter-
consistency among different annotators. The 
definition frame is the key to our goal, which is 
constituted of steps can be followed both in 
making corpus annotation and taxonomy 
expanding. 
  We also compare the CLT with the CPB. The 
absence of a global semantic role list in the CPB 
makes verb senses disconnected from each other. 
Since there is not a global list of semantic roles in 
the CPB, we will use the semantic roles of the CLT 
to annotate arguments in CPB. We will also add 
new semantic roles if the current semantic roles are 
insufficient for the CPB. We will also acquire a list 
of syntactic frames and alternations to create a 
more fine-grained definition frames for the CLT.  
 
Acknowledgement: 
This work is supported partial by DARPA via 
Contract HR0011-11-C-0145. All views expressed 
in this paper are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the view of DARPA. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25



 

References  
Bai, Xiaopeng. 2012. Building Word Sense Taxonomy 

and Automatic Annotation for Mandarin Chinese. 
PhD Thesis, National University of Singapore. 

Bai, Xiaopeng. 2008. The Word Sense Category based 
on Semantic Features of Argument. Proceeding of 
Chinese Lexical Semantics Workshop, Singapore. 

Chen, Qunxiu. 2001. Expanding of Machine Tractable 
Dictionary of Contemporary Chinese Predicate Verbs 
and Research on Relations of Slots Centering on 
Noun of Contemporary Chinese. Applied Linguistics 
(Yuyan Wenzi Yingyong), No. 4, P98-04. 

Chen Xiaohe. 1998. A Lexical Classification System for 
Language Engineering. Applied Linguistics (Yuyan 
Wenzi Yingyong), No. 2, P71-76. 

Ciaramita, Massimiliano & Johnson, Mark. 2003. 
Supersense tagging of unknown nouns in WordNet. 
Proceedings of the 2003 conference on Empirical 
methods in natural language processing, Stroudsburg, 
PA, USA. 

Dong, Zhendong & Dong, Qiang. 2006. Hownet And 
the Computation of Meaning. World Scientific 
Publishing Company, Singapore. 

Fellbaum, Christiane. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic 
Lexical Database. MIT Press, USA. 

Gao, Liqi et al. 2005. Thesaurus-Based Semantic 
Smoothing in Language Modeling for Chinese 
Document Retrieval. International Conference on 
Mutilingual Information Processing.  

Picca, David et al. 2007. Semantic Domains and 
Supersense Tagging for Domain-Specific Ontology 
Learning. Conference RIAO2007, Pittsburgh, PA, 
USA.  

Levin, Beth. 1993. English Verb Classes and 
Alternations: A Preliminary Investigation. The 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, US. 

TIAN, Jiu-le et al. 2010. Words Similarity Algorithm 
Based on Tongyici Cilin in Semantic Web Adaptive 
Learning System. Journal of Jilin University 
(Information Science Edition), 2010-06. 

Wang, Hui et al. 2003. The Specification of The 
Semantic Knowledge Base of Contemporary Chinese. 
Journal of Chinese Language and Computing, 13(2). 

Xue, Nianwen, et al. 2005. The Penn Chinese Treebank: 
Phrase Structure Annotation of a Large Corpus. 
Natural Language Engineering, 11(2):207-238. 

Xue, Nianwen. 2008. Labeling Chinese Predicates with 
Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics, 34 (2): 
225-255. 

Xue, Nianewn and Palmer, Martha. 2009. Adding 
semantic roles to the Chinese Treebank. Natural 
Language Engineering, 15(1):143-172.  

26


