



















































Where's the meeting that was cancelled? existential implications of transitive verbs


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex-III), pages 183–194,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Where’s the Meeting that was Cancelled?
Existential Implications of Transitive Verbs

Pat ricia Amaral1 Valeria de Paiva2 Cleo Condoravdi3 Annie Zaenen3
(1)Department of Romance Languages, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA

(2)School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, UK
(3)CSLI, Stanford University, USA

pamaral@unc.edu, valeria.depaiva@gmail.com, cleoc@csli.stanford.ed,
azaenen@csli.stanford.edu

ABSTRACT
This paper describes a preliminary classification of transitive verbs in terms of the implications
of existence (or non-existence) associated with their direct object nominal arguments. The
classification was built to underlie the lexical marking of verbs in the lexical resources that
the automated system BRIDGE developed at Xerox PARC used for textual inference. Similar
classifications are required for other logic-based textual inference systems, but very little is
written about the issue.

KEYWORDS: textual inference, lexical resources, transitive verbs.

1 Motivation

A computational system cannot be said to understand natural language if it cannot draw some
rather direct inferences from a text. Central among them are inferences about the existence
or non-existence of the entities and eventualities referred to. In this paper we look at two
types of referentially opaque transitive verbs: verbs that are inherently negative and thus imply
non-existence, and verbs with what we could call time-dependent opacity.

In our discussion we make the simplifying assumption that the reader/the system considers the
speaker trustworthy so that anything that the speaker is committed to as being true (or false)
by virtue of the linguistic expression used, is treated as true (or false). Our notion of speaker
commitment covers both entailments and presuppositions/implicatures (see (Karttunen and
Zaenen, 2005) for a short discussion and (Potts, 2005) for an extensive motivation.)

The detection of existential implications is an essential part of computing textual inferences, as
conceived, for instance, in the RTE (Recognizing Textual Entailment) Pascal challenge (Dagan
et al., 2006). A simplified example is given in (1).

(1) Ed built a spacious hut. There was a spacious hut. YES

Our inquiry and classification extends (Nairn et al., 2006), which looks at implicative verbs
with clausal complements. The relation between the two problems can be seen by comparing
the implications of the verb ‘prevent’ construed with a clausal complement or a nominal
(event-denoting) complement:

183



(2) Ed prevented Mary from leaving. Mary left. NO

(3) Ed prevented an accident. There was an accident. NO

The work reported here, as the one in (Nairn et al., 2006) and elsewhere, takes the view that
inferential aspects are one of the main challenges that lexicographers interested in cognitive
features of the lexicon need to address.

The treatment proposed in (Nairn et al., 2006) aims at capturing the author’s commitment to
the truth or falsity of the complement clause of the verb. This classification is based both on the
semantics of the complement-taking verb and on the syntactic type of the clause (e.g. factive
forget that vs. implicative forget to). In the case of nominal complements, different factors
need to be taken into consideration to determine the speaker’s commitment to the existence or
non-existence of the denotation of the complement of the verb. These include:

• syntactic alternations of the verb,
• the aspectual class of the verb phrase,
• whether the nominal complement is event-denoting or not,
• the aspectual properties of the nominal complement if it is event-denoting
• the tense and aspect of the verb.

A final factor is the (in)definiteness of the direct object. Definite NPs tend to presuppose
the existence of their referents. We will try to control for this by constructing examples with
indefinite NPs. Further complications will be discussed in the relevant sections.

2 Constraints on the classification

The classification was conceived to be used in conjunction with the representations produced
by the automated system BRIDGE (Bobrow et al., 2007a),(Bobrow et al., 2007b). An important
feature of these representations is the (un)instantiability of concepts, which corresponds to a
claim of (non-)existence of an entity or occurrence of an event denoted by the concept. For
instance, the sentence “Negotiations prevented a strike” involves events of the type “negotiation”,
“strike” and “preventing”. Intuitively, the negotiations (whatever they may be) are presented as
having occurred in the real world and so is the preventing event. In our representation, the
terms corresponding to the words “negotiations” and “prevented” are instantiated in the top
context, which corresponds to what the author of the sentence considers as true. But the term
corresponding to “strike” should only be instantiable in the prevent-context; in the top context
the term should be declared uninstantiable. See (Condoravdi et al., 2001), (Crouch et al., 2003)
for motivation and details. The use of contexts, which correspond logically to partial possible
worlds, allows us to represent further aspects of the situation prevented (for instance, how long
that strike would have been or how bitter, etc.) without running into contradictions.

The BRIDGE system, by default, treats the nominal arguments of verbs as carrying existential
commitments at least in the context of the predication. This is obviously inadequate for the
phenomena that we discuss in this paper and in section 5 we will propose an extension of the
system that allows us to treat these phenomena more adequately.

184



3 Criteria for the classification

The main criterion adopted in the classification of the verb classes is whether the verb meaning
indicates or does not indicate that the referent of the direct object existed before the eventuality
denoted by the verb took place (pre-state) or not and whether the referent of the direct object
exists after this eventuality (post-state). We focus on verbs that affect the existence of its object;
for example, annul meets this description, but touch does not; only in the former case is the
change with respect to the existence of the referent of the direct object part of the meaning
of the verb. This difference in the implications that we intend to capture is exemplified in the
contrast between (4) and (5):1

(4) Ed touched a teapot.
Pre-state: There was a teapot. YES
Post-state: There is a teapot. YES

(5) The judge has annulled Ed’s marriage.
Pre-state: Ed was married. YES
Post-state: Ed is married. NO

We will call verbs that indicate a change in the existence of the referent of their nominal
complement, existential change verbs. In this paper we focus on this type of verbs and leave
aside verbs that do not encode pre- and post–states (or with pre- and post–states that are the
same). We present the different types of existential change verbs in the next section. In section
5, we discuss the representation of information about existence in our system.

4 Existential change verbs

In this class we identified eight sub-classes. They can be subdivided broadly into verbs of
causation (the first five subclasses) and aspectual verbs (the last three subclasses).

4.1 Cause-type verbs

In this subsection we look at verbs whose nominal complement is headed by a noun that denotes
an eventuality. Examples are cause, provoke, force, produce, bring about, induce. They share the
following implications: (i) In positive environments: the predicate entails the occurrence of an
eventuality/situation as a post-state, (ii) the caused eventuality/situation does not exist in the
pre-state, (iii) in negative environments it is unknown whether the caused eventuality/situation
has taken place. This indeterminacy is due to the indeterminacy of the scope of the negation.
This pattern of inferences is exemplified in (6) and (7):

(6) The decree caused trouble.
pre-state: There was trouble. NO
post-state: There was trouble. YES

1This representation of the lexical meaning of verbs abstracts away from many factors that may intervene in a
factual situation. For instance, (5) may be used in a case where Ed has gotten married again.

185



(7) The decree didn’t cause trouble.
pre-state: There was trouble. UNKNOWN
post-state: There was a trouble. UNKNOWN

Similarly, in (8), under normal circumstances, the speaker is committed to the non-occurrence
of the revolution before the decree and to its occurrence after the decree.

(8) The decree caused a revolution.
pre-state: There was a revolution before the decree. NO
post-state: There was a revolution after the decree. YES

When the progressive is used we find some cases of the “Imperfective Paradox”((Dowty, 1979)),
whereas in others there seems not to be such effect. Compare (9) and (10):

(9) The decree was causing trouble when it was revoked.

(10) The decree was causing a revolution when it was revoked.

Whereas in the first example we conclude that there was trouble (i.e., the decree has caused
some trouble), in the second we conclude that a revolution was avoided. We hypothesize
that this is due to the nature of the eventuality that the nominal refers to. It is well-known
that eventualities can be ‘homogeneous’ (states and processes) or not (accomplishments and
achievements). ‘Trouble’ is homogeneous: a little bit of trouble is trouble but ‘revolution’ is not:
for instance, the beginning of a revolution is not a revolution.

Cause–type verbs can also be used to express a change of degree rather that a change from
non-existence to existence as exemplified in (11).

(11) The medicine induced an increase in blood pressure.
pre-state: There was an increase of blood pressure. NO
post-state: There was an increase in blood pressure. YES

Here the event that occurs is not the coming into existence of blood pressure but the increase in
it. That is, of course, as expected: here the caused eventuality is the increase.

4.2 Verbs of creation

Closely related to the previous class are verbs of creation. They are different in that their
complement refers to an object (physical or not) and not to an eventuality. This class includes
verbs like build, bake (as in ‘bake a cake’), write, coin, compose, compute(as in ‘compute
a solution’), concoct, construct (see Create verbs 24.4 and 24.1 in (Levin, 1993)) with the
following cluster of implications: (i) in positive environments, there is a speaker’s commitment
to the non-existence of the object before the event (entailment), and (ii) a commitment to the
existence of the object after the event in the simple past tense, (iii) in negative environments,
it is unknown whether the object exists, all we know is that the referent of the subject of the
sentence did not bring it into existence.

186



(12) John built a house.
There is a house.YES

(13) John didn’t build a house.
There is a house. UNKNOWN

The effect of the “Imperfective Paradox”, however, is much stronger with these verbs than
with the previous class: in positive environments, the use of the progressive form changes
the speaker’s commitment as to the existence of the object. Therefore, we need a conditional
marking in the rules, i.e. if the verb occurs in the simple past, the speaker is committed to the
existence of the object, and if the verb occurs in the progressive, the speaker is committed to
the non-existence of the object.

(14) John is building a house.
There is a house. NO

Verbs like draw, picture,sculpt etc. behave like verbs of creation when their nominal complement
denotes the material or eventive result (draw a picture, sing a song). But they belong in the class
of intensional verbs when their nominal complement denotes the content of the act: because
what you draw may or may not exist in the real world (e.g. draw a unicorn).

4.3 Verbs of destruction

Verbs like destroy, extinguish, terminate, annul, invalidate, nullify, break off, annihilate, demolish,
undo, wreck, resolve, share the following cluster of implications: In positive environments, (i)
the speaker is committed to the existence of the object before the event (entailment) and (ii)
the speaker is committed to the non-existence of the object after the event (entailment), and
(iii) in negative environments, there is no commitment as to the existence of the object, but in
common usage the speaker seems to be committed to the existence of the object (plausible, not
strict inference). This is exemplified below:

(15) The firefighters extinguished a fire.
pre-state: There was a fire. YES
post-state: There is a fire. NO

(16) The firefighters didn’t extinguish a fire.
pre-state: There was a fire. UNKNOWN
post-state: The fire continues. UNKNOWN
(The firefighters didn’t extinguish the fire, but the rain did.)

The following two classes of verbs differ from the previous ones in that there is a modal
component to their meaning; the nominal complement of the verb may denote either an
eventuality that is true in the actual world or whose existence is restricted to a possible world
other than the actual world.2

2Speakers’ commitments of existence (or non-existence) allowed by the verbs presented in sections 4.4 and 4.5 may
receive a morphological marking.

187



4.4 Avoid-type verbs

Verbs like avoid, elude, escape, whose meaning can roughly be paraphrased as ‘manage not to
experience something evaluated as bad’, share the following cluster of implications when the
nominal denotes an eventuality: In positive environments, (i) the speaker is committed to the
potential occurrence of the eventuality denoted by the nominal complement before the event,
and (ii) these verbs allow for both a wide and a narrow scope interpretation: in the wide scope
interpretation, the speaker is committed to the occurrence of the eventuality after the event,
and in the narrow scope interpretation, the speaker is committed to the non-occurrence of the
eventuality after the event. (iii) In negative environments, the speaker is committed to the
occurrence of the eventuality after the event.

This is exemplified below for avoid:
Narrow scope reading:

(17) So here’s some good news about how hundreds of workers avoided a layoff and
didn’t lose the jobs to downsizing . . .

pre-state: There was a potential layoff. YES
post-state: There was a layoff. NO

Wide scope reading:

(18) We landed in Lima only to find that yet again we had narrowly avoided an earthquake
(Tokyo all over again). This one was a massive quake of around 7-8 on the richter
scale . . .

pre-state: There was a potential earthquake. YES
post-state: There was an earthquake. YES

Note that we are concerned here with the inferences that are licensed by the lexical meaning of
avoid. What has changed between the pre–state and the post–state is precisely the speaker’s
commitment as to the existence of the eventuality denoted by the nominal complement of the
verb in the post–state: the non-occurrence of the eventuality in (17) and its occurrence in (18).
When the nominal dependent denotes an object rather than an event, the object is assumed to
exist in the pre- and in the post–state (wide scope reading):

(19) We avoided a tree.
pre-state: There was a tree. YES
post-state: There was a tree. YES.

When the nominal complement’s direct denotation is an object, by semantic coercion the
complement is interpreted as denoting an eventuality:

(20) We avoided a tree.
We avoided hitting a tree.
We avoided the ball.
We avoided being hit by the ball.

188



The direct denotation of these objects is assumed to exist before and after the act of avoidance
but the eventuality described in the expansions is asserted not to take place.

4.5 Prevent-type verbs

Verbs like prevent, avert, block, inhibit, impede, hinder, deter, preclude, forbid, forestall, and cancel
(in the sense of ‘cause not to’,‘prevent from happening’), spare (in the meaning ‘refrain from
harming’) share the following cluster of implications: In positive environments: (i) the speaker
is committed to the potential existence of the object before the event, and (ii) the speaker is
committed to the non-existence of the object after the event, (iii) there is a causal implication,
and (iv) in negative environments, the speaker is committed to the existence of the object
(plausible inference, seems to be the common usage). The nominal complement of this class of
verbs is event-denoting.

(21) The government prevented an oil spill in the bay.
post-state: There was an oil spill in the bay. NO

(22) And nobody questions him because this mayor of a large American city who didn’t
prevent a major terrorist attack but seemed emotional in its aftermath has some
special insight into the nature of terrorism . . .
post-state: There was a major terrorist attack. YES

4.6 Begin-type verbs

This class includes aspectual verbs like begin, start, initiate that denote the beginning of an
eventuality. When the referent of the nominal complement is an eventuality, these verbs
share the following cluster of implications: (i) in positive environments, there is a speaker’s
commitment as to the non-occurrence of the eventuality before the event (entailment), and (ii)
there is no commitment as to the occurrence of the eventuality after the event; (iii) in negative
environments, there is a commitment as to the non-occurrence of the eventuality after the event.
We illustrate (i) in (24), 25, and (23)):

(23) Ed and Mary didn’t begin a relationship.
pre-state: There was a relationship. NO

(24) Ed and Mary began a relationship.
pre-state: There was a relationship. NO

(25) The queen began a visit to India.
pre-state: There was a visit. NO

The status of (ii) depends on the properties of the eventuality referred to by the nominal
complement. We hypothesize that the same distinction as discussed above in subsection 4.1
holds here too: when the eventuality is homogeneous, there is an existence commitment, when
it is not, there is no commitment. Compare (26) and (27):

189



(26) Ed began a trip to Paris.
post-state: Ed made a trip to Paris. UNKNOWN
The queen began a visit to India.
post-state: The queen made a visit to India. UNKNOWN

(27) Ed and Mary began a relationship.
post-state: There was a relationship. YES
A boy playing with matches started a Southern California wildfire.
post-state: There was a wildfire. YES

Adapting test for verbs we can illustrate the difference between the nouns in (26) and (27) as
follows:

(28) #They had a relationship in 2 months.
#There was a wildfire in two weeks.
They made a trip to Paris in 2 weeks.
They made a visit to India in two weeks.

As is the case with verbs, homogeneous events do not take temporal modifiers that express the
duration, whereas accomplishments do.

When the verbs in this class take a nominal complement which is not event–denoting, as is the
case of ‘book’ in (29), semantic coercion changes the denotation to an eventuality. As has been
argued inter alia in (Pustejovsky, 1995), a sentence like (29) is ambiguous (at least) between
‘starting to write a book’ and ‘starting to read a book’. As the combination of the verb and the
nominal complement does not tell us which reading we have to choose, and this choice bears
on the existential commitment about the object (see (30) and (31)), we mark the implications
of (29) as UNKNOWN.

(29) John started a book.
pre-state: There is a book.UNKNOWN
post-state: There is a book. UNKNOWN

(30) John started to write a book.
pre-state: There is a book. NO
post-state: There is a book. UNKNOWN

(31) John started to read a book.
pre-state: There is a book. YES
post-state: There is a book.YES

In negative environments, the entailments are the same regardless of whether the denotation of
the complement is an object or an eventuality.

190



4.7 Continue-type verbs

Verbs like continue and pursue, which we don’t illustrate here, share the following cluster of
implications: (i) the speaker is committed to the occurrence of the eventuality in the pre–state
(presupposition), (ii) in positive environments, the speaker is committed to the occurrence
of the eventuality in the post–state (entailment), (iii) in negative environments, there is a
speaker’s commitment as to the non-occurrence of the eventuality in the post–state. As with the
previous class the implications depend on the aspectual class of the noun.

4.8 End-type verbs

Examples of end-type verbs are end, stop, cease, finish, discontinue, suspend, interupt. When the
direct denotation of their nominal complement isn’t an eventuality, its interpretation is coerced
to an eventuality reading as is the case with begin and continue-type verbs. The end-type
verbs share the following cluster of implications: (i) In positive environments, the speaker is
committed to the non-occurrence of the eventuality after the end-event (entailment), and (ii)
in negative environments, there is no commitment as to the occurrence of the eventuality, but
in common usage the speaker seems to be committed to the occurrence of the eventuality after
the end-event (plausible, not strict inference).

Again, these verbs, as well as interrupt and discontinue, have different entailments depending
on the aspectual properties displayed by the nouns that they take as complement. With nouns
that denote activities, the speaker is committed to the existence of the activity, whereas this is
not the case for nouns denoting accomplishments (or achievements):

(32) Ed interrupted a discussion between the students.
pre-state: The students had been discussing. YES
post-state: There was a discussion between the students. NO

(33) Ed stopped the bleeding.
pre-state: There was a bleeding. YES
post-state: There is bleeding. NO

(34) John stopped the evaluation of the system.
pre-state: There was an evaluation of the system. NO
post-state: The system was evaluated. NO

However, we must further distinguish between two sub-classes within this class of verbs. The
verbs end and finish behave differently from stop with accomplishment predicates:

(35) Ed stopped a repair.
post-state: There was a repair. NO

(36) Ed ended/finished a repair.
post-state: There was a repair. YES

But this is not the case for nouns that denote activities or states, where both end and stop display
the same pattern of implications:

191



(37) The president ended/stopped a war.
post-state: There is a war. NO

With respect to nominals whose primary denotation are objects, the interpretation depends
again on the eventuality to which the interpretation of the nominal is plausibly coerced. For
example, in (38) what is understood to have stopped is the ticking of the clock. Again finish
and end behave differently.

(38) John stopped a clock.
post-state: There is a clock. YES

(39) Ed didn’t finish a dissertation.
post-state: There is a dissertation. NO

It is clear, then, that the entailments of sentences containing aspectual verbs like start, continue,
end and stop, among others, depend on the aspectual properties of the nouns that they take as
complements. For event-denoting nouns that are not deverbal (e.g. crime, accident, earthquake,
ceremony, game, violence) little is known about these properties.

5 Representing existence information

Representation of the kind of information within the system BRIDGE is mediated by the relevant
lexical information being imported into the Unified Lexicon (UL) (Crouch and King, 2005).
Similarly to complement taking implicative verbs (Nairn et al., 2006), we expect to mark by
hand the new implication signatures discussed, using some frequency criteria. We envisage
using the British National Corpus (BNC) frequency list to uncover transitive verbs with these
new kinds of implicative behavior. The appropriate lexical markings would then trigger rules
constructing representations that encode the corresponding implications. We also envisage
leveraging some of the Verbnet semantics information to check our proposed pre and post
conditions.

Notions of pre- and post conditions are widely used in logics for verification of programs, in the
so-called Hoare logics. These kinds of conditions are also used in AI planning and in formal
models of concurrency. However, they have found little use in semantics of natural languages.
We propose to use these conditions as a first approximation for the inferential meaning of verbs.

6 Conclusion

The present investigation of existential implications of transitive verbs shows that any imple-
mentation of logic-based textual inference needs to take into consideration different types
of factors: the implicative behavior of a set of transitive verbs as a function of their lexical
meaning, tense and aspect of the verbs, aspectual properties of the nominal complements, and
definiteness. The combination of these factors as clues for the identification of the commitment
of the speaker with respect to the existence of the entity or event denoted by the nominal
complement of the verb is a challenge for any Entailment and Contradiction Detection system.

Our attempt to spell out the existential inferences leads to theoretical problems: it shows
that we need an ontological classification of the nominal complements in eventuality-denoting
and object-denoting, that we need a coercion mechanism for the object-denoting nouns and

192



a distinction between the existential implications for the denoted object and for the denoted
coerced eventuality and it forces us to look at the ill-understood aspectual properties of
eventuality-denoting nouns whether they are morphologically deverbal or not.

References

Bobrow, D., Cheslow, B., Condoravdi, C., Karttunen, L., King, T. H., Price, L., Nairn, R.,
de Paiva, V., L.Price, and Zaenen, A. (2007a). Precision-focused textual inference. Proceedings
of ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing, pages 16–21.

Bobrow, D., Condoravdi, C., Karttunen, L., King, T. H., Price, L., Nairn, R., de Paiva, V., L.Price,
and Zaenen, A. (2007b). Parc’s bridge and question answering system. Proceedings of Grammar
Engineering Across Frameworks, pages 26–45.

Condoravdi, C., Crouch, R., van den Berg, M., Everett, J., Stolle, R., Paiva, V., and Bobrow,
D. (2001). Preventing existence. In Proceedings of the Conference on Formal Ontologies in
Information Systems (FOIS), Ogunquit, Maine.

Crouch, D., Condoravdi, C., de Paiva, V., and Stolle, R. (2003). Entailment, intensionality and
text understanding. In Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL Workshop on Text Meaning, Edmonton,
Canada.

Crouch, D. and King, T. H. (2005). Unifying lexical resources. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
the Identification and Representation of Verb Features and Verb Classes, Saarbruecken, Germany.

Dagan, I., Glickman, O., and Magnin, B. (2006). The pascal recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3944, pages 177 – 190.

Dowty, D. (1979). Word Meaning and Montague Grammar. Reidel, Dordrecht.

Karttunen, L. and Zaenen, A. (2005). Veridicity. In Katz, G., Pustejovsky, J., and Schilder, F.,
editors, Annotating, Extracting and Reasoning about Time and Events, volume Dagstuhl Seminar
Proceedings 05151. Dagstuhl, Germany.

Levin, B. (1993). English Verb Classes and Alternations: A Preliminary Investigation. The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Nairn, R., Condoravdi, C., and Karttunen, L. (2006). Computing relative polarity for textual
inference. In Proceedings of ICoS-5 (Inference in Computational Semantics), Buxton, UK.

Potts, C. (2005). The Logic of Conventional Implicatures. Oxford Studies in Theoretical
Linguistics. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Pustejovsky, J. (1995). The generative Lexicon. MIT Press.

193




