










































PLUTO: Automated Solutions for Patent Translation


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 69–71,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

PLUTO: Automated Solutions for Patent Translation
i
 

John Tinsley, Alexandru Ceausu, Jian Zhang 

 

Centre for Next Generation Localisation 

School of Computing 

Dublin City University, Ireland 

{jtinsley;aceausu;jzhang}@computing.dcu.ie 

  

1 Introduction 

PLUTO is a commercial development project 

supported by the European Commission as part 

of the FP7 programme which aims to eliminate 

the language barriers that exist worldwide in the 

provision of multilingual access to patent infor-

mation. The project consortium comprises four 

partners: the Centre for Next Generation Locali-

sation at Dublin City University,1 ESTeam AB,2 

CrossLang, 3  and the Dutch Patent Information 

User Group (WON).4 Research and development 

is carried out in close collaboration with user 

groups and intellectual property (IP) profession-

als to ensure solutions and software are delivered 

that meet actual user needs. 

1.1 The need for patent translation 

The number of patent applications filed 

worldwide is continually increasing, with over 

1.8 million new filings in 2010 alone. Yet De-

spite the fact that patents are filed in dozens of 

different languages, language barriers are no ex-

cuse in the case of infringement. When carrying 

our prior-art and other searches IP professionals 

must ensure they include collections which en-

compass all potential relevant patents. Such 

searches will typically return results – a set of 

patent documents – 30% of which will be in a 

foreign language. 

As professional translation for patents is such 

a specialist task, translators command a premium 

fee for this service, often up to €0.50 per word 

for Asian languages. This often results in high or 

unworkable translation costs for innovators. 

While free machine translation (MT) tools such 

as Google translate have unquestionably been 

beneficial in helping to reduce the need to resort 

                                                      
1 www.cngl.ie 
2 www.esteam.se 
3 www.crosslang.com 
4 www.won-nl.com 

to expensive human translation, the quality is 

still often inadequate as the models are too gen-

eral to cope with the intricacies of patent text. 

In what follows, we will provide an overview 

of some of the technologies being developed in 

PLUTO to address the need for higher quality 

MT solutions for patents and how these are de-

ployed for the benefit of IP professionals. 

2 Language Technology for Patents 

Patent translation is a unique task given the 

style of language used in patent documents. This 

language, so-called “patentese”, typically com-

prises a mixture of highly-specific technical ter-

minology and legal jargon and is often written 

with the express purpose of obfuscating the in-

tended meaning. For example, in 2001 an inno-

vation was granted in Australia for a “Circular 

Transportation Facilitation Device”, i.e. a wheel.5 

Patents are also characterised by a prolifera-

tion of extremely long sentences, complex chem-

ical formula, and other constructs which make 

the task for MT more difficult. 

2.1 Domain-specfic machine translation 

The patent translation systems used in 

PLUTO have been built using the MaTrEx MT 

framework (Armstrong et al., 2006). The systems 

are domain specific in that they have been 

trained exclusively using parallel patent corpora. 

A number of experiments related to domain ad-

aptation of the language and translation models 

have been carried out in the context of these sys-

tems. The principal findings from this work were 

that systems combining all available patent data 

for a given language were preferable (Ceausu et 

al. 2011). 

                                                      
5  

http://pericles.ipaustralia.gov.au/aub/pdf/nps/2002/0808/200

1100012A4/2001100012.pdf 

69



Significant pre-processing techniques are also 

applied to the input text to account for specific 

features of patent language. For instance, sen-

tence splitting based on the marker hypothesis 

(Green, 1979) is used to reduce long sentences to 

more manageable lengths, while named-entity 

recognition is applied to isolate certain struc-

tures, such as chemical compounds and refer-

ences to figures, in order to treat them in a 

specific manner. 

Additionally, various language-specific tech-

niques are used for relevant MT systems. For 

example, a technique called word packing (Ma et 

al., 2007), is exploited for Chinese—English. 

This is a bilingually motivated task which im-

proves the precision of word alignment by “pack-

ing” several consecutive words together which 

correspond to a single word in the corresponding 

language.  

Japanese—English is a particularly challeng-

ing pair due to the divergent word ordering be-

tween the two languages. To overcome this, we 

employ preordering of the input text (Talbot et 

al. 2011) in order to harmonise the word ordering 

between the two languages and reduce the likeli-

hood of ordering errors. This is done using a 

rule-based technique called head-finalisation 

(Isozaki et al., 2010) which moves the English 

syntactic head towards the end of the phrase to 

emulate the Japanese word order. 

Finally, we use compound splitting and true 

casing modules for our English—German MT 

systems in order to reduce the occurrence of out-

of-vocabulary words. 

2.2 Translation memory integration 

In order to further improve the translation 

quality, we are developing an engine to automat-

ically combine the outputs of the MT system and 

a translation memory (TM). 

The engine works by taking a patent docu-

ment as input and searching for full matches on 

paragraph, sentence, and segment (sub-

sentential) level in the TM. If no full matches are 

found, fuzzy matches are sought above a prede-

termined threshold and combined with the output 

of the MT system using phrase- and word-level 

alignment information. 

For patents, most leverage from the TM is 

seen at segment level, particularly as the patent 

claims are often written using quite a rigid struc-

ture. This is due to that fact that, as patents typi-

cally describe something novel which may never 

have been written about previously, there is often 

little repetition of full sentences. 

2.3 Evaluation 

The performance of the patent MT systems in 

PLUTO is evaluated using a range of methods 

aimed not only at gauging general quality, but 

also identifying areas for improvement and rela-

tive performance against similar systems. 

In addition to assessing the MT systems using 

automatic evaluation metrics such as BLEU 

(Papineni et al., 2002) and METEOR (Banerjee 

et al. 2005), large-scale human evaluations are 

also carried out. MT system output is ranked 

from 1—5 based on the overall quality of transla-

tion, and individual translation errors are identi-

fied and classified in an error categorisation task. 

On top of this standalone evaluation, the 

PLUTO MT systems are also benchmarked 

against leading commercial systems across two 

MT paradigms: Google Translate for statistical 

MT and Systran (Enterprise) for rule-based MT. 

A comparative analysis is carried out using both 

the automatic and human evaluation techniques 

described above. This comparison is also applied 

to the output of the PLUTO MT systems and the 

output of the integrated TM/MT system in order 

to quantify the improvements achieved using the 

translation memories. 

The main findings from the first round of 

evaluations for our French—English and Portu-

guese—English systems showed that our MT 

systems score relatively high based on human 

judgments -- 3.8 out of 5 on average -- while be-

ing ranked higher than the commercial systems 

approximately 75% of the time. More details on 

these experiments can be found in Ceausu et al. 

(2011). 

3 Patent Translation Web Service 

The PLUTO MT systems are deployed as a 

web service (Tinsley et al., 2010). The main en-

try point for end users is through a web browser 

plugin which allows them to access translations 

on-the-fly regardless of the search engine being 

used to find relevant patents. In addition to the 

browser plugin, users also have the option to in-

put text directly or upload patent documents in a 

number of formats including PDF and MS Word. 

A number of further natural language pro-

cessing techniques are exploited to improve the 

user experience. N-gram based language identifi-

cation is used to send input to the correct MT 

system; while frequency based keyword extrac-

70



tion provides users with potentially important 

terms with which to carry out subsequent search-

es. 

Corresponding source and target segments are 

highlighted on both word and phrase level, while 

users have the option of post-editing translations 

which are stored in a personal terminology data-

base and applied to future translations. 

The entire framework has been designed to 

facilitate the patent professional in their daily 

workflow. It provides them with a consistency of 

translation quality and features regardless of the 

search tools being used to locate relevant patents. 

This has been validated through extensive us-

er experience testing which included a usability 

evaluation of the translation output.  

4 Looking Forward 

The PLUTO project has been running for just 

over two years and is scheduled to end in March 

2013. Our goal by that time is to have established 

a viable commercial offering to capitalize on the 

state-of-the-art research and development into 

automated patent translation. 

In the meantime, we will continue to build 

upon our existing work by building MT systems 

for additional language pairs and iteratively im-

proving upon our baseline translation perfor-

mance. Significant effort will also be spent on 

optimising the integration of translation memo-

ries with MT using techniques such as those de-

scribed in He et al. (2011). 

Acknowledgements 
 

The PLuTO project (ICT-PSP-250416) is 

funded under the European Union's ICT Policy 

Support Programme as part of the Competitive-

ness and Innovation Framework Programme 

References 
Armstrong, S., M. Flanagan, Y. Graham, D. 

Groves, B. Mellebeek, S. Morrissey, N. 

Stroppa and A. Way. 2006. MaTrEx: Ma-

chine Translation Using Examples. TC-STAR 

OpenLab on Speech Translation. Trento, Ita-

ly. 

Banerjee, S. and Lavie, A. (2005). METEOR: An 

Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with Im-

proved Correlation with Human Judgments. 

In Proceedings of Workshop on Intrinsic and 

Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for MT and/or 

Summarization at the 43th Annual Meeting of 

the Association of Computational Linguistics 

(ACL-05), Ann Arbor, MI. 

Ceausu, Alexandru, John Tinsley, Andrew Way, 

Jian Zhang, Paraic Sheridan, Experiments on 

Domain Adaptation for Patent Machine 

Translation in the PLuTO project, The 15th 

Annual Conference of the European Associa-

tion for Machine Translation, EAMT-2011, 

Leuven, Belgium 

Green, T., The necessity of syntax markers. two 

experiments with artificial languages. Journal 

of Verbal Learning and Behavior, 

18:481{496}, 1979. 

Isozaki, H., Sudoh, K., Tsukada, H., and Duh, K. 

Head finalization: A simple reordering rule 

for SOV languages. In Proceedings of the 5th 

Workshop on Machine Translation (WMT), 

Upsala, Sweden. 

Ma, Yanjun, Nicolas Stroppa, and Andy Way. 

2007. Boostrapping Word Alignment via 

Word Packing. In Proceedings of the 45th An-

nual Meeting of the Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics (ACL 2007), Prague, Czech 

Republic, pp.304—311 

Papineni, K., Roukos, S.,Ward, T., and Zhu,W.-

J. (2002). BLEU: a Method for Automatic 

Evaluationof Machine Translation. In Pro-

ceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics 

(ACL-02), pages 311–318, Philadelphia, PA. 

Talbot, David, Hideto Kazawa, Hiroshi Ichikwa, 

Jason Katz-Brown, Masakazu Seno, Franz 

Och A Lightweight Evaluation Framework for 

Machine Translation Reordering, In Proceed-

ings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Ma-

chine Translation (July 2011), Edinburgh, 

Scotland.pp. 12-21 

Tinsley, J., A. Way and P. Sheridan 

2010. PLuTO: MT for Online Patent Transla-

tion In Proceedings of the 9th Conferences of 

the Association for Machine Translation in the 

Americas. Denver, CO, USA. 

 

                                                      
i This paper is an extended abstract intended to accom-

pany an oral presentation. It is not intended to be a 

standalone scientific article. 

71


