










































Tracking the dynamics of kinship and social category terms with AustKin II


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Joint Workshop of LINGVIS & UNCLH, pages 98–107,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 24 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Tracking the dynamics of kinship and social category terms with 
AustKin II 

 
 
 

 
Patrick McConvell Laurent Dousset 

Australian National University CREDO – EHESS – AMU 
Canberra 3 place Victor Hugo 
Australia F-13003 Marseille 

Patrick.mcconvell@anu.edu.au dousset@ehess.fr 
 

 

 
 

Abstract 

The first AustKin project (AustKin I) 
collected a large database of kinship terms 
from Aboriginal languages all over Australia, 
endeavouring to maintain standards of 
spelling, kin formulae and group identities, 
without losing the details of original sources 
used. An online geospatial interface has been 
used to map distributions of forms of terms 
and their polysemies or equations. The 
patterns of the latter provide identification of 
kinship systems as defined in ethnology. The 
project proposed and tested hypotheses about 
the evolution of such systems in Australia 
based on knowledge of the common 
polysemies and related changes. The next 
stage, AustKin II, builds on hypotheses from 
the current authors and others, testing these 
further by adding two more components to 
the database: the marriage rules and the social 
categories used by each group. Of the latter, 
section and subsection systems are unique to 
Australia. The aim is to gauge how these 
different systems fit together and propose 
how they evolved over time and how they 
influenced each other. 

1.The AustKin project 

1.1The design of the AustKin database. 
 
The AustKin database documents words in the 
domain of kinship terminologies for 316 
Australian languages or dialects (which could be 
grouped into about 200 languages, depending on 
criteria used). The 3i6 languages/dialects have an 
average of approximately two different wordlists 
each. from different ethnographic or historical 
sources for each language or dialect, with a total 

of over 22 000 words that belong to the domain 
of kinship.  
   Designing a database and an interface to such a 
database has revealed itself to be a complex 
matter since the number and diversity of 
variables that need to be taken into account are 
considerable. In summary, the following had to 
be taken into account: 
 
A – Systemic variables 
1) Kinship terminologies are not just words, but 
also relationships; and in particular they are 
related among each other. 
2) A kinship terminology constitutes a system; 
but not all kinship terminologies belong to the 
same type of system. 
3) Kinship terminologies change and they need 
to be placed against their chronological and 
historical background. 
 
B – Sporadic variables 
1) Kinship terminologies are recorded by 
humans, and often by non-linguists; they include 
errors. 
2) Kinship terminologies are seldom complete, 
and need to be completed when possible through 
other sources. 
3) Original Informants may not always have been 
local speakers. 
 
Arriving at, or at least proposing, potential 
solutions to the B-type variables was not as 
difficult as it may appear. The solution chosen 
was to keep each kin term in its original form as 
it appears in the original source, while working 
with rewritten words (for instance those in an 
orthography standard for the whole database) 
linked to the original source, so as to be able to 
retrace every step of transformation and analysis 

98



undertaken for each kinship term and system. 
The standard orthography used for comparison is 
based on common ground between practical 
orthographies in use, and can be entered on a 
normal keyboard, rather than for instance the 
Interenational Phonetic Alphabet. 
   We have also chosen to record as many as 
possible sets for each language and to investigate 
these in parallel. And further, the individual 
researchers had the opportunity to create a 
“canonical” set out of these various and often 
partial word lists for analytical purposes.  
   Here again, it was important to be able to trace 
steps and modifications. Therefore, each such 
canonical set is attributed to a participant of the 
team, and each participant of the team can create 
his or her own canonical set, or create other types 
of sets of words based on typologies or 
groupings the researcher is interested in. 
 
1.2 Standardisation of  kinterm meanings 
 
Kinship terms can generally be described using 
the following elementary idiom, which is in one 
form or another applied in anthropology and 
linguistics, but which we have to some degree 
adapted to our needs. 
 
Females: 
M = Mother (one generation above, direct line) 
Z = Sister (same generation, identical link to M 
or F) 
D = Daughter (one generation below, direct line) 
W = Wife (same generation, alliance, reciprocal 
of H) 
 
Males: 
F = Father (one generation above, direct line) 
B = Brother (same gen., identical link to M or F) 
S = Son (one generation below, direct line) 
H =Husband (same generation, alliance, 
reciprocal of W) 
 
Additionally, since this element is in some cases 
structurally significant, the following two codes 
are used to indicate relative age difference: 
e = elder 
y = younger 
 
Also, for some terms, the gender of the 
propositus needs to be detailed: f=female; m = 
male. The ‘propositus’ refers to e.g. ‘John’ in 
‘John’s father’. Thus, for example, a man’s 
patrilateral female cross-cousin is a father’s 
sister’s daughter and is coded as mFZD. Terms 

for grandchildren require this distinction of 
gender of propositus to be made. For instance the 
reciprocal of MM is fDS or fDD, whereas the 
reciprocal of MF is mDS or mDD. 
   ‘Cross’ in the term ‘cross-cousin’ means that 
there is difference in gender between the first 
two kin links in the kintype e.g. beween ‘mother’ 
and ‘brother’ in MBD and ‘father’ and ‘sister’ in 
FZD. The obverse is ‘parallel’, where the gender 
of the two links is the same, as in the parallel 
cousins  MZD and FBD. In many kinship 
systems around the world, including in Australia, 
this is a fundamental distinction: for instance 
‘cross-cousins’ can frequently marry, whereas 
parallel cousins are classed as siblings, and 
cannot marry. ‘Cross’ and ‘parallel’ are also used 
for other relations e.g. MF is a cross-grandparent 
and MM is a parallel grandparent. 
   The way of coding by letters concatenated into 
strings representing kintypes allows for the 
search and establishment of equivalences (also 
known as ‘equations’ or ‘polysemies’). For 
example, if after searching for equivalences, the 
words for MBD and FZD are found to be 
identical in some languages, then we can assume 
that cross-cousins are not distinguished 
according to father’s or mother’s line. Such 
conclusions have important consequences for the 
identification, for example, of so-called skewed 
systems). In such systems, the equivalences are 
between vertically adjacent generations, for 
instance an MBD can be called M in an Omaha 
system, which identifies relatives linked 
vertically in the male line. 
 

1.3 Kinterm polysemies and kinship 
systems 

A well-used search function in the AustKin 
database is the polysemy search. This finds 
languages in which specific kin types are united 
in one kin term. So to take the examples already 
mentioned, we can use this function to find 
languages in which MBD=FZD, or MBD=M. 
These instances of polysemy can then be mapped 
on-line using the geo-spatial interface of 
AustKin.  The actual forms of these terms can 
also be mapped using another search function 
and overlays of language families and subgroups 
used to get a preliminary idea of whether the 
forms and the polysemies are correlated with 
linguistic groupings. 
 

99



These polysemies are the prime features which 
identify what we know as ‘kinship systems’. 
MBD=FZD, for instance, is a  symmetrical 
system of cross-cousin terminology and, as 
discussed in the section on AustKin II,  tends to 
be associated with symmetrical cross-cousin 
marriage. On the other hand, if MBD ≉ FZD (the 
terms for the kin types are different) then this an 
asymmetrical system, associated with 
asymmetrical marriage in many cases.  
   MBD =M is a feature of an Omaha skewing 
system. Even in the case of skewing, it is often 
the case that there is variability between the use 
of separate or the same term depending on social 
and discourse contexts, remarked also for other 
types of systems in Australia (Dousset, 2002, 
2003) as well as elsewhere in the world by 
Kronenfeld (2009). The database allows coding 
of such contexts of variation. 
   From Morgan (1997 [1871]) on, it has been 
remarked that there is a limited set of ways in 
which kinship terminologies vary, and there have 
been several attempts to codify these as named 
systems. The normal usage of the term ‘kinship 
system’ in anthropology emphasises patterns of 
equivalence as discussed in the above paragraphs 
Systems which have more than one diagnostic 
equation can be plotted using the AustKin 
database. The ‘Kariera’ system, named after a 
language group reputedly with this pattern in its 
full form, exhibits several equations and non-
equations in the grandparental generation 
 
MM=FFZ≠FM=MFZ; FF=MMB≠MF=FMB; 
 
This type of system also usually has the 
symmetrical cross-cousin pattern FZD=MBD, 
FZS=MBS . However, adding additional criteria 
for these named types may not be best practice. 
Rather, one of the strategies we have followed in 
AustKin I research is to propose hypotheses 
about which are the most robust diagnostic 
patterns and then verify empirically in our 
database the extent to which other patterns can 
be predicted by the most diagnostic pattern of 
polysemy, e.g. the grandparental equations or 
non-equations cited above for ‘Kariera’ 
(McConvell and Hendery, to appear).  
   ‘Kariera’ itself can be considered as a sub-type 
of the Dravidian system, found in many societies 
on all continents, where ‘cross’ and ‘parallel’ 
relatives are rigorously distinguished. However, 
in the Australian Kariera systems this 
characteristic of distinguishing cross and parallel 
is found strongly expressed in the grandparental 

generation, whereas elsewhere in the world this 
may not be the case.  
 
Kariera is only one of the systems in Australia. 
Others include the ‘Aranda’ system in which  
 
MM≠FFZ≠FM≠MFZ; FF≠MMB≠MF≠FMB  
 
in other words, twice the number of distinctive 
terms. Other kinds of systems are those with 
asymmetrical cross-cousin terms (eg 
FZD≠MBD) and asymmetrical grandparent 
terms, which form a kind of half-way house 
between Kariera and Aranda, for instance  
 
MM≠FFZ≠FM=MFZ; FF≠MMB≠MF=FMB 
 
One system which neutralises the cross-parallel 
division found in Kariera is the so-called 
‘Aluridja’ system. In some such systems the 
main feature is the neutralisation of distinctions 
between cross-cousins and parallel 
cousins/siblings. In some systems, such as in the 
Western Desert, the distinction between cross 
and parallel grandparents is also neutralised 
yielding a system like the modern European 
grandmother-grandfather terminology. 
 
1.4 Reconstruction of proto-forms, proto 
meanings and proto-systems 
 
While anthropological (ethnological) research on 
kinship has sometimes been comparative, 
producing synchronic typologies of systems, it 
has rarely focused on diachronic change and 
reconstruction. Even the work on transformations 
from Levi-Strauss to more recent significant 
work such as Godelier et al. (1998)  has not tied 
transformations to times, places and lexical 
forms. 
   In linguistics, however, there has been a current 
of research on reconstructing kinship terms and 
systems (e.g. Blust, 1980; Whistler, 1980), but 
not in Australia. Our aim in the AustKin project 
has been to apply the comparative method to 
Australian kinship data using systematic 
querying of databases, and marry the results to 
anthropological work.  
   One of the key issues in kinship reconstruction 
is understanding and prediction of types of 
semantic change. A guiding principle has been 
that most semantic change happens via a stage of 
polysemy. In our database we can find instances 
of polysemy A=B which lie between meaning A 

100



and meaning B. So for instance we can map 
M=MBD and MB=MBS, two of the key Omaha 
equations. These show distributions of this 
polysemy (with different forms of kinship terms) 
in various areas (Figure 1, see McConvell, in 
press). 
 
Figure 1: Omaha skewing polysemies in Northern 
Australia 
 

 
 

 
These polysemy patterns have implications for 
the change in meaning of terms and their 
reconstruction. Note that one of the languages 
with an Omaha skewing pattern in Figure 1 is 
Ayabadhu in eastern Cape York Peninsula. Now 
look at the distribution of cognates of the root for 
MB in Ayabadhu (kaala) in Figure 2. The MB 
meanings are all clustered around Cape York 
Peninsula in the Paman subgroup of Pama-
Nyungan and to some extent south of there (the 
left-side blue half-arrows). However there are 
also cognates scattered north-west into Yolngu, 
in North-east Arnhem Land, west into Ngumpin-
Yapa, south-east into Southern Queensland and 
Northern New South Wales. All these latter 
forms of the root (the right-side red half-arrows) 
have the meaning of (matrilateral) cross-cousin 
and/or spouse or sibling-in-law (the latter 
polysemy change is due to cross-cousin 
marriage). 
   The hypothesis to explain this striking pattern 
is that the original meaning is MB, as 
reconstructed in proto-Paman, but also, we 
suggest, in proto-Pama-Nyungan. The meaning 
change to MB’s child (MBD/MBS) and 
subsequently extended to spouse through another 
common polysemy, is due to the existence of 
Omaha skewing in Paman languages, which is 
the bridge between the uncle and cousin/spouse 
meaning. This bridge remains intact in the form 
of a polysemy in some languages such as 
Ayabadhu. 
 
 
 

Figure 2: distribution *kaal MB > MBS > spouse 
 

 
 
This method of reconstruction has now been 
applied to many of the kinship terms in our 
database, providing reconstructions of proto-
forms and proto-meanings with accounts of 
semantic change which accord with the highly 
constrained types of polysemy we know of, and 
geographical distribution of the languages.  
   While kinship terms are usually inherited, there 
are a number of loan forms, and the source of 
these is recorded in the database. Two types of 
these have been examined in the project. 
 
1. forms which are imported to fill a gap in a 
system when there is a change in kinship system, 
for instance the fact that all terms for FF in 
Ngumpin-Yapa are borrowed from different 
sources points to a change to an Aranda system 
from one with less grandparent terms 
 
2. forms which are widely borrowed 
(Wanderwörter) tend to be affinal (in-law) terms 
or have a polysemy which includes an affinal 
sense. The examples of these examined seem to 
indicate a change in marriage arrangements and 
associated avoidance and joking relationships 
over time (McConvell, 2011).  
 
2. The AustKin II project 
 
We are now designing an AustKin II database, 
linked to the AustKin I but being able to store, 
handle and map two additional features of 
kinship and social organization: 1) marriage rules, 
including aspects of prescription, proscription 
(unmarriageability) , preferential and alternative 
marriages; and 2) category systems such as 
moieties, semi-moieties, sections and subsections. 
We aim to track and visualise how these systems 
interact with each other over time. 

Ngarinyin 

Nunggubuyu Anindilyakwa 

Marra 

Ayabadhu 

Guugu 
Yimidhirr 

101



 
2.1 Marriage rules  
 
In Aboriginal Australia, marriages take place 
between kinship categories or classes, not just 
between individuals, lineages, clans or moieties. 
A preferential or prescribed wife for a male 
propositus may be a MBD (mother’s brother’s 
daughter); or she may be a MMBDD (mother’s 
mother’s brother’s daughter’s daughter), or she 
may be a classificatory – not actual - DD 
(daughter’s daughter) etc. In most cases, the 
hypothesis can be advanced that the kinship 
terminologies which are part of the AustKin I 
database are coherent with this new database that 
will record and map the marriage relationships. 
   Earlier attempts at typologies of kinship 
systems often included marriage rules in the 
definition of kinship systems. This would not be 
a wise precedent for us to follow. We know for 
instance that sometimes the marriage systems do 
not ‘fit’ exactly with the kinship terminologies.  
Because of our concern with change we also 
need to record such cases very carefully as they 
may represent ‘phasing in’ of a kinship 
terminology or marriage system not totally in 
harmony with each other due to time-lag between 
them, or competition between different systems 
exerting influence on a group. It is important to 
record marriage rules separately from kinship 
systems to compare them as independent factors.  
   In many cases there is a main ‘straight’ 
marriage partner recognized, and this person can 
be designated by a kin type e.g. MBD for a man. 
These are often classificatory rather than actual 
cross-cousins, and in some groups actual first 
cross-cousins are unmarriageable. For many 
systems though there is a hierarchy of preference 
for marriageable kin types. Among the Gurindji 
for instance, for a man the MMBDD is the ‘first 
choice’, but a cross-cousin MBD/FZD is second 
choice, and so on.  There is a need then for a 
ranked coding of marriage options, using kin 
types, with other systems and cultural categories 
being brought in where necessary. 
   Some marriage systems may be a good deal 
more complex than this, even at the level of ideal 
rules, involving, for instance, preference for 
certain other clans or language groups, 
geographic exogamy, or contingent dispreference 
for marriage with families with whom marriage 
had been contracted in previous generations, 
generating a pattern Keen (2002) calls ‘shifting 
webs’. Where these factors are systematic they 
should be allowed for in our coding protocols. 

 
Beyond the ‘ideal rules’ of marriage, we do 
intend to make a foray into the actual marriages 
that have taken place over time, at least in some 
manageable sample data sets, and link the 
systemic analysis of terminologies and expressed 
rules to actual genealogies. There are now 
several such large genealogical databases 
available which some members of our team are 
working with, and which could provide the basis 
for such work. So far analysis has been done 
with these data sets using the Social Network 
Analysis tool Pajek (de Nooy et al., 2011), by 
Woodrow Denham and James Rose, research 
associates on this project.    
   One exercise could be comparison of 
predictions of ideal marriage rules with what had 
actually occurred, and if there is divergence, 
seeking reasons for that. Among the Gurindji it 
seems that preferred ‘straight’ marriage has been 
much less adhered to than among the 
neighbouring Warlpiri. Several possibilities exist 
for explaining such discrepancies. The Warlpiri 
are a larger population, and can presumably 
make marriages which address practical issues in 
choosing spouses at the same time as abiding by 
the strict rules. Also possibly there has been 
change in the marriage patterns among the 
Gurndji in the last two hundred years which 
increases optionality without abandoning the 
system. In the Western Desert, another example, 
there seem to be two at first sight contradictory 
strategies involved. One that aims to consolidate 
group membership through rules of repeated 
marriages between families; and another that 
aims at the diversification of the social network 
through the prohibition of these repetitions. This 
is a further topic to be investigated by examining 
marriage patterns in selected regions and 
possible conditioning factors. 
   There is often a strong connection between 
kinship terms and marriage rules. Because affinal 
terms are associated with kintypes which also 
have a ‘consanguineal’ meaning, there is often a 
polysemy between them – not only between 
spouse and cross-cousin in a Kariera system, but 
between WM (mother-in-law) and FZ also in a 
Kariera system, and other pairings. The change 
in meanings of terms provide evidence of change 
in marriage systems over time, for instance the 
old root *kaal- MB>MBS reflected in Warlpiri 
kali- as ‘spouse, MMBDC’. There has been 
change from preference for cross-cousin spouse 
to a second-cousin spouse – the latter known to 
be associated with the ‘Aranda’ system. 

102



Other connections between kin term polysemies 
and marriage rules can include the type 
mentioned earlier, that is, the equation 
FZD=MBD=W, that might imply bilateral cross-
cousin marriage.  However this and similar 
predictions should be tested empirically rather 
than taken for granted, and this is a task that the 
AustKin II database will be able to do. If the 
predictions are not borne out, then the proto-form 
or loan sources of the terms concerned can be 
investigated to determine if there has been 
historical change. 
   Other aspects which can be of importance in 
the relations between marriage and kinship terms, 
their origins and loan spread  are avoidance and 
ritual behaviours. We will try to use coding 
systems from the Ethnographic Atlas  (Murdock, 
1967; Gray, 1998) for this where possible, but 
we may again need to modify these to our needs. 
 
Figure 3: The general work plan for designing 
the marriage database and its interface 

 
2.2 Sections and subsections 
 
Sections and subsections and their development 
have been topics investigated over years by the 
present authors Dousset (2005 on spread of 
sections in the Western Desert) and McConvell 
(1985, 1997 on the origin and spread of 
subsections in north central Australia). 
Sections and subsections are named sociocentric 
divisions, four and eight respectively. Each 
occurs in separate regions with a little overlap 
between them The sections are made up of a set 
pf classificatory or fictive  parallel  kin of the 
same or harmonic (+2 or -2) generations  In 
subsections each section is divided into two, with 
those who are classificatory mother’s mother(’s 
siblings) and woman’s daughter’s children to 
each other separated into a different subsection 
from siblings and father’s father(‘s siblings). 
They are categories which each individual 
derives from his or her parents, but the section or 
subsection term of the child are different from 

those of its parents. Sections and subsections are 
unique to Australia.  
   To illustrate a four-section system, take the 
Gamilaraay in northern NSW: each section has a 
different term for men and women: the sections 
are ordered into two named matrilineal moieties 
and two (unnamed) generation levels (see table, 
based on Wafer and Lissarrague (2008):454). 
The marriage rule is articulated in terms of 
section membership: a person’s spouse should be 
from the opposite matrimoiety and the same 
generation level; e.g. a Gambuu man marries a 
Maadhaa woman and their children are Gabii and 
Gabudhaa, while a Buudhaa woman’s husband is 
Marrii and their children are Yibaay and 
Yibadha. 

 
Generation 
level/Matrimoiety 

Gubadhin
-Yanguu 

Dhilbi-
Wudhurru 

1 Masculine Gambuu Marrii 
1 Feminine Buudhaa Maadhaa 
2 Masculine Yibaay Gabii 
2 Feminine Yibadha Gabudhaa 

 
In this case, and many others where there is a 
section system, the prescribed marriage is with a 
classificatory cross-cousin (a mother’s brother’s 
child or father’s sister’s child).  
   Regarding subsections, the 8 skin system, 
McConvell’s work has shown clearly how 
important linguistic evidence is to plotting 
evolution and spread of such systems.  He was 
able to explain the apparent gender prefixes in 
subsection terms of gender-less languages like 
Warlpiri (masculine Japanangka vs. feminine 
Napanangka) by tracing the origin of the terms to 
languages far to the north which earlier had 
gender prefixes of the right form (see also 
Harvey (2008)). 
   Unlike kinship terms, which tend to be mostly 
inherited, subsection terms, and probably most 
section terms, are diffused (loanwords). It  seems 
unlikely that kinship terminologies, and social 
categories database, have parallel histories. More 
complex relationships are likely to be uncovered 
in this project. 
   Relative chronology of the spread of 
subsections from the origin area in the north was 
discovered by use of the ‘linguistic stratigraphy’ 
of sound changes in the subsection terms, 
compared to sound changes in other words. In 
some cases it may be possible to convert these 
relative chronologies into absolute chronologies 
by use of archaeological dating of material 
culture items, terms for which show related 

103



patterns of sound change, or perhaps datable 
contacts with overseas visitors who brought 
loanwords (like the Macassans) over the past few 
hundred years. 
   Both sections and subsections undergo 
permutations or rotations in some areas into 
which they diffused. For instance, in the Pilbara 
of Western Australia, in the systems shown in the 
tables below, Kariera (1) and Coastal 
Nyangumarta (2) have the same arrangement 
except that the term Milangka has replaced the 
older term Palyeri (Palyarri). However in Inland 
Nyuangumarts (3)  the terms have switched 
around positions on the grid – Karimarra the 
classificatory mother or daughter of Panaka on 
the coast has become his/her spouse inland, and 
Purungu the reverse process has occurred  
 
1. Kariera sections  (Radcliffe-Brown ,1913) 
 
A Banaka   B Burung 
C Karimera D Palyeri 

2. Coastal Nyangumarta sections (O’Grady & 
Mooney, 1973) 

A Panaka   B Purungu 
C Karimarra D Milangka 

3. Inland Nyangumarta sections (O’Grady & 
Mooney, 1973) 

A Panaka   B Karimarra 
C Purungu  D Milangka 
 
In part of the Western Desert a partial merger of 
two section systems took place yielding what 
was known as a 6-section system (but see 
Doussset 2005 for a different interpretation). A 
more dramatic merger of two sections systems 
with a particular pattern of marriage alliance 
yielded the original subsection system 
(McConvell, 1985, 1997).  
   McConvell (1985) also analyses the various 
permutations of subsection terms in Arnhem 
Land as a historical sequence and advances the 
idea that ‘bottlenecks’ allow for such changes to 
occur, where unorthodox marriages occur among 
fringe isolated groups leading to change in the 
systems. This kind of hypothesis will be 
investigated further in AustKin II. 
   It is important for the AustKin II project to 
have a clear method of coding the meaning and 
structure of section and subsection systems. The 
Pilbara examples above illustrate the method 
introduced by Radcliffe-Brown, in which each 
position in the grid has a letter A-D (and a 

number 1-2 in the case of subsections).  This 
system potentially indicates two things:  
(a) the (pseudo-) kinship relationships between 
the sections A-B (spouse, cross-cousin etc); A-C 
(mother-child, MB-niece/nephes etc) and so on. 
(b) the ‘pragmatic equivalence’ between two 
sections/subsections with the same alphanumeric 
code in different language groups, that is that A 
refers to the same category of people in wider 
dealing between groups, withut necessarily using 
a linguistically related form 
   It is necessary to include the Radcliffe-Brown 
(1930-31) coding in the database simply because 
this is the most widely used standard. However 
while criterion (b) is clear from the literature in 
some cases, in others it is less so and requires 
fine grained historical and ethnological research 
– bearing in mind also that these systems are no 
longer in use in many areas and not well 
remembered. Pragmatic equivalence is a key to 
understanding how systems work, however, since 
they are inherently wide-scale linking together 
people in large marriage and socioeconomic 
networks. 
   Other coding schemas or types of 
representations will have to be included, such as 
those proposed by Cresswell (1975) or Service 
(1960). However, in addition to the coding of 
sections and subsections in an optimal way, we 
also need to code for moieties and other social 
institutions and category systems such as clans. 
Matrimoieties and patrimoieties are found in 
different areas, sometimes close together. Berndt 
(2000) represents such social classifications 
across Australia in a map, but the lack of ability 
to show layering and overlaps of different kinds 
of systems is a drawback with such 
representations (cf. McConvell’s maps in 
Peterson et al. (2005):91). 
   Moreover, moieties have clans (matriclans or 
patriclans) affiliated to them. Both moieties and 
clans often carry totemic animal names. Testart 
(1978) has argued, from evidence of associated 
clan species, that the matrimoieties historically 
preceded the patrimoieties and that there was a 
transformation of matrimoieties into 
patrimoieties.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

104



Figure 4: The general work plan for setting up the 
social category database 

 
 
2.3 Analysis of synchronic and diachronic 
relationships between kin, skins and 
marriage 
 
In relation to Australia here has been a tradition 
of combining kinship terminology, marriage 
rules and social categories (sections and 
subsections) into a unitary ‘kinship system’ in 
which these elements are inextricably connected 
by close functional cohesion. This perception of 
how Australian systems operate became 
especially influential due to analyses of section 
systems by anthropologists exploring 
componential approaches such as Burling (1962), 
Often this nglects the relative independence and 
differing histories of these elements. 
   More significantly for our project, such an 
approach does not facilitate comparison and the 
tracing of diachronic interactions of kinship 
terminology, marriage and social categories 
which we have identified as a major goal. 
   We need to design the AustKin II database so 
that these elements are in separate modules but 
their relationships can be tracked both 
visualization by historical-geographical maps 
and subject to statistical analysis showing how 
closely the elements match with each other. We 
already have standard assumptions which we can 
recast as hypotheses and pay close attention to 
the mismatches and deviations. 
   Beyond these three components there is also a 
demographic one, in particular how actual 
marriage patterns relate to maintenance and 
change of marriage rules, kinship systems and 
social categories. The possibility of ‘bottlenecks’ 
leading to change in social category systems has 
been mentioned– this relates both to marriage 
patterns, general interaction and perhaps 
population size and density. 
   A number of writers have proposed hypotheses 
relating different types of social categories to 
differing ecological conditions (e.g, Yengoyan, 
1976, cf. McKnight, 1981). Ecological 
determinist hypotheses generally do not work 

well, and are flawed by their synchronic and 
ahistorical nature – when what is needed is 
understanding of movements which drive 
diffusion of such systems. 
   Hypotheses such as Keen (1982, 2004) linking 
polygyny to types of marriage and associated age 
structure and marriage network flows in different 
areas of Arnhem Land are more promising.  The 
work done in AustKin I developing a diachronic 
dimension for Yolngu  kinship in North-east 
Arnhem land (McConvell & Keen, 2011) can 
now be put together with the correlational work 
by Keen to explore the dynamics of how kinship, 
marriage and demography influence each other 
over time. 
   Another more wide ranging hypothesis  to 
which we pay attention is that of White and 
Denham (2009), where the functional advantage 
of types of kinship systems such as Omaha 
skewing and social categories like sections and 
subsections lies in their driving force towards 
exogamy, rescuing small groups from otherwise 
almost certain demographic collapse. 
Simulations could play a role in testing these 
kinds of hypotheses.  
   If our historical reconstruction work can begin 
to find relative or even absolute dates for these 
institutional changes, we can contribute to debate 
which has gone on for some time over whether 
the type of society of recent times in Australia is 
very ancient or whether there was a major 
change, perhaps related to ‘intensification’ 
(economic and population growth) identified by 
archaeologists in the Holocene. It has been 
argued that this led to more stable groupings and 
ethnicities, based on specific types of kinship, 
marriage and social organisation. 
   The hypothesis of the origin and spread of 
subsections now has a secure foundation, but 
requires much more detailed work of the kind 
outlined for the AustKin II project. The question 
of the origin of sections, the older system from 
which subsections evolved by merger of two 
section systems, is still at an earlier stage . 
 
3.Technology 
 
As is the case with AustKin I (Dousset et al., 
2010), AustKin II  will be based on a rather 
classic LAMP environment (Linux-Apache-
MySQL-PHP) to assure portability, 
redeployment and simultaneous multiuser 
tasking. Data itself is stored in a highly flat and 
atomized manner in multiple small-scale tables 
linked to each other through multiple 

105



relationships. Groupings, filtering, sorting, 
recombination, or hierarchical relationships are 
reconstructed through the PHP scripts on the fly 
and if necessary stored in other database tables to 
ensure as strictly as possible a clear distinction 
between interpretation or analysis and the raw 
data itself. In AustKin II, this model will allow 
us to reconstruct data following different modes 
of representation and Coding (Radcliffe-Brown, 
Cresswell, Service etc.) without actually 
modifying the raw data itself. 
 
Figure 5: Simplified relationships between tables 
in AustKin I, model for AustKin II 
 

 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
The study of the evolution of Australian kinship 
systems and the relationship between them and 
marriage and social category (‘skins’) systems is 
significant not just for Australia. It has been 
claimed by Allen (1998) that the primordial 
world social organization was based on a 
‘tetradic’ structure similar to sections, from 
which evolved Dravidian-Kariera systems. Hage 
(2003) claimed to have found ‘Kariera’ systems 
in proto-languages in many part of the world.  
   If the earliest kinship systems we can detect in 
Australia by our reconstruction methods are 
Kariera, then this adds some weight to the world 
primordial (or very early) Dravidian-Kariera 
hypothesis, but is by no means convincing, as we 
are probably dealing with proto-languages of not 
much more than 5000 years in age. A similar 
problem of relative short age also besets the idea 
that Australian sections may be relics of a very 
early human type of social organization. It may 
be that sections are in fact younger than the 
proto-languages e.g. proto-Pama-Nyungan) and 
this is something AustKin II may be able to find 
out.In order to give credible answers to such 
questions we should not indulge in speculation, 
as so many have. We have some good methods 
in linguistics and ethnology and these have to be 
put to work systematically.  
 

We have made a good start with AustKin I and 
its database of Australian indigenous kinship 
terminology, which enables us to reconstruct 
systems going back some thousands of years and 
visualize the distributions of patterns and 
changes. The next step, AustKin II, brings this 
together with other modules in a database dealing 
with marriage and the social category systems, 
especially sections and subsections. With these 
tools in hand we will explore the co-evolution of 
these systems - their interaction with each other 
over time.  
 
References  
 
Nicholas Allen. 1998. The prehistory of Dravidian-

type terminologies. In Maurice Godelier, Thomas 
Trautmann & F. Tjon Sie Fat (eds.) 
Transformations of kinship, 314-331. 

Ronald Berndt. 2000. The World of the First 
Australians. Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press. 

Robert Blust. 1980. Early Austronesian Social 
Organization: The Evidence of Language. Current 
Anthropology, 21(2):205-47.  

Robbins Burling. 1962. A structural restatement of 
Njamal kinship terminology. Man, 62:122-124. 

R. Cresswell.  1975. La parenté, Cresswell R. (ed.) 
Elements d'Ethnologie, 2: 132-174. Paris: Armand 
Collin. 

Wouter De Nooy, Andrej Mrvar and  Vladimir 
Batagelj. 2011. Exploratory Social Network 
Analysis with Pajek. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Laurent. Dousset. 2002. Accounting for context and 
substance: the Australian Western Desert kinship 
system. Anthropological Forum, 12(2):193-204. 

Laurent  Dousset. 2003. On the misinterpretation of 
the Aluridja kinship system type (Australian 
Western Desert). Social Anthropology, 11(1): 43-
61. 

Laurent Dousset. 2005. Assimilating identities: Social 
Networks and the Diffusion of Sections. Sydney: 
Oceania Monograph 57. 

Laurent  Dousset. 2011. Australian Aboriginal 
Kinship: an introductory handbook with particular 
emphasis on the Western Desert. Pacific-credo 
Publications. 

 Laurent  Dousset. In press. Horizontal and vertical 
skewing: similar objectives, two solutions. In 
Thomas R. Trautmann and Peter M. Whiteley 
(eds) Crow-Omaha: New Light on a Classic 
Problem of Kinship Analysis. Arizona University 
Press. 

Laurent Dousset, Rachel Hendery, Claire Bowern, 
Harold Koch & Patrick McConvell. 2010. 
Developing a database for Australian Indigenous 
kinship terminology: The AustKin project, 
Australian Aboriginal Studies, 2010(1):42-56. 

106



Maurice Godelier, Thomas Trautmann and F. Tjon 
Sie Fat (eds.). 1998. Transformations of kinship. 
Washington DC: Smithsonian. 

J. Patrick Gray. 1998. Ethnographic Atlas Codebook. 
World Cultures, 10(1):86-136. 

Per Hage. 2003. The ancient Maya kinship system. 
Journal of Anthropological Research. 59:5-21. 

Mark Harvey. 2008. Proto-Mirndi. Canberra: Pacific 
Linguistics. 

Doug Jones and Bojka Milicic (eds.). 2010. Kinship, 
language and prehistory: Per Hage and the 
Renaissance in Kinship Studies. Salt Lake City: 
University of Utah Press. 

Ian Keen. 1982. How Some Murngin Men Marry Ten 
Wives: The Marital Implications of Matrilateral 
Cross-Cousin Structures. Man, 17(4): 620-642.  

Ian Keen. 2002. Seven Aboriginal marriage systems 
and their correlates. Anthropological Forum, 
12(2):145-157.  

Ian Keen. 2004. Aboriginal Economy and Society: 
Australia at the threshold of Colonisation. 
Melbourne: Oxford University Press. 

David Kronenfeld. 2009. Fanti kinship and the 
analysis of kinship terminologies. Champagne: 
University of Illinois Press. 

Patrick McConvell. 1985. The Origin of Subsections 
in Northern Australia. Oceania, 56:1-33.  

Patrick McConvell. In press. Omaha skewing in 
Australia: overlays, dynamism and change. In 
Thomas R. Trautmann and Peter M. Whiteley 
(eds) Crow-Omaha: New Light on a Classic 
Problem of Kinship Analysis. Arizona University 
Press. 

 Patrick McConvell. 1997. Long lost relations: Pama-
Nyungan and Northern kinship. In Patrick 
McConvell and Nicholas Evans (eds.) Archeology 
and Linguistics: Aboriginal Australia in Global 
Perspective,  207-236. 

Patrick McConvell and Nicholas Evans (eds.). 1997. 
Archaeology and Linguistics: Aboriginal Australia 
in Global Perspective. Melbourne: Oxford 
University Press. 

Patrick McConvell and Rachel Hendery.  To appear. 
What is a Kariera kinship system? 

Patrick McConvell and Ian Keen. 2010. The transition 
from Kariera to an asymmetrical system: Cape 
York Peninsula to North-east Arnhem Land. In 
Doug Jones and Bojka Milicic (eds.) Kinship, 
language and prehistory: Per Hage and the 
Renaissance in Kinship Studies, 99-132. 

Patrick McConvell,  Ian Keen and Rachel Hendery 
(eds.). In press. Kinship change and 
reconstruction. Salt Lake City: University of Utah 
Press. 

David McKnight. 1981. Distribution of Australian 
Aboriginal ‘Marriage Classes’: Environmental and 
Demographic Influences. Man (N.S.), 16: 75-89. 

Lewis Henry Morgan. 1997. Systems of consanguinity 
and affinity of the Human Family. Lincoln & 

London: University of Nebraska Press 
[Smithsonian Institution volume 17 [1871].  

George P. Murdock. 1967. Ethnographic Atlas. 
Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University Press. 

Geoffrey  O’Grady and Kathleen Mooney. 1973. 
Nyangumarda Kinship Terminology. 
Anthropological Linguistics, 15(1):1-23. 

Nicolas Peterson and  Patrick McConvell. 2005. 
Social Organisation. In Bill Arthur and Frances 
Morphy (eds.) Macquarie Atlas of Indigenous 
Australia, 88-112. Sydney:Macquarie. 

 Alfred Reginald Radcliffe-Brown. 1913. Three 
Tribes of Western Australia. Journal of the Royal 
Anthropological Institute, 43:143-19 

Alfred Reginald  Radcliffe-Brown. 1930-31. The 
social organization of Australian tribes. Oceania, 
1(1-4): 34-63; 206-46; 322-41; 426-56. 

Elman R. Service. 1960. Sociocentric Relationship 
Terms and the Australian Class System, G.E. Dole 
& R.L. Carneiro (eds.) Essays in the Science of 
Culture in Honour of Leslie G. White, 416-436. 
New York: Thomas Crowell.  

Alain Testart. 1978. Des Classifications dualistes en 
Australie. Paris: Maison des Sciences de l’homme. 

Thomas  Trautmann, and Peter Whiteley (eds.). In 
press.  Crow-Omaha: New Light on a Classic 
Problem of Kinship Analysis. Tucson: University 
of Arizona Press.  

James Wafer, Amanda Lissarague and Jean Harkins. 
2008. A handbook of Aboriginal languages of New 
South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory. 
Nambucca Heads: Muurbay. 

Kenneth Whistler. 1980. Proto-Wintun Kin 
Classification: a case study of reconstruction of a 
complex semantic system. Ph.D dissertation, 
University of California Berkeley.  

Douglas White and Woodrow Denham. 2007. The 
Indigenous Marriage Paradox. Paper for SASci 
meeting , San Antonio.  

Aram Yengoyan. I976. Structure, event and ecology 
in Aboriginal Australia: a comparative viewpoint. 
In Nicolas Peterson (eds.) Tribes and boundaries 
in Australia, 121-140. Canberra: Australian 
Institute of Aboriginal Studies. 

 

 

107


