










































Assisting Social Conversation between Persons with Alzheimers Disease and their Conversational Partners


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies (SLPAT), pages 37–46,
Montréal, Canada, June 7–8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Assisting Social Conversation between Persons with Alzheimer’s Disease 

and their Conversational Partners 
 

 

 

Nancy L. Green Curry Guinn Ronnie W. Smith  
UNC Greensboro 

Dept. of Computer Science 

UNC Wilmington 

Dept. of Computer Science 

East Carolina University 

Dept. of Computer Science 

 

Greensboro, NC, USA Wilmington, NC, USA Greenville, NC, USA  
nlgreen@uncg.edu guinnc@uncw.edu rws@cs.ecu.edu  

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

The number of people with dementia of the Alzheimer's 

type (DAT) continues to grow. One of the significant 

impacts of this disease is a decline in the ability to 

communicate using natural language. This decline in 

language facility often results in decreased social inter-

action and life satisfaction for persons with DAT and 

their caregivers. One possible strategy to lessen the ef-

fects of this loss of language facility is for the unaffect-

ed conversational partner (Facilitator) to "co-construct" 

short autobiographical stories from the life of the DAT-

affected conversational partner (Storyteller).  It has been 

observed that a skilled conversational partner can facili-

tate co-constructed narrative with individuals who have 

mild to moderate DAT.  Developing a computational 

model of this type of co-constructed narrative would 

enable assistive technology to be developed that can 

monitor a conversation between a Storyteller and Facili-

tator. This technology could provide context-sensitive 

suggestions to an unskilled Facilitator to help maintain 

the flow of conversation. This paper describes a frame-

work in which the necessary computational model of 

co-constructed narrative can be developed. An analysis 

of the fundamental elements of such a model will be 

presented.   

1 Introduction 

 

According to the Alzheimer’s Association 

[2009], 13% of Americans over the age of 65 pre-

sent with AD [Alzheimer’s Disease]. The decline 

in language associated with AD can result in de-

creased social interaction and life satisfaction for 

persons with AD and their caregivers.  In particu-

lar, persons with AD begin to feel a loss of their 

personal identity.  “Reminiscent therapy is an ex-

ample of an intervention activity that can reveal 

and support a person’s identity. Even the family 

can participate and play a major role to support 

their relative” (Cohene et al. 2005).  

 

It has been suggested that if caregivers can learn 

communication techniques to enhance social con-

versation with individuals affected by dementia of 

the Alzheimer’s type (DAT), it may make a signif-

icant difference in the quality of life of the persons 

with DAT, as well as reduce stress on their care-

givers (Dijkstra et al. 2004). One recommended 

technique (Moore and Davis 2002; Waller 2006) is 

for the unaffected conversational partner (called 

the Facilitator in this paper) to “co-construct” short 

autobiographical vignettes with the DAT-affected 

conversational partner (called the Storyteller in this 

paper). Typically, such “small stories” (Bamberg 

and Georgakopoulou 2008) present the teller’s 

self-identity (e.g., hard-working, frugal, etc.). Ac-

cording to Cheepen (1988), co-constructed narra-

tive is common in social conversation. 

Furthermore, skilled conversational partners can 

facilitate co-constructed narrative with individuals 

who have mild to moderate DAT (Davis 2005; Da-

vis & Maclagan 2009; Davis 2010). A co-

constructed narrative produced by a person with 

DAT in conversation with skilled Facilitators is 

illustrated in Figure 1.  Increased social interaction 

can improve quality of life by enabling persons 

with DAT to remain socially engaged, which in 

turn may reduce their health problems as well as 

delay memory loss (Davis and Pope 2009; Len-

chuk and Swain 2010). 

37



 

 
Figure 1. An excerpt from Shenk et al. (2002, p. 409) of 

a conversation between GM, a person with early moder-

ate DAT, and her skilled conversational partners BD 

and LM. We added annotations highlighting narrative 

elements (Labov 1972). 

 

 

While there have been several notable efforts in 

the area of communication training for caregivers 

of persons with DAT (see section 2.1), none have 

focused on assistive technology for improving 

communication in real-time as the conversation is 

occurring.  This paper presents a framework for 

developing a natural language processing system, 

ASSIST (Assistive Story Intervention Technolo-

gy), which can listen to the conversation between a 

person with DAT and his conversational partner 

and provide context-sensitive suggestions to the 

unaffected participant to help maintain the flow of 

conversation. In particular, ASSIST will help the 

unaffected partner to co-construct the autobio-

graphical stories of the participant with DAT.  To 

build a system such as ASSIST will require devel-

opment of a novel computational model of narra-

tive co-construction and other communication-

enhancing techniques for conversation with per-

sons with DAT.  After reviewing related research 

efforts, we present an analysis of the unique ele-

ments of the required computational model includ-

ing an NLU component designed to interpret the 

sometimes disfluent utterances of a Storyteller with 

DAT, a Dialogue/Story Manager which recognizes 

the discourse goals of the Storyteller and plans dia-

logue acts that the Facilitator could use to co-

construct the narrative, and an NLG/Coach that 

provides the Facilitator with suggestions on what 

to say next to co-construct the narrative and sustain 

the conversation.    

2 Related Research 

2.1 DAT Caregiver Communication 

For the most part, communication training for 

caregivers of persons with DAT has used non-

technological modes of active instruction such as 

role playing with human trainers (Ripich et al. 

1998, Burgio et al. 2001) and individualized one-

on-one coaching (McCallion et al. 1999, Bourgeois 

et al. 2004). Irvine et al. (2003) describe a comput-

er program that enables a user to observe videos of 

conversations in which nurse aids demonstrate use 

of recommended communication techniques in 

conversation with patients. Davis and colleagues 

have developed a range of computer-based training 

materials (Davis and Smith 2009; Smith, Davis et 

al. 2010) providing information on stereotypes of 

aging and dementia, communication changes in 

dementia, and communication techniques such as 

“quilting” (Moore and Davis 2003), in which the 

caregiver repeats or paraphrases statements given 

by the person with DAT that seem to be elabora-

tions or evaluations of elements of a narrative. 

Green and colleagues developed and evaluated a 

menu-based interactive system for training care-

givers to engage more effectively in social conver-

sation with persons with DAT (Green 2002; Green 

and Davis 2003; Green, Lawton and Davis 2004; 

Green 2005a; Green and Bevan 2009). 

 /* orientation: */ 

1. GM:  I just lived in a regular farm home. 
Farmed cotton, corn, eh-everything 

you…grow on a farm. 

2. BD:   That’s right. 
/* complicating action: */ 

3. GM:  I had a big ol’ cotton bag tied 
around me, pickin’ a hundred pounds of 

cotton … UhhmmHmm. 

4. BD:  A hundred pounds? An’ you so ti-
ny! 

5. GM:  Huh? 
6. LM: You’re a tiny person to be carrying 

that much cotton. 

7. GM: I decided one day I’d pick a hun-
dred pounds. Guess how much! 

8. LM: How much? 
/* resolution: */ 

9. GM:  A hundred and three. 
10. LM:  Oooohh.  
11. BD: Wow. 
12. GM:  I went over. 
13. BD: That’s fantastic. 

/* evaluation: */ 

14. GM: A hundred and three—you’ve got 
to grab it to…get a hundred and three 

pounds of cotton in one day.  

38



2.2 Augmentative and Alternative Communi-
cation Technology  

There has been recent interest in developing remi-

niscence technology for the general population, 

e.g., (Cosley et al. 2009; Petrelli et al. 2009). Wal-

ler (2006) cites the need to develop augmentative 

and alternative communication systems for people 

with complex communication needs (CCN) to en-

gage in conversational narrative. One assistive 

software package, Talk:About, enables someone 

with CCN to edit pre-stored text during a conversa-

tion, enabling the user to retell autobiographical 

stories. Phototalk (Allen et al. 2008) allows people 

with aphasia to manage personal photographs to 

support face-to-face communication. Non-

technology-based reminiscence therapy has been 

used in dementia care (Hsieh 2003; Woods et al. 

2005) and gerontological nursing (Burnside 1996).  

 

CIRCA is a computer system that people with de-

mentia and caregivers can use together to prompt 

reminiscing by providing multimedia stimuli (Alm 

et al. 2007). CIRCA provides touch-screen access 

to hypermedia presenting non-personalized remi-

niscence materials (e.g., photographs and music of 

a certain era). In a controlled study, CIRCA was 

compared to traditional reminiscence (TRAD) ses-

sions with materials provided by caregivers (Astell 

et al. 2010). In TRAD sessions, “the caregivers 

worked very hard to keep the interaction going, 

particularly by asking lots of questions. These were 

typically closed questions … that did not encour-

age either initiation or choosing [topics] by people 

with dementia … caregivers offer more choice dur-

ing CIRCA sessions and are much more likely to 

encourage the people with dementia to decide what 

they want to look at and talk about” (p. 7).  

 

Baecker and colleagues (Cohene et al. 2005; Mas-

simi et al. 2008; Smith et al. 2009; Damianakis et 

al. 2010) have been investigating creation and use 

of personalized DVD-based multimedia biog-

raphies by persons with AD and mild cognitive 

impairments. These researchers note that organiza-

tions such as the National Institutes of Health rec-

ommend creation of personal reminiscence aids 

such as photographs to help maintain the affected 

individual’s sense of identity (Smith et al. 2009). 

“The loss of identity is among the most devastating 

effects of Alzheimer’s disease … it is possible that 

sensitively designed technologies may help com-

pensate for identity loss by acting as external 

memory or conversational aids” (Massimi et al. 

2008).  Roark et al. (2011) report on an initial 

study of technology-assisted co-construction.  

However, their emphasis is very different from 

ours and is focused on assisting with word and 

phrase completion of general conversation involv-

ing typewritten communication. 

2.3 Narrative Technology 

Cassell’s research group has focused on systems 

that interact with human storytellers. In Grand-

Chair, an embodied conversational agent (ECA) 

portrays a grandchild who elicits autobiographical 

stories from elderly users by providing feedback 

(through speech recognition technology) while the 

stories are recorded (Smith 2000). Story Listening 

Systems (SLS) use technology to encourage young 

children to create personally relevant stories in or-

der to improve their oral linguistic skills (Cassell 

2004). Sam the CastleMate (Ryokai, Vaucelle, & 

Cassell 2003) is an SLS in which SAM, an ECA, 

listens to the child’s stories (also using speech 

recognition technology) and tells stories to the 

child. Natural language processing and statistical 

machine learning tools have been applied to the 

problem of automatic plot analysis of children’s 

stories (Halpin et al. 2004; Passonneau et al. 2007) 

and to creation of story understanding tools (Elson 

and McKeown 2009).  

 

Other researchers have focused on story genera-

tion. Narrative scholars distinguish the fabula – 

events in a fictional world – and sujhet – the au-

thor’s choices in presentation of selected elements 

of the fabula. (Note that in our future ASSIST sys-

tem, the fabula is already established when the us-

er’s stories are collected; the role of ASSIST is to 

facilitate the retelling, i.e., the sujhet.) Most past 

natural language generation research in narrative 

has focused on prose rather than dialogue (Calla-

way 2000; Theune et al. 2007; Hervás et al. 2006). 

Piwek and Stoyanchev (2010) have investigated 

automatically transforming human-authored narra-

tive prose into dialogue performed by virtual char-

acters as a way of presenting educational 

information.  

39



3 Corpus Analysis  

Most previous computationally-oriented re-

search on human-human dialogue has focused on 

task-driven dialogue, i.e., dialogue intended to 

achieve an agent’s (or agents’ collaborative) task 

goals such as making a travel reservation. In con-

trast, ASSIST is modeling social conversation con-

taining co-constructed narrative. That is, through 

certain conversational moves one participant (the 

Facilitator) can enable the other participant (the 

Storyteller) to retell short autobiographical stories, 

despite the Storyteller’s language and memory 

problems associated with DAT. The model will be 

informed by interdisciplinary research on retained 

language competencies of speakers with DAT 

(Davis 2005; Guendouzi and Muller 2006), as well 

as by our own statistical and qualitative analyses of 

the Carolina Conversations Collection (CCC) Cor-

pus (Davis and Pope 2009; Pope and Davis 2011). 

The CCC corpus includes 400 recorded and tran-

scribed conversations between researchers and stu-

dents and 125 persons with DAT. Our model will 

be constructed by annotating and analyzing a set of 

the DAT conversations as described in more detail 

in Section 4. The overall goal is to analyze the ef-

ficacy of narrative co-construction and other com-

munication-enhancing techniques proposed in 

previous studies of language of persons with DAT 

(e.g., Ripich and Wykle, 1996; Ramanathan 1997; 

Moore and Davis 2002; Santo Pietro and Ostuni, 

2003) and to possibly identify other effective tech-

niques.  As context for discussion of the necessary 

analysis of the CCC, we will first present a high-

level description of the necessary system architec-

ture. 

4 System Architecture 

The ASSIST architecture is shown in Figure 2. 

While a Storyteller and Facilitator converse, 

ASSIST listens with the goals of detecting poten-

tial problems in the flow of conversation and of 

providing suggestions to the Facilitator on what to 

say next to co-construct the narrative and sustain 

conversation. The tasks of the NLU component 

include syntactic and semantic interpretation and 

reference resolution; note that these tasks may re-

quire use of biographical information about the 

Storyteller to help interpret disfluencies character-

istic of AD language. Another key task of NLU is 

to recognize the Facilitator’s use of grounding acts,  

which play a key role in narrative co-construction 

and in sustaining conversation in general. One of 

the Dialogue/Story Manager’s tasks is to recog-

nize the conversational goals of the Storyteller’s 

contributions, including narrative goals. Having 

recognized the Storyteller’s current goal, the other 

task of the Dialogue Manager is to plan the next 

dialogue act that the Facilitator could use to con-

tinue to co-construct the Storyteller’s narrative. 

The Dialogue Manager may use biographical in-

formation about the Storyteller in both tasks, i.e., 

to help recognize narrative goals and to select con-

tent when planning the next suggested narrative 

act. The NLG/Coach component is responsible 

for providing the Facilitator with one or more sug-

gested utterances that the Facilitator could say 

next. Based upon the current discourse state, the 

suggested dialogue acts provided by the Dia-

logue/Story Manager, and a coaching model, the 

NLG/Coach component chooses one or more Fa-

cilitator acts and realizes them.  In the remainder of 

this section we will describe the required analyses 

of the corpus needed to inform the development of 

the computational model for each of these main 

architectural components. 

 

 
 

Figure 2. ASSIST system architecture. 

4.1 Dialogue/Story Manager  

Part of the CCC corpus study will analyze narra-

tive features of the dialogue and related pragmatic 

and affective features. Coelho (1998) surveys vari- 

Storyteller 

ASR 

Discourse 

State 

Biographical Info: 

People, relation-

ships, major events 

NLU 
Dialogue/ 
Story 

Manager 

NLG/
Coach 

Facilitator 

40



ous approaches to narrative analysis in discourse of 

communicatively impaired adults. Our analysis 

will reflect the following characteristics of conver-

sational narrative identified in narrative studies 

(Georgakopoulou and Goutsos 1997; Polkinghorne 

1996):  

 Conversational narratives have a characteristic 
structure, consisting of an abstract, orientation, 

one or more complicating actions, resolution, 

evaluation, and coda (Labov 1972). Note that 

only the complicating action and resolution are 

required. We will annotate this structure, as 

shown in Figure 1. 

 They often convey the teller’s attitudes and 
feelings about narrated events, i.e., although 

not required the evaluation is often present. 

Furthermore, the objective truth of the events 

is not important. We will also annotate polarity 

and intensity of the evaluation (Wiebe et al. 

2005). 

 Conversational narrative is context-dependent, 
i.e., dependent upon the audience and the sit-

uation in which it is told. We will also annotate 

features of the social context such as the age, 

gender, and relationship of the conversational 

participants. 

 There are culture-specific properties that make 
a story tellable. We will annotate the recurrent 

cultural themes in the corpus informed by pre-

vious studies of narrative themes as in, e.g., 

(Polanyi 1985; Shenk et al. 2002).   

 

Although the above characteristics were derived 

from studies of narrative in other populations than 

in speakers with DAT, there is preliminary evi-

dence of their applicability to ASSIST. For exam-

ple, by examining retellings of the same stories 

over time, Davis and Maclagan (2009) found that 

“With AD story-tellers, components vanish from 

surface retellings, particularly the ab-

stract/orientation. Instead, the listener is presented 

with parts of the story’s complicating action or an 

evaluative comment that includes a fragment of the 

complication and its result”; yet, “even when full 

stories are not retrieved … the emotion is still con-

veyed to the listener” (p. 152). Comparing life-

history narratives of two rural American older 

women, one with dementia and one without, Shenk 

et al. (2002, p. 410) found similar “major themes 

that are consistent with rural American cultural 

values”, e.g., strong family ties, hard work, and 

religious faith.  

 

Based on analysis of the stories in the CCC, we 

plan to define a set of abstract narrative schemas. 

A schema will include constraints on tellability 

with respect to audience characteristics (e.g., age, 

gender, social relationship) and current topic, and a 

specification of narrative goals (e.g. present the 

Storyteller as having been hard-working and 

thrifty). Each schema will be structured according 

to Labov’s elements of a well-formed narrative. 

The schemas will be derived by analysis of the 

CCC corpus and informed by previous studies of 

narrative themes. 

 

In addition to analysis of features suggested by 

previous narrative studies, we will analyze occur-

rences of pragmatic features that may be used by a 

speaker with DAT to compensate for difficulties 

when telling a story. For example, Davis and 

Maclagan (2009) studied both  how use of unfilled 

pauses and pauses with fillers (e.g., “oh”, “um”, or 

a formulaic phrase) changed over time in DAT 

discourse, and also the placement of filled and un-

filled pauses with respect to narrative components. 

Pauses in earlier stages of DAT correlated with 

word-finding problems, while pauses in later stag-

es marked narrative components. Thus, Davis and 

Maclagan hypothesize that pauses in the later stag-

es correlate with search for the next component of 

the story. Also, the Facilitator’s contribution to the 

co-constructed narrative will be analyzed, e.g., 

when the Facilitator invites the Storyteller to begin 

a particular story and responds appropriately to an 

element supplied by the Storyteller. Development 

of the computational model for the Dia-

logue/StoryManager requires consideration of both 

the narrative structure and these related pragmatic 

and affective features. 

4.2 Natural Language Understanding (NLU)  

A skilled Facilitator tries to anticipate the kinds of 

problems that a Storyteller with DAT might have 

in a conversation and provide appropriate support 

so that the frequency and severity of DAT-related 

disfluencies will be reduced. In the event that a 

disfluency does occur, the Facilitator tries to pro-

vide support either by trying to resolve the particu-

lar kind of disfluency via a direct or indirect repair 

41



or by trying to advance the story without necessari-

ly resolving the disfluency. Therefore, in order for 

ASSIST to facilitate conversation between a Story-

teller and his or her conversational partner, the 

NLU module must be able to listen to a conversa-

tion and be able to determine the following: (1) 

How fluent was the Storyteller in the prior utter-

ances? (2) If the Storyteller exhibited any issues 

with fluency, what was the nature of the problems? 

(3) What conversational strategies did the Facilita-

tor use to help alleviate issues related to fluency, if 

any, before, during or after the Storyteller’s utter-

ances? Addressing these questions requires an 

analysis of the Carolina Conversations Collection 

(CCC) as discussed below. 

Fluency 

Considerable research has investigated the lan-

guage of individuals with DAT (Bucks et al. 2000; 

Martin and Fedio 1983; Phillips et al. 1996; Sabat 

1994). Linguistic features such as long pauses, re-

starts, repetitions, unfinished sentences, pronomi-

nal reference mistakes, and filler phrases are 

prevalent in the spontaneous speech of persons 

with DAT. Further, research has shown deviations 

from the norm in syntactic measurements such as 

part-of-speech rates (nouns, verbs, adjectives, pro-

nouns), richness of vocabulary (Type Token Ratio, 

Brunet’s Index, Honore’s Statistic), and semantic 

cohesion in text (Singh and Bookless 1997).   It is 

necessary to analyze the CCC corpus to determine 

the statistical prevalence of these phenomena with-

in the corpus with a goal of making predictions 

about the relative fluency of an utterance based on 

the presence or dearth of these measurements.    

Conversational Repair Strategies 

Once we have a calculation for the level of fluency 

of each turn that a person with DAT (the Storytell-

er) takes in the dialog, we can then look at the sur-

rounding behavior of the Facilitator.    One of our 

hypotheses is that there are certain strategies that 

will be beneficial in increasing the fluency of DAT 

utterances. For example, narrative co-construction 

techniques recommended for caregivers of persons 

with DAT (Moore and Davis 2002) will be anno-

tated in the corpus, including two-syllable go-

ahead phrases (e.g., “uh huh”, “really”, “ok”), par-

aphrases and repetitions, and indirect questions. 

Most of these strategies can be described as  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3. An excerpt from Davis (2005, p. 141) of a 

conversation between GM, a person with early moderate 

DAT, and her skilled conversational partner BD. 

 

grounding acts (Clark and Schaefer 1989). The 

following seven types of grounding acts occur in 

co-constructed narratives:  

 

 Continued attention.  These utterances, such 
as “That’s right” (line 2 in Figure 1), indicate 

that the listener is paying attention to the 

speaker. 

 Relevant next contribution.  By these utter-
ances, which we call forward grounding 

moves, the conversational participant contin-

ues the conversation with a question or com-

ment that requires that he or she understood 

the previous speaker’s utterance (e.g. lines 2, 

4, and 8 in Figure 3). 

 Acknowledgement.  In addition to showing 
continued attention, these utterances provide 

an assessment, e.g. “wow” (line 11 in Figure 

1).  

 Demonstration.  The conversational partici-
pant paraphrases a previous utterance of his 

own or of the other participants (e.g. line 4 of 

Fig. 3). 

 Display.  The listener repeats all or part of the 
previous utterance verbatim (e.g. line 6 in Fig-

ure 3). 

1. BD:  You were telling me about your hus-

band. 

2. Did he preach sermons? 

3. GM:  My husband? 

4. BD: Would he be a preacher? 

5. GM: Yes. He was a preacher that preached 

“hell hot and heaven beautiful!”  

(They both laugh.) 

6. BD: Heaven beautiful … 

7. GM:  Yes. “Hell hot and heaven beautiful!” 

That was one of his messages. I don’t  

know… he preached all right. He was 

an Evangelistic-type preacher. 

8. BD: I bet you went many places! 

9. GM: Well, I had my family while I was 

young and couldn’t go. I mean … you can’t 

go with a bunch of little kids. 

10. BD:  No you can’t. 

42



 Completion. The conversational participant 
completes the utterance of the previous speak-

er. 

 Request for repair. The listener indicates that 
he or she did not understand all or part of the 

previous utterance (e.g. line 3 in Figure 3). 

 

The first five types are described in Clark and 

Schaefer (1989) while Completion and Request for 

Repair have been described in Traum (1994) and 

elsewhere. Of particular importance is the use of 

the Relevant next contribution or forward ground-

ing move. Persons with DAT have difficulty with 

lexical retrieval and other memory tasks associated 

with generating language (Martin and Fedio 1983). 

An effective Facilitator will provide lexical prim-

ing and syntactic structures to help these memory 

tasks (Ramanathan 1997; Orange 2001).   

 

Unlike previous research on techniques for auto-

matic grading of children’s written stories (e.g. 

Halpin et al. 2004), the contributions of the partner 

with DAT will not necessarily be counted as dis-

fluent when details are missing, incorrect, or pre-

sented out of temporal sequence. As discussed pre- 

viously, in conversation with people with DAT 

narrative elements are often missing and a narra-

tive may consist of as little as a fragment of the 

complicating action and the evaluation. The Facili-

tator’s role is not to correct inaccuracies, to de-

mand clarification, or to tell the story for the 

Storyteller. For example, suppose the Storyteller 

said, "I uh used to have a farm there." Suppose that 

the word "there" is not something that the Facilita-

tor can resolve based on the context of the conver-

sation. So, from the Facilitator's point of view, to 

understand the story better, it might make sense to 

resolve the word "there" by asking, "Where was 

your farm?" However, a more appropriate response 

would be a grounding move that prompts the con-

tinuation of the story without asking a wh-

question: "Really? You were a farmer?" 

 

By analyzing the CCC corpus, we can determine 

the prevalence of the above grounding actions by 

the Facilitator. Based on the fluency of the Story-

teller’s subsequent utterances, we can determine 

the relative effectiveness of these strategies on in-

creasing or decreasing Storyteller fluency. This 

analysis can be further refined by examining the 

types of disfluency exhibited by the Storyteller 

before and after these grounding actions. In turn, 

this data can be used to make predictions about 

what repair strategies a conversational participant 

might use in response to a particular type of disflu-

ent utterance. Based on the analysis techniques 

presented in Cherney et. al. (1998), we will be able 

to examine the extent to which greater fluency in 

the Storyteller utterances leads to more complete 

and coherent narrative.  This anaylsis is also used 

in the development of the NLG/Coach module as 

described below. 

 

4.3 NLG/Coach 

Based upon the current discourse state and the 

suggested dialogue acts provided by the Dia-

logue/Story Manager, the NLG/Coach component 

must choose one or more Facilitator acts and real-

ize them.  The coaching model will be based upon 

empirical studies of the CCC of effective repair 

strategies for conversing with persons with AD, as 

well as a study of particular syntactic forms used 

with specific strategies.  This analysis makes great 

use of the necessary analysis about fluency and 

especially conversational repair strategies de-

scribed in the previous section about NLU. 

5 Summary 

Co-constructed narrative between a person with 

DAT, and a skilled conversational partner offers a 

means by which persons with DAT and their care-

givers may improve their social interaction and life 

satisfaction.  Assistive technology can play a role 

in enabling even an unskilled conversational part-

ner in maintaining the flow of the conversation.  

This paper presents an architecture for such a sys-

tem, ASSIST, and describes how analysis of an 

existing corpus, the Carolinas Conversation Col-

lection (CCC), can inform the development of the 

computational model for co-constructed narrative 

in ASSIST.  We have begun preliminary analysis 

of excerpts from the CCC. 

Acknowledgments 

We gratefully acknowledge many years of encour-

agement and guidance from Dr. Boyd Davis, UNC 

Charlotte.    

43



References  

Allen, M., McGrenere, J., and Purves, B. (2008). The 

Field Evaluation of a Mobile Digital Image Communi-

cation Application Designed for People with Aphasia. 

ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing, Vol. 1, 

No. 1, Article 5. 

 

Alm N., Dye, R., Gowans, G., Campbell, J., Astell, A. 

and Ellis, M. (2007). A communication support system 

for older people with dementia. IEEE Computer, May 

2007: 35-41. 

 

Alzheimer’s Association. (2009). 2009 Alzheimer’s 

Disease Facts and Figures. Downloaded on 4/30/09 

from www.alz.org. 

 

Astell, A.J. et al. (2010). Using a touch screen computer 

to support relationships between people with dementia 

and caregivers. Interacting with Computers. 

 

Bamberg, M. and Georgakopoulou, A. (2008). Small 

stories as a new perspective in narrative and identity 

analysis. Text and Talk 28(3): 377-396. 

 

Bourgeois, M.S., Dijkstra, K., Burgio, L.D., and Allen, 

R.S. (2004). Communication Skills Training for Nurs-

ing Aides of Residents with Dementia: The Impact of 

Measuring Performance. Clinical Gerontologist, Vol. 

27(1/2) 2004, 119-138. 

 

Bucks, R., Singh, S., Cuerden, J.M., and G. Wilcock. 

(2000). Analysis of spontaneous, conversational speech 

in dementia of Alzheimer type: Evaluation of an objec-

tive technique for analyzing lexical performance, Apha-

siology, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 71-91. 

 

Burgio, L.D., Allen-Burge, R., Roth, D.L., Bourgeois, 

M.S., Dijkstra, K., Gerstle, J., Jackson, E. and Bankes-

ter, L. (2001). Come talk with me: Improving commu-

nication between nursing assistants and nursing home 

residents during care routines. The Gerontologist 41: 

449-460. 

 

Burnside, I. (1996). Life Review and Reminiscence in 

Nursing Practice. In Aging and Biography: Explorations 

in Adult Development, Birren et al. (Eds.), Springer. 

 

Callaway, C. (2000). Narrative Prose Generation. Ph.D. 

thesis, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC.  

 

Cassell, J. (2004). Towards a model of technology and 

literacy development: Story listening systems. Applied 

Developmental Psychology 25: 75-105. 

 

Cheepen, C. (1988). The predictability of informal con-

versation. Oxford: Printer Publishers Ltd.  

 

Cherney, L.R., Shadden, B.B., and Coelho, C.A. (1998). 

Analyzing Discourse in Communicatively Impaired 

Adults. Aspen Publishers, Inc., Gaithersburg, Maryland. 

 

Clark, H. H. and Schaefer, E.F.. Contributing to dis-

course. (1989). Cognitive Science, 13:259–294. 

 

Coelho, C.A. (1998). Analysis of Story Grammar. In 

Cherney, L.R., Shadden, B.B., and Coelho, C.A. Ana-

lyzing Discourse in Communicatively Impaired Adults. 

Aspen Publishers, Inc., Gaithersburg, Maryland. 

 

Cohene, T., Baecker, R., and Marziali, E.  Designing 

Interactive Life Story Multimedia for a Family Affected 

by Alzheimer’s Disease: A Case Study. CHI 2005, April 

2–7, 2005, Portland, Oregon, USA., p.1300-1303. 

 

Cosley, D., Akey, K., Alson, B., Baxter, J., Broomfield, 

M., Lee, S., and Sarabu, C. (2009). Using Technologies 

to Support Reminiscence. HCI 2009 – People and Com-

puters XXIII – Celebrating people and technology, 480-

484 

 

Damianakis, T., Crete-Nishihata, Smith, K., Baecker, 

R.M., and Marziali, E. (2010). The psychosocial im-

pacts of multimedia biographies on persons with cogni-

tive impairments. The Gerontologist 50(1): 23-35. 

 

Davis, B.H. (Ed.) (2005). Alzheimer talk, text and con-

text: Enhancing communication. New York: Palgrave 

Macmillan. 

 

Davis, B.H. (2010). Intentional stance and Lucinda 

Greystone. In V. Ramanathan and P. McPherron, eds. 

Language, Bodies and Health. NY: Continuum. 

 

Davis, B.H. and Maclagan, M. (2009). Examining paus-

es in Alzheimer’s discourse. American Journal of Alz-

heimer’s Disease and Other Dementias 24, 141-154. 

 

Davis, B.H. and Pope, C. (2009). Institutionalized 

ghosting: policy contexts and language use in erasing 

the person with Alzheimer’s. Language Policy. Online 

First DOI 10.1007/s10993-009-9153-8.  

 

Davis, B.H. and Smith, M. (2009). Infusing cultural 

competence training into the curriculum: Describing the 

development of culturally sensitive dementia care com-

munication. Kaohsiung Journal of Medical Sciences 25, 

503-510. 

 

Dijkstra, K., Bourgeois, M., Allen, R.,  and Burgio, L. 

(2004). Conversational coherence: discourse analysis of 

44



older adults with and without dementia. Journal of Neu-

rolinguistics 17: 263-283. 

 

Elson, D.K. and McKeown, K.R. (2009). Extending and 

Evaluating a Platform for Story Understanding. AAAI 

2009 Spring Symposium on Intelligent Narrative Tech-

nologies II. 

 

Georgakopoulou, A. and Goutsos, D. (1997). Discourse 

Analysis: An Introduction. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Uni-

versity Press. 

 

Green, N. (2002). A Virtual World for Coaching Care-

givers of Persons with Alzheimer's Disease.  Papers 

from the AAAI Workshop on Automation as Caregiver: 

The Role of Intelligent Technology in Elder Care.  

AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA, pp. 18-23. 

 

Green, N. (2005). Simulating Alzheimer's discourse for 

caregiver training in artificial intelligence-based dia-

logue systems. In Davis, Boyd H. (ed.). Alzheimer talk, 

text and context: enhancing communication. New York, 

NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005, 199-207. 

 

Green, N and Bevan, C. (2009). Efficacy of Active Par-

ticipation in  Conversation with a Virtual Patient with 

Alzheimer's Disease. Papers from 2009 AAAI Fall  

Symposium: Virtual Healthcare Interaction, Arlington, 

Virginia from November 5- 7,2009. 

 

Green, N. and B. Davis.  (2003). Dialogue Generation in 

an Assistive Conversation Skills Training System  for 

Caregivers of Persons with Alzheimer's Disease. In Pa-

pers from the 2003 AAAI  Spring Symposium on Natu-

ral Language Generation in Spoken and Written 

Dialogue, pp. 36-43. 

 

Green, N, Lawton, W., and Davis, B. (2004). An Assis-

tive Conversation Skills Training System for Caregivers 

of Persons with Alzheimer's Disease. In Proceedings of 

the AAAI 2004 Fall Symposium on Dialogue Systems for 

Health Communication. 

 

Guendouzi, J. and Muller, N. (2006). Approaches to 

discourse in dementia. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erl-

baum. 

 

Halpin, H., Moore, J.D., and Robertson,J. (2004). Au-

tomatic Analysis of Plot for Story Rewriting. Proceed-

ings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language 

Processing. 

 

Hervás, R., Pereira, F., Gervás, P., andCardoso, A. 

(2006) Cross-domain analogy in automated text genera-

tion, Proc. of the Third joint workshop on Computation-

al Creativity, ECAI’06, Trento, Italy.  

 

Hsieh, H.F. Effect of reminiscence therapy on depres-

sion in older adults: a systematic review. (2003). Inter-

national Journal of Nursing Studies, 40(4):335–345. 

 

Irvine, A.B., Ary, D.V., and Bourgeois, M.S. (2003). An 

Interactive Multimedia Program to Train Professional 

Caregivers. Journal of Applied Gerontology 22(2), June 

2003, 269-288. 

 

Labov, W. (1972). Language in the inner city. Philadel-

phia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 

 

Lenchuk, I. and M. Swain. (2010). Alise’s small stories: 

indices of identity construction and of resistance to the 

discourse of cognitive impairment. Language Policy : 9-

28. 

 

Martin, A. and P. Fedio, (1983). Word production and 

comprehension in Alzheimer's disease: The breakdown 

of semantic knowledge, Brain and Language, Volume 

19, Issue 1, May 1983, Pages 124-141. 

 

Massimi, M., Berry, E., Browne, G., Smyth, G., Wat-

son, P., and Baecker, R. M. (2008). Neuropsychological 

Rehabilitation 18(5-6): 742-765. 

 

McCallion, P., Toseland, R.W., Lacey, D., and  Banks, 

S. (1999). Educating nursing assistants to communicate 

more effectively with nursing home residents with de-

mentia. The Gerontologist 39(5): 546-558. 

 

Moore, L. & B. Davis. (2002) Quilting narrative: using 

repetition techniques to help elderly communicators. 

Geriatric Nursing, 23(5):262-6. 

 

Orange, J. B. (2001). Family caregivers, communica-

tion, and Alzheimer's disease. In M. L. Hummert & J. F. 

Nussbaum (Eds.), Aging communication, and health: 

Linking research and practice for successful aging (pp. 

225-248). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Eribaum Associates, 

Inc. 

 

Passonneau,R., Goodkind, A., and Levy, E. (2007). An-

notation of children’s oral narrations: Modeling emer-

gent narrative skills for computational applications. 

Proceedings of the 20
th

 Annual Meeting of the Florida 

Artificial Intelligence Research Society (FLAIRS-20). 

 

Petrelli, D., van den Hoven, E., and Whittaker, S. 

(2009). Making history: Intentional capture of future 

memories. CHI 2009, April 4-9, 2009, Boston, MA. pp. 

1723-1732. 

 

Phillips, L., Sala, S.D. and C. Trivelli. (1996). Fluency 

deficits in patients with Alzheimer's disease and frontal 

45



lobe lesions, European Journal of Neurology, vol. 3, pp. 

102.108. 

 

Piwek, P. and S. Stoyanchev (2010). Generating Ex-

pository Dialogue from Monologue: Motivation, Corpus 

and Preliminary Rules. NAACL HLT 2010. 

 

Polanyi , L. (1985). Telling the American Story: A 

Structural and Cultural Analysis of Conversational Sto-

rytelling. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

 

Polkinghorne, D.E. (1996). Narrative Knowing and the 

Study of Lives. In Aging and biography: explorations in 

adult development, Birren, J.E., Kenyon, G.M., Ruth, J., 

Schroots, J.J.F., and Svensson, T. (Eds.), Springer. 

 

Pope, C. and Davis, B.H. (2011). Finding a balance: 

The Carolinas Conversation Collection. Corpus Linguis-

tics and Linguistic Theory 7-1, 143-161. 

 

Ramanathan V. (1997).  Alzheimer Discourse: Some 

Sociolinguistic Dimensions. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 

Erlbaum. 

 

Ripich, D.N., Ziol, E., and Lee, M.M. (1998). Longitu-

dinal Effects of Communication Training on Caregivers 

of Persons with Alzheimer's Disease. Clinical Geron-

tologist 19(2): 37-55. 

  

Roark, B., Fowler, A., Sproat, R., Gibbons, C., and 

Fried-Oken, M. 2011. Towards technology-assisted co-

construction with communication partners. Proceedings 

of the 2
nd

 Workshop on Speech and Language Pro-

cessing for Assistive Technologies. pp. 22-31. 

 

Ryokai, K., Vaucelle, C. and Cassell, J. 2003. Virtual 

peers as partners in storytelling and literacy learning. 

Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 19(2), 195-208. 

 

Sabat, S. (1994). Language function in Alzheimer's dis-

ease: a critical review of selected literature, Language 

and Communication, vol. 14, pp. 331-351. 

 

Santo Pietro, Mary Jo and Ostuni, Elizabeth. (2003). 

Successful Communication with Persons with Alz-

heimer’s Disease, An In-Service Manual, 2
nd

 ed., But-

terworth Heinemann, St. Louis, Missouri. 

 

Shenk, D., Davis, B., Peacock, J. and  L.  Moore. 

(2002). Narratives and self-identity in later life: Two 

rural American older women, Journal of Aging Studies, 

Volume 16, Issue 4, November 2002, Pages 401-413. 

 

Singh, S. and T. Bookless. (1997).Analyzing Spontane-

ous Speech in Dysphasic Adults, International Journal 

of Applied Linguistics, vol. 7.2, no. 2, pp. 165-182. 

 

Smith, J. (2000). GrandChair: Conversational collec-

tion of family stories. Media Arts and Sciences. Un-

published master’s thesis, MIT, Cambridge, MA. 

 

Smith, K.L., Crete-Nishihata, M., Damianakis, T., 

Baecker,R.M., and Marziali, E. (2009). Multimedia 

biographies: a reminiscence and social stimulus tool for 

persons with cognitive impairment. Journal of 

Technology in Human Services, 27(4): 287-306. 

 

Smith, M., Davis B., et al. (2010). Twelve important 

minutes: Introducing enhanced online materials about 

elder abuse to Nursing Assistants. Journal of 

Continuing Education for Nursing. 

 

Theune, M., Slabbers, N., and Hielkema, F. (2007). The 

Narrator: NLG for digital storytelling. Proc ENLG 07, 

109-112. 

 

Traum, D. R.  (1994). A Computational Theory of 

Grounding in Natural Language Conversation. PhD 

thesis, Department of Computer Science, University of 

Rochester, Also available as TR 545, Department of 

Computer Science, University of Rochester. 

 

Waller, A. (2006). Communication Access to Conversa-

tional Narrative. Topics in Language Disorders 26(3): 

221-239. 

 

Wiebe, J., Wilson, T., and Cardie, C. (2005). Annotat-

ing expressions of opinions and emotions in language, 

Language Resources and Evaluation, 1(2): 165-210. 

 

 

Woods, B., Spector, A., Jones, C.,  Orrell,M., and Da-

vies, S. (2005). Reminiscence therapy for demen-

tia.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.  

 

46


