



















































Forward Transliteration of Dzongkha Text to Braille


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Advances in Text Input Methods (WTIM 2), pages 97–106,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Forward Transliteration of Dzongkha Text to Braille 

TirthankarDasgupta     Manjira Sinha     Anupam Basu 

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur 

{iamtirthankar, manjira87, anupambas}@gmail.com 

ABSTRACT 

In this paper we present an automatic Dzongkha text to Braille forward transliteration system. 

Dzongkha is the national language of Bhutan. The system is aimed at providing low cost efficient 

access mechanisms for blind people. It also addresses the problem of scarcity of having 

automatic Braille transliteration systems in language slime Dzongkha. The present system can be 

configured to take Dzongkha text document as input and based on some transliteration rules it 

generates the corresponding Braille output. We further extended the system to support an Audio 

QWERTY editor which allows a blind person to read and write Dzongkha texts or its equivalent 

Braille through a computer. The editor also contains Dzongkha voice feedbacks to further ease 

the use. 

KEYWORDS: Braille, Forward Transliteration, Dzongkha, Audio QWERTY  

97



1 Introduction 

The Braille encoding system is one of the primary means of representing textual documents in a 

readable format for the Blind persons (Loaber, 1976; Weller and Klema, 1965; Basu et al,, 1998; 

Lahiri et al., 2005). However, due to the scarcity of Braille compatible reading materials, blind 

people face difficulty in fulfilling necessities like education and employment. The unavailability 

of low-cost technical supports worsens the situation further. For them, the inability to 

communicate via the traditional writing system leads to complications at official places where the 

primary mode is still through writing. In order to bridge between the written text systems 

generally aimed at sighted persons and access mechanisms through which blind people can 

communicate with ease and efficiency, developments of systems such as automatic Braille 

transliteration and screen readers are highly needed. 

Several works have been done on building automatic, bi-directional text to Braille transliteration 

system and speech enabled interfaces for the Blind community (Blenkhorn, 1995; Pennington 

and McCoy, 1998; Raman, 1996). However, all the present systems suffer from the central 

limitation of language dependency. A Braille transliteration system requires certain rules, based 

on which the system automatically transliterate a given text document into Braille. The rules are 

very specific to the input language. Therefore, system for a particular language cannot be 

extended to the others. 

Dzongkha is the national language of Bhutan
1
. It has been found that more than 4% of the 

children in Bhutan suffer from early blindness. Therefore, it is essential to develop tools and 

technologies in such a country that will facilitate blind persons to access information from written 

text documents. The existing text on Braille transliteration systems cannot be directly applied to 

Dzongkha, mainly due to the following reasons: 

1. Most of the systems are based on foreign languages like English, French, Germany, 

Spanish, Portuguese, and Swedish (winbraille, 2012; Duxbury, 2000; indexbraille, 2012; 

NFBTRANS, 2004). As Bhutanese scripts are quite different from these languages, 

separate rules are applied to transliterate from Dzongkha to Braille. 

2. Foreign systems like, Duxbury (2004) and JAWS (2008) are costly and a large segment 

of the blind population is from poor economic background. 

In order to overcome the limitations of the existing systems, we have developed a Dzongkha 

language text to Braille transliteration (DLBT) system. The system comprises of the following 

two key features: 

i. A generic framework for the transliteration of Dzongkha texts to Braille. 

ii. An audio QWERTY editor that provides pre-recorded voice feedback to any key-press 

operation performed by a blind user.  

Apart from creating Braille encoded textbooks, such system will also assist blind people to create 

their own electronic text documents. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 briefly discusses about the state of the art 

in text to Braille transliteration systems; in section 3 we have discussed about the Dzongkha 

                                                           
1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages_of_Bhutan 

98



Braille encoding system; in section 4 we have described the architecture of our proposed system 

and its the key components; we have discussed the Audio QWERTY editor in section 5 and 

finally concluded the paper in section 6. 

2 Related Works 

A number of texts to Braille transliteration tools are present for different languages. In English, 

systems like, Duxbury (2000), JAWS (2008), and WinBraille (2012) are popularly used. 

However, the problem of transliterating English text to Braille is relatively simpler than south-

east Asian languages like, Indian or Bhutanese languages. It has been observed that due to the 

similarity in the scripts of these languages, rules to transliterate Dzongkha texts to Braille are 

very similar to that of the Indian language texts. The Sparsha Text to Braille Transliteration 

toolset (Lahiri et al., 2005; Dasgupta and Basu, 2009) is the only system encountered by us so far 

that can transliterate Indian language texts to Braille. The system provides some unique features 

like transliteration of mathematical symbols and tactile graphics to Braille. Apart from computer 

based transliterations of Braille, a Braille writing tutor system has been developed by Kalra et al. 

(2007). The prototype tutor system uses an e-slate device to capture a student’s action and tries to 

develop the Braille writing skills. 

3 The Dzongkha Braille Encoding System  

The Dzongkha Braille system is the standard technique of representing Dzongkha texts into 

Braille (Tibetan, 2004; Dzongkha, 2005). The system uses 6 dot cells to represent each Dzongkha 

character. The combination of these 6 dots can represent a total of 2
6
-1 i.e., 63 different Braille 

characters. However, as described later, Dzongkha has more than 63 characters. This issue is 

handled by assigning multiple Braille characters for a single source language character. This is 

illustrated in the third row of table 1. Although Braille encoding for all languages share the same 

Braille font, different languages have different Braille representation rule, thus a single Braille 

character may be interpreted differently in the context of different languages. Table 1 contains 

the mapping of same Braille codes to different characters of three different languages: English, 

Hindi, and Dzongkha. 

Braille English Hindi Dzongkha 

k  k क ཀ  
T . त ཐ  

" R  " R ऋ ར 
TABLE 1- Mapping of Braille codes to characters of English, Hindi and Bangla  

The Dzongkha script, which is also known as the Bhutanese script, is used to write Dzongkha. 

The Dzongkha script has 30 consonants and 4 basic vowels. The 30 consonants can occur in three 

different positions: twice in nominal position and once in orthographic subjoined position 

(Bhutan, 2004; Tibetan, 2009; Dzongkha, 2005). This leads to a total of 30*3=90 consonants, 4 

99



vowels and 1 extra character, i.e., 95 alphabets in Dzongkha. Therefore, Dzongkha scripts can be 

written either from top to bottom or from left to right (Bhutan, 2004) (refer to figure 1(b)). 

 

  

As in other languages, two or more consonants can combine to form a conjugate Dzongkha 

character. However, these consonants are not separated by any special symbols (as in the case of 

Indian languages where the consonants within the conjugate are separated by a special symbol 

called halant). The consonant clustering in Dzongkha takes place between the consonant at the 

nominal position and consonant at the orthographic subjoined position. This is illustrated in Fig. 

1(a). It can be observed from table 2 below that the conjugate characters, as constructed by 

clustering of consonants and vowels, may have an entirely different visual representation. 

However, the corresponding transliterated Braille is represented by a sequence of Braille cells for 

each of the characters. 

Rule Example Braille 

CC ང +  ྐ = ང  @+K  

CCV ང +  ྐ +  ྐ = ལ  GK o 

CCC  ས +  ྐ +  ྐ = སྐྱ @S @T R  

CCCV ས +  ྐ +  ྐ +  ྐ = སྐྱ  @S @T R 9  

TABLE 2- Conjugate construction rules with examples taken from Dzongkha language 

(C=Consonant, V=Vowel) 

Unlike any Indian language texts, there exists no inter-word separation in Dzongkha. Each of the 

Dzongkha words are composed of single or multiple syllables. The syllables are separated by a 

special symbol called tsheg. Each of the syllables contains a root letter, and may additionally 

contain a prefix, suffix, vowel and post-suffix. Figure 2 illustrates this phenomenon with an 

example. 

ང +  ྐ = ང  

ས +  ྐ +  ྐ +  ྐ = སྐྱ  
FIGURE 1(A) - Construction of 

Dzongkha conjugates 

FIGURE 1(B) - Dzongkha chracters 

arranged from top to bottom  

100



 

FIGURE 2- Construction of a Dzongkha syllable  

4 The System Architecture 

The architecture of our proposed Dzongkha text to Braille transliteration (DLBT) system is 

shown in figure 3. The diagram presents the essential components of the system. The details are 

discussed in the subsequent sections. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 3 - The proposed system architecture 

4.1 The Input and Output of the System 

The input to the system can either be a Unicode (Hudson, 2000) supported Dzongkha text 

document written in any popular word processor, or Dzongkha texts entered through a keyboard. 

Based on the user’s requirements, the system can transliterate the given text to Braille. The 

Braille output is then provided to the Blind user by printing the Braille texts on a large variety of 

commercially available Braille embossers (Taylor, 2000; Brailler). The current system has been 

evaluated on the Braille embossers like, Index Basic-S, Index Basic-D, Index 4X4 PRO, Romeo 

and Juliet Pro. 

4.2 Forward Transliteration 

Based on the information discussed in section 3, we have constructed distinct forward 

transliteration rules for Dzongkha text to Braille. The transliteration engine consists of a code 

table which is nothing but a collection of the transliteration rules. An example of the code table 

structure is shown in figure 4.  

Audio 

Feedback 
Dzongkha Unicode Text 

Transliteration 

Engine 

Audio QWERTY 

Editor 

Forward 

Transliteration 

Rules 

Braille 

Embosser Output Braille 

101



 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 4- Code Table Structure of Forward Transliteration Engine. 

Most of the transliteration rules are very similar to Indian language text to Braille transliteration 

(Lahiri et al., 2005; Dasgupta and Basu, 2009). However, there are few exceptional cases like, 

handling of some special conjugates in Dzongkha script, where the transliteration rules changes. 

For example, Braille representation of certain Dzongkha characters like ―ra‖, ―la‖ and ―sa‖ 

depends upon the occurrence of the character that follows it. This process is represented by the 

following rule in figure 5: 

The rule says, if the head letter of a Dzongkha conjugate begins with U+0f62, U+0f63 or 

U+0f66 and the root latter belongs to U+0f90, U+0F92, or U+0F94 then the Braille 

representation of the head characters will changed to ―53‖,  ―59‖ or ―57‖. Figure 6 illustrates the 

above rule with an example; figure 7 shows a screenshot of the working of the Dzongkha text to 

Braille transliteration system.  

 

FIGURE 6- Illustration of the context dependent forward transliteration rules in Dzongkha 

The Dzongkha Braille transliteration tool allows 38 characters per line and 25 lines per page. 

However, the system allows the user to change the configuration if needed. As mentioned above 

Dzongkha script does not allow any inter word space. However, the syllables and sentences are 

separated by the special symbols: tsheg and she. An interesting feature found in Dzongkha 

Braille formatting is that, each line of a Braille document must end with either tsheg or she. This 

issue is handled by an inbuilt auto formatting module of the transliteration system. The module 

first analyses the transliterated Braille output and puts 38 Braille characters per line at the 

preview window. If the last character of a line is not a tsheg or she then the module starts 

accumulating the previous characters into an array till it gets a tsheg or she. The array elements 

are then printed into the next line of the preview window. This results into the fact that after 

transliteration is over all the lines in the Braille output does not contain 38 characters. 

CONJ {PREFIX {U+0f62|U+0f63|U+0f66, U+0f90|U+0F92|U+0F94}} 

 PutBraille (53|59|57) 

 

0981 0027 

0982 003B 

0983 002C 

0985 0041 

Dzongkha Unicode 

Character Code 

Corresponding Braille 

Transliteration Code 

FIGURE 5- Context dependent text to Braille conversion rule in Dzongkha 

102



5  Dzongkha Text and Braille Audio QWERTY Editor 

The primary goal of the audio QWERTY editor is to allow Blind people to create Dzongkha 

Text/Braille documents (see figure 8). This requires an interface for accepting the regional 

language text entered through the keyboard and performing different operations on it, like 

formatting, printing and saving the text. The creation of a new editor interface was not warranted 

as it would put additional burden on the user to learn the new system. Hence, we have chosen to 

use some already existing standard editor with the required capabilities. Our investigations have 

proved that Microsoft Word can be configured to accept text in regional languages including 

Dzongkha. Although the Audio QWERTY editor plug-in can be integrated to any other Unicode 

enabled text editors like, Notepad, and WordPad, the reasons for choosing Microsoft Word are: 

1. Support for Unicode– ensures the use of multi-language text documents 

2. Rendering of Fonts –uses proper rendering engines for correct rendering of regional 
language fonts including glyph shaping and repositioning (Rolfe, 2001). 

3.  Well documented object model – the editor exposes a comprehensive set of objects for 
interacting with it, this simplifies the task of programming. 

4. Ease of Use – the existing popularity of this editor predicts a low learning curve for the 
proposed system. Further, the editor provides a large number of keyboard-shortcuts.

FIGURE 7: WORKING OF THE DZONGKHA TEXT TO BRAILLE TRANSLITERATION SYSTEM 

103



 

 

FIGURE 8- The Dzongkha Braille Audio QWERTY Editor. For any key press operation, the Blind 

user will get audio based feedback. 

The audio QWERTY editor is integrated with the pre-recorded Dzongkha alphabet voices that 

make it different from other commercially available text editor; as a result, each of the keyboard 

operation performed through this editor is followed by a voice feedback in Dzongkha. This 

enhances its ease and efficiency for a Blind person to read and write Braille texts. 

Conclusion 

The Dzongkha text to Braille transliteration system is an attempt to develop low cost technology 

to assist blind people. The system will help a large segment of Blind population of Bhutan to 

access printed text book materials. The present version of the system can only perform the 

forward transliteration of Text to Braille. In future, we will try to incorporate the reverse 

transliteration approach where given a Braille document it can be transliterated back to its 

original Dzongkha font. Further, we will provide an online version of the system so that it can be 

accessed from different parts of the world. 

References 

A. Basu, S. Roy, P. Dutta and S. Banerjee. ―A PC based multi-user Braille reading system for the 

blind libraries‖, IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineering, Vol. 6, No. 1, March 1998, 

pp.60—68 

A. Lahiri, J. S. Chattopadhyay, A. Basu, ―Sparsha: A comprehensive Indian language toolset for 

the blind‖. Proceedings of the 7th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and 

accessibility. 2005. 

104



T. Dasgupta, and A. Basu, ―A speech enabled Indian language text to Braille transliteration 

system‖, nformation and Communication Technologies and Development (ICTD), 2009, pp-201-

211 

P. Blenkhorn, ―A system for converting Braille to print‖, IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation 

Engineering, Vol. 3, No. 2, June 1995, pp. 215-221 

HAL. Dolphin Computer Access, www.dolphinuk.co.uk/products/hal.htm 

C.A. Pennington and K.F. McCoy, ―Providing intelligent language feedback or augmentative 

communication users‖, Springer-Verlag, 1998. 

T.V. Raman (1996). ―Emacspeak – a speech interface‖. Proceedings of CHI96, April 1996 

winbraille. (n.d.). Retrieved on September 14, 2012, from 

www.braille.se/downloads/winbraille.htm  

Duxbury.(n.d). In Duxbury Braille Translator, 2000. www.duxburysystems.com 

indexbraille. (n.d.). Retrieved on September 14, 2012, from www.indexbraille.com 

NFBTRANS. National Federation of the Blind, 2004, http://www.nfb.org/nfbtrans.htm 

MONTY, VisuAide. http://www.visuaide.com/monty.html 

JAWS. 2008. In JAWS for Window. Freedom Scientific. 

http://www.freedomscientific.com/fs_products/software_jaws.asp 

N. Kalra, T. Lauwers, D. Dewey, T. Stepleton and M. B. Dias, ―Iterative design of a Braille 

writing tutor to combat illiteracy‖, Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE/ACM International Conference 

on Information and Communication Technologies and Development, December, 2007. 

A. Taylor. ―Choosing your Braille embosser‖, Braille   Monitor, October 2000. Available at   

www.nfb.org/bm/bm01/bm0110/bm011007.htm 

Brailler. (n.d). Retrieved from www.brailler.com/ 

J. Hudson for Microsoft Typography, ―Windows glyph processing: an open type primer‖, 

November 2000,  

http://www.microsoft.com/typography/glyph%20processing/intro.mspx 

R. Rolfe, 2001, ―What is an IME (Input Method Editor) and how do I use it?‖ 

http://www.microsoft.com/globaldev/handson 

Bhutan. (2004). downloaded from http://www.tcllab.org/events/uploads/pema-bhutan.pdf 

Tibetan. (2009). In The Online Encyclopedia of Writing Systems and Languages, Retrieved 

October 14, 2009, from http://www.omniglot.com/writing/tibetan.htm 

Dzongkha (2005), Retrieved from  http://www.learntibetan.net/grammar/alphabet.htm 

N.C. Loaber, ―Modified standard office equipment for Braille translation and embossing‖, ACM 

SIGCAPH Computers and the Physically Handicapped, Issue 21, November 1976, Pages 9-19 

Walter J. Weller, Virginia C. Klema, ―A rapid Braille transliteration technique for certain IBM 

machine‖, Communications of the ACM, Volume 8 Issue 2, Feb. 1965, Pages 115-116 

105




