










































Semantic frames as an anchor representation for sentiment analysis


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, pages 104–109,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Semantic frames as an anchor representation for sentiment analysis

Josef Ruppenhofer
Department of Information Science
and Natural Language Processing

University of Hildesheim, Germany
ruppenho@uni-hildesheim.de

Ines Rehbein
SFB 632: Information Structure

German Department
Potsdam University, Germany

irehbein@uni-potsdam.de

Abstract
Current work on sentiment analysis is char-
acterized by approaches with a pragmatic fo-
cus, which use shallow techniques in the inter-
est of robustness but often rely on ad-hoc cre-
ation of data sets and methods. We argue that
progress towards deep analysis depends on
a) enriching shallow representations with lin-
guistically motivated, rich information, and b)
focussing different branches of research and
combining ressources to create synergies with
related work in NLP. In the paper, we propose
SentiFrameNet, an extension to FrameNet, as
a novel representation for sentiment analysis
that is tailored to these aims.

1 Introduction
Sentiment analysis has made a lot of progress on
more coarse-grained analysis levels using shallow
techniques. However, recent years have seen a trend
towards more fine-grained and ambitious analyses
requiring more linguistic knowledge and more com-
plex statistical models. Recent work has tried to pro-
duce relatively detailed summaries of opinions ex-
pressed in news texts (Stoyanov and Cardie, 2011);
to assess the impact of quotations from business
leaders on stock prices (Drury et al., 2011); to detect
implicit sentiment (Balahur et al., 2011); etc. Ac-
cordingly, we can expect that greater demands will
be made on the amount of linguistic knowledge, its
representation, and the evaluation of systems.

Against this background, we argue that it is
worthwhile to complement the existing shallow
and pragmatic approaches with a deep, lexical-
semantics based one in order to enable deeper analy-
sis. We report on ongoing work in constructing Sen-

tiFrameNet, an extension of FrameNet (Baker et al.,
1998) offering a novel representation for sentiment
analysis based on frame semantics.

2 Shallow and pragmatic approaches
Current approaches to sentiment analysis are mainly
pragmatically oriented, without giving equal weight
to semantics. One aspect concerns the identifica-
tion of sentiment-bearing expressions. The anno-
tations in the MPQA corpus (Wiebe et al., 2005),
for instance, were created without limiting what an-
notators can annotate in terms of syntax or lexicon.
While this serves the spirit of discovering the variety
of opinion expressions in actual contexts, it makes
it difficult to match opinion expressions when us-
ing the corpus as an evaluation dataset as the same
or similar structures may be treated differently. A
similar challenge lies in distinguishing so-called po-
lar facts from inherently sentiment-bearing expres-
sions. For example, out of context, one would not
associate any of the words in the sentence Wages
are high in Switzerland with a particular evaluative
meaning. In specific contexts, however, we may
take the sentence as reason to either think positively
or negatively of Switzerland: employees receiving
wages may be drawn to Switzerland, while employ-
ers paying wages may view this state of affairs neg-
atively. As shown by the inter-annotator agreement
results reported by (Toprak et al., 2010), agreement
on distinguishing polar facts from inherently eval-
uative language is low. Unsurprisingly, many ef-
forts at automatically building up sentiment lexica
simply harvest expressions that frequently occur as
part of polar facts without resolving whether the sub-
jectivity clues extracted are inherently evaluative or

104



merely associated with statements of polar fact.
Pragmatic considerations also lead to certain ex-

pressions of sentiment or opinion being excluded
from analysis. (Seki, 2007), for instance, annotated
sentences as “not opinionated” if they contain indi-
rect hearsay evidence or widely held opinions.

In the case of targets, the work by (Stoyanov and
Cardie, 2008) exhibits a pragmatic focus as well.
These authors distinguish between (a) the topic of
a fine-grained opinion, defined as the real-world ob-
ject, event or abstract entity that is the subject of the
opinion as intended by the opinion holder; (b) the
topic span associated with an opinion expression is
the closest, minimal span of text that mentions the
topic; and (c) the target span defined as the span
of text that covers the syntactic surface form com-
prising the contents of the opinion. As the defini-
tions show, (Stoyanov and Cardie, 2008) focus on
text-level, pragmatic relevance by paying attention
to what the author intends, rather than concentrat-
ing on the explicit syntactic dependent (their target
span) as the topic. This pragmatic focus is also in
evidence in (Wilson, 2008)’s work on contextual po-
larity classification, which uses features in the clas-
sification that are syntactically independent of the
opinion expression such as the number of subjectiv-
ity clues in adjoining sentences.

Among lexicon-driven approaches, we find that
despite arguments that word sense distinctions are
important to sentiment analysis (Wiebe and Mihal-
cea, 2006), often-used resources do not take them
into account and new resources are still being cre-
ated which operate on the more shallow lemma-level
(e.g. (Neviarouskaya et al., 2009)). Further, most
lexical resources do not adequately represent cases
where multiple opinions are tied to one expression
and where presuppositions and temporal structure
come into play. An example is the verb despoil:
there is a positive opinion by the reporter about the
despoiled entity in its former state, a negative opin-
ion about its present state, and (inferrable) negative
sentiment towards the despoiler. In most resources,
the positive opinion will not be represented.

The most common approach to the task is an in-
formation extraction-like pipeline. Expressions of
opinion, sources and targets are often dealt with sep-
arately, possibly using separate resources. Some
work such as (Kim and Hovy, 2006) has explored

the connection to role labeling. One reason not to
pursue this is that “in many practical situations, the
annotation beyond opinion holder labeling is too ex-
pensive” (Wiegand, 2010, p.121). (Shaikh et al.,
2007) use semantic dependencies and composition
rules for sentence-level sentiment scoring but do not
deal with source and target extraction. The focus on
robust partial solutions, however, prevents the cre-
ation of an integrated high-quality resource.

3 The extended frame-semantic approach
We now sketch a view of sentiment analysis on the
basis of an appropriately extended model of frame
semantic representation.1

Link to semantic frames and roles Since the pos-
sible sources and targets of opinion are usually iden-
tical to a predicate’s semantic roles, we add opinion
frames with slots for Source, Target, Polarity and
Intensity to the FrameNet database. We map the
Source and Target opinion roles to semantic roles
as appropriate, which enables us to use semantic
role labeling systems in the identification of opinion
roles (Ruppenhofer et al., 2008).

In SentiFrameNet all lexical units (LUs) that are
inherently evaluative are associated with opinion
frames. The language of polar facts is not associ-
ated with opinion frames. However, we show in the
longer version of this paper (cf. footnote 1) how we
support certain types of inferred sentiment. With re-
gard to targets, our representation selects as targets
of opinion the target spans of (Stoyanov and Cardie,
2008) rather than their opinion topics (see Section
2). For us, opinion topics that do not coincide with
target spans are inferential opinion targets.
Formal diversity of opinion expressions For fine-
grained sentiment-analysis, handling the full vari-
ety of opinion expressions is indispensable. While
adjectives in particular have often been found to
be very useful cues for automatic sentiment anal-
ysis (Wiebe, 2000; Benamara et al., 2007), eval-
uative meaning pervades all major lexical classes.
There are many subjective multi-words and idioms
such as give away the store and evaluative mean-
ing also attaches to grammatical constructions, even
ones without obligatory lexical material. An exam-

1We present a fuller account of our ideas in an unpublished
longer version of this paper, available from the authors’ web-
sites.

105



ple is the construction exemplified by Him be a doc-
tor? The so-called What, me worry?-construction
(Fillmore, 1989) consists only of an NP and an in-
finitive phrase. Its rhetorical effect is to express the
speaker’s surprise or incredulity about the proposi-
tion under consideration. The FrameNet database
schema accommodates not only single and multi-
words but also handles data for a constructicon (Fill-
more et al., to appear) that pairs grammatical con-
structions with meanings.
Multiple opinions We need to accommodate multi-
ple opinions relating to the same predicate as in the
case of despoil mentioned above. Predicates with
multiple opinions are not uncommon: in a 100-item
random sample taken from the Pittsburgh subjectiv-
ity clues, 17 involved multiple opinions.

The use of opinion frames as described above en-
ables us to readily represent multiple opinions. For
instance, the verb brag in the modified Bragging
frame has two opinion frames. The first one has pos-
itive polarity and represents the frame-internal point
of view. The SPEAKER is the Source relative to the
TOPIC as the Target. The second opinion frame has
negative polarity, representing the reporter’s point of
view. The SPEAKER is the Target but the Source is
unspecified, indicating that it needs to be resolved
to an embedded source. For a similar representation
of multiple opinions in a Dutch lexical resource, see
(Maks and Vossen, 2011).
Event structure and presuppositions A complete
representation of subjectivity needs to include event
and presuppositional structure. This is necessary,
for instance, for predicates like come around (on) in
(1), which involve changes of opinion relative to the
same target by the same source. Without the pos-
sibility of distinguishing between attitudes held at
different times, the sentiment associated with these
predicates cannot be modeled adequately.

(1) Newsom is still against extending weekday me-
tering to evenings, but has COME AROUND on
Sunday enforcement.

For come around (on), we want to to distinguish
its semantics from that of predicates such as ambiva-
lent and conflicted, where a COGNIZER simultane-
ously holds opposing valuations of (aspects of) a tar-
get. Following FrameNet’s practice, we model pre-
supposed knowledge explicitly in SentiFrameNet by

Figure 1: Frame analysis for "Come around"

using additional frames and frame relations. A par-
tial analysis of come around is sketched in Figure 1.

We use the newly added Come around scenario
frame as a background frame that ties together all
the information we have about instances of coming
around. Indicated by the dashed lines are the SUB-
FRAMES of the scenario. Among them are three
instances of the Deciding frame (solid lines), all
related temporally (dashed-dotted) and in terms of
content to an ongoing Discussion. The initial dif-
ference of opinion is encoded by the fact that De-
ciding1 and Deciding2 share the same POSSIBILI-
TIES but differ in the DECISION. The occurrence
of Come_around leads to Deciding3, which has the
same COGNIZER as Deciding1 but its DECISION is
now identical to that in Deciding2, which has been
unchanged. The sentiment information we need is
encoded by simply stating that there is a sentiment
of positive polarity of the COGNIZER (as source)
towards the DECISION (as target) in the Deciding
frame. (This opinion frame is not displayed in the
graphic.) The Come around frame itself is not as-

106



sociated with sentiment information, which seems
right given that it does not include a DECISION as a
frame element but only includes the ISSUE.

For a discussion of how SentiFrameNet captures
factuality presuppositions by building on (Saurí,
2008)’s work on event factuality, we refer the inter-
ested reader to the longer version of the paper.
Modulation, coercion and composition Speakers
can shift the valence or polarity of sentiment-bearing
expressions through some kind of negation operator,
or intensify or attenuate the impact of an expression.
Despite these interacting influences, it is desirable to
have at least a partial ordering among predicates re-
lated to the same semantic scale; we want to be able
to find out from our resource that good is less pos-
itive than excellent, while there may be no ordering
between terrific and excellent. In SentiFrameNet, an
ordering between the polarity strength values of dif-
ferent lexical units is added on the level of frames.

The frame semantic approach also offers new per-
spectives on sentiment composition. We can, for in-
stance, recognize cases of presupposed sentiment,
as in the case of the noun revenge, which are not
amenable to shifting by negation: She did not take
revenge does not imply that there is no negative eval-
uation of some injury inflicted by an offender.

Further, many cases of what has been called va-
lence shifting for us are cases where the evaluation
is wholly contained in a predicate.

(2) Just barely AVOIDED an accident today.

(3) I had served the bank for 22 years and had
AVOIDED a promotion since I feared that I
would be transferred out of Chennai city.

If we viewed avoid as a polarity shifter and fur-
ther treated nouns like promotion and accident as
sentiment-bearing (rather than treating them as de-
noting events that affect somebody positively or neg-
atively) we should expect that while (2) has positive
sentiment, (3) has negative sentiment. But that is not
so: accomplished intentional avoiding is always pos-
itive for the avoider. Also, the reversal analysis for
avoid cannot deal with complements that have no in-
herent polarity. It readily follows from the coercion
analysis that I avoid running into her is negative but
that cannot be derived in e.g. (Moilanen and Pul-
man, 2007)’s compositional model which takes into
account inherent lexical polarity, which run (into)

lacks. The fact that avoid imposes a negative evalu-
ation by its subject on its object can easily be mod-
eled using opinion frames.

4 Impact and Conclusions
Deep analysis Tying sentiment analysis to frame se-
mantics enables immediate access to a deeper lexical
semantics. Given particular application-interests,
for instance, identifying statements of uncertainty,
frames and lexical units relevant to the task can
be pulled out easily from the general resource. A
frame-based treatment also improves over resources
such as SentiWordNet (Baccianella et al., 2008),
which, while representing word meanings, lacks any
representation of semantic roles.
Theoretical insights New research questions await,
among them: whether predicates with multiple opin-
ions can be distinguished automatically from ones
with only one, and whether predicates carrying fac-
tivity or other sentiment-related presuppositions can
be discovered automatically. Further, our approach
lets us ask how contextual sentiment is, and how
much of the analysis of pragmatic annotations can
be derived from lexical and syntactic knowledge.

Evaluation With a frame-based representation,
the units of annotation are pre-defined by a gen-
eral frame semantic inventory and systems can read-
ily know what kind of units to target as potential
opinion-bearing expressions. Once inherent seman-
tics and pragmatics are distinguished, the correct-
ness of inferred (pragmatic) targets and the polarity
towards them can be weighted differently from that
of immediate (semantic) targets and their polarity.

Synergy On our approach, lexically inherent sen-
timent information need not be annotated, it can be
imported automatically once the semantic frame’s
roles are annotated. Only pragmatic information
needs to be labeled manually. By expanding the
FrameNet inventory and creating annotations, we
improve a lexical resource and create role-semantic
annotationsas well as doing sentiment analysis.

We have proposed SentiFrameNet as a linguisti-
cally sound, deep representation for sentiment anal-
ysis, extending an existing resource. Our approach
complements pragmatic approaches, allows us to
join forces with related work in NLP (e.g. role label-
ing, event factuality) and enables new insights into
the theoretical foundations of sentiment analysis.

107



References

S. Baccianella, A. Esuli, and F. Sebastiani. 2008. SEN-
TIWORDNET 3.0: An enhanced lexical resource
for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh conference on International
Language Resources and Evaluation LREC10, pages
2200–2204. European Language Resources Associa-
tion (ELRA).

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley Framenet Project. In Proceed-
ings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and 17th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics-Volume 1,
pages 86–90. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Alexandra Balahur, Jesús M. Hermida, and Andrés Mon-
toyo. 2011. Detecting implicit expressions of senti-
ment in text based on commonsense knowledge. In
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis
(WASSA 2.011), pages 53–60, Portland, Oregon, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Farah Benamara, Sabatier Irit, Carmine Cesarano, Napoli
Federico, and Diego Reforgiato. 2007. Sentiment
analysis : Adjectives and adverbs are better than ad-
jectives alone. In Proc of Int Conf on Weblogs and
Social Media, pages 1–4.

Brett Drury, Gaël Dias, and Luís Torgo. 2011. A con-
textual classification strategy for polarity analysis of
direct quotations from financial news. In Proceedings
of the International Conference Recent Advances in
Natural Language Processing 2011, pages 434–440,
Hissar, Bulgaria, September. RANLP 2011 Organising
Committee.

Charles J. Fillmore, Russell Lee-Goldman, and Russell
Rhodes, to appear. Sign-based Construction Gram-
mar, chapter The FrameNet Constructicon. CSLI,
Stanford, CA.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1989. Grammatical construction
theory and the familiar dichotomies. In R. Dietrich
and C.F. Graumann, editors, Language processing in
social context, pages 17–38. North-Holland/Elsevier,
Amsterdam.

S.M. Kim and E. Hovy. 2006. Extracting opinions, opin-
ion holders, and topics expressed in online news media
text. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment and
Subjectivity in Text, pages 1–8. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Isa Maks and Piek Vossen. 2011. A verb lexicon model
for deep sentiment analysis and opinion mining appli-
cations. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Com-
putational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment

Analysis (WASSA 2.011), pages 10–18, Portland, Ore-
gon, June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Karo Moilanen and Stephen Pulman. 2007. Senti-
ment composition. In Proceedings of RANLP 2007,
Borovets, Bulgaria.

A. Neviarouskaya, H. Prendinger, and M. Ishizuka.
2009. Sentiful: Generating a reliable lexicon for senti-
ment analysis. In Affective Computing and Intelligent
Interaction and Workshops, 2009. ACII 2009. 3rd In-
ternational Conference on, pages 1–6. Ieee.

J. Ruppenhofer, S. Somasundaran, and J. Wiebe. 2008.
Finding the sources and targets of subjective expres-
sions. In LREC, Marrakech, Morocco.

Roser Saurí. 2008. A Factuality Profiler for Eventualities
in Text. Ph.d., Brandeis University.

Yohei Seki. 2007. Crosslingual opinion extraction from
author and authority viewpoints at ntcir-6. In Proceed-
ings of NTCIR-6 Workshop Meeting, Tokyo, Japan.

Mostafa Shaikh, Helmut Prendinger, and Ishizuka Mit-
suru. 2007. Assessing sentiment of text by semantic
dependency and contextual valence analysis. Affec-
tive Computing and Intelligent Interaction, pages 191–
202.

Veselin Stoyanov and Claire Cardie. 2008. Topic
identification for fine-grained opinion analysis. In
Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics - Volume 1, COLING ’08,
pages 817–824, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Veselin Stoyanov and Claire Cardie. 2011. Auto-
matically creating general-purpose opinion summaries
from text. In Proceedings of RANLP 2011, pages 202–
209, Hissar, Bulgaria, September.

Cigdem Toprak, Niklas Jakob, and Iryna Gurevych.
2010. Sentence and expression level annotation of
opinions in user-generated discourse. In Proceedings
of ACL-10, the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, Portland. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Janyce Wiebe and Rada Mihalcea. 2006. Word sense and
subjectivity. In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and the 44th
annual meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, ACL-44, pages 1065–1072, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie. 2005.
Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions
in language. Language Resources and Evaluation,
39(2/3):164–210.

Janyce Wiebe. 2000. Learning subjective adjectives
from corpora. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-
2000), pages 735–740, Austin, Texas.

108



Michael Wiegand. 2010. Hybrid approaches to senti-
ment analysis. Ph.D. thesis, Saarland University, Saar-
brücken.

Theresa Ann Wilson. 2008. Fine-grained Subjectivity
and Sentiment Analysis: Recognizing the Intensity, Po-
larity, and Attitudes of Private States. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Pittsburgh.

109


