



















































Dictionary-ontology cross-enrichment


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex-III), pages 81–94,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Dictionary-Ontology Cross-Enrichment
Using TLFi and WOLF to enrich one another

Emmanuel ECKARD1 Lucie BARQU E2 Alex is NASR1 Benoı̂t SAGOT 3
(1) Laboratoire d’Informatique Fondamentale de Marseille, UMR 7279 - CNRS, Université Aix Marseille

(2) LDI, UMR 7187- CNRS, Université Paris 13, France
(3) Alpage, INRIA Paris-Rocquencourt & Université Paris 7, France

Emmanuel.Eckard@a3.epfl.ch, lucie.barque@univ-paris13.fr,

benoit.sagot@inria.fr, Alexis.Nasr@lif.univ-mrs.fr

ABSTRACT
It has been known since Ide and Veronis [6] that it is impossible to automatically extract an
ontology structure from a dictionary, because that information is simply not present. We at-
tempt to extract structure elements from a dictionary using clues taken from a formal ontology,
and use these elements to match dictionary definitions to ontology synsets; this allows us to
enrich the ontology with dictionary definitions, assign ontological structure to the dictionary,
and disambiguate elements of definitions and synsets.

KEYWORDS: Dictionaries, ontologies, WordNet.

1 Introduction

It has been known since Ide and Veronis [6] that it is impossible to extract an ontology struc-
ture from a dictionary, because this information is simply not present in the dictionnary as
it is in the ontology, not even implicitly. Human intuition that dictionary definitions contain
an ontology-like structure stems from the world knowledge that we uncounsciously also take
into consideration as context when we read them; since this world knowledge is not available
to computers, automated extraction fails. For instance, one of the Wiktionary definitions for
“lock” is “A segment of a canal or other waterway enclosed by gates, used for raising and lower-
ing boats between levels”. The term “canal” here is polysemous, defined either as “An artificial
waterway, often connecting one body of water with another” or “A tubular channel within the
body”. A computer has no straightforward1 way to tell which of the senses is relevant, while a
human, linking “waterway”, “boats” and “body of water” to a common semantic field through
their experience of the world, will easily choose the boating sense over the anatomic one.

Since the closest thing to a world knowledge available to computers is precisely ontologies,
it seems appealing to design an ontology-powered automated process to identify elements of
ontological structure present in the dictionary. Clearly, the ontology information that we inject
into the process should not excessively constrain it, lest we find that very information. Instead,
the process should trigger a virtuous circle where clues from the ontology permit structuring
the dictionary, which in turn enriches the ontology with dictionary information. Only under
these conditions can the process be both practical and useful. The approach of nurturing

1Recognising a common semantic field for two segments of text that share few or no common words goes beyond
mere co-occurrence count; it is feasible, but requires sophisticated strategies such as latent semantics, for instance,
and is difficult on small samples.

81



interpretation of dictionary definition with ontology information can be considered from two
points of view: a minima, as relaxing the strong hypotheses of “dictionary information only”,
under which Ide and Veronis showed extraction to be impossible2; a maxima, as injecting
information into the process to mimick Human understanding of definitions through world
knowledge.

Resources containing world knowledge can provide their information in different formats: for
instance, dictionaries provide a number of definitions for each given word, with a distinct
definition for each sense, and possibly hierarchies of sub-meanings; ontologies also provide
short definitions, but mostly provide a structured set of relationships between senses, such
as hypernymy, meronymy, etc. Although a wealth of resources exists in computer-readable
form, resources become scarcer when we consider languages other than English. For instance,
the general ontologies WordNet and FrameNet in English are hand-built, quite complete and
available under a Free software-like licence [3, 4]. In French, on the other hand, the most
notable alternatives are Euro Wordnet, which is quite complete and hand-built but only avail-
able under a commercial licence [13], and WOLF, which is available under a Free licence but
is computer-generated from WordNet and incompletely translated. WOLF particularly suffers
from the difficulty to adequately identify and translate polysemous words [12].

Since it provides a great deal of information while leaving room for improvement, WOLF
constitutes both a resource and a testing bed for new algorithms and heuristics. As a resource,
we can use it to generate clues for our heuristic; as a testing bed, contribute improvements
to it. In this work, we attempt to enrich WOLF with dictionary definitions taken from the
TLFi (Trésor de la Langue française informatisé). Practically, this comes down to assigning a
dictionary definition to ontology synset elements, or to match ontology synsets with precise
senses of a word in the dictionary. To achieve this result, we will explore the ambiguous graph
structure implicitly formed by TLFi definitions. The heuristic attempts to connect two words h
and H through a hypernymy relation by recursively roaming the definitions of words contained
in a definition, concentrating on a hypernym; when successful, it stores the list of elementary
segments that connect h to H. For instance, WOLF predicts that établissement (establishment)
is a hypernym of académie (academy); indeed, in TLFi, these words are connected through
certain senses of école (school): we find

académie→ école→ établissement

The word école is contained in the definition of académie and its own definition in turn contains
établissement. Hence, académie leads to établissement as predicted by the clue provided by
WOLF. Each of the words visited by the heuristic yields a number of different senses, each with
its own definition which is examined separately. Hence, the hierarchy actually detects

académie-6→ école-1→ établissement

After a successful connection attempt, the pairs of unique senses immediately connected to
each other (like académie-6 → école-1) are recorded and a frequentation counter associated
with the sense pair is incremented. The result of the process allows us to tell which sense of
école is expressed in the definition of académie that we considered.

2Several studies proposed automatic or semi-automatic methods to develop lexical hierarchies from dictionary data,
e.g. [2, 10].

82



2 Resources

2.1 TLFi

The Trésor de la Langue française informatisé (TLFi) [11] is the digital version of the Trésor de la
Langue française, a large reference dictionary for French. The two main reasons why we have
chosen the TLFi is that it is available in electronic form for research purpose and that most of its
definitions belong to so-called definitions by genus and differentiæ allowing us to extract genus
(or hypernym of the defined unit). The TLFi has also a wide coverage with around 270,000
definitions. This study is restricted to nouns, for which the TLFi provide 100,493 definitions
describing the meaning(s) of 35,498 nominal entries.

The senses of a lexical entry in TLFi are subdivised into a hierarchy of senses and subsenses,
each complete with a unique identification number and a definition; for instance, the word
bois (wood) comprises the following senses3:

1.1.1 Ensemble d’arbres croissant sur un terrain d’étendue moyenne; ce terrain même.
2.1.1.1 Matière (racines, tronc, branches) qui constitue l’arbre (à l’exception du feuillage).

2.1.1 Identification of definitions genus

In the framework of the Definiens project, TLFi definitions of nouns were POS-tagged and
processed to determine the genus of a given definition, that is, the noun or noun phrase that
corresponds to the hypernym of the defined noun [1]. The Definiens heuristic relies on lexico-
syntactic patterns that recognise nouns or noun phrases as possible genus candidates. More
precisely, around fifty rules have been manually elaborated to identify geni in the TLFi defini-
tions. Represented as finite-state transducers, the rules have been run on definitions previously
labeled with part of speech tags by the NLP tool suite MACAON [8]. The rule presented in fig-
ure 1 identifies nominal definitions that begin with a common noun (nc for nom commun in
French), followed by a preposition and then another noun (left hand side of the rule). The
right hand side of the rule proposes two possible geni for this kind definition: the first noun
or a more specific phrasal genus constituted by the three elements (noun, preposition, noun)
detected in the left hand side of the rule. This rule matches for example the definition of JODH-
PURS presented below since it begins with a noun (pantalon) followed by a preposition (de)
followed by a noun (équitation). The right hand side of the rule thus indicates two possible
geni for this definition : pantalon (trousers) and pantalon d’équitation (horse riding trousers).

JODHPURS = Pantalon d’équitation importé des Indes par les officiers anglais, ajusté du genou
à la cheville et qui se porte sans bottes (Horse riding trousers imported from India by English
officers, tight from knee to ankle and that is worn without boots.) ⇒ genus 1: pantalon,
genus 2: pantalon d’équitation

The rule presented in figure 1 also matches the definiton of BOIS-1.1.1 given above. Never-
theless, geni like "ensemble de N" have to be treated in a particular way. Thus, the rules can
also include lexical elements, as illustrated below in figure 2: when a definition matches the

3"Wood" 1.1.1 Set of trees growing on a medium-sized area of land; said terrain.
2.1.1.1 Matter (roots, trunk, branches) that constitute a tree (except the
foliage). This particular case is provided here to examplify definition numbering, without prejudice of further ques-
tions, like whether the “said terrain” metonymy should ideally be numbered separately. In the Princeton Wordnet,
only the first half of this definition appears at all.

83



<rule>
<lhs>
<elt cat="nc"/>
<elt cat="prep"/>
<elt cat="nc"/>

</lhs>
<rhs>
<genus><elt num="1"/></genus>
<rhs>

<genus>
<elt num="1"/>
<elt num="2"/>
<elt num="3"/>

</genus>
</rhs>

</rhs>
</rule>

Figure 1: Example of a syntactic genus extraction rule

sequence ensemble de/d’ + nc (set of), the selected genus is not ensemble but the common noun
that follows the preposition. The noun is moreover applied to the function "set of".

<regle>
<lhs>

<elt lex="ensemble"/>
<elt cat="prep"/>
<elt cat="nc"/>

</lhs>
<rhs>

<function><elt num="1"/></function>
<genus><elt num="3"/></genus>

</rhs>
</regle>

Figure 2: Example of a lexico-syntactic genus extraction rule

When the rules propose multiple geni for a given word sense, as in the rule presented in figure 1
above, the genus that is selected is the most specific one, provided that this most specific genus
is classifying (i. e. appears as a genus in at least another definition). In other words, the genus
that is nor too specific nor too general is assumed to represent the most accurate genus. In the
JODHPURS example, the genus pantalon d’équitation (horse riding trousers) is more specific than
pantalon (trousers) but the processing of the whole corpus tells us that pantalon d’équitation
appears only once, in the definition of JODHPURS, whereas pantalon appears in the definition
of eighteen word senses (BLUE-JEAN, SAROUAL, . . . ) in the TLFi.

This automatic process, that consists in counting every possible geni of every definitions
through the corpus, allows us to obtain the data described in table 1 below. As shown in

Nominal words 35,498
Nominal word senses 100,493
Distinct geni 17,204
Classifying geni : 13,924

Simple nouns 5,578
Phrasal nouns 8,346

Table 1: Geni extracted from the TLFi

84



this table, the 13,924 classifying geni are composed of 5,578 simple nouns (e.g. conifère
(conifer), formule (formula), . . . ) and 8,346 phrasal nouns (e.g. conifère de grande
taille (tall conifer), courte formule (short formula); . . . ). Let’s recall that phrasal geni
are very interesting in that they “naturally” disambiguate ambiguous forms (cf. carte vs
carte géographique (map) and carte à jouer (playing card)). The 8,346 phrasal geni
that have been yet detected are based on only 1,754 distinct nominal heads and more than 90
percent of them are included in the simple nouns set. The total number of words to disam-
biguate is therefore equal to 5,578 simple nouns plus 175 heads of complex nouns that are not
already included in the simple geni set. Most of these geni are ambiguous, for an average of 4
senses per genus.

2.1.2 Adaptation of the sense hierarchy to limit ambiguity

The number of distinct senses can be high, and the differences between some of them can be
quite subtle. For instance, the verb “to dive” distinguishes the senses “move briskly and rapidly
downwards” and “being directed downwards”. TLFi also records unusual or archaic senses of
words: for instance, the term fourchette (“fork”) lists the chess configuration, which might not
be the first to spring to mind, as well as an archaic vernacular word for “bayonet”.

In TLFi, the different senses of a word are organised in a hierarchy of sense numbers, such as
“1”, “2.3.1”, etc. Senses with more decimals in their sense number are children of the parent
sense, i.e. variants of the parent sense in a particular framework. Senses with 4 or more
decimals in their sense number tend to be very specific senses, with long definitions. To avoid
hyper-correction, we deem it adequate to trim this sense hierarchy, as the fine granularity
achieved by human lexicographers is not a realistic goal for our automatic system [7]. We
devise two simple schemes to this purpose: the “cut” scheme simply ignores all definitions
whose sense number bears more than a given number of decimals; and the “merge” scheme
deletes all definitions whose sense number bears more than a given number of decimals, but
concatenates their definition to that of their direct parent. For instance, “cut 2” will retain
senses “1”, “2.1” and “3.1”, but will eliminate senses “1.2.1”, “2.1.1”, “3.1.2.1”, etc.; and
“merge 1” will retain senses “1” and “2”, and will eliminate sense “2.1” and “2.3.1.1” after
concatenating their definition to the definition of sense “2”. In cases where definitions are
merged, their geni are stored in a vector, which allows us to take them into consideration one
by one.

2.2 WOLF

WOLF (WOrdNet Libre du Français)4 is a French-language ontology, automatically built from
the Princeton WordNet (PWN) and various other resources [12]. Monosemous literals in the
PWN 2.0 were translated using a bilingual French-English lexicon built from various multilin-
gual resources. Polysemous PWN literals were handled by an alignment approach based on a
multilingual parallel corpus. The synsets obtained from both approaches were then merged.
The resulting resource, WOLF, preserves the hierarchy and structure of PWN 2.0 and con-
tains the definitions and usage examples provided in PWN for each synset. Although new
approaches are currently being used for increasing its coverage [5], WOLF is rather sparse, as
information was not found for all PWN synsets by these automatic methods. Indeed, one of
the difficulties in completing WOLF is to disambiguate the words contained in its synsets as to

4http://alpage.inria.fr/~sagot/wolf.html

85



allow a correct translation, since the level of polysemy is high.

In this work, we used the version 0.2.0 of the WOLF, in which 46,449 out of the 115,424
PWN 2.0 synsets are filled with at least one French literal. WOLF 0.2.0 contains 50,968 unique
literals which take part in 86,235 (literal, synset) pairs, i.e., lexical entries (to be compared
with the 145,627 such pairs in the PWN 2.0). Approximately half of these pairs are nouns, i.e.,
belong to nominal synsets.

Since the WOLF was created automatically using several distinct techniques, each (literal,
synset) pair is associated with the set of techniques that suggested its creation, together with
a technique-specific confidence measure. This information is used for filtering out (literal,
synset) pairs with the lowest confidence scores. We defined two filters: a medium filter, which
retain more candidates, and a strong filter, which retain only the most reliable candidates
(cf. figures in the next section).

3 Using hypernymic paths for synset–definition matching

Our aim is to enrich WOLF and TLFi with one another, entailing that we need to assign specific
definitions to given WOLF synsets. These synsets, or sets of synonyms, contain words that
share a same meaning, but this meaning is yet not explicitly determined. As such, these words
are ambiguous with respect to TLFi, and it is not straightforward to decide which of the TLFi
definitions should be associated with them, if any. To solve this issue, we propose to use the
two resources and compound them with a heuristic.

The heuristic attempts to connect two words with a hypernymy relation, and stores the senses
through which the connection goes in case of success. At each step, a definition is associated
with hypernym candidate words — typically the head of the genus of the TLFi definition,
provided by a pre-processing of TLFi (see section 2.1.1 ; the senses of this word are explored
recursively in a breadth-first search until the goal is reached.

The WOLF hypernymy hierarchy provides us with numerous hyponym–hypernym couples, in-
cluding measures of confidence for these couples. The heuristic processes all these couples,
storing the elementary steps that constitute successful hypernymy paths, and keeping track of
their frequentation.

The nature of dictionary definitions — short bursts of text completely independent from one
another — prevents us from using machine learning techniques. Instead, we take advantage of
the graph structures that are explicitly expressed in the ontology, and to some extent implicitly
in the dictionary. Given a word h and a hypernym H of h, we use a graph exploration technique
to connect senses of h and H. We then record pairs to constitute the path between h and H.
This provides us with a set of word sense pairs that TLFi puts in direct hypernymy relation.
We can then use these pairs to populate WOLF: if two words w and W are deemed to have
definitions d and D in direct hypernymy according to TLFi, and belong to synsets s and S in
WOLF, these synsets also being in the hypernymy relation, then we can safely identify d to s
and D to S.

To disambiguate the hyponyms of an (h, H) pair, we explore the graph by hypernymic ascent:
we consider the different senses h1, . . . ,hn that TLFi provides for h, and attempt to connect
each of them to any of the senses of H. Inspired by [9], we propose a connection scheme
whereby we jump from one word to a word of its definition, iteratively, until we reach the
target H. In our implementation of the hypernymic ascent scheme, we select the genus of the

86



abordage

assaut

attaque

action

abordage

action

Figure 3: TLFi ambiguous structure (left) WOLF structure (right)

definition of a word (that can also be considered as its hypernym) to carry on the next iteration
step, taking advantage of the preprocessing performed in the Definiens project [1].

This process is illustrated in figure 3. In the left hand part of the figure, we have represented
the TLFi ambiguous structure. In this figure, the dots represent word senses while ellipses
represent words. An ellipse that contains two dots therefore represent a polysemous word that
has two possible different senses. An arrow linking a sense s (a dot) to an ellipse w (a word)
indicates that the w is a hypernym of s. The problem, of course, is that we do not know which
sense of w is actually the hypernym of s.

The right hand side of the figure represents the WOLF synset structure. Synsets are represented
as rectangles while dots represent word senses. It must be noted that, in WOLF, word senses
are not associated with definitions. In case of a polysemous word such that one of its senses
is part of a synset, we do not actually know which sense it is. The arrows between rectangles
represent the hypernymic relation.

In our example, we can extract from the WOLF subgraph that one sense of abordage has as a
hypernym one sense of action although we do not know which sense of abordage nor which
sense of action are linked by this relation. This is where the hypernymic ascent comes into
play by looking, in the TLFi graph, for a path that links one sense of abordage with one sense
of action.

The result of the hypernymic ascent is represented in figure 3. A path relating one sense
of abordage to the word action has been discovered, it goes through a given sense of assaut
(assault) as well as a given sense of attaque (attack). The number that labels the arcs between
two senses corresponds to the number of paths that go through this arc.

Hypernymic ascent described can fail for several reasons. The main ones are described below:

1. Either the hypernym of the hyponym in an (h, H) pair extracted from the WOLF is absent
from the TLFi. When used with the medium filter, a total number of 86,636 (h, H)
couples are extracted from the WOLF. For 49,908 of them, both the hyponym and the
hypernym are present in the TLFi. When the strong filter is used, 47,858 couples are
extracted out of which 24,443 have both their hyponym and hypernym present in the
TLFi.

87



abordage

assaut

attaque

action

abordage

action

1

1

0

0

Figure 4: Result of the hypernymic ascent

2. Both h and H appear in the TLFi but no path was found that links them. This situation
can have several causes :

(a) Pre-processing errors. The preprocessing of the TLFi definition is made of several
steps, each of which is error-prone. These steps are word segmentation of the
definition, part of speech tagging and lemmatization.

(b) Non standard definition. Although TLFi definitions generally follow a genus differ-
entia schema some of them do not, some senses are defined, for example, by means
of synonyms. In such cases the identification of the genus in the definition fails.

3. The (h, H) pair extracted from WOLF is incorrect. In such a case, a path can be found
which contains at least one incorrect arc.

When the process actually succeeds, it can be the case that several paths are found that link h
to H. A crude but quite effective way to deal with this situation is to select the shortest paths.

With the strong filter on WOLF hypernym couples (supposedly the most reliable set of (h, H)
pairs given as clues), the success rate for connections is 21%; this falls to 18% with the medium
filter (more details in table 2: for the strong and medium filters on WOLF (strong is the strictest
and produces the most reliable couples), we give the number of words to explore, the number
of senses yielded by the words, the number of successful connections, and the success rate of
the connection attempts.).

words senses success success rate
medium 48,188 109,306 8,787 18.23%
strong 23,291 52,408 4,916 21.11%

Table 2: Connection attempts through hypernyms between two given words in hypernymic
relationship.

The low success rate is ultimately neither a surprise, since a successful connection on one
particular hyponym-hypernym pair is subject to many imponderables, nor a severe hindrance
to our endeavour, since it is the accumulation of the elementary components yielded by the

88



successful connections that constitutes our result. Therefore, success rates around 20% are
both well explained, and quite fit for our purpose.

It is worth noting that the scheme described above does not generalise as to disambiguate
the hypernym in the (h, H) couple as well. This is ultimately due to a fundamental asymetry
between the definitions of h and H: though the hyponym is often defined in terms that ulti-
mately lead to the hypernym (either directly or through other definitions), the converse is not
true since the hypernym H contains no information leading to the hyponym h. For example, a
clue tells us that “snake” is the ultimate hypernym of “naja”. The direct hypernym of “naja” is
“cobra”, which has several senses; only one of these senses has “snake” for hypernym, allowing
us to discard cars and helicopters as candidate semantic fields. However, we have no way to
determine which sense of “snake” is relevant (see figure 5).

Naja

Cobra
(snake)

Cobra
(car)

Cobra
(helicopter)

Snake
(reptile)

Snake
(plumber)

?

?

Figure 5: Ambiguous hypernym
One could attempt to reverse the hypernymic ascent into a hyponymic descent. However, this
cannot be done simply by backtracking the path found during the hypernymic ascent, since
the path is then completely determined. Hyponymic relationships linking TLFi dictionary defi-
nitions together should be available independently from the previously performed hypernymic
ascent, for the hyponymic descent scheme to be viable. Unfortunately, this information is not
present in TLFi. It is not possible to efficiently recreate this information by an exploratory pre-
processing. For instance, envision a couple of direct hyponym-hypernym (w,W ), such as one
of the wi is defined as being a kind of W ; a pre-exploration of these relations would accurately
detect that wi is a hyponym of one of the W1, . . . ,Wn, but it would have no direct way to tell
the relevant Wi . In consequence, it is impossible to tell one Wi from another with this method,
making hyponymic descent impractical with TLFi alone.

In summary, existence of quasi-hypernymic information in the form of geni of definitions fea-
tured in TLFi makes hypernymic ascent possible; absence of similar hyponymic data in defi-
nitions (like examples would partially provide) makes it impossible in practice to reverse the
scheme.

4 Experiments

In order to measure the performances of the method, we ran it over two samples of 48,188
and 23,291 clues respectively (see table 2). After completion of the task, we randomly choose
one hundred of the elementary hyponym-hypernym pairs and manually checked whether the

89



chosen senses for the hyponym and the hypernym are relevant i.e. we answer the question :
"is H an appropriate hypernym of h?". The answer is yes for the "homme-10 / mâle-1" pair
given below and no for the "verbe-4 / expression-1" pair :

• homme-10 = Mâle adulte de l’espèce humaine (adult male human) / mâle-1 = Individu appar-
tenant au sexe qui possède le pouvoir de fécondation

• verbe-4= Expression verbale de la pensée (à l’oral ou par écrit) (verbal expression of the thought)
/ expression-1 = Action d’extraire d’un corps le liquide qu’il contient (extraction of liquid from a
substance)

We find a 45% accuracy in the tested sample. Given the average polysemy of 4.03 for Central
Components in our sample, a random baseline will yield performance in the order of 25%;
with our 45% accuracy, we are therefore significantly higher than the baseline.

The frequency of a segment (the number of times a segment appear in a successful path) did
not correlate with the correctness of the segment. Instead, they tend to correlate with how
high the segment is in the ontology, and thus to how general or abstract a segment is: many
hypernymic paths tend to feature them as they climb towards the root of the ontology. Using
them as an indicator for the correctness of a segment will need some kind of normalization
with respect to the abstractness of the segment.

In order to get a better understanding of what happens during the hypernymic ascent, we
present below a few examples of partially successful or failed paths.

academy – establishment, an unexpected and convoluted connection: We have seen a
correct connection of “academy” to “establishment”, through an adequate meaning of “school”.
Nevertheless, “academy” has no less than 15 meanings in TLFi. Notably, académie-18 is defined
as “house of gaming or pleasure”5. This triggers a search through the heavily polysemic word
maison (28 definitions) which eventually leads to “establishment” through

académie-18→maison-41→ bâtiment-11→ grange-4→ établissement

Interestingly, all of the segments yielded by this search are actually valid. This is a good
illustration of the fact that the connection of the terms of the WOLF clue is a mere pretext to
the research of elementary segments: it does not matter much that the connection has taken
a detour, as long as the elementary segments are valid – it can in fact yield more segments to
enrich our collection.

baboon – animal, a connection through irrelevant definitions: WOLF predicts that animal
(animal) is a hypernym of babouin (baboon); indeed, in TLFi, these words are connected
through certain senses of singe (monkey) and voyageur (traveller): we find

babouin-1→ singe-24→ voyageur-14→ animal

By examining the definitions of these senses, we see there that the word voyageur (“traveller”),
perhaps surprising at a first glance, is in fact taken in its acceptation of “moving animal”6; on

5maison de jeu ou de plaisir
6The definition for voyageur-14 gives “Animal roaming its natural habitat (air, sea, ground), particularly migratory

birds” (Animal se déplaçant dans son milieu naturel (air, mer, terre); en particulier, oiseau migrateur.)

90



the other hand, the word singe (“monkey” or “ape”) is taken in its unusual and little-known
acceptation of “surnumerary passenger”7, which is clearly not relevant in the context8. This
case has successfully connected “baboon” to “animal”, yet it yields two segments, babouin-1
→ singe-24 and singe-24→ voyageur-14, that are both incorrect.
Similarly WOLF predicts that adonis (adonis) is a hyponym of mâle (male). One of the connec-
tions found is

adonis-7→ papillon-3→ personne-1→ individu-11→ homme-10→male

Starting with the entomological sense of “adonis” (a Lycaena butterfly), we jump to “butterfly”,
but in the sense of “socialite”; from there, we follow a foreseeable path through “person”,
“individual”, “man” and eventually “male”. Here, the segment adonis-7→ papillon-3 is false,
though the others are correct. Obviously, the overall path connecting the terms of the WOLF
clue makes little sense to the Human eye, but this is less problematic than incorrect segments.
The overall path is merely a pretext to the research of elementary segments. By contrast,
another path found for the same clue is

adonis-8→ nom-30→ partie-31→ individu-11→ homme-10→male
which makes more sense, but does not yield more correct elementary segments than the previ-
ous example.

steal mill – factory, a trivial connection: WOLF predicts that aciérie (steal mill) is a hy-
ponym of usine (factory); indeed, in TLFi, the first and only definition of aciérie is “factory
where steal is manufactured”9, entailing that the connection is direct and trivial. Since the
term usine has seven different definitions on TLFi, and since our heuristic leaves the ultimate
hypernym ambiguous, it is impossible to select which sense of usine is relevant. Thus, in spite
of a successful connection, this path yields no useful segment.

poster – worker, an erroneous WOLF clue: WOLF predicts that affiche (poster) is a hy-
pernym of ouvrier (worker), a rather counter-intuitive pair; our heuristic manages to find a
convoluted path that connects these two words, but it is clear that integrity of the semantic
field has been lost en route. The connection path goes

affiche-8→ action-2→mise-72→ investissement-1→manœuvre-1→ ouvrier

The word mise is here taken as “stakes in a gamble”, leading to “investment” taken in its
economic sense; the sense of “investment” then switches to the military term for “surround-
ing an enemy”, yielding the word manœuvre (“manoeuver”); manœuvre then switches to its
meaning of “unqualified worker”, eventually completing the connection. Yet, the segments
mise-72→ investissement-1 and investissement-1→manœuvre-1 are incorrect.

7The definition for singe-24 gives “Traveller installed on the upper floor out of a lack of space in the inside of a
public car” (Voyageur installé sur l’impériale faute de place à l’intérieur d’une voiture publique.)

8One set of experiments considered ignoring archaic meanings, as well as all specialised meaning marked by a
domain tag in TLFi, to aleviate ambiguity somewhat; this did not yield significant improvement in performance.

9Usine où se fabrique l’acier

91



5 Conclusions

We have described an exploration scheme of how the hypotheses of Ide and Veronis can be re-
laxed as to make it possible to automatically align a dictionary and an ontology. We use “clues”
extracted from an ontology to search consistent paths in the dictionary linking a hyponym to
a hypernym, recording the intermediary steps that form the overall path. We attempted this
using WOLF and TLFi, taking advantage of the TLFi dataset that was made available to us.

This “hypernymic ascent” scheme yields a high rate of connection failures, which is not in itself
a problem as these connections are a pretext to recording the elementary segments that form
the connection. Nevertheless, this indicates that relying on Central Components to climb in
the hypernymy chain is not very efficient in the context of a natural language dictionary. We
could envision better performances using more rigidely formatted dictionaries and less naive
approximations for the hypernym of a definition than merely using its Central Component.

Another issue is that words close to the root of the ontology tend to be very fundamental and
highly polysemic. Therefore, a connection that passes through them is likely to have lost its
semantic integrity. The yields semantically inconsistant segments, thereby generating noise.

In spite of the many difficulties that we encounter with the data and the naive nature of some
elements of our system, we still managed to obtain a 45% accuracy on a randomly selected
sample, significantly above the random baseline. This makes our system suitable as a weak
classifier as it is, and leaves much room for improvement using more rigidely formatted and
self-consistent data, better management of word inflexions, and refined selection of definition
features beyond mere central components.

Acknowledgments

This work has been funded by the French Agence Nationale pour la Recherche, through the
project EDYLEX (ANR-08-CORD-009).

References

[1] L. Barque, A. Nasr, and A. Polguère. From the definitions of the trésor de la langue
française to a semantic database of the french language. In European Association for
Lexicography International Congress (EURALEX), Leeuwarden, Pays Bas, 2010.

[2] M. Chodorow, R. Byrd, and G. Heidorn. Extracting semantic hierarchies from a large
on-line dictionary. In ACL, pages 299–304, 1985.

[3] C. Fellbaum. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass,
1998.

[4] C. Fillmore, C. Johnson, and M. Petruck. Background to Framenet. International Journal
of Lexicography, 16:235–250, 2003.

[5] V. Hanoka and B. Sagot. Wordnet creation and extension made simple: A multilingual
lexicon-based approach using wiki resources. In Proc. of the 8th international conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), page 6, Istanbul, Turquie, 2012.

[6] N. Ide and J. Veronis. Extracting knowledge-bases from machine-readable dictionaries:
Have we wasted our time? In Proc KB&KB’93 Workshop, 1993.

92



[7] N. Ide and Y. Wilks. Making sense about sense. In Text, Speech and Language Technology,
volume 33, pages 47–73, 2006.

[8] A. Nasr, F. Béchet, J.-F. Rey, B. Favre, and J. Le Roux. Macaon: An nlp tool suite for
processing word lattices. In The 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2011.

[9] R. Navigli. Using cycles and quasi-cycles to disambiguate dictionary glosses. In Proceed-
ings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, EACL ’09, pages 594–602, Athens, Greece, 2009.

[10] R. Navigli and P. Velardi. From glossaries to ontologies: Extracting semantic structure
from textual definitions. In Ontology Learning and Population: Bridging the Gap between
Text and Knowledge, pages 71–87, 2008.

[11] J. M. Pierrel. Le Trésor de la Langue Française Informatisé : un dictionnaire de référence
accessible à tous. AMOPA, (174):25–28, 2006.

[12] B. Sagot and D. Fišer. Automatic Extension of WOLF. In GWC2012 - 6th International
Global Wordnet Conference, Matsue, Japon, January 2012. PHC PROTEUS 22718UC.

[13] P. Vossen. EuroWordNet : a multilingual database with lexical semantic networks for Euro-
pean Languages. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1999.

93




