










































Discourse Structure and Computation: Past, Present and Future


Proceedings of the ACL-2012 Special Workshop on Rediscovering 50 Years of Discoveries, pages 42–54,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 10 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Discourse Structure and Computation: Past, Present and Future

Bonnie Webber
School of Informatics

University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh UK EH8 9AB

bonnie.webber@ed.ac.uk

Aravind Joshi
Dept of Computer & Information Science

University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia PA 19104-6228
joshi@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

The discourse properties of text have long
been recognized as critical to language tech-
nology, and over the past 40 years, our un-
derstanding of and ability to exploit the dis-
course properties of text has grown in many
ways. This essay briefly recounts these de-
velopments, the technology they employ, the
applications they support, and the new chal-
lenges that each subsequent development has
raised. We conclude with the challenges faced
by our current understanding of discourse, and
the applications that meeting these challenges
will promote.

1 Why bother with discourse?

Research in Natural Language Processing (NLP) has
long benefitted from the fact that text can often be
treated as simply a bag of words or a bag of sen-
tences. But not always: Position often matters —
e.g., It is well-known that the first one or two sen-
tences in a news report usually comprise its best ex-
tractive summary. Order often matters – e.g., very
different events are conveyed depending on how
clauses and sentences are ordered.

(1) a. I said the magic words, and a genie ap-
peared.

b. A genie appeared, and I said the magic
words.

Adjacency often matters — e.g., attributed mate-
rial may span a sequence of adjacent sentences,
and contrasts are visible through sentence juxtaposi-
tion. Context always matters — e.g., All languages
achieve economy through minimal expressions that

can only convey intended meaning when understood
in context.

Position, order, adjacency and context are intrin-
sic features of discourse, and research on discourse
processing attempts to solve the challenges posed by
context-bound expressions and the discourse struc-
tures that give rise, when linearized, to position, or-
der and adjacency.

But challenges are not why Language Technol-
ogy (LT) researchers should care about discourse:
Rather, discourse can enable LT to overcome known
obstacles to better performance. Consider auto-
mated summarization and machine translation: Hu-
mans regularly judge output quality in terms that in-
clude referential clarity and coherence. Systems can
only improve here by paying attention to discourse
— i.e., to linguistic features above the level of n-
grams and single sentences. (In fact, we predict that
as soon as cheap — i.e., non-manual – methods are
found for reliably assessing these features — for ex-
ample, using proxies like those suggested in (Pitler
et al., 2010) — they will supplant, or at least com-
plement today’s common metrics, Bleu and Rouge
that say little about what matters to human text un-
derstanding (Callison-Burch et al., 2006).)

Consider also work on automated text simplifica-
tion: One way that human editors simplify text is
by re-expressing a long complex sentence as a dis-
course sequence of simple sentences. Researchers
should be able to automate this through understand-
ing the various ways that information is conveyed
in discourse. Other examples of LT applications
already benefitting from recognizing and applying
discourse-level information include automated as-
sessment of student essays (Burstein and Chodorow,
2010); summarization (Thione et al., 2004), infor-

42



mation extraction (Patwardhan and Riloff, 2007;
Eales et al., 2008; Maslennikov and Chua, 2007),
and more recently, statistical machine translation
(Foster et al., 2010). These are described in more
detail in (Webber et al., 2012).

Our aim here then, on this occasion of ACL’s 50th
Annual Meeting, is to briefly describe the evolution
of computational approaches to discourse structure,
reflect on where the field currently stands, and what
new challenges it faces in trying to deliver on its
promised benefit to Language Technology.

2 Background

2.1 Early Methods
The challenges mentioned above are not new.
Question-Answering systems like LUNAR (Woods,
1968; Woods, 1978) couldn’t answer successive
questions without resolving context-bound expres-
sions such as pronouns:
(2) What is the concentration of silicon in brec-

cias?
〈breccia1, parts per million〉
〈breccia2, parts per million〉
〈 . . . 〉
What is it in volcanics? (Woods, 1978)

Early systems for human interaction with animated
agents, including SHRDLU (Winograd, 1973) and
HOMER (Vere and Bickmore, 1990), faced the
same challenge. And early message understand-
ing systems couldn’t extract relevant information
(like when a sighted submarine submerged – “went
sinker”) without recognizing relations implicit in the
structure of a message, as in
(3) VISUAL SIGHTING OF PERISCOPE FOL-

LOWED BY ATTACK WITH ASROC AND TOR-
PEDO. WENT SINKER. LOOSEFOOT 722/723
CONTINUE SEARCH. (Palmer et al., 1993)

The same was true of early systems for processing
narrative text (under the rubric story understanding).
They took on the problem of recognizing events that
had probably happened but hadn’t been mentioned
in the text, given the sequence of events that had
been (Lehnert, 1977; Rumelhart, 1975; Schank and
Abelson, 1977; Mandler, 1984).

Since these early systems never saw more than
a handful of examples, they could successfully em-
ploy straight-forward, but ad hoc methods to handle

the discourse problems the examples posed. For ex-
ample, LUNAR used a single 10-position ring buffer
to store discourse entities associated with both the
user’s and the system’s referring expressions, resolv-
ing pronouns by looking back through the buffer
for an appropriate entity and over-writing previous
buffer entries when the buffer was full.

The next wave of work in computational dis-
course processing sought greater generality through
stronger theoretical grounding, appealing to then-
current theories of discourse such as Centering The-
ory (Grosz et al., 1986; Grosz et al., 1995), used as
a basis for anaphor resolution (Brennan et al., 1987;
Walker et al., 1997; Tetreault, 2001) and text genera-
tion (Kibble and Power, 2000), Rhetorical Structure
Theory (Mann and Thompson, 1988), used as a ba-
sis for text generation (Moore, 1995) and document
summarization (Marcu, 2000b), and Grosz and Sid-
ner’s theory of discourse based on intentions (Grosz
and Sidner, 1986a) and shared plans (Grosz and
Sidner, 1990), used in developing animated agents
(Johnson and Rickel, 2000). Issues related to fully
characterizing centering are explored in great detail
in (Kehler, 1997) and (Poesio et al., 2004).

The approaches considered during this period
never saw more than a few handfuls of examples.
But, as has been clear from developments in PoS-
tagging, Named Entity Recognition and parsing,
Language Technology demands approaches that can
deal with whatever data are given them. So subse-
quent work in computational discourse processing
has similarly pursued robustness through the use of
data-driven approaches that are usually able to cap-
ture the most common forms of any phenomenon
(ie, the 80% at the high end of the Zipfian distri-
bution), while giving up on the long tail. This is
described in Section 3.

2.2 Early Assumptions

While early work focussed on the correct assump-
tion that much was implicit in text and had to be
inferred from the explicit sequence of sentences that
constituted a text, work during the next period fo-
cussed on the underlying structure of discourse and
its consequences. More specificaly, it assumed that
the sequence of sentences constituting the text were
covered by a single tree structure, similar to the sin-
gle tree structure of phrases and clauses covering the

43



s1 s2

s3

condition

condition

s1

s2 s3
motivation

motivation

(a) (b)

Figure 1: Proposed discourse structures for Ex. 4: (a) In
terms of informational relations; (b) in terms of inten-
tional relations

words in a sentence. At issue though was the nature
of the structure.

One issue concerned the nature of the relation be-
tween parent and child nodes in a discourse tree,
and/or the relation between siblings. While Rhetor-
ical Structure Theory (Mann and Thompson, 1988)
posited a single discourse relation holding between
any two discourse units (i.e., units projecting to ad-
jacent text spans), Moore and Pollack (1992) gave an
example of a simple discourse (Ex. 4) in which dif-
ferent choices about the discourse relation holding
between pairs of units, implied different and non-
isomorphic structures.

(4) Come home by 5:00. s1 Then we can go to the
hardware store before it closes. s2 That way we
can finish the bookshelves tonight. s3

Example 4 could be analysed purely in terms of
information-based discourse relations, in which s1
specified the CONDITION under which s2 held,
which in turn specified the CONDITION under which
s3 held. This would make s1 subordinate to s2,
which in turn would be subordinate to s3, as in Fig-
ure 1a. Alternatively, Example 4 could be analysed
purely in terms of intention-based (pragmatic) rela-
tions, in which s2 would be MOTIVATION for s1,
while s3 would be MOTIVATION for s2. This would
make s3 subordinate to s2, which in turn would be
subordinate to s1, as in Figure 1b. In short, the
choice of relation was not merely a matter of labels,
but had structural implications as well.

Another issue during this period concerned the
nature of discourse structure: Was it really a tree?
Sibun (1992), looking at people’s descriptions of the
layout of their house or apartment, argued that they
resembled different ways of linearizing a graph of
the rooms and their connectivity through doors and

halls. None of these linearizations were trees. Sim-
ilarly, Knott et al. (2001), looking at transcriptions
of museum tours, argued that each resembled a lin-
ear sequence of trees, with one or more topic-based
connections between their root nodes — again, not
a single covering tree structure. Wiebe (1993), look-
ing at simple examples such as
(5) The car was finally coming toward him. s1

He finished his diagnostic tests, s2
feeling relief. s3
But then the car started to turn right. s4

pointed multiple lexical items explicitly relating a
clause to multiple other clauses. Here, but would
relate s4 to s3 via a CONTRAST relation, while then
would relate s4 to s2 via a temporal SUCCESSION
relation.

The most well-known of work from this period
is that of Mann and Thompson (1988), Grosz and
Sidner (1986b), Moore and Moser (1996), Polanyi
and van den Berg (1996), and Asher and Lascarides
(2003).1

The way out of these problems was also a way
to achieve the robustness required of any Language
Technology, and that lay in the growing consensus
towards the view that discourse does not have a sin-
gle monolithic hierarchical structure. Rather, dif-
ferent aspects of a discourse give rise to different
structures, possibly with different formal properties
(Stede, 2008; Stede, 2012; Webber et al., 2012).
These different structures we describe in the next
section, while the fact that this can’t be the end of
the story, we take up in Section 4.

3 The Situation Today

Recent years have seen progress to differing degrees
on at least four different types of discourse struc-
tures: topic structure, functional structure, event
structure, and a structure of coherence relations.
First we say a bit about the structures, and then about
the resources employed in recognizing and labelling
them.

3.1 Types of discourse structures
Topic structure and automated topic segmentation
aims to break a discourse into a linear sequence of

1For a historical account and assessent of work in automated
anaphora resolution in this period and afterwards, we direct the
reader to Strube (2007), Ng (2010) and Stede (2012).

44



topics such the geography of a country, followed by
its history, its demographics, its economy, its legal
structures, etc. Segmentation is usually done on a
sentence-by-sentence basis, with segments not as-
sumed to overlap. Methods for topic segmenation
emply semantic, lexical and referential similarity
or, more recently, language models (Bestgen, 2006;
Chen et al., 2009; Choi et al., 2001; Eisenstein and
Barzilay, 2008; Galley et al., 2003; Hearst, 1997;
Malioutov and Barzilay, 2006; Purver et al., 2006;
Purver, 2011).

Functional structure and automated functional
segmentation aims to identify sections within a dis-
course that serve different functions. These func-
tions are genre-specific. In the case of scien-
tific journals, high-level sections generally include
the Background (work that motivates the objec-
tives of the work and/or the hypothesis or claim
being tested), followed by its Methods, and Re-
sults, ending with a Discussion of the results or out-
comes, along with conclusions to be drawn. Finer-
grained segments might include the advantage of
a new method (method-new-advantage) or of an
old method (method-old-advantage) or the disad-
vantage of one or the other (Liakata et al., 2010).
Again, segmentation is usually done on a sentence-
by-sentence basis, with sentences not assumed to
fill more than one function. Methods for functional
segmentation have employed specific cue words and
phrases, as well as more general language models
(Burstein et al., 2003; Chung, 2009; Guo et al.,
2010; Kim et al., 2010; Lin et al., 2006; McKnight
and Srinivasan, 2003; Ruch et al., 2007; Mizuta
et al., 2006; Palau and Moens, 2009; Teufel and
Moens, 2002; Teufel et al., 2009; Agarwal and Yu,
2009). The BIO approach to sequential classica-
tion (Beginning/Inside/Outside) used in Named En-
tity Recognition has also proved useful (Hirohata
et al., 2008), recognizing that the way the start of
a functional segement is signalled may differ from
how it is continued.

Note that topic segmentation and functional seg-
mentation are still not always distinguished. For
example, in (Jurafsky and Martin, 2009), the term
discourse segmentation is used to refer to any seg-
mentation of a discourse into a “high-level” linear
structure. Nevertheless, segmentation by function
exploits different features (and in some cases, dif-

ferent methods) than segmentation by topic, so they
are worth keeping distinct.

Attention to event structure and the identification
of events within a text is a more recent phenomena,
after a hiatus of over twenty years. Here we just
point to work by (Bex and Verheij, 2010; Cham-
bers and Jurafsky, 2008; Do et al., 2011; Finlayson,
2009).

The automated identification of discourse rela-
tions aims to identify discourse relations such as
CONDITION and MOTIVATION, as in Example 4,
and CONTRAST and SUCCESSION, as in Exam-
ple 5. These have also been called coherence re-
lations or rhetorical relations. Methods used de-
pend on whether or not a text is taken to be divisible
into a covering sequence of a non-overlapping dis-
course units related to adjacent units by discourse
relations as in Rhetorical Structure Theory (Mann
and Thompson, 1988) or to both adjacent and non-
adjacent units as in the Discourse GraphBank (Wolf
and Gibson, 2005). If such a cover is assumed,
methods involve parsing a text into units using lex-
ical and punctuational cues, followed by labelling
the relation holding between them (Marcu, 2000a;
Marcu, 2000b; Wolf and Gibson, 2005). If text is
not assumed to be divisible into discourse units, then
methods involve finding evidence for discourse re-
lations (including both explicit words and phrases,
and clausal and sentential adjacency) and their ar-
guments, and then labelling the sense of the iden-
tified relation (Elwell and Baldridge, 2008; Ghosh
et al., 2011; Lin et al., 2010; Lin, 2012; Prasad et
al., 2010a; Wellner, 2008; Wellner and Pustejovsky,
2007).

3.2 Resources for discourse structure
All automated systems for segmenting and labelling
text are grounded in data — whether the data has
informed the manual creation of rules or has been
a source of features for an approach based on ma-
chine learning. In the case of topic structure and
high-level functional structure, there is now a sub-
stantial amount of data that is freely available. For
other types of discourse structure, manual annota-
tion has been required and, depending on the type of
structure, different amounts are currently available.

More specifically, work on topic structure and
segmentation has been able to take advantage of the

45



large, free, still-growing wikipedia, where articles
on similar topics tend to show similar explicit seg-
mentation into sub-topics. This is certainly the case
with the English wikipedia. If similar wikipedia
evolving in other languages lack explicit segmenta-
tion, it may be that cross-lingual techniques may be
able to project explicit segmentation from English-
language articles.

With respect to high-level functional structure,
some work on automated segmentation has been
able to exploit explicit author-provided indicators
of structure, such as the author-structured abstracts
now required by bio-medical journals indexed by
MedLine. Researchers have used these explicitly
structured abstracts to segment abstracts that lack
explicit structure (Chung, 2009; Guo et al., 2010;
Hirohata et al., 2008; Lin et al., 2006).

For all other kinds of discourse structures, ded-
icated manual annotation has been required, both
for segmentation and labelling, and many of these
resources have been made available for other re-
searchers. For fine-grained functional structure,
there is the ART corpus (Liakata et al., 2010)2.

For discourse relations annotated in the RST
framework, there is the RST Discourse TreeBank of
English text (Carlson et al., 2003), available through
the Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC), as well as
similarly annotated corpora in Spanish (da Cunha et
al., 2011), Portugese (Pardo et al., 2008) and Ger-
man (Stede, 2004).

For discourse relations annotated in the lexically-
grounded approach first described in (Webber and
Joshi, 1998), there is the Penn Discourse TreeBank
(Prasad et al., 2008) in English, as well as corpora
in Modern Standard Arabic (Al-Saif and Markert,
2010; Al-Saif and Markert, 2011), Chinese (Xue,
2005; Zhou and Xue, 2012), Czech (Mladová et al.,
2008), Danish (Buch-Kromann et al., 2009; Buch-
Kromann and Korzen, 2010), Dutch (van der Vliet
et al., 2011), Hindi (Oza et al., 2009), and Turk-
ish (Zeyrek and Webber, 2008; Zeyrek et al., 2009;
Zeyrek et al., 2010). Also available are discourse-
annotated journal articles in biomedicine (Prasad et
al., 2011) and discourse-annotated dialogue (Tonelli
et al., 2010).

2http://www.aber.ac.uk/en/cs/research/cb/projects/art/art-
corpus/

4 New challenges

Although the largely empirically-grounded, multi-
structure view of discourse addresses some of the
problems that previous computational approaches
encountered, it also reveals new ones, while leaving
some earlier problems still unaddressed.

4.1 Evidence for discourse structures

The first issue has to do with what should be taken as
evidence for a particular discourse structure. While
one could simply consider all features that can be
computed reliably and just identify the most accu-
rate predictors, this is both expensive and, in the end,
unsatisfying.

With topic structure, content words do seem to
provide compelling evidence for segmentation, ei-
ther using language models or semantic relatedness.
On the other hand, this might be improved through
further evidence in the form of entity chains, as ex-
plored earlier in (Kan et al., 1998), but using to-
day’s more accurate approaches to automated coref-
erence recognition (Strube, 2007; Charniak and El-
sner, 2009; Ng, 2010).

Whatever the genre, evidence for function struc-
ture seems to come from the frequency and distri-
bution of closed-class words, particular phrases (or
phrase patterns), and in the case of speech, into-
nation. So, for example, Niekrasz (2012) shows
that what he calls participant-relational features
that indicate the participants relationships to the
text provide convincing evidence for segmenting
oral narrative by the type of narrative activity tak-
ing place. These features include the distribution
and frequency of first and second person pronouns,
tense, and intonation. But much work remains to
be done in this area, in establishing what provides
reliable evidence within a genre and what evidence
might be stable across genres.

Evidence for discourse relations is what we have
given significant thought to, as the Penn Discourse
TreeBank (Prasad et al., 2008) and related corpora
mentioned in Section 3.2 aim to ground each in-
stance of a discourse relation in the evidence that
supports it. The issue of evidence is especially
important because none of these corpora has yet
been completely annotated with discourse relations.
Completing the annotation and developing robust

46



automated segmentation techniques requires iden-
tifying what elements of the language provide evi-
dence for coherence relations, and under what con-
ditions.

The two main types of evidence for discourse re-
lations in English are the presence of a discourse
connective and sentence adjacency. Discourse con-
nectives annotated in the PDTB 2.0 come from
a list of subordinating and coordinating conjunc-
tions, and discourse adverbials — a subset of those
identified by Forbes-Riley et al (2006). Subse-
quently, Prasad et al. (2010b) used Callison-Burch’s
technique for identifying syntax-constrained para-
phrases (Callison-Burch, 2008) to identify addi-
tional discourse connectives, some of which don’t
appear in the PDTB corpus and some of which
appear in the corpus but were not identified and
annotated as discourse connectives. English isn’t
alone in lacking a complete list of discourse con-
nectives: While German has the massive Hand-
buch de deutschen Konnektoren (Pasch et al., 2003),
even this resource has been found to be incomplete
through clever application of automated tagging and
word-alignment of parallel corpora (Versley, 2010).

Evidence for discourse relations in the PDTB also
comes from lexical or phrasal elements that are out-
side the initial set of conjunctions and discourse ad-
verbials. This evidence has been called alternative
lexicalization or AltLex (Prasad et al., 2010b), and
includes (in English) clause-initial what’s more (Ex-
ample 6) and that means (Example 7).

(6) A search party soon found the unscathed air-
craft in a forest clearing much too small to have
allowed a conventional landing. What’s more,
the seven mail personnel aboard were missing.
[wsj 0550]

(7) The two companies each produce market
pulp, containerboard and white paper. That
means goods could be manufactured closer
to customers, saving shipping costs, he said.
[wsj 0317]

The discovery of these other forms of evidence3

raises the question of when it is that a word or phrase
signals a discourse relation. For example, only 15 of
the 33 tokens of that means in the PDTB were anno-
tated as evidence of a discourse relation. While the

3which English is not alone in having, cf. (Rysova, 2012)

three paragraph-initial instances were left unanno-
tated due to resource limitations (ie, no paragraph
initial sentences were annotated unless they con-
tained an explicit discourse connective), the major-
ity were ignored because they followed an explicit
connective.

As Wiebe’s example (5) showed, there can be
multiple explicit discourse connectives in a clause,
each of which is evidence for a separate discourse re-
lation (albeit possibly between the same arguments).
All of these are annotated in the PDTB – eg, both but
and then in

(8) Congress would have 20 days to reject the
package with a 50% majority, but then a Presi-
dent could veto that rejection. [wsj 1698]

The question is whether an AltLex in the context of
an explicit connective also provides evidence of a
distinct discourse relation — for example, with the
conjunction with But in

(9) At a yearling sale, a buyer can go solo and get
a horse for a few thousand dollars. But that
means paying the horse’s maintenance; on av-
erage, it costs $25,000 a year to raise a horse.
[wsj 1174]

As noted above, the PDTB 2.0 also admits sen-
tence adjacency as evidence for one, or even two,
implicit discourse relations, as in

(10) And some investors fault Mr. Spiegel’s life
style; [Implicit = because, for instance] he
earns millions of dollars a year and flies
around in Columbia’s jet planes. [wsj 0179]

Here, the implicit token of because is associ-
ated with a discourse relation labelled CONTIN-
GENCY.CAUSE.REASON, while the implicit token
of for instance is associated with one labelled EX-
PANSION.RESTATEMENT.SPECIFICATION.

The question is whether sentence adjacency could
also serve as evidence for a distinct discourse rela-
tion, even when there is also an explicit discourse
adverbial, as in the following three instances of in-
stead. Here, Ex. 11 can be paraphrased as And in-
stead, Ex. 12 as But instead, and Ex.13 as So in-
stead.

(11) But many banks are turning away from strict
price competition. Instead, they are trying to

47



build customer loyalty by bundling their ser-
vices into packages and targeting them to small
segments of the population. [wsj 0085]

(12) The tension was evident on Wednesday
evening during Mr. Nixon’s final banquet
toast, normally an opportunity for reciting plat-
itudes about eternal friendship. Instead, Mr.
Nixon reminded his host, Chinese President
Yang Shangkun, that Americans haven’t for-
given China’s leaders for the military assault
of June 3-4 that killed hundreds, and perhaps
thousands, of demonstrators. [wsj 0093]

(13) Since stars are considerably more massive than
planets, such wobbles are small and hard to
see directly. Instead, Dr Marcy and others like
him look for changes that the wobbles cause in
the wavelength of the light from the star. [The
Economist, 10 November 2007]

These examples suggest that the presence of an
explicit connective should not, in all cases, be con-
sidered evidence for the absense of an implicit con-
nective. Once the set of explicit connectives have
been identified that can co-occur with each other
(including for example and for instance, as well as
instead), automated parsers for coherence relations
can be made to consider the presence of an implicit
connective whenever one of these is seen.

4.2 Variability in discourse annotation
Another issue relates to variability in annotating dis-
course structure: Inter-annotator agreement can be
very low in annotating pragmatic and discourse-
related phenomena. While we will illustrate the
point here in terms of annotating coherence rela-
tions, for other examples, the general point is illus-
trated in papers from the DGfS Workshop on Beyond
Semantics4 and in an upcoming special issue of the
journal Discourse and Dialogue devoted to the same
topic.

The Penn Wall Street Journal corpus contains
twenty-four (24) reports of errata in previously-
appearing articles. Twenty-three (23) consist of a
single pair of sentences, with no explicit discourse
connective signalling the relation between them.5

4http://www.linguistics.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/beyondsem/
5The other report contains three sentences, again with no

explicit connectives.

One sentence reports the error, and the other, the cor-
rect statement – e.g.

(14) VIACOM Inc.’s loss narrowed to $21.7 million
in the third quarter from $56.9 million a year
ago. Thursday’s edition misstated the narrow-
ing. [wsj 1747]

In twenty of the errata (class C1), the correct
statement is given in the first sentence and the er-
ror, in the second; In the other three (class C2), it is
the other way around. One might think that the two
sentences in the twenty C1 reports would be anno-
tated as having the same discourse relation holding
between them, and the same with the two sentences
in the three C2 reports. But that is not the case: The
twenty C1 reports presented to annotators at differ-
ent times ended up being labelled with six different
discourse relations. There was even variability in
labelling the three members of the C2 class: They
were labelled with one discourse relation, and one
with a completely different one.

What should one conclude from this variability?
One possibility is that there is one right answer,
and annotators just vary in their ability to iden-
tify it. This would mean it would be beneficial to
have a large troop of annotators (so that the major-
ity view could prevail). Another possibility is that
there is more than one right answer, which would
imply multi-label classification so that multiple la-
bels could hold to different degrees. A third possi-
bility reflects the view from Beyond Semantics that
it is often very hard to transfer results from theoreti-
cal linguistics based on toy examples to naturally-
occurring texts. In this case, variability is a con-
sequence of the still exploratory nature of much
discourse annotation. In the case of errata, while
clearly some relation holds between the pair of sen-
tences, it may actually not be any of those used in
annotating the PDTB. That is, as Grosz and Sidner
(1986b) argued several years ago, the sentences may
only be related by their communicative intentions –
one sentence intended to draw the reader’s attention
to the specific error that was made (so that the reader
knows what was mis-stated), the other intended to
correct it. One might then take the sense annotation
of discourse relations as still exploratory in the wide
range of corpora being annotated with this informa-
tion (cf. Section 3.2).

48



4.3 Systematic relations between discourse
structures

Fortunately for approaches to automated discourse
structure recognition, the lack of isomorphism be-
tween different discourse structures does not neces-
sarily mean that they are completely independent.
This belief that different aspects of discourse would
be related, is what led Grosz and Sidner (1986b) to
propose a theory that linked what they called the in-
tentional structure of discourse, with its linguistic
structure and with the reader or listener’s cognitive
attentional structure.

With respect to the different types of discourse
structure considered here, (Lin, 2012) has consid-
ered the possibility of systematic relations between
Teufel’s Argumentative Zone labelling of scientific
texts in a corpus developed for her PhD thesis
(Teufel, 1999) and PDTB-style discourse relations,
both within and across sentences. This is certainly
worth additional study, for the value it can bring to
automated methods of discourse structure recogni-
tion.

4.4 Intentional structure

When computational discourse processing turned
to machine learning methods based on reliably-
identifiable features, it abandoned (at least temporar-
ily) the centrality of pragmatics and speaker in-
tentions to discourse. That is, there were few or
no features that directly indicated or could serve
as reliable proxies for what role speaker intended
his/her utterance to play in the larger discourse. But
both Niekrasz’ work on meeting segmentation (Sec-
tion 4.1) and the discussion in Section 4.2 of errata
and variability in their labelling draws new attention
to this old question, and not just to Moore and Pol-
lack’s observation (Section 3) that intentional and
informational characterizations may confer differ-
ent, non-isomorphic structures over a text. It may
also be the case that neither structure may provide a
complete cover: A new visit is warranted.

4.5 Discourse and inference

Not only were intentions abandoned in the move
to data-intensive methods, so was inference and is-
sues of how readers and listeners recover informa-
tion that isn’t explicit. What’s missing can be an

unmentioned event, with classic examples coming
from the restaurant script (Lehnert, 1977), where
someone enters a restaurant, sits down at a ta-
ble and gives their order to a waiter, where un-
mentioned inter alia is an event in which the per-
son becomes informed of what items the restaurant
has to offer, say through being given a menu. Or
it can be an unmentioned fact, such as that pro-
gram trading involves the computer-executed trad-
ing of a basket of fifteen or more stocks. The
latter explains the annotation of an implicit EX-
PANSION.RESTATEMENT.GENERALIZATION rela-
tion between the two sentences in

(15) “You’re not going to stop the idea of trading a
basket of stocks,” says Vanderbilt’s Prof. Stoll.
“Program trading is here to stay, and computers
are here to stay, and we just need to understand
it.” [wsj 0118]

The problem here with inference is when labelling
an implicit coherence relation requires inferred in-
formation about its arguments, those arguments may
have quite different features than when all the infor-
mation needed to label the relation is explicit.

5 Conclusion

There are still large challenges ahead for compu-
tational discourse modelling. But we are hopeful
that greater openness to how information is con-
veyed through discourse, as well as richer modelling
techniques developed for other problems, will allow
needed progress to be made. If we can improve sys-
tem performance in recognizing the roles that utter-
ances are meant to play in discourse in one genre,
perhaps it will help us generalize and transport this
intention recognition between genres. We also hope
for progress in finding more ways to take advantage
of unannotated data in discourse research; in un-
derstanding more about inter-dependencies between
features of different types of discourse structure; in
continuing to carry out related computational dis-
course research and development in multiple lan-
guages and genres, so as to widen the access to the
knowledge gained; and in exploiting discourse in
Language Technology applications, including infor-
mation extraction and SMT.

49



References
Shashank Agarwal and Hong Yu. 2009. Automati-

cally classifying sentences in full-text biomedical arti-
cles into introduction, methods, results and discussion.
Bioinformatics, 25(23):3174–3180.

Amal Al-Saif and Katja Markert. 2010. The Leeds Ara-
bic Discourse Treebank: Annotating discourse con-
nectives for Arabic. In Proceedings, 7th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2010).

Amal Al-Saif and Katja Markert. 2011. Modelling dis-
course relations for Arabic. In Proceedings, Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 736–
747.

Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. 2003. Logics
of Conversation. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge UK.

Yves Bestgen. 2006. Improving text segmentation us-
ing Latent Semantic Analysis: A reanalysis of Choi,
Wiemer-Hastings, and Moore (2001). Computational
Linguistics, 32(1):5–12.

Floris Bex and Bart Verheij. 2010. Story schemes for
argumentation about the facts of a crime. In Proceed-
ings, AAAI Fall Symposium on Computational Narra-
tives, Menlo Park CA. AAAI Press.

Susan E. Brennan, Marilyn Walker Friedman, and Carl J.
Pollard. 1987. A centering approach to pronouns. In
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting, Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 155–162, Stan-
ford University, Stanford CA.

Matthias Buch-Kromann and Iørn Korzen. 2010. The
unified annotation of syntax and discourse in the
Copenhagen Dependency Treebanks. In Proceedings
of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages
127–131, July.

Matthias Buch-Kromann, Iørn Korzen, and Henrik Høeg
Müller. 2009. Uncovering the ‘lost’ structure of
translations with parallel treebanks. In Fabio Alves,
Susanne Göpferich, and Inger Mees, editors, Copen-
hagen Studies of Language: Methodology, Technol-
ogy and Innovation in Translation Process Research,
Copenhagen Studies of Language, vol. 38, pages 199–
224. Copenhagen Business School.

Jill Burstein and Martin Chodorow. 2010. Progress and
new directions in technology for automated essay eval-
uation. In R Kaplan, editor, The Oxford Handbook of
Applied Linguistics, pages 487–497. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2 edition.

Jill Burstein, Daniel Marcu, and Kevin Knight. 2003.
Finding the WRITE stuff: Automatic identification of
discourse structure in student essays. IEEE Intelligent
Systems: Special Issue on Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, 18:32–39.

Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and Philipp
Koehn. 2006. Re-evaluating the role of bleu in ma-
chine translation research. In 11th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 249–256, Trento, Italy.

Chris Callison-Burch. 2008. Syntactic constraints
on paraphrases extracted from parallel corpora. In
EMNLP ’08: Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.

Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen Okurowski.
2003. Building a discourse-tagged corpus in the
framework of rhetorical structure theory. In J. van
Kuppevelt & R. Smith, editor, Current Directions in
Discourse and Dialogue. Kluwer, New York.

Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2008. Unsuper-
vised learning of narrative event chains. In Proceed-
ings, Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 789–797.

Eugene Charniak and Micha Elsner. 2009. Em works
for pronoun anaphora resolution. In Proc. European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Harr Chen, S. R. K. Branavan, Regina Barzilay, and
David Karger. 2009. Global models of document
structure using latent permutations. In Proceedings,
Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(NAACL), pages 371–379.

Freddy Y. Y. Choi, Peter Wiemer-Hastings, and Johanna
Moore. 2001. Latent Semantic Analysis for text seg-
mentation. In EMNLP ’01: Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 109–117.

Grace Chung. 2009. Sentence retrieval for abstracts of
randomized controlled trials. BMC Medical Informat-
ics and Decision Making, 10(9), February.

Iria da Cunha, Juan-Manuel Torres-Moreno, and Gerardo
Sierra. 2011. On the development of the rst spanish
treebank. In Proc. 5th Linguistic Annotation Work-
shop, pages 1–10, Portland OR.

Quang Xuan Do, Yee Seng Chan, and Dan Roth. 2011.
Minimally supervised event causality identification.
In Proceedings, Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 294–303.

James Eales, Robert Stevens, and David Robertson.
2008. Full-text mining: Linking practice, protocols
and articles in biological research. In Proceedings of
the BioLink SIG, ISMB 2008.

Jacob Eisenstein and Regina Barzilay. 2008. Bayesian
unsupervised topic segmentation. In EMNLP ’08:
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 334–343.

50



Robert Elwell and Jason Baldridge. 2008. Dis-
course connective argument identication with connec-
tive specic rankers. In Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Semantic Computing (ICSC-08).

Mark Finlayson. 2009. Deriving narrative morphologies
via analogical story merging. In Proceedings, 2nd In-
ternational Conference on Analogy, pages 127–136.

Katherine Forbes-Riley, Bonnie Webber, and Aravind
Joshi. 2006. Computing discourse semantics: The
predicate-argument semantics of discourse connec-
tives in D-LTAG. Journal of Semantics, 23:55–106.

George Foster, Pierre Isabelle, and Roland Kuhn. 2010.
Translating structured documents. In Proceedings of
AMTA.

Michel Galley, Kathleen McKeown, Eric Fosler-Lussier,
and Hongyan Jing. 2003. Discourse segmentation of
multi-party conversation. In Proceedings of the 41st
Annual Conference of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Sucheta Ghosh, Sara Tonelli, Giuseppe Riccardi, and
Richard Johansson. 2011. End-to-end discourse
parser evaluation. In Proceedings, IEEE Conference
on Semantic Computing (ICSC-11).

Barbara Grosz and Candace Sidner. 1986a. Attention,
intention and the structure of discourse. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 12(3):175–204.

Barbara Grosz and Candace Sidner. 1986b. Attention,
intention and the structure of discourse. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 12(3):175–204.

Barbara Grosz and Candace Sidner. 1990. Plans for dis-
course. In Philip Cohen, Jerry Morgan, and Martha
Pollack, editors, Intentions in Communication, pages
417–444. MIT Press.

Barbara Grosz, Aravind Joshi, and Scott Weinstein.
1986. Towards a computational theory of dis-
course interpretation. Widely circulated unpublished
manuscript.

Barbara Grosz, Aravind Joshi, and Scott Weinstein.
1995. Centering: A framework for modelling the lo-
cal coherence of discourse. Computational Linguis-
tics, 21(2):203–225.

Yufan Guo, Anna Korhonen, Maria Liakata, Ilona Silins,
Lin Sun, and Ulla Stenius. 2010. Identifying the infor-
mation structure of scientific abstracts. In Proceedings
of the 2010 BioNLP Workshop, July.

Marti Hearst. 1997. TextTiling: Segmenting text into
multi-paragraph subtopic passages. Computational
Linguistics, 23(1):33–64.

Kenji Hirohata, Naoki Okazaki, Sophia Ananiadou, and
Mitsuru Ishizuka. 2008. Identifying sections in scien-
tic abstracts using conditional random fields. In Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing, pages 381–388.

W. Lewis Johnson and Jeff Rickel. 2000. Animated ped-
agogical agents: Face-to-face interaction in interactive
learning environments. Int’l J. Artificial Intelligence
in Education, 11:47–78.

Dan Jurafsky and James Martin. 2009. Speech and Lan-
guage Processing. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs
NJ, 2 edition.

Min-Yen Kan, Judith Klavans, and Kathleen McKeown.
1998. Linear segmentation and segment significance.
In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Very Large
Corpora.

Andrew Kehler. 1997. Current theories of centering for
pronoun intepretation: A critical evaluation. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 23(3):467–475.

Rodger Kibble and Richard Power. 2000. An integrated
framework for text planning and pronominalisation. In
Proc. of the First International Conference on Natural
Language Generation, pages 77–84, Mitzpe Ramon,
Israel, June.

Su Nam Kim, David Martinez, and Lawrence Cavedon.
2010. Automatic classification of sentences for evi-
dence based medicine. In Proc. ACM 4th Int’l Work-
shop on Data and Text Mining in Biomedical informat-
ics, pages 13–22.

Alistair Knott, Jon Oberlander, Mick O’Donnell, and
Chris Mellish. 2001. Beyond elaboration: The
interaction of relations and focus in coherent text.
In T Sanders, J Schilperoord, and W Spooren, ed-
itors, Text Representation:Linguistic and psycholin-
guistic aspects, pages 181–196. John Benjamins Pub-
lishing.

Wendy Lehnert. 1977. A conceptual theory of question
answering. In Proc 5th International Joint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, pages 158–164.

Maria Liakata, Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan, and
Colin Batchelor. 2010. Corpora for the conceptuali-
sation and zoning of scientific papers. In Proceedings
of the 7th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2010).

Jimmy Lin, Damianos Karakos, Dina Demner-Fushman,
and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2006. Generative content
models for structural analysis of medical abstracts. In
Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL Workshop on BioNLP,
pages 65–72.

Ziheng Lin, Hwee Tou Ng, and Min-Yen Kan.
2010. A PDTB-styled end-to-end discourse
parser. Technical report, Department of Com-
puting, National University of Singapore, November.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1011.0835.

Ziheng Lin. 2012. Discourse Parsing: Inferring Dis-
course Structure, Modelling Coherence, and its Appli-
cations. Ph.D. thesis, National University of Singa-
pore.

51



Igor Malioutov and Regina Barzilay. 2006. Minimum
cut model for spoken lecture segmentation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jean Mandler. 1984. Stories, scripts, and scenes: As-
pects of schema theory. Lawrence Erlbaum Asso-
ciates, Hillsdale NJ.

William Mann and Sandra Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical
Structure Theory: Toward a functional theory of text
organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Daniel Marcu. 2000a. The rhetorical parsing of unre-
stricted texts: A surface-based approach. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 26(3):395–448.

Daniel Marcu. 2000b. The theory and practice of dis-
course parsing and summarization. MIT Press.

Mstislav Maslennikov and Tat-Seng Chua. 2007. A
multi-resolution framework for information extraction
from free text. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual
Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 592–599. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Larry McKnight and Padmini Srinivasan. 2003. Cate-
gorization of sentence types in medical abstracts. In
Proceedings of the AMIA Annual Symposium, pages
440–444.

Yoko Mizuta, Anna Korhonen, Tony Mullen, and Nigel
Collier. 2006. Zone analysis in biology articles as a
basis for information extraction. International Journal
of Medical Informatics, 75:468487.

Lucie Mladová, Šárka Zikánová, and Eva Hajičová.
2008. From sentence to discourse: Building an an-
notation scheme for discourse based on the Prague De-
pendency Treebank. In Proceedings of the 6th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC 2008).

Johanna Moore and Martha Pollack. 1992. A problem
for RST: The need for multi-level discouse analysis.
Computational Linguistics, 18(4):537–544.

Johanna Moore. 1995. Participating in Explanatory Di-
alogues. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.

Megan Moser and Johanna Moore. 1996. Toward a syn-
thesis of two accounts of discourse structure. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 22(3):409–419.

Vincent Ng. 2010. Supervised noun phrase coreference
research: The first 15 years. In Proc. 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 1396–1411, Uppsala, Sweden.

John Niekrasz. 2012. Toward Summarization of Com-
municative Activities in Spoken Conversation. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Edinburgh.

Umangi Oza, Rashmi Prasad, Sudheer Kolachina,
Dipti Misra Sharma, and Aravind Joshi. 2009. The

hindi discourse relation bank. In Proc. 3rd ACL Lan-
guage Annotation Workshop (LAW III), Singapore, Au-
gust.

Raquel Mochales Palau and Marie-Francine Moens.
2009. Argumentation mining: the detection, classifi-
cation and structure of arguments in text. In Proc. 12th
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Law, ICAIL ’09, pages 98–107. ACM.

Martha Palmer, Carl Weir, Rebecca Passonneau, and Tim
Finin. 1993. The kernal text understanding system.
Artificial Intelligence, 63:17–68.

Thiago Alexandre Salgueiro Pardo, Maria das Gracas
Volpe Nunes, and Lucia Helena Machado Rino. 2008.
Dizer: An automatic discourse analyzer for brazilian
portuguese. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence,
3171:224–234.

Renate Pasch, Ursula Brausse, Eva Breindl, and Ulrich
Wassner. 2003. Handbuch der deutschen Konnek-
toren. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin.

Siddharth Patwardhan and Ellen Riloff. 2007. Effective
information extraction with semantic affinity patterns
and relevant regions. In Proceedings of the 2007 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-07).

Emily Pitler, Annie Louis, and Ani Nenkova. 2010.
Automatic evaluation of linguistic quality in multi-
document summarization. In Proc., 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 544–554, Uppsala, Sweden.

Massimo Poesio, Rosemary Stevenson, Barbara Di Eu-
genio, and Janet Hitzeman. 2004. Centering: A para-
metric theory and its instantiations. Computational
Linguistics, 30(3):300–363.

Livia Polanyi and Martin H. van den Berg. 1996.
Discourse structure and discourse interpretation. In
P. Dekker and M. Stokhof, editors, Proceedings of the
Tenth Amsterdam Colloquium, pages 113–131, Uni-
versity of Amsterdam.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, and et al. 2008. The Penn Discourse Treebank
2.0. In Proceedings of the 6th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation.

Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie Webber.
2010a. Exploiting scope for shallow discourse pars-
ing. In Proceedings of the 7th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2010).

Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie Webber.
2010b. Realization of discourse relations by other
means: Alternative lexicalizations. In Proceed-
ings, International Conf. on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING).

Rashmi Prasad, Susan McRoy, Nadya Frid, Aravind
Joshi, and Hong Yu. 2011. The Biomedical Discourse

52



Relation Bank. BMC Bioinformatics, 12(188):18
pages. http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-
2015/12/188.

Matthew Purver, Tom Griffiths, K.P. Körding, and Joshua
Tenenbaum. 2006. Unsupervised topic modelling for
multi-party spoken discourse. In Proceedings, Inter-
national Conf. on Computational Linguistics (COL-
ING) and the Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 17–24.

Matthew Purver. 2011. Topic segmentation. In Gokhan
Tur and Renato de Mori, editors, Spoken Language
Understanding: Systems for Extracting Semantic In-
formation from Speech. Wiley, Hoboken NJ.

Patrick Ruch, Celia Boyer, Christine Chichester, Imad
Tbahriti, Antoine Geissbühler, Paul Fabry, and et al.
2007. Using argumentation to extract key sentences
from biomedical abstracts. International Journal of
Medical Informatics, 76(2–3):195–200.

David Rumelhart. 1975. Notes on a schema for stories.
In Dan Bobrow and Alan Collins, editors, Representa-
tion and Understanding: Studies in Cognitive Science.
Academic Press, New York.

Magdalena Rysova. 2012. Alternative lexicalizations of
discourse connectives in czech. In Proc. 8th Int’l Conf.
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012).

Roger Schank and Robert Abelson. 1977. Scripts, Plans,
Goals and Understanding: an Inquiry into Human
Knowledge Structures. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale
NJ.

Penni Sibun. 1992. Generating text without trees. Com-
putational Intelligence, 8(1):102–122.

Manfred Stede. 2004. The Potsdam Commentary Cor-
pus. In ACL Workshop on Discourse Annotation,
Barcelona, Spain, July.

Manfred Stede. 2008. RST revisted: Disentangling nu-
clearity. In Cathrine Fabricius-Hansen and Wiebke
Ramm, editors, ’Subordination’ versus ’Coordination’
in Sentence and Text, pages 33–59. John Benjamins,
Amsterdam.

Manfred Stede. 2012. Discourse Processing. Morgan &
Claypool Publishers.

Michael Strube. 2007. Corpus-based and ma-
chine learning approaches to anaphora resolution.
In Monika Schwarz-Friesel, Manfred Consten, and
Mareile Knees, editors, Anaphors in Text: Cognitive,
formal and applied approaches to anaphoric refer-
ence, pages 207–222. John Benjamins Publishing.

Joel Tetreault. 2001. A corpus-based evaluation of cen-
tering and pronoun resolution. Computational Lin-
guistics, 27(4):507–520.

Simone Teufel and Marc Moens. 2002. Summariz-
ing scientific articles - experiments with relevance and
rhetorical status. Computational Linguistics, 28:409–
445.

Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan, and Colin Batche-
lor. 2009. Towards discipline-independent argumen-
tative zoning: evidence from chemistry and compu-
tational linguistics. In Proceedings, Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1493–1502.

Simone Teufel. 1999. Argumentative Zoning: Informa-
tion Extraction from Scientific Text. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of Edinburgh.

Gian Lorenzo Thione, Martin van den Berg, Livia
Polanyi, and Chris Culy. 2004. Hybrid text summa-
rization: combining external relevance measures with
structural analysis. In Proceedings of the ACL 2004
Workshop Text Summarization Branches Out.

Sara Tonelli, Guiseppe Riccardi, Rashmi Prasad, and
Aravind Joshi. 2010. Annotation of discourse re-
lations for conversational spoken dialogs. In Proc.
7th Int’l Conf. Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2010).

Nynke van der Vliet, Ildikó Berzlánovich, Gosse Bouma,
Markus Egg, and Gisela Redeker. 2011. Building a
discourse-annotated Dutch text corpus. In Bochumer
Linguistische Arbeitsberichte, pages 157–171.

Steven Vere and Timothy Bickmore. 1990. A basic
agent. Computational Intelligence, 6(1):41–60.

Yannick Versley. 2010. Discovery of ambiguous and un-
ambiguous discourse connectives via annotation pro-
jection. In Workshop on the Annotation and Exploita-
tion of Parallel Corpora (AEPC). NODALIDA.

Marilyn Walker, Aravind Joshi, and Ellen Prince. 1997.
Centering in Discourse. Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford, England.

Bonnie Webber and Aravind Joshi. 1998. Anchor-
ing a lexicalized tree-adjoining grammar for discourse.
In Coling/ACL Workshop on Discourse Relations and
Discourse Markers, pages 86–92, Montreal, Canada.

Bonnie Webber, Markus Egg, and Valia Kordoni. 2012.
Discourse structure and language technology. Natural
Language Engineering.

Ben Wellner and James Pustejovsky. 2007. Automati-
cally identifying the arguments of discourse connec-
tives. In Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-07).

Ben Wellner. 2008. Sequence Models and Ranking
Methods for Discourse Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, Bran-
deis University.

Janyce Wiebe. 1993. Issues in linguistic segmentation.
In Workshop on Intentionality and Structure in Dis-
course Relations, Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 148–151, Ohio StateUniversity.

Terry Winograd. 1973. A procedural model of language
understanding. In Roger Schank and Ken Colby, ed-
itors, Computer Models of Thought and Language,

53



pages 152–186. W.H. Freeman. Reprinted in Grosz
et al. (eds), Readings in Natural Language Processing.
Los Altos CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1986,
pp.249-266.

Florian Wolf and Edward Gibson. 2005. Representing
discourse coherence: A corpus-based study. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 31:249–287.

William Woods. 1968. Procedural semantics for a
question-answering machine. In Proceedings of the
AFIPS National Computer Conference, pages 457–
471, Montvale NJ. AFIPS Press.

William Woods. 1978. Semantics and quantification in
natural language question answering. In Advances in
Computers, volume 17, pages 1–87. Academic Press,
New York.

Nianwen Xue. 2005. Annotating discourse connectives
in the chinese treebank. In ACL Workshop on Frontiers
in Corpus Annotation II, Ann Arbor MI.

Deniz Zeyrek and Bonnie Webber. 2008. A discourse re-
source for Turkish: Annotating discourse connectives
in the METU corpus. In Proceedings of the 6th Work-
shop on Asian Language Resources (ALR6).

Deniz Zeyrek, Ümut Deniz Turan, Cem Bozsahin, Ruket
Çakıcı, and et al. 2009. Annotating Subordinators in
the Turkish Discourse Bank. In Proceedings of the 3rd
Linguistic Annotation Workshop (LAW III).

Deniz Zeyrek, Işın Demirşahin, Ayışığı Sevdik-
Çallı, Hale Ögel Balaban, İhsan Yalçınkaya, and
Ümut Deniz Turan. 2010. The annotation scheme
of the Turkish Discourse Bank and an evaluation of
inconsistent annotations. In Proceedings of the 4th
Linguistic Annotation Workshop (LAW III).

Yuping Zhou and Nianwen Xue. 2012. Pdtb-style dis-
course annotation of chinese text. In Proc. 50th An-
nual Meeting of the ACL, Jeju Island, Korea.

54


