










































Linguist's Assistant: A Multi-Lingual Natural Language Generator based on Linguistic Universals, Typologies, and Primitives


INLG 2012 Proceedings of the 7th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 59–66,
Utica, May 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Linguist’s Assistant: A Multi-Lingual Natural Language Generator 

based on Linguistic Universals, Typologies, and Primitives 

 

 

 

Tod Allman Stephen Beale Richard Denton 
Graduate Institute of Applied 

Linguistics 

University of Maryland, Bal-

timore County 

Dartmouth College 

6127 Wilder Lab 

7500 W. Camp Wisdom Rd. 1000 Hilltop Circle Hanover, NH 03755 

Dallas, TX 75236 Baltimore, MD 21250 richard.e.denton@ 

tod_allman@gial.edu sbeale@csee.umbc.edu dartmouth.edu 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Abstract 

Linguist’s Assistant (LA) is a large scale se-

mantic analyzer and multi-lingual natural lan-

guage generator designed and developed 

entirely from a linguist’s perspective.  The 

system incorporates extensive typological, 

semantic, syntactic, and discourse research in-

to its semantic representational system and its 

transfer and synthesizing grammars.  LA has 

been tested with English, Korean, Kewa (Pa-

pua New Guinea), Jula (Cote d’Ivoure), and 

North Tanna (Vanuatu), and proof-of-concept 

lexicons and grammars have been developed 

for Spanish, Urdu, Tagalog, Chinantec (Mexi-

co), and Angas (Nigeria).  This paper will 

summarize the major components of the NLG 

system, and then present the results of exper-

iments that were performed to determine the 

quality of the generated texts.  The experi-

ments indicate that when experienced mother-

tongue translators use the drafts generated by 

LA, their productivity is typically quadrupled 

without any loss of quality. 

1 Introduction 

The fundamental goal underlying LA was to de-

velop a system capable of generating high quality 

texts in a wide variety of languages, particularly 

minority and endangered languages.  Drafts pro-

duced by LA are always easily understandable, 

grammatically correct, semantically equivalent to 

the source documents, and at approximately a sixth 

grade reading level.  Because the system is based 

on linguistic research, LA is expected to work well 

for typologically diverse languages; it works equal-

ly well for languages that are coranking or clause 

chaining, highly isolating or highly polysynthetic, 

fusional or agglutinative, etc.  A natural language 

generator of this type is practical only when trans-

lating large quantities of texts into many different 

languages.  Therefore semantic representations for 

a large variety of texts are being developed for LA.  

This system is a tool which enables linguists to 

document a language and simultaneously generate 

numerous texts for the speakers of that language.  

A model of LA is shown in Figure 1. 

Figure 1. Model of Linguist’s Assistant 

As seen in the figure, there are five primary com-

ponents: 1) the ontology, 2) the semantic represen-

tations, 3) the lexicon, 4) the transfer grammar, and 

5) the synthesizing grammar.  The two components 

59



in ovals are static knowledge which is supplied 

with LA, and the three items in rectangles are user-

supplied target language knowledge.  The final 

product of LA is target text. 

2 The Ontology  

One of the foundational principles of Natural Se-

mantic Metalanguage theory (Goddard & 

Wierzbicka, 1994; Wierzbicka, 1996) proposes 

that there is a small set of innate concepts which 

are present in every language.  These innate con-

cepts can be used to explicate every word in every 

language.  If semantic representations were devel-

oped using only these innate primitives, the prob-

lem of lexical mismatch between languages would 

be eliminated.  However, building semantic repre-

sentations using only the innate concepts is un-

wieldy, so semantically simple molecules were 

identified in a principled manner.  For our seman-

tic molecules, we elected to use the defining vo-

cabulary in Longman’s Contemporary English 

Dictionary (2003).  By using these semantically 

simple concepts, the problem of lexical mismatch 

between source and target languages is significant-

ly reduced.  There are certainly still instances of 

lexical mismatch, and we have an approach for 

dealing with them which will be described below.  

LA also permits the automatic insertion of seman-

tically complex concepts into the semantic repre-

sentations, but only if the linguist indicates that the 

target language has a lexical equivalent. 

3 LA’s Semantic Representational System  

The development of an adequate method of mean-

ing representation for LA’s source texts proved to 

be a challenge.  Formal semantics (Cann, 1993; 

Rosner, 1992), conceptual semantics (Jackendoff, 

1990) and generative semantics (Lakoff, 1987) 

were each considered but found unsuitable because 

they didn’t include sufficient information for mi-

nority languages.  Therefore a new format was de-

veloped specifically for LA’s semantic 

representational system.  LA’s semantic represen-

tations are comprised of a controlled, English in-

fluenced metalanguage augmented by a feature 

system which was designed to accommodate a 

wide variety of languages.  Fundamentally these 

semantic representations consist of concepts, struc-

tures, and features.  The concepts that are permit-

ted in the semantic representations are all semanti-

cally simple as was described earlier.  The struc-

tures permitted in the semantic representations are 

a small restricted set of English-like sentence 

structures.  The feature system developed for LA 

includes semantic, syntactic, and discourse infor-

mation.  The feature values have been gleaned 

from a wide variety of diverse languages.  Table 1 

shows a few examples of these features and their 

values. 
Object Num-

ber 

Singular, Dual, Trial, Quadrial, Plu-

ral, Paucal 

Object Partici-

pant Tracking 

First Mention, Routine, Interroga-

tive, Frame Inferable, Exiting, Re-

staging, Generic 

Object Prox-

imity 

Near Speaker and Listener, Near 

Speaker, Near Listener, Remote 

within Sight, Remote out of Sight, 

Temporally Near, Temporally Re-

mote, Contextually Near with Focus 

Event Time Discourse, Present, Immediate Past, 

Earlier Today, Yesterday, 2 to 3 

days ago, 4 to 6 days ago, 1 to 4 

weeks ago, 1 to 5 months ago, 6 to 

12 months ago, …, Immediate Fu-

ture, Later Today, Tomorrow, 2 to 3 

days from now, … 

Proposition 

Illocutionary 

Force 

Declarative, Imperative, Content 

Interrogative, Yes-No Interrogative 

Proposition 

Salience Band 

(Longacre, 

1996) 

Pivotal Storyline, Script Predictable 

Actions, Backgrounded Actions, 

Flashback, Setting, Irrealis, Evalua-

tion, Cohesive Material 

Object Phrase 

Semantic Role 

Agent, Patient, State, Source, Desti-

nation, Instrument, Beneficiary, 

Addressee 

Table 1. Several Features and their Values 

The semantic representation for “Paulus started 

walking from the market to a village named 

Terpen” is shown in Figure 2. 

 
Figure 2. LA’s Semantic Representational System 

As seen in Figure 2, every concept, phrase, and 

proposition has numerous features associated with 

it; the letters and numbers below the concepts and 

beside the phrase and proposition boundaries rep-

resent specific feature values.  For example, the 

60



phrase containing Paulus has its Semantic Role set 

to Agent, the phrase containing market has its Se-

mantic Role set to Source, the phrase containing 

village has its Semantic Role set to Destination, the 

event walk has its Time set to Discourse and its 

Aspect set to Inceptive, the proposition’s Illocu-

tionary Force is set to Declarative and its Salience 

Band is set to Pivotal Storyline, etc. 

4 LA’s Lexicon  

The target lexicon serves as a repository for all of 

the target language’s words and their associated 

features and forms.  Within the lexicon a linguist 

defines the features that are pertinent to each syn-

tactic category for his particular target language.  

For example, each noun can be assigned a gender 

value, an honorific value, a class value, etc.  Simi-

larly the required forms are defined in the target 

lexicon (e.g., English verbs have a stem plus a past 

tense form, a perfect participle form, a gerund 

form, and a third singular present form).  Then lex-

ical spellout rules are used to generate the various 

forms of each target word.  All instances of supple-

tion are entered into the target lexicon manually.  

5 LA’s Transfer Grammar  

The purpose of LA’s transfer grammar1 is to re-

structure the English influenced semantic represen-

tations in order to produce a new underlying 

representation that is appropriate for the target lan-

guage.  This new underlying representation con-

sists of the target language’s words, structures, and 

features.  For example, many languages have rules 

that are based on grammatical relations, but the 

object phrases in the semantic representations are 

marked with semantic roles rather than grammati-

cal relations.  Therefore a rule in the transfer 

grammar must generate grammatical relations from 

the semantic roles.  For another example, many 

languages in the world are clause chaining rather 

than coranking, so a rule in the transfer grammar 

must build appropriate clause chains from the 

coranking propositions in the semantic representa-

                                                           
1 The translation process is often divided into three fundamen-

tal steps: 1) analysis: analyze the source document to deter-

mine its meaning, 2) transfer: reconstruct that meaning using 

the target language’s lexemes, structures, and world view, and 

3) synthesis: synthesize the final surface forms.  The term 

“Transfer Grammar” here refers to the grammar in LA that 

performs the second step of the translation process.   

tions.  A model of LA’s transfer grammar is shown 

in Figure 3.  The transfer grammar consists of nine 

different types of rules, several of which will be 

briefly described below. 

 
Figure 3. Model of LA’s Transfer Grammar 

Complex Concept Insertion Rules: These rules 

are prebuilt for specific complex concepts and may 

be activated by the user if his target language has a 

lexical equivalent for a particular complex concept.  

For example, the concept blind is semantically 

complex and is not permitted in the semantic rep-

resentations.  Whenever the adjective “blind” is 

used attributively in a source document, it is re-

placed in the semantic representations with the rel-

ative clause who is not able to see.  But if the 

target language has a lexical equivalent for blind, 

the user can activate the complex concept insertion 

rule which will replace all occurrences of who is 

not able to see in the semantic representations with 

blind.  

Styles of Direct Speech: Many languages employ 

techniques for indicating relative status when two 

people talk to one another.  Therefore in the se-

mantic representations all propositions that are di-

61



rect speech are marked with five features indicat-

ing: 1) the general category of the speaker (e.g., 

father, mother, child, political leader, religious 

leader, employer, employee, etc.), 2) the general 

category of the listener, 3) the speaker’s attitude, 4) 

the speaker’s approximate age, and 5) the age of 

the speaker relative to the listener.  Linguists are 

able to define the styles of direct speech that are 

pertinent to the target language, and then use these 

features and rules to set the style appropriately.  

Subsequent rules then insert the appropriate pro-

nouns or honorific morphology to indicate the rela-

tive status of the speaker to the listener. 

Relative Clause Strategies: Extensive typological 

research has been done regarding relative clauses 

(Comrie 1989:138, Givón 1990:645), and linguists 

have found that languages apply a limited number 

of strategies to a limited number of grammatical 

relations in what is commonly called the NP Ac-

cessibility Hierarchy (Keenan & Comrie 1977, 

Comrie 1989:156).  Cross-linguistically relative 

clauses may be classified as either embedded or 

adjoined.  If a language uses embedded relative 

clauses, they may be pre-nominal, post-nominal, or 

circum-nominal.  If a language uses adjoined rela-

tive clauses, they are either sentence initial or sen-

tence final.  There are generally three strategies for 

encoding the coreferential noun in a relative 

clause: the gap strategy, the pronoun retention 

strategy, and the relative pronoun strategy.  The 

relative clause rules in LA enable a linguist to de-

scribe what types of relative clauses are employed 

in his target language, and which strategies are 

used at the various positions in the Accessibility 

Hierarchy. 

Collocation Correction Rules:  Collocation deals 

with how certain words go together, and how 

words and phrases co-occur with certain grammat-

ical choices.  Every word in every language has its 

own collocational range and restrictions.  There-

fore collocation correction rules are used to change 

one target word to another target word in a particu-

lar environment.  For example, in English a king 

wears his crown, but in Korean, a king 쓰다 [sseu 

da] uses his crown.  So a collocation correction 

rule will change the Korean verb 입다 [ip da] ‘to 

wear’ to 쓰다 [sseu da] ‘to use’ whenever the agent 

is a king or queen and the patient is a crown. 

Theta Grid Adjustment Rules:  Every verb in 

every language has an associated theta grid which 

describes its argument structure.  The theta grids 

for the events in the semantic representations are 

very similar to the theta grids for the equivalent 

English verbs.  However, the verbs in other lan-

guages have different argument structures, so the 

theta grid adjustment rules enable a linguist to easi-

ly restructure an event’s arguments according to 

the theta grid of the target language’s equivalent 

verb.  The Korean theta grid adjustment rule for 

the concept walk is shown in Figure 4.  That rule 

inserts the appropriate Korean postpositions into 

the source and destination phrases. 

 
Figure 4. Korean Theta Grid Adjustment Rule 

Structural Adjustment Rules: The structural ad-

justment rules are used to restructure the semantic 

representations in any way that’s necessary in or-

der to construct an appropriate underlying repre-

sentation for the target language.  These rules may 

be used to handle lexical mismatch, convert predi-

cate adjective constructions to verbal construc-

tions, build clause chains from coranking 

propositions, make adjustments for various views 

of time, etc.  The structural adjustment rules look 

identical to the theta grid adjustment rule shown in 

Figure 4, but they are grouped separately because 

they perform a variety of tasks.   

The final product of the transfer grammar is a 

new underlying representation that is appropriate 

for the target language.  This underlying represen-

tation consists of the target language’s words, 

structures, and features.  This underlying represen-

tation serves as the input to the synthesizing 

grammar. 

6 LA’s Synthesizing Grammar  

LA’s synthesizing grammar is responsible for syn-

thesizing the final surface forms of the target text.  

62



LA’s synthesizing grammar was designed to re-

semble as closely as possible the descriptive 

grammars that field linguists routinely write.  Be-

fore developing this grammar, dozens of descrip-

tive grammars written by field linguists were 

examined in order to observe the capabilities that 

are required to synthesize surface text.  A model of 

the final result is shown in Figure 5, and several of 

these rule types will be briefly described below. 

 

 
Figure 5. Model of LA’s Synthesizing Grammar 

Feature Copying Rules: The feature copying 

rules copy features from one constituent to another 

constituent so that the spellout rules can add the 

necessary morphology to indicate appropriate 

agreement.  For example, certain Jula nouns agree 

in person and number with their object nouns, so a 

feature copying rule copies the person and number 

of the object noun to the verb.  Then a spellout rule 

adds the appropriate morphology to the verb. 

Spellout Rules: The spellout rules add contextual 

morphology in order to synthesize the final form of 

each target word.  There are four basic types of 

spellout rules: (i) simple spellout rules which add a 

prefix, suffix, infix, circumfix, or a new word to an 

existing word, or they provide a new translation of 

a particular target word in a given context; (ii) 

form selection rules which select a form of a target 

word from the target lexicon; (iii) morphophone-

mic rules which perform morphophonemic opera-

tions on the affixes that were added to the stem; 

and (iv) table spellout rules which group a com-

mon set of affixes together into a single rule.  After 

these spellout rules have been executed, each target 

word is in its final surface form. A table spellout 

rule that adds tense suffixes to Kewa verbs is 

shown in Figure 6. 

 
Figure 6. Spellout Rule that adds Kewa Tense Affixes 

Clitic Rules: Linguists have found that languages 

employ three different types of clitics (Payne, 

1997): (i) pre-clitics which attach to the beginning 

of the first word in a phrase, (ii) second position 

clitics which attach to the end of the first word in a 

phrase, and (iii) post-clitics which attach to the end 

of the last word in a phrase.  A clitic rule that adds 

the post-clitic –me to Kewa subjects is shown in 

Figure 7. 

 
Figure 7. A Clitic Rule for Kewa 

Pronoun Rules: There are no pronouns in the 

semantic representations because each language 

63



has its own rules for determining when and where 

pronouns are appropriate.  Therefore, after the 

phrase structure rules have moved each constituent 

into its final position, the pronoun rules identify 

the nominals that should be realized with pro-

nouns, and then supply the appropriate surface 

forms. 

Word Morphophonemic Rules: The word mor-

phophonemic rules are similar to the morphopho-

nemic rules described in the spellout rule section 

above, but these morphophonemic rules operate 

across word boundaries rather than morpheme 

boundaries.  For example, the English indefinite 

article a changes to an whenever the next word 

begins with a vowel. 

7 LA’s Target Text  

After the synthesizing grammar has been executed 

and produced the final form of the target text, 

mother-tongue speakers edit the text to improve 

the naturalness and information flow.  Samples of 

English and Korean texts generated by LA are 

shown in Figure 8.  The texts in that figure have 

not been edited; they are the actual texts that were 

generated by LA.  These texts occur at the begin-

ning of a story that describes how to prevent the 

spread of Avian Influenza. 
One day a doctor named 

Paulus returned from the 

market to his village named 

Terpen. While Paulus had 

been at the market, some 

people had told him about a 

certain disease. So when 

Paulus returned to his vil-

lage, he said to Isak, who 

was the village chief, and 

the other people who lived 

in Terpen, "A new disease 

named Avian Influenza has 

killed most of the birds that 

are at the market. This dis-

ease has killed many chick-

ens and many ducks. 

어느 날 팔러스라는 의사가 

시장에서 터펜이라는 자기 

마을로 돌아왔다. 팔러스가 

시장에 있는 동안 사람들이 

팔러스에게 어떤 병에 

대해서 말하였다. 그래서 

팔러스는 자기 마을로 

돌아왔을 때 마을 이장인 

아이작과 터펜에 사는 다른 

사람들에게 말하였다. 

"조류 인플루엔자라는 새 

병이 시장에 있는 대부분 

새들을 죽였습니다. 이 

병은 닭들과 오리들을 많이 

죽였습니다. 

Figure 8. Examples of LA’s English and Korean Texts 

8 LA’s Results  

Extensive grammars and lexicons were developed 

for English, Korean, Kewa, and Jula.  We began 

each project by working through a set of sentences 

called the Grammar Introduction.  The Grammar 

Introduction consists of approximately 500 basic 

sentences, each illustrating a particular feature or 

construction of the semantic representational sys-

tem.  For example, the Grammar Introduction in-

cludes a series of propositions dealing with the 

various tenses, aspects, and moods, there’s a set of 

propositions dealing with relative clauses, object 

complement clauses, and adverbial clauses, anoth-

er set of propositions dealing with pronouns, etc.  

After completing the Grammar Introduction
2
, a 

very thorough foundation has been developed for 

the lexicon and grammar, but the Grammar Intro-

duction is intentionally restricted to a very small 

set of concepts.  Therefore rules that deal with 

concept-specific issues must be dealt with while 

working through actual texts.  While working 

through the semantic representations of these texts, 

a very clear trend developed for each of the test 

languages: the number of new grammatical rules 

required per chapter of text decreased very quickly 

as seen in Figures 9 through 12. 

 
Figure 9. Graph of New Rules for Jula 

 
Figure 10. Graph of New Rules for Kewa 

                                                           
2 For each test language, working through the Grammar Intro-

duction took approximately 40 to 50 hours.   

64



 
Figure 11. Graph of New Rules for Korean 

 

Figure 12. Graph of New Rules for English 

The graphs shown above conclusively demonstrate 

that the grammars developed in LA are accurately 

capturing the significant generalizations of these 

four languages. 

9 Quality of Generated Texts  

After generating texts in Korean, Kewa, and Jula, 

experiments were performed to determine whether 

or not the drafts generated by LA are of sufficient 

quality that they improve the productivity of expe-

rienced mother-tongue translators.  Two sets of 

experiments were performed: the first set tested for 

increased productivity, and the second set tested 

for quality.  The first set compared the quantity of 

text an experienced translator could translate in a 

given period of time with the quantity of text gen-

erated by LA that the same person could edit in the 

given time.  Eight professional mother-tongue 

translators participated in the Jula experiment, one 

translator participated in the Kewa experiment, and 

eighteen translators participated in the Korean ex-

periment.  In these experiments, quantity was de-

termined by word count.  Table 2 summarizes the 

results of these productivity experiments. 

Language Ratio of Edited Words to 

Manually Translated Words 

Jula 4.3 

Kewa 6.7 

Korean 4.6 
Table 2. Summary of Productivity Experiments 

The table shown above indicates that in each test 

language, the drafts generated by LA were of such 

high quality that they more than quadrupled the 

productivity of experienced mother-tongue transla-

tors.  The results of these experiments were cer-

tainly encouraging, but at this point we didn’t 

know whether or not the editors had done a thor-

ough job of editing the generated texts.  Therefore 

we performed another set of experiments to deter-

mine whether or not the edited texts were compa-

rable in quality with professionally translated texts. 

10 Quality of Edited Texts  

The second set of experiments was performed with 

Jula and Korean speakers in order to determine the 

quality of the edited LA drafts.  Speakers of these 

languages were asked to compare the edited LA 

texts with the manually translated texts.  These 

evaluations were performed by people who did not 

know how either of the texts had been produced.  

Forty evaluations were performed by Jula speak-

ers, and 192 evaluations were performed by Kore-

an speakers.  Although no evaluations were 

performed by Kewa speakers, the edited Kewa 

draft was ultimately published.  Table 3 summariz-

es the Jula and Korean evaluations. 

Language LA Texts Manual Texts Equal 

Jula 12 11 17 

Korean 88 71 33 
Table 3. Summary of the Evaluation Experiments 

In Table 3, the column labeled “LA Texts” indi-

cates the number of evaluators who said that the 

edited LA text was better
3
 than the manually trans-

lated text, the column labeled “Manual Texts” in-

dicates the number of evaluators who said the 

manually translated text was better than the edited 

LA text, and the column labeled “Equal” indicates 

the number of evaluators who said that the edited 

LA text was equal in quality to the manually trans-

                                                           
3 The term “better” is intentionally very generic.  We didn’t 

want to ask the evaluators which text was more natural, or was 

easier to read, etc.  Instead we let the evaluators choose 

whichever text they thought was better for any reason. 

65



lated text.  In both languages the evaluation exper-

iments indicate that the edited LA texts are consid-

ered as good as the manually translated texts. 

11 Conclusions  

LA is a tool which drastically reduces the amount 

of time and effort required to produce an initial 

draft of a translation of a text.  This tool enables 

linguists to build large scale lexicons and gram-

mars for a very wide variety of languages, particu-

larly minority and endangered languages.  After a 

lexicon and grammar have been completed, LA 

generates drafts of texts which are at approximate-

ly a sixth grade reading level.  We hope to eventu-

ally have a large library of community 

development texts which will describe how to pre-

vent the spread of various diseases such as AIDS, 

Avian Influenza, etc.  This tool works equally well 

for languages that are thoroughly studied, lan-

guages that have only slightly been studied, and 

languages that are endangered.  Similarly, this tool 

works equally well for languages that are typologi-

cally diverse with respect to their morphological 

and syntactic features.  It is hoped that this tool 

will empower speakers of minority languages 

around the world by providing them with transla-

tions of vital information, which will not only ena-

ble them to live longer, healthier, and more 

productive lives, but will also enable them to par-

ticipate in the larger world.   

References  

Allman, Tod. 2010. The Translator‘s Assistant: A 

Multilingual Natural Language Generator based 

on Linguistic Universals, Typologies, and Prim-

itives. Arlington, TX: University of Texas dis-

sertation. 

Allman, Tod, and Stephen Beale. 2006. A Natural 

Language Generator for Minority Languages. In 

Proceedings of Speech and Language Technol-

ogy for Minority Languages (SALTMIL). Gen-

oa, Italy. 

Beale, Stephen. In print. Documenting Endangered 

Languages using Linguist’s Assistant. Lan-

guage Documentation and Conservation. Draft 

available at http:/onyxcons.com/LA/ 

Beale, Stephen, and Tod Allman. 2011. Linguist’s 

Assistant: a Resource for Linguists. In Proceed-

ings of 5
th
 International Joint Conference on 

Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP-11), The 

9th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, 

Chiang Mai, Thailand. 

Cann, Ronnie. 1993. Formal Semantics. Cam-

bridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Givón, Talmy. 1990. Syntax: A Functional-

Typological Introduction, 2 vols. Amsterdam: 

John Benjamins. 

Goddard, Cliff, and Anna Wierzbicka. 1994. Se-

mantic and Lexical Universals: Theory and 

Empirical Findings. Amsterdam: John 

Benjamins. 

Jackendoff, Ray. 1990. Semantic Structures. Cam-

bridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press. 

Lakoff, George. 1987. Women, Fire, and Danger-

ous Things. Chicago: University of Chicago 

Press. 

Longacre, Robert. 1996. The Grammar of Dis-

course. 2
nd

 ed. New York: Plenum Press. 

Payne, Thomas. 1997, Describing Morphosyntax. 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Wierzbicka, Anna. 1996. Semantics: Primes and 

Universals. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

 

 

66


