










































A Pilot PropBank Annotation for Quranic Arabic


Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 78–83,
Montréal, Canada, June 8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Pilot PropBank Annotation for Quranic Arabic 
 

                  Wajdi Zaghouani 
            University of Pennsylvania 
                Philadelphia, PA USA 
     wajdiz@ldc.upenn.edu 

               Abdelati Hawwari and Mona Diab    
              Center for Computational Learning Systems 

            Columbia University, NYC, USA 
      {ah3019,mdiab}@ccls.columbia.edu 

 
 
 

  

Abstract 

The Quran is a significant religious text written in a 
unique literary style, close to very poetic language 
in nature. Accordingly it is significantly richer and 
more complex than the newswire style used in the 
previously released Arabic PropBank (Zaghouani 
et al., 2010; Diab et al., 2008). We present prelimi-
nary work on the creation of a unique Arabic prop-
osition repository for Quranic Arabic. We annotate 
the semantic roles for the 50 most frequent verbs in 
the Quranic Arabic Dependency Treebank (QATB) 
(Dukes and Buckwalter 2010). The Quranic Arabic 
PropBank (QAPB) will be a unique new resource 
of its kind for the Arabic NLP research community 
as it will allow for interesting insights into the 
semantic use of classical Arabic, poetic literary 
Arabic, as well as significant religious texts. More-
over, on a pragmatic level QAPB will add approx-
imately 810 new verbs to the existing Arabic 
PropBank (APB). In this pilot experiment, we 
leverage our knowledge and experience from our 
involvement in the APB project. All the QAPB 
annotations will be made freely available for re-
search purposes. 

1 Introduction 

Explicit characterization of the relation between 
verbs and their arguments has become an impor-
tant issue in sentence processing and natural lan-
guage understanding. Automatic Semantic role 
labeling [SRL] has become the correlate of this 
characterization in natural language processing 
literature (Gildea and Jurafsky 2002). In SRL, the 
system automatically identifies predicates and their 
arguments and tags the identified arguments with 
meaningful semantic information. SRL has been 
successfully used in machine translation, summari-

zation and information extraction. In order to build 
robust SRL systems there is a need for significant 
resources the most important of which are seman-
tically annotated resources such as proposition 
banks. Several such resources exist now for differ-
ent languages including FrameNet (Baker et al., 
1998), VerbNet (Kipper et al. 2000) and PropBank 
(Palmer et al., 2005). These resources have marked 
a surge in efficient approaches to automatic SRL of 
the English language. Apart from English, there 
exist various PropBank projects in Chinese (Xue et 
al., 2009), Korean (Palmer et al. 2006) and Hindi 
(Ashwini et al., 2011). These resources exist on a 
large scale spearheading the SRL research in the 
associated languages (Carreras and Marquez, 
2005), Surdeanu et al. (2008). However, resources 
created for Arabic are significantly more modest. 
The only Arabic Propank [APB] project (Zaghoua-
ni et al., 2010; Diab et al., 2008) based on the 
phrase structure syntactic Arabic Treebank (Maa-
mouri et al. 2010) comprises a little over 4.5K 
verbs of newswire modern standard Arabic. Apart 
from the modesty in size, the Arabic language 
genre used in the APB does not represent the full 
scope of the Arabic language. The Arabic culture 
has a long history of literary writing and a rich 
linguistic heritage in classical Arabic. In fact all 
historical religious non-religious texts are written 
in Classical Arabic. The ultimate source on clas-
sical Arabic language is the Quran. It is considered 
the Arabic language reference point for all learners 
of Arabic in the Arab and Muslim world. Hence 
understanding the semantic nuances of Quranic 
Arabic is of significant impact and value to a large 
population. This is apart from its significant differ-
ence from the newswire genre, being closer to 
poetic language and more creative linguistic ex-

78



pression. Accordingly, in this paper, we present a 
pilot annotation project on the creation a Quranic 
Arabic PropBank (QAPB) on layered above the 
Quranic Arabic Dependency Treebank (QATB) 
(Dukes and Buckwalter 2010).  

2 The PropBank model  

The PropBank model is a collection of annotated 
propositions where each verb predicate is anno-
tated with its semantic roles. An existing syntactic 
treebank is typically a prerequisite for this shallow 
semantic layer. For example consider the following 
English sentence: ‘John likes apples’, the predicate 
is ‘likes’ and the first argument, the subject, is 
‘John’, and the second argument, the object, is 
‘apples’. ‘John’ would be semantically annotated 
as the agent and ‘apples’ would be the theme. Ac-
cording to PropBank, ‘John’ is labeled ARG0 and 
‘apples’ is labeled ARG1. Crucially, regardless of 
the adopted semantic annotation formalism (Prop-
Bank, FrameNet, etc), the labels do not vary in 
different syntactic constructions, which is why 
proposition annotation is different from Treebank 
annotation. For instance, if the example above was 
in the passive voice, ‘Apples are liked by John’, 
John is still the agent ARG0, and Apples are still 
the theme ARG1.  

3 Motivation and Background 

The main goal behind this project is to extend cov-
erage of the existing Arabic PropBank (APB) to 
more verbs and genres (Zaghouani et al. 2010; 
Diab et al. 2008). APB is limited to the newswire 
domain in modern standard Arabic (MSA). It sig-
nificantly lags behind the English PropBank (EPB) 
in size. EPB consists of 5413 verbs corresponding 
to 7268 different verb senses, the APB only covers 
2127 verb types corresponding to 2657 different 
verb senses. According to El-Dahdah (2008) Arab-
ic Dictionary, there are more than 16,000 verbs in 
the Arabic language. The Quran corpus comprises 
a total of 1466 verb types including 810 not 
present in APB. Adding the 810 verbs to the APB 
is clearly a significant boost to the size of the APB 
(38% amounting to 2937 verb types).  

In the current paper however we address the 
annotation of the Quran as a stand alone resource 
while leveraging our experience in the APB anno-
tation process. The Quran consists of 1466 verb 

types corresponding to 19,356 verb token in-
stances. The language of the Quran is Classical 
Arabic (CA) of 77,430 words, sequenced in chap-
ters and verses, dating back to over 1431 years. It 
is considered a reference text on both religious as 
well as linguistic matters. The language is fully 
specified with vocalic and pronunciation markers 
to ensure faithful oration. The language is poetic 
and literary in many instances with subtle allusions 
(Zahri 1990). It is the source of many other reli-
gious and heritage writings and a book of great 
importance to muslims worldwide, including non 
speakers of Arabic.  

Dukes and Buckwalter (2010) started the Qu-
ranic Arabic Corpus, an annotated linguistic re-
source which marks the Arabic grammar, syntax 
and morphology for each word. The QATB pro-
vides two levels of analysis: morphological annota-
tion and syntactic representation. The syntax of 
traditional Arabic grammar is represented in the 
Quranic Treebank using hybrid dependency graphs 
as shown in Figure 1.1 To the best of our know-
ledge, this is the first PropBank annotation of a 
religious and literary style text. 

The new verbs added from the Quran are also 
common verbs widely used today in MSA but the 
Quranic context adds more possible senses to these 
verbs. Having a QAPB allows for a more semantic 
level of analysis to the Quran. Currently the Qu-
ranic Corpus Portal2 comprises morphological 
annotations, syntactic treebanks, and a semantic 
ontology. Adding the QAPB will render it a unique 
source for Arabic language scholars worldwide 
(more than 50,000 unique visitors per day).  
Linguistic studies of the Quranic verbs such as 
verbal alternations, verb valency, polysemy and 
verbal ambiguity are one of the possible research 
directions that could be studied with this new re-
source. On the other hand, the Arabic NLP re-
search community will benefit from the increased 
coverage of the APB verbs, and the new domain 
covered (religious) and the new writing style (Qu-
ranic Arabic). Furthermore, Quranic citations are 
commonly used today in MSA written texts 
(books, newspapers, etc.), as well as Arabic social 
media intertwined with dialectal writings. This 

                                                 
1This display is different from the other existing Arabic Tree-
bank, the Prague Arabic Dependency Treebank (PADT) (Smrž 
et al., 2008). 
2http://corpus.quran.com/ 

79



makes the annotation of a Quranic style a rare and 
relevant resource for the building of Arabic NLP 
applications.  

4 Methodology 

We leverage the approach used with the previous 
APB (Zaghouani et al. 2010; Diab et al. 2008). We 
pay special attention to the polysemic nature of 
predicates used in Quranic Arabic. An Arabic root 
meaning tool is used as a reference to help in iden-
tifying different senses of the verb. More effort is 
dedicated to revision of the final product since 
unlike the APB, the QAPB is based on a depen-
dency Treebank (QATB) not a phrase structure 
Treebank.3 

For this pilot annotation experiment, we on-
ly annotate the 50 most frequent verbs in the cor-
pus corresponding to 7227 verbal occurrences in 
the corpus out of 19,356 total verbal instances. In 
the future plans, the corpus will cover eventually 
all the 1466 verbs in the whole Quranic corpus. 
Ultimately, it is our plan to perform a merging 
between the new frame files of the QAPB and the 
existing 1955 Frame files of the Arabic PropBank 
 
4.1 The annotation process 
 
The PropBank annotation process is divided into 
two steps: a. creation of the frame files for verbs 
occurring in the data, and b. annotation of the ver-
bal instances with the frame file ids. During the 
creation of the Frame Files, the usages of the verbs 
in the data are examined by linguists (henceforth, 
“framers”). During the frameset creation process, 
verbs that share similar semantic and syntactic 
characteristics are usually framed similarly). Once 
a predicate (in this case a verb) is chosen, framer-
look at an average sample size of 60-70 instances 
per predicate found in the Quranic corpus in order 
to get an idea of its syntactic behavior. Based on 
these observations and their linguistic knowledge 
and native-speaker intuition, the framers create a 
Frame File for each verb containing one or more 
framesets, which correspond to coarse-grained 
senses of the predicate lemma. Each frameset spe-
cifies the PropBank core labels (i.e., ARG0, 
                                                 
3 The Propbank style of annotation are already used with other 
languages on top of dependency Treebank structures such as 
the Hindi  Treebank project (Ashwini et al., 2011).  

ARG1,…ARG4) corresponding to the argument 
structure of the verb. Additionally, illustrative ex-
amples are included for each frameset, which will 
later be referenced by the annotators. Note that in 
addition to these core, numbered roles, PropBank 
also includes annotations of a variety of modifier 
roles, prefixed by ARGM labels from a list of 15 
arguments (ARGM-ADV, ARGM-BNF, ARGM-
CAU,ARGM-CND, ARGM-DIR, ARGM-DIS, 
ARGM-EXT, ARGM-LOC, ARGM-MNR, 
ARGM-NEG, ARGM-PRD, ARGM-PRP, ARGM-
REC, ARGM-TMP, ARGM-PRD). Unlike the 
APB frame files creation, where no specific Arabic 
reference is used, for this project, an Arabic root 
meaning reference tool developed by Swalha 
(2011) is used by the framers to ensure that all 
possible meanings of the verbs in the corpus are 
covered and all various senses are taken into ac-
count. The Arabic root-meaning search tool is free-
ly available online.4 The search is done by root, the 
tool displays all possible meanings separated by a 
comma with citation examples from many sources 
including the Quran. Once the Frame files are 
created, the data that have the identified predicate 
occurrences are passed on to the annotators for a 
double-blind annotation process using the pre-
viously created framesets. Each PropBank entry 
represents a particular instance of a verb in a par-
ticular sentence in the Treebank and the mapping 
of numbered roles to precise meanings is given on 
a verb-by-verb basis in a set of frames files during 
the annotation procedure. To ensure consistency, 
the data is double annotated and finally adjudicated 
by a third annotator. The adjudicator resolves dif-
ferences between the two annotations if present to 
produce the gold annotation. A sample Frameset 
and a related annotation example from the QAPB 
are shown in Table 1. During the annotation 
process, the data is organized by verb such that 
each verb with all its instances is annotated at 
once. In doing so, we firstly ensure that the frame-
sets of similar verbs, and in turn, the annotation of 
the verbs, will both be consistent across the data. 
Secondly, by tackling annotation on a verb-by-verb 
basis, the annotators are able to concentrate on a 
single verb at a time, making the process easier and 
faster for the annotators. 

                                                 
4 Available at :<http://www.comp.leeds.ac.uk/cgi-
bin/scmss/arabic_roots.py> 
 

80



 
FrameSet Example Annotation Example 
Predicate: wajadaَوِجد   
 َ
Roleset id: f1, to find 
Arg0: the finder 
Arg1: thing found 
 

Rel: wajada, َوِجَد 
Arg0: -NONE- * 
Gloss: You 
Arg1: ُه 
Gloss: it 
ArgM-LOC: َِِّعْنَد اللَّھ 
Gloss: with Allah 
 
Example in Arabic: 
َوَما ُتَقدُِّموا ِلَأْنُفِسُكْم ِمْن َخْیٍر َتِجُدوُه ِعْنَد 
 اللَّھَِّ
Gloss: and whatever good you 
put forward for yourselves - 
you will find it with Allah 

Table 1. The frameset / Annotation of wajada 
 

4.2 Tools 
 

Frameset files are created in an XML format. We 
use tools used in the APB project. The Frame File 
editing is performed by the Cornerstone tool (Choi 
et al., 2010a), which is a PropBank frameset editor 
that allows creation and editing of PropBank fra-
mesets without requiring any prior knowledge of 
XML. Moreover, we use Jubilee5 as the annotation 
tool (Choi et al., 20010b). Jubilee is a recent anno-
tation tool which improves the annotation process 
of the APB by displaying several types of relevant 
syntactic and semantic information simultaneously. 
Having everything displayed helps the annotator 
quickly absorb and apply the necessary syntactic 
and semantic information pertinent to each predi-
cate for consistent and efficient annotation. Both 
tools are currently being modified in order to han-
dle the Dependency TreeBank structure, originally 
the tool was designed specifically to handle phrase 
structure Tree format. Moreover, since the file 
formats and the tree formats in the dependency 
Treebank are different from the previous APB 
effort, a revision in the Quranic Treebank output 
had to be done. This involves mainly a change in 
the annotated data format in order to add the role 
labels in the annotation file. For the moment, all of 
the 50 XML Frame files have been created and 
some manual annotation is performed to illustrate 
the feasibility of the experiment. 
                                                 
5 Cornerstone and Jubilee are available as Open Source tools 
on Google code. 
 

4.3 Impact of the dependency structure 
Treebank  

 
Having The Quran corpus annotated using a de-
pendency structure Treebank has some advantages. 
First, semantic arguments can be marked explicitly 
on the syntactic trees (such as the Arg0 Pron. In 
Figure 1), so annotations of the predicate argument 
structure can be more consistent with the depen-
dency structure as shown in Figure 1.  
 

 
Figure 1. Semantic role labels to the QATB 
 

Secondly, the Quranic Arabic Dependency 
Treebank (QATB) provides a rich set of dependen-
cy relations that capture the syntactic-semantic 
information. This facilitates possible mappings 
between syntactic dependents and semantic argu-
ments. A successful mapping would reduce the 
annotation effort.  

It is worth noting the APB comprises 1955 ver-
bal predicates corresponding to 2446 framesets 
with an ambiguity ratio of 1.25. This is in contrast 
to the QAPB where we found that the 50 verbal 
predicate types we annotated corresponded to 71 
framesets thereby an ambiguity ratio of 1.42. 
Hence these results suggest that the QAPB is more 
ambiguous than the newswire genre annotated in 
the APB. By way of contrast, the EPB comprises 
6089 verbal predicates corresponding to 7268 fra-
mesets with an ambiguity ratio of 1.19. 

21 verb types of the 50 verbs we annotated are 
present in both corpora corresponding to 31 frame-
sets in QAPB (a 1.47 ambiguity ratio) and 25 fra-
mesets in APB (1.19 ambiguity ratio).  The total 
verbal instances in the QAPB is 2974. 29 verb 

81



types with their corresponding 40 framesets occur 
only in the QAPB (58% of the list of 50 verbs). 
This translated to a 1.38 ambiguity ratio. 

In the common 21 verb types shared between 
APB and QAPB corpora we note that 12 predicates 
share the same exact frame sets indicating no 
change in meaning between the use of the predi-
cates in the Quran and MSA. However, 9 of the 
verbal predicates have more framesets in QAPB 
than APB. None of the verbal predicates have 
more framesets in APB than QAPB. Below is an 
example of a verbal predicate with two different 
framesets.  
 

FrameSet  
Example 

Annotation Example 

Predicate: >anozal َأْنَزل 
Roleset id: f1, to reveal 
Arg0: revealer 
Arg1: thing revealed 
Arg2: start point 
Arg3: end point, recipient 

Rel: >anozal 
Arg0: َنا 
Gloss: we 
Arg1: ٍآَیاٍت َبیَِّنات  
Gloss:  clear verses 
Arg3: َِإَلْیك  
Gloss: to you 
 
Example in Arabic: 
ٍَوَلَقْد َأْنَزْلَنا ِإَلْیَك آَیاٍت َبیَِّنات  
We have certainly revealed to you 
verses [which are] clear proofs 

Table 2. The frameset / Annotation of  >anozal 
(QAPB)  
 

FrameSet  
Example 

Annotation Example 

Predicate:  
>anozal َأْنَزل 

Roleset id: f1, to 
release 
Arg0: agent re-
leasing 
Arg1:thing re-
leased 

Rel: >anozal 
Arg0: زیاد   
Gloss: Zyad 

Arg1:NONE-* 
Gloss: He 
ARGM-TMP: منتصف الثمانینات 
Gloss: the mid-eighties 
 
Example in Arabic: 
عودة الطلب على أغاني شریط أنا مش كافر الذي أنزلھ 
 زیاد منتصف الثمانینات
The songs of the Album I am not a disbe-
liever released by Ziad during the eighties 
are popular again.  

Table 3. The frameset / Annotation of  >anozal 
(APB)  

The two frames of verb ’’ >anozal “ can clarify 
the meaning differences between MSA and QA as 
used in the Quran. Although  both APB and QAPB 
have this verb, they have different senses leading 
to different semantic frames. In the QAPB the 
sense of revealed is only associated with religious 
texts, while in MSA it has the senses of released or 
dropped.   

5 Conclusion 

We have presented a pilot Quranic Arabic 
PropBank experiment with the creation of frame 
files for 50 verb types. At this point, our initial 
study confirms that building a lexicon and tagging 
the Arabic Quranic Corpus with verbal sense and 
semantic information following the PropBank 
model is feasible. In general, the peculiarities of 
the Quranic Arabic language did not seem to cause 
problems for the PropBank annotation model. We 
plan to start the effective annotation of the resource 
in order to finalize the creation of a QAPB that 
covers all 1466 verbal predicates. Once released, 
the data will be freely available for research pur-
pose. 

References  
Vaidya Ashwini, Jinho Choi, Martha Palmer, and Bhu-

vana Narasimhan. 2011. Analysis of the Hindi Prop-
osition Bank using Dependency Structure. In 
Proceedings of the fifth Linguistic Annotation Work-
shop. ACL 2011, pages 21-29. 

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe. 
1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Proceed-
ings of COLING-ACL ’98, the University of Mon-
treal, pages 86–90. 

Xavier Carreras and Lluıs Marquez. 2005. Introduction 
to the CoNLL-2005 shared task: Semantic role labe-
ling. In Proceedings of the Ninth (CoNLL-2005), 
pages 152–164. 

Jinho Choi, Claire Bonial, and Martha Palmer.2010a. 
PropBank Instance Annotation Guidelines Using a 
Dedicated Editor, Cornerstone.In Proceedings of the 
(LREC'10), pages 3650-3653. 

Jinho Choi, Claire Bonial, and Martha Palmer.2010b. 
PropBank Instance Annotation Guidelines Using a 
Dedicated Editor, Jubilee.In Proceedings of the 
(LREC'10), pages 1871-1875. 

Mona Diab, Aous Mansouri, Martha Palmer, Olga Bab-
ko-Malaya,Wajdi Zaghouani, Ann Bies, and Mo-

82



hammed Maamouri. 2008. A Pilot Arabic PropBank. 
In Proceedings of the (LREC'08), pages 3467-3472. 

Kais Dukes and Tim Buckwalter. 2010. A Dependency 
Treebank of the Quran using Traditional Arabic 
Grammar. In Proceedings of the 7th International 
Conference on Informatics and Systems (INFOS). 

Antoine El-Dahdah. 2008. A Dictionary of Arabic Verb 
Conjugation. Librairie du Liban, Beirut, Lebanon. 

Daniel Gildea, and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic-
Labeling of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguis-
tics 28:3, 245-288 

Karin Kipper, HoaTrang Dang, and Martha Palmer. 
2000. Class-Based Construction of a Verb Lexicon. 
In Proceedings of the AAAI-2000 Seventeenth Na-
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 
691-696. 

 Mohamed Maamouri, Ann Bies, Seth Kulick, Fatma-
Gaddeche, Wigdan Mekki, Sondos Krouna, Basma-
Bouziri, and Wajdi Zaghouani. 2011. Arabic 
Treebank: Part 2 v 3.1. LDC Catalog 
No.:LDC2011T09 

Martha Palmer, Dan Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury. 2005. 
The proposition bank: A corpus annotated with se-
mantic roles. Computational Linguistics Journal, 
31:1 

Martha Palmer, Shijong Ryu, Jinyoung Choi, Sinwon 
Yoon, and Yeongmi Jeon. 2006. LDC Catalog 
LDC2006T03. 

Otakar Smrž, Viktor Bielický, IvetaKouřilová, Jakub 
Kráčmar, Jan Hajič and Petr Zemánek. 2008. Prague 
Arabic Dependency Treebank: A Word on the Mil-
lion Words.In Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Arabic and Local Languages (LREC 2008). 

Mihai Surdeanu, Richard Johansson, Adam Meyers, 
Lluıs Marquez, and Joakim Nivre. 2008. The 
CoNLL-2008 shared task on joint parsing on syntac-
tic and semantic dependencies. In Proceedings of 
CoNLL’08, pages 159–177. 

Majdi Swalha. 2011. Open-source Resources and Stan-
dards for Arabic Word Structure Analysis: Fine 
Grained Morphological Analysis of Arabic Text Cor-
pora. PhD thesis, Leeds University. 

Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2004. Calibrating 
features for semantic role labeling. In Dekang Lin 
and Dekai Wu, editors, Proceedings of EMNLP 
2004, pages 88–94. 

Wajdi Zaghouani , Mona Diab, Aous Mansouri, Sameer 
Pradhan, and Martha Palmer. 2010. The revised 
Arabic PropBank. In Proceedings of the Fourth Lin-

guistic Annotation Workshop (LAW IV '10), ACL, 
pages 222-226. 

Maysoon Zahri. 1990. Metaphor and translation. PhD 
thesis, University of Salford. 

 

 

83


