










































Integrating User-Generated Content in the ACL Anthology


Proceedings of the ACL-2012 Special Workshop on Rediscovering 50 Years of Discoveries, pages 83–87,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 10 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Integrating User-Generated Content in the ACL Anthology

Praveen Bysani
Web IR / NLP Group (WING)

National University of Singapore
13 Computing Link, Singapore 117590
bpraveen@comp.nus.edu.sg

Min-Yen Kan
Web IR / NLP Group (WING)

National University of Singapore
13 Computing Link, Singapore 117590

kanmy@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

The ACL Anthology was revamped in 2012
to its second major version, encompassing
faceted navigation, social media use, as well
as author- and reader-generated content and
comments on published work as part of the re-
vised frontend user interface. At the backend,
the Anthology was updated to incorporate its
publication records into a database. We de-
scribe the ACL Anthology’s previous legacy,
redesign and revamp process and technolo-
gies, and its resulting functionality.

1 Introduction

To most of its users, the ACL Anthology1 is a useful
open-access repository of scholarly articles on the
topics of computational linguistics and natural lan-
guage processing. The liberal use and access policy
granted by the Association of Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL) to the authors of works published by
the ACL makes discovery, access, and use of its re-
search results easily available to both members and
the general readership. The ACL Anthology initia-
tive has contributed to the success of this mission,
both as an archiving and dissemination vehicle for
published works.

Started as a means to collect and preserve arti-
cles published by the ACL in 2001, the Anthology
has since matured and now has well-defined work-
flows for its core missions. In 2009, the Anthology

Praveen Bysani’s work was supported from the National
Research Foundations grant no. R-252-000-325-279.

1http://aclweb.org/anthology/; beta version 2
currently at http://aclantho3.herokuapp.com/.

staff embarked to expand the Anthology’s mission to
meet two specific goals: on the backend, to enforce
a proper data model onto the publication metadata;
on the frontend, to expand the scope of the Anthol-
ogy to encompass services that would best serve its
constituents. Where possible, we adopted widely-
deployed open source software, customizing it for
the Anthology where needed.

With respect to the backend, the revamp adopted a
database model to describe the publication metadata,
implemented using MySQL. On top of this database
layer, we chose Ruby on Rails as the application
framework to interact with the data, and built suit-
able web interfaces to support both administrative
and end-users. The backend also needed to support
resource discovery by automated agents, and meta-
data export to sites that ingest ACL metadata.

With respect to the frontend, the Anthology web-
site needed to meet the rising expectations in search
and discovery of documents both by content and by
fielded metadata. To satisfy both, we incorporated
a faceted browsing interface that exposes metadata
facets to the user. These metadata fields can be
used to restrict subsequent browsing and searching
actions to the values specified (e.g., Year = 2001–
2011). Aside from resource discovery, the fron-
tend also incorporated changes to support the work-
flow of readers and authors. We added both per-
author and per-publication webpages. The publica-
tion pages invite the public to define content for the
Anthology: anyone can report errors in the meta-
data, authors can supply revisions and errata, soft-
ware and dataset links post-publication, readers can
discuss the papers using the commenting framework

83



in the system, and automated agents can use NLP
and CL technology to extract, process and post in-
formation related to individual papers.

2 Revamp Design

Prior to our revamp, the Anthology’s basic mission
was to transcribe the metadata of ACL proceed-
ings into a suitable form for the Web. To ensure
widespread adoption, a simple XML format for the
requisite metadata of author and title was created,
with each ACL event’s publication chair providing a
single XML file describing the publications in each
event and the details of the event (e.g., the volume’s
booktitle and year). Other fields were optional and
could be included in the XML. The Anthology ed-
itor further added a unique identifier, an Anthology
ID, for each publication record (e.g., “A00-1001”).
Mandatory fields in the XML were extracted by a
collection of programs to create the visible HTML
pages in the Anthology website and the service ex-
port files, used to update the Association of Com-
puting Machinery’s (ACM) Portal2 and the DBLP
Computer Science Bibliography3. Prior to the re-
vamp, this set of XML files – collected over various
years – represented the canonical record of all pub-
lication data.

While easing adoption, storing canonical pub-
lication metadata as XML is not ideal. As it
is stored across multiple files, even simple ques-
tions of inventory are hard to answer. As there
was no set document type definition, the XML
schema and enforcement of mandatory fields var-
ied per document. In the revamp, we migrated
the publication data into a database schema shown
in Figure 1. The database form allows easy in-
corporation of additional fields that can be pro-
vided post-publication (including the Document
Object Identifier, DOI, currently provided by the
ACM by mutual agreement). The database struc-
ture also promotes publications, venues, and au-
thors to first-class objects, enabling joins and views
on the data, such as paper—author and venue—
special interest group.The database currently has
21,107 papers, authored by 19,955 authors. These

2http://dl.acm.org
3http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/

˜ley/db/

papers encompass one journal, 17 conferences and
hundreds of workshops sponsored by 14 SIG groups.
The publication years of these papers range from
1965 to 2012.

Figure 1: Current database schema for the Anthology.

The database’s content is further indexed in in-
verted search indices using Apache Solr4. Solr
allows indexing and querying in XML/JSON for-
mats via HTTP requests, powering the frontend
website search facility and enabling programmatic
search by automated agents in the Anthology’s fu-
ture roadmap. We employ Ruby on Rails (or
“Rails”, version 3.1), a widely-deployed and mature
web development framework, to build the frontend.
It follows a Model-View-Controller (MVC) archi-
tecture, and favors convention over customization,
expediting development and maintenance. Rails
provides a closely tied model for basic database in-
teractions, page rendering, web server deployment
and provides a platform for integrating plugins for
additional functionality. To enable faceted browsing
and search, the revamped Anthology integrates the
Project Blacklight5 plugin, which provides the web
search interface via our Solr indices. Rails appli-
cations can be deployed on many commercial web
hosts but not on the current hosting service used
by the primary ACL website. We have deployed
the new Anthology interface on Heroku, a commer-
cial cloud-based platform that caters to Rails deploy-
ment.

3 Frontend Form and Function

Of most interest to Anthology users will be the pub-
lic website. The remainder of this paper describes

4http://lucene.apache.org/solr/
5http://projectblacklight.org/, version 3.2

84



Figure 2: A screenshot of a faceted keyword search, showing additional restrictions on Author and Year (as a range).

the individual features that have been incorporated
in the new interface.

Faceted Browsing: Facets let a paper (or other
first-class object, such as authors) be classified along
multiple dimensions. Faceted browsing combines
both browsing- and search-based navigation: An-
thology users can progressively filter the collection
in each dimension by selecting a facet and value, and
concurrently have the freedom of searching by key-
word. It is a prevailing user interface technique in
e-commerce sites and catching on in digital libraries.

The current Anthology defines five facets for pa-
pers. ‘Author’, ‘Publication Year’, ‘Venue’, ‘Attach-
ments’ and ‘SIG’ (Special Interest Group) of the cor-
responding volume. The ‘Year’ facet further exposes
an interface for date range filtering, while the ‘At-
tachments’ allows the selection of papers with soft-
ware, errata, revisions and/or datasets easily. The
website also has a standard search box that sup-
ports complex Boolean queries. Figure 2 illustrates
some of these functions in a complex query involv-
ing both facets and keyword search. This is an im-
provement over the previous version that employed
Google custom search, which can not leverage our
structured data to add filtering functionality. Tak-
ing back search from Google’s custom search also
means that our search logs can be provided to our
own community for research, that could enable an
improved future Anthology.

Programmatic Contributions: The ACL com-
munity is uniquely positioned to enhance the An-
thology by applying natural language technology

on its own publication output. The ACL Anthol-
ogy Reference Corpus (Bird et al., 2008) previously
standardized a version of the Anthology’s articles
for comparative benchmarking. We take this idea
farther by allowing automated agents to post-process
information about any publication directly into the
publication’s corresponding page. An agent can cur-
rently provide per-paper supplementary material in
an XML format (shown below) to the editor. After
suitable validation as non-spam, the editor can ingest
the XML content into the Anthology, incorporating
it into the paper’s webpage. Such functionality could
be used to highlight summarization, information ex-
traction and other applications that can process the
text of papers and enrich them.

We use the Anthology ID to uniquely identify
the associated paper. Currently the system is pro-
visioned to support supplementary data provided as
1) text (as shown in Figure 3), 2) an embedded web-
page, and 3) hyperlinks to websites (similar to how
attachments are shown).

<paper id="P11-1110">
<content name="keywords", type="text">
<item>
discourse, implicit reference, coherence,
readability

</item>
</content>

</paper>
...

Figure 3: Excerpt of a programmatic contribution to the
Anthology. The excerpt shows a keyword contribution on
paper P11-1110.

85



Figure 4: (Compressed) individual publication view with
callout highlights of features.

Bibliographic Metadata Export: The previous
Anthology exposed bibliographic metadata in Bib-
TeX format, but its production was separate from
the canonical XML data. In the revamp, we trans-
form the database field values into the MODS bibli-
ography interchange format. We then integrated the
Bibutils6 software module that exports MODS into
four end-user formats: BibTeX, RIS, EndNote and
Word. This lessens the effort for users to cite works
in the Anthology by matching major bibliography
management systems. Our use of Blacklight also
enhances this ability, allowing the selection of mul-
tiple items to be exported to bibliographic exporting
formats or to be shared by email.

User Contributed Data: While social media fea-
tures are quintessential in today’s Web, scholarly
digital libraries and academic networks have yet to
utilize them productively. One vehicle is to allow
the readership to comment on papers and for those
comments to become part of the public record. To

6http://sourceforge.net/p/bibutils/home/
Bibutils/

accomplish this, we integrated a commenting plugin
from Disqus7, which enables users logged into other
social media platforms to leave comments.

We also want to tighten the loop between reader
feedback and Anthology management. Our revamp
allows users to submit corrections and additions to
any paper directly through a web form on the indi-
vidual paper’s webpage. Post-publication datasets,
corrections to author name’s and paper errata can
be easily processed in this way. To avoid spam
changes, this feature requires the Anthology editor
to manually validate the changes. Figure 4 shows the
individual publication view, with metadata, biblio-
graphic export, metadata editing, commenting, and
user (programmatic) contribution sections.

Author Pages: As a consequence of using Rails,
it becomes trivially easy to create pages for other
first-class data elements. Currently, we have created
webpages per author, as shown in Figure 5. It gives
the canonical listing of each author’s publications
within the Anthology in reverse chronological or-
der and includes a list of the popular co-authors and
publication venues. This feature brings the Anthol-
ogy up to parity with other similar digital libraries.
We hope it will spur authors to report publications
under different variants of their names so a naming
authority for ACL authors can result partially from
community effort.

Figure 5: (Compressed) author page with corresponding
co-author and venue information.

7http://www.disqus.com

86



4 Usage Analysis

The revised Anthology interface is already seeing
heavy use. We analyzed the application logs of the
new Anthology website over a period of five days to
understand the impact and usage of the new features.
During this period the website has received 16,930
page requests. This is an increase over the original
website, which garnered less than 7,000 page views
during the same period. The average response time
of the server is 0.73 seconds, while the average load
time of a page is measured at 5.6 seconds. This is
slow – web usability guidelines suggest load times
over 200 milliseconds are suboptimal – but as the
website is deployed on the cloud, server response
can be easily improved by provisioning additional
resources for money. Currently the new Anthology
interface is run on a no-cost plan which provides
minimal CPU bandwidth to serve the dynamically
generated webpages to the readership.

The majority of the requests (11,398) use the new
faceting feature; indeed only 30 requests use the tra-
ditional search box. The most used facet patterns
include “Author, Venue” (51.6%) followed by “Au-
thor, Venue, Year” (14.8%). While we believe that it
is too early to draw conclusions on user behavior, the
overwhelming preference to use facets reveals that
faceted browsing is a preferable navigational choice
for the bulk of the Anthology users.

3,180 requests reached individual (detailed) pub-
lication views, while 2,455 requests accessed au-
thor pages. Approximately 62% of the total requests
had a visit duration under 10 seconds, but 22% re-
quests last between 11 seconds to 3 minutes, with
the remaining 16% sessions being up to 30 minutes
in length. The noticeable large ratio of long visits
support our belief that the newly-added features en-
courages more user engagement with the Anthology.
Since the website went live, we have received 3 valid
requests for metadata changes through the new in-
terface. Up to now, there has not been any use of
the social media features, but we believe Anthology
users will adopt them in due course.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

S.R. Ranganathan, arguably the father of faceted
classification, proposed that “the library is a grow-
ing organism” as one of his laws of library science

(Ranganathan, 1931). We observe that this is true in
the digital context as well.

We will support the legacy ACL Anthology inter-
face until the end of 2012 in parallel with the new
interface, gradually phasing in the new interface as
the primary one. Our immediate goal is to flesh
out the per-author, -venue, -SIG views of the data,
and to enable resource discovery via Open Archives
Initiative’s Protocol for Metadata Harvesting (OAI-
PMH) (Lagoze et al., 2002), an open protocol for
harvesting metadata by web crawlers. Our medium
term outlook hopes to furtherincorporate grassroot
ACL resources such as the ACL Anthology Net-
work (Radev et al., 2009) and the ACL Search-
bench (Schäfer et al., 2011).

We are most excited by the ability to incorporate
programmatic contributions made by NLP software
into the Anthology. We hope that the community
makes full use of this ability to showcase the impor-
tance of our natural language processing on schol-
arly data and improve its accessibility and relevance
to others.

References
Steven Bird, Robert Dale, Bonnie J. Dorr, Bryan Gib-

son, Mark Joseph, Min-Yen Kan, Dongwon Lee, Brett
Powley, Dragomir R. Radev, and Yee Fan Tan. 2008.
The ACL Anthology Reference Corpus: A reference
dataset for bibliographic research in computational lin-
guistics. In LREC’08.

Carl Lagoze, Hebert Van de Sompel, Michael Nelson,
and Simeon Warner. 2002. The open archives
initiative protocol for metadata harvesting, version
2.0. http://www.openarchives.org/OAI/2.0/ openar-
chivesprotocol.htm, June.

Dragomir R. Radev, Pradeep Muthukrishnan, and Vahed
Qazvinian. 2009. The ACL Anthology Network cor-
pus. In Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Text
and Citation Analysis for Scholarly Digital Libraries,
pages 54–61.

S. R. Ranganathan. 1931. The Five Laws of Library Sci-
ence. Madras Library Association (Madras, India) and
Edward Goldston (London, UK).

Ulrich Schäfer, Bernd Kiefer, Christian Spurk, Jörg Stef-
fen, and Rui Wang. 2011. The ACL Anthology
Searchbench. In Proceedings of the 49th Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies: Systems Demonstrations, pages 7–13.

87


