










































A high speed transcription interface for annotating primary linguistic data


Proceedings of the 6th EACL Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 7–12,
Avignon, France, 24 April 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A high speed transcription interface for annotating primary linguistic
data

Mark Dingemanse, Jeremy Hammond, Herman Stehouwer,
Aarthy Somasundaram, Sebastian Drude
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics

Nijmegen
{mark.dingemanse, jeremy.hammond, herman.stehouwer,

aarthy.somasundaram, sebastian.drude}@mpi.nl

Abstract

We present a new transcription mode for
the annotation tool ELAN. This mode is
designed to speed up the process of creat-
ing transcriptions of primary linguistic data
(video and/or audio recordings of linguistic
behaviour). We survey the basic transcrip-
tion workflow of some commonly used
tools (Transcriber, BlitzScribe, and ELAN)
and describe how the new transcription in-
terface improves on these existing imple-
mentations. We describe the design of
the transcription interface and explore some
further possibilities for improvement in the
areas of segmentation and computational
enrichment of annotations.

1 Introduction

Recent years have seen an increasing interest in
language documentation: the creation and preser-
vation of multipurpose records of linguistic pri-
mary data (Gippert et al., 2006; Himmelmann,
2008). The increasing availability of portable
recording devices enables the collection of pri-
mary data even in the remotest field sites, and the
exponential growth in storage makes it possible
to store more of this data than ever before. How-
ever, without content annotation for searching and
analysis, such corpora are of limited use. Ad-
vances in machine learning can bring some mea-
sure of automation to the process (Tschöpel et
al., 2011), but the need for human annotation re-
mains, especially in the case of primary data from
undocumented languages. This paper describes
the development and use of a new rapid transcrip-
tion interface, its integration in an open source

software framework for multimodality research,
and the possibilities it opens up for computational
uses of the annotated data.

Transcription, the production of a written rep-
resentation of audio and video recordings of
communicative behaviour, is one of the most
time-intensive tasks faced by researchers work-
ing with language data. The resulting data is use-
ful in many different scientific fields. Estimates
for the ratio of transcription time to data time
length range from 10:1 or 20:1 for English data
(Tomasello and Stahl, 2004, p. 104), but may
go up to 35:1 for data from lesser known and en-
dangered languages (Auer et al., 2010). As in all
fields of research, time is a most important limit-
ing factor, so any significant improvement in this
area will make available more data and resources
for analysis and model building. The new tran-
scription interface described here is designed for
carrying out high-speed transcription of linguis-
tic audiovisual material, with built-in support for
multiple annotation tiers and for both audio and
video streams.

Basic transcription is only the first step; fur-
ther analysis often necessitates more fine-grained
annotations, for instance part of speech tagging
or morpheme glossing. Such operations are even
more time intensive. Time spent on further an-
notations generally goes well over a 100:1 anno-
tation time to media duration ratio1 (Auer et al.,
2010).The post-transcription work is also an area
with numerous possibilities for further reduction
of annotation time by applying semi-automated
annotation suggestions, and some ongoing work

1Cf. a blog post by P.K.Austin http://blogs.usyd.edu.au
/elac/2010/04/how long is a piece of string.html.

7



to integrate such techniques in our annotation sys-
tem is discussed below.

2 Semi-automatic transcription:
terminology and existing tools

Transcription of linguistic primary data has long
been a concern of researchers in linguistics and
neighbouring fields, and accordingly several tools
are available today for time-aligned annotation
and transcription. To describe the different user
interfaces these tools provide, we adopt a model
of the transcription process by (Roy and Roy,
2009), adjusting its terminology to also cover the
use case of transcribing sign language. According
to this model, the transcription of primary linguis-
tic data can be divided into four basic subtasks:
1) find linguistic utterances in the audio or video
stream, 2) segment the stream into short chunks
of utterances, 3) play the segment, and 4) type the
transcription for the segment.

Existing transcription tools implement these
four steps in different ways. To exemplify this we
discuss three such tools below. All three can be
used to create time-aligned annotations of audio
and/or video recordings, but since they have dif-
ferent origins and were created for different goals,
they present the user with interfaces that differ
quite radically.

Transcriber (Barras et al., 2001) was “designed
for the manual segmentation and transcription of
long duration broadcast news recordings, includ-
ing annotation of speech turns, topics and acoustic
condition” (Barras et al., 2001, p. 5). It provides
a graphical interface with a text editor at the top
and a waveform viewer at the bottom. All four
subtasks from the model above, FSPT, are done
in this same interface. The text editor, where Seg-
menting and Typing are done, is a vertically ori-
ented list of annotations. Strengths of the Tran-
scriber implementation are the top-to-bottom ori-
entation of the text editor, which is in line with
the default layout of transcripts in the discipline,
and the fact that it is possible to rely on only one
input device (the keyboard) for all four subtasks.
Weaknesses are the fact that it does not mark an-
notation ends, only beginnings,and that it treats
the data as a single stream and insists on a strict
partitioning, making it difficult to handle overlap-
ping speech, common in conversational data (Bar-
ras et al., 2001, p. 18).

BlitzScribe (Roy and Roy, 2009) was devel-

oped in the context of the Human Speechome
project at the MIT Media Lab as a custom solu-
tion for the transcription of massive amounts of
unstructured English speech data collected over a
period of three years (Roy et al., 2006). It is not
available to the academic community, but we de-
scribe it here because its user interface presents
significant improvements over previous models.
BlitzScribe uses automatic speech detection for
segmentation, and thus eliminates the first two
steps of the FSPT model, Find and Segment, from
the user interface. The result is a minimalist de-
sign which focuses only on Playing and Typing.
The main strength of BlitzScribe is this stream-
lined interface, which measurably improves tran-
scription speed — it is about four times as fast as
Transcriber (Roy and Roy, 2009, p. 1649). Weak-
nesses include its monolingual, speech-centric fo-
cus, its lack of a mechanism for speaker identi-
fication, and its single-purpose design which ties
it to the Human Speechome project and makes it
unavailable to the wider academic community.

ELAN (Wittenburg et al., 2006) was developed
as a multimedia linguistic annotation framework.
Unlike most other tools it was built with multi-
modal linguistic data in mind, supporting the si-
multaneous display and annotation of multiple au-
dio and video streams. Its data model is tier-
based, with multiple tiers available for annota-
tions of different speakers or different modalities
(e.g. speech and gesture). Its strengths are its
support for multimodal data, its handling of over-
lapping speech, its flexible tier structure, and its
open source nature. Its noted weaknesses include
a steep learning curve and a user interface that
was, as of 2007, “not the best place to work on a
‘first pass’ of a transcript” (Berez, 2007, p. 288).

The new user interface we describe in this pa-
per is integrated in ELAN as a separate “Tran-
scription Mode”, and was developed to combine
the strengths of existing implementations while at
the same time addressing their weaknesses. Fig-
ure 1 shows a screenshot of the new transcription
mode.

3 Description of the interface

From the default Annotation Mode in ELAN, the
user can switch to several other modes, one of
which is Transcription Mode. Transcription Mode
displays annotations in one or more columns. A
column collects annotations of a single type. For

8



Figure 1: The interface of the transcription mode, showing two columns: transcriptions and the corresponding
translations.

instance, the first column in Figure 1 displays all
annotations of the type “practical orthography”
in chronological order, colour-coding for differ-
ent speakers. The second column displays cor-
responding, i.e., time aligned, annotations of the
type “literal translation”. Beside the annotation
columns there is a pane showing the data (video
and/or audio stream) for the selected utterance.
Below it are basic playback parameters like vol-
ume and rate, some essential interface settings,
and a button “Configure” which brings up the col-
umn selection dialog window. We provide an ex-
ample of this preference pane in Figure 2.

The basic organisation of the Transcription
Mode interface reflects its task-oriented design:
the annotation columns occupy pride of place and
only the most frequently accessed settings are
directly visible. Throughout, the user interface
is keyboard-driven and designed to minimise the
number of actions the user needs to carry out. For
instance, selecting a segment (by mouse or key-
board) will automatically trigger playback of that
segment (the user can play and pause using the
Tab key). Selecting a grey (non-existent) field in
a dependent column will automatically create an
annotation. Selection always opens up the field

for immediate editing. Arrow keys as well as user-
configurable shortcuts move to adjacent fields.

ELAN Transcription Mode improves the tran-
scription workflow by taking apart the FSPT
model and focusing only on the last two steps:
Play and Type. In this respect it is like
BlitzScribe; but it is more advanced than that and
other tools in at least two important ways. First,
it is agnostic to the type of data transcribed. Sec-
ond, it does not presuppose monolingualism and
is ready for multilingual work. It allows the dis-
play of multiple annotation layers and makes for
easy navigation between them.Further, when tran-
scription is done with the help of a native speaker
it allows for them to provide other relevant infor-
mation at the same time (such as cultural back-
ground explanations) keeping primary data and
meta-data time aligned and linked.

Some less prominently visible features of the
user interface design include: the ability to re-
order annotation columns by drag and drop; a tog-
gle for the position of the data streams (to the left
or to the right of the annotation columns); the abil-
ity to detach the video stream (for instance for dis-
play on a secondary monitor); the option to show
names (i.e. participant ID’s) in the flow of anno-

9



Figure 2: The interface of the transcription mode; the configuration dialog.

tations or to indicate them by colour-coding only;
the option to keep the active annotation centered;
and settings for font size and number of columns
(in the ”Configure” pane). These features enable
the user to customise the transcription experience
to their own needs.

The overall design of Transcription Mode
makes the process of transcription as smooth as
possible by removing unnecessary clutter, fore-
grounding the interface elements that matter, and
enabling a limited degree of customisation. Over-
all, the new interface has realised significant
speedups for many people2. User feedback in re-
sponse to the new transcription mode has been
overwhelmingly positive, e.g., the members of
mailing lists such as the Resource Network for
Linguistic Diversity3.

4 A prerequisite: semi-automatic
segmentation

As we noted in the introduction, the most im-
portant step before transcription is that of seg-
mentation (steps Find and Segment in the FSPT
model). Segmentation is a large task that involves
subdividing the audio or video stream in, possi-
bly overlapping, segments. The segments each
denote a distinct period of speech or any other
communicative act and each segment is com-

2Including ourselves, Jeremy Hammond claims that:
“Based on my last two field work trips, I am getting my tran-
scription time down below that of transcriber (but perhaps
not by much) but still keeping the higher level of data that
ELANs tiers provide - probably around 18-20 hours for an
hour of somewhat detailed trilingual annotation.”

3www.rnld.org

monly assigned to a specific speaker. This step
can potentially be sped up significantly by doing
it semi-automatically using pattern recognition
techniques, as pursued in the AVATecH project
(Auer et al., 2010).

In the AVATecH project, audio and video
streams can be sent to detection components
called ‘recognisers’. Some detection compo-
nents accept the output of other recognisers as
additional input, next to the audio and/or video
streams, thus facilitating cascaded processing of
these streams. Amongst the tasks that can be per-
formed by these recognisers is the segmentation
of audio and video, including speaker assignment.

A special challenge for the recognisers in this
project is the requirement of language indepen-
dence (in contrast to the English-only situation
in the Human Speechome project that produced
Blitzscribe(Roy et al., 2006)). The recognisers
should ideally accommodate the work of field
linguists and other alike researchers and there-
fore cannot simply apply existing language and
acoustic models. Furthermore, the conditions that
are encountered in the field are often not ideal,
e.g., loud and irregular background noises such as
those from animals are common. Nevertheless,
automatic segmentation has the potential to speed
up the segmentation step greatly.

5 Future possibilities: computational
approaches to data enrichment

While a basic transcription and translation is es-
sential as a first way into the data, it is not suf-
ficient for many research questions, linguistic or

10



otherwise. Typically a morphological segmenta-
tion of the words and a labelling of each individ-
ual morph is required. This level of annotation is
also known as basic glossing (Bow et al., 2003b;
Bow et al., 2003a).

Automatically segmenting the words into their
morphological parts, without resorting to the use
of pre-existing knowledge has seen a wide vari-
ety of research (Hammarström and Borin, 2011).
Based on the knowledge-free induction of mor-
phological boundaries the linguist will usually
perform corrections. Above all, a system must
learn from the input of the linguist, and must in-
corporate it in the results, improving the segmen-
tation of words going forward. However, it is well
known from typological research that languages
differ tremendously in their morphosyntactic or-
ganisation and the specific morphological means
that are employed to construct complex meanings
(Evans and Levinson, 2009; Hocket, 1954).

As far as we know, there is no current morpho-
logical segmentation or glossing system that deals
well with all language types, in particular inflec-
tional and polysynthetic languages or languages
that heavily employ tonal patterns to mark differ-
ent forms of the same word. Therefore, there is
a need for an interactive, modular glossing sys-
tem. For each step of the glossing task, one would
use one, or a set of complementary modules. We
call such modules “annotyzers”. They generate
content on the basis of the source tiers and addi-
tional data, e.g. lexical data (or learnt states from
earlier passes). Using such modules will result
in a speedup for the researcher. We remark that
there are existing modular NLP systems, such as
GATE(Cunningham et al., 2011), however these
are tied to different workflows, i.e., they are not as
suitable for the multimodal multi-participant an-
notation process.

Currently a limited set of such functionality is
available in Toolbox and FLEX. In the case of
both Toolbox and FLEX the functionality is lim-
ited to a set of rules written by the linguist (i.e.
in a database-lookup approach). Even though
the ELAN modules will offer support for such
rules, our focus is on the automation of machine-
learning systems in order to scale the annotation
process.

Our main aim for the future is to incorporate
learning systems that support the linguists by im-
proving the suggested new annotations on the

bases of choices the linguist made earlier. The
goal there is, again, to reduce annotation time, so
that the linguist can work more on linguistic anal-
ysis and less on annotating. At the same time,
a working set of annotyzers will promote more
standardised glossing, which can then be used for
further automated research, cf. automatic tree-
bank production or similar (Bender et al., 2011).

6 Conclusions

The diversity of the world’s languages is in dan-
ger. Perhaps user interface design is not the first
thing that comes to mind in response to this sober-
ing fact. Yet in a field that increasingly works with
digital annotations of primary linguistic data, it is
imperative that the basic tools for annotation and
transcription are optimally designed to get the job
done.

We have described Transcription Mode, a new
user interface in ELAN that accelerates the tran-
scription process. This interface offers several ad-
vantages compared to similar tools in the software
landscape. It automates actions wherever pos-
sible, displays multiple parallel information and
annotation streams, is controllable with just the
keyboard, and can handle sign language as well
as spoken language data. Transcription Mode re-
duces the required transcription time by providing
an optimised workflow.

The next step is to optimise the preceding and
following stages in the annotation process. Pre-
ceding the transcription stage is segmentation and
speaker labelling, which we address using auto-
matic audio/video recogniser techniques that are
independent of the language that is transcribed.
Following transcription, we aim to support basic
glossing (and similar additional annotations based
on transcriptions) with a modular software archi-
tecture. These semi-automated steps lead to fur-
ther time savings, allowing researchers to focus
on the analysis of language data rather than on the
production of annotations.

The overall goal of the developments described
here is to help researchers working with primary
language data to use their time more optimally.
Ultimately, these improvements will lead to an in-
crease in both quality and quantity of primary data
available for analysis. Better data and better anal-
yses for a stronger digital humanities.

11



References
Eric Auer, Peter Wittenburg, Han Sloetjes, Oliver

Schreer, Stefano Masneri, Daniel Schneider, and
Sebastian Tschöpel. 2010. Automatic annotation
of media field recordings. In Proceedings of the
ECAI 2010 Workshop on Language Technology for
Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities
(LaTeCH 2010), pages 31–34.

Claude Barras, Edouard Geoffrois, Zhibiao Wu, and
Mark Liberman. 2001. Transcriber: Develop-
ment and use of a tool for assisting speech corpora
production. Speech Communication, 33(1-2):5–22,
January.

Emily M. Bender, Dan Flickinger, Stephan Oepen, and
Yi Zhang. 2011. Parser evaluation over local and
non-local deep dependencies in a large corpus. In
Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
397–408, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK., July. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Andrea L. Berez. 2007. Review of EUDICO linguis-
tic annotator (ELAN). Language Documentation &
Conservation, 1(2):283–289, December.

Catherine Bow, Baden Hughes, and Steven Bird.
2003a. A four-level model for interlinear text.

Cathy Bow, Baden Hughes, and Steven Bird. 2003b.
Towards a general model of interlinear text. In
Proceedings of EMELD Workshop 2003: Digitizing
and Annotating Texts and Field Recordings. Lans-
ing MI, USA.

Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, Kalina
Bontcheva, Valentin Tablan, Niraj Aswani, Ian
Roberts, Genevieve Gorrell, Adam Funk, Angus
Roberts, Danica Damljanovic, Thomas Heitz,
Mark A. Greenwood, Horacio Saggion, Johann
Petrak, Yaoyong Li, and Wim Peters. 2011. Text
Processing with GATE (Version 6).

Nicholas Evans and Stephen C. Levinson. 2009. The
myth of language universals: Language diversity
and its importance for cognitive science. Behav-
ioral and Brain Sciences, 32(05):429–448.

Jost Gippert, Nikolaus P. Himmelmann, and Ulrike
Mosel, editors. 2006. Essentials of language docu-
mentation. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin / New York.

Harald Hammarström and Lars Borin. 2011. Un-
supervised learning of morphology. To Appear in
Computational Linguistics.

Nikolaus P. Himmelmann. 2008. Reproduction and
preservation of linguistic knowledge: Linguistics’
response to language endangerment. In Annual Re-
view of Anthropology, volume 37 (1), pages 337–
350.

Charles F. Hocket. 1954. Two models of grammatical
description. Word 10, pages 210–234.

Chris Rogers. 2010. Review of fieldworks language
explorer (flex) 3.0. In Language Documentation

& Conservation 4, pages 1934–5275. University of
Hawai’i Press.

Brandon C. Roy and Deb Roy. 2009. Fast transcrip-
tion of unstructured audio recordings. In Proceed-
ings of Interspeech 2009, Brighton, England.

Deb Roy, Rupal Patel, Philip DeCamp, Rony Kubat,
Michael Fleischman, Brandon C. Roy, Nikolaos
Mavridis, Stefanie Tellex, Alexia Salata, Jethran
Guinness, Micheal Levit, and Peter Gorniak. 2006.
The human speechome project. In Paul Vogt, Yu-
uga Sugita, Elio Tuci, and Chrystopher Nehaniv, ed-
itors, Symbol Grounding and Beyond, volume 4211
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 192–
196. Springer, Berlin / Heidelberg.

Michael Tomasello and Daniel Stahl. 2004. Sam-
pling children’s spontaneous speech: How much is
enough? Journal of Child Language, 31(01):101–
121.

Sebastian Tschöpel, Daniel Schneider, Rolf Bardeli,
Peter Wittenburg, Han Sloetjes, Oliver Schreer, Ste-
fano Masneri, Przemek Lenkiewicz, and Eric Auer.
2011. AVATecH: Audio/Video technology for hu-
manities research. Language Technologies for Dig-
ital Humanities and Cultural Heritage, page 86.

Peter Wittenburg, Hennie Brugman, Albert Russel,
and Han Sloetjes. 2006. ELAN: a professional
framework for multimodality research. In Proceed-
ings of LREC 2006.

12


