










































Formemes in English-Czech Deep Syntactic MT


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 267–274,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Formemes in English-Czech Deep Syntactic MT ∗

Ondřej Dušek, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Martin Popel,
Martin Majliš, Michal Novák, and David Mareček

Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics

Malostranské náměstí 25, Prague
{odusek,zabokrtsky,popel,majlis,mnovak,marecek}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

One of the most notable recent improve-
ments of the TectoMT English-to-Czech trans-
lation is a systematic and theoretically sup-
ported revision of formemes—the annotation
of morpho-syntactic features of content words
in deep dependency syntactic structures based
on the Prague tectogrammatics theory. Our
modifications aim at reducing data sparsity,
increasing consistency across languages and
widening the usage area of this markup.
Formemes can be used not only in MT, but in
various other NLP tasks.

1 Introduction

The cornerstone of the TectoMT tree-to-tree ma-
chine translation system is the deep-syntactic lan-
guage representation following the Prague tec-
togrammatics theory (Sgall et al., 1986), and its ap-
plication in the Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT)
2.01 (Hajič et al., 2006), where each sentence is
analyzed to a dependency tree whose nodes corre-
spond to content words. Each node has a number
of attributes, but the most important (and difficult)
for the transfer phase are lemma—lexical informa-
tion, and formeme—surface morpho-syntactic infor-

∗ This research has been supported by the grants
FP7-ICT-2009-4-247762 (FAUST), FP7-ICT-2009-4-249119
(Metanet), LH12093 (Kontakt II), DF12P01OVV022 (NAKI),
201/09/H057 (Czech Science Foundation), GAUK 116310, and
SVV 265 314. This work has been using language resources de-
veloped and/or stored and/or distributed by the LINDAT-Clarin
project of the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic
(project LM2010013).

1http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0

mation, including selected auxiliary words (Ptáček
and Žabokrtský, 2006; Žabokrtský et al., 2008).

This paper focuses on formemes—their definition
and recent improvements of the annotation, which
has been thoroughly revised in the course of prepa-
ration of the CzEng 1.0 parallel corpus (Bojar et al.,
2012b), whose utilization in TectoMT along with the
new formemes version has brought the greatest ben-
efit to our English-Czech MT system in the recent
year. However, the area of possible application of
formemes is not limited to MT only or to the lan-
guage pair used in our system; the underlying ideas
are language-independent.

We summarize the development of morpho-
syntactic annotations related to formemes (Sec-
tion 2), provide an overview of the whole TectoMT
system (Section 3), then describe the formeme an-
notation (Section 4) and our recent improvements
(Section 5), as well as experimental applications, in-
cluding English-Czech MT (Section 6). The main
asset of the formeme revision is a first systematic re-
organization of the existing practical aid, providing
it with a solid theoretical base, but still bearing its
intended applications in mind.

2 Related Work

Numerous theoretical approaches had been made
to morpho-syntactic description, mainly within va-
lency lexicons, starting probably with the work by
Helbig and Schenkel (1969). Perhaps the best one
for Czech is PDT-VALLEX (Hajič et al., 2003), list-
ing all possible subtrees corresponding to valency
arguments (Urešová, 2009). Žabokrtský (2005)
gives an overview of works in this field.

267



This kind of information has been most exploited
in structural MT systems, employing semantic re-
lations (Menezes and Richardson, 2001) or surface
tree substructures (Quirk et al., 2005; Marcu et al.,
2006). Formemes, originally developed for Natural
Language Generation (NLG) (Ptáček and Žabokrt-
ský, 2006), have been successfully applied to MT
within the TectoMT system. Our revision of for-
meme annotation aims to improve the MT perfor-
mance, keeping other possible applications in mind.

3 The TectoMT English-Czech Machine
Translation System

The TectoMT system is a structural machine trans-
lation system with deep transfer, first introduced
by Žabokrtský et al. (2008). It currently supports
English-to-Czech translation. Its analysis stage
follows the Prague tectogrammatics theory (Sgall,
1967; Sgall et al., 1986), proceeding over two layers
of structural description, from shallow (analytical)
to deep (tectogrammatical) (see Section 3.1).

The transfer phase of the system is based on Max-
imum Entropy context-sensitive translation models
(Mareček et al., 2010) and Hidden Tree Markov
Models (Žabokrtský and Popel, 2009). It is factor-
ized into three subtasks: lemma, formeme and gram-
matemes translation (see Sections 3.2 and 3.3).

The subsequent generation phase consists of rule-
based components that gradually change the deep
target language representation into a shallow one,
which is then converted to text (cf. Section 6.1).

The version of TectoMT submitted to WMT122

builds upon the WMT11 version. Several rule-based
components were slightly refined. However, most of
the effort was devoted to creating a better and bigger
parallel treebank—CzEng 1.03 (Bojar et al., 2012b),
and re-training the statistical components on this re-
source. Apart from bigger size and improved filter-
ing, one of the main differences between CzEng 0.9
(Bojar and Žabokrtský, 2009) (used in WMT11) and
CzEng 1.0 (used in WMT12) is the revised annota-
tion of formemes.

2http://www.statmt.org/wmt12
3http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/czeng

3.1 Layers of structural analysis

There are two distinct structural layers used in the
TectoMT system:

• Analytical layer. A surface syntax layer, which
includes all tokens of the sentence, organized
into a labeled dependency tree. The labels cor-
respond to surface syntax functions.

• Tectogrammatical layer. A deep syntax/se-
mantic layer describing the linguistic meaning
of the sentence. Its dependency trees include
only content words as nodes, assigning to each
of them a deep lemma (t-lemma), a semantic
role label (functor), and other deep linguistic
features (grammatemes), such as semantic part-
of-speech, person, tense or modality.

The analytical layer can be obtained using differ-
ent dependency parsers (Popel et al., 2011); the tec-
togrammatical representation is then created by rule-
based modules from the analytical trees.

In contrast to the original PDT annotation,
the TectoMT tectogrammatical layer also includes
formemes describing the surface morpho-syntactic
realization of the nodes (cf. also Section 3.3).

3.2 Transfer: Translation Factorization and
Symmetry

Using the tectogrammatical representation in struc-
tural MT allows separating the problem of translat-
ing a sentence into relatively independent simpler
subtasks: lemma, functors, and grammatemes trans-
lation (Bojar et al., 2009; Žabokrtský, 2010). Since
topology changes to deep syntax trees are rare in MT
transfer, each of these three subtasks allows a vir-
tually symmetric source-target one-to-one mapping,
thus simplifying the initial n-to-m mapping of word
phrases or surface subtrees.

Žabokrtský et al. (2008) obviated the need for
transfer via functors (i.e. semantic role detection)
by applying a formeme transfer instead. While
formeme values are much simpler to obtain by au-
tomatic processing, this approach preserved the ad-
vantage of symmetric one-to-one value translation.

Moreover, translations of a given source morpho-
syntactic construction usually follow a limited num-
ber of patterns in the target language regardless of

268



their semantic functions, e.g. a finite clause will
most often be translated as a finite clause.

3.3 Motivation for the Introduction of
Formemes

Surface-oriented formemes have been introduced
into the semantics-oriented tectogrammatical layer,
as it proves beneficial to combine the deep syntax
trees, smaller in size and more consistent across lan-
guages, with the surface morphology and syntax to
provide for a straightforward transition to the surface
level (Žabokrtský, 2010).

The three-fold factorization of the transfer phase
(see Section 3.2) helps address the data sparsity is-
sue faced by today’s MT systems. As the translation
of lemmas and their morpho-syntactic forms is sepa-
rated, combinations unseen in the training data may
appear on the output.

To further reduce data sparsity, only minimal in-
formation needed to reconstruct the surface form is
stored in formemes; morphological categories deriv-
able from elsewhere, i.e. morphological agreement
or grammatemes, are discarded.

4 Czech and English Formemes in
TectoMT

A formeme is a concise description of relevant
morpho-syntactic features of a node in a tectogram-
matical tree (deep syntactic tree whose nodes usu-
ally correspond to content words). The general
shape of revised Czech and English formemes, as
implemented within the Treex4 NLP framework
(Popel and Žabokrtský, 2010) for the TectoMT sys-
tem, consists of three main parts:

1. Syntactic part-of-speech.5 The number of syn-
tactic parts-of-speech is very low, as only con-
tent words are used on the deep layer and the
categories of pronouns and numerals have been
divided under nouns and adjectives accord-
ing to syntactic behavior (Ševčíková-Razímová
and Žabokrtský, 2006). The possible values are
v for verbs, n for nouns, adj for adjectives,
and adv for adverbs.

4http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/treex/,
https://metacpan.org/module/Treex

5Cf. Section 5.2 for details.

2. Subordinate conjunction/preposition. Applies
only to formemes of prepositional phrases and
subordinate clauses introduced by a conjunc-
tion and contains the respective conjunction or
preposition; e.g. if, on or in_case_of.

3. Form. This part represents the morpho-
syntactic form of the node in question and de-
pends on the part-of-speech (see Table 1).

The two or three parts are concatenated into
a human-readable string to facilitate usage in
hand-written rules as well as statistical systems
(Žabokrtský, 2010), producing values such as
v:inf, v:if+fin or n:into+X. Formeme val-
ues of nodes corresponding to uninflected words are
atomic.

Formemes are detected by rule-based modules op-
erating on deep and surface trees. Example deep
syntax trees annotated with formemes are shown in
Fig. 1. A listing of all possible formeme values is
given in Table 1.

Verbal formemes remain quite consistent in both
languages, except for the greater range of forms in
English (Czech uses adjectives or nouns instead of
gerunds and verbal attributes). Nominal formemes
differ more significantly: Czech is a free-word order
language with rich morphology, where declension
is important to syntactic relations—case is therefore
included in formemes. As English makes its syntac-
tic relations visible rather with word-order than with
morphology, English formemes indicate the syntac-
tic position instead. The same holds for adjecti-
val complements to verbs. Posession is expressed
mostly using nouns in English and adjectives in
Czech, which is also reflected in formemes.

5 Recent Markup Improvements

Our following markup innovations address several
issues found in the previous version and aim to adapt
the range of values more accurately to the intended
applications.

5.1 General Form Changes
The relevant preposition and subordinate conjunc-
tion nodes had been selected based on their depen-
dency labels; we use a simple part-of-speech tag fil-
ter instead in order to minimize the influence of pars-
ing errors and capture more complex prepositions,

269



Figure 1: An example English and Czech deep sentence structure annotated with formemes (in typewriter font).

Formeme Language Definition
v:(P+)fin both Verbs as heads of finite clauses
v:rc both Verbs as heads of relative clauses
v:(P+)inf both Infinitive clauses; typically with the particle to in English∗

v:(P+)ger EN Gerunds, e.g. I like reading (v:ger), but I am tired of arguing (v:of+ger).
v:attr EN Present or past participles (i.e. -ing or -ed forms) in the attributive syntactic

position, e.g. Striking (v:attr) teachers hate bored (v:attr) students.
n:[1..7] CS Bare nouns; the numbers indicate morphological case†

n:X CS Bare nouns that cannot be inflected
n:subj EN Nouns in the subject position (i.e. in front of the main verb of the clause)
n:obj EN Nouns in the object position (i.e. following the verb with no preposition)
n:obj1, n:obj2 EN Nouns in the object position; distinguishing the two objects of ditransitive

verbs (e.g. give, consider)
n:adv EN Nouns in an adverbial position, e.g. The sales went up by 1 % last month
n:P+X EN Prepositional phrases
n:P+[1..7] CS Prepositional phrases; the preposition surface form is combined with the re-

quired case‡

n:attr both Nominal attributes, e.g. insurance company or president Smith in English
and prezident Smith in Czech

n:poss EN English possessive pronouns and nouns with the ’s suffix
adj:attr both Adjectival attributes (Czech inflection forms need not be stored thanks to

congruency with the parent noun)
adj:compl EN Direct adjectival complements to verbs
adj:[1..7] CS Direct adjectival complements to verbs (morphological case must be stored

in Czech, as it is determined by valency)
adj:poss CS Czech possesive adjectives and pronouns; a counterpart to English n:poss
adv both Adverbs (not inflected, can take no prepositions etc.)
x both Coordinating conjunctions, other uninflected words
drop both Deep tree nodes which do not appear on the surface (e.g. pro-drop pronouns)

∗I.e. infinitives as head of clauses, not infinitives as parts of compound verb forms with finite auxiliary verbs.
†Numbers are traditionally used to mark morphological case in Czech; 1 stands for nominative, 2 for genitive etc.
‡Since many prepositions may govern multiple cases in Czech, the case number is necessary.

Table 1: A listing of all possible formeme values, indicating their usage in Czech, English or both languages. “P+”
denotes the (lowercased) surface form of a preposition or a subordinate conjunction. Round brackets denote optional
parts, square brackets denote a set of alternatives.

270



e.g. in case of. Our revision also allows combining
prepositions with all English gerunds and infinitives,
preventing a loss of important data.

We also use the lowercased surface form in the
middle formeme part instead of lemmas to allow for
a more straightforward surface form generation.

5.2 Introducing Syntactic Part-of-Speech
Formemes originally contained the semantic part-of-
speech (sempos) (Razímová and Žabokrtský, 2006)
as their first part. We replaced it with a syntac-
tic part-of-speech (syntpos), since it proved compli-
cated to assign sempos reliably by a rule-based mod-
ule and morpho-syntactic behavior is more relevant
to formemes than semantics.

The syntpos is assigned in two steps:

1. A preliminary syntpos is selected, using our
categorization based on the part-of-speech tag
and lemma.

2. The final syntpos is selected according to the
syntactic position of the node, addressing nom-
inal usage of adjectives and cardinal numerals
(see Sections 5.4 and 5.5).

5.3 Capturing Czech Nominal Attributes
Detecting the attributive usage of nouns is straight-
forward for English, where any noun depending di-
rectly on another noun is considered an attribute.
In Czech, one needs to distinguish case-congruent
attributes from others that have a fixed case. We
aimed at assigning the n:attr formeme only in the
former case and thus replaced the original method
based on word order with a less error-prone one
based on congruency and named entity recognition.

5.4 Numerals: Distinguishing Usage and
Correcting Czech Case

The new formemes now distinguish adjectival and
nominal usage of cardinal numerals (cf. also Sec-
tion 5.2), e.g. the number in 5 potatoes is now as-
signed the adj:attr formeme, whereas Apollo 11
is given n:attr. The new situation is analogous
in Czech, with nominal usages of numerals having
their morphological case marked in formemes.

To reduce data sparsity in the new formemes ver-
sion, we counter the inconsistent syntactic behavior
of Czech cardinal numerals, where 1-4 behave like

The word banán is in genitive (n:2), but would have an ac-
cusative (n:4) form if the numeral behaved like an adjective.

Figure 2: Case correction with numerals in Czech.

adjectives but other numerals behave like nouns and
shift their semantically governing noun to the po-
sition of a genitive attribute. An example of this
change is given in Fig. 2.

5.5 Adjectives: Nominal Usage and Case
The new formemes address the usage of adjectives
in the syntactic position of nouns (cf. Section 5.2),
which occurs only rarely, thus preventing sparse val-
ues, namely in these syntactic positions:

• The subject. We replaced the originally as-
signed adj:compl value, which was impos-
sible to tell from adjectival objects, with the
formeme a noun would have in the same po-
sition, e.g. in the sentence Many of them were
late, the subject many is assigned n:subj.

• Prepositional phrases. Syntactic behavior of
adjectives is identical to nouns here; we thus
assign them the formeme values a noun would
receive in the same position, e.g. n:of+X in-
stead of adj:of+X in He is one of the best at
school.

In Czech, we detect nominal usage of adjectives
in verbal direct objects as well, employing large-
coverage valency lexicons (Lopatková et al., 2008;
Hajič et al., 2003).

Instead of assigning the compl value in Czech,
our formemes revision includes the case of adjecti-
val complements, which depends on the valency of
the respective verb.

5.6 Mutual Information Across Languages
The changes described above have been motivated
not only by theoretical linguistic description of the
languages in question, but also by the intended us-
age within the TectoMT translation system. Instead

271



of retraining the translation model after each change,
we devised a simpler and faster estimate to measure
the asset of our innovations: using Mutual Informa-
tion (MI) (Manning and Schütze, 1999, p. 66) of
formemes in Czech and English trees.

We expect that an inter-language MI increase will
lead to lower noise in formeme-to-formeme transla-
tion dictionary (Bojar et al., 2009, cf. Section 3.2),
thus achieving higher MT output quality.

Using the analysis pipeline from CzEng1.0, we
measured the inter-language MI on sentences from
the Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank
(PCEDT) 2.0 (Bojar et al., 2012a). The overall re-
sults show an MI increase from 1.598 to 1.687 (Bo-
jar et al., 2012b). Several proposed markup changes
have been discarded as they led to an inter-language
MI drop; e.g. removing the v:rc relative clause
formeme or merging the v:attr and adj:attr
values in English.

6 Experimental Usage

We list here our experiments with the newly de-
veloped annotation: an NLG experiment aimed at
assessing the impact of formemes on the synthesis
phase of the TectoMT system, and the usage in the
English-Czech MT as a whole.

6.1 Czech Synthesis
The synthesis phase of the TectoMT system relies
heavily on the information included in formemes, as
its rule-based blocks use solely formemes and gram-
mar rules to gradually change a deep tree node into
a surface subtree.

To directly measure the suitability of our changes
for the synthesis stage of the TectoMT system, we
used a Czech-to-Czech round trip—deep analysis of
Czech PDT 2.0 development set sentences using the
CzEng 1.0 pipeline (Bojar et al., 2012b), followed
directly by the synthesis part of the TectoMT sys-
tem. The results were evaluated using the BLEU
metric (Papineni et al., 2002) with the original sen-
tences as reference; they indicate a higher suitability
of the new formemes for deep Czech synthesis (see
Table 2).

6.2 English-Czech Machine Translation
To measure the influence of the presented formeme
revision on the translation quality, we compared

Version BLEU
Original formemes 0.6818
Revised formemes 0.7092

Table 2: A comparison of formeme versions in Czech-to-
Czech round trip.

Version BLEU
Original formemes 0.1190
Revised formemes 0.1199

Table 3: A comparison of formeme versions in English-
to-Czech TectoMT translation on the WMT12 test set.

two translation scenarios—one using the origi-
nal formemes and the second using the revised
formemes in the formeme-to-formeme translation
model. Due to time reasons, we were able to
train both translation models only on 1/2 of the
CzEng 1.0 training data.

The results in Table 3 demonstrate a slight6 BLEU
gain when using the revised formemes version. The
gain is expected to be greater if several rule-based
modules of the transfer phase are adapted to the re-
visions.

7 Conclusion and Further Work

We have presented a systematic and theoretically
supported revision of a surface morpho-syntactic
markup within a deep dependency annotation sce-
nario, designed to facilitate the TectoMT transfer
phase. Our first practical experiments proved the
merits of our innovations in the tasks of Czech syn-
thesis and deep structural MT as a whole. We have
also experimented with formemes in the functor as-
signment (semantic role labelling) task and gained
moderate improvements (ca. 1-1.5% accuracy).

In future, we intend to tune the rule-based parts
of our MT transfer for the new version of formemes
and examine further possibilities of data sparsity re-
duction (e.g. by merging synonymous formemes).
We are also planning to create formeme annotation
modules for further languages to widen the range of
language pairs used in the TectoMT system.

6Significant at 90% level using pairwise bootstrap resam-
pling test (Koehn, 2004).

272



References
O. Bojar and Z. Žabokrtský. 2009. CzEng 0.9: Large

Parallel Treebank with Rich Annotation. Prague Bul-
letin of Mathematical Linguistics, 92.

O. Bojar, D. Mareček, V. Novák, M. Popel, J. Ptáček,
J. Rouš, and Z. Žabokrtský. 2009. English-Czech MT
in 2008. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation, pages 125–129. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

O. Bojar, J. Hajič, E. Hajičová, J. Panevová, P. Sgall,
S. Cinková, E. Fučíková, M. Mikulová, P. Pajas,
J. Popelka, J. Semecký, J. Šindlerová, J. Štěpánek,
J. Toman, Z. Urešová, and Z. Žabokrtský. 2012a.
Announcing Prague Czech-English Dependency Tree-
bank 2.0. In Proceedings of LREC 2012, Istanbul,
Turkey, May. ELRA, European Language Resources
Association. In print.

O. Bojar, Z. Žabokrtský, O. Dušek, P. Galuščáková,
M. Majliš, D. Mareček, J. Maršík, M. Novák,
M. Popel, and A. Tamchyna. 2012b. The Joy of Par-
allelism with CzEng 1.0. In Proceedings of LREC
2012, Istanbul, Turkey, May. ELRA, European Lan-
guage Resources Association. In print.

J. Hajič, J. Panevová, Z. Urešová, A. Bémová,
V. Kolárová, and P. Pajas. 2003. PDT-VALLEX: Cre-
ating a large-coverage valency lexicon for treebank an-
notation. In Proceedings of The Second Workshop on
Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, volume 9, pages
57–68.

J. Hajič, J. Panevová, E. Hajičová, P. Sgall, P. Pajas,
J. Štěpánek, J. Havelka, M. Mikulová, Z. Žabokrtský,
and M. Ševčíková-Razímová. 2006. Prague Depen-
dency Treebank 2.0. CD-ROM LDC2006T01, LDC,
Philadelphia.

G. Helbig and W. Schenkel. 1969. Wörterbuch zur
Valenz und Distribution deutscher Verben. VEB Bib-
liographisches Institut, Leipzig.

P. Koehn. 2004. Statistical Significance Tests for
Machine Translation Evaluation. In Proceedings of
EMNLP 2004, Barcelona, Spain.

M. Lopatková, Z. Žabokrtský, V. Kettnerová, and
K. Skwarska. 2008. Valenční slovník českých sloves.
Karolinum, Prague.

C.D. Manning and H. Schütze. 1999. Foundations of
statistical natural language processing. MIT Press.

D. Marcu, W. Wang, A. Echihabi, and K. Knight. 2006.
SPMT: Statistical machine translation with syntacti-
fied target language phrases. In Proceedings of the
2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 44–52. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

D. Mareček, M. Popel, and Z. Žabokrtský. 2010. Maxi-
mum entropy translation model in dependency-based

MT framework. In Proceedings of the Joint Fifth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation and Met-
rics (MATR), pages 201–206. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

A. Menezes and S. D. Richardson. 2001. A best-first
alignment algorithm for automatic extraction of trans-
fer mappings from bilingual corpora. In Proceed-
ings of the workshop on Data-driven methods in ma-
chine translation - Volume 14, DMMT ’01, pages 1–8,
Stroudsburg, PA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.J. Zhu. 2002.
BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meet-
ing on association for computational linguistics, pages
311–318. Association for Computational Linguistics.

M. Popel and Z. Žabokrtský. 2010. TectoMT: modular
NLP framework. Advances in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 293–304.

M. Popel, D. Mareček, N. Green, and Z. Žabokrtský.
2011. Influence of parser choice on dependency-based
MT. In Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof
Monz, and Omar Zaidan, editors, Proceedings of the
Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 433–439, Edinburgh, UK. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

J. Ptáček and Z. Žabokrtský. 2006. Synthesis of
Czech sentences from tectogrammatical trees. In Text,
Speech and Dialogue, pages 221–228. Springer.

C. Quirk, A. Menezes, and C. Cherry. 2005. De-
pendency treelet translation: Syntactically informed
phrasal SMT. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 271–279. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

M. Razímová and Z. Žabokrtský. 2006. Annotation
of grammatemes in the Prague Dependency Treebank
2.0. In Proceedings of the LREC 2006 Workshop on
Annotation Science, pages 12–19.

M. Ševčíková-Razímová and Z. Žabokrtský. 2006. Sys-
tematic parameterized description of pro-forms in the
Prague Dependency Treebank 2.0. In J. Hajič and
J. Nivre, editors, Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on
Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT), pages 175–
186, Prague.

P. Sgall, E. Hajičová, J. Panevová, and J. Mey. 1986. The
meaning of the sentence in its semantic and pragmatic
aspects. Springer.

P. Sgall. 1967. Generativní popis jazyka a česká dekli-
nace. Academia, Prague.

Z. Urešová. 2009. Building the PDT-VALLEX valency
lexicon. In On-line proceedings of the fifth Corpus
Linguistics Conference. University of Liverpool.

273



Z. Žabokrtský, J. Ptáček, and P. Pajas. 2008. Tec-
toMT: highly modular MT system with tectogrammat-
ics used as transfer layer. In Proceedings of the Third
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, StatMT
’08, pages 167–170, Stroudsburg, PA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Z. Žabokrtský. 2005. Valency Lexicon of Czech Verbs.
Ph.D. thesis, Charles University in Prague.

Z. Žabokrtský. 2010. From Treebanking to Machine
Translation. Habilitation thesis, Charles University in
Prague.

Z. Žabokrtský and M. Popel. 2009. Hidden Markov
Tree Model in Dependency-based Machine Transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Con-
ference Short Papers, pages 145–148, Suntec, Singa-
pore.

274


