










































Modeling the Acquisition of Mental State Verbs


In: R. Levy & D. Reitter (Eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics (CMCL 2012), pages 1–10,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Modeling the Acquisition of Mental State Verbs

Libby Barak, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson
Department of Computer Science

University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada

{libbyb,afsaneh,suzanne}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

Children acquire mental state verbs (MSVs)
much later than other, lower-frequency, words.
One factor proposed to contribute to this de-
lay is that children must learn various seman-
tic and syntactic cues that draw attention to the
difficult-to-observe mental content of a scene.
We develop a novel computational approach
that enables us to explore the role of such cues,
and show that our model can replicate aspects
of the developmental trajectory of MSV acqui-
sition.

1 Introduction

Mental State Verbs (MSVs), such as think, know,
and want, are very frequent in child-directed lan-
guage, yet children use them productively much
later than lower-frequency action verbs, such as fall
and throw (Johnson and Wellman, 1980; Shatz et al.,
1983). Psycholinguistic theories have suggested that
there is a delay in the acquisition of MSVs because
they require certain cognitive and/or linguistic skills
that are not available during the early stages of lan-
guage development. For example, MSVs typically
occur with a sentential complement (SC) that refers
to the propositional content of the mental state, as in
He thinks Mom went home. Children have to reach a
stage of syntactic development that includes some
facility with SCs in order to fully acquire MSVs.
However, even at 3–5 years old, children are able to
process SCs only imperfectly (e.g., Asplin, 2002).

Even when children are able to produce SCs with
other verbs (such as verbs of communication, as in
He said Mom went home), there is a lag before they

productively use MSVs referring to actual mental
content (Diessel and Tomasello, 2001).1 Psycholin-
guists have suggested that young children lack the
conceptual ability to conceive that others have men-
tal states separate from their own (Bartsch and Well-
man, 1995; Gopnik and Meltzoff, 1997), further de-
laying the acquisition of MSVs.

Another factor suggested to contribute to the dif-
ficulty of acquiring MSVs is their informational re-
quirements (Gleitman et al., 2005; Papafragou et al.,
2007). Children learn word meanings by figuring
out which aspects of an observed scene are referred
to by a particular word (Quine, 1960). MSVs of-
ten refer to aspects of the world that are not directly
observable (i.e., the beliefs and desires of another
entity). Thus, in addition to the above-mentioned
challenges posed by children’s developing linguis-
tic/conceptual abilities, children may simply have
difficulty in identifying the relevant mental content
necessary to learning MSVs.

In particular, Papafragou et al. (2007) [PCG] have
shown that even given adequate conceptual and lin-
guistic abilities (as in adults) the mental events in a
scene (the actors’ internal states) are not attended
to as much as the actions, unless there are cues
that heighten the salience of the mental content.
PCG further demonstrate that children’s sensitivity
to such cues lags behind that of adults, suggesting an
additional factor in the acquisition of MSVs which

1Researchers have noted that children use MSVs in fixed
phrases, in a performative use or as a pragmatic marker, well be-
fore they use them to refer to actual mental content (e.g., Diessel
and Tomasello, 2001; Shatz et al., 1983). Here by “acquisition
of MSVs”, we are specifically referring to children learning us-
ages that genuinely refer to mental content.

1



is the developmental change in how strongly such
cues are associated with the relevant mental content.

We develop a computational model of MSV ac-
quisition (the first, to our knowledge) to further il-
luminate these issues. We extend an existing model
of verb argument structure acquisition (Alishahi and
Stevenson, 2008) to enable the representation and
processing of mental state semantics and syntax.
We simulate the developmental change proposed by
PCG through a gradually increasing ability in the
model to appropriately attend to the mental content
of a scene. In addition, we suggest that even when
the learner’s semantic representation is biased to-
wards the action content, the learner attends to the
observed SC syntax in an MSV utterance. This is
especially important to account for the pattern of er-
rors in child data. Our model thus extends the ac-
count of PCG to show that a probabilistic interplay
of the semantic and syntactic features of a partial and
somewhat erroneous perception of the input, com-
bined with a growing ability to attend to cues indica-
tive of mental content, can help to account for chil-
dren’s developmental trajectory in learning MSVs.

2 Background and Our Approach

To investigate the linguistic and contextual cues that
could help in learning MSVs, PCG use a procedure
called the Human Simulation Paradigm (originally
proposed by Gillette et al., 1999). In this paradigm,
subjects are put in situations intended to simulate
various word learning conditions of young children.
E.g., in one condition, adults watch silent videos of
caregivers interacting with children, and are asked
to predict the verb uttered by the caregiver. In an-
other condition, subjects hear a sentence containing
a nonce verb (e.g., gorp) after watching the video,
and are asked what gorp might mean.

We focus on two factors investigated by PCG in
the performance of adults and children in identifying
MSVs. The first factor they investigated involved
the syntactic frame used when subjects were given a
sentence with a nonce verb. PCG hypothesized that
an SC frame would be a cue to mental content (and
an MSV), since the SC refers to propositional con-
tent. The second factor PCG examined was whether
the video described a “true belief” or a “false be-
lief” scene: A true belief scene shows an ordinary

situation which unfolds as the character in the scene
expects — e.g., a little boy takes food to his grand-
mother, and she is there in the house as expected.
The corresponding false belief scene has an unex-
pected outcome for the character — in this case, an-
other character has replaced the grandmother in her
bed. Here the hypothesis was that such false belief
scenes would heighten the salience of mental activ-
ity in the scene and lead to greater belief verb re-
sponses in describing them.

PCG’s results showed that both adults and chil-
dren were sensitive to both the scene and syntax
cues, but children’s ability to draw on such cues was
inferior to that of adults. They thus propose that the
difference between children and adults is that chil-
dren have not yet formed as strong an association
as adults between the cues and the mental content
of a scene as required to match the performance of
adults. Nonetheless, their results suggest that the
participating children had the conceptual and lin-
guistic abilities required for MSVs, since they were
able to produce them under conditions with suffi-
ciently strong cues.

We simulate PCG’s experiments using a novel
computational approach. Following PCG, we as-
sume that even when a learner is able to perceive
the general semantic and syntactic properties of a
belief scene and associated utterance, they may not
attend to the mental content in every situation, and
that this ability improves over time. We model a de-
velopmental change in a learner’s attention to mental
content: At early stages, corresponding to the state
of young children, the learner largely focuses on the
action aspects of a belief scene, even in the presence
of an utterance using an MSV. Over time, the learner
gradually increases in the ability to attend appropri-
ately to the mental aspects of such a scene and ut-
terance, until adult-like competence is achieved in
associating the available cues with mental content.

Importantly, our work extends the proposal of
PCG by bringing in evidence from other relevant
studies on children’s ability to process SCs. More
specifically, we suggest that when children hear a
sentence like I think Mom went home, they recog-
nize (and record) the existence of an SC, while at
the same time they focus on the action semantics
as the main (most salient) event. In other words,
we assume that children’s imperfect syntactic abil-

2



ities are at least sufficient to recognize the SC us-
age (Nelson et al., 1989; Asplin, 2002). However,
their attention is mostly directed towards the action
expressed in the embedded complement, either be-
cause mental content is less easily observable than
action (Papafragou et al., 2007), or due to the lin-
guistic saliency of the embedded clause (Diessel and
Tomasello, 2001; Dehe and Wichmann, 2010). As
mentioned above, we model this misrepresentation
by considering the possibility of not attending to
mental content in a belief scene. Specifically, we
assume that (i) the model is very likely to overlook
the mental content at earlier stages (corresponding to
children’s observed behaviour); and (ii) as the model
‘ages’ (i.e., receives more input), its attentional abil-
ities improve and thus the model is more likely to
focus on the mental content as the main proposition.
Our results suggest that these changes to the model
lead to a match between our model’s behaviour and
PCG’s differential results for children and adults.

3 The Computational Model

A number of computational models have examined
the role of interacting syntactic and semantic cues
in the acquisition of verb argument structure (e.g.,
Niyogi, 2002; Buttery, 2006; Alishahi and Steven-
son, 2008; Perfors et al., 2010; Parisien and Steven-
son, 2011). However, to our knowledge no com-
putational model has addressed the developmental
trajectory in the acquisition of MSVs. Here we ex-
tend the verb argument structure acquisition model
of Alishahi and Stevenson (2008) to enable it to ac-
count for MSV acquisition. Specifically, we use
their core Bayesian learning algorithm, but modify
the input processing component to reflect a develop-
mental change in attention to the mental state con-
tent of an MSV usage and its consequent represen-
tation, as noted above.

We use this model for the following reasons: (i) it
focuses on argument structure learning, and the in-
terplay between syntax and semantics, which are key
to MSV acquisition; (ii) it is probabilistic and hence
can naturally capture gradient responses to different
cues; and (iii) it is incremental, which allows us to
investigate changes in behaviour over time. We first
give an overview of the original model, and then ex-
plain our extensions.

3.1 Model Overview

The input to the model is a sequence of utterances
(what the child hears), each paired with a scene
(what the child perceives); see Table 1 for an ex-
ample. First, the frame extraction component of
the model extracts from the input pair a frame—
a collection of features. We use features that in-
clude both semantic properties (‘event primitives’
and ‘event participants’) and syntactic properties
(‘syntactic pattern’ and ‘verb count’). See Table 2
for examples of two possible frames extracted from
the pair in Table 1. Second, the learning component
of the model incrementally clusters the extracted
frames one by one. These clusters correspond to
constructions that reflect probabilistic associations
of semantic and syntactic features across similar us-
ages, such as an agentive intransitive or causative
transitive. The model can use these associations to
simulate various language tasks as the prediction of
a missing feature given others. For example, to sim-
ulate the human simulation paradigm setting, we can
use the model to predict a missing verb on the basis
of the available semantic and syntactic information
(as in Alishahi and Pyykkon̈en, 2011).

3.2 Algorithm for Learning Constructions

The model clusters the input frames into construc-
tions on the basis of their overall similarity in the
values of their features. Importantly, the model
learns these constructions incrementally, consider-
ing the possibility of creating a new construction for
a given frame if the frame is not sufficiently similar
to any of the existing constructions. Formally, the
model finds the best construction (including a new
one) for a given frame F as in:

BestConstruction(F ) = argmax
k∈Constructions

P (k|F )

(1)
where k ranges over all existing constructions and a
new one. Using Bayes rule:

P (k|F ) = P (k)P (F |k)
P (F )

∝ P (k)P (F |k) (2)

The prior probability of each construction P (k) is
estimated as the proportion of observed frames that
are in k, assigning a higher prior to constructions

3



Think[state,consider,cogitate](I[experiencer,preceiver,considerer ],Go[physical,act,move](MOM[agent,actor,change],HOME[location,destination]))
I think Mom went home.

Table 1: A sample Scene–Utterance input pair.

(a) Interpretation#1 (mental event is attended to) (b) Interpretation#2 (mental event not attended to)
main predicate think main predicate go
other predicate go other predicate think
event primitives { state, consider , cogitate } event primitives { physical , act ,move}
event participants { experiencer , perceiver , considerer} event participants { agent , actor , change}

{ preposition, action, perceivable} { location, destination}
syntactic pattern arg1 verb arg-S syntactic pattern arg1 verb arg-S
verb count 2 verb count 2

Table 2: Two frames extracted from the scene–utterance pair in Table 1. The bottom left and right panels of the table
describe the two possible interpretations given the input pair. (a) Interpretation#1 assumes that the mental event is the
focus of attention. Here think is interpreted as the main predicate, which the event primitives and participants refer
to. (b) Interpretation#2 assumes that attention is mostly directed to the physical action in the scene, and thus go is
taken to be the main predicate, which also determines the extracted event primitives and participants. Note that for
both interpretations, the learner is assumed to perceive the utterance in full, thus both verbs are heard in the context
of the sentential complement syntax (i.e., syntactic pattern with SC and 2 verbs), without fully extracting the syntactic
relations between the clauses.

that are more entrenched (i.e., observed more fre-
quently). The likelihood P (F |k) is estimated based
on the values of features in F and the frames in k:

P (F |k) =
∏

i∈frameFeatures
Pi(j|k) (3)

where i refers to the ith feature of F and j refers
to its value. The conditional probability of a feature
i to have the value j in construction k, Pi(j|k), is
calculated with a smoothed version of:

Pi(j|k) =
counti(j, k)

nk
(4)

where counti(j, k) reflects the number of times fea-
ture i has the value j in construction k, and nk is the
number of frames in k. We have two types of fea-
tures: single-valued and set-valued. The result of the
counti operator for a single-valued feature is based
on exact match to the value j, while the result for a
set-valued feature is based on the degree of overlap
between the compared sets, as in the original model.

3.3 Modeling Developmental Changes in
Attending to Mental Content

We extend the model above to account for the in-
crease in the ability to attend to cues associated with
MSVs, as observed by PCG. In addition, we pro-
pose that children’s representation of this situation

includes the observed syntax of the MSV. That is,
children do not simply ignore the MSV usage, focus-
ing only on the action expressed in its complement
— they must also note that this action semantics oc-
curs in the context of an SC usage.

To adapt the model in these ways, we change
the frame extraction component to allow two pos-
sible interpretations for a mental event input. First,
to reflect PCG’s proposal, we incorporate a mecha-
nism into the model’s frame-extraction process that
takes into account the probability of attending to
mental content. Specifically, we assume that when
presented with an input pair containing an MSV,
as in Table 1, a learner attends to the perceptu-
ally salient action/state expressed in the comple-
ment (here Go) with probability p, and to the non-
perceptually salient mental event expressed in the
main verb (here Think) with probability 1− p. This
probability p is a function over time, correspond-
ing to the observed developmental progression. At
very early stages, p will be high (close to 1), sim-
ulating the much greater saliency of physical ac-
tions compared to mental events for younger chil-
dren. With subsequent input, p will decrease, giv-
ing more and more attention to the mental content
of a scene with a mental event, gradually approach-
ing adult-like abilities.

4



We adopt the following function for p:

p =
1

δ · t+ 1
, 0 < δ � 1 (5)

where t is the current time, expressed as the total
number of scene–utterance pairs observed thus far
by the model, and the parameter δ is set to a small
value to assign a high probability to the physical ac-
tion interpretation of the scene in the initial stages of
learning (when t is small).

We must specify the precise make-up of the
frames that correspond to the two possible inter-
pretations considered with probability p and 1 − p.
PCG state only that children and adults differen-
tially attend to the action vs. mental content of the
scene. We operationalize this by forming two pos-
sible frames in response to an MSV usage. We pro-
pose that one of the frames (with probability 1−p) is
the interpretation of the mental content usage, as in
Table 2(a). However, we extend the account of PCG
by proposing that the other frame considered is not
simply a standard representation of an action scene–
utterance pair. Rather, we suggest that the interpre-
tation of an MSV scene–utterance pair that focuses
on the action semantics does so within the context of
the SC syntax, given the assumed stage of linguistic
abilities of the learner. This leads to the frame (with
probability p) as in Table 2(b), which represents the
action semantics within a two-verb construction as-
sociated with the SC syntax.

4 Experimental Setup

4.1 Input Data
We generate artificial corpora for our simulations,
since we do not have access to sufficient data of ac-
tual utterances paired with scene representations. In
order to create naturalistic data that resembles what
children are exposed to, we follow the approach of
Alishahi and Stevenson (2008) to build an input-
generation lexicon that has the distributional prop-
erties of actual child-directed speech (CDS). Their
original lexicon contains only high-frequency phys-
ical action verbs that appear in limited syntactic pat-
terns. Our expanded lexicon also includes mental
state, perception, and communication verbs, all of
which can appear with SCs.

We extracted our verbs and their distributional
properties from the child-directed speech of 8

children in the CHILDES database (MacWhinney,
2000).2 We selected 28 verbs from different se-
mantic classes and different frequency ranges: 12
physical action verbs taken from the original model
(come, go, fall, eat, play, get, give, take, make, look,
put, sit), 6 perception and communication verbs
(see, hear, watch, say, tell, ask), 5 belief verbs (think,
know, guess, bet, believe), and 5 desire verbs (want,
wish, like, mind, need). For each verb, we manually
analyzed a random sample of 100 CDS usages (or
all usages if fewer than 100) to extract distributional
information about its argument structures.

We construct the input-generation lexicon by list-
ing each of the 28 verbs (i.e. the ‘main predicate’),
along with its overall frequency, as well as the fre-
quency with which it appears with each argument
structure. Each entry contains values of the syn-
tactic and semantic features (see Table 2 for ex-
amples), including ‘event primitives’, ‘event partic-
ipants’, ‘syntactic pattern’, and ‘verb count’. By
including these features, we assume that a learner
is capable of understanding basic syntactic proper-
ties of an utterance, including word syntactic cat-
egories (e.g., noun and verb), word order, and the
appearance of SCs (e.g., Nelson et al., 1989). We
also assume that a learner has the ability to perceive
and conceptualize the general semantic properties
of events — including mental, perceptual, commu-
nicative, and physical actions — as well as those
of the event participants. Values for the semantic
features (the event primitives and event participants)
are taken from Alishahi and Stevenson (2008) for
the action verbs, and from several sources including
VerbNet (Kipper et al., 2008) and Dowty (1991) for
the additional verbs.

For each simulation in our experiments (explained
below), we use the input-generation lexicon to
automatically generate an input corpus of scene–
utterance pairs that reflects the observed frequency
distribution in CDS.3 For an input utterance that
contains an MSV, we randomly pick one of the ac-
tion verbs as the verb appearing within the sentential
complement (the ‘other predicate’).

2Corpora of Brown (1973); Suppes (1974); Kuczaj (1977);
Bloom et al. (1974); Sachs (1983); Lieven et al. (2009).

3The model does not use the input-generation lexicon in
learning.

5



4.2 Setup of Simulations
We perform simulations by training the model on
a randomly generated input corpus, and examin-
ing changes in its performance over time with pe-
riodic tests. Specifically, we perform simulations of
the verb identification task in the human simulation
paradigm as follows: At each test point, we present
the model with a partial test frame with missing
predicate (verb) values, and different amounts of in-
formation for the other features. The tests corre-
spond to the scenarios in the original experiments of
PCG, where each scenario is represented by a partial
frame as follows:

1. scene-only scenario: Corresponds to subjects
watching a silent video depicting either an Ac-
tion or a Belief scene. Our test frame includes
values for the semantic features (event primi-
tives and event participants) corresponding to
the scene type, but no syntactic features.

2. syntax-only scenario: Corresponds to subjects
hearing either an SC or a non-SC utterance.
The test frame includes the corresponding syn-
tactic pattern and verb count of the utterance
type heard, but no semantic features.

3. syntax & scene scenario: Corresponds to sub-
jects watching a silent video (with Action or
Belief content), and hearing an associated (non-
SC or SC) utterance. The test frame includes all
the relevant syntactic and semantic features.

We perform 100 simulations, each on 15000
randomly-generated training frames, and examine
the type of verbs that the model predicts in response
to test frames for the three scenarios. For each
scenario and each simulation, we generate a test
frame by including the relevant feature values of a
randomly-selected physical action or belief verb us-
age from the input-generation lexicon.

PCG code the individual verb responses of their
human subjects into various verb classes. To analo-
gously code our model’s response to each test frame,
we estimate the likelihood of each of two verb
groups, Belief and Action,4 by summing over the

4The Action verbs include action, communication, and per-
ception verbs, as in PCG. Verbs from the desire group are not
considered here, also as in PCG.

Figure 1: Likelihood of Belief verb prediction given Ac-
tion or Belief input.

likelihood of all the verbs in that group. In the re-
sults below, these likelihood scores are averaged for
each test point over the 100 simulations.

When our model is presented with a test frame
containing a Belief scene, we assume that the model
(like a language learner) may not attend to the men-
tal content, resulting in one of the two interpreta-
tions described in Section 3.3 (see Table 2). We thus
calculate the verb class likelihoods using a weighted
average of the verbs predicted under the two inter-
pretations. Following PCG, we test our model with
two types of Belief scenes: True Belief and False
Belief, with the latter having a higher level of be-
lief saliency. We model the difference between these
two scene types as a difference in the probabilities
of perceiving the two interpretations, with a higher
probability for the belief interpretation given a False
Belief test frame. In the experiments presented here,
we set this probability to 80% for False Belief, and
to 60% (just above chance) for True Belief. (Un-
like in training, where we assume a change over time
in the probability of a belief interpretation, for each
presentation of the test frame we use the same prob-
abilities of the two interpretations.)

5 Experimental Results

We present two sets of results: In Section 5.1, we
examine the role of syntactic and semantic cues in
MSV identification, by comparing the likelihoods
of the model’s Belief verb predictions across the
three scenarios. Here we test the model after pro-
cessing 15000 input frames, simulating an adult-like
behaviour (as in PCG). At this stage, we present
the model with an Action test frame (Action scene
and/or Transitive syntax), or a Belief test frame

6



(False Belief scene and/or SC syntax). In Sec-
tion 5.2, we look into the role of semantic cues
that enhance belief saliency, by comparing the like-
lihoods of Belief vs. Action verb predictions in the
syntax & scene scenario. The test frames depict ei-
ther a True Belief or a False Belief scene, paired with
an SC utterance. Here, we test our model periodi-
cally to examine the developmental pattern of MSV
identification, comparing our results with the differ-
ence in the behaviour of children and adults in PCG.

5.1 Linguistic Cues for Belief Verb Prediction

The left side of Figure 1 presents the results of PCG
(for adult subjects); the right side shows the likeli-
hood of Belief verb prediction by our model. Simi-
lar to the results of PCG, our model’s likelihood of
Belief verb prediction is extremely low when given
an Action test frame (Action scene and/or Transi-
tive syntax), whereas it is much higher when the
model is presented with a Belief test frame (False
Belief scene and/or SC syntax). Moreover, as in
PCG, when the model is tested with Belief content,
the lowest likelihood is for the scene-only scenario
and the highest is for the syntax & scene scenario.

PCG found, somewhat surprisingly, that the
syntax-only scenario was more informative for MSV
prediction than the scene-only scenario. Our results
replicate this finding, which we believe is due to the
way our Bayesian clustering groups verb usages to-
gether. Non-SC usages of MSVs are often grouped
with action verbs that frequently appear with non-
SC syntax, and this results in constructions with
mixed (action and belief) semantics. When using
MSV semantic features to make the verb predic-
tion, the action verbs get a higher likelihood based
on such mixed constructions. However, the frequent
usage of MSVs with SC results in entrenched con-
structions of mostly MSVs. Although other verbs,
such as see and say, may also be used with SC syn-
tax, they are grouped with verbs such as watch and
tell into constructions with mixed (SC and non-SC)
syntax. When given SC syntax in verb prediction,
the more coherent MSV constructions result in a
high likelihood of predicting Belief verbs.

5.2 Belief Saliency in Verb Prediction

Figure 2(a) shows the PCG results, for children
and adults, and for True Belief and False Belief.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2: Verb class likelihood: (a) PCG results for
adults and children (aged 3;7–5;9); (b) Model’s results
given True Belief; (c) Model’s results given False Belief.

Figures 2(b) and (c) present the likelihoods of the
model’s Belief vs. Action verb prediction, over time,
for True and False Belief situations (True/False Be-
lief scene and SC syntax), respectively. We first
compare the responses of our model at the final stage
of training to those of adults in PCG. At this stage,
the model’s verb predictions (for both True and False
Belief) follow a similar trend to that of adult sub-
jects in PCG. The likelihood of Belief verbs is much
higher than the likelihood of Action verbs given a
False Belief situation. Moreover, the likelihood of
Belief verbs is higher given a False Belief situation,
compared to a True Belief situation.

Next, we compare the developmental pattern of
Belief/Action verb predictions in the model with the
difference in behaviour of children and adults in
PCG. We focus on the model’s responses after pro-

7



cessing about 3000 input pairs, as it corresponds to
the trends observed for the children in PCG. At this
stage, the likelihood of Belief verbs is lower than
that of Action verbs for the True Belief situation,
but the pattern is reversed for False Belief; a pattern
similar to children’s behaviour in PCG (see Figure
2(a)). As in PCG, the likelihood of Belief verb pre-
dictions in our model is higher than that of Action
verbs for the False Belief situation, in both “child”
and “adult” stages, with a larger difference as the
model ‘ages’ (i.e., processes more input). For the
True Belief situation also the pattern is similar to
that of PCG: Belief verbs are less likely than Action
verbs to be predicted at early stages, but as the model
receives more input, the likelihood of Belief verbs
becomes slightly higher than that of Action verbs.

PCG’s hypothesis of greater attention to the action
content of a scene implicitly implies that children
focus on the action semantics and syntax of the em-
bedded SC of a Belief verb. We have suggested in-
stead that the focus is on the action semantics within
the context of the SC syntax of the MSV. To directly
evaluate the necessity of our latter assumption, we
performed a simulation using both action syntax and
semantics to represent the physical interpretation of
the belief scene. Specifically, the syntactic features
in this representation were non-SC structure with
only one verb. Based on these settings, the model
predicted high likelihood for the Belief verbs from a
very early stage, not showing the same delayed ac-
quisition pattern exhibited by PCG’s results. This
result suggests that the SC syntax plays an impor-
tant role in MSV acquisition.

6 Discussion

Various studies have considered why mental state
verbs (MSVs) appear relatively late in children’s
productions (e.g., Shatz et al., 1983; Bartsch and
Wellman, 1995). The Human Simulation Paradigm
has revealed that adult participants tend to focus on
the physical action cues of a scene (Gleitman et al.,
2005). PCG’s results further show that cues empha-
sizing mental content lead to a significant increase
in MSV responses in such tasks. Moreover, they
show that a sentential complement (SC) structure is
a stronger cue to an MSV than the semantic cues
emphasizing mental content.

In this paper we adapt a computational Bayesian
model to analyze such semantic and syntactic cues
in the ability of children to identify them. We sim-
ulate an attentional mechanism of the growing sen-
sitivity to mental content in a scene into the model.
We show that both the ability to observe the obscure
mental content and the ability to recognize the use of
an SC structure are essential to replicate PCG’s ob-
servations. Moreover, our results predict the strong
association of MSVs to the SC syntax, for the first
time (to our knowledge) in a computational model.

Children often use verbs other than MSVs in ex-
perimental settings in which MSVs would be the ap-
propriate or correct verb choice (Asplin, 2002; Kidd
et al., 2006; Papafragou et al., 2007). Our model
presents similar variability in verb choice. One un-
derlying cause of this behaviour in the model is its
association of action semantics to SC syntax, due to
the tendency to observe the physical cues in a scene
associated with an utterance using an MSV with an
SC. Preliminary results (not reported here) imply
that the association of perception and communica-
tion verbs that frequently appear with SC contribute
to this pattern of verb choice (see de Villiers, 2005,
for theoretical support). Our results require further
work to fully understand this behaviour.

Finally, our model will facilitate future work in re-
gards to the performative usage of MSVs, in which
MSVs do not indicate mental content, but rather di-
rect the conversation. Several studies (e.g., Diessel
and Tomasello, 2001; Howard et al., 2008), have re-
ferred to the role performative use likely plays in
MSV acquisition, since the first MSV usages by
children are performative. The semantic properties
MSVs take in performative usages is not currently
represented in our lexicon. However, the physical
interpretation of the mental scene that we have used
in our experiments here is similar to the performa-
tive usage: i.e., the main perceived action and the
observed syntactic structure are the same. At the
moment, our results imply that the association of
MSVs with their genuine mental meaning is delayed
by interpretations of the mental scene which over-
look the mental content. In the future, we aim to in-
corporate the semantic representation of performa-
tive usages to better analyze their effect on MSV ac-
quisition.

8



References

Afra Alishahi and Pirita Pyykkon̈en. 2011. The on-
set of syntactic bootstrapping in word learning:
Evidence from a computational study. In Pro-
ceedings of the 33st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.

Afra Alishahi and Suzanne Stevenson. 2008. A com-
putational model of early argument structure ac-
quisition. Cognitive Science, 32(5):789–834.

Kristen N. Asplin. 2002. Can complement frames
help children learn the meaning of abstract
verbs? Ph.D. thesis, UMass Amherst.

Karen Bartsch and Henry M. Wellman. 1995. Chil-
dren talk about the mind.

Lois Bloom, Lois Hood, and Patsy Lightbown.
1974. Imitation in language development: If,
when, and why. Cognitive Psychology, 6(3):380–
420.

Roger Brown. 1973. A first language: The early
stages. Harvard U. Press.

Paula J. Buttery. 2006. Computational models
for first language acquisition. Technical Report
UCAM-CL-TR-675, University of Cambridge,
Computer Laboratory.

Jill G. de Villiers. 2005. Can language acquisition
give children a point of view. In Why Language
Matters for Theory of Mind, pages 199–232. Ox-
ford University Press.

Nicole Dehe and Anne Wichmann. 2010. Sentence-
initial I think (that) and i believe (that): Prosodic
evidence for use as main clause, comment clause
and dicourse marker. Stuides in Language,
34(1):36–74.

Holger Diessel and Michael Tomasello. 2001. The
acquisition of finite complement clauses in en-
glish: A corpus-based analysis. Cognitive Lin-
guistics, 12(2):97–142.

David Dowty. 1991. Thematic Proto-Roles and Ar-
gument Selection. Language, 67(3):547–619.

Jane Gillette, Lila Gleitman, Henry Gleitman, and
Anne Lederer. 1999. Human simulations of lexi-
cal acquisition. Cognition, 73(2):135–176.

Lila R. Gleitman, Kimberly Cassidy, Rebecca
Nappa, Anna Papafragou, and John C. Trueswell.

2005. Hard words. Language Learning and De-
velopment, 1(1):23–64.

Alison Gopnik and Andrew N. Meltzoff. 1997.
Words, thoughts, and theories.

Alice A. Howard, Lara Mayeux, and Letitia R.
Naigles. 2008. Conversational correlates of chil-
dren’s acquisition of mental verbs and a theory of
mind. First Language, 28(4):375.

Carl Nils Johnson and Henry M. Wellman. 1980.
Children’s developing understanding of mental
verbs: Remember, know, and guess. Child De-
velopment, 51(4):1095–1102.

Evan Kidd, Elena Lieven, and Michael Tomasello.
2006. Examining the role of lexical frequency in
the acquisition and processing of sentential com-
plements. Cognitive Development, 21(2):93–107.

Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and
Martha Palmer. 2008. A large-scale classification
of English verbs. Language Resources and Eval-
uation, 42(1):21–40–40.

A. Kuczaj, Stan. 1977. The acquisition of regular
and irregular past tense forms. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16(5):589–600.

Elena Lieven, Dorothé Salomo, and Michael
Tomasello. 2009. Two-year-old children’s pro-
duction of multiword utterances: A usage-based
analysis. Cognitive Linguistics, 20(3):481–507.

Brian MacWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES project:
Tools for analyzing talk, volume 2. Psychology
Press.

Deborah G. Kemler Nelson, Kathy Hirsh-Pasek, Pe-
ter W. Jusczyk, and Kimberly Wright Cassidy.
1989. How the prosodic cues in motherese might
assist language learning. Journal of child Lan-
guage, 16(1):55–68.

Sourabh Niyogi. 2002. Bayesian learning at the
syntax-semantics interface. In Proceedings of the
24th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society.

Anna Papafragou, Kimberly Cassidy, and Lila Gleit-
man. 2007. When we think about thinking:
The acquisition of belief verbs. Cognition,
105(1):125–165.

Christopher Parisien and Suzanne Stevenson. 2011.
Generalizing between form and meaning using

9



learned verb classes. In Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.

Amy Perfors, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Elizabeth
Wonnacott. 2010. Variability, negative evidence,
and the acquisition of verb argument construc-
tions. Journal of Child Language, 37(03):607–
642.

Willard .V.O. Quine. 1960. Word and object, vol-
ume 4. The MIT Press.

Jacqueline Sachs. 1983. Talking about the there and
then: The emergence of displaced reference in
parent-child discourse. Children’s Language, 4.

Marilyn Shatz, Henry M. Wellman, and Sharon Sil-
ber. 1983. The acquisition of mental verbs: A
systematic investigation of the first reference to
mental state. Cognition, 14(3):301–321.

Patrick Suppes. 1974. The semantics of children’s
language. American Psychologist, 29(2):103.

10


