



















































Integrating Location, Visibility, and Question-Answering in a Spoken Dialogue System for Pedestrian City Exploration


Proceedings of the 13th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL), pages 134–136,
Seoul, South Korea, 5-6 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Integrating Location, Visibility, and Question-Answering in a Spoken
Dialogue System for Pedestrian City Exploration

Srinivasan Janarthanam1, Oliver Lemon1, Xingkun Liu1, Phil Bartie2,
William Mackaness2, Tiphaine Dalmas3 and Jana Goetze4

1Interaction Lab, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh
2 School of GeoSciences, University of Edinburgh
3School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh

4KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
sc445,o.lemon,x.liu@hw.ac.uk, philbartie@gmail.com,

william.mackaness@ed.ac.uk,
tiphaine.dalmas@aethys.com, jagoetze@kth.se

Abstract

We demonstrate a spoken dialogue-based in-
formation system for pedestrians. The system
is novel in combining geographic information
system (GIS) modules such as a visibility en-
gine with a question-answering (QA) system,
integrated within a dialogue system architec-
ture. Users of the demonstration system can
use a web-based version (simulating pedes-
trian movement using StreetView) to engage
in a variety of interleaved conversations such
as navigating from A to B, using the QA func-
tionality to learn more about points of interest
(PoI) nearby, and searching for amenities and
tourist attractions. This system explores a va-
riety of research questions involving the inte-
gration of multiple information sources within
conversational interaction.

1 Motivation

Although navigation and local information are avail-
able to users through smartphone apps, there are still
important problems such as how such information is
delivered safely and proactively, and without cogni-
tively overloading the user. (Kray et al., 2003) sug-
gested that cognitive load of information presented
in textual and speech-based interfaces is medium
and low respectively when compared to more com-
plicated visual interfaces. Our objective, therefore,
is to build a hands-free and eyes-free system that en-
gages the pedestrian user by presenting all informa-
tion and receiving user requests through speech only.

In addition, and in contrast to other mobile ap-
plications, this system is conversational – meaning

that it accumulates information over time, and plans
its utterances to achieve long-term goals. It inte-
grates with a city model and a visibility engine (Bar-
tie and Mackaness, 2012) to identify points of inter-
ests and visibile landmarks for presentation, a pedes-
trian tracker to improve the GPS positioning of the
user and a question-answering (QA) system to en-
able users to explore information about the city more
freely than with a graphical interface.

Table 1 presents an example dialogue interaction
with the system showing the use of visibility infor-
mation and Question-Answering.

User: Take me to Princes Street.
System: Turn left on to South Bridge and
walk towards the tower in front of you.
...
System: Near you is the famous statue of David Hume.
User: Tell me more about David Hume.
System: David Hume is a Scottish philosopher....

Table 1: An example interaction with the system

2 Related work

There are several mobile apps such as Triposo, Trip-
wolf, and Guidepal that provide point of interest
information, and apps such as Google Navigation
that provide navigation instructions to users. How-
ever, they demand the user’s visual attention because
they predominantly present information on a mobile
screen. In contrast, ours is a speech only interface
in order to keep the user’s cognitive load low and
avoid users from being distracted (perhaps danger-

134



ously so) from their primary task.
Generating navigation instructions in the real

world for pedestrians is an interesting research
problem in both computational linguistics and geo-
informatics (Dale et al., 2003; Richter and Duck-
ham, 2008). CORAL is an NLG system that gener-
ates navigation instructions incrementally upon user
requests based on the user’s location (Dale et al.,
2003). DeepMap is a system that interacts with
the user to improve positioning using GUI controls
(Malaka and Zipf, 2000). SmartKom is a dialogue
system that presents navigation information multi-
modally (Reithinger et al., 2003). There are also
several mobile apps developed to help low-vision
users with navigation instructions (see (Stent et al.,
2010) for example). In contrast to these earlier sys-
tems we present navigational, point-of-interest and
amenity information in an integrated way with users
interacting eyes-free and hands-free through a head-
set connected to a smartphone.

3 Architecture

The architecture of the current system is shown in
figure 1. The server side consists of a dialogue in-
terface (parser, interaction manager, and generator),
a City Model, a Visibility Engine, a QA server and a
Pedestrian tracker. On the user’s side is a web-based
client that consists of the simulated real-world and
the interaction panel.

Figure 1: System Architecture

3.1 Dialogue interface
The dialogue interface consists of an utterance
parser, an interaction manager and an utterance gen-
erator. The interaction manager is the central com-
ponent of this architecture, which provides the user

navigational instructions and interesting PoI infor-
mation. It receives the user’s input in the form of a
dialogue act and the user’s location in the form of
latitude and longitude information. Based on these
inputs and the dialogue context, it responds with sys-
tem output dialogue act (DA), based on a dialogue
policy. The utterance generator is a natural language
generation module that translates the system DA into
surface text, using the Open CCG toolkit (White et
al., 2007).

3.2 Pedestrian tracker

Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) (e.g.
GPS, GLONASS) provide a useful positioning so-
lution with minimal user side setup costs, for loca-
tion aware applications. However urban environ-
ments can be challenging with limited sky views,
and hence limited line of sight to the satellites, in
deep urban corridors. There is therefore signifi-
cant uncertainty about the user’s true location re-
ported by GNSS sensors on smartphones (Zandber-
gen and Barbeau, 2011). This module improves on
the reported user position by combining smartphone
sensor data (e.g. accelerometer) with map matching
techniques, to determine the most likely location of
the pedestrian (Bartie and Mackaness, 2012).

3.3 City Model

The city model is a spatial database containing in-
formation about thousands of entities in the city of
Edinburgh. These data have been collected from a
variety of existing resources such as Ordnance Sur-
vey, OpenStreetMap and the Gazetteer for Scotland.
It includes the location, use class, name, street ad-
dress, and where relevant other properties such as
build date. The model also includes a pedestrian net-
work (streets, pavements, tracks, steps, open spaces)
which can be used to calculate minimal cost routes,
such as the shortest path.

3.4 Visibility Engine

This module identifies the entities that are in the
user’s vista space (Montello, 1993). To do this it
accesses a digital surface model, sourced from Li-
DAR, which is a 2.5D representation of the city in-
cluding buildings, vegetation, and land surface ele-
vation. The visibility engine uses this dataset to offer
a number of services, such as determining the line

135



of sight from the observer to nominated points (e.g.
which junctions are visible), and determining which
entities within the city model are visible. These met-
rics can be then used by the interaction manager
to generate effective navigation instructions. E.g.
“Walk towards the castle”, “Can you see the tower
in front of you?”, “Turn left after the large building
on your left after the junction” and so on.

3.5 Question-Answering server

The QA server currently answers a range of defini-
tion questions. E.g., “Tell me more about the Scot-
tish Parliament”, “Who was David Hume?”, etc. QA
identifies the entity focused on in the question us-
ing machine-learning techniques (Mikhailian et al.,
2009), and then proceeds to a textual search on texts
from the Gazetteer of Scotland and Wikipedia, and
definitions from WordNet glosses. Candidates are
reranked using a trained confidence score with the
top candidate used as the final answer. This answer
is provided as a flow of sentence chunks that the user
can interrupt. This information can also be pushed
by the system when a salient entity appears in the
user’s viewshed.

4 Web-based User interface

For the purposes of this (necessarily non-mobile)
demonstration, we present a web-based interface
that simulates users walking in a 3D city environ-
ment. Users will be able to provide speech or text
input (if the demonstration environment is too noisy
for usable speech recognition as is often the case at
conference demonstration sessions).

The web-based client is a JavaScript/HTML pro-
gram running on the user’s web browser. For a
detailed description of this component, please re-
fer to (Janarthanam et al., 2012). It consists of two
parts: the Streetview panel and the Interaction panel.
The Streetview panel presents a simulated real world
visually to the user. A Google Streetview client
(Google Maps API) is created with an initial user
coordinate which then allows the web user to get
a panoramic view of the streets around the user’s
virtual location. The user can walk around using
the arrow keys on his keyboard or the mouse. The
system’s utterances are synthesized using Cereproc
text-to-speech engine and presented to the user.

Acknowledgments

The research has received funding from the Eu-
ropean Community’s 7th Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no. 270019
(SPACEBOOK project http://www.spacebook-
project.eu/).

References
P. Bartie and W. Mackaness. 2012. D3.4 Pedestrian Po-

sition Tracker. Technical report, The SPACEBOOK
Project (FP7/2011-2014 grant agreement no. 270019).

R. Dale, S. Geldof, and J. Prost. 2003. CORAL : Using
Natural Language Generation for Navigational Assis-
tance. In Proceedings of ACSC2003, South Australia.

S. Janarthanam, O. Lemon, and X. Liu. 2012. A web-
based evaluation framework for spatial instruction-
giving systems. In Proc. of ACL 2012, South Korea.

C. Kray, K. Laakso, C. Elting, and V. Coors. 2003. Pre-
senting route instructions on mobile devices. In Pro-
ceedings of IUI 03, Florida.

R. Malaka and A. Zipf. 2000. Deep Map - challenging IT
research in the framework of a tourist information sys-
tem. In Information and Communication Technologies
in Tourism 2000, pages 15–27. Springer.

A. Mikhailian, T. Dalmas, and R. Pinchuk. 2009. Learn-
ing foci for question answering over topic maps. In
Proceedings of ACL 2009.

D. Montello. 1993. Scale and multiple psychologies of
space. In A. U. Frank and I. Campari, editors, Spatial
information theory: A theoretical basis for GIS.

N. Reithinger, J. Alexandersson, T. Becker, A. Blocher,
R. Engel, M. Lckelt, J. Mller, N. Pfleger, P. Poller,
M. Streit, and V. Tschernomas. 2003. SmartKom -
Adaptive and Flexible Multimodal Access to Multiple
Applications. In Proceedings of ICMI 2003, Vancou-
ver, B.C.

K. Richter and M. Duckham. 2008. Simplest instruc-
tions: Finding easy-to-describe routes for navigation.
In Proceedings of the 5th Intl. Conference on Geo-
graphic Information Science.

A. J. Stent, S. Azenkot, and B. Stern. 2010. Iwalk: a
lightweight navigation system for low-vision users. In
Proc. of the ASSETS 2010.

M. White, R. Rajkumar, and S. Martin. 2007. Towards
Broad Coverage Surface Realization with CCG. In
Proc. of the UCNLG+MT workshop.

P. A. Zandbergen and S. J. Barbeau. 2011. Positional
Accuracy of Assisted GPS Data from High-Sensitivity
GPS-enabled Mobile Phones. Journal of Navigation,
64(3):381–399.

136


