










































Developing ARET: An NLP-based Educational Tool Set for Arabic Reading Enhancement


The 7th Workshop on the Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 127–135,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Developing ARET: An NLP-based  Educational Tool Set for Arabic 
Reading Enhancement 

 

Mohamed Maamouri1, Wajdi Zaghouani1, Violetta Cavalli-Sforza2, 
Dave Graff1 and Mike Ciul1 

 
1 Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania, 3600 Market St., Suite 810,  

Philadelphia, PA 19104. 
           2 School of Science and Engineering, Al Akhawayn University, Ifrane 53000, Morocco. 

maamouri@ldc.upenn.edu, wajdiz@ldc.upenn.edu, 
v.cavallisforza@aui.ma, graff@ldc.upenn.edu, mciul@ldc.upenn.edu 

 
 
 

Abstract 

This paper describes a novel Arabic Reading 
Enhancement Tool (ARET) for classroom use, 
which has been built using corpus-based Natu-
ral Language Processing in combination with 
expert linguistic annotation. The NLP tech-
niques include a widely used morphological 
analyzer for Modern Standard Arabic to pro-
vide word-level grammatical details, and a rela-
tional database index of corpus texts to provide 
word concordances. ARET also makes use of a 
commercial Arabic text-to-speech (TTS) sys-
tem to add a speech layer (with male and fe-
male voices) to the Al-Kitaab language 
textbook resources. The system generates test 
questions and distractors, offering teachers and 
students an interesting computer-aided lan-
guage learning tool. We describe the back-
ground and the motivation behind the building 
of ARET, presenting the various components 
and the method used to build the tools. 

1 Introduction 

Reading is an essential skill for learners of Modern 
Standard Arabic (MSA). For most of learners it is 
the most important skill to master in order to en-
sure success in learning. With strengthened reading 
skills, learners of Arabic tend to make greater 
progress in other areas of language learning. Read-
ing should be an active, fluent process that in-

volves the reader and the reading material in build-
ing meaning. Often, however, it is not. The average 
learner’s second language reading ability is usually 
well below that of the first language. This can im-
pede academic progress in the second language. 
Arabic language teachers and learners face many 
challenges in the classroom. Teaching students 
how to utilize the skills and knowledge they bring 
from their first language, develop vocabulary 
skills, improve reading comprehension and rate, 
and monitor their own improvement are just some 
of the issues that teachers must consider in prepar-
ing for an Arabic language reading class. With 
these issues in mind, we set out to create a web-
based service that would provide efficient and 
pedagogically relevant access to instructional texts 
in Modern Standard Arabic, with the goal of creat-
ing a resource that would serve both instructors 
and students, by presenting novel modes of infor-
mation access. We received valuable support from 
Georgetown University Press, which gave permis-
sion for us to use the reading passages from the 3-
volume textbook publication Al-Kitaab (Al-Batal 
et al., 2001;2004 and 2006), which is the most 
popular publication in the USA for teaching Arab-
ic. 

2 Motivation 

Using technology in classrooms can make the les-
sons more efficient. There are many technology 

127



tools that can be used in English as a Second Lan-
guage (ESL) classes to improve foreign students’ 
English and technology skills. According to Wang 
(2005) there are many advantages integrating tech-
nology in classrooms especially for ESL students. 
To be able to improve their language skills, like 
writing, reading, listening and speaking, English 
language learners use pedagogical computer appli-
cations to check their work and improve their lan-
guage skills; they also use web browsers and e-
mail to search for information, join in online dis-
cussions, publish their work, read technology texts, 
communicate each other even worldwide. He also 
says that, “Technology integration in foreign lan-
guage teaching demonstrates the shift in educa-
tional paradigms from a behavioral to a 
constructivist learning approach” (p. 2). Gone are 
the days in which learning foreign language voca-
bulary and grammar rules relied largely on repeti-
tive drills; more and more, foreign language 
learners are asked to engage directly with authentic 
materials and take more initiative in their learning. 
However, finding appropriate, authentic reading 
materials is a challenge for language instructors. 
The Web is a vast resource of texts, but most pages 
are not suitable for reading practice, and commer-
cial search engines are not well suited to finding 
texts that satisfy pedagogical constraints such as 
reading level, length, text quality, and presence of 
target vocabulary. We present a system that uses 
various language technologies to facilitate the se-
lection , presentation and study of authentic read-
ing materials from the widely used textbook series 
Al-Kitaab (Al-Batal et al., 2001;2004 and 2006). In 
the next section we review some of the related 
work. In section 4 we discuss some of the specific 
challenges faced when learning the Arabic lan-
guage.  

3 Related work 

Many studies have shown that an on-line learning 
environment that supplements classroom instruc-
tion with additional study materials at an appropri-
ate level for the learner may enhance language 
learning and development (Ware, 2004; Chiu et al., 
2007; Yuan, 2003; Wang, 2005;). As a result, a 
number of recent projects have aimed to dynami-
cally provide a supply of accessible authentic texts 
to language learners by drawing from online re-
sources. WERTi (Meurers et al. 2010) is an intelli-

gent automatic workbook that uses texts from the 
Web to increase knowledge of English grammati-
cal forms and functions. READ-X (Miltsakaki and 
Troutt, 2007) is a tool for finding texts at specified 
reading levels. SourceFinder (Sheehan et al.,2007) 
is an authoring tool for finding suitable texts for 
standardized test items on verbal reasoning and 
reading comprehension. Project REAP (Reader-
Specific Lexical Practice) (Brown and Eskenazi, 
2004; Heilman et al., 2006) takes a different ap-
proach. Rather than teachers choosing texts, in 
REAP the system selects individualized practice 
readings from a digital library according to specific 
lexical constraints. Readings are chosen to contain 
vocabulary words that a given student needs to 
learn, while limiting the number of words the stu-
dent does not know. The choice of texts is there-
fore driven by a curriculum model, informed by a 
student model, and constrained by the availability 
of suitable texts, as described by their text model.  

While a user-adapted tool has the potential to 
better match individual needs, since each student 
can work with different texts, a drawback of this 
approach is that instructors may have difficulty 
coordinating group discussion about readings and 
integrating the tool into their curriculum. An ad-
vantage of a tool containing a search system, how-
ever, is that teachers can find texts that match the 
needs and interests of the class as a whole. While 
some degree of individualization is lost, the advan-
tages of better coordinated support from teachers 
and classroom integration are gained. In the early 
stages of this project, we had planned to use REAP 
software after adapting it to handle the complex 
morphology of MSA. Unfortunately, while the 
system was already being tested in the field, REAP 
project leaders did not consider the code base ma-
ture enough to be released to other research 
groups. As a result, we chose to develop our own 
database and access method to texts, foregoing 
adaptation to individual users. 

4 Challenges of Arabic reading 

It has never been an easy transition from ‘learning 
to read’ to ‘reading to learn’ for Arabs and other 
Arabic learners. In Meynet (1971) and according to 
father Anastase Al-Karmali, a member of the 
Arabic Language Academy in Cairo, Egypt. “The 
Arabs study the rules of the Arabic language in 
order to learn to read, whereas others read in order 

128



to learn …”. Indeed, reading in Arabic as a first or 
second language presents special challenges due to 
its script and its rich and complex morphology. 
Also, Arabic texts lack short vowels and other 
diacritics that distinguish words and grammatical 
functions. These linguistic complexities result in 
significant reading difficulties. Typically, Arabic 
as a second language learners face difficulties in 
word recognition, word disambiguation and the 
acquisition of decoding skills, including recogniz-
ing letter and word boundaries, decoding unvoca-
lized words and identifying these words. In order 
to understand Arabic text, the novice reader must 
learn to insert short vowels and other diacritics 
based on grammatical rules not yet learned. The 
ambiguity associated with a lack of diacritization is 
shown for instance in the lemma علم /Elm/ which 
has the following nine possible reading interpreta-
tions shown in Table 1. 

 ’Science, learning‘ ِعلم
 ’flag’ َعَلم
 (3rd P. Masc. Sing. Perf. V. (MSA V. I َعِلَم

‘he learned/knew’ 
 3rd P. Sing. Pass. V. (MSA V. I) ‘it/he ُعِلَم

was learned’  
 Intensifying, Caus. V. (MSA V. II) ‘he َعلََّم

taught 
 Causative V. Pass (MSA V. II) ‘he was َعلََّم

taught’ 
ِعلٌم/ِعلُم  (NOM Noun + Definite and Indefinite) 

 (ACCU Noun + Definite) ِعلَم
ِعلٍم/ِعلِم  (GEN Noun + Definite and Indefinite) 

Table 1.  Various interpretations for the lemma علم 
 

5 The Arabic reading enhancement tools 

To address these challenges, we developed an 
Arabic Reading Enhancement Tool (ARET) for 
classroom use with support from the U.S. Depart-
ment of Education’s International Research Study 
Program (IRS). The ARET tool is rather similar in 
intent to the foreign language learning tool, 
GLOSSER-RuG built by Nerbonne and Smit 
(1996) for Dutch, but targets explicitly the particu-
larities of MSA. ARET has two subparts tools : the 
Arabic Reading Facilitation Tool (ARFT) and the 
Arabic Reading Assessment Tool (ARAT). A ma-
jor achievement of this project was to create a col-
lection of fully annotated texts for learners of 

Arabic, using materials included in an authoritative 
textbook series that spans several competence le-
vels. In this section, we describe the creation, 
structure and content of the Arabic corpus/lexicon 
database, and then describe the ARFT and ARAT 
tools in more detail. 

5.1 The Al-Kitaab corpus database 

The ARET system uses the full text of Arabic 
reading passages from the Georgetown University 
Press Al-Kitaab textbook series, which represents a 
60,000 word corpus. Each passage was submitted 
to a combined automatic/manual annotation 
process in order to create a version of the text that 
was completely diacritized and thoroughly seg-
mented and labeled to identify all morphemes for 
each word, including their part-of-speech labels 
and English glosses. 

We first applied the Standard Arabic Morpho-
logical Analyzer (SAMA) (Maamouri et al., 2010), 
to enumerate all possible solutions for each word 
token in a given passage. The entire passage, with 
the full set of possible SAMA solutions for each 
word token, was then presented to a native Arabic 
speaker experienced in the morphological analysis 
of MSA, and their task was to select the particular 
SAMA solution for each word based on their un-
derstanding of the context; where necessary, the 
annotator would manually edit the details of POS 
tags or glosses to fill gaps in SAMA’s coverage of 
the vocabulary. This is a standard approach used in 
the annotation of numerous Arabic text corpora, 
including the Arabic Treebank Project (Maamouri 
and Bies 2004). As described in section 5.2, the 
resulting annotation was fully reviewed by expert 
Arabic linguists using our reading facilitation tool, 
to identify and repair errors. 

A relational database was created to store the 
corpus and annotations. Separate tables were used 
to enumerate (a) the reading passages (keeping 
track of the book volume, chapter and page num-
ber of each passage), (b) the sequence of sentences 
in each passage, (c) the word token sequence for 
each sentence, (d) the inventory of distinct word 
types (i.e. orthographic word forms with their con-
text-dependant analyses), and (e) the inventory of 
distinct “headwords” (lemmas) and affix mor-
phemes (clitics). 

Using this relational table structure, a full pas-
sage could be assembled for display by querying 

129



for the sequence of sentences and the word tokens 
for each sentence. The information returned by the 
query could include, for each word token, the orig-
inal and/or diacritized spelling, and an index for 
looking up the context-dependent morphological 
analysis plus gloss for the token. This in turn also 
provided access to a dictionary entry for the lemma 
from which the token was derived. Table 2 sum-
marizes the contents of the database.  The number 
of distinct lemmas refers to the number of citation 
forms for content words (nouns, verbs, etc) that are 
referenced by the all the inflected stems found in 
the reading texts; the number of glossary entries 
refers to the manually edited dictionary descrip-
tions for lemmas / citation forms, including their 
consonantal roots. In cases where a lemma does 
not have a corresponding glossary entry, the fully-
detailed morphological analysis provides an Eng-
lish gloss (but not the root) for each word token 
containing the lemma. 
 

Type No. of 
Entries 

Sentences, titles and sub-headings 
3,692 

Arabic word tokens 53,411 
Distinct undiacritized Arabic ortho-
graphic forms 

17,209 

Distinct diacritized orthographic forms 20,725 
Distinct morphology/POS/gloss anno-
tations on word forms 

22,304 

Distinct clitic and inflected-stem mor-
phemes 

16,774 

Distinct lemmas 6,829 
Glossary entries for lemmas 3,436 
 Table 2. Corpus quantities in ARET database 

5.2 The Arabic reading facilitation tool 

The Arabic Reading Facilitation Tool (ARFT) 
provides the user with direct access to the Al-
Kitaab text corpus, organized by volume, chapter 
and page number. In addition to presenting the full 
text for a given passage, the user can click on any 
word in the passage to bring up in a side-bar the 
full morphological analysis and gloss for the word 
in that context, along with a glossary entry for the 
associated lemma, and a summary of other Arabic 
citation forms that are related by root. Two other 
important functions are also provided: (a) toggling 
the presence vs. absence of all diacritic marks in 

the full display of the reading passage, and (b) the 
ability to view a concordance of all occurrences for 
any selected word. The tool also provides a "tool-
tip" pop-up window whenever the mouse cursor 
hovers over an Arabic word in the text passage; if 
the page is showing undiacritized text, the pop-up 
shows the diacritized form of the word, and vice-
versa. This is a very useful feature for the new 
learners of the Arabic language. 

As soon as the annotated version of the corpus 
was loaded into the database, there was a sustained 
effort involving native Arabic speakers and Arabic 
faculty to carefully review the database content, as 
displayed by the ARFT, and validate it against the 
original textbook content. This effort involved 
numerous repairs of all sorts that stemmed from all 
stages of corpus preparation: typing mistakes from 
the original keyboarding of the text, problems in 
morphological annotation, and difficulties in the 
loading of the tables. Customized tools and proce-
dures were developed to facilitate the updates that 
were needed to apply all the corrections directly to 
the database.  

A glossary for use in the ARFT was added to 
the database, with the relational linkage needed to 
support glossary lookups triggered by the user 
clicking on any word in a text passage. The word-
to-glossary relation is based on the "lemma_ID" of 
the stem in each word. The lemma_ID is a string 
identifier assigned by the Standard Arabic Mor-
phological Analyzer (SAMA), which was used for 
the morphological annotation of the entire corpus; 
all verbs in a given conjugation paradigm share the 
same lemma_ID, as do all nouns or adjectives in a 
given declensional (case) paradigm, so every dis-
tinct inflected form of a noun, adjective or verb is 
linked by the annotation to its corresponding glos-
sary entry. The glossary table (with indexing by 
Semitic root) was a special, additional annotation 
specifically for ARFT, so not all lemmas were 
covered in the glossary; when a term not in the 
glossary is clicked, the side-bar display area in the 
ARFT shows the message "Refer to Morphology 
Information"; the morphology information is the 
full set of annotation data for each word based on 
SAMA, and this always includes an English gloss 
for the stem (except in the case of proper nouns, 
which always have "Proper Noun" as their part-of-
speech label).  

The ARFT is intended for use with a modern 
web browser over a reasonably fast internet con-

130



nection. The tool has a flexible and intuitive web 
interface to navigate the texts via several key fea-
tures: 
 
1. Source Panel, featuring Al-Kitaab text 
2. Highlighted Sentence 
3. Highlighted Word 
4. Audio Player for highlighted sentence 
5. Audio Player for highlighted word 
6. Morphological Data Panel 
7. Lexical Data Panel 
8. Tabbed browsing for convenient access to 
multiple screens 
 
Figure 1. below illustrates an example of the tool 
using a passage of text from Al-Kitab Volume 2, 
Page 61. 
 

 
Figure 1. Arabic Reading Facilitation Tool featuring 
function labels 
 

5.3 The Text to speech module 

An Arabic Text-to-Speech technology module was 
licensed from RDI1. This technology has been used 
to add an audio feature to the ARFT, and can be 
used to render audio of arbitrary Arabic text. So 
the users will be able to listen to individual words 
or passages of text spoken by a high quality syn-
thesized voice. The RDI module, reads text files or 
literal text in Windows Arabic encoding and gene-
rates WAV audio data either as files or for direct 
output to an audio device. It has a C++ API that 
may be employed in Microsoft Visual Studio. The 

                                                           
1<http://www.rdi-eg.com/Technologies/speech.htm> 

voice rendering quality is excellent. Moreover, the 
module analyzes diacritized or undiacritized Arab-
ic text to determine pronunciation, rhythm and 
inflection of speech. Many variables of speech 
production can be controlled, most significantly 
the gender of the speaker. We developed a simple 
console-based executable that reads a list of Arabic 
text files and generates a WAV file of speech cor-
responding to each one, using a male voice, female 
voice, or one of each.  

5.4 The Arabic Reading Assessment Tool 
(ARAT) 

In order to support the creation of tests and quizzes 
for specific Arabic reading skills the Arabic Read-
ing Assessment Tool (ARAT) has been built 
around an existing open-source web application 
framework called Moodle (http://moodle.org). This 
framework was developed as a “Content Manage-
ment System”, and provides built-in support for 
many of the ‘infrastructure’ functions that ARAT 
would need, including: registration of faculty and 
student user accounts; creation of courses with 
schedule plans and content-based resources; crea-
tion, presentation and scoring of tests and quizzes; 
and overall record-keeping of resources, activities 
and test scores. Custom software modules were 
developed to augment the Moodle code base in 
order to provide functions that are specific to the 
ARAT: 
 - communicating with and importing data from the 
annotated Al-Kitaab passage database; 
 - defining specialized question types (the first 
three types described below) based on annotations 
in the database, such that answers to the questions 
can be scored automatically by reference to the 
corpus annotations.  
 

The three types of annotation-based questions 
were defined and implemented in the prototype 
ARAT: 
 - Cloze-Test Question: given a reading passage in 
Arabic, one or more words are chosen as test items 
and are replaced in the text by an underlined empty 
slot; the student is given a multiple-choice question 
to identify the correct Arabic word to fill each slot. 
 - English Gloss Question: given a reading passage, 
one or more words are chosen as test items and 
highlighted in the text; the student is given a mul-

131



tiple-choice question to identify the correct English 
gloss for each test word. 
 - Case-Ending Question: given reading passage, 
one or more nouns and/or adjectives are chosen as 
test items and highlighted in the text; the student is 
given a multiple-choice question of the six possible 
cases in Arabic to identify the correct case ending 
for each test word. Mood ending could also be 
considered for verbs. 
- Yes/No questions: these are fully  developed by 
teachers, who must enter questions and answers 
into the program in order to have Moodle give the 
student/teacher the appropriate final scores and 
correct answers feedback.  

The implementation allows an instructor to se-
lect what text passage to use for a given quiz, and 
also allows for either manual and automatic selec-
tion of words to use as test items from the text, as 
well as either manual or automatic selection of 
distractor items for the Cloze and Gloss tests. By 
providing automatic selection of test items and 
distractors based on available annotations in the 
corpus database, ARAT allows a student to prac-
tice each task any number of times on a given text 
passage, be challenged by novel questions on each 
attempt, and receive a tally of right and wrong 
answers, without the instructor having to create or 
score each attempt as shown in Figure 2. 
 

 
 
Figure 2. A sample question created with ARAT 
 

5.5 The test set creation procedure 

The procedure for creating a test set within ARAT 
breaks down to the following ‘top-level’ steps: 

 

1. Provide or select a text passage to be used as the 
source from which test questions are derived. 

 
2. For questions that will be based on specific word 
tokens in the text, identify the tokens that will be 
basis for test questions; these token-specific ques-
tions will always involve a particular task with a 
multiple-choice response, so for each selected to-
ken: select the task (word choice, gloss choice, 
case-ending), identify a correct answer and provide 
or select a set of three distractors. 

 
3. For questions not based on specific tokens, the 
instructor must supply the following: prompting 
text for the question, the type of response (y/n, t/f, 
type-in, multiple choice) and the correct answer 
(and three distractors for multiple choice). Figure 3 
shows the test set main screen. 
 

 
Figure 3. Test set main screen. 
 

6 Classroom usage and tool evaluation 

The ARFT was presented to Arabic faculty at the 
University of Pennsylvania; the tool was an-
nounced in Arabic courses and students were asked 
to use it. Several lists of student enrollments for 
many Arabic courses have been imported into the 
Moodle-based system.  

An informal evaluation was also performed, in 
the Summer of 2010, with Arabic instructors teach-
ing in the ARAbic and North African Studies 
(ARANAS) program at Al Akhawayn University, 
in Ifrane, Morocco. Unfortunately, due to the very 
rushed schedule and time pressure that instructors 
work under during this intensive program, the tools 
did not receive the desired attention. Only a hand-
ful of instructors actually explored the tools. Two 

132



instructors filled out an evaluation questionnaire 
concerning various aspects of the tools and their 
use of computer technology for language teaching 
in general. The feedback was generally positive 
and included some detailed suggestion for improv-
ing the tools; they also revealed some issues with 
inconsistent response time (partly due to the net-
work infrastructure of the university at that time) 
and ease of use (for non technology-savy instruc-
tors). The biggest obstacles to using the tools, 
however, appeared to be lack of time on the part of 
the instructors to acquire sufficient familiarity with 
the tools and devise effective ways of introducing 
them in the curriculum. We are investigating the 
possibility of using the tools with exchange stu-
dents during the regular academic year, even 
though the numbers in Arabic classes at all levels 
is much lower than in the Summer program. 

Recently, the use of the ARFT and its compa-
nion the ARAT has been mandated by the Arabic 
Section at the University of Pennsylvania and we 
hope that a more consistent use is going to be 
made. As of now, 118 students are registered 
representing four 1st Year classes (total: 63 stu-
dents), two 2nd Year classes (total:3 students), one 
3rd Year class ( total: 13 students) and One 4th 
Year class ( 11students).At this point, the tool im-
pact on the classroom has not been evaluated, but it 
is in our future plans to do a comprehensive class-
room evaluation of the tool. 

As part of the effort to introduce the ARFT and 
the ARAT to faculty, we obtained three short read-
ing passage texts, totaling 1022 Arabic word to-
kens, selected by a faculty member from news 
sources. These were submitted to annotation to 
disambiguate and diacritize the content based on 
SAMA analysis, just as was done for the Al-Kitaab 
passages. The annotated texts have been added into 
the database corpus and are available for use in the 
ARAT, but are not accessible for general browsing 
via the ARFT. The annotation and database import 
went quickly, demonstrating that these procedures 
have matured, and providing resources for building 
quizzes and tests based on materials that are ‘un-
seen’ by students who use both the ARFT and the 
ARAT. 

7 Conclusion 

We have described computational tools and lin-
guistic resources that enable students to enhance 

their Arabic reading skills by helping them with 
the difficulties they face in word recognition, word 
disambiguation and general decoding skills during 
the Arabic reading process. These computational 
tools and resources provide the needed correct and 
meaningful vocalizations by using natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) technologies namely a 
Standard Arabic Morphological Analyzer 
(SAMA), a concordance, a Text-to-Speech module 
and various interfaces. The time gained by students 
who use our Reading Enhancement Tools could be 
put to good use in the current ASL (Arabic as a 
Second Language) classroom which, following the 
ACTFL proficiency movement puts a primary 
emphasis on communication with less concern for 
accuracy as reflected in morphology or syntax, 
particularly at the initial stages of ASL learning. 
We reiterate at this point that our choice of the 
GUP Al-Kitaab textbook series was not fortuitous. 
We could have chosen any other pedagogical text 
but Al-Kitaab distinguishes itself by being widely 
used in the United States and abroad, and provid-
ing an extensive curriculum with a wide variety of 
texts. We are thankful that GUP gave us permis-
sion to use this resource, as it enabled us to create a 
tool that can accompany many English-speaking 
students studying MSA in many classrooms around 
the world.  

In addition to answering learners’ reading needs 
in MSA, our efforts went beyond the specificities 
of this language by allowing us to demonstrate that 
our tools and the methodology we followed was in 
fact ‘portable’ to other languages which had a 
morphologically complex nature such as, for in-
stance, the Nahuatl Learning Environment (NLE) 
project based on the ARET infrastructure 2. Future 
efforts will continue experimentation of the use of 
available and robust Arabic NLP technologies to 
extend the enhancement of Arabic reading to better 
understanding of authentic reading text that the 
reader could download from the Internet for in-
stance. Progress in that direction is desirable and 
possible because it would increase the motivation 
of Modern Standard Arabic learners and will boost 
access by students and other professionals to au-
thentic real world language text in new genres and 
topics. In this way, the contribution of NLP tech-
                                                           
2 The Nahuatl learning tool project prepared by Jonathan 
Amith (n.d) and a team of Nahuatl speakers can be accessed 
online through a Beta version of the Nahuatl Learning Envi-
ronment at the LDC : http://nahuatl.ldc.upenn.edu/. 

133



nologies to the teaching and learning of languages 
may become more significant and more compelling 
to all concerned, teachers, learners and computer 
NLP specialists alike.  

Acknowledgements 

We gratefully acknowledge the sponsorship of the 
U.S. Department of Education, whose International 
Research Study (IRS) Grant No. P017A050040-
07-05 supported our work on this project. The 
views, opinions and/or findings contained in this 
article are those of the authors and should not be 
interpreted as representing the official views or 
policies, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. 
Department of Education's International Research 
Study program.  We also acknowledge the help 
and support of Georgetown University Press who 
allowed us to use their Al-Kitaab series as a testing 
ground for our tools.  Thanks and appreciation go 
Professor Roger Allen and his team of Arabic 
teachers at the University of Pennsylvania for their 
warm reception of our tools in their teaching struc-
ture.  Thanks go finally, to all the programmers 
and annotators who worked on the project.  They 
are numerous and we cannot give them all the cre-
dit they deserve but without them our achievement 
would not have been so significant.  

References 
Mahmoud Al-Batal, Kristen Brustad & Abbas Al-Tonsi. 

2006. Al-Kitaab fii tacallum al-cArabiyya, Volume II 
(with DVDs, Second Edition).Washington, D.C.: 
Georgetown University Press, 2006.  

Mahmoud Al-Batal, Kristen Brustad & Abbas Al-Tonsi. 
2004. Al-Kitaab fii tacallum al-cArabiyya, A Text-
book for Beginning Arabic, Volume I (with DVDs, 
Second Edition). Washington, D.C.: Georgetown 
University Press, 2004. 

Mahmoud Al-Batal, Kristen Brustad & Abbas Al-Tonsi. 
2001. Al-Kitaab fii tacallum al-cArabiyya,Volume 
III.Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 
2001. 

Jonathan Amith.  n.d. Nahuatl Learning Environment. 
Available online at : http://nahuatl.ldc.upenn.edu/. 

Jon Brown and Maxine Eskenazi. 2004. Retrieval of 
authentic documents for reader-specific lexical prac-
tice. In Proceedings of  InSTIL/ICALL Symposium 
2004. Venice, Italy. 

Tsuo-Lin Chiu, Hsien-Chin Liou and Yuli Yeha. 2007. 
A study of web-based oral activities enhanced byau-
tomatic speech recognition for EFL college learning. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20 (3), 209– 
233. 

Michael Heilman, Kevyn Collins-Thompson, Jamie 
Callan, and Maxine Eskenazi. 2006. Classroom suc-
cess of an Intelligent Tutoring System for lexical 
practice and reading comprehension. In Proceedings 
of the Ninth International Conference on Spoken 
LanguageProcessing. Pittsburgh, PA. 

Mohamed Maamouri, David Graff, Basma Bouziri, 
Sondos Krouna, Ann Bies and Seth Kulick. 2010. 
Standard Arabic Morphological Analyzer (SAMA) 
Version 3.1. Linguistic Data Consortium, Catalog 
No.: LDC2010L01. 

Mohamed Maamouri and Ann Bies. 2004. Developing 
an Arabic Treebank: Methods, Guidelines, Proce-
dures, and Tools. In Proceedings of the Workshop 
Computational Approaches to Arabic Script-based 
Languages. Pages 2-9./20th International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics/. COLING Geneva, 
Switzerland. 

Detmar Meurers, Ramon Ziai, Luiz Amaral, Adriane 
Boyd, Aleksandar Dimitrov, Vanessa Metcalf, Niels 
Ott. 2010. Enhancing Authentic Web Pages for Lan-
guage Learners. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop 
on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational 
Applications, NAACL-HLT 2010, Los Angeles. 

Roland Meynet. 1971. L'écriture arabe en question: les 
projets de l'Académie de Langue Arabe du Caire de 
1938 à 1968.Beirut: Dar el-Machreq, 1971. 142 pp 

Eleni Miltsakaki and Audrey Troutt. 2007. Read-X: 
Automatic Evaluation of Reading Difficulty of Web 
Text. In Proceedings of  E-Learn 2007, sponsored by 
the Association for theAdvancement of Computing in 
Education. Quebec, Canada. 

John Nerbonne and Petra Smit. 1996. GLOSSER-RuG: 
in Support of Reading. In Proceedings of the 16th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING 1996). 

Kathleen M. Sheehan, Irene Kostin, Yoko Futagi. 2007. 
SourceFinder: A Construct-Driven Approach for Lo-
cating Appropriately Targeted Reading Comprehen-
sion Source Texts. In Proceedings of the SLaTE 
Workshop on Speech and Language Technology in 
Education.Carnegie Mellon University and Interna-
tional Speech Communication Association (ISCA). 

Li Wang. 2005. The advantages of using technology in 
second language education. T.H.E. Journal, 32 (10), 
1-6. 

134



Paige D. Ware. 2004. Confidence and competition on-
line: ESL student perspectives on web based discus-
sions in the classroom. Computers and Composition, 
21, 451–468. 

Yi Yuan. 2003. The use of chat rooms in an ESL set-
ting. Computers and Composition, 20, 194–206. 

135


