










































Measuring Comparability of Documents in Non-Parallel Corpora for Efficient Extraction of (Semi-)Parallel Translation Equivalents


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 10–19,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Measuring Comparability of Documents in Non-Parallel Corpora for
Efficient Extraction of (Semi-)Parallel Translation Equivalents

Fangzhong Su
Centre for Translation Studies

University Of Leeds
LS2 9JT, Leeds, UK

smlfs@leeds.ac.uk

Bogdan Babych
Centre for Translation Studies

University Of Leeds
LS2 9JT, Leeds, UK

b.babych@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract

In this paper we present and evaluate three
approaches to measure comparability of
documents in non-parallel corpora. We de-
velop a task-oriented definition of compa-
rability, based on the performance of auto-
matic extraction of translation equivalents
from the documents aligned by the pro-
posed metrics, which formalises intuitive
definitions of comparability for machine
translation research. We demonstrate ap-
plication of our metrics for the task of
automatic extraction of parallel and semi-
parallel translation equivalents and discuss
how these resources can be used in the
frameworks of statistical and rule-based
machine translation.

1 Introduction

Parallel corpora have been extensively exploited
in different ways in machine translation (MT)
— both in Statistical (SMT) and more recently,
in Rule-Based (RBMT) architectures: in SMT
aligned parallel resources are used for building
translation phrase tables and calculating transla-
tion probabilities; and in RBMT, they are used
for automatically building bilingual dictionaries
of translation equivalents and automatically deriv-
ing bilingual mappings for frequent structural pat-
terns. However, large parallel resources are not
always available, especially for under-resourced
languages or narrow domains. Therefore, in re-
cent years, the use of cross-lingual comparable
corpora has attracted considerable attention in
the MT community (Sharoff et al., 2006; Fung
and Cheung, 2004a; Munteanu and Marcu, 2005;
Babych et al., 2008).

Most of the applications of comparable cor-
pora focus on discovering translation equivalents
to support machine translation, such as bilingual
lexicon extraction (Rapp, 1995; Rapp, 1999;
Morin et al., 2007; Yu and Tsujii, 2009; Li and
Gaussier, 2010; Prachasson and Fung, 2011), par-
allel phrase extraction (Munteanu and Marcu,
2006), and parallel sentence extraction (Fung and
Cheung, 2004b; Munteanu and Marcu, 2005;
Munteanu et al., 2004; Smith et al., 2010).

Comparability between documents is often un-
derstood as belonging to the same subject domain,
genre or text type, so this definition relies on these
vague linguistic concepts. The problem with this
definition then is that it cannot be exactly bench-
marked, since it becomes hard to relate automated
measures of comparability to such inexact and un-
measurable linguistic concepts. Research on com-
parable corpora needs not only good measures for
comparability, but also a clearer, technologically-
grounded and quantifiable definition of compara-
bility in the first place.

In this paper we relate comparability to use-
fulness of comparable texts for MT. In particu-
lar, we propose a performance-based definition of
comparability, as the possibility to extract parallel
or quasi-parallel translation equivalents – words,
phrases and sentences which are translations of
each other. This definition directly relates compa-
rability to texts’ potential to improve the quality
of MT by adding extracted phrases to phrase ta-
bles, training corpus or dictionaries. It also can be
quantified as the rate of successful extraction of
translation equivalents by automated tools, such
as proposed in Munteanu and Marcu (2006).

Still, successful detection of translation equiv-
alents from comparable corpora very much de-

10



pends on the quality of these corpora, specifically
on the degree of their textual equivalence and suc-
cessful alignment on various text units. There-
fore, the goal of this work is to provide compa-
rability metrics which can reliably identify cross-
lingual comparable documents from raw corpora
crawled from the Web, and characterize the de-
gree of their similarity, which enriches compara-
ble corpora with the document alignment infor-
mation, filters out documents that are not useful
and eventually leads to extraction of good-quality
translation equivalents from the corpora.

To achieve this goal, we need to define a
scale to assess comparability qualitatively, met-
rics to measure comparability quantitatively, and
the sources to get comparable corpora from. In
this work, we directly characterize comparability
by how useful comparable corpora are for the task
of detecting translation equivalents in them, and
ultimately to machine translation. We focus on
document-level comparability, and use three cat-
egories for qualitative definition of comparability
levels, defined in terms of granularity for possible
alignment:

• Parallel: Traditional parallel texts that are
translations of each other or approximate
translations with minor variations, which can
be aligned on the sentence level.

• Strongly-comparable: Texts that talk about
the same event or subject, but in different
languages. For example, international news
about oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, or
linked articles in Wikipedia about the same
topic. These documents can be aligned on
the document level on the basis of their ori-
gin.

• Weakly-comparable: Texts in the same sub-
ject domain which describe different events.
For example, customer reviews about hotel
and restaurant in London. These documents
do not have an independent alignment across
languages, but sets of texts can be aligned
on the basis of belonging to the same subject
domain or sub-domain.

In this paper, we present three different ap-
proaches to measure the comparability of cross-
lingual (especially under-resourced languages)
comparable documents: a lexical mapping based

approach, a keyword based approach, and a ma-
chine translation based approach. The experimen-
tal results show that all of them can effectively
predict the comparability levels of the compared
document pairs. We then further investigate the
applicability of the proposed metrics by measur-
ing their impact on the task of parallel phrase ex-
traction from comparable corpora. It turns out
that, higher comparability level predicted by the
metrics consistently lead to more number of paral-
lel phrase extracted from comparable documents.
Thus, the metrics can help select more compara-
ble document pairs to improve the performance of
parallel phrase extraction.

The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 discusses previous work. Section
3 introduces our comparability metrics. Section
4 presents the experimental results and evaluation.
Section 5 describes the application of the metrics.
Section 6 discusses the pros and cons of the pro-
posed metrics, followed by conclusions and future
work in Section 7.

2 Related Work

The term “comparability”, which is the key con-
cept in this work, applies to the level of corpora,
documents and sub-document units. However, so
far there is no widely accepted definition of com-
parability. For example, there is no agreement on
the degree of similarity that documents in com-
parable corpora should have or on the criteria for
measuring comparability. Also, most of the work
that performs translation equivalent extraction in
comparable corpora usually assumes that the cor-
pora they use are reliably comparable and focuses
on the design of efficient extraction algorithms.
Therefore, there has been very little literature dis-
cussing the characteristics of comparable corpora
(Maia, 2003). In this section, we introduce some
representative work which tackles comparability
metrics.

Some studies (Sharoff, 2007; Maia, 2003;
McEnery and Xiao, 2007) analyse comparability
by assessing corpus composition, such as struc-
tural criteria (e.g., format and size), and linguistic
criteria (e.g., topic, domain, and genre). Kilgarriff
and Rose (1998) measure similarity and homo-
geneity between monolingual corpora. They gen-
erate word frequency list from each corpus and
then apply χ2 statistic on the most frequent n (e.g.,
500) words of the compared corpora.

11



The work which deals with comparability
measures in cross-lingual comparable corpora is
closer to our work. Saralegi et al. (2008) measure
the degree of comparability of comparable cor-
pora (English and Basque) according to the dis-
tribution of topics and publication dates of docu-
ments. They compute content similarity for all the
document pairs between two corpora. These sim-
ilarity scores are then input as parameters for the
EMD (Earth Mover’s Distance) distance measure,
which is employed to calculate the global com-
patibility of the corpora. Munteanu and Marcu
(2005; 2006) select more comparable document
pairs in a cross-lingual information retrieval based
manner by using a toolkit called Lemur1. The
retrieved document pairs then serve as input for
the tasks of parallel sentence and sub-sentence ex-
traction. Smith et al. (2010) treat Wikipedia as
a comparable corpus and use “interwiki” links to
identify aligned comparable document pairs for
the task of parallel sentence extraction. Li and
Gaussier (2010) propose a comparability met-
ric which can be applied at both document level
and corpus level and use it as a measure to se-
lect more comparable texts from other external
sources into the original corpora for bilingual lex-
icon extraction. The metric measures the propor-
tion of words in the source language corpus trans-
lated in the target language corpus by looking up
a bilingual dictionary. They evaluate the met-
ric on the rich-resourced English-French language
pair, thus good dictionary resources are available.
However, this is not the case for under-resourced
languages in which reliable language resources
such as machine-readable bilingual dictionaries
with broad word coverage or word lemmatizers
might be not publicly available.

3 Comparability Metrics

To measure the comparability degree of document
pairs in different languages, we need to translate
the texts or map lexical items from the source lan-
guage into the target languages so that we can
compare them within the same language. Usually
this can be done by using bilingual dictionaries
(Rapp, 1999; Li and Gaussier, 2010; Prachasson
and Fung, 2011) or existing machine translation
tools. Based on this process, in this section we
present three different approaches to measure the

1Available at http://www.lemurproject.org/

comparability of comparable documents.

3.1 Lexical mapping based metric

It is straightforward that we expect a bilingual dic-
tionary can be used for lexical mapping between a
language pair. However, unlike the language pairs
in which both languages are rich-resourced (e.g.,
English-French, or English-Spanish) and dictio-
nary resources are relatively easy to obtain, it is
likely that bilingual dictionaries with good word
coverage are not publicly available for under-
resourced languages (e.g., English-Slovenian, or
English-Lithuanian). In order to address this
problem, we automatically construct dictionaries
by using word alignment on large-scale parallel
corpora (e.g., Europarl and JRC-Acquis2).

Specifically, GIZA++ toolkit (Och and Ney,
2000) with default setting is used for word align-
ment on the JRC-Acquis parallel corpora (Stein-
berger et al., 2006). The aligned word pairs to-
gether with the alignment probabilities are then
converted into dictionary entries. For example,
in Estonian-English language pair, the alignment
example “kompanii company 0.625” in the word
alignment table means the Estonian word “kom-
panii” can be translated as (or aligned with) the
English candidate word “company” with a prob-
ability of 0.625. In the dictionary, the transla-
tion candidates are ranked by translation proba-
bility in descending order. Note that the dictio-
nary collects inflectional form of words, but not
only base form of words. This is because the dic-
tionary is directly generated from the word align-
ment results and no further word lemmatization is
applied.

Using the resulting dictionary, we then per-
form lexical mapping in a word-for-word map-
ping strategy. We scan each word in the source
language texts to check if it occurs in the dic-
tionary entries. If so, the first translation candi-
date are recorded as the corresponding mapping
word. If there are more than one translation can-
didate, the second candidate will also be kept as
the mapping result if its translation probability is
higher than 0.33. For non-English and English

2The JRC-Acquis covers 22 European languages and
provides large-scale parallel corpora for all the 231 language
pairs.

3From the manual inspection on the word alignment re-
sults, we find that if the alignment probability is higher than
0.3, it is more reliable.

12



language pair, the non-English texts are mapped
into English. If both languages are non-English
(e.g., Greek-Romanian), we use English as a pivot
langauge and map both the source and target
language texts into English4. Due to the lack
of reliable linguistic resources in non-English
languages, mapping texts from non-English lan-
guage into English can avoid language process-
ing in non-English texts and allows us to make
use of the rich resources in English for further
text processing, such as stop-word filtering and
word lemmatization5. Finally, cosine similarity
measure is applied to compute the comparability
strength of the compared document pairs.

3.2 Keyword based metric

The lexical mapping based metric takes all the
words in the text into account for comparability
measure, but if we only retain a small number of
representative words (keywords) and discard all
the other less informative words in each docu-
ment, can we judge the comparability of a doc-
ument pair by comparing these words? Our in-
tuition is that, if two document share more key-
words, they should be more comparable. To
validate this, we then perform keyword extrac-
tion by using a simple TFIDF based approach,
which has been shown effective for keyword or
keyphrase extraction from the texts (Frank et al.,
1999; Hulth, 2003; Liu et al., 2009).

More specifically, the keyword based metric
can be described as below. First, similar to the
lexical mapping based metric, bilingual dictionar-
ies are used to map non-English texts into En-
glish. Thus, only the English resources are ap-
plied for stop-word filtering and word lemmatiza-
tion, which are useful text preprocessing steps for
keyword extraction. We then use TFIDF to mea-
sure the weight of words in the document and rank
the words by their TFIDF weights in descending
order. The top n (e.g., 30) words are extracted
as keywords to represent the document. Finally,
the comparability of each document pair is deter-
mined by applying cosine similarity to their key-

4Generally in JRC-Acquis, the size of parallel corpora
for most of non-English langauge pairs is much smaller than
that of language pairs which contain English. Therefore, the
resulting bilingual dictionaries which contain English have
better word coverage as they have many more dictionary en-
tries.

5We use WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) for word lemmatiza-
tion.

word lists.

3.3 Machine translation based metrics

Bilingual dictionary is used for word-for-word
translation in the lexical mapping based metric
and words which do not occur in the dictionary
will be omitted. Thus, the mapping result is like
a list of isolated words and information such as
word order, syntactic structure and named entities
can not be preserved. Therefore, in order to im-
prove the text translation quality, we turn to the
state-of-the-art SMT systems.

In practice, we use Microsoft translation API6

to translate texts in under-resourced languages
(e.g, Lithuanian and Slovenian) into English and
then explore several features for comparability
metric design, which are listed as below.

• Lexical feature: Lemmatized bag-of-word
representation of each document after stop-
word filtering. Lexical similarity (denoted
by WL) of each document pair is then ob-
tained by applying cosine measure to the lex-
ical feature.

• Structure feature: We approximate it by
the number of content words (adjectives, ad-
verbs, nouns, verbs and proper nouns) and
the number of sentences in each document,
denoted by CD and SD respectively. The in-
tuition is that, if two documents are highly
comparable, their number of content words
and their document length should be similar.
The structure similarity (denoted by WS) of
two documents D1 and D2 is defined as bel-
low.

WS = 0.5 ∗ (CD1/CD2) + 0.5 ∗ (SD1/SD2)

suppose that CD1<=CD2, and SD1<=SD2.

• Keyword feature: Top-20 words (ranked by
TFIDF weight) of each document. keyword
similarity (denoted by WK) of two docu-
ments is also measured by cosine.

• Named entity feature: Named entities of
each document. If more named entities co-
occur in two documents, they are very likely
to talk about the same event or subject and

6Available at http://code.google.com/p/microsoft-
translator-java-api/

13



thus should be more comparable. We use
Stanford named entity recognizer7 to extract
named entities from the texts (Finkel et al.,
2005). Again, cosine is then applied to mea-
sure the similarity of named entities (denoted
by WN ) between a document pair.

We then combine these four different types of
score in an ensemble manner. Specifically, a
weighted average strategy is applied: each indi-
vidual score is associated with a constant weight,
indicating the relative confidence (importance) of
the corresponding type of score. The overall com-
parability score (denoted by SC) of a document
pair is thus computed as below:

SC = α ∗ WL + β ∗ WS + γ ∗ WK + δ ∗ WN
where α, β, γ, and δ ∈ [0, 1], and α+β+γ+δ =
1. SC should be a value between 0 and 1, and
larger SC value indicates higher comparability
level.

4 Experiment and Evaluation

4.1 Data source

To investigate the reliability of the proposed
comparability metrics, we perform experiments
for 6 language pairs which contain under-
resoured languages: German-English (DE-EN),
Estonian-English (ET-EN), Lithuanian-English
(LT-EN), Latvian-English (LV-EN), Slovenian-
English (SL-EN) and Greek-Romanian (EL-RO).
A comparable corpus is collected for each lan-
guage pair. Based on the definition of compa-
rability levels (see Section 1), human annota-
tors fluent in both languages then manually anno-
tated the comparability degree (parallel, strongly-
comparable, and weakly-comparable) at the doc-
ument level. Hence, these bilingual comparable
corpora are used as gold standard for experiments.
The data distribution for each language pair, i.e.,
number of document pairs in each comparability
level, is given in Table 1.

4.2 Experimental results

We adopt a simple method for evaluation. For
each language pair, we compute the average
scores for all the document pairs in the same com-
parability level, and compare them to the gold

7Available at http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/CRF-
NER.shtml

Language
pair

#document
pair

parallel strongly-
comparable

weakly-
comparable

DE-EN 1286 531 715 40
ET-EN 1648 182 987 479
LT-EN 1177 347 509 321
LV-EN 1252 184 558 510
SL-EN 1795 532 302 961
EL-RO 485 38 365 82

Table 1: Data distribution of gold standard corpora

standard comparability labels. In addition, in or-
der to better reveal the relation between the scores
obtained from the proposed metrics and compara-
bility levels, we also measure the Pearson correla-
tion between them8. For the keyword based met-
ric, top 30 keywords are extracted from each text
for experiment. For the machine translation based
metric, we empirically set α = 0.5, β = γ = 0.2,
and δ = 0.1. This is based on the assumption
that, lexical feature can best characterize the com-
parability given the good translation quality pro-
vided by the powerful MT system, while keyword
and named entity features are also better indica-
tors of comparability than the simple document
length information.

The results for the lexical mapping based met-
ric, the keyword based metric and the machine
translation based metric are listed in Table 2, 3,
and 4, respectively.

Language
pair

parallel strongly-
comparable

weakly-
comparable

correlation

DE-EN 0.545 0.476 0.182 0.941
ET-EN 0.553 0.381 0.228 0.999
LT-EN 0.545 0.461 0.225 0.964
LV-EN 0.625 0.494 0.179 0.973
SL-EN 0.535 0.456 0.314 0.987
EL-RO 0.342 0.131 0.090 0.932

Table 2: Average comparability scores for lexical map-
ping based metric

Overall, from the average scores for each
comparability level presented in Table 2, 3,
and 4, we can see that, the scores obtained
from the three comparability metrics can reli-

8For correlation measure, we use numerical calibration
to different comparability degrees: “Parallel”, “strongly-
comparable” and “weakly-comparable” are converted as 3,
2, and 1, respectively. The correlation is then computed
between the numerical comparability levels and the cor-
responding average comparability scores automatically de-
rived from the metrics.

14



Language
pair

parallel strongly-
comparable

weakly-
comparable

correlation

DE-EN 0.526 0.486 0.084 0.941
ET-EN 0.502 0.345 0.184 0.990
LT-EN 0.485 0.420 0.202 0.954
LV-EN 0.590 0.448 0.124 0.975
SL-EN 0.551 0.505 0.292 0.937
EL-RO 0.210 0.110 0.031 0.997

Table 3: Average comparability scores for keyword
based metric

Language
pair

parallel strongly-
comparable

weakly-
comparable

correlation

DE-EN 0.912 0.622 0.326 0.999
ET-EN 0.765 0.547 0.310 0.999
LT-EN 0.755 0.613 0.308 0.984
LV-EN 0.770 0.627 0.236 0.966
SL-EN 0.779 0.582 0.373 0.988
EL-RO 0.863 0.446 0.214 0.988

Table 4: Average comparability scores for machine
translation based metric

ably reflect the comparability levels across dif-
ferent language pairs, as the average scores
for higher comparable levels are always sig-
nificantly larger than those of lower compara-
ble levels, namely SC(parallel)>SC(strongly-
comparable)>SC(weakly-comparable). In addi-
tion, in all the three metrics, the Pearson correla-
tion scores are very high (over 0.93) across dif-
ferent language pairs, which indicate that there
is strong correlation between the comparability
scores obtained from the metrics and the corre-
sponding comparability level.

Moreover, from the comparison of Table 2, 3,
and 4, we also have several other findings. Firstly,
the performance of keyword based metric (see
Table 3) is comparable to the lexical mapping
based metric (see Table 2) as their comparability
scores for the corresponding comparability levels
are similar. This means it is reasonable to deter-
mine the comparability level by only comparing a
small number of keywords of the texts. Secondly,
the scores obtained from the machine translation
based metric (see Table 4) are significantly higher
than those in both the lexical mapping based met-
ric and the keyword based metric. Clearly, this
is due to the advantages of using the state-of-the-
art MT system. In comparison to the approach
of using dictionary for word-for-word mapping,
it can provide much better text translation which
allows detecting more proportion of lexical over-

lapping and mining more useful features in the
translated texts. Thirdly, in the lexical mapping
based metric and keyword based metric, we can
also see that, although the average scores for EL-
RO (both under-resourced languages) conform to
the comparability levels, they are much lower than
those of the other 5 language pairs. The reason
is that, the size of the parallel corpora in JRC-
Acquis for these 5 language pairs are significantly
larger (over 1 million parallel sentences) than that
of EL-EN, RO-EN9, and EL-RO, thus the result-
ing dictionaries of these 5 language pairs also con-
tain many more dictionary entries.

5 Application

The experiments in Section 4 confirm the reli-
ability of the proposed metrics. The compara-
bility metrics are thus useful for collecting high-
quality comparable corpora, as they can help filter
out weakly comparable or non-comparable doc-
ument pairs from the raw crawled corpora. But
are they also useful for other NLP tasks, such as
translation equivalent detection from comparable
corpora? In this section, we further measure the
impact of the metrics on parallel phrase extraction
(PPE) from comparable corpora. Our intuition is
that, if document pairs are assigned higher com-
parability scores by the metrics, they should be
more comparable and thus more parallel phrases
can be extracted from them.

The algorithm of parallel phrase extraction,
which develops the approached presented in
Munteanu and Marcu (2006), uses lexical over-
lap and structural matching measures (Ion, 2012).
Taking a list of bilingual comparable document
pairs as input, the extraction algorithm involves
the following steps.

1. Split the source and target language docu-
ments into phrases.

2. Compute the degree of parallelism for each
candidate pair of phrases by using the bilin-
gual dictionary generated from GIZA++
(base dictionary), and retain all the phrase
pairs with a score larger than a predefined
parallelism threshold.

9Remember that in our experiment, English is used as the
pivot language for non-English langauge pairs.

15



3. Apply GIZA++ to the retained phrase pairs
to detect new dictionary entries and add them
to the base dictionary.

4. Repeat Step 2 and 3 for several times (empir-
ically set at 5) by using the augmented dic-
tionary, and output the detected phrase pairs.

Phrases which are extracted by this algorithm
are frequently not exact translation equivalents.
Below we give some English-German examples
of extracted equivalents with their corresponding
alignment scores:

1. But a successful mission — seiner überaus
erfolgreichen Mission abgebremst —
0.815501989333333

2. Former President Jimmy Carter — Der
ehemalige US-Präsident Jimmy Carter —
0.69708324976825

3. on the Korean Peninsula — auf der koreanis-
chen Halbinsel — 0.8677432145

4. across the Muslim world — mit der muslim-
ischen Welt ermöglichen — 0.893330864

5. to join the United Nations — der Weg
in die Vereinten Nationen offensteht —
0.397418711927629

Even though some of the extracted phrases are
not exact translation equivalents, they may still
be useful resources both for SMT and RBMT if
these phrases are passed through an extra pre-
processing stage, of if the engines are modified
specifically to work with semi-parallel translation
equivalents extracted from comparable texts. We
address this issue in the discussion section (see
Section 6).

For evaluation, we measure how the metrics af-
fect the performance of parallel phrase extraction
algorithm on 5 language pairs (DE-EN, ET-EN,
LT-EN, LV-EN, and SL-EN). A large raw compa-
rable corpus for each language pair was crawled
from the Web, and the metrics were then applied
to assign comparability scores to all the docu-
ment pairs in each corpus. For each language pair,
we set three different intervals based on the com-
parability score (SC) and randomly select 500
document pairs in each interval for evaluation.
For the MT based metric, the three intervals are

(1) 0.1<=SC<0.3, (2) 0.3<=SC<0.5, and (3)
SC>=0.5. For the lexical mapping based metric
and keyword based metric, since their scores are
lower than those of the MT based metric for each
comparability level, we set three lower intervals at
(1) 0.1<=SC<0.2, (2) 0.2<=SC<0.4, and (3)
SC>=0.4. The experiment focuses on counting
the number of extracted parallel phrases with par-
allelism score>=0.410, and computes the average
number of extracted phrases per 100000 words
(the sum of words in the source and target lan-
guage documents) for each interval. In addition,
the Pearson correlation measure is also applied to
measure the correlation between the interval11 of
comparability scores and the number of extracted
parallel phrases. The results which summarize the
impact of the three metrics to the performance of
parallel phrase extraction are listed in Table 5, 6,
and 7, respectively.

Language
pair

0.1<=
SC<0.2

0.2<=
SC<0.4

SC>=0.4 correlation

DE-EN 728 1434 2510 0.993
ET-EN 313 631 1166 0.989
LT-EN 258 419 894 0.962
LV-EN 470 859 1900 0.967
SL-EN 393 946 2220 0.975

Table 5: Impact of the lexical mapping based metric to
parallel phrase extraction

Language
pair

0.1<=
SC<0.2

0.2<=
SC<0.4

SC>=0.4 correlation

DE-EN 1007 1340 2151 0.972
ET-EN 438 650 1050 0.984
LT-EN 306 442 765 0.973
LV-EN 600 966 1722 0.980
SL-EN 715 1026 1854 0.967

Table 6: Impact of the keyword based metric to parallel
phrase extraction

From Table 5, 6, and 7, we can see that
for all the 5 language pairs, based on the aver-
age number of extracted aligned phrases, clearly
we have interval (3)>(2)>(1). In other words, in
any of the three metrics, a higher comparability
level always leads to significantly more number

10A manual evaluation of a small set of extracted data
shows that parallel phrases with parallelism score >=0.4 are
more reliable.

11For the purpose of correlation measure, the three inter-
vals are numerically calibrated as “1”, “2”, and “3”, respec-
tively.

16



Language
pair

0.1<=
SC<0.3

0.3<=
SC<0.5

SC>=0.5 correlation

DE-EN 861 1547 2552 0.996
ET-EN 448 883 1251 0.999
LT-EN 293 483 1070 0.959
LV-EN 589 1072 2037 0.982
SL-EN 560 1151 2421 0.979

Table 7: Impact of the machine translation based met-
ric to parallel phrase extraction

of aligned phrases extracted from the comparable
documents. Moreover, although the lexical map-
ping based metric and the keyword based metric
produce lower comparability scores than the MT
based metric (see Section 4), they have similar
impact to the task of parallel phrase extraction.
This means, the comparability score itself does
not matter much, as long as the metrics are re-
liable and proper thresholds are set for different
metrics.

In all the three metrics, the Pearson correla-
tion scores are very close to 1 for all the language
pairs, which indicate that the intervals of compa-
rability scores obtained from the metrics are in
line with the performance of equivalent extrac-
tion algorithm. Therefore, in order to extract more
parallel phrases (or other translation equivalents)
from comparable corpora, we can try to improve
the corpus comparability by applying the compa-
rability metrics beforehand to add highly compa-
rable document pairs in the corpora.

6 Discussion

We have presented three different approaches to
measure comparability at the document level. In
this section, we will analyze the advantages and
limitations of the proposed metrics, and the feasi-
bility of using semi-parallel equivalents in MT.

6.1 Pros and cons of the metrics
Using bilingual dictionary for lexical mapping is
simple and fast. However, as it adopts the word-
for-word mapping strategy and out-of-vocabulary
(OOV) words are omitted, the linguistic structure
of the original texts is badly hurt after mapping.
Thus, apart from lexical information, it is diffi-
cult to explore more useful features for the com-
parability metrics. The TFIDF based keyword ex-
traction approach allows us to select more repre-
sentative words and prune a large amount of less
informative words from the texts. The keywords

are usually relevant to subject and domain terms,
which is quite useful in judging the comparabil-
ity of two documents. Both the lexical mapping
based approach and the keyword based approach
use dictionary for lexical translation, thus rely on
the availability and completeness of the dictionary
resources or large scale parallel corpora.

For the machine translation based metric, it
provides much better text translation than the
dictionary-based approach so that the comparabil-
ity of two document can be better revealed from
the richer lexical information and other useful
features, such as named entities. However, the
text translation process is expensive, as it depends
on the availability of the powerful MT systems12

and takes much longer than the simple dictionary
based translation.

In addition, we use a translation strategy of
translating texts from under-resourced (or less-
resourced) languages into rich-resourced lan-
guage. In case that both languages are under-
resourced languages, English is used as the pivot
langauge for translation. This can compensate the
shortage of the linguistic resources in the under-
resourced languages and take advantages of vari-
ous resources in the rich-resourced languages.

6.2 Using semi-parallel equivalents in MT
systems

We note that modern SMT and RBMT sys-
tems take maximal advantage of strictly parallel
phrases, but they still do not use full potential
of the semi-parallel translation equivalents, of the
type that is illustrated in the application section
(see Section 5). Such resources, even though they
are not exact equivalents contain useful informa-
tion which is not used by the systems.

In particular, the modern decoders do not work
with under-specified phrases in phrase tables, and
do not work with factored semantic features. For
example, the phrase:

But a successful mission — seiner überaus er-
folgreichen Mission abgebremst

The English side contains the word but, which
pre-supposes contrast, and on the Greman side
words überaus erfolgreichen (“generally success-
ful”) and abgebremst (“slowed down”) – which
taken together exemplify a contrast, since they

12Alternatively, we can also train MT systems for text
translation by using the available SMT toolkits (e.g., Moses)
on large scale parallel corpora.

17



have different semantic prosodies. In this example
the semantic feature of contrast can be extracted
and reused in other contexts. However, this would
require the development of a new generation of
decoders or rule-based systems which can suc-
cessfully identify and reuse such subtle semantic
features.

7 Conclusion and Future work

The success of extracting good-quality translation
equivalents from comparable corpora to improve
machine translation performance highly depends
on “how comparable” the used corpora are. In this
paper, we propose three different comparability
measures at the document level. The experiments
show that all the three approaches can effectively
determine the comparability levels of comparable
document pairs. We also further investigate the
impact of the metrics on the task of parallel phrase
extraction from comparable corpora. It turns out
that higher comparability scores always lead to
significantly more parallel phrases extracted from
comparable documents. Since better quality of
comparable corpora should have better applica-
bility, our metrics can be applied to select highly
comparable document pairs for the tasks of trans-
lation equivalent extraction.

In the future work, we will conduct more com-
prehensive evaluation of the metrics by capturing
its impact to the performance of machine transla-
tion systems with extended phrase tables derived
from comparable corpora.

Acknowledgments

We thank Radu Ion at RACAI for providing us
the toolkit of parallel phrase extraction, and the
three anonymous reviewers for valuable com-
ments. This work is supported by the EU funded
ACCURAT project (FP7-ICT-2009-4-248347) at
the Centre for Translation Studies, University of
Leeds.

References
Bogdan Babych, Serge Sharoff and Anthony Hartley.

2008. Generalising Lexical Translation Strategies
for MT Using Comparable Corpora. Proceedings
of LREC 2008, Marrakech, Morocco.

Yun-Chuang Chiao and Pierre Zweigenbaum. 2002.
Looking for candidate translational equivalents in
specialized, comparable corpora. Proceedings of
COLING 2002, Taipei, Taiwan.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
USA.

Jenny Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher Man-
ning. 2005. Incorporating Non-local Information
into Information Extraction Systems by Gibbs Sam-
pling. Proceedings of ACL 2005, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.

Eibe Frank, Gordon Paynter and Ian Witten. 1999.
Domain-specific keyphrase extraction. Proceedings
of IJCAI 1999, Stockholm, Sweden.

Pascale Fung and Percy Cheung. 2004a. Mining very
non-parallel corpora: Parallel sentence and lexicon
extraction via bootstrapping and EM. Proceedings
of EMNLP 2004, Barcelona, Spain.

Pascale Fung and Percy Cheung. 2004b. Multi-level
bootstrapping for extracting parallel sentences from
a quasicomparable corpus. Proceedings of COL-
ING 2004, Geneva, Switzerland.

Anette Hulth. 2003. Improved Automatic Keyword
Extraction Given More Linguistic Knowledge. Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP 2003, Sapporo, Japan.

Radu Ion. 2012. PEXACC: A Parallel Data Mining
Algorithm from Comparable Corpora. Proceedings
of LREC 2012, Istanbul, Turkey.

Adam Kilgarriff and Tony Rose. 1998. Measures for
corpus similarity and homogeneity. Proceedings of
EMNLP 1998, Granada, Spain.

Bo Li and Eric Gaussier. 2010. Improving cor-
pus comparability for bilingual lexicon extraction
from comparable corpora. Proceedings of COL-
ING 2010, Beijing, China.

Feifan Liu, Deana Pennell, Fei Liu and Yang Liu.
2009. Unsupervised Approaches for Automatic
Keyword Extraction Using Meeting Transcripts.
Proceedings of NAACL 2009, Boulder, Colorado,
USA.

Belinda Maia. 2003. What are comparable corpora?
Proceedings of the Corpus Linguistics workshop on
Multilingual Corpora: Linguistic requirements and
technical perspectives, 2003, Lancaster, U.K.

Anthony McEnery and Zhonghua Xiao. 2007. Par-
allel and comparable corpora? In Incorporating
Corpora: Translation and the Linguist. Translating
Europe. Multilingual Matters, Clevedon, UK.

Emmanuel Morin, Beatrice Daille, Korchi Takeuchi
and Kyo Kageura. 2007. Bilingual terminology
mining — using brain, not brawn comparable cor-
pora. Proceedings of ACL 2007, Prague, Czech Re-
public.

Dragos Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2006. Ex-
tracting parallel sub-sentential fragments from non-
parallel corpora. Proceedings of ACL 2006, Syn-
dey, Australia.

Dragos Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2005. Improv-
ing machine translation performance by exploiting
non-parallel corpora. Computational Linguistics,
31(4): 477-504.

18



Dragos Munteanu, Alexander Fraser and Daniel
Marcu. 2004. Improved machine translation
performance via parallel sentence extraction from
comparable corpora. Proceedings of HLT-NAACL
2004, Boston, USA.

Franz Och and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improved Statis-
tical Alignment Models. Proceedings of ACL 2000,
Hongkong, China.

Emmanuel Prochasson and Pascale Fung. 2011. Rare
Word Translation Extraction from Aligned Compa-
rable Documents. Proceedings of ACL-HLT 2011,
Portland, USA.

Reinhard Rapp. 1995. Identifying Word Translation
in Non-Parallel Texts. Proceedings of ACL 1995,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Reinhard Rapp. 1999. Automatic identification of
word translations from unrelated English and Ger-
man corpora. Proceedings of ACL 1999, College
Park, Maryland, USA.

Xabier Saralegi, Inaki Vicente and Antton Gurrutxaga.
2008. Automatic Extraction of Bilingual Terms
from Comparable Corpora in a Popular Science
Domain. Proceedings of the Workshop on Compa-
rable Corpora, LREC 2008, Marrakech, Morocco.

Serge Sharoff. 2007. Classifying Web corpora into
domain and genre using automatic feature identifi-
cation. Proceedings of 3rd Web as Corpus Work-
shop, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

Serge Sharoff, Bogdan Babych and Anthony Hartley.
2006. Using Comparable Corpora to Solve Prob-
lems Difficult for Human Translators. Proceedings
of ACL 2006, Syndey, Australia.

Jason Smith, Chris Quirk and Kristina Toutanova.
2010. Extracting Parallel Sentences from Compa-
rable Corpora using Document Level Alignment.
Proceedings of NAACL 2010, Los Angeles, USA.

Ralf Steinberger, Bruno Pouliquen, Anna Widiger,
Camelia Ignat and Dan Tufis. 2006. The JRC-
Acquis: A multilingual aligned parallel corpus
with 20+ languages. Proceedings of LREC 2006,
Genoa, Italy.

Kun Yu and Junichi Tsujii. 2009. Extracting bilingual
dictionary from comparable corpora with depen-
dency heterogeneity. Proceedings of HLT-NAACL
2009, Boulder, Colorado, USA.

19


