



















































Automatic Extraction of Compound Verbs from Bangla Corpora


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on South and Southeast Asian Natural Language Processing (SANLP), pages 153–162,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Automatic Extraction of Compound Verbs from Bangla 

Corpora 

Sibansu Mukhopadhyay
1  Tirthankar Dasgupta

2
 Manjira Sinha

2 
 Anupam Basu

2
 

(1) Society for Natural Language Technology Research, Kolkata 700091 
(2) Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302 

{sibansu, iamtirthankar, manjira87, anupambas}@gmail.com 

ABSTRACT 

In this paper we present a rule-based technique for the automatic extraction of Bangla compound 

verbs from raw text corpora. In our work we have (a) proposed rules through which a system 

could automatically identify Bangla CVs from texts. These rules will be established on the basis 

of syntactic interpretation of sentences, (b) we shall explain problems of CV identification 

subject to the semantics and pragmatics of Bangla language, (c) finally, we have applied these 

rules on two different Bangla corpuses to extract CVs. The extracted CVs were manually 

evaluated by linguistic experts where our system and achieved an accuracy of around 70%. 

 

KEYWORDS: COMPOUND VERBS, AUTOMATIC EXTRACTION, VECTOR VERBS  

153



1 Introduction 

Compound verbs (henceforth CV) are special type of complex predicates consisting of a 

sequence of two or more verbs acting as a single verb and express a single expression of 

meaning. However, not all verb sequences are considered as compound verbs. A compound verb 

consists of a sequence of two verbs, V1 and V2 such that V1 is a common verb with /-e/ [non-

finite] inflection marker and V2 is a finite verb that indicates orientation or manner of the action 

or process expressed by V1 (Dasgupta, 1977). The verb V1 is known as pole and V2 is called as 

vector. For example, in the sentence রুটিগুলরো খেলে খপলরো (/ruTigulo kheYe phela/) “bread-plural-the 

eat and drop-pres. Imp” “Eat the breads”, the verb sequence “kheYe phela” is an example of CV.  

Identification of compound verbs from sentences is useful in many NLP applications including 

Wordnet development, Information Retrieval, and Machine Translation. However, automatic 

identification of compound verbs from a given text document is not a trivial task. As mentioned 

in (Dasgupta, 1977), a sequence of two or more verbs does not always guarantees to be a 

compound verb. Depending on the context a verb sequence may or may not act as CV. Thus, 

automatic identification of compound verbs is extremely important and a challenging task.  

This paper deals with the rule-based automatic identification of these types of Bangla CV, 

where V1 is a pole and V2 is a vector. In our work (a) we shall propose rules through which a 

system could automatically identify Bangla CVs from texts and these rules will be established on 

the basis of syntactic interpretation of sentences, (b) we shall explain problems of CV 

identification subject to the semantics and pragmatics of Bangla language, (c) finally we shall 

make a statistical evaluation of our rules.    

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In section 2 we first perform the linguistic study 

and the related concepts of the compound verb and different issues related to the automatic 

extraction of CVs. Section 3 briefly discuss about the different related works done in this area. 

Section 4 discuss about the different linguistic rules that can be applied to extract CVs from text 

corpuses. Section 5 presents the experimentations, evaluations and results of our work. 

2 Background 

An important feature of CV is that the vector verb has no independent meaning. The Vector verb 

only can affect/support the pole to express some certain pragmatic expression. Linguists call this 

process of semantic nullification, process of grammaticalization. Considering the previous 

example, if we have a CV like „খেলে খপলরো‟, we, or any native speaker of Bangla, must not 

differentiate those two verbs to comprehend the meaning for the each. Bangla native speakers 

have the sense that the combination „খেলে খপলরো‟ produces a common meaning which is almost but 

not really same to the central meaning of the verb „েো‟ [khaa: „eat‟]. And the meaning of the 2
nd

 

verb, „খপল্‟ [phel: „drop‟] is being bleached out.  This second or the vector verb is functionally 

attached to the pole and grammatically subservient and both the two verbs produce a single 

meaning.  

 

This is true that each of the verbs of this phrase can be used as a pole or as an independent verb in 

different contexts. Native speakers are pragmatically competent to understand the phrase duly 

depending on the certain contexts. If one says in Bangla, “রুটিগুলরোয কলেকটো খেলে খপলর 

দোও।” (/ruTigulor kaYekaTaa kheYe phele daao/), it means “Eat some of the breads and reject the 

rest of breads.” The same combination of the root verbs, “েো” (eat) and “খপল্”, (drop) plays a 

different role. The interesting thing can be pointed out that there is another one verb „দোও‟ is being 

154



attached on the right side of the combination „খেলে খপলর‟ and the „খপলর‟ is containing an infinite 

inflection /-e/. It means „খপলর‟ (phele) is no more playing role of a vector. There the combination 

of CV is being shifted from „েো‟ (eat) and „খপর‟ (drop) to „খপল্‟ (drop) and „খদ‟ (give). The new CV 

has a new vector „খদ‟ (give), which has lost its meaning. There about twenty two verbs are used as 

vectors which support poles to describe its action in CVs.  

2.1 Why Compound Verbs Occur? 

Now a psycho-cognitive question arises. Why do the speakers intend to speak a half-hearted 

semantically bliched out vector verb with a main verb, when she has an option to manage her 

expression with a pole? We have to say that the poles always do nothing in such cases where 

speakers need to realize specific genres of daily speech, though it is a question of natural 

language survey. We have to consider some examples [(8) to (11)], where the poles cannot cover 

up the specification necessary for the conversation.  

 

(8) তুমভ মক কোর টোকোটো অভলরয ঴োলে মদলে খ঩লযল ো? 

Expression: “Could you give the money to Amal yesterday?”  

 

(9) তুমভ মক কোর টোকোটো অভলরয ঴োলে মদলে উঠলে খ঩লযল ো?  

Expression: “Could you at last give the money to Amal yesterday? Or something like: “Had you 

managed your time to give the money to Amal yesterday?”  

 

(10) তুমভ কোজটো কলযল ো। 

Expression: You have done the job.  

  

(11) তুমভ কোজটো কলয খপলরল ো।  

Expression: You have finished the job.  

  

(8)-(9) and (10)-(11) are the pairs of sentences, where (9) and (11) have CVs, whereas (8) and 

(10) have not. The expressions are indicating the differences between CV and non-CV. Some 

verbs feel lonely. They cannot take the risks of such expressions, which go beyond the physical 

property of the language. Hook (1974) shows that, a CV can tackle sometimes aspectual or modal 

expressions in Hindi.  

The speech act of vector can be discussed under the area of pragmatics. Ancient Indian tradition 

of grammar proposed more than one way of understanding meaning of speech. According to such 

Indian grammatical discourse, native speakers have the potential to under meaning depending on 

some lakshans (indication) of the components. A word or a speech unit has this power of 

concieving intended meaning (lakshana shakti). Vectors also have the power. Let us consider 

again some examples below.  

(12) অভর গোন গোইলরো।  

“Amal sang song.” 

 

(13) অভর গোন খগলে উঠলরো।  

“Amal started to sing song.” 

 

(14) অভর এভন ঳ভে ঴ঠোৎ গোন গোইলরো।     

“At that time, suddenly Amal sang song.” 

  

155



(15) অভর এভন ঳ভে ঴ঠোৎ গোন খগলে উঠলরো। 

“At that time, suddenly Amal started to sing the song.” 

     

(16) অভর কোর ঳লযেলফরো জর঳োে গোন গোইলফ।  

“Amal will sing song in a function tomorrow evening.”  

  

(17) *অভর কোর ঳লযেলফরো জর঳োে গোন খগলে উঠলফ।  

“Amal will start to sing (suddenly) song in a function tomorrow evening.” 

 
Now we need to focus on the above sentence (12) which is a simple sentence. Speaker states that 

“Amal sang song”. Sentence (13) has a complex predicate /geYe uThalo/. Sentence like (13) 

expresses that there is a reason for which Amal started to sing song. This sentence also deserves 

sentential extension with such words like “emana samaYa haThat.h” (at that time suddenly) to 

relate the reason for which Amal started to sing song [(15)]. Therefore, we see there is a question 

of appropriateness we have to face regarding understanding the semantics of the vectors. As 

“uThalo” refer to the sudden reason behind fact of Amal‟s singing in past, it cannot be appear in 

future. That is why the sentence (17) is unacceptable to Bengali speakers. So CV is very specific 

for its use in the social discourses.         

2.2 Challenges in Automatic CV Extraction  

Now allow us to turn to the question of identification. We have understood that a couple of verbs 

(V1+V2) can be considered as a CV when the second verb helps to express some pragmatic 

specification of the first verb (pole) and when the second verb has no independent meaning. We 

recognize a CV as we have the pragmatic competence. But how do we refer that pragmatic sense 

which is beyond the physical property? How does a machine understand that these compound 

components are CV and these are not? After POS-tagger describes a sentence, how can a 

machine annotate CV, as there are so many possibilities where more than one verb occurs 

immediately in a syntagmatic order? 

This paper tries to reveal such syntactic conditions for the identification of CV without applying 

pragmatics. And we have targeted to fix certain properties for the CV that a system can easily 

identify. This has to be said that these conditions will work well to a trained or supervised data 

but not for the all. However, the easiest way to identify a CV is to mark the vectors in a language 

first. Let us consider following non-semantic or non-pragmatic conditions to identify a CV in 

Bangla: 

  

(18)  (a) Verb (V1) + verb (V2).  

 (b) V1 ends with an inflection /-e/ (not –te of course). 

 (c) V2 is a marked vector.   

But these conditions (18) do not properly handle the situations. We have discussed little earlier 

that all the verb plus verb is not CV. V1 with /-e/-ending is also a common form of infinitive in 

Bangla. For example, consider (19).  

 

(19)  যমফ বোে খেলে ফরলফ। 

/rabi bhaata kheYe balabe/ 

“Eating rice Rabi will say.”    

 

“kheYe balabe” in this sentence (19) is not a CV, though there V1 ends with /-e/. And for 

(18)/(c), this is said that the vectors, usually, are poles (normal verbs). This is very difficult to 

156



identify a verb as a vector, if we do not have the idea of context or the information about its 

position in a V+V sequence. If a machine understands that the second position in a V+V is for the 

vectors and if such a vector, machine finds from the list it may identify that this V+V is a CV. 

But, even in Bangla, there are many options, where a vector-listed verb plays a role of pole. In 

those cases, V+V are to be sub-categorized as Pole + Pole, not as Pole + Vector. Table 1 

describes a list of 16 vector verbs as proposed by (Paul, 2003). 

 
Table 1: Bangla Vector Verb List 

Sl. 

No. 

Vector 

Verb 

Transliterati

on  

General 

Meaning 

Example  

1 মো /yaa/ Go  ঳কোর খেলক বৃমি ঩লে মোলে।  

2 আস্‌ /aas.h/ Come  ফহুমদন ধলয যমফ কোজ ক'খয আ঳ল । 

3 ঩ড়্‌ /pa.D.h/  Fall  যমফ আজ ঳কোর ঳কোর ঘুভ খেলক উলঠ 

঩ের। 

4 খপল্‌ /phel.h/ Drop যমফ কেোটো ফলর খপরর। 

5 খদ /de/ Give যমফ মফস্কুটটো খেলরো নো খপলর মদলরো। 

6 খন /ne/ Take  যমফ েোেোেোমে ঴োলেয কোজ ক'টো খ঳লয 

মনর। 

7 ভর্ /mar.h/ Die তুমভ শ্যোভলরয জন্য মভলে খবলফ 

ভযল ো। 

8 ফস্‌ /bas.h/ Seat  যমফ ঳কলরয ঳োভলন কেোটো ফলর 

ফ঳লরো। 

9 উঠ্‌ /uTh.h/ Get up তুমভ মক খেোভোয ফোফোলক কেোটো ফলর 

উঠলে ঩োযলর? 

10 তুর /tul/ Lift  তুমভ মক ভোনুললক জোমগলে তুরলফ 

বোফল ো? 

11  োড়্‌ /chhaa.D.h/ Leave  যমফ কোজটো কলয  োেলরো। 

12 যোখ্ /raakh.h/ Put down  খভো঴য ঳কোর ঳কোর কোজ গুম লে 

খযলেল । 

13 আন্ /aan.h/ Bring  কোজটো প্রোে খ঱ল কলয এলনম ।  

14 ঩োঠো /paaThaa/ Send  মেমন ফলর ঩োঠিলেল ন।  

3 Related works 

Recent trends in computational linguistics revisit several old issues from hardcore linguistics or 

traditional grammar. CV is one such issue, natural language scientists have the scope to use it in 

the computational aspect and experiment through a large linguistic corpus. CV issues in Indian 

language perspective have been reviewed by many Indian researchers, such as (Alsena, 1991; 

Abbi, 1991, 1992; Gopalkrishnan and Abbi, 1992; Butt, 1993; Butt, 1995) with a special focus to 

Hindi (Burton-Page, 1957; Hook, 1974), Urdu (Butt, 1995), Bangla (Sarkar, 1975; Paul, 2003, 

2004, 2010), Kashmiri (Kaul, 1985) and Oriya (Mohanty, 1992, 2010). 

 

Paul (2004) has attempted to work on a constraint-based and semantically-grounded account of 

Bangla CV within the HPSG (Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar) framework (Paul, 2010). 

An automatic extraction of Hindi CV was presented in (Chakrabarty et al., 2008). They analyses 

157



the Hindi complex predicate system and provides scope of linguist test for identification of Hindi 

CV. Chakrabarty and Paul, both have conceptualized vector and used an incomplete list of those 

vectors. An automatic extraction of Bangla complex predicates have been performed by (Das 

et.al, 2010). The system uses the vectors as proposed in the literature of (Paul, 2003). To the best 

of our knowledge, this is the only attempt made to extract Bangla CV from the text corpuses.  

4 Compound Verb Identification Grammar and Formal Rules 

Apart from all and keeping (18) in our mind we can certify some more rules for the identification 

of CV in Bangla. This section is basically an overall revisit of our entire dialogues. To identify a 

CV we can follow the following condition:    

 

(I) The common identification of a CV: Verb + Verb [V1 (+ /-e/) + V2 (-so many inflectional 

endings according to the tense, aspect, modality and so on)].  

  

(II) Noun + Verb combination is not a Compound Verb, it may be considered as Composite Verb 

(For Example, ঴োম঳ খ঩র, যোগ কযলরো, ঘুভ খ঩র.)   

  

(III) V1+V2 = CV and v2 has no meaning. V2 is grammatically subservient, i.e., v2 serves or 

acts in a subordinate capacity and formally attached to the v1. On the other hand v1 is 

grammatically central. (Hook, 1974; Dasgupta, 1977)  

  

(IV) As V2 plays a role of an essentially subordinate of V1, it cannot even take a modifier. 

  

(V) V1, i.e., a pole must not immediately be followed by a V2, i.e. a vector. For 

example, কোজটো কলয(v1) তুমভ ঠিক খপরলফ(v2)। This implies possibilities of such following 
combinations too: 

N+P+N+V = CV 

N+P+V+N = CV 

  

(VI) CV collapses if there is an adverb in between V1 and V2. For example, *ফইটো ঩লে (v1) েোেোেোমে 

(adv) খপর (v2) ।   
  

(VII) If there is a sequence like V+V+V, then first two verbs should be (normally) poles. 

<v1+v2+v3 = pole + pole + vector>. 

  

(VIII) Direct question to a vector is not allowed. Consider an example,  

অভর গলেয ফইটো ঩লে খপরলফ। 

Amal story book-sing-the read (inf) drop-future 

Amal will finish the story book.  

 One cannot ask question to the vector of the combination, '঩লে খপরলফ';    

  

* অভর মক খপরলফ? 

One must ask completely; 

অভর মক ঩লে খপরলফ?   

  

158



This proves CV (V1 + V2) is a single entity and as V2 is subservient, it cannot take a question 

directly.  

(IX) Bangla CV does not allow double negation like English 

5 Experimentation and Results 

Based on the CV extraction technique discussed in the earlier section, we try to identify Bangla 

CVs from the Rabindra-Rachanabali
1

and Bankim Rachanabali
2

 corpus. The Rabindra- 

Rachanabali corpus has a collection of 176000 Bangla sentences and the Bankim-Rachanabali 

corpus has a collection of 34000 sentences. These sentences were POS (part of Speech) tagged 

using the Bangla POS tagger
3
. From the POS tagged corpus, we have identified all possible 

sentences containing multiple verbs. We consider the verb + verb combinations within these 

sentences, as potential CVs. Altogether 26500 sentences containing the potential CVs are 

identified from the corpus (see Table 1). 

Table 1: Corpus Statistics 

Total No. of Sentence in Corpus 2,10,000 

Total Number of V+V sequence 26500 

Total No. of CV Annotated 

Sentence 

6500 

Total No. of CVs (identified 

manually) 

895 

 

Table 2: Results of the Compound Verb Extraction Module 

 Before POS 

Modification 

After POS 

Modification 

No. of  V+V correctly identified as CV by the 

system (True Positive) 

313 427 

No. of  V+V correctly identified as Not-CV by the 

system (True Negative) 

197 197 

No. of  V+V falsely identified as CV by the system 

(False Positive) 

201 160 

No. of  V+V falsely identified as non-CV by the 

system (False Negative) 

184 111 

Precision (%) 61 72 

Recall (%) 63 79 

F-Measure (%) 62 75 

Accuracy (%) 57 70 

 
Out of these 26500 Bangla sentences, we have manually annotated 6500 sentences using a 

Linguist. We then applied the CV extraction rules, mentioned in the previous section. The 

extracted CVs are then compared with the manually evaluated gold standard data. The summary 

of the results obtained are depicted in table 2.  

                                                           
1 www.rabindra-rachanabali.nltr.org 
2 www.bankim-rachanabali.nltr.org 
3 www.nltr.org/downloades/ 

159



The result from table 2 implies that, we have a precision of around 61% and a recall value of 

63%. The F-measure is coming out to be 62% whereas the overall accuracy of the system comes 

to be 57%.  

The results of table 2 imply that a lot of anomalous verb sequences have been incorrectly 

identified as CV by the present system. A close observation over the result reveals some 

interesting findings that may play some crucial role during the extraction of Bangla CV. Our 

result shows that, whenever a pole is attached with a suffix “-te” the V1+V2 sequence does not 

belongs to the CV group irrespective of whether V2 belongs to the pre-defined list of vectors. 

Thus, we have incorporated an additional rule on the system that checks whether a pole verb 

contains a suffix “-te” along with its vector counterpart. We further observe that, the loss in 

precision was also caused due to high error in POS tagging. We identified around 30% of errors 

are generated due to incorrect POS tags. Thus, when measures were taken to eliminate these 

errors we reached an accuracy of around 70%.  

Further, we perform the analysis for each of the individual vector verbs. The result shows that 

not all vector verbs are equally responsible to form compound verbs. It has been observed that in 

most of the cases, vector verbs like, ত োলো, তেড়োন ো, and মরো have a higher tendency of forming 

compound verbs as compared to vectors like, আসো, থোকো and তেখো. Figure 1 presents the graph 
that shows the percentage of cases for which different vectors form the compound verb structure. 

 
Figure 1: The role of different vector verbs in CV formation 

We further classify the vector verbs according to their frequencies. Depending on the frequency, 

we categorize the list of vectors into the following four different classes: 

 Class-I: Frequently occurring vectors with high precision like, ফে঱া and উঠা. 

 Class-II: Less frequent vectors with high precision like, ফ া঱া and ফেড়ান া. 

 Class-III: Frequently occurring vectors with low precision like, য়াওযা and আসা 

 Class-IV: Less frequent vectors with low precision like, আ া and রাখা. 

We have considered the low frequency vectors to be those for which the frequency is below the 

average frequency. We observe that, the vectors belonging to class-III are very frequent but have 

160



a very low probability of being a CV. Similar effects have been found for vectors belonging to 

class-IV.  We also observed that low frequency vectors have a higher tendency to construct the 

CV where as high frequency words do not tend to construct CVs. 

Conclusion 

In the present work we try to automatically extract the Bangla Compound verbs from the literary 

documents belonging to Rabindra Rachanabali and Bankim Rachanabali. These corpuses have 

been chosen because of the varied type of text contents. In order to extract the CV we have used 

the vector verb list as provided by (Paul, 2003). We observe that vector verbs cannot identify the 

occurrence of compound verbs alone. There are several other features responsible for a verb + 

verb combination to be a CV. We also saw that, frequencies as well as the type of a vector are 

very much responsible in order to classify a V+V combination as CV. 

In the next stage of our work, we will try to enhance the existing model of CV identification and 

try to apply the information content measures to identify the degree of compositionality of a 

given CV. 

Acknowledgement 

We thank Prof. Probal Dasgupta for providing us useful linguistic insight about the problem and 

Society for Natural Language Technology Research Kolkata for providing us with the Bangla 

corpus and partially sponsoring us to conduct the research work. 

 

References 

Abbi, Anvita. 1991. Semantics of Explicator Compound Verbs. In South Asian Languages, 

Language Sciences, 13(2): 161-180. 

Alsina, Alex. 1996. Complex Predicates: Structure and Theory. Center for the Study of Language 

and Information Publications, Stanford, CA. 

Butt, Miriam. 1995. The Structure of Complex Predicates in Urdu. Doctoral Dissertation, 

Stanford University. 

Burton-Page, John. 1957. Compound and conjunct verbs in Hindi. Bulletin of the School of 

Oriental and African Studies, 19: 469-78. 

Chakrabarti, Debasri, Mandalia Hemang, Priya Ritwik, Sarma Vaijayanthi, Bhattacharyya 

Pushpak. 2008. Hindi Compound Verbs and their Automatic Extraction. International 

Conference on Computational Linguistics –2008, pp. 27-30. 

Das, D., Pal, S., Mondal, T., Chakraborty, T., Bandyopadhyay, S., “Automatic Extraction of 

Complex Predicates in Bengali”, Proceedings of the Multiword Expressions: From Theory to 

Applications (MWE 2010), pages 37–45, Beijing, August 2010 

Dasgupta, Probal. 1977.  The internal grammar of Bangla compound verbs. Indian Linguistics 

38:2.68-85. 

Hook, Peter. 1974. The Compound Verbs in Hindi. The Michigan Series in South and South-east 

Asian Language and Linguistics. The University of Michigan. 

161



Kaul, Vijay Kumar. 1985. The Compound Verb in Kashmiri. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. 

Kurukshetra University. 

Mohanty, Panchanan. 2010. WordNets for Indian Languages: Some Issues. Global WordNet 

Conference-2010, pp. 57-64. 

Mohanty, Gopabandhu. 1992. The Compound Verbs in Oriya. Ph. D. dissertation, Deccan 

College Post-Graduate and Research Institute, Pune. 

Paul, Soma. 2010. Representing Compound Verbs in Indo WordNet. Golbal Wordnet 

Conference- 2010, pp. 84-91. 

Paul, Soma. 2004. An HPSG Account of Bangla Compound Verbs with LKB Implementation. 

Ph.D dissertation, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad. 

Paul, Soma. 2003. Composition of Compound Verbs in Bangla. Multi-Verb constructions. 

Trondheim Summer School. 

Sarkar, Pabitra. 1975. Aspects of Compound Verbs in Bengali. Unpublished M.A. dissertation, 

Chicago University. 

 

162


