










































On Improving the Accuracy of Readability Classification using Insights from Second Language Acquisition


The 7th Workshop on the Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 163–173,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

On Improving the Accuracy of Readability Classification
using Insights from Second Language Acquisition

Sowmya Vajjala
Seminar für Sprachwissenschaft

Universität Tübingen
sowmya@sfs.uni-tuebingen.de

Detmar Meurers
Seminar für Sprachwissenschaft

Universität Tübingen
dm@sfs.uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract

We investigate the problem of readability as-
sessment using a range of lexical and syntac-
tic features and study their impact on predict-
ing the grade level of texts. As empirical ba-
sis, we combined two web-based text sources,
Weekly Reader and BBC Bitesize, targeting
different age groups, to cover a broad range
of school grades. On the conceptual side, we
explore the use of lexical and syntactic mea-
sures originally designed to measure language
development in the production of second lan-
guage learners. We show that the develop-
mental measures from Second Language Ac-
quisition (SLA) research when combined with
traditional readability features such as word
length and sentence length provide a good
indication of text readability across different
grades. The resulting classifiers significantly
outperform the previous approaches on read-
ability classification, reaching a classification
accuracy of 93.3%.

1 Introduction

Reading plays an important role in the development
of first and second language skills, and it is one of
the most important means of obtaining information
about any subject, in and outside of school. How-
ever, teachers often find it difficult to obtain texts
appropriate to the reading level of their students, on
a given topic. In many cases, they end up modifying
or creating texts, which takes significant time and ef-
fort. In addition to such a traditional school setting,
finding texts at the appropriate reading level is also

important in a wide range of real-life contexts in-
volving people with intellectual disabilities, dyslex-
ics, immigrant populations, and second or foreign
language learners.

Readability-based text classification, when used
as a ranking parameter in a search engine, can help
in retrieving texts that suit a particular target reading
level for a given query topic. In the context of lan-
guage learning, a language aware search engine (Ott
and Meurers, 2010) that includes readability classi-
fication can facilitate the selection of texts from the
web that are appropriate for the students in terms of
form and content. This is one of the main motiva-
tions underlying our research.

Readability assessment has a long history
(DuBay, 2006). Traditionally, only a limited set of
surface features such as word length and sentence
length were considered to derive a formula for read-
ability. More recently, advances in computational
linguistics made it possible to automatically extract
a wider range of language features from text. This
facilitated building machine learning models that es-
timate the reading level of a text. On the other hand,
there has also been an on-going stream of research
on reading and text complexity in other areas such as
Second Language Acquisition (SLA) research and
psycholinguistics.

In SLA research, a range of measures have been
proposed to study the development of complexity
in the language produced by learners. These mea-
sures are used to evaluate the oral or written pro-
duction abilities of language learners. The aim of
readability classification, on the other hand, is to re-
trieve texts to be comprehended by readers at a par-

163



ticular level. Since we want to classify and retrieve
texts for learners of different age groups, we hypoth-
esized that these SLA-based complexity measures of
learner production, when used as features for read-
ability classification will improve the performance
of the classifiers. In this paper, we show that this
approach indeed results in a significant performance
improvement compared to previous research.

We used the WeeklyReader website1 as one of
the text used in previous research. We combined it
with texts crawled from the BBC-Bitesize website2,
which provides texts for a different age group. The
combined corpus, WeeBit, covers a comparatively
larger range of ages than covered before.

To summarize, the contributions of this paper are:

• We adapt measures from second language ac-
quisition research to readability classification
and show that the overall classification accu-
racies of an approach including these features
significantly outperforms previous approaches.

• We extend the most widely used WeeklyReader
corpus by combining it with another corpus that
is graded for a different age-group, thereby cre-
ating a larger and more diverse corpus as basis
for future research.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 de-
scribes related work on reading level classification
to put our work in context. Section 3 introduces the
corpora we used. Section 4 describes the features
we considered in detail. Section 5 presents the ap-
proach and discusses the results. Section 6 provides
a summary and points to future work.

2 Related Work

The traditional readability formulae made use of a
limited number of surface features, such as the aver-
age sentence length and the average word length in
characters or syllables (Kincaid et al., 1975; Cole-
man and Liau, 1975). Some works also made use
of lists of “difficult” words, typically based on fre-
quency counts, to estimate readability of texts (Dale
and Chall, 1948; Chall and Dale, 1995; Stenner,

1http://www.weeklyreader.com
2http://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize

1996). Dubay (2006) provides a broad survey of tra-
ditional approaches to readability assessment. Al-
though the features considered appear shallow in
terms of linguistic modeling, they have been popular
for many years and are widely used.

More recently, the developments in computational
linguistics made it possible to consider various lex-
ical and syntactic features to automatically model
readability. In some of the early works on statis-
tical readability assessment, Si and Callan (2001)
and Collins-Thompson and Callan (2004) reported
the impact of using unigram language models to es-
timate the grade level of a given text. The models
were built on a United States text book corpus.

Heilman et al. (2007; 2008b; 2008a) extended
this approach and worked towards retrieving rele-
vant reading materials for language learners in the
REAP3 project. They extended the above mentioned
approach to include a set of manually and later au-
tomatically extracted grammatical features.

Schwarm and Ostendorf (2005) and Petersen and
Ostendorf (2009) report on classification experi-
ments with WeeklyReader data, considering statisti-
cal language models, traditional formulae, as well as
certain basic parse tree features in building an SVM-
based statistical model. Feng et al. (2010) and Feng
(2010) went beyond lexical and syntactic features
and studied the impact of several discourse-based
features, comparing their performance on the Week-
lyReader corpus.

While the vast majority of approaches have tar-
geted English texts, some work on other languages
such as German, Portuguese, French and Italian (vor
der Brück et al., 2008; Aluisio et al., 2010; Fran-
cois and Watrin, 2011; Dell’Orletta et al., 2011) is
starting to emerge. Parse-tree-based features have
also been used to measure the complexity of spoken
Swedish (Roll et al., 2007).

The process of text comprehension and the effect
of factors such as the coherence of texts have also
been intensively studied (e.g., Crossley et al., 2007a;
2007b; Graesser et al., 2004) and measures to ana-
lyze the text under this perspective have been imple-
mented in the CohMetrix project.4

The DARPA Machine Reading program created

3http://reap.cs.cmu.edu
4http://cohmetrix.memphis.edu

164



a corpus of general text readability containing var-
ious forms of human and machine generated texts
(Strassel et al., 2010).5 The aim of this program is to
transform natural language texts into a format suit-
able for automatic processing by machines and to
filter out poorly written documents based on the text
quality. Kate et al. (2010) used this data set to build
a coarse grained model of text readability.

While in this paper we focus on comparing com-
putational linguistic approaches to readability as-
sessment and improving the state of the art on a tra-
ditional and available data set, Nelson et al. (2012)
compared several research and commercially avail-
able text difficulty assessment systems in support of
the Common Core Standards’ goal of providing stu-
dents with texts at the appropriate level of difficulty
throughout their schooling.6

Independent of the research on readability, the
complexity of the texts produced by language learn-
ers has been extensively investigated in Second
Language Acquisition (SLA) research (Housen and
Kuiken, 2009). Recent approaches have automated
and compared a number of such complexity mea-
sures for learner language, specifically in English as
Second Language learner narratives (Lu, 2010; Lu,
2011b). So far, there is hardly any work on using
such insights in computational linguistics, though,
with the notable exception of Chen and Zechner
(2011) using SLA features to evaluate spontaneous
non-native speech. Given that graded corpora are
also intended to be used by incremental age groups,
we started to investigate whether the insights from
SLA research can fruitfully be applied to readability
classification.

3 Corpora

We used a combined corpus of WeeklyReader and
BBC-Bitesize to develop a statistical model that
classifies texts into five grade levels, based on the
age groups.
WeeklyReader7 is an educational newspaper, with
articles targeted at four grade levels (Level 2, Level
3, Level 4, and Senior), corresponding to children

5The corpus is apparently intended to be available for public
use, but does not yet seem to be so; we so far were unsuccessful
in obtaining more information from the authors.

6http://www.corestandards.org
7http://www.weeklyreader.com

between ages 7–8, 8–9, 9–10, and 9–12 years. The
articles cover a wide range of non-fiction topics,
from science to current affairs, written according to
the grade level of the readers. The exact criterion
of graded writing is not published by the magazine.
We obtained permission to use the graded magazine
articles and downloaded the archives in 11/2011.8

Though we used the same WeeklyReader text
base as the previous works, the corpus is not identi-
cal since we downloaded our version more recently.
Thus the archive contained more articles per level
and some preprocessing may differ. The Week-
lyReader magazine issues in addition to the actual
articles include teacher guides, student quizzes, im-
ages and brain teaser games, which we did not in-
clude in the corpus. The distribution of articles after
this preprocessing is shown in Table 1.

Grade Age Number of Avg. Number of
Level in Years Articles Sentences/Article

Level 2 7–8 629 23.41
Level 3 8–9 801 23.28
Level 4 9–10 814 28.12
Senior 10-12 1325 31.21

Table 1: The Weekly Reader corpus

BBC-Bitesize9 is a website with articles classi-
fied into four grade levels (KS1, KS2, KS3 and
GCSE), corresponding to children between ages 5–
7, 8–11, 11–14 and 14–16 years. The Bitesize cor-
pus is freely available on the web, and we crawled it
in 2009. Most of the articles at KS1 consisted of im-
ages and flash files and other audio-visual material,
with little text. Hence, we did not include KS1 in
our corpus. We also excluded pages that contained
only images, audio, or video files without text.

To cover a broad range of non-overlapping age
groups, we used Level 2, Level 3 and Level 4 from
WeeklyReader and KS3 and GCSE from Bitesize
data respectively and built a combined corpus cover-
ing learners aged 7 to 16 years. Note that while KS2
covers the age group of 8–11 years, Levels 2, 3, and

8A license to use the texts on the website for research can be
obtained for a small fee from support@weeklyreader.com. To
support comparable research, we will share the exact corpus we
used with other researchers who have obtained a license to use
the WeeklyReader materials.

9http://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize

165



4 together cover ages 7–10 years. Similarly, the Se-
nior Level overlaps with Level 4 and KS3. Hence,
we excluded KS2 and Senior from the combined
corpus. We will refer to the combined five-level cor-
pus we created in this way as WeeBit. The distribu-
tion of articles in the combined WeeBit corpus after
preprocessing and removing the overlapping grade
levels, is shown in Table 2.

Grade Age Number of Avg. Number of
Level in Years Articles Sentences/Article

Level 2 7–8 629 23.41
Level 3 8–9 801 23.28
Level 4 9–10 814 28.12

KS3 11–14 644 22.71
GCSE 14–16 3500 27.85

Table 2: The WeeBit corpus

To avoid a classification bias towards a class with
more training examples during, for each level in the
WeeBit corpus, 500 documents were taken as train-
ing set and 125 documents were taken as test set.
In total, we trained on a set of 2500 documents and
used a test set of 625 documents, spanning across
five grade levels.

4 Features

To build our classification models, we combined
features used in previous research with other parse
tree features as well as lexical richness and syntactic
complexity features from SLA research. We group
the features into three broad categories: lexical, syn-
tactic and traditional features.

4.1 Lexical Features
Word n-grams have been frequently used as lexical
features in the previous research (Collins-Thompson
and Callan, 2004; Schwarm and Ostendorf, 2005).10

POS n-grams as well as POS-tag ratio features have
also been used in some of the later works (Feng et
al., 2010; Petersen and Ostendorf, 2009).

In the SLA context, independent of the readability
research, Lu (2011a) studied the relationship of lexi-
cal richness to the quality of English as Second Lan-
guage (ESL) learners’ oral narratives and analyzed

10In the readability literature, n-grams are traditionally dis-
cussed as lexical features. N-grams beyond unigrams naturally
also encode aspects of syntax.

the distribution of three dimensions of lexical rich-
ness (lexical density, sophistication and variation) in
them using various metrics proposed in the language
acquisition literature. Those measures were used to
analyze a large scale corpus of Chinese learners of
English. We adapted some of the metrics from this
research as our lexical features:

Type-Token Ratio (TTR) is the ratio of number
of word types (T) to total number word tokens in
a text (N). It has been widely used as a measure
of lexical diversity or lexical variation in language
acquisition studies. However, since it is depen-
dent on the text size, various alternative transfor-
mations of TTR came into existence. We consid-
ered Root TTR (T/

√
N ), Corrected TTR (T/

√
2N ),

Bilogarithmic TTR (Log T/Log N) and Uber Index
(Log2T/Log(N/T )).

Another recent TTR variant we considered, which
is not a part of Lu (2011a), is the Measure of Textual
Lexical Diversity (MTLD; McCarthy and Jarvis,
2010). It is a TTR-based approach that is not af-
fected by text length. It is evaluated sequentially, as
the mean length of string sequences that maintain a
default Type-Token Ratio value. That is, the TTR
is calculated at each word. When the default TTR
value is reached, the MTLD count increases by one
and TTR evaluations are again reset. McCarthy and
Jarvis (2010) considered the default TTR as 0.72 and
we continued with the same default.

Considering nouns, adjectives, non-modal and
non-auxiliary verbs and adverbs as lexical items,
Lu (2011a) studied various syntactic category based
word ratio measures. Lexical variation is defined
as the ratio of the number of lexical types to lexi-
cal tokens. Other variants of lexical variation stud-
ied in Lu (2011a) included noun, adjective, modi-
fier, adverb and verb variations, which represent the
proportion of the words of the respective categories
compared to all lexical words in the document. Al-
ternative measures of verb variation, namely Verb
Variation-1 (Tverb/Nverb), Squared Verb Variation-
1 (T 2verb/Nverb) and Corrected Verb Variation-1
(Tverb/

√
2Nverb) are also studied in the literature.

We considered all these measures of lexical varia-
tion as a part of our lexical features. We have also
included Lexical Density, which is the ratio of the
number of lexical items in relation to the total num-
ber of words in a text.

166



In addition to these measures from the SLA lit-
erature, in our lexical features we included the aver-
age number of syllables per word (NumSyll) and the
average number of characters per word (NumChar),
which are used as word-level indicators of text com-
plexity in various traditional formulae (Kincaid et
al., 1975; Coleman and Liau, 1975).

Finally, we included the proportion of words in
the text which are found on the Academic Word List
as another lexical feature. It refers to the word list
created by Coxhead (2000), which contains a list of
most frequent words found in the academic texts.11

The list does not include the most frequent words in
the English language as such. The words in this list
are specific to academic contexts. It was intended to
be used both by teachers and students as a measure
of vocabulary acquisition. We use it as an additional
lexical feature in our work – and it turned out to be
one of the most predictive features.

All the lexical features we considered in this work
are listed in Table 3. The SLA based lexical features
are referred to as SLALEX in the table. Of these,

Lexical Features from SLA research (SLALEX)
– Lexical Density (LD)
– Type-Token Ratio (TTR)
– Corrected TTR (CTTR)
– Root TTR (RTTR)
– Bilogarithmic TTR (LogTTR)
– Uber Index (Uber)
– Lexical Word Variation (LV)
– Verb Variation-1 (VV1)
– Squared VV1 (SVV1)
– Corrected VV1 (CVV1)
– Verb Variation 2 (VV2)
– Noun Variation (NV)
– Adjective Variation (AdjV)
– Adverb Variation (AdvV)
– Modifier Variation (ModV)
– Mean Textual Lexical Density (MTLD)

Other Lexical Features
– Proportion of words in AWL (AWL)
– Avg. Num. Characters per word (NumChar)
– Avg. Num. Syllables per word (NumSyll)

Table 3: Lexical Features (LEXFEATURES)

11http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Academic_Word_List

six features CTTR, RTTR, SVV1, CVV1, AdvV, ModV
were shown by Lu (2011b) to correlate best with the
learner data. We will refer to them as BESTLEX-
SLA, highlighted in italics in the table.

4.2 Syntactic Features
Schwarm and Ostendorf (2005) implemented four
parse tree features (average parse tree height, aver-
age number of SBARs, NPs per sentence and VPs
per sentence) in their work. Feng (2010) considered
more syntactic features, adding the average lengths
of phrases (NP, VP and PP) per sentence in words
and characters, and the total number of respective
phrases in the document. In our work, we started
with reconsidering the above mentioned syntactic
features.

In addition, we included measures of syntactic
complexity from the SLA literature. Lu (2010) se-
lected 14 measures from a large set of measures used
to monitor the syntactic development in language
learners. He then used these measures in the analysis
of syntactic complexity in second language writing
and showed that some of them correlate well with
the syntactic development of adult Chinese learners
of English. They are grouped into five broad cate-
gories:

The first set consists of three measures of syn-
tactic complexity based on the length of a unit at
the sentential, clausal and T-unit level respectively.
The definitions for sentence, clause and T-unit were
adapted from the SLA literature. While a sentence
is considered to be a group of words delimited with
punctuation mark, a clause is any structure with a
subject and a finite verb. Finally, a T-unit is char-
acterized as one main clause plus any subordinate
clause or non-clausal structure that is attached to or
embedded in it.

The second type of measure targets sentence com-
plexity. Clauses per sentence is considered as a sen-
tence complexity measure.

The third set of measures reflect the amount of
subordination in the sentence. They include clauses
per T-unit, complex T-units per T-unit, dependent
clauses per clause and dependent clauses per T-unit.
A complex T-unit is considered as any T-unit that
contains a dependent clause.

The fourth type of measures measured the amount
of co-ordination in a sentence. They consist of co-

167



ordinate phrases per clause and co-ordinate phases
per T-unit. Any adjective, verb, adverb or noun
phrase that dominates a co-ordinating conjunction is
considered a co-ordinate phrase.

The fifth type of measures represented the rela-
tionship between specific syntactic structures and
larger production units. They include complex nom-
inals per clause, complex nominals per T-unit and
verb phrases per T-unit. Complex nominals are com-
prised of a) nouns plus adjective, possessive, prepo-
sitional phrase, relative clause, participle or appos-
itive, b) nominal clauses, c) gerunds and infinitives
in subject positions.

We implemented these 14 syntactic measures as
features in building our classification models, in ad-
dition to existing features. Eight of these features
(MLC, MLT, CP/C, CP/T, CN/C, CN/T, MLS, VP/T)
were argued to correlate best with language develop-
ment. We refer to this subset of eight as BESTSYN-
SLA, shown in italics in Table 4. We will see in sec-
tion 5 that a set including those features also holds
good predictive power for classifying graded texts.

We also included the number of dependent
clauses, complex T-units, and co-ordinate phrases
per sentence as additional syntactic features. Table 4
summarizes the syntactic features used in this paper.

4.3 “Traditional” Features

The average number of characters per word (Num-
Char), the average number of syllables per word
(NumSyll), and the average sentence length in words
(MLS) have been used to derive formulae for read-
ability in the past. We refer to them as Traditional
Features below. We included MLS in the syntactic
features and NumChar, and NumSyll in the Lexi-
cal features. We also included two popular readabil-
ity formulae, Flesch-Kincaid score (Kincaid et al.,
1975) and Coleman-Liau readability formula (Cole-
man and Liau, 1975), as additional features. The
latter will be referred as Coleman below, and both
formulas together as Traditional Formulae.

5 Experiments and Evaluation

We used the Berkeley Parser (Petrov and Klein,
2007) with the standard model they provide for
building syntactic parse trees and defined the pat-
terns for extracting various syntactic features from

Syntactic features from SLA research (SLASYN)
– Mean length of clause (MLC)
– Mean length of a sentence (MLS)
– Mean length of T-unit (MLT)
– Num. of Clauses per Sentence (C/S)
– Num. of T-Units per sentence (T/S)

– Num. of Clauses per T-unit (C/T)
– Num. of Complex-T-Units per T-unit (CT/T)
– Dependent Clause to Clause Ratio (DC/C)
– Dependent Clause to T-unit Ratio (DC/T)
– Co-ordinate Phrases per Clause (CP/C)

– Co-ordinate Phrases per T-unit (CP/T)
– Complex Nominals per Clause (CN/C)
– Complex Nominals per T-unit (CN/T)
– Verb phrases per T-unit (VP/T)

Other Syntactic features
– Num. NPs per sentence (NumNP)
– Num. VPs per sentence (NumVP)
– Num. PPs per sentence (NumPP))
– Avg. length of a NP (NPSize)
– Avg. length of a VP (VPSize)
– Avg. length of a PP (PPSize)
– Num. Dependent Clauses per sentence (NumDC)
– Num. Complex-T units per sentence (NumCT)
– Num. Co-ordinate Phrases per sentence (CoOrd)
– Num. SBARs per sentence (NumSBAR)
– Avg. Parse Tree Height (TreeHeight)

Table 4: Syntactic features (SYNFEATURES)

the trees using the Tregex pattern matcher (Levy and
Andrew, 2006). More details about the patterns from
the SLA literature and their definitions can be found
in Lu (2010). We used the OpenNLP12 tagger to
get POS tag information and calculate Lexical Rich-
ness features. We used the WEKA (Hall et al., 2009)
toolkit for our classification experiments. We ex-
plored different classification algorithms such as De-
cision Trees, Support Vector Machines, and Logis-
tic Regression. The Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)-
classifier performed best with various combinations
of features, so we focus on reporting the results for
that algorithm.

12http://opennlp.apache.org

168



Feature set # Features Classifier Performance
Accuracy RMSE

Traditional Formulae 2 38.8% 0.36
Traditional Features 3 70.3% 0.25

Trad. Features + Trad. formulae 5 72.3% 0.32
SLALEX 16 68.1% 0.29
SLASYN 14 71.2% 0.28

SLALEX + SLASYN 30 82.3% 0.23
BEST10SYN 10 69.9% 0.28

All Syntactic Features 25 75.3% 0.27
BEST10LEX 10 82.4% 0.22

All Lexical Features 19 86.7% 0.20
BEST10ALL 10 89.7% 0.18
All features 46 93.3% 0.15

Table 5: Classification results for WeeBit Corpus

5.1 Evaluation Metrics

We report our results in terms of classification accu-
racy and root mean square error.

Classification accuracy refers to the percentage of
instances in the test set that are classified correctly.
The correct classifications include both true posi-
tives and true negatives. However, accuracy does
not reflect how close the prediction is to the actual
value. A difference between expected and predicted
values of one grade level is treated the same way as
the difference of, e.g., four grade levels.

Root mean square error (RMSE) is a measure
which gives a better picture of this difference.
RMSE is the square root of empirical mean of the
squared prediction errors. It is frequently used as
a measure to estimate the deviation of an observed
value from the expected value. In readability assess-
ment, it can be understood as the average difference
between the predicted grade level and the expected
grade level.

5.2 Feature Combinations

Complementing our experiments comparing the dif-
ferent lexical and syntactic features and their com-
bination, we also used WEKA’s information-gain-
based feature selection algorithm, and selected the
Top-10 best features using the ranker method.

When all features were considered, the top 10
most predictive features were found to be: (Num-
Char, NumSyll, MLS, AWL, ModVar, CoOrd, Cole-

man, DC/C, CN/C,and AdvVar), which are referred
to as BEST10ALL in the table.

Considering the 25 syntactic features alone, the
10 most predictive features were: (MLS, CoOrd,
DC/C, CN/C, CP/C, NumPP, VPSize, C/T, CN/T and
NumVP), referred to as BEST10SYN in the table.

The 10 most predictive features amongst all the
lexical features were: (NumChar, NumSyll, AWL,
ModV, AdvV, AdjV, LV, VV1, NV and SVV1). They
are referred to as BEST10LEX in the table.

Although the traditionally used features (Num-
Char, NumSyll, MLS) seem to be the most predictive,
it can be seen from the other top ranked features,
that there is significant overlap between the best fea-
tures identified by WEKA and the features which
Lu (2010; 2011b) identified as correlating best with
language development (shown in italics in Table 3
and Table 4), which supports our hypothesis that the
SLA-based measures are useful features for read-
ability classification of non-learner text too.

5.3 Results

Table 5 shows the results of our classification ex-
periments using WEKA’s Multi-Layer Perceptron
algorithm with different combinations of features.
Combining all features results in the best accuracy
of 93.3%, which is a large improvement over the
current state of the art in readability classification
reported on the WeeklyReader corpus (74.01% by
Feng et al., 2010). It should, however, be kept

169



# Features Highest reported accuracy
Previous work (on WeeklyReader)

(Feng et al., 2010) 122 74.01%
(Petersen and Ostendorf, 2009) 25 63.18%

Syntactic features only (Petersen and Ostendorf, 2009) 4 50.91%
Our Results (on WeeklyReader alone)

Syntactic features from (Petersen and Ostendorf, 2009) 4 50.68%
All our Syntactic Features 25 64.3%
All our Lexical Features 19 84.1%

All our Features 46 91.3%
Our Results (on WeeBit)
All our Syntactic Features 25 75.3%
All our Lexical Features 19 86.7%

All our Features 46 93.3%

Table 6: Overall Results and Comparison with Previous Work

in mind that the improvement is achieved on the
WeeBit corpus which is an extension of the Week-
lyReader corpus previously used. Interestingly, the
result of 89.7% for BEST10ALL, the top 10 features
chosen by the WEKA ranker, are quite close to our
best result, with a very small number of features.

Lexical features seem to perform better than syn-
tactic features when considered separately. How-
ever, this better performance of lexical features was
mainly due to the addition of the traditionally used
features NumChar and NumSyll. So it is no won-
der that these shallow features have been used in
the traditional readability formulae for such a long
time; but the predictive power of the traditional for-
mulae as features by themselves is poor (38.8%), in
line with the conclusions drawn in previous research
(Schwarm and Ostendorf, 2005; Feng et al., 2010)
about the Flesch-Kincaid and Dale-Chall formulae.
Interestingly, Coleman, which was not considered
in those previous approaches, was ranked among
the Top-10 most predictive features by the WEKA
ranker. So it holds a good predictive power when
used as one of the features for the classifier.

We also studied the impact of SLA based fea-
tures alone on readability classification. The perfor-
mance of the SLA based lexical features (SLALEX)
and syntactic features (SLASYN) when considered
separately are still in a comparable range with the
previously reported results on readability classifi-
cation (68.1% and 71.2% respectively). However,

combining both of them resulted in an accuracy of
82.3%, which is a considerable improvement over
previously reported results. It again adds weight to
the initial hypothesis that SLA based features can be
useful for readability classification.

5.4 Comparison with previous work

Table 6 provides an overall comparison of the accu-
racies obtained for the key features sets in our work
with the best results reported in the literature for the
WeeklyReader corpus. However, since our classi-
fication experiments were carried out with a newly
compiled corpus extending the WeeklyReader data,
such a direct comparison is not particularly mean-
ingful by itself. To address this issue, we explored
two avenues.

Firstly, we ran additional experiments, training
and testing on the WeeklyReader data only, includ-
ing the four levels used in previous work on that cor-
pus. A summary of the results can be seen in Table
6. Our approach with 46 features results in 91.3%
accuracy on the WeeklyReader corpus, compared to
74.01% as the best previous WeeklyReader result,
reported by Feng et al. (2010) for their much larger
feature set (122 features).

In order to verify the impact of our choice of fea-
tures, we also did a replication of the parsed syntac-
tic feature measures reported by (Schwarm and Os-
tendorf, 2005) on the WeeklyReader corpus and ob-
tained essentially the same accuracy as the one pub-

170



lished (50.7% vs. 50.91%), supporting the compa-
rability of the WeeklyReader data used. The signif-
icant performance increase we reported thus seems
to be due to the new features we integrated from the
SLA literature.

Secondly, we were interested in the impact of the
training size on the results. We therefore investi-
gated how good our best approach (using all fea-
tures) is on a training corpus that is comparable to
the WeeklyReader corpus used in previous work in
terms of the number of documents per class. When
we took 1400 WeeklyReader documents distributed
into four classes as described in Feng et al. (2010),
we obtained an accuracy of 84.2%, compared to the
74.01% they reported as best result. Using 2500
documents distributed into four classes as in Pe-
tersen and Ostendorf (2009) we obtained 88.4%,
compared to their best result of 63.18%. Given that
the original corpora used are not available, these
WeeklyReader corpora with the same source, num-
ber of documents, and size of classes are as close
as we can get to a direct comparison. In the future,
the availability of the WeeBit corpus will support a
more direct comparison of approaches.

In sum, the above experiments seem to indicate
that the set of features and classifier used in our ap-
proach play an important role in the resulting signif-
icant increase in accuracy.

6 Conclusion and Discussion

We created a new corpus, WeeBit, by combining
texts from two graded web sources WeeklyReader
and BBC Bitesize. The resulting text corpus is
larger and covers more grade levels, spanning the
age group between 7 and 16 years. We hope that
the availability of this graded corpus will be useful
as an empirical basis for future studies in automatic
readability assessment.13

We studied the impact of various lexical and syn-
tactic features and explored their performance in
combination with features encoding syntactic com-
plexity and lexical richness that were inspired by
Second Language Acquisition research. Our experi-
ments show that not only the full set of features, but

13As mentioned above, we will make the WeeBit corpus
available to all researchers who have obtained the inexpensive
research license from WeeklyReader.

also specific manually or automatically selected sub-
sets of features provide results significantly improv-
ing on the previously published state of the art in
automatic readability assessment. There also seems
to be a clear correlation between the good predictors
according to SLA research on language learning and
those that performed well in text classification.

Although the exact criteria based on which the
individual corpora (WeeklyReader, BBC-Bitesize)
were created is not known, it is possible that they
were created with the well-known, traditional read-
ability formulae in mind. It would be surprising if
the two corpora, compiled in the US and Britain by
different companies, were created with the same set
of measures in mind, so the WeeBit corpus should
be less affected. Still, it is possible that the rea-
son the traditional features NumChar, NumSyll and
MLS held such a strong predictive power is that
these measures were considered when the texts were
written. But removing these traditional features only
strengthens the role of the other features and thereby
the main point of the paper arguing for the usefuless
of SLA developmental measures for readability clas-
sification.

As a part of our future work, we intend to revisit
and study the impact of further classes of features
employed in psycholinguistics and cognitive sci-
ence research, such as those studied in Coh-Metrix
(Graesser et al., 2004) or in the context of retrieving
texts for specific groups of readers (Feng, 2010).

In terms of our overall application goal, we are
currently studying the ability of the classification
models we built to generalize to web data. We then
plan to add the classification model to a language
aware search engine (Ott and Meurers, 2010). Such
a search engine may then also be able to integrate
user feedback on the readability levels of webpages,
to build a dynamic, online model of readability.

7 Acknowledgements

We thank the anonymous reviewers and workshop
organizers for their feedback on the paper. The re-
search leading to these results has received funding
from the European Commission’s 7th Framework
Program under grant agreement number 238405
(CLARA).14

14http://clara.uib.no

171



References
Sandra Aluisio, Lucia Specia, Caroline Gasperin, and

Carolina Scarton. 2010. Readability assessment for
text simplification. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT
2010 Fifth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for
Building Educational Applications, pages 1–9, Los
Angeles, California, June.

Jeanne S. Chall and Edgar Dale. 1995. Readability
Revisted: The New Dale-Chall Readability Formula.
Brookline Books.

Maio Chen and Klaus Zechner. 2011. Computing and
evaluating syntactic complexity features for automated
scoring of spontaneous non-native speech. In Pro-
ceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 722–731,
Portland, Oregon, June.

Meri Coleman and T.L. Liau. 1975. A computer read-
ability formula designed for machine scoring. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 60:283–284.

Kevyn Collins-Thompson and Jamie Callan. 2004. A
language modeling approach to predicting reading dif-
ficulty. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL 2004, Boston,
USA.

Averil Coxhead. 2000. A new academic word list.
Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages,
34(2):213–238.

Scott A. Crossley, David F. Dufty, Philip M. McCarthy,
and Danielle S. McNamara. 2007a. Toward a new
readability: A mixed model approach. In Danielle S.
McNamara and Greg Trafton, editors, Proceedings of
the 29th annual conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Cognitive Science Society.

Scott A. Crossley, Max M. Louwerse, Philip M. Mc-
Carthy, and Danielle S. McNamara. 2007b. A lin-
guistic analysis of simplified and authentic texts. The
Modern Language Journal, 91(1):15–30.

Edgar Dale and Jeanne S. Chall. 1948. A formula for
predicting readability. Educational research bulletin;
organ of the College of Education, 27(1):11–28.

Felice Dell’Orletta, Simonetta Montemagni, and Giulia
Venturi. 2011. Read-it: Assessing readability of ital-
ian texts with a view to text simplification. In Proceed-
ings of the 2nd Workshop on Speech and Language
Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 73–83.

William H. DuBay. 2006. The Classic Readability Stud-
ies. Impact Information, Costa Mesa, California.

Lijun Feng, Martin Jansche, Matt Huenerfauth, and
Noémie Elhadad. 2010. A comparison of features for
automatic readability assessment. In In Proceedings of
the 23rd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (COLING 2010), Beijing, China.

Lijun Feng. 2010. Automatic Readability Assessment.
Ph.D. thesis, City University of New York (CUNY).

Thomas Francois and Patrick Watrin. 2011. On the con-
tribution of mwe-based features to a readability for-
mula for french as a foreign language. In Proceedings
of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing,
pages 441–447.

Arthur C. Graesser, Danielle S. McNamara, Max M.
Louweerse, and Zhiqiang Cai. 2004. Coh-metrix:
Analysis of text on cohesion and language. Behav-
ior Research Methods, Instruments and Computers,
36:193–202.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: An update.
The SIGKDD Explorations, 11(1).

Michael Heilman, Kevyn Collins-Thompson, Jamie
Callan, and Maxine Eskenazi. 2007. Combining
lexical and grammatical features to improve readabil-
ity measures for first and second language texts. In
Human Language Technologies 2007: The Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (HLT-NAACL’07),
pages 460–467, Rochester, New York.

Michael Heilman, Kevyn Collins-Thompson, and Max-
ine Eskenazi. 2008a. An analysis of statistical mod-
els and features for reading difficulty prediction. In
Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Innovative Use of
NLP for Building Educational Applications, Colum-
bus, Ohio.

Michael Heilman, Le Zhao, Juan Pino, and Maxine Eske-
nazi. 2008b. Retrieval of reading materials for vocab-
ulary and reading practice. In Proceedings of the Third
Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Ed-
ucational Applications (BEA-3) at ACL’08, pages 80–
88, Columbus, Ohio.

Alex Housen and Folkert Kuiken. 2009. Complexity,
accuracy, and fluency in second language acquisition.
Applied Linguistics, 30(4):461–473.

Rohit J. Kate, Xiaoqiang Luo, Siddharth Patwardhan,
Martin Franz, Radu Florian, Raymond J. Mooney,
Salim Roukos, and Chris Welty. 2010. Learning to
predict readability using diverse linguistic features. In
23rd International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics (COLING 2010).

J. P. Kincaid, R. P. Jr. Fishburne, R. L. Rogers, and B. S
Chissom. 1975. Derivation of new readability for-
mulas (Automated Readability Index, Fog Count and
Flesch Reading Ease formula) for Navy enlisted per-
sonnel. Research Branch Report 8-75, Naval Techni-
cal Training Command, Millington, TN.

Roger Levy and Galen Andrew. 2006. Tregex and tsur-
geon: tools for querying and manipulating tree data
structures. In 5th International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, Genoa, Italy.

172



Xiaofei Lu. 2010. Automatic analysis of syntactic
complexity in second language writing. International
Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 15(4):474–496.

Xiaofei Lu. 2011a. A corpus-based evaluation of syn-
tactic complexity measures as indices of college-level
esl writers’ language development. TESOL Quarterly,
45(1):36–62, March.

Xiaofei Lu. 2011b. The relationship of lexical richness
to the quality of esl learners’ oral narratives. The Mod-
ern Languages Journal. in press.

Philip McCarthy and Scott Jarvis. 2010. Mtld, vocd-
d, and hd-d: A validation study of sophisticated ap-
proaches to lexical diversity assessment. Behavior Re-
search Methods, 42(2):381–392.

J. Nelson, C. Perfetti, D. Liben, and M. Liben. 2012.
Measures of text difficulty: Testing their predictive
value for grade levels and student performance. Tech-
nical report, The Council of Chief State School Offi-
cers.

Niels Ott and Detmar Meurers. 2010. Information re-
trieval for education: Making search engines language
aware. Themes in Science and Technology Education.
Special issue on computer-aided language analysis,
teaching and learning: Approaches, perspectives and
applications, 3(1–2):9–30.

Sarah E. Petersen and Mari Ostendorf. 2009. A machine
learning approach to reading level assessment. Com-
puter Speech and Language, 23:86–106.

Slav Petrov and Dan Klein. 2007. Improved inference
for unlexicalized parsing. In Human Language Tech-
nologies 2007: The Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics; Proceedings of the Main Conference, pages 404–
411, Rochester, New York, April.

Mikael Roll, Johan Frid, and Merie Horne. 2007. Mea-
suring syntactic complexity in spontaneous spoken
swedish. Language and Speech, 50(2).

Sarah Schwarm and Mari Ostendorf. 2005. Reading
level assessment using support vector machines and
statistical language models. In Proceedings of the
43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL’05), pages 523–530, Ann Ar-
bor, Michigan.

Luo Si and Jamie Callan. 2001. A statistical model for
scientific readability. In Proceedings of the 10th Inter-
national Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management (CIKM), pages 574–576. ACM.

A. Jackson Stenner. 1996. Measuring reading compre-
hension with the lexile framework. In Fourth North
American Conference on Adolescent/Adult Literacy.

Stephanie Strassel, Dan Adams, Henry Goldberg,
Jonathan Herr, Ron Keesing, Daniel Oblinger, Heather
Simpson, Robert Schrag, and Jonathan Wright. 2010.

The darpa machine reading program - encouraging lin-
guistic and reasoning research with a series of read-
ing tasks. In Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), Malta.

Tim vor der Brück, Sven Hartrumpf, and Hermann Hel-
big. 2008. A readability checker with supervised
learning using deep syntactic and semantic indicators.
Informatica, 32(4):429—-435.

173


