










































A Template Based Hybrid Model for Chinese Personal Name Disambiguation


Proceedings of the Second CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference on Chinese Language Processing, pages 121–126,
Tianjin, China, 20-21 DEC. 2012

A Template Based Hybrid Model for Chinese Personal Name Disam-

biguation 

 

 

Zong Hao Derek F. Wong Lidia S. Chao 

NLP
2
CT Research Group Department of Computer and Information Science, 

University of Macau, Macau SAR, China 

MB15463@umac.mo derekfw@umac.mo lidiac@umac.mo 

  

 

  

 

Abstract 

 

This paper proposes a template based 

hybrid model for Chinese Personal 

Name Disambiguation (CPND). The 

template makes use of the features of 

personal role such as discriminating 

personal name (nickname, stage 

name), together with the specific con-

text of most frequent words, personal 

name nearest words named entities, 

date and time that are effective for this 

disambiguation task, as well as sur-

rounding context of nominal, verbal 

and adjectival constituents. The con-

struction of the templates is automati-

cally derived from the articles that 

maximizes the deviation of different 

categories of personal names. The ex-

traction algorithm of keyword features 

based on the distribution of unlabeled 

data is also proposed in this paper for 

this challenging task. In addition, an 

augmented similarity measure for the 

CPND model has been designed to 

calculate the similarity between a 

standard template and an unlabeled 

text. The final evaluation reveals that 

the proposed model can achieve the F-

measure of 75.75% on the test data. 

 

1 Introduction 

The We participated in the CIPS-SIGHAN Joint 

Conference on Chinese Language Processing and 

focus on task 2: Chinese Personal Name Disam-

biguation. 

This task is a little different from 2010 

SIGHAN task 3
1
. It has given a short description 

of a certain personal name (here we call this 

standard classes), and each unlabeled text may 

belong to three main categories which respec-

tively are a standard class, OUT class and 

OTHER class. 

This task is a little more challenging than 2010 

SIGHAN Bake-off task 3, because this task has 

given us a standard class which usually has less 

information than an unlabeled text. 

This task is very similar to a text clustering 

problem. Usually most people will use some 

clustering algorithm, like Xiamen University 

(Zhu, et al., 2010) and Dalian University (Wang 

& Huang, 2010) in 2010 SIGHAN Bake-off 

task3, both of them used Hierarchical Agglomer-

ative Clustering (HAC) algorithm (Jain et al., 

1999) to do the clustering. As a conclusion, the 

most dissimilar in SIGHAN 2010 task3 is that 

they used different feature set. 

For this task, we have a referenced standard 

class; the clustering for this standard class may 

not have a good effect. The shortage for this 

clustering algorithm is that the text must be large 

enough for this algorithm to extract useful fea-

ture, and more importantly the clustering algo-

rithm is very time consuming and highly rely on 

the feature set. This feature set will add much 

human effort inside, such as the university name 

selection, gender selection, job title selection, 

work experience selection. For this specific task 

these information may not be enough to distin-

guish standard classes. Because two standard 

classes many have some common features. That 

is the last we want to see. Therefore we design a 

                                                 
1 http://www.cipsc.org.cn/clp2010/task3_en.html 

121



similarity formula to handle the clustering time 

consuming problem. We pruned most unneces-

sary calculation. For example, we first calculate 

the unlabeled text’s keyword similarity to each 

standard class; then further calculate good fea-

ture similarity if there is more than one standard 

has the same keyword similarity. For feature se-

lection, we also design an algorithm to extract 

the most discriminating words. This original idea 

of this algorithm is to extract the primitive name 

or used name. However this personal name in-

formation is limited, so we try to use other in-

formation as our text feature. Here we proposed 

a word distribution concept. This word distribu-

tion concept refers to the distribution in the 

whole unlabeled texts. We suppose there is a 

group of existing words in the standard classes 

that their sum of distribution is close to 1. Since 

the classification has OTHER and OUT class, we 

set the expected sum of all distribution is 0.75. 

So we suppose the total OTHER and OUT un-

labeled texts are less than 25% of entire texts. 

    The following sections include Keyword ex-

traction, named entity recognition, model con-

struction, similarity calculation, OUT class solu-

tion and other issues. Then we will show the 

evaluation and conclusion. 

2 General Instructions  

The keyword extraction in standard class is dif-

ferent from the key word extraction in unlabeled 

text. Since the words in the standard classes are 

rare, we have to make full use of these words. In 

standard classes we extract the personal name 

(primitive name, used name (name ever used be-

fore), stage name, pen name, nickname and so 

on), organization name (university, company, 

government organization), other name entity 

(such as film name, song name, etc.) and other 

discriminating word as the keyword. In unla-

beled text we only extract the named entities as 

the keywords.  

2.1 Keyword Extraction Algorithm 

ACL-2010 Keyword extraction is the most sig-

nificant procedure in our system. We utilize 

keyword as the most efficient word to associate 

the unlabeled text with its corresponding stand-

ard class. 

Many scholars use the bag of words as their 

keyword, such as AIDA (Yosef et al., 2011), 

Collective Annotation of Wikipedia Entities in 

Web Text (Kulkarni et al., 2009), both of them 

used bag of word strategy. However in this task, 

we anticipate that there may have some very sim-

ilar standard classes which are very difficult to 

distinguish with this bag of words. We suppose 

that if we use as less keywords as possible, we 

can distinguish those similar standard classes 

more easily. 

This algorithm is based on this idea, and usual-

ly each standard class will have no more than 3 

keywords. Using the most discriminating words as 
our keywords usually gets the best result. We then 

proposed an algorithm to extract the keywords auto-

matically. 

 

Algorithm 1 Keyword Extraction 

Input:  

1.    : Standard classes text; 
2.                : unlabeled text 

Output:  

1.    :  Keywords for all standard classes 
text; 

Variables: 

    : segmentation result appending POS; 
    : Distribution of keywords in unlabelled text; 
Begin: 

For each 𝑆𝐶 ∈ 𝑆𝐶𝑇 
                  𝑆𝐶  
                          
Count[SC]   0 
For each   ∈                : 

If      ∈    ∈          
𝐶     𝑆𝐶    𝐶     𝑆𝐶    
Break 

End if 

End for 

End for 

           𝐶      
While     <                              

𝑇                 𝐶       
                     𝑇  
                           
For each  ∈                 

If      ∈    ∈          
Count[T]   Count[T]+1 
Break 

End If 

End For 

       SUM(Count) 
End While 

Return     
End; 

Algorithm 1. Keyword Extraction Algorithm 

 

This algorithm shows the basic strategy of ex-

tract keyword. We always follow a rule which is 

making the distribution keep reasonable. We 

suppose the distribution should be flat (evenly 

distributed), hence we got a bad performance on 

overbalance unlabeled texts. 

122



By this algorithm we can extract really useful 

keyword. For example, in the test data, after we 

run this algorithm, we get all keywords as Table 

1 below for personal name “白雪 (Bai Xue)”. 
Considering the probability of overbalance, not only 

the keyword but also other useful features together 

which make the performance of this system much 

better should be taken into account. 
This keyword extraction is only for the stand-

ard class, not for the unlabeled texts. It is be-

cause that we assume that most of the unlabeled 

texts have a corresponding standard class, and 

based on this we design this algorithm, and for 

the OUT unlabeled texts, we have not figured out 

a solution.  

 

Standard Class No. Keyword  

Standard class 1 越剧 (Shaoxing opera) 

Standard class 2 白百合 (Bai Baihe) 

Standard class 3 马拉松(Marathon) 

Standard class 4 配音(Dub) 

Standard class 5 陈大威 (Chen Dawei) 

Standard class 6 作家(Writer) 

Standard class 7 大秦帝国 (The great 
Qin empire) 

Table 1: Keywords of Personal Name 白雪 (Bai 
Xue) 

2.2 Keyword priority 

We set different priority corresponding to differ-

ent kind of keywords. We consider that the most 

discriminating words are personal names. When 

trying to distinguish someone with a same name, 

other personal titles (such used name, pen name, 

stage name, etc.) are always the most effective. 

For example, in standard class 白雪 (Bai Xue), 

白百合 (Bai Baihe) and 陈大威 (Chen Dawei) 
can distinguish these two standard classes effi-

ciently. In Table 2 we list our priority setting for 

different types of keyword. 
 

Keyword type Priority 

Personal name High 

Other named entity Mid 

Other discriminating 

words 

Low 

Table 2: Keyword priority 

 

Here all the other discriminating words refer to 

nouns, and the chosen condition is the distribu-

tion of these words in unlabeled text. 

3 Named Entity Recognition 

Chinese Named Entity Recognition (NER) is 

more complex than English Named Entity 

Recognition because it contains a segmentation 

step before. In this system NER is playing a very 

important role. For those unlabeled data, it will 

do NER first. If this system recognizes that the 

name in this text is not a Named Entity (NE), it 

will directly assert that this text belongs to the 

OTHER class. If the name in the text is a NE, we 

will then mark all the NE in this text to help the 

later work. 

Before we do NER we have to do the Chinese 

segmentation and Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging. 

Here this system used ICTCLAS
2
 2011 with ad-

ditional user dictionary to improve the segmenta-

tion and POS tagging accuracy. 

Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) is the most 

popular approach to do NER task. This approach 

is easy to implement and usually achieve a very 

high accuracy. Hence this system also used CRFs 

to do the NER. The CRFs toolkit adopted in this 

system is CRF++
3
 toolkit and used feature is 

three single characters (before, current, after), 

three POS tags (before, current, after), some suf-

fix and prefix (s/f) information and three seg-

mentation label sets (before, current, after). The 

training data set is January-June People’s Daily 

1998. We get F-measure 91.4% from our test set. 

4 Model Construction  

We propose a hierarchical personal model for 

each standard class and unlabeled text. Basically 

this model consists of four parts: 

1. The Keyword, it has the highest priority ( ). 
2. The second is good features ( ), it contains 

other NE except the keyword, the nearest 10 

words and the most frequently used 10 

words.  

3. The date information word ( ).  
4. The other information ( ) contains all noun, 

verb and adjective. 

In this system, all these features are in differ-

ent level, we divide features in four levels, and 

each level’s word contributes different weight to 

the final classification result. 

Basically we rule the weight from great to less 

is          The keyword in standard class is 
different from unlabeled text. In the standard 

class, we use the keyword extraction algorithm, 

                                                 
2 http://www.ictclas.org/ 
3 CRF++: Yet Another Toolkit [CP/OL]. 

  http://crfpp.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/doc/index.html 

123



but in unlabeled text, we check whether this text 

contains the keyword in standard class is, if it 

contain, we add this keyword to it K set, other-

wise K set will empty. 

In this task, the  majority of unlabeled texts 

will have a richer model than standard class, be-

cause unlabeled texts have a very high probabil-

ity of containing a larger size of texts. In some 

standard class it even contains several single 

words. Hence, This system also tried to balance 

the model between the standard class and the 

unlabeled text. It is defined that if a standard 

class contains less than 10 words, all this stand-

ard class text’s words will be added in its model. 

5 Similarity Calculation 

Most scholars will choose to use cosine similari-

ty between two candidate models as the final 

similarity between two documents. This method 

is a measure of similarity between two vectors of 

an inner product space that measure the cosine of 

the angle between them. Its value range is from -

1 to 1, which is a very good range (no need to do 

the normalization).  Here is  an example to ex-

plain this method: when calculating the cosine 

similarity of two candidate documents, firstly 

convert these two documents into a vector space 

A and B, the use   represent the angle between A 
and B. The similarity then can be calculated us-

ing the following equation: 
 

                   
   

|   |    
 

∑      
 
   

√∑     
  

    √∑     
  

   

  (1) 

 

Some common vector units are the tf-idf words, 

some user defined useful information (such as 

university name, job title, age, gender, hometown, 

etc.). 

The biggest advantage of this similarity is its 

result is already normalized. And the shortage is 

when converting the model to vector space, and 

during this procedure some character information 

will be abandoned. Furthermore this calculation 

can’t solve unsymmetrical length problem (the 

standard class is usually much shorter than unla-

beled text). Therefore we define a formula to 

overcome its shortage. The formula takes this 

form: 
 

 𝑆          ∑         
 
      (2) 

 

   Denotes the i
th
 matched word between stand-

ard class model and unlabeled model.        
Denotes a balance factor for different types of 

words.   Denotes penalty, it depends on the 
length of  the unlabeled text. For each unlabeled 

text, we will calculate the similarity for each 

named standard class, and choose the one with 

largest similarity as its corresponding standard 

class. When the largest similarity is less than a 

threshold we will label this text as an OUT class. 

6 Out Class Solution 

The OUT class enlarged the complexity of this 

task. The OUT categories are not limited and 

they are full of uncertainty. Some OUT texts 

may be very similar to a standard class related 

text. In this section we defined a formula. It can 

basically distinguish the OUT class. 

To handle the OUT class, we need clustering 

algorithm. The basic idea is still using the Simi-

larity formula. The detail algorithm is following: 

 

Algorithm 2 OUT Classification  

Input:  

O : All potential OUT class text 

Output:  

Label : Label for each OUT class text 

Begin 

Variables: 

     : Consist of a group of features extracted 
from text; 

𝑇        : A threshold used to determine whether 
this model is belong to a certain model or not; 
For each O ∈    𝑇       

If          
          𝑇    
        EXTRACT_FEATURE    

Else 

𝑇                           
         
                
For each M ∈ Model 

𝑆      SIMILARITY 𝑇         
If 𝑆          

      𝑆    
               

END If 

End For 

If      𝑇         
MERGE_MODEL 𝑇         

Else 

      
    𝑇                     

Return Label 

End For 

End; 

Algorithm 2. OUT classification Algorithm 

124



7 System Architecture 

Our system involves the following steps to do the 

personal name disambiguation. 

For the standard class: 

1) Extract keyword and other useful infor-
mation. Utilize this information to build a 

model for this standard class. 

For the unlabeled text: 

1) Do named entity recognition, label all the 
named entity in this text, if the certain name 

is not a named entity, marked it as the 

OTHER category. 

2) Extract keyword and other useful infor-
mation (good feature, date information and 

other nouns, verbs, adjectives). 

3) Calculate the similarities against the standard 
class. 

The main architecture of this system is shown in 

Figure 1. 

 

 
 

Figure 1: Main workflow. 𝑇 denotes a threshold. 
 

8 Other Issues  

There are some other issues about this task, first-

ly we think the word match method should not 

be completely matched, we should use a similari-

ty instead. Since our matching approach did not 

contain large information about the word posi-

tion. We get a bit lower F-measure after applying 

a TongYiCiCiLin(同义词词林) based similarity 
calculation. 

 We also tried to add the information about the 

distance to the headword which is the certain 

personal name by setting weight. Due to the 

complexity of the unlabeled text, this approach 

did not show a better result. 

9 Evaluation  

We followed the formula given by the organizers 

to calculate the precision rate, recall rate and 

FB1
4
. 

We directly list the best test result based on the 

given so called train set (Table 3): 

 

Personal Name P R FB1 

白雪(Bai Xue) 0.7447 0.7944 0.7687 

白云 (Bai Xun) 0.5333 0.7526 0.6243 

丛林 (Cong  Lin) 0.7738 0.8956 0.8303 

杜鹃(Du Juan) 0.7143 0.9010 0.7969 

方正 (Fang Zheng) 0.6064 0.9135 0.7289 

胡琴 (Hu Qin) 0.7577 0.9131 0.8282 

华明(Hua  Ming) 0.8511 0.9770 0.9097 

华山 (Hua Shan) 0.5062 0.7332 0.5989 

Total 0.6859 0.8600 0.7632 

Table 3: The evaluation of the training data 

 

And for the competition, our result is in Table 

4: 

 

Precision  Recall  FB1 

0.7256 0.7923 0.7575 

Table 4: The official evaluation of final test. 

 

We only get overall score, not in detail. All 

these data show that our recall rate is obviously 

larger than the precision rate. Which means our 

system is better at detecting the OUT and the 

OTHER class. 

10 Conclusion 

We designed an approach for this Chinese Per-

sonal Name Disambiguation task. In our ap-

proach we firstly removed the OTHER class and 

then using a name model to distinguish the unla-

beled text. We designed a keyword extraction 

algorithm which is significantly useful in this 

task. Furthermore, since the recall rate is always 

larger than the precision rate, our designed for-

mula is also vital. 

We implement this system in Python, and our 

system is highly efficient, in the so called train 

set, our whole classification procedure cost only 

5 seconds, and for the final test set it cost 55 se-

conds (experiment environment: Inter Core i5 

760 CPU and 8GB DDR3 1333 memory).  

 

Acknowledgments 

                                                 
4 http://www.cipsc.org.cn/clp2012/task2.html 

Feature Checking

Model
Standard 

Class Model

Similarity
Standard 

Class  t
OUT

Feature Extraction

Named Entity 

Recognition

Model

Other

Set Weight

Reject

Standard class

Unlabeled Text

Pass

Set Weight

Compute

    

125



This work was partially supported by the Re-

search Committee of University of Macau under 

grant UL019B/09-Y3/EEE/LYP01/FST, and also 

supported by Science and Technology Develop-

ment Fund of Macau under grant 057/2009/A2. 

References  

 Jain, A. K., Murty, M. N. & Flynn, P. J. 1999. Data 

clustering: a review, ACM computing surveys 

(CSUR),31(3),264–323. 

Kulkarni, S., Singh, A., Ramakrishnan, G. & 

Chakrabarti, S. 2009. Collective annotation of Wik-

ipedia entities in web text, Proceedings of the 15th 

ACM SIGKDD international conference on 

Knowledge discovery and data mining, 457–466. 

Wang, D. & Huang, D. 2010. DLUT: Chinese Per-

sonal Name Disambiguation with Rich, CIPS-

SIGHAN Joint Conference on Chinese Language 

Processing. 

Yosef, M. A., Hoffart, J., Bordino, I., Spaniol, M. & 

Weikum, G. 2011. Aida: An online tool for accu-

rate disambiguation of named entities in text and 

tables, Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 

4(12). 

Zhu, X., Shi, X., Liu, N., Guo, Y. M. & Chen, Y. 

2010. Chinese Personal Name Disambiguation: 

Technical Report of Natural Language Processing 

Lab of Xiamen University, CIPS-SIGHAN Joint 

Conference on Chinese Language Processing. 

Duan, H. & Zheng, Y. 2011. A study on features of 

the CRFs-based Chinese Named Entity Recogni-

tion, International Journal of Advanced Intelli-

gence, 3(2), 287–294. 

126


