










































A Challenge Set for Advancing Language Modeling


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop: Will We Ever Really Replace the N-gram Model? On the Future of Language Modeling for HLT, pages 29–36,
Montréal, Canada, June 8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Challenge Set for Advancing Language Modeling

Geoffrey Zweig and Chris J.C. Burges
Microsoft Research

Redmond, WA 98052

Abstract

In this paper, we describe a new, publicly
available corpus intended to stimulate re-
search into language modeling techniques
which are sensitive to overall sentence coher-
ence. The task uses the Scholastic Aptitude
Test’s sentence completion format. The test
set consists of 1040 sentences, each of which
is missing a content word. The goal is to select
the correct replacement from amongst five al-
ternates. In general, all of the options are syn-
tactically valid, and reasonable with respect to
local N-gram statistics. The set was gener-
ated by using an N-gram language model to
generate a long list of likely words, given the
immediate context. These options were then
hand-groomed, to identify four decoys which
are globally incoherent, yet syntactically cor-
rect. To ensure the right to public distribution,
all the data is derived from out-of-copyright
materials from Project Gutenberg. The test
sentences were derived from five of Conan
Doyle’s Sherlock Holmes novels, and we pro-
vide a large set of Nineteenth and early Twen-
tieth Century texts as training material.

1 Introduction
Perhaps beginning with Claude Shannon’s use of
N-gram statistics to compute the perplexity of let-
ter sequences (Shannon and Weaver, 1949), N-gram
models have grown to be the most commonly used
type of language model in human language tech-
nologies. At the word level, N-gram modeling tech-
niques have been extensively refined, with state-
of-the-art techniques based on smoothed N-gram

counts (Kneser and Ney, 1995; Chen and Good-
man, 1999), multi-layer perceptrons (Schwenk and
Gauvain, 2002; Schwenk, 2007) and maximum-
entropy models (Rosenfeld, 1997; Chen, 2009a;
Chen, 2009b). Trained on large amounts of data,
these methods have proven very effective in both
speech recognition and machine translation applica-
tions.

Concurrent with the refinement of N-gram model-
ing techniques, there has been an important stream
of research focused on the incorporation of syntac-
tic and semantic information (Chelba and Jelinek,
1998; Chelba and Jelinek, 2000; Rosenfeld et al.,
2001; Yamada and Knight, 2001; Khudanpur and
Wu, 2000; Wu and Khudanpur, 1999). Since in-
tuitively, language is about expressing meaning in
a highly structured syntactic form, it has come as
something of a surprise that the improvements from
these methods have been modest, and the methods
have yet to be widely adopted in non-research sys-
tems.

One explanation for this is that the tasks to which
language modeling has been most extensively ap-
plied are largely soluble with local information. In
the speech recognition application, there is a fun-
damental confluence of acoustic and linguistic in-
formation, and the language model can be thought
of as resolving ambiguity only between acoustically
confusable words (Printz and Olsen, 2002). Since
words which are acoustically similar, e.g. “bill” and
“spill” usually appear in very different textual con-
texts, the local information of an N-gram language
model may be adequate to distinguish them. To a
lesser degree, in a machine translation application,

29



1. One of the characters in Milton Murayama’s
novel is considered because he deliber-
ately defies an oppressive hierarchical society.
(A) rebellious (B) impulsive (C) artistic (D)
industrious (E) tyrannical

2. Whether substances are medicines or poisons
often depends on dosage, for substances that are

in small doses can be in large.
(A) useless .. effective
(B) mild .. benign
(C) curative .. toxic
(D) harmful .. fatal
(E) beneficial .. miraculous

Figure 1: Sample sentence completion questions
(Educational-Testing-Service, 2011).

the potential phrase translations may be similar in
meaning and local information may again suffice to
make a good selection.

In this paper, we present a language processing
corpus which has been explicitly designed to be non-
solvable using purely N-gram based methods, and
which instead requires some level of semantic pro-
cessing. To do this, we draw inspiration from the
standardized testing paradigm, and propose a sen-
tence completion task along the lines of that found
in the widely used Scholastic Aptitude Test. In this
type of question, one is given a sentence with one or
two words removed, and asked to select from among
a set of five possible insertions. Two examples of
SAT test questions are shown in Figure 1.

As can be seen, the options available all make
sense from the local N-gram point of view, and are
all syntactically valid; only semantic considerations
allow the correct answer to be distinguished. We
believe this sort of question is useful for two key
reasons: first, its full solution will require language
modeling techniques which are qualitatively differ-
ent than N-grams; and secondly, the basic task for-
mulation has been externally determined and is a
widely used method for assessing human abilities.
Unfortunately, to date no publicly available corpus
of such questions has been released.

The contribution of this work is to release a public

corpus of sentence completion questions designed to
stimulate research in language modeling technology
which moves beyond N-grams to explicitly address
global sentence coherence. The corpus is based
purely on out-of-copyright data from Project Guten-
berg, thus allowing us to distribute it. The test ques-
tions consist of sentences taken from five Sherlock
Holmes novels. In each, a word has been removed,
and the task is to choose from among five alterna-
tives. One of the options is the original word, and the
other four “decoys” have been generated from an N-
gram language model using local context. Sampling
from an N-gram model is done to generate alternates
which make sense locally, but for which there is no
other reason to expect them to make sense globally.
To ensure that synonyms of the correct answer are
not present, and that the options are syntactically
reasonable, the decoys have been hand selected from
among a large number of possibilities suggested by
the N-gram model. The training data consists of
approximately 500 out-of-copyright Nineteenth and
early Twentieth century novels, also from Project
Gutenberg.

We expect that the successful development of
models of global coherence will be useful in a va-
riety of tasks, including:

• the interactive generation of sentence comple-
tion questions for vocabulary tutoring applica-
tions;

• proof-reading;

• automated grading of essays and other student
work; and

• sentence generation in free-form dialog appli-
cations.

The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. In Section 2, we describe the process by which
we made the corpus. Section 3 provides guidance
as to the proper use of the data. In Section 4, we
present baseline results using several simple auto-
mated methods for answering the questions. Finally,
in Section 5, we discuss related work.

2 The Question Generation Process

Question generation was done in two steps. First,
a candidate sentence containing an infrequent word

30



was selected, and alternates for that word were auto-
matically determined by sampling with an N-gram
language model. The N-gram model used the im-
mediate history as context, thus resulting in words
that may “look good” locally, but for which there
is no a-priori reason to expect them to make sense
globally. In the second step, we eliminated choices
which are obviously incorrect because they consti-
tute grammatical errors. Choices requiring semantic
knowledge and logical inference were preferred, as
described in the guidelines, which we give in Sec-
tion 3. Note that an important desideratum guid-
ing the data generation process was requiring that
a researcher who knows exactly how the data was
created, including knowing which data was used to
train the language model, should nevertheless not be
able to use that information to solve the problem.
We now describe the data that was used, and then
describe the two steps in more detail.

2.1 Data Used

Seed sentences were selected from five of Co-
nan Doyle’s Sherlock Holmes novels: The Sign of
Four (1890), The Hound of the Baskervilles (1892),
The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (1892), The
Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes (1894), and The Val-
ley of Fear (1915). Once a focus word within
the sentence was selected, alternates to that word
were generated using an N-gram language model.
This model was trained on approximately 540 texts
from the Project Gutenberg collection, consisting
mainly of 19th century novels. Of these 522 had
adequate headers attesting to lack of copyright,
and they are now available at the Sentence Com-
pletion Challenge website http://research.
microsoft.com/en-us/projects/scc/.

2.2 Automatically Generating Alternates

Alternates were generated for every sentence con-
taining an infrequent word. A state-of-the-art class-
based maximum entropy N-gram model (Chen,
2009b) was used to generate the alternates. Ide-
ally, these alternates would be generated according
to P (alternate|remainder of sentence). This can
be done by computing the probability of the com-
pleted sentence once for every possible vocabulary
word, and then normalizing and sampling. However,
the normalization over all words is computationally

expensive, and we have used a procedure based on
sampling based on the preceding two word history
only, and then re-ordering based on a larger context.
The following procedure was used:

1. Select a focus word with overall frequency less
than 10−4. For example, we might select “ex-
traordinary” in “It is really the most extraordi-
nary and inexplicable business.”

2. Use the two-word history immediately preced-
ing the selected focus word to predict alter-
nates. We sampled 150 unique alternates at this
stage, requiring that they all have frequency
less than 10−4. For example, “the most” pre-
dicts “handsome” and “luminous.”

3. If the original (correct) sentence has a better
score than any of these alternates, reject the
sentence.

4. Else, score each option according to how well it
and its immediate predecessor predict the next
word. For example, the probability of “and”
following “most handsome” might be 0.012.

5. Sort the predicted words according to this
score, and retain the top 30 options.

In step 3, omitting questions for which the correct
sentence is the best makes the set of options more
difficult to solve with a language model alone. How-
ever, by allowing the correct sentence to potentially
fall below the set of alternates retained, an opposite
bias is created: the language model will tend to as-
sign a lower score to the correct option than to the
alternates (which were chosen by virtue of scoring
well). We measured the bias by performing a test on
the 1,040 test sentences using the language model,
and choosing the lowest scoring candidate as the an-
swer. This gave an accuracy of 26% (as opposed to
31%, found by taking the highest scoring candidate:
recall that a random choice would give 20% in ex-
pectation). Thus although there is some remaining
bias for the answer to be low scoring, it is small.
When a language model other than the precise one
used to generate the data is used, the score reversal
test yielded 17% correct. The correct polarity gave
39%. If, however, just the single score used to do
the sort in the last step is used (i.e. the probability

31



of the immediate successor alone), then the lowest
scoring alternate is correct about 38% of the time -
almost as much as the language model itself. The
use of the word score occurring two positions af-
ter the focus also achieves 38%, though a positive
polarity is beneficial here. Combined, these scores
achieve about 43%. Neither is anywhere close to
human performance. We are currently evaluating
a second round of test questions, in which we still
sample options based on the preceding history, but
re-order them according the the total sentence prob-
ability P (w1 . . . wN ).

The overall procedure has the effect of providing
options which are both well-predicted by the imme-
diate history, and predictive of the immediate future.
Since in total the procedure uses just four consec-
utive words, it cannot be expected to provide glob-
ally coherent alternates. However, sometimes it does
produce synonyms to the correct word, as well as
syntactically invalid options, which must be weeded
out. For this, we examine the alternates by hand.

2.3 Human Grooming
The human judges picked the best four choices of
impostor sentences from the automatically gener-
ated list of thirty, and were given the following in-
structions:

1. All chosen sentences should be grammatically
correct. For example: He dances while he ate
his pipe would be illegal.

2. Each correct answer should be unambiguous.
In other words, the correct answer should al-
ways be a significantly better fit for that sen-
tence than each of the four impostors; it should
be possible to write down an explanation as to
why the correct answer is the correct answer,
that would persuade most reasonable people.

3. Sentences that might cause offense or contro-
versy should be avoided.

4. Ideally the alternatives will require some
thought in order to determine the correct an-
swer. For example:

• Was she his [ client | musings | discomfi-
ture | choice | opportunity ] , his friend ,
or his mistress?

would constitute a good test sentence. In order
to arrive at the correct answer, the student must
notice that, while ”musings” and ”discomfi-
ture” are both clearly wrong, the terms friend
and mistress both describe people, which there-
fore makes client a more likely choice than
choice or opportunity.

5. Alternatives that require understanding proper-
ties of entities that are mentioned in the sen-
tence are desirable. For example:

• All red-headed men who are above the age
of [ 800 | seven | twenty-one | 1,200 |
60,000 ] years , are eligible.

requires that the student realize that a man can-
not be seven years old, or 800 or more. How-
ever, such examples are rare: most often, arriv-
ing at the answer will require thought, but not
detailed entity knowledge, such as:

• That is his [ generous | mother’s | suc-
cessful | favorite | main ] fault , but on
the whole he’s a good worker.

6. Dictionary use is encouraged, if necessary.

7. A given sentence from the set of five novels
should only be used once. If more than one
focus word has been identified for a sentence
(i.e. different focuses have been identified, in
different positions), choose the set of sentences
that generates the best challenge, according to
the above guidelines.

Note that the impostors sometimes constitute a
perfectly fine completion, but that in those cases, the
correct completion is still clearly identifiable as the
most likely completion.

2.4 Sample Questions
Figure 2 shows ten examples of the Holmes
derived questions. The full set is available
at http://research.microsoft.com/
en-us/projects/scc/.

3 Guidelines for Use

It is important for users of this data to realize the fol-
lowing: since the test data was taken from five 19th
century novels, the test data itself is likely to occur in

32



1) I have seen it on him , and could to it.
a) write b) migrate c) climb d) swear e) contribute

2) They seize him and use violence towards him in order to make him sign some papers to make
over the girl’s of which he may be trustee to them.
a) appreciation b) activity c) suspicions d) administration e) fortune

3) My morning’s work has not been , since it has proved that he has the very strongest
motives for standing in the way of anything of the sort.
a) invisible b) neglected c) overlooked d) wasted e) deliberate

4) It was furred outside by a thick layer of dust , and damp and worms had eaten through the wood
, so that a crop of livid fungi was on the inside of it.
a) sleeping b) running c) resounding d) beheaded e) growing

5) Presently he emerged , looking even more than before.
a) instructive b) reassuring c) unprofitable d) flurried e) numerous

6) We took no to hide it.
a) fault b) instructions c) permission d) pains e) fidelity

7) I stared at it , not knowing what was about to issue from it.
a) afterwards b) rapidly c) forever d) horror-stricken e) lightly

8) The probability was , therefore , that she was the truth , or , at least , a part of the truth.
a) addressing b) telling c) selling d) surveying e) undergoing

9) The furniture was scattered about in every direction , with dismantled shelves and open drawers
, as if the lady had hurriedly them before her flight.
a) warned b) rebuked c) assigned d) ransacked e) taught

10) The sun had set and was settling over the moor.
a) dusk b) mischief c) success d) disappointment e) laughter

Figure 2: The first ten questions from the Holmes Corpus.

the index of most Web search engines, and in other
large scale data-sets that were constructed from web
data (for example, the Google N-gram project). For
example, entering the string That is his fault , but on
the whole he’s a good worker (one of the sentence
examples given above, but with the focus word re-
moved) into the Bing search engine results in the
correct (full) sentence at the top position. It is im-
portant to realize that researchers may inadvertently
get better results than truly warranted because they
have used data that is thus tainted by the test set.
To help prevent any such criticism from being lev-
eled at a particular publication, we recommend than

in any set of published results, the exact data used
for training and validation be specified. The train-
ing data provided on our website may also be con-
sidered “safe” and useful for making comparisons
across sites.

4 Baseline Results

4.1 A Simple 4-gram model

As a sanity check we constructed a very simple N-
gram model as follows: given a test sentence (with
the position of the focus word known), the score for
that sentence was initialized to zero, and then incre-

33



mented by one for each bigram match, by two for
each trigram match, and by three for each 4-gram
match, where a match means that the N-gram in
the test sentence containing the focus word occurs
at least once in the background data. This simple
method achieved 34% correct (compared to 20% by
random choice) on the test set.

4.2 Smoothed N-gram model
As a somewhat more sophisticated baseline, we use
the CMU language modeling toolkit 1 to build a 4-
gram language model using Good-Turing smooth-
ing. We kept all bigrams and trigrams occurring
in the data, as well as four-grams occurring at least
twice. We used a vocabulary of the 126k words that
occurred five or more times, resulting in a total of
26M N-grams. Sentences were ordered according to
their probability according to the language model:
P (w1 . . . wN ). This improved by 5% absolute on
the simple baseline to achieve 39% correct.

4.3 Latent Semantic Analysis Similarity
As a final benchmark, we present scores for a novel
method based on latent semantic analysis. In this
approach, we treated each sentence in the training
data as a “document” and performed latent semantic
analysis (Deerwester et al., 1990) to obtain a 300
dimensional vector representation of each word in
the vocabulary. Denoting two words by their vectors
x,y, their similarity is defined as the cosine of the
angle between them:

sim(x,y) =
x · y

‖ x ‖‖ y ‖
.

To decide which option to select, we computed the
average similarity to every other word in the sen-
tence, and then output the word with the greatest
overall similarity. This results in our best baseline
performance, at 49% correct.

4.4 Benchmark Summary
Table 1 summarizes our benchmark study. First, for
reference, we had an unaffiliated human answer a
random subset of 100 questions. Ninety-one per-
cent were answered correctly, showing that scores
in the range of 90% are reasonable to expect. Sec-
ondly, we tested the performance of the same model

1http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/SLM/toolkit.html

Method % Correct (N=1040)
Human 91
Generating Model 31
Smoothed 3-gram 36
Smoothed 4-gram 39
Positional combination 43
Simple 4-gram 34
Average LSA Similarity 49

Table 1: Summary of Benchmarks

(Model M) that was used to generate the data. Be-
cause this model output alternates that it assigns
high-probability, there is a bias against it, and it
scored 31%. Smoothed 3 and 4-gram models built
with the CMU toolkit achieved 36 to 39 percent. Re-
call that the sampling process introduced some bias
into the word scores at specific positions relative to
the focus word. Exploiting the negative bias induced
on the immediately following word, and combin-
ing it with the score of the word two positions in
the future, we were able to obtain 43%. The sim-
ple 4-gram model described earlier did somewhat
worse than the other N-gram language models, and
the LSA similarity model did best with 49%. As
a further check on this data, we have run the same
tests on 108 sentence completion questions from a
practice SAT exam (Princeton Review, 11 Practice
Tests for the SAT & PSAT, 2011 Edition). To train
language models for the SAT question task, we used
1.2 billion words of Los Angeles Times data taken
from the years 1985 through 2002. Results for the
SAT data are similar, with N-gram language models
scoring 42-44% depending on vocabulary size and
smoothing, and LSA similarity attaining 46%.

These results indicate that the “Holmes” sentence
completion set is indeed a challenging problem, and
has a level of difficulty roughly comparable to that
of SAT questions. Simple models based on N-gram
statistics do quite poorly, and even a relatively so-
phisticated semantic-coherence model struggles to
beat the 50% mark.

5 Related Work

The past work which is most similar to ours is de-
rived from the lexical substitution track of SemEval-
2007 (McCarthy and Navigli, 2007). In this task,
the challenge is to find a replacement for a word or

34



phrase removed from a sentence. In contrast to our
SAT-inspired task, the original answer is indicated.
For example, one might be asked to find replace-
ments for match in “After the match, replace any re-
maining fluid deficit to prevent problems of chronic
dehydration throughout the tournament.” Scoring
is done by comparing a system’s results with those
produced by a group of human annotators (not un-
like the use of multiple translations in machine trans-
lation). Several forms of scoring are defined us-
ing formulae which make the results impossible to
compare with correct/incorrect multiple choice scor-
ing. Under the provided scoring metrics, two con-
sistently high-performing systems in the SemEval
2007 evaluations are the KU (Yuret, 2007) and UNT
(Hassan et al., 2007) systems. These operate in two
phases: first they find a set of potential replacement
words, and then they rank them. The KU system
uses just an N-gram language model to do this rank-
ing. The UNT system uses a large variety of infor-
mation sources, each with a different weight. A lan-
guage model is used, and this receives the highest
weight. N-gram statistics were also very effective -
according to one of the scoring paradigms - in (Giu-
liano et al., 2007); as a separate entry, this paper fur-
ther explored the use of Latent Semantic Analysis
to measure the degree of similarity between a poten-
tial replacement and its context, but the results were
poorer than others. Since the original word provides
a strong hint as to the possible meanings of the re-
placements, we hypothesize that N-gram statistics
are largely able to resolve the remaining ambigui-
ties, thus accounting for the good performance of
these methods on this task. The Holmes data does
not have this property and thus may be more chal-
lenging.

ESL synonym questions were studied by Turney
(2001), and subsequently considered by numerous
research groups including Terra and Clarke (2003)
and Pado and Lapata (2007). These questions are
easier than the SemEval task because in addition to
the original word and the sentence context, the list
of options is provided. For example, one might be
asked to identify a replacement for “rusty” in ”A
[rusty] nail is not as strong as a clean, new one.
(corroded; black; dirty; painted).” Jarmasz and
Szpakowicz (2003) used a sophisticated thesaurus-
based method and achieved state-of-the art perfor-

mance on the ESL synonyms task, which is 82%.
Again the Holmes data does not have the property
that the intended meaning is signaled by providing
the original word, thus adding extra challenge.

Although it was not developed for this task, we
believe the recurrent language modeling work of
Mikolov (2010; 2011b; 2011a) is also quite rel-
evant. In this work, a recurrent neural net lan-
guage model is used to achieve state-of-the-art per-
formance in perplexity and speech recognition er-
ror rates. Critically, the recurrent neural net does
not maintain a fixed N-gram context, and its hid-
den layer has the potential to model overall sen-
tence meaning and long-span coherence. While the-
oretical results (Bengio et al., 1994) indicate that
extremely long-range phenomena are hard to learn
with a recurrent neural network, in practice the span
of usual sentences may be manageable. Recursive
neural networks (Socher et al., 2011) offer similar
advantages, without the theoretical limitations. Both
offer promising avenues of research.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we have described a new, publicly
available, corpus of sentence-completion questions.
Whereas for many traditional language modeling
tasks, N-gram models provide state-of-the-art per-
formance, and may even be fully adequate, this task
is designed to be insoluble with local models. Be-
cause the task now allows us to measure progress
in an area where N-gram models do poorly, we ex-
pect it to stimulate research in fundamentally new
and more powerful language modeling methods.

References

Yoshua Bengio, Patrice Simard, and Paolo Frasconi.
1994. Learning long-term dependencies with gradi-
ent descent is difficult. IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks, 5(2):157 –166.

Ciprian Chelba and Frederick Jelinek. 1998. Exploit-
ing syntactic structure for language modeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and 17th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics - Volume 1,
ACL ’98, pages 225–231, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Ciprian Chelba and Frederick Jelinek. 2000. Structured

35



language modeling. Computer Speech and Language,
14(4):283 – 332.

Stanley F. Chen and Joshua Goodman. 1999. An empir-
ical study of smoothing techniques for language mod-
eling. Computer Speech and Language, 13(4):359 –
393.

S. Chen. 2009a. Performance prediction for exponential
language models. In NAACL-HLT.

S. Chen. 2009b. Shrinking exponential language models.
In NAACL-HLT.

S. Deerwester, S.T. Dumais, G.W. Furnas, T.K. Landauer,
and R. Harshman. 1990. Indexing by latent semantic
analysis. Journal of the American Society for Informa-
tion Science, 41(96).

Educational-Testing-Service. 2011.
https://satonlinecourse.collegeboard.com/sr/ digi-
tal assets/assessment/pdf/0833a611-0a43-10c2-0148-
cc8c0087fb06-f.pdf.

Claudio Giuliano, Alfio Gliozzo, and Carlo Strapparava.
2007. Fbk-irst: Lexical substitution task exploiting
domain and syntagmatic coherence. In Proceedings
of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evalu-
ations, SemEval ’07, pages 145–148, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Samer Hassan, Andras Csomai, Carmen Banea, Ravi
Sinha, and Rada Mihalcea. 2007. Unt: Subfinder:
Combining knowledge sources for automatic lexical
substitution. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluations, SemEval ’07,
pages 410–413, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Sanjeev Khudanpur and Jun Wu. 2000. Maximum
entropy techniques for exploiting syntactic, semantic
and collocational dependencies in language modeling.
Computer Speech and Language, 14(4):355 – 372.

R. Kneser and H. Ney. 1995. Improved backing-off
for m-gram language modeling. In Proceedings of
ICASSP.

Jarmasz M. and Szpakowicz S. 2003. Roget’s thesaurus
and semantic similarity. In Recent Advances in Natu-
ral Language Processing (RANLP).

Diana McCarthy and Roberto Navigli. 2007. Semeval-
2007 task 10: English lexical substitution task. In Pro-
ceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Seman-
tic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 48–53.

Tomas Mikolov, Martin Karafiat, Jan Cernocky, and San-
jeev Khudanpur. 2010. Recurrent neural network
based language model. In Proceedings of Interspeech
2010.

Tomas Mikolov, Anoop Deoras, Stefan Kombrink, Lukas
Burget, and Jan Cernocky. 2011a. Empirical evalua-
tion and combination of advanced language modeling
techniques. In Proceedings of Interspeech 2011.

Tomas Mikolov, Stefan Kombrink, Lukas Burget, Jan
Cernocky, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2011b. Ex-
tensions of recurrent neural network based language
model. In Proceedings of ICASSP 2011.

Sebastian Pado and Mirella Lapata. 2007. Dependency-
based construction of semantic space models. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 33 (2), pages 161–199.

Harry Printz and Peder A. Olsen. 2002. Theory and prac-
tice of acoustic confusability. Computer Speech and
Language, 16(1):131 – 164.

Ronald Rosenfeld, Stanley F. Chen, and Xiaojin Zhu.
2001. Whole-sentence exponential language models:
a vehicle for linguistic-statistical integration. Com-
puter Speech and Language, 15(1):55 – 73.

R. Rosenfeld. 1997. A whole sentence maximum en-
tropy language model. In Proceedings ASRU.

Holger Schwenk and Jean-Luc Gauvain. 2002. Connec-
tionist language modeling for large vocabulary contin-
uous speech recognition. In Proceedings of ICASSP.

Holger Schwenk. 2007. Continuous space language
models. Computer Speech and Language, 21(3):492
– 518.

Claude E. Shannon and Warren Weaver. 1949. The
Mathematical Theory of Communication. University
of Illinois Press.

Richard Socher, Cliff Chiung-Yu Lin, Andrew Y. Ng,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2011. Parsing natural
scenes and natural language with recursive neural net-
works. In Proceedings of the 2011 International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ICML-2011).

E. Terra and C. Clarke. 2003. Frequency estimates for
statistical word similarity measures. In Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (NAACL).

Peter D. Turney. 2001. Mining the web for synonyms:
PMI-IR versus LSA on TOEFL. In European Confer-
ence on Machine Learning (ECML).

Jun Wu and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 1999. Combining non-
local, syntactic and n-gram dependencies in language
modeling. In Proceedings of Eurospeech.

Kenji Yamada and Kevin Knight. 2001. A syntax-
based statistical translation model. In Proceedings of
the 39th Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, ACL ’01, pages 523–530, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Deniz Yuret. 2007. Ku: word sense disambiguation
by substitution. In Proceedings of the 4th Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluations, SemEval
’07, pages 207–213, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

36


