










































Detecting Hate Speech on the World Wide Web


Proceedings of the 2012 Workshop on Language in Social Media (LSM 2012), pages 19–26,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Detecting Hate Speech on the World Wide Web

William Warner and Julia Hirschberg
Columbia University

Department of Computer Science
New York, NY 10027

whw2108@columbia.edu, julia@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
We present an approach to detecting hate
speech in online text, where hate speech is
defined as abusive speech targeting specific
group characteristics, such as ethnic origin, re-
ligion, gender, or sexual orientation. While
hate speech against any group may exhibit
some common characteristics, we have ob-
served that hatred against each different group
is typically characterized by the use of a small
set of high frequency stereotypical words;
however, such words may be used in either
a positive or a negative sense, making our
task similar to that of words sense disambigua-
tion. In this paper we describe our definition
of hate speech, the collection and annotation
of our hate speech corpus, and a mechanism
for detecting some commonly used methods
of evading common “dirty word” filters. We
describe pilot classification experiments in
which we classify anti-semitic speech reach-
ing an accuracy 94%, precision of 68% and
recall at 60%, for an F1 measure of .6375.

1 Introduction

Hate speech is a particular form of offensive lan-
guage that makes use of stereotypes to express an
ideology of hate. Nockleby (Nockleby, 2000) de-
fines hate speech as “any communication that dis-
parages a person or a group on the basis of some
characteristic such as race, color, ethnicity, gen-
der, sexual orientation, nationality, religion, or other
characteristic.” In the United States, most hate
speech is protected by the First Amendment of
the U. S. Constitution, which, except for obscen-
ity, “fighting words” and incitement, guarantees the

right to free speech, and internet commentators exer-
cise this right in online forums such as blogs, news-
groups, Twitter and Facebook. However, terms of
service for such hosted services typically prohibit
hate speech. Yahoo! Terms Of Service 1 prohibits
posting “Content that is unlawful, harmful, threat-
ening, abusive, harassing, tortuous, defamatory, vul-
gar, obscene, libelous, invasive of another’s privacy,
hateful, or racially, ethnically or otherwise objec-
tionable.” Facebook’s terms 2 are similar, forbid-
ding “content that: is hateful, threatening, or porno-
graphic; incites violence.” While user submissions
are typically filtered for a fixed list of offensive
words, no publicly available automatic classifier cur-
rently exists to identify hate speech itself.

In this paper we describe the small amount of ex-
isting literature relevant to our topic in Section 2. In
Section 3 we motivate our working definition of hate
speech. In Section 4 we describe the resources and
corpora of hate and non-hate speech we have used
in our experiments. In Section 5 we describe the an-
notation scheme we have developed and interlabeler
reliability of the labeling process. In Section 6 we
describe our approach to the classification problem
and the features we used. We present preliminary
results in Section 7, follow with an analysis of clas-
sification errors in 8 and conclude in Section 9 with
an outline of further work.

1Yahoo TOS, paragraph 9a
http://info.yahoo.com/legal/us/yahoo/utos/utos-173.html

2Facebook TOS, paragraph 3.7
https://www.facebook.com/legal/terms

19



2 Previous Literature

There is little previous literature on identifying hate
speech.

In (A Razavi, Diana Inkpen, Sasha Uritsky, Stan
Matwin, 2010), the authors look for Internet
“flames” in newsgroup messages using a three-stage
classifier. The language of flames is significantly
different from hate speech, but their method could
inform our work. Their primary contribution is a
dictionary of 2700 hand-labeled words and phrases.

In (Xu and Zhu, 2010), the authors look for offen-
sive language in YouTube comments and replaces
all but the first letter of each word with asterisks.
Again, while the language and the goal is different,
the method may have some value for detecting hate
speech. Their detection method parses the text and
arranges it into a hierarchy of clauses, phrases and
individual words. Both the annotation and the clas-
sification strategies found in this paper are based on
the sentiment analysis work found in (Pang and Lee,
2008) and (Pang, Lee and Vaithyanathan, 2002).

3 Defining Hate Speech

There are numerous issues involved in defining what
constitutes hate speech, which need to be resolved in
order to annotate a corpus and develop a consistent
language model. First, merely mentioning, or even
praising, an organization associated with hate crimes
does not by itself constitute hate speech. The name
“Ku Klux Klan” by itself is not hateful, as it may ap-
pear in historical articles, legal documents, or other
legitimate communication. Even an endorsement of
the organization does not constitute a verbal attack
on another group. While one may hypothesize that
such endorsements are made by authors who would
also be comfortable with hateful language, by them-
selves, we do not consider these statements to be
hate speech.

For the same reason, an author’s excessive pride
in his own race or group doesn’t constitute hate
speech. While such boasting may seem offensive
and likely to co-occur with hateful language, a dis-
paragement of others is required to satisfy the defi-
nition.

For example, the following sentence does not con-
stitute hate speech, even though it uses the word
“Aryan”.

And then Aryan pride will be true because
humility will come easily to Aryans who
will all by then have tasted death.

On the other hand, we believe that unnecessary
labeling of an individual as belonging to a group of-
ten should be categorized as hate speech. In the fol-
lowing example, hate is conveyed when the author
unnecessarily modifies bankers and workers with
“jew” and “white.”

The next new item is a bumper sticker that
reads: “Jew Bankers Get Bailouts, White
Workers Get Jewed!” These are only 10
cents each and require a minimum of a
$5.00 order

Unnecessarily calling attention to the race or eth-
nicity of an individual appears to be a way for an
author to invoke a well known, disparaging stereo-
type.

While disparaging terms and racial epithets when
used with the intent to harm always constitute hate-
ful language, there are some contexts in which such
terms are acceptable. For example, such words
might be acceptable in a discussion of the words
themselves. For example:

Kike is a word often used when trying to
offend a jew.

Sometimes such words are used by a speaker who
belongs to the targeted group, and these may be hard
to classify without that knowledge. For example:

Shit still happenin and no one is hearin
about it, but niggas livin it everyday.

African American authors appear to use the “N”
word with a particular variant spelling, replacing
“er” with “a”, to indicate group solidarity (Stephens-
Davidowitz, 2011). Such uses must be distin-
guished from hate speech mentions. For our pur-
poses, if the identity of the speaker cannot be as-
certained, and if no orthographic or other contextual
cues are present, such terms are categorized as hate-
ful.

20



4 Resources and Corpora

We received data from Yahoo! and the American
Jewish Congress (AJC) to conduct our research on
hate speech. Yahoo! provided data from its news
group posts that readers had found offensive. The
AJC provided pointers to websites identified as of-
fensive.

Through our partnership with the American Jew-
ish Congress, we received a list of 452 URLs previ-
ously obtained from Josh Attenberg (Attenberg and
Provost, 2010) which were originally collected to
classify websites that advertisers might find unsuit-
able. After downloading and examining the text
from these sites, we found a significant number that
contained hate speech according to our working def-
inition; in particular, a significant number were anti-
semitic. We noted, however, that sites which which
appeared to be anti-semitic rarely contained explic-
itly pejorative terms. Instead, they presented sci-
entifically worded essays presenting extremely anti-
semitic ideologies and conclusions. Some texts con-
tained frequent references to a well known hate
group, but did not themselves constitute examples of
hate speech. There were also examples containing
only defensive statements or declarations of pride,
rather than attacks directed toward a specific group.

In addition to the data we collected from these
URLs, Yahoo! provided us with several thou-
sand comments from Yahoo! groups that had been
flagged by readers as offensive, and subsequently
purged by administrators. These comments are
short, with an average of length of 31 words, and
lacked the contextual setting in which they were
originally found. Often, these purged comments
contained one or more offensive words, but obscured
with an intentional misspelling, presumably to evade
a filter employed by the site. For common racial ep-
ithets, often a single character substitution was used,
as in “nagger”, or a homophone was employed, such
as “joo.” Often an expanded spelling was employed,
in which each character was separated by a space
or punctuation mark, so that “jew” would become
“j@e@w@.”

The two sources of data were quite different, but
complementary.

The Yahoo! Comment data contained many ex-
amples of offensive language that was sometimes

hateful and sometimes not, leading to our hypoth-
esis that hate speech resembles a word sense dis-
ambiguation task, since, a single word may appear
quite frequently in hate and non-speech texts. An
example is the word “jew”. In addition, it provided
useful examples of techniques used to evade simple
lexical filters (in case such exist for a particular fo-
rum). Such evasive behavior generally constitutes a
positive indicator of offensive speech.

Web data captured from Attenberg’s URLs tended
to include longer texts, giving us more context,
and contained additional lower frequency offensive
terms. After examining this corpus, we decided
to attempt our first classification experiments at the
paragraph level, to make use of contextual features.

The data sets we received were considered offen-
sive, but neither was labeled for hate speech per se.
So we developed a labeling manual for annotating
hate speech and asked annotators to label a corpus
drawn from the web data set.

5 Corpus Collection and Annotation

We hypothesize that hate speech often employs well
known stereotypes to disparage an individual or
group. With that assumption, we may be further sub-
divide such speech by stereotype, and we can distin-
guish one form of hate speech from another by iden-
tifying the stereotype in the text. Each stereotype
has a language all its own, with one-word epithets,
phrases, concepts, metaphors and juxtapositions that
convey hateful intent. Anti-hispanic speech might
make reference to border crossing or legal identi-
fication. Anti-African American speech often ref-
erences unemployment or single parent upbringing.
And anti-semitic language often refers to money,
banking and media.

Given this, we find that creating a language model
for each stereotype is a necessary prerequisite for
building a model for all hate speech. We decided to
begin by building a classifier for anti-semitic speech,
which is rich with references to well known stereo-
types.

The use of stereotypes also means that some lan-
guage may be regarded as hateful even though no
single word in the passage is hateful by itself. Of-
ten there is a relationship between two or more sen-
tences that show the hateful intent of the author.

21



Using the website data, we captured paragraphs
that matched a general regular expression of words
relating to Judaism and Israel 3. This resulted in
about 9,000 paragraphs. Of those, we rejected those
that did not contain a complete sentence, contained
more than two unicode characters in a row, were
only one word long or longer than 64 words.

Next we identified seven categories to which
labelers would assign each paragraph. Annota-
tors could label a paragraph as anti-semitic, anti-
black, anti-asian, anti-woman, anti-muslim, anti-
immigrant or other-hate. These categories were de-
signed for annotation along the anti-semitic/not anti-
semitic axis, with the identification of other stereo-
types capturing mutual information between anti-
semitism and other hate speech. We were interested
in the correlation of anti-semitism with other stereo-
types. The categories we chose reflect the content
we encountered in the paragraphs that matched the
regular expression.

We created a simple interface to allow labelers
to assign one or more of the seven labels to each
paragraph. We instructed the labelers to lump to-
gether South Asia, Southeast Asia, China and the
rest of Asia into the category of anti-asian. The
anti-immigrant category was used to label xenopho-
bic speech in Europe and the United States. Other-
hate was most often used for anti-gay and anti-white
speech, whose frequency did not warrant categories
of their own.

5.1 Interlabeler Agreement and Labeling
Quality

We examined interlabeler agreement only for the
anti-semitic vs. other distinction. We had a set of
1000 paragraphs labeled by three different annota-
tors. The Fleiss kappa interlabeler agreement for
anti-semitic paragraphs vs. other was 0.63. We cre-
ated two corpora from this same set of 1000 para-
graphs. First, the majority corpus was generated
from the three labeled sets by selecting the label
with on which the majority agreed. Upon examin-
ing this corpus with the annotators, we found some
cases in which annotators had agreed upon labels
that seemed inconsistent with their other annotations

3jewish|jew|zionist|holocaust|denier|rabbi|
israel|semitic|semite

– often they had missed instances of hate speech
which they subsequently felt were clear cases. One
of the authors checked and corrected these apparent
“errors” in annotator labeling to create a gold cor-
pus. Results for both the original majority class an-
notations and the “gold” annotations are presented
in Section 7.

As a way of gauging the performance of human
annotators, we compared two of the annotators’ la-
bels to the gold corpus by treating their labeled para-
graphs as input to a two fold cross validation of
the classifier constructed from the gold corpus. We
computed a precision of 59% and recall of 68% for
the two annotators. This sets an upper bound on the
performance we should expect from a classifier.

6 Classification Approach

We used the template-based strategy presented in
(Yarowsky, 1994) to generate features from the cor-
pus. Each template was centered around a single
word as shown in Table 1. Literal words in an or-
dered two word window on either side of a given
word were used exactly as described in (Yarowsky,
1994). In addition, a part-of-speech tagging of each
sentence provided the similar part-of-speech win-
dows as features. Brown clusters as described in
(Koo, Carreras and Collins, 2008) were also utilized
in the same window. We also used the occurrence of
words in a ten word window. Finally, we associated
each word with the other labels that might have been
applied to the paragraph, so that if a paragraph con-
taining the word “god” were labeled “other-hate”, a
feature would be generated associating “god” with
other-hate: “RES:other-hate W+0:god”.

We adapted the hate-speech problem to the prob-
lem of word sense disambiguation. We say that
words have a stereotype sense, in that they either
anti-semitic or not, and we can learn the sense of
all words in the corpus from the paragraph labels.
We used a process similar to the one Yarowsky de-
scribed when he constructed his decisions lists, but
we expand the feature set. What is termed log-
likelihood in (Yarowsky, 1994) we will call log-
odds, and it is calculated in the following way. All
templates were generated for every paragraph in the
corpus, and a count of positive and negative occur-
rences for each template was maintained. The ab-

22



solute value of the ratio of positive to negative oc-
currences yielded the log-odds. Because log-odds is
based on a ratio, templates that do not occur at least
once as both positive and negative are discarded. A
feature is comprised of the template, its log-odds,
and its sense. This process produced 4379 features.

Next, we fed these features to an SVM classifier.
In this model, each feature is dimension in a fea-
ture vector. We treated the sense as a sign, 1 for
anti-semitic and -1 otherwise, and the weight of each
feature was the log-odds times the sense. The task
of classification is sensitive to weights that are large
relative to other weights in the feature space. To
address this, we eliminated the features whose log-
odds fell below a threshold of 1.5. The resulting val-
ues passed to the SVM ranged from -3.99 to -1.5 and
from +1.5 to +3.2. To find the threshold, we gener-
ated 40 models over an evenly distributed range of
thresholds and selected the value that optimized the
model’s f-measure using leave-1-out validation. We
conducted this procedure for two sets of indepen-
dent data and in both cases ended up with a log-odds
threshold of 1.5. After the elimination process, we
were left with 3537 features.

The most significant negative feature was the un-
igram literal “black,”, with log-odds 3.99.

The most significant positive feature was the part-
of-speech trigram “DT jewish NN”, or a determiner
followed by jewish followed by a noun. It was as-
signed a log-odds of 3.22.

In an attempt to avoid setting a threshold, we
also experimented with binary features, assigning -1
to negative feature weights and +1 to positive fea-
ture weights, but this had little effect, and are not
recorded in this paper. Similarly, adjusting the SVM
soft margin parameter C had no effect.

We also created two additional feature sets. The
all unigram set contains only templates that are
comprised of a single word literal. This set con-
tained 272 features, and the most significant re-
mained “black.” The most significant anti-semitic
feature of this set was “television,” with a log-odds
of 2.28. In the corpus we developed, television fig-
ures prominently in conspiracy theories our labelers
found anti-semitic.

The positive unigram set contained only unigram
templates with a positive (indicating anti-semitism)
log-odds. This set contained only 13 features, and

the most significant remained “television.”

7 Preliminary Results

7.1 Baseline Accuracy

We established a baseline by computing the ac-
curacy of always assuming the majority (not anti-
semitic) classification. If N is the number of sam-
ples and Np is the number of positive (anti-semitic)
samples, accuracy is given by (N − Np)/N , which
yielded a baseline accuracy of 0.910.

7.2 Classifiers

For each of the majority and gold corpora, we
generated a model for each type of feature tem-
plate strategy, resulting in six classifiers. We used
SV M light (Joachims, 1999) with a linear kernel
function. We performed 10 fold cross validation for
each classifier and recorded the results in Table 2.
As expected, our results on the majority corpus were
not as accurate as those on the gold corpus. Perhaps
surprising is that unigram feature sets out performed
the full set, with the smallest feature set, comprised
of only positive unigrams, performing the best.

8 Error Analysis

Table 3 contains a summary of errors made by all
the classifiers. For each classifier, the table reports
the two kinds of errors a binary classifier can make:
false negatives (which drive down recall), and false
positives (which drive down precision).

The following paragraph is clearly anti-semitic,
and all three annotators agreed. Since the classifier
failed to detect the anti-semitism, we use look at this
example of a false negative for hints to improve re-
call.

4. That the zionists and their american
sympathizers, in and out of the american
media and motion picture industry, who
constantly use the figure of ”six million”
have failed to offer even a shred of evi-
dence to prove their charge.

23



Table 1: Example Feature Templates
unigram ”W+0:america”
template literal ”W-1:you W+0:know”
template literal ”W-1:go W+0:back W+1:to”
template part of speech ”POS-1:DT W+0:age POS+1:IN”
template Brown sub-path ”W+0:karma BRO+1:0x3fc00:0x9c00 BRO+2:0x3fc00:0x13000”
occurs in ±10 word window ”WIN10:lost W+0:war”
other labels ”RES:anti-muslim W+0:jokes”

Table 2: Classification Performance
Accuracy Precision Recall F1

Majority All Unigram 0.94 0.00 0.00 0.00
Majority Positive Unigram 0.94 0.67 0.07 0.12
Majority Full Classifier 0.94 0.45 0.08 0.14
Gold All Unigram 0.94 0.71 0.51 0.59
Gold Positive Unigram 0.94 0.68 0.60 0.63
Gold Full Classifier 0.93 0.67 0.36 0.47
Human Annotators 0.96 0.59 0.68 0.63

Table 3: Error Report
False Negative False Positive

Majority All Unigram 6.0% 0.1%
Majority Positive Unigram 5.6% 0.2%
Majority Full Classifier 5.5% 0.6%
Gold All Unigram 4.4% 1.8%
Gold Positive Unigram 3.6% 2.5%
Gold Full Classifier 5.7% 1.6%

24



The linguistic features that clearly flag this para-
graph as anti-semitic are the noun phrase containing
zionist ... sympathizers, the gratuitous inclusion of
media and motion picture industry and the skepti-
cism indicated by quoting the phrase “six million”.
It is possible that the first feature could have been de-
tected by adding parts of speech and Brown Cluster
paths to the 10 word occurrence window. A method
for detecting redundancy might also be employed to
detect the second feature. Recent work on emotional
speech might be used to detect the third.

The following paragraph is more ambiguous. The
annotator knew that GT stood for gentile, which left
the impression of an intentional misspelling. With
the word spelled out, the sentence might not be anti-
semitic.

18 ) A jew and a GT mustn’t be buried side
by side.

Specialized knowledge of stereotypical language
and the various ways that its authors mask it could
make a classifier’s performance superior to that of
the average human reader.

The following sentence was labeled negative by
annotators but the classifier predicted an anti-semitic
label.

What do knowledgeable jews say?

This false positive is nothing more than a case of
over fitting. Accumulating more data containing the
word “jews” in the absence of anti-semitism would
fix this problem.

9 Conclusions and Future Work

Using the feature templates described by Yarowsky
we successfully modeled hate speech as a classifica-
tion problem. In terms of f-measure, our best classi-
fier equaled the performance of our volunteer anno-
tators. However, bigram and trigram templates de-
graded the performance of the classifier. The learn-
ing phase of the classifier is sensitive to features that
ought to cancel each other out. Further research on
classification methods, parameter selection and op-
timal kernel functions for our data is necessary.

Our definition of the labeling problem could have
been more clearly stated to our annotators. The anti-
immigrant category in particular may have confused
some.

The recall of the system is low. This suggests
there are larger linguistic patterns that our shallow
parses cannot detect. A deeper parse and an analysis
of the resulting tree might reveal significant phrase
patterns. Looking for patterns of emotional speech,
as in (Lipscombe, Venditti and Hirschberg, 2003)
could also improve our recall.

The order of the paragraphs in their original con-
text could be used as input into a latent variable
learning model. McDonald (McDonald et al, 2007)
has reported some success mixing fine and course
labeling in sentiment analysis.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful for the data and the sup-
port of Matthew Holtzman of the American Jewish
Congress. We would also like to thank Belle Tseng,
Kim Capps-Tanaka, Evgeniy Gabrilovich and Mar-
tin Zinkevich of Yahoo! for providing data as well
as for their financial support. Without their support,
this research would not have been possible.

References

[Choi et al 2005] Yejin Choi, Claire Cardie, Ellen Riloff,
Siddharth Patwardhan, Identifying Sources of Opin-
ions with Conditional Random Fields and Extraction
Patterns. In HLT ’05 Association for Computational
Linguistics Stroudsburg, PA, USA, pp. 355-362, 2005

[Yarowsky 1994] David Yarowsky, Decision Lists for
Lexical Ambiguity Resolution: Application to Ac-
cent Restoration in Spanish and French. In ACL-94,
Stroudsburg, PA, pp. 88-95, 1994

[Yarowsky 1995] David Yarowsky, Unsupervised Word
Sense Disambiguation Rivaling Supervised Methods.
In ACL-95, Cambridge, MA, pp. 189-196, 1995.

[Nockleby 2000] John T. Nockleby, Hate Speech. In
Encyclopedia of the American Constitution (2nd ed.,
edited by Leonard W. Levy, Kenneth L. Karst et al.,
New York: Macmillan, 2000), pp. 1277-1279 (see
http://www.jiffynotes.com/a_study_
guides/book_notes/eamc_03/eamc_03_
01193.html)

[Stephens-Davidowitz 2011] Seth Stephens-Davidowitz,
The Effects of Racial Animus on Voting: Evidence Us-
ing Google Search Data http://www.people.
fas.harvard.edu/˜sstephen/papers/
RacialAnimusAndVotingSethStephensDavidowitz.
pdf

25



[McDonald et al 2007] McDonald, R. Hannan, K. Ney-
lon, T. Wells, M. Reynar, J. Structured Models
for Fine-to-Coarse Sentiment Analysis. In ANNUAL
MEETING- ASSOCIATION FOR COMPUTATIONAL
LINGUISTICS 2007, CONF 45; VOL 1, pages 432-
439

[Pang and Lee 2008] Pang, Bo and Lee, Lillian, Opinion
Mining and Sentiment Analysis. In Foundations and
Trends in Information Retrieval, issue 1-2, vol. 2, Now
Publishers Inc., Hanover, MA, USA, 2008 pp. 1–135

[Pang, Lee and Vaithyanathan 2002] Pang, Bo and Lee,
Lillian and Vaithyanathan, Shivakumar Thumbs up?:
sentiment classification using machine learning tech-
niques. In Proceedings of the ACL-02 conference on
Empirical methods in natural language processing -
Volume 10, Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2002 pp. 79-86

[Qiu et al 2009] Qiu, Guang and Liu, Bing and Bu, Jia-
jun and Chen, Chun Expanding domain sentiment lexi-
con through double propagation. In Proceedings of the
21st international jont conference on Artificial intelli-
gence, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. San Fran-
cisco, CA, USA, 2009 pp. 1199-1204

[Joachims 1999] Making large-Scale SVM Learning
Practical. Advances in Kernel Methods - Support
Vector Learning, B. Schlkopf and C. Burges and A.
Smola (ed.), MIT-Press, 1999.

[Koo, Carreras and Collins 2008] Simple Semi-
supervised Dependency Parsing In Proc. ACL/HLT
2008

[Xu and Zhu 2010] Filtering Offensive Language in On-
line Communities using Grammatical Relations

[A Razavi, Diana Inkpen, Sasha Uritsky, Stan Matwin 2010]
Offensive Language Detection Using Multi-level Clas-
sification In Advances in Artificial Intelligence
Springer, 2010, pp. 1627

[Attenberg and Provost 2010] Why Label When You Can
Search?: Alternatives to active learning for applying
human resources to build classification models under
extreme class imbalance, KDD 2010

[Lipscombe, Venditti and Hirschberg 2003] Classifying
Subject Ratings of Emotional Speech Using Acoustic
Features. In Proceedings of Eurospeech 2003, Geneva.

26


