










































Pastiche Detection Based on Stopword Rankings. Exposing Impersonators of a Romanian Writer


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Deception Detection, pages 72–77,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Pastiche detection based on stopword rankings. Exposing impersonators
of a Romanian writer

Liviu P. Dinu
Faculty of Mathematics
and Computer Science
University of Bucharest

ldinu@fmi.unibuc.ro

Vlad Niculae
Faculty of Mathematics
and Computer Science
University of Bucharest
vlad@vene.ro

Octavia-Maria S, ulea
Faculty of Foreign Languages

and Literatures
Faculty of Mathematics
and Computer Science
University of Bucharest

mary.octavia@gmail.com

Abstract

We applied hierarchical clustering using
Rank distance, previously used in compu-
tational stylometry, on literary texts written
by Mateiu Caragiale and a number of dif-
ferent authors who attempted to imperson-
ate Caragiale after his death, or simply to
mimic his style. Their pastiches were con-
sistently clustered opposite to the original
work, thereby confirming the performance
of the method and proposing an extension
of the method from simple authorship attri-
bution to the more complicated problem of
pastiche detection.

The novelty of our work is the use of fre-
quency rankings of stopwords as features,
showing that this idea yields good results
for pastiche detection.

1 Introduction

The postulated existence of the human stylome
has been thoroughly studied with encouraging re-
sults. The term stylome, which is currently not in
any English dictionaries, was recently defined as
a linguistic fingerprint which can be measured, is
largely unconscious, and is constant (van Halteren
et al., 2005).

Closely related to the problem of authorship
attribution lies the pastiche detection problem,
where the fundamental question is: Can the hu-
man stylome be faked in order to trick authorship
attribution methods? There are situations where
certain authors or journalists have tried to pass
their own work as written by someone else. A
similar application is in forensics, where an im-
personator is writing letters or messages and sign-
ing with someone else’s name, especially online.

It is important to note that sometimes pastiches
are not intended to deceive, but simply as an ex-

ercise in mimicking another’s style. Even in this
case, the best confirmation that the author of the
pastiche can get is if he manages to fool an au-
thorship attribution algorithm, even if the ground
truth is known and there is no real question about
it.

Marcus (1989) identifies the following four sit-
uation in which text authorship is disputed:

• A text attributed to one author seems non-
homogeneous, lacking unity, which raises
the suspicion that there may be more than
one author. If the text was originally at-
tributed to one author, one must establish
which fragments, if any, do not belong to
him, and who are their real authors.

• A text is anonymous. If the author of a text
is unknown, then based on the location, time
frame and cultural context, we can conjec-
ture who the author may be and test this hy-
pothesis.

• If based on certain circumstances, arising
from literature history, the paternity is dis-
puted between two possibilities, A and B, we
have to decide if A is preferred to B, or the
other way around.

• Based on literary history information, a text
seems to be the result of the collaboration of
two authors, an ulterior analysis should es-
tablish, for each of the two authors, their cor-
responding text fragments.

We situate ourselves in a case similar to the
third, but instead of having to choose between two
authors, we are asking whether a group of texts
were indeed written by the claimed author or by
someone else. Ideally, we would take samples au-
thored by every possible impersonator and run a

72



multi-class classifier in order to estimate the prob-
ability that the disputed work is written by them
or by the asserted author. Such a method can give
results if we know who the impersonator can be,
but most of the time that information is not avail-
able, or the number of possible impersonators is
intractabally large.

In the case of only one impersonator, the prob-
lem can simply be stated as authorship attribu-
tion with a positive or a negative answer. How-
ever, when there are a number of people sepa-
rately writing pastiches of one victim’s style, the
extra information can prove beneficial in an unsu-
pervised learning sense. In this paper we analyze
the structure induced by the Rank Distance metric
using frequencies of stopwords as features, previ-
ously applied for authorship attribution, on such
a sample space. The assumption is that trying
to fake someone else’s stylome will induce some
consistent bias so that new impersonators can be
caught using features from other pastiche authors.

2 The successors of Mateiu Caragiale

Mateiu Caragiale, one of the most important Ro-
manian novelists, died in 1936, at the age of 51,
leaving behind an unfinished novel, Sub pecetea
tainei. Some decades later, in the 70’s, a rumor
agitated the Romanian literary world: it seemed
that the ending of the novel had been found. A
few human experts agreed that the manuscript is
in concordance with Mateiu’s style, and in the
next months almost everybody talked about the
huge finding. However, it was suspicious that
the writer who claimed the discovery, Radu Al-
bala, was considered by the critics to be one of
the closest stylistic followers of Mateiu Caragiale.
When the discussions regarding the mysterious
finding reached a critical mass, Albala publically
put a stop to them, by admitting that he him-
self had written the ending as a challenge - he
wanted to see how well he could deceive the pub-
lic into thinking the text in question was written
by Mateiu himself.

Other authors attempted to write different end-
ings to the novel, but without claiming Caragiale’s
paternity, like Albala did. Around the same time,
Eugen Bălan also set to continue the unfinished
novel, as a stylistic exercise. He addressed a sep-
arate storyline than Albala’s. Later, Alexandru
George also attempted to finish the novel, claim-
ing that his ending is the best. Unfortunately

there is only one copy of George’s work, and we
couldn’t obtain it for this study.

In 2008, Ion Iovan published the so-called Last
Notes of Mateiu Caragiale, composed of sections
written from Iovan’s voice, and another section
in the style of a personal diary describing the life
of Mateiu Caragiale, suggesting that this is really
Caragiale’s diary. This was further strengthened
by the fact that a lot of phrases from the diary
were copied word for word from Mateiu Cara-
giale’s novels, therefore pushing the style towards
Caragiale’s. However, this was completely a work
of fiction, the diary having been admittedly imag-
ined and written by Iovan.

Another noteworthy case is the author Ştefan
Agopian. He never attempted to continue Mateiu
Caragiale’s novel, but critics consider him one of
his closest stylistic successors. Even though not
really a pastiche, we considered worth investigat-
ing how such a successor relates to the imperson-
ators.

3 Simple visual comparisons

The pioneering methods of Mendenhall (Menden-
hall, 1901) on the subject of authorship attribu-
tion, even though obsolete by today’s standards,
can be used to quickly examine at a glance the dif-
ferences between the authors, from certain points
of view. The Mendenhall plot, showing frequency
versus word length, does not give an objective cri-
terion to attribute authorship, but as an easy to cal-
culate statistic, it can motivate further research on
a specific attribution problem.

A further critique to Mendenhall’s method is
that different distributions of word length are not
necessary caused by individual stylome but rather
by the genre or the theme of the work. This can
further lead to noisy distributions in case of ver-
satile authors, whereas the stylome is supposed to
be stable.

Even so, the fact that Mateiu Caragiale’s
Mendenhall distribution has its modes consis-
tently in a different position than the others, sug-
gests that the styles are different, but it appears
that Caragiale’s successors have somewhat simi-
lar distributions. This can be seen in figure 3. In
order to evaluate the questions How different, how
similar?, and to make a more objective judgement
on authorship attribution, we resort to pairwise
distance-based methods.

73



(a) Mateiu Caragiale (b) Ştefan Agopian

(c) Radu Albala (d) Ion Iovan

Figure 1: Mendenhall plots: frequency distribution of word lengths, showing similarities between the other
authors, but differences between them and Mateiu Caragiale.

şi ı̂n să se cu o la nu a ce mai din pe un că ca mă fi care era lui fără ne pentru el ar dar
ı̂l tot am mi ı̂nsă ı̂ntr cum când toate al aa după până decât ei nici numai dacă eu avea
fost le sau spre unde unei atunci mea prin ai atât au chiar cine iar noi sunt acum ale
are asta cel fie fiind peste această a cele face fiecare nimeni ı̂ncă ı̂ntre aceasta aceea
acest acesta acestei avut ceea cât da făcut noastră poate acestui alte celor cineva către
lor unui altă aţi dintre doar foarte unor vă aceste astfel avem aveţi cei ci deci este
suntem va vom vor de

Table 1: The 120 stopwords extracted as the most fre-
quent words in the corpus.

In order to speak of distances, we need to rep-
resent the samples (the novels) as points in a met-
ric space. Using the idea that stopword frequen-
cies are a significant component of the stylome,
and one that is difficult to fake (Chung and Pen-
nebaker, 2007), we first represented each work
as a vector of stopword frequencies, where the
stopwords are chosen to be the most frequent
words from all the concatenated documents. The
stopwords can be seen in table 1. Another use-
ful visualisation method is the Principal Compo-
nents Analysis, which gives us a projection from
a high-dimensional space into a low-dimensional

one, in this case in 2D. Using this stopword fre-
quency representation, the first principal compo-
nents plane looks like figure 3.

4 Distances and clustering

In (Popescu and Dinu, 2008), the use of rankings
instead of frequencies is proposed as a smoothing
method and it is shown to give good results for
computational stylometry. A ranking is simply an
ordering of items; in this case, the representation
of each document is the ranking of the stopwords
in that particular document. The fact that a spe-
cific function word has the rank 2 (is the second
most frequent word) in one text and has the rank 4
(is the fourth most frequent word) in another text
can be more directly relevant than the fact that the
respective word appears 349 times in the first text
and only 299 times in the second.

Rank distance (Dinu, 2003) is an ordinal metric
able to compare different rankings of a set of ob-
jects. In the general case, Rank distance works for

74



Figure 2: Principal components plot. Works are colour coded like in figure 3. The cluster on the left consists
only of novels by Mateiu Caragiale. Individual authors seem to form subclusters in the right cluster.

rankings where the support set is different (for ex-
ample, if a stopword would completely be missing
from a text). When this is not the case, we have
the following useful property:

A ranking of a set of n objects is a mapping
σ : {1, 2, ..., n} → {1, 2, ..., n} where σ(i) will
represent the place (rank) of the object indexed as
i such that if σ(q) < σ(p) word q is more frequent
than word p. The Rank distance in this case is
simply the distance induced by L1 norm on the
space of vector representations of permutations:

D(σ1, σ2) =

n∑
i=1

|σ1(i)− σ2(i)| (1)

This is a distance between what is called full rank-
ings. However, in real situations, the problem of
tying arises, when two or more objects claim the
same rank (are ranked equally). For example, two
or more function words can have the same fre-
quency in a text and any ordering of them would
be arbitrary.

The Rank distance allocates to tied objects a
number which is the average of the ranks the tied
objects share. For instance, if two objects claim
the rank 2, then they will share the ranks 2 and 3
and both will receive the rank number (2+3)/2 =
2.5. In general, if k objects will claim the same
rank and the first x ranks are already used by other

objects, then they will share the ranks x + 1, x +
2, . . . , x + k and all of them will receive as rank
the number: (x+1)+(x+2)+...+(x+k)k = x +

k+1
2 .

In this case, a ranking will be no longer a permu-
tation (σ(i) can be a non integer value), but the
formula (1) will remain a distance (Dinu, 2003).

Even though computationally the formula (1)
allows us to use the L1 distance we will continue
using the phrase Rank distance to refer to it, in or-
der to emphasize that we are measuring distances
between rankings of stopwords, not L1 distances
between frequency values or anything like that.

Hierarchical clustering (Duda et al., 2001) is a
bottom-up clustering method that starts with the
most specific cluster arrangement (one cluster for
each sample) and keeps joining the nearest clus-
ters, eventually stopping when reaching either a
stopping condition or the most general cluster ar-
rangement possible (one cluster containing all the
samples). When joining two clusters, there are
many possible ways to specify the distance be-
tween them. We used complete linkage: the dis-
tance between the most dissimilar points from the
two clusters. The resulting clustering path, visu-
alised a dendrogram, is shown in figure 4.

The use of clustering techniques in authorship
attribution problems has been shown useful by
Labbé and Labbé (2006); Luyckx et al. (2006).
Hierarchical clustering with Euclidean distances

75



Figure 3: Dendrogram showing the results of hierarchical clustering using the L2 (euclidean) distance.

has been used for pastiche detection in (Somers
and Tweedie, 2003). The novelty of our work
is the use of rankings as features, and using the
L1 distance (equivalent to the Rank distance for
this particular case). (Somers and Tweedie, 2003)
shows how the Euclidean distance clusters mostly
works by the same author at the finest level, with a
few exceptions. On the data from our problem, we
observed a similar problem. The Euclidean dis-
tance behaves in a less than ideal fasion, joining
some of Agopian’s works with the cluster formed
by the other authors (see figure 3), whereas the
Rank distance always finds works by the same au-
thor the most similar at the leaves level (with the
obvious exception of Eugen Bălan’s text, because
it is his only available text).

Reading the dendrogram in the reverse order
(top to bottom), we see that for k = 2 clusters,
one corresponds to Mateiu Caragiale and the other
to all of his successors. In a little finer-grained
spot, there is a clear cluster of Ştefan Agopian’s
work, the (single) text by Eugen Bălan, and a joint
cluster with Radu Albala and Ion Iovan, which
also quickly breaks down into the separate au-
thors. The fact that there is no k for which all
authors are clearly separated in clusters can be
attributed to the large stylistic variance exhibited
by Ştefan Agopian and Mateiu Caragiale, whose

clusters break down more quickly.
These results confirm our intuition that rank-

ings of stopwords are more relevant than frequen-
cies, when an appropriate metric is used. Rank
distance is well-suited to this task. This leads us
to believe that if we go back and apply our meth-
ods to the texts studies in (Somers and Tweedie,
2003), an improvement will be seen, and we in-
tend to further look into this.

5 Conclusions

We reiterate that all of the authors used in
the study are considered stylistically similar to
Mateiu Caragiale by the critics. Some of their
works, highlighted on the graph, were either at-
tributed to Caragiale (by Albala and Iovan), or in-
tended as pastiche works continuing Caragiale’s
unfinished novel.

A key result is that with this models, all of these
successors prove to be closer to each other than to
Mateiu Caragiale. Therefore, when faced with a
new problem, we don’t have to seed the system
with many works from the possible authors (note
that we used a single text by Bălan): it suffices
to use as seeds texts by one or more authors who
are stylistically and culturally close to the claimed
author (in this case, Mateiu Caragiale). Cluster-
ing with an appropriate distance such as Rank dis-

76



Figure 4: Dendrogram showing the results of hierarchical clustering using L1 distance on stopword rankings
(equivalent to Rank distance).

tance will unmask the pastiche.

References

Cindy Chung and James Pennebaker. The psy-
chological functions of function words. Social
communication: Frontiers of social psychol-
ogy, pages 343–359, 2007.

Liviu Petrisor Dinu. On the classification and ag-
gregation of hierarchies with different consti-
tutive elements. Fundamenta Informaticae, 55
(1):39–50, 2003.

R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork. Pattern
Classification (2nd ed.). Wiley-Interscience
Publication, 2001.

Cyril Labbé and Dominique Labbé. A tool for
literary studies: Intertextual distance and tree
classification. Literary and Linguistic Comput-
ing, 21(3):311–326, 2006.

Kim Luyckx, Walter Daelemans, and Edward
Vanhoutte. Stylogenetics: Clustering-based
stylistic analysis of literary corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC-2006, the fifth International
Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence, pages 30–35, 2006.

Solomon Marcus. Inventie si descoperire. Ed.
Cartea Romaneasca, Bucuresti, 1989.

T C Mendenhall. A mechanical solution of a liter-
ary problem. Popular Science Monthly, 60(2):
97–105, 1901.

Marius Popescu and Liviu Petrisor Dinu. Rank
distance as a stylistic similarity. In COLING
(Posters)’08, pages 91–94, 2008.

Harold Somers and Fiona Tweedie. Authorship
attribution and pastiche. Computers and the
Humanities, 37:407–429, 2003. ISSN 0010-
4817. 10.1023/A:1025786724466.

Hans van Halteren, R. Harald Baayen, Fiona J.
Tweedie, Marco Haverkort, and Anneke Neijt.
New machine learning methods demonstrate
the existence of a human stylome. Journal of
Quantitative Linguistics, pages 65–77, 2005.

77


