










































On the Use of Homogenous Sets of Subjects in Deceptive Language Analysis


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Deception Detection, pages 39–47,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

On the Use of Homogenous Sets of Subjects in Deceptive Language
Analysis

Tommaso Fornaciari
Center for Mind/Brain Sciences

University of Trento
tommaso.fornaciari@unitn.it

Massimo Poesio
Language and Computation Group

University of Essex
Center for Mind/Brain Sciences

University of Trento
massimo.poesio@unitn.it

Abstract

Recent studies on deceptive language sug-
gest that machine learning algorithms can
be employed with good results for classi-
fication of texts as truthful or untruthful.
However, the models presented so far do
not attempt to take advantage of the dif-
ferences between subjects. In this paper,
models have been trained in order to clas-
sify statements issued in Court as false or
not-false, not only taking into considera-
tion the whole corpus, but also by identify-
ing more homogenous subsets of producers
of deceptive language. The results suggest
that the models are effective in recogniz-
ing false statements, and their performance
can be improved if subsets of homogeneous
data are provided.

1 Introduction

Detecting deceptive communication is a challeng-
ing task, but one that could have a number of use-
ful applications. A wide variety of approaches to
the discovery of deceptive statements have been
attempted, ranging from using physiological sen-
sors such as lie detectors to using neuroscience
methods (Davatzikos et al., 2005; Ganis et al.,
2003). More recently, a number of techniques
have been developed for recognizing deception
on the basis of the communicative behavior of
subjects. Given the difficulty of the task, many
such methods rely on both verbal and non-verbal
behavior, to increase accuracy. So for instance
De Paulo et al. (2003) considered more than 150
cues, verbal and non-verbal, directly observed
through experimental subjects. But finding clues
indicating deception through manual inspection is
not easy. De Paulo et al. asserted that “behaviors

that are indicative of deception can be indicative
of other states and processes as well”.

The same point is made in more recent liter-
ature: thus Frank et al. (2008) write “We find
that there is no clue or clue pattern that is spe-
cific to deception, although there are clues spe-
cific to emotion and cognition”, and they wish
for “real-world databases, identifying base rates
for malfeasant behavior in security settings, opti-
mizing training, and identifying preexisting excel-
lence within security organizations”. Jensen et al.
(2010) exploited cues coming from audio, video
and textual data.

One solution is to let statistical and machine
learning methods discover the clues. Work such
as Fornaciari and Poesio (2011a,b); Newman et al.
(2003); Strapparava and Mihalcea (2009) sug-
gests that these techniques can perform reason-
ably well at the task of discovering deception
even just from linguistic data, provided that cor-
pora containing examples of deceptive and truth-
ful texts are available. The availability of such
corpora is not a trivial problem, and indeed, the
creation of a realistic such corpus is one of the
problems in which we invested substantial effort
in our own previous work, as discussed in Section
3.

In the work discussed in this paper, we tackle
an issue which to our knowledge has not been
addressed before, due to the limitations of the
datasets previously available: this is whether the
individual difference between experimental sub-
jects affect deception detection. In previous work,
lexical (Fornaciari and Poesio, 2011a) and surface
(Fornaciari and Poesio, 2011b) features were em-
ployed to classify deceptive statements issued in
Italian Courts. In this study, we report the results

39



of experiments in which our methods were trained
either over the whole corpus or over smaller sub-
sets consisting of the utterances produced by more
homogenous subsets of subjects. These subsets
were identified either automatically, by cluster-
ing subjects according to their language profile,
or by using meta-information about the subjects
included in the corpus, such as their gender.

The structure of the paper is as follows. In Sec-
tion 2 some background knowledge is introduced.
In Section 3 the data set is described. In Section 4
we discuss our machine learning and experimen-
tal methods. Finally, the results are presented in
Section 5 and discussed in Section 6.

2 Background

2.1 Deceptive language analysis
From a methodological point of view, to investi-
gate deceptive language gives rise to some tricky
issues: first of all, the strategy chosen to collect
data. The literature can be divided in two main
families of studies:

• Field studies;

• Laboratory studies.

The first ones are usually interesting in forensic
applications but in such studies verifying the sin-
cerity of the statements is often complicated (Vrij,
2005). Laboratory studies, instead, are character-
ized by the artificiality of participants’ psycholog-
ical conditions: therefore their findings may not
be generalized to deception encountered in real
life.

Due to practical difficulties in collection and
annotation of suitable data, in literature finding
papers in which real life linguistic data are em-
ployed, where truthfulness is surely known, is
less common and Zhou et al. (2008) complain
about the lack of “data set for evaluating decep-
tion detection models”. Just recently some studies
tried to fill this gap, concerning both the English
(Bachenko et al., 2008; Fitzpatrick and Bachenko,
2009) and Italian language (Fornaciari and Poe-
sio, 2011a,b). Just the studies on Italian language
come from data which have constituted the first
nucleus of the corpus analysed here.

2.2 Stylometry
Our own work and that of other authors that re-
cently employed machine learning techniques to

detect deception in text employs techniques very
similar to that of stylometry. Stylometry is a dis-
cipline which studies texts on the basis of their
stylistic features, usually in order to attribute them
to an author - giving rise to the branch of author
attribution - or to get information about the author
himself - this is the field of author profiling.

Stylometric analyses, which relies mainly on
machine learning algorithms, turned out to be ef-
fective in several forensic tasks: not only the clas-
sical field of author profiling (Coulthard, 2004;
Koppel et al., 2006; Peersman et al., 2011; Solan
and Tiersma, 2004) and author attribution (Luy-
ckx and Daelemans, 2008; Mosteller and Wallace,
1964), but also emotion detection (Vaassen and
Daelemans, 2011) and plagiarism analysis (Stein
et al., 2007). Therefore, from a methodological
point of view, Deceptive Language Analysis is a
particular application of stylometry, exactly like
other branches of Forensic Linguistics.

3 Data set

3.1 False testimonies in Court
In order to study deceptive language, we created
the DECOUR - DEception in COURt - corpus,
better described in Fornaciari and Poesio (2012).
DECOUR is a corpus constituted by the tran-
scripts of 35 hearings held in four Italian Courts:
Bologna, Bolzano, Prato and Trento. These tran-
scripts report verbatim the statements issued by a
total of 31 different subjects - four of which have
been heard twice. All the hearings come from
criminal proceedings for calumny and false tes-
timony (artt. 368 and 372 of the Italian Criminal
Code).

In particular, the hearings of DECOUR come
mainly from two situations:

• the defendant for any criminal proceeding
tries to use calumny against someone;

• a witness in any criminal proceeding lies for
some reason.

In both cases, a new criminal proceeding arises,
in which the subjects can issue new statements or
not, and having as a body of evidence the tran-
script of the hearing held in the previous proceed-
ing.

The crucial point is that DECOUR only in-
cludes text from individuals who in the end have
been found guilty. Hence the proceeding ends

40



with a judgment of the Court which summarize
the facts, pointing out precisely the lies told by
the speaker in order to establish his punishment.
Thanks to the transcripts of the hearing and to the
final judgment of the Court, it is possible to anno-
tate the statements of the speakers on the basis of
their truthfulness or untruthfulness, as follows.

3.2 Annotation and agreement

The hearings are dialogs, in which the judge, the
public prosecutor and the lawyer pose questions
to the witness/defendant who in turn has to give
them answers. These answers are the object of
investigation of this study. Each answer is con-
sidered a turn, delimited by the end of the pre-
vious and the beginning of the following inter-
vention of another individual. Each turn is con-
stituted by one or more utterances, delimited by
punctuation marks: period, triple-dots, question
and exclamation marks. Utterances are the anal-
ysis unit of DECOUR and have been annotated as
false, true or uncertain. In order to verify the
agreement in the judgments about truthfulness or
untruthfulness of the utterances, three annotators
separately annotated about 600 utterances. The
agreement study concerning the three classes of
utterances, described in detail in (Fornaciari and
Poesio, 2012), showed that the agreement value
was k=.57. Instead, if the problem is reduced to
a binary task - that is, if true and uncertain utter-
ances are collapsed into a single category of not-
false utterances, opposed to the category of false
ones - the agreement value is k=.64.

3.3 Corpus statistics

The whole corpus has been tokenized and sensi-
tive data have been made anonymous, according
to the previous agreement with the Courts. Then
DECOUR has been lemmatized and POS-tagged
using a version of TreeTagger1 (Schmid, 1994)
trained for Italian.

DECOUR is made up of 3015 utterances, which
come from 2094 turns. 945 utterances have been
annotated as false, 1202 as true and 868 as un-
certain. The size of DECOUR is 41819 tokens,
including punctuation blocks.

1http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.
de/projekte/corplex/TreeTagger/
DecisionTreeTagger.html

4 Methods

In this Section we first summarize our classifica-
tion methods from previous work, then discuss the
three experiments we carried out.

4.1 Classification methods

Each utterance is described by a feature vector.
As in our previous studies (Fornaciari and Poesio,
2011a,b) three kinds of features were used.

First of all, the feature vectors include very ba-
sic linguistic information such as the length of ut-
terances (with and without punctuation) and the
number of words longer than six letters.

The second type of information are lexical fea-
tures. These features have been collected mak-
ing use of LIWC - Linguistic Inquiry and Word
Count, a linguistic tool realized by Pennebaker
et al. (2001) and widely employed in deception
detection (Newman et al., 2003; Strapparava and
Mihalcea, 2009). LIWC is based on a dictionary
in which each term is associated with an appro-
priate set of syntactical, semantical and/or psy-
chological categories. When a text is analysed
with LIWC, the tokens of the text are compared
with the LIWC dictionary. Every time a word
present in the dictionary is found, the count of
the corresponding categories grows. The output
is a profile of the text which relies on the rate of
incidence of the different categories in the text it-
self. LIWC also includes different dictionaries for
several languages, amongst which Italian (Agosti
and Rellini, 2007). Therefore it has been possi-
ble to apply LIWC to Italian deceptive texts, and
the approximate 80 linguistic dimensions which
constitute the Italian LIWC dictionary have been
included as features of the vectors.

Lastly, frequencies of lemmas and part-of-
speech n-grams were used. Five kinds of n-
grams of lemmas and part-of-speech were taken
into consideration: from unigrams to pentagrams.
These frequency lists come from the part of DE-
COUR employed as training set. More precisely,
they come from the utterances held as true or false
of the training set, while the uncertain utterances
have not been considered. In order to empha-
size the collection of features effective in clas-
sifying true and false statements, frequency lists
of n-grams have been built considering true and
false utterances separately. This means that, in
the training set, homologous frequency lists of n-

41



Table 1: The most frequent n-grams collected

N-grams Lemmas POS Total

Unigrams 50 15
Bigrams 40 12
Trigrams 30 9
Tetragrams 20 6
Pentagrams 10 3

Total 150 45 195

grams - unigrams, bigrams and so on - have been
collected from the subset of true utterances and
form the subset of false ones. From these lists,
the most frequent n-grams have been collected, in
a decreasing amount according to the length of the
n-grams. Table 1 shows in detail the number of
the most frequent lemmas and part-of-speech col-
lected for the different n-grams. Then the couples
of frequency lists were merged into one.

This procedure implies that the number of sur-
face features is not determined a priori. In fact
the 195 features indicated in Table 1, which are
collected from true and false utterances, are uni-
fied in a list where each feature has to appear
only once. Therefore, theoretically in the case of
perfect identity of features in true and false ut-
terances, a final list with the same 195 features
would be obtained. In the opposite case, if the
n-grams from true and false utterances would be
completely different, a list of 195 + 195, then 390
n-grams would result. The aim of this procedure
is to get a list of n-grams which could be as much
as possible representative of the features of true
and false utterances. Obviously, the smaller the
overlap of the features of the two subsets, the
greater the difference in the appearance of true
and false utterances, and greater the hope to reach
a good performance in the classification task.

We used the Support Vector Machine imple-
mentation in R (Dimitriadou et al., 2011). As
specified above, the classes of the utterances are
false vs. not-false, where the category of not-false
utterances results from the union of the true and
uncertain ones.

4.2 Corpus division

With the aim of training models able to classify
the utterances of DECOUR as false or not-false,
the corpus has been divided as follows:

Training set The 20 hearings coming from the
Courts of Bologna and Bolzano have been
employed as training set. In terms of anal-
ysis units, this means 2279 utterances, that
is 75.59% of DECOUR. The features of the
vectors come from this set of data.

Test set The 9 hearings of the Court of Trento
have been employed as test set, in order to
evaluate the effectiveness of the trained mod-
els. This test set was made up by 426 utter-
ances, which are 14.13% of DECOUR.

Development set The 6 hearings of the Court of
Prato have been employed as development
set during the phase of choice and calibration
of vector features, therefore this set of utter-
ances is not directly involved in the results of
the following experiments. The develpment
set was constituted by 310 utterances, that is
10.28% of DECOUR.

In the various experimental conditions, some sub-
sets of DECOUR have been taken into consider-
ation. Hence, different hearings have been re-
moved from the test and/or training set in order
to carry out different experiments. Since the test
sets vary in the different experiments, in relation
to each of them different chance levels have been
determined, in order to evaluate the effectiveness
of the models’ performance.

4.3 Experiments
Three experiments were carried out. In the first
experiment, the entire corpus was used to train
and test our algorithms. In the second and third
experiment, sub-corpora were identified.

4.3.1 Experiment 1: whole test set
In the first experiment, the classification task

has been carried out simply employing the train-
ing set and the test set as described above, in order
to have a control as reference point in relation to
the following experiments.

4.3.2 Experiment 2: no outliers
In the second experiment, a more homogeneous

subset of DECOUR was obtained by automati-
cally identifying and removing outliers. This was
done in an unsupervised way by building vector
descriptions of the hearings and clustering them.
The features of these vectors were the same n-
grams described above, collected from the whole

42



Figure 1: Multi-Dimensional Scaling of DE-
COURĖach entity corresponds to a hearing; the letters
represent the sex of the speakers.

corpus (not from the only test set); their values
were the mean values of the frequencies of the ut-
terances belonging to the hearing.

This data set has been transformed into a ma-
trix of between-hearing distances and a Multi-
Dimensional Scaling - MDS function has been
applied to this matrix (Baayen, 2008). Figure 1
shows the plot of MDS function. Each entity cor-
responds to a hearing, and is represented by a let-
ter indicating the sex of the speaker. Getting a
glimpse at Figure 1, it is possible to notice that,
in general, almost all the hearings are quite close
- that is, similar - to each other. Only three hear-
ings seem to be clearly more peripheral than all
the others, particularly the three most to the left in
Figure 1. These hearings have been considered as
outliers and shut out from the experiment. They
are two hearings from Trento and one from Prato.
In practice, it means that the training set, com-
ing from the hearings of Bologna and Bolzano,
remained the same as the previous experiment,
while two hearings have been removed from the
test set, which was constituted only by the hear-
ings of Trento.

4.3.3 Experiment 3: only male speakers
Different from the previous one, the third ex-

periment does not rely on a subset of data au-
tomatically identified. Instead, the subset comes
from personal information concerning the sub-

jects involved in the hearings. In fact, their sex,
place of birth and age at the moment of the hear-
ing are known. In this paper, places of birth
and age have not been taken into consideration,
since grouping them together in reliable cate-
gories raises issues that do not have a straightfor-
ward solution, and the size of the subsets of cor-
pus which would be obtained must be taken into
account.

Therefore this experiment has been carried out
taking into consideration only the sex of the sub-
jects, and in particular it concerned only the hear-
ings involving men. This meant reducing the
training set consistently, where seven hearings of
women were present and thence removed. Instead
from the test set just three hearings have been
taken off, one involving a woman and two involv-
ing a transsexual.

4.4 Baselines

The chance levels for the various test sets have
been calculated through Monte Carlo simula-
tions, each one specific to every experiment. In
each simulation, 100000 times a number of ran-
dom predictions has been produced, in the same
amount and with the same rate of false utterances
of the test set employed in the single experiment.
Then this random output was compared to the real
sequence of false and not-false utterances of the
test set, in order to count the amount of correct
predictions. The rate of correct answers reached
by less than 0.01% of the random predictions has
been accepted as chance threshold for every ex-
periment.

As a baseline, a simple majority baseline was
computed: to classify each utterance as belonging
to the most numerous class in the test set (not-
false).

5 Results

The test set of the first experiemnt, carried out
on the whole test set, was made up of 426 utter-
ances, of which 190 were false, that is 44.60%.
While the majority baseline is 55.40% of accu-
racy, a Monte Carlo simulation applied to the test
set showed that the chance level was 59.60% of
correct predictions. The results are shown in Ta-
ble 2. The overall accuracy - almost 66% - is
clearly above the chance level, being more than
six points greater than the baseline.

43



Table 2: Whole training and test set

Correctly Incorrectly
classified entities classified entities Precision Recall F-measure

False utterances 59 131 80.82% 31.05% 44.86%
True utterances 222 14 62.89% 94.07% 75.38%

Total 281 145
Total percent 65.96% 34.04%

Monte Carlo simulation 59.60%
Majority baseline 55.40%

Table 3: Test set without outliers
Correctly Incorrectly

classified entities classified entities Precision Recall F-measure

False utterances 51 90 80.95% 36.17% 50.00%
True utterances 180 12 66.67% 93.75% 77.92%

Total 231 102
Total percent 69.37% 30.63%

Monte Carlo simulation 61.26%
Majority baseline 57.66%

Table 4: Training and test set with only male speakers

Correctly Incorrectly
classified entities classified entities Precision Recall F-measure

False utterances 32 85 74.42% 27.35% 40.00%
True utterances 179 11 67.80% 94.21% 78.85%

Total 211 96
Total percent 68.73% 31.27%

Monte Carlo simulation 63.19%
Majority baseline 61.89%

In the second experiment, the test set without
outliers was made up of 333 utterances; 141 were
false, which means 42.34% of the test set. The
majority baseline was then at 57.66%, while the
chance threshold determined with a Monte Carlo
simulation had an accuracy rate of 61.26%. Ta-
ble 3 shows the results of the analyses. Taking the
outliers out of the test set allows tthe best perfor-
mance of the three experiments to be reached. In
fact the accuracy is more than 69%, which is more
than eight points above the highest chance level of
61.26%.

In the third experimental condition, where only

male speakers were considered, the training set
was made up of 13 hearings and the test set of
6 hearings. The utterances in the test set were
307, of which 117 were false, meaning 38.11%
of the test set. In this last case, the majority base-
line is at 61.89% of accuracy, while according to
a Monte Carlo simulation the chance level was
63.19%. The overall accuracy reached in this ex-
periment, shown in Table 4, was more than 68%:
higher than the first experiment, but in this case
the lower amount of false utterances in the test
set led to higher chance thresholds. Therefore the
difference between performance and the chance

44



level of 63.19% is now the smallest of all the ex-
periments: just five points and half.

From the point of view of detection of false
utterances, although with internal differences, all
the experiments are placed in the same reference
frame. In particular, the weak point in perfor-
mance is always the recall of false utterances,
which remains more or less at 30%. Instead the
good news comes from the precision in recogniz-
ing them, which is close to 80%. Regarding true
utterances, the recall is always good, being never
lower than 93%, while the precision is close to
65%.

6 Discussion

The goal of this paper was to verify if restricting
the analysis to more homogeneous subsets could
improve the accuracy of our models. The results
are mixed. On the one end, taking the outliers out
of the corpus results in a remarkable improvement
of accuracy in the classification task, in relation
to the performance of the models tested on the
whole test set. On the other end, in other cases
- most clearly, considering only speakers of the
male gender - we find no difference; our hypoth-
esis is that any potential advantage derived from
the increased homogeneity is offset by the reduc-
tion in training material (seven hearings are re-
moved in this case). So the conclusion may be
that increasing homogeneity is effective provided
that the remaining set is still sufficiently large.

Regarding the models’ capacity to detect false
rather than true utterances, the difference between
the respective recalls is noteworthy. In fact, while
the recall of not-false utterances is very high, that
of false ones is poor. In other words, the results
indicate that an amount of false utterances is ef-
fectively so similar to the not-false ones, that the
models are not able to detect them. One challenge
for future studies is surely to find a way to detect
some aspect currently neglected of deceptive lan-
guage, which could be employed to widen the size
of false utterances which can be recognized.

On the other hand, in the two more reliable ex-
periments the precision in detecting false utter-
ances was about 80%. This could suggest that an
amount of false utterances exists, whose features
are in some way peculiar and different from not-
false ones. The data seem to show that this subset
could be more or less one third of all the false ut-
terances.

However, this study was not aimed to estimate
the possible performance of the models in an hy-
pothetic practical application. The experimental
conditions taken into consideration, in fact, are
considerably different from those that would be
present in a real life analysis.

The main reason of this difference is that in a
real case to classify every utterance of a hearing
would not be requested. A lot of statements are ir-
relevant or perfectly known as true. Furthermore
it would not make sense to classify all the utter-
ances which have not propositional value, such as
questions or meta-communicative acts. In the per-
spective of deception detection in a real life sce-
nario, to classify this last kind of utterances is use-
less. Only a subset of the propositional statements
should be classified. In a previous study, carried
out on a selection of utterances with propositional
value of a part of DECOUR, machine learning
models reached an accuracy of 75% in classifica-
tion task (Fornaciari and Poesio, 2011b). In that
study, precision and recall of false utterances are
also quite similar to those of this study, the first
being about 90% and the second about 50%.

From a theoretical point of view, the present
study suggests that it is possible to be relatively
confident in the effectiveness of the models in the
analysis of any kind of utterance. This means
that deceptive language is at least in part differ-
ent from the truthful one and stylometric analyses
can detect it. If this is true, the rate of precision
with which false statements are correctly classi-
fied should clearly exceed the chance level.

Also in this case, Monte Carlo simulation is
taken as reference point. Out of the 100000 ran-
dom trials carried out to determine the baseline for
the first experiment, less than 0.01% had a preci-
sion greater than 57.90% in classifying false ut-
terances, in front of a precision of the models at
80.82%. Regarding the second experiment, the
threshold for precision related to false utterances
was 58.15% against a precision of the models at
80.95%. In the third experiment, the baseline
for precision was 55.55% and the performance of
models was 74.42%. In every experiment the gap
is about twenty points per cent. The same cannot
be said about the recall of false utterances: the
baselines of Monte Carlo simulations in the three
experiments were about 51-54%, while the best
models’ performance (of the second experiment)
did not exceed 36%.

45



The precision reached in recognizing false
statements shows that the models were reliable
in detection of deceptive language. On the other
hand a remarkable amount of false utterances was
not identified. The challenge for the future is to
understand to which extent it will be possible to
improve the recall in detecting false utterances,
not losing and hopefully improving the relative
precision. At that point, although in specific con-
texts, a computational linguistics’ approach could
be really employed to detect deception in real life
scenarios.

7 Acknowledgements

To create DECOUR has been very complex, and
it would not have been possible without the kind
collaboration of a lot of people. Many thanks to
Dr. Francesco Scutellari, President of the Court
of Bologna, to Dr. Heinrich Zanon, President of
the Court of Bolzano, to Dr. Francesco Antonio
Genovese, President of the Court of Prato and to
Dr. Sabino Giarrusso, President of the Court of
Trento.

References

Agosti, A. and Rellini, A. (2007). The Italian
LIWC Dictionary. Technical report, LIWC.net,
Austin, TX.

Baayen, R. (2008). Analyzing linguistic data:
a practical introduction to statistics using R.
Cambridge University Press.

Bachenko, J., Fitzpatrick, E., and Schonwetter,
M. (2008). Verification and implementation
of language-based deception indicators in civil
and criminal narratives. In Proceedings of the
22nd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics - Volume 1, COLING ‘08,
pages 41–48, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Coulthard, M. (2004). Author identification, idi-
olect, and linguistic uniqueness. Applied Lin-
guistics, 25(4):431–447.

Davatzikos, C., Ruparel, K., Fan, Y., Shen, D.,
Acharyya, M., Loughead, J., Gur, R., and Lan-
gleben, D. (2005). Classifying spatial patterns
of brain activity with machine learning meth-
ods: Application to lie detection. NeuroImage,
28(3):663 – 668.

De Paulo, B. M., Lindsay, J. J., Malone, B. E.,
Muhlenbruck, L., Charlton, K., and Cooper, H.
(2003). Cues to deception. Psychological Bul-
letin, 129(1):74–118.

Dimitriadou, E., Hornik, K., Leisch, F., Meyer,
D., and Weingessel, A. (2011). r-cran-
e1071. http://mloss.org/software/
view/94/.

Fitzpatrick, E. and Bachenko, J. (2009). Building
a forensic corpus to test language-based indi-
cators of deception. Language and Computers,
71(1):183–196.

Fornaciari, T. and Poesio, M. (2011a). Lexical
vs. surface features in deceptive language anal-
ysis. In Proceedings of the ICAIL 2011 Work-
shop Applying Human Language Technology to
the Law, AHLTL 2011, pages 2–8, Pittsburgh,
USA.

Fornaciari, T. and Poesio, M. (2011b). Sin-
cere and deceptive statements in italian crimi-
nal proceedings. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Association of Forensic Linguists Tenth
Biennial Conference, IAFL 2011, Cardiff,
Wales, UK.

Fornaciari, T. and Poesio, M. (2012). Decour: a
corpus of deceptive statements in italian courts.
In Proceedings of the eighth International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, LREC 2012. In press.

Frank, M. G., Menasco, M. A., and O’Sullivan,
M. (2008). Human behavior and deception de-
tection. In Voeller, J. G., editor, Wiley Hand-
book of Science and Technology for Homeland
Security. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Ganis, G., Kosslyn, S., Stose, S., Thompson, W.,
and Yurgelun-Todd, D. (2003). Neural corre-
lates of different types of deception: An fmri
investigation. Cerebral Cortex, 13(8):830–836.

Jensen, M. L., Meservy, T. O., Burgoon, J. K., and
Nunamaker, J. F. (2010). Automatic, Multi-
modal Evaluation of Human Interaction. Group
Decision and Negotiation, 19(4):367–389.

Koppel, M., Schler, J., Argamon, S., and Pen-
nebaker, J. (2006). Effects of age and gender on
blogging. In AAAI 2006 Spring Symposium on
Computational Approaches to Analysing We-
blogs.

46



Luyckx, K. and Daelemans, W. (2008). Author-
ship attribution and verification with many au-
thors and limited data. In Proceedings of the
22nd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics - Volume 1, COLING ’08,
pages 513–520, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Mosteller, F. and Wallace, D. (1964). Infer-
ence and Disputed Authorship: The Federalist.
Addison-Wesley.

Newman, M. L., Pennebaker, J. W., Berry, D. S.,
and Richards, J. M. (2003). Lying Words:
Predicting Deception From Linguistic Styles.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
29(5):665–675.

Peersman, C., Daelemans, W., and Van Vaeren-
bergh, L. (2011). Age and gender prediction on
netlog data. Presented at the 21st Meeting of
Computational Linguistics in the Netherlands
(CLIN21), Ghent, Belgium.

Pennebaker, J. W., Francis, M. E., and Booth, R. J.
(2001). Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count
(LIWC): LIWC2001. Lawrence Erlbaum As-
sociates, Mahwah.

Schmid, H. (1994). Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of
International Conference on New Methods in
Language Processing.

Solan, L. M. and Tiersma, P. M. (2004). Author
identification in american courts. Applied Lin-
guistics, 25(4):448–465.

Stein, B., Koppel, M., and Stamatatos, E. (2007).
Plagiarism analysis, authorship identification,
and near-duplicate detection pan’07. SIGIR Fo-
rum, 41:68–71.

Strapparava, C. and Mihalcea, R. (2009). The
Lie Detector: Explorations in the Automatic
Recognition of Deceptive Language. In Pro-
ceeding ACLShort ’09 - Proceedings of the
ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers.

Vaassen, F. and Daelemans, W. (2011). Auto-
matic emotion classification for interpersonal
communication. In 2nd Workshop on Compu-
tational Approaches to Subjectivity and Senti-
ment Analysis (WASSA 2.011).

Vrij, A. (2005). Criteria-based content analysis
- A Qualitative Review of the First 37 Studies.

Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 11(1):3–
41.

Zhou, L., Shi, Y., and Zhang, D. (2008). A
Statistical Language Modeling Approach to
Online Deception Detection. IEEE Transac-
tions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
20(8):1077–1081.

47


