










































Multilingual Natural Language Processing


Proceedings of the Workshop on Innovative Hybrid Approaches to the Processing of Textual Data (Hybrid2012), EACL 2012, page 45,
Avignon, France, April 23 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Invited talk presentation
Multilingual Natural Language Processing

Rada Mihalcea
University of North Texas

USA
rada@cs.unt.edu

Title

Multilingual Natural Language Processing

Abstract

With rapidly growing online resources, such as
Wikipedia, Twitter, or Facebook, there is an in-
creasing number of languages that have a Web
presence, and correspondingly there is a growing
need for effective solutions for multilingual natu-
ral language processing. In this talk, I will explore
the hypothesis that a multilingual representation
can enrich the feature space for natural language
processing tasks, and lead to significant improve-
ments over traditional solutions that rely exclu-
sively on a monolingual representation. Specif-
ically, I will describe experiments performed on
three different tasks: word sense disambiguation,
subjectivity analysis, and text semantic similarity,
and show how the use of a multilingual represen-
tation can leverage additional information from
the languages in the multilingual space, and thus
improve over the use of only one language at a
time. This is joint work with Samer Hassan and
Carmen Banea.

Bio

Rada Mihalcea is an Associate Professor in the
Department of Computer Science and Engineer-
ing at the University of North Texas. Her research
interests are in computational linguistics, with
a focus on lexical semantics, graph-based algo-
rithms for natural language processing, and mul-
tilingual natural language processing. She serves
or has served on the editorial boards of the Jour-
nals of Computational Linguistics, Language Re-
sources and Evaluations, Natural Language Engi-
neering, and Research in Language in Computa-
tion. She was a program co-chair for the Confer-
ence of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (2011), and the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (2009).
She is the recipient of a National Science Foun-
dation CAREER award (2008) and a Presidential
Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers
(2009).

45


