










































Kriya - The SFU System for Translation Task at WMT-12


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 356–361,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Kriya - The SFU System for Translation Task at WMT-12

Majid Razmara and Baskaran Sankaran and Ann Clifton and Anoop Sarkar
School of Computing Science

Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive

Burnaby BC. V5A 1S6. Canada
{razmara, baskaran, aca69, anoop}@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract

This paper describes our submissions for the
WMT-12 translation task using Kriya - our hi-
erarchical phrase-based system. We submitted
systems in French-English and English-Czech
language pairs. In addition to the baseline sys-
tem following the standard MT pipeline, we
tried ensemble decoding for French-English.
The ensemble decoding method improved the
BLEU score by 0.4 points over the baseline
in newstest-2011. For English-Czech, we seg-
mented the Czech side of the corpora and
trained two different segmented models in ad-
dition to our baseline system.

1 Baseline Systems

Our shared task submissions are trained in the hier-
archical phrase-based model (Chiang, 2007) frame-
work. Specifically, we use Kriya (Sankaran et al.,
2012) - our in-house Hiero-style system for training
and decoding. We now briefly explain the baseline
systems in French-English and English-Czech lan-
guage pairs.

We use GIZA++ for word alignments and the
Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) phrase-extractor for ex-
tracting the initial phrases. The translation models
are trained using the rule extraction module in Kriya.
In both cases, we pre-processed the training data by
running it through the usual pre-processing pipeline
of tokenization and lowercasing.

For French-English baseline system, we trained
a simplified hierarchical phrase-based model where
the right-hand side can have at most one non-
terminal (denoted as 1NT) instead of the usual two

non-terminal (2NT) model. In our earlier experi-
ments we found the 1NT model to perform com-
parably to the 2NT model for close language pairs
such as French-English (Sankaran et al., 2012) at the
same time resulting in a smaller model. We used the
shared-task training data consisting of Europarl (v7),
News commentary and UN documents for training
the translation models having a total of 15 M sen-
tence pairs (we did not use the Fr-En Giga paral-
lel corpus for the training). We trained a 5-gram
language model for English using the English Gi-
gaword (v4).

For English-Czech, we trained a standard Hiero
model that has up to two non-terminals on the right-
hand side. We used the Europarl (v7), news com-
mentary and CzEng (v0.9) corpora having 7.95M
sentence pairs for training translation models. We
trained a 5-gram language model using the Czech
side of the parallel corpora and did not use the Czech
monolingual corpus.

The baseline systems use the following 8 stan-
dard Hiero features: rule probabilities p(e|f) and
p(f |e); lexical weights pl(e|f) and pl(f |e); word
penalty, phrase penalty, language model and glue
rule penalty.

1.1 LM Integration in Kriya

The kriya decoder is based on a modified CYK al-
gorithm similar to that of Chiang (2007). We use
a novel approach in computing the language model
(LM) scores in Kriya, which deserves a mention
here.

The CKY decoder in Hiero-style systems can
freely combine target hypotheses generated in inter-

356



mediate cells with hierarchical rules in the higher
cells. Thus the generation of the target hypotheses
are fragmented and out of order in Hiero, compared
to the left to right order preferred by n-gram lan-
guage models.

This leads to challenges in estimating LM scores
for partial target hypotheses and this is typically ad-
dressed by adding a sentence initial marker (<s>)
to the beginning of each derivation path.1 Thus the
language model scores for the hypothesis in the in-
termediate cell are approximated, with the true lan-
guage model score (taking into account sentence
boundaries) being computed in the last cell that
spans the entire source sentence.

Kriya uses a novel idea for computing LM scores:
for each of the target hypothesis fragment, it finds
the best position for the fragment in the final sen-
tence and uses the corresponding score. Specifi-
cally, we compute three different scores correspond-
ing to the three states where the fragment can end
up in the final sentence, viz. sentence initial, middle
and final and choose the best score. Thus given a
fragment tf consisting of a sequence of target to-
kens, we compute LM scores for (i) <s> tf , (ii)
tf and (iii) tf </s> and use the best score (only)
for pruning.2 While this increases the number of
LM queries, we exploit the language model state in-
formation in KenLM (Heafield, 2011) to optimize
the queries by saving the scores for the unchanged
states. Our earlier experiments showed significant
reduction in search errors due to this approach, in
addition to a small but consistent increase in BLEU
score (Sankaran et al., 2012).

2 French-English System

In addition to the baseline system, we also trained
separate systems for News and Non-News genres
for applying ensemble decoding (Razmara et al.,
2012). The news genre system was trained only us-
ing the news-commentary corpus (about 137K sen-

1Alternately systems add sentence boundary markers (<s>
and </s>) to the training data so that they are explicitly present
in the translation and language models. While this can speed
up the decoding as the cube pruning is more aggressive, it also
limits the applicability of rules having the boundary contexts.

2This ensures the the LM score estimates are never underes-
timated for pruning. We retain the LM score for fragment (case
ii) for estimating the score for the full candidate sentence later.

tence pairs) and the non-news genre system was
trained on the Europarl and UN documents data
(14.8M sentence pairs). The ensemble decoding
framework combines the models of these two sys-
tems dynamically when decoding the testset. The
idea is to effectively use the small amount of news
genre data in order to maximize the performance on
the news-based testsets. In the following sections,
we explain in broader detail how this system combi-
nation technique works as well as the details of this
experiment and the evaluation results.

2.1 Ensemble Decoding

In the ensemble decoding framework we view trans-
lation task as a domain mixing problem involving
news and non-news genres. The official training
data is from two major sources: news-commentary
data and Europarl/UN data and we hope to exploit
the distinctive nature of the two genres. Given that
the news data is smaller comparing to parliamen-
tary proceedings data, we could tune the ensemble
decoding to appropriately boost the weight for the
news genre mode during decoding. The ensemble
decoding approach (Razmara et al., 2012) takes ad-
vantage of multiple translation models with the goal
of constructing a system that outperforms all the
component models. The key strength of this system
combination method is that the systems are com-
bined dynamically at decode time. This enables the
decoder to pick the best hypotheses for each span of
the input.

In ensemble decoding, given a number of transla-
tion systems which are already trained and tuned, all
of the hypotheses from component models are used
in order to translate a sentence. The scores of such
rules are combined in the decoder (i.e. CKY) using
various mixture operations to assign a single score to
them. Depending on the mixture operation used for
combining the scores, we would get different mix-
ture scores.

Ensemble decoding extends the log-linear frame-
work which is found in state-of-the-art machine
translation systems. Specifically, the probability of
a phrase-pair (ē, f̄) in the ensemble model is:

p(ē | f̄) ∝ exp
(

w1 · φ1︸ ︷︷ ︸
1st model

⊕ w2 · φ2︸ ︷︷ ︸
2nd model

⊕ · · ·
)

357



where⊕ denotes the mixture operation between two
or more model scores.

Mixture operations receive two or more scores
(probabilities) and return the mixture score (prob-
ability). In this section, we explore different options
for this mixture operation.

Weighted Sum (wsum): in wsum the ensemble
probability is proportional to the weighted sum
of all individual model probabilities.

p(ē | f̄) ∝
M∑
m

λm exp
(
wm · φm

)
where m denotes the index of component mod-
els, M is the total number of them and λi is the
weight for component i.

Weighted Max (wmax): where the ensemble score
is the weighted max of all model scores.

p(ē | f̄) ∝ max
m

(
λm exp

(
wm · φm

))
Product (prod): in prod, the probability of the en-

semble model or a rule is computed as the prod-
uct of the probabilities of all components (or
equally the sum of log-probabilities). When
using this mixture operation, ensemble de-
coding would be a generalization of the log-
linear framework over multiple models. Prod-
uct models can also make use of weights to
control the contribution of each component.
These models are generally known as Logarith-
mic Opinion Pools (LOPs) where:

p(ē | f̄) ∝ exp
( M∑

m

λm wm · φm
)

Model Switching: in model switching, each cell in
the CKY chart gets populated only by rules
from one of the models and the other mod-
els’ rules are discarded. This is based on the
hypothesis that each component model is an
expert on different parts of sentence. In this
method, we need to define a binary indicator
function δ(f̄ ,m) for each span and component
model.

δ(f̄ ,m) =


1, m = argmax

n∈M
ψ(f̄ , n)

0, otherwise

The criteria for choosing a model for each cell,
ψ(f̄ , n), could be based on:

Max: for each cell, the model that has the
highest weighted top-rule score wins:

ψ(f̄ , n) = λn max
e

(wn · φn(ē, f̄))

Sum: Instead of comparing only the score of
the top rules, the model with the high-
est weighted sum of the probability of
the rules wins (taking into account the
ttl(translation table limit) limit on the
number of rules suggested by each model
for each cell):

ψ(f̄ , n) = λn
∑

ē

exp
(
wn · φn(ē, f̄)

)
The probability of each phrase-pair (ē, f̄) is
computed as:

p(ē | f̄) =
∑
m

δ(f̄ ,m) pm(ē | f̄)

Since log-linear models usually look for the best
derivation, they do not need to normalize the scores
to form probabilities. Therefore, the scores that dif-
ferent models assign to each phrase-pair may not be
in the same scale. Therefore, mixing their scores
might wash out the information in one (or some)
of the models. We applied a heuristic to deal with
this problem where the scores are normalized over
a shorter list. So the list of rules coming from each
model for a certain cell in the CKY chart is normal-
ized before getting mixed with other phrase-table
rules. However, experiments showed using normal-
ized scores hurts the BLEU score radically. So we
use the normalized scores only for pruning and for
mixing the actual scores are used.

As a more principled way, we used a toolkit,
CONDOR (Vanden Berghen and Bersini, 2005), to
optimize the weights of our component models on
a dev-set. CONDOR, which is publicly available, is
a direct optimizer based on Powell’s algorithm that
does not require explicit gradient information for the
objective function.

2.2 Experiments and Results
As mentioned earlier all the experiments reported
for French-English use a simpler Hiero translation

358



Method Devset Test-11 Test-12
Baseline Hiero 26.03 27.63 28.15
News data 24.02 26.47 26.27
Non-news data 26.09 27.87 28.15
Ensemble PROD 25.66 28.25 28.09

Table 1: French-English BLEU scores. Best performing
setting is shown in Boldface.

model having at most one non-terminal (1NT) on the
right-hand side. We use 7567 sentence pairs from
news-tests 2008 through 2010 for tuning and use
news-test 2011 for testing in addition to the 2012
test data. The feature weights were tuned using
MERT (Och, 2003) and we report the devset (IBM)
BLEU scores and the testset BLEU scores computed
using the official evaluation script (mteval-v11b.pl).

The results for the French-English experiments
are reported in Table 1. We note that both baseline
Hiero model and the model trained from the non-
news genre get comparable BLEU scores. The news
genre model however gets a lesser BLEU score and
this is to be expected due to the very small training
data available for this genre.

Table 2 shows the results of applying various mix-
ture operations on the devset and testset, both in nor-
malized (denoted by Norm.) and un-normalized set-
tings (denoted by Base). We present results for these
mixture operations using uniform weights (i.e. un-
tuned weights) and for PROD we also present the
results using the weights optimized by CONDOR.
Most of the mixture operations outperform the Test-
11 BLEU of the baseline models (shown in Table 1)
even with uniform (untuned) weights. We took the
best performing operation (i.e. PROD) and tuned its
component weights using our optimizer which lead
to 0.26 points improvement over its uniform-weight
version.

The last row in Table 1 reports the BLEU score
for this mixture operation with the tuned weights
on the Test-12 dataset and it is marginally less than
the baseline model. While this is disappointing, this
also runs counter to our empirical results from other
datasets. We are currently investigating this aspect
as we hope to improve the robustness and applicabil-
ity of our ensemble approach for different datasets
and language pairs.

Mix. Operation Weights Base Norm.
WMAX uniform 27.67 27.94
WSUM uniform 27.72 27.95
SWITCHMAX uniform 27.96 26.21
SWITCHSUM uniform 27.98 27.98
PROD uniform 27.99 28.09
PROD optimized 28.25 28.11

Table 2: Applying ensemble decoding with different mix-
ture operations on the Test-11 dataset. Best performing
setting is shown in Boldface.

3 English-Czech System

3.1 Morpheme Segmented Model

For English-Czech, we additionally experimented
using morphologically segmented versions of the
Czech side of the parallel data, since previous
work (Clifton and Sarkar, 2011) has shown that seg-
mentation of morphologically rich languages can
aid translation. To derive the segmentation, we
built an unsupervised morphological segmentation
model using the Morfessor toolkit (Creutz and La-
gus, 2007).

Morfessor uses minimum description length cri-
teria to train a HMM-based segmentation model.
Varying the perplexity threshold in Morfessor does
not segment more word types, but rather over-
segments the same word types. We hand tuned the
model parameters over training data size and per-
plexity; these control the granularity and coverage of
the segmentations. Specifically, we trained different
segmenter models on varying sets of most frequent
words and different perplexities and identified two
sets that performed best based on a separate held-
out set. These two sets correspond to 500k most fre-
quent words and a perplexity of 50 (denoted SM1)
and 10k most frequent words and a perplexity of 20
(denoted SM2). We then used these two models to
segment the entire data set and generate two differ-
ent segmented training sets. These models had the
best combination of segmentation coverage of the
training data and largest segments, since we found
empirically that smaller segments were less mean-
ingful in the translation model. The SM2 segmenta-
tion segmented more words than SM1, but more fre-
quently segmented words into single-character units.

359



For example, the Czech word ‘dlaebnı́’ is broken
into the useful components ‘dlaeb + nı́’ by SM1, but
is oversegmented into ‘dl + a + e + b + nı́’ by SM2.
However, SM1 fails to find a segmentation at all for
the related word ‘dlaebnı́mi’, while SM2 breaks it
up similiarly with an additional suffix: ‘dl + a + e +
b + nı́ + mi’.

With these segmentation models, we segmented
the target side of the training and dev data before
training the translation model. Similarly, we also
train segmented language models corresponding to
the two sets SM1 and SM2. The MERT tuning step
uses the segmented dev-set reference to evaluate the
segmented hypotheses generated by the decoder for
optimizing the weights for the BLEU score. How-
ever for evaluating the test-set, we stitched the seg-
ments in the decoder output back into unsegmented
forms in a post-processing step, before performing
evaluation against the original unsegmented refer-
ences. The hypotheses generated by the decoder
can have incomplete dangling segments where one
or more prefixes and/or suffixes are missing. While
these dangling segments could be handled in a dif-
ferent way, we use a simple heuristic of ignoring the
segment marker ’+’ by just removing the segment
marker. In next section, we report the results of us-
ing the unsegmented model as well as its segmented
counterparts.

3.2 Experiments and Results

In the English-Czech experiments, we used the same
datasets for the dev and test sets as in French-
English experiments (dev: news-tests 2008, 2009,
2010 with 7567 sentence pairs and test: news-
test2011 with 3003 sentence pairs). Similarly,
MERT (Och, 2003) has been used to tune the feature
weights and we report the BLEU scores of two test-
sets computed using the official evaluation script
(mteval-v11b.pl).

Table 3.2 shows the results of different segmenta-
tion schemes on the WMT-11 and WMT-12 test-sets.
SM1 slightly outperformed the other two models in
Test-11, however the unsegmented model performed
best in Test-12, though marginally. We are currently
investigating this and are also considering the pos-
sibility employing the idea of morpheme prediction
in the post-decoding step in combination with this
morpheme-based translation as suggested by Clifton

Segmentation Test-11 Test-12
Baseline Hiero 14.65 12.40
SM1 : 500k-ppl50 14.75 12.34
SM2 : 10k-ppl20 14.57 12.34

Table 3: The English-Czech results for different segmen-
tation settings. Best performing setting is shown in Bold-
face.

and Sarkar (2011).

4 Conclusion

We submitted systems in two language pairs French-
English and English-Czech for WMT-12 shared
task. In French-English, we experimented the en-
semble decoding framework that effectively utilizes
the small amount of news genre data to improve the
performance in the testset belonging to the same
genre. We obtained a moderate gain of 0.4 BLEU
points with the ensemble decoding over the baseline
system in newstest-2011. For newstest-2012, it per-
forms comparably to that of the baseline and we are
presently investigating the lack of improvement in
newstest-2012. For Cz-En, We found that the BLEU
scores do not substantially differ from each other
and also the minor differences are not consistent for
Test-11 and Test-12.

References
David Chiang. 2007. Hierarchical phrase-based transla-

tion. Computational Linguistics, 33.
Ann Clifton and Anoop Sarkar. 2011. Combin-

ing morpheme-based machine translation with post-
processing morpheme prediction. In Proceedings of
the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies - Volume 1, pages 32–42.

Mathias Creutz and Krista Lagus. 2007. Unsupervised
models for morpheme segmentation and morphology
learning. ACM Transactions on Speech and Language
Processing, 4(1):3:1–3:34, February.

Kenneth Heafield. 2011. KenLM: Faster and smaller
language model queries. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
187–197.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard

360



Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL on Inter-
active Poster and Demonstration Sessions, pages 177–
180. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Annual Meeting of Association of Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 160–167.

Majid Razmara, George Foster, Baskaran Sankaran, and
Anoop Sarkar. 2012. Mixing multiple translation
models in statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, Jeju, Republic of Korea,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics. To
appear.

Baskaran Sankaran, Majid Razmara, and Anoop Sarkar.
2012. Kriya an end-to-end hierarchical phrase-based
mt system. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Lin-
guistics, 97(97):83–98, April.

Frank Vanden Berghen and Hugues Bersini. 2005. CON-
DOR, a new parallel, constrained extension of pow-
ell’s UOBYQA algorithm: Experimental results and
comparison with the DFO algorithm. Journal of Com-
putational and Applied Mathematics, 181:157–175,
September.

361


