










































A Computational Analysis of Style, Affect, and Imagery in Contemporary Poetry


Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 8–17,
Montréal, Canada, June 8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Computational Analysis of Style, Affect, and Imagery in Contemporary
Poetry

Justine Kao
Psychology Department

Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA

justinek@stanford.edu

Dan Jurafsky
Linguistics Department

Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA

jurafsky@stanford.edu

Abstract

What makes a poem beautiful? We use
computational methods to compare the stylis-
tic and content features employed by award-
winning poets and amateur poets. Building
upon existing techniques designed to quanti-
tatively analyze style and affect in texts, we
examined elements of poetic craft such as dic-
tion, sound devices, emotive language, and
imagery. Results showed that the most impor-
tant indicator of high-quality poetry we could
detect was the frequency of references to con-
crete objects. This result highlights the influ-
ence of Imagism in contemporary professional
poetry, and suggests that concreteness may be
one of the most appealing features of poetry to
the modern aesthetic. We also report on other
features that characterize high-quality poetry
and argue that methods from computational
linguistics may provide important insights into
the analysis of beauty in verbal art.

1 Introduction

Poetry is nerved with ideas, blooded with emotions,
held together by the delicate, tough skin of words.

—Paul Engle (1908 -1991)

Many people have experienced the astounding
and transformational power of a beautiful poem.
However, little empirical research has been done to
examine the textual features or mental processes that
engender such a sensation. In this paper, we pro-
pose a computational framework for analyzing tex-
tual features that may be responsible for generating

sensations of poetic beauty. We built a poetry cor-
pus consisting of poems by award-winning profes-
sional poets and amateur poets, and compared po-
ems in the two categories using various quantita-
tive features. Although there are many reasons why
some poems are included in prestigious anthologies
and others are never read, such as a poet’s fame,
we assume that the main distinction between poems
in well-known anthologies and poems submitted by
amateurs to online forums is that expert editors per-
ceive poems in the former category as more aesthet-
ically pleasing. Given this assumption, we believe
that the kind of comparison we propose should be
the first step towards understanding how certain tex-
tual features might evoke aesthetic sensations more
than others.

The next sections review previous computational
work on poetry and motivate the features we use; we
then introduce our corpus, our analyses, and results.

2 Computational aesthetics

Previous research on the computational analysis of
poetry focused on quantifying poetic devices such
as rhyme and meter (Hayward, 1996; Greene et al.,
2010; Genzel et al., 2010), tracking stylistic influ-
ence between authors (Forstall et al., 2011), or clas-
sifying poems based on the poet and style (Kaplan
& Blei, 2007; He et al., 2007; Fang et al., 2009).
These studies showed that computational methods
can reveal interesting statistical properties in poetic
language that allow us to better understand and cate-
gorize great works of literature (Fabb, 2006). How-
ever, there has been very little work using computa-
tional techniques to answer an important question in

8



both poetics and linguistics (Jakobson, 1960): what
makes one poem more aesthetically appealing than
another?

One such attempt is the “aesthetic measure” pro-
posed by mathematician G.D. Birkhoff, who for-
malized beauty as a ratio between order and com-
plexity (Birkhoff, 1933). Birkhoff found interest-
ing correlations between the measure and people’s
aesthetic judgments of shapes, sounds, and poems.
While the aesthetic measure enjoyed some success
in the domain of visual arts (Rigau et al., 2008),
it ran into problems of semantics when applied to
language. Birkhoff’s aesthetic measure judges a
poem’s beauty based solely on phonemic features,
such as alliterations and assonance, rhymes, and mu-
sical vowels. The formula does not capture the sub-
tlety of word choice or richness of meaning in po-
etry. Since Birkhoff’s measure only considers pho-
netic features, it fails to fully quantify the aesthetic
value of meaningful poetic texts.

In this paper, we aim to combine computational
linguistics with computational aesthetics. We in-
troduce a variety of theoretically-motivated features
that target both poetic style and content, and exam-
ine whether each feature is a distinguishing char-
acteristic of poems that are considered beautiful by
modern experts and critics.

3 Elements of Craft

One demands two things of a poem. Firstly, it must
be a well-made verbal object that does honor to the
language in which it is written. Secondly, it must say
something significant about a reality common to us
all, but perceived from a unique perspective

—W. H. Auden (1907 - 1973)

We review several elements of craft that creative
writers and critics reference in their analysis and ap-
preciation of poetry. For each feature that we con-
sider in our model, we provide theoretical motiva-
tion from creative writing and literary criticism. We
then describe how we computed the values of each
feature using tools from computational linguistics.

3.1 Diction

Aristotle argued that good writing consists of a bal-
ance of ordinary words that make the writing com-
prehensible and strange words that make the writ-

ing distinguished (Aristotle, 1998). Several hun-
dred years later, Longinus argued that “noble dic-
tion and elevated word arrangement” is one of the
primary sources of aesthetic language (Earnshaw,
2007; Longinus, 2001). These early scholars of po-
etic craft passed down the belief that poetic beauty
stems from the level of individual words. In her
influential creative writing textbook titled, “Imagi-
native Writing: The Elements of Craft,” Burroway
(2007) describes poetry as a high-density form of
language. Poetic language is usually intentionally
ambiguous and often packs several meanings into
a compact passage (Addonizio & Laux, 1997). As
a result, each word in a poem carries especially
heavy weight and must be carefully selected and di-
gested. Based on these ideas, we decided to examine
whether or not good poetry is defined by the use of
sophisticated vocabulary.

Diction can be evaluated from two different per-
spectives: word frequency, a measure of difficulty,
and type-token ratio, a measure of diversity.

Word frequency: Psychologists, linguists, and
testing agencies often use word frequency to esti-
mate the difficulty and readability of words and sen-
tences (Marks, Carolyn B. et al., 1974; Breland,
1996). Based on these studies, it is reasonable to
predict that poems written by professional poets may
contain more difficult words and lower average word
frequencies than poems written by amateur poets.

We measured average word frequency using a list
of top 500,000 most frequent words from the Cor-
pus of Contemporary American English (COCA)
(Davies, 2011). An average log word frequency was
obtained for each poem by looking up each word in
the poem in the word list and summing up the log
word frequencies. The total log frequency was then
divided by the number of words in the poem to ob-
tain the average.

Type-token ratio: Readability measures and au-
tomatic essay grading systems often use the ra-
tio of total word types to total number of words
in order to evaluate vocabulary sophistication, with
higher type-token ratios indicating more diverse and
sophisticated vocabulary (Ben-Simon & Bennett,
2007; Pitler & Nenkova, 2008). We predict that
professional poets utilize a larger and more varied
vocabulary and avoid using the same word several
times throughout a poem. A type-token ratio score

9



was calculated for each poem by counting all the
separate instances of words and dividing that num-
ber by the total number of words in the poem.

3.2 Sound Device
Poetry has a rich oral tradition that predates liter-
acy, and traces of this aspect of poetic history can
be found in sound devices such as rhyme, repeti-
tion, and meter. How a poem sounds is critical to
how it is perceived, understood, and remembered.
Indeed, most contemporary creative writing hand-
books devote sections to defining various sound de-
vices and analyzing notable poetry according to in-
teresting patterns of sound (Burroway, 2007; Ad-
donizio & Laux, 1997).

The sound device features described below were
computed using Kaplan’s 2006 PoetryAnalyzer. Po-
etryAnalyzer utilizes the Carnegie Mellon Pro-
nouncing Dictionary to obtain pronunciations of
words in each poem and identify patterns indicative
of poetic sound devices.

Perfect and slant end rhyme: Rhyme is one of
the most well-known and popular sound devices in
poetry. The earliest poets used strict rhyme schemes
as a mnemonic device to help them memorize and
recite long poems. Research in psychology has con-
firmed poets’ intuitions about the powerful effects
of rhyme on perception and learning. For example,
an aphorism that contains a rhyme is more likely to
be perceived as true than a non-rhyming aphorism
with the same meaning (McGlone & Tofighbakhsh,
2000). Exposure to rhymes also enhances phono-
logical awareness in young children and can lead to
better reading performances (Bryant et al., 1990).

The PoetryAnalyzer identifies end rhymes in po-
ems by examining the phoneme sequences at the end
of lines. A window of four line endings is analyzed
at a time. If two words in the window have different
initial consonants but identical phoneme sequences
from the stressed vowel phoneme onward, then an
instance of a perfect end rhyme instance is recorded.
The final count of perfect end rhymes in a poem is
normalized by the total number of words. If two
words in the window of four line endings have the
same stressed vowel but different phonemes follow-
ing the stressed vowel, then an instance of a slant
end rhyme is recorded. The final count of slant end
rhymes in a poem is normalized by the total number

of words.
Alliteration and consonance: Alliteration is the

repetition of consonant sounds at the beginning of
words, and consonance is the repetition of conso-
nant sounds elsewhere. In addition to rhyme, allit-
eration was used as a powerful mnemonic device in
ancient epic poetry (Rubin, 1995). Researchers in
psychology and discourse analysis have shown that
alliteration reactivates readers’ memories for previ-
ous information that was phonologically similar to
the cue (Lea et al., 2008).

The PoetryAnalyzer identifies alliteration and
consonance as follows. If the initial phoneme of two
consecutive words are identical consonants, the allit-
eration count is incremented. The total count is then
divided by the total number of words to obtain a al-
literation score for each poem. If there are at least
two identical consonant phonemes in a window of
nine syllables, the consonance count is incremented.
The count is divided by the total number of words in
a poem to obtain a consonance score.

Assonance: Assonance is the repetition of vowel
sounds. Similar to consonants, different vowel
sounds also have their own characteristics and ef-
fects. Long vowels take longer to utter and draw out
the rhythm and pacing of the line, while short vow-
els feel brief and urgent (Burroway, 2007).

We calculated an assonance score for each poem
in the same fashion as we did for the consonance
score, except the target phonemes are vowels instead
of consonants.

3.3 Affect
Studies have shown that poetry allows mental health
patients to explore and reinterpret their emotions
in useful ways. Through reading and writing po-
etry, patients are able to freely express their thoughts
without the constraints of form and logic (Harrower,
1972). On the other hand, critics of poetry therapy
have suggested that writing poetry may be harmful
to psychological health, because it allows the poet
to immerse herself in an inexplicable emotion with-
out having to make sense or order out of it (Stirman
& Pennebaker, 2001). For example, Silverman &
Will (1986) claimed that Sylvia Plath’s poetry may
have undermined her control mechanisms and con-
tributed to her death. If reading good poetry is found
to be cathartic and therapeutic, do skilled poets make

10



more references to psychological states and explore
the emotional world with more depth and intensity?

We examine this question using several existing
sentiment lexicons available for sentiment analy-
sis research. One is the Harvard General Inquirer,
which consists of 182 word categories, including
basic sentiment categories, categories for concrete
objects, and categories for abstract concepts (Stone
et al., 1966). Another sentiment lexicon is the
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) (Pen-
nebaker et al., 2001). While the General Inquirer
was designed for content analysis, LIWC was de-
signed to facilitate the understanding of individuals’
cognitive and emotional states through text analy-
sis. As a result, most of the categories in LIWC in-
volve mental activity, with over 4, 500 words related
to affective, social, and cognitive processes. Six cat-
egories from the Harvard General Inquirer and two
categories from LIWC were selected because they
are most suitable for our purpose of analyzing el-
ements of poetic craft. These features are summa-
rized in Table 1.

3.4 Imagery

One of the most important and oft-repeated piece of
advice for writers is the following: “Show, don’t
tell.” Burroway (2007) interprets this as meaning:
“Use concrete, significant details that address the
senses.” Effective imagery allows readers to bring
in their own associations to understand and truly ex-
perience a new emotion, and skilled poets and writ-
ers are able to pick out specific sensory details that
evoke deeper abstractions and generalizations.

The appeal of concrete imagery may have roots in
processes that facilitate learning and memory. Previ-
ous research has shown that concrete noun pairs are
easier to memorize than abstract noun pairs, which
suggests that imagery can enhance the learning of
word pairings (Paivio et al., 1966). Other studies
have shown that mental imagery facilitates relational
association between concepts (Bower, 1970). Fur-
thermore, Jessen et al. (2000) found neural corre-
lates that suggest that concrete nouns are processed
differently in the brain than abstract nouns. One of
the reasons why we find poetic imagery striking may
be due to the psychological power of imagery to
evoke rich associations formed by culture and per-
sonal experience.

Feature Examples
Word frequency –
Type-token ratio –
Perfect end rhyme floor / store
Slant end rhyme bred / end
Alliteration frozen field
Consonance brown skin hung
Assonance shallower and yellowed
Positive outlook able; friend
Negative outlook abandon; enemy
Positive emotion happiness; love
Negative emotion fury; sorrow
Phys. wellbeing alive; eat
Psych. wellbeing calm; adjust
Object boat; leaf
Abstract day; love
Generalization none; all

Table 1: Summary of features

Another reason why imagery is an essential ele-
ment of poetic craft is that it allows writers to avoid
falling into cliche, which is the bane of the creative
writer’s existence. Burroway (2007) writes, “flat
writing is. . . full of abstractions, generalizations, and
judgments. When these are replaced with nouns that
call up a sense image and with verbs that represent
actions we can visualize, the writing comes alive.”
Many abstract and common concepts can be embod-
ied or evoked by surprising imagery. In our analy-
sis, we predict that skilled poets are more likely to
describe concrete objects and less likely to reference
abstract concepts. We measure the degree to which
a poem contains concrete details rather than abstrac-
tions and generalizations using categories from the
Harvard General Inquirer (see Table 1).

4 Methods

4.1 Materials

In order to test the defining features of beautiful po-
etry described in the section above, we constructed
a corpus containing poems that vary in quality and
“beauty” by some established standard. One way
to do this would be to randomly sample poems from
various sources and ask experts to rate them for qual-
ity and beauty. However, such a method can be ex-
pensive and time-consuming. A more efficient way

11



of achieving a similar effect is to sample poems from
pre-existing categories, such as poems written by
skilled professional poets versus poems written by
amateur poets. We assume that award-winning poets
produce poems that experts would consider “better”
and more beautiful than poetry written by amateurs.
Although there might be exceptions, since for ex-
ample experts may consider some poems written by
amateur poets to be very beautiful and sophisticated,
these pre-existing categories for the most part should
be a good approximation of expert opinions.

One hundred poems were selected from sixty-
seven professional poets whose work was published
in a collection of Contemporary American Poetry
(Poulin & Waters, 2006). The poets produced most
of their work towards the middle and end of the 20th
century and are considered some of the best contem-
porary poets in America (e.g., Louise Gluck, Mary
Oliver, Mark Strand, etc.). All of the poets are listed
in the website of the Academy of American Poets
and many have won prestigious awards. This serves
as confirmation that the poets in this collection are
widely acclaimed and that their craft is acknowl-
edged and celebrated by poetry experts and literary
critics.

We randomly selected one to three poems from
each poet, proportionate to the number of poems
each poet had in the collection. When an excessively
long poem (over 500 words) was selected, we re-
moved it and replaced it with a different poem from
the same poet. This served as a rough control for the
length of the poems in the corpus. The final selection
of one hundred professional poems ranged from 33
to 371 words in length with an average length of 175
words. We believe that these poems are a good rep-
resentation of work produced by the best and most
celebrated poets of our time.

In addition, one hundred poems were selected
from amateur poets who submitted their work
anonymously to a free and open-to-all website,
aptly called “Amateur Writing” (www.amateur-
writing.com). At the time of selection, the website
had over 2500 amateur poem submissions by regis-
tered users. The website contains a diverse set of
poems submitted by amateur writers with a wide
range of experience and skill levels. We randomly
selected one hundred poems from the website and
corrected for misspellings and obvious grammatical

errors in the poems to control for the effect of basic
language skills. The final selection of amateur po-
ems ranged from 21 to 348 words in length with an
average length of 136 words.

4.2 Procedures

We implemented the 16 features described in sec-
tion 3, each of which target one of three separate
domains: style, sentiment, and imagery. The sound
device scores were computed using PoetryAnalyzer
(Kaplan & Blei, 2007). For each category taken
from the General Inquirer, scores were calculated
using the General Inquirer system available on a
server (Inquirer, 2011). A score for a certain cat-
egory is the number of words in a poem that ap-
pear in the category normalized by the length of the
poem. For the two categories taken from LIWC,
scores were calculated by counting the number of
words in each poem that match a word stem in the
LIWC dictionary and dividing it by the total number
of words. A score for each of the features was de-
rived for every poem in the poetry corpus. All scores
were then standardized to have zero mean and unit
variance across poems.

5 Results and Analysis

To measure the effect of each variable on the like-
lihood of a poem being written by a professional
or an amateur poet, we constructed a logistic re-
gression model in R (R: A Language and Environ-
ment for Statistical Computing). For model selec-
tion, we used the step-wise backward elimination
method. This method begins by building a model us-
ing all 16 feature variables. It then recursively elim-
inates variables that do not significantly contribute
to explaining the variance in the data according to
the Akaike information criterion (AIC), which mea-
sures the amount of information lost when using a
certain model. The selection method stops when fur-
ther eliminating a variable would result in significant
loss of information and model fit. The final logistic
regression model for the predictors of professional
versus amateur poetry is summarized in the formula
above (Table 2). Note that the variables included in
the final model might not all be statistically signifi-
cant.

Results show that poem type (professional or am-

12



Probability(poem type = professional |X), where
Xβ −0.6071 =

−0.5039 * average log word frequency +
0.6646 * type token ratio +
0.4602 * slant end rhyme frequency +
−2.1 * perfect end rhyme frequency +

−0.6326 * alliteration frequency +
−1.0701 * positive outlook words +
−0.7861 * negative emotional words +
−0.5227 * psychological words +

1.3124 * concrete object words +
−1.2633 * abstract concept words +
−0.836 * generalization words

Table 2: Model formula

ateur) is significantly predicted by eight different
variables (p < 0.05): type token ratio, perfect
end rhyme frequency, alliteration frequency, positive
outlook words, negative emotional words, concrete
object words, abstract concept words, and general-
ization words. The other nine variables: average log
word frequency, slant end rhyme frequency, asso-
nance, consonance, negative outlook words, positive
emotional words, physical well-being words, and
psychological words did not have significant predic-
tive value. While positive outlook and positive emo-
tion were highly correlated (r = 0.54), as were neg-
ative outlook and negative emotion (r = 0.53), there
was no collinearity among the variables in the final
logistic regression model selected by the backward
elimination method.

The model predicts the likelihood of the poem
type (professional or amateur) using the formula de-
scribed in Table 2. The influence of each feature is
represented by the coefficient β for each variable.
A positive value for a coefficient increases the like-
lihood of a poem being written by a professional.
For example, type token ratio and concrete object
words have positive coefficient values; thus higher
type token ratios and more concrete object words in-
crease the likelihood of a poem being a professional
poem. A negative value for a coefficient decreases
the likelihood of a poem being written by a profes-
sional. For example, perfect end rhyme frequency
has a negative coefficient value, and thus higher per-
fect end rhyme frequencies decrease the likelihood
of a poem being written by a professional poet. The

Feature variable Odds p-value
type token ratio 1.94 0.0308
perfect end rhyme frequency 0.12 5.06e−7

alliteration frequency 0.53 0.0188
positive outlook words 0.34 0.0130
negative emotional words 0.46 0.0244
concrete object words 3.72 0.0002
abstract concept words 0.28 0.0027
generalization words 0.43 0.0035

Table 3: Odds ratios and p values of significant predictors
of professional poetry

Professional Amateur
Word Count Word Count
tree 29 thing 40
room 20 wall 12
thing 18 bed 11
grass 17 clock 7
wall 14 room 7
flower 13 tree 6
glass 13 leave 6
floor 13 gift 5
car 12 mirror 4
dirt 11 flower 4
[. . .] 538 [. . .] 103
Proportion 4.1% Proportion 1.5%
Type count 250 Type count 85

Table 4: Concrete words

relative odds and p-values of each significant predic-
tor variable are presented in Table 3.

In summary, professional poems have signifi-
cantly higher type-token ratios, contain fewer per-
fect end rhymes, fewer instances of alliteration,
fewer positive outlook words, fewer negative emo-
tional words, more references to concrete objects,
less references to abstract concepts, and fewer gen-
eralizations. From the odds ratios, we can see that
the most significant predictors of professional poetry
are fewer perfect end rhymes and more references to
concrete objects.

6 Discussion

What are skilled poets doing differently from ama-
teurs when they write beautiful poetry? Based on re-
sults from our regression model, it appears that Aris-

13



Professional Amateur
Word Count Word Count
day 40 day 54
night 31 time 33
year 25 beauty 25
time 20 soul 16
death 11 night 15
new 9 new 14
morning 8 moment 13
childhood 7 christmas 12
hour 7 think 11
afternoon 7 future 9
[. . .] 139 [. . .] 143
Proportion 1.8% Proportion 2.6%
Type count 82 Type count 75

Table 5: Abstract words

Professional Amateur
Word Count Word Count
all 63 all 82
nothing 26 never 46
never 19 always 43
always 14 nothing 21
every 11 every 15
any 10 forever 14
anything 5 anything 7
nobody 5 any 6
everything 5 everything 5
forever 3 everyone 4
Proportion < 1% Proportion 1.8%

Table 6: Generalization words

totle may have been wrong about diction, at least
for modern poetry. The words in professional po-
etry are not significantly more unusual or difficult
than words used by amateur writers. This suggests
that contemporary poets are not interested in flowery
diction or obscure words, but are focused on using
ordinary words to create extraordinary effects.

However, professional poets do use more distinct
word types. The 100 poems written by professional
poets contain a total of 18, 304 words and 4, 315 dis-
tinct word types (23.57%). The 100 poems written
by amateur poets contain a total of 14, 046 words
and 2, 367 distinct word types (16.85%), a much
smaller portion. In aggregate, professional poets
have a larger and more varied vocabulary than am-
ateur poets. Moreover, professional poets use a sig-
nificantly larger number of word types within each
poem. Although professional poets do not use more
difficult and unusual words, higher type-token ra-
tio is a significant predictor of professional poetry,
suggesting that professional poems may be distin-
guished by a richer set of words.

The results on sound devices provide interesting
insight into the current stylistic trends of contempo-
rary professional poetry. While sound devices have a
long history in poetry and are considered a feature of
poetic beauty, contemporary professional poets now
use these devices much less often than amateur po-
ets. Sound devices that were traditionally important
in poetry for mnemonic purposes, such as rhyme
and alliteration, are more prevalent in amateur po-
ems. Even subtle and sophisticated sound devices
like slant rhyme, consonance, and assonance are not
significant indicators of professional poetry. These
results suggest that repetition of sound is becoming
a less aesthetically significant poetic device among
contemporary masters of poetry.

In terms of affect, our results suggest that po-
ems by professional poets are not more negatively
emotional—at least not explicitly. On the contrary,
amateur poets are significantly more likely to ref-
erence negative emotions than professional poets.
Our results reveal an interesting distinction between
words with positive and negative outlooks and con-
notations versus words that reference positive and
negative emotions. While the two pairs of cate-
gories are strongly correlated, they capture different
aspects of a text’s emotional content. The positive

14



and negative outlook categories contain many words
that are not emotions but may evoke certain emo-
tional attitudes, such as clean and death. The fact
that professional poets are significantly less likely to
use explicitly negative emotion words than amateur
poets, but not significantly less likely to use nega-
tively connotative words, suggests that professional
poets may evoke more negative sentiment through
connotation rather than explicit descriptions.

As predicted, poems written by professional poets
contain significantly more words that reference ob-
jects and significantly less words about abstract con-
cepts and generalizations. This result suggests that
professional poets follow the sacred rule of “show,
don’t tell” and let images instead of words con-
vey emotions, concepts, and experiences that stick
to readers’ minds. Professional poets not only use
more object words than amateur poets (698 counts
versus 205), but they also use a larger and more di-
verse set of object words (250 types versus 85), as
shown in Table 4. Professional poets reference natu-
ral objects very often, such as tree, grass, and flower.
On the other hand, the most frequent concrete object
word in amateur poems is the extremely vague word
thing. This suggests that even when amateur poets
reference concrete objects, they do not use words
that provide specific sensory details.

Our analysis supports the idea that Imagism has
strongly influenced the ways in which modern poets
and literary critics think about literary writing. Lit-
erary critic I.A. Richards argued that image clusters
and patterns of imagery are keys to deeper meaning
in literary works, and that critics should pay close at-
tention to these patterns in order to understand “the
language of art” beneath the surface ordinary lan-
guage (Richards, 1893). Not only are concrete im-
ages able to render the world in spectacular detail,
they also provide windows into particular experi-
ences on which readers can project their own per-
ceptions and interpretations.

Consistent with our predictions and with the aes-
thetic ideals of Imagism, professional poets also
make significantly fewer direct references to abstract
and intangible concepts (Table 5). If the deeper
meaning of a poem is conveyed through imagery, ab-
stract words are no longer needed to reference con-
cepts and experiences explicitly. Moreover, amateur
poets use significantly more words concerned with

generalizations, as shown in Table 6. While amateur
poets embrace the human impulse to generalize, the
skilled poet must learn to extract and report unique
details that single out each experience from the rest.

Overall, our results suggest that professional po-
ets are more likely to show, while amateur poets
have a tendency to tell. This difference marks the
most significant distinction between contemporary
professional and amateur poetry in our analysis and
may be an essential aspect of craft and poetic beauty.

7 Future directions

Categorizing poetry as professional or amateur is a
rather coarse measure of quality. In order to iden-
tify defining features of more fine-grained levels
of poetic skill, future work could compare award-
winning poetry with poems written by less presti-
gious but also professionally trained poets. Exper-
imenting with different databases and lexicons for
affect and imagery could also be helpful, such as
word-emotion associations (Mohammad & Turney,
2011) and imageability ratings (Coltheart, 1981). In
addition, more sophisticated methods that consider
sense ambiguities and meaning compositionality in
affective words (Socher et al., 2011) should be ap-
plied to help enhance and improve upon our current
analyses.

While our approach reveals interesting patterns
that shed light on elements of poetic sophistication,
conclusions from the analysis need to be tested us-
ing controlled experiments. For example, does mod-
ifying a professional poem to include less concrete
words make people perceive it as less beautiful? In-
vestigating these questions using psychology exper-
iments could help identify causal relationships be-
tween linguistic elements and sensations of poetic
beauty.

In summary, our framework provides a novel way
to discover potential features of poetic beauty that
can then be experimentally tested and confirmed. By
applying both stylistic and content analyses to the
quantitative assessment of contemporary poetry, we
were able to examine poetic craft on a representative
set of poems and reveal potential elements of skill
and sophistication in modern poetry.

15



Acknowledgments

We are deeply grateful for David Kaplan’s generos-
ity in sharing the code for the PoetryAnalyzer pro-
gram, on which a substantial part of our analysis is
based. We would also like to thank Lera Boroditsky,
Todd Davies, and the anonymous reviewers for their
extremely helpful feedback.

References

Addonizio, K., & Laux, D. (1997). The Poet’s Com-
panion: A guide to the pleasures of writing po-
etry. W. W. Norton and Company.

Aristotle (1998). Poetics. The Critical Tradition:
Classical Texts and Contemporary Trends.

Ben-Simon, A., & Bennett, R. E. (2007). Toward
more substantively meaningful automated essay
scoring. The journal of Technology, Learning, and
Assessment.

Birkhoff, G. (1933). Aesthetic Measure. Kessinger
Publishing.

Bower, G. (1970). Imagery as a relational organizer
in associative learning. Journal of Verbal Learn-
ing and Verbal Behavior, 9(5), 529–533.

Breland, H. M. (1996). Word frequency and word
difficulty: A comparison of counts in four cor-
pora. Psychological Science, 7(2), pp. 96–99.

Bryant, P., Maclean, M., Bradley, L., & Crossland,
J. (1990). Rhyme and alliteration, phoneme de-
tection, and learning to read. Developmental Psy-
chology, 26(3).

Burroway, J. (2007). Imaginative Writing: The Ele-
ments of Craft. Pearson, 2 ed.

Coltheart, M. (1981). The mrc psycholinguistic
database. The Quarterly Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology, 33(4), 497–505.

Davies, M. (2011). Word frequency data
from the Corpus of Contemporary Ameri-
can English (COCA). Downloaded from
http://www.wordfrequency.info on May 10, 2011.

Earnshaw, S. (Ed.) (2007). The Handbook of Cre-
ative Writing. Edinburgh University Press.

Fabb, N. (2006). Generated metrical form and im-
plied metrical form. Formal approaches to poetry,
(pp. 77–91).

Fang, A. C., Lo, F., & Chinn, C. K. (2009). Adapt-
ing nlp and corpus analysis techniques to struc-
tured imagery analysis in classical chinese poetry.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Adaptation of
Language Resources and Technology to New Do-
mains, AdaptLRTtoND ’09, (pp. 27–34).

Forstall, C., Jacobson, S., & Scheirer, W. (2011).
Evidence of intertextuality: investigating paul the
deacon’s angustae vitae. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 26(3), 285–296.

Genzel, D., Uszkoreit, J., & Och, F. (2010). Po-
etic statistical machine translation: rhyme and
meter. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, (pp. 158–166). Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Greene, E., Bodrumlu, T., & Knight, K. (2010). Au-
tomatic analysis of rhythmic poetry with applica-
tions to generation and translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP
’10, (pp. 524–533).

Harrower, M. (1972). The therapy of poetry. Oryx,
London.

Hayward, M. (1996). Analysis of a corpus of poetry
by a connectionist model of poetic meter. Poetics,
24(1), 1–11.

He, Z., Liang, W., Li, L., & Tian, Y. (2007). Svm-
based classification method for poetry style. In
Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 2007 Inter-
national Conference on, vol. 5, (pp. 2936–2940).
IEEE.

Inquirer, H. G. (2011). How the general inquirer is
used and a comparison of general inquirer with
other text-analysis procedures.

Jakobson, R. (1960). Closing statement: Linguistics
and poetics. Style in language, 350, 377.

Jessen, F., Heun, R., Erb, M., Granath, D. O., Klose,
U., Papassotiropoulos, A., & Grodd, W. (2000).
The concreteness effect: Evidence for dual cod-
ing and context availability. Brain and Language,
74(1), 103 – 112.

Kaplan, D. (2006). Computational analysis and vi-
sualized comparison of style in american poetry.
Unpublished undergraduate thesis.

16



Kaplan, D., & Blei, D. (2007). A computational ap-
proach to style in american poetry. In IEEE Con-
ference on Data Mining.

Lea, R., Rapp, D., Elfenbein, A., Mitchel, A., &
Romine, R. (2008). Sweet silent thought: Allit-
eration and resonance in poetry comprehension.
Psychological Science, 19(709).

Longinus (2001). On sublimity. The Norton Anthol-
ogy of Theory and Criticism.

Marks, Carolyn B., Doctorow, Marleen J., & Wit-
trock, M. C. (1974). Word frequency and reading
comprehension. The Journal of Educational Re-
search, 67(6), 259–262.

McGlone, M., & Tofighbakhsh, J. (2000). Birds of
a feather flock conjointly (?): Rhyme as reason in
aphorisms. Psychological Science, 11, 424–428.

Mohammad, S., & Turney, P. (2011). Crowdsourc-
ing a word–emotion association lexicon. Compu-
tational Intelligence, 59(000), 1–24.

Paivio, A., Yuille, J., & Smythe, P. (1966). Stimu-
lus and response abstractness, imagery, and mean-
ingfulness, and reported mediators in paired-
asscoiate learning. Canadian Journal of Psychol-
ogy, 20(4).

Pennebaker, J., Francis, M., & Booth, R. J. (2001).
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC):
LIWC2001. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Pitler, E., & Nenkova, A. (2008). Revisiting read-
ability: A unified framework for predicting text
quality. In Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, (pp. 186–195).

Poulin, A., & Waters, M. (2006). Contemporary
American Poetry. Houghton Mifflin Company,
eighth ed.

Richards, I. (1893). Practical criticism: a study of
literary judgment. Transaction Publishers.

Rigau, J., Feixas, M., & Sbert, M. (2008). Infor-
mational aesthetics measures. In IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications.

Rubin, D. (1995). Memory in oral traditions:
The cognitive psychology of epic, ballads, and
counting-out rhymes. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.

Silverman, M., & Will, N. (1986). Sylvia plath and
the failure of emotional self-repair through poetry.
Psychoanal Q, 55, 99–129.

Socher, R., Pennington, J., Huang, E., Ng, A., &
Manning, C. (2011). Semi-supervised recursive
autoencoders for predicting sentiment distribu-
tions. In Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, (pp. 151–161). Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Stirman, S. W., & Pennebaker, J. (2001). Word use
in the poetry of suicidal and nonsuicidal poets.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 63(4), 517–22.

Stone, P., Dunphry, D., Smith, M., & Ogilvie, D.
(1966). The General Inquirer: A Computer Ap-
proach to Content Analysis. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

17


