










































Exploiting naive vs expert discourse annotations: an experiment using lexical cohesion to predict Elaboration / Entity-Elaboration confusions


Proceedings of the 6th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 22–30,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12-13 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Exploiting naive vs expert discourse annotations: an experiment using
lexical cohesion to predict Elaboration / Entity-Elaboration confusions

Clémentine Adam
CLLE & University of Toulouse
adam@univ-tlse2.fr

Marianne Vergez-Couret
LPL, Aix-Marseille University

and Hong-Kong Polytechnic University
marianne.vergez@gmail.com

Abstract

This paper brings a contribution to the field of
discourse annotation of corpora. Using ANN-
ODIS, a french corpus annotated with dis-
course relations by naive and expert annota-
tors, we focus on two of them, Elaboration
and Entity-Elaboration. These two very fre-
quent relations are (a) often confused by naive
annotators (b) difficult to detect automatically
as their signalling is poorly studied. We pro-
pose to use lexical cohesion to differentiate
between them, and show that Elaboration is
more cohesive than Entity-Elaboration. We
then integrate lexical cohesion cues in a clas-
sification experiment, obtaining highly satis-
fying results.

1 Introduction

This paper brings a contribution to the field of cor-
pus annotation at the discourse level. Discourse
structure is based on coherence links existing be-
tween discourse units. These links can be cap-
tured using the notion of discourse relations (Mann
and Thompson, 1987; Asher and Lascarides, 2003).
Handling and detecting elements of discourse struc-
ture is very challenging for Natural Language Pro-
cessing. Applications such as natural language gen-
eration (Bateman and Zock, 2005), automatic sum-
marization (Marcu, 2000), among others, could take
advantage of discourse level information detection.
In the current state of research, providing reliably
annotated corpora at the discourse level is really
groundbreaking and opens new possibilities of in-
vestigation in discourse studies.

The ANNODIS project (Péry-Woodley et al.,
2009; Afantenos et al., 2012) will provide the sci-
entific community with access to such a corpus for
French (see section 2). It is the first ressource in
French annotated with discourse relations. Similar
corpora have already been developped for English,
including the Penn Discourse TreeBank (Prasad et
al., 2007), the RST Tree Bank (Carlson et al., 2001)
or the Discor corpus (Reese et al., 2007). But ANN-
ODIS has distinct characteristics. For our concern,
the main difference is the two-level annotation: first
a pre-annotation done by naive annotators (called
“naive annotation”) and then a revised annotation
done by expert annotators (called “expert annota-
tion”). This allows investigation on the whole pro-
cess of annotation.

In this paper, we focus on Elaboration and Entity-
Elaboration, the two most frequent and frequently
confused relations (see section 3). We propose a new
approach based on lexical cohesion cues to differen-
tiate between these relations, and show its reliability
using expert annotation (see section 4). We integrate
this approach in a machine learning experiment and
highlight the improvement it brings (see section 5).
We show how the obtained classifier can be used to
automatically improve naive annotation or to reduce
the experts’ workload.

2 The ANNODIS corpus

The ANNODIS corpus1, enriched with annotations
at the discourse level, considers two different ap-
proaches of discourse organization, a top-down ap-

1http://w3.erss.univ-tlse2.fr/annodis

22



proach2 and a bottom-up approach. Here, we fo-
cus only on the bottom-up approach which aims at
constructing the structure of discourse, starting from
elementary discourse units (EDUs) and recursively
building more complex discourse units (CDUs) via
discourse relations (EDUs contain at least one even-
tuality, most of the time only one). At the end, a hier-
archical structure is defined for the whole text. This
part of the corpus is composed of newspaper articles
(from Est Républicain) and extracts from Wikipedia
articles.

The specifications in the annotation manual were
adapted from the SDRT model, a semantic approach
of discourse structure (Asher and Lascarides, 2003),
but were also inspired by other discourse models
such as the RST framework (Mann and Thompson,
1987), the Linguistic Discourse Model (Polanyi,
1988), the graphbank model (Wolf and Gibson,
2005) etc. The discourse relations linking discourse
units described in the manual are a set of relations3

largely inspired from discourse relations common to
most discourse theories mentioned above.

The ANNODIS corpus was annotated using a
three-step process: it contains preliminary, naive and
expert annotations of discourse relations. During
the first preliminary phase, 50 documents were an-
notated by 2 postgraduate students in language sci-
ences. The key purpose of this initial phase was to
assist the drafting of the annotation manual which
was used afterwards for the second main phase of
annotation. 86 different texts were then doubly an-
notated with the help of the aforementioned man-
ual by 3 postgraduate students in language sciences.
The naive annotation was performed in order to dis-
cover cognitive principles of discourse organization
(Afantenos et al., 2012). The double annotation
allowed evaluating the inter-annotators agreement.
The Kappa score (Cohen, 1960) on common at-
tached discourse units for the full set of relations is
0.4, which indicates a moderate to weak agreement

2The top-down approach focuses on the selective annotation
of multi-level discourse structure such as enumerative structures
(Ho-Dac et al., 2009).

3Alternation, Attribution, Background, Comment, Contin-
uation, Contrast, Elaboration, Entity-Elaboration, Explanation,
Flashback, Frame, Goal, Narration, Parallel, Result, Temporal
Location. Fusion is also used when expert annotation disagreed
with segmentation. Fusion(1,2) means that segments 1 and 2
are considered one segment.

and reveals the difficulty of the discourse annotation
task. The expert annotation was performed as a third
phase. 42 texts randomly selected from naive anno-
tation were then reviewed and corrected by expert
annotators. 44 texts from naive annotations remain
to be reviewed and corrected.

This paper will focus on one of the frequent mis-
takes concerning two close relations: Elaboration
and Entity-Elaboration (hereafter E-Elaboration) in
the naive annotation and their correction in the ex-
pert annotation.

3 On Elaboration and Entity-Elaboration

The distinction between an elaboration of a state
or an event (Elaboration) and an elaboration of an
entity (E-Elaboration) is common in discourse the-
ories. But the status of E-Elaboration as a dis-
course relation is not obvious and divides the sci-
entific community. In the RST framework (Mann
and Thompson, 1987), distinction points exist be-
tween Elaboration and E-Elaboration but both are
regrouped in a single discourse relation. Knott
(1996) considers discourse markers as the basis to
motivate a set of coherence relations. Therefore
Knott et al. (2001) reject E-Elaboration as a dis-
course relation for two reasons. The first is ab-
sence of obvious discourse markers. The second is
that the E-Elaboration relation does not relate two
propositions, as discourse relations usually do. Con-
versely, Fabricius-Hansen and Behrens (2001) intro-
duce separate relations (called E[ventuality] Elabo-
ration and I[ndividual] Elaboration). Prévot et al.
(2009) note the need to introduce this relation in or-
der to avoid confusions in annotation, arguing that
keeping all the embedded segments in one discourse
segment smudges the discourse contribution of the
including segment. In ANNODIS, the choice was
made to consider two different relations for annota-
tion.

3.1 Elaboration and Entity-Elaboration in
ANNODIS

For each relation, the annotation manual gives an
informal description, several illustrations and addi-
tional information on the possible confusions be-
tween the described relation and other discourse re-
lations. Here are the descriptions of Elaboration and

23



E-Elaboration in the annotation manual of ANN-
ODIS:

The Elaboration relation relates two propositions
only if the second proposition describes a sub-state
or sub-event of the state or event described in the
first proposition. Elaboration also includes exempli-
fication, reformulation and paraphrase cases.

The E-Elaboration relation relates two segments
for which the second one specifies a property of one
of the involved entities in the first segment. This
property can be important (e.g. identificatory) or
marginal.

Example (1) illustrates both relations. Each seg-
ment corresponding to one EDU is numbered. Seg-
ments sharing a same rhetorical role in the discourse
must be joined into complex segments.

(1) [La Lausitz, [une région pauvre de l’est de
l’Allemagne,]1 [réputée pour ses mines de
charbon à ciel ouvert,]2 a été le théâtre d’une
première mondiale, mardi 9 septembre.]3
[Le groupe suédois Vattenfall a inauguré,
dans la petite ville de Spremberg, une cen-
trale électrique à charbon expérimentale]4
[qui met en œuvre toute la chaı̂ne des
techniques de captage et de stockage du
carbone]5
[Lausitz, [a poor region in east Germany,]1 [fa-
mous for its open air coal mines,]2 was the scene
of a world first, on Tuesday September 9th.]3
[The swedish group Vattenfall inaugurated, in
the small town of Spremberg, an experimental
coal power plant]4 [involving the complete car-
bon capture and storage chain.]5

The expert annotation for this mini-discourse is
given below :

E-Elaboration (3,[1-2])
Elaboration (3,4)

E-Elaboration (4,5)

Complex segment [1-2] is embedded in segment
3 and is given properties of the entity “La Lausitz”.
It is therefore attached to this segment by Entity-
Elaboration. Segment 4 describes the event “to inau-
gurate a power plant” which is a reformulation of “to
be the scene of a world first” and is attached to seg-
ment 3 with Elaboration. Finally, segment 5 gives a
property of the entity “a power plant” in segment 4
and is attached to it via E-Elaboration.

The annotation manual also discusses possible

confusions between Elaboration and E-Elaboration
(and conversely). The discussion mostly highlights
how the distinction between state and event could
help to avoid confusion. It also reminds the reader
of the major distinction between the two relations,
e.g. Elaboration gives details on a state or an event
while E-Elaboration gives details on an entity.

Despite these precautions, the naive annotators
are often prone to error when confronted with these
two relations.

3.2 Quantitative analysis in ANNODIS

Elaboration and E-Elaboration are the more frequent
relations in the ANNODIS corpus, both in the naive
annotation with 50% of the annotated relations and
in the expert annotation with 35% of the annotated
relations. The low inter-agreement for these rela-
tions in the naive annotation indicates that the rela-
tions are not well-understood. This hypothesis is re-
inforced by overestimation of annotated Elaboration
and E-Elaboration: in 60% of the cases, an agree-
ment between two naive annotators does not ensure
that the annotation is correct (Vergez-Couret, 2010).

Note that when experts review and correct naive
annotation, most of the corrections involve wrong
annotations of Elaboration and E-Elaboration. Ta-
ble 1 presents the expert annotation for each Elabo-
rations and E-Elaborations annotated by the naives.

Naive
Elab E-Elab Total

E
xp

er
t Elab 302 70 372

E-Elab 158 216 374
Total 460 286 746

E
xp

er
t Fusion 81 57

Continuation 70 32
Background 32 18

Other 150 59

Table 1: Expert annotations for E-Elaborations and Elab-
orations in naive annotation

This table shows that confusions between Elab-
oration and E-Elaboration are the most important
compared to confusions with other discourse rela-
tions. Elaboration is mistaken for E-Elaboration
(hereafter Elaboration→ E-Elaboration ) and more
importantly E-Elaboration is mistaken for Elabo-

24



ration (here after noted E-Elaboration → Elabora-
tion). This paper only focuses on these two relations
for methodological reasons: this choice allows first
to give careful considerations to the linguistic fea-
tures involved in the two relations (see section 3.3)
and also to highlight and evaluate the improvements
brought by using new kinds of linguistic cues (see
section 4).

3.3 Linguistic features of Elaboration and
Entity-Elaboration

Annotating Elaboration and E-Elaboration, man-
ually or automatically, is very challenging since
no prototypical marker exists for the two relations
(Knott, 1996, among others). Some possible mark-
ers given in the ANNODIS manual ( à savoir, c’est-
à-dire, notamment, etc. ) are not discriminatory for
one of the two relations, and they are relatively rare.

One could think of other possible linguistic fea-
tures of Elaboration and E-Elaboration. Prévot et
al. (2009) underline possible linguistic realisations
of E-Elaboration such as relative clauses and appo-
sitions (nominal and adjectival appositions, brack-
ets...). Adam and Vergez-Couret (2010) point out
that French gerund clauses may express serveral dis-
course relations including Elaboration but not E-
Elaboration. Even if these syntactic features are not
discriminatory with respect to all discourse relations
(for instance gerund clauses and appositions may ex-
press Explanation or Background), we will see in
section 4 if these syntactic features allow to distin-
guish Elaboration and E-Elaboration.

But more importantly, we would like to focus on
one of the major distinctions between the two rela-
tions, e.g. Elaboration provides details on a state
or an event while E-Elaboration provides detail on
an entity, and how to highlight this distinction. The
hypothesis we are testing is that this distinction re-
sults in differences concerning the lexical cohesion
between the two segments. Cohesion includes all
the links holding a text together as a whole, includ-
ing reference, ellipsis and lexical cohesion. Lexical
cohesion encompasses relations such as synonymy,
hyperonymy, lexical similarity, etc. Our hypothe-
sis is that Elaboration involves more lexical cohe-
sion links since it relates two propositions and its
interpretation involves information given by lexical
semantics and world knowledge (Asher and Las-

carides, 2003). Adam and Vergez-Couret (2010)
show that the use of lexical cohesion cues reliably
detect gerund clauses which are Elaborations. In
contrast, E-Elaboration only relates a proposition to
an entity. In example (2), where Elaboration relates
[17-19] to the target segment 16, it is indeed possi-
ble to highlight lexical cohesion links playing a role
in Elaboration.

(2) [Un soir, il faisait un temps horrible,]16
[les éclairs se croisaient,]17 [le tonnerre
grondait,]18 [la pluie tombait à torrent.]19
[One night, the weather was horrible,]16
[flashes of lightning were crossing,]17 [thunder
growled,]18 [rain fell heavily.]19

In this case, cohesion lexical links between “temps”
(weather) in 16 and “éclair” (flash of lightning),
“tonnerre” (thunder) and “pluie” (rain) in [17-19]
play a role in the interpretation of Elaboration.

On the other hand, E-Elaboration does not pro-
vide details about the whole proposition in the tar-
get segment, but provides details on an entity of this
segment. Lexical cohesion links are not expected in
this case.

(3) [Pourquoi a-t-on abattu Paul Mariani,
[cinquante-cinq ans]4, [attaché au cabinet de
M. François Doubin,]5 ?]6
[Why was Paul Mariani, [fifty-five]4, [personal
assistant to M. François Doubin,]5 gunned
down?]6

In example (3), the age and the profession of Paul
Mariani is not lexically linked to the fact that he was
gunned down.

In the next section, we discuss how to highlight
lexical cohesion links in order to differenciate Elab-
oration and E-Elaboration.

4 Differentiating between Elaboration and
Entity-Elaboration using lexical cohesion

4.1 Preamble

The interplay of lexical cohesion and discourse
structure is an often studied but still not fully un-
derstood issue (Barzilay, 2008; Berzlánovich et al.,
2008). Lexical cohesion cues are typically used in
diverse automated approaches of discourse, but as
these cues are used among others, their impact is
not precisely evaluated. We aim at demonstrating

25



that lexical cohesion cues can be successfully ap-
plied to differentiation between Elaboration and E-
Elaboration.

Adam and Morlane-Hondère (2009) propose to
use a distributional semantic model (Baroni and
Lenci, 2010) in order to detect lexical cohesion.
Adam and Vergez-Couret (2010) use the lexical
links identified by this method in a practical exper-
iment of Elaboration detection. They show that the
use of distributional neighbors in combination with
an ambiguous marker of Elaboration (the gerund
clause) very reliably detects some cases of Elabo-
ration. This result confirms that Elaboration implies
lexical cohesion, and that a distributional semantic
model is a good lexical resource for identifying lex-
ical cohesion links in texts.

As an extension to those studies, we want to use
lexical cohesion cues to help differentiating between
Elaboration and E-Elaboration. We first present
how distributional neighbors can be used to esti-
mate lexical cohesion between two text segments
(section 4.2). Then, we compare the lexical cohe-
sion of Elaboration and E-Elaboration and show that
Elaboration is significatively more cohesive than E-
Elaboration (section 4.3).

4.2 Methods: How to evaluate the strength of
lexical cohesion between two segments

In order to evaluate the strength of lexical cohesion
between two text segments Sa and Sb, we proceed
in two steps. First, the two segments are annotated
with part-of-speech and lemma information using
the TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994). Then, all the lex-
ical proximity links between the two segments are
annotated. To detect these links, we use a lexical
proximity measure based on the distributional anal-
ysis of the french Wikipedia (Bourigault, 2002). In-
ternal links in a segment are not considered.

The number of lexical links N` can be directly in-
terpreted as a cohesion cue. But this cue is skewed
since this number is correlated to the segment’s size
(longer segments have more items to be linked). To
reduce this skew, we built a score where the number
of lexical links is normalized. Calling Na the num-
ber of neighbours (linked or not) in the first segment
(Sa) and Nb the number of neighbours in the second

segment (Sb), our normalized score Sc is defined as:

Sc =
N`√

Na ·Nb

4.3 Application to Elaboration and
E-Elaboration relations in ANNODIS

From the ANNODIS corpus, we extracted all the
Elaboration and E-Elaboration relations according
to the expert annotation. Then, we projected the
neighbourhood links as described in section 4.2. The
results are given in the Table 2.

Elab. E-elab.
Number of cases 625 527

Average segment length 54.61 27.84
Average # of proj. links N` 5.99 1.39
Average cohesion score Sc 0.61 0.32

Table 2: Comparison between Elaboration and E-
Elaboration lexical cohesion

Table 2 shows that Elaborations contain much
more lexical links than E-Elaborations (4 to 5 times
more). This can partially be explained by the length
of Elaboration segments : Elaborations are typically
2 times longer than E-Elaborations. From an ap-
plication point of view, the skew on N` is not a
problem. Using N` as a cue is then equivalent to
combining two cues: the higher lexical cohesion of
Elaboration relation and the fact than Elaborations
are longer than E-Elaborations. From a theoretical
point of view, we expect to observe that Elabora-
tion is more lexically cohesive than E-Elaboration
even for the normalized score Sc. Data in Table 2
confirms this expectation. This first result is inter-
esting in itself, as it provides an experimental vali-
dation based on a corpus for the theoretical descrip-
tions of Elaboration and E-Elaboration (Asher and
Lascarides, 2003; Prévot et al., 2009).

Based on this result, we propose to use lexical co-
hesion cues to improve ANNODIS annotations, by
predicting the errors of the annotators. In the next
section (5) we present an experiment set up in order
to reach this goal.

26



5 Predicting the confusions between
Elaboration and E-Elaboration:
implementation

In section 3, we highlighted that Elaboration and E-
Elaboration are the relations that are most frequently
mistaken in the naive annotation of ANNODIS cor-
pus. However, as shown in section 4, Elaboration
and E-Elaboration can be distinguished using their
lexical cohesion, which can be evaluated by using
distributional neighbours. In this section, we present
a machine learning experiment aiming at automati-
cally classifying Elaboration and E-Elaboration us-
ing lexical cohesion cues, among other features.

5.1 Experiment methodology
From the ANNODIS corpus, we extracted all Elab-
oration and E-Elaboration relations according to the
naive annotation. We restricted this subset to rela-
tions having an Elaboration or E-Elaboration anno-
tation in the expert annotation. Indeed, we only de-
fined cues for these two relations; considering other
relations would require specifying markers for them.
Then, for each < Sa, Sb > couple, we computed the
attributes listed in Table 3.

Att. Description Values
N` see section 4.2 N` ∈ N
Sc see section 4.2 Sc ∈ R+
rel Sb is a relative clause boolean
app Sb is a nom. / adj. apposition boolean
ger Sb is a gerund clause boolean
bra Sb is in brackets boolean
emb Sb is an embedded segment boolean
wSa # of words in Sb wS1 ∈ N
wSb # of words in Sb wS2 ∈ N
wtot wSa + wSb wtot ∈ N
sSa # of segments in Sa sS1 ∈ N
sSb # of segments in Sb sS2 ∈ N
stot sSa + sSb stot ∈ N

Table 3: Attributes computed

Thus, we considered:

• lexical cohesion cues described in section 4.2
(N` and Sc);

• linguistic features presented in section 3.3 (rel,
app, ger and bra): these features were detected

using patterns based on the part-of-speech an-
notation of the segments;

• structural features regarding the two segments:
is Sb embedded in Sa? (emb) How many words
are there in the two segments? (wSa, wSb and
wtot) Are they simple segments or complex
segments? (sSa, sSb and stot).

We then processed the data produced using the
machine learning software Weka (Hall et al., 2009).
More specifically, we used Weka’s implementation
of the Random Forest classifier (Breiman, 2001). In
the following sections, we present our results (sec-
tion 5.2) and discuss the way they could be exploited
in an annotation campaign (section 5.3).

5.2 Classification results

Table 4 shows again the results for naive annotation
when compared to the annotation provided by ex-
perts. The accuracy is satisfying at 69.4%, but closer
examination reveals that a large set of E-Elaboration
are mistakenly classified as Elaboration by the naive
annotators. Using the classifier introduced in sec-

elab e-elab ← Naive annot.
elab 302 70

e-elab 158 216
↑Expert annot. Accuracy : 69.4%

Table 4: Confusion matrix for naive annotation

tion 5.1, we performed a classification experiment
on this data set, considering the naive annotation
as an additional unreliable cue. Results from this
experiment, using 10-fold cross-validation, are pre-
sented in Table 5. The accuracy increases to
75.7% and both E-Elaboration→Elaboration and
Elaboration→E-Elaboration confusions are signif-
icantly reduced. This 6.3% improvement on the
naive annotation is highly satisfying.

elab e-elab ← Naive-aided
elab 306 66 auto. annot.

e-elab 115 259
↑Expert annot. Accuracy : 75.7%

Table 5: Confusion matrix for naive-aided automatic an-
notation

27



In order to evaluate the impact of the different at-
tributes used in the classifier (see Table 3), we re-
peated the classification experiment, using a single
attributes category at a time. The results are sum-
marized in Table 6. Structural attributes bring only a

Attributes used Accuracy
Naive annotation 69.4%
Naive + lexical cohesion cues 72.3% (+2.9%)
Naive + linguistic cues 71.7% (+2.3%)
Naive + structural cues 69.7% (+0.3%)
All 75.7% (+6.3%)

Table 6: Impact of the different attributes categories

0.3% gain. As expected, lexical cohesion cues bring
a noticeable improvement (+2.9%). Moreover, this
improvement is stronger than the one brought by all
linguistic features combined (+2.3%). This confirms
the importance of lexical cohesion to differentiate
between Elaboration and E-Elaboration. The syn-
ergy between the attributes categories is highlighted
by the gain brought by the combination of all at-
tributes, significantly higher than the sum of indi-
vidual gains.

5.3 Exploiting our classifier’s results in an
annotation campaign

In the context of an iterative annotation campaign
such as ANNODIS, an automatic classifier could
hold different roles: (a) providing a first annotation,
i.e. replacing the naive annotation (b) improving the
naive annotation, i.e. replacing the expert annotation
(c) helping the expert annotation, with an intermedi-
ate process between naive and expert annotation.

Role (a) is irrelevant to the present study. In-
deed, the automatic annotations experiments were
performed only on cases identified by naive anno-
tators as Elaboration or E-Elaboration. In its cur-
rent form, the automatic annotation system devel-
oped can only be used as a processing step follow-
ing the required naive annotation (in the ANNODIS
context, naive annotation is the only one available
for 44 texts, see section 2). As demonstrated by
the results of section 5.2, our system can directly
be used to improve the naive annotation (b): a sig-
nificant amount of confusions between the frequent
relations Elaboration and E-Elaboration can be cor-
rected (from 69.4% to 75.7% accuracy).

Finally, we show below how our classifier can be
exploited to help expert annotation (c). This last pro-
posal is relevant to workload reduction for the ex-
perts annotators, which are still required here (con-
trary to proposal (b)) . We have seen (Table 4)
that naive annotators are not very reliable for E-
Elaboration identification, so that in practice this
classification should always be reviewed. However,
presenting all naive E-Elaboration results to the ex-
pert introduces a significant overhead. Automatic
classification can be used to isolate the most critical
cases, allowing to reduce this overhead by present-
ing only those cases to the expert.

Table 8 illustrates the expected performance for
such a system. From 286 relations classified as E-
Elaboration by the naive annotators, 159 are auto-
matically validated as E-Elaboration and not pre-
sented to the experts. Aiming for an error rate below
10%, we used the cost matrix presented in Table 7.
Thus, only 8.2% of the accepted annotations are er-

0 10
1 0

Table 7: Cost matrix

roneous. The experts are then presented with the 127
cases that the automated classifier identified as pos-
sible Elaborations. For the data on which Table 8 is
based, this represents a 159/286 = 55.6% workload
reduction for expert annotators.

elab e-elab ← automatic annot.
elab 57 13 (naive annot=e-elab)

e-elab 70 146
↑Expert 127 159

↙ ↘
second look
by expert

accepted annot.
(error : 8.2%)

Table 8: Confusion matrix for naive e-elab second-look
setup

Going further, our system could also be used to
suggest improvements to the annotation manual, by
highlighting the causes for frequent mistakes and by
allowing an analysis of the reliability of the different
cues taken in consideration (or not) by the annota-
tors

28



6 Conclusion

In this paper, we used ANNODIS, a french corpus
annotated with discourse relations, which provides
the results of two annotation steps, to study two
particular discourse relations: Elaboration and E-
Elaboration. These two very frequent relations are
(a) often erroneously interchanged by annotators (b)
difficult to detect automatically as their signalling is
poorly studied. We considered these relations from
a lexical cohesion viewpoint.

We introduced a method to evaluate the lexical co-
hesion between two segments, using distributional
neighbors. This approach allowed us to confirm that
Elaboration is more cohesive than E-Elaboration.
We therefore integrated lexical cohesion cues in a
machine learning system, employed in a classifica-
tion experiment with promising results.

These results bring improvements that could be
used to facilitate future annotation campaigns. Go-
ing further, this study is especially interesting be-
cause (a) it fully exploits two levels of annotation,
which is very rare; (b) it enhances the linguistic de-
scription of the considered relations, based on at-
tested data; (c) it validates our approach based on
lexical cohesion detection.

References

C. Adam and F. Morlane-Hondère. 2009. Détection de la
cohésion lexicale par voisinage distributionnel : appli-
cation à la segmentation thématique. In RECITAL’09,
Senlis, France, juin 2009.

C. Adam and M. Vergez-Couret. 2010. Signalling elabo-
ration: Combining gerund clauses with lexical cues.
In Multidisciplinay Approaches to Discourse (MAD
2010), Moissac, France, 17-20 March.

S. Afantenos, N. Asher, F. Benamara, M. Bras, C. Fabre,
M. Ho-dac, A. Le Draoulec, P. Muller, M.-P.
Péry-Woodley, L. Prévot, J. Rebeyrolle, L. Tanguy,
M. Vergez-Couret, and L. Vieu. 2012. An em-
pirical resource for discovering cognitive principles
of discourse organisation: the annodis corpus. In
Eighth Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence (LREC 2012), Istanbul (Turkey), 21-22 May.

N. Asher and A. Lascarides. 2003. Logics of conversa-
tion. Cambridge:CUP.

M. Baroni and A. Lenci. 2010. Distributional mem-
ory: A general framework for corpus-based semantics.
Computational Linguistics, 36(4):673–721.

M. Barzilay, R. & Lapata. 2008. Modeling local coher-
ence: An entity-based approach. Computational Lin-
guistics, 34(1):1–34.

J. Bateman and M. Zock, 2005. The Oxford Handbook of
Computational Linguistics, chapter Natural Language
Generation, pages 284–304. Oxford Universtity Press,
New York.

I. Berzlánovich, M. Egg, and G. Redeker. 2008. Coher-
ence structure and lexical cohesion in expository and
persuasive texts. In Proceedings of the Workshop Con-
straints in Discourse III, pages 19–26, Potsdam, Ger-
many.

D. Bourigault. 2002. UPERY : un outil d’analyse distri-
butionnelle étendue pour la construction d’ontologies
à partir de corpus. In Actes de la 9ème confrence sur le
Traitement Automatique de la Langue Naturelle, pages
75–84, Nancy.

L. Breiman. 2001. Random forests. Machine Learning,
45(1):5–32.

L. Carlson, D. Marcu, and M. E. Okurowski. 2001.
Building a discourse-tagged corpus in the framework
of rhetorical structure theory. In Proceedings of the
2nd SigDial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue.
version papier + version lectronique.

J. Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal
scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement,
20 (1):37–46.

C. Fabricius-Hansen and B. Behrens. 2001. Elaboration
and related discourse relations viewed from an inter-
lingual perspective. In Proceedings from Third Work-
shop on Text Structure, Austin, Texas.

M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reute-
mann, and I. H. Witten. 2009. The weka data mining
software: An update. SIGKDD Explorations, 11(1).

L.-M. Ho-Dac, C. Fabre, M.-P. Péry-Woodley, and J. Re-
beyrolle. 2009. A top-down approach to discourse-
level annotation. In Corpus linguistic Conference,
Liverpool, UK, 20-23 juillet.

A. Knott, J. Oberlander, M. O’Donnell, and C. Mellish.
2001. Beyond elaboration : the interaction of relations
and focus in coherent text. In T. Sanders, J. Schilpero-
ord, and W. Spooren, editors, Text representation : lin-
guistic and psycholinguistic aspects, pages 181–196.
Amsterdam : Benjamins.

A. Knott. 1996. A data-driven methodology for motivate
a set of coherence relations. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Edinburgh.

W. C. Mann and S. A. Thompson. 1987. Rhetorical
structure theory : a theory of text organisation. Tech-
nical report, Technical report ISI/RS-87-190, Informa-
tion Sciences Intitute.

D. Marcu. 2000. The rhetorical parsing of unrestricted
texts : a surface-based approach. Computational Lin-
guistics, 26(3):395–448.

29



M.-P. Péry-Woodley, N. Asher, P. Enjalbert, F. Benamara,
M. Bras, C. Fabre, S. Ferrari, L.-M. Ho-Dac, A. Le
Draoulec, Y. Mathet, P. Muller, L. Prévot, J. Rebey-
rolle, M. Vergez-Couret, L. Vieu, and A. Widlöcher.
2009. Annodis : une approche outillée de l’annotation
de structures discursives. In Actes de la conférence
TALN, Senlis, France.

L. Polanyi. 1988. A formal model of the structure of
discourse. Journal of Pragmatics, 12:601–638.

R. Prasad, E. Miltsakaki, N. Dinesh, A. Lee, A. Joshi,
L. Robaldo, and B-L. Webber. 2007. The penn dis-
course treebank 2.0. annotation manual. Technical re-
port, IRCS, Institute for Research in Cognitive Sci-
ence, University of Pennsylvania.

L. Prévot, L. Vieu, and N. Asher. 2009. Une formalisa-
tion plus précise pour une annotation moins confuse:
la relation d’elaboration d’entité. Journal of French
Language Studies, 19(2):207–228.

B. Reese, P. Denis, N. Asher, J. Baldridge, and J. Hunter.
2007. Reference manual for the analysis and annota-
tion of rhetorical structure. Technical report, Univer-
sity of Texas at Austin.

H. Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging
using decision trees. In Proceedings of the Conference
on New Methods in Language Processing, Manchester,
UK.

M. Vergez-Couret. 2010. Etude en corpus des
réalisations linguistiques de la relation d’Elaboration.
Ph.D. thesis, Université de Toulouse.

F. Wolf and E. Gibson. 2005. Representing discourse
coherence: A corpus-based study. Computational Lin-
guistics, 31(2):249–287, June.

30


