










































A free and open-source tool that reads movie subtitles aloud


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies (SLPAT), pages 1–4,
Montréal, Canada, June 7–8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A free and open-source tool that reads movie subtitles aloud

Peter Ljunglöf
Computer Science and Engineering

University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden

peter.ljunglof@gu.se

Sandra Derbring and Maria Olsson
DART: Centre for AAC and AT

Gothenburg, Sweden
sandra.derbring@vgregion.se
maria.in.olsson@vgregion.se

Abstract

We present a simple tool that enables the com-
puter to read subtitles of movies and TV shows
aloud. The tool extracts information from sub-
title files, which can be freely downloaded
from the Internet, and reads the text aloud
through a speech synthesizer. There are three
versions of the tool, one for Windows and
Linux, another for Mac OS X, and the third is
a browser-based HTML5 prototype. The tools
are freely available and open-source.

The target audience is people who have trou-
ble reading subtitles while watching a movie,
including elderly, people with visual impair-
ments, people with reading difficulties and
people who wants to learn a second language.
The application is currently being evaluated
together with user from these groups.

1 Background

1.1 Why read subtitles aloud?

Spoken subtitles could be a solution if, due to sight
disorder or poor reading skills, a person is unable to
read subtitles and the language spoken in the movie
is unknown, or not known well enough.

Swedish Association of the Visually Impaired1

has around 12,000 members but there are most likely
many more people with poor eyesight. The num-
ber of people with reading disabilities is unknown,
but according to the Swedish dyslexia association
“Dyslexiföreningen”2 between 5 and 8 percent of
the population have significant difficulties to read
and write. A survey by OECD (Organisation for

1Synskadades riksförbund, http://www.srfriks.org/
2Dyslexiföreningen, http://dyslexiforeningen.se/

Economic Co-operation and Development) in 1996
showed that “8 per cent of the adult population [in
Sweden] encounters a severe literacy deficit in ev-
eryday life and at work” (OECD, 2000, p. xiii). For
other countries, the problems were even bigger: “In
14 out of 20 countries, at least 15 per cent of all
adults have literacy skills at only the most rudimen-
tary level” (OECD, 2000, p. xiii).

To hear the subtitles along with the original au-
dio track of the movie may not suit everyone, but
making these movies and TV shows accessible could
bring a huge value for people who would use it.

1.2 Related work

The idea of automatic reading of movie and TV sub-
titles is not new. It is implemented in regular pub-
lic service TV broadcasts in at least Sweden and
the Netherlands, and probably also in more coun-
tries. In 2002, the Dutch national broadcasting com-
pany NOS started regular broadcasts of automatic
subtitles reading (Verboom et al., 2002), and Swe-
den’s public service TV company SVT followed in
2005 (A-focus, 2010, p. 20). In both these cases,
the speech signal is transmitted through a second
channel, which means that the user needs two digi-
tal boxes. Naturally, this solution only works for the
programs that the company itself is broadcasting.

Other projects have been trying to use OCR (op-
tical character recognition) to interpret the subtitles
on the TV or computer screen. In 2002, a project
by the Swedish Association of the Visually Impaired
developed a prototype that used OCR to Interpret
subtitles, which then were spoken aloud using TTS
(Eliasson, 2005, pp. 63–64). The project estimated
that a mass-produced product would cost around
2500C, which they concluded would be too much

1



for ordinary users. In 2007, a similar Danish project
described a tool that reads the composite video sig-
nal, performs OCR on the subtitles and then speaks
them using TTS (Nielson and Bothe, 2007). They
also developed a specialised OCR algorithm for sub-
title detection (Jønsson and Bothe, 2007). However,
both systems have remained prototypes and have not
been released as publicly available tools.

A similar Czech project has investigated how to
minimise speech overlap and how to get better syn-
chronisation by using techniques such as time com-
pression and text simplification (Hanzlíček et al.,
2008; Matoušek et al., 2010). Their evaluation is
purely technical, where they count the number of
overlapped subtitles and the number of subtitles that
require different compression factors, but they have
not evaluated their prototype system on actual users.

Finally, there is an ongoing Swedish project by
the Swedish dyslexia association “Dyslexiförbundet
FMLS” where they aim to make cinemas more ac-
cessible by transmitting spoken subtitles via Wi-Fi
which the users can listen to via their own mobile
phone.

1.3 Issues with existing solutions
Currently there are two kinds of spoken subtitles
systems, and both of them have different problems:

• TV broadcasting systems that transmit the spo-
ken subtitles in a separate audio stream. It is
an important addition to the TV infrastructure,
but it is by nature closed to one media channel
and cannot be used for users who want to watch
movies or TV shows on their computer or from
the Internet.

• Systems that use OCR to interpret movie subti-
tles have a great potential, but they are currently
no publicly available systems. There are still
some technological problems left to be solved
until OCR based systems can be released to the
public.

None of the existing systems are freely available, let
alone open-source products. Furthermore, we have
not found any studies that evaluate these systems on
real users, to find out how useful they are in practice.

The systems we describe in this paper are all
freely available and open-source. They are focused

on personal computer use, not TV or cinemas, and
are meant to be usable and easily installable to those
with basic computer skills.

2 Implementation

The idea behind all our implementations is very sim-
ple. The program reads the subtitles into an internal
database. When the movie starts playing, the pro-
gram communicates with the movie to get the cur-
rent time position, and calls a speech synthesiser
when it is time to show the next subtitle. The pro-
gram does not include a speech synthesiser, but as-
sumes that it is already installed on the computer.
Alternatively, the program can call an online web
service-based TTS.

We have developed three systems which work
in different ways and on different operating sys-
tems. Some of them are still in prototype/demo state,
whereas others are almost finished products. All
systems are free and open-source and can be down-
loaded from the project website:

http://code.google.com/p/subtts

2.1 Windows/Linux media player
The Windows/Linux client has been developed by
the company STTS.3 It is implemented in Python
and the wxWidgets GUI toolkit.4 The video play-
back interface uses a Python backend that comes
with the VLC Media Player.5 This means that the
client can play all media formats that the VLC player
can handle, including DVD movies.

2.2 Mac OS X menulet
The Mac OS X client uses the AppleScript Event
model to communicate with the active media player.
The program is developed in Objective-C and re-
sides in the menu bar as a global “menulet”6.

When the user starts watching a movie, the
menulet repeatedly queries the media player for
the current time, and calls the speech synthesiser
whenever a new subtitle is about to be shown.
The menulet currently supports the following me-
dia players: VLC, QuickTime Player (versions 7 and
X), and Apple DVD Player.

3Södermalms Talteknologiservice, http://stts.se/
4wxWidgets, http://wxwidgets.org/
5VLC, http://videolan.org/
6http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Menulet

2



2.3 Browser-based HTML5 media player
We have also developed a prototype browser-based
media player written in Javascript, that uses HTML5
video and audio elements to support spoken subti-
tles. This has the potential to be very useful, but is
currently limited since current browsers do not sup-
port HTML5 video and audio in full.

We estimate that, in a few years time, the main
browsers will support all HTML5 features,as well as
offline TTS. Then this kind of HTML5 media player
could have a big impact on movie and TV accessi-
bility.

2.4 Subtitle files
The system does not extract the subtitles from the
movie file or the DVD. Instead the user has to pro-
vide it with a text file with the movie subtitles. Sub-
titles are available from several sites on the Internet,7

both in the original language and in translations into
different other languages.

The subtitle format that we support is SRT, which
is the de-facto standard for movie subtitiles and a
very simple text format. Each subtitle is in a separate
paragraph on the following form:

26
00:03:05,083 --> 00:03:09,417
You, I mean we,
we could easily die out here.

The above example means that the 26th subtitle con-
sists of two lines of text, and should be displayed
3 minutes 5.083 seconds into the movie and disap-
pear 4.334 seconds later.

Both the Windows and the Mac OS X clients can
show DVD movies, but they cannot use the subtitles
that are provided with the movie. DVD subtitles are
pre-rendered into separate video tracks. To access
them we would have to use OCR which was not in
the scope of this project.

One serious drawback with existing subtitles is
that they do not store meta-information about the
speaker. Useful meta-information would be gender,
age and dialect of the speaker, or even a unique iden-
tifier for each person in the movie. With this infor-
mation the system could use different TTS voices for
different characters.

7E.g., http://opensubtitles.org/ and http://undertexter.se/.

2.5 Speech synthesis
We are only using existing speech synthesisers,
which means that the user either has to have a TTS
voice installed on his/her computer, or constant ac-
cess to the Internet since the system can call exist-
ing online TTS engines. The only problem with on-
line TTS systems is that almost all of them are for
demonstration purposes only and therefore cannot
be used in day-to-day work. We have been using
an online Swedish open-source voice being devel-
oped by the company STTS8 using the OpenMary
TTS platform (Schröder and Trouvain, 2003).

Here is the current status of speech synthesis for
our different systems:

• The Windows client can use any SAPI voice in-
stalled on the system. It can also use an online
voice, as an alternative.

• The Mac OS X client can use any voice in-
stalled on the system. The latest version of
OS X (10.7) includes high-quality voices for 22
different languages, so there is no need for on-
line voices on this platform.

• The HTML5 browser client cannot use system-
installed voices, since that functionality is not
included in HTML5. There is a current W3C
draft proposal for how to use TTS from within
HTML (Bringert, 2010), but it is not decided
upon and no browsers support this yet. Un-
til TTS becomes a HTML standard we have to
rely on online voices, which unfortunately is a
scarce resource.

3 Discussion

3.1 Social and pedagogical advantages
People with visually impairments and/or reading
difficulties often use text-to-speech to cope with
school work, and to keep up with society. Spoken
subtitles further increase the accessibility of foreign
movies and TV shows for these people.

Hopefully, spoken subtitles can help improve the
reading skills for people with reading difficulties.
The theory is that listening to the spoken subtitles
at the same time as reading the text may benefit the
reading process, but this has yet to be tested.

8Södermalms Talteknologiservice, http://stts.se/

3



3.2 Evaluation

We are currently, during spring 2012, evaluating the
applications together with different users in the tar-
get groups. Initially we will only be evaluating user
satisfaction and whether this approach could be an
accepted solution to the need of text interpretation
during movie playback.

If this initial evaluation is positive, we are very
interested in continuing by evaluating specific fac-
tors that might or might not improve user satisfac-
tion. Such factors could be: using different TTS
voices, using different speech rates, reducing speech
overlap, having the speech coming from another di-
rection, lowering the movie volume while speaking,
using advanced audio techniques for filtering away
movie speech, etc.

Another interesting evaluation would be to en-
code speaker meta-information into movie subtitles,
and test how different TTS voices for different char-
acters can improve the user’s satisfaction and com-
prehension.

3.3 Future work

To further ease the user friendliness and the avail-
ability, it would be desirable to have the func-
tionality built into an existing media player, such
as the open-source and cross-platform VLC Media
Player.9 If more users request this functionality, the
developers will have to catch on and include it into
new releases.

According to (Hanzlíček et al., 2008), 44 per-
cent of the Czech subtitles had overlaps when spo-
ken with TTS. Even though we have no figures for
Swedish, some overlap is to be expected also here,
which is an issue that should be addressed. One pos-
sible simple solution is to modify the speech rate.

An important factor for the experience of the
speech synthesizer together with a video playback
would be the settings of the audio channels. Hy-
pothetically, a listener would want to keep both the
original background cues, like music, and the orig-
inal voices. However, these sounds must not inter-
fere with the speech synthesizer that is the source
of information for the listener. Balancing these two
criteria to get the optimized result is of great interest.

9VLC Media Player, http://www.videolan.org/vlc/

If the program would be used for language learn-
ing, or to help slow readers to comprehend, the fea-
ture of highlighting the word that is spoken could be
a very useful additional feature.

Acknowledgements

The SubTTS project is funded by the Swedish Post
and Telecom Authority (PTS). We are grateful to
four anonymous referees for their comments.

References
A-focus. 2010. Utredning avseende TV-tillgänglighet

för personer med funktionsnedsättning. Myndigheten
för radio och TV, Stockholm, Sweden.

Björn Bringert. 2010. HTML text to speech (TTS) API
specification. W3c editor’s draft, W3C.

Folke Eliasson. 2005. IT i praktiken – slutrapport.
Hjälpmedelsinstitutet, Sweden.

Zdeněk Hanzlíček, Jindřich Matoušek, and Daniel Ti-
helka. 2008. Towards automatic audio track gener-
ation for Czech TV broadcasting: Initial experiments
with subtitles-to-speech synthesis. In ICSP ’08, 9th
International Conference on Signal Processing, Bei-
jing, China.

Morten Jønsson and Hans Heinrich Bothe. 2007. OCR-
algorithm for detection of subtitles in television and
cinema. In CVHI’07, 5th Conference and Workshop
on Assistive Technology for People with Vision and
Hearing Impairments, Granada, Spain.

Jindřich Matoušek, Zdeněk Hanzlíček, Daniel Tihelka,
and Martin Méner. 2010. Automatic dubbing of TV
programmes for the hearing impaired. In 10th IEEE
International Conference on Signal Processing, Bei-
jing, China.

Simon Nielson and Hans Heinrich Bothe. 2007. SubPal:
A device for reading aloud subtitles from television
and cinema. In CVHI’07, 5th Conference and Work-
shop on Assistive Technology for People with Vision
and Hearing Impairments, Granada, Spain.

OECD. 2000. Literacy in the Information Age: Final Re-
port of the International Adult Literacy Survey. OECD
Publications, Paris.

Marc Schröder and Jürgen Trouvain. 2003. The Ger-
man text-to-speech synthesis system MARY: A tool
for research, development and teaching. International
Journal of Speech Technology, 6:365–377.

Maarten Verboom, David Crombie, Evelien Dijk, and
Mildred Theunisz. 2002. Spoken subtitles: Making
subtitled TV programmes accessible. In ICCHP’02,
8th International Conference on Computers Helping
People with Special Needs, Linz, Austria.

4


