










































Analysis of Travel Review Data from Readers Point of View


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, pages 47–51,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Analysis of Travel Review Data from Reader’s Point of View 

 
 

Maya Ando Shun Ishizaki 
Graduate School of Media and Governance 

Keio University 
5322 Endo, Fujisawa-shi, Kanagawa 252-0882, Japan 

maya@sfc.keio.ac.jp ishizaki@sfc.keio.ac.jp 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Abstract 

In the NLP field, there have been a lot of 
works which focus on the reviewer’s point of 
view conducted on sentiment analyses, which 
ranges from trying to estimate the reviewer’s 
score. However the reviews are used by the 
readers. The reviews that give a big influence 
to the readers should have the highest value, 
rather than the reviews to which was assigned 
the highest score by the writer. In this paper, 
we conducted the analyses using the reader’s 
point of view. We asked 20 subjects to read 
500 sentences in the reviews of Rakuten travel 
and extracted the sentences that gave a big 
influence to the subjects. We analyze the 
influential sentences from the following two 
points of view, 1) targets and evaluations and 
2) personal tastes.  We found that “room”, 
“service”, “meal” and “scenery” are important 
targets which are items included in the reviews, 
and that “features” and “human senses” are 
important evaluations which express sentiment 
or explain targets. Also we showed personal 
tastes appeared on “meal” and “service”.  

1 Introduction  

Reviews are indispensable in the current e-
commerce business. In the NLP field, there have 
been a lot of works conducted on sentiment 
analyses, which ranges from trying to estimate the 
reviewer’s score or analyzing them by the aspects 
of reviewer’s evaluations. However the reviews 
are used by the customers, not by the reviewers. 

So, the business value of the review lies on the 
customer’s point of view, rather than the 
reviewer’s point of view. The reviews which give 
a great influence to the customers should have the 
highest value, rather than the reviews to which 
were assigned the highest score by the writer. We 
defined customers as readers and reviewers as 
writers. We found the differences between the 
writer’s view and the reader’s one using scores 
given by reviewers. Especially the negative 
information is found much more influential to the 
readers than the positive one (Ando et al., 2012). 

We conducted the analyses using the reader’s 
point of view. We asked 20 subjects to read 500 
review sentences in Rakuten travel reviews1 and 
extract the sentences from them that gave a great 
influence. We analyzed the influential sentences 
from the following two points of view, 1) targets 
and evaluations (Chap. 4) and 2) Personal tastes 
(Chap. 5). 

2 Previous Study 

There have been a lot of works on sentiment 
analysis in the past decade. Some of them were 
classifying reviews into positive, negative, or 
neutral (Turney, 2002; Pang et al., 2002;  Koppel 
et al., 2006; Pang, 2005; Okanohara et al.,  2006; 
Thelwall et al., 2010). These works were 
conducted based on the writer’s point of view, i.e. 
the targets are mainly assigned by the writers. In 
our research, we will describe reader’s point of 
view. 

                                                           
1 Rakuten Travel Inc. 
http://travel.rakuten.co.jp/ (Japanese) 

47



     In some reviews, there is information called 
helpfulness which is given by readers. Ghose et al. 
(2007) used it as one of the features in order to 
rank the reviews. Passos (2010) also used it to 
identify authoritativeness of reviews. They didn’t 
conduct any detailed analysis like what we 
conducted in this paper. So far, the usage of the 
helpfulness information is limited, and indeed the 
information is too obscure to be used in the 
analyses we are trying to conduct. 

3 Data Preparation 

We use hotel’s reviews of Rakuten travel Inc. We 
defined influential sentences as those that 
influence readers to make them book the hotel. In 
practice, influential sentences are very sparse. So, 
in order to collect them efficiently, we used a 
heuristic that it is relatively more likely to find 
them in the sentences with exclamation marks 
(“!”) located at their ends. We randomly extract 
500 sentences which have more than one “!” at 
the end, and used for the analyses. Note that 
exclamation mark doesn’t change the meaning of 
the sentence. We conducted a preliminary survey 
and found that our assumption works well. 

We asked 20 subjects to extract influential 
sentences from the 500 sentences. The task is to 
extract sentences by which each subject thinks it 
influential enough to decide he/she wants to book 
or never to do the hotel. We asked them not to 
include their personal tastes. There are 84 
influential sentences on which more than 4 
subjects agreed. In the following sections, these 
84 sentences will be called the influential 
sentences and the other sentences are regarded as 
the non-influential sentences. 

4 Analysis of Target and Evaluation 

We analyze classes of targets and evaluations 
which are most influential to the readers. Here, 
the targets are such as meals or locations of the 
hotels, and the evaluations are the reader’s 
impressions about the targets such as good or 
convenient. We allow duplication of the 
classification, i.e. if a sentence contains more than 
one target or evaluation then we extract all the 
target or evaluation terms. 

We categorized the targets into 11 classes and 
the evaluations into 7 classes (Table1). The table 

contains the Chi-square test results for each class. 
It indicates how significantly each class appears 
in the influential sentences compared to the non-
influential sentences. “Less than 1%” means that 
the chance having the number of classes in the 
influential sentences and that in the non-
influential sentences is less than 1%, if random 
distribution is assumed. “None” means there is no 
significant influence. The results of Chi-square 
test show that the three classes of target, “room”, 
“meal” and “service” give influence to the readers 
(less than 1%), and “scenery” is also influential 
(less than 5%). Two classes of the evaluations, 
“human senses” and “features” are influential 
(less than 1%). “Features” are expressions 
describing the writer’s view about particular 
targets in the hotel. 

We found that some particular combinations 
of a target and an evaluation are influential 
(Table 2). “-” indicates infrequence (less than 6). 
We will discuss the combinations of “meal + 
human senses”, “service + feelings” and “room/ 
meal/ service/ scenery + features”. 

In the combination of “meal + human 
senses”, “human senses” are all about taste. The 
number of the influential sentences is 12, and the 
non-influential sentences are 19. We analyze 
each set of sentences, and found that the 
influential sentences include particular name of 
dish like “sukiyaki” much more often (less than 
1%). Non-influential sentences include more 
abstract expressions, like “breakfast”. The 
readers are influenced by particular food.  

The combination of “feeling + service” 
appeared in influential sentences relatively more 
often(less than 2.5%). “Service” includes service 
of the hotel like “welcome fruit” or “staff’s 
service”. “Feeling” is influential only when it 
combines with “service” (ex. 1). 

Ex. 1: …there was happy surprise service at the 
dinner!! 

 “Features” is very frequent. Investigating the 
combination with targets, we found that “room”, 
“meal” and “service” are the ones which made 
significant difference (less than 1%) by 
combining with “features”. These are the key to 
make “features” more influential for readers. 
“Scenery" is a target originally created and has a 
significant difference less than 5%. It is a bit 
unexpected, but was useful information for some 
readers.  

48



 

Table 1. Target and Evaluation with Chi-square test 
Result of Chi-square test Target evaluation 

Less than 1% Room, meal, service Human sense (e.g. delicious, stink), Features (e.g. marvelous, bad) 

Less than 5% Scenery - 

None 
Location, staff, 

facility, hotel, bath, 
plan, price 

recommendation (e.g. This is my recommendation)  
next visiting (e.g. I’ll never use this hotel), feeling (e.g. happy) 

request (e.g. I want you to…), others (e.g. Thank you) 

Table 2. Combination of Target and Evaluation with Chi-square test 
  room meal  bath service facility scenery 

features less than 1% less than 1% NO less than 1% NO less than 5% 
feelings NO - - less than 2.5% - - 

human senses - less than 1% - - - - 

 

5 Personal tastes in the influential 
sentences  

Although we instructed the subjects not to include 
particular personal tastes, we observed the 
selections of the influential sentences are different 
among the subject.  289 sentences are selected as 
influential sentences by at least one subject, and 
94 sentences are selected by only one subject.  

The personal tastes often appear on the target, 
so we analyzed differences of targets among the 
subject. We clustered the subjects based on their 
choice of the targets. For each subject, we create a 
frequency vector whose elements are including 
the most popular 7 targets, namely “location”, 
“room”, “meal”, “bath”, “service”, “facility”, and 
“scenery”. Then the cosine metrics is applied to 
calculate the similarity between any pair of the 
subjects. Next, we run the hierarchical 
agglomerative clustering with the farthest 
neighbor method to form their clusters. Three 
figures, Figures 1 to 3, show the results of three 
clusters in Rader charts. Each of three clusters has 
a typical personal taste, namely groups who are 
influenced more by “service” very strongly (Fig. 
1), by “meal” (Fig. 2) or by both “service” and 
“meal “(Fig. 3).  

We analyze influential sentences by using the 
number of sentences including “service”. Table 3 
shows the numbers of sentences that were judged 
influential by certain numbers of subjects on 
“service”. In this analysis, we categorize the 
influential sentences into positive and negative 
ones. For example, there were 2 positively 
influential sentences that were judged influential 
by 9 subjects. From Table 3, we can observe that 
the sentences can clearly be grouped into two; 

sentences which 7 or more subjects judged 
influential (we will call them as a popular group) 
and sentences less than 7 subjects judged 
influential (unpopular group). 

 
Figure 1. “Service” type     Figure 2.   “Meal” type 

 
Figure 3. “Service & meal”  type 

Table 3: the number of influential sentences judged by 
certain number of subjects on “service” 
 10 or more 9 8 7 6 5 Less than 5 
Positive 3 2 1 0 1 5 33 
Negative 3 3 1 0 0 2 4 

In the “service” target, 63 sentences are 
selected as influential by at least one subject. 
Among them, 45 sentences are positive, 13 
sentences are negative and 5 sentences are 
classified other (i.e. neither positive nor negative). 
There are four sets of data by combining positive-
negative axis and axis. We will analyze them one 
by one. 

[Negative & Popular] 
There are 7 sentences in this group and we found 
that 3 of them include “feeling” evaluation, such 
as “surprised” or “angry”. In contrast, there is no 
sentence including feeling in the negative & 
unpopular group. Also, very unpleasant events 

49



like “arrogant attitude of hotel staff,” “lost the 
luggage” and “payment trouble” are found 
negatively influential by many subjects.  

 [Negative & Unpopular] 
There are sentences about staff’s attitude in this 

group, too, but it is less important compared to the 
ones in the popular group. For example, staff’s 
attitude is about greetings or conversation by the 
hotel staff. We believe it is depending on people if 
they care those issues or not. 

 [Positive & Popular] 
In this group, there are 2 sentences that show 
unexpected warm service (ex. 2). Also, there are 
sentences that express high satisfactions not only 
in service but also in other targets, such as meal. 

Ex. 2: …they kept the electric carpet on 
because it was cold. We, with my elderly 
farther, were so glad and impressed!! 

 [Positive & Unpopular] 
All sentences include some positive descriptions 
about services, such as “carrying the luggage” or 
“welcome fruit”. Some subjects are influenced, 
but the others aren’t. We believe it is because 
some people think that these are just usual 
services to be provided. 

Now, we describe analyses on the “meal” target. 
There are 68 influential sentences selected by at 
least one subject. There are 58 positive sentences, 
5 negative sentences and 4 sentences otherwise. 
We analyze the four groups, just like what we did 
for “service”.  

[Negative & Popular] 
We find strong negative opinion about meal itself 
like “Their rice was cooked terrible”, which are 
not found in the unpopular group. Many people 
are influenced when the meal is described badly.  

 [Negative & Unpopular] 
There are 2 sentences about the situation of the 
restaurant, such as "crowded" or "existence of a 
large group of people". We believe that the most 
important feature of meal is taste, not the situation. 
Many people might know such situation happens 
by chance, so only some people cares about this 
kind of issue. 

[Positive & Popular] 
The sentences in both popular and unpopular 
groups include “delicious”, but “delicious” with 
emphasizing adjectives, like “really delicious” 
were found only in the popular group.  

 [Positive & Unpopular] 
The sentences including "cost performance" and 
"large portion" only appear in the unpopular 
group. We believe that the size might be 
influential to people who like to eat a lot, but 
people who might not be interested in them.  

The analyses show that there is personal taste 
and we analyzed it in detail by examining the 
examples. It indicates that personalization is very 
important for the readers to find the reviews that 
might satisfy readers. 

6 Conclusion  

The main focus of our study is on the reader’s 
point view to evaluate reviews, compared to the 
writer’s point of view that was the major focus in 
the previous studies. We defined the influential 
sentences as those that could make the reader’s 
decision. We analyzed the 84 influential sentences, 
based on the selection by the 20 subjects from the 
500 sentences. We conducted the following two 
analyses.  
1) We analyzed targets and evaluations in 

influential sentences. We found that “room”, 
“service”, “meal” and “scenery” are important 
targets, and “features” and “human senses” are 
important evaluations. We also analyzed 
combinations of the targets and evaluations. 
We find that some combinations make it more 
influential than each of them. 

2) We analyzed the personal tastes. The subjects 
can be categorized into three clusters, which 
can be explained intuitively. We found that the 
most important targets to characterize the 
clusters are ”service” and “meal”. 

There are many directions in our future work. 
One of the important topics is to conduct 
cognitive analysis on the influential sentences. 
We found that expressions can be very influential 
by adding a simple modifier (“really delicious”). 
Furthermore, many metaphorical expressions are 
found in influential sentences (this topic was not 
covered in this paper). We would like to conduct 
the cognitive analyses on these topics to clarify 
the characteristics of the reader’s point of view. 
We believe it will reveal new types of information 
in reviews that is also useful for applications. 
 
 

50



References  

Alexandre Passos and Jacques Wainer, 2010, What do 
you know? A topic-model approach to authority 
identification, Proc. Of Computational Social 
Science and Wisdom of Crowds(NIP2010). 

Anindya Ghose and Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis. 2007. 
Designing novel review ranking systems: Predicting 
usefulness and impact of reviews. Proc. of the 
International Conference on Electronic Commerce 
(ICEC), pp. 303-309.  

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan. 
2002. "Thumbs up? Sentiment Classification using 
Machine Learning Techniques". Proceedings of the 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing (EMNLP). pp. 79–86. 

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2005. "Seeing stars: 
Exploiting class relationships for sentiment 
categorization with respect to rating scales". 
Proceedings of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL). pp. 115–124. 

Daisuke Okanohara and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 
2007.Assigning Polarity Scores to Reviews Using 
Machine Learning Techniques. Journal of Natural 
Language Processing. 14(3). pp. 273-295. 

Koppel, M. and Schler, J. 2006. “The Importance of 
Neutral Examples in Learning Sentiment”. 
Computational Intelligence. 22(2). pp.100-109. 

Maya Ando and Shun Ishizaki. 2012, Analysis of 
influencial reviews on Web(in Japanese), Proc. Of 
the 18th Annual Conference of the Association for 
Natural Language Processing,  pp. 731-734. 

P. Victor, C. Cornelis, M. De Cock, and A. Teredesai. 
2009. “Trust- and distrustbased recommendations 
for controversial reviews.”  in Proceedings of the 
WebSci’09, Society On-Line. 

Peter Turney. 2002. "Thumbs Up or Thumbs Down? 
Semantic Orientation Applied to Unsupervised 
Classification of Reviews". Proceedings of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics. pp. 417-
424.  

Thelwall, Mike; Buckley, Kevan; Paltoglou, Georgios; 
Cai, Di; Kappas, Arvid. 2010. "Sentiment strength 
detection in short informal text". Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and 
Technology 61 (12). pp. 2544-2558. 

 

 

51


