



















































Corpus Building of Literary Lesser Rich Language-Bodo: Insights and Challenges


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 29–34,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Corpus Building of Literary Lesser Rich Language- Bodo: Insights 

and Challenges  

Biswajit Brahma1 Anup Kr. Barman1 Prof. Shikhar Kr. Sarma1 Bhatima Boro1 

(1) DEPT. OF IT, GAUHATI UNIVERSITY, Guwahati - 781014, India 

bswjtbrahma@gmail.com, anupbarman.gu@gmail.com, 

sks001@gmail.com, borobhatima@gmail.com 

ABSTRACT 
Collection of natural language texts in to a machine readable format for investigating various linguistic 

phenomenons is call a corpus. A well structured corpus can help to know how people used that language in 

day-to-day life and to build an intelligent system that can understand natural language texts. Here we 

review our experience with building a corpus containing 1.5 million words of Bodo language. Bodo is a 

Sino Tibetan family language mainly spoken in Northern parts of Assam, the North Eastern state of India. 

We try to improve the quality of Bodo corpora considering various characteristics like representativeness, 

machine readability, finite size etc. Since Bodo is one of the Indian language which is lesser reach on 

literary and computationally we face big problem on collecting data and our generated corpus will help the 

researchers in both field. 

KEYWORD : Bodo language, Corpus, Linguistics, Natural Language Processing. 

29



1 Introduction 

The term corpus is derived from Latin corpus "body” which it means as a representative collection of texts 

of a given language, dialect or other subset of a language to be used for linguistic analysis. Precisely, it 

refers to (a) (loosely) anybody of text; (b) (most commonly) a body of machine readable text; and (c) (more 

strictly) a finite collection of machine-readable texts sampled to be representative of a language or variety 

(Mc Enery and Wilson 1996: 218). Again, Corpus is a machine readable texts (both spoken and written) 

document stored in machine systematically collected from different sources. It is an important text in digital 

media world. It is defined as corpus and in plural corpora a collection of linguistic data, either compiled as 

written texts or as a transcription of recorded speech. The main purpose of a corpus is to verify a hypothesis 

about language - for example, to determine how the usage of a particular sound, word, or syntactic 

construction varies. Corpus linguistics deals with the principles and practice of using corpora in language 

study. A computer corpus is a large body of machine-readable texts
1
. So it is the computerization of 

varieties text (various domains of texts such as literature, science, sports etc.) of a given language. Corpus 

may be of monolingual, bilingual and multi lingual format of machine readable data etc. It is an annotated 

and tagged component of parts of speech. It is most important for computing to make it accessible 

worldwide via internet. Moreover it is a valid machine readable data of a given language which gives us 

proper information of a language where it follows linguistics principles. 

The need of language corpora has given rise to the study of corpus linguistics. It is not a branch of 

linguistics but the methodology that helps in analysis and research of naturally occurring language through 

the help of computerized corpora, i.e. with the specialized software. From the very beginning, modern 

corpus linguistics has been closely associated with the development of computer software for corpus 

analysis. In modern corpus linguistics, the linguists and the computer scientists share a common goal that it 

is important to depend on the real or actual language data (speech or written) for carrying out any kind of 

linguistic analysis. Moreover, it is an approach which satisfies two main purposes: how people use 

language in day-to-day communication and to build up intelligent system to interact with human beings. 

It is not easy to classify corpora into various types. Modern day corpora are of various types. In fact, it is a 

very crucial task of classifying language corpora into different types. However, written corpus, spoken 

corpus, general corpus, monolingual corpus, bilingual corpus, unannotated corpus, annotated corpus, 

parallel and learner corpus are worth mentioning.  

2 Related Studies  

The first computer corpus, “Brown Corpus” was created early in the 1960s by Nelson Francis and Henry 

Kuccera. But it was not warmly accepted by the linguistics community, yet they are regarded as the pioneer 

of the Corpus linguistics. Creation of corpus is the most important to keep alive from the extinction of 

languages from this world. Keeping in the notice for the development of the Indian scheduled languages the 

government of India also started corpus generation revolution in India. As a consequence of its view the 

government of India emphasized for the development of Indian scheduled languages in technological media 

world and initiated the technological development works on scheduled languages in 1991. Accordingly 

machine readable texts have been developed in some major languages in India viz. Hindi, Indian English, 

Punjabi, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Gujarati, Oriya, Bengali, Assamese, Sanskrit, Urdu, Sindhi 

and Kashmiri in many universities and technology Institutes of India. Later development of corpora for the 

remaining languages had been done as to run parallel with the other languages for the better gaining to all. 

Bodo language belongs to the Sino Tibetan language family under the sub branch of Assam-Burmese 

group. This language speakers have spread highly in the northern part of the Brahmaputra valley. They are 

also scattered in all the districts of Assam state more or less. Apart from they can be found in the North-

Eastern states like Arunachal, Nagaland, Mizoram, Manipur, Tripura, Northern parts of West Bengal, Bihar 

and adjoining part of the Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan in small concentration. This language has the three 

distinct dialects according to some researchers. But Promod Chandra Bhattachrya in his doctoral thesis 

book “A descriptive analysis of the Boro Language” stated four dialects of Bodo language. These are i) 

                                         
1. Crystal, David. 1992. An Encyclopedic Dictionary of Language and Languages. Oxford,85 (cf.)  

 

30



North-west dialects areas having sub dialects of North Kamrupand North Goalpara district ii) South-West 

dialect area comprising South Goalpara and garo hills district iii) North-Central Assam dialect area 

comprising Darrang lakhimpur districts and a few places of Arunachal Pradesh iv) Southern dialect area 

comprising Nowgong North Cachar , Mikir Hills, Cachar and adjacent districts. It has two types of tone 

high and low tone. Intonation, juncture, agglutinating features is there in this language. Use of high back 

unrounded /w/ vowel is more frequent in this language. There are 22 phonemes 16 consonant and 6 vowel 

phonemes. Highly use of monosyllabic word can be found in this language. Devnagiri script is the main 

script of this language. 

Recently the language has recognized as the scheduled language by the government of India in 2003. The 

language is the medium of instruction up to the 10
th

 standard in school from 1963. In 1984 the language is 

recognized as the state associate official language in the districts of Kokrajhar and Udalguri. This language 

is introduced as major subject in the colleges under Gauhati University affiliation in the very recent. 

3 Bodo Text Corpus  

Consideration of size or length of corpus is an important factor. Overall size of Bodo corpus is determined 

as 1.5 million words. It is also determined of the availability of data, time for computerizing them in the 

format. The determined size of the corpus is collected from the expected three main category- Media, 

Learned and Literature. These categories are again classified into sub categories during the creation of 

Bodo corpus as given against in the following table. Thus the corpus generation is done keeping in mind of 

determined target from the different domain collection resources in Bodo. In Bodo media house collection 

news paper like dailies, weeklies; bi-weeklies and magazines monthlies, bi-monthlies etc are very less. And 

medical science, engineering, technological word terms very rare, those terms words are taken from the 

“Glossary of Administrative Terms” published by the Ministry of Human Resource Development 

(Department of Higher Education), government of India. Entire collection of the data was taken from the 

written texts document from the various resources as given in the following tree diagram. In Media 

category total 637000 roots words have been entered comprising category and subcategories. 229250 root 

words from the learned material category including category and sub categories and a total count of 711500 

root words from literature category have been computerised in the text format as shown in the following 

tree diagram. Having all these three category the Bodo corpus has been created and shaped a total word 

counting of 1.5 million words (total 1,577,750 words). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 1 – A tree diagram showing categories of corpus contents 

31



3.1 Content Selection 

A large number of written genres are selected keeping in the mind of its purpose and utility of a corpus. But 

poetry genre is not included in our selection. Some genres are not in Bodo like Obituaries, Classified 

advertisements in the news paper. So these are cannot be found in the format data. There is no film’s and 

women’s magazine in Bodo but getting a few representations in the magazines it was included in the 

corpus. All these genres represent the actual sense of the language and they are listed in the above given 

diagram. 

It is the second task after selecting the genres to determine how many the numbers of texts and the range of 

writers to be included in the Bodo corpus. There are a huge number of texts available in the languages, but 

we are very selective in determining the number of texts. Similarly, in the selection of the range of authors, 

we give importance to both eminent authors and little-known authors. But in case of news paper and 

magazine we select all the news papers and magazines published in Bodo as news paper items are not 

available in the language. In case of learned material also we try to cover up all necessary domains. And in 

literature the science fiction and sentimental fiction are also not available, so they are avoided in the corpus 

while generating the corpora. 

3.2 Data Collection 

For building a corpus in Bodo, data are collected from the written texts of the language. In order to collect 

data, we mainly go for buying books, use of library materials, some texts are also photocopied and scanned 

etc. The issue of copyright is always kept in mind.  

3.3 Computerizing data 

The collected data are now ready for entering on to the computer. The task of computerising the text 

materials is a very crucial. These data are compiled by the native speakers only. Trio-lingual a (Bodo-

English-Hindi) dictionary of Bodo Sahitya Sabha published by Onsumwi Library, Kokrajhar, Assam is 

followed while entering the texts in the format for standardization of the language and in some cases 

linguistics standardization is also followed. 

3.4 Validation  

The next process is the validation of those typed data. Validation must be done by the expert. He should be 

a native speaker of Bodo langauge who has the linguistic command over the Bodo langauge. Generation of 

Bodo corpus is based the standardization of “Boro-Ingraji-Hindi Swdwbbigung” a trio-lingual (Bodo-

English-Hindi) dictionary of Bodo Sahitya Sabha published by Onsumwi Library, Kokrajhar, Assam and in 

some cases linguistics standardization is also followed. Present discussion is done generated raw corpus in 

Bodo of few years back. Validation is done manually because this language does not have still tagged 

corpus and annotated texts. It has a long way to reach its fruitful goal. 

4 Issues related to Bodo corpus generation  

The size and quality of the corpus depends on the data of a respective language on its resources. Bodo does 

not have such a rich resources in various fields of its language and the literature and in the science 

(Chemistry, physics etc.) and in the media house whatever it is electronics or print media. Child literature is 

very less as compared to other literature and medical science and engineering and the terms of respective 

subject’s words are very rare. Medical science, administrative engineering terms words are entered in the 

corpus from the glossary book published by MHRD, government of India. Provisions like obituary, 

classified advertisements etc. are not there in the news paper. In these entire field the resources is increasing 

day to day. Here we mention some challenges  faced  during building period of Bodo corpus: 

Spelling variation  

It is a major problem in Bodo literature as well as in other writing fields also. No standard or uniform 

spelling system is followed by the authors or writers in this language for their writings though standardized 

language is followed. Many authors and writers go their own wishes. So it is found very difficult while 

entering texts documents in the format. As for example: [थाखाय, थाखाइ (thakhai): for], [बायदि, बाइदि 

32



(baidi): etc.]  here whereas both the word [थाखाय, थाखाइ (thakhai): for] is used to mean the same meaning 
but spelling is changed in the last letter of the word i.e. य letter is changing to इ in the second word and 
also in second example [बायदि, बाइदि (baidi): alike] it also refers same meaning though the word spelling 
in the middle is changed from य to इ. Both in the above example there is no change in their word meaning 
but its spelling is varying in both the words. So it is one of the major problems which one has to be follow 

while entering the text for corpus. 

Word Split 

Splitting of words is found frequently in Bodo while entering the texts into format.  These words are edited 

and correctly entered by the compiler.  For example:   

BS: ब ुंिोंमोन दि TF:bungdwngmw di 
Correct:BS: ब ुंिोंमोनदि TF:bungdwngmwdi 
Joined Sentence/Word  
Many times joined sentence is found in the texts while entering the texts. The compiler itself corrected the 

sentence and entered in the format. 

BS: गस्ऱाखौ गानहाुं जाबायमोन।रामोना आुंखौ लऱुंहरो। 
TF:goslakhou ganhan jabaimwn.Ramwna angkhou linghorw 

Correct:BS:  गस्ऱाखौ गानहाुं जाबायमोन। रामोना आुंखौ लऱुंहरो। 
TF:goslakhou ganhan jabaimwn. Ramwna angkhou linghorw. 

Punctuation Error  
A large number of punctuation incorrect marks are found in the texts materials. These are removed and 

corrected by the compiler. As for example 

BS: खोऱाहा थथङै। सानैजों गोबाऱायासै । TF: khwlaha thingwi. Sanwijwng gwbalayaswi.  
Correct:BS:  खोऱाहा थथङै सानैजों गोबाऱायासै। TF: khwlaha thingwi sanwijwng gwbalayaswi.  
Dialect Words  
Sometime many dialect words are found in the texts. These words are corrected by the compiler and 

entered in the data format for the corpus. For instance  

BS: कोरर्ाारखो TF: quarterkhw 
Correct:BS:  कोरर्ाारखौ TF:quarterkhou 
Grammatical error 

There are lots of sentences which are found grammatically incorrect in the texts. Those sentences are edited 

and entry is done correctly by the compiler as given in the following example.  

BS: जेब्ऱा राुंरालसया गहेऱ थानाय कोरर्ाारखो मोनहैयो अब्ऱा हर 10 र्ासो जाबायमोन ।  
TF: jebla rangrasiya gohel thanai quarterkhou mwnhwiyw obla hor 10 tasw jabaimwn 

Correct:BS: जेब्ऱा राुंरालसया गहेऱ थानाय कोरर्ाारखौ मोनहैयो अब्ऱा हरनन 10 र्ासो जाबायमोन । 
TF: jebla rangrasiya gohel thanai quarterkhou mwnhwiyw obla horni 10 tasw jabaimwn. 

Hyphenated words 

Bodo also have hyphenated words, those are in case of multiword expression words.  But surprisingly, there 

are a few hyphenated words in Bodo within a word which are found in the texts. Those words are compiled 

and entered by the compiler in the format. For example  

BS: गालम-आररफ्रा  TF: gami-arifra 
Correct:BS: गालमआररफ्रा TF: gamiarifra 
Incomplete sentence 

Incomplete sentences in the texts are very frequent in the Bodo texts. Complier has to face problem . For 

instance    

BS: बबयो गाज्ऱुं Ø थाङो । TF: biyw gajlaong Ø thangw. 
Correct:BS: बबयो गाज्ऱुं गाज्ऱुं थाङो। TF: biyw gajlong gajlong thangw. 

33



Conclusion 

It is seen from the above discussion that there is no developed fonts in Bodo. Due to in-uniformity of 

spelling the compiler of the corpus has to face several problems while entering the text into the format. In 

such cases they have to correct themselves. There is no science and sentimental fictions in Bodo and in 

some fields like journals like women’s, children’s, whether it is monthlies, bi-monthlies and news papers 

whether it is dailies, weeklies etc are very rare. The entire generation of Bodo corpus is based the 

standardization of trio-lingual (a Bodo-English-Hindi) dictionary of Bodo Sahitya Sabha published by 

Onsumwi Library, Kokrajhar, Assam in some cases and linguistics standardization is also followed. Present 

discussion is done generated raw corpus in Bodo of few years back. Validation of this generation corpus is 

done manually as this language does not have still tagged corpus and annotated texts. It has a long way to 

reach its fruitful goal.  

References 

Brahma, Promod Chandra (Compiler): Boro-Ingraji-Hindi Swdwbbigung, Onsumwi Library 2003, 

Kokrajhar Assam. 

Ministry of Human Resource Department. Government of India 2007, Glossary of Administrative Terms 

Aston, G (Ed. 2004) Learning with Corpora. Cambridge: Cambridge University press. 

Jayaram, B.D and  Rajyashree, S.K.: Corpora in Indian Languages. Central Institute of Languages 

Manasagangotri, Mysore 570006, India. 

Jayaram, B.D. (1996). Development of Corpora in Indian Languages: Problems and Suggested Solutions. 

Paper presented at workshop of Indian Language Corpus and its applications at CIIL, Mysore. 

Ganesan, M: Tamil Corpus Generation and Text Analysis: Annamalai University, Annamalainagar, 

Tamilnadu, India. 

Jaimai Purev  and Chimeddorj Obdayar. (2008). Corpus Building for Mongolian Language in Proceedings 

The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008  

Steven  A. and Steven B. (2010). The Human Language Project: building a universal corpus of the 

world's languages. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 

Linguistics, Uppsala, Sweden. 

N.S. Dash (2005). Corpus Languistics and Language Technology with Reference to Indian languages: 

Mitali Publication, New Delhi. 

Charles F. Mayer: English Corpus Linguistics An Introduction.  Published by the press Syndicate  of the 

University of Cambridge. 

Stella E.O. Tagnin: A Multilingual Learner Corpus in Brazil. Published: Rodopi. 

McEnery and Andrew Wilson: Corpus Linguistics. Published by Edinburge University press. 

Michael McCarthy: Touchstone From Corpus to Course Book. Published by the syndicate of the 

University of Cambridge. 

Kenji Imamura and Eiichiro Sumita (2002). Bilingual Corpus Cleaning Focusing on Translation Literality. 

In: 7th International Conference on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP-2002). 

34


