










































Detecting Influencers in Written Online Conversations


Proceedings of the 2012 Workshop on Language in Social Media (LSM 2012), pages 37–45,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Detecting Influencers in Written Online Conversations

Or Biran1* Sara Rosenthal1* Jacob Andreas1**

Kathleen McKeown1* Owen Rambow2†

1 Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027
2 Center for Computational Learning Systems, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027

* {orb, sara, kathy}@cs.columbia.edu
** jda2129@columbia.edu †rambow@ccls.columbia.edu

Abstract

It has long been established that there is a cor-
relation between the dialog behavior of a par-
ticipant and how influential he or she is per-
ceived to be by other discourse participants.
In this paper we explore the characteristics of
communication that make someone an opinion
leader and develop a machine learning based
approach for the automatic identification of
discourse participants that are likely to be in-
fluencers in online communication. Our ap-
proach relies on identification of three types
of conversational behavior: persuasion, agree-
ment/disagreement, and dialog patterns.

1 Introduction

In any communicative setting where beliefs are ex-
pressed, some are more influential than others. An
influencer can alter the opinions of their audience,
resolve disagreements where no one else can, be rec-
ognized by others as one who makes important con-
tributions, and often continue to influence a group
even when not present. Other conversational par-
ticipants often adopt their ideas and even the words
they use to express their ideas. These forms of per-
sonal influence (Katz and Lazarsfeld, 1955) are part
of what makes someone an opinion leader. In this
paper, we explore the characteristics of communica-
tion that make someone an opinion leader and de-
velop a machine learning based approach for the au-
tomatic identification of discourse participants who
are likely to be influencers in online communication.

Detecting influential people in online conversa-
tional situations has relevance to online advertising

strategies which exploit the power of peer influence
on sites such as Facebook. It has relevance to analy-
sis of political postings, in order to determine which
candidate has more appeal or which campaign strat-
egy is most successful. It is also relevant for design-
ing automatic discourse participants for online dis-
cussions (“chatbots”) as it can provide insight into
effective communication. Despite potential applica-
tions, analysis of influence in online communication
is a new field of study in part because of the rela-
tively recent explosion of social media. Thus, there
is not an established body of theoretical literature in
this area, nor are there established implementations
on which to improve. Given this new direction for
research, our approach draws on theories that have
been developed for identifying influence in spoken
dialog and extends them for online, written dialog.
We hypothesize that an influencer, or an influencer’s
conversational partner, is likely to engage in the fol-
lowing conversational behaviors:
Persuasion: An influencer is more likely to express
personal opinions with follow-up (e.g., justification,
reiteration) in order to convince others.
Agreement/disagreement: A conversational partner
is more likely to agree with an influencer, thus im-
plicitly adopting his opinions.
Dialog Patterns: An influencer is more likely to par-
ticipate in certain patterns of dialog, for example
initiating new topics of conversation, contributing
more to dialog than others, and engendering longer
dialog threads on the same topic.

Our implementation of this approach comprises
a system component for each of these conversa-
tional behaviors. These components in turn provide

37



the features that are the basis of a machine learn-
ing approach for the detection of likely influencers.
We test this approach on two different datasets, one
drawn from Wikipedia discussion threads and the
other drawn from LiveJournal weblogs. Our results
show that the system performs better for detection
of influencer on LiveJournal and that there are in-
teresting differences across genres for detecting the
different forms of conversational behavior.

The paper is structured as follows. After review-
ing related work, we define influence, present our
data and methods. We present a short overview of
the black box components we use for persuasion and
detection of agreement/disagreement, but our focus
is on the development of the influencer system as a
whole and thus we spend most time exploring the
results of experimentation with the system on dif-
ferent data sets, analyzing which components have
most impact. We first review related work.

2 Related Work

It has long been established that there is a correlation
between the conversational behavior of a discourse
participant and how influential he or she is perceived
to be by the other discourse participants (Bales et al.,
1951; Scherer, 1979; Brook and Ng, 1986; Ng et al.,
1993; Ng et al., 1995). Specifically, factors such as
frequency of contribution, proportion of turns, and
number of successful interruptions have been identi-
fied as being important indicators of influence. Reid
and Ng (2000) explain this correlation by saying that
“conversational turns function as a resource for es-
tablishing influence”: discourse participants can ma-
nipulate the dialog structure in order to gain influ-
ence. This echoes a starker formulation by Bales
(1970): “To take up time speaking in a small group
is to exercise power over the other members for at
least the duration of the time taken, regardless of the
content.” Simply claiming the conversational floor is
a feat of power. This previous work presents two is-
sues for a study aimed at detecting influence in writ-
ten online conversations.

First, we expect the basic insight – conversation
as a resource for influence – to carry over to written
dialog: we expect to be able to detect influence in
written dialog as well. However, some of the charac-
teristics of spoken dialog do not carry over straight-

forwardly to written dialog, most prominently the
important issue of interruptions: there is no interrup-
tion in written dialog. Our work draws on findings
for spoken dialog, but we identify characteristics of
written dialog which are relevant to influence.

Second, the insistence of Bales (1970) that power
is exercised through turn taking “regardless of con-
tent” may be too strong. Reid and Ng (2000) discuss
experiments which address not just discourse struc-
ture features, but also a content feature which repre-
sents how closely a turn is aligned with the overall
discourse goal of one of two opposing groups (with
opposing opinions on a specific issue) participating
in the conversation. They show that interruptions are
more successful if aligned with the discourse goal.
They propose a model in which such utterances
“lead to participation which in turn predicts social
influence”, so that the correlation between discourse
structure and influence is really a secondary phe-
nomenon. However, transferring such results to
other types of interactions (for example, in which
there are not two well-defined groups) is challeng-
ing. In this study, we therefore examine two types of
features as they relate to influence: content-related
(persuasion and agreement/disagreement), and dis-
course structure-related.

So far, there has been little work in NLP related
to influencers. Quercia et al. (2011) look at influ-
encers’ language use in Twitter contrasted to other
users’ groups and find some significant differences.
However, their analysis and definition relies quite
heavily on the particular nature of social activity
on Twitter. Rienks (2007) discusses detecting influ-
encers in a corpus of conversations. While he fo-
cuses entirely on non-linguistic behavior, he does
look at (verbal) interruptions and topic initiations
which can be seen as corresponding to some of our
Dialog Patterns Language Uses.

3 What is an Influencer?

Our definition of an influencer was collectively for-
mulated by a community of researchers involved in
the IARPA funded project on Socio Cultural Content
in Language (SCIL).

This group defines an influencer to be someone
who:

38



P1 by Arcadian <pc1>There seems to be a much better list at the National Cancer Institute than the one we’ve
got.</pc1><pa1>It ties much better to the actual publication (the same 11 sections, in the same order).</pa1>
I’d like to replace that section in this article. Any objections?
P2 by JFW <pc2><a1>Not a problem.</a1></pc2>Perhaps we can also insert the relative incidence as

published in this month’s wiki Blood journal
P3 by Arcadian I’ve made the update. I’ve included template links to a source that supports looking up

information by ICD-O code.
P4 by Emmanuelm Can Arcadian tell me why he/she included the leukemia classification to this lymphoma

page? It is not even listed in the Wikipedia leukemia page! <pc3>I vote for dividing the WHO classification
into 4 parts in 4 distinct pages: leukemia, lymphoma, histocytic and mastocytic neoplasms.</pc3><pa3>
Remember, Wikipedia is meant to be readable </pa3>by all. Let me know what you think before I delete
the non-lymphoma parts.
P5 by Arcadian Emmanuelm, aren’t you the person who added those other categories on 6 July 2005?

P6 by Emmanuelm <d1>Arcadian, I added only the lymphoma portion of the WHO classification.
You added the leukemias on Dec 29th.</d1>Would you mind moving the leukemia portion to the
leukemia page?

P7 by Emmanuelm <pc4>Oh, and please note that I would be very comfortable with a “cross-coverage”
of lymphocytic leukemias in both pages.</pc4>My comment is really about myeloid, histiocytic and
mast cell neoplasms who share no real relationship with lymphomas.
P8 by Arcadian <pa5><a2>To simplify the discussion, I have restored that section to your version.

</a2></pa5>You may make any further edits, and <pc6>I will have no objection.</pc6>
P9 by JFW The full list should be on the hematological malignancy page, and the lymphoma part can be here.

<pc7>It would be defendable to list ALL and CLL here.</pc7><pa7>They fall under the lymphoproliferative
disorders.</pa7>

Table 1: Influence Example: A Wikipedia discussion thread displaying Emmanuelm as the influencer. Replies are
indicated by indentation (for example, P2 is a response to P1). All Language Uses are visible in this example: Attempt
to Persuade ({pci, pai}), Claims (pci), Argumentation (pai), Agreement (ai), Disagreement (di), and the five Dialog
Patterns Language Uses (eg. Arcadian has positive Initiative).

1. Has credibility in the group.
2. Persists in attempting to convince others, even if
some disagreement occurs
3. Introduces topics/ideas that others pick up on or
support.

By credibility, we mean someone whose ideas are
adopted by others or whose authority is explicitly
recognized. We hypothesize that this shows up
through agreement by other conversants. By per-
sists, we mean someone who is able to eventually
convince others and often takes the time to do so,
even if it is not quick. This aspect of our definition
corresponds to earlier work in spoken dialog which
shows that frequency of contributions and propor-
tion of turns is a method people use to gain influence
(Reid and Ng, 2000; Bales, 1970). By point 3, we
see that the influencer may be influential even in di-
recting where the conversation goes, discussing top-
ics that are of interest to others. This latter feature
can be measured through the discourse structure of

the interaction. The influencer must be a group par-
ticipant but need not be active in the discussion(s)
where others support/credit him.

The instructions that we provided to annotators
included this definition as well as examples of who
is not an influencer. We told annotators that if some-
one is in a hierarchical power relation (e.g., a boss),
then that person is not an influencer to sub-ordinates
(or, that is not the type of influencer we are look-
ing for). We also included someone with situational
power (e.g., authority to approve other’s actions) or
power in directing the communication (e.g., a mod-
erator) as negative examples.

We also gave positive examples of influencers. In-
fluencers include an active participant who argues
against a disorganized group and resolves a discus-
sion is an influencer, a person who provides an an-
swer to a posted question and the answer is accepted
after discussion, and a person who brings knowledge
to a discussion. We also provided positive and neg-

39



ative examples for some of these cases.
Table 1 shows an example of a dialog where there

is evidence of influence, drawn from a Wikipedia
Talk page. A participant (Arcadian) starts the thread
with a proposal and a request for support from other
participants. The influencer (Emmanuelm) later
joins the conversation arguing against Arcadian’s
proposal. There is a short discussion, and Arcadian
defers to Emmanuelm’s position. This is one piece
of dialog within this group where Emmanuelm may
demonstrate influence. The goal of our system is to
find evidence for situations like this, which suggests
that a person is more likely to be an influencer.

Since we attempt to find local influence (a per-
son who is influential in a particular thread, as op-
posed to influential in general), our notion of influ-
encer is consistent with diverse views on social in-
fluence. It is consistent with the definition of influ-
encer proposed by Gladwell (2001) and Katz (1957):
an exceptionally convincing and influential person,
set apart from everyone else by his or her ability to
spread opinions. While it superficially seems incon-
sistent with Duncan Watts’ concept of “accidental
influentials” (Watts, 2007), that view does not make
the assertion that a person cannot be influential in
a particular situation (in fact, it predicts that some-
one will) - only that one cannot in general identify
people who are always more likely to be influencers.

4 Data and Annotation

Our data set consists of documents from two differ-
ent online sources: weblogs from LiveJournal and
discussion forums from Wikipedia.

LiveJournal is a virtual community in which peo-
ple write about their personal experiences in a we-
blog. A LiveJournal entry is composed of a post
(the top-level content written by the author) and a
set of comments (written by other users and the au-
thor). Every comment structurally descends either
from the post or from another comment.

Each article on Wikipedia has a discussion forum
(called a Talk page) associated with it that is used
to discuss edits for the page. Each forum is com-
posed of a number of threads with explicit topics,
and each thread is composed of a set of posts made
by contributors. The posts in a Wikipedia discussion
thread may or may not structurally descend from

other posts: direct replies to a post typically descend
from it. Other posts can be seen as descending from
the topic of the thread.

For consistency of terms, from here on we refer to
each weblog or discussion forum thread as a thread
and to each post or comment as a post.

We have a total of 333 threads: 245 from Live-
Journal and 88 from Wikipedia. All were annotated
for influencers. The threads were annotated by two
undergraduate students of liberal arts. These stu-
dents had no prior training or linguistic background.
The annotators were given the full definition from
section 3 and asked to list the participants that they
thought were influencers. Each thread may in princi-
ple have any number of influencers, but one or zero
influencers per thread is the common case and the
maximal number of influencers found in our dataset
was two. The inter-annotator agreement on whether
or not a participant is an influencer (given by Co-
hen’s Kappa) is 0.72.

5 Method

Our approach is based on three conversational be-
haviors which are identified by separate system
components described in the following three sec-
tions. Figure 1 shows the pipeline of the Influencer
system and Table 1 displays a Wikipedia discussion
thread where there is evidence of an influencer and
in which we have indicated the conversational be-
haviors as they occur. Motivated by our definition,
each component is concerned with an aspect of the
likely influencer’s discourse behavior:
Persuasion examines the participant’s language to
identify attempts to persuade, such as {pc1, pa1} in
Table 1, which consist of claims (e.g. pc1) made
by the participant and supported by argumentations
(e.g. pa1). It also identifies claims and argumenta-
tions independently of one another (pc4 and pa5).
Agreement/Disagreement examines the other par-
ticipants’ language to find how often they agree or
disagree with the participant’s statements. Examples
are a1 and d1 in Table 1.
Dialog Patterns examines how the participant inter-
acts in the discussion structurally, independently of
the content and the language used. An example of
this is Arcadian being the first poster and contribut-
ing the most posts in the thread in Table 1.

40



Figure 1: The influencer pipeline. Solid lines indicate
black-box components, which we only summarize in this
paper. Dashed lines indicate components described here.

Each component contributes a number of Lan-
guage Uses which fall into that category of conver-
sational behavior and these Language Uses are used
directly as features in a supervised machine learn-
ing model to predict whether or not a participant is
an influencer. For example, Dialog Patterns con-
tributes the Language Uses Initiative, Irrelevance,
Incitation, Investment and Interjection.

The Language Uses of the Persuasion and Agree-
ment/Disagreement components are not described in
detail in this paper, and instead are treated as black
boxes (indicated by solid boxes in Figure 1). We
have previously published work on some of these
(Biran and Rambow, 2011; Andreas et al., 2012).
The remainder of this section describes them briefly
and provides the results of evaluations of their per-
formance (in Table 2). The next section describes
the features of the Dialog Patterns component.

5.1 Persuasion

This component identifies three Language Uses: At-
tempt to Persuade, Claims and Argumentation.

We define an attempt to persuade as a set of con-
tributions made by a single participant which may
be made anywhere within the thread, and which are
all concerned with stating and supporting a single
claim. The subject of the claim does not matter:
an opinion may seem trivial, but the argument could
still have the structure of a persuasion.

Our entire data set was annotated for attempts to
persuade. The annotators labeled the text partici-
pating in each instance with either claim, the stated
opinion of which the author is trying to persuade
others or argumentation, an argument or evidence
that supports that claim. An attempt to persuade
must contain exactly one claim and at least one in-
stance of argumentation, like the {claim, argumen-
tation} pairs {pc1, pa1} and {pc3, pj3} in Table 1.

In addition to the complete attempt to persuade
Language Use, we also define the less strict Lan-
guage Uses claims and argumentation, which use
only the subcomponents as stand-alones.

Our work on argumentation, which builds on
Rhetorical Structure Theory (Mann and Thompson,
1988), is described in (Biran and Rambow, 2011).

5.2 Agreement/Disagreement

Agreement and disagreement are two Language
Uses that model others’ acceptance of the partici-
pant’s statements. Annotation (Andreas et al., 2012)
is performed on pairs of phrases, {p1, p2}. A phrase
is a substring of a post or comment in a thread. The
annotations are directed since each post or comment
has a time stamp associated with it. This means that
p1 and p2 are not interchangeable. p1 is called the
“target phrase”, and p2 is called the “subject phrase”.
A person cannot agree with him- or herself, so the
author of p1 and p2 cannot be the same. Each anno-
tation is also labeled with a type: either “agreement”
or “disagreement”.

6 Dialog Patterns

The Dialog Patterns component extracts features
based on the structure of the thread. Blogs and dis-
cussion threads have a tree structure, with a blog
post or a topic of discussion as the root and a set of

41



Component Wikipedia LiveJournal
P R F P R F

Attempt 79.1 69.6 74 57.5 48.2 52.4
to persuade
Claims 83.6 74.5 78.8 53.7 13.8 22
Argumentation 23.3 91.7 37.1 30.9 48.9 37.8
Agreement 12 31.9 17.4 20 50 28.6
Disagreement 8.7 9.5 9.1 6.3 14.3 8.7

Table 2: Performance of the black-box Language Uses in
terms of Precision (P), Recall (R), and F-measure(F).

Conversational
Behavior

Language Use
(Feature)

Users

Component A J E
Persuasion Claims 2/6 2/6 2/6

Argumentation Y Y Y
Attempt to Per-
suade

Y Y Y

Agreement/ Agreement 1/1 0/1 0/1
Disagreement Disagreement 1/1 0/1 0/1
Dialog Initiative Y N N
Patterns Irrelevance 2/4 1/2 1/3

Incitation 4 1 3
Interjection 1/9 2/9 4/9
Investment 4/9 2/9 3/9

Table 3: The feature values for each of the partici-
pants, Arcadian (A), JFW (J), and Emmanuelm (E), in
the Wikipedia discussion thread shown in Table 1.

comments or posts which are marked as a reply - ei-
ther to the root or to an earlier post. The hypothesis
behind Dialog Patterns is that influencers have typ-
ical ways in which they participate in a thread and
which are visible from the structure alone.

The Dialog Patterns component contains five sim-
ple Language Uses:
Initiative The participant is or is not the first poster
of the thread.
Irrelevance The percentage of the participant’s
posts that are not replied to by anyone.
Incitation The length of the longest branch of
posts which follows one of the participant’s posts.
Intuitively, the longest discussion started directly by
the participant.
Investment The participant’s percentage of all posts
in the thread.
Interjection The point in the thread, represented
as percentage of posts already posted, at which the
participant enters the discussion.

7 System and Evaluation

The task of the system is to decide for each partici-
pant in a thread whether or not he or she is an influ-
encer in that particular thread. It is realized with a
supervised learning model: we train an SVM with a
small number of features, namely the ten Language
Uses. One of our goals in this work is to evaluate
which Language Uses allow us to more accurately
classify someone as an influencer. Table 3 shows
the full feature set and feature values for the sample
discussion thread in Table 1. We experimented with
a number of different classification methods, includ-
ing bayesian and rule-based models, and found that
SVM produced the best results.

7.1 Evaluation

We evaluated on Wikipedia and LiveJournal sepa-
rately. The data set for each corpus consists of all
participants in all threads for which there was at least
one influencer. We exclude threads for which no in-
fluencer was found, narrowing our task to finding the
influencers where they exist. For each participant X
in each thread Y, the system answers the following
question: Is X an influencer in Y?

We used a stratified 10-fold cross validation of
each data set for evaluation, ensuring that the same
participant (from two different threads) never ap-
peared in both training and test at each fold, to elim-
inate potential bias from fitting to a particular partic-
ipant’s style. The system components were identical
when evaluating both data sets, except for the claims
system which was trained on sentiment-annotated
data from the corpus on which it was evaluated.

Table 4 shows the performance of the full system
and of systems using only one Language Use feature
compared against a baseline which always answers
positively (X is always an influencer in Y). It also
shows the performance for the best system, which
was found for each data set by looking at all possible
combinations of the features. The best system for
the Wikipedia data set is composed of four features:
Claims, Argumentation, Agreement and Investment.
The best LiveJournal system is composed of all five
Dialog Patterns features, Attempt to Persuade and
Argumentation. We found our results to be statis-

42



System Wikipedia LiveJournal
P R F P R F

Baseline: all-
yes

16.2 100 27.9 19.2 19.2 32.2

Full 40.5 80.5 53.9 61.7 82 70.4
Initiative 31.6 31.2 31.4 73.5 72.7 73.1
Irrelevance 21.7 77.9 34 19.2 100 32.2
Incitation 28.3 77.9 41.5 49.5 73.8 59.2
Investment 43 71.4 53.7 50.2 75.4 60.3
Interjection 24.7 88.3 38.6 36.9 91.3 52.5
Agreement 36 46.8 40.7 45.1 82.5 58.3
Disagreement 35.3 70.1 47 19.2 100 32.2
Claims 40 72.7 51.6 54.3 76 63.3
Argumentation 19 98.7 31.8 31.1 85.2 45.6
Attempt 23.7 79.2 36.5 37.4 48.1 42.1
to persuade
Best system 47 80.5 59.3 66.2 84.7 74.3

Table 4: Performance in terms of Precision (P), Recall
(R), and F-measure (F) using the baseline (everyone is an
influencer), all features (full), individual features one at a
time, and the best feature combination for each data set.

tically significant (with the Bonferroni adjustment)
in paired permutation tests between the best system,
the full system and the baseline of each data set.

When we first performed these experiments, we
used all threads in the data set. The performance on
this full set was lower, as shown in Table 5 due to
the presence of threads with no influencers. Threads
in which the annotators could not find a clear influ-
encer tend to be of a different nature: there is either
no clear topic of discussion, or no argument (every-
one is in agreement). We leave the task of distin-
guishing these threads from those which are likely
to have an influencer to future work.

7.2 Evaluating with Perfect Components

In a hierarchical system such as ours, errors can
be attributed to imperfect components or to a bad
choice of features, so it is important to look at the
potential contribution of the components. As an ex-
ample, Table 6 shows the difference between our
Attempt to Persuade system and a hypothetical per-
fect Attempt to Persuade component, simulated by
using the gold annotations, when predicting influ-
encer directly (i.e., a participant is an influencer iff
she makes an attempt to persuade).

Clearly, when predicting influencers, Attempt to

System Wikipedia LiveJournal
P R F P R F

Baseline 13.9 100 24.5 14.2 100 24.9
Full 36.7 79.2 50.2 46.3 79.8 58.6
Best 40.1 76.6 52.7 48.2 81.4 60.6

Table 5: Performance on the data set of all threads, in-
cluding those with no influencers. The ’Best System’ is
the system that performed best on the filtered data set.

Data Set Our System Gold Answers
P R F P R F

Wikipedia 23.6 69.4 35.2 23.8 81.6 36.9
LiveJournal 37.5 48.1 42.1 40.7 61.8 49

Table 6: Performance of the Attempt to Persuade compo-
nent in directly predicting influencers. A comparison of
our system and the component’s gold annotation. These
experiments were run on the full data set, which is why
the system results are not exactly those of Table 4.

Persuade is a stronger indicator in LiveJournal than
it is in Wikipedia. However, as shown in Table 2,
our Attempt to Persuade system performs better on
Wikipedia. This situation is reflected in Table 6,
where the lower quality of the system component in
LiveJournal corresponds to a significantly lower per-
formance when applied to the influencer task. These
results demonstrate that Attempt to Persuade is a
good feature: a more precise feature value means
higher predictability of influencer. In the future we
will perform similar analyses for the other features.

8 Discussion

We evaluated our system on two corpora - Live-
Journal and Wikipedia discussions - which differ in
structure, context and discussion topics. As our re-
sults show, they also differ in the way influencers
behave and the way others respond to them. To
illustrate the differences, we contrast the sample
Wikipedia thread (Table 1) with an example from
LiveJournal (Table 7).

It is common in LiveJournal for the blogger to be
an influencer, as is the case in our example thread,
because the topic of the thread is set by the blog-
ger and comments are typically made by her friends.
This fact is reflected in our results: Initiative is a
very strong indicator in LiveJournal, but not so in

43



P1 by poconell <pc1>He really does make good on his promises! </pc1><pa1>Day three in office, and the
Global Gag Rule (A.K.A“The Mexico City Policy”) is gone!</pa1>I was holding my breath, hoping it
wouldn’t be left forgotte. He didn’t wait. <pc2>He can see the danger and risk in this policy, and the damage
it has caused to women and families.</pc2><pc3>I love that man!</pc3>
P2 by thalialunacy <a1>I literally shrieked ‘HELL YES!’ in my car when I heard. :D:D:D</a1>

P3 by poconell <a2>Yeah, me too</a2>
P4 by lunalovepotter <pc4><a3>He is SO AWESOME!</a3></pc4><pa4>Right down to business, no

ifs, ands, or buts! :D</pa4>
P5 by poconell <pc5>It’s amazing to see him so serious too!</pc5><pa5>This is one tough,

no-nonsense man!</pa5>
P6 by penny sieve My icon says it all :)

P7 by poconell <pc6>And I’m jealous of you with that President!</pc6><pa6>We tried to overthrow
our Prime Minister, but he went crying to the Governor General. </pa6>

Table 7: Influence Example: A LiveJournal discussion thread displaying poconell as the influencer. All the Language
Uses are visible in this example: agreement/disagreement (ai/di), persuasion ({pci, pai}, pci, pai), and dialog patterns
(eg. poconell has positive Initiative). This example is very different from the Wikipedia example in Table 1.

Wikipedia, where the discussion is between a group
of editors, all of whom are equally interested in the
topic. In general, the Dialog Patterns features are
stronger in LiveJournal. We believe this is due to the
fact that the tree structure in LiveJournal is strictly
enforced. In Wikipedia, people do not always reply
directly to the relevant post. Investment is the excep-
tion: it does not make use of the tree structure, and
is therefore an important indicator in Wikipedia.

Attempt to Persuade is useful in LiveJournal (the
influencer poconell makes three attempts to per-
suade in Table 7) but less so in Wikipedia. This is
explained by the precision of the gold system in Ta-
ble 6. Only 23.8% of those who attempt to persuade
in Wikipedia are influencers, compared with 40.7%
in LiveJournal. Attempts to Persuade are more com-
mon in Wikipedia (all participants attempt to per-
suade in Table 1), since people write there specifi-
cally to argue their opinion on how the article should
be edited. Conversely, agreement is a stronger pre-
dictor of influence in Wikipedia than in LiveJournal;
we believe that is because of a similar phenomenon,
that people in LiveJournal (who tend to know each
other) agree with each other more often. Disagree-
ment is not a strong indicator for either corpus which
may say something about influencers in general -
they can be disagreed with as often as anyone else.

9 Conclusion and Future Work

We have studied the relevance of content-related
conversational behavior (persuasion and agree-

ment/disagreement), and discourse structure-related
conversational behavior to detection of influence.
Identifying influencers is a hard task, but we are
able to show good results on the LiveJournal corpus
where we achieve an F-measure of 74.3%. Despite
a lower performance on Wikipedia, we are still able
to significantly outperform the baseline which yields
only 28.2%. Differences in performance between
the two seem to be attributable in part to the more
straightforward dialog structure in LiveJournal.

There are several areas for future work. In our
current work, we train and evaluate separately for
our two corpora. Alternatively, we could investigate
different training and testing combinations: train on
one corpus and evaluate on the other; a mixed cor-
pus for training and testing; genre-independent cri-
teria for developing different systems (e.g. length of
thread). We will also evaluate on new genres (such
as the Enron emails) in order to gain an appreciation
of how different genres of written dialog are.

Acknowledgment

This work has been supported by the Intelligence
Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via
Army Research Laboratory (ARL) contract num-
ber W911NF-09-C-0141. The U.S. Government is
authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for
Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copy-
right annotation thereon.

44



References
Jacob Andreas, Sara Rosenthal, and Kathleen McKe-

own. 2012. Annotating agreement and disagreement
in threaded discussion. In Proceedings of the 8th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Computation (LREC), Istanbul, Turkey, May.

R. F. Bales, Strodtbeck, Mills F. L., T. M., and M. Rose-
borough. 1951. Channels of communication in small
groups. American Sociological Review, pages 16(4),
461–468.

R. F. Bales. 1970. Personality and interpersonal be-
haviour.

Or Biran and Owen Rambow. 2011. Identifying justifi-
cations in written dialog. In Proceedings of the Fifth
IEEE International Conference on Semantic Comput-
ing.

M.E. Brook and S. H. Ng. 1986. Language and social
influence in small conversational groups. Journal of
Language and Social Psychology, pages 5(3), 201–
210.

Malcolm Gladwell. 2001. The tipping point: how little
things can make a big difference. Abacus.

Elihu Katz and Paul F. Lazarsfeld. 1955. Personal in-
fluence. Free Press, Glencoe, IL. by Elihu Katz and
Paul F. Lazarsfeld. With a foreword by Elmo Roper.
”A report of the Bureau of Applied Social Research,
Columbia University.” Bibliography: p. 381-393.

E. Katz. 1957. The Two-Step Flow of Communication:
An Up-To-Date Report on an Hypothesis. Bobbs-
Merrill Reprint Series in the Social Sciences, S137.
Ardent Media.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional the-
ory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

S. H. Ng, D. Bell, and M. Brooke. 1993. Gaining turns
and achieving high in influence ranking in small con-
versational groups. British Journal of Social Psychol-
ogy, pages 32, 265–275.

S. H. Ng, M Brooke, and M. Dunne. 1995. Interruption
and in influence in discussion groups. Journal of Lan-
guage and Social Psychology, pages 14(4),369–381.

Daniele Quercia, Jonathan Ellis, Licia Capra, and Jon
Crowcroft. 2011. In the mood for being influential on
twitter. In SocialCom/PASSAT, pages 307–314. IEEE.

Scott A. Reid and Sik Hung Ng. 2000. Conversation as a
resource for in influence: evidence for prototypical ar-
guments and social identification processes. European
Journal of Social Psychology, pages 30, 83–100.

Rutger Joeri Rienks. 2007. Meetings in smart environ-
ments : implications of progressing technology. Ph.D.
thesis, Enschede, the Netherlands, July.

K. R. Scherer. 1979. Voice and speech correlates of per-
ceived social influence in simulated juries. In H. Giles

and R. St Clair (Eds), Language and social psychol-
ogy, pages 88–120. Oxford: Blackwell.

Duncan Watts. 2007. The accidental influentials. Har-
vard Business Review.

45


