



















































Automatic Easy Japanese Translation for information accessibility of foreigners


Proceedings of the Workshop on Speech and Language Processing Tools in Education, pages 85–90,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Automatic Easy Japanese Translation for information 
accessibility of foreigners 

Manami MOKU 
1   Kazuhide YAMAMOTO 

1
   Ai MAKABI 

1 

(1) Department of Electrical Engineering, Nagaoka University of Technology, 
1603-1, Kamitomioka-cho, Nagaoka-city, Niigata 940-2188, JAPAN 

{moku, yamamoto, makabi}@jnlp.org 

ABSTRACT 

This paper examines the introduction of “Easy Japanese” by extracting important segments for 

translation. The need for Japanese language has increased dramatically due to the recent influx of 

non-Japanese-speaking foreigners. Therefore, in order for non-native speakers of Japanese to 

successfully adapt to society, the so-called Easy Japanese is being developed to aid them in every 

aspect from basic conversation to translation of official documents. The materials of our project 

are the official documents since they are generally distributed in public offices, hospitals, and 

schools, where they include essential information that should be accessed for all residents. 

Through an analysis of Japanese language dependency as a pre-experiment, this paper introduces 

a translation by extracting important segments to facilitate the acquisition of Easy Japanese. 

Upon effective completion, the project will be introduced for use on the Internet and proposed for 

use by foreigners living in Japan as well as educators.  

KEYWORDS : Easy Japanese, Extracting important segments, Translation system, Official 

documents, Japanese education. 

85



1 Introduction 

It is estimated that more than two million foreigners are now living in Japan and roughly a half 

million of those do not have enough Japanese fluency. Since only Japanese is used in ordinary 

Japanese society, it has been a problem in Japan in terms of information accessibility to such 

foreigners. 

One solution for this is use of simple and plain expressions for communication to those. Several 

trials have been attempted to define and spread somewhat simple expressions to the non-Japanese 

community, mainly by Japanese language teachers. We are joining "Easy Japanese" project (Isao 

Iori, 2008) since last year. Although it is also a project to teach easy Japanese to foreigners, one 

goal of this project is to automatically "translate" (or summarize easily) ordinary Japanese 

sentences into easy one, by use of natural language processing (NLP) techniques. The target 

material of the project is official documents that are generally distributed in public offices, 

hospitals, and schools, where they include essential information that should be accessed for all 

residents.   

It is observed that official documents may include some peculiar expressions that make it 

difficult for foreigners to understand.  For example, in case of English, we may see something 

like: "Please avoid your children's attendance in school with an assessment of the situation by a 

guardian when the situation is dangerous for children in case of bad weather." Although it is no 

problem to understand for native speakers, it is far easier for non-native speakers just to say like: 

"Don't go to school in case of bad weather." We aim to build a system to translate a sentence like 

the former one into the latter one.  We propose in this paper to do that by extracting essential 

segments and rewriting them into more direct expressions. This paper briefly reports outline of 

the project, approach of the current translation system, and results of preliminary experiments.   

2 Related works 

2.1 Easy Japanese 

This system of so-called Easy Japanese has been previously researched by those in the translation 

of news. In one particular study, easy and difficult words from the news were defined (Hideya 

Mino et al., 2010). In this case, the authors utilized pairs of entities, and the word levels were 

defined on the basis of a word list from the Japanese Language Proficiency Test (JLPT).
1
  This 

method was general method since there were similar methods.  

2.1.1 Easy Japanese system 

A previous Easy Japanese system, known as the Plain Japanese (PJ) system,
2
 was designed for 

use in engineering education in Japan. Although such education is generally in Japanese, 

international students find it difficult not only to learn everyday Japanese but also acquire 

technical Japanese. In this case, this system used both restricted vocabulary and grammar. 

Therefore, this method was not suitable for our system since we aim to extract such important 

contents.  

                                                           
1 http://www.jlpt.jp/e/index.html : This site is written in English. 
JLPT is one of tests for Japanese beginners who learn Japanese. This research use the grade of JLPT, N1~N5. 
2 http://twinning.nagaokaut.ac.jp/PJ/PJ.html : This site is written in Japanese. 

86



2.2 Extraction of important contents 

Extracting important contents and sentences (Tsutomu Hirano et al., 2005) was generally used 

for summarization since the summary maintains natural grammar. However, sometimes, abstract 

sentences are reconstructed from some natural sentences. In one particular study, important 

segments were extracted for summaries using Support Vector Machines (SVMs) (Daisuke 

Suzuki et al., 2006), which was more effective when summarizing documents compared to 

extracting important sentences. We believe that extracting important segments can be the same as 

talking with Japanese language beginners. Therefore, we would like to re-introduce an easy 

process based on Japanese dependency analysis since we do not have more examples of 

important segment extraction in official documents using SVMs.  

3 Data 

3.1 Easy Japanese corpus 

Easy Japanese overall includes two corpora. The first Easy Japanese pre-corpus was created by 

two Japanese teachers (Chie Tsutsui, 2010) and included 1,179 sentences from official 

documents that were rewritten into Easy Japanese. In this case, “easy” implies that Japanese 

language beginners can easily understand words/sentences, whereas “difficult” indicates that they 

simply cannot understand the sentences. For this first corpus, the grammar was considered by our 

project member while the vocabulary was determined on the basis of Japanese Language 

Proficiency Test (JLPT) levels. 

The second Easy Japanese corpus was created by 40 Japanese teachers and it included 42,274 

official sentences that were rewritten into Easy Japanese. An example of these language pairs is 

shown in TABLE 1. 

For this paper, Easy Japanese pre-corpus is used for evaluating and extracting important 

segments. In addition, the Easy Japanese corpus will be used for building the Easy Japanese 

translation system.  

  Kind of corpus Japanese English 

output 

Japanese Easy 

Japanese 

Pre-corpus 
Easy 

Japanese 

Corpus 

予防接種 a vaccination 

Easy 

Japanese 

予防注射 a preventive injection 

 病気にならないため

の注射 

an injection which 

prevents a disease 

TABLE 1 - An example of a pair of Japanese and Easy Japanese from each corpora. 

4 Pre-experiment for extracting important segments 

4.1 Important segment extraction 

First, we focused on the predicates of official sentences since the important contents, especially 

the instructions, were constructed with verbs. In addition, we randomly selected 20 sentences 

from the Easy Japanese pre-corpus, and the sentences were edited with conjunctions and 

87



keywords such as “場合 (in case of)” through morphological analysis by ChaSen.3 An example is 
shown in TABLE 2. 

Next, the sentences were analyzed through a Japanese dependency analysis by CaboCha,
4
 and the 

output of this process became the candidates for these important sentences. An example is shown 

in TABLE 3.  

 

TABLE 2 - An example of the process for decreasing errors in the Japanese dependency analysis. 

 

  Japanese English 

input 
保護者の判断で登校を見合わせ

てください． 

Please avoid your children’s attendance 

in school with an assessment of the 

situation by a guardian. 

Japanese 

dependency 

analysis 

保護者の –D by a guardian 

    判断で –D   with an assessment of the situation 

    登校を –D   your children’s attendance in school 

        見合わせてください．     Please avoid 

output 

I 
保護者の判断で見合わせてくだ

さい． 

Please avoid with an assessment of the 

situation by a guardian. 

II 登校を見合わせてください． 
Please avoid your children’s attendance 

in school. 

TABLE 3 - An example of Japanese dependency analysis. 

 

                                                           
3 Morphological Analysis, ChaSen, Ver.2.3.3,  
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Computational Linguistics Laboratory 
http://chasen.naist.jp/hiki/ChaSen/, 
4 Japanese dependency analysis, CaboCha 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Taku Kudo 
http://code.ge.g.,oogle.com/p/cabocha/ 

  Japanese English 

input 

悪天候の際には，大雨警報，暴風

警報，大雪警報，暴風雪警報が発

令されていなくても，周囲の状況

で危険な場合は，保護者の判断で

登校を見合わせてください． 

Please avoid your children’s attendance 

in school with an assessment of the 

situation by a guardian when the 

situation is dangerous for children and 

no warning is issued in case of bad 

weather. 

output 

I 悪天候の際には， in case of bad weather 

II 

大雨警報，暴風警報，大雪警報，

暴風雪警報が発令されていなくて

も，周囲の状況で危険な場合は， 

when the situation is dangerous for 

children and no warning is issued 

III 
保護者の判断で登校を見合わせて

ください． 

Please avoid your children’s attendance 

in school with an assessment of the 

situation by a guardian 

88



  Japanese English 

output 

I 
保護者の判断で見合わせてくだ

さい． 

Please avoid with an assessment of 

the situation by a guardian. 

II 登校を見合わせてください． 
Please avoid your children’s 

attendance to school. 

TABLE 4 - An example of output selection. 

Finally, we selected the final output from these candidates and focused on postpositional words, 

especially with regard to particles attached with nouns for easy judgment. In addition, we 

established an order of priority for the particles. An example is shown in TABLE 4. In the case of 

example “登校を見合わせてください (Please avoid your children’s attendance to school)”, 
this phrase was selected as the system’s output. 

4.2 Rewriting into direct expressions 

The outputs, after extracting the important segments, were shorter than the original sentences. 

However, it was still difficult for Japanese language beginners to read them. Therefore, we 

rewrote 165 sentences into direct expressions that could be easily utilized by these beginners, 

which included pairs of official segments and segments of direct expressions similar to TABLE 1. 

5 Evaluating pre-experiments 

The Easy Japanese expressions were not only understandable for Japanese language beginners 

but also native Japanese speakers. Consequently, the outputs were evaluated by one of the 

authors of this project, who is a native speaker of Japanese.  

5.1 Data for evaluation 

We randomly extracted 20 sentences from the Easy Japanese pre-corpus and analyzed them for 

the extraction processes. An example is shown in TABLE 5. The method of evaluation included 

a two-tiered process that compared the input and output sentences.  

  Japanese English 

input 

手続きには，診断書はいりませ

ん．所定の用紙がありますので，

該当するようなけがをした場合

は，担任または顧問まですぐにお

知らせください． 

You don’t need a medical certificate for 

a processing. Please tell your 

homeroom teacher or an advisor about 

your injury with the prescribed form, 

which follows the rules of our school. 

output 

I 診断書はいりません． You don’t need a medical certificate. 

II 所定の用紙があります． There is a prescribed form. 

III 
該当するようなけがをした場合

は， 

When your injury follows the  rules of 

our school 

IV お知らせください． Please tell us about it. 

TABLE 5 - An example of evaluation data. 

 

89



 First, the process included extracting important sentences (9.1), which was ineffective according 

to the results due to the order of priority for the particles. In this case, the particles depend upon 

each of the verbs. Therefore, it was necessary to consider the particles of each verb because the 

verbs in data alone were insufficient for obtaining the particles. 

 Next, the process included rewriting the sentences into direct expressions (9.2), which was also 

ineffective since the pairs were insufficient for obtaining a significant result. However, we found 

that the pairs of Japanese and Easy Japanese included many points of similarity. In future 

research, we will utilize existing pairs of Japanese and Easy Japanese (Manami Moku et al., 

2011) or create new pairs from them.  

Conclusion and perspectives  

When extracting important segments, we considered that predicates included important 

information and particles were defined by the order of priority. However, the particles relied 

upon each of the verbs. We believe that our findings will be important for Japanese language 

beginners, and the Easy Japanese corpus will be utilized for future experiments since the corpus 

is smaller. 

In addition, after rewriting the sentences into direct expressions, we found that the direct 

expressions had many similarities to Easy Japanese. Furthermore, we will use the pairs of 

Japanese and Easy Japanese for it.  

Finally, in regard to the Easy Japanese system, the system will include three overall steps: (1) 

Extract important segments; (2) Create tags for representation of intention; and (3) Rewrite 

Japanese into Easy Japanese. Furthermore, we understand that the direct expressions include 

many similarities to Easy Japanese. Consequently, we will utilize data comprising pairs of 

Japanese and easy Japanese sentences for our project, and through the processes, we will create a 

system that can be used on the Internet by Japanese language beginners.  

References 

Chie Tsutsui. (2010). Creation of pre-corpus, The Meeting of Society for Teaching Japanese as 

a Foreign Language in 2009, The Spring Meeting in 2009, pages 86 –87 

Daisuke Suzuki and Akira Utaumi. (2006). A Method for Extracting Important Segments from 

Documents Using Support Vector Machines: Toward Automatic Text Summarization, The 

Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence, vol.21, no.4, B, pages 330–339 

Isao Iori. (2008). Surround Easy Japanese, The 4th Society to Study for Teaching Japanese as a 

Foreign Language in Multicultural Symbolical Society, pages 1–12 

Hideya Mino and Hideki Tanaka. (2010). Simplifying noun using Japanese dictionary in news, 

The 16th Yearly Meeting of Association for Natural Language Processing, pages 760–763 

Manami Moku and Kazuhide Yamamoto. (2011). Investigation of Paraphrase of Easy Japanese 

in Official Documents, The 17th Yearly Meeting of Association for Natural Language 

Processing, pages 376–379 

Tsutomu Hirano, Hideki Isozaki, Eisaku Maeda and Yuji Matsumoto. (2002). Extracting 

Important Sentences with Support Vector Machines, Proceedings of the 19th International 

Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2002), pp.342–348 

90


