










































Natural Language Inspired Approach for Handwritten Text Line Detection in Legacy Documents


Proceedings of the 6th EACL Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 107–111,
Avignon, France, 24 April 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Natural Language Inspired Approach for Handwritten Text Line
Detection in Legacy Documents∗

Vicente Bosch Campos
Inst. Tec. de Informática

Univ. Politécnica Valencia
Valencia - Spain

vbosch@iti.upv.es

Alejandro Héctor Toselli
Inst. Tec. de Informática

Univ. Politécnica Valencia
Valencia - Spain

ahector@iti.upv.es

Enrique Vidal
Inst. Tec. de Informática

Univ. Politécnica Valencia
Valencia - Spain

evidal@iti.upv.es

Abstract

Document layout analysis is an important
task needed for handwritten text recogni-
tion among other applications. Text lay-
out commonly found in handwritten legacy
documents is in the form of one or more
paragraphs composed of parallel text lines.
An approach for handwritten text line de-
tection is presented which uses machine-
learning techniques and methods widely
used in natural language processing. It is
shown that text line detection can be accu-
rately solved using a formal methodology,
as opposed to most of the proposed heuris-
tic approaches found in the literature. Ex-
perimental results show the impact of us-
ing increasingly constrained ”vertical lay-
out language models” in text line detection
accuracy.

1 Introduction

Handwritten text transcription is becoming an in-
creasingly important task, in order to provide his-
torians and other researchers new ways of index-
ing, consulting and querying the huge amounts of
historic handwritten documents which are being
published in on-line digital libraries.

Transcriptions of such documents are currently
obtained with solutions that range from the use of
systems that aim at fully automatic handwritten
text recognition (Bazzi et al., 1999)

(HTR), to computer assisted transcription
(CATTI), were the users participate interactively
in the proper transcription process (Toselli et al.,
2009).

∗Work supported under the MIPRCV ”Consolider
Ingenio 2010” program (CSD2007-00018), MITTRAL
(TIN2009-14633-C03-01) and also Univ. Politécnica Valen-
cia (PAID-05-11)

The basic input to these systems consists of text
line images. Hence, text line detection and ex-
traction from a given document page image be-
comes a necessary preprocessing step in any kind
of transcription systems. Furthermore the quality
of line segmentation directly influences the final
accuracy achieved by such systems.

Detection of handwritten text lines in an im-
age entails a greater difficulty, in comparison with
printed text lines, due to the inherent properties of
handwritten text: variable inter-line spacing, over-
lapping and touching strokes of adjacent hand-
written lines, etc.

The difficulty is further increased in the case
of ancient documents, due to common problems
appearing in them: presence of smear, significant
background variations and uneven illumination,
spots due to the humidity, and marks resulting
from the ink that goes through the paper (gener-
ally called ”bleed-through”).

Among the most popular state-of-the art meth-
ods involved in handwritten text line detection
we find four main families: based on (ver-
tical) projection profiles (Likforman-Sulem et
al., 2007), on the Hough transform (Likforman-
Sulem et al., 1995), the repulsive-attractive net-
work approach (Öztop et al., 1999) and finally
the so-called stochastic methods (Vinciarelli et al.,
2004), which combine probabilistic models such
as Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) along with
dynamic programming techniques (e.g. Viterbi
algorithm) to derive optimal paths between over-
lapping text lines.

It is worth noting that, most of the mentioned
approaches somewhat involve heuristic adjust-
ments of their parameters, which have to be prop-
erly tuned according to the characteristics of each

107



task in order to obtain adequate results.
In this work, the text line detection problem in

legacy handwritten documents is approached by
using machine-learning techniques and methods
which are widely used in natural language pro-
cessing (NLP).

It is shown that the text line detection problem
can be solved by using a formal methodology, as
opposed to most of the currently proposed heuris-
tic based approaches found in the literature.

2 Statistical Framework for Text Line
Detection

For the work presented in this paper, we assume
that the input image (of a page or selected region)
contains one or more paragraphs of single-column
parallel text with no images or diagram figures.
Additionally, we assume that the input image has
been properly preprocessed so as to ensure that
their text lines are roughly horizontal. These as-
sumptions are reasonable enough for most legacy
handwritten documents.

Similarly to how the statistic framework of
automatic speech recognition (ASR) is estab-
lished, the handwritten text line detection prob-
lem can be also formulated as the problem of
finding the most likely text lines sequence, ĥ =
〈h1, h2, . . . , hn〉, for a given handwritten page
image represented by a sequence of observations1

o = 〈o1, o2, . . . , om〉, that is:

ĥ = arg max
h

P (h | o) (1)

Using the Bayes’ rule we can decompose the
probability P (h | o) into two terms:

ĥ = arg max
h

P (o | h) · P (h) (2)

In the jargon of NLP these probabilities rep-
resent the morphological and syntactic knowl-
edge levels, respectively. As it happens in ASR,
P (o | h) is typically approximated by HMMs,
which model vertical page regions, while P (h)
by a ”language model” (LM), which restricts how
those regions are composed in order to form an
actual page. In what follows, a detailed descrip-
tion of this modelling scheme is given.

1Henceforward, in the context of this formal framework,
each time it is mentioned image of page or selected text, we
are implicitly referring to the input feature vector sequence
“o” describing it.

2.1 Modelling
In our line detection approach four different kinds
of vertical regions are defined:

Blank Line-region (BL): Large rectangular re-
gion of blank space usually found at the start
and the end of a page (top and bottom mar-
gins).

Normal text Line-region (NL): Region oc-
cupied by the main body of a normal
handwritten text line.

Inter Line-region (IL): Defined as the region
found within two consecutive normal text
lines, characterized by being crossed by the
ascenders and descenders belonging to the
adjacent text lines.

Non-text Line-region (NT): Stands for every-
thing which does not belong to any of the
other regions.

Figure 1: Examples of the different kind of line-
regions.

We model each of these regions by an HMM
which is trained with instances of such regions.
Basically, each line-region HMM is a stochastic
finite-state device that models the succession of
feature vectors extracted from instances of this
line-region image. In turn, each HMM state
generates feature vectors following an adequate
parametric probabilistic law; typically, a mixture
of Gaussian densities. The adequate number of
states and Gaussians per state may be conditioned
by the available amount of training data.

Once an HMM “topology” (number of states
and structure) has been adopted, the model pa-
rameters can be easily trained from instances (se-
quences of features vectors) of full images con-
taining a sequence of line-regions (without any

108



kind of segmentation) accompanied by the refer-
ence labels of these images into the correspond-
ing sequence of line-region classes. This training
process is carried out using a well known instance
of the EM algorithm called forward-backward or
Baum-Welch re-estimation (Jelinek, 1998).

The syntactic modelling level is responsible for
the way that the different line regions are com-
posed in order to produce a valid page structure.
For example we can force that NL and NT line
regions must always be followed by IL inter-line
regions: NL+IL and NT+IL. We can also use
the LM to impose restrictions about the mini-
mum or maximum number of line-regions to be
detected. The LM for our text line detection ap-
proach, consists in a stochastic finite state gram-
mar (SFSG) which recognizes valid sequences of
elements (line regions): NL+IL, NT+IL and BL.

Both modelling levels, morphological and syn-
tactical, which are represented by finite-state au-
tomaton, can be integrated into a single global
model on which Eq. (2) is easily solved; that is,
given an input sequence of raw feature vectors,
an output string of recognized sequence of line-
region labels is obtained. In addition the vertical
position of each detected line and and line-region
is obtained as a by-product.

3 System Architecture

Page layout
corpus

LM ModelOff-line  line
HMMs

HMM Training LM Training

Preprocessing

Feature Extraction

Decoding

Training

Page Images

Cleaned Page
Images

Feature Vectors

Type label and 
Region position

coordinates

Figure 2: Global scheme of the handwritten text line
detection process.

The flow diagram of Fig. 2 displays the overall
process of the proposed handwritten text line de-
tection approach. It is composed of four different
phases: image preprocessing, feature extraction,
HMMs and LM training and decoding. Next we
will overview the first two phases, preprocessing
and feature extraction, since the rest has already

been covered in the preceding section.

3.1 Preprocessing Phase
Initially performing background removal and
noise reduction is carried out by applying a bi-
dimensional median filter on them. The resulting
image skew is corrected by applying vertical pro-
jection profile and RLSA (Wong and Wahl, 1982),
along with standard techniques to calculate the
skew angle.

3.2 Feature Extraction Phase
As our text line detection approach is based on
HMMs, each preprocessed image must be rep-
resented as a sequence of feature vectors.This is
done by dividing the already preprocessed image
(from left-to-right) into D non-overlapping rect-
angular regions with height equal to the image-
height (see Fig. 3).

In each of these rectangular regions we calcu-
late the vertical grey level histogram. RLSA is
applied to obtain a more emphasized vertical pro-
jection profile. Finally, to eliminate local maxima
on the obtained vertical projection profiles, they
are smoothed with a rolling median filter (Man-
matha and Srimal, 1999) (see Fig. 3) . In this way,

Figure 4: Review of the impact of the RLSA and
rolling media filter on the histogram calculation of a
sample line.

a D-dimensional feature vector is constructed for
each page/block image pixels row, by stacking the
D projection profile values corresponding to that
row. Hence, at the end of this process, a sequence
of L D-dimensional feature vectors is obtained,
where L is the image height.

4 Experimental Setup and Results
In order to study the efficacy of the line detection
approach proposed in this paper, different experi-
ments were carried out. We are mainly interested
in assessing the impact upon final text line detec-

109



1 2 3 4 5

Figure 3: Partial page image visualization of 5 (D = 5) rectangular regions across over 3 handwritten text lines.
For each region, its vertical projection profile is also plotted.

tion accuracy of employing increasingly restric-
tive LMs.

4.1 Corpus Description
Experiments are carried out with corpus compiled
from a XIX century Spanish manuscript identified
as “Cristo-Salvador” (CS), which was kindly pro-
vided by the Biblioteca Valenciana Digital (Bi-
VaLDi)2. This is a rather small document com-
posed of 53 colour images of text pages, scanned
at 300 dpi and written by a single writer. Some
page images examples are shown in Fig. 5.

Figure 5: Examples of pages images from CS corpus.
In this work we employ the so-called book

partition, which has been defined for this data-
set (Romero et al., 2007). Its test set contains
the last 20 page images were as the training set
is composed of the 33 remaining pages. Table 1
summarizes the relevant information of this parti-
tion.

Table 1: Basic statistics of the Cristo-Salvador corpus
partition.

Number of: Training Test Total
Pages 33 20 53
Normal-text lines (NL) 685 497 1 182
Blank Lines (BL) 73 70 143
Non-text Lines (NT) 16 8 24
Inter Lines (IL) 701 505 1 206

Each page was annotated with a succession of
reference labels (NL, NT, BL and IL) indicating

2http://bv2.gva.es.

the kind of line-regions that composed it. Such
references were generated by executing standard
methods for text line detection based on vertical
projection profiles, which were afterwards manu-
ally labelled, verified, adjusted and/or rectified by
a human operator to ensure correctness.

4.2 Evaluation Measures
We measure the quality of the text line detec-
tion by means of the ”line error rate” (LER)
which is performed by comparing the sequences
of automatically obtained region labels with the
corresponding reference label sequences. The
LER is computed in the same way as the well
known WER, with equal costs assigned to dele-
tions, insertions and substitutions (McCowan et
al., 2004).

4.3 Experiments and Results
A series of experiments were performed on the CS
corpus using a simple hold-out validation as per
the CS “book” partition. Initially some param-
eters were set up: feature extraction dimension
D, HMM topology (number of states and Gaus-
sians),number of Baum-Welch iterations, and de-
coding grammar scale factor (GSF) and word in-
sertion penalty (WIP). After some informal exper-
imentation, adequate values were found for sev-
eral of them: feature vectors dimension of 2, left-
to-right HMMs with 4 states topology, 32 Gaus-
sian mixtures per state trained by running 3 cycles
of Baum-Welch re-estimation algorithm. The re-
maining parameters, all related with the decoding
process itself, were tuned to obtain the best figures
for each of the two following language models:
the prior and conditional represented by topolog-
ically different SFSGs. The prior model transi-
tion probabilities are estimated from the training
set as the fraction of the number of appearances
of each vertical region label over the whole count
of labels. The conditional model also considers
the previous label in order to perform the estima-
tion. These estimates resemble the uni-gram and

110



bi-gram LMs calculations, except no smoothing
strategy is implemented here.

Additionally, it is defined for each test page a
line-number constrained LM which uses the con-
ditional probabilities to populate the model but
enforces a total number of possible line-regions to
detect as per the number of reference line-region
labels of that test page. Table 2 reports the ob-
tained LER results for each of these LMs.

Table 2: Best detection LER(%) obtained for each
kind of language model: Prior, Conditional and Line-
Number Constrained.

LM WIP GSF LER(%)

Prior -32 8 0.86
Conditional -8 16 0.70
LN-Constrained -128 1 0.34

As can be seen, the more restrictive the LM
is, the better accuracy is achieved. Concerning
the line-number constrained, they are really con-
ceived for its utilization in (parts of) documents
or document collections with homogeneous num-
bers of lines per page.

5 Conclusions
We have presented a new approach for text line
detection by using a statistical framework similar
to that already employed in many topics of NLP.
It avoids the traditional heuristics approaches usu-
ally adopted for this task.

The accuracy of this approach is similar to or
better than that of current state of the art solutions
found in the literature. We find that the detected
baselines provided by our approach are of better
quality (visually closer to the actual line) than cur-
rent heuristic methods as can be seen in 6.

Figure 6: Image shows the difference between our pro-
posed method (upper side of each coloured region )
and the histogram projection method (lower side)

In the future we will extend this approach not
only to detect, but also to classify line-region
types in order to determine for example titles,
short lines, beginning and and end of paragraphs,
etc. Furthermore, it is envisioned that the pro-
posed stochastic framework serves as a corner-
stone to implementing interactive approaches to

line detection similar to those used for handwrit-
ten text transcription used in (Toselli et al., 2009).

References
Issam Bazzi, Richard Schwartz, and John Makhoul.

1999. An omnifont open-vocabulary OCR system
for English and Arabic. IEEE Transactions on Pat-
tern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 21(6):495–
504.

Frederick Jelinek. 1998. Statistical methods for
speech recognition. MIT Press.

Laurence Likforman-Sulem, Anahid Hanimyan, and
Claudie Faure. 1995. A hough based algorithm
for extracting text lines in handwritten documents.
Document Analysis and Recognition, International
Conference on, 2:774.

Laurence Likforman-Sulem, Abderrazak Zahour, and
Bruno Taconet. 2007. Text line segmentation of
historical documents: a survey. International Jour-
nal on Document Analysis and Recognition, 9:123–
138, April.

Raghavan Manmatha and Nitin Srimal. 1999. Scale
space technique for word segmentation in handwrit-
ten documents. In Proceedings of the Second In-
ternational Conference on Scale-Space Theories in
Computer Vision, SCALE-SPACE ’99, pages 22–
33, London, UK. Springer-Verlag.

Iain A. McCowan, Darren Moore, John Dines, Daniel
Gatica-Perez, Mike Flynn, Pierre Wellner, and
Hervé Bourlard. 2004. On the use of informa-
tion retrieval measures for speech recognition eval-
uation. Idiap-RR Idiap-RR-73-2004, IDIAP, Mar-
tigny, Switzerland, 0.

Verónica Romero, Alejandro Héctor Toselli, Luis
Rodrı́guez, and Enrique Vidal. 2007. Com-
puter Assisted Transcription for Ancient Text Im-
ages. In International Conference on Image Anal-
ysis and Recognition (ICIAR 2007), volume 4633
of LNCS, pages 1182–1193. Springer-Verlag, Mon-
treal (Canada), August.

Alejandro Héctor Toselli, Verónica Romero, Moisés
Pastor, and Enrique Vidal. 2009. Multimodal inter-
active transcription of text images. Pattern Recog-
nition, 43(5):1824–1825.

Alessandro Vinciarelli, Samy Bengio, and Horst
Bunke. 2004. Off-line recognition of uncon-
strained handwritten texts using hmms and statisti-
cal language models. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 26(6):709–720,
june.

Kwan Y. Wong and Friedrich M. Wahl. 1982. Doc-
ument analysis system. IBM Journal of Research
and Development, 26:647–656.

Erhan Öztop, Adem Y. Mülayim, Volkan Atalay, and
Fatos Yarman-Vural. 1999. Repulsive attractive
network for baseline extraction on document im-
ages. Signal Processing, 75(1):1 – 10.

111


