



















































A Light Weight Stemmer for Urdu Language: A Scarce Resourced Language


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on South and Southeast Asian Natural Language Processing (SANLP), pages 69–78,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

A Light Weight Stemmer for Urdu Language: A Scarce 
Resourced Language 

Sajjad Ahmad Khan1, Waqas Anwar1, Usama Ijaz Bajwa1, Xuan Wang2 

(1) COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad, Pakistan 
(2) Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen Graduate School, P.R.China 

Sajjad_ak78@yahoo.com,waqas@ciit.net.pk,usama@ciit.net.pk, 

wangxuan@insun.hit.edu.cn 

ABSTRACT 

Stemming is a procedure that conflates morphologically related terms into a single term without 

doing complete morphological analysis. Urdu language raises several challenges to Natural 

Language Processing (NLP) largely due to its rich morphology. The core tool of information 

retrieval (IR) is a Stemmer which reduces a word to its stem form.  Due to the diverse nature of 

Urdu, developing its stemmer for an IR system is a challenging task. This paper presents a light 

weight stemmer for Urdu text, which uses rule based approach. Exceptional lists are developed to 

enhance the accuracy of the stemmer. The result of the stemmer is quite enough and can be 

effective in IR system.  

KEYWORDS : Information Retrieval,  Light weight stemmer, Exceptional Lists, Suffix and prefix 

list 

1 Introduction 

Urdu is an Indo-Aryan language. It is the national language of Pakistan and is one of the twenty-

three official languages of India. It is written in Perso-Arabic script. The Urdu vocabulary 

consists of several languages including Arabic, English, Turkish, Sanskrit and Farsi (Persian) etc. 

Urdu’s script is right-to-left and form of a word’s character is context sensitive, means the form 

of a character varies in a word because of the position of that character in the word (start, end, 

medial, independent). 

According to (Al-Khuli, M. 1991), Morphology deals with the internal structure of words. 

Hundreds thousands of words are contained in every human language and constantly fresh words 

are incorporated. These words are formed from a group of smaller components. In morphology, 

its main building blocks are morphemes. Morpheme is the smallest component in a language 

having some meaning1. There are two types of morphemes i.e. free and bound morphemes. 

Morphemes which exists freely (alone) are called free morphemes whereas bound morphemes are 

made as a result of combination with another morpheme. The affixes are bound morphemes. 

Those morphemes that produce the grammatical formation of a word are called Inflectional 

morphemes2. Deriving new words from the existing ones is called derivational morphemes. In 

derivation, a different part-of-speech class is created by adding a bound morph to a stem.  

In Urdu language, morphological processing becomes particularly important for IR. IR system is 

used to ensure easy access to stored information. Inside IR, the information data which is stored 

and receives search calls usually corresponds to the lists of identifiers recognized as key terms, 

keywords. One of the attempts to make the search engines more efficient in IR is the use of 

                                                           
1 http://www.ielanguages.com/linguist.html 
2 http://introling.ynada.com/session-6-types-of-morphemes 

69



stemmer. Stem is the base or root form of a word. Stemmer is an algorithm that reduces the word 

to their stem/root form e.g. jumping, jumped and jumps to the stem “jump”. Similarly the Urdu 

stemmer should stem the words تدنصیثی (unlucky), نصیة دار (lucky), تدنصیة (luckless) to Urdu 

stem word نصیة (luck).  

The stemmer is also applicable to other natural language processing applications needing 

morphological analysis for example spell checkers, word frequency count studies, word parsing 

etc. The rest of the paper organization is as follows: In section 2, different stemming approaches 

and rule based stemming algorithms are discussed, in section 3, Orthographic features of Urdu is 

discussed, in section 4, the Urdu morphology is discussed, section 5 discusses light weight 

stemmer, section 6 discusses the Proposed Urdu Stemmer and finally the evaluation of the 

stemmer is discussed in section 7. 

2 Stemming approaches and algorithms 

There are four kinds of stemming approaches (Frakes, et al.1992 ): table lookup, affix removal, 

successor variety and n-grams. Table lookup method is also known as brute force method, where 

every word and its respective stem are stored in table. The stemmer finds the stem of the input 

word in the respective stem table. This process is very fast, but it has a disadvantage i.e. large 

memory space required for words and their stems and the difficulties in creating such tables. The 

affix removal stemmer eliminates affixes from words leaving a stem. The successor variety 

stemmer is based on the determination of morpheme borders, i.e., it needs information from 

linguistics, and is more complex than affix removal stemmer. The N-grams stemmer is based on 

the detection of bigrams and trigrams. 

The study (J.B. Lovins, 1968 ) discussed the first English stemmer and used about 260 rules for 

stemming the English language. The study, suggested a stemmer consisting of two-phases. The 

first stage removes the maximum possible match from the suffix list sorted on the base of word 

lengths. The spelling exceptions are covered in the second stage. 

The Porter stemmer (M.F. Porter, 1980) developed the stemmer on the truncation of suffixes, by 

means of list of suffixes and some restrictions/conditions are placed to recognize the suffix to be 

detached and generating a valid stem. Porter Stemmer performs stemming process in five steps. 

The Inflectional suffixes are handled in the first step, derivational suffixes are handled through 

the next three steps and the final step is the recoding step. Porter simplified the Lovin’s rules upto 

60 rules.    

Different stemmers have also been developed for Arabic language. The study (S. Khoja, et al. 

1999) explains an Arabic stemmer called a superior root-based stemmer. This stemming 

algorithm truncates prefixes, suffixes and infixes and then uses patterns for matching to pull out 

the roots. The study (Thabet, N. 2004) described a stemmer, which performs on classical Arabic 

in Quran to produce stem. For each Surah, this stemmer generates list of words. These words are 

checked in stop word list, if they don’t exist in this list then corresponding prefixes and suffixes 

are removed from these words.  

The study (E.T. Al-Shammari, et al. 2008) proposed the Educated Text Stemmer (ETS). It is a 

simple, dictionary free and efficient stemmer that decreases stemming errors and needs lesser 

storage and time.  
Bon was the first stemmer developed for Persian language (M. Tashakori, et al. 2002). Bon is an 

iterative longest matching stemmer. The iterative longest matching stemmer truncates the longest 

possible morpheme from a word according to a set of rules. This procedure is repeated until no 

more characters can be eliminated. The study (Mokhtaripour, et al. 2006) proposed a Persian 

70



stemmer that works without dictionary. This stemmer first removes the verb and noun suffixes 

from a word. After that it starts truncation of prefixes from that word.  

Till date only one stemmer i.e. Assas-band, has been developed for Urdu language (Q. Akram, et 

al. 2009). This stemmer extracts the stem/root word of only Urdu words and not of borrowed 

words i.e. words from Arabic, Persian and English used in Urdu. This algorithm removes the 

prefix and suffix from a word and returns the stem word. 

3 Orthographic features of Urdu 

According to (Malik, M. G. Abbas, et al. 2008), Urdu alphabet consists of 35 simple consonants, 

15 aspired consonants, 10 vowels, 15 diacritical marks, 10 digits and other symbols 

3.1 Consonants 

Consonants are divided into two groups i.e. Aspirated consonants and non aspirated consonants. 

There are 15 aspirated consonants in Urdu language. These consonants are shown by a grouping 

of a simple consonant to be aspirated. A special letter called Heh Doachashmee (ھ) is used to 

mark the aspiration. Aspired Consonants are   نھ , مھ ,  ڑھ, رھ , گھ , کھ , ڈھ , دھ ,چھ ,جھ ,ٹھ , تھ , پھ ,تھ ,  

 Urdu language consists of 35 non aspirated consonant signs that represent 27 consonant. لھ

sounds. Various scripts are employed to show the similar sound in Urdu, For example: Sad (ص), 

Seen (س) and Seh (ث) represent the sound [s]. 

3.2 Vowels 

Urdu has ten vowels. Seven of them contain nasalized forms. Out of these seven, four long 

vowels are represented by Alef Madda (آ), Alef (ا), Choti Yeh (ی) and Vav (و) and three short 

vowels are represented by Arabic Kasra (Zer), Arabic Fatha (Zabar) and Arabic Damma (Pesh). 

In Urdu language, the Vowel demonstration is context sensitive. For example, the Urdu Choti 

Yeh (ی) and Vav (و) can also be used as a consonant (Malik, M. G. Abbas, et al. 2008). 

3.3 Diacritical marks 

The diacritical marks are those marks that are added to a letter to change the pronunciation of a 

word or to differentiate among similar words. It is also called as accent mark or diacritic.3  

There are 15 diacritical accent marks in Urdu (Malik, M. G. Abbas, et al. 2008). Diacritical 

marks (Zabar, Zer, Pesh, Ulta Pesh, Do-Zabar, Do-Zer, Do-Pesh etc) represent vowel sounds. 

These are placed above or below of an Urdu word. The diacritical marks are very rarely used by 

people in writing Urdu. When the diacritic of a character in a word is changed then it could 

entirely change its meaning. For example the word (تیل) has two meanings i.e. a “creeping plant” 

as well as it means “bull”. To remove the doubt between these two words, there should be Zabar 

after Beh (ب) for deducing the meaning as “bull”. 

                                                           

3 http://www.the-comma.com/diacritics.php 

 

71



4 Urdu morphological structure 

Urdu verbs, nouns and adjectives are discussed in the following sections as in (Sabzwari, S, 

2002): 

4.1 Urdu verb 

Verb (فعل) corresponds to occurrence or performing of something. That verb which does not take 

object is called intransitive verb (  When a verb needs a direct object then it is called .(فعل الزم

transitive verb  and we can called it (فعل متعدی) in Urdu. A root form is that morpheme of Urdu 

verb which is not changed among different morphological forms and it is also called base form. 

When a suffix (نا) is removed from the verb’s lexicon form (infinitive form) then the left over part 

of an infinitive form will be a root, which is also called  in Urdu. Causative Stem Form of (مادہ) 

verb can be achieved through adding of suffixes to root form. The Causative verb forms 

/transitivitized verb forms can be obtained through the roots of lower valency verb by adding 

Urdu suffixes: –aa (ا), –waa (وا) to the root form of verb. The causative verb types are known as 

stem forms. The infinitive (مصدر) is that kind of verb which has the suffix “نا”. This form of the 

verbs also can be used in place of noun. Usually this form of the verb has a masculine suffix “نا”. 

For feminine infinitive form the suffix “نے” and the suffix “نی” for oblique infinitive form are 

used. The repetitive form (استمراری) also known as imperfect or habitual form that is produced by 

appending suffixes to the root as: تیں ,تی ,تے ,تا. 

4.2 Urdu noun 

A word which is the name of anything is called Noun, i.e. person’s name, a place, an animal, 
thing, a concept, time, a situation etc. 
Initially nouns are classified into proper and common nouns. Proper noun (اسن هعرفہ) is the name of 
particular person, thing or place, e.g. Hafsa, Del Laptop , Karachi etc. The Common noun ( اسن
 is the common name for any person, thing or place e.g. woman, pen, village, etc. The (نکرہ
Common nouns are further divided into state, spatial, group, instrumental and temporal nouns. 
There are four fundamental properties related with Urdu nouns i.e. Gender, Number, Form and 
Case. The masculine and feminine gender is accepted by the Urdu’s Nouns. For inanimate nouns, 
to get its gender categorization in Urdu, there is no common rule. Generally powerful, huge, 
dominant, heavy and larger items are masculine, whereas lighter, weak and smaller are feminine. 
Generally, masculine are shown through bigger nouns  whereas feminine are shown ,(اسن هکبر) 
through smaller nouns  The Urdu nouns have two possibilities for number. One is .(اسن هصغر) 
called singular and second is called plural. In Normal form, when Urdu noun is listed in dictionary 
is called  nominative form. When Nouns are followed by a  postposition then it can be viewed in 
oblique form. Those Urdu nouns which belong to human being and sometimes other animate 
nouns contain a different form used to call/ address person, this type is called vocative. 

4.3 Urdu adjective 

An adjective express the status or action, quality that a noun refers to e.g. نیک آدمی(Pious man) ,  

(Fresh banana)  Descriptive Adjective is the most common and significant type of. تازہ کیال

adjective. It express attributes of the noun they qualify in terms of its color, size, dimensions, 

shape, sound, shade, personal trait, time, and quality. When the descriptive adjectives directly 

lead a nominal head as modifiers, in that case  they are called attributive adjectives e.g. (Cruel 

king) سفید گیند   ظالم تادشاہ,  (White ball).  

72



The Possessive adjectives are used to show the ownership and the ownership relation is 

understand in two ways; whether, in noun phrases, adjectives lead the head noun as modifiers or 

they may be lead by a proper form of the genitive postposition (کا،کے،کی) e.g. حفصہ کا نیال دوپٹہ 

(Hafsa’s blue veil). 

5 Light weight stemmer 

Light weight stemming is to find the representative indexing form of a word by the application of 

truncation of affixes (Imed Al-Sughaiyer, et al. 2004). The core objective of light weight 

stemmer is to preserve the word meaning intact and so increases the retrieval performance of an 

IR system.  

In this paper, a light stemmer for Urdu text is proposed. Various lists are developed that help in 

finding a stem of an Urdu word. This stemmer is rule based and works by truncating all possible 

affixes from a word. The problem in this light weight stemming is that in some cases there is 

ambiguity e.g. a particular string of letters may or may not play a function of affix. A method is 

introduced for detecting such type of ambiguity that finds if a specific sequence in an affix is part 

of the original word. For this purpose Global Prefix Exceptional and Global Suffix Exceptional 

Lists are developed which are discussed in the coming sections. 

6 Proposed Urdu Stemmer 

During morphological analysis of Urdu text, it is noticed that there could be upto sixty different 

forms of a single verb (Rizvi, S, et al. 2005). Therefore reducing these forms to their stem forms 

is very important during IR tasks. Affixes perform an important role in making inflection and 

derivation of words. When these affixes are removed from a word, it gives a stem word. We have 

developed different lists for our stemmer. The details of these lists are given below. 

6.1 Stop word list 

Stop words are those words that occur frequently. For English stemmers, a stop word list is 

already maintained, similarly, it is necessary for Urdu stemmer, that there must be a stop word 

list. Therefore, to accomplish this task, various Urdu books and literature were studied and finally 

150 stop words are generated for Urdu. Some of the stop words in Urdu are نے،کا،کے،سے،میں. 

6.2 Prefix list 

Prefix is that morpheme which is attached to the start of a word. The prefix may consist of only a 

single character, two or more than two characters and sometimes a complete word. After 

consulting many grammar books 180 prefixes were collected. A sample of these prefixes 

are تد،زتر،تا،خار. 

6.3 Suffix list 

The suffix is that morpheme that is added to the end of a word. The suffix may consist of a 

character, more than a single character or a complete word. A list of suffixes, consisting of 750 

suffixes for Urdu text is collected after consulting relevant literature. Samples of such suffixes 

are ات،تاش،تندی،پسند،خانہ. 

73



6.4 Global prefix exceptional list 

There are some words that contain a prefix, in fact it is not a prefix but it is the part of that word 

e.g. in the word “نایاب”, this word contain a prefix “نا” ,  if it is removed then it produces a word  

 which is incorrect from stemming point of view. Therefore, such type of words must need ,”یاب“

to be identified in advance and to be treated as an exceptional case. For our stemmer an 

exceptional list for prefixes (about 13000) is created called Global Prefix Exceptional List 

(GPEL).  Samples of such type of words are اعتماد،اتفاق،ازل،درج . 

6.5 Global suffix exceptional list 

In some cases, when a suffixe is removed from a word and actually that suffix was the part of a 

stem word that should not be detached. An erroneous result will be produced due to irrelevant 

truncation of suffix e.g. in the word “نانا”, when the suffix “نا” is removed then it produces stem 

 .which is incorrect.  Therefore such type of words should be treated as an exceptional case ,”نا“

Samples of such type of words are فوت،دستیاب،لیاقت،مرد. For our stemmer an exceptional list for 
suffix (of length about 16000) is created. 

6.6 Characters add-list (normalization of stem) 

When affix stripping algorithm is applied on Urdu words, then some time we get an incomplete 

word, e.g. after stripping affixes from a word “خوتصورتی” (Beautifulness), we get stem “صور”, 

which is incorrect stem. Therefore, this word should be added with the character “ت” to form 

correct stem form i.e. “صورت” (appearance). For this reason five types of list are maintained for 

five characters; (ا،ہ،ت،ی،ن).  

6.7 Stem dictionary 

To check the accuracy of any stemmer, there should be a stem word dictionary. After studying 

relevant literature, it is noted that there is no stem dictionary available for Urdu text. Therefore, 

we developed a stem dictionary for Urdu words having 3500 words. 

6.8 Proposed algorithm of Urdu stemmer 

The longest-match theory regarding affix removal states that when more than one affixes result as 

a match, the one which is longest should be removed. This method is applied by first sorting the 

affixes in any class in order of decreasing length. In case of suffix removal, if -ional is removed 

when there is another match -ational, then more work has to be done to eliminate -at, that is, for 

another order-class. To avoid this extra order-class, -ational should precede -ional in the 

prefix/suffix exception list. 

An algorithm based on the principle of longest-match uses only one order-class. The entire 

feasible combinations of affixes are compiled and then ordered based on their length, so the 

longest word comes first. When a match is not found on longer suffixes / prefixes, shorter ones 

are scanned. 

 

 

74



A- INPUT Word for stemming  

Initially Word = (Prefix)-stem-(Suffix) 

B- Search in Stop word list 

IF Word exists in Stop word list 

         Return to step A (for next word) 

ELSE go to step C 

C- Search in Global Prefix Exceptional List    (GPEL) 

IF Word exists in GPEL 

         THEN go to step E 

ELSE go to step D 

D- OPEN Urdu prefixes file  

READ prefix one by one from the file until EOF is 

reached 

IF there is a match  

         THEN remove prefix from word 

         So Word = stem-(Suffix) 

 

E- Search in  Global Suffix Exceptional List   

(GSEL)  

IF Word exist in GSEL  

         THEN output Word = stem  

         go to step H 

ELSE go to step F 

 

F- OPEN Urdu suffixes file 

READ suffix one by one from the file Until EOF 

reached 

IF there is a match  

         THEN remove suffix from word 

         So Word = stem 

         go to step G 

ELSE go to step H 

G- Search in Characters-Add List (CAL) file     

IF Word exists in CAL file 

          THEN Add the respective   

                   character to the word 

           So Word = stem (normalized) 

ELSE 

           Word=stem 

H- End 

The proposed stemmer extracts the stem by removing the prefixes and suffixes having maximum 

length from a word. Thus for this purpose, the prefix and suffix lists are sorted in descending 

order before any prior operation. 

To understand the proposed algorithm, please refer to Figure 1. Our proposed algorithm first 

checks the entered word that whether it is a stop word? If so then no processing will be done on 

that word and next word will be entered. When a word is not a stop word then the word is 

checked in global prefix exceptional list, if it exists then it means that the word has prefix(s) but 

should not be removed from the word because they are the part of stem. On the other hand if it 

does not exist in global prefix exceptional list then it means it has some prefix (s), thus prefix 

rules are applied to remove the maximum prefix from the word. 

75



The word is now checked in global suffix exceptional list, if it exists then it is marked as the 

stem. But if it does not exist in the list then it means this word has some suffix (s). Therefore 

suffix rules are applied to remove the maximum suffix from the word. 

To normalize the word form, the word is checked in five different lists maintained for (ا،ہ،ت،ی،ن)     

characters i.e. Characters-Add list.  When a word is found in any of the five lists then respective 

character is added to produce a normal word form. Thus marks this resultant word as the stem. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 Evaluation 

We evaluated the proposed Urdu stemmer on three corpora4 i.e. corpus-1 (9200 words), corpus-2 

(27000 words) and corpus-3 (30000 words). These corpora include data in the form of verbs, 

nouns, adjectives, punctuations, numbers, special symbols etc. When the corpus-1 is fed to the 

stemmer, then in pre-processing step, the stemmer removed all stop words, numbers and 

punctuation marks. Thus after pre-processing steps, there were 4268 words left. Stemming is 

performed on 4268 words that produce 39.4% precision, 71.1% recall and 50.70%   F1-Measure. 

The low accuracy obtained is due to the occurrence of various issues in stemming Urdu words 

e.g. Compounding, Tokenization, Transliteration and Infixation. It is very difficult to classify the 

compound words as a single or multiple words e.g. مرہم پٹی (bandaging), خط وکتاتت 

(correspondence). Some times the reduplication also produces ambiguity; whether it is treated as 

single or double word e.g.  جگہ جگہ،آہستہ آہستہ،ساتھ ساتھ(together, slowly, at every place) 

English language generally uses white spaces or punctuation marks for the identification of word 

boundaries. Although in Urdu, space character is not present but with increasing usage of 

computer, it is now being used, for generating right shaping and to break up words. Tokenization 

process should be error free, hence producing correct tokens before applying an Urdu stemmer. It 

                                                           
4 http://www.crulp.org/software/ling_resources/UrduNepaliEnglishParallelCorpus.htm 

Figure 1: Flow chart of Proposed Urdu Stemmer 

76



is also observed that these corpora include Urdu transliteration of English words e.g. فیولیز 

(families),  پروگراهنگ (programming). There is no prefix and suffix morpheme available in our 

developed lists for such type of words. We cannot get stem word of an Urdu word by only 

stripping off prefixes and (or) suffixes e.g.  .(knowledge) علوم , (mosques) هساجد , (nations) اقوام  

These words contain infixes and large amount of such type of words are present in Urdu. Thus 

light weight stemmer cannot handle words having infixes. Due to insufficient words in Character 

Add lists, it leads to error in stemming. Proper nouns and abbreviations also contribute in the 

error of stemming e.g.  اے-ایس-یو  (USA),  لندى  (London). 

The same stemmer is applied on corpus-2 that produced 18378 words after pre-processing. It 

gives 49% precision, 78.6% recall and 60.36% F1-Measure. When corpuse-3 is fed to the 

stemmer it produces 19351 words after pre-processing. Our light weight stemmer produced 

precision 73.55%, recall 90.53% and 81.16% F1-Measure. The summary of the three corpora and 

evaluation of the stemmer after applying stemmer is given in table 1. 

Characteristics 
Corpus 

(1) 

Corpus 

(2) 

Corpus 

(3) 

Words after  

Pre-processing  4268 18378 19351 

Already stemmed Words 2233 10674 12428 

Words to be Stemmed 2035 7704 6923 

Correct Stemmed Words  802 3775 5092 

Results 

Precision 39.4% 49% 73.55% 

Recall  71.1% 78.6% 90.53% 

F1-Measure  50.70% 60.36% 81.16% 

Table-1: Description of corpora after pre-processing and evaluation of stemmer 

Conclusion  

Morphologically Urdu is a complex language. There exist a number of variants in this language 

for a single word. Urdu language is rich in both inflectional and derivational morphologies.  

In this paper, a light weight stemmer for Urdu text is proposed. The proposed stemmer handles 

inflectional morphology. This stemmer removes prefixes and suffixes from a word to get stem 

word but before removing the affixes, the stemmer checks the exceptional cases. The stemmer 

gives 73.55% precision, 90.53% recall and 81.16% F1-Measure and it was also compared with 

Assas-band, the only available Urdu stemmer. 

Generally stemmer increases recall at the cost of decreased precision. Our study proves that 

maximum matching affix approach is more suitable for developing the stemmer for Urdu 

language. Other regional languages of Pakistan (Punjabi, Pashtu, Sindi, and Kashmiri etc) are 

similar to Urdu in morphology. It would be interesting to observe whether similar techniques can 

be used to develop stemmers for these languages. 

References 

Al-Khuli, M. (1991). A dictionary of theoretical linguistics: English-Arabic with an Arabic-

English glossary. Published by Library of Lebanon. 
 

77



E.T. Al-Shammari, Jessica Lin, (2008). Towards an error-free Arabic stemming. 17th Conference 

on Information and Knowledge Management, iNEWS’08, pages 1–6,Napa Valley, California, 

USA. 
 

Frakes, R.Baeza-Yates, (1992). Information Retrieval: Data Structures and Algorithms. New 

Jersey, Prentice Hall PTR. 
 

Imed Al-Sughaiyer, Ibrahim Al-Kharashi. (2004). Arabic morphological analysis techniques: a 

comprehensive survey. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 

55(3):189 – 213. 
 

J.B. Lovins, (1968). Development of a stemming algorithm. Mechanical Translation and 

Computational Linguistics, 11(1 and 2):22–31. 
 

Malik, M. G. Abbas,B.C. Bhattcharyya, P. (2008). Hindi Urdu machine transliteration using 

finite-state transducers. proceedings of COLING 2008, pages 537–544, Manchester, UK. 
 

M.F. Porter. (1980). An algorithm for suffix stripping. Program, 14(3): 130–137. 
 

Mokhtaripour and S. Jahanpour, (2006). Introduction to a new Farsi stemmer. CIKM Proceedings 

of the 15th ACM international conference on Information and knowledge management, pages 

826-827,Arlington, Virginia, USA. 
 

M. Tashakori, M. Meybodi & F. Oroumchian, (2002). Bon: first Persian stemmer. Lecture Notes 

on Information and Communication Technology, pages 487-494. 
 

Q. Akram, A. Naseer and S. Hussain, (2009). Assas-band, an affix- exception-list based Urdu 

stemmer”, Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 40–47, 

Singapore. 
 

Rizvi, S. & Hussain, M. (2005), “Analysis, Design and implementation of Urdu morphological 

analyzer.  Engineering Sciences and Technology, SCONEST, pages 1-7. 
 

Sabzwari, S. (2002). Urdu Quwaid.  Sang-e-Meel Publication. 
 

S. Khoja and R. Garside. (1999). Stemming Arabic Text, Lancaster, UK, Computing Department, 

Lancaster University. 
 

Thabet, N. (2004). Stemming the Qur’an. In the Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational 

Approaches to Arabic Script-based Languages, pages 85-88. 

 

78


