



















































The Shape of Elementary Trees and Scope Possibilities in STAG


Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms (TAG+11), pages 232–240,
Paris, September 2012.

The Shape of Elementary Trees and Scope Possibilities in STAG

Robert Frank
Yale University

Department of Linguistics
370 Temple Street

New Haven, CT 06511
robert.frank@yale.edu

Dennis Ryan Storoshenko
Yale University

Department of Linguistics
370 Temple Street

New Haven, CT 06511
dennis.storshenko@yale.edu

Abstract

Work on the syntax-semantics interface in
the TAG framework has grappled with the
problem of identifying a system with suf-
ficient power to capture semantic depen-
dencies which also imposes formally and
linguistically interesting constraint on the
kinds of dependencies that can be ex-
pressed. The consensus in recent years ap-
pears to have shifted to the use of a system
that is substantially more expressive than
TAG. In this paper, we revisit some of the
arguments in favor of more formal power,
particularly those from Nesson and Shieber
(2008). We show that these arguments can
be defused once we adopt a different per-
spective on predicate-headed semantic el-
ementary trees, namely that they are di-
vided into scope and variable components
like their quantificational counterparts. We
demonstrate as well that this proposal pro-
vides an new perspective on scope rigidity.

1 TAG Semantics and Formal Power

Much of the interest in using Tree Adjoining
Grammar as the structure-building component of
syntactic theory stems from the combination of its
formal and computational restrictiveness and its
apparent sufficiency to express the kinds of pat-
terns that are found in natural language. Over
the past couple of decades, researchers have at-
tempted to augment TAG models of syntax with
mechanisms for assigning semantic interpreta-
tions. One line of work in this regard is that
of Kallmeyer and Joshi (2003) and Kallmeyer
and Romero (2008). In this approach, elemen-
tary trees are associated with underspecified se-
mantic descriptions, which are combined using

a combinatory mechanism that operates in par-
allel with TAG derivational steps, essentially a
form of feature unification. Though this approach
has had considerable empirical success, it does so
by sacrificing the restrictiveness of the TAG for-
mal system: unification over unbounded feature
structures is Turing complete (Johnson, 1988).1

An alternative line exploits the TAG combinatory
machinery itself to construct semantic interpreta-
tions, through a synchronous derivation of syn-
tactic representations and semantic terms (Shieber
and Schabes, 1990). Though this Synchronous
TAG (STAG) approach is appealing, because it
maintains the constrained approach to grammat-
ical combination embraced in TAG, it remains
an open question whether it is sufficiently pow-
erful to accomplish the task of assigning compo-
sitional interpretations. Indeed, in comparison to
the wealth of work on the grammatical complex-
ity of patterns found in natural language syntax,
there is precious little work studying the com-
plexity of semantic patterns, or of the syntax-
semantics mapping.2

Recently, Nesson and Shieber (2008) have ar-
gued that there are empirical reasons to move

1As far as we are aware, Kallmeyer and colleagues have
not proposed restrictions on their system which constrains
its expressiveness. One interesting avenue to pursue in this
connection could follow the work of Feinstein and Wintner
(2008) who prove that the class of one-reentrant unification
grammars generate exactly the Tree Adjoining Languages.
Of course, it remains an open empirical question whether im-
posing this restriction on this approach would yield a system
that is sufficiently expressive to assign meanings in a compo-
sitional fashion. We briefly return to this issue in Section 5
below.

2See Marsh and Partee (1984) for one notable exceptions,
though questions remain about the empirical relevance of
this result.

232



beyond the tree-local multicomponent version of
STAG advocated by Shieber and Schabes (1990)
and in Schabes and Shieber (1994), to a system
which is greater in power than simple TAG. In
this paper, we suggest that Nesson and Shieber
were mistaken: the examples that they use to mo-
tivate greater expressive power can in fact be dealt
with using tree-local MCTAG, but only once we
rethink the semantic representations of elemen-
tary trees for lexical predicates. We then move
beyond English, showing that this new concep-
tion of semantic elementary tree set provides a
natural way to characterize cross-linguistic vari-
ability in scopal flexibility, a variability that is un-
expected under the multiple adjunction approach
to scope ambiguity. Finally, we briefly discuss a
potential analogy between scope and scrambling
and the implications that this analogy has for the
complexity of the syntax-semantics interface.

2 Puzzles for a Restrictive Semantics

Nesson and Shieber (2008) present a number of
sentence types whose semantic derivations they
take to require power beyond that possible under
tree-local MCTAG. One of these involves “inverse
linking”, where a quantifier is syntactically em-
bedded within another quantificational NP. Such
a case is given in (1):

(1) Mitt courted every person at some
fundraiser.
(∃ > ∀, ∀ > ∃)

To derive an interpretation for this sentence, Nes-
son and Shieber make use of what has become
the standard TAG treatment of quantifiers, given
in Figure 1, augmented with dominance links that
are crucial only to the inverse linking case. A
quantifier’s interpretation is assigned two pieces
of structure, a scope tree and a variable tree. To
derive (1), the quantifier, some fundraiser, is com-
bined into the at-headed tree set, of which it is

〈 { DP
D

some

NP 2

N

fundraiser

} { t 2
∃x t 2

〈e,t〉 2

fundraiser

x

t*
e

x

} 〉

Figure 1: Tree Set for some fundraiser

〈 {
S*

NP

NP* PP

P

at

NP↓ 1

} {
t*

〈e,t〉

and 〈e,t〉* 〈e,t〉

at e↓ 1

} 〉

Figure 2: Tree Set for at proposed in Nesson and
Shieber (2008)

the complement, given in Figure 2: on the seman-
tic side, the variable component of the quantifier
substitutes into the 〈e,t〉-recursive auxiliary tree,
following the link in the syntactic tree. However,
there is no place in the 〈e,t〉 recursive auxiliary to
host the t-recursive scope component of the quan-
tifier, meaning that tree local combination is im-
possible. It is only because of the presence of the
degenerate t component of this tree set that the
combination of the quantifier and preposition is
even able to occur set locally. The derivation con-
tinues by adjoining the derived tree set into an-
other quantifier tree set, representing every per-
son, this time tree-locally, within the set’s scope
component.

Nesson and Shieber invoke a second kind of
example to argue for the inadequacy of even set-
local MCTAG. This case involves the interleaving
of scopal elements from multiple clauses, of the
sort seen in (2).

(2) Some professor remembered to review
every paper (that he promised to review).
(∃ > ∀ > remembered)

In the relevant reading of (2), the universal quan-
tifier that is the object of the lower clause takes
scope below the existential matrix subject, but
above the matrix verbal predicate. This interpreta-
tion cannot be derived even set-locally under stan-
dard assumptions.3 If the tree set associated with

3In fact, Shieber and Nesson’s assumptions about the se-
mantic elementary tree for the control predicate remember
do not match the ones we are currently making. Instead, they
invoke a three-part tree set for the semantics of control pred-
icates like remember, including a lambda abstraction over
the subject, the lexical predicate and a variable to be inserted
into the (controlled) embedded subject position. This move
allows them to generate the desired scope for (2), though it
does not generalize to slightly more complex cases such as
the following, involving a matrix adverbials, as they observe:

(i) Every boy always wants to eat some food.
(always > ∃ > ∀ > wants)

The proposal we make in the current paper can be seen as

233



{ t
∃x t

〈e,t〉

professor

x

t

e

x

〈e,t〉

〈t,〈e,t〉〉

remembered] t*

}

Figure 3: Derived matrix auxiliary tree for some pro-
fessor remembered

the existential quantifier some professor adjoins
and substitutes into a single-component seman-
tic elementary tree associated with remembered,
as it must under tree-local or set-local MCTAG,
the relative scope of these elements can be fixed
(as ∃ >remembered), forming a derived auxiliary
tree that encapsulates these scopal elements, seen
in Figure 3. However, because of the nature of
the adjoining operation, there is no way the these
two elements can be separated when this derived
auxiliary tree into it complement review, which
will also host the embedded quantifier every pa-
per. As a result, this embedded quantifier will be
able to take scope above all of the matrix scopal
elements or below all of them, but crucially not
between them, contrary to fact.

Nesson and Shieber also discuss a third type of
example, involving pied-piped relative clauses:

(3) John saw a soccer player whose picture
every boy bought.

On the relevant reading, the universal quantifier
can take scope outside of the (implicit) existen-
tial provided by the pied-piped relative asserting
the existence of a picture (i.e., each boy bough a
distinct picture of the same soccer player). They
argue that neither a tree-local nor a set-local anal-
ysis can generate this interpretation. In this case,
however, the argument rests on what we take to
be an implausible analysis of relative clause syn-
tax and semantics, in which the syntactic head and
core semantics of a pied-piped relative clause is
provided by the possessive morpheme. Below,
we discuss an alternative analysis of such pied-
piped relatives in which the relative clause seman-
tics and existential force is provided by a verbally-

a generalization of Nesson and Shieber’s multicomponent
treatment of control predicates to all lexical predicates. Fur-
thermore, by assuming that temporal arguments license their
own semantic component, the scope in (i) can be derived.

〈 { TP
1 DP↓ T ′

T VP

V

courted

DP↓ 2

}{ t 1 2
1 e↓ 〈e,t〉

λy′ t

2 e↓ 〈e,t〉

λx′ t*

t

〈e,t〉

〈e〈e,t〉〉

λxλy.court(y, x)

e

x′

e

y′

} 〉

Figure 4: Two-Part Predicate Trees for courted

headed relative clause tree, and which allows this
interpretation to be derived.

3 A Return to Tree-Locality: A New
Proposal for Semantic Elementary
Trees

Nesson and Shieber’s arguments, interesting as
they are, rest on assumptions about the nature of
the elementary trees that contribute to the relevant
derivations. Though the elementary trees they as-
sume are largely in conformity with other propos-
als in the TAG literature, they provide no under-
lying theory of what semantic elementary trees
should look like. As a result, it is simply un-
clear whether their arguments hold up if the con-
stituent elementary trees and assumptions about
their structure are changed. To get around their
arguments and maintain tree-local combination,
our proposal in this paper reconceptualizes the se-
mantic elementary trees for predicates as multi-
component sets. These sets will consist of (at
least) two pieces: a ‘variable part’ and ‘scope
part’. This division is familiar in the TAG seman-
tics literature for quantifiers, and we propose that
it be generalized to argument taking elements of
all sorts.

Let us be specific about how this works. The
semantic elementary tree set for transitive verb,
such as courted, will contain two pieces. One,
which we call the “variable part”, will include the
lexical predicate with each of its argument po-
sitions saturated by variables. The other, which
we call the “scope part”, contains a lambda op-
erator binding each of the variables in the vari-
able part, with substitution nodes to which each of
the lambda operators applies. The resulting tree
set is depicted in Figure 4. To use this tree set
to derive an example like Mitt courted some De-
troiters, the subject and object DP arguments will
both combine tree-locally in the semantic deriva-
tion with the scope portion of the courted tree set,

234



{ t
∃z t

〈e,t〉

Detroiters

z

t

e

Mitt

〈e,t〉

λy′ t

e

z

〈e,t〉

λx′ t

〈e,t〉

〈e〈e,t〉〉

λxλy.court(y, x)

e

x′

e

y′

}

Figure 5: Derived semantic tree for derivation of Mitt
courted some Detroiters

Mitt through substitution into the higher e node,
and some Detroiters through substitution into the
lower e and adjoining to the root t. When a deriva-
tion results with two trees in a single tree set, we
assume that they may combine together, with the
scope part adjoining to the variable part, result-
ing in the derived semantic structure in Figure 5.
Turn now to the derivation of the putatively prob-
lematic inverse linking case (1), repeated here.

(1) Mitt courted every person at some
fundraiser.
(∃ > ∀, ∀ > ∃)

Note first of all, that our multicomponent ap-
proach to the semantics of predicates can be ap-
plied to prepositions as well, as seen in Figure 6.
Following the derivation tree in Figure 7, the com-
ponents of some fundraiser compose tree-locally
into the scope part of at, one via substitution and
the other via adjoining, just as in the derivation
just sketched. Next, both components of at’s
semantics combine (tree locally) with the scope
component of every person, via adjoining at either
of the 2 -linked t nodes in the quantifier tree set of
the same form as the one in Figure 1. If such ad-

〈{ NP
NP* PP

P

at

DP↓ 1

} {
t 1

1 e↓ 〈e,t〉

λz′ t*

〈e,t〉

〈e,t〉* ∧ 〈e,t〉

〈e〈e,t〉〉

λxλy.at(y, x)

e

z′

} 〉

Figure 6: Two-Part Predicate Trees for at

joining targets the higher t node, the inverse link-
ing obtains, while surface scope derives from the
lower attachment. Now, the derived object quanti-
fier every person at some fundraiser can combine
with the verbal predicate as we saw, with scope
ambiguity with respect to the subject determined
by the ordering of the combinations into the ver-
bal scope tree.

Our conception of predicate-headed elemen-
tary trees also yields a tree-local treatment of
cases of scopal interleaving like (2), repeated
here:

(2) Some professor remembered to review
every paper (that he promised to review).
(∃ > ∀ > remembered)

As before, the tree set representing the object
quantifier (tree locally) adjoins and substitutes
into the scope component of the (embedded) verb,
whose representation will be like the verbal tree
in Figure 4. The semantics of the matrix verb
remember will also involve both scope and vari-
able components, though this time there be an ad-
ditional variable component corresponding to the
controlled argument in the embedded clause. The
resulting tree set is given in Figure 8. Interest-
ingly, this tree set is in fact identical to the one
adopted by Nesson and Shieber (2008) in their
treatment of control. Although they do not ex-
plain their motivation for adopting this tree, it is
clear that the use of lambda abstraction is driven
by the need to have the subject argument of the
matrix predicate to bind the variables saturating
the external arguments of both the control and
embedded predicates. What is less clear is why
the lambda operator lies in a separate component
from the lexical predicate, and it is this separation
that is necessary to derive the scope interleaving.
Under the current proposal, the separation of the
lambda expression from the lexical predicate into
two components is a general property of seman-
tic elementary tree sets. Returning to the deriva-

courted

every person

at

some fundraiser

two politicians

Figure 7: Derivation Tree for (1)

235



〈 { TP
DP↓ T′

T VP

V

remembered

TP*

DP

PRO

} { t
e↓ 〈e,t〉

λw t*

t

〈e,t〉

〈t,〈e,t〉〉

remembered

t*

e

w

e

w

} 〉

Figure 8: Elementary trees for control predicate remembered

〈 { TP
DP

some professor

T′

T VP

V

remembered

TP*

DP

PRO

} { t
∃x t

〈e, t〉

professor

e

x

t

e

x

〈e,t〉

λw t*

t

〈e,t〉

〈t,〈e,t〉〉

remembered

t*

e

w

e

w

} 〉

〈 { TP
DP↓ T′

T

to

VP

V

meet

DP

every boy

} { t
∀y t

〈e,t〉

paper

e

y

t

e ↓ 〈e,t〉

λu t

e

y

〈e,t〉

λv t*

t

〈e,t〉

〈e,〈e,t〉〉

review

e

v

e

u

} 〉

Figure 9: Matrix and embedded derived auxiliary trees for interleaving scope in (2)

tion of (2), the matrix quantifier some professor
will combine tree-locally into the scope compo-
nent of the remembered tree set. The result of
these derivational steps is the two derived tree sets
in Figure 9. The matrix clause’s tree set will now
combine tree locally into the scope component of
the embedded clause’s tree: because of the control
relation, it must combine with this tree if we are
to be able to substitute the e-type variable (con-
tributed by the control predicate) into the exter-
nal argument slot of review. Now, by adjoining
the scope component of the matrix clause at the
root of this scope component, and adjoining the
predicate+variable component of the matrix at the
foot node of this component, we derive the de-
sired relative scopes. As before, we assume that
the remaining components are composed to com-
plete the derivation.

Our approach extends to cases discussed by
Nesson and Shieber, where additional scopal in-
terleaving arises because of matrix adverbials:

(4) Every boy always wants to eat some food.
(always > ∃ > ∀ > wants)

The treatment of such cases depends crucially
on the incorporation of temporal arguments into
semantic elementary trees, about which see
Storoshenko and Frank (this volume). We assume
that such arguments are lambda bound in the same
way as other e-type arguments, in distinct scope
components, and this allows us to treat temporal
dependencies in a manner similar to control. In
the (semantic side of the) derivation of (4), always
combines with the temporal scope component of
want, while every boy combines with the e-type
scope component. The resulting derived tree set
then combines, again tree locally, with the scope
component of the eat elementary tree set. The
interleaving interpretation can now be derived if
we adopt a version of delayed combination intro-
duced by Freedman and Frank (2010), whereby
the different components of a tree set need not
be composed into an elementary tree at a single

236



point in the derivation, even if they remain tree lo-
cal. Specifically, we first adjoin the variable and
e-type scope components of the matrix predicate
to the scope component of the eat tree set. Then,
we combine the scope component of eats together
with its variable component, and finally we adjoin
the temporal scope component.

As already noted, Nesson and Shieber argue
that tree local derivations cannot generate inter-
pretations for relative clauses with pied-piping, as
in (3).

(3) John saw a soccer player whose picture
every boy bought.
(∃ soccer player > ∀ boy > ∃ picture)

In fact, we can generate an interpretation for this
example by making use of a relative clause tree
rather different from the one assumed by Nesson
and Shieber. First of all, we apply our split seman-
tics to the verbally-headed relative clause tree set,
shown in Figure 10. This tree includes the famil-
iar structure of a t-recursive scope part, and the
predicate component. We assume that the exis-
tential force associated with pied-piped relatives
is in fact associated with this verbally-headed tree
set, and is present in the scope part of this set. In
addition, this tree set includes a component rep-
resenting the relative operator, into which the re-
maining components may substitute. To a degree,
this mirrors those accounts that treat the lambda
operator associated with the relative as a part of
the semantics of the relative pronoun in that the
〈e,t〉-recursive tree carries only that operator, and
takes the remainder of the clause material as an
argument via substitution. Though space prevents
us form justifying this assumption, we take the
semantics of a relativizing DP with a possessive
wh-phrase to be of type 〈e,〈e,t〉〉, so that a wh-
phrase like whose picture is assigned an interpre-
tation like λxλy.y is a picture of x. The deriva-
tion of (3) proceeds by substituting such a rela-
tivizing DP and its associated semantics into the
1 -annotated nodes in Figure 10, and combining

the universal quantifier at the 2 -annotated nodes.
By adjoining the scope part of the quantifier to the
higher t node, we can derive the scope indicated
in (3), while adjoining at the lower t node will
yield a narrow scope interpretation for the uni-
versal (where the choice of picture does not vary
scope with the boy).

4 Scope Rigidity

In addition to providing a tree-local analysis of
certain problematic cases, our proposal for the
structure of semantic elementary trees also pro-
vides an account of a phenomenon that has re-
ceived relatively little attention in the TAG liter-
ature (but cf. Freedman and Frank (2010), Freed-
man (2012)). In contrast to English, where sub-
ject and object quantifiers often permit both linear
and inverse scope, languages like Japanese exhibit
scope rigidity, where the scopal relation among
quantifiers is fixed by hierarchical order. This is
shown in the following example from Hoji (1985).

(5) Dareka-ga
someone-NOM

daremo-o
everyone-ACC

aisiteiru.
love

‘Someone loves everyone.’
(∃ > ∀, *∀ > ∃)

Such scope facts are challenging for any analy-
sis which relies on multiple adjoining at a sin-
gle t node for all arguments of a given predicate,
as scope permutations are predicted to take place
freely within a clause so long as the two argu-
ments can combine with verb in either order.

Our analysis as presented thus far does not pro-
vide an account of this pattern either: the quanti-
fiers would both combine with the scope part of
the verbal elementary tree, in either order, lead-
ing to an expectation of scope ambiguity. How-
ever, it is straightforward to modify the verbal el-
ementary tree set in Figure 4 to achieve the ef-
fect of scope rigidity. In particular, we propose
that languages may differ in their representation
of scope in predicate elementary trees. In lan-
guages like English, lambda operators binding ar-
gument variables are collected together in a single
scope tree. In contrast, we take canonical clauses
in languages like Japanese to be represented by el-
ementary tree sets like the one in Figure 11. Here,
the lambda abstraction for each e type argument
takes place in its own scope tree. Furthermore,
we assume that these scope trees are constrained
to adjoin in a way that respects their syntactic hi-
erarchical relation, with the result that the subject
lambda abstraction component must be higher in
the derived tree than the object lambda abstraction
component. As before, we assume that the differ-
ent components of this tree set, if they remain sep-
arate, will compose at the end of the derivation, in
a manner that respects the specified hierarchical
constraints. Now, if we continue to assume that all

237



〈 { NPNP CP
DPi ↓ 1 C′

C TP

DP↓ 2 T′

T VP

V

bought

DPi

t

} { 〈e,t〉
〈e,t〉* ∧ 〈e,t〉

λx t↓

t 2

∃y t

〈e.t〉

1 〈e,〈e.t〉〉↓ e

y

e

x

t 2

〈e,t〉

λz t*

e↓ 2

t

〈e,t〉

〈e,〈e,t〉〉

bought

e

y

e

z

} 〉

Figure 10: Elementary tree set for pied-piped relative clause in 3

〈 { TP
1 DP↓ T′

VP

2 DP↓ V

aisiteiru no

T

} { t 1
1 e↓ 〈e,t〉

λy′ t*

t 2

2 e↓ 〈e,t〉

λx′ t*

t

〈e,t〉

〈e〈e,t〉〉

λxλy.love(y, x)

e

x′

e

y′

} 〉

Figure 11: Split scope components for scope rigidity in (5)

combination must take place in a tree-local man-
ner, we derive the unavoidable conclusion that the
quantifiers cannot permute with one another: each
quantifier tree set substitutes and adjoins to its as-
sociated verbal scope tree, with no possibilities
for multiple adjoining.

Scope is however not always rigid in Japanese.
When an object scrambles past the subject, as in
(6), we find the kind of ambiguity familiar from
English.

(6) Daremo-oi
someone-NOM

dareka-ga
everyone-ACC

ti

aisiteiru.
love
‘Everyone, someone loves.’
(∃ > ∀, ∀ > ∃)

Such circumvention of canonical scope could of
course be modeled by allowing clauses involving
scrambling to be derived by an English-like tree
set. However, a more intriguing possibility re-
tains the idea of multiple scope trees in Japanese,
as in in Figure 11, but removes the hierarchy con-
straint that we have imposed on the final positions
of the scope trees. Scope ambiguity then results
because of multiple possibilities for collapsing the

verbal tree set at the end of the derivation. But
why would the verbal tree underlying (6) differ in
this way from the one underlying (5)? We propose
that hierarchy constraints on components of a se-
mantic multicomponent set are the reflection of
syntactic hierarchy. In a canonical sentence, the
syntax determines a unique hierarchical relation
among the arguments, giving rise to a unique pos-
sibility for scope. With scrambling, where the ob-
ject is represented syntactically in both a base and
surface position, the hierarchical relation between
subject and object is underdetermined, yielding
scopal flexibility.

5 A Note on Expressiveness: Scope vs.
Scrambling

Though our novel perspective on elementary trees
yields a treatment of Nesson and Shieber’s prob-
lematic cases, one might object that a wealth of
other cases await us which cannot be so ana-
lyzed. After all, our proposed system for seman-
tic combination remains a tree-local MCTAG, and
as such is very limited in the kinds of dependen-
cies that it can capture. Indeed, an anonymous re-
viewer argues that the kinds of dependencies pos-
sible among quantifiers and their variables resem-
bles those between scrambled elements and their

238



associated verbs. The reviewer cites examples of
the form in 7, claiming that all scopal orderings of
the quantifiers are possible.

(7) Every professor wanted to ask some TA to
tell every student to stay at home.

If this is right, the results in Becker et al.
(1992) concerning the complexity of scrambling
would immediately tell us that scopal dependen-
cies could not be completely captured using tree-
local MCTAG.

We see a number of difficulties with this argu-
ment. The first of these concerns commutativity
of quantifiers. As is well-known, two formulas
of first order logic that are distinguished only by
the relative order of two quantifiers of the same
type (i.e., both universal or both existential) do
not have distinct truth conditions. As a result, it
is not possible on meaning grounds to distinguish
between an ordering of the quantifiers in (7) un-
der which the most embedded universal has scope
above the matrix universal or immediately below
it. Because of the limited number of quantifier
types of natural language, the number of distin-
guishable scopes will be limited in way that does
not parallel the situation with scrambling, where
all word orders are easily distinguished. As a re-
sult, it remains to be determined whether Becker
et al.’s arguments can be adapted to the case of
scope, where the set of (semantically distinct)
scopes is not equivalent to the set of permutations
of the quantifiers.

A second problem for this argument parallels a
similar one that has been pointed out for scram-
bling. As Joshi et al. (2000) note, all word or-
der permutations up to a certain depth of embed-
ding can be generated with tree-local MCTAG
using elementary trees of a linguistically plau-
sible sort. To show that a grammar for scram-
bling requires greater power, we must appeal to
more complex cases, whose empirical status is not
clear. And although it is not unreasonable to as-
sume that the grammar of scrambling does indeed
generalize in way that produces all permutations
of arguments over arbitrary levels of embedding
including the empirically murky cases (as Ram-
bow (1994) does), Joshi et al. (2000) argue that
it is equally sensible to assume that the grammar
generates only a subset of the possible cases, be-
cause of limits on its generative capacity, so long
as this includes all of the cases that are indis-

putably acceptable to speakers. The situation with
scope seems to us completely parallel. Although
many scopings are imaginable in examples like
(7) and more complex cases along the same lines,
the empirical situation is far from clear with re-
spect to which interpretations are actually avail-
able to speakers. Therefore, the prudent course
seems to us to be one which explores the empiri-
cal landscape of these cases, in an attempt to find
cases that demand additional power.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the TAG+11 anonymous
reviewers for their helpful comments. This work
has been partially funded by SSHRC Postdoc Fel-
lowship 756-2010-0677 to Storoshenko.

References

Tilman Becker, Owen Rambow, and Michael Niv.
1992. The derivational generative power of scram-
bling is beyond LCFRS. Technical Report IRCS
92-38, Institute for Research in Cognitive Science,
University of Pennsylvania.

Daniel Feinstein and Shuly Wintner. 2008. Highly
constrained unification grammars. Journal of
Logic, Language and Information, 17(3):345–381.

Michael Freedman and Robert Frank. 2010. Re-
stricting inverse scope in STAG. In Proceedings of
the 10th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining
Grammars and Related Formalisms. Yale Univer-
sity.

Michael Freedman. 2012. Scope economy and TAG
locality. In Proceedings of the 11th International
Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Re-
lated Formalisms.

Hajime Hoji. 1985. Logical Form and Configura-
tional Structures in Japanese. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of Washington.

Mark Johnson. 1988. Attribute Value Logic and
Theory of Grammar. CSLI Lecture Notes Series.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Aravind K. Joshi, Tilman Becker, and Owen Rambow.
2000. Complexity of scrambling: A new twist on
the competence-performance distinction. In Anne
Abeillé and Owen Rambow, editors, Tree Adjoin-
ing Grammars: Formalisms, Linguistic Analysis
and Processing, pages 167–181. CSLI Publications,
Stanford, CA.

Laura Kallmeyer and Aravind K. Joshi. 2003. Factor-
ing predicate argument and scope semantics: Un-
derspecified semantics with LTAG. Research on
Language and Computation, 1:3–58.

239



Laura Kallmeyer and Maribel Romero. 2008. Scope
and situation binding in LTAG using semantic uni-
fication. Research on Language and Computation,
6(3):3–52.

William Marsh and Barbara Partee. 1984. How non-
context-free is variable binding? In M. Cobler,
S. MacKaye, and M. Wescoat, editors, Proceedings
of the West Coast Conference on Formal Linguis-
tics, pages 179–190. Stanford University.

Rebecca Nesson and Stuart M. Shieber. 2008. Syn-
chronous vector TAG for syntax and semantics:
Control verbs, relative clauses, and inverse linking.
In Claire Gardent and Anoop Sarkar, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Tree
Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms.

Owen Rambow. 1994. Formal and Computational
Aspects of Natural Language Syntax. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

Yves Schabes and Stuart M. Shieber. 1994. An
alternative conception of tree-adjoining derivation.
Computational Linguistics, 20(1):91–124.

Stuart M. Shieber and Yves Schabes. 1990. Syn-
chronous Tree Adjoining Grammars. In Papers
Presented to the 13th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, volume 3, pages 253–
258.

240


