



















































Building Multilingual Lexical Resources using Wordnets: Structure, Design and Implementation


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex-III), pages 161–170,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Building Multilingual Lexical Resources Using Wordnets: 

Structure, Design and Implementation 
Shikhar Kr. Sarma

1
 Dibyajyoti Sarmah

1
 

Biswajit Brahma
1
 Mayashree Mahanta

1
 Himadri Bharali

1
 Utpal Saikia

1
 

(1) Department of Information Technology, 

Institute of Science & Technology, Gauhati University, Guwahati – 14 Assam, India 

{sks001, dibyasarmah, bswjtbrahma, mayashreemahanta, himadri0001, 

utpal.sk}@gmail.com 

Abstract 

The present paper deals with the design and implementation of multilingual lexical resources of 

Assamese and Bodo Language with the help of Hindi Wordnet. Here, we present the multilingual 

dictionaries (for Hindi, Assamese and Bodo), synset based word search for Assamese-Hindi and 

Bodo-Hindi language. These words, of course, will have to go through some pre-processing 

before finally being uploaded to a database. The user-interface is being developed for specific 

language (Assamese, Bodo and Hindi language).  

KEYWORDS: Lexical Resources, Concept Based Dictionary, Multilingual Dictionary 

Database, Web-based Interface 

1 Introduction 

In recent years, mono and multilingual lexical resources, Wordnet and other lexical resources are 

in high demand. Wordnet is a very recent and rich multilingual lexical resource which is being 

used in MT (Machine Translation), cross-lingual search, information extraction etc. Among the 

Indian language Wordnet, the Hindi Wordnet
1
 was the first one to come into existence from 2000 

onwards. It was inspired by the English Wordnet
2
 which contains nouns, verbs, adjectives and 

adverbs organized into synonym sets, each representing one underlying lexical concept 

(Fellbaum, 1998). Different relations like hypernymy, hyponymy etc. link the synonym sets to 

each other. Soon, other Indian language Wordnet started getting created. The Wordnet for 

Assamese and Bodo have followed the Hindi Wordnet. 

The present model tries to represent the lexical elements and their multilingual counterparts 

efficiently and economically. The present frameworks are derived inspiration from the Hindi 

Wordnet. 

2 A case study: Introduction of Assamese language and Bodo language 

Assamese language is the mainly spoken in the state of Assam. According to the VIII schedule of 

Indian Constitution, Assamese is recognized as the regional language. It becomes the official 

language of Assam. It is also used as a medium of communication in many north-eastern states 

specially Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland and also in outside the north-eastern regions such as 

Bhutan and Bangladesh. Apart from these, a large number of Assamese speaking people settled 

in different parts of India and outside India like U.K. and U.S. due to various reasons. The 

                                                      
1 http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/wordnet/webhwn/ 
2 http://wordnet.princeton.edu/ 

161



tentative number of Assamese speaker in the state of Assam and neighboring states of north-east 

India is 1.4 million and across India is approximately 14.3 million.  

Bodo language became the scheduled language in the year 2003. It is spoken in the northern part 

of the Brahmaputra valley of Assam and also in the southern part of the valley. A small section 

of Bodo speakers are also found in the border areas like Meghalaya, Nagaland, North Bengal, 

Nepal and Bhutan adjoining Assam. According to the census 1991, there are approximately 11, 

84, 569 Bodo speakers. However, the Bodo language has its written record from the last part of 

the 19
th

 century. In the year 1963, it was introduced in the primary level of education in Assam 

and presently, it becomes the medium of instruction up to 10
th

 standard in the state of Assam. 

The script of the Bodo is Devanagiri.  

UNICODE compliant font sets, keyboard drivers, corpus, word-processors, spelling checkers, 

CLDR (Common Locale Data Repository) etc. are being developed with Government of India 

initiative very recently. Work has also started simultaneously for developing the Assamese and 

Bodo Wordnet as part of the North East Indo Wordnet development, which will ultimately be 

linked to the composite Indo Wordnet [Sarma, 2010].  

3 The Multilingual Lexical Resources   

A lexical resource (LR) is a database consisting of one or several dictionaries. Depending on the 

type of languages that are addressed, the LR may be qualified as monolingual, bilingual or 

multilingual. For bilingual and multilingual LRs, the words may be connected or not connected, 

from a language to another. When connected, the equivalence from a language to another, is 

performed through a bilingual link (for bilingual LRs) or through multilingual notations (for 

Multilingual LRs). 

Following is the linked synset in Assamese and Bodo Wordnet 
 

Assamese Linked Synset Bodo Linked Synset 

14958 15785 

TABLE 1 – Synset of Assamese and Bodo Wordnet 

 

 
FIGURE 1– Relation between Assamese and Bodo synset with Hindi 

 

Here we define the source language to target language flow diagram. For creating the target 

language synset, we derive help from Hindi Wordnet. For building the Multilingual (Assamese, 

Bodo and Hindi) lexical resources we used root Wordnet Hindi for Assamese and Bodo language 

and mapping words by compare with Hindi. 

Hindi Synset 

Assamese Synset Bodo Synset 

162



                             
FIGURE 2 –Synset of English ‘fruit’ word sense in different 

 

There are three words (फल, फर, प्रसून) in Hindi which form the Hindi synset, two words (ফল, 
ফলমূল) in Assamese from Assamese synset for the same concept and another three words 
(फफथाइ, फफथाइ-सामथाइ, बिथाइ) in Bodo from Bodo synset, as illustrated in FIGURE 2. 

   
In FIGURE 3 we show the mapping with Assamese and Bodo with root synset Hindi. Here the 

फल (fruit) word is mapping with Assamese word ফল (phal:fruit) and Bodo word फफथाइ 
(fithai:Fruit). In the same way फर (phar:fruit) word is related with ফলমূল (phalmul:fruits) 
(Assamese synset) and फफथाइ-सामथाइ (fithai-samthai:fruits) (Bodo synset). But there is no 
equivalent Assamese word for Hindi प्रसून word. So, we cannot map this प्रसून with Assamese 
synset. 

4 Challenges in Lexical Resources   

Morphological Characteristics (Assamese Language) 
Assamese is very rich in morphological features

3
. Some of them are outlined below 

1. There is no inflection for number and gender in Assamese. There are two kinds of numbers, 
viz., singular and plural. Linguistically, Gender is of two types – Masculine and Feminine. 

But traditionally Common and Neuter gender are also used. 

2. Relational nouns or kinship terms are inflected for person and case. 
3. Derivation is done by various processes – prefixation, suffixation, zero modification, 

compounding and change of consonant and vowel phoneme. 

                                                      
3
 Golock C Goswami. 1983. Structure of Assamese, Gauhati University, Assam 

1.ফল 
2.ফলমলূ 

1.फल 
2.फर 

3.प्रसून 

1.फफथाइ 
2.फफथाइ-सामथाइ 
3.बिथाइ  

Assamese Synset Hindi Synset Bodo Synset 

FIGURE 3 –Mapping with root synset (Hindi Synset) 

Synset of Hindi 

word 

 

Synset of Assamese 

word 

 

Synset of Bodo 

word 

 

फल (fruit) 

फर (fruit) ফলমলূ(fruits) 

ফল(fruit) 

बिथाइ (fruit) 

फफथाइ-
सामथाइ(fruits) 

फफथाइ (fruit) 

प्रसून (born) 

163



4. There are two types of affixes in Assamese language – Prefix and suffix. But there is no 
infix found in the language.  

5. Assamese language contains six types of case markings, Nominative, Accusative, 
Instrumental, Dative, Ablative and Locative.  

6. In negation, the negative ‘n-’ is prefixed to the verb and morphophonemic changes are also 
common in the language.  

Syntactic Characteristics 
a) The basic sentence structure in Assamese language is Subject + Object + Verb (SOV). 

But it may vary according to the context or mood of the speaker 

b) Depending on the form, the sentence in the language is of three kinds – Simple, 
Complex and Compound. 

c) Semantically, sentences in Assamese are classed into – Declarative, Interrogative, 
Exclamatory, Imperative. In fact, Intonation plays a significant role in determining the 

sentence type. 
Bodo Morpho-syntactic features 

a) Sentence pattern of the Bodo is Subject + Object + Verb (SOV) pattern. 
b) The language does not follow the concord relation which is the agreement of verb and 

person. 

c) There is no change of verb according to the person and number. In each sentence the 
verb does not possess change of its character regarding person and number where it is 

singular or plural form in the sentence.  

5 Challenges of Lexical Resources 

The linkage task has to do a fine balance between maintaining accuracy and providing maximum 

linkages. While trying to do this for the linkage between the Hindi, Assamese and Bodo 

Wordnet, several challenges were encountered. The specific such problems were faced are the 

synset denoting the following: 

a) It is often the case that a concept is expressed through a synthetic expression in one 
language, but through a single word expression in the other language.eg. For Bodo 

language a single word express a whole sentence. 

For example, 
4
HC: एक प्रकार के छोटे जंतु जजनके मुुँह में, विशेषकर कुतरने में सहायक, छोटे और पैन ेदाुँत होत ेहैं 

5
ET: Relatively small gnawing animals having a single pair of constantly growing incisor teeth 

specialized for gnawing. 
6
HS: क ं तक जन्तु (rodent, gnawer, gnawing_animal) 

7
BS: गोफार_हाथाय_गोनां_जुनार (gwfar-hathai-gwnang-junar: sharped teeth animal) 

In this example Hindi Synset क ं तक जन्तु word meaning is like as गोफार_हाथाय_गोनां_जुनार in 
Bodo Wordnet. This word is a combination of four parts.  

                                                      
4 HC-Hindi Concept 
5 ET-English Translation 
6HS-Hindi Synset 
7 BS-Bodo Synset 

 

164



b) Sometime there is no equivalent concept in target language. For example, the Hindi 

concept like साधु िन जाना (to become a monk) is not found any equivalent term in the 
target language Assamese. 

Some cultural terms may be missed out from the target languages as these are not available in the 

Hindi Wordnet. It prevents the true representation of the target language in digital world. For 

example: the terms relating to festival like     (Bihu) in Assamese and िैसागु (Boisagu) in Bodo 
are not found in the Hindi Wordnet. 

In source language and target language, we have found words with same structure with different 

meanings in different time. For instance, धुरन्धर (dhurandhar) in Hindi means ‘renowned one’, 
but in Assamese ধুৰন্ধৰ (dhurandhar) refers to ‘a scoundrel’. 

6 Multilingual Lexical Database for Computational Framework 

Design of multilingual database by help of root Wordnet (Hindi Wordnet) is shown in below. 

First we create our target language synset from Hindi Wordnet by using multilingual tool. After 

creating our own language we put that file in our database. In FIGURE 4 we show the DFD (Data 

Flow Diagram) of multilingual lexical resources. 

 

 
 

7 Multilingual Lexical Database for Computational Framework 

The Multilingual tool, used by lexicographers for manually linking the two Wordnet, was 

developed at CFILT, IIT Bombay.  

The offline multilingual tool takes as input a source file containing the number of query synset N, 

where N stands for total number of synset that are to be linked and N lines in following format: 

 Synset ID 

 POS category 

 Concept 

 EXAMPLE 

 SYNSET 

Synset Input(language 

specific) 

Multilingual dictionary 

development tool 

Sense-based dictionary 

database 

Multilingual 

Dictionary Multilingual dictionary builder 

  Language specific data 
Hindi Wordnet 

data 

Multilingual data 

   Web Interface 

FIGURE 4 – DFD of Multilingual Dictionary creation 

165



 

FIGURE 5 –Multilingual Tool (for Assamese language) 

In this tool, the synset (synset ID, POS category, Concept, example and synonyms) is displayed 

in the source synset panel at the top of the tool. Similar information is displayed in the candidate 

synset panel below it, for each of the N candidate synset. The candidates are displayed in 

decreasing order of their confidence score. Facility for searching synset in both source and target 

languages with respect to a word or synset ID is also provided in the tool. 

 

 

FIGURE 6 –Multilingual Tool (for Bodo language) 

We have taken help from the Indo Wordnet website, when we did not find equivalent concept in 

our target languages. For example, Synset ID, POS (Part Of Speech), Concept, Example, Synset, 

Hyponymy etc. for respective languages.  

166



                   
 

8 User Interface of lexical resources 

A. Bilingual link (Assamese-Hindi synset based translation). 
B. Bilingual link (Bodo- Hindi synset based translation). 
C. Multilingual dictionary (Assamese-Bodo-Hindi).   

 

 

FIGURE 7–Searching a word (User Interface) 

 

FIGURE 8–Synset based word search (Assamese-Hindi) 

Search word 

Synset ID POS Concept Example Synset Word 

relations 

FIGURE 7– Word Structure of Hierarchical order 

167



 

FIGURE 9–Synset based Word search(Bodo-Hindi) 

 

FIGURE 10–Interface of Multilingual Dictionary (Assamese-Bodo-Hindi) 

9 Conclusions 

In this paper, we present a discussion on the structure, design and implementation of the 

multilingual lexical resources for Assamese and Bodo Wordnet which is done by mapping with 

the Hindi Wordnet. Besides, the present paper also highlights the challenges faced in creating the 

Wordnet in Assamese as well as in Bodo such as script issue, cultural terms, similar structure but 

different meaning etc.  

In future, attempts should be taken to create Wordnet for other north-eastern languages as well as 

other Indic languages which would not only preserve the language but also standardize the 

language in digital world. This kind of research would help the user for easy browsing of any 

language data in digital format. 

168



Acknowledgment 

The works have been done during the NE Wordnet development project. The authors 

acknowledge support from DIT, Ministry of Communication & IT, Govt. of India, & Indwordnet 

team, IIT Bombay. 

References 

Awasthi, S. and (Smt.) I. Awasthi. 2000.  Chambers English-Hindi Dictionary (ed.). Allied 

Publisher Limited, New Delhi, India. 

Fellbaum, C. 1998. Wordnet: An Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press. 

Kamil, Bulke. 1997. An English-Hindi Dictionary (ed.).  S. Chand & Co, New Delhi, India. 

Khapra, Mitesh, Sapan Shah, Piyush Kedia and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2009. Projecting 

Parameters for Multilingual Word Sense Disambiguation. Empirical Methods in Natural 

Language Processing (EMNLP09), Singapore. 

Narayan Dipak, Debasri Chakrabarti, Prabhakar Pande and P. Bhattacharyya.2002.An 

Experience in Building the Indo WordNet-a WordNet for Hindi, First International Conference 

on Global WordNet, Mysore, India. 

Ramanand J.. Akshay Ukey, Brahm Kiran Singh, Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2007. Mapping and 

Structural Analysis of Multi-lingual Wordnets. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, 30(1). 

Sarma, Shikhar Kr., Moromi Gogoi, Rakesh Medhi and Utpal Saikia, 2010. Foundation and 

Structure of Developing an Assamese Wordnet, Global Wordnet Conference, IIT Bombay. 

Sarma, Shikhar Kr.,Moromi Gogoi, Biswajit Brahma, Mane Bala Ramchiary,2010. A Wordnet 

for Bodo Language: Structure and Development. 

Sinha Manish,Mahesh Kumar Reddy and Pushpak Bhattacharyya.2006.An Approach towards 

Construction and Application of Multilingual Indo-WordNet, 3rd Global WordNet Conference 

(GWC 06), Jeju Island, Korea. 

169




