










































Contrasting Objective and Subjective Portuguese Texts from Heterogeneous Sources


Proceedings of the Workshop on Innovative Hybrid Approaches to the Processing of Textual Data (Hybrid2012), EACL 2012, pages 46–51,
Avignon, France, April 23 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Contrasting objective and subjective Portuguese texts from
heterogeneous sources

Michel Généreux
Centro de Linguı́stica da

Universidade de Lisboa (CLUL)
Av. Prof. Gama Pinto, 2

1649-003 Lisboa - Portugal
genereux@clul.ul.pt

William Martinez
Instituto de Linguı́stica

Téorica e Computacional (ILTEC)
Avenida Elias Garcia, 147 - 5◦ direito

1050-099 Lisboa - Portugal
william@iltec.pt

Abstract

This paper contrasts the content and form
of objective versus subjective texts. A col-
lection of on-line newspaper news items
serve as objective texts, while parliamen-
tary speeches (debates) and blog posts form
the basis of our subjective texts, all in
Portuguese. The aim is to provide gen-
eral linguistic patterns as used in objec-
tive written media and subjective speeches
and blog posts, to help construct domain-
independent templates for information ex-
traction and opinion mining. Our hybrid
approach combines statistical data along
with linguistic knowledge to filter out ir-
relevant patterns. As resources for subjec-
tive classification are still limited for Por-
tuguese, we use a parallel corpus and tools
developed for English to build our sub-
jective spoken corpus, through annotations
produced for English projected onto a par-
allel corpus in Portuguese. A measure for
the saliency of n-grams is used to extract
relevant linguistic patterns deemed “objec-
tive” and “subjective”. Perhaps unsurpris-
ingly, our contrastive approach shows that,
in Portuguese at least, subjective texts are
characterized by markers such as descrip-
tive, reactive and opinionated terms, while
objective texts are characterized mainly by
the absence of subjective markers.

1 Introduction

During the last few years there has been a growing
interest in the automatic extraction of elements re-
lated to feelings and emotions in texts, and to pro-
vide tools that can be integrated into a more global
treatment of languages and their subjective aspect.
Most research so far has focused on English, and

this is mainly due to the availability of resources
for the analysis of subjectivity in this language,
such as lexicons and manually annotated corpora.
In this paper, we contrast the subjective and the
objective aspects of language for Portuguese.

Essentially, our approach will extract linguis-
tic patterns (hopefully “objective” for newspa-
per news items and “subjective” for parliamen-
tary speeches and blog posts) by comparing fre-
quencies against a reference corpus. Our method
is relevant for hybrid approaches as it combines
linguistic and statistic information. Our reference
corpus, the Reference Corpus of Contemporary
Portuguese (CRPC)1, is an electronically based
linguistic corpus of around 310 million tokens,
taken by sampling from several types of written
texts (literature, newspapers, science, economics,
law, parliamentary debates, technical and didactic
documents), pertaining to national and regional
varieties of Portuguese. A random selection of
10,000 texts from the entire CRPC will be used
for our experiment. The experiment flow-chart is
shown in Figure 1. We define as objective short
news items from newspapers that reports strictly
a piece of news, without comments or analysis. A
selection of blog post items and short verbal ex-
changes between member of the European parlia-
ment will serve as subjective texts.

2 Previous work

The task of extracting linguistic patterns for data
mining is not new, albeit most research has so
far dealt with English texts. Extracting subjec-
tive patterns represents a more recent and chal-
lenging task. For example, in the Text Analy-

1
http://www.clul.ul.pt/en/resources/

183-reference-corpus-of-contemporary-portuguese-crpc

46



Parliamentary
Speeches

(subjective)

Blog Posts
(subjective)

News Items
(objective)

Term and
Pattern

Extraction

Reference
Corpus

(neutral)

Patterns

Figure 1: Experiment flow-chart.

sis Conference (TAC 2009), it was decided to
withdraw the task of creating summaries of opin-
ions, present at TAC 2008, the organizers having
agreed on the difficulty of extracting subjective el-
ements of a text and organize them appropriately
to produce a summary. Yet, there is already some
relevant work in this area which may be men-
tioned here. For opinions, previous studies have
mainly focused in the detection and the gradation
of their emotional level, and this involves three
main subtasks. The first subtask is to distinguish
subjective from objectives texts (Yu and Hatzi-
vassiloglou, 2003). The second subtask focuses
on the classification of subjective texts into pos-
itive or negative (Turney, 2002). The third level
of refinement is trying to determine the extent to
which texts are positive or negative (Wilson et al.,
2004). The momentum for this type of research
came through events such as TREC Blog Opin-
ion Task since 2006. It is also worth mention-
ing recent efforts to reintroduce language and dis-
cursive approaches (e.g. taking into account the
modality of the speaker) in this area (Asher and
Mathieu, 2008). The approaches developed for
automatic analysis of subjectivity have been used
in a wide variety of applications, such as online
monitoring of mood (Lloyd et al., 2005), the clas-
sification of opinions or comments (Pang et al.,
2002) and their extraction (Hu an Liu, 2004) and
the semantic analysis of texts (Esuli and Sebas-
tiani, 2006). In (Mihalcea et al., 2007), a bilingual
lexicon and a manually translated parallel corpus
are used to generate a sentence classifier accord-

ing to their level of subjectivity for Romanian.
Although many recent studies in the analysis of
subjectivity emphasize sentiment (a type of sub-
jectivity, positive or negative), our work focuses
on the recognition of subjectivity and objectivity
in general. As stressed in some work (Banea et
al., 2008), researchers have shown that in senti-
ment analysis, an approach in two steps is often
beneficial, in which we first distinguish objective
from subjective texts, and then classify subjective
texts depending on their polarity (Kim and Hovy,
2006). In fact, the problem of distinguishing sub-
jective versus objective texts has often been the
most difficult of the two steps. Improvements in
the first step will therefore necessarily have a ben-
eficial impact on the second, which is also shown
in some work (Takamura et al., 2006).

3 Creating a corpus of Subjective and
Objective Portuguese Texts

To build our subjective spoken corpus (more than
2,000 texts), we used a parallel corpus of English-
Portuguese speeches2 and a tool to automatically
classify sentences in English as objective or sub-
jective (OpinionFinder (Riloff et al., 2003)). We
then projected the labels obtained for the sen-
tences in English on the Portuguese sentences.
The original parallel corpus is made of 1,783,437
pairs of parallel sentences, and after removing
pervasive short sentences (e.g. “the House ad-
journed at ...”) or pairs of sentences with the ra-
tio of their respective lengths far away from one
(a sign of alignment or translation error), we are
left with 1,153,875 pairs. A random selection of
contiguous 20k pairs is selected for the experi-
ment. The English sentences are submitted to
OpinionFinder, which labels each of them as “un-
known”, “subjective” or “objective”. Opinion-
Finder has labelled 11,694 of the 20k sentences
as “subjective”. As our experiment aims at com-
paring frequencies between texts, we have auto-
matically created segments of texts showing lex-
ical similarities using Textiling (Hearst, 1997),
leading to 2,025 texts. We haven’t made any at-
tempt to improve or evaluate OpinionFinder and
Textiling performance. This strategy is sensible
as parliamentary speeches are a series of short
opinionated interventions by members on specific

2European Parliament: http://www.statmt.org/
europarl/

47



themes. The 11,694 subjective labels have been
projected on each of the corresponding sentences
of the Portuguese corpus to produce our final spo-
ken corpus3. Note that apart from a bridge (here
a parallel corpus) between the source language
(here English) and the target language (here Por-
tuguese), our approach does not require any man-
ual annotation. Thus, given a bridge between
English and the target language, this approach
can be applied to other languages. The consid-
erable amount of work involved in the creation of
these resources for English can therefore serve as
a leverage for creating similar resources for other
languages.

We decided to include a collection of blog posts
as an additional source of subjective texts. We
gathered a corpus of 1,110 blog posts using Boot-
Cat4, a tool that allows the harvesting and clean-
ing of web pages on the basis of a set of seed
terms5.

For our treatment of objectivity and how news
are reported in Portuguese newspapers, we have
collected and cleaned a corpus of nearly 1500 ar-
ticles from over a dozen major websites (Jornal
de Notı́cias, Destak, Visão, A Bola, etc.).

After tokenizing and POS-tagging all sen-
tences, we collected all n-grams (n = 1, 2 and
3) along with their corresponding frequency for
each corpus (reference (CRPC), objective (news
items) and subjective (parliamentary speeches and
blog posts)), each gram being a combination of
a token with its part-of-speech tag (e.g. falar V,
“speak V”). The list of POS tags is provided in
appendix A.

3As our subjective spoken corpus has been built entirely
automatically (Opinion Finder and Textiling), it is important
to note that (Généreux and Poibeau, 2009) have verified that
such a corpus correlates well with human judgements.

4http://bootcat.sslmit.unibo.it/
5In an attempt to collect as much opinionated pages in

Portuguese as can be, we constraint BootCat to extract pages
written in Portuguese from the following web domains:
communidades.net, blogspot.com, wordpress.
com and myspace.com. We used the following seed
words, more or less strongly related to the Portuguese cul-
ture: ribatejo, camões, queijo, vinho, cavaco, europa, sintra,
praia, porto, fado, pasteis, bacalhau, lisboa, algarve, alen-
tejo and coelho.

4 Experiments and Results

4.1 POS and n-grams

In our experiments we have compared all the n-
grams (n = 1, 2 and 3) from the objective and
subjective texts with the n-grams from the ref-
erence corpus. This kind of analysis aims es-
sentially at the identification of salient expres-
sions (with high log-odds ratio scores). The log-
odds ratio method (Baroni and Bernardini, 2004)
compares the frequency of occurrence of each n-
gram in a specialized corpus (news, parliamen-
tary speeches or blogs) to its frequency of oc-
currence in a reference corpus (CRPC). Apply-
ing this method solely on POS, we found that
objective texts used predominantly verbs with an
emphasis on past participles (PPT/PPA, adotado,
“adopted”), which is consistent with the nature
of reported news. In general, we observed that
subjective texts have a higher number of adjec-
tives (ADJ, ótimo, “optimum”): parliamentary
speeches also include many infinitives (INF, fe-
licitar “congratulate”), while blogs make use of
interjections (ITJ, uau, “wow”). Tables 1, 2 and
3 show salient expressions for each type of texts.
These expressions do not always point to a dis-
tinction between subjectivity and objectivity, but
also to topics normally associated with each type
of texts, a situation particularly acute in the case
of parliamentary speeches. Nevertheless, we can
make some very general observations. There
is no clear pattern in news items, except for a
slight tendency towards the use of a quantita-
tive terminology (“save”, “spend”). Parliamen-
tary speeches are concerned with societal issues
(“socio-economic”, “biodegradable”) and forms
of politeness (“wish to express/protest”). In blog
posts we find terms related to opinions (“pinch
of salt”), wishes (“I hope you enjoy”), reactions
(“oups”) and descriptions (“creamy”).

4.2 Patterns around NPs

The n-gram approach can provide interesting pat-
terns but it has its limits. In particular, it does not
allow for generalization over larger constituents.
One way to overcome this flaw is to chunk cor-
pora into noun-phrases (NP). This is the approach
taken in (Riloff and Wiebe, 2003) for English. In
Riloff and Wiebe (2003), the patterns for English
involved a very detailed linguistic analysis, such
as the detection of grammatical functions as well

48



PORTUGUESE ENGLISH
detetado PPA “detected”
empatado PPT “tied”
castigado PPT “punished”
ano CN perdido PPA “lost year”
triunfa ADJ “triumph”
receção CN “recession”
podem V poupar INF “can save”
vai V salvar INF “will save”
deviam V hoje ADV “must today”
ameaças CN se CL “threats

concretizem INF materialize”
andam V a DA gastar INF “go to spend”
ano CN de PREP “year of

desafios CN challenges”
contratações CN de PREP “hiring of

pessoal CN staff”

Table 1: Salient expressions in news.

as active or passive forms. Without the proper re-
sources needed to produce sophisticated linguistic
annotations for Portuguese, we decided to sim-
plify matters slightly by not making distinction
of grammatical function or voice. That is, only
NPs would matter for our analysis. We used the
NP-chunker Yamcha6 trained on 1,000 manually
annotated (NPs and POS-tags) sentences. The
main idea here remains the same and is to find
a set of syntactic patterns that are relevant to each
group of texts, as we did for n-grams previously,
each NP becoming a single 1-gram for this pur-
pose. It is worth mentioning that NP-chunking
becomes particularly challenging in the case of
blogs, which are linguistically heterogeneous and
noisy. Finally, log-odds ratio once again serves
as a discriminative measure to highlight relevant
patterns around NPs. Tables 4, 5 and 6 illustrate
salient expressions from the three specialized cor-
pora, presenting some of them in context.

Although limited to relatively simple syntactic
patterns, this approach reveals a number of salient
linguistic structures for the subjective texts. In
parliamentary speeches, forms of politeness are
clearly predominant (“ladies and <NP>”, “thank
<NP>” and “<NP> wish to thank”). Unfortu-
nately, the patterns extracted from blog posts are

6http://chasen.org/˜taku/software/
yamcha/. Our evaluation of the trained chunker on
Portuguese texts lead to an accuracy of 86% at word level.

PORTUGUESE ENGLISH
socioeconómicas ADJ “socio-economic”
biodegradveis ADJ “biodegradable”
infraestrutural ADJ “infra-structural”
base CN jurı́dica ADJ “legal basis”
estado-membro ADJ “member state”
resolução CN “common

comun ADJ resolution”
gostaria V de PREP “wish to

expressar INF express”
gostaria V de PREP “wish to

manifestar INF protest”
adoptar INF uma UM “adopt an ”

abordagem CN approach”
agradecer INF muito ADV “thank very

sinceramente ADV sincerely”
começar INF por PREP “start by

felicitar INF congratulate”
senhora CN “Commissioner”

comissária CN
senhora CN deputada CN “Deputy”
quitação CN “discharge”
governança CN “governance”

Table 2: Salient expressions in parliamentary
speeches.

pervaded by “boiler-plate” material that were not
filtered out during the cleaning phase and parasite
the analysis: “published by <NP>”, “share on
<NP>” and “posted by <NP>”. However, opin-
ions (“<NP> is beautiful”) and opinion primer
(“currently, <NP>”) remain present. News items
are still characterized mainly by the absence of
subjective structures (markers), albeit quantitative
expressions can still be found (“spent”).

Obviously, a statistical approach yields a cer-
tain number of irrelevant (or at best “counter-
intuitive”) expressions: our results are no excep-
tion to this reality. Clearly, in order to reveal
insights or suggest meaningful implications, an
external (human) evaluation of the patterns pre-
sented in this study would paint a clearer picture
of the relevance of our results for information ex-
traction and opinion mining, but we think they
constitute a good starting point.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

We have presented a partly automated approach
to extract subjective and objective patterns in se-

49



PORTUGUESE ENGLISH
direto ADJ “direct”
cremoso ADJ “creamy”
crocante ADJ “crispy”
atuais ADJ “current”
coletiva ADJ “collective”
muito ADV legal ADJ “very legal”
redes CN sociais ADJ “social networks”
ups ITJ “oups”
hum ITJ “hum”
eh ITJ “eh”
atualmente ADV “currently”
atrações CN “attractions”
tenho V certeza CN “I am sure”
é V exatamente ADV “this is exactly”
café CN da PREP+DA “morning

manhã CN coffee”
pitada CN de PREP “pinch of

sal CN salt”
espero V que CJ “I hope

gostem INF you enjoy”

Table 3: Salient expressions in blogs.

lected texts from the European Parliament, blog
posts and on-line newspapers in Portuguese. Our
work first shows that it is possible to built re-
sources for Portuguese using resources (a paral-
lel corpus) and tools (OpinionFinder) built for En-
glish. Our experiments also show that, despite our
small specialised corpora, the resources are good
enough to extract linguistic patterns that give a
broad characterization of the language in use for
reporting news items and expressing subjectivity
in Portuguese. The approach could be favourably
augmented with a more thorough cleaning phase,
a parsing phase, the inclusion of larger n-grams (n
> 3) and manual evaluation. A fully automated
daily process to collect a large-scale Portuguese
press (including editorials) and blog corpora is
currently being developed.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Iris Hendrickx from CLUL for
making available the POS-tagger used in our ex-
periments.

References
Asher N., Benamara F. and Mathieu Y. Distilling opin-

ion in discourse: A preliminary study. In Coling

Some NP-patterns in context
• fiquemos V à PREP+DA <NP>
“we are waiting for <NP>”
E também não fiquemos à <espera da
Oposição> mais interessada em chegar ao
Poder.
“And also we are not waiting for an opposition
more interested in coming to power.”
• revelam V <NP> gastámos V
“revealed by <NP> we spent”
O problema é que, como revelam <os dados
da SIBS, na semana do Natal> gastámos
quase 1300 euros por segundo.
“The problem is that as shown by the data of
SIBS, in the Christmas week we spent
nearly 1300 Euros per second.”
• <NP> deviam V hoje ADV
“<NP> must today”
E para evitar males maiores, <todos os
portugueses ( ou quase todos )> deviam hoje
fazer . . .
“And to avoid greater evils, all the Portuguese
(or almost all) should today make . . .
Other NP-patterns
• <NP> gostámos V quase ADV
“<NP> spent almost”
• precisa V daqueles PREP+DEM <NP>
“need those <NP>”

Table 4: NP-patterns in news

2008, posters, pages 710, Manchester, UK.
Banea C., Mihalcea R., Wiebe J. and Hassan S. Multi-

lingual subjectivity analysis using machine transla-
tion. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP 2008), Hon-
olulu, Hawaii, October 2008.

Baroni M. and Bernardini S. Bootcat : Bootstrapping
corpora and terms from the web. In Proceedings of
LREC 2004, p. 1313-1316.

Esuli A. and Sebastiani F. Determining term subjec-
tivity and term orientation for opinion mining. In
EACL 2006.

Généreux M. and Poibeau T. Approche mixte
utilisant des outils et ressources pour l’anglais
pour l’identification de fragments textuels subjec-
tifs français. In DEFT’09, DÉfi Fouilles de Textes,
Atelier de clôture, Paris, June 22nd, 2009.

Hearst M. TextTiling: Segmenting text into multi-
paragraph subtopic passages. In Computational
Linguistics, pages 33–64, 1997.

Hu M. and Liu B. Mining and summarizing customer
reviews. In ACM SIGKDD.

50



Some NP-patterns in context
• também ADV <NP> gostaria V
“also <NP> would like”
Senhor Presidente , também <eu> gostaria de
felicitar a relatora, . . .
“Mr President, I would also like to congratulate
the rapporteur, . . .”
• senhoras ADJ e CJ <NP>
“ladies and <NP>”
Senhor Presidente , Senhora Deputada
McCarthy, Senhoras e <Senhores
Deputados>, gostaria de começar . . .
“Mr President, Mrs McCarthy, Ladies and
gentlemen, let me begin . . .”
• agradecer INF à PREP+DA <NP>
“thank <NP>”
Gostaria de agradecer à <minha colega,
senhora deputada Echerer>, pela . . .
“I would like to thank my colleague,
Mrs Echerer for . . . ”
Other NP-patterns
• <NP> desejo V agradecer INF
“<NP> wish to thank”
• aguardo V com PREP <NP>
“I look forward to <NP>”
• associar INF aos PREP+DA <NP>
“associate with <NP>”
• considero V , PNT <NP>
“I consider, <NP>”

Table 5: NP-patterns in parliamentary speeches

Kim S.-M. and Hovy E. Identifying and analyzing
judgment opinions. In HLT/NAACL 2006.

Lloyd L., Kechagias D. and Skiena S. Lydia: A system
for large-scale news analysis. In SPIRE 2005.

Mihalcea R., Banea C. and Hassan S. Learning mul-
tilingual subjective language via cross-lingual pro-
jections. In ACL 2007.

Pang B., Lee L. and Vaithyanathan S. Thumbs
up? Sentiment classification using machine learn-
ing techniques. In EMNLP 2002.

Riloff E. and Wiebe J. Learning extraction patterns for
subjective expressions. In Proceedings of EMNLP-
03, 8th Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, Sapporo, JP.

Riloff E., Wiebe J. and Wilson T. Learning subjective
nouns using extraction pattern bootstrapping. In
W. Daelemans & M. Osborne, Eds., Proceedings of
CONLL-03, 7th Conference on Natural Language
Learning, p. 2532, Edmonton, CA.

Takamura H., Inui T. and Okumura M. Latent vari-

Some NP-patterns in context
• publicada V por PREP <NP>
“published by <NP>”
Publicada por <Joaquim Trincheiras>
em 07:30
“Posted by Joaquim Trenches at 07:30”
• partilhar INF no PREP+DA <NP>
“share on <NP>”
Partilhar no <Twitter> . . .
“Share on Twitter ” . . .
• postado PPA por PREP <NP>
“posted by <NP>”
Postado por <Assuntos de Polı́cia> às 13:30.
“Posted by Police Affairs at 13:30.”
Other NP-patterns
• <NP> por PREP lá ADV
“<NP> over there”
• <NP> deixe V <NP>
“<NP> let <NP>”
• atualmente ADV , PNT <NP>
“currently, <NP>”
• <NP> é V linda ADJ
“<NP> is beautiful”

Table 6: NP-patterns in blogs

able models for semantic orientations of phrases. In
EACL 2006.

Turney P. Thumbs up or thumbs down? Semantic ori-
entation applied to unsupervised classification of re-
views. In ACL 2002.

Wilson T., Wiebe J. and Hwa R. Just how mad are
you? Finding strong and weak opinion clauses. In
Proceedings of AAAI-04, 21st Conference of the
American Association for Artificial Intelligence, p.
761-769, San Jose, US.

Yu H. and Hatzivassiloglou V. Towards answering
opinion questions: Separating facts from opinions
and identifying the polarity of opinion sentences. In
EMNLP 2003.

A List of POS-tags

ADJ (adjectives), ADV (adverbs), CJ (con-
junctions), CL (clitics), CN (common nouns),
DA (definite articles), DEM (demonstratives),
INF (infinitives), ITJ (interjections), NP (noun
phrases), PNT (punctuation marks) PPA/PPT
(past participles), PREP (prepositions), UM
(”um” or ”uma”), V (other verbs).

51


