










































Cross-discourse Development of Supervised Sentiment Analysis in the Clinical Domain


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, pages 79–83,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Cross-discourse Development of Supervised Sentiment Analysis in the
Clinical Domain

Phillip Smith
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham

pxs697@cs.bham.ac.uk

Mark Lee
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham

M.G.Lee@cs.bham.ac.uk

Abstract

Current approaches to sentiment analysis as-
sume that the sole discourse function of
sentiment-bearing texts is expressivity. How-
ever, the persuasive discourse function also
utilises expressive language. In this work,
we present the results of training supervised
classifiers on a new corpus of clinical texts
that contain documents with an expressive dis-
course function, and we test the learned mod-
els on a subset of the same corpus containing
persuasive texts. The results of this indicate
that despite the difference in discourse func-
tion, the learned models perform favourably.

1 Introduction

Examining the role that discourse function holds is
a critical part of an in-depth analysis into the capa-
bilities of supervised sentiment classification tech-
niques. However, it is a field that has not been com-
prehensively examined within the domain of sen-
timent analysis due to the lack of suitable cross-
discourse corpora to train and test various machine
learning methods upon.

In order to carry out such an investigation, this
study will focus on the relationship between senti-
ment classification and two types of discourse func-
tion: Expressive and Persuasive. The expressive
function denotes the feelings or attitudes of the au-
thor of a document. This is demonstrated in the fol-
lowing examples:

1. “I didn’t like the attitude of the nursing staff.”

2. “The doctors treated me with such care.”

Intuitively, the associated polarity of each exam-
ple is trivial to determine in these explicit examples.
However, expressive statements do not operate in
isolation of other respective discourse functions. As
Biber (1988) notes, a persuasive statement incorpo-
rates elements of the expressive function in order to
advise an external party of a proposed action that
should be taken. The following example shows how
persuasive statements make use of expressive func-
tions:

1. “The clumsy nurse who wrongly diagnosed me
should be fired.”

The role of a persuasive statement is to incite
an action in the target, dependent upon the inten-
tion that the author communicates. By using plain,
sentiment-neutral language, the reader may misin-
terpret why the request for action is being given, and
in the worst-case scenario not carry it out. Through
the incorporation of expressive language, the weight
of the persuasive statement is increased. This en-
ables the speaker to emphasise the underlying senti-
ment of their statement, thereby increasing the like-
lihood of the intended action being undertaken, and
their goals being accomplished. In the above ex-
ample, the intention communicated by the author
is the firing of the nurse. This in itself holds neg-
ative connotations, but through the use of the word
‘clumsy’, the negative sentiment of the statement be-
comes clearer to understand.

The inclusion of expressive aspects in the lan-
guage of the persuasive discourse function, enables
us to identify the sentiment of a persuasive com-
ment. As there is this cross-over in the language of
the two discourse functions, we can hypothesise that

79



if we train a supervised classifier on an expressive
corpus, a learned model will be created that when
applied to a corpus of persuasive documents, will
classify these texts to an adequate standard.

As the corpus that we developed is in the clin-
ical domain, it is worth noting the important role
that sentiment analysis can play for health practi-
tioners, which unfortunately has not received a great
deal of attention. In assessing the effectiveness of
treatments given by the health service for a condition
which is curable, the results themselves indicate the
effectiveness of such a process. However, for pallia-
tive treatments which merely alleviate the symptoms
of an illness or relieve pain, it is vital to discover the
extent to which these are effective. Feedback has
progressed from the filling in of paper forms to the
ability to give feedback through web pages and mo-
bile phones. Text is stored in a highly accessible
way, and is now able to be efficiently processed by
sentiment classification algorithms to determine the
opinions that patients are expressing. This in turn
should enable health services to make informed de-
cisions about the palliative care which they provide.

2 Patient Feedback Corpus

NHS Choices1 is a website run by the National
Health Service (NHS), which acts as an extensive
knowledge base for any health-related queries. This
website not only provides comprehensive articles
about various ailments, but also gives the users of
the site the option to rate and comment on the ser-
vices that are provided to them at hospitals and GP
surgeries. This user feedback provides an excellent
basis for the sentiment classification experiments of
this work.

The reviews that are submitted are typically pro-
vided by a patient or close relative who has experi-
enced the healthcare system within a hospital. When
submitting feedback, the user is asked to split their
feedback into various fields, as opposed to submit-
ting a single documents detailing all the comments
of the user. During corpus compilation, each com-
ment was extracted verbatim, so spelling mistakes
remain in the developed corpus. All punctuation
also remains in order to enable future experiments to
be carried out on either the sentence or phrase level

1http://nhs.uk

Corpus D W Davglength V
Expressive

Positive 1152 75052 65.15 6107
Negative 1108 76062 68.65 6791

Persuasive
Positive 768 46642 60.73 4679
Negative 864 113632 131.52 7943

Table 1: Persuasive & expressive corpus statistics.

within each comment.
In developing the corpus, we leverage the fact that

the data was separated into subfields, as opposed
to one long review, where the all data is merged
into a single document. We extracted comments
which came under three categories in the NHS Pa-
tient Feedback dataset: Likes, Dislikes and Advice.
The Likes were assumed to express positive senti-
ment and highlight elements of the health service
that patients appreciated. Conversely, the documents
given under the Dislikes header were assumed to
convey a negative sentiment. These two subsets
make up the Expressive subset of the compiled cor-
pus. The Advice documents did not have an initial
sentiment associated with them, so each comment
was labelled by two independent annotators at the
document level as being either a positive or nega-
tive comment. These Advice comments contributed
to the Persuasive subcorpus. In compiling the per-
suasive document sets, we automatically discarded
those comments that contained the term “N/A ” or
any of its derivative forms.

3 Method

The aim in this work was to examine the effect of
training a supervised classifier on a corpus whose
discourse function differs to that of the training
set. We experimented with three standard super-
vised machine learning algorithms: standard Naı̈ve
Bayes (NB), multinomial Naı̈ve Bayes (MN NB)
and Support Vector Machines (SVM) classification.
Each has proven to be effective in previous senti-
ment analysis studies (Pang et al. , 2002), so as
this experiment is rooted in sentiment classification,
these methods were also assumed to perform well in
this cross-discourse setting.

For the cross-discourse sentiment classification

80



experiments, two variants of the Naı̈ve Bayes algo-
rithm are used. The difference between the stan-
dard NB and MN NB is the way in which the fea-
tures for classification, the words, are modelled. In
the standard NB learning method, a binary presence
approached is taken in modelling the words of the
training documents. This differs to the MN NB clas-
sifier, which takes into account term frequency when
modelling the documents. Each has proven to be a
high performing classifier across various sentiment
analysis domains, but no distinction has been given
as to which is the preferable method to use. There-
fore in this paper, both were implemented.

In the literature, results from the use of SVMs in
classification based experiments have outperformed
other algorithms (Joachims, 1998; Pang et al. ,
2002). For these cross-discourse experiments we use
the Sequential Minimal Optimization training algo-
rithm (Platt, 1998), in order to achieve the maximal
hyperplane, and maximise the potential of the cre-
ated classifier. Traditionally SVMs have performed
well in text classification, but across discourse do-
mains the results of such classification has not been
examined.

Each document in the corpus was modelled as
a bag of words. Features used within this repre-
sentation were unigrams, bigrams and bigrams aug-
mented with part-of-speech information. Due to
this, and observing the results of preliminary experi-
mentation that included rare features, it was decided
to remove any feature that did not occur more than
5 times throughout the training set. A stopword list
and stemmer were also used.

Each supervised classification technique was then
trained using a random sample of 1,100 documents
from both the positive and negative subsections of
the expressive corpus. Following this we tested the
classifiers on a set of 1,500 randomly selected per-
suasive documents, using 750 documents from each
of the positive and negative subcorpora.

The results of cross-validation (Table 2) sug-
gested that unigram features may outperform both
bigram and part-of-speech augmented bigrams for
all learning methods. In particular, the accuracy
results produced by the NB algorithm surpassed
the results of other classifiers in the tenfold cross-
validation. This suggests that within a single dis-
course domain, presence based features are prefer-

Features NB Multinomial NB SVM
Unigrams 79.65 78.14 76.11
Bigrams 57.79 60.84 63.36

Bigrams + POS 74.25 75.71 72.83

Table 2: Average tenfold cross-validation accuracies on
only the expressive corpus. Boldface: best performance
for a given classifier.

able to considering the frequency of a term when
generating a machine learning model.

4 Results

Table 3 shows the classification accuracies achieved
in all experiments. For each classifier, with each fea-
ture set, if we take the most basic baseline for the
two-class (positive/negative) problem to be the ran-
dom baseline of 50% classification accuracy, then
this is clearly exceeded. However if we take the re-
sults of the tenfold cross-validation as a baseline for
each classifier in the experiments, then only the re-
sults given by the MN NB classifier with unigram
and bigram features are able to surpass this.

The results given from the NB and the MN NB
classifier imply that using frequency based fea-
tures are preferable to using presence based features
when performing cross-discourse sentiment classi-
fication. The MN NB is one of the few classifiers
tested that exceeds the results of the cross-validated
model. These results support experiments carried
out for topic based classification using Bayesian
classifiers by McCallum and Nigam (1998), but dif-
fers from sentiment classification results from Pang
et al. (2002) that suggest that term-based models
perform better than the frequency-based alternative.
This also differs to the results that were returned
during the cross-validation of the classifiers, where
presence based features produced the greatest clas-
sification accuracy.

In our tests, the feature set which yielded the high-
est degree of classification accuracy across all clas-
sifiers is the unigram bag of words model. Tan et
al. (2002) suggest that using bigrams enhances text
classification, but as sentiment classification goes
beyond this task, the assumption does not hold, as
the results here show. The difference in discourse
function could also contribute to bigrams yielding

81



Positive Negative
Accuracy Precision Recall F1 Precision Recall F1

NB Uni 76.07 78.29 72.13 75.09 74.17 80.00 76.97
NB Bi 58.93 55.19 94.93 69.80 81.90 22.93 35.83

NB Bi + POS 65.00 71.84 49.33 58.50 61.42 80.67 69.74
MN NB Uni 83.53 82.04 85.87 83.91 85.17 81.20 83.14
MN NB Bi 57.00 63.78 32.40 42.97 54.69 81.60 65.49

MN NB Bi + POS 69.97 69.59 69.87 69.73 69.75 69.47 69.61
SVM Uni 69.00 68.43 70.53 69.47 69.60 67.47 68.52
SVM Bi 55.40 60.98 30.00 40.21 53.58 80.80 64.43

SVM Bi + POS 63.27 63.11 63.87 63.49 63.43 62.67 63.04

Table 3: Results of experimentation, with the expressive corpus as the training set, and the persuasive corpus as the
test set. Boldface indicates the best performance for each metric.

the lowest accuracy results. Bigrams model quite
specific language patterns, but as the expressive and
persuasive language differs in structure and content,
then the patterns learnt in one domain do not accu-
rately map to another domain. Bigrams contribute
the least to sentiment classification in this cross-
discourse scenario, and only when they are aug-
mented with part of speech information does the ac-
curacy sufficiently pass the random baseline. How-
ever for good recall, using bigram based features
produces excellent results, at the sacrifice of ade-
quate precision, which suggests that bigram mod-
els overfit when they are used as features in such a
learned model.

The SVM classifier with a variety of features does
not perform as well as the multinomial Naı̈ve Bayes
classifier. Joachims (1998) suggests that for text
categorization, the SVM algorithm regularly outper-
forms other classifiers, but unfortunately the out-
come of our experiments do not correlate with these
results. This suggests that SVMs struggle with text
classification when the discourse function between
the training and test domains differ.

5 Discussion

The results produced through training supervised
machine learning methods on an expressive corpus,
and testing on a corpus which contains documents
with a persuasive discourse function indicate that
cross-discourse sentiment classification is feasible.

The best performance occurred when the classi-
fier took frequency based features into account, as

opposed to solely presence based features. The rea-
soning for this could be attributed to the way that pa-
tients were asked to submit their feedback. Instead
of asking a patient to submit a single comment on
their experience with the health service, they were
asked to submit three distinct comments on what
they liked, disliked and any advice that they had.
This gave the user the opportunity to separate their
sentiments, and clearly communicate their thoughts.

It is of interest to note that the cross-discourse ac-
curacy should surpass the cross-validation accuracy
on the training set. This was not to be expected, due
to the differences in discourse function, and there-
fore features used. However, where just the presence
of a particular word may have made the difference
in a single domain, across domains, taking into ac-
count the frequency of a word in the learned model
is effective in correctly classifying a comment by
its sentiment. Unigram features outperform both the
bigram and bigrams augmented with part-of-speech
features in our experiments. By using single tokens
as features, each word is taken out of the context
that its neighbours provide. In doing so the language
contributing to the relative sentiment is generalised
enough to form a robust model which can then be
applied across discourse domains.

6 Related Work

A number of studies (Cambria at al. , 2011; Xia et
al. , 2009) have used patient feedback as the domain
for their sentiment classification experiments. How-
ever our work differs to these studies as we consider

82



the effect that cross-discourse evaluation has on the
classification outcome. Other work that has consid-
ered different discourse functions in sentiment anal-
ysis, have experimented on detecting arguments (So-
masundaran et al. , 2007) and the stance of political
debates (Thomas et al. , 2006).

Machine learning approaches to text classification
have typically performed well when using a Sup-
port Vector Machine (Joachims, 1998) classifier or
a Naı̈ve Bayes (McCallum and Nigam, 1998) based
classifier. Pang et al. (2002) applied these classi-
fiers to the movie review domain, which produced
good results. However the difference in domain,
and singularity of discourse function differentiates
the scope of this work from theirs.

7 Conclusion & Future Work

In this study we focused on the cross-discourse
development of supervised machine learning algo-
rithms in the clinical domain, that trained and tested
across the expressive and persuasive discourse func-
tions. We demonstrated that despite the differences
in function of a corpus of patient feedback, the
greatest classification accuracy was achieved when
considering word frequency in the features of the
learned model.

This study centred on the expressive and persua-
sive discourse functions, but it would be interesting
to examine other such functions that convey a sen-
timent, such as argumentation. Another interesting
avenue of investigation for this work would be to ex-
plore the lexical semantics of the different discourse
functions, that could be used in sentiment classifica-
tion, and factor this into the evaluation of the overall
sentiment of persuasive documents within a corpus.

References
Douglas Biber. 1988. Variation Across Speech and

Writing. Cambridge University Press.

John Blitzer, Mark Dredze and Fernando Pereira. 2007.
Biographies, Bollywood, Boom-boxes, and Blenders:
Domain Adaptation for Sentiment Classification. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation of Computational Linguistics, pp. 440–447.

Erik Cambria, Amir Hussain and Chris Eckl. 2011.
Bridging the Gap between Structured and Unstruc-

tured Health-Care Data through Semantics and
Sentics. In Proceedings of ACM WebSci, Koblenz.

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Senti-
WordNet: A Publicly Available Lexical Resource
for Opinion Mining In Proceedings of Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC), pp 417–422.

Thorsten Joachims. 1998. Text categorization with
support vector machines: learning with many relevant
features. In Proceedings of ECML-98, 10th European
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 137–142.

Andrew McCallum and Kamal Nigam. 1998. A
Comparison of Event Models for Naive Bayes Text
Classification. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ICML-98
Workshop on Learning for Text Categorization, pp.
41–48.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment Classification using
Machine Learning Techniques. In Proceedings of the
2002 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 79–87.

John Platt. Sequential Minimal Optimization: A Fast
Algorithm for Training Support Vector Machines.
In Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vector
Learning.

Swapna Somasudaran and Josef Ruppenhofer and Janyce
Wiebe. 2007. Detecting Arguing and Sentiment in
Meetings. In Proceedings of the SIGdial Workshop on
Discourse and Dialogue, pp.26–34.

Chade-Meng Tan, Yuan-Fang Wang and Chan-Do Lee.
2002. The use of bigrams to enhance text catego-
rization. In Information Processing & Management,
38(4) pp. 529–546.

Matt Thomas, Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2006. Get out
the vote: Determining support or opposition from
Congressional floor-debate transcripts. In Proceeding
of the 2006 Conference on Emperical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.327–335.

Lei Xia, Anna Lisa Gentile, James Munro and José Iria.
2009. Improving Patient Opinion Mining through
Multi-step Classification. In Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Text, Speech and Dia-
logue (TSD’09), pp. 70–76.

83


