










































A User and NLP-Assisted Strategic Workflow for a Social Semantic OWL 2-Based Knowledge Platform


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 37–45,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A User and NLP-Assisted Strategic Workflow for a  

Social Semantic OWL 2-Based Knowledge Platform  

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

Abstract 

Originating from a multidisciplinary research 

project that gathers, around the Semantic 

Web standards and principles, Social 

Networking and Natural Language 

Processing along with some Bioinformatics 

notions, this paper sheds the light on some of 

the most critical aspects of the 

correspondingly adopted framework and real-

time knowledge architecture and modeling 

platform. It recognizes the considerable 

profits of an appropriate fusion between the 

aforementioned disciplines, especially via the 

proper exploitation of OWL 2 (Web 

Ontology Language) features and novelties, 

typically OWL 2 language profiles. 

Accordingly, it proposes a distinctive 

workflow with well-defined strategies for an 

ontology-aware user and NLP-assisted 

flexible and multidimensional approach for 

the management of the abundantly available 

Social data. Application scenarios related to 

awareness and orientation recommender 

systems based on biomedical domain 

ontologies for childhood obesity prevention 

and surveillance are explored as typical proof 

of concept application areas. 

1 Introduction 

In parallel with the Semantic Web's extremely 

active research community lies a continuous and 

exceptionally rising propagation of the Social 

Web. A remarkable advancement can be made if 

a proper methodology for maximizing the 

cooperation between the two webs can be set. 

Such a methodology should highly encourage the 

first Web to bring in its theories and formalisms 

to the second, in exchange for some of the latter's 

popularity and proliferation. 

 An amplified fusion between the Social and 

the Semantic Webs is indeed a strongly 

beneficial achievement to both disciplines. It 

shall solve the foremost problems undergone by 

each of them, yielding an outcome that by far 

surpasses the sum of its individual components 

by endorsing automation, standardization and 

interoperability, promoting efficient information 

extraction, querying and aggregations, and 

providing valuable large data sets to feed the 

Semantic Web applications from the abundant 

social networking Web 2.0 sites (SNS). These 

sites will successively benefit from Semantic 

Web applications to generate semantically-rich 

data, and an overall reflection of the henceforth 

strongly formalized Social Web's network effect 

on the Semantic Web, boosting its formerly 

limited usage (Breslin et al., 2009).  

 By delving into the Semantic Web's main 

achievements for Social Networking (SN), this 

research notices a lack in those involving the 

Semantic Web's advanced findings and relatively 

complicated vocabularies and grammars, 

particularly in the endeavors related to OWL 2 

(Web Ontology Language) novelties. In addition, 

it recognizes the major limitations and concerns 

related to complexity and accuracy when dealing 

Jinan El-Hachem 

Engineering & Computer Science Department 

Concordia University 

Montreal, Quebec, Canada 

ji_elhac@encs.concordia.ca 

 

Volker Haarslev 
Engineering & Computer Science Department 

Concordia University  

Montreal, Quebec, Canada 

haarslev@cse.concordia.ca 

37



 

 

with ontology-aware Natural Language 

Processing for large amounts of data. 

 As a consequence, it proposes a promising 

flexible and multidimensional user and NLP-

assisted workflow for social data management 

encompassing different strategies varying 

according to prerequisite constraints and 

concerns. The proposed workflow is highlighted 

as part of a knowledge architecture and modeling 

platform that in addition to its possible 

incorporation of previous efforts, includes formal 

methods and models for more advanced 

Semantic Web accomplishments in support of 

SN.  

 The paper thus introduces a backbone 

knowledge base repository while laying a 

particular emphasis on an anticipated "meta-

semantics" model, revealing the numerous 

advantages it offers such as its particular 

language and fragment projection capabilities 

and the considerably gained flexibility whilst 

addressing a favorable application area along 

with appropriate corresponding profile reasoning 

facilities.  

 Furthermore, the suggested innovative policy 

for applying ontology-aware pattern-matching 

grammars for natural language processing, 

recommends a layered approach that considers 

preconditioned concerns and constraints to 

loosen or restrict text parsing procedures. On the 

other hand, it confers a Web 2.0 user 

collaboration novelty residing in promoting SN  

users "rule tagging" assignments that are initiated 

on account of domain-specific semantic 

arrangements in the knowledge base repository. 

This optional user intervention feature 

determines the semi-automatic as opposed to the 

fully automatic adopted strategy. 

 The overall initiative leads to valuable and 

fruitful foundations of semantically engineered 

social data for efficient decision support and 

recommender systems. 

 Conversely, data and methodologies for 

relevant application scenarios aiming at 

awareness and orientation recommender systems 

based on biomedical domain ontologies are 

provided to support the different endeavors and 

provide typical proof of concept application 

areas. 

 Following is a summary of the key 

contributions: 

• Highlights on the critical aspects of an 
inclusive approach and framework for a 

knowledge architecture and modeling 

platform, in its comprised layers and 

methodologies  

• A flexible and multi-dimensional social 
data management strategy 

• An analysis of the proposed strategy's 
sub-approaches  encompassing a crucial 

NLP component 

• A description and emphasis on the user's 
role in assigning "semantic rule tags". 

 The rest of this paper is organized as follows: 

in the next section, we provide an overview of 

some of the related background work. Section 3 

presents a very brief overview of the enclosing 

knowledge framework and platform; in Section 

4, the user and NLP-assisted workflow is 

portrayed and analyzed; Section 5 exposes OWL 

2-supported demonstrating scenarios that endow 

with recommender systems based on an ontology 

for childhood obesity surveillance. We finally 

wrap up with a conclusions section that 

comprises a closing discussion and highlights on 

future work. 

2 Contextual Background Overview 

Description Logics (DL) are a family of 

knowledge representation languages (Baader et 

al., 2006) having building blocks consisting of 

three kinds of entities: concepts, roles and 

individual names. A DL ontology consists of 

statements called axioms formed based on the 

different types of entities and separated into three 

groups: the set of terminological axioms TBox, 

assertional axioms ABox, and relational axioms 

RBox. 

 While the NLP-related background work will 

be progressively  presented in its related Section 

4, we will provide herein some general 

background information related to OWL 2 

novelties on the one hand, and to the main 

relevant Semantic Web realizations for the Social 

Web on the other.   

2.1 OWL 2 and Description Logics 
Concepts 

Relying on Description Logics, OWL 2 was 

designed to overcome limitations encountered in 

the initial version of OWL and to compensate for 

them (W3C, 2009). It presents extended 

expressivity, convenience features and various 

capabilities that will prove to be particularly 

beneficial for the SN typical data expressed in 

blogs, wikis, feedback updates, etc. OWL 2 

profiles are among the novelty aspects that will 

38



 

 

mostly be referred to across different sections in 

this paper. 

 OWL 2 Profiles (also known as tractable 

fragments are "trimmed-down" versions of OWL 

2 DL; they are the result of a simple trade 

between all-inclusive expressivity and efficient 

reasoning. Every fragment addresses a favorable 

application area; it is therefore essential to 

identify the target scenario in order to apply the 

accordingly most favorable profile. In terms of 

reasoning engines, the regular OWL 2 reasoners 

are applicable; however, more capable 

specifically designed ones based on every 

fragment's constructs have been built. 

The main profiles presented for OWL 2 are: 

• OWL 2 EL: conceived for the reasoning 
over large-scale ontologies based on the 

EL++ family of description logics 

(Baader et al., 2005). This profile offers 

OWL's expressive features required by 

large-scale ontologies such as the 

"Systemised Nomenclature of Medicine - 

Clinical Terms" (SNOMED-CT) 

renowned ontology1. 

• OWL 2 QL: enabling conjunctive 
queries' satisfiability based on the DL-

Lite family of description logics 

(Calvanese et al., 2007), conceived 

specifically for reasoning with large 

amounts of data organized consistently 

with relatively simple schemata. 

• OWL 2 RL: a forward-chaining rule 
processing system supporting 

conjunctive rules and relying on a rule-

based description logics fragment 

(Grosof et al., 2003) and on parts of 

OWL Full rule-based implementations 

(ter Horst, 2005). 

2.2 Social Semantic Web Efforts and 
Ontologies 

The main efforts undergone based on a 

cooperation between the Semantic and the Social 

Webs have yielded a vast number of interesting 

SN specifications, ontologies and projects.  Some 

of the main contributions that our framework is 

set to be compatible with, to reuse and/or extend, 

are summarized next: 

• The Semantically Interlinked Online 
Community (SIOC 2 ) initiative presents 

an ontology for representing user 

activities in blogs and forums, thus 

                                                           
1 www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct 
2 www.sioc-project.org 

increasing the integration of the 

information in online communities. 

SIOC is a description of online-

community information. It offers a 

means to represent "rich data" from the 

Social Web in RDF  (Bojars et al., 2008). 

• The Friend-of-a-Friend (FOAF 3 ) is an 
ontology for describing people along 

with their relationships. FOAF can be 

integrated with other Semantic Web 

vocabularies and has been established as 

the most broadly used domain ontology 

on the semantic web (Miller and 

Brickley, 2010). 

• The Meaning of a Tag (MOAT 4 ) 
framework allows the association of tags 

to semantics, via linking them to 

knowledge base URIs such as DBpedia 

(Auer et al., 2007), GeoNames 5 , etc. 

(Passant and Laublet, 2008). 

3 Introducing the Overall Framework 

The various efforts described in this paper are all 

enfolded in an already conceptualized framework 

for a knowledge architecture and modeling 

platform that we briefly present herein. Figure 1 

provides a high level depiction of its main flow, 

components and layers. 

 Having as its core aim the extension of the 

cooperation between the Social and the Semantic 

Webs via an underlined use of highly developed 

and expressive Description Logics-based 

languages - namely OWL 2, this framework 

comprises: a knowledge base repository to hold 

the ontological data, rules and axioms, including 

specialized domain ontologies, and previously 

defined social semantic ones; a user and natural 

language processing-assisted approach to parse 

and detect semantics from SN Website data (to 

be explored in the next section),  as well as 

dedicated reasoning capabilities to offer a variety 

of knowledge and information system services 

and facilities. Typical reasoning services, 

typically elucidated in (Baader et al., 2006), like 

classification and subsumption, satisfiability and 

instance checking, inference discovery and query 

answering, rule validation and processing, are the 

means by which the outcome decision support 

systems capabilities are attainable. The backbone 

repository (based on the Semantic Meta-Object-

Facility, SMOF (OMG, 2010), another OWL 2

                                                           
3 www.foaf-project.org 
4 www. moat-project.org 
5 www.geonames.org 

39



 

 

 
Figure 1- Knowledge-based Architecture and Modeling Platform General Overview

 

feature) also holds dedicated structures known as 

meta-semantics structures; they play a  crucial 

role in sorting and grouping the different axioms 

in the knowledge base, to later allow automatic 

scaling or downscaling between the OWL 2 

sublanguages having varying levels of 

expressivity. Algorithms and methods that allow 

this categorization procedure are beyond the 

scope of this paper, but it is worth noting that this 

process will have an important impact at the 

different platforms' levels, notably the NLP-

based social data management and ontology 

population workflow that forms the spotlight of 

this manuscript.   

4 Proposed User and NLP-Assisted 
Ontology Population Workflow 

The proposed strategy that will allow the 

generation of semantic annotations and the 

consequent ontological data population is next 

explored. In a few words, it is a 

multidimensional and flexible user and  NLP-

assisted approach relying on SN data constraints 

and knowledge based prerequisites for automatic 

or at least semi-automatic domain specific 

expressive ontology population.  

4.1 Online Social Data Sources and NLP 
Background 

The different Web 2.0 platforms such as 

Twitter 6 , Facebook 7 , LinkedIn 8 , as well as 

conventional Web logs (blogs), wikis and forums 

websites all form adequate sources of online SN 

data to be exploited by our framework, but surely 

with different levels of availability. Throughout 

our explored overall framework, we mostly rely 

on blog and forum posts, due to their 

accessibility facilities. 

 The data parsing layer targeting semantic 

information extraction from the available SN 

data is based on GATE (the General Architecture 

for Text Engineering) (Cunningham, 2002). 

GATE has rapidly grown and evolved to turn 

into one of the most mature NLP platforms. 

GATE's effectiveness in ontology-aware 

language processing has already been 

demonstrated within several studies and projects, 

such as KIM
9

, a platform for Information 

Extraction using GATE and targeting large-scale 

semantic annotation and ontology population 

based on the PROTON 
10

  lightweight ontology. 

                                                           
6 www.twitter.com 
7
 www.facebook.com 

8
 www.linkedin.com  

9
 www.ontotext.com/kim  

10 http://proton.semanticweb.org  

40



 

 

Some efforts are even directed at more 

expressive OWL-DL support (Witte et al., 2010). 

In the scope of our framework, we exploit similar 

efforts, we further follow  our proposed 

workflow strategy and as a consequence, we 

reach an automatic or at least semi-automatic 

creation of the semantic annotations that 

accordingly lead to the population of our 

expressive domain ontologies with data 

compatible with existing relevant SN ontologies 

(FOAF
11

, SIOC
12

, etc.). 

4.2 User and NLP-Assisted Workflow for 
Social Data Management 

In an ideal situation, a straightforward fully 

automatic ontology population with instances 

assigned based on the ontology-aware NLP 

grammars allows the populated ontology to be 

readily exploitable by the different OWL 

reasoners. Constraints and considerations related 

to the length of the massive social data in 

question, as well as to the level of expressivity 

and complexity of the ontology's semantics 

stimulates the conceptualization and adoption of 

a more flexible and beneficial strategy and 

workflow, illustrated in Figure 2, that aims at 

overcoming or at least limiting the different 

constraints' significance. 

 As a particular processing aspect that is 

proper to our overall previously described 

framework, a more progressive role held by the 

SN User is highlighted. A user is accordingly 

encouraged to explicitly authenticate and even 

communicate meaningful expressive rules based 

on provided suggestions. We describe such a role 

with the terminology of "rules tagging" 

assignment, enthused by the different SN tagging 

systems - for instance Flickr
13

 and Del.icio.us
14

 - 

that make it possible for users to tag their photos, 

documents and webpages with simple descriptive 

taxonomies. 

 For a more comprehensive interpretation of 

Figure 2, we start by considering the main 

constraints to be taken into account a priori, 

those being the concerns related to the amount of 

data to be processed, and the complexity of the 

ontology grammar. 

Unless the availability of massive amounts of 

data to handle is not deemed problematic, 

                                                           
11

 www.foaf-project.org 
12

 www.sioc-project.org 
13

 www.flickr.com 
14 http://www.delicious.com/ 

predefined mostly impacting subsets of the 

original data can be arranged in accordance with: 

• The blog or forum post title 
• The first sentence or paragraph 
• The last sentence or paragraph 
• A preset number of lines 
• A preset number of sentences or 

paragraphs 

• The blogs and forums relevant to a 
particular SNS that is known to be 

mostly dedicated to our domain or sub-

domain in question 

• The blogs and forums satisfying a 
certain chronological period 

• The blogs and forums containing 
specific keywords (domain critical 

elements) 

• Combinations of the above elements 
 

 

 
Figure 2: Workflow Illustration 

 

Conversely, unless it is estimated more 

advantageous to deal with the full ontology, or at 

least the ensemble of axioms accepted by the 

employed NLP tool and appropriately developed 

grammars, semantic strategies can be adopted to 

deal with expressivity and complex ontology 

constructs concerns based on: 

41



 

 

• DL particular less expressive 
sublanguages, typically the OWL 2 

profiles already introduced 

• DL specific types of constructs, 
assessed as mostly critical for the global 

flow 

• Most significant ontology classes or 
concepts 

• Particular key axioms or expressions 
• Preset number of levels to go deep in 

the ontology hierarchy 

• A particular branch or set of branches in 
the ontology hierarchy 

• The set of axioms and expressions 
relevant to  certain given concept/s 

• Proper combinations of the above 
To note that all these conditions and strategies 

are made possible through the backbone 

repository's already introduced "meta-semantics" 

structures. 

 As a result of all the above, and based on the 

presented inputs, constraints and limitations, 

different scenarios can be arranged, and we end 

up with one of four "possible sub-approaches" as 

denoted in the illustration: 

• Full text processing and open semantics 
approach, which encompasses thorough 

analysis and semantic matching covering 

complicated rules and grammars, which 

increases implementation complexity, 

performance and accuracy concerns. 

• Open semantics on restricted data 
approach, in which the originally large 

amount of data to be processed is 

minimized. 

• Full text processing with semantics 
restrictions approach, in which we can 

afford managing large amounts of data, 

but require a low degree of development 

complexity, and correspondingly a high 

accuracy of the attained results. 

• Data and semantics restricted approach, 
which minimizes the large amounts of 

processable data, as well as performance 

and accuracy concerns. 

These defined NLP-assisted approaches have 

corresponding meta structures in our metadata 

repository. Such structures retain information 

related to the source data's SNS Web 2.0 

platforms, to their related conditions and 

parameters for data and semantics restrictions. 

Having reached this stage, the availability or 

absence of the SNS user collaboration will 

determine whether the overall strategy towards 

ontology population is fully or semi automatic. 

Back to the role of the user in his "rule tagging" 

assignment, and to lay more emphasis on this 

role, we highlight the provisional output resulting 

from the described NLP strategy, which mainly 

consists of constructed templates of preliminary 

non-validated sets of semantics, including 

identity relations and rules, thus made available 

in a user friendly questionnaire form to 

optionally confirm, correct or even add more 

expressive axioms and details. Although not 

mandatory, this semi-automatic approach that 

includes a user intervention is deemed extremely 

advantageous, especially for the open semantics 

case where the available NLP technology has 

severe restrictions upon dealing with somewhat 

complex and expressive vocabularies and 

ontologies. Nevertheless, it is the overall 

flexibility provided at both the data and 

semantics level that will limit the accuracy 

concerns encountered in traditional NLP 

approaches. 

5 Proof of Concept and Application 
Scenarios 

Our efforts are being carried out under the scope 

of parents' awareness and orientation. Useful 

SNS data sources typically beneficial for our 

domain are "Mom Bloggers". While these sites 

are extremely active and abundant, most of our 

data is extracted based on Babycenter
15

 (which 

alone counts more than 20 million users), Canada 

Moms Blog
16

, Raising Children Network
17

, 

among others. 

As part of the Brain-to-Society (BtS) (Dubé et 

al., 2008) research endeavors that call for a  

whole-of-society (WoS) transformation, centered 

on the indivudual, the Childhood Obesity 

[Knowledge] Enterprise (COPE) ontology was 

conceived (Shaban-Nejad et al., 2011) with the 

aim of allowing cross-sectional analysis of the 

obesity domain and consequently generating both 

generic and customized preventive 

recommendations. Figure 3 depicts an 

OntoGraf
18

 visualization of a  partial view of its 

major concepts and relationships. 

   
                                                           
15

   www.babycenter.com 
16

   www.canadamomsblog.com 
17

  www. raisingchildren.net.au 
18  http://protegewiki.stanford.edu/wiki/OntoGraf 

42



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

COPE’s data sources (mainly relevant to TBox 

and RBox ontological data, apart from the 

assertional ABox data generated from our 

ontology population workflow) are: RAMQ
19

, 

Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS20) 

(population health database), CARTaGENE
21

, 

which offer information on medical history, 

genealogical data, lifestyles, etc..  
 The COPE ontology was extended and 

enriched with OWL 2 constructs to maximize its 

richness and expressivity and be able to take 

advantage of different language projection and 

reasoning facilities provided by our real-time 

knowledge architecture and modeling platform. 

It has hence served as a source for our 

semantically aware NLP grammars and 

Information Extraction algorithms.  

 To concretize a possible approach from the 

already proposed strategic workflow (the data 

and semantics restricted approach),  a hybrid 

methodology that considers the full ontological 

data related to childhood obesity risks for posts 

reported in 2012, performs a first phase of 

processing in which the filtering of all textual 

data compliant with the specified data 

restrictions occurs, and then proceeds to the 

remaining detailed semantics-based analysis. 

                                                           
19  Régie de l'assurance maladie du Québec:  

     http://www.ramq.gouv.qc.ca/index_en.shtml  
20  Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS):  

  http://www.statcan.gc.ca/concepts/health-sante/index-eng.htm 
21  http://www.cartagene.qc.ca/index.php?lang=english 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1 below provides  sample generated 

semantics (represented in DL axioms) along with 

their contextual natural language interpretation.  
 

DL Axiom Possible Interpretation 
∃hasRegulatoryDietGoal.Self User has a goal/plan to go 

on a diet 
∃hasDaughter.hasAge(6 m) User is a  parent of a 6 

months-old baby ∀hasChild.Overweight All user's children are 
overweight 

∃experienceProblem 

(Fatigue  ⊓ AbdominalPain) Is experiencing health problems consisting in 
fatigue and abdominal 

pain 
livesIn(MarySt,Grimbsy) MarySt lives in Grimbsy 

Table 1: Illustrated sample semantics with their 

contextual natural language interpretation 
 

 The rest of the flow depends on an optional 

user validation phase that will precede the 

population of our knowledge base with the 

detected ABox assertional data. Interoperability 

is ensured through an established link between 

detected individuals and existing FOAF users 

within the SIOC communities. 

 Having reached this stage, reasoning 

procedures can be applied in order to attain the 

required  services for our awareness and 

orientation recommender systems related to 

childhood obesity surveillance. Redirection 

mechanisms, based on the projected languages 

 
Figure 3 Partial view of the COPE major concepts and their interactions 

43



 

 

and fragments, target advanced and powerful 

reasoners and rule engines. For example, Pellet 

(Sirin et al., 2007) can handle OWL 2 DL and 

RL, RacerPro (Haarslev and Möller, 2001; 

Haarslev et al., 2008) can manage a subset OWL 

2 DL and OWL 2 EL, HermiT (Motik et al., 

2007) and FacT++ (Tsarkov et al., 2006) can 

cope with OWL 2 DL. On the other hand, the 

Jena framework (2007) and the database Oracle 

11g enable the processing of OWL 2 RL rules, 

whereas Quill (Thomas and Pan, 2009) a TrOWL 

(Thomas et al., 2010) component provide OWL 2 

QL querying capabilities. 

6 Conclusions 

Apart from providing a maximal set of consistent 

and accurate semantics, fostering such a user and 

NLP-assisted workflow can prove to be 

advantageous at many levels. We can underline a 

few extra issues, by considering for example the 

"Open World Assumption" which is evidently 

appropriate for the context of textual blog 

information dealt with in this research: a 

statement or fact not explicitly mentioned in a 

blog does not disprove its existence. 

Nevertheless, to deal with certain critical rules 

and axioms, for which the availability of accurate 

data is deemed much more valuable for our 

working framework, an exclusive approach can 

be embraced in order to possibly "close the 

world" related to these critical facts. Closing 

axioms can be identified in our backbone 

repository, and presented to the user, inviting 

them to key in their exact input. Furthermore, the 

intensional reasoning required in any application 

involving natural language processing presents 

DL-safety restrictions, due to conclusions 

referring to unnamed objects. By offering this 

user rule tagging facility, we can limit the effects 

of such constraints. In all cases, relying on a 

collective effort through which rules and 

semantics are gathered and validated, before 

becoming instance and ontology enrichment 

elements is a much more profitable and effective 

approach.  

 A well-populated knowledge base, 

henceforth enriched with semantically 

engineered social data, is consequently 

accessible for further extensive reasoning and 

analysis. The outcome reached surpasses by far 

the sum of its social and semantic data 

components, typically leading to significant 

services and recommender systems. 

 Taking into consideration the applicable 

involved reasoning, the opportunity of 

identifying, creating and expanding social and 

semantic networks is presented. Implemented 

algorithms allow opinion mining, detection of 

ties and similarities between people, leading to 

connections via shared interests or any possible 

common ground areas. For instance, semantic 

networks are initiated based on the algorithms' 

ability to retrieve people with same or similar 

goals, tastes, origins, backgrounds, etc., and to 

further apply advanced reasoning with the 

intention of providing suggestions, 

recommendations, possible solutions, feedbacks, 

openings, and so on. More straightforward Web 

Social Networks can be deduced through the 

users' joint actions and interactions, their created, 

commented upon, linked to, or similarly 

annotated contents. 

 Many aspects of the conclusions and findings 

will thus be related to the concept of "object-

centered sociality", which connects people via 

the common interests associated with their 

occupations, hobbies, jobs, etc. 

 Analogous features accessible through this 

semantically engineered social data and possibly 

serving the purposes of recommender systems 

include the ability to perform: 

• User profiling, clustering and 
segmentation based on certain traits and 

criteria, all of which are endeavors 

considered closely related to opinion 

mining undertakings 

• Tracking processes to identify a user’s 
Web history from different Web 2.0 

platforms, outlining this user’s general 

overall contributions to the Web and 

reporting their different activities, goals 

and problems 

• Improved quality of the search process, 
with ego-centric algorithms and searches 

to identify a key user’s associated or 

closely related nodes, as well as 

community detection algorithms to trace 

two or more key users’ surrounding 

community 

 In terms of future work, we plan to pursue 

fostering our different efforts that include 

implementation and verification tools, looking 

for the incorporation of maximized sets of rules 

and Description Logics-based fragments, 

providing further validating ground for the 

widest set of the aforementioned potentials and 

promises. 

44



 

 

References  

A. Passant, P. Laublet. Meaning Of A Tag: A 

collaborative approach to bridge the gap between 

tagging and Linked Data. In Proceedings of the 

WWW2008 Workshop Linked Data on the Web 

(LDOW2008), Beijing, China, Apr 2008  

A. Shaban-Nejad, D. Buckeridge, D, L. Dubé, COPE: 

Childhood Obesity Prevention [Knowledge] 

Enterprise. in Proceedings of AIME 2011, pp. 225-

229 

B. Grosof, I. Horrocks, R. Volz, S. Decker, 

Description Logic Programs: Combining Logic 

Programs with Description Logic, In Proceedings 

of the 12th Int. World Wide Web Conference 

(WWW 2003), Budapest, Hungary, 2003 

B.Motik, R. Shearer, I. Horrocks, Optimized 

reasoning in description logics using 

hypertableaux, in: CADE-07, 2007 

D. Calvanese, G.D. Giacomo, D. Lembo, M. 

Lenzerini, R. Rosati, Tractable reasoning and 

efficient query answering in description logics: the 

DL-Lite family, Journal of Automated Reasoning, 

vol.9, pp. 385-429, 2007 

D. Tsarkov, I. Horrocks, FaCT++ description logic 

reasoner: system description, In Proceedings of the 

IJCAR 2006, Seattle,WA, USA, 2006 

D. Miller, D. Brickley, FOAF Vocabulary 

Specification, Friend of a Friend Project, 

http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/, 9 August 2010 

E. Sirin, B. Parsia, B.C. Grau, A. Kalyanpur, Y. Katz, 

Pellet: a practical OWL-DL reasoner, Journal of 

Web Semantics, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 51-53, 2007 

E. Thomas, J. Z. Pan, R-Quill: Reasoning with a 

Billion Triples, In 8th International Semantic Web 

Conference (ISWC2009), 2009. 

E. Thomas, J. Pan, and Y. Ren, TrOWL: Tractable 

OWL 2 Reasoning Infrastructure, In Proceedings 

of the Extended Semantic Web Conference. 

Springer, 2010 

F. Baader, S. Brandt, C. Lutz, Pushing the EL 

envelope, In Proceedings of the IJCAI 2005, 2005 

F. Baader, D. Calvanese, D.L. McGuinness, D. Nardi, 

P.F. Patel-Schneider, The Description Logic 

Handbook: Theory, Implementation and 

Applications, Cambridge University Press, 2006. 

H. Cunningham, GATE, a General Architecture for 

Text Engineering, Journal of Computers and the 

Humanities, vol. 36, pp. 223-254, 2002 

H. J. ter Horst, Completeness, decidability and 

complexity of entailment for RDF Schema and a 

semantic extension involving the OWL vocabulary, 

The Journal of Web Semantics, vol. 3, no.2-3, pp. 

79-115, 2005 

J.G. Breslin, A. Passant, S. Decker, The Social 

Semantic Web, Springer, October 2009  

Jena - A Semantic Web Framework for Java, URL: 

http://jena.sourceforge.net, 2007 

Object Management Group OMG, MOF Support for 

Semantic Structures (SMOF) Revised Joint 

Submission, OMG Document formal/2010-08-06, 

http://www.omg.org/spec/SMOF/1.0/Source/10-

08-06.pdf, 2010 

R. Witte, N. Khamis, J. Rilling. Flexible Ontology 

Population from Text: The OwlExporter, The 

Seventh International Conference on Language 

Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2010), pp.3845-

3850, May 19-21, 2010, Valletta, Malta. 

Systemised Nomenclature of Medicine - Clinical 

Terms (SNOMED-CT), URL: 

http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/ 

S. Auer, C. Bizer, G. Kobilarov, J. Lehmann, R. 

Cyganiak, and Z. Ives, DBpedia: A Nucleus for a 

Web of Open Data. 6th International Semantic 

Web Conference, November 2007 

The KIM Platform, URL: 

http://www.ontotext.com/kim/ 

The PROTON Ontology, URL: 

http://proton.semanticweb.org 

U. Bojars, J.G. Breslin, V. Peristeras, G. Tummarello, 

S. Decker, Interlinking the Social Web with 

Semantics, IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 23, no. 

3, pp. 29-40, 13 May 2008 

V. Haarslev, R. Möller, RACER system description, 

in Proceedings of the IJCAR 2001, Siena, Italy, 

2001. 

V. Haarslev, R. Möller, and S. Wandelt, The revival 

of structural subsumption in tableau-based 

description logic reasoners, In Proceedings of the 

2008 International Workshop on Description 

Logics, 2008. 

World Wide Web Consortium W3C, OWL 2 Web 

Ontology Language Document Overview, 

http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-overview/, W3C 

Recommendation, 27 October 2009 

 

45


