










































Towards Situated Collaboration


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Future directions and needs in the Spoken Dialog Community: Tools and Data, pages 13–14,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards Situated Collaboration 

 

Dan Bohus, Ece Kamar, Eric Horvitz 
Microsoft Research 

One Microsoft Way 

Redmond, WA, 98052, USA 
{dbohus,eckamar,horvitz@microsoft.com} 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Abstract 

We outline a set of key challenges for dialog 

management in physically situated interactive 

systems, and propose a core shift in perspec-

tive that places spoken dialog in the context of 

the larger collaborative challenge of managing 

parallel, coordinated actions in the open 

world.  

Multiple models for dialog management have been 

proposed, studied, and evaluated in the research 

community (i.a. Allen et al, 2001; Bohus and Rud-

nicky, 2009; Rich and Sidner, 1998; Traum and 

Larsson, 2003; Williams and Young, 2007). In the 

process, a diverse set of problems have come to 

light and have been pursued. These include the 

challenges of modeling initiative in interaction, 

contextual interpretation and processing, the man-

agement of uncertainty, grounding, error handling 

and recovery, turn-taking and, more recently, in-

cremental processing in dialog systems. Analyses 

of existing approaches (Allen et. al, 2001; Church-

er et. al, 1997; McTear 2002; Paek and Pieraccini, 

2008) reveal a constellation of benefits but also 

shortcomings along multiple dimensions, where no 

single technique provides the benefits of all. 

While taking incremental, focused steps is im-

portant for making progress within a mature disci-

pline, we believe that the current scope and 

conceptual borders of work in spoken dialog con-

strains thinking about possibilities and gets in the 

way of achieving breakthrough advances. Research 
to date on dialog management has focused almost 

exclusively on dyadic settings, where a single user 

interacts with a system over a relatively narrow, 

speech-only channel. Characteristics of this domi-

nant and shared worldview on dialog research have 

driven modeling and architectural choices, and of-

ten done so in an implicit, hidden manner. For in-

stance, dialog is often viewed as a collection of 

dialog moves that are timed in a relatively well-

structured, sequential fashion. As a consequence, 

dialog management models typically operate on a 

“per-turn” basis: inputs are assumed to arrive se-

quentially and are processed one at a time; for each 

received input, discourse understanding is per-

formed, and a corresponding response is generated.  

In reality, interactions among actors situated in 

the open, physical world depart deeply from com-

mon assumptions made in spoken dialog research 

and bring into focus an array of important, new 

challenges (Horvitz, 2007; Bohus and Horvitz, 

2010; Bohus, Horvitz, Kanda et al., eds., 2010).  

We describe some of the challenges with respect to 

dialog management, and re-frame this problem as 

an instance of the larger collaborative challenge of 

managing parallel, coordinated actions amidst a 

dynamically changing physical world.  

As an example, consider a robot that has been 

given the responsibility of greeting, interacting, 

and escorting visitors in a building. In this setting, 

reasoning about the actors, objects and events and 

relationships in the scene can play a critical role in 

understanding and organizing the interactions. The 

surrounding environment provides rich, continu-

ously streaming situational context that is relevant 

for determining the best way an agent might con-

tribute to interactions. Because the situational con-

text can evolve asynchronously with respect to 

turns in the conversation, systems that operate in 

the open world must be able to plan continuously, 

13



in stream, rather than on a “per-turn” basis. Inter-

action and collaboration in these settings is best 

viewed as a flow of coordinated, parallel actions. 

The sequential structure of turns in dyadic interac-

tions is but one example of such coordination, fo-

cused solely on linguistic actions. However, to 

successfully interact and collaborate with multiple 

participants in physically situated settings, an agent 

must be able to recognize, plan, and produce both 

linguistic and non-linguistic actions, and reason 

about potentially complex patterns of coordination 

between actions, in-stream—as they are being pro-

duced by the participants in the collaboration. 

We argue that attaining the dream of fluid, 

seamless spoken language interaction with ma-

chines requires a fundamental shift in how we view 

dialog management. First, we need to move from 

per-turn to continual in-stream planning. Second, 

we need to move from reasoning about sequential 

actions to reasoning about parallel and coordinat-

ed actions and their influence on states in the 

world. And third, we need models that can track 

and leverage the streaming situational context, 

from noisy observations, to make decisions about 

how to best contribute to collaborations.  

Spoken dialog is an important channel for ex-

pressing coordinative information. However, we 

need to recognize and begin to tackle head on the 

larger challenge of situated collaborative activity 

management.  We understand that taking this per-

spective introduces new complexities—and that 

some of our colleagues will view diving into the 

larger problems in advance of solving simpler ones 

as being unwise. However, we believe that we 

must embrace the larger goals to make significant 

progress on the struggles with the simpler ones, 

and that the investment in solving challenges with 

physically situated collaboration will have eventual 

payoffs in enabling progress in spoken dialog.   

Making progress on the broader challenge re-

quires technical innovations, tools, and data. Con-

sider for instance one sub-problem of belief 

tracking in these systems: continuously updating 

beliefs over the state of the collaborative activity 

and the situational context requires the develop-

ment of new types of models that can combine 

streaming evidence about context collected 

through sensors, with discrete evidence about the 

actions performed or the turns spoken collected 

through speech, gesture or other action-recognition 

components. In addition, progress hinges on identi-

fying a set of relevant problem domains, and coor-

dinating efforts in the community to collect data, 

and comparatively evaluate proposed approaches. 

New tools geared towards analysis, visualization 

and debugging with streaming multimodal data are 

also required.   

We propose a core shift of perspective and as-

sociated research agenda for moving from dialog 

management to situated collaborative activity 

management. We invite discussion on these ideas.  

References  

Allen, J.F., Byron, D.K., Dzikovska, M., Ferguson, G., 

Galescu, L., and Stent, A. 2001. Towards Conversa-

tional Human-Computer Interaction, AI Magazine, 

22(3) 

Bohus, D., and Rudnicky, A. 2009. The Ravenclaw dia-

log management framework: Architecture and sys-

tems, in Computer, Speech and Language, 23(3). 

Bohus, D., and Horvitz, E. 2010. On the Challenges and 

Opportunities of Physically Situated Dialog, AAAI 

Symposium on Dialog with Robots, Arlington, VA. 

Bohus, D., Horvitz, E., Kanda, T., Mutlu, B., Raux, A., 

editors, 2010. Special Issue on “Dialog with Robots”, 

AI Magazine 32(4). 

Churcher, G. E., Atwell, E.S, and Souter, C. 1997 Dia-

logue Management Systems: a Survey and Overview, 

Technical Report, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. 

Horvitz, E., 2007. Reflections on Challenges and Prom-

ises of Mixed-Initiative Interaction, AI Magazine 28, 

pp. 19-22. 

McTear, M.F. 2002. Spoken dialogue technology: ena-

bling the conversational user interface, ACM Compu-

ting Surveys, 34(1):90-169. 

Paek, T., and Pierracini, R. 2008. Automating Spoken 

Dialogue Management design using machine learn-

ing: An industry perspective, Speech Communica-

tion, 50(8-9):716-729. 

Rich, C., and Sidner, C.L. 1998. Collagen: A Collabora-

tion Manager for a Collaborative Interface Agent, 

User Modelling and User Assisted Interaction, 7(3-

4):315-350, Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

Traum, D., and Larsson, S. 2003. The Information State 

Approach to Dialogue Management. Current and 

New Directions in Discourse and Dialogue, Text 

Speech and Language Technology, 22:325-353. 

Williams, J., and Young, S., 2007. Partially Observable 

Markov Decisions Processes for Spoken Dialog Sys-

tems, Computer, Speech and Language, 21(2). 

Young, S. 2006. Using POMDPs for Dialog Manage-

ment, in Proc. of SLT-2006, Palm Beach, Aruba. 

14


