



















































Semi-Automatic Annotation of Intra-Sentential Discourse Relations in PDT


Proceedings of the Workshop on Advances in Discourse Analysis and its Computational Aspects (ADACA), pages 43–58,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Semi-Automatic Annotation of Intra-Sentential 
Discourse Relations in PDT

Pavlína Jínová, Jiří Mírovský and Lucie Poláková
Charles University in Prague

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics

{jinova|mirovsky|polakova}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

ABSTRACT

In the present paper, we describe in detail and evaluate the process of semi-automatic 
annotation of intra-sentential discourse relations in the Prague Dependency Treebank, 
which is a part of the project of otherwise mostly manual annotation of all (intra- and 
inter-sentential)  discourse  relations  with  explicit  connectives  in  the  treebank.  Our 
assumption that some syntactic features of a sentence analysis  (in a form of a deep-
syntax  dependency  tree)  correspond  to  certain  discourse-level  features  proved to  be 
correct, and the rich annotation of the treebank allowed us to automatically detect the 
intra-sentential  discourse  relations,  their  connectives  and  arguments  in  most  of  the 
cases.

TITLE AND ABSTRACT IN CZECH

Poloautomatická anotace vnitrovětných diskurzních 
vztahů v PDT

ABSTRAKT

V tomto článku nabízíme detailní  popis  a  evaluaci  procesu  poloautomatické  anotace 
vnitrovětných textových vztahů v Pražském závislostním korpusu jako součást projektu 
jinak  především  manuální  anotace  všech  (vnitro-  a  mezivětných)  textových  vztahů s 
explicitním  konektorem  v  tomto  korpusu.  Potvrdil  se  náš  předpoklad,  že  některé 
syntaktické vlastnosti analýzy věty (ve formě závislostního stromu hloubkové syntaxe) 
odpovídají  jistým vlastnostem na úrovni analýzy  textových vztahů (diskurzu).  Bohatá 
anotace korpusu nám ve většině případů umožnila automaticky detekovat vnitrovětné 
vztahy, jejich konektory a argumenty.

KEYWORDS : TECTOGRAMMATICS, PDT, DISCOURSE ANNOTATION, INTRA-SENTENTIAL RELATIONS

KEYWORDS IN CZECH : TEKTOGRAMATIKA, PDT, ANOTACE DISKURZU, VNITROVĚTNÉ VZTAHY

43



1 Introduction

Linguistic phenomena going beyond the sentence boundary have been coming into the 
focus  of  computational  linguists  in  the  last  decade.  Various  corpora  annotated  with 
discourse relations appear,  two of the first and most influential (for English)  were the 
RST  Discourse  Treebank  (Carlson,  Marcu,  Okurowski,  2002)  and  Penn  Discourse 
Treebank  (Prasad  et  al.,  2008).  For  other  languages  we  can  mention  discourse-
annotated  resources  for  Turkish  (Zeyrek  et  al.,  2010),  Arabic  (Al-Saif  and  Markert, 
2010), and Chinese (Zhou and Xue, 2012). Most of these projects have raw texts as their 
annotation basis. In the discourse project for Czech, contrary to the others, discourse-
related  phenomena  have  been annotated  directly  on  top  of  the  syntactic 
(tectogrammatical)  trees  of  the  Prague  Dependency  Treebank  2.5  (henceforth  PDT, 
Bejček et  al.,  2012),  with the goal to make maximum use of the syntactico-semantic 
information from the sentence representation.

The annotation of discourse relations (semantic relations between discourse units) in 
PDT  consisted  of  two  steps  –  first,  the  inter-sentential  discourse  relations  were 
annotated  manually,  second,  the  intra-sentential  discourse  relations  were  annotated 
semi-automatically.  In  both  cases,  only  relations  signalled by  an  explicit  discourse 
connective have been annotated.

The main goal of this paper is to report in detail on the process of the semi-automatic 
annotation of intra-sentential discourse relations in PDT. As we assumed, some of the 
(not only) syntactic features already annotated in the treebank were very helpful and 
enabled  us  to  perform  automatic  extractions  and  conversions. 1 Nevertheless,  some 
manual work had to be done both before and after the annotation.

1.1 Layers of Annotation in PDT

The data in our project come from the Prague Dependency Treebank 2.5 (Bejček et al., 
2012), which is a corrected and enhanced version of PDT 2.0 (Hajič et al., 2006). PDT is  
a treebank of Czech written journalistic texts (almost 50 thousand sentences)  enriched 
with a complex manual annotation at three layers: the morphological layer, where each 
token is assigned a lemma and a POS tag, the so-called analytical layer, at which the 
surface-syntactic structure of the sentence is represented as a dependency tree, and the 
tectogrammatical layer, at which the linguistic meaning of the sentence is represented.

At  the  tectogrammatical  layer,  the  meaning  of  the  sentence  is  represented  as  a 
dependency tree structure. Nodes of the tectogrammatical tree represent auto-semantic 
words,  whereas  functional  words  (such  as  prepositions,  auxiliaries,  subordinating 
conjunctions) and punctuation marks have (in most cases) no node of their own. The 
nodes are labelled with a large set of attributes, mainly with a tectogrammatical lemma 
and a functor (semantic relation; e.g.  Predicate (PRED),  Actor (ACT), Patient (PAT), 

1 For  details  on  the  exploitation  of  the  syntactic  features  during  the  manual  annotation  of  the  inter-
sentential relations, please consult Mírovský et al. (2012). 

44



Location (LOC))2.  Additionally,  the tectogrammatical  layer includes  the  annotation of 
information  structure  attributes  (sentence  topic  and  focus,  rhematizing  expressions 
etc.).

1.2 Discourse Annotation in Two Steps

In the project of discourse annotation, we have focused on discourse relations anchored 
by  an  explicit  (surface-present)  discourse  connective.  These  relations  and  their 
connectives have been annotated throughout the whole PDT. However, all the numbers 
reported in the paper refer to the training and development test parts of the whole data 3, 
i.e. 43,955 sentences (approx. 9/10 of the treebank).4

The annotation of discourse relations proceeded in two steps: First, the inter-sentential 
and some selected intra-sentential discourse relations were annotated manually, second, 
the remaining intra-sentential discourse relations were annotated (semi-)automatically, 
based on the information already annotated in PDT.5

The main theoretical principle of the annotation was the same for both phases. It  was 
inspired  partially  by  the  lexical  approach  of  the  Penn  Discourse  Treebank  project 
(Prasad et al., 2008), and partially by the tectogrammatical approach and the functional  
generative description (Sgall et al., 1986, Mikulová et al., 2005). A discourse connective 
in this view takes two text spans (verbal clauses  or larger units) as its arguments. The 
semantic relation between the arguments is represented by a discourse arrow (link), the 
direction  of  which also uniformly defines  the nature of  the argument (e.g.  reason – 
result).6

2 For a description of functors in PDT, see 
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/en/t-layer/html/ch07.html.
3 as distinguished in the PDT project
4 Thus the last tenth of the treebank, evaluation test data, remains (as far as possible) unobserved.
5 The  annotation  had  to  proceed  in  this  order.  Our  understanding  what  is  possible  to  annotate  
automatically only formed during the manual annotation, as we got familiar with the data.
6 For further information on the annotation guidelines, see http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/discourse/.

FIGURE 1 – An example of an inter-sentential discourse relation, represented by a thick 
arrow between roots of the arguments

45



1.2.1 Step 1: Manual Annotation (Mostly of the Inter-Sentential Relations)

The first  phase of the annotation was a thorough manual processing of the treebank 
primarily  focused  on  the  inter-sentential  relations  (relations  between  sentences) 
signalled  by  explicit  discourse  connectives.  Example 1  and  Figure 1  show  an  inter-
sentential discourse relation of type opposition with explicit connective ale (but).

(1)  Lidé chtějí platit jen to, co skutečně spotřebovali. 
Ještě dlouho tomu tak ale patrně nebude.

People only want to pay for what they really consumed.
But apparently, it will not be so yet for a long time.

Intra-sentential relations (within a sentence) were during the first phase only marked 
manually in cases where the discourse type could not be determined unambiguously by 
the tectogrammatical label (functor) and the actual discourse type was not prevailing for 
the  given  functor.  For  instance,  the  tectogrammatical  label  (functor) ADVS  (the 
adversative relation, in our case clausal) is too general and corresponds to several finer 
discourse  types,  namely  the  types  of  opposition,  restrictive  opposition,  correction, 
confrontation, and  concession.  Opposition is predominant among the discourse types 
for the functor ADVS, so it was not annotated in the first phase (and was left for the  
second  phase)7.  All  the  other  discourse  types  for  the  functor  ADVS were  annotated 
manually in the first phase.  The situation is illustrated by Example 2 and Figure 2; on 
the tectogrammatical layer, the relation between the two clauses was labelled as ADVS 

7 See Table 1 for predominant discourse types for various functors.

FIGURE 2 – An example of an intra-sentential discourse relation 
annotated during the first phase

46



(functor  of  the  coordinative  node  in  Figure 2);  the  discourse  type  is  correction  (the 
relation is marked by the arrow with label corr in Figure 2).

(2) Důvodem kanibalismu nebyl hlad, ale politické motivy.

The reason for the cannibalism was not hunger but political motives.

For a more detailed description of the manual annotation of the treebank including the 
annotation evaluation see e.g. Jínová et al. 2012.

1.2.2 Step 2: Automatic Annotation of the Intra-Sentential Relations

The  second  phase  of  the  annotations  consisted  predominantly  of  an  automatic 
procedure that extracted mostly tectogrammatical features and used them directly for 
the annotation of intra-sentential  discourse relations. The main goal was to find and 
mark all so far unmarked intra-sentential discourse relations.

This is the main topic of the present paper and we describe it in detail in the following 
sections.  Section 2  briefly  describes  the  manual  preparatory  work  preceding  the 
automated part of the extraction. Section 3 is devoted to the automatic annotation itself 
and to some practical  issues connected to it. In Section 4, we mention  two necessary 
manual  corrections  performed  after  the  automatic  annotation, and  we  evaluate  our 
results in Section 5, which is followed by a conclusion.

2 Pre-Annotation

Two manual steps preceded the automatic annotation of the intra-sentential discourse 
relations:  completely  manually  annotated  selected  intra-sentential  relations  and 
partially manually annotated temporal relations.

2.1 Manual Work

As explained in  Subsection 1.2.1  (Example  2,  Figure 2),  some of  the intra-sentential 
discourse relations were annotated manually during the first phase of the annotations. It 
was  510  vertical  (subordinate)  relations  and  1,681  horizontal  (coordinate)8 intra-
sentential  relations.  Other  cases  of  intra-sentential  relations,  where  the 
tectogrammatical annotation was adequate for the discourse interpretation, were left to 
the  second  phase.  As  an  example,  if  we  follow  the  sub-classification  of  the  ADVS 
tectogrammatical label for discourse semantics mentioned above in 1.2.1, except for the 
relations marked  previously  in  the  manual  phase,  the  remaining  cases  were  all 
automatically  set  to discourse  type  opposition (opp),  see  Table 1  and  Section 3.1  for 
details.

2.2 Semi-Automatic Annotation

Finite verbs with the type of dependency being one of the temporal relations (functors 
TFHL, THL, THO, TSIN, TTILL, TWHEN) were pre-processed manually. For each of 

8 In dependency trees of PDT, root nodes of coordinated phrases are captured as siblings (direct children 
of the coordinating node), hence “horizontal” relations.

47



them, the type of the discourse relation was set by a human annotator, along with the 
direction of the relation (whether from the dependent node to its governor or the other 
way)9 and the exact position of the arguments (the nodes themselves or possibly their 
coordinating  nodes  (if  present)).  All  this  information  was  annotated  in  a  table  and 
passed to the automatic script to create the discourse relations and to find and set the 
appropriate connective to each relation automatically. Altogether, it was 491 relations.

3 Automatic Annotation

After the manual annotation described in Subsection 2.1 and the manual preprocessing 
of temporal relations described in Subsection 2.2, an automatic script went through the 
tectogrammatical layer of the whole data of PDT, document by document, sentence by 
sentence and node by node.

If the node represented

• a finite verb with one of the temporal functors (TFHL, THL, THO, TSIN, TTILL, 
TWHEN), it was annotated using the information from the manually created 
table (Subsection 2.2 above).

• a  finite  verb  with functor  CAUS,  COND,  CNCS,  AIM,  CONTRD or  SUBS,  it 
became a candidate for an automatically detected vertical discourse relation.

• a coordination node with functor REAS, CSQ, ADVS, CONFR, GRAD, CONJ or 
DISJ,  coordinating  (directly  or  transitively)  finite  verbs  or  non-finite-verbal 
nodes with functor PRED10, it became a candidate for a horizontal relation.

In all cases, the connective was detected automatically (see below in Subsection 3.4).

Vertical Relations

Candidates for a vertical relation were checked for a presence of a previously manually 
annotated relation; if there was none, an automatic discourse relation was created, in the 
basic case  directly between the dependant and governing verbal nodes.  If  one of the 
nodes was a member of a  coordination,  more complex procedure was used to set the 
exact  position of the arguments (see below Subsections 3.2 and 3.2.1).  The discourse 
type  and  direction  of  the  discourse  arrow  were  set  based  on  the  tectogrammatical  
functor  of  the  dependant  node,  see  Subsection 3.1  below  for  details.  Finally,  the 
connective was found and set – see Subsection 3.4 for the procedure. 

Horizontal Relations

Similarly,  candidates  for  a  horizontal  relation  were  checked  for  a  presence  of  a 
previously  manually  annotated  relation;  if  there  was  none,  an  automatic  discourse 

9 There is  a rich variety of connectives,  and also  verbal  aspect  values and negation play  a role.  These 
features in combination determine the discourse type and also the direction of the discourse arrow (i.e. the 
nature of the discourse arguments:  precedence – succession).  However, as the occurrences in the data 
were not so many, it was faster to decide on the type of the relation and the order of arguments manually.
10 PRED – a tectogrammatical predicate; for a list and description of all functors, please see the 
tectogrammatical manual: http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/en/t-layer/html/ch07.html

48



relation was created among the members of the coordination. A special case of multiple 
coordinations is discussed in 3.2.2 below. The discourse type and direction of the arrow 
were established based on the tectogrammatical functor of the coordinating node, again 
see Subsection 3.1 below for details. Subsection 3.4 describes the procedure of searching 
for the connective of the horizontal relation.

3.1 Functor to Discourse Type Conversion

Table 1  shows a list  of  tectogrammatical  functors and their  corresponding  prevailing 
discourse  types.  After  the  manual  annotation,  the  table  could  be  (and was)  used  to 
identify  the  discourse  type  of  the  remaining  relations.  Note  that  it  is  still  not  a  1-1 
relation, for example the discourse type confrontation can be signalled by two different 
functors (CONTRD and CONFR),  as we give up the syntactic distinction  of  hypotactic 
(CONTRD) vs. paratactic (CONFR) in this respect. The transformation table was used 
for all automatically annotated horizontal relations (7,392 cases) and all automatically 
annotated vertical relations (2,599 cases).

Functor
Functor

(long name)11
Discourse 

type
Discourse type

(long name)
AIM purpose purp purpose

CAUS cause reason reason-result

CNCS concession conc concession

COND condition cond condition

CONTRD confrontation confr confrontation

SUBS substitution corr correction

ADVS adversative relation opp opposition

CONFR confrontation confr confrontation

CONJ conjunction conj conjunction

CSQ consequence reason reason-result

DISJ disjunction disjalt disjunctive alternative

GRAD gradation grad gradation

REAS causal relation reason reason-result

TABLE 1 – Functor to discourse type automatic translation table; the first six rows 
represent vertical relations, the last seven rows represent horizontal relations.

3.2 Arguments with Coordinations

In PDT, coordinating expressions are represented as separate nodes and technically they 
are  not  different  from  other  nodes  representing  content  words.  In  the  detection  of  
discourse arguments, two situations needed to be treated in a special way, as described 
in the following two subsections.

11 taken from the tectogrammatical manual: 
   http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/en/t-layer/html/ch07.html

49



3.2.1 Coordinated Structures in the Detection of the Argument Position

In many cases, an argument of a discourse relation is represented by a coordination of 
verbal nodes, not by the verbal nodes individually.  In such cases,  the position of the 
argument was shifted from the verbal nodes to the coordinating node. It  could even 
happen transitively, so the topmost suitable coordination was always searched for.

Example 3 demonstrates a  complex  case  of  coordinated  arguments.  The  situation  is 
depicted in Figure 3, which is a tectogrammatical tree in a folded mode (nodes  of the 
tree represent individual clauses or coordinations)12. All discourse annotation in the tree 
is a result of the automatic procedure.

(3) Po revoluci se s různými pavědami a šarlatánstvím roztrhl pytel, což chápu, 
protože jednak byly za komunismu zakázané, a tak logicky přitahovaly, a za 
druhé nabízejí rychlá a snadná řešení a vysvětlení, což se hrozně líbí těm, kteří 
neradi myslí. 

After the revolution, we were flooded with various pseudosciences and 
charlatanisms, which I can understand, because for one thing, they were 
forbidden in the communist era and so logically they were attractive, and for 
another, they offer fast and easy solutions and explanations, which is awfully 
liked by those who do not like to think.

12 For all features of the annotation tool for discourse, see Mírovský et al. (2010).

50



In this example sentence, five discourse relations along with their types and connectives  
have been automatically detected. Four of them are horizontal relations:

i. a  horizontal  relation of  type  conj between  clauses  “Po revoluci  se  … roztrhl  
pytel” (“After the revolution, we were flooded … charlatanisms”), and “chápu” 
(“I can understand”), with the connective což (which),

ii. a  horizontal  relation  of  type  reason between  clauses  “logicky  přitahovaly” 
(“logically they were attractive”)  and  “byly za komunismu zakázané” (“they 
were forbidden in the communist era”), with the connective “a tak” (“and so”),

iii. a horizontal relation of type conj between clauses “nabízejí … vysvětlení” (“they 
offer … explanations”) and “se hrozně líbí … neradi myslí” (“is awfully liked … 
do not like to think”), with the connective což (which),

iv. and a horizontal relation of type  conj between coordinations of clauses in (ii) 
and  (iii),  with  the  connective  “jednak  a  za  druhé” (“for  one  thing  and  for  
another”).

One of them is a vertical relation:

v. a vertical relation of type reason between the coordination of the coordinations 
in  (iv)  and  the  coordination  of  clauses  in  (i),  with  the  connective  protože 
(because).

Cases (i), (ii) and (iii) are simple cases where the arguments are represented directly by  
the coordinated verbal nodes.

Case (iv) is also a relatively simple case, only a presence of a coordinated 13 finite-verb in 
the  subtree  of  both  the  coordinated  clauses  needed  to  be  checked  (transitively  in 
general).

Case  (v)  is  a  vertical  discourse  relation  represented  by  an  arrow  between  the  two 
coordinating nodes. The relation was however signalled by four occurrences of functor 
CAUS,  marking a  linguistic  (effective)  dependency14 between  each  of  the transitively 
coordinated finite verbs with this functor15 and each of their linguistic parents (finite 
verbs  “roztrhnout  se” (“be  flooded”)  and  chápat (“to  understand”)),  which  are  also 
coordinated. The arguments of the relation(s) needed to be lifted to the topmost suitable 
coordinating nodes.16 Thus, instead of eight discourse relations that could be created 
directly between the individual  verbal nodes,  only one overall  discourse relation was 
created, which is a more comprehensible solution, without a loss of any information.

In all detected vertical  relations, the effective parent was shifted by one coordination 
level 263 times, resulting in 110 discourse relations, and by two coordination levels 8 
times,  resulting  in  3  discourse  relations.  The  effective  child  was  shifted  by  one 

13 The tectogrammatical attribute is_member serves to distinguishing coordinated and non-coordinated 
children of a coordinating node.
14 The effective dependency is a linguistic dependency between nodes representing content words, taking 
all effects of coordinations etc. into account.
15 verbal nodes “být (zakázaný)” (“to be (forbidden)”), přitahovat (“to be attractive”), nabízet (“to offer”), 
and “líbit se” (“to be liked”)
16 Again, the tectogrammatical attribute is_member was used.

51



coordination  level  634  times,  resulting  in  314  discourse  relations,  and  by  two 
coordination levels 61 times, resulting in 25 discourse relations.

3.2.2 Multiple Coordinations

In case  of  multiple coordinations (coordinations with more than two members) with 
only  a  comma  as  the  conjunction  of  the  first  members  of  the  coordination  and  a 
connective  (often  a (and))  as  the  conjunction  of  the  last  two  members  of  the 
coordination,  only  the  last  two  members  form a  discourse  relation  with  an  explicit 
connective (as we do not consider a comma to be a discourse connective). Example  4 
demonstrates such a case:

(4) Pozoroval jsem jednou jednu slečnu: seděla u PC, měla prst zabořen do klávesnice a 
evidentně se nudila.

I watched a young lady once: she was sitting at a PC, had her finger buried in the 
keyboard and evidently was bored.17

Here,  a  discourse  relation  was  only  created  between  clauses  “evidentně  se  nudila” 
(“evidently was bored”) and “měla prst zabořen do klávesnice” (“had her finger buried 
in the keyboard”), with a (and) as a connective.  The other discourse relations in these 
coordinations are considered implicit  and will be annotated in the future, during the 
annotations of implicit discourse relations.

Multiple coordinations of this type occur 501 times in the data.

3.3 Scope of Arguments

In all  intra-sentential  relations,  the scope  of  a  discourse  argument  is  defined  as  the 
effective subtree18 of the root node of the argument (the root node of the argument can 
either be a finite verb or a node coordinating19 finite verbs or another type of node with 
functor PRED), excluding all nodes of the other argument of the relation. In all 10,482 
automatically annotated intra-sentential relations, the tectogrammatical tree structure 
correctly  defined  the scope of  the arguments,  independently  of  the fact  whether  the 
argument was formed on the surface by a continuous  sequence of words or not.20

3.4 Detection of Discourse Connectives

In most cases, the discourse connectives of intra-sentential discourse relations could be 
automatically  detected  on the basis  of  the information on the  tectogrammatical  and 
analytical layers.

17 The presence of a subject in a Czech clause is irrelevant for the decision whether to annotate a discourse  
relation or not,  as Czech is a pro-drop language. Hence, the English translation of the example sentence 
with no subject in the last two clauses  is not to be treated as a VP coordination,  which  would not be 
annotated in some projects for English like the PDTB (see Prasad, 2007)
18 Effective subtree of a node is a set of nodes that linguistically depend (transitively) on the given node,  
taking all effects of coordinations etc. into account.
19 possibly transitively, i.e. through other coordinating nodes
20 For the 2,191 manually annotated intra-sentential relations, in all but 146 cases the scope of arguments  
was also equal to the effective subtree of the root node, in the 146 cases the annotator had to define a 
different scope of the argument.

52



Connectives of the vertical relations can be found among nodes from the analytical layer 
that correspond to the verbal root of the discourse argument on the tectogrammatical  
layer.  All  auxiliary  analytical  counterparts  (not  the lexical  counterpart)  of  the verbal 
node  except  for  auxiliary  verbs  and reflexive  particles  (se,  si)  become a  part  of  the 
connective.

Connectives of the horizontal relations can be found on the tectogrammatical layer at the 
coordinating node (all its analytical counterparts, e.g. a (and), buď – nebo (either – or), 
etc.)  or its modifiers (functor CM (conjunction modifier), e.g.  dokonce (even),  přesto 
(despite of that), or negation).

With the exception of 23 atypical cases (which were fixed manually, see Subsection 4.1), 
discourse  connectives  could  be  detected  automatically  for  all  10,482 intra-sentential 
discourse relations. In the rest of this subsection, we point out three special cases of the 
connective detection.

3.4.1 Connectives with tak, pak, potom

For vertical  relation, connectives like  jestliže – pak (if – then), the second part (pak 
(then)) needed to be found among the effective children of the effective parent(s) of the 
given verbal node. They were filtered using the tectogrammatical lemma (only tak, pak,  
potom (so, then, then)) and the functor (only PREC or one of the temporal relations). It 
happened 93 times in the data.

3.4.2 Connectives with Expression což

The  expression  což (which) can  represent  an  intra-sentential  connective  with  the 
conjunctive meaning even though it can be inflected and plays a role of a participant of 
the clause structure (including a valence participant). To make it possible to distinguish 
the connective role of this expression automatically, grammatical coreference21 was used. 
If  the annotated  anaphoric  link from the expression  což referred  to the coordinated 
verbal  phrase  (or  in  a  more  complex  case  to  a  coordination  of  verbal  phrases),  což 
became  a  part  of  the  connective.  See  Example 5,  where  což (which)  refers  (via  the 
grammatical coreference) to stal se (became):

(5) Pavlov se pak stal předsedou vlády, což se Klausovi přihodilo nakonec také.

Pavlov then became the prime minister, which after all happened to Klaus as well.

In the data, 220 occurrences of the expression což have a grammatical coreference link 
to a finite-verb node, 11 occurrences have this link to a coordination of finite-verb nodes.  
Altogether,  231  discourse  relations  were  created  with  což (which)  as  a  part  of  the 
connective.

21 Grammatical  coreference  was annotated  in  PDT for  expressions  where it  is  possible  to  identify  the 
coreferred part of the text on the basis of grammatical rules  (see Mikulová et. al, 2005). 

53



3.4.3 Double Connectives

In some cases of a vertical relation where dependant finite verbal nodes are coordinated, 
the  coordinated  clauses  begin  with  separate  or  different  connectives,  like  protože  – 
protože (because – because) in Example 6. Both the connectives become a part of the 
connective of the discourse relation.

(6) … je škodlivý a ideologicky zavádějící, protože odráží nedůvěru v racionalitu 
chování každého z nás a protože implikuje falešnou víru ve schopnosti některých z 
nás vytvořit pro nás ostatní lepší, dokonalejší svět.

… is harmful and ideologically misleading because it reflects the mistrust in the 
behaviour rationality of each of us and because it implicates a false faith in the 
ability of some of us to create for the rest of us a better, more perfect world.

This happened 69 times in our data.

4 Manual Corrections

After the automatic annotation, a few manual checks and corrections were needed. They 
are described in the following two subsections.

4.1 Failures in the Connective Identification

After having run the script, some manual correction turned up to be necessary in cases 
where the automatic search for connectives failed (23 cases in sum). These failures arose 
from two types of situation. First, connectives were placed on a non-typical position in 
the tree. Second, connectives were not present in the sentence at all. This situation is  
illustrated by  Example 7:  the last  clause (he did not pay for this)  is interpreted as a 
causal sentence on the tectogrammatical layer, but no connective signals this relation.

(7) … vůbec nejhorší posádka v safari busu je smíšená: Angličan si zapomene kameru v  
hotelu a chce se vrátit, Francouz zuří, za tohle neplatil!

… the absolutely worst crew in a safari bus is a mixed one: the Englishman forgets 
his camera in the hotel and wants to go back, the Frenchman is furious, he did not 
pay for this!

In  the  first  type  of  situation,  the  connective  was  added  manually  (we  count  these 
relations under the manually annotated ones), in the second type (as in Example 7), the 
whole relation was deleted for violation of the surface-present connective rule.

4.2 Clauses Depending on a Noun Phrase or an Infinitive

Solely  manual  treatment  required those types  of  constructions where the dependent 
clause with discourse semantics was related to a complex predicate structure containing 
a noun phrase or an infinitive.  Only semantics  allows to distinguish cases  where the 
dependent clause is related to the whole predicate structure from those related only to 
an infinitive  or  a  noun phrase.  Consider  Examples  8 and 9.  In  both structures,  the 
dependent  clause  is  a  child-node  of  the infinitive,  but  only  in  Example 8 it  is 

54



semantically related to the whole predicate structure “je ochoten povolit” (“is willing to  
permit”).  In Example 9 the dependent clause is semantically related only to the noun 
phrase “připravenost odpovědět silou” (“readiness to respond with force”). As we only 
annotate discourse relations between text spans with finite verbs, only in Example 8 a 
discourse relation was annotated.

(8) Srbský prezident Slobodan Miloševič je ochoten povolit mezinárodní kontrolu své 
blokády bosenských Srbů, pokud bude obdobná kontrola uplatněna i na hranicích 
Chorvatska a Bosny.

The Serbian president Slobodan Milosevic is willing to permit an international 
inspection of his blockade of the Bosnian Serbs if a similar control is applied also on 
borders of Croatia and Bosnia.

(9) Zdůraznili však také připravenost odpovědět silou, pokud opozice bude trvat na 
použití zbraní.

However, they also emphasised their readiness to respond with force if the 
opposition will insist on the use of weapons.

There  were  146 cases  with  such  a  dependent  clause  related  to  the  whole  predicate 
structure and 73 occurrences where it was not the case.

5 Summary

Table 2 shows the summary of all relations annotated during both phases of the project,  
and gives detailed numbers of various “types” of the intra-sentential relations. The last 
row of the table presents the whole number of all annotated discourse relations of any 
type.22

Type of the relation count
Intra-sentential relations 12,673

    - automatic vertical 2,599

    - semi-automatic vertical 491

    - automatic horizontal 7,392

    - manual vertical 510

    - manual horizontal 1,681

Inter-sentential (all manual) 5,514

Total 18,187

TABLE 2 – Overview of discourse relations annotated in PDT

We  were  able  to  automatically  convert  9,991 (2,599 vertical  and  7,392  horizontal) 
tectogrammatical dependencies into discourse relations, along with all properties of the 
relations (i.e.  the position of arguments, the discourse type and the connective) .  For 

22 Let us emphasize again:  although everything was done on the whole PDT data,  all  reported  numbers 
only refer to the training and development test parts of the data (9/10 of the treebank, 43,955 sentences). 

55



another 491 vertical dependencies, the discourse type, the order of arguments and their 
position  according  to  possible  coordinations were set  manually,  as  explained  in 
Subsection 2.2,  while  the  rest  of  the  work with these  relations  was also  done 
automatically; we count these relations as semi-automatic. Mostly during the first phase 
of  the annotation,  2,191 (510 vertical  and 1,681 horizontal)  intra-sentential  discourse 
relations  were  annotated  completely  manually.  After  the  automatic  procedure,  non-
typical  connectives  needed  to  be  fixed  in  23  cases,  and  146  relations  between  a 
dependent clause and a complex predicate structure needed to be manually added, as 
explained in Section 4.

Conclusion

In the paper, we have presented in detail the second phase of the discourse annotation 
project in the Prague Dependency Treebank 2.5, namely the semi-automatic annotation 
of intra-sentential discourse relations marked by an explicit connective. In the preceding 
first  phase  of  the project,  the  whole  treebank  was processed manually and all  inter-
sentential  relations  were  marked  by  a  human  annotator.  Also  all  intra-sentential 
relations were assessed manually and those relations whose discourse semantics was not 
unambiguously inferable from the tectogrammatical  information were annotated. After 
the manual annotation, the tectogrammatical interpretation of the remaining relations 
conveyed the discourse semantics properly  and,  in the second phase of the project, all 
these  remaining  intra-sentential  relations  were annotated semi-automatically  or 
automatically. During the automatic part of the annotation, the presence of a discourse 
relation, the exact position of its arguments, its discourse type and the connective were 
automatically detected, using the annotation of the deep-syntax dependency trees at the 
tectogrammatical  layer of PDT.  As a final step, a few manual checks and corrections 
were performed.

We have also discussed interesting theoretical  observations  revealed  during the semi-
automatic  annotation,  namely  to  what  extent  a  syntax-based  discourse  analysis  is 
automatically  processible  and what  are  the  special  (and so  linguistically  interesting) 
cases that require more attention.

The annotated data  (both intra-  and inter-sentential  relations)  was published in  the 
autumn of  2012 under the same licence  as  the underlying PDT 2.5,  i.e.  the Creative 
Commons licence23. It is available (downloadable) from the repository of LINDAT-Clarin 
– Centre for Language Research Infrastructure in the Czech Republic24.

Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge support from the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic (grants 
P406/12/0658 and P406/2010/0875) and from the Ministry of Education, Youth and 
Sports in the Czech Republic, program KONTAKT (ME10018) and the LINDAT-Clarin 
project (LM2010013).

23 http://creativecommons.org
24 http://www.lindat.cz

56



References

Al-Saif, A; Markert, K. (2010). The Leeds Arabic Discourse Treebank: Annotating 
discourse connectives for Arabic. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2010), Valletta, Malta, pp. 2046–2053. 

Bejček, E., Panevová, J., Popelka, J., Smejkalová, L., Straňák, P., Ševčíková, M., 
Štěpánek, J., Toman, J., Žabokrtský, Z., Hajič, J. (2012). Prague Dependency Treebank 
2.5. Data/software, Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic, 
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.5/.

Carlson, L., Marcu, D., and Okurowski, M.E. (2002). RST Discourse Treebank, 
LDC2002T07 [Corpus]. Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Hajič, J., Panevová, J., Hajičová, E., Sgall, P., Pajas, P., Štěpánek, J., Havelka, J., 
Mikulová, M., Žabokrtský, Z. and Ševčíková-Razímová, M. (2006). Prague Dependency 
Treebank 2.0. Software prototype, Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 
ISBN 1-58563-370-4, www.ldc.upenn.edu, Jul 2006.

Mírovský, J., Jínová, P., Poláková, L. (2012). Does Tectogrammatics help the Annotation 
of Discourse? In Procedings of the 24th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING 2012), Mumbai, India, December 2012.

Jínová, P., Mírovský, J., Poláková, L. (2012). Analyzing the Most Common Errors in the 
Discourse Annotation of the Prague Dependency Treebank. In Proceedings of the 11th 
International Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT 11), Lisboa, 
Portugal.

Mikulová, M., Bémová, A., Hajič, J., Hajičová, E., Havelka, J., Kolářová-Řezníčková, V., 
Kučová, L., Lopatková, M., Pajas, P., Panevová, J., Razímová, M., Sgall, P., Štěpánek, J., 
Urešová, Z., Veselá, K. and Žabokrtský, Z. (2005). Anotace na tektogramatické rovině 
Pražského závislostního korpusu. Anotátorská příručka. Praha: UFAL MFF. Available 
at: http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/cz/t-layer/html/index.html.

Mírovský, J., Mladová, L., Žabokrtský, Z. (2010). Annotation Tool for Discourse in PDT. 
In  Proceedings  of  the  23rd  International  Conference  on  Computational  Linguistics  
(Coling 2010), Beijing, China, pp. 9-12.

Prasad, R., Dinesh, N., Lee, A., Miltsakaki, E., Robaldo, L., Joshi, A. and Webber, B. 
(2007). The Penn Discourse TreeBank 2.0 Annotation Manual. Available at: 
http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~pdtb/PDTBAPI/pdtb-annotation-manual.pdf.

Prasad, R., Dinesh, N., Lee, A., Miltsakaki, E., Robaldo, L., Joshi, A. and Webber, B. 
(2008). The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of the 6th International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2008), Marrakech, 
Morocco, pp. 2961–2968.

Sgall, P., Hajičová, E. and Panevová, J. (1986). The Meaning of the Sentence in Its 
Semantic and Pragmatic Aspects, Praha: Academia.

57



Zeyrek, D., Demirşahin Işın, Çallı A. B. S., Balaban H. Ö., Yalçınkaya İ., & Turan Ü. D. 
(2010).  The annotation scheme of the Turkish Discourse Bank and an evaluation of 
inconsistent annotations. In Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation 
Workshop, ACL 2010, Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 282–289.

Yuping Zhou and Nianwen Xue. (2012). PDTB-style discourse annotation of Chinese 
text. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL 2012), Jeju, Republic of Korea, pp. 69–77. 

58


