










































Medical diagnosis lost in translation - Analysis of uncertainty and negation expressions in English and Swedish clinical texts


Proceedings of the 2012 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2012), pages 56–64,
Montréal, Canada, June 8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Medical diagnosis lost in translation – Analysis of uncertainty and negation
expressions in English and Swedish clinical texts

Danielle L Mowery
University of Pittsburgh

200 Meyran Ave
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
dlm31@pitt.edu

Sumithra Velupillai
Stockholm University

164 40 Kista
Stockholm, Sweden

sumithra@dsv.su.se

Wendy W Chapman
University of California San Diego

10100 Hopkins Dr
La Jolla, CA 92093

wwchapman@ucsd.edu

Abstract

In the English clinical and biomedical text do-
mains, negation and certainty usage are two
well-studied phenomena. However, few stud-
ies have made an in-depth characterization
of uncertainties expressed in a clinical set-
ting, and compared this between different an-
notation efforts. This preliminary, qualita-
tive study attempts to 1) create a clinical un-
certainty and negation taxonomy, 2) develop
a translation map to convert annotation la-
bels from an English schema into a Swedish
schema, and 3) characterize and compare two
data sets using this taxonomy. We define
a clinical uncertainty and negation taxonomy
and a translation map for converting annota-
tion labels between two schemas and report
observed similarities and differences between
the two data sets.

1 Introduction and Background

Medical natural language processing techniques are
potentially useful for extracting information con-
tained in clinical texts, such as emergency depart-
ment reports (Meystre et al., 2008). One impor-
tant aspect to take into account when developing ac-
curate information extraction tools is the ability to
distinguish negated, affirmed, and uncertain infor-
mation (Chu et al., 2006). Several research stud-
ies have targeted this problem and created anno-
tation schemas and manually annotated reference
standards for uncertainty and negation occurrence
in news documents (Saurı́ and Pustejovsky (2009),
Wiebe et al. (2001), Rubin et al. (2006)), biomedical
research articles (Wilbur et al. (2006), Vincze et al.

(2008)), and clinical narratives (Uzuner et al. (2011)
and Uzuner et al. (2009)). There are encoding tools
developed for automatic identification of uncertainty
and negation in English, such as ConText (Harkema
et al., 2009), which relies on heuristics and keyword
lists, and MITRE’s CARAFE (Clark et al., 2011),
which combines heuristic and statistical techniques.

However, most relevant annotation schemas, ref-
erence standards, and encoding tools are built for
English documents. For smaller languages, such as
Swedish, resources are scarce.

We present a pilot, qualitative study to compare
two different annotation schemas and subsequent
annotated corpora for uncertainty modeling of dis-
order mentions, e.g., signs, symptoms, and diseases,
in clinical texts, for two different languages: English
and Swedish. We compare these annotation schemas
and their instantiation in the two languages in an at-
tempt to gain a deeper understanding of how uncer-
tainty and negation are expressed in different clini-
cal texts with an emphasis on creating a portable un-
certainty and negation application that generalizes
among clinical texts of different languages.

This pilot study is motivated for at least two
reasons. First, little attention has been given to
mapping, characterizing, or comparing annotation
schemas built for different languages or to character-
izing different types of uncertainty expressions and
the intention underlying those expressions. Such
knowledge is needed for building information ex-
traction tools that can accurately identify or track
differential diagnoses over time, particularly when
medical reasoning can be laden with uncertainty
about a disorder’s existence or change over time.

56



Second, building new resources for small lan-
guages is time consuming. Utilizing existing tools
and techniques already developed for one language,
such as English, could be an efficient way of devel-
oping new useful tools for other less exploited lan-
guages, such as Swedish.

Our overall goal is to move towards improving au-
tomatic information extraction from clinical texts by
leveraging language differences and similarities. In
order to address this issue, our aims in this study
are to 1) create a taxonomy for deepened charac-
terization of how uncertainty and negation is ex-
pressed in clinical texts, 2) compare two existing un-
certainty and negation annotation schemas from this
perspective, and 3) compare differences and similar-
ities in expressions of uncertainty and negation be-
tween two languages: English and Swedish.

2 Methods

In this pilot, qualitative comparison study, we used
grounded theory (Strauss and Corbin, 1990) to in-
ductively identify themes that characterize clini-
cal uncertainty and negation expressed in both En-
glish (University of Pittsburgh Medical Center) and
Swedish (Karolinska University Hospital) research
data sets derived from emergency department re-
ports.

2.1 Uncertainty/negation annotation schemas
Two independently developed annotation schemas
were used to annotate disorder mentions in the
clinical texts: a schema developed for English re-
ports (Mowery et al. (2012)) and one for Swedish
(Velupillai et al. (2011)). Each disorder mention
was pre-annotated and constituted the input to a sep-
arate set of annotators, who assigned values to a set
of attributes defined in the schema. For instance, in
the sentence “Patient with possible pneumonia.”, an-
notators for the English data set assigned values to
four attributes for the instance of pneumonia:

• Existence(yes, no): whether the disorder was ever present

• AspectualPhase(initiation, continuation, culmination, un-
marked): the stage of the disorder in its progression

• Certainty(low, moderate, high, unmarked): amount of certainty
expressed about whether the disorder exists

• MentalState(yes, no): whether an outward thought or feeling
about the disorder’s existence is mentioned

In the Swedish schema, annotators assigned val-
ues to two attributes:

• Polarity(positive, negative): whether a disorder mention is in the
positive or negative polarity, i.e., affirmed (positive) or negated
(negative)

• Certainty(possibly, probably, certainly): gradation of certainty
for a disorder mention, to be assigned with a polarity value.

2.2 Data Sets
The English data set included 30 de-identified, full-
length emergency department reports annotated with
283 disorders related to influenza-like illnesses by
a board-certified infectious disease physician. Each
disorder was annotated with four attributes – exis-
tence, aspectual phase, certainty and mental state –
by two independent annotators (including DM) who
came to consensus after reviewing disagreements.

The Swedish data set included 1,297 assessment
sections from emergency department reports anno-
tated with approx. 2,000 disorders, automatically
marked from a manually created list of approx-
imately 300 unique disorders by two physicians.
The two physicians annotated each disorder mention
with attributes of polarity and certainty. A random
subset of approx. 200 annotated disorder mentions
from the data set were used for this qualitative study.

2.3 Study Process
In order to better understand how physicians de-
scribe uncertainty of the presence or absence of a
disorder, we evaluated the annotations from the two
data sets as follows: 1) created a clinical uncertainty
and negation taxonomy, 2) developed a translation
map for mapping attributes and values from the En-
glish schema into the Swedish schema, and 3) char-
acterized and compared both data sets and languages
using the taxonomy.

To create the uncertainty and negation taxonomy,
we conducted a literature review of recent annota-
tion schemas (e.g. Vincze et al. (2008)), assignment
applications (e.g. Uzuner et al. (2011), Harkema
et al. (2009), Clark et al. (2011), Chapman et al.
(2011)), and observational studies (Lingard et al.,
2003) about uncertainty or negation in the clinical
domain. From our review, we created a clinical tax-
onomy describing notable characteristics of uncer-
tainty and negation, which were added to and re-
fined using grounded theory, by inspecting the dis-
order annotations in our data sets and documenting

57



emerging themes consistent with issues found from
the literature review. For instance, one characteristic
of negation annotations found in the literature and in
our data sets is the existence of a lexical cue indicat-
ing that a disorder is negated, and the lexical cue can
occur before, within, or after the disorder mention.
The characteristics included in the taxonomy repre-
sent features describing the attributes of uncertainty
and negation in the data sets (see Section 3.1).

To develop the translation map between certainty
and negation values from each annotation schema,
authors DM and SV jointly reviewed each annotated
disorder mention from the English data set and as-
signed a Swedish polarity and certainty label, then
devised a map from the English schema into the
Swedish schema.

To characterize and compare manifestations of
uncertainty and negation using annotations from the
two data sets, DM and SV annotated each disorder
mention in both data sets with the features in the
clinical uncertainty and negation taxonomy. In the
English data set, each disorder was annotated by DM
and adjudicated by SV. In the Swedish data set, each
disorder was annotated by SV then translated into
English for adjudication by DM.

3 Results

3.1 Clinical Uncertainty and Negation
Taxonomy

We developed a clinical uncertainty and negation
taxonomy to characterize the linguistic manifesta-
tions of uncertainty and negation in clinical text
(Figure 1). We found three high-level features in
the literature and in our data sets: position of lexical
cue (i.e., position of the lexical expression indicat-
ing uncertainty or negation with respect to the dis-
order), opinion source (i.e. person believing there
is absence, presence, or uncertainty), and evidence
evaluation (i.e., reason for the uncertainty or nega-
tion belief).

Position of lexical cue demonstrated itself in the
data sets in three non-mutually exclusive ways:

• pre-disorder (lexical cue precedes the disorder) “Patient denies
chest pain.”

• intra-disorder (lexical cue occurs within the name of the disor-
der) “x-ray...possibly be indicative of pneumonia.”

• post-disorder (lexical cue occurs after the disorder)
“abdominal cramping..is unlikely.”

Opinion source exhibited the following values:

• dictating physician (dictating physician alone expressed pres-
ence, absence, or uncertainty regarding the disorder) “I suspect
bacterial pneumonia.”

• dictating physician with consultation (dictating physician explic-
itly includes other clinical professional in statement) “Discussing
with Dr. **NAME**, pneumonia can not be excluded.”

• other clinical care providers (other clinical team members ex-
plicitly stated as expressing presence, absence or uncertainty re-
garding the disorder) “per patient’s primary doctor, pneumonia
is suspected.”

• patient (patient expressed presence, absence, or uncertainty re-
garding the disorder) “Pt doesn’t think she has pneumonia.”

• unknown (ambiguous who is expressing presence, absence, or
uncertainty regarding the disorder) “there was a short episode of
coughing.”

Evidence evaluation includes a modified subset
of values found in the model of uncertainty pro-
posed by Lingard et al. (2003) to connote perceived
reasons for the provider uncertainty (and negation)
about the disorder mention as used in our data sets.

• limits of evidence (data limitations for hypothesis testing), one
diagnosis

– evidence contradicts (data contradicts expected hypothe-
sis), “Blood test normal, but we still think Lyme disease.”

– evidence needed (evidence unavailable to test hypoth-
esis) “Waiting for x-ray results to determine if it’s a
femur fracture.”

– evidence not convincing, but diagnosis asserted (data
doesn’t fully support proposed hypothesis), “Slightly el-
evated levels of WBCs suggests infection.”

• limits of evidence, more than one diagnosis

– differential diagnoses enumerated (competing diagnoses
reasoned), “bacterial infection vs. viral infection.”

• limits in source of evidence (untrusted evidence)

– non-clinical source (from non-provider source), “Pt can’t
remember if she was diagnosed with COPD.”

– clinical source (from provider source), “I do not agree
with Dr. X’s diagnosis of meningitis.”

– test source (from test e.g., poor quality), “We cannot de-
termine from the x-ray if the mass is fluid or a tumor.”

• limitless possibilities (large number of likely diagnoses so diag-
nosis defaulted to most likely), “This is probably an infection of
some sort.”

• other (no evidence limitation)

– asserting a diagnosis or disorder as affirmed (positive
case), “Confirms nausea.”

– asserting a diagnosis or disorder as negated (negative
case), “No vomiting.”

58



Figure 1: Uncertainty and negation taxonomy with features – Position of lexical cue, Opinion source and Evidence evaluation –
with corresponding values (nested lines and sub-lines).

3.2 Translation Map
In order to compare annotations between the data
sets, we developed a mapping procedure for convert-
ing the four annotated attribute values from the En-
glish schema into the two annotated attribute values
from the Swedish schema. This mapping procedure
uses two normalization steps, negation and certainty
(see Figure 2).

Using Figure 2, we explain the mapping proce-
dure to convert English annotations into Swedish
annotations. Our steps and rules are applied with
precedence, top down and left to right. For “I have
no suspicion for bacterial infection for this patient”,
English annotations are Existence(no) AND Aspec-
tualPhase(null) AND Certainty(high) AND Men-
talState(yes), and Swedish annotations are Polar-
ity(negative) AND Certainty(probably). The map-
ping procedure applies two normalization steps,
negation and uncertainty, with the following rules.

The first step is negation normalization to convert
Existence and Aspectual Phase into Polarity anno-
tations. In this example, Existence(no) → Polar-
ity(negative).

The second step is certainty normalization with
up to two sub steps. For Certainty mapping, in sum-
mary, map English NOT Certainty(unmarked) to
Swedish Certainty level, e.g., Certainty(high)
→ Certainty(probably). For MentalState

mapping, if English Certainty(unmarked) AND
MentalState(yes), map to either Swedish Cer-
tainty(probably) OR Certainty(possibly) using
your best judgment; otherwise, map to Cer-
tainty(certainly). For our example sentence,
Certainty mapping was sufficient to map from the
English to the Swedish Certainty levels.

We found that these two schemas were mappable.
Despite the binary mapping splits from English Cer-
tainty(Moderate) → Swedish Certainty(possibly)
OR Certainty(probably) and judgment calls neces-
sary for MentalState mapping, few annotations were
not easily mapped.

3.3 Characterization of English and Swedish
Data sets

In this study, we characterized our data sets accord-
ing to a clinical uncertainty and negation taxonomy
comprised of three concepts – position of lexical
cue, opinion source, and evidence evaluation.

3.3.1 Position of lexical cue
In Table 1, we show examples of phrases from each
data set representing the Polarity and Certainty lev-
els in the taxonomy. In our data set, we did not
explicitly annotate markers for the highest certainty
levels in the positive polarity, such as “definitely
has”. We did not encounter any of these cases in the

59



Figure 2: Map between values for attributes in Swedish and English schemas. Bolded rules indicate the rules used to assign values
to the example sentence (English sentence on top).

data set. We observed that most uncertainty expres-
sions precede a disorder mention. Few expressions
both precede and follow the disorder mention, or
within the disorder mention itself. We observed that
most expressions of uncertainty are conveyed using
positive polarity gradations such as “probably” and
“possibly”, for example “likely”, “appears to have”,
“signs of”. Lexical cues of low levels of certainty in
the negative polarity were rare.

3.3.2 Opinion source
In Table 2, we report examples of the various in-
dividuals – dictating physician, dictating physician
with consultation, other clinical care providers, pa-
tient, unknown – that are the source of the belief
state for uncertainty about a disorder. We observed
explicit judgments or mental postulations e.g., “I
judge” or implied speculations in which the physi-
cian was not the subject and passive expressions
were used e.g., “patient appears to have”. In cases
of dictating physician with consultation, the physi-
cian speculated about the disorder using references
to other providers consulted to strengthen the as-
sessment e.g., “Discussing with Dr...”. In cases of
other clinical care providers, there was no owner-
ship on the part of the dictating physician, but of
other members of the clinical care team e.g., “Con-

sulting Attending (Infection) thinks...”. In cases for
patient, the patient is conveying statements of con-
fusion with respect to self-diagnosing e.g., “Pat. re-
ports that she finds it difficult to discern...”. We ob-
served no expressions of uncertainty owned by the
patient in the English data set or by a relative in the
Swedish data set. In the unknown case, it is unclear
from the context of the report whether the specu-
lation is on the part of the physician to believe the
symptom reported or the relative unsure about re-
porting the symptoms e.g., “there was apparently”.

3.3.3 Evidence evaluation
Below we list examples of the different rea-
sons for uncertainties that were identified. Not all
types were observed in both corpora (Not observed).

limits of evidence, one diagnosis

- evidence contradicts – English: “Likely upper GI bleed
with elevated bun, but normal h and h.”; Swedish: “Kon-
sulterar infektionsjour som anser viros vara osannolikt
med tanke på normalt leverstatus. (Consulting Attend-
ing (infection) who thinks that virosis is improbable given
normal liver status.)”

- evidence needed – English: “chest x-ray was ordered
to rule out TB.”; Swedish: “Diskuterar med RAH-jour;
vi börjar utredning med CT-skalle med kontrast på mis-
stanke om metastaser och någon form av epileptiskt anfall
(Discussion with Attendant [CLINIC]; we start inves-

60



Table 1: Common lexical cues and their relative position to the disorder mention: Pre-disorder: uncertainty marker before disor-
der, Intra-disorder: uncertainty marker inside disorder, Post-disorder: uncertainty marker after disorder, }= schema compatibil-
ity/neutral case.

Table 2: Opinion source of uncertainty or negation types with English and Swedish examples.

tigation with CT-brain with contrast on suspicion for
metastasis and some form of epileptic seizure.)”

- evidence not convincing, but diagnosis asserted – En-
glish: Not observed; Swedish: “Förmodligen en viros
eftersom man kan se en viss lymfocytopeni i diff (Proba-
bly a virosis since there is some lymphocyte in blood cell
count.)”

limits of evidence, more than one diagnosis

- differential diagnoses enumerated – English: “ques-
tionable right-sided increased density on the right side
of the chest x-ray that could possibly be indicative of
a pneumonia versus increased pulmonary vasculature”;
Swedish: “Förefaller neurologiskt, blödning? Infarkt?
(Appears neurological, bleeding? Infarction?)”

limits in source of evidence

- non-clinical source – English: “I am not convinced that
he is perfectly clear on his situation..”; Swedish: “Pat

uppger att hon har svårt att skilja på panikångest och an-
dra symtom. (Pat. reports that she finds it difficult to
discern panick disorder from other symptoms...)”

- clinical source – English: “there was no definite diagno-
sis and they thought it was a viral syndrome of unknown
type..”; Swedish: Not observed

- test source – English: “..confusion was possible related
a TIA without much facial droop appreciated on my
physical exam”; Swedish: “Ter sig mest sannolikt som
reumatoid artrit både klinisk och lab-mässigt (Seems like
it most probably is rheumatoid arthritis both clinically
and lab-wise.)”

limitless possibilities – English: “I think this is probably a
viral problem.”; Swedish: “Pat bedömes ha en förkylning,
troligen virusinfektion. (Patient is evaluated as having a cold,
probably a virus infection.)”

other

61



- asserting dx or disorder as affirmed – English: “I sus-
pect that colon cancer is both the cause of the patient’s
bleeding..”; Swedish: Not observed

- asserting dx or disorder as negated – English: “...her
fever has abated.”; Swedish: Not observed

In many cases, the local context was sufficient for
understanding the evidential origins for uncertainty.
When a single disorder was mentioned, uncertainty
was due to data insufficient to make a definitive di-
agnosis because it contradicted a hypothesis, was
unavailable, or was not convincing. For instance,
data was to be ordered and the opportunity to inter-
pret it had not presented itself, such as “..was or-
dered to rule out TB” or “..start investigation with
CT-brain with contrast..”. In few cases, more than
one diagnosis was being enumerated due to a lim-
itation in the evidence or data gathered e.g., “Ap-
pears neurological, bleeding? Infarction?”. We ob-
served cases in which the source of the evidence pro-
duced uncertainty including both non-clinical and
clinical sources (care providers consulted and tests
produced). In cases of limitless possibilities, the
physician resorted to a common, default diagnosis
e.g., “probably a virus infection”. Limitations of ev-
idence from a clinical source were not found in the
Swedish data set and few were found in the English
data set. We expect that more examples of this cat-
egory would be found in e.g. radiology reports in
which the quality of the image is a critical factor in
making an interpretation.

4 Discussion and Conclusion

From the resulting clinical taxonomy and charac-
terization, we observe some general differences and
similarities between the two data sets and languages.
The Swedish assessment entries are more verbose
compared to the English medical records in terms
of a more detailed account of the uncertainty and
what is being done by whom to derive a diagnosis
from a disorder mention. This might reflect cultural
differences in how documentation is both produced
and used. Differential diagnoses are often listed with
question marks (“?”) in the Swedish set, e.g., “Dis-
order 1? Disorder 2? Disorder 3?”, whereas in the
English data set enumerations are either listed or
competing, e.g., “disorder 1 vs. disorder 2”. De-
spite these differences, there are many similarities

between the two data sets.
Mapping observations from the English schema

into the Swedish schema was not complicated
despite the difference in the modeled attributes.
In most cases, we determined that designating
attribute-value rules for negation and certainty nor-
malization steps was sufficient to accurately map ob-
servations between the language schemas without
changing an observation’s semantics. This finding
suggests that simple heuristics can be used to trans-
late annotations made from English trained tools
into the Swedish schema values.

The majority of the lexical markers are pre-
positioned in both languages, and the majority of
these markers are similar across the two languages,
e.g., “likely”, “possible”, “suspicion for”. How-
ever, inflections and variants are more common in
Swedish, and the language allows for free word or-
der, this relation needs to be studied further. The
default case, i.e. affirmed, or certainly positive, was
rarely expressed through lexical markers.

When it comes to the opinion source of an un-
certainty or negation, we observed a pattern in the
use of passive voice, e.g. “it was felt”, indicating
avoidance to commitment in a statement. Accurate
extraction of the opinion source of an expression
has important implications for a system that, for in-
stance, tracks the reasoning about a patient case over
time by source. This has been recognized and incor-
porated in other annotation efforts, for example for
news documents (Saurı́ and Pustejovsky, 2009). In
the English data set, no cases of self-diagnosing are
found, i.e. a patient owning the expressed uncer-
tainty. In both data sets, an implicit dictating physi-
cian source is most common, i.e. there is no explicit
use of pronouns indicating the opinion holder. In
most cases it is clear that it is the writer’s (i.e. the
dictating physician’s) opinion that is expressed, but
in some cases, a larger context is needed for this
knowledge to be resolved.

Reviewing the evidential origins or reason for ex-
pressed uncertainty, for both the Swedish and En-
glish data sets, the category “limits of evidence” is
most common. This reflects a clinical reality, where
many disorders require test results, radiology find-
ings and other similar procedures before ascertain-
ing a diagnosis. Although most cases of uncertainty
are manifested and strengthened through a lexical

62



marker, there are also instances where the uncer-
tainty is evident without such explicit markers, e.g.
the ordering of a test may in itself indicate uncer-
tainty.

4.1 Limitations

There are several limitations of this study. The
Swedish data set only contains parts of the medi-
cal record and the English data set is very small.
In the creation of the taxonomy and characteristics,
we have not focused on studying uncertainty lev-
els, i.e. distinctions between “possibly” and “prob-
ably”. The values of our taxonomy are preliminary
and may change as we develop the size of our data
set. Additionally, we only studied emergency de-
partment reports. We need to study other report
types to evaluate the generalizability of the taxon-
omy.

The two compared languages both origin from the
same language family (Germanic), which limits gen-
eralizability for other languages. Furthermore, the
definitions of disorders in the two sets differ to some
extent, i.e., English disorders are related to specific
influenza-like illnesses and Swedish to more general
disorders found in emergency departments.

4.2 Comparison to related work

Annotation schemas and reference standards for un-
certainty and negation have been created from dif-
ferent perspectives, for different levels and pur-
poses. The BioScope Corpus, for instance, contains
sentence-level uncertainty annotations with token-
level annotations for speculation and negation cues,
along with their linguistic scope (Vincze et al.,
2008). In Wilbur et al. (2006), five qualitative di-
mensions for characterizing biomedical articles are
defined, including levels of certainty. In the 2010
i2b2/VA Challenge on concepts, assertions and re-
lations in clinical texts, medical problem concepts
were annotated. The assertion task included six an-
notation classes (present, absent, possible, hypothet-
ical, conditional, not associated with the patient),
to be assigned to each medical problem concept
(Uzuner et al., 2011). Vincze et al. (2011) present
a quantitative comparison of the intersection of two
English corpora annotated for negation and specula-
tion (BioScope and Genia Event) from two different
perspectives (linguistic and event-oriented).

We extend these schemas by characterizing the
underlying meaning and distinctions evident by the
linguistic expressions used to indicate uncertainty
and negation in the clinical domain and by exploring
the relationship between uncertainty and negation,
through an analysis and comparison of two differ-
ent annotation schemas. However, this study is not a
proposal for mapping to these schemas or others.

From an application perspective, uncertainty and
negation handling have been included in rule-based
systems such as NegEx and ConText, applied on dis-
order mentions. In Chapman et al. (2011), a gener-
alized version of ConText is presented, with uncer-
tainty values (probably, definitely) linked to either a
positive or negative assertion, with an added indeter-
minate value. A previous study has shown promis-
ing results for adapting NegEx to Swedish (Skepp-
stedt, 2011), indicating that further extensions and
adaptations between the two languages for e.g. un-
certainty modeling should be viable. Machine-
learning based approaches outperform rule-based
for assertion classification according to results pre-
sented in Uzuner et al. (2009). A machine-learning
approach was also used in the top performing sys-
tem in the 2010 i2b2/VA Challenge assertion task
(de Bruijn et al., 2011).

4.3 Implications and future work

With uncertainty lexicons for both Swedish and En-
glish, we hypothesize that we will be able to ex-
tend ConText to handle uncertainties in English as
well as in Swedish. This enables both improve-
ments over the existing system and the possibilities
of further comparing system performances between
languages. We will also experiment with machine-
learning approaches to detect and annotate uncer-
tainty and negation. We plan to extend both data
sets, the English data set using semi-automatically
translated disorders marked in the Swedish data set
to encode new disorder mentions, and the Swedish
data set by extracting the full medical records, thus
creating a larger set for comparison. We will extend
the taxonomy as needed e.g., syntactic and semantic
patterns, and investigate how to integrate the clini-
cal taxonomy to inform ConText by providing more
granular descriptions of the motivation behind the
uncertainty, thus bringing us closer to natural lan-
guage understanding.

63



Acknowledgments

For the English and Swedish data sets, we obtained
approval from the University of Pittsburgh IRB and
the Regional Ethical Review Board in Stockholm
(Etikprövningsnämnden i Stockholm). The study is
part of the Interlock project, funded by the Stock-
holm University Academic Initiative and partially
funded by NLM Fellowship 5T15LM007059. Lex-
icons and probabilities will be made available and
updated on the iDASH NLP ecosystem under Re-
sources: http://idash.ucsd.edu/nlp/natural-language-
processing-nlp-ecosystem.

References
B. E. Chapman, S. Lee, H. Peter Kang, and W. W. Chap-

man. 2011. Document-level Classification of CT Pul-
monary Angiography Reports Based on an Extension
of the ConText Algorithm. Journal of Biomedical In-
formatics, 44:728–737.

D. Chu, J.N. Dowling, and WW Chapman. 2006. Eval-
uating the Effectiveness of Four Contextual Features
in Classifying Annotated Clinical Conditions in Emer-
gency Department Reports. In AMIA Annu Symp Proc,
pages 141–145.

C. Clark, J. Aberdeen, M. Coarr, D. Tresner-Kirsh,
B. Wellner, A. Yeh, and L. Hirschman. 2011. MITRE
system for Clinical Assertion Status Classification. J
Am Med Inform Assoc, 11(18):563–567.

B. de Bruijn, C. Cherry, S. Kiritchenko, J. Martin, and
X. Zhu. 2011. Machine-learned Solutions for Three
Stages of Clinical Information Extraction: The State of
the Art at i2b2 2010. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 18:557–562.

H. Harkema, J. N. Dowling, T. Thornblade, and W. W.
Chapman. 2009. ConText: An Algorithm for De-
termining Negation, Experiencer, and Temporal Status
from Clinical Reports. Journal of Biomedical Infor-
matics, 42:839–851.

L. Lingard, K. Garwood, C. F. Schryer, and M. M. Spaf-
ford. 2003. A Certain Art of Uncertainty: Case Pre-
sentation and the Development of Professional Iden-
tity. Social science medicine, 56(3):603–616.

S. M. Meystre, G. K. Savova, K. C. Kipper-Schuler, and
John E. Hurdle. 2008. Extracting Information from
Textual Documents in the Electronic Health Record: A
Review of Recent Research. IMIA Yearbook of Medi-
cal Informatics 2008. 47 Suppl 1:138-154.

D. Mowery, P. Jordan, J.M. Wiebe, H. Harkema, and
W.W. Chapman. 2012. Semantic Annotation of Clini-
cal Text: A Pilot Study. Unpublished.

V. L. Rubin, E. D. Liddy, and N. Kando. 2006. Cer-
tainty Identification in Texts: Categorization Model
and Manual Tagging Results. In Computing Affect and
Attitutde in Text: Theory and Applications. Springer.

R. Saurı́ and J. Pustejovsky. 2009. FactBank: A Corpus
Annotated with Event Factuality. Language Resources
and Evaluation, 43(3):227–268–268, September.

M. Skeppstedt. 2011. Negation Detection in Swedish
Clinical Text: An Adaptation of NegEx to Swedish.
Journal of Biomedical Semantics, 2(Suppl. 3):S3.

A. L. Strauss and J. Corbin. 1990. Basics of Qual-
itative Research: Grounded Theory Procedures and
Techniques. Sage.

Ö. Uzuner, X. Zhang, and T. Sibanda. 2009. Ma-
chine Learning and Rule-based Approaches to Asser-
tion Classification. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 16(1):109–115.

Ö. Uzuner, B. R. South, S. Shen, and S. L. DuVall. 2011.
2010 i2b2/VA Challenge on Concepts, Assertions, and
Relations in Clinical Text. JAMIA, 18(5):552–556.

S. Velupillai, H. Dalianis, and M. Kvist. 2011. Factual-
ity Levels of Diagnoses in Swedish Clinical Text. In
A. Moen, S. K. Andersen, J. Aarts, and P. Hurlen, ed-
itors, Proc. XXIII International Conference of the Eu-
ropean Federation for Medical Informatics (User Cen-
tred Networked Health Care), pages 559 – 563, Oslo,
August. IOS Press.

V. Vincze, G. Szarvas, R. Farkas, G. Móra, and J. Csirik.
2008. The BioScope Corpus: Biomedical Texts An-
notated for Uncertainty, Negation and Their Scopes.
BMC Bioinformatics, 9(S-11).

V. Vincze, G. Szarvas, G. M’ora, T. Ohta, and R. Farkas.
2011. Linguistic Scope-based and Biological Event-
based Speculation and Negation Annotations in the
BioScope and Genia Event Corpora. Journal of
Biomedical Semantics, 2(Suppl. 5):S8.

J. Wiebe, R. Bruce, M. Bell, M. Martin, and T. Wilson.
2001. A Corpus Study of Evaluative and Specula-
tive Language. In Proceedings of the Second SIG-
dial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue - Volume
16, SIGDIAL ’01, pages 1–10, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

J. W. Wilbur, A. Rzhetsky, and H. Shatkay. 2006.
New Directions in Biomedical Text Annotation: Def-
initions, Guidelines and Corpus Construction. BMC
Bioinformatics, 7:356+, July.

64


