










































Combining Rule-Based and Statistical Syntactic Analyzers


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 48–54,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Combining Rule-Based and Statistical Syntactic Analyzers 

 
 

María Jesús Aranzabe*, Arantza Díaz de Ilarraza, Nerea Ezeiza, Kepa Bengoetxea, 
Iakes Goenaga, Koldo Gojenola,  

Department of Computer Languages and Systems / * Department of Basque Philology 
University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU 

{maxux.aranzabe@ehu.es, kepa.bengoetxea, jipdisaa@si.ehu.es, 
n.ezeiza@ehu.es, koldo.gojenola@ehu.es, iakes@gmail.com} 

 
 

 

Abstract 

This paper presents the results of a set of 
preliminary experiments combining two 
knowledge-based partial dependency 
analyzers with two statistical parsers, 
applied to the Basque Dependency 
Treebank. The general idea will be to apply 
a stacked scheme where the output of the 
rule-based partial parsers will be given as 
input to MaltParser and MST, two state of 
the art statistical parsers. The results show 
a modest improvement over the baseline, 
although they also present interesting lines 
for further research. 

1. Introduction 
In this paper we present a set of preliminary 
experiments on the combination of two 
knowledge-based partial syntactic analyzers with 
two state of the art data-driven statistical parsers. 
The experiments have been performed on the 
Basque Dependency Treebank (Aduriz et al., 
2003). 

In the last years, many attempts have been 
performed trying to combine different parsers 
(Surdeanu and Manning, 2010), with significant 
improvements over the best individual parser’s 
baseline. The two most successful approaches have 
been stacking (Martins et al., 2008) and voting 
(Sagae and Lavie, 2006, Nivre and McDonald, 
2008, McDonald and Nivre, 2011). In this paper 
we will experiment the use of the stacking 
technique, giving the tags obtained by the rule-

based syntactic partial parsers as input to the 
statistical parsers. 

Morphologically rich languages present new 
challenges, as the use of state of the art parsers for 
more configurational and non-inflected languages 
like English does not reach similar performance 
levels in languages like Basque, Greek or Turkish 
(Nivre et al., 2007a). As it was successfully done 
on part of speech (POS) tagging, where the use of 
rule-based POS taggers (Tapanainen and 
Voutilainen, 1994) or a combination of a rule-
based POS tagger with a statistical one (Aduriz et 
al., 1997, Ezeiza et al., 1998) outperformed purely 
statistical taggers, we think that exploring the 
combination of knowledge-based and data-driven 
systems in syntactic processing can be an 
interesting line of research. 

Most of the experiments on combined parsers 
have relied on different types of statistical parsers 
(Sagae and Lavie, 2006, Martins et al., 2008, 
McDonald and Nivre, 2011), trained on an 
automatically annotated treebank. Yeh (2000) used 
the output of several baseline diverse parsers to 
increase the performance of a second 
transformation-based parser. In our work we will 
study the use of two partial rule-based syntactic 
analyzers together with two data-driven parsers: 

• A rule-based chunker (Aduriz et al., 2004) 
that marks the beginning and end of noun 
phrases, postpositional phrases and verb 
chains, in the IOB (Inside/ 
Outside/Beginning of a chunk) style. 

• A shallow dependency relation annotator 
(Aranzabe et al., 2004), which tries to 
detect dependency relations by assigning a 

48



set of predefined tags to each word, where 
each tag gives both the name of a 
dependency relation (e.g. subject) together 
with the direction of its head (left or right). 

• We will use two statistical dependency 
parsers, MaltParser (Nivre et al., 2007b) 
and MST (McDonald et al, 2005). 

In the rest of this paper, section 2 will first 
present the corpus and the different parsers we will 
combine, followed by the experimental results in 
section 3, and the main conclusions of the work. 

2. Resources 
This section will describe the main resources that 
have been used in the experiments. First, 
subsection 2.1 will describe the Basque 
Dependency Treebank, and then subsection 2.2 
will explain the main details of the analyzers that 
have been employed. The analyzers are a rule-
based chunker, a rule-based shallow dependency 
parser and two state of the art data-driven 
dependency parsers, MaltParser and MST.  

2.1 Corpora 
Our work will make use the second version of the 
Basque dependency Treebank (BDT II, Aduriz et 
al., 2003), containing 150,000 tokens (11,225 
sentences). Figure 1 presents an example of a 
syntactically annotated sentence. Each word 
contains its form, lemma, category or coarse part 
of speech (CPOS), POS, morphosyntactic features 
such as case, number of subordinate relations, and 
the dependency relation (headword + dependency). 
The information in figure 1 has been simplified 
due to space reasons, as typically each word 

contains many morphosyntactic features (case, 
number, type of subordinated sentence, ...), which 
are relevant for parsing. The last two lines of the 
sentence in figure 1 do not properly correspond to 
the treebank, but are the result of the rule-based 
partial syntactic analyzers (see subsection 2.2). For 
evaluation, we divided the treebank in three sets, 
corresponding to training, development, and test 
(80%, 10%, and 10%, respectively). The 
experiments were performed on the development 
set, leaving the best system for the final test. 

2.2 Analyzers 
This subsection will present the four types of 
analyzers that have been used. The rule-based 
analyzers are based on the Contraint Grammar 
(CG) formalism (Karlsson et al., 1995), based on 
the assignment of morphosyntactic tags to words 
using a formalism that has the capabilities of finite 
state automata or regular expressions, by means of 
a set of rules that examine mainly local contexts of 
words to determine the correct tag assignment. 

The rule-based chunker (RBC henceforth, 
Aranzabe et al., 2009) uses 560 rules, where 479 of 
the rules deal with noun phrases and the rest with 
verb phrases. The chunker delimits the chunks with 
three tags, using a standard IOB marking style (see 
figure 1). The first one is to mark the beginning of 
the phrase (B-VP if it is a verb phrase and B-NP 
whether it's a noun phrase) and the other one to 
mark the continuation of the phrase (I-NP or I-VP, 
meaning that the word is inside an NP or VP). The 
last tag marks words that are outside a chunk. The 
evaluation of the chunker on the BDT gave a result 
of 87% precision and 85% recall over all chunks. 
We must take into account that this evaluation was 

auxmod 
ccomp_obj 
 auxmod 

Gizonak    mutil    handia   etorri     dela        esan      du . 
The-man       boy        tall-the    come         has+he+that     tell      he+did+it   
N-ERG-S       N          ADJ-ABS-S   V            AUXV+S+COMPL    V         AUXV 
B-NP          B-NP       I-NP        B-VP         I-NP            B-VP      I-VP 
&NCSUBJ>      &NCSUBJ>   $<NCMOD     $CCOMP_OBJ>  &<AUXMOD        &MAINV    &<AUXMOD 

ncsubj 

ncmod 
ncsubj 

Figure 1. Dependency tree for the sentence Gizonak mutil handia etorri dela esan du (the man told that the tall 
boy has come). The two last lines show the tags assigned by the rule-based chunker and the rule-based 

dependency analyzer, respectively. 
(V = main verb, N = noun, AUXV = auxiliary verb, COMPL = completive, ccomp_obj = clausal complement object, ERG = 

ergative, S: singular, auxmod = auxiliary, ncsubj = non-clausal subject, B-NP = beginning of NP, I-NP = inside an NP, 
&MAINV = main verb, &<AUXMOD = verbal auxiliary modifier). 

 

49



performed on the gold POS tags, rather than on 
automatically assigned POS tasks, as in the present 
experiment. For that reason, the results can serve 
as an upper bound on the real results. 

The rule-based dependency analyzer (RBDA, 
Aranzabe et al., 2004) uses a set of 505 CG rules 
that try to assign dependency relations to 
wordforms. As the CG formalism only allows the 
assignment of tags, the rules only aim at marking 
the name of the dependency relation together with 
the direction of the head (left or right). For 
example, this analyzer assigns tags of the form 
&NCSUBJ> (see figure 1), meaning that the 
corresponding wordform is a non-clausal syntactic 
subject and that its head is situated to its right (the 
“>” or “<” symbols mark the direction of the 
head). This means that the result of this analysis is 
on the one hand a partial analysis and, on the other 
hand, it does not define a dependency tree, and can 
also be seen as a set of constraints on the shape of 
the tree. The system was evaluated on the BDT, 
obtaining f-scores between 90% for the auxmod 
dependency relation between the auxiliary and the 
main verb and 52% for the subject dependency 
relation, giving a (macro) average of 65%. 

Regarding the data-driven parsers, we have 
made use of MaltParser (Nivre et al., 2007b) and 
MST Parser (McDonald et al., 2006), two state of 
the art dependency parsers representing two 
dominant approaches in data-driven dependency 
parsing, and that have been successfully applied to 
typologically different languages and treebanks 
(McDonald and Nivre, 2007).  

MaltParser (Nivre, 2006) is a representative of 
local, greedy, transition-based dependency parsing 
models, where the parser obtains deterministically 
a dependency tree in a single pass over the input 
using two data structures: a stack of partially 
analyzed items and the remaining input sequence. 
To determine the best action at each step, the 
parser uses history-based feature models and 
discriminative machine learning. The learning 
configuration can include any kind of information 
(such as word-form, lemma, category, subcategory 
or morphological features). Several variants of the 
parser have been implemented, and we will use 
one of its standard versions (MaltParser version 
1.4). In our experiments, we will use the Stack-
Lazy algorithm with the liblinear classifier.  

The MST Parser can be considered a 
representative of global, exhaustive graph-based 

parsing (McDonald et al., 2005, 2006). This 
algorithm finds the highest scoring directed 
spanning tree in a dependency graph forming a 
valid dependency tree. To learn arc scores, it uses 
large-margin structured learning algorithms, which 
optimize the parameters of the model to maximize 
the score margin between the correct dependency 
graph and all incorrect dependency graphs for 
every sentence in a training set. The learning 
procedure is global since model parameters are set 
relative to classifying the entire dependency graph, 
and not just over single arc attachments. This is in 
contrast to the local but richer contexts used by 
transition-based parsers. We use the freely 
available version of MSTParser1. In the following 
experiments we will make use of the second order 
non-projective algorithm.  

3. Experiments  
We will experiment the effect of using the output 
of the knowledge-based analyzers as input to the 
data-driven parsers in a stacked learning scheme. 
Figure 1 shows how the two last lines of the 
example sentence contain the tags assigned by the 
rule-based chunker (B-NP, I-NP, B-VP and I-VP) 
and the rule-based partial dependency analyzer 
(&NCSUBJ, &<NCMOD, &<AUXMOD, 
&CCOMP_OBJ and &MAINV) . 

The first step consisted in applying the complete 
set of text processing tools for Basque, including: 

• Morphological analysis. In Basque, each 
word can receive multiple affixes, as each 
lemma can generate thousands of word-
forms by means of morphological 
properties, such as case, number, tense, or 
different types of subordination for verbs. 
Consequently, the  morphological analyzer 
for Basque (Aduriz et al. 2000) gives a 
high ambiguity. If only categorial (POS) 
ambiguity is taken into account, there is an 
average of 1.55 interpretations per word-
form, which rises to 2.65 when the full 
morphosyntactic information is taken into 
account, giving an overall 64% of 
ambiguous word-forms. 

• Morphological disambiguation. 
Disambiguating the output of 
morphological analysis, in order to obtain 
a single interpretation for each word-form, 

                                                           
1 http://mstparser.sourceforge.net 

50



can pose an important problem, as 
determining the correct interpretation for 
each word-form requires in many cases the 
inspection of local contexts, and in some 
others, as the agreement of verbs with 
subject, object or indirect object, it could 
also suppose the examination of elements 
which can be far from each other, added to 
the free constituent order of the main 
sentence elements in Basque. The 
erroneous assignment of incorrect part of 
speech or morphological features can 
difficult the work of the parser. 

• Chunker 
• Partial dependency analyzer 

When performing this task, we found the 
problem of matching the treebank tokens with 
those obtained from the analyzers, as there were 
divergences on the treatment of multiword units, 
mostly coming from Named Entities, verb 
compounds and complex postpositions (formed 
with morphemes appearing at two different words). 
For that reason, we performed a matching process 
trying to link the multiword units given by the 
morphological analysis module and the treebank, 
obtaining a correct match for 99% of the sentences.  

Regarding the data-driven parsers, they are 
trained using two kinds of tags as input: 

• POS and morphosyntactic tags coming 
from the automatic morphological 
processing of the dependency treebank. 
Disambiguation errors, such as an 
incorrect POS category or morphological 
analyses (e.g. the assignment of an 
incorrect case) can harm the parser, as 
tested in Bengoetxea et al. (2011). 

• The output of the rule-based partial 
syntactic analyzers (two last lines of the 
example in figure 1). These tags contain 
errors of the CG-based syntactic taggers. 
As the analyzers are applied after 

morphological processing, the errors can 
be propagated and augmented. 

Table 1 shows the results of using the output of 
the knowledge-based analyzers as input to the 
statistical parsers. We have performed three 
experiments for each statistical parser, trying with 
the chunks provided by the chunker, the partial 
dependency parser, and both. The table shows 
modest gains, suggesting that the rule-based 
analyzers help the statistical ones, giving slight 
increases over the baseline, which are statistically 
significant when applying MaltParser to the output 
of the rule-based dependency parser and a 
combination of the chunker and rule-based parsers. 
As table 1 shows, the parser type is relevant, as 
MaltParser seems to be sensitive when using the 
stacked features, while the partial parsers do not 
seem to give any significant improvement to MST. 

3.1 Error analysis 
Looking with more detail at the errors made by the 
different versions of the parsers, we observe 
significant differences in the results for different 
dependency relations, seeing that the statistical 
parsers behave in a different manner regarding to 
each relation, as shown in table 2. The table shows 
the differences in f-score2  corresponding to five 
local dependency relations, (determination of 
verbal modifiers, such as subject, object and 
indirect object).  

McDonald and Nivre (2007) examined the types 
of errors made by the two data-driven parsers used 
in this work, showing how the greedy algorithm of 
MaltParser performed better with local dependency 
relations, while the graph-based algorithm of MST 
was more accurate for global relations. As both the 
chunker and the partial dependency analyzer are 
based on a set of local rules in the CG formalism, 
we could expect that the stacked parsers could 
benefit mostly on the local dependency relations. 
                                                           
2 f-score = 2 * precision * recall / (precision + recall) 

 MaltParser MST Parser 
 LAS UAS LAS UAS 
Baseline 76.77% 82.09%  77.96% 84.04% 
+ RBC 77.10% (+0.33) 82.29% (+0.20)  77.99% (+0.03) 83.99% (-0.05) 
+ RBDA *77.15% (+0.38) 82.27% (+0.18)  78.03% (+0.07) 83.76% (-0.28) 
+ RBC + RBDA  *77.25% (+0.48) 82.18% (+0.09)  78.00% (+0.04) 83.34% (-0.70) 

Table 1. Evaluation results  
(RBC = rule-based chunker, RBDA = rule-based dependency analyzer, LAS: Labeled Attachment Score,  

UAS: Unlabeled Attachment Score, *: statistically significant in McNemar's test, p < 0.05) 
 

51



Table 2 shows how the addition of the rule-based 
parsers’ tags performs in accord with this behavior, 
as MaltParser gets f-score improvements for the 
local relations. Although not shown in Table 2, we 
also inspected the results on the long distance 
relations, where we did not observe noticeable 
improvements with respect to the baseline on any 
parser. For that reason, MaltParser, seems to 
mostly benefit of the local nature of the stacked 
features, while MST does not get a significant 
improvement, except for some local dependency 
relations, such as ncobj and ncsubj. 

We performed an additional test using the partial 
dependency analyzer’s gold dependency relations 
as input to MaltParser. As could be expected, the 
gold tags gave a noticeable improvement to the 
parser’s results, reaching 95% LAS. However, 
when examining the scores for the output 
dependency relations, we noticed that the gold 
partial dependency tags are beneficial for some 
relations, although negative for some others. For 
example the non-clausal modifier (ncmod) 
relation’s f-score increases 3.25 points, while the 
dependency relation for clausal subordinate 
sentences functioning as indirect object decreases 
0.46 points, which is surprising in principle. 

For all those reasons, the relation between the 
input dependency tags and the obtained results 
seems to be intricate, and we think that it deserves 
new experiments in order to determine their nature. 
As each type of syntactic information can have an 
important influence on the results on specific 
relations, their study can shed light on novel 
schemes of parser combination. 

4. Conclusions  
We have presented a preliminary effort to integrate 
different syntactic analyzers, with the objective of 
getting the best from each system. Although the 
potential gain is in theory high, the experiments 

have shown very modest improvements, which 
seem to happen in the set of local dependency 
relations. We can point out some avenues for 
further research: 

• Development of the rule-based 
dependency parser using the dependencies 
that give better improvements on the gold 
dependency tags, as this can measure the 
impact of each kind of shallow 
dependency tag on the data-driven parsers. 

• Development of rules that deal with the 
phenomena where the statistical parsers 
perform worse. This requires a careful 
error analysis followed by a redesign of 
the manually developed CG tagging rules. 

• Application of other types of combining 
schemes, such as voting, trying to get the 
best from each type of parser. 

Finally, we must also take into account that the 
rule-based analyzers were developed mainly 
having linguistic principles in mind, such as 
coverage of diverse linguistic phenomena or the 
treatment of specific syntactic constructions 
(Aranzabe et al., 2004), instead of performance-
oriented measures, such as precision and recall. 
This means that there is room for improvement in 
the first-stage knowledge-based parsers, which will 
have, at least in theory, a positive effect on the 
second-phase statistical parsers, allowing us to test 
whether knowledge-based and machine learning-
based systems can be successfully combined. 

Acknowledgements 
This research was supported by the Department of 
Industry of the Basque Government (IT344-10, S-
PE11UN114), the University of the Basque 
Country (GIU09/19) and the Spanish Ministry of 

 MaltParser MST Parser 
Dependency 
relation 

Baseline + RBC + RBDA + RBC  
+ RBDA 

Baseline + RBC + RBDA + RBC  
+ RBDA 

ncmod 75,29 75,90 76,08 76,40 77,15 77,44 76,39 76,92 
ncobj 67,34 68,49 69,67 69,54 64,85 64,86 65,56 66,18 
ncpred 61,37 61,92 61,26 63,50 60,37 57,55 58,44 59,27 
ncsubj 61,92 61,90 63,96 63,91 59,19 59,26 62,23 61,61 
nciobj 75,76 76,53 77,16 76,29 74,23 74,47 72,16 69,08 

Table 2. Comparison of the different parsers’ f-score with regard to specific dependency relations 
(ncmod = non-clausal modifier, ncobj = non-clausal object, ncpred = non-clausal predicate, ncsubj = non-clausal subject, 

nciobj = non-clausal indirect object) 

52



Science and Innovation (MICINN, TIN2010- 
20218). 

References  
Itziar Aduriz, José María Arriola, Xabier Artola, 

Arantza Díaz de Ilarraza, Koldo Gojenola and 
Montse Maritxalar. 1997. Morphosyntactic 
disambiguation for Basque based on the Constraint 
Grammar Formalism. Conference on Recent 
Advances in Natural Language Processing 
(RANLP), Bulgaria. 

Itziar Aduriz, Eneko Agirre, Izaskun Aldezabal, Iñaki 
Alegria, Xabier Arregi, Jose Mari Arriola, Xabier 
Artola, Koldo Gojenola, Montserrat Maritxalar, Kepa 
Sarasola, and Miriam Urkia. 2000. A word-grammar 
based morphological analyzer for agglutinative 
languages. Coling 2000, Saarbrucken. 

Itziar Aduriz, José María Arriola, Arantza Díaz de 
Ilarraza, Koldo Gojenola, Maite Oronoz and Larraitz 
Uria. 2004. A cascaded syntactic analyser for 
Basque. In Computational Linguistics and Intelligent 
Text Processing, pages 124-135. LNCS Series. 
Springer Verlag. Berlin. 2004 

Itziar Aduriz, Maria Jesus Aranzabe, Jose Maria 
Arriola, Aitziber Atutxa, Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza, 
Aitzpea Garmendia and Maite Oronoz. 2003. 
Construction of a Basque dependency treebank. 
Treebanks and Linguistic Theories. 

María Jesús Aranzabe, José María Arriola and Arantza 
Díaz de Ilarraza. 2004. Towards a Dependency 
Parser for Basque. In Proceedings of the Workshop 
on Recent Advances in Dependency Grammar, 
Geneva, Switzerland. 

Maria Jesus Aranzabe, Jose Maria Arriola and Arantza 
Díaz de Ilarraza. 2009. Theoretical and 
Methodological issues of tagging Noun Phrase 
Structures following Dependency Grammar 
Formalism. In Artiagoitia, X. and Lakarra J.A. (eds) 
Gramatika Jaietan. Patxi Goenagaren omenez. 
Donostia: Gipuzkoako Foru Aldundia-UPV/EHU. 

Kepa Bengoetxea and Koldo Gojenola. 2010. 
Application of Different Techniques to Dependency 
Parsing of Basque. Proceedings of the 1st Workshop 
on Statistical Parsing of Morphologically Rich 
Languages (SPMRL), NAACL-HLT Workshop. 

Kepa Bengoetxea, Arantza Casillas and Koldo 
Gojenola. 2011. Testing the Effect of Morphological 
Disambiguation in Dependency Parsing of Basque. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Parsing Technologies (IWPT). 2nd Workshop on 

Statistical Parsing Morphologically Rich Languages 
(SPMRL), Dublin, Ireland. 

Gülsen Eryiğit, Joakim Nivre and Kemal Oflazer. 2008. 
Dependency Parsing of Turkish. Computational 
Linguistics, Vol. 34 (3).  

Nerea Ezeiza, Iñaki Alegria, José María Arriola, Rubén 
Urizar and Itziar Aduriz. 1998. Combining 
Stochastic and Rule-Based Methods for 
Disambiguation in Agglutinative Languages. 
COLING-ACL’98, Montreal. 

Fred Karlsson, Atro Voutilainen, Juka Heikkila and 
Arto Anttila. 1995. Constraint Grammar: A 
Language-independent System for Parsing 
Unrestricted Text. Mouton de Gruyter. 

André F. T. Martins, Dipanjan Das, Noah A. Smith and 
Eric P. Xing. 2008. Stacking Dependency Parsing. 
Proceedings of EMNLP-2008. 

Ryan McDonald, Kevin Lerman and Fernando Pereira. 
2005. Online large-margin training of dependency 
parsers. In Proceedings of ACL. 

Ryan McDonald, Kevin Lerman and Fernando Pereira. 
2006. Multilingual dependency analysis with a two-
stage discriminative parser. In Proc. CoNLL. 

Ryan McDonald and Joakim Nivre. 2007. 
Characterizing the Errors of Data-Driven 
Dependency Parsing Models. Proceedings of the 
2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing and Computational 
Natural Language Learning, EMNLP/CoNLL. 

Ryan McDonald and Joakim Nivre. 2011. Analyzing 
and Integrating Dependency Parsers. Computational 
Linguistics, Vol. 37(1), 197-230. 

Joakim Nivre. 2006. Inductive Dependency Parsing. 
Springer. 

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Sandra Kübler, Ryan 
McDonald, Jens Nilsson, Sebastian Riedel and Deniz 
Yuret. 2007a. The CoNLL 2007 Shared Task on 
Dependency Parsing. Proceedings of EMNLP-
CoNLL. 

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Atanas Chanev, 
Gülsen Eryiğit, Sandra Kübler, S. Marinov and 
Edwin Marsi. 2007b. MaltParser: A language-
independent system for data-driven dependency 
parsing. Natural Language Engineering.  

Joakim Nivre and Ryan McDonald. 2008. Integrating 
graph-based and transition-based dependency 
parsers. Proceedings of ACL-2008. 

Kenji Sagae and Alon Lavie. 2006. Parser Combination 
by Reparsing. Proceedings of the Human Language 

53



Technology Conference of the North American 
Chapter of the ACL, pages 129–132, New York. 

Mihai Surdeanu and Christopher D. Manning. 2010. 
Ensemble Models for Dependency Parsing: Cheap 
and Good? Proceedings of the Human Language 
Technology Conference of the North American 
Chapter of the ACL. 

Pasi Tapanainen and Atro Voutilainen. 1994. Tagging 
Accurately-Don´t guess if you know. Proceedings 
of the Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing, ANLP´94. 

Alexander Yeh. 2000. Using existing systems to 
supplement small amounts of annotated 
grammatical relations training data. Proceedings of 
ACL 2000. 

54


