










































An annotated English child language database


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Workshop on Computational Models of Language Acquisition and Loss, pages 23–25,
Avignon, France, April 24 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

An annotated English child language database

Aline Villavicencio♣♠, Beracah Yankama♠, Rodrigo Wilkens♣,
Marco A. P. Idiart♣, Robert Berwick♠

♣Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (Brazil)
♠MIT (USA)

alinev@gmail.com, beracah@mit.edu, rswilkens@gmail.com, marco.idiart@gmail.com, berwick@csail.mit.edu

1 Introduction

The use of large-scale naturalistic data has been
opening up new investigative possibilities for lan-
guage acquisition studies, providing a basis for
empirical predictions and for evaluations of alter-
native acquisition hypotheses. One widely used
resource is CHILDES (MacWhinney, 1995) with
transcriptions for over 25 languages of interac-
tions involving children, with the English corpora
available in raw, part-of-speech tagged, lemma-
tized and parsed formats (Sagae et al., 2010; But-
tery and Korhonen, 2005). With a recent increase
in the availability of lexical and psycholinguistic
resources and robust natural language processing
tools, it is now possible to further enrich child-
language corpora with additional sources of infor-
mation.

In this paper we describe the English CHILDES
Verb Database (ECVD), which extends the orig-
inal lexical and syntactic annotation of verbs
in CHILDES with information about frequency,
grammatical relations, semantic classes, and other
psycholinguistic and statistical information. In
addition, these corpora are organized in a search-
able database that allows the retrieval of data ac-
cording to complex queries that combine different
sources of information. This database is also mod-
ular and can be straightforwardly extended with
additional annotation levels. In what follows, we
discuss the tools and resources used for the anno-
tation (§2), and conclude with a discussion of the
implications of this initial work along with direc-
tions for future research (§3).

2 Linguistic and Statistical
Properties

The English CHILDES Verb Database con-
tains information about the English corpora in
CHILDES parsed using three different pipelines:
(1) MEGRASP; (2) RASP; and (3) the CHILDES
Treebank. In the first, made available as part of
the CHILDES distribution1, the corpora are POS

1http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/

tagged (in %mor), and parsed using MEGRASP
(Sagae et al., 2010) which provides information
about dependency parses and grammatical rela-
tions (in %gra):2

*MOT: I said (.) Adam you could have a banana
and offer Robin and Ursula one (.)would you
?

%mor: pro|I v|say&PAST n:prop|Adam pro|you
aux|could v|have det|a n|banana ...

%gra: 1|2|SUBJ 2|6|CJCT 3|2|OBJ 4|6|SUBJ
5|6|AUX 6|9|COORD 7|8|DET 8|6|OBJ ...

In the second pipeline, the RASP system
(Briscoe et al., 2006) is used for tokenisation,
tagging, lemmatization and parsing of the input
sentences, outputting syntactic trees (in %ST)
and grammatical relations (%GR).3 In both
examples each GR denotes a relation, along with
its head and dependent:

*MOT: oh no # he didn’t say anything about win-
dow .

%ST: (T Oh:1 no:2 ,:3 (S he:4 (VP do+ed:5
not+:6 say:7 anything:8 (PP about:9 (N1
window:10)))) .:11)

%GR: (|ncsubj| |say:7 VV0| |he:4 PPHS1| )
(|aux| |say:7 VV0| |do+ed:5 VDD|)
(|ncmod| |say:7 VV0| |not+:6 XX|)
(|iobj| |say:7 VV0| |about:9 II|) (|dobj|
|say:7 VV0| |anything:8 PN1|) (|dobj|
|about:9 II| |window:10 NN1|)

The third focuses on the Adam corpus from
the Brown data set (Brown, 1973) and uses
the Charniak parser with Penn Treebank style
part of speech tags and output, followed by
hand-curation, as described by Pearl and Sprouse
(2012):

(S1 (SBARQ (WHNP (WP who)) (SQ (VP (COP is)

(NP (NN that)))) (. ?)))

2In an evaluation MEGRASP produced correct depen-
dency relations for 96% of the relations in the gold stan-
dard, with the dependency relations being labelled with the
correct GR 94% of the time.

3The data was kindly provided by P. Buttery and A.
Korhonen and generated as described in (Buttery and Ko-
rhonen, 2005).

23



The use of annotations from multiple parsers
enables the combination of the complementary
strengths of each in terms of coverage and ac-
curacy, similar to inter-annotator agreement ap-
proaches. These differences are also useful for op-
timizing search patterns in terms of the source
which produces the best accuracy for a particu-
lar case. Information about corpora sizes and the
annotated portions for each of the parsers is dis-
played in table 1.

Information Sentences

Total Raw 4.84 million
MEGRASP & RASP Raw 2.5 million
MEGRASP Parsed 109,629
RASP Parsed 2.21 million
CHILDES Treebank 26,280
MEGRASP & RASP Parsed 98,456

Table 1: Parsed Sentences

The verbs in each sentence are also annotated
with information about shared patterns of mean-
ing and syntactic behavior from 190 fine-grained
subclasses that cover 3,100 verb types (Levin,
1993). This annotation allows searches defined
in terms of verb classes, and include all sentences
that contain verbs that belong to a given class.
For instance, searching for verbs of running would
return sentences containing not only run but also
related verbs like slide, roll and stroll.

Additional annotation of properties linked to
language use and recognition include extrinsic fac-
tors such as word frequency and intrinsic factors
such as the length of a word in terms of sylla-
bles; age of acquisition; imageability; and familiar-
ity. Some of this annotation is obtained from the
MRC Psycholinguistic Database (Coltheart, 1981)
which contains 150,837 entries with information
about 26 properties, although not all properties
are available for every word (e.g. IMAG is only
available for 9,240 words).

For enabling complex search functionalities
that potentially combine information from several
sources, the annotated sentences were organized
in a database, and Tables 2 and 3 list some of the
available annotations. Given the focus on verbs,
for search efficiency each sentence is indexed ac-
cording to the verbs it contains. In addition, verbs
and nouns are further annotated with information
shown in table 3 whenever it is available in the
existing resources.

These levels of annotation allow for complex
searches involving for example, a combination of
information about a verb’s lemma, target gram-
matical relations, and occurrence of Levin’s classes
in the corpora.

Not all sentences have been successfully ana-
lyzed, and the comments field contains informa-

Fields

Sentence ID
Corpus
Speaker
File
Raw sentence
MOR and POST tags
MEGRASP dep. and GRs
RASP syntactic tree
RASP dep. and GRs
Comments

Table 2: Information about Sentences

Fields

Word ID
Sentence ID
Levin’s classes
Age of acquisition
Familiarity
Concreteness
Frequency
Imageability
Number of syllables

Table 3: Information about Words

tion about the missing annotations and cases of
near perfect matches that arise from the parsers
using different heuristics for e.g. non-words, meta-
characters and punctuation. These required more
complex matching procedures for identifying the
corresponding cases in the annotations of the
parsers.

3 Conclusions and future work

This paper describes the construction of the En-
glish CHILDES Verb Database. It combines in-
formation from different parsing systems to capi-
talize on their complementary recall and precision
strengths and ensure the accuracy of the searches.
It also includes information about Levin’s classes
for verbs, and some psycholinguistic information
for some of the words, like age of acquisition,
familiarity and imageability. The result is a
large-scale integrated resource that allows com-
plex searches involving different annotation lev-
els. This database can be used to inform analysis,
for instance, about the complexity of the language
employed with and by a child as her age increases,
that can shed some light on discussions about the
poverty of the stimulus. This is an ongoing project
to make the annotated data available to the re-
search community in a user-friendly interface that
allows complex patterns to be specified in a simple
way.

Acknowledgements

This research was partly supported by CNPq
Projects 551964/2011-1, 202007/2010-3,

24



305256/2008-4 and 309569/2009-5.

References

E. Briscoe, J. Carroll, and R. Watson. 2006. The
second release of the rasp system. In Proceedings
of the COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive Presentation
Sessions, Sydney, Australia.

R. Brown. 1973. A first language: The early
stages. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts.

P. Buttery and A. Korhonen. 2005. Large-scale anal-
ysis of verb subcategorization differences between
child directed speech and adult speech. In Proceed-
ings of the Interdisciplinary Workshop on the Iden-
tification and Representation of Verb Features and
Verb Classes.

M. Coltheart. 1981. The MRC psycholinguistic
database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, 33A:497–505.

B. Levin. 1993. English verb classes and alterna-
tions - a preliminary investigation. The University
of Chicago Press.

B. MacWhinney. 1995. The CHILDES project: tools
for analyzing talk. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, second edition.

L. Pearl and J. Sprouse, 2012. Experimental Syntax
and Islands Effects, chapter Computational Models
of Acquisition for Islands. Cambridge University
Press.

K. Sagae, E. Davis, A. Lavie, B. MacWhinney, and
S. Wintner. 2010. Morphosyntactic annotation of
CHILDES transcripts. Journal of Child Language,
37(03):705–729.

25


