










































On generating coherent multilingual descriptions of museum objects from Semantic Web ontologies


INLG 2012 Proceedings of the 7th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 76–84,
Utica, May 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

On generating coherent multilingual descriptions of museum objects
from Semantic Web ontologies

Dana Dannélls
Språkbanken

Department of Swedish
University of Gothenburg, Sweden
dana.dannells@svenska.gu.se

Abstract

During the last decade, there has been
a shift from developing natural lan-
guage generation systems to developing
generic systems that are capable of pro-
ducing natural language descriptions di-
rectly from Web ontologies. To make
these descriptions coherent and accessi-
ble in different languages, a methodol-
ogy is needed for identifying the gen-
eral principles that would determine the
distribution of referential forms. Pre-
vious work has proved through cross-
linguistic investigations that strategies for
building coreference are language depen-
dent. However, to our knowledge, there is
no language generation methodology that
makes a distinction between languages
about the generation of referential chains.
To determine the principles governing
referential chains, we gathered data from
three languages: English, Swedish and
Hebrew, and studied how coreference is
expressed in a discourse. As a result of
the study, a set of language specific coref-
erence strategies were identified. Using
these strategies, an ontology-based mul-
tilingual grammar for generating writ-
ten natural language descriptions about
paintings was implemented in the Gram-
matical Framework. A preliminary eval-
uation of our method shows language-
dependent coreference strategies lead to
better generation results.

createdBy (Guernica, PabloPicasso)
currentLocation (Guernica, MuseoReinaSofía)
hasColor (Guernica, White)
hasColor (Guernica, Gray)
hasColor (Guernica, Black)
Guernica is created by Pablo Picasso.
Guernica has as current location the Museo
Reina Sofía. Guernica has as color
White, Gray and Black.

Figure 1: A natural language description generated
from a set of ontology statements.

1 Introduction

During the last decade, there has been a shift
from developing natural language generation
systems to developing generic systems that are
capable of producing natural language descrip-
tions directly from Web ontologies (Schwitter
and Tilbrook, 2004; Fuchs et al., 2008; Williams
et al., 2011). These systems employ controlled
language mechanisms and Natural Language
Generation (NLG) technologies such as dis-
course structures and simple aggregation meth-
ods to verbalise Web ontology statements, as
exemplified in figure 1.

If we want to adapt such systems to the gen-
eration of coherent multilingual object descrip-
tions, at least three language dependent prob-
lems must be faced, viz. lexicalisation, aggre-
gation and generation of referring expressions.
The ontology itself may contain the lexical in-

76



Guernica is created by Pablo Picasso.
It has as current location the Museo Reina Sofía.
It has as color White, Gray and Black.
Guernica målades av Pablo Picasso.
Den finns på Museo Reina Sofía.
Den är målad i vitt, svart och grått.

Figure 2: A museum object description generated in
English and Swedish.

formation needed to generate natural language
(McCrae et al., 2012) but it may not carry any
information either about the aggregation of se-
mantic concepts or the generation of a coher-
ent discourse from referring expressions. Hall-
iday and Hasan (1976), and other well known
theories such as Centering Theory (Grosz et
al., 1995), propose establishing a coherent de-
scription by replacing the entity referring to the
Main Subject Reference (MSR) with a pronoun
– a replacement which might result in sim-
ple descriptions such as illustrated in figure 2.
Although these descriptions are coherent, i.e.
they have a connectedness that contributes to
the reader’s understanding of the text, they are
considered non-idiomatic and undeveloped by
many readers because of consecutive pronouns
– a usage which in this particular context is un-
acceptable.

Since previous theories do not specify the
types of linguistic expressions different enti-
ties may bear in different languages or do-
mains, there remain many open questions that
need to be addressed. The question addressed
here is the choice of referential forms to re-
place a sequence of pronouns, which makes
the discourse coherent in different languages.
Our claim is that different languages use dif-
ferent linguistic expressions when referring to
a discourse entity depending on the seman-
tic context. Hence a natural language gen-
erator must employ language dependent co-
referential strategies to produce coherent de-
scriptions. This claim is based on cross-
linguistic investigations into how coreference
is expressed, depending on the target language

and the domain (Givón, 1983; Hein, 1989; Ariel,
1990; Prince, 1992; Vallduví and Engdahl, 1996).

In this paper we present a contrasting study
conducted in English, Swedish and Hebrew to
learn how coreference is expressed. The study
was carried out in the domain of art, more
specifically focusing on naturally-occurring
museum object descriptions. As a result of the
study, strategies for generating coreference in
three languages are suggested. We show how
these strategies are captured in a grammar de-
veloped in the Grammatical Framework (GF).1

We evaluated our method by experimenting
with lexicalised semantic web ontology state-
ments which were structured according to par-
ticular organizing principles. The result of the
evaluation shows language-dependent corefer-
ence strategies lead to better generation results.

2 Related work

Also Prasad (2003) employed a corpus-based
methodology to study the usage of referring ex-
pressions. Based on the results of the analy-
sis, he developed an algorithm to generate ref-
erential chains in Hindi. Other algorithms for
characterizing referential expressions based on
corpus studies have been proposed and imple-
mented in Japanese (Walker et al., 1996), Ital-
ian (Di Eugenio, 1998), Catalan and Spanish
(Potau, 2008), and Romanian (Harabagiu and
Maiorano, 2000).

Although there has been computational
work related to Centering for generating a co-
herent text (Kibble and Power, 2000; Barzilay
and Lee, 2004; Karamanis et al., 2009), we are
not aware of any methodology or NLG system
that employs ontologies to guide the generation
of referential chains depending on the language
considered.

3 Data collection, annotations and
analysis

3.1 Material

To study the domain-specific conventions and
the ways of signalling linguistic content in En-

1http://www.grammaticalframework.org/

77



glish, Swedish and Hebrew, we collected ob-
ject descriptions written by native speakers of
each language from digital libraries that are
available through on-line museum databases.
The majority of the Swedish descriptions were
taken from the World Culture Museum.2 The
majority of the English descriptions were col-
lected from the Metropolitan Museum.3 The
majority of the Hebrew descriptions were taken
from Artchive.4 Table 1 gives an overview of
the three text collections. In addition, we ex-
tracted 40 parallel texts that are available under
the sub-domain Painting from Wikipedia.

Number of Eng. Swe. Heb.
Descriptions 394 386 110
Tokens 42792 27142 5690
Sentences 1877 2214 445
Tokens/sentence 24 13 13
Sentences/description 5 6 4

Table 1: Statistics of the text collections.

3.2 Syntactic annotation

All sentences in the reference material were
tokenised, part-of-speech tagged, lemmatized,
and parsed using open-source software. We
used Hunpos, an open-source Hidden Markov
Model (HMM) tagger (Halácsy et al., 2007) and
Maltparser, version 1.4 (Nivre et al., 2007). The
English model for tagging was downloaded
from the Hunpos web page.5 The model for
Swedish was trained on the Stockholm Umeå
Corpus (SUC) and is available to download
from the Swedish Language Bank web page.6

The Hebrew tagger and parsing models are de-
scribed in Goldberg and Elhadad (2010).

3.3 Semantic annotation

The texts were semantically annotated by the
author. The annotation schema for the seman-
tic annotation is taken from the CIDOC Con-

2http://collections.smvk.se/pls/vkm/
rigby.welcome

3http://www.metmuseum.org
4http://www.artchive.com/
5http://code.google.com/p/hunpos/

downloads/list
6http://spraakbanken.gu.se/

ceptual Reference Model (CRM) (Crofts et al.,
2008).7 Ten of the CIDOC-CRM concepts were
employed to annotate the data semantically.
These are given in table 2. Examples of seman-
tically annotated texts are given in figure 3.8

Actor Man-Made_Object
Actor Appellation Material
Collection Place
Dimension Time-span
Legal Body Title

Table 2: The semantic concepts for annotation.

3.4 Referential expressions annotation

The task of identifying referential instances of
a painting entity, which is our main subject
reference, requires a meaningful semantic def-
inition of the concept Man-Made Object. Such
a fine-grained semantic definition is available
in the ontology of paintings (Dannélls, 2011),9

which was developed in the Web Ontology
Language (OWL) to allow expressing useful
descriptions of paintings.10 The ontology con-
tains specific concepts of painting types, exam-
ples of the hierarchy of concepts that are speci-
fied in the ontology are listed below.

subClassOf(Artwork, E22_Man-Made_Object)

subClassOf(Painting, Artwork)

subClassOf(PortraitPainting, Painting and
depicts(Painting, AnimateThing))

subClassOf(OilPainting, Painting and
hasMaterial(Painting, OilPaint))

When analysing the corpus-data, we look
closer at two linguistic forms of reference ex-
pressions: definite noun phrases and pronouns,
focusing on three semantic relations: direct hy-
pernym (for example Painting is direct hyper-
nym of Portrait Painting), higher hypernym (for
example, both Artwork and Man-Made Object
are higher hypernyms of Portrait Painting) and

7http://cidoc.ics.forth.gr/
8In the Hebrew examples we use a Latin transliteration

instead of the Hebrew alphabet.
9http://spraakdata.gu.se/svedd/

painting-ontology/painting.owl
10http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/

78



Eng: (1) [[The Starry Night]Man−Made_Object]i is [[ a painting]Man−Made_Object]i by [[Dutch
Post-Impressionist artist]Actor_Appellation]j [[Vincent van Gogh]Actor]j . (2) Since [1941]Time−Span
[[ it ]Man−Made_Object]i has been in the permanent collection of [the Museum of Modern Art]place,
[New York City]Place. (3) Reproduced often, [[ the painting]Man−Made_Object]i is widely
hailed as his magnum opus.
Swe: (1) [[Stjärnenatten]Man−Made_Object]i är [[en målning]Man−Made_Object]i av [[den nederländske
postimpressionistiske konstnären]Actor_Appellation]j [[Vincent van Gogh]Actor]j från [1889]Time−Span.
(2) Sedan [1941]Time−Span har [[den]Man−Made_Object]i varit med i den permanenta utställningen vid
[det moderna museet]place i [New York]Place. (3) [[Tavlan]Man−Made_Object]i har allmänt hyllats
som [[hans]Actor]j magnum opus och har reproducerats många gånger och är [en av [[hans]Actor]j
mest välkända målningar]Man−Made_Object]i.
Heb: (1) [[lila ’ohavim]Man−Made_Object]i hyno [[stiyor śhemen]Man−Made_Object]i śel
[[hastayar haholandi]Actor_Appellation]j [[vincent van gogh]Actor]j , hametoharac lesnat [1889]Time−Span.
(2) [[hastiyor]Man−Made_Object]i mostag kayom [bemozehon lehomanot modernit]place [sebahir new
york]Place. (3) [[ho]Man−Made_Object]i exad hastiyorim hayedoyim beyoter sel [[van gogh]Actor]j .

Figure 3: A comprehensive semantic annotation example.

synonym, i.e. two different linguistic units of
reference expressions belonging to the same
concept.

3.5 Data analysis and results

The analysis consisted of two phases: (1) anal-
yse the texts for discourse patterns, and (2)
analyse the texts for patterns of coreference in
the discourse.

Discourse patterns A discourse pattern (DP)
is an approach to text structuring through
which particular organizing principles of the
texts are defined through linguistic analysis.
The approach follows McKeown (1985) to for-
malize principles of discourse for use in a com-
putational process. Following this approach,
we have identified three discourse patterns for
describing paintings that are common in the
three languages. These are summarised below.

• DP1 Man-Made_Object, Object-Type, Ac-
tor, Time-span, Place, Dimension
• DP2 Man-Made_Object, Time-span,

Object-Type, Actor, Dimension, Place
• DP3 Man-Made_Object, Actor, Time-span,

Dimension, Place

Patterns of coreference In the analysis for
coreference, we only considered entities ap-
pearing in subject positions. Below follows ex-
amples of the most common types of corefer-
ence found in the corpus-data.

As seen in (1b) and in many other exam-
ples, the first reference expressions are the def-
inite noun phrase the painting, i.e. coreference
is build through the direct hypernym relation.
The choice of the reference expression in the fol-
lowing sentence (1c) is the definite noun phrase
the work, which is a higher hypernym of the
main subject of reference The Old Musician.

(1) a. The Old Musician is an 1862 painting
by French painter, Édouard Manet.

b. The painting shows the influence of
the work of Gustave Courbet.

c. This work is one of Manet’s largest
paintings and Ø is now conserved at
the National Gallery of Art in
Washington.

Sentence (2b) shows a noun is avoided; the
linguistic unit of the reference expression is a
pronoun preceding a conjunction, followed by
an ellipsis.

(2) a. The Birth of Venus is a painting by
the French artist Alexandre Cabanel.

b. It was painted in 1863, and Ø is now
in the Musée d’Orsay in Paris.

In the Swedish texts we also find occurrences
of pronouns in the second sentence of the dis-
course, as in (3b). We learn that the most com-
mon linguistic units of the reference expres-
sions also are definite noun phrases given by
the direct hypernym relation.

79



(3) a. Stjärnenatten är en målning av den
nederländske postimpressionistiske
konstnären Vincent van Gogh från
1889.

b. Sedan 1941 har den varit med i den
permanenta utställningen vid det
moderna museet i New York.

c. Tavlan har allmänt hyllats som hans
magnum opus och har reproducerats
många gånger.

((a) The Starry Night is a painting by the
dutch artist Vincent van Gogh, created in
1889. (b) Since 1941 it was in the
permanent exhibition of the museum in
New York. (c) The picture is widely
hailed as his magnum opus and has been
reproduced many times.)

Similar to English, the most common linguis-
tic units of the reference expressions are definite
noun phrases, as in (4b). However, the relation
of these phrases with respect to the main sub-
ject of reference is either a direct hypernym or a
synonym, such as tavlan in (3c) and (5b).

(4) a. Wilhelm Tells gåta är en målning av
den surrealistiske konstnären
Salvador Dalí.

b. Målningen utfördes 1933 och Ø finns
idag på Moderna museet i Stockholm.

((a) Wilhelm Tell’s Street is a painting by
the artist Salvador Dali. (b) The painting
was completed in 1933 and today it is
stored in the modern museum in
Stockholm.)

(5) a. Baptisterna är en målning av Gustaf
Cederström från 1886, och Ø
föreställer baptister som samlats för
att förrätt dop.

b. Tavlan finns att beskåda i Betel
folkhögskolas lokaler.

((a) The Baptists is a painting by Gustaf
Cederström from 1886, and depicts
baptists that have gathered for a bad.
(b) The picture can be seen in Betel at the
people’s high school premises.)

The Hebrew examples also include definite
noun phrases determined by the direct hyper-
nym relation, as hastiyor in (6b). Pronouns only
occur in a context that contains a comparison,
for example (6c). In other cases, e.g. (7b), (7c),
the relation selected for the reference expres-
sion is higher-hypernym.

(6) a. lila ’ohavim hyno stiyor śhemen śel
hasayar haholandi vincent van gogh,
hametoharac lesnat 1889.

b. hastiyor mosag kayom bemozehon
lehomanot modernit sebahir new
york.

c. ho exad hastiyorim hayedoyim
beyoter sel van gogh.

((a) The Starry Night is an oil painting by
the dutch painter Vincent van Gogh,
created in 1899. (b) The painting is stored
in the Museum of Modern Art in New
York. (c) It is one of the most famous
works of Vincent van Gogh.)

(7) a. hahalmon nehaviyon ho stiyor sel
pablo picasso hametaher hames
zonot.

b. hayestira sestzoyra ben ha sanyim
1906-1907 nehsevet lehahat min
heyestirot hayedohot sel picasso vesel
hahomanot hamodernit.

c. hayestira mosteget kayom
bemostehon lehomanot modernitt
sebe new york.

((a) The Young Ladies of Avignon is a
painting by Pablo Picasso that portrays
five prostitutes. (b) The artwork that was
painted during 1906-1907 is one of the
most known works by Picasso in the
modern art. (c) The artwork can today be
seen in the Museum of Modern Art in
New York City.)

The synonym relation occurs when giving
the dimensions of the painting, as in (8b).

(8) a. Soded haken (1568) ho stiyor semen
al luax est meet hastayar hapalmi
peter broigel haav.

80



b. hatmona hi begodel 59 al 68
centimeter, ve Ø motseget bemozeon
letoldot haaomanot bevina.

((a) The Nest thief (1568) is an oil painting
made on wood by the painter Peter Brogel
Hav. (b) The picture measures 59 x 68 cm,
and is displayed in the art museum in
Vienna.)

3.6 The results of the analysis

The above examples show a range of differ-
ences in the way chains of coreference are con-
structed. Table 3 summarizes the results the
analysis revealed. 1st, 2nd and 3rd correspond
to the first, second and third reference expres-
sion in the discourse. In summary, we found:

• Pronoun is common in Swedish and En-
glish, and rare in Hebrew
• Direct-hypernym is common in English,

Swedish and Hebrew
• Higher-hypernym is rare in English and

Swedish, and common in Hebrew
• Synonym is common in Swedish, less fre-

quent in English, and rare in Hebrew

DP English Swedish Hebrew1st 2nd 3rd 1st 2nd 3rd 1st 2nd 3rd
1 DH P DH P DH Ø
1 DH HH Ø DH Ø DH
1 P Ø P Ø
1 P P Ø Ø DH
1 Ø P DH
1,2 P DH P S Ø
2 HH HH
2 HH Ø HH
3 P DH P DH

Table 3: Coreference strategies for a painting object
realisation. Pronoun (P), Synonym (S), Direct Hy-
pernym (DH), Higher Hypernym (HH), Ellipsis (Ø).

Although the identified strategies are con-
strained by a relatively simple syntax and
a domain ontology, they show clear differ-
ences between the languages. As table 3
shows, consecutive pronouns occur commonly
in English, while consecutive higher hypernym
noun phrases are common in Hebrew.

4 Generating referential chains from
Web ontology

4.1 Experimental data

We made use of the data available in the paint-
ing ontology presented in section 3.4 to gener-
ate multilingual descriptions by following the
domain discourse patterns. The data consists of
around 1000 ontology statements and over 250
lexicalised entities extracted from the Swedish
National Museums of World Culture and the
Gothenburg City Museum.

4.2 The generation grammar

The grammar was implemented in GF, a gram-
mar formalism oriented toward multilingual
grammar development and generation (Ranta,
2004). It is a logical framework based on a gen-
eral treatment of syntax, rules, and proofs by
means of a typed λ-calculus with dependent
types (Ranta, 1994). Similar to other logical
formalisms, GF separates between abstract and
concrete syntaxes. The abstract syntax reflects
the type theoretical part of a grammar. The con-
crete syntax is formulated as a set of lineariza-
tion rules that can be superimposed on an ab-
stract syntax to generate words, phrases, sen-
tences, and texts of a desirable language. In ad-
dition, GF has an associated grammar library
(Ranta, 2009); a set of parallel natural language
grammars that can be used as a resource for
various language processing tasks.

Our grammar consists of one abstract mod-
ule that reflects the domain knowledge and is
common to all languages, plus three concrete
modules, one for each language, which en-
code the language dependent strategies. Rather
than giving details of the grammatical formal-
ism, we will show how GF captures the con-
straints presented in section 3.6. The examples
include the following GF constructors: mkText
(Text), mkPhr (Phrase), mkS (Sentence), mkCl
(Clause), mkNP (Noun Phrase), mkVP (Verb
Phrase), mkAdv (Verb Phrase modifying ad-
verb), passiveVP (Passive Verb Phrase), mkN
(Noun).

81



English
painting paintingtype painter

year museum = let
str1 : Phr = mkPhr
(mkS (mkCl (mkNP painting) (mkVP
(mkVP (mkNP
(mkNP a_Art paintingtype) make_V2))
(mkAdv by8agent_Prep
(mkNP (mkNP painter)
(mkAdv in_Prep year.s))))));
str2 : Phr = mkPhr (mkS
(mkCl (mkNP the_Art paintingtype)
(mkVP (passiveVP display_V2)
(mkAdv at_Prep museum.s))))
in mkText str1 (mkText str2) ;

Swedish
painting paintingtype painter

year museum = let
str1 : Phr = mkPhr
(mkS (mkCl (mkNP painting)
(mkVP (mkVP
(mkNP a_Art paintingtype))
(mkAdv by8agent_Prep
(mkNP (mkNP painter)
(mkAdv from_Prep (mkNP year)))))));
str2 : Phr = mkPhr
(mkS (mkCl (mkNP the_Art
(mkN "tavla" "tavla"))
(mkVP (mkVP (depV finna_V))
(mkAdv on_Prep (mkNP museum)))) )
in mkText str1 (mkText str2) ;

Hebrew
painting paintingtype painter

year museum = let
str1 : Str = ({s = painting.s ++
paintingtype.s ++ "sl " ++
painter.s ++ "msnt " ++ year.s}).s;
str2 : Str = ({s = artwork_N.s ++
(displayed_V ! Fem) ++ at_Prep.s ++
museum.s}).s in
ss (str1 ++ " ." ++ str2 ++ " ." );

The above extracts from the concrete mod-
ules follow the observed organization prin-
ciples concerning the order of semantic in-
formation in a discourse and the generation
of language-dependent referential chains (pre-
sented in the right-hand column of table 4). In
these extracts, variations in referential forms
are captured in the noun phrase of str2. In the
English module, the paintingtype that is the di-

rect hypernym of the painting object is coded,
while in the Swedish module, a synonym word
of the painting concept is coded, e.g tavla. In
the Hebrew module, a higher concept in the hi-
erarchy of paintings, artwork_N.s is coded.

4.3 Experiments and results

A preliminary evaluation was conducted to test
how significant is the approach of adapting
language-dependent coreference strategies to
produce coherent descriptions. Nine human
subjects participated in the evaluation, three
native speakers of each language.

The subjects were given forty object descrip-
tion pairs. One description containing only
pronouns as the type of referring expressions
and one description that was automatically
generated by applying the language dependent
coreference strategies. Examples of the descrip-
tion pairs the subjects were asked to evaluate
are given in table 4. We asked the subjects to
choose the description they find most coherent
based on their intuitive judgements. Partici-
pant agreement was measured using the kappa
statistic (Fleiss, 1971). The results of the evalu-
ation are reported in table 5.

Pronouns Pronouns/NPs K
English 17 18 0.66
Swedish 9 29 0.78
Hebrew 6 28 0.72

Table 5: A summary of the human evaluation.

On average, the evaluators approved at least
half of the automatically generated descrip-
tions, with a considerably good agreement. A
closer look at the examples where chains of pro-
nouns were preferred revealed that these oc-
curred in English when a description consisted
of two or three sentences and the second and
third sentences specified the painting dimen-
sions or a date. In Swedish, these were pre-
ferred whenever a description consisted of two
sentences. In Hebrew, the evaluators preferred
a description containing a pronoun over a de-
scription containing the higher hypernym Man-
made object, and also preferred the pronoun
when a description consisted of two sentences,

82



English
The Long Winter is an oil-painting The Long Winter is an oil-painting
by Peter Kandre from 1909. It is displayed in by Peter Kandre from 1909. The painting is
the Museum Of World Culture. displayed in the Museum Of World Culture.
The Little White Girl is a painting The Little White Girl is a painting
by James Abbott McNeill Whistler. by James Abbott McNeill Whistler.
It is held in the Gotheburg Art Museum. The painting is held in the Gotheburg Art Museum.
The Long Winter is a painting by Peter The Long Winter is a painting by Peter
Kandre from 1909. It measures 102 by 43 cm. Kandre from 1909. It measures 102 by 43 cm.
It is displayed in the Museum The painting is displayed in the Museum
Of World Culture. Of World Culture.

Swedish
Den långa vintern är en oljemålning av Den långa vintern är en oljemålning av
Peter Kandre från 1909. Peter Kandre från 1909.
Den återfinns på Världskulturmuseet. Tavlan återfinns på Världskulturmuseet.
Den lilla vita flickan är en målning Den lilla vita flickan är en målning
av James Abbott McNeill Whistler. Den av James Abbott McNeill Whistler. Målningen
återfinns på Göteborgs Konstmuseum. återfinns på Göteborgs Konstmuseum.
Den långa vintern målades av Peter Den långa vintern målades av Peter
Kandre 1909. Den är 102 cm lång och 43 Kandre 1909. Målningen är 102 cm lång och 43
cm bred. Den återfinns på Världskulturmuseet. cm bred. Tavlan återfinns på Världskulturmuseet.

Hebrew
hHwrP hArwK hnw Zywr smN sl pyTr qndrh hHwrP hArwK hnw Zywr smN sl pyTr qndrh
msnt 1909. msnt 1909.
hyA mwZg bmwzAwN sl OlM htrbwt. hZywr mwZg bmwzAwN sl OlM htrbwt.
hyaldh hktnh alevmh hi tmona hyaldh hktnh alevmh hi tmona
sl abut mcnil wistl. hyA mwZgt sl abut mcnil wistl. hyZyrh mwZgt
bmwzAwN homanot sl gwTnbwrg. bmwzAwN homanot sl gwTnbwrg.
HwrP ArwK tzoyar el–yedy pyTr qndrh b–1909. HwrP ArwK tzoyar el–yedy pyTr qndrh b–1909.
hyA bgwdl 102 Ol 43 Sg2m. hyZyrh bgwdl 102 Ol 43 Sg2m.
hyA mwZgt bmwzAwN sl OlM htrbwt. hyZyrh mwZgt bmwzAwN sl OlM htrbwt.

Table 4: Examples of object description pairs that were used in the evaluation.

the second of which concerned the painting di-
mensions.

5 Conclusions and future work

This paper has presented a cross-linguistic
study and demonstrated some differences
in how coreference is expressed in English,
Swedish and Hebrew. As a result of the in-
vestigation, a set of language-specific coref-
erence strategies were identified and imple-
mented in GF. This multilingual grammar was
used to generate object descriptions which
were then evaluated by native speakers of each
language. The evaluation results, although per-
formed with a small number of descriptions
and human evaluators, indicate that language-
dependent coreference strategies lead to better

output. Although the data used to compare
the co-referential chains was restricted in size, it
was sufficient to determine several differences
between the languages for the given domain.

Future work aims to extend the grammar to
cover more ontology statements and discourse
patterns. We will consider conjunctions and el-
lipsis in these patterns. We intend to formalize
and generalize the strategies presented in this
paper and test whether there exist universal co-
referential chains, which might result in coher-
ent descriptions in more than three languages.

Acknowledgments

The research presented in this paper was sup-
ported in part by MOLTO European Union
Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-

83



2013) under grant agreement FP7-ICT-247914.11

I would like to thank the Centre for Lan-
guage Technology (CLT) in Gothenburg and the
anonymous INLG reviewers.12

References

Mira Ariel. 1990. Accessing Noun Phrase Antecedents.
Routlege, London.

Regina Barzilay and Lillia Lee. 2004. Catching the
drift: Probabilistic content models, with applica-
tions to generation and summarization. In Proc.
of HLT-NAACL, pages 113–120.

Nick Crofts, Martin Doerr, Tony Gill, Stephen Stead,
and Matthew Stiff, 2008. Definition of the CIDOC
Conceptual Reference Model.

Dana Dannélls. 2011. An ontology model of paint-
ings. Journal of Applied Ontologies. Submitted.

B. Di Eugenio, 1998. Centering in Italian, pages 115–
137. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Joseph L. Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale
agreement among many raters. Psychological Bul-
letin, 76(5):378–382.

Norbert E. Fuchs, Kaarel Kaljurand, and Tobias
Kuhn. 2008. Attempto Controlled English for
Knowledge Representation. In Reasoning Web,
Fourth International Summer School. Springer.

T. Givón, editor. 1983. Topic continuity in discourse: A
quantitative cross-language study. Amsterdam and
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

Yoav Goldberg and Michael Elhadad. 2010. An effi-
cient algorithm for easy-first non-directional de-
pendency parsing. In Proc. of NAACL 2010.

Barbara J. Grosz, Scott Weinstein, and Aravind K.
Joshi. 1995. Centering: A framework for mod-
eling the local coherence of discourse. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 21(2).

Péter Halácsy, András Kornai, and Csaba Oravecz.
2007. HunPos: an open source trigram tagger. In
Proc. of ACL on Interactive Poster and Demonstration
Sessions, pages 209–212, Morristown, NJ, USA.

Michael A. K. Halliday and R. Hasan. 1976. Cohe-
sion in English. Longman Pub Group.

S. Harabagiu and S. Maiorano. 2000. Multilingual
coreference resolution. In Proc. of ANLP.

Anna Sågvall Hein. 1989. Definite NPs and back-
ground knowledge in medical text. Computer and
Artificial Intelligence, 8(6):547–563.

11http://www.molto-project.eu/
12http://www.clt.gu.se/

Nikiforos Karamanis, Massimo Poesio, Chris Mel-
lish, and Jon Oberlander. 2009. Evaluating Cen-
tering for Information Ordering using Corpora.
Computational Linguistics, 35(1).

Rodger Kibble and Richard Power. 2000. Opti-
mizing Referential Coherence in Text Generation.
Computational Linguistics, 30(4).

J. McCrae, G. Aguado-de Cea, P. Buitelaar, P. Cimi-
ano, T. Declerck, A. Gomez-Perez, J. Gracia,
L. Hollink, E. Montiel-Ponsoda, D. Spohr, and
T. Wunner. 2012. Interchanging lexical resources
on the semantic web. Language Resources and
Evaluation.

Kathleen R. McKeown. 1985. Text generation : us-
ing discourse strategies and focus constraints to gen-
erate natural language text. Cambridge University
Press.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Atanas
Chanev, Gülsen Eryigit, Sandra Kübler, Svetoslav
Marinov, and Erwin Marsi. 2007. Maltparser:
A language-independent system for data-driven
dependency parsing. Natural Language Engineer-
ing, 13(2):95–135.

Marta Recasens Potau. 2008. Towards Coreference
Resolution for Catalan and Spanish. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Barcelona.

Rashmi Prasad. 2003. Constraints on the generation of
referring expressions, with special reference to hindi.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania.

Ellen F. Prince. 1992. The ZPG letter: Subjects, defi-
niteness, and information-status. In Discourse de-
scription. diverse linguistic analyses of a fund-raising
text, volume 10, pages 159–173.

Aarne Ranta. 1994. Type-theoretical grammar: A Type-
theoretical Grammar Formalism. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, UK.

Aarne Ranta. 2004. Grammatical Framework, a
type-theoretical grammar formalism. Journal of
Functional Programming, 14(2):145–189.

Aarne Ranta. 2009. The GF resource grammar li-
brary. The on-line journal Linguistics in Language
Technology (LiLT), 2(2).

R. Schwitter and M. Tilbrook. 2004. Controlled
Natural Language meets the Semantic Web. In
Proceedings of the Australasian Language Technology
Workshop, pages 55–62, Macquarie University.

Enric Vallduví and Elisabet Engdahl. 1996. The lin-
guistic realization of information packaging. Lin-
guistics, (34):459–519.

M. A. Walker, M. Iida, and S. Cote. 1996. Centering
in Japanese Discourse. Computational Linguistics.

Sandra Williams, Allan Third, and Richard Power.
2011. Levels of organisation in ontology verbali-
sation. In Proc. of ENLG, pages 158–163.

84


