










































The Voice and Eye Gaze Behavior of an Imposter: Automated Interviewing and Detection for Rapid Screening at the Border


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Deception Detection, pages 49–54,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

 

The Voice and Eye Gaze Behavior of an Imposter: Automated 
Interviewing and Detection for Rapid Screening at the Border 

Aaron C. Elkins Douglas C. Derrick 
University of Arizona University of Nebraska at Omaha 

aelkins@cmi.arizona.edu   dcderrick@mail.unomaha.edu   
Monica Gariup 

Frontex, Research and Development Unit 
monica.gariup@frontex.europa.eu   

 
 

 

 

Abstract 

Contextual differences present significant 
challenges when developing computational 
methods for detecting deception. We 
conducted a field experiment with border 
guards from the European Union in order to 
demonstrate that deception detection can be 
done robustly using context specific 
computational models.  In the study, some of 
the participants were given a “fraudulent” 
document with incorrect data and asked to 
pass through a checkpoint. An automated 
system used an embodied conversational 
agent (ECA) to conduct interviews.  Based 
on the participants’ vocalic and ocular 
behavior our specific model classified 100% 
of the imposters while limiting false positive 
errors.  The overall accuracy was 94.47%.  

1 Introduction 

Unlike Pinocchio, liars do not exhibit universal 
behavior or physiological signals in all situations. 
Deception is often inappropriately reduced to 
either simply telling the truth or lying. However, 
there are many strategies for lying (e.g., 
omission, imposters, equivocation, hedging); 
situations where lying occurs (e.g., rapid 
screening, imposter, interrogation, conversation); 
varying consequences and power dynamics (e.g., 
parents, friends, boss, border guard, law 
enforcement); and interviewing styles (e.g., 
behavioral analysis interviewer, informal chat, 
guilty knowledge test, short answer format). All 
of these factors contribute to the type of 
behaviors and physiological responses that are 
exhibited and are theoretically expected.  These 
contextual differences present significant 
challenges when trying to develop computational 

methods for detecting deception. In order to 
develop systems that can be used for reliable 
deception detection, we must constrain the 
complex problem of deception and manage the 
factors described above.   
 
We conducted a field experiment with border 
guards from the European Union in order to 
demonstrate that by controlling some of the 
above factors and by developing context specific 
computational models, deception detection can 
be achieved robustly.  In the experiment, some of 
the participants were given a “fraudulent” 
document with incorrect data and asked to pass 
through a checkpoint. An automated system used 
an embodied conversational agent (ECA) to 
conduct interviews.  The system was equipped 
with vocal and ocular sensors, as well as an 
electronic passport reader. Based on the 
participants’ vocal and eye gaze behavior a 
computational classification model was 
developed to identify imposters while limiting 
the number of false positives. 

2 Embodied Conversational Agent 

To account for the complex interplay between 
liars and the deceived, Buller and Burgoon 
(1996) introduced Interpersonal Deception 
Theory (IDT). This theory expanded and 
conceptualized deception as a strategic 
interaction between a sender and receiver. Liars 
must simultaneously manage information, their 
behavior, and appearance during the interaction. 
Moreover, liars will use different strategies 
depending on their skill, relationship with the 
interaction partner, preparation, motivation, and 
time.  
 

49



 

Lying is undeniably a social act. One major 
challenge to computational deception detection is 
accounting for the variability introduced by 
human interviewers. Every interviewer has their 
own style (e.g., aggressive, friendly), 
inconsistently asks questions, and gets tired. The 
behavior and approach of the interviewer 
strongly influences the behavior and reactions of 
the interviewee. For example, if the interviewer 
is angry, the interviewee will be affected by this 
and artificially display reciprocal anger or even 
distress. Perhaps after a lunch break the 
interviewer is fresh and in better spirits and 
returns to a more friendly interaction. Any 
deception detection system that relies on 
consistent behavioral cues will have to account 
for the diverse range of human interviewer 
variability. 
 
To address this challenge, we developed an 
ECA-based deception detection system that asks 
the same questions, in the same order, and in the 
same way each time. Additionally, this system 
can speak the native language of every 
interviewee. 
 
Figure 1. ECA Interviewer 

 

3 Sensors 

The ECA depicted above (Figure 1) conducts the 
structured border-screening interview and 
integrated into this system were three sensors for 
detecting imposters: microphone (vocalic 

measures), near infrared camera (ocular 
behavior), and an electronic passport reader 
(document input).  

3.1 Vocalic Measures 
A unidirectional microphone was integrated into 
the system to capture spoken responses to the 
ECA’s questions.  Vocal features were extracted 
from each of these responses near real-time (i.e., 
seconds). Previous research has found that an 
increase in the fundamental frequency or pitch is 
related to stress or arousal (Bachorowski & 
Owren, 1995; Elkins & Stone, 2011; Streeter, 
Krauss, Geller, Olson, & Apple, 1977).  Pitch is 
a function of the speed of vibration of the vocal 
folds during speech production (Titze & Martin, 
1998). Females have smaller vocal folds than 
men, requiring their vocal chords to vibrate faster 
and leading to their higher pitch. When we are 
aroused our muscles tense and tighten. When the 
vocal muscles become tenser, they vibrate at a 
higher frequency, leading to a higher pitch. 
Similarly, previous research has found that when 
aroused or excited, our pitch also exhibits more 
variation and higher intensities (Juslin & Laukka, 
2003).  
 
Deceptive speech is also predicted to be more 
cognitively taxing, leading to non-strategic or 
leakage cues (Buller & Burgoon, 1996; 
Rockwell, Buller, & Judee K. Burgoon, 1997; 
Zuckerman, DePaulo, & Rosenthal, 1981). These 
cues, specific to cognitive effort, can be 
measured vocally. Cognitively taxed speakers 
take longer to respond (response latency) and 
incorporate more disfluencies (e.g., “um” “uh”, 
speech errors).  Moreover, the harmonics-to-
noise ratio serves as an indicator of voice quality 
(Boersma, 1993).  Originally intended to 
measure speech pathology (Yumoto, Gould, & 
Baer, 1982), liars have been found to speak with 
a lower harmonic-to-noise ratio than truth-tellers 
(Nunamaker, Derrick, Elkins, Burgoon, & 
Patton, 2011).  The quality of the voice is 
affected by increased cognitive effort and 
heightened stress/emotion. 

3.2 Ocular Behavior	
This system was designed to be used in a rapid 
screening environment and to assess eye 
behavior during an interview typical at a port of 
entry.  All participants were shown an image of 
his or her issued visa during the interview and 
asked if the information was correct. All of the 

50



 

information was correct on the visa for all 
participants except the imposters where the date 
of birth was inaccurate.  This test design is based 
on orienting theory and predicts that measurable 
physiology accompanies an orienting reflex to 
familiar stimulus. Pavlov originally studied the 
orienting reflex during his classical conditioning 
experiments.  This reflex orients attention to 
novel and familiar stimuli and is considered 
adaptive to the environment.    In order to capture 
the eye behavior responses, we used the EyeTech 
Digital Systems VT2 infrared eye tracker (see 
figure 2) mounted directly below a computer 
monitor. 
   
Figure 2. EyeTech Eye Tracker 
 

 
 
The VT2 has two infrared light sources and an 
integrated infrared camera.  It connects via USB 
to a Windows computer and captures the eye 
gaze location (x, y coordinates) at each instance 
at a rate of approximately 33-34 frames per 
second. During the interaction with the 
interviewing system, participants’ eye behavior 
was monitored while they spoke to the ECA 
(e.g., for eye contact) and when they observed 
the image of their visa.  Based on prior research 
(Derrick, Jenkins, & Nunamaker, 2011), we 
anticipated that the imposter would orient on 
areas of the image that contained false 
information about their identity. A sample of the 
document used by all participants is shown in 
Figure 3.  

3.3 Electronic Passport Reader 
To provide the system with additional 
information about each participant, a 3M AT-
9000 e-passport reader was integrated into the 
system. Each participant placed their visa 
document on the scanner prior to the interview. 
The information from the document was read 
into the system using the Machine Readable 
Zone (MRZ) and an image of the visa was 
captured for use during interview.  
 
 
 
 

Figure 3. Visa Issued to Participants 
 

 

4 Final System 

The final system used during the field 
experiment is depicted below in Figure 4.  The 
ECA conducted the screening interview in the 
language of each participant’s choice (English, 
French, German, Polish, or Spanish). The eye 
gaze and vocal behavior were recorded and 
processed during the interaction in near real-
time. Immediately to the right of the monitor is a 
passport reader used to scan the entire 
participant’s visas to read the information and 
image. 
 
Figure 4. ECA System Screening Participants 

 

5 Method 

5.1 Participants 
37 border guards from the following European 
Union (EU) member states participated: Austria, 
Belgium, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, 
Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, the 
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Romania, 
Slovakia, Spain, Sweden and the United 
Kingdom. In addition, two representatives from 
the U.S. Customs and Border Protection and the 
Canadian Border Services Agency also 

51



 

participated.  The simulation was part of a 
workshop on decision support for screening and 
risk assessment at passport control.  Of the 37, 
four (two men from the Netherlands and 
Romania and two women from Sweden and 
Denmark respectively) were selected to be 
imposters with incorrect dates of birth on their 
visa. The selection was based on the results of an 
earlier survey that asked participants about their 
confidence in his or her ability to lie and remain 
undetected. Participants with the highest 
confidence scores were selected. 

5.2 Procedure 
All participants were given the visa document at 
their registration to use as their travel document 
during the simulated border check. The 
document consisted of personal data: name, 
surname, date of birth, place of birth, and 
nationality. For the sake of the simulation, all 
documents were assumed to be genuine (not 
counterfeited/falsified).   The imposters were 
given basic instructions on the scenario and their 
role. They had acquired genuine documents of a 
person with a name identical to theirs who also 
looked like them (based on the photo of their 
own passport).  
The goal of the imposter was to pass the border 
check undetected, meet with their fellow 
accomplices (the other imposters), and place a 
bomb at a reception. The imposters were 
explicitly instructed the day before the 
simulation to check his or her visa document and 
note that the date and location of their birth was 
false (not coincident with their real one).  
The imposters were asked to lie and answer 
affirmatively when the ECA asked him or her 
whether the document belonged to them and if 
the data were correct. In order to reinforce the 
imposters in their role, on the day before the 
simulation, they were invited to meet in secret in 
the reception room and discuss how they would 
set up a bomb scare.  
The other participants were simply told to behave 
normally. All other participants, and 
experimental staff were blind to the identity of 
the imposters.	
 
Upon arrival to the in participants scanned their 
document in the e-passport reader and selected 
the language for the ECA to use for the interview 
(English, Polish, Spanish, French, or German).  
The ECA then asked the following questions: 
 

1. What is your full name? 

2. Where were you born? 
3. Do have anything to declare? 
4. What is the purpose of your visit? 
5. Please carefully examine the following 

document  
a. Scanned document shown (15 seconds) 

6. Are the data on this document correct? 
a. Scanned document shown (15 seconds) 

7. Is this your document? 
 
During each of the responses, the sensors 
monitored the vocal and ocular behavior of the 
participants and descriptive measures were 
calculated and presented to an experimenter and 
other participating border guard. 

6 Results 

6.1 Vocal Behavior 
To assess the relationship between the voice and 
the participant’s interview responses a multilevel 
model was specified with vocal quality as the 
response variable (N=189) regressed on 
condition (Guilty/Innocent) and question number 
(time). To reflect the repeated measure 
experimental design of multiple questions, both 
time and the Intercept of vocal quality were 
modeled to vary within Subject (N=38) as 
random effects. To calibrate each speaker each 
measurement of voice quality was subtracted by 
their starting value to reflect the deviance from a 
neutral starting point (Question One).   
Table 1 below lists the fixed effects from this 
analysis. The imposters had a significantly larger 
drop in voice quality during the interview than 
innocent participants, b=-2.18, p<.01. Innocent 
participants and imposters both dropped their 
voice quality over time, likely because of the 
stress of the interview in contrast to the benign 
starting question. 

Table 1. Vocal Behavior Fixed Effects (N=189, 
38 Subjects) 
Fixed Effects β 
Intercept -0.136 
Imposter -2.180** 
Time (Question) -0.134* 
*p<.05; **p<.01; Fit by Maximum Likelihood Estimation. 
 
The imposters spoke with much lower vocal 
quality when answering questions related to their 
identity (questions 5, 6, and 7 above). Figure 5 
below illustrates the difference in vocal quality 
between innocent and guilty participants.  
 

52



 

Figure 5. Lower Vocal Quality of Imposters 
 

 

6.2 Eye Behavior 
Eye contact with the ECA was not predictive of 
deception. However, a Between Subjects 
ANOVA revealed that when participants were 
asked to examine the image of their visa, 
imposters spent much more time fixating on the 
incorrect date of birth information, F(1,36)=5.18, 
p=.028, η2=.14. Imposters spent 2.12 times more 
time fixating on the incorrect date of birth fields 
on their visa (Imposter M=29.73, SD=35.63; 
Innocent M=13.99, SD=8.45). 
 
Figure 6. Eye Fixation Time on DOB Field 

 

7 Summary of Predictors 

To summarize the predictive potential of each of 
the collected vocal and eye gaze behavior 
measurements, each were submitted to Between 
Subjects ANOVA. Table 2 details the results for 
each measurement as a predictor of an imposter 
when answering question six. 
 
Table 2. Vocal and Eye Gaze Behavior ANOVA 
Summary 
Predictor df F p 
Vocal Pitch Mean 36 0.05 .83 
Vocal Pitch SD 36 0.30 .58 
Vocal Quality Mean 36 8.78 <.01** 
Vocal Quality SD 36 0.29 .59 
Vocal Intensity Mean 36 1.65 .21 
Vocal Intensity SD 36 0.82 .37
DOB Eye Fixation 36 5.18 .03* 
Pupil Dilation 36 0.04 .83 
*p<.05; **p<.01; DOB is Date of Birth field on visa document; All 
vocal measurements were speaker calibrated 

8 Classifying Imposters 

Vocal quality and date of birth fixation were 
submitted to a recursive partitioning 
classification algorithm (Clark & Pregibon, 
1992; R Development Core Team, 2011). This 
type of classification algorithm has the advantage 
of being very easy to interpret and resulted in the 
decision rule detailed in Figure 7 below. 
 
Figure 7. Imposter Classification Model 

 
This final model had 94.47% accuracy, correctly 
identified all imposters, and misclassified two 
other participants of being imposters. When the 
classification model did not include the eye gaze 
behavior, the Voice Quality cut-off was much 
less conservative and resulted in many more false 
positives. However, after including the Eye 
Fixation variable, the system was calibrated to 
not over-rely on the voice. 
This classification model illustrated the 
importance of additional sensors for improving 
overall accuracy of prediction, not just focusing 
entirely on true positives, or identifying 
imposters. Falsely accusing too many people 
would make the system infeasible in a high 
throughput, operational scenario.  Given the 
diverse nature of the participants it should be 
noted that that gender, language, and potential 
cultural differences did not affect the results, but 
no support or conclusions can be drawn given the 
relatively small size of the various populations. 

9 Conclusion 

We conducted a field experiment with border 
guards from the European Union in order to 
demonstrate that by controlling some of the 
above factors and by developing context specific 
computational models, deception detection can 
be done robustly.  We demonstrated that using 
both vocalic and ocular measurements we could 
correctly classify 100% of imposters in a limited 
scenario while limiting false positives.  Future 
experimentation needs to be conducted to 
understand how the system compares to human 

53



 

judgment and if synergies exist between human 
and automated screening. 

References  

Bachorowski, J. A., & Owren, M. J. 1995. Vocal 
expression of emotion: Acoustic properties of 
speech are associated with emotional intensity and 
context. Psychological Science, 219–224. 

Boersma, P. 1993. Accurate short-term analysis of the 
fundamental frequency and the harmonics-to-noise 
ratio of a sampled sound. Proceedings of the 
Institute of Phonetic Sciences (Vol. 17, pp. 97-
110). 

Buller, D. B., & Burgoon, J. K. 1996. Interpersonal 
deception theory. Communication Theory, 6, 203-
242. 

Clark, L. A., & Pregibon, D. 1992. Tree-based 
models. Statistical models in S, 377–419. 

Derrick, D. C., Jenkins, J., & Nunamaker, J. F. 
(2011). Design Principles for Special Purpose, 
Embodied, Conversational Intelligence with 
Environmental Sensors (SPECIES) Agents. AIS 
Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction, 
3(2), 62-81. 

Elkins, A. C., & Stone, J. 2011. The Effect of 
Cognitive Dissonance on Argument Language and 
Vocalics. Forty-Fourth Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences. 
Koloa, Kauai, Hawaii. 

Juslin, P. N., & Laukka, P. 2003. Communication of 
emotions in vocal expression and music 
performance: Different channels, same code? 
Psychological Bulletin, 129(5), 770-814. 

Nunamaker, J. F., Derrick, D. C., Elkins, A. C., 
Burgoon, J. K., & Patton, M. W. 2011. Embodied 
Conversational Agent-Based Kiosk for Automated 
Interviewing. Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 28(1), 17–48. doi:10.2753/MIS0742-
1222280102 

R Development Core Team. 2011. R: A Language and 
Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna, 
Austria. Retrieved from http://www.R-project.org/ 

Rockwell, P., Buller, D. B., & Judee K. Burgoon. 
1997. Measurement of deceptive voices: 
Comparing acoustic and perceptual data. Applied 
Psycholinguistics, 18(04), 471-484. 

Streeter, L. A., Krauss, R. M., Geller, V., Olson, C., & 
Apple, W. 1977. Pitch changes during attempted 
deception. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 35(5), 345–350. 

Titze, I. R., & Martin, D. W. 1998. Principles of voice 
production. Acoustical Society of America 
Journal, 104, 1148. 

Yumoto, E., Gould, W. J., & Baer, T. 1982. 
Harmonics-to-noise ratio as an index of the degree 
of hoarseness. Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America, 71(6), 1544-1550. 

Zuckerman, M., DePaulo, B. M., & Rosenthal, R. 
1981. Verbal and nonverbal communication of 

deception. Advances in experimental social 
psychology, 14(1), 59. 

 

54


