










































Discourse Structure in Simultaneous Spoken Turkish


Proceedings of the 2012 Student Research Workshop, pages 55–60,

Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Discourse Structure in Simultaneous Spoken Turkish

Işın Demirşahin
Middle East Technical University

Informatics Institute, Cognitive Science
ODTU, 06800, Ankara, TURKEY 

disin@metu.edu.tr

Abstract

The current  debate  regarding  the data  struc-
ture necessary to represent discourse structure, 
specifically whether tree-structure is sufficient 
to  represent  discourse  structure  or  not,  is 
mainly focused on written text. This paper re-
views  some  of  the  major  claims  about  the 
structure in discourse and proposes an investi-
gation of discourse structure for simultaneous 
spoken Turkish by focusing on tree-violations 
and exploring ways to explain them away by 
non-structural means.

1 Introduction

There  is  an  ongoing  debate  about  the  nature  of 
structure in discourse. Halliday and Hasan (1976) 
propose that although there is some structure in the 
text and structure implies texture; texture does not 
necessarily imply structure.  Text  is  held together 
by a variety of non-structural cohesive ties:  refer-
ence, substitution, ellipsis, conjunction and lexical  
cohesion.  However,  their  notion  of  structure  is 
strictly syntactic; and for other researchers, the ele-
ments  that  hold the text  together,  especially  ele-
ments of conjunction, can be taken as indicators of 
structure in discourse.

If there is structure in discourse, the complexity 
of  the  said  structure  is  of  interest  to  linguistics, 
cognitive  science  and  computer  science  alike.  Is 
discourse structure more complex or more simple 
than  that  of  sentence  level  syntax?  How and  to 
what degree is that structure constrained? In order 
to answer questions along these lines, researchers 
explore the possible data structures for discourse in 
natural language resources.

Section  2,  reviews  the  current  approaches  to 
discourse structure.  Section 3 introduces the cur-
rent study, i.e., the search for deviations from tree 
structure in spontaneous spoken language. Section 
4 presents a conclusive summary.

2 The Structure of Discourse

2.1 Tree Structure for Discourse  
Hobbs (1985) takes it as a fact that discourse has 
structure. He argues that a set of coherence rela-
tions build a discourse structure that is composed 
of trees of successive and sometimes intertwining 
trees of various sizes connected at the peripheries. 

Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) (Mann and 
Thompson, 1988) proposes that a text can be ana-
lyzed as a single tree structure by means of prede-
fined rhetorical relations. Rhetorical relations hold 
between adjacent constituents either asymmetrical-
ly between a  nucleus and a satellite, or symmetri-
cally between two nuclei. The notion of nuclearity 
allows  the  units  to  connect  to  previous  smaller 
units  that  are  already embedded  in  a  larger  tree 
structure,  because  a  relation  is  assumed  to  be 
shared by the nuclei of non-atomic constituents. In 
other words, a relation to a complex discourse unit 
can be interpreted as either between the adjacent 
unit and the whole of the complex unit, or between 
the adjacent unit and a nucleus of the complex unit. 

One of the rhetorical structures in RST,  elabo-
ration is criticized by Knott et al. (2001) who pro-
pose an elaboration-less coherence structure, where 
the global focus defines linearly organized  entity  
chains,  which can contain multiple atomic or non-
atomic  RS trees,  and  which  are  linked  via  non-
rhetorical resumptions. 

55



Discourse - Lexicalized Tree Adjoining Gram-
mar (D-LTAG) (Webber, 2004) is an extension of 
the sentence-level Tree Adjoining Grammar (Joshi, 
1987) to discourse level. Discourse connectives act 
as  discourse  level  predicates  that  connect  two 
spans of text with abstract object (Asher, 1993) in-
terpretations.  Coordinating and subordinating con-
junctions  such  as  fakat  'but'  (1)  and  rağmen  'al-
though' (2), take their host clauses by substitution 
and the other argument either by substitution or by 
adjoining; whereas discourse adverbials such as (3) 
take the host argument by adjoining, and the other 
argument  anaphorically.  In  the  examples  below, 
the host  argument is  in boldface, the other argu-
ment  is  in  italics  and the connectives are  under-
lined.
(1) Araştırma Merkezi aşağı yukarı bitmiş du-

rumda, fakat iç ve dış donanımı eksik.
‘The Research Center is more or less com-
plete but     its internal and external equip-
ments are missing.’

(2) Benim için çok utandırıcı bir durum ol-
masına rağmen oralı olmuyordum.
‘Although it was a very embarrassing situ-
ation for me, I didn’t pay much heed.’ 

(3) İlgisizliğim seni şaşırtabilir. ama  üvey 
babamı görmek istemediğim için yıllardır o  
eve gitmiyorum.  Anneme çok bağlı olduğu-
mu da söyleyemem ayrıca.

My indifference might surprise you, but since 
I do not want to see my stepfather,  I have not  
been to that  house for  years.  In addition,  I 
cannot  say  I  am  attached  to  my  mom 
much.

As in sentence level syntax, the anaphoric rela-
tions are not part of the structure; as a result, the 
discourse  adverbials  can  access  their  first  argu-
ments anywhere in the text without violating non-
crossing constraint of tree structure. When a struc-
tural connective such as  ve 'and'  and a discourse 
adverbial such as bundan ötürü 'therefore' are used 
together as in (4), an argument may have multiple 
parents violating one of the constraints of the tree 
structure;  but  since the discourse  adverbial  takes 
the other argument anaphorically, the non-crossing 
constraint is not violated. 
(4) Dedektif  romanı içinden çıkılmaz gibi görü-

nen esrarlı bir cinayetin çözümünü sunduğu  
için,  her  şeyden  önce  mantığa  güveni  ve  
inancı dile getiren bir anlatı türüdür ve
   bundan  ötürü  de   burjuva  rasyonelliğinin 
edebiyattaki özü haline gelmiştir.
Unraveling the solution to a seemingly intri-
cate murder mystery, the detective novel is a  
narrative genre which primarily gives voice  
to the faith and trust in reason and being so, 
it has become the epitome of bourgeois ra-
tionality in the literature.

Figure 1: Tree structure for (4). Bundan ötürü 'therefore' takes one argument anaphorically, shown as a dotted line in 
this representation. Since the anaphora is non structural, there is no crossing in (4). However, tree structure is still vi-
olated because Du2 and Du3 share an argument, resulting in multiple-parent structure. 

56



Implicit  connectives  always link two adjacent 
spans structurally, the host span by substitution and 
the other by adjoining. Since after adjunction the 
initial immediate dominance configurations are not 
preserved, the semantic composition is defined on 
the  derivation  tree  rather  than  the  derived  tree 
(Forbes et al., 2003; Forbes-Riley et al., 2005). 

The Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) (Prasad 
et al., 2008) is loosely based on D-LTAG, as the 
discourse  connectives  are  annotated  as  discourse 
level predicates with two arguments; but the focus 
is no longer on the global structure of discourse but 
on  individual  relations,  and  the  annotations  are 
kept as theory-neutral as possible. 

2.2 Deviations from Tree Structure
Wolf  and Gibson (2005),  judging from a corpus 
annotated  for  a  set  of  relations  that  is  based  on 
Hobbs  (1985),  argue  that  the  global  discourse 
structure cannot be represented by a tree structure. 
They point out that the definition for the anaphoric 
connectives in D-LTAG seems to be circular, since 
they  are  defined  by  their  anaphoric  arguments 
which can be involved in crossing dependencies, 
and in turn they are defined as anaphoric and thus 
outside the structural constraints.  They propose a 
chain graph-based annotations scheme, which they 
claim express  the  discourse  relations  more accu-
rately than RST, because the relations can access 
embedded, non-nuclear constituents that would be 
inaccessible in an RST tree. 

Since  Wolf  and  Gibson  use  attribution  and 
same relations, which are not considered discourse 
relations in D-LTAG or the PDTB, a direct com-
parison of chain graph annotations and the PDTB 
does not seem possible at this point; but violations 
of tree structure are also attested in the PDTB. 

Lee et  al.  (2006,  2008)  investigate  the  PDTB 
and identify dependencies that are compatible with 
tree  structure,  independent  relations and  full  em-
bedding;  as  well  as  incompatible  dependencies, 
shared  argument,  properly  contained  argument,  
partially overlapping arguments, and  pure cross-
ing. They claim that only shared arguments (same 
text  span taken as argument  by two distinct  dis-
course connectives) and properly contained argu-
ments (a text span that is the argument of one con-
nective properly contains a smaller text span that is 
the  argument  of  another  connective)  should  be 
considered  as  contributing  to  the  complexity  of 

discourse  structure;  the  reason being that  the  in-
stances  of  partially  overlapping  arguments  and 
pure crossing can be explained away by anaphora 
and  attribution,  both  of  which  are  non-structural 
phenomena. The presence of shared arguments car-
ries  the  discourse  structure  from tree  to  directed 
acyclic graphs (Webber et al., 2011).

Aktaş et al. (2010) have identified similar tree 
structure violations in the Turkish Discourse Bank 
(TDB) (Zeyrek et al., 2010). In addition to the de-
pendencies in Lee et al. (2006), Aktaş have identi-
fied  properly contained relations and  nested rela-
tions.  A full  analysis of the TDB with respect to 
discourse structure is yet to be done.

Egg and Redeker (2008, 2010) argue that tree 
structure violations can be overcome by applying 
an underspecification formalism to discourse rep-
resentation.  They  adopt  a  weak  interpretation  of 
nuclearity, where although the relation between an 
atomic constituent   and a  complex constituent  is 
understood to hold between the atomic constituent 
ant the  nucleus of the complex constituent, struc-
turally the relation does not access the nucleus of 
the complex, and therefore does not result in multi-
ple parenting. This approach is not directly appli-
cable to PDTB-style relations, because of the mini-
mality principle, which constrains the annotators to 
select the smallest text span possible that is neces-
sary to interpret the discourse relation when anno-
tating the arguments of a discourse connective. 

Egg and Redeker also argue that  most  of  the 
crossing dependencies in Wolf and Gibson (2005) 
involve anaphora, which is  considered non-struc-
tural in discourse as well as in syntax. However, 
they admit that multi-satellite constructions (MSC) 
in RST, where one constituent can enter into multi-
ple rhetorical relations as long as it is the nucleus 
of  all  relations,  seems  to  violate  tree  structure. 
They state that only some of the MSCs can be ex-
pressed  as  atomic-to-complex  relations,  but  they 
also state that those the MSCs that cannot be ex-
pressed  so  seems  to  be  genre  specific.  The  fact 
that both Egg and Redeker (2008) and Lee et al. 
(2006, 2008) cannot refute the presence of multiple 
parenting in discourse structure is striking.

2.3 Discourse Structure in Spoken Language
All  studies  in  Section  2  investigates  discourse 
structure in written texts. There are spoken corpora 
annotated for RST such as Stent (2000) and SDRT 

57



(Baldridge  &  Lascarides,  2005),  but  the  only 
PDTB-style spoken discourse structure annotation 
within the author's knowledge is part of the LUNA 
corpus in Italian (Tonelli, 2010). 

The most striking change Tonelli et al. made in 
the PDTB annotation scheme when annotating spo-
ken dialogues is to allow for implicit relations be-
tween non-adjacent text spans due to higher frag-
mentation in spoken language. They also added an 
interruption label for when a single argument of a 
speaker  was  interrupted.  Some  changes  to  the 
PDTB  Sense  Hierarchy  was  necessary  including 
the addition of the GOAL type under CONTINGENCY 
class, fine tuning of  PRAGMATIC subtypes, exclu-
sion of LIST type from EXPANSION class and merg-
ing  of  syntactically  distinguished  REASON and 
RESULT subtypes  into  a  semantically  defined 
CAUSE type. 

3 Proposed Study and Methodology

The  aim  of  the  current  study  is  to  determine 
whether tree structure is sufficient to represent dis-
course  structure  in  simultaneous spoken Turkish. 
Unfortunately, due to time and budget constraints, 
continuous annotation of a large-scale corpus with 
multiple  annotators  is  not  possible  for  the  short 
term. Therefore, the immediate goal is  to extract 
excerpts of interest that include tree-violation can-
didates, annotate the violations along with their im-
mediate context adopting a PDTB-style annotation 
with some adjustments for Turkish and spoken lan-
guage;  and  explore  means  of  explaining  away 
these violations by non-structural cohesive ties de-
fined by Halliday and Hasan (1976). Cohesive ties 
include the frequently discussed anaphora (refer-
ence in  their  terms),  but  also include other  non-
structural mechanisms such as  ellipsis and  lexical  
cohesion. 

3.1 Extracting tree-violation candidates
The first step of the study is to examine the struc-
tural configurations in the TDB. Although the TDB 
is a written text source, it contains texts from mul-
tiple genres;  and in some genres such as novels, 
stories and interviews, dialogues are annotated for 
discourse  structure.  We  expect  the  TDB annota-
tions  to  provide  some  insight  that  can  be  trans-
ferred to spoken language. For example, if a cer-
tain  discourse  connective,  a  particular  attribution 
verb  or  some  specific  type  of  embedded  clause 

seem to participate frequently in tree-violations in 
the TDB, searching for instances of that particular 
elements in spoken data may considerably hasten 
the search for tree-violation candidates.

The second step is the continuous annotation of 
small pieces of spoken data. The goal of this step is 
not to produce  a fully annotated spoken corpus, 
but rather to gather some insight into the structures 
that are unique to spoken data. By annotating ran-
domly  selected  small  pieces  of  spoken  data,  we 
aim to discover structures that are unique to spoken 
data that cannot be extracted form the TDB. Like 
the first step, the goal is to identify elements that 
are  likely  to  result  in  tree-violations  that  can  be 
searched for in large amounts of unannotated data.

The last step is obviously to look for the identi-
fied  elements  in  the  first  two  phases  in  larger 
amounts of spoken data and annotate them. Cur-
rently considered spoken resources are the  METU 
Spoken Turkish Corpus (Ruhi and Karadaş 2009) 
and freely available podcasts. 

3.2 Anticipated adjustments to the PDTB an-
notation scheme

The TDB has already made some adjustments for 
Turkish on the PDTB style. One major adjustment 
is to annotate phrasal expressions that include deic-
tic expressions (such as bu sebeple 'for this reason') 
as discourse connectives. Although the PDTB an-
notates  some  phrasal  and  multipart  connectives, 
deictic and productive phrasal expressions such as 
that's because  or the reason is were annotated as 
alternative  lexicalizations  rather  than  lexicalized 
discourse predicates. In the TDB, such expressions 
are annotated as discourse connectives because of 
the   structural  similarity  between deictic  phrasal 
expressions  and  subordinating  discourse  connec-
tives.  In addition, a  shared span label was intro-
duced to accommodate for text spans that belong to 
both  arguments,  such  as  sentential  adverbials  or 
subjects of subordinate clauses. Finally, in an on-
going attempt to add sense annotations to the TDB, 
some  new  sense  labels  such  as  OBJECTION and 
CORRECTION were added to the PDTB sense hierar-
chy.  

In addition to Turkish-specific changes, we will 
consider adopting speech-specific changes such as 
the non-adjacent implicit connectives and the repe-
tition label by Tonelli (2010) as needed.

58



Figure2: An attempt at building a tree for (5). The first argument of çünkü in Du5 is either recovered from Du3 by 
non-structural means, or taken structurally form Du3, resulting in pure crossing and depending on the decision to 
annotate attribution as a discourse annotation or not, either shared argument or properly contained argument.

3.3 A sample tree-violation candidate
A sample excerpt of interest is (5). The context 

is that  the speaker is complaining that the project 
manager assigns new tasks right before the end of 
working hours.
(5) Sonra da sabah gelip  onlar neden yetişmedi 

diye hesap sorup sinir bozuyor. E, çünkü sen 
altıya çeyrek kala iş verirsen yetişmez tabi.
Then he comes in the morning and asks why 
they are not ready yet and (thus) he gets on 
my nerves. Well,  because if you assign the 
task at a quarter to six o'clock, they won't 
be ready of course.

In  (5),  the  first  argument  of  the  connective 
çünkü 'because' is the complement of asking, and is 
embedded in a  sequence of  events.  Most  impor-
tantly, it is neither the first nor the last event in the 
sequence, so structurally it should not be available 
to çünkü.  

Once a tree-violation candidate such as (5) is 
identified, it will be analyzed to see if a plausible 
tree structure can be constructed, or the violation 
can be explained away by non-structural  mecha-
nisms or speech-specific features such as intona-
tion.  In  this  case,  there  doesn't  seem  to  be  an 
anaphoric explanation to get rid of the crossing de-
pendency.  However,  left  hand  side  argument  of 
çünkü is embedded in a verb of attribution. 

“Why are they not ready yet?” and the answer 
“Because if you give the task at  a quarter to six 
o'clock, they won't be ready of course.” make up a 

sub-discourse  distinct  from  the  structure  of  the 
main discourse. Another non-structural explanation 
is ellipsis, where the missing argument of çünkü is 
recovered from the preceding context.  Repetition 
(an  element  of  lexical  cohesion)  of  yetişmek 'to 
catch up, be ready', may play a role in the recovery 
of the missing argument. At this point, we confine 
ourselves to identifying possible explanations, but 
refrain from committing ourselves  to any one of 
the  explanations.  Further  research  should  reveal 
whether this is a frequent dependency type a. for 
çünkü 'because', b. for lexically reinforced ellipsis  
and  c.  for  arguments  of  attribution  verbs  d.  for 
Turkish  discourse,  or  e.  for  spontaneous  speech. 
Each of this possibilities will have different ramifi-
cations, ranging from a discourse adverbial inter-
pretation of çünkü 'because' to a graph structure for 
spoken discourse. 

4 Conclusion

Whether tree structure is sufficient to represent dis-
course relations is an open question that will bene-
fit from diverse studies in multiple languages and 
modalities. Here we have presented some of the ar-
guments for and against tree structure in discourse. 
The current study aims to reveal the constraints in 
simultaneous  spoken Turkish  discourse  structure. 
The  proposed  framework  for  discourse  structure 
analysis is based on PDTB-style, with  adjustments 
for Turkish and spoken language. The adjustments 
will be based on the existing PDTB-style studies in 

59



Turkish  and  simultaneous  speech,  although  they 
are likely to evolve further as research progresses. 
The methodology for the study is to search for pos-
sible tree-violations, and try to apply the explana-
tions in the literature to explain them away. The vi-
olations that  cannot  be plausibly explained away 
by  non-structural  mechanisms  should  be  accom-
modated by the final discourse model. 

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the support of Turkish 
Scientific and  Technological Research Council of 
Turkey  (TUBITAK)  and  METU  Scientific  Re-
search  Fund  (no.  BAP-07-04-2011-005)  for  the 
Turkish Discourse Bank.

References
Berfin Aktaş, Cem Bozşahin, Deniz Zeyrek. 2010. Dis-

course  Relation  Configurations  in  Turkish  and  an 
Annotation  Environment.  Proc.  LAW  IV  -  The  
Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop.

Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects in  
Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Jason  Baldridge,  Alex  Lascarides.  2005.  Annotating 
Discourse Structure for Robust Semantic Interpreta-
tion. Proc. 6th International Workshop on Computa-
tional Semantics.

Markus Egg, Gisela Redeker. 2008. Underspecified Dis-
course Representation. In A. Benz and P. Kuhnlein 
(eds)  Constraints  in  Discourse (117-138).  Ben-
jamins: Amsterdam.

Markus Egg, Gisela Redeker.  2010. How Complex is 
Discourse Structure? Proc. 7th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 
2010) pp. 1619–23.

Katherine  Forbes,  Eleni  Miltsakaki,  Rashmi  Prasad, 
Anoop  Sarkar,  Aravind  K.  Joshi.  2003.  D-LTAG 
System: Discourse Parsing with a Lexicalized Tree-
Adjoining  Grammar.  Journal  of  Logic,  Language 
and Information, 12(3), 261–279.

Katherine  Forbes-Riley,  Bonnie  Webber,  Aravind  K. 
Joshi.  2005.  Computing  Discourse  Semantics:  The 
Predicate-Argument Semantics of Discourse Connec-
tives in D-LTAG. Journal of Semantics, 23, 55-106. 

Michael A. K. Halliday, Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976.  Cohe-
sion in English. London: Longman.

Jerry R. Hobbs. 1985. On the Coherence and Structure 
of Discourse. Report CSLI-85-37, Center for Study of  
Language and Information.

Aravind  K.  Joshi.  1987. An Introduction to  Tree  Ad-
joining  Grammar.  In  A.  Manaster-  Ramer  (Ed.), 
Mathematics  of  Language.  Amsterdam:  John  Ben-
jamins.

Alistair  Knott,  Jon  Oberlander,  Michael  O'Donnel, 
Chris Mellish. 2001. Beyond elaboration: The inter-
action of relations and focus in coherent text. In T. 
Sanders, J. Schilperoord & W. Spooren (Eds.),  Text  
Representation:Linguistic  and  psycholinguistic  as-
pects (181-196): John Benjamins Publishing.

Alan Lee, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind K. Joshi, Nikhil Di-
nesh,  Bonnie Webber.  2006. Complexity of depen-
dencies  in discourse:  are dependencies  in discourse 
more complex than in syntax?  Proc. 5th Workshop 
on Treebanks and Linguistic Theory (TLT’06 ).

Alan  Lee,  Rashmi  Prasad,  Aravind  K.  Joshi,  Bonnie 
Webber. 2008. Departures from tree structures in dis-
course. Proc. Workshop on Constraints in Discourse  
III.

William C. Mann, Sandra A. Thompson. 1988. Rhetori-
cal  structure theory:  Toward a functional  theory of 
text organization. Text, 8(3), 243-281.

Rashmi Prasad,  Nikhil  Dinesh,  Alan  Lee,  Eleni  Milt-
sakaki,  Livio  Robaldo,  Aravind  K.  Joshi,  Bonnie 
Webber.  2008.  The  Penn  Discourse  Treebank  2.0. 
Proc. LREC’08 - The sixth international conference  
on Language Resources and Evaluation.

Şükriye Ruhi, Derya Çokal Karadaş. 2009.  Features for 
an internet accessible corpus of spoken Turkish dis-
course. Working Papers in Corpus-based Linguistics  
and Language Education 3, 311-320.

Amanda  Stent.  2000.  Rhetorical  structure  in  dialog. 
Proc. 2nd International Natural  Language Genera-
tion Conference (INLG'2000). Student paper.

Sara  Tonelli,  Giuseppe  Riccardi,  Rashmi  Prasad,  Ar-
avind Joshi. 2010. Annotation of Discourse Relations 
for Conversational  Spoken Dialogues. In  Proceed-
ings of the Seventh International Conference on Lan-
guage  Resources and Evaluation (LREC). 

Bonnie Webber, Matthew Stone, Aravind K. Joshi, Al-
istair Knott. 2003. Anaphora and discourse structure. 
Computational Linguistics. 29 (4):545-587.

Bonnie Webber. 2004. D-LTAG: Extending Lexicalized 
TAG to  Discourse.  Cognitive  Science,  28(5),  751-
779.

Bonnie  Webber,  Markus  Egg,  Valia  Kordoni.  2011. 
Discourse structure and language technology.  Natu-
ral  Language  Engineering, doi:  10.1017/ 
S1351324911000337,  Published  online  by  Cam-
bridge University Press 08 December 2011.

Florian Wolf, Edward Gibson. 2005. Representing dis-
course  coherence:  a  corpus-based  study.  Computa-
tional Linguistics 31: 249–87.

Deniz  Zeyrek,  Işın  Demirşahin,  Ayışığı  Sevdik-Çallı, 
Hale  Ögel  Balaban,  İhsan  Yalçınkaya,  Ümit  Deniz 
Turan. 2010. The annotation scheme of Turkish dis-
course bank and an evaluation of inconsistent annota-
tions.  Proc. 4th  Linguistic  Annotation  Workshop  
(LAW IV).

60


