



















































Hand-Crafting a Lexical Network With a Knowledge-Based Graph Editor


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex-III), pages 109–126,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Hand-Crafting a Lexical Network
With a Knowledge-Based Graph Editor

Nabil GADER1 Veronika LUX-POGODALLA2 Alain POLGUÈRE3
(1) MVS Publishing Solutions, Sainte-Marguerite, F-88100, FRANCE

(2) CNRS, ATILF, UMR 7118, Nancy, F-54063, FRANCE
(3) Université de Lorraine, ATILF, UMR 7118, Nancy, F-54000, FRANCE

Nabil.Gader@mvs.fr, Veronika.Lux@atilf.fr,
Alain.Polguere@univ-lorraine.fr

ABSTRACT
We present the data structure of a lexical resource—the French Lexical Network (FLN)—,
that is being hand-crafted using a knowledge-based lexicographic editor. The FLN is formally
a lexical graph whose structuring is mainly supported by the system of paradigmatic and
syntagmatic lexical functions of the Meaning-Text linguistic approach. Section 1 offers a general
characterization of the FLN. Section 2 describes the database and the lexicographic editor
in their present state. Section 3 focuses on the SQL data structure used to encode lexical
information in the FLN, with special attention paid to the encoding of lexical function relations.
Section 4 considers the feasibility of porting the FLN data to known standards such as the
Lexical Markup Framework (LMF). Finally, in section 5, we consider the cognitive relevance of
the FLN approach to the modeling of lexicons.

KEYWORDS: lexical database, lexical graph, virtual dictionary, semantic derivation, collocation,
lexical function, Explanatory Combinatorial Lexicology/Lexicography, lexicographic editor,
French language.

Introduction

The French Lexical Network, hereafter FLN,1 is a new hand-crafted lexical resource, currently
under development, that possesses many distinguishing features, both in terms of content,
structure and building process. In this paper, we focus on the FLN’s data structure and on the
graph editor that has been designed to support the lexicographic task of building the FLN. This
work is currently performed at the ATILF CNRS laboratory (Nancy, France) in the context of a
broader R&D project called RELIEF (Lux-Pogodalla and Polguère, 2011). Though the process of
building the FLN is a long-term enterprise and we are at the time of writing only 18 months
into this project, the resource’s structure is already sufficiently stable, and the resource itself is
sufficiently well into development, for us to be able to account for our first results. We believe
that the approach taken in designing the FLN is particularly relevant for the linguistics, NLP and
cognitive science communities due to (i) its formal nature, (ii) its strong theoretical linguistic
background and (iii) its fundamental semantic orientation. All points that will be made clearer
below.

1In French: Réseau Lexical du Français or RLF.

109



1 General characterization of the French Lexical Network (FLN)

The FLN belongs to the family of Net-like lexical databases (Fellbaum, 1998; Baker et al., 2003;
Ruppenhofer et al., 2010; Spohr, 2012) and possesses at least four distinguishing characteristics.

1. The FLN is a lexical network—i.e., a network of interconnected lexical units—whose
structure is mainly organized around a constantly growing set of lexical links, based on
the system of so-called lexical functions proposed by the Meaning-Text linguistic theory.2

2. Though manually performed, the construction of the FLN is done by means and “under
the supervision” of a tailor-made lexicographic editor named Dicet—developed by MVS
Publishing Solutions (Sainte-Marguerite, France)3—that allows lexicographers to browse
through the lexical network and directly expand and revise it, using linguistic and
metalinguistic information. Dicet can therefore be best conceived of as being a knowledge-
based lexical graph editor and browser.

3. Lexical information stored in the FLN is entirely formalized, thus allowing for computer
processing of the lexical network, for both lexicographic purposes (automatic coher-
ence checking, implementation of analogical lexicographic reasoning, etc.) and natural
language processing.

4. Though not a dictionary—it doesn’t possess the textual structure of a paper or comput-
erized dictionary—the FLN is designed to have embedded in it sufficient lexicographic
information (both in formal and “popularized” form) to be used to automatically generate
dictionaries of multiple formats. It is thus the repository of virtual dictionaries (Atkins,
1996; Selva et al., 2003; Polguère, 2012a).

This last characteristic is particularly important as it explains why the construction of the FLN
is indeed a true lexicographic project. Ultimately, the FLN is meant to be a multi-purpose
lexical resource, that should allow for the automatic generation of (i) dictionaries with various
macro- and microstructures targetting human users, and (ii) formalized resources for NLP.
The fact that computer programs should be able to make use of the FLN sets the target in
terms of formalization and “computability.” On the other hand, the targeting of a content that
is dictionary-grade and suitable for human users—language learners being the prototypical
users—sets very high standards in terms of accuracy. This rules out any strategy of automatically
compiling the FLN out of already existing linguistic resources such as electronic dictionaries,
corpora, etc. (Sagot and Fišer, 2011). The process of building the FLN has to be a full-fledged
lexicographic one and involves an organized team of lexicographers.4

2 Present state of the lexical graph and lexicographic editor

Let us first mention that, according to our terminology, a lexical entry in the FLN corresponds to
a (potentially) polysemic word, called vocable. We name lexical unit each well-specified sense
of the vocables that constitute the FLN’s wordlist. For instance, the French vocable CHANTAGE

2See (Milićević, 2006) for a short introduction to the Meaning-Text approach to language study.
3MVS is ATILF’s private sector partner in the RELIEF project, that has a significant R&D facet. RELIEF targets both the
construction of the FLN and its utilization in natural language processing tasks such as fine-grained semantic access to
textual information.

4At present, 12 members of the team are directly involved in lexicographic tasks.

110



‘blackmail’ comprises two senses—i.e. lexical units—in the current state of the FLN: CHANTAGE I
‘criminal act’ and CHANTAGE II ‘pressure (put on someone).’

Each lexical unit possesses a unique ID (identifier) in the FLN’s database. Such is the case
for each vocable, the belonging of lexical units to given vocables being modeled as relations
between vocable and lexical unit IDs.

Links between lexical units are also implemented as links between lexical unit IDs. This is
true in particular for links based on so-called lexical functions of the Meaning-Text linguistic
approach (Mel’čuk, 1996), that form the bulk of the FLN’s structure. For instance, let us return
to the case of Fr. CHANTAGE I, whose predicative structure is ‘blackmail by $1 on $2 regarding $3
to obtain $4.’5 The fact that Fr. CIBLE II.2 ‘target’ and VICTIME II ‘victim’ are typical names for the
second actant ($2) of CHANTAGE I is modeled by the following lexical function application, where
S2 is the paradigmatic lexical function that returns typical names for the second actant of a
predicative lexical unit:

S2( chantage I ) = cible II.2 [de ART ∼], victime II [de ART ∼]

Such lexicographic information about CHANTAGE I is structured in the FLN by means of the
following lexical subgraph:

Figure 1: Structure of S2( chantage I ) in the FLN

Paradigmatic lexical functions, such as S2, correspond to semantic relations between lexical
units called semantic derivations in Meaning-Text linguistics terminology. However, there exist
also syntagmatic lexical functions, that correspond to collocational links between lexical units.
For instance, the fact that the verbs Fr. CÉDER IV.1 lit. ‘to give in [to someone]’, OBÉIR 3 lit. ‘to
obey’ and OBTEMPÉRER lit. ‘to comply’ are used as collocates of their complement CHANTAGE I to
express ‘$2 does what he/she is expected (by $1) to do in respect to $1’s blackmail,’ is modeled
by the following lexical function application, where Real2 is the syntagmatic lexical function
that returns “verbs of realization” that take the second actant of a predicative noun as subject
and the noun itself as first complement:

Real2( chantage I ) = céder IV.1 [à ART ∼], obéir3 [à ART ∼], obtempérer [à ART ∼]

In total, the set of lexical function links that gravitates around a given lexical unit can be quite
significant. This is illustrated in Figure 2 below, that displays all lexical function links of which

5$1, $2, $3,... are local variables (in the computational sense) that function locally in each individual lexical unit
description. They ensure the proper numbering and naming of actant slots and are used in place of the traditional X , Y ,
Z, ... variables.

111



CHANTAGE I is currently the source or the target.6 Notice that this lexical unit represents a mild
case in terms of lexical function connections: many links leaving from and leading to CHANTAGE I
are yet to be encoded and it is easy to find lexical units that are much bigger “lexical crossroads”
than this particular one.

Figure 2: All lexical function links leaving from or leading to CHANTAGE I in the FLN

As one can see, the bulk of the FLN’s informational content and structuring lies in the set of
lexical units (grouped under given polysemic vocables) and the set of lexical function links that
connect lexical units together. Based on the formal characteristics of the resource, the best way
to evaluate the FLN’s state of development is to count:

1. the number of lexical entities—mainly, vocables (V ) and lexical units (LU)—it contains,
such as for standard dictionaries where the number of entries and senses are often used
as coverage measurement;

2. the polysemy rate (LU/V ), that tells us how many lexical units (senses), in average, are
grouped under each vocable;

3. the number of lexical function links (LF L) between lexical units;

4. the connectivity rate LF L/LU , that tells us how many lexical function (in or out) links
are connecting, in average, a lexical unit to the rest of the FLN graph.7

6For lack of space we are forced to select a display that doesn’t allow for the legibility of all arc labels. All lexical graphs
used here have been automatically generated from the FLN database and displayed by means of the yEd graph editor
(http://www.yworks.com/en/products_yed_about.html).

7Expressed in mathematical terms (graph theory), the connectivity rate is the average degree of lexical nodes in the FLN
graph whose edges are lexical function relations.

112



Here are the statistics at the time of writing:

Vocables, i.e. entries [= V ] : 10363
Lexical units, i.e. senses [= LU] : 13767
Polysemy rate [= LU/V ] : 1.33
Lexical function links LU1→ LU2 [= LF L] : 17353
Connectivity rate [= LF L/LU] : 1.26

As the first two numbers show, the FLN is already far from being a sample or prototype of a
lexical resource in regard to how many entries and senses it contains. In actual fact, we do
consider that we have already reached our target in the RELIEF project in terms of wordlist
size. We initially estimated the minimal number of entries to be around 10,000, with no fixed
upper limit. However, adding an entry to the RLF wordlist is not a difficult task once a core
wordlist for French has been identified. What matters from now on is the growth of information
that is to be attached to each vocable: identification of its polysemy through creation of senses
associated to it and description of linguistic properties of each senses—essentially, through
weaving of lexical function links.

The polysemy rate is a particularly good indicator of how advanced the description of each
vocable is. Each time a vocable is actually studied and described, its sense structure is analyzed
and described by adding new senses to the database. A good polysemy rate for a fully mature
database would be between 2.5 and 3. For the sake of comparison, the French Petit Robert
reference dictionary—a very detailed dictionary in respect to the polysemic structuring of
entries—possesses a polysemy rate of 5. The rate of 1.33 that we currently achieve indicates
that the FLN has not reach its full maturity yet, but is already an “adolescent” lexical database
on its way to adulthood.

Let us emphasize the fact that statistics given here are based on the complete
database, not on lexical units that have actually been methodically studied. All
rates are therefore “diluted” by the mass of targeted units that are participating
in holding the graph together but are still unexplored locations in the global RLF
topography.

Together with the polysemy rate, the connectivity rate is an important indicator of how fleshy
and informative each entry is. Figure 3 below indicates the evolution of statistics on connectivity
since the moment the hardcoding of lexical function relations has been launched.

Notice that, at the moment of its birth, the FLN was nothing but a “fully non-connected” graph:
a set of individual nodes (lexical units) with no lexical connection to other nodes. This initial set
of 3,734 nodes was automatically injected into the RLF database from a manually constructed
priming wordlist—see (Lux-Pogodalla and Polguère, 2011; Polguère and Sikora, ToAp) for
details on the FLN’s growth process.

As for the FLN microstructure, lexical units—headwords—articles are made up of seven lexico-
graphic zones:

1. GC for grammatical characteristics (part of speech, noun gender, specific inflectional
behavior, etc.);

2. DF for definition;

113



Figure 3: Evolution of lexical connectivity in the FLN

3. NB for Nota Bene about the headword description;

4. GP for the headword’s government pattern, i.e. the description of its syntactic valency
(Mel’čuk, 2004a,b; Milićević, 2009);

5. LF for lexical function relations originating from the headword (headword as argument
of lexical function applications);

6. EX for lexicographic exemples;

7. PH for pointers to so-called full phrasemes, i.e. idioms, that are formally made up of a
lexemic headword—e.g. BULLET points to BITE THE BULLET.

All lexicographic zones are currently being dealt with by lexicographers. However, only the
GC (grammatical characteristics) and LF (lexical functions) zones are fully formalized and
supervised by the Dicet editor at the time of writing. The other zones are for the time being
completed as simple text fields and the EX (lexicographic examples) zone is presently under
formalization and about to be completed at the time of writing.

By saying that a given zone is supervised by the Dicet editor, we mean that:

• Dicet possesses knowledge about the information that has to be provided in the zone;
• embedded in Dicet, are special lexicographic tools that allow for the entering of informa-

tion under complete supervision of the editor.

114



In this approach to lexicography, lexicographers do not write articles; rather, they build them
by putting together all microscopic lexical rules that are associated with each lexical unit. The
encoded information is used by the editor for computing a textual presentation in what is
called an article-view of the headword’s description. At no time does the lexicographer type a
lexicographic text in an implemented zone (except in its Comments field). Figure 4 below
shows an association between the sub-window of the LF zone that is used to pull lexical
function links from the headword—at the bottom, right above the Comments zone—and
the corresponding article-view—on top—that displays the encoded information in textual
(dictionary-like) form. The headword used in this figure is CHANTAGE I, whose position in a
lexical function subgraph of the FLN has been described above (see Figure 2).

Figure 4: Correspondance between lexical function lexicographic tools and the article-view

Names of targets of lexical function links in the article-view are clickable textual items that give
direct access to the edition of the corresponding lexical units (opening of new editing windows).
For lack of space, we cannot delve further into the functioning of the Dicet editor. But we will
have the opportunity to provide more information on its functionalities when presenting the
FLN’s computational model (next section).

The designing and programming of the Dicet editor represents a significant investment in terms
of time and effort; before undertaking it, we reviewed existing softwares without being able to
find anything that came close to what we were looking for: a lexicographic editor supporting
graph weaving of lexical function links. It is also important to highlight the fact that Dicet
was not built from scratch. It is a customization of resources that were already available from
the MVS partner of the project, among its publishing solutions: primarily, the Dixit publishing
tool.8 Dicet is indeed a lexicographically-boosted knowledge-based version of Dixit, recoded
in Java for portability purposes. Dicet is also part of a suite integrating workflow, user rights

8http://www.mvs.fr/pdf/MVS_Dixit.pdf

115



management and controlled connection to an SQL database, while most existing lexicographic
editors seem to work on XML databases— for example, IDM DPS (Lannoy, 2010) and the
Dictionary Editor and Browser (DEB) (Horák et al., 2006).

In spite of its distinctive features, Dicet shares features with tools such as TLex (Joffe and
de Schryver, 2012) or the above-mentioned DEB. In particular, just as TLex supports “smart
cross-references” (Joffe and de Schryver, 2012, pp. 25–27 and pp. 68–69), Dicet allows easy
creation and maintenance of links between lexical units, a major concern given our lexicographic
model. However, beyond lexicographic editing, Dicet was designed to support a completely new
approach to building lexical resources. Because we developed our own tool, we were totally
free to explore and implement new ways of performing lexicographic activity (cf. section 5
below).

3 Data model: a relational SQL database

The FLN’s data model is an SQL database which, at the time of writing, comprises 46 separate
SQL tables; presenting all of them here is of course out of the question. As very limited space is
available to us, we will concentrate on lexical functions. Notice that a significant number of
publications on formal and computational modeling of lexical functions are already available,
for instance (Kahane and Polguère, 2001; Iordanskaja et al., 1992; Lareau et al., 2012); we will
consider solely the FLN’s approach to the problem.

In total, 16 SQL tables are used in the FLN’s database for the storage of lexical function-related
information. Part of these tables are used for modeling lexical functions per se, e.g. S2, as
individual lexical entities; this information could be exported as a stand-alone model of the
linguistic system of lexical functions (cf. section 4). Figure 5 below shows the interface that
allows lexicographers to manage the lexical function knowledge base embedded in the FLN. In
this figure, one can see the database record that defines the S2 lexical function. It contains the
three following types of information, from top to bottom.

1. Classification: S2 is a simple standard paradigmatic lexical function of the “S2” family,
that comprises also S2⊃, S2∩, S2usual, etc.

2. Formula structure: the lexical function formula S2 is constructed by assembling two
atomic formal elements—the name central component S and the subscript 2. As one
can see, names of lexical functions are broken down into atomic building blocks9, thus
allowing for future automatic compilation of standard lexical function encodings into
more “computable” formulas, such as those proposed in (Kahane and Polguère, 2001).

3. Popularization: S2 is at present associated with three popularization formulas (from the
popularization formula database).

In the remainder of this section, we focus on the SQL modeling of lexical function applications—
e.g. S2( chantage I )—rather than lexical function themselves. This modeling is supported by 4
SQL tables, shown in Figure 6 below. This subpart of the database can be seen as storing actual
lexical function relations among lexical units. As said earlier, such data represents the crucial
element of lexical structuring in the FLN.

The content of each of the 4 SQL tables in Figure 6 can be described as follows.
9For instance, the complex lexical function formula Magnquant+A1 is defined in the FLN database as an assembling of
5 atomic elements: Magn, quant, +, A and 1.

116



Figure 5: Interface for managing the FLN lexical function knowledge base: definition of S2

Figure 6: SQL tables handling lexical function applications in the FLN

117



1. Table ln_senses describes each lexical unit (sense), using 16 different fields. A lexical
unit, identified by a unique identifier (id), is formally linked to the vocable it belongs
to (based on id_vocable) and is characterized by a lexicographic number (ex. I.1)
if its vocable is polysemic.10 To sum up, the ln_senses table is used to store basic
information about lexical units such as CHANTAGE I, CIBLE II.2, VICTIME II, CÉDER IV.1, OBÉIR 3,
OBTEMPÉRER, etc.

2. Table ln_senses_lf describes the application of a lexical function LF (whose unique
identifier is id_lf ) to a lexical unit L (whose unique identifier is id_sens). Each
application of a lexical function to a lexical unit LF(L) has a unique identifier (id in
table ln_senses_lf).

3. This identifier is used under the name id_sens_lf in the ln_senses_lf_pop
table, that handles the association between individual lexical function applications and
the associated popularization formula. For example, the table ln_senses_lf is used
to store:

• the application of the lexical function S2 to the lexical unit CHANTAGE I, application
to which the table ln_senses_lf_pop associates the popularization formula
[$2] qui subit ∼ (= ‘[$2] who undergoes ∼’).11

• the application of the lexical function Real2 to the lexical unit CHANTAGE I, appli-
cation to which the table ln_senses_lf_pop associates the popularization
formula [$2] réagir comme $1 le souhaite vis-à-vis de ∼
(= ‘[$2] to react as expected by $1 regarding ∼’).

4. Each target L’ of a lexical function application LF(L) is specified in the
ln_senses_lf_targets table, using lexical function identifiers. But the
ln_senses_lf_targets table also contains:

• information necessary to logically order all LF(L)’s targets (field position) when
they are enumerated in an article-view;

• information about target separators (field separator whose value can be “,”,
“;” or “<”);

• information about the complementation frame of each target (field
syntactic_frame);

• etc.

In short, this table stores all additional linguistic information that is necessary to compute
what is displayed in the article-view for the lexical function zone (see the article-view in
Figure 4 above).

10Some fields, whose names begin by comment_, are used for the storage of “freely” entered information, i.e. informa-
tion for which Dicet does not yet implement a full formalization (comments_gc stands for comments on grammatical
characteristics, comments_df stands for comments on definition, etc.). Some other fields are for the management of
the lexicographic work. E.g. status has a value indicating if the description of the lexical unit is “completed,” “being
validated,” “under description” or “unworked;” created contains the creation date; creator contains the login of
the sense’s creator; etc.

11The “∼” symbol is used throughout a lexicographic article to refer to this article’s headword.

118



When weaving lexical function relations among lexical units, lexicographers work under
the supervision of the Dicet editor. Figure 7 shows the interface they use to feed the
ln_senses_lf_targets table with all the necessary information.

Figure 7: Part of the Dicet interface for pulling lexical function links in the FLN

Because our lexicographic model is implemented as SQL tables and the FLN itself is stored in
a relational database, we benefit from the well-established technology of relational database
management systems (quick access to data, secure data storage, management of users rights,
etc.).

As illustrated in this section, the Dicet editor is a powerful interface. Dicet helps lexicographers
to enter data that is compliant to our lexicographic principles. Simultaneously, Dicet computes
article-views of lexicographic data that is instantly available to lexicographers as a retroaction
they can use in order to check and validate their description. In short, Dicet ensures compliance
with a fine-grained formal model while giving lexicographers the clear feeling that they are,
afterall, performing a task that is equivalent to “writing” lexicographic articles.

4 Compatibility with standards for lexical data structures

It is nowadays unconceivable to target the public distribution of a lexical resource such as
the FLN without taking into consideration the compatibility of its computational modeling of
linguistic information (i.e., data structure) with available standards. In this section, we present
the outcome of some preliminary reflections on this topic.

As explained above, the FLN is implemented as a relational SQL database. This database
provides XML (and HTML) data exports, which means that it is conformant with a general
well-known data model and a general format standard. We wish to explore the compatibility
of FLN’s data with a more specialized standard: the Lexical Markup Framework—hereafter,
LMF—, which is the ISO standard for NLP-compatible lexical databases and dictionaries (ISO,
2008; Francopoulo et al., 2006). LMF Core Package and extensions are defined with the Unified
Modeling Language (UML), so that the normative content of LMF is expressed as sets of UML
classes with associations among classes. Attribute-value pairs used to adorn the UML classes
are not directly provided by LMF. Rather, LMF recomands to use Data Category specifications in
accordance with the ISO 12620 standard (ISO, 2009).

To start with, we have checked if the FLN is in accordance with LMF general principles expressed
in the LMF core package. The Lexical Entry class from the LMF Core Package, which is

119



just “a container for managing the Form and Sense classes” (ISO, 2008, p. 18) perfectly matches
the FLN vocable entity, which we model as a grouping of lexical units. More importantly, in
both LMF and the FLN, the basic unit for lexicographic description is a Sense (= lexical unit
in the FLN).

To go further, since the FLN provides a large range of properties for each lexical unit, we would
have to select several LMF extensions in addition to the LMF core package. We chose to focus
on the encoding of lexical function applications—whose central role in structuring the FLN has
been extensively discussed above—and examine how it can be compiled into LMF format.

The LMF NLP semantics extension includes a SenseRelation class, defined as “a multipur-
pose class that can be used to represent antonymy, generic/specific or part of relationship” (ISO,
2008, p. 41), which seems to fit our needs. The code sample below illustrates the use of this
class to model the two lexical function applications S2( chantage I ) and Real2( chantage I ),
that have been examined in section 2.

<LexicalEntry>
<feat att="partOfSpeech" val="nom"/>
<Lemma>

<feat att="writtenForm" val="chantage"/>
</Lemma>
<Sense xml:id="chantage:I">

<SenseRelation targets="#cible:II.2 #victime:II">
<feat att="lexicalFunction" val="S_2"/>
<feat att="popularizedFormat" val="[$2] subir ~"/>

</SenseRelation>
<SenseRelation targets="#céder:IV.1 #obéir:3 #obtempérer">

<feat att="lexicalFunction" val="Real_2"/>
<feat att="popularizedFormat" val="[$2] réagir

comme $1 le souhaite vis-à-vis de ~"/>
</SenseRelation>

</Sense>
</LexicalEntry>
<LexicalEntry>

<feat att="partOfSpeech" val="nom"/>
<Lemma>

<feat att="writtenForm" val="cible"/>
</Lemma>
<Sense xml:id="cible:I"/>
<Sense xml:id="cible:II.1"/>
<Sense xml:id="cible:II.2"/>

</LexicalEntry>
<!-- Lexical entry omitted for "victime" -->
<LexicalEntry>

<feat att="partOfSpeech" val="verbe"/>
<Lemma>

<feat att="writtenForm" val="céder"/>
</Lemma>
<Sense xml:id="céder:I"/>
<Sense xml:id="céder:II"/>
<Sense xml:id="céder:III"/>
<Sense xml:id="céder:IV.1"/>
<Sense xml:id="céder:IV.2"/>

</LexicalEntry>
<!-- Lexical entries omitted for "obéir" and "obtempérer" -->

The above code is based on the LMF SenseRelation class as it is, using only one additional

120



feature to encode the associated popularization formula. For an actual compilation of the FLN
into LMF, we will probably need to define a new class, say LexicalFunctionRelation,
as a specialization of the SenseRelation class.

Additionally, this example clearly shows that the XML version of the LMF model, used here,
is not rich enough. In particular, the targets attribute of the SenseRelation element
allows us to link a lexical unit to a list of lexical units, using a given lexical function, while, as
shown in section 3, we need a data structure that is far more complex than a list, together with
additional information attached to links pointing to targeted lexical units.12 We need a true
LMF equivalent of our ln_senses_lf_targets SQL table.

From our preliminary exploration of the problem of the FLN’s compatibility with existing
standards, we draw the following conclusions.

• The FLN is in accordance with the few high-level good-practice principles provided by
LMF.

• Since the FLN has a very precisely defined structure, we need to add more specificity to
LMF classes in order to get a tighter LMF model.

• If an LMF compatible distribution of the FLN is indeed implemented, several linguistic
resources used in the FLN should be converted into Data Category Registries, following
the ISO 12620 standard (ISO, 2009). For example, in order to define the attributes and
values used to adorn the LexicalFunction class, one probably has to build a Data
Category Registry dedicated to lexical functions. This could be automatically generated
from a subset of the FLN SQL tables, in which a description of all FLN’s lexical functions
is provided.

• Finally, let’s mention that we consider exploring in the future other standards for lexical
resources, in particular the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI), that includes two relevant
chapters: Dictionaries and Graphs, networks and trees.

5 On the cognitive relevance of the FLN approach

In order to conclude, we wish to reflect on the cognitive relevance of the FLN approach to
the modeling of lexical information. Indeed, our motivations for designing such a project—in
terms of lexical model and lexicographic methodology—do not originate from computational
considerations. The need to implement, fully formalize and make computer-tracktable our
lexical model is a non-negotiable constraint, an essential parameter in our approach. However,
our first and foremost goal is to build a lexical resource that complies before all not to encoding
standards, but to lexicological ones! The FLN design and modus operandi is the outcome of
an extremely long process of experimentation with lexicological models and of lexicographic
practice: from earlier “theoretical dictionaries” called Explanatory Combinatorial Dictionaries
(Mel’čuk and Žolkovskij, 1984; Mel’čuk, I. et al., 1999), to the work on the DiCo lexical database
(Polguère, 2000; Mel’čuk and Polguère, 2006), the layman-oriented pedagogical Lexique Actif
du Français13 (Mel’čuk and Polguère, 2007; Polguère, 2007) and the first proposal for a graph-
based version of Explanatory Combinatorial lexical databases called lexical systems (Polguère,

12Cf. Figure 7, section 3, the set of parameters represented by columns to be filled in the Dicet window.
13Lit. ‘Active French Lexicon.’

121



2009). All this has matured into a project that, we hope, goes beyond the very specific problem
of building a French lexical resource.14

As was mentioned at the beginning of this paper (section 1), the constraint of being able to use
the FLN as a resource for such a linguistically demanding context of application as language
learning (and teaching) imposes on us to consider a lexical model that has relevance to the
processes of acquiring and using lexical knowledge. There are at least two aspects of the FLN
that we believe make it compatible with this goal.

Firstly, the FLN is a rich, non-hierarchical lexical graph, that is more in line with the plausible
structure of “actual” lexical knowledge (Aitchison, 2003) than textual models of the dictionary
type.

Secondly, the Dicet editor has a crucial importance in our approach in that it not only helps
entering and retrieving formally coherent information, but it also implements a new “lexico-
graphic gesture.” We are convinced that this gesture is intrinsically compatible with language
speaker’s navigation in the lexicon in the context of language learning and use (Wolter, 2006;
Zock and Schwab, 2011). We cannot enter here into the detail of this last aspect of our work; it
is dealt with in A. Polguère’s oral presentation at CogALex III (Polguère, 2012b) and will be
developed in later publications. Suffice it to say here that FLN’s lexicographers build the lexical
model in a non-linear way, through gradual and sometimes aleatory weaving of lexical links.
This process of building lexicographic information—that follows semantic, combinatorial and
formal relations between lexical units—presents strong analogies with plausible wading of the
speaker through the structure of lexical knowledge.

Acknowledgments

The RELIEF project is supported by a grant from the Agence de Mobilisation Économique de
Lorraine (AMEL) and Fonds Européen de Développement Régional (FEDER). We wish to thank
our colleague Bertrand Gaiffe for his precious guidance on LMF and CogALex III reviewers for
their extremely sound and useful comments on a preliminary version of this paper.

References

Aitchison, J. (2003). Words in the Mind: An Introduction to the Mental Lexicon. Blackwell,
Oxford UK, 3rd edition.

Atkins, B. T. S. (1996). Bilingual Dictionaries: Past, Present and Future. In Gellerstam, M.,
Järborg, J., Malmgren, S.-G., Norén, K., Rogström, L., and Papmehl, C. R., editors, Euralex’96
Proceedings, pages 515–590, Gothenburg. Gothenburg University, Department of Swedish.

Baker, C. F., Fillmore, C. J., and Cronin, B. (2003). The Structure of the FrameNet Database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 16(3):281–296.

Fellbaum, C., editor (1998). WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press, Cam-
bridge MA.

Francopoulo, G., George, M., Calzolari, N., Monachini, M., Bel, N., Pet, M., and Soria, C.
(2006). Lexical Markup Framework (LMF). In Proceedings of International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation – LREC 2006, Genova.

14Note that the FLN approach is presently being used, in exploratory satellite projects based on the same data structure
and lexicographic editor, for the modeling of the Korean and Spanish lexicons.

122



Horák, A., Pala, K., Rambousek, A., and Rychlý, P. (2006). New Clients for Dictionary Writing
on the DEB Platform. In de Schryver, G.-M., editor, DWS 2006: Proceedings of the Fourth
International Workshop on Dictionary Writing Systems, pages 17–23, Turin.

Iordanskaja, L., Kim, M., and Polguère, A. (1992). Some Procedural Problems in the Imple-
mentation of Lexical Functions. In Wanner, K. H. . L., editor, Proceedings of the International
Workshop on The Meaning-Text Theory, Arbeitspapiere der GMD 671, pages 197–205, Darm-
stadt (Allemagne). GMD-MBH.

ISO (2008). Language Resource management – Lexical markup framework (LMF). ISO/TC
37/SC 4 N453. N330 Rev. 16.

ISO (2009). Terminology and other language and content resources – Specification of data cat-
egories and management of a Data Category Registry for language resources. ISO/TC37/SC3
ISO 12620. Stage : 60.60 (2009-12-10).

Joffe, D. and de Schryver, G.-M. (2012). TLex Suite User Guide (version 7.0.1). Technical
report, TshwaneDJe Human Language Technology.

Kahane, S. and Polguère, A. (2001). Formal Foundation of Lexical Functions. In Proceedings of
“COLLOCATION: Computational Extraction, Analysis and Exploitation”, 39th Annual Meeting
and 10th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 8–15, Toulouse.

Lannoy, V. (2010). The IDM Free Online Platform for Dictionary Publishers. In Proceedings of
the XIVth Euralex International Congress, pages 389–401, Leeuwarden.

Lareau, F., Dras, M., Börschinger, B., and Turpin, M. (2012). Implementing Lexical Functions
in XLE. In Butt, M. and King, T. H., editors, Proceedings of the LFG12 Conference, Stanford.
CSLI.

Lux-Pogodalla, V. and Polguère, A. (2011). Construction of a French Lexical Network: Method-
ological Issues. In Proceedings of the First InternationalWorkshop on Lexical Resources, WoLeR
2011. An ESSLLI 2011 Workshop, pages 54–61, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Mel’čuk, I. (1996). Lexical Functions: A Tool for the Description of Lexical Relations in
the Lexicon. In Wanner, L., editor, Lexical Functions in Lexicography and Natural Language
Processing, volume 31 of Language Companion Series, pages 37–102. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam/Philadelphia.

Mel’čuk, I. (2004a). Actants in semantics and syntax I: actants in semantics. Linguistics,
42(1):1–66.

Mel’čuk, I. (2004b). Actants in semantics and syntax II: actants in syntax. Linguistics,
42(2):247–291.

Mel’čuk, I. and Polguère, A. (2006). Dérivations sémantiques et collocations dans le DiCo/LAF.
Langue française, 150:66–83.

Mel’čuk, I. and Polguère, A. (2007). Lexique actif du français. L’apprentissage du vocabulaire
fondé sur 20 000 dérivations sémantiques et collocations du français. Champs linguistiques. De
Boeck & Larcier, Brussels.

123



Mel’čuk, I. and Žolkovskij, A. (1984). Explanatory Combinatorial Dictionary of Modern Russian.
Wiener Slawistischer Almanach, Vienna.

Mel’čuk, I. et al. (1984, 1988, 1992, 1999). Dictionnaire explicatif et combinatoire du français
contemporain. Recherches lexico-sémantiques. Volumes I–IV. Les Presses de l’Université de
Montréal, Montreal.

Milićević, J. (2006). A Short Guide to the Meaning-Text Linguistic Theory. Journal of Koralex,
8:187–233.

Milićević, J. (2009). Schéma de régime : le pont entre le lexique et la grammaire. Langages,
176:94–116.

Polguère, A. (2000). Towards a theoretically-motivated general public dictionary of semantic
derivations and collocations for French. In Proceedings of EURALEX’2000, pages 517–527,
Stuttgart.

Polguère, A. (2007). Lessons from the Lexique actif du français. In Gerdes, K., Reuther, T., and
Wanner, L., editors, Meaning-Text Theory 2007. Proceedings of the Third International Conference
on the Meaning Text Theory, Klagenfurt, May 20–24, 2007, Wiener Slawistischer Almanach
Sonderband 69, pages 397–405, München–Wien.

Polguère, A. (2009). Lexical systems: graph models of natural language lexicons. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 43(1):41–55.

Polguère, A. (2012a). Lexicographie des dictionnaires virtuels. In Apresjan, Y., Boguslavsky, I.,
L’Homme, M.-C., Iomdin, L., Milićević, J., Polguère, A., and Wanner, L., editors, Meanings, Texts,
and Other Exciting Things. A Festschrift to Commemorate the 80th Anniversary of Professor Igor
Alexandrovǐc Mel’̌cuk, Studia Philologica, pages 509–523. Jazyki slavjanskoj kultury Publishers,
Moscow.

Polguère, A. (forthcoming 2012b). Like a Lexicographer Weaving Her Lexical Network. In
Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex III). Summary
of invited talk.

Polguère, A. and Sikora, D. (to appear ToAp). Modèle lexicographique de croissance du
vocabulaire fondé sur un processus aléatoire, mais systématique. In Masseron, C., Garcia-
Debanc, C., and Ronveaux, C., editors, Enseigner le lexique. Pratiques sociales, objets à enseigner
et pratiques d’enseignement, volume 5. AiRDF.

Ruppenhofer, J., Ellsworth, M., Petruck, M. R. L., Johnson, C. R., and Scheffczyk, J. (2010).
FrameNet II: Extended Theory and Practice. International Computer Science Institute, Berke-
ley CA.

Sagot, B. and Fišer, D. (2011). Extending wordnets by learning from multiple resources. In
Proceedings of LTC 2011, Poznań.

Selva, T., Verlinde, S., and Binon, J. (2003). Vers une deuxième génération de dictionnaires
électroniques. Traitement Automatique des Langues (TAL), 44(2):177–197.

Spohr, D. (2012). Towards a Multifunctional Lexical Resource. Design and Implementation of a
Graph-based Lexicon Model. De Gruyter, Berlin/Boston.

124



Wolter, B. (2006). Lexical Network Structures and L2 Vocabulary Acquisition: The Role of L1
Lexical/Conceptual Knowledge. Applied Linguistics, 27(4):741–747.

Zock, M. and Schwab, D. (2011). Storage does not Guarantee Access: The Problem of
Organizing and Accessing Words in a Speaker’s Lexicon. Journal of Cognitive Science, 12:233–
259.

125




