










































Searching the Annotated Portuguese Childes Corpora


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Workshop on Computational Models of Language Acquisition and Loss, pages 26–28,
Avignon, France, April 24 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Searching the Annotated Portuguese Childes Corpora

Rodrigo Wilkens
Institute of Informatics

Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
Brazil

rswilkens@inf.ufrgs.br

1 Introduction

Annotated corpora of child language data are
valuable resources for language acquisition stud-
ies, for instance, providing the basis for devel-
opmental comparisons and evaluation of different
hypotheses. For computational investigations an-
notated corpora can serve as an approximation to
the linguistic environment to which a child is ex-
posed, as discussed by Wintner (2010).

Recently there has been a growing number
of initiatives for annotating children’s data for a
number of languages, with for instance, part-of-
speech (PoS) and syntactic information (Sagae et
al., 2010; Buttery and Korhonen, 2007; Yang,
2010) and some of these are available as part of
CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000). For resource
rich languages like English these annotations can
be further extended with detailed information,
for instance, from WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998)
about synonymy, from the MRC Psycholinguistic
Database (Coltheart, 1981) about age of acquisi-
tion, imagery, concreteness and familiarity among
others. However, for many other languages one of
the challenges is in annotating corpora in a con-
text where resources and tools are less abundant
and many are still under development.

In this paper we describe one such initiative, for
annotating the raw Portuguese corpora available
in the CHILDES database with (psycho)linguistic
and distributional information (§2) . It also de-
scribes a modular searching environment for these
corpora that allows complex and flexible searches
that combine different levels of annotation, and
that can be easily extended (§3). We finish with
some conclusions and future work.

2 Resource Description

The Portuguese, CHILDES contains 3 corpora:

• Batoréo (Batoreo, 2000) with 60 narratives,
30 from adults and 30 from children, about
two stories

• Porto Alegre (Guimarães, 1994; Guimarães,
1995) with data from 5 to 9 year old children,
collected both cross-sectionally and longitu-
dinally and

• Florianópolis with the longitudinal data for
one Brazilian child: 5530 utterances in broad
phonetic transcription.

The total number of sentences and words per
age in these corpora is shown in Table 1

Table 1: Frequency of words and sentences per age in
the Portuguese corpora

Age words sentences
0 0 0
1 7k 2k
2 8k 1k
3 0 0
4 1k 61
5 38k 1k
6 47k 1k
7 56k 1k
8 56k 1k

In order to annotate the transcribed sentences
in the CHILDES Portuguese corpora we used the
PALAVRAS parser1 (Bick, 2000). It is a statisti-
cal robust Portuguese parser, which always return

1Tagset avaliable at http://beta.visl.sdu.dk/visl/pt/info/symbolset-
manual.html.

26



at least one analysis even for incomplete or un-
grammatical sentences. This parser has a high ac-
curacy: 99% for part-of-speech and 96-97%. The
parser also has a named entity recognizer (Bick,
2003) and provides some semantic information
for nouns, verbs and adjectives (e.g. organization,
date, place, etc). The annotations process con-
sisted of the following steps:

1. automatic pre-processing for dealing with in-
complete words and removing transcription
notes;

2. tagging and parsing with PALAVRAS
parser;

3. annotation of verbs and nouns with psy-
cholinguistic information like age of acqui-
sition and concreteness from (Cameirao and
Vicente, 2010).

For enabling age related analysis, the sen-
tences were subsequently divided according to the
child’s age reported in each corpus, and annotated
with frequency information collected considering
separately each type of annotation per age.

3 System Description

In order to allow complex searches that combine
information from different levels of annotation
for each age, the sentences were organized in a
database, structured as in Tables 2 and 3, respec-
tively presenting the structure of words and sen-
tences).

Table 2: Information about Words
Word

age of acquisition
part-of-speech

corpus frequency
frequency by age
adult frequency

Table 3: Information about Sentences
Sentence

children gender
PoS tags

dependency tree
semantic tags

Using a web environment, a user can choose
any combination of fields in the database to per-
form a query. It is possible to examine, for in-
stance, the usage of a particular word and its evo-
lution according to grammatical class per age.

The environment provides two modes for
queries: an expert mode, where database queries
can be dynamically specified selecting the rele-
vant fields, and a guided mode which contains
predefined query components and a set of filters
that users can combine in the queries. The results
are available both as a file containing the relevant
annotated sentences for further processing, or in
a graphical form. The latter shows a chart of fre-
quency per age, which can be displayed in terms
of absolute or relative values.

The guided mode provides an iterative way for
query construction where the user selects a rele-
vant field (e.g. age of acquisition) at a time and
adds it to the query until all desired fields have
been added, when the resulting query is saved.
The user can repeat this process to create com-
bined queries and at the end of the process can
chose the form for outputting the result (graphic
or file).

4 Conclusion

This paper describes the (psycho)linguistic and
distributional annotation of the Portuguese cor-
pora in CHILDES, and presents an environment
for searching them. This environment allows
complex searches combining multiple levels of
annotation to be created even by non-expert users.
Therefore this initiative not only produced an in-
tegrated and rich annotation schema so far lack-
ing for these corpora, but also provided a modular
environment for structuring and searching them
through a more user friendly interface. As next
steps we foresee the extension of the annotation
using other resources. We also plan to add cor-
pora for other languages to the environment, such
as English and Spanish.

Acknowledgements

This research was partly supported by CNPq
Projects 551964/2011-1 and 478222/2011-4.

References
Batoréo, H. 2000. Expressão do Espaço no Por-

tuguês Europeu. Contributo Psicolinguı́stico para

27



o Estudo da Linguagem e Cognição. PhD Disser-
tation, Fundação Calouste Gulbenkian e Fundação
para a Ciência e a Tecnologia, Ministério da Ciência
e da Tecnologia, Lisboa

Bick, E. 2000. The Parsing System Palavras. Au-
tomatic Grammatical Analysis of Portuguese in a
Constraint Grammar Framework. [S.l.]: University
of Arhus.

Bick, E. 2003. Multi-level NER for Portuguese in a
CG framework. Proceedings of the Computational
Processing of the Portuguese Language.

Briscoe, E., Carroll, J., and Watson, R. 2006. The sec-
ond release of the rasp system. COLING/ACL 2006
Interactive Presentation Sessions, Sydney, Aus-
tralia.

Buttery, P., Korhonen, A. 2007. I will shoot your
shopping down and you can shoot all my tins–
Automatic Lexical Acquisition from the CHILDES
Database. Proceedings of the Workshop on Cogni-
tive Aspects of Computational Language Acquisi-
tion. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Cameirao, M.L. and Vicente, S.G. 2010. Age-of-
acquisition norms for a set of 1,749 portuguese
words. Behavior research methods 42, Springer.

Coltheart, M. 1981. The MRC psycholinguistic
database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, 33A:497–505.

Fellbaum, C. 1998. WordNet An Electronic Lexical
Database.. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA ; Lon-
don.

Guimarães, A. M. 1994. Desenvolvimento da lin-
guagem da criança na fase deletramento. Cadernos
de Estudos Linguı́sticos, 26, 103-110

Guimarães, A. M. 1994. The use of the CHILDES
database for Brazilian Portuguese. I. H. Faria &
M. J. Freitas (Eds.), Studies on the acquisition of
Portuguese. Lisbon: Colibri

MacWhinney, B. 2000. The CHILDES project: tools
for analyzing talk. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
second edition.

Sagae, K., Davis, E., Lavie, A., MacWhinney, B. and
Wintner, S. 2010. Morphosyntactic annotation of
CHILDES transcripts. Journal of Child Language.

Wintner, S. 2010. Computational Models of Lan-
guage Acquisition. CICLing’10.

Charles, Yang 2010. Three factors in language varia-
tion. Lingua.

28


