



















































Real-Time Tone Recognition in A Computer-Assisted Language Learning System for German Learners of Mandarin


Proceedings of the Workshop on Speech and Language Processing Tools in Education, pages 37–42,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Real-Time Tone Recognition in A Computer-Assisted
Language Learning System for German Learners of Mandarin

Hussein HUSSEIN 1 Hans jör g M IX DORF F2 Rüdiger HOF F MANN 1
(1) Chair for System Theory and Speech Technology, Dresden University of Technology,

Dresden, Germany
(2) Department of Computer Sciences and Media, Beuth University of Applied Sciences,

Berlin, Germany

hussein.hussein@mailbox.tu-dresden.de, mixdorff@beuth-hochschule.de

ABSTRACT
This paper presents an evaluation of tone recognition systems integrated in a computer-assisted
pronunciation training system for German learners of Mandarin. Both the reference tone recog-
nition system as well as a recently redesigned tone recognition system contain monotone,
bitone and tritone recognizers for isolated monosyllabic and disyllabic words and sentences,
respectively. The performance of the reference system and the redesigned tone recognition
systems was compared on data from German learners of Mandarin, while varying the feature
vector to contain spectral as well as prosodic features. The redesigned tone recognition sys-
tem matched or outperformed the reference system. For monosyllabic and disyllabic words it
improved when spectral features were added to prosodic features. In contrast, results of tone
recognition in sentences yielded better results based on prosodic features only.

KEYWORDS: Mandarin Chinese, Tone Recognition, Computer-Assisted Language Learning.

37



1 Introduction

It is commonly known that Mandarin or standard Chinese is a tone language and hence tonal
contours of syllables change the meaning. There are 22 consonant initials (including glottal
stop) and 39 vowel finals. Mandarin comprises a relatively small number of syllables. The
most important acoustic correlate of tones is F0. Mandarin has four syllabic tones, that is, high,
rising, low, and falling (Tones 1-4) and a neutral tone (Tone 0) in unstressed syllables. In
citation forms of monosyllabic words the tonal patterns are very distinct as shown in figure
1, but when several syllables are connected, F0 contours observed vary considerably due to
tonal coarticulation. German is a stress-timed non-tonal language. Mandarin differs from
German on the segmental level, but it is the tonal distinctions that pose serious problems to
German learners, especially in the context of two or more syllables. Therefore tone display,
recognition and correction are paramount features for a pronunciation training system. In the
current paper we present results from a redesigned tone recognition system intended to bring
improvement over the reference approach employed in the computer-assisted pronunciation
teaching (CAPT) system so far.

Time

F0

Tone 1

Tone 2

Tone 3

Tone 4

High F0 region

Low F0 region

Figure 1: Typical F0 patterns of Tones 1-4 in mono-syllables.
Robust feature extraction and tone modeling techniques are required for reliable tone recog-
nition algorithms. Accuracy of tone recognition obtained on isolated words is typically high,
but deteriorates on continuous speech. This implies that hitherto most speech recognition sys-
tems for tone languages only rely on spectral features, because they can be estimated more
reliably than prosodic features. Many statistical methods for Mandarin tone recognition have
been proposed, including Hidden Markov Models (HMM), Neural Networks (NN), Decision-
tree classification, Support Vector Machines (SVM) and rule-based methods (Chen and Jang,
2008)(Liao et al., 2010). Most tone recognition algorithms use F0 contours as basic features.
The accuracy of tone recognition for Tones 1-4 is usually high, but much lower for the neutral
tone, because F0 features are not effective to discriminate the neutral tone. Energy, however,
has been found to be an effective cue for tone perception when F0 is missing.

Taking into account tonal coarticulation in the context of the Computer-Assisted Language
Learning (CALL) system for German learners of Mandarin (“CALL-Mandarin system”), tone
recognition systems consisting of monotone, bitone and tritone recognizers were integrated.
Whereas a monotone model operates on isolated syllables, a bitone model takes into consider-
ation the tone of the left neighboring syllable and a tritone model depends on the tones of both
the left and right neighboring syllables. The reference tone recognition system of our project
partner (IFLYTEK company, Hefei, China) and the redesigned system consist of monotone and
bitone recognizers for isolated monosyllabic and disyllabic words as well as a tritone-based
continuous speech recognizer for sentences. They were evaluated on data from German lean-
ers of Mandarin.

38



2 Speech Material

2.1 Chinese Data - L1

The experiments of speaker-independent tone recognition were carried out using three read
speech databases from native speakers of Mandarin (“CN_Mono”, “CN_Bi” and “CN_Sent”).

1. CN_Mono - Isolated Monosyllabic Words:
The monotone recognizer was trained on isolated monosyllabic words. The monosylla-
bles were uttered by 29 female and 27 male native speakers of Mandarin, yielding a total
of 45000 monosyllables (14.83 hours).

2. CN_Bi - Isolated Disyllabic Words:
The bitone recognizer was trained with isolated disyllabic words. The disyllabic words
were produced by the same native speakers as in CN_Mono with a total of 75000 disylla-
bles (28.83 hours).

3. CN_Sent - Sentences:
The tritone recognizer was trained on sentence data. The sentences were produced by
200 native speakers of Mandarin with a total of 2023 utterances (18.60 hours). Each
utterance contains a recording of one paragraph composed of several long sentences with
a minimum of 11 and a maximum of 231 syllables. The average length of a paragraph
is about 115 syllables.

2.2 German Data - L2

Three speech databases from German learners of Mandarin (“DE_Mono”, “DE_Bi” and
“DE_Sent”) were used for the evaluation of tone recognizers by German learners of Mandarin
in real-time. The amount of these data is rather small, but they include all available data which
are not used in the adaptation process.

1. DE_Mono - Isolated Monosyllabic Words:
DE_Mono consists of eight monosyllabic words produced by 5 German learners with a
total of 40 utterances.

2. DE_Bi - Isolated Disyllabic Words:
DE_Bi consists of 10 disyllabic words produced by 12 German students yielding a total
of 120 utterances.

3. DE_Sent - Sentences:
DE_Sent consists of 10 sentences produced by 12 German students with a total of 120
utterances.

3 Tone Recognition

In order for tone recognition to take place the utterance must be segmented on the syllable and
phone levels. This task is performed by the phone recognizer of IFLYTEK for both the reference
and redesigned tone recognition system.

3.1 Reference Recognizer

The tone recognition system of IFLYTEK is part of an automated proficiency test of Man-
darin. (Wang et al., 2007). F0 contours are calculated with the PRAAT default algorithm

39



(Boersma and Weenink, 2001). Tone models consist of four emitting states for monotone,
bitone and tritone models. HMMs were employed for tone modeling. The training data, which
is different from the data described in section 2.1, consists of utterances from native speakers
of Mandarin (164 female and 105 male speakers, 30 minutes for each speaker).

3.2 Redesigned Recognizer
Different kinds of features, including spectral and prosodic-based features, were used. F0 con-
tours were calculated via the Robust Algorithm for Pitch Tracking (RAPT) (Talkin, 1995). RAPT
was modified and integrated in the CALL-Mandarin system to work in real-time. The output of
RAPT contains in addition to F0 values, energy (RMS) and voicing (DoV) measures. Since F0
contours are often affected by extraction errors and micro-prosody, and are interrupted for un-
voiced sounds, the raw F0 data is often pre-processed by applying interpolation and smoothing.
In our case we applied a cubic spline interpolation and smoothing and filtered the resulting
contour at a stop-frequency of 0.5 Hz yielding a high frequency component (HFC) and a low
frequency component (LFC) as in (Mixdorff, 2000). Based on the fact that phrase compo-
nents should be taken into account when analyzing and synthesizing F0 contours of Mandarin,
it was found that tone recognition results based on HFCs are better than results based on
smoothed F0 contours (Hussein et al., 2012). For the subsequent processing we only used the
HFC, thus disregarding low frequency phrase level influences. High frequency contours and
energy contours were normalized applying z-score normalization. The spectral features, 13
Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCCs) and their deltas and delta-deltas were also used
for tone recognition. All features were only extracted from the final segments. We compared
the performance of several feature vectors:

• A: F0-based features.
• B: F0- and energy-based features.
• C: F0-, energy-based and voicing features. These features refer to prosodic features.
• D: MFCC-based features.
• E: MFCC-, F0-, energy-based and voicing features.

HMMs were employed for tone modeling. The tone models consist of three emitting states for
monotone, bitone and tritone models. 64 mixtures were used for cases A, B and C and 512
mixtures for cases D and E. The data CN_Mono, CN_Bi and CN_Sent were used for the training
of the monotone, bitone and tritone models, respectively. Every database was divided into
training data (90%) and test data (10%). Since there will be insufficient data associated with
many of the states, similar acoustic states within bitone or tritone sets were tied to ensure that
all state distributions were robustly estimated. The number of Gaussian components in each
mixture was increased iteratively during training. Six iterations gave the best results for cases
A, B and C. 16 and 20 iterations gave the best results for cases D and E, respectively. Tone
models were adapted by using German students’ data labeled as correct by Chinese native
listeners Maximum Likelihood Linear Regression (MLLR) was implemented for the adaptation
of tone models.

3.3 Evaluation of Mandarin Tone Recognition
Two experiments were performed. First, we tested the redesigned recognition system on data
CN_Mono, CN_Bi and CN_Sent from native speakers of Mandarin and compared the perfor-

40



mance on feature vectors A-E. This test was run outside the CAPT system. Second, we com-
pared the reference system with two versions of the redesigned system after integrating them
into the CAPT system, on data DE_Mono, DE_Bi and DE_Sent from German learners of Man-
darin:

• R: Tone recognizer by IFLYTEK (reference).
• C′: Tone recognizer using prosodic features (case C) and adapted tone models.
• E′: Tone recognizer using both spectral and prosodic features (case E) and adapted tone

models.

4 Experimental Results

The correctness of the three tone recognizers trained on feature sets A to E is displayed in
table 1. The table shows that adding energy and voicing features to F0 features (case C)
improved the tone recognition results. The combination of spectral and prosodic features
(case E) improved the tone correctness in comparison to individual features, especially in tone
recognition of sentences. Tone correctness for monotone, bitone and tritone recognizers is
99.50%, 98.86% and 77.03% using both spectral and prosodic features for monosyllables,
disyllables and sentences, respectively. The result of the bitone recognizer only concerns the
recognition of Tones 1-4, since the data CN_Bi did not contain neutral tone.

Feature CN_Mono CN_Bi CN_Sent
A 81.53 94.69 63.79
B 96.28 96.90 66.68
C 97.39 97.31 67.37
D 97.36 93.90 58.68
E 99.50 98.86 77.03

Table 1: Tone correctness of monotone, bitone and tritone recognizers by using different kinds
of features and normalized HFCs on data by native speakers of Mandarin (in %).

Figure 2 presents the tone evaluation results of monotone, bitone and tritone recognizers for
the reference tone recognizer (R) and the redesigned tone recognizers when applying prosodic
features (C′) and combined spectral and prosodic features (E′). The monotone, bitone and
tritone recognizers were tested in the CALL-Mandarin system by using the data DE_Mono, DE_Bi
and DE_Sent, respectively. The tone correctness of monosyllables in R and E′ is the same. The
tone recognition in monosyllabic words using both spectral and prosodic features improved the
results significantly in comparison to prosodic features only. On disyllabic words, the bitone
recognizer based on the combination of spectral and prosodic features outperformed the other
presented algorithm. In contrast, for sentence recognition, the tritone recognizer based only on
prosodic features outperformed the other algorithms. This result suggests that the variation
in the MFCCs which is mostly due to segmental and not tonal variations affects the tritone
models more than the monotone and bitone models.

Conclusions

This study compared redesigned monotone, bitone and tritone HMM-based Mandarin tone
recognizers for our CALL system for German learners of Mandarin with a pre-exisiting ref-
erence. During development different spectral and prosodic features were tested. Of the F0

41



30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

Monosyllabic Word Disyllabic Word Sentence

T
on

e 
C

or
re

ct
ne

ss
 %

R

C'

E'

Figure 2: Tone correctness of monotone, bitone and tritone recognizers for reference (R) and
redesigned tone recognizers (C′ and E′) on data by German learners of Mandarin in CALL-
Mandarin system.

contour we only employed the HFC, hence suppressing phrasal contributions. The tone models
were adapted by using correct data from German learners of Mandarin. Tone recognition of
mono- and disyllabic words using both spectral and prosodic features yielded the best results.
In contrast, for sentence recognition the tritone recognizer based on only prosodic features
performed best. Overall, the redesigned tone recognition system matched or surpassed the
performance of the reference system and will therefore henceforth be employed in the CALL
system. Including the new features slightly increases the computation time of the system
which, however, as informal tests have shown, is still short enough to provide online feedback.

Acknowledgements

This work is funded by the German Ministry of Education and Research grant 1746X08 and
supported by DAAD-NSC and DAAD-CSC project related travel grants for 2009/2010.

References

Boersma, P. and Weenink, D. (2001). Praat: doing phonetics by computer.

Chen, J.-C. and Jang, J.-S. R. (2008). TRUES: Tone Recognition Using Extended Segments.
ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, 7(3).

Hussein, H., Mixdorff, H., Liao, Y.-F., and Hoffmann, R. (2012). HMM-Based Mandarin Tone
Recognition - Application in Computer-Aided Language Learning System for Mandarin. In
Proc. of ESSV, pages 347–354, Cottbus, Germany. TUDpress.

Liao, H.-C., Chen, J.-C., Chang, S.-C., Guan, Y.-H., and Lee, C.-H. (2010). Decision Tree Based
Tone Modeling with Corrective Feedbacks for Automatic Mandarin Tone Assessment. In Proc.
of Interspeech, pages 602–605, Makuhari, Chiba, Japan.

Mixdorff, H. (2000). A Novel Approach to the Fully Automatic Extraction of Fujisaki Model
Parameters. In Proc. of ICASSP, volume 3, pages 1281–1284, Istanbul, Turkey.

Talkin, D. (1995). Speech Coding and Synthesis, chapter A Robust Algorithm for Pitch Tracking
(RAPT), pages 495–518. Elsevier Science, New York, USA.

Wang, R.-H., Liu, Q., and Wei, S. (2007). Advances in Chinese Spoken Language Processing,
chapter Putonghua Proficiency Test and Evaluation, pages 407–429.

42


