










































Adapting Wikification to Cultural Heritage


Proceedings of the 6th EACL Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 101–106,
Avignon, France, 24 April 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Adapting Wikification to Cultural Heritage

Samuel Fernando and Mark Stevenson
Department of Computer Science

Regent Court
211 Portobello

Sheffield, S1 4DP
s.fernando@shef.ac.uk

m.stevenson@dcs.shef.ac.uk

Abstract

Large numbers of cultural heritage items
are now archived digitally along with ac-
companying metadata and are available to
anyone with internet access. This informa-
tion could be enriched by adding links to
resources that provide background informa-
tion about the items. Techniques have been
developed for automatically adding links
to Wikipedia to text but the methods are
general and not designed for use with cul-
tural heritage data. This paper explores a
range of methods for adapting a system for
adding links to Wikipedia to cultural her-
itage items. The approaches make use of
the structure of Wikipedia, including the
category hierarchy. It is found that an ap-
proach that makes use of Wikipedia’s link
structure can be used to improve the quality
of the Wikipedia links that are added.

1 Introduction

Cultural heritage (CH) items are now increasingly
being digitised and stored online where they can
be viewed by anyone with a web browser. These
items are usually annotated with metadata which
gives the title of the item, subject keywords, de-
scriptions and so on. However such metadata
can often be very limited, with some items hav-
ing very little metadata at all. This paper exam-
ines methods to enrich such metadata with inline
links to Wikipedia. These links allow users to find
interesting background information on the items
and related topics, and provides a richer expe-
rience especially where the metadata is limited.
Additionally the links may also help to categorise
and organise the collections using the Wikipedia
category hierarchy.

CH items from Europeana1 are used for the
evaluation. Europeana is a large online aggrega-
tion of cultural heritage collections from across
Europe. The WikiMiner software (Milne and
Witten, 2008) is used to automatically enrich
the Europeana items collections with Wikipedia
links. Two methods are used to improve the
quality of the links. The first makes use of the
Wikipedia category hierarchy. Top-level cate-
gories of interest are selected and articles close
to these categories are used as training data for
WikiMiner. The second method uses existing
links from Wikipedia as evidence to find useful
links for the CH items.

2 Background

Mihalcea and Csomai (2007) first addressed the
task of automatically adding inline Wikipedia
links into text and coined the term Wikification
for the process. Their procedure for wikification
used two stages. The first stage was detection,
which involved identifying the terms and phrases
from which links should be made. The most ac-
curate method for this was found to be using link
probability, defined as the number of Wikipedia
articles that use the term as an anchor, divided by
the number of Wikipedia articles that mention it
at all. The next stage, disambiguation ensure that
the detected phrases link to the appropriate arti-
cle. For example the term plane usually links to
an article about fixed wing aircraft. However it
sometimes points to a page describing the mathe-
matical concept of a theoretical surface, or of the
tool for flattening wooden surfaces. To find the
correct destination a classifier is trained using fea-
tures from the context. Although the quality of re-

1http://www.europeana.eu

101



sults obtained is very good, a large amount of pre-
processing is required, since the entire Wikipedia
encyclopedia must be parsed.

Milne and Witten (2008) build upon this previ-
ous work with the WikiMiner program. The soft-
ware is trained on Wikipedia articles, and thus
learns to disambiguate and detect links in the
same way as Wikipedia editors. Disambiguation
of terms within the text is performed first. A
machine-learning classifier is used with several
features. The main features used are commonness
and relatedness, as in Medelyan et al. (2008). The
commonness of a target sense is defined by the
number of times it is used a destination from some
anchor text e.g. the anchor text ‘Tree’ links to the
article about the plant more often than the math-
ematical concept and is thus more common. Re-
latedness gives a measure of the similarity of two
articles by comparing their incoming and outgo-
ing links. The performance achieved using their
approach is currently state of the art for this task.
The WikiMiner software is freely available2, and
has been used as the basis for the approaches pre-
sented here.

Recent work on named entity linking and wik-
ification makes use of categories and link infor-
mation (Bunescu and Pasca, 2006; Dakka and
Cucerzan, 2008; Kulkarni et al., 2009). Wikifi-
cation has also been applied to the medical do-
main (He et al., 2011). Wikipedia categories and
links have been used previously to find the sim-
ilarity between CH items (Grieser et al., 2011).
The category retraining approach presented here
differs in that it only makes use of the top-level
categories.

3 Methods

Three approaches to improving the quality of
Wikipedia links added by WikiMiner were devel-
oped. The first two make use of Wikipedia’s cat-
egory structure while the third uses the links be-
tween Wikipedia articles.

3.1 Wikipedia Categories
Almost all articles in Wikipedia are manually as-
signed to one or more categories. For example the
page ALBERT EINSTEIN belongs to the categories
Swiss physicists, German-language philoso-
phers and several others. The category pages thus

2http://wikipedia-miner.cms.waikato.
ac.nz/

group together articles of interest. Furthermore,
each category may itself be a sub-category of one
or more categories. So for example Swiss physi-
cists is a sub-category of the categories Swiss
scientists, Physicists by nationality etc.

The categories give a general indication of the
topic of the article and we assume that articles rel-
evant to Cultural Heritage items are likely to be
closely associated with certain categories.

3.2 Retraining using Categories

The first approach is to retrain WikiMiner us-
ing articles associated with particular categories.
Three top-level categories manually judged to in-
dicate articles that are relevant to cultural her-
itage were selected: Culture, Arts and Human-
ities. All articles within 2 links of these selected
categories were found and used as training data
for WikiMiner. (We also explored using differ-
ent numbers of links but found that fewer than
2 links produced a very small number of arti-
cles while more than 2 generated very large num-
bers which would be prohibitively expensive for
retraining.) The same approach was also tested
with categories which are unlikely to be related to
cultural heritage (Computers, Mathematics and
Science) in order to test the effect of using dif-
ferent categories.

3.3 Filtering using Categories

This approach uses the category information to
filter articles after WikiMiner has been run. Each
article added by WikiMiner is examined and any
which are more than a certain distance from a top-
level category which has been identified as being
relevant to cultural heritage is removed. The as-
sumption behind this approach is that relevant ar-
ticles are much more likely to be closely associ-
ated with these categories than ones which are not
relevant.

3.4 Exploiting Wikipedia’s Link Structure

The final method makes use of Wikipedia’s link
structure rather than the category hierarchy and is
similar to the previous method since it filters the
links added by WikiMiner to identify those which
are relevant to a particular article.

The first stage is to run the item through
WikiMiner to detect suitable links. This is done
with 2 parameter settings, each returning a set of
links. The aim of the first run is to find as many

102



!"#$%&
'(%#)*+

,$-./
0$-1+/(-#

23$++$)&456&+#-(#+7

'*%$89&4:;(3"(%<7

!"#$%&#'"

!"#$%&'()%*+',"+%-./'

0$*11*-'2#3%%#/'4*35/'

6*3#7'4*3517"3%

289:%;#&',"+%-.

<%1;3"=#"*+&'>?#%3"*3'

@"%A'*B'#7%';.+*=CD0$-1

=.#8/#%&>$+#8/&5/#*.-#&

?*;3&@-#<<

A(""3#+:-$;</

B(%"3#9C&,$-./&0$-1+/(-#&

!
"

!
#

$
#

Figure 1: Example illustrating the method, where articles (on the left) which link to the high precision articles
(SP ) are used to find good links in the high recall set (SR).

potential links in the text as possible, for example
by using a low confidence threshold. This give a
set of links SR which is high recall (because most
links are included), but low precision, since many
incorrect or irrelevant links are also present. The
aim of the second run is to find a smaller set of
links which are likely to be of good quality, for
example by setting a high confidence threshold.
The resulting set SP is high precision but lower
recall since good links may be discarded.

The result set of links is initialised with the high
precision articles R = SP . The aim is then to try
to find additional good links within SR. This is
done by finding a list of articles AP which con-
tain links to 1 or more of the articles in SP . Let
O(a) be the set of outlinks from an article a. Each
article in AP is then scored on how many links are
shared with SP :

∀a ∈ AP : score(a) = |O(a) ∩ SP | (1)

The N top scoring articles in AP are then used
to find further good links with within SR. For
each of these articles a:

R ··= R ∪ (O(a) ∩ SR) (2)

Figure 1 gives an example illustrating how the
method works on an Europeana item about an
old Odeon Cinema in York. The article on Paul
Gregg links to the articles in the SP set {Odeon
Cinemas, North Yorkshire}. Since it also links
to the York article in the SR set, the method takes
this as evidence that York might also be a good ar-
ticle to link to, and so this would be added to the
result set R.

4 Annotation

To evaluate the quality of the Wikipedia links, a
sample of CH items was manually annotated. The
sample of 21 items was randomly selected from
Europeana. When run through WikiMiner with
no probability threshold (i.e. including all possi-
ble links), a total of 366 potential links were iden-
tified. A further 16 links were manually added
which the WikiMiner software had missed, giving
a total of 381 links.

Web surveys were created to allow the annota-
tors to judge the links. For each item in the survey
users were presented with a picture of the item,
the metadata text, and the set of possible links
(with the anchor text identified). The annotators
were then given a binary choice for each link to
decide if it should be included or not.

Two separate surveys were taken by three flu-
ent English speakers. The first was to determine if
each link was correctly disambiguated within the
context of the item (regardless of whether the link
was useful or appropriate for that item). For each
link the majority decision was used to judge if the
link was indeed correct or not. Out of the 381
links, 70% were judged to be correct and 30% as
incorrect. For 80% of the links the judgement was
unanimous with all 3 annotators agreeing on the
correctness of the links. The remaining 20% were
2-to-1 judgements. This gives an overall inter-
annotator agreement of 93.4%.

The second survey was to determine which of
the correct links were useful and appropriate for

103



the corresponding items. As before each of the
21 items was presented to the annotators, but this
time only with the 267 links that had been judged
as correct within the previous survey. Again,
three annotators completed the survey. Out of the
267 correct links, 49.8% were judged to be use-
ful/appropriate and 50.2% as not. For 67.7% of
the links the judgement was unanimous. The re-
maining 32.2% were 2-1 judgements. This gives
an inter-annotator agreement of 89.3%. The 133
links judged to be correct, useful and appropriate
were then used as the gold standard to evaluate the
automatic methods.

As an example, the links and judgements for
the following text are shown in Table 1:

Title: Odeon Cinema, Blossom Street, York,
North Yorkshire
Subject: Cinema
Description: Exterior view of the canopy.

Link Correct Useful
Odeon Cinemas Yes Yes
Blossom (TV series) No N/A
York Yes Yes
North Yorkshire Yes No
Cinema Yes No
Canopy Yes Yes

Table 1: Examples of links and judgements

5 Experiments

The methods from Section 3 were used to identify
links in the items from Europeana. The results
were evaluated against the gold standard manu-
ally annotated data that was described in Section
4. For all experiments the standard metrics of pre-
cision, recall and F-measure are used to measure
the performance of the methods.

Milne and Witten (2008) noted that training us-
ing articles with a similar length and link density
to the target documents can improve WikiMiner’s
performance. The descriptions associated with
Europeana items are relatively short so further ex-
periments were carried out in which WikiMiner
was retrained with different sets of articles. The
best results were obtained using a set of arti-
cles between 100 and 500 words that contained
a minimum of five links to other articles. (Re-
sults for experiments comparing other configura-

tions are not reported here for brevity.) Table 2
shows results obtained using the default model,
when WikiMiner is run ‘off the shelf’, and when
it has been retrained. These results demonstrate
that retraining WikiMiner improves performance.
Precision improves to over 50% and, although
there is a drop in recall, F-measure is also higher.
Results using the retrained model are used as a
baseline against which alternative approaches are
compared.

Model P R F
Default 34.0 91.7 49.6

Retrained 56.6 77.4 65.4

Table 2: Results obtained using WikiMiner using de-
fault model and after retraining

5.1 Category retraining

The category retraining approach (Section 3.2)
was applied using all articles within two links of
selected categories as training data for WikiMiner.
The results are shown in Table 3 and show that
precision is improved over the baseline for all cat-
egories. However the results do not fit the hy-
pothesis, with Science giving the best F-measure
overall, a statistically significant improvement
over the baseline (p < 0.05, t-test). This may be
for various reasons. Firstly the category hierarchy
in Wikipedia is often messy with articles assigned
to many different categories, and each category
can contain a diverse sets of articles which may
not be very useful. Secondly it may be that the
topics of the articles are not so important for the
training, but rather factors like the length of the
articles and the link densities. However it is in-
teresting that using articles close to the top level
categories does appear to improve performance.

Method P R F
Baseline 56.6 77.4 65.4
Culture 65.5 71.4 68.3

Arts 69.6 65.4 67.4
Humanities 71.9 65.4 68.5

Mathematics 72.9 58.6 65.0
Science 72.4 69.1 70.8

Computers 76.7 59.4 66.9

Table 3: Retraining using top level categories.

104



5.2 Category filtering
The category filtering approach (Section 3.3) was
applied. Articles within a distance of 1 to 4 links
from selected top level categories are kept and
all others are discarded. The following combina-
tions of categories were used: C (Culture), CHA
(Culture, Humanities and Arts), and CHAGSE
(Culture, Humanities, Arts, Geography, Soci-
ety and Education).

Results are shown in Table 4 and are surpris-
ingly low. Both precision and recall drop signif-
icantly when category filtering is applied. This
may be because the articles within categories are
often very diverse and do not capture many of
the possible topics found within cultural heritage
items.

Method Precision Recall F
Baseline 56.6 77.4 65.4

C 35.1 19.5 25.1
CHA 27.4 27.8 27.6

CHAGSE 24.5 34.6 28.7

Table 4: Filtering using top level categories.

5.3 Using Wikipedia links
The final experiment explores the link filtering ap-
proach described in Section 3.4. The high preci-
sion SP set is chosen to be those returned by the
retrained WikiMiner model (“Retrained” in Table
2) while the high recall SR set is the default model
(“Default” in Table 2). Experiments were per-
formed varying N , the number of top scoring arti-
cles used (using the score metric defined in Equa-
tion 1).

No. of similar articles P R F
Baseline 56.6 77.4 65.4

1 74.0 53.4 62.0
2 70.7 61.7 65.9
3 68.5 63.9 66.1
4 67.4 68.4 67.9
5 66.9 69.9 68.4
6 66.2 70.6 68.4
7 66.2 70.7 68.4
8 65.5 71.4 68.3
9 65.1 71.4 68.1

10 63.9 72.9 68.1

Table 5: Filtering using Wikipedia’s link structure

The results are shown in Table 5 and show a
clear improvement in precision for N from 1 to 10.
The F-measure peaks when 5-7 related articles are
used. The improvement in the F-measure over
the baseline is statistically significant (p < 0.05
t-test).

6 Conclusions and future work

This paper explores a variety of methods for im-
proving the quality of Wikipedia links added by
the WikiMiner software when applied to the cul-
tural heritage domain. Approaches that make
use of the Wikipedia category hierarchy and link
structure were compared and evaluated using a
data set of manual judgements created for this
study.

The approaches based on the category hier-
archy appeared to be less promising than those
which used the link structure. Improvements were
obtained by retraining WikiMiner using articles
associated with particular categories. However
the results were unexpected, with categories such
as Science giving better performance as train-
ing data than categories such as Culture or Arts.
Although a higher score was obtained using this
method than the link approach, this may be due to
factors such as document length and link density
rather than the topic of the articles.

Results obtained using a novel method based
on existing links within Wikipedia suggest this
approach is promising. The method is fully un-
supervised so it can be easily applied to domains
other than cultural heritage.

Information from both categories and links
could be combined in a similar way to that sug-
gested by Grieser et al. (2011). Enriching cultural
heritage data with Wikipedia links should im-
prove the experience for users while they browse
the data. In addition the links themselves may be
useful to categorise, cluster and find similar items.
Further work will investigate these possibilities.

Acknowledgments

The research leading to these results was
carried out as part of the PATHS project
(http://paths-project.eu) funded by
the European Community’s Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agree-
ment no. 270082.

105



References
Razvan Bunescu and Marius Pasca. 2006. Using

Encyclopedic Knowledge for Named Entity Dis-
ambiguation. In Proceedings of European Chap-
ter of the Association of Computational Linguistics
(EACL), volume 6, pages 9–16.

Wisam Dakka and Silviu Cucerzan. 2008. Augment-
ing Wikipedia with Named Entity Tags. In Pro-
ceedings of The Third International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP).

Karl Grieser, Timothy Baldwin, Fabian Bohnert, and
Liz Sonenberg. 2011. Using Ontological and Doc-
ument Similarity to Estimate Museum Exhibit Re-
latedness. Journal on Computing and Cultural Her-
itage (JOCCH), 3(3):10.

Jiyin He, Maarten de Rijke, Maarten de Rijke, Rob
van Ommering, and Yuechen Qian. 2011. Generat-
ing Links to Background Knowledge: A Case Study
Using Narrative Radiology Reports. In 20th ACM
Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement (CIKM), pages 1867–1876, Glasgow.

Sayali Kulkarni, Amit Singh, Ganesh Ramakrishnan,
and Soumen Chakrabarti. 2009. Collective An-
notation of Wikipedia Entities in Web Text. In
Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD Interna-
tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pages 457–466.

Olena Medelyan, Ian H. Witten, and David Milne.
2008. Topic Indexing with Wikipedia. In Proceed-
ings of the Association for the Advancement of Ar-
tificial Intelligence (AAAI) WikiAI workshop.

Rada Mihalcea and Andras Csomai. 2007. Wikify!:
Linking Documents to Encyclopedic Knowledge.
In ACM Sixteenth Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management (CIKM), volume 7, pages
233–242.

David Milne and Ian H. Witten. 2008. Learning to
Link with Wikipedia. In Proceeding of the 17th
ACM conference on Information and Knowledge
Management, pages 509–518.

106


