










































Explorations in creole research with phylogenetic tools


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Joint Workshop of LINGVIS & UNCLH, pages 89–97,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 24 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Explorations in creole research with phylogenetic tools 
 
 

Aymeric Daval-Markussen Peter Bakker 
Research Centre for Grammar and Language 

Use, Aarhus University 
Research Centre for Grammar and Language 

Use, Aarhus University 
aymemeric@gmail.com linpb@hum.au.dk 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Abstract 

The principal goal of this paper is to illustrate 
various ways in which phylogenetic tools can 
advantageously be put to use in investigating and 
visualizing the relationships of creole languages to 
other languages, both creoles and non-creoles. 
After introducing a test study on the English-based 
creoles, the major theories seeking to explain the 
emergence and development of creoles will be 
reviewed and assessed. The final part of the paper 
is concerned with the typological status of creoles, 
where various samples will be used to show that 
creoles form a typologically coherent group among 
the world's languages. 

 
1. Introduction 
Although the linguistic processes underlying 
creolization remain far from being fully 
understood, computational methods offer today 
the opportunity of uncovering complex 
mechanisms of language evolution on the basis 
of quantitative investigations. More sophisticated 
and powerful algorithms now available enable 
the visualization of patterns in a straightforward 
manner that was not possible before. 

Creole languages emerged in situations of 
intense contact between several languages, more 
often than not in the context of massive forced 
population displacements as were typical of 
European slave-trading ventures. A diglossic 
situation with a high-prestige variety (the 
superstrate) and several low-prestige languages 
(the substrates) characterized the settings in 
which creoles developed. Therefore, creole 
languages can be said to have several parents, 
and possess as well many often recurring features 
that appear ex nihilo. Thus, the problem of 
determining relationships between creole 
languages and other creoles or unrelated 
languages has long haunted creolists and been  
recognized as one of the challenges in the field.  

Following recent developments in 
creolistics, where phylogenetic networks were 
used to investigate questions inherent to the field 
(Bakker et al. 2011, Daval-Markussen 2011, 
Daval-Markussen and Bakker 2011), the aim of 
this paper is to argue that creole languages offer 
an unparalleled venue for exploratory research in 
language evolution, and that available 
computational tools now permit to graphically 
represent the relationships between the languages 
considered. In our demonstration, we will 
exemplify various ways in which phylogenetic 
networks may advantageously be used to 
visualize the results.  

Following the argumentation in Daval-
Markussen (2011: 6-13), only structural features 
will be taken into account in the present study, 
since the lexical stock of a creole is mainly 
derived from a single source language, and this 
would likely be reflected in the resulting graphs. 

In the first part of the paper, phylogenetic 
tools are used to represent the relationships 
between 33 English-based creoles, for which 62 
typological features were selected and encoded 
binarily1. The second part examines the various 
scenarios proposed to account for the emergence 
of creole languages in the light of phylogenetic 
networks. To this end, samples of various sizes 
and including creoles as well as non-creole 
languages (mostly languages involved in the 
emergence of creoles) were used in order to 
visualize the impact of the various languages 
present in the contact situation on the new 
vernaculars. The final part deals with the 
typological status of creoles, a topic hotly 
debated in creolistics (e.g. DeGraff 2003; 
McWhorter 1998, 2011). Basing our analysis on 
samples of languages selected from the World 
Atlas of Linguistic Structures (Dryer and 
                                                             
1 These correspond to the structural features described in 
Daval-Markussen and Bakker (2011). 

89



Haspelmath 2011, hereafter WALS), we will 
show that phylogenetic methods represent a 
unique tool for exploring the relationships 
between creole languages and other languages of 
the world and can provide invaluable insights 
into questions on language birth and evolution. 
 
2. Classification 
A number of studies have sought to classify 
English-based creoles on the basis of shared 
similarities (Hancock 1969, 1987; McWhorter 
1995; Baker 1999 to mention just a few). The 
results presented in these studies are in 
accordance on several higher-level groupings 
(the West African, the Suriname, and the 
Eastern/Western Caribbean groups). We expect 
therefore to find similar groupings in our results, 
even though we are using different features and a 
different method.  

The languages selected for this investigation 
are presented in Hancock’s (1987) seminal study 
on the relationships between 33 Atlantic English-
based creoles 2 . On the basis of these data, 
Hancock (1987: 324-325) attempted to construct 
a historical scenario explaining their distribution. 
Although he summarized the results in a tree 
structure, it is worth mentioning that Hancock 
indicated the influences between varieties with 
dotted lines, thus foreshadowing the approach 
advocated here, i.e. when investigating 
relationships between (especially creole) 
languages, lateral influences must be taken into 
account and somehow be graphically depicted. 

The 33 languages were analyzed and 62 
typological features attesting the presence vs. 
absence of a particular phenomenon were 
selected for binary encoding (see also the 
Supplementary Materials).  

The data were used as input for the software 
SplitsTree v. 4.12.3 (Huson and Bryant 2006) 
and returned the network presented in Fig. 1. The 
geographic location of each variety is indicated 
with the following colors: blue = Leeward Is., 
brown = Pacific; green = Caribbean; grey = 
Suriname; pink = Windward Is.; red = West 
Africa; yellow = mainland US. 

Several clusters are immediately evident in 
the network reproduced in Fig. 1. While the color 
codes help visualize the geographic distribution 
of the included languages, the varieties which 
appear closest to one another also correspond to  

                                                             
2 The full list of languages and features used throughout the 
essay with the corresponding abbreviations is found in the 
Supplementary Materials. 

 
Figure 1: Phylogenetic network of 33 English-based 
creoles with 62 typological features 

 
groupings identified by other authors (such as the 
Suriname creoles in grey in the lower right side 
of the graph). In several cases, we can observe 
disrupted groups, such as Afr/Sea and Bla (in 
yellow), or Kri/Nig/Cam and Lib (in red) in 
clusters which correspond to genealogical 
groupings (e.g. the Suriname creoles and the 
varieties of West Africa). The reason for these 
discrepancies is to be found in the histories of 
these vernaculars, which have developed apart 
from one another (see Daval-Markussen and 
Bakker 2011 for an overview). Besides, the 
results in Fig. 1 go against the conclusions of 
Donohue et al. (2011), who claim that the 
various clusterings observable in phylogenetic 
networks are due to the effects of areality  and 
geography rather than to genealogy. 

This indicates that phylogenetic networks 
can confidently be used to shed light on the 
relationships between creoles by presenting the 
results in such a visually appealing manner.  
 
3. The challenges of creolistics 
The present section focuses on the various 
explanations proposed to account for the 
similarities observed between creoles, an issue 
which has been central to creolistics ever since 
its beginnings. How creoles came about is still a 
matter of controversy, and in practice, most 
creolists agree on a working definition 
encompassing both the linguistic and 
sociohistorical aspects of creoles.  

The main theories seeking to explain how 
creoles came into being claim that the languages 
that have played a major role in the creation of 
the nascent vernaculars were: i) the superstrate, 
or lexifier (the superstratist school); ii) the 
substrate languages spoken by the displaced 
populations (the substratist account); iii) only the 
superstrate and substrates provide the features 
available for competition and selection and 

90



nothing else (the Feature Pool hypothesis); and 
finally, iv) no language in particular and creole 
similarities are to be explained by restructuring 
universals, where similar solutions were found in 
order to optimize communication (the 
universalist approach). These approaches are not 
necessarily mutually exclusive (e.g. Mufwene 
1986). 

In order to determine whether the 
predictions made by the various theories 
accounting for the emergence and development 
of creoles are borne out by the facts, a sample of 
creoles and non-creole languages was carefully 
selected and binary oppositions were encoded 
according to the 97 morphosyntactic features 
presented in Holm and Patrick's Comparative 
Creole Syntax  (Holm and Patrick 2007, 
henceforth CCS). The 18 creoles originally 
described in the Holm and Patrick volume were 
included, as well as languages known to be 
involved in the creation of the creoles. Apart 
from the 18 CCS creoles, we included 19 
substrates, 7 lexifiers, as well as 8 non-creoles, 
selected because of their analytic character and 
relative low complexity so as to match the 
character of creoles (see Bakker et al. 2011).  

In order to facilitate the interpretation of the 
figures, it should be kept in mind that the 
abbreviations used in each network provide the 
following information: a three-letter code was 
attributed to each language and written in upper-
case for creoles and in lower-case for all non-
creoles. A further distinction is made in all the 
abbreviations, where an initial capital letter (L, S 
or X) indicates whether the language is a lexifier, 
a substrate or a non-creole respectively, while a 
lower-case ‘c’ precedes all the abbreviations for 
the creoles. 

In the following, with the help of 
phylogenetic networks, we will test the 
predictions made by each of the four major 
proposals seeking to account for the emergence 
and development of creoles. 
 
3.1 The superstratist view 
The main idea within the superstratist framework 
is that the structural similarities between creoles 
are due to the role played by the superstrate (or 
lexifier) language in the period of creole 
formation. Thus, in this view, creoles are mere 
continuations of the European languages which 
provided the bulk of their lexicon and are thus 
genetically related to their lexifiers. Moreover, 
according to Mufwene (e.g. 2000, 2008) and 
Chaudenson (1992, 2003), creolization results 

from normal language change under particular 
sociohistorical circumstances and is more a 
sociological process rather than a linguistic one, 
and therefore creoles are in this view 
indistinguishable from non-creoles structurally 
and typologically. 

In order to test the validity of the 
superstratist approach, we produced a network  

 

 
Figure 2: A network of 18 creoles and 7 lexifiers 
 
including the 18 creoles of the CCS sample with 
the seven lexifiers involved in their creation. Fig. 
2 shows the resulting network. 

The seven lexifiers all cluster together on 
the left hand of the network, separated from the 
creoles by a curved line. All the Indo-European 
languages cluster neatly together, while Arabic 
(Laeg) shows up further removed, and the 
creoles all appear away from the lexifiers. 
Obviously, the visual interpretation of the 
network in Fig. 2 does not support the 
superstratist view, since the creoles do not group 
with their respective lexifiers, as otherwise 
expected. This strongly suggests that the 
superstrates have had a rather limited influence 
on the grammatical makeup of the incipient 
creoles at the time of restructuring. 
 
3.2 The substratist position 
The substratist school of thinking emphasizes the 
role of the substrate languages involved in the 
creation of a creole, which, in this view, was 
highly influenced by the languages of the 
enslaved populations (e.g. Holm 1989). Obvious 
influences are found in the lexicons of individual 
creoles in the form of borrowings and syntactic 
structures such as serial verb constructions have 
also been claimed to be inherited from substrate 
languages (e.g. Sebba 1987).  

In order to assess the extent to which the 
substratist approach is able to account for the 
resemblances between creoles, we will examine a 
network including the 18 CCS creoles with a set 
of 19 languages which have been claimed to be 
substrate languages of the various creoles. 

91



 

 
Figure 3: Phylogenetic network of 18 creoles and 19 
substrates 
 

The network in Fig. 3 shows an obvious 
clustering of all the creoles to the right of the 
dotted line, while all the substrates appear on the 
left side. Several West African languages often 
mentioned in the context of creoles are found in 
the vicinity of the creole cluster and form a 
transition zone between creoles and non-creoles. 
Fon (Sfon), Ijo (Sijo), Mandinka (Smdk), Temne 
(Stne) and Yoruba (Syor) are known to share 
some structures with creoles (they all use 
preverbal TMA markers for instance), and this is 
clearly reflected in the network, where they 
appear between the creole and non-creole 
clusters.  

Similarly, Tolai (Stla) appears relatively 
close to the creoles without affecting its relative 
position to Tok Pisin (cTOK), hence suggesting 
that the substratist approach fails to fully account 
for the facts. 

 
3.3 The feature pool approach 
The main proponent of the feature pool approach 
is Mufwene (e.g. 2001, 2008 - see also Aboh and 
Ansaldo 2006), who advocates a view inspired 
by genetics and applied to language change. In 
this context, languages are conceived of as 
biological species, and processes of language 
change are explained through the lens of 
population genetics and Darwinian evolution. 
Hence, in this view, the roles of the dominant 
substrates and non-standard varieties of the 
lexifier are critical, since they provide the feature 
pool where particular items compete for 
selection, first in individual idiolects, and then in 
the wider linguistic community (Mufwene 2008).  

In order to test the validity of the feature 
pool approach, two languages which are known 
substrates of Seychellois (cSEY), Makhuwa 
(Smak) and Malagasy (Smal), were specifically 
included, as well as a third substrate language, 

Swahili (Sswa), which was encoded for being a 
suggested substrate for another creole, Nubi 
Arabic (cNUB). In this sense, we voluntarily 
tipped the balance in favor of the languages that 
we know were present at the time when 
Seychellois emerged and must therefore have 
provided the feature pool from which the various 
items were available options for competition and 
selection in this framework. 
 

 
Figure 4: A network of 18 creoles, 3 substrates and 
one lexifier 

 
The network in Fig. 4 shows that even 

though only languages involved in the creation of 
Seychellois were included, the creoles cluster 
together, which goes against the predictions of a 
feature pool view, according to which 
Seychellois would be expected to appear close to 
the languages that were involved in its formation. 
The topology of the creole cluster in this and 
previous networks remains strikingly similar, 
without affecting the position of Seychellois in 
the lower right side of the graph. This strongly 
suggests that the role of the languages involved 
in the formation of creoles is overstated in a 
feature pool approach. 
 
3.4 The universalist view 
Another hypothesis on creole formation posits 
that structural similarities between creoles are 
due to an innate biological propensity, to 
cognitive constraints or to universals of language 
restructuring. Thus, language creators drew on 
the same cognitive resources and universal 
linguistic processes when trying to solve the 
communicative problems they encountered, and 
which in turn resulted in the observed similarities 
between creolized vernaculars. Bickerton (1981, 
1984) further claims that a language-acquisition 
device in the human brain is the source of creole 
similarities and regulates the outcome of 
imperfect language acquisition with the default 
(or unmarked) settings due to the limited input. 

92



In order to assess the validity of the last 
hypothesis, that of a universalist account of 
creole formation, a sample of 52 languages 
including both substrates and lexifiers was used. 
Fig. 5 presents a network illustrating the 
relationships between these languages.  
 

 
Figure 5: A network of 18 creoles, 19 substrates, 7 
lexifiers and 8 non-creoles 
 

In the graph in Fig. 5, the creole cluster is 
again clearly identifiable to the right of the 
dotted line. On closer inspection, the network 
reveals on the upper left a cluster including all 
the Indo-European languages, Assamese (Lass), 
Dutch (Ldut), English (Leng), French (Lfre), 
Marathi (Smhi), Portuguese (Lpor) and Spanish 
(Lspa). However, this cluster is disrupted by the 
presence of Arawak (Sara), Kolyma Yukaghir 
(Xyko) and Brahui (Xbrh). Another genealogical 
cluster comprising the Afro-Asiatic languages 
Egyptian Arabic (Laeg) and Mina (Xmin) is 
found in the lower left side of the graph. 

The four Bantu languages that were 
included, Kikongo (Skik), Kimbundu (Skim), 
Makhuwa (Smak) and Swahili (Swa), appear in 
different clusters. Only Kimbundu and Swahili 
do show up in a cluster on the left in spite of 
their belonging to widely different branches of 
the Bantu family (respectively Bantu P and 
Bantu G in the Guthrie 1948 classification), 
whereas Kikongo and Kimbundu, which are both 
Bantu H, appear in opposite ends of the graph. 
Similarly, the other Niger-Congo languages of 
West Africa, Akan (Sakn), Bambara (Sbam), Fon 
(Sfon), Ijo (Sijo), Mandinka (Smdk), Temne 
(Stne), Wolof (Swlf) and Yoruba (Syor), all 
appear in different clusters, with the exception of 
Temne and Yoruba. As for the three 
Austronesian languages of the sample, Cebuano 
(Sceb) and Malagasy (Smal) appear in a cluster  
on the left, far from Tolai (Stla).  

Thus, the software was able to detect a clear 
phylogenetic signal in only a few cases, which in 

itself is not surprising, since the features were 
originally selected as representative of the 
Atlantic creoles (Holm and Patrick 2007: vi). 
Hence, the results lend support to the universalist 
position. Besides, all the graphs presented so far 
also support the idea that creoles form a 
relatively homogeneous group of languages, in 
that the creoles are clearly visible and easily 
distinguishable from the other languages. 
 
4. Creole typology 
In this section, we will deal with the typological 
status of creoles. The issue has long been 
controversial in creolistics, and the debate has 
severely suffered from a paucity of systematic 
cross-linguistic empirical studies directly 
addressing the question. However, recent studies 
have shed new light on the matter with the help 
of phylogenetic tools (Cysouw 2009, Bakker et 
al. 2011, Daval-Markussen 2011). In the 
following section, we will show in a similar 
spirit that creoles pattern similarly in 
phylogenetic analyses, thus providing further 
support to the claim that creoles form a 
synchronically distinguishable sub-group among 
the world’s languages. 
 
4.1 Sampling and method 
Traditionally, comparative work in creolistics 
has focused on subdomains of syntax and/or 
lexicon for individual languages and/or a 
restricted number of languages to compare with. 
In spite of an increasing awareness of the lack of 
comparative studies encompassing creoles other 
than the ones lexified by Indo-European 
languages (partly remedied for with the 
publication of Holm and Patrick's long-awaited 
Comparative Creole Syntax in 2007), a majority 
of investigations on creoles still focus on 
varieties derived from Indo-European 
superstrates, partly because of the rarity of creole 
with a non-European lexical base.  

The question whether creoles are 
structurally distinguishable as a group against 
other languages of the world can be visualized 
with Neighbor-Joining trees (Saitou and Nei 
1987), which have the advantage of quickly 
returning clear-cut groupings. Since in this part 
of the study, we are less concerned with 
pinpointing the reticulation events that shaped 
creoles than in establishing typological 
relationships, we have opted for using NJ trees in 
the remainder of this article. 

93



 The study conducted by Parkvall (2008) 
was the first to make use of quantitative cross-
linguistic data for creoles, and the results 
presented strongly suggested that creoles are 
structurally distinguishable from non-creoles 
from a simplicity point of view. In his 
investigation of the complexity of creoles, 
Parkvall selected 43 features, 37 of which were 
taken directly from the WALS (Dryer and 
Haspelmath 2011), with a further six added by 
that author. These features were used to calculate 
the relative complexity of the 155 languages 
included in the WALS for which at least 30 
features were known (see Parkvall 2008 for the 
selection criteria). He then added data on 30 
creoles and pidgins with diverse lexifiers (2008: 
278), some of which are also found in the CCS 
sample: Dominican, Guinea Bissau, Haitian, 
Jamaican, Nubi, Negerhollands, Palenquero and 
Tok Pisin, i.e. almost half of the Holm and 
Patrick sample. Parkvall interpreted his results as 
evidence that creoles are structurally less 
complex than other natural languages. 
Consequently, another conclusion reached by the 
author was that creoles form a typological group 
characterized by a relatively low level of 
structural complexity.  

The dataset used by Parkvall (2008) also 
served to provide additional evidence that creoles 
do indeed form a typological group (Bakker et al. 
2011) on the basis of a quantitative empirical 
analysis. The strongest piece of evidence Bakker 
et al.'s (2011) large-scale investigation presents 
relies on Parkvall's (2008) data: 34 creoles and 
pidgins distinctly cluster in a network including 
155 non-creole languages of the world. However, 
the validity of the results is somewhat 
undermined by the fact that the data which 
allowed the authors to reach this conclusion were 
specifically selected on the basis of creole 
properties, in that Parkvall selected the features 
in WALS that could be quantified in terms of 
complexity (e.g. presence versus absence of a 
grammatical distinction, or less versus more of a 
particular phenomenon). Thus, one could object 
that the results do not really reflect what the 
authors claim them to (see also Kouwenberg 
2010 for a critical assessment).  

In order to provide additional, and this time 
irrefutable evidence, these results must be 
replicated with different samples and different 
features. This is what will be attempted in this 
section, first with the CCS languages and 
features used in the previous section, then with 

various samples of WALS languages and 
features. 
 
4.2 Using the CCS features and languages 
The morphosyntactic features described in Holm 
and Patrick (2007) are divided up into 20 
overarching categories covering various areas 
(such as TMA systems, NPs or relativization 
strategies), which were reduced to 18 binary 
features by selecting for each category the 
feature(s) that were shared by most creoles. The 
major linguistic families are indicated with 
colors in order to facilitate the interpretation of   
 

Figure 6: NJ tree of 50 languages with 18 binary 
features 
 
the graphs (cobalt blue = creoles; cyan = Nilo-
Saharan; dodger blue = Afro-Asiatic; green = 
Indo-European; light blue = Niger-Congo; olive 
= Austronesian; orange = Austro-Asiatic; pink = 
Altaic; purple = Uto-Aztecan; red = Australian; 
tangerine = Trans New Guinea; yellow = Sino-
Tibetan). 

A cluster consisting of all the creoles is 
immediately visible in the right end of the tree. 
The analysis producing these results is based on 
binary characters only attesting the presence vs. 
absence of a feature. Therefore, we will 
introduce in the next section new samples 
selected from a different database that allows the 
inclusion of finer-grained distinctions.  
 
4.3 Using WALS to settle the matter 
The database provided by the World Atlas of 
Linguistic Structures (Dryer and Haspelmath 
2011) consists of descriptions of 144 typological 
features in a wide variety of languages of the 
world (2678 as of March 2012 in the constantly 
updated online version). In the following, 
different datasets will be extracted from the 

94



WALS in order to further explore the 
relationships of creoles in the context of the 
world’s linguistic diversity. 

The features that are shared by at least 60% 
of the CCS languages were retained and used to 
produce several trees based following the 
multiple-state encoding of the WALS. In the 
following figures, the same color codes were 
applied to identify typological clusters. 
 

 
Figure 7: NJ tree of 61 languages with 9 multi-state 
features 
  

The creole cluster is immediately evident on 
the left side of the graph in Fig. 7, but a closer 
look reveals several anomalies: two unrelated 
languages, Basque (Xbsq) and Guarani (Xgua), 
appear in the periphery of the core creole cluster, 
while further up the tree on the initial branch of 
the creole cluster, four non-creoles show up: the 
Indo-European Irish and Russian (Xiri and Xrus), 
the Afro-Asiatic language Hebrew (Xheb) and 
the Khoisan language Khoekhoe (Xkho). 

In order to test the robustness of these 
results, a larger, more representative sample of 
the world’s languages is required. A logical 
result of the operation of reducing the number of 
features increases the number of languages, 
therefore we gathered another sample of 76 
languages based on 6 multi-character features, 
which returned the tree presented in Fig. 8. 

The graph reveals a much denser creole 
cluster compared to the previous graphs, thus 
emphasizing the relative homogeneity of creoles 
as a group. However, several non-creoles appear 
within the creole cluster: Basque (Xbsq) and 
Khoekhoe (Xkho) in the core cluster, and four 
Indo-European languages, Dutch (Ldut), English 
(Leng), Greek (Xgrk) and Spanish (Lspa), the 
Uto-Aztecan language O’odham (Xood) and 
Hungarian (Xhun, Finno-Ugric) in its periphery. 
 

 
Figure 8: NJ tree of 76 languages with 6 multi-state 
features 
 

In order to further increase the number of 
languages included, we have kept the 4 features 
which were shared by at least 80% of the CCS 
creoles. The resulting tree is presented in Fig. 9. 
 

 
Figure 9: NJ tree of 134 languages with 4 multi-state 
features 
 

In this final graph, the creole cluster is once 
again unequivocally identifiable. This time, a 
majority of the creoles (16 out of 18) are present  
on a single branch, while two creoles, Krio 
(cKRI) and Berbice Dutch (cBER) appear on an 
adjacent branch together with three Austronesian 
languages, Loniu (Xlon), Motu (Xmtu) and 
Tahitian (Xtah). The graph in Fig. 9 thus 
provides conclusive evidence as to the status of 
creoles: they do form a coherent group of 
languages that can be distinguished solely on 
synchronic grounds, as is clearly visible in this, 
and in previous graphs. 
 
5. Conclusion 
We have shown that the application of 
phylogenetic tools can help shed new light on the 
typological relationships between languages in 
general on the one hand, and, on the other hand, 

95



more specifically on the relationships between 
creoles and other languages, both creoles and 
non-creoles. The problem of the classification of 
creoles was shown to be a manageable task with 
the help of phylogenetic networks. The various 
theories seeking to account for the similarities 
between creoles were investigated with the help 
of phylogenetic networks, and it was found that 
the chosen analysis was advantageous in that it 
allowed to graphically represent the relationships 
between the various languages involved in the 
emergence of creoles. Finally, the controversial 
question of whether creoles form a 
distinguishable subgroup among the world’s 
languages was similarly satisfactorily answered 
using phylogenetic trees. Moreover, we 
introduced different ways of depicting the 
results, where color codes were used so as to 
instantly identify linguistic patterns. 

The availability of freely accessible online 
databases is constantly increasing, and the 
prospects for future research are many in the 
perspective of the interplay between 
computational methods and linguistics, and, 
more specifically, in the context of creole 
languages, as their emegence raise questions on 
the very nature of language evolution as well. 
 
References 
Enoch O. Aboh and Umberto Ansaldo. 2006. The role 

of typology in language creation. In Umberto 
Ansaldo, Stephen Matthews and Lisa Lim (eds.), 
Deconstructing creole, 39–66. 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: Benjamins. 

Philip Baker. 1999. “Investigating the origin and 
diffusion of shared features among the Atlantic 
English Creoles”. In Philip Baker and Adrienne 
Bruyn (eds.), St Kitts and the Atlantic Creoles. 
The texts of Samuel Augustus Mathews in 
perspective, 315-364. London: Battlebridge. 

Peter Bakker, Aymeric Daval-Markussen, Mikael 
Parkvall and Ingo Plag. 2011. Creoles are 
typologically distinct from non-creoles. In Parth 
Bhatt and Tonjes Veenstra (eds.), Journal of 
Pidgin and Creole Languages. 26(1): 5-42. 

Derek Bickerton. 1981. Roots of Language. Ann 
Arbor: Karoma. 

Derek Bickerton. 1984. The language bioprogram 
hypothesis. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 
7: 173-188. 

Robert Chaudenson. 1992. Des îles, des hommes, des 
langues. Paris: L'Harmattan. 

Robert Chaudenson. 2003. La créolisation: théorie, 
applications, implications. Paris: L'Harmattan. 

Michael Cysouw. 2009. APiCS, WALS, and the 
creole typological profile (if any). Paper 

presented at the 1st APiCS conference, Leipzig, 
5-8 November 2009. 

Aymeric Daval-Markussen and Peter Bakker. 2011. A 
phylogenetic networks approach to the 
classification of English-based Atlantic creoles. 
English World-Wide. 32(2). 

Aymeric Daval-Markussen. 2011. Of networks and 
trees in contact linguistics: new light on the 
typology of creoles. MA thesis, Aarhus 
University.  

Michel DeGraff. 2003. Against Creole 
Exceptionalism.  Language. 79(2): 391-410. 

Mark Donohue, Simon Musgrave, Bronwen Whitting, 
and Søren Wichmann. 2011. Typological feature 
analysis models linguistic geography. Language. 
87(2): 369-383. 

Matthew Dryer and Martin Haspelmath (eds.). 2011. 
The World Atlas of Linguistic Structures Online. 
Munich: Max Planck Digital Library. Available 
online at http://wals.info/. Accessed on 2012-01-
15. 

Malcolm Guthrie. 1948. The classification of the 
Bantu languages. London: Oxford University 
Press. 

Ian F. Hancock. 1969. A provisional comparison of 
the English-based Atlantic Creoles. African 
Language Review. 8: 7-72. 

Ian F. Hancock. 1987. A preliminary classification of 
the anglophone Atlantic creoles with syntactic 
data from thrity-three representative dialects. In 
Glenn G. Gilbert (ed.), Pidgin and Creole 
languages. Essays in memory of John E. 
Reinecke, 264-333. Honolulu: University of 
Hawaii Press. 

John Holm. 1989. Pidgins and Creoles. Vol. 2. 
Reference survey. Cambrige: Cambridge 
University Press. 

John Holm and Peter L. Patrick (eds.). 2007. 
Comparative Creole Syntax. London: 
Battlebridge. 

Daniel H. Huson and David Bryant. 2006. Application 
of phylogenetic networks in evolutionary studies. 
Molecular Biology and Evolution. 23: 254-267. 

Silvia Kouwenberg. 2010. Creole studies and 
linguistic typology: Part 2. Journal of Pidgin and 
Creole Languages. 25(2): 359-380. 

John H. McWhorter. 1995. Sisters under the skin: a 
case for genetic relationship between the Atlantic 
English-based Creoles. Journal of Pidgin and 
Creole Languages. 10(2): 289-333.  

John H. McWhorter. 1998. Identifying the creole 
prototype. Vindicating a typological class. 
Language. 74(4): 788–818. 

John H. McWhorter. 2011. Linguistic simplicity and 
complexity: Why do languages undress? Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter. 

Salikoko S Mufwene. 1986. The Universalist and 
Substrate Hypotheses Complement One 
Another. In Pieter Muysken and Norval Smith 
(eds.), Substrata versus universals in creole 

96



genesis, 129-162. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins. 

Salikoko S. Mufwene. 2000. Creolization is a social, 
not a structural, process. In Ingrid Neumann-
Holzschuh and Edgar Schneider (eds.), Degrees 
of restructuring in creole languages, 65-84. 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 

Salikoko S. Mufwene. 2001. The Ecology of 
Language Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Salikoko S. Mufwene. 2008. Language evolution: 
Contact, competition, and change. London/New 
York: Continuum Press. 

Mikael Parkvall. 2008. The simplicity of creoles in a 
cross-linguistic perspective. In Matti Miestamo, 
Kaius Sinnemäki, and Fred Karlsson (eds.), 
Language Complexity. Typology, Contact, 
Change, 265–285. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins. 

Naruya Saitou and Masatoshi Nei. 1987. The 
neighbor-joining method: a new method for 
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Molecular 
Biology and Evolution. 4(4): 406-425. 

Mark Sebba. 1987. The Syntax of Serial Verbs. 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 

 
 

97


