










































Annotating the Focus of Negation in terms of Questions Under Discussion


Proceedings of the ACL-2012 Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational Linguistics (ExProM-2012),
pages 65–69, Jeju, Republic of Korea, 13 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotating the Focus of Negation in terms of Questions Under Discussion

Pranav Anand
Department of Linguistics

University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA
panand@ucsc.edu

Craig Martell
Department of Computer Science

Naval Postgraduate School
Monterey, CA USA

cmartell@nps.edu

Abstract

Blanco & Moldovan (Blanco and Moldovan,
2011) have empirically demonstrated that
negated sentences often convey implicit pos-
itive inferences, or focus, and that these in-
ferences are both human annotatable and ma-
chine learnable. Concentrating on their anno-
tation process, this paper argues that the focus-
based implicit positivity should be separated
from concepts of scalar implicature and neg-
raising, as well as the placement of stress. We
show that a model making these distinctions
clear and which incorporates the pragmatic
notion of question under discussion yields κ
rates above .80, but that it substantially de-
flates the rates of focus of negation in text.

1 Introduction

The recent paper by Blanco & Moldovan (Blanco
and Moldovan, 2011) has highlighted the fact that
negation in natural language is more that just a
propositional logic operator. The central claims of
the paper are that negation conveys implicit positiv-
ity more than half of the time and that such positivity
is both reliably annotatable by humans and promis-
ingly learnable by machine. In this paper, we eval-
uate their annotation process and propose a differ-
ent model that incorporates the pragmatic concept
that discourse is guided by questions under discus-
sion (QUDs), often implicit issues that hearers and
speakers are attending to. We concentrate on the
corpus used in (Blanco and Moldovan, 2011), PB-
FOC.1

1PB-FOC was released as part of *SEM 2012
Shared Task: Resolving the Scope and Focus of Nega-

Our animating concern can be seen concretely by
comparing the examples2 from the corpus provided
below.

(1) a. “They were willing to mistreat us be-
cause we hadn’t shown any moxie, any
resistance,” says William Queenan, a
DC-10 pilot and 14-year Federal vet-
eran. (ex. 939)

b. “I won’t be throwing 90 mph, but I will
throw 80-plus,” he says. (ex. 1)

c. “Some shows just don’t impress, he
says, and this is one of them.” (ex. 30)

d. “But we don’t believe there is enough
of a difference to be clinically signifi-
cant,” Dr. Sobel said. (ex. 426)

We believe these examples are incorrectly anno-
tated, but in somewhat different ways. Following
Blanco & Moldovan, assume that focus of negation
is diagnosed by an implication that some alternative
to the focus would make a sentence true. Then in
(1a), in which the focus is annotated as being on the
negative polarity item any moxie, any resistance, it
is not clear that there is focus at all. If there were,
the sentence would imply that the pilots in ques-
tion showed something but not some moxie. This
doesn’t seem to be the meaning intended. In con-
trast, in (1b), we agree that focus is present, but
take it to be on the phrase 90 mph, as is confirmed

tionhttp://www.clips.ua.ac.be/sem2012-st-neg/
2The citation (ex. n) will refer to the nth annotated instance

in the PB-FOC dataset. In these and following examples, we
indicate the PB-FOC focus by emboldening and our suggested
alternative (if present) by italics

65



by the overt contrast that follows. Finally, (1c) and
(1d) both show something more complex; in (1c) the
scalar quantifier some is not in the scope of negation
(lest it mean no shows impress), and thus cannot be
a focus. Nonetheless, we agree that a positive im-
plicature arises here (namely, that some shows do
impress), but we suggest that this is simply a fact
about scalar implicatures. Finally, in (1d), in which
the verb believe is a so-called neg-raiser (a predicate
P such that ¬P (x) ↔ P (¬x)), the implicit posi-
tivity about a belief the doctors have is not due to
pragmatic focus, but a lexical property of the verb in
question.

In sum, what worried us was the variety of con-
structions being considered equivalent. In order to
respond to these concerns, we reannotated 2304 sen-
tences from the development subcorpus, being care-
ful to try to tease apart the relevant distinctions men-
tioned above. This paper documents that effort. Our
central finding is that the PB-FOC data contains an
overabundance of focus-marked phrases (i.e., cases
like (1a)): the PB-FOC rate of focus marking in our
subcorpus is 74% (somewhat higher than the 65%
for the whole dataset), while we observed a rate of
50%. Although the reduction in focus-marking oc-
curs across all Propbank role types, we show that it
is highest with the A1 and AM-MNR roles. One
central reason for the overmarking, we argue, is
that the definition of focus of negation Blanco &
Moldovan use is somewhat vague, allowing one to
confuse emphasis with implicit positivity. We ar-
gue instead that although they are right to correlate
stress with focus (by and large), focus is connected
to referencing a QUD (Rooth, 1996; Roberts, 1996;
Kadmon, 2001), and only indirectly leads to positiv-
ity.

2 Delimiting Focus of Negation

2.1 What Focus of Negation is

Following (Huddleston and Pullman, 2002), Blanco
& Moldovan define the focus of negation as “that
part of the scope [of negation] that is most promi-
nently or explicitly negated.” They further argue that
when there is a focus of negation, it yields a cor-
responding positive inference. This idea has roots
in Jackendoff’s seminal theory of focus (Jackendoff,
1972). Jackendoff proposes a) that focus in general

(with or without negation) partitions a sentence into
a function, obtained by lambda abstracting over the
focused constituent and b) that negation is a focus-
sensitive operator, stating that the function applied to
the focused constituent yields falsity. To capture the
positive inference cases, Jackendoff initially claims
that focus always presupposes that there is some el-
ement in the function’s domain (i.e., there is some
way to make the sentence true).

(2) Bill likes Mary. 7→ 〈λx Bill likes x, Mary〉
(3) not(〈f, x〉) = 0.
(4) focus presupposition: ∃y[f(y) = 1].

While 4 might be correct for focus-sensitive op-
erators like only, it is clearly not for negation. As
Jackendoff himself points out, the sentence

(5) Bill doesn’t like anybody.

clearly does not lead to the inference that Bill likes
someone, even when anybody is strongly stressed.
More contemporary work (Rooth, 1996; Roberts,
1996) has instead argued that what focus presup-
poses is that there is a relevant question under dis-
cussion (QUD). In the case of 2, it is the question

(6) Who does Bill like?

The QUD model assumes that dialogue is struc-
tured in terms of currently relevant (often implicit)
questions, which serve to explain how a coherent
discourse arises. Focus is thus coherent in context
if the corresponding QUD is relevant. This serves to
explain Jackendoff’s counterexample (5) – anybody
is focused because the question (6) is currently rele-
vant. Under this account, focus of negation does not
automatically yield an existential positive inference,
but only if the corresponding QUD is assumed to ex-
clude negative answers (i.e., if it is assumed that no
one is not a suitable answer to Who does Bill like?).
Adopting the QUD model thus means that in deter-
mining the positive inferences from a negated sen-
tence, we must ask two questions:

a) What is the relevant QUD for this sentence/sub-
sentence?

b) Does that QUD in context prohibit negative an-
swers?

66



2.2 What isn’t Focus of Negation
Thus, we see that the positive inference resulting
from a negated sentence is the result of an inter-
play of the general meaning of focus (referencing
a relevant QUD) and context (furnishing an assump-
tion that some non-negative answer to the QUD ex-
ists). However, there is another way of yielding pos-
itive inferences to negated sentences, relying merely
on the familiar theory of scalar implicature. Con-
sider (7) below, which involves the scalar expres-
sion much (roughly equivalent to a lot). In positive
assertions, using the quantifier a lot entails the corre-
sponding alternative with some, and using all entails
a lot. In the scope of negation, these patterns reverse,
giving rise to opposite implicatures. Thus, (7) impli-
cates that the stronger alternative (8) is false and thus
(9) – that some but not much of a clue is given.

(7) assertion: However, it doesn’t give much of
a clue as to whether a recession is on the
horizon. (ex. 122)

(8) stronger alternative: It doesn’t give any clue
as to whether a recession is on the horizon.

(9) implicature: It gives some clue as to whether
the recession is on the horizon.

A different problem occurs with ‘neg-raising’
predicates like believe, expect, think, seem, and
want. Since (Filmore, 1963), it has been noted that
some clausal embedding predicates seem to interpret
a superordinate negation inside their scope – that is,
BILL DOESN’T THINK MARY IS HERE seems to be
equivalent to BILL THINKS MARY ISN’T HERE.

While neg-raising is defeasible in certain contexts
and its explanation is contentious (see (Gajewski,
2007) for discussion), it does not seem to be depen-
dent on focus per se. In particular, putting focus on
any element in the complement clause seems to en-
gender a different positive inference. For example,
in (10), this would give rise to the inference that Bill
wants to talk to someone else, not simply that he
wants to not talk to Mary.

(10) Bill doesn’t want to talk to Mary.

In short, neg-raising cases should be considered
more properly to be cases where the scope of nega-
tion is semantically lower than it appears, not cases
of focus driven inference.

3 Reannotation

We annotated 2304 examples from the shared task
training corpus. As in the original study, annotators
were shown a target sentence as well as the prior
and following sentence and were asked to mark the
focus of negation in the target. Annotators followed
a three step process. First, they were instructed to
“move” the negation around the sentence to various
constituents, as exemplified below, introducing an
existential quantificational some. . . but not.

(11) a. [She]A0 didn’t have [hot water]A1 [for
five days]AM−TMP . (ex. 1925)

b. Someone but not her had hot water for
five days.

c. She had something but not hot water for
five days.

d. She had hot water but not for five days.

They were then asked to determine which if any
of these was most relevant, given the surrounding
context and mark that as the focus. In determining
which was most relevant, annotators asked whether
the question corresponding to each altered sentence
(e.g., Who had hot water for five days?) appeared to
be under discussion in context.3

Three linguist annotators were selected and
trained on 20 examples randomly drawn from the
training set, including 5 examples of scalar “focus”,
3 of neg-raising, and 5 instances of no focus. An-
notators were given explicit feedback on each trial
annotated. The annotators then annotated the re-
maining 2284 examples in our subcorpus with 100%
overlap and 2 annotators per token.

3.1 Results

Figure 1 summarizes the differences between PB-
FOC and our annotation by role4. Our annotators
achieved a pairwise κ of 0.82. Our agreement with
PB-FOC was significantly lower: κ = 0.48 if we
exclude scalars and neg-raisers and 0.59 if we count
them as focused.

3The QUD model in general allows multiple foci, e.g., Who
had hot water when? We did not consider multiple foci in the
present study.

4Other consists of C-A1, AM-PNC, AM-LOC, A4, R-A1,
AM-EXT, A3, R-A0, AM-DIR, AM-DIS, R-AM-LOC

67



PB-FOC ROLE COUNT AGREED SCALAR NEG-RAISING NO FOCUS OTHER
A1 920 332 54 101 372 61
NO FOCUS 591 532 0 0 AGREED 59
AM-TMP 160 116 0 0 29 15
AM-MNR 125 51 28 0 40 6
A2 112 43 1 0 47 21
A0 88 24 20 0 23 21
AM-ADV 77 30 3 0 26 18
No Role 69 42 2 0 19 6
Other 161 42 8 20 75 16
TOTAL 2303 1212 116 121 631 223

Figure 1: Overall comparison of roles

As Figure 1 shows, the central reason for this
discrepancy is the 631 examples where our annota-
tors did not find focus where PB-FOC indicated that
there was some; in contrast, only 59 examples that
PB-FOC labeled as focusless were disagreed with.
There are two interesting trends. First, we found
an abundance of cases where the the question pro-
duced by the PB-FOC focus yielded an uninforma-
tive question (12% of disagreements), often in cases
containing predicates of possession (e.g., have, con-
tain). For example, in (12), the PB-FOC label would
be answer the question What do American Brands
conclude they have under the contract?, which does
not seem relevant in context.

(12) possession (7%): “We have previously had
discussions with representatives of Pinker-
ton’s Inc. concerning the (sale of the com-
pany) and we concluded that we did not have
liability under the contract,” says American
Brands. (ex. 181)

An additional 4% of the disagreements involved
idiomatic expressions, where neither the syntactic
nor the semantic sub-constituents could be mean-
ingfully separated; in (13), take kindly to that as a
whole is negated, and focusing on any one part will
upset the idiom. Although of small number, the bi-
ased questions exemplified in (14) are illustrative of
negation’s chimerical lives; in these questions, nega-
tion’s function is at the discourse level and it has no
propositional negative force.

(13) idioms (4%): But media-stock analyst
Richard J. MacDonald of MacDonald

Grippo Riely says Wall Street won’t take
kindly to that. (ex. 2081)

(14) biased questions (10 instances): But
wouldn’t a president who acted despite Sen-
ate objections be taking grave political
risks? (ex. 489)

4 Conclusion

We have argued that while the study of the focus of
negation is of compelling interest to the computa-
tional community, more work is needed at theory-
and annotation-building levels before we can effec-
tively ask machine learning questions. We have sug-
gested that one promising route for pursuing this
is to operationalize the question under discussion
model of focus’s contribution to a sentence, and
that such a procedure yields a marked decrease in
the prevalence of focus of negation in PB-FOC.
This partly follows from our decision on linguistic
grounds to separate focus of negation from scalar
implicature and neg-raising. From an engineering
perspective, if our goal is to extract any positive in-
ference from negated clauses, such distinctions may
be academic. We suspect, however, that the linguis-
tic heterogeneity substantially complicates annota-
tor’s task. We have shown that by explicitly telling
annotators what the differences are, agreement rises,
and we think future work should incorporate such a
model. Finally, we plan on annotating foci that do
not yield positive inferences, since it has the hope of
giving us a window into when and how focus gives
rise to positivity.

68



References
Eduardo Blanco and Dan Moldovan. 2011. Semantic

Representation of Negation Using Focus Detection. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies (ACL-HLT 2011), Portland, OR,
USA.

Charles Filmore. 1963. The position of embedding trans-
formations in grammar. Word, 19:208–231.

Jan Robert Gajewski. 2007. Neg-raising and polarity.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 30:289–328.

Rodney Huddleston and Geoffrey K. Pullman. 2002. The
Cambridge Grammar of the English Langauge. Cam-
bridge University Press.

Ray Jackendoff. 1972. Semantic Interpretation in Gen-
erative Grammar. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Nirit Kadmon. 2001. Formal Pragmatics: Seman-
tics, Pragmatics, Presupposition, and Focus. Wiley-
Blackwell.

Craige Roberts. 1996. Information structure: Towards
an integrated theory of formal pragmatics. In Jae-Hak
Yoon and Andreas Kathol, editors, OSU Working Pa-
pers in Linguistics, Volume 49: Papers in Semantics,
pages 91–136. The Ohio State University Department
of Linguistics.

Mats Rooth. 1996. Focus. In Shalom Lappin, editor, The
Handbook of Contemporary Semantic Theory, pages
271–298. Blackwell, Oxford.

69


