



















































Rule-based Machine Translation between Indonesian and Malaysian


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on South and Southeast Asian Natural Language Processing (SANLP), pages 191–200,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Rule-based Machine Translation between Indonesian and
Malaysian

Ra ymond Hend y Susanto1 Septina Dian Larasati2 F rancis M . T yers3
(1) Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore

(2) Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, MFF, Charles University in Prague
(3) Dept. Lleng. i Sist. Inform., Universitat d’Alacant

raymondhs@nus.edu.sg, larasati@ufal.mff.cuni.cz, ftyers@dlsi.ua.es

ABSTRACT
We describe the development of a bidirectional rule-based machine translation system between
Indonesian and Malaysian (id-ms), two closely related Austronesian languages natively spoken
by approximately 35 million people. The system is based on the re-use of free and publicly
available resources, such as the Apertium machine translation platform and Wikipedia articles.
We also present our approaches to overcome the data scarcity problems in both languages by
exploiting the morphology similarities between the two.

KEYWORDS: machine translation, Malay languages, morphology.

191



1 Introduction

In this paper we describe the development of apertium-id-ms, a bidirectional Indonesian and
Malaysian machine translation system based on the Apertium platform. The paper is laid out as
follows: Section 2 gives a brief description of the two languages; Section 3 gives a short review
of the previous work in Indonesian-Malaysian language pair; Section 4 describes the system
and the creation of the resources; Section 5 presents an evaluation of the system, and finally
we describes future work that could be done and some concluding remarks.

2 Languages

Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia) and Malaysian (Bahasa Malaysia) are standards of the Malay
language and both belong to the Austronesian family. Indonesian is spoken by approximately 35
million people1, mostly from Indonesia, but also widespread in the Netherlands, the Philippines,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, and the United States. Malaysian has 10 million speakers across the
Peninsular Malaysia, and other speakers coming from parts of Sarawak, Indonesia (Sumatra),
Singapore, and United States.

Indonesian and Malaysian are closely related; both languages are mutually intelligible to a
great extent. The morphology of the two languages are the same, where agglutination is used
extensively (by means of affixation, reduplication, and compounding), although some affixes
are more frequently used in one language over the other. For instance, the prefix juru- is often
used in Malaysian to indicate an actor characterized by the stem it is attached to. While this
affixation also happens in Indonesian, it is not as frequently found as in Malaysian.

The main difference between Indonesian and Malaysian languages lies in their vocabulary;
Indonesian is largely influenced by Dutch and Javanese, whereas Malaysian has many words
borrowed from English, e.g. dokter vs. doktor (‘doctor’) and tas vs. beg (‘bag’). Moreover,
there are frequent minor spelling differences, e.g. kabar vs. khabar (‘news’) and mau vs. mahu
(‘want’).

3 Motivation

The development of this system is motivated by an early prototype Apertium system developed
in Larasati and Kubon (2010). Since then, most of the components in the prototype were
completely redesigned, and the direction of the development was based on the following
rationale:

• Morphological analyser: We wanted to create a morphological analyser which is not
only robust, but also does not overgenerate either. Both Indonesian and Malaysian
morphology are characterized by rich derivational morphology, but poor inflectional
morphology, unlike some other morphologically-complex languages such as Arabic and
Turkish. Moreover, each root undergoes an idiosyncratic subset of these derivational
processes (i.e. we cannot simply apply the derivational affixes to new words).

• Bidirectional: A new translation direction from Malaysian to Indonesian was added,
and used as the starting point instead of the opposite direction, since translating from
Indonesian to Malaysian appears to be more ambiguous.

• Evaluation: Finally, we performed a quality evaluation of our system, which has not been
done before.

1http://www.lmp.ucla.edu/Profile.aspx?menu=004&LangID=89 Last accessed: October 2012

192



We have chosen the rule-based approach, instead of the ubiquitous corpus-based statistical
approach, due to the dearth of parallel corpora for the two languages. Moreover, the closeness
between the two languages makes the rule-based approach favourable. Recent development for
closely related languages with the rule-based approach have shown competitive performance
with respect to the statistical approach, e.g. the rule-based Swedish→Danish system in Tyers
and Nordfalk (2009) and the Italian→Catalan system in Toral et al. (2011), where both systems
outperform a rivaling statistical-based system.

4 System

The system is based on the Apertium machine translation platform (Forcada et al., 2011).2

The platform was originally aimed at the Romance languages of the Iberian peninsula, but has
also been adapted for other, more distantly related language pairs. The whole platform, both
programs and data, are licensed under the Free Software Foundation’s General Public Licence3

(GPL) and all the software and data for the 33 supported language pairs (and the other pairs
being worked on) is available for download from the project website.

4.1 Architecture of the system

morph.

analyser

morph.

disambig.

morph.

generator

post-

generator

SL

text

TL

text

deformatter

reformatter

structural

transfer

lexical

transfer

lexical

selection

Figure 1: The pipeline architecture of the Apertium system.

The Apertium translation engine consists of a Unix-style pipeline or assembly line with the
following modules (see Fig. 1):

• A deformatter which encapsulates the format information in the input as superblanks that
will then be seen as blanks between words by the other modules.

• A morphological analyser which segments the text in surface forms (SF) (words, or, where
detected, multi-word lexical units or MWLUs) and for each, delivers one or more lexical
forms (LF) consisting of lemma, lexical category and morphological information.

• A morphological disambiguator (constraint grammar) which chooses, using linguistic rules
the most adequate sequence of morphological analyses for an ambiguous sentence.

• A lexical transfer module which reads each SL LF and delivers the corresponding target-
language (TL) LF by looking it up in a bilingual dictionary encoded as an FST compiled
from the corresponding XML file. The lexical transfer module may return more than one
TL LF for a single SL LF.

• A lexical selection module which chooses, based on context rules the most adequate
translation of ambiguous source language LFs.

2http://www.apertium.org/
3http://www.fsf.org/licensing/licenses/gpl.html

193



• A structural transfer module which performs local syntactic operations, is compiled from
XML files containing rules that associate an action to each defined LF pattern. Patterns
are applied left-to-right, and the longest matching pattern is always selected.

• A morphological generator which delivers a TL SF for each TL LF, by suitably inflecting it.

• A reformatter which de-encapsulates any format information.

4.2 Morphological transducers

There is one publicly available morphological tool for Indonesian, MorphInd (Larasati et al.,
2011). However, MorphInd is only designed for analysis, while we wanted a tool for both
morphological analysis and generation. Moreover, there are rarely linguistic resources and
tools available for Malaysian. Baldwin (2006) has developed the free/open-source lemmatiser
for Malay, but this does not meet our need either since we wanted to include more robust
morphological information into our Malaysian transducer, such as part-of-speech and affixes.
Thus, we decided to build the morphological transducers from scratch.

Similar to most Apertium language pairs, the morphological transducers for both Indonesian and
Malaysian are constructed using lttoolbox, a toolbox for morphological analysis and generation
that is available under a free/open-source licence. The monolingual dictionary for each language
is provided as XML-formatted entries, which is then compiled into a finite state transducers
using lttoolbox.

4.2.1 Indonesian morphological transducer

A lexicon list was created semi-automatically to the Indonesian morphological analyser based
on a words frequency list, with the most frequent words being added first. The frequency list
was taken from a database dump of the Indonesian Wikipedia. For each word in the frequency
list, we obtained its lemma and part-of-speech information from Kateglo4, an online Indonesian
dictionary with over 70,000 entries licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.5. Since we also wanted
to include affix information in our analyser, we wrote a rule-based morpheme segmentor to
decompose a given Indonesian surface form into their constituent morphemes, also by making
use of the lemma information from Kateglo. Moreover, closed word classes (e.g. pronouns,
conjunctions) were added by hand.

4.2.2 Malaysian morphological transducer

A frequency list for Malaysian was also created based on a database dump of the Malaysian
Wikipedia. Unlike Indonesian, we did not find a comprehensive Malaysian dictionary with
adequate morphological information, such as lemma and part-of-speech. Hence, the Malaysian
analyser was built using the two strategies below.

First, Malaysian words that also exist as an Indonesian word were assumed to share the
same morphological information (i.e. the same lemma and part-of-speech), and were added
automatically to the analyser. Although this method may introduce a number of false friends
(e.g. polisi means ‘policy’ in Malay but ‘police’ in Indonesian), the benefit outweighs the risk

4http://kateglo.bahtera.org/
5http://creativecommonsorg/licenses/by-sa/3.0/

194



since there is huge overlap in the lexicons of the two languages. Moreover, most of these false
friends usually belong to the same part-of-speech.

Second, we also added Malaysian words which appear in our bilingual dictionary. Since every
entry in a bilingual dictionary is a pair of words with the same meaning, we can assume that
these words also belong to the same part-of-speech most of the time. Our approaches to building
the bilingual dictionary are presented in the following section.

4.3 Bilingual dictionary

There is no freely available bilingual dictionary between Indonesian and Malaysian, so we had
to build the dictionary from scratch. At the moment, the bilingual dictionary contains 12,142
entries, which was developed in several ways described below.

First, most of the entries were added using automatic word alignments. We created an
Indonesian-Malaysian parallel corpus by translating many articles taken from Malaysian
Wikipedia. The translation process is mostly automatic, with the help of existing Malaysian-
Indonesian machine translation systems such as Google Translate.6

Next the Wikipedia corpus is tagged using our morphological analyser, and word alignments
were created by running GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) on the tagged corpus. We fed the proba-
bilistic dictionary into the ReTraTos toolbox (Caseli et al., 2006), which extracts both phrases
and single-word translations from alignments, and converts them into Apertium translation
entries. The ReTraTos method gave us about 12,000 translation entries, but also required a
manual check due the amount of noise in the resulting data.

Finally, some entries were added manually, which included closed word classes and words that
frequently appeared in Wikipedia but were not yet added to the bilingual dictionary.

4.4 Disambiguation

The output from the morphological analysis is disambiguated using Apertium’s statistical
disambiguator module. The module implements a bigram part-of-speech tagger based on
hidden Markov models (HMM). To improve the accuracy of our disambiguator, a Constraint
Grammar (Karlsson, 1990) could be used as a pre-disambiguator module before feeding the
input to the HMM, which is left for future work.

4.5 Lexical selection rules

Given the closeness of the languages, lexical selection is not a large problem between Indonesian
and Malaysian. However, a number of rules can be written for ambiguous words; for example,
the Malaysian preposition daripada ‘from (to explain the origin of something), than (compari-
son)’ can be translated into Indonesian as either dari ‘from’ or daripada ‘than (comparison)’,
depending on the surrounding context.

Another example is the copulas adalah and ialah (both meaning ‘be’), which exist in both
Indonesian and Malaysian, but have a slightly different usage in each language. In Malaysian,
adalah is used before an adjective phrase or a prepositional phrase, and ialah is used only
before a noun phrase. In comparison to Indonesian, there are no strict rules governing the use
of the two words, and their usage is more interchangeable.

6http://translate.google.com/

195



4.6 Transfer rules
There are barely differences between the grammar of Indonesian and Malaysian, in that the
structure of words, phrases, clauses, and sentences are almost exactly the same. That said, the
lexical transfer between the two languages works by simple word substitution in most cases.

(Malaysian) Input Cuaca kelmarin amatlah sejuk.

Mor. analysis ˆCuaca/Cuaca<n><sg>$ ˆkelmarin/kelmarin<adv>$
ˆamatlah/amatlah<adv>$ ˆsejuk/sejuk<adj>$
ˆ./.<sent>$

Mor. disambiguation ˆCuaca<n><sg>$ ˆkelmarin<adv>$ ˆamatlah<adv>$
ˆsejuk<adj>$ˆ.<sent>$

Transfer ˆCuaca<n><sg>$ ˆkemarin<adv>$ ˆamatlah<adv>$
ˆdingin<adj>$ˆ.<sent>$

Mor. generation Cuaca kemarin amatlah dingin.

Table 1: Translation process for the sentence Cuaca kelmarin amatlah sejuk. ‘The weather yesterday is
very cold’.

5 Evaluation

The system was evaluated in three ways. The first was the coverage7 of the system. The second
was the word error rate (WER) of the translation output for our test data set, together with
the error analysis of the translations. Lastly, we did a comparative evaluation with an existing
system.

5.1 Coverage
Lexical coverage of the system is calculated over the Indonesian and Malaysian Wikipedia
articles, as shown in Table 2. The database dump of the Indonesian Wikipedia8 was from the
29th April 2012, and that of Malaysian Wikipedia9 from the 28th April 2012. Both database
dumps were stripped of formatting.

Corpus Tokens Coverage

Indonesian Wikipedia 19,021,087 80.70%

Malaysian Wikipedia 12,613,364 80.10%

Table 2: Naïve vocabulary coverage over Wikipedia articles.

5.2 Quantitative and Qualitative
We tested our system on a 2,084 word text taken from various articles in Malaysian Wikipedia.
The translation quality was measured using Word Error Rate (WER), a metric based on the

7Here coverage is defined as naïve coverage, that is for any given surface form at least one analysis is returned by our
monolingual dictionaries

8http://id.wikipedia.org/; idwiki-20120429-pages-articles.xml.bz2
9http://ms.wikipedia.org/; mswiki-20120428-pages-articles.xml.bz2

196



Levenshtein distance (Levenshtein, 1966). We calculated the WER for each sentence using the
apertium-eval-translator10 tool. The WER metric was preferred to other MT metrics such as
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) since we want to evaluate the system for the postedition task. That
is, we want to assess the amount of manual labour needed to improve the machine-generated
translation.11

For the Malaysian to Indonesian direction, the sentences were translated by the system, and
then postedited by a native Indonesian speaker. For the Indonesian to Malaysian direction, we
used the reference translation, as postedited by the native speaker and used it as a source of
Indonesian to be translated to Malaysian, then the original Malaysian sentence was used as the
reference translation.

Corpus Direction Tokens Unknown WER

Malaysian Wikipedia
id→ms 2,079 211 14.43% (83.89%)
ms→id 2,084 256 7.58% (69.53%)

Table 3: Word error rate over the Malaysian Wikipedia test data. Number in parentheses gives percentage
of unknown words which were free rides.

We consider the WER of our system, as depicted in Table 3 is quite acceptable for postediting.
In our system, unknown words are left unprocessed. Nonetheless, many of these unknown
words are free rides12, which will not affect the final quality of the translation.

As a direction for future improvement, we did an error analysis by reviewing the translation
outputs from our system. Most of the translation errors were due to the mistakes and gaps in
our analyser. Specifically, many of the stems do not have the complete set of its derived forms.
As a result, it cannot provide analysis for a unknown derived wordform even if the stem already
exists in the analyser. Moreover, the analyser cannot handle clitics attached to unknown words
(e.g. possessive enclitic -nya). These errors can be fixed by a more thorough revision of the
morphological analyser. Lastly, the system is often not capable of choosing the most suitable
translation given a particular context. A lexical selection module can be written to alleviate this
problem.

Dir. System WER

id→ms Apertium 14.43%
Google 13.90%

ms→id Apertium 7.58%
Google 4.07%

Table 4: Accuracy comparison between the two systems.

10https://apertium.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/apertium/trunk/apertium-eval-translator/
11BLEU is not used in our evaluation because we are using a reference translation which is a postedition of the

machine-translated text, and the normal use of BLEU is for evaluating against a non-postedited reference. If we used
BLEU it would give artifically high scores.

12That is, the word is unknown to the system, but the same in Indonesian and Malaysian. Typical free-rides include
names and special terminology.

197



5.3 Comparative

We compared our system to another MT system for Indonesian to Malaysian and Malaysian
to Indonesian, Google Translate, a web-based statistical machine translation system. The
evaluation was performed the same way: the test data was translated with Google Translate,
then postedited.

We notice from Table 4 that Google outperforms the Apertium system in both translation
directions. For Malaysian to Indonesian, the error rate is reduced by almost a half. It is also
interesting that both systems perform almost as worse for Indonesian to Malaysian, perhaps due
to the fact that translating from Indonesian to Malaysian is more ambiguous than translating to
Indonesian. Google seems to have a greater vocabulary coverage than Apertium, as exemplified
in the first example in Table 5. The Malaysian word mencuba (‘try’) is unknown to the Apertium
system (denoted by the asterisk), whereas it is correctly translated by Google as mencoba.

Moreover, in many cases, Google seems to be performing better in picking the most natural
translations. In the second example, it translates the noun phrase kuasa ketenteraan (‘military
power’) to kekuatan militer, which sounds much more natural than kuasa ketentaraan.

Source Para saintis mencuba menjawab pertanyaan tersebut.
Apertium Para ilmuwan *mencuba menjawab pertanyaan tersebut.
Google Para ilmuwan mencuba menjawab pertanyaan tersebut.
Reference Para ilmuwan mencoba menjawab pertanyaan tersebut.

‘Scientists are trying to answer that question.’

Source Sebuah kuasa ketenteraan yang disegani.
Apertium Sebuah kuasa ketentaraan yang disegani.
Google Sebuah kekuatan militer yang disegani.
Reference Sebuah kekuatan militer yang disegani.

‘A respectable military power.’

Table 5: Example translations from Malaysian to Indonesian.

Conclusion and future work

We have presented a bidirectional rule-based machine translation system between Indonesian
and Malaysian, two closely-related Malay languages. The system is available as free/open-source
software under the GNU GPL and the whole system may be downloaded from SVN.13

The resulting system provides comparable results with a leading corpus-based machine transla-
tion system, and we are looking forward to improving the translation quality of our system in
the future. The long-term plan is to integrate the data created to make transfer systems with
more distantly related languages such as Indonesian-English and Malaysian-English.

Acknowledgments

Development of the system was funded as part of the Google Summer of Code14, an annual
program sponsored by Google, Inc. to promote students’ participation in open-source software
projects.

13https://apertium.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/apertium/trunk/apertium-id-ms
14http://code.google.com/soc/

198



References

Baldwin, T. (2006). Open source corpus analysis tools for Malay. In In Proc. of the 5th
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation.

Caseli, H. M., Nunes, M. D., and Forcada, M. L. (2006). Automatic induction of bilingual
resources from aligned parallel corpora: application to shallow-transfer machine translation.
Machine Translation, 20(4):227–245.

Forcada, M. L., Ginestí-Rosell, M., Nordfalk, J., O’Regan, J., Ortiz-Rojas, S., Pérez-Ortiz, J. A.,
Sánchez-Martínez, F., Ramírez-Sánchez, G., and Tyers, F. M. (2011). Apertium: a free/open-
source platform for rule-based machine translation. Machine Translation, 25(2):127–144.

Karlsson, F. (1990). Constraint grammar as a framework for parsing running text. In Proceedings
of the 13th Conference on Computational Linguistics - Volume 3, COLING ’90, pages 168–173.

Larasati, S. and Kubon, V. (2010). A study of Indonesian-to-Malaysian MT system. In
Proceedings of the 4th International MALINDO Workshop, Depok, pages 16–22.

Larasati, S., Kuboň, V., and Zeman, D. (2011). Indonesian Morphology Tool (MorphInd):
Towards an Indonesian Corpus. Systems and Frameworks for Computational Morphology, pages
119–129.

Levenshtein, V. I. (1966). Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals.
Soviet Physics—Doklady 10, 707–710. Translated from Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR, pages
845–848.

Lewis, M. P. e. (2009). Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Sixteenth edition. Dallas, Tex.: SIL
International.

Och, F. J. and Ney, H. (2003). A systematic comparison of various statistical alignment models.
Comput. Linguist., 29(1):19–51.

Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J. (2002). BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL ’02, pages 311–318.

Toral, A., Ginestí, M., and Tyers, F. M. (2011). An Italian to Catalan RBMT system reusing
data from existing language pairs. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Free/Open-Source
Rule-Based Machine Translation.

Tyers, F. M. and Nordfalk, J. (2009). Shallow-transfer rule-based machine translation for
Swedish to Danish. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Free/Open-Source Rule-Based
Machine Translation.

199




