



















































Clause Boundary Identification for Malayalam Using CRF


Proceedings of the Workshop on Machine Translation and Parsing in Indian Languages (MTPIL-2012), pages 83–92,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Clause Boundary Identification for Malayalam Using CRF
Lakshmi, S.,Vijay Sundar Ram,R and  Sobha, Lalitha Devi 

AU-KBC RESEARCH CENTRE,MIT Campus of Anna University, Chrompet, Chennai, India
lakssreedhar@gmail.com,sundar@au-kbc.org,sobha@au-kbc.org

ABSTRACT

This paper presents a clause boundary identification system for Malayalam sentences using the 
machine learning approach CRF (Conditional Random Field).Malayalam Language is 
considered as a 'Left branching language' where verbs are seen at the end of the sentence. Clause 
boundary identification plays a vital role in many NLP applications and for Malayalam language, 
the clause boundary identification is not yet explored. The clause boundaries are identified here 
using grammatical features.

KEYWORDS : Malayalam Language, CRF, Clause boundaries, Left branching Language 

83



1 Introduction

The goal of clause identification is to divide sentences into clauses which typically contain a 
subject and a predicate. In NLP clause identification is considered as a shallow semantic parsing 
technique which can be useful in applications like Machine Translation, parallel corpora 
alignment, Information Extraction and speech applications. The clause boundary identification is 
done with the help of CRF  (Conditional Random Fields) which is a statistical machine learning 
technique. The clauses can be identified as Main clauses and subordinate clauses. There are 8 
types of subordinate clauses namely: Complementizer, Relative Participle, Relative, Temporal, 
Manner, Causality, Condition and Nominal. First three types of clauses are more syntactic while 
remaining five clauses are more semantic in nature. In our approach grammatical features are 
taken into consideration and Noun chunks are being identified instead of Nouns to study the 
sentence structure.Malayalam belongs to the category of relatively free order, agglutinative and 
morphologically rich languages. Hence the part-of speech-tagging provides more information. 
For the clause boundary identification we take into account the suffixes attached to the verb. In 
Malayalam language, the verbs are usually seen at the end of the sentence and the noun phrases 
take a position to the left of the verb. The subject in a sentence has possessive, nominative or 
dative marking.

Numerous techniques have been in use to identify the clause boundaries for different languages. 
Early experiments in the clause identification such as Eva Ejerhed’s basic clause identification 
system(Ejerhed, 1988) for text to speech system, Papageorgiou’s rule-based clause boundary 
system a preprocessing tool for bilingual alignment parallel text(Papageorgiou, 1997) . Leffa’s 
rule-based system reduces clauses to noun, adjective or adverb, which was used in 
English/Portuguese machine translation system(Leffa, 1998).There were hybrid clause boundary 
identifying systems which uses memory based learning and post process it using rule-based 
system by Orasan(Orasan, 2000). The clause identification was the shared task in CoNLL-
2001(Tjong et al., 2001).Carreras did a partial parsing of sentence, which makes a global 
inference on a local classifier and used a dynamic programming for choosing the best 
decomposition of sentence to clauses(Carreras et al., 2002). Carreras did a phrase recognition 
using perceptrons and an online learning algorithm(Carreras et al., 2003).Georgiana did a 
multilingual clause splitting experiment, where he used a machine learning technique and 
indicators of co-ordination and subordination with verb information( Puscasu , 2004).

Here we have used conditional random fields (CRF) for clause boundary detection. CRF is an 
undirected graphical model, where the conditional probability of the output are maximized for a 
given input sequences(McCallum et al., 2003).This is proved successful for most of the sequence 
labeling tasks, such as shallow parsing(Sha , 2003),named entity recognition task(McCallum et 
al., 2003). CRF was used for clause splitting task by Vinh Van Nguyen, where they have also 
used linguistic information and a bottom-up dynamic algorithm for decoding to split a sentence 
into clauses(Nguyen et al., 2007 ). In another experiment the clause identification was done using 
a hybrid method, where CRF and linguistic rules were used and cascaded by an error 
analyzer(Vijay et al., 2008). In Indian languages, some are Statistical approaches using machine 
learning techniques for Tamil language(Vijay  et  al., 2009) which was 75% accurate. 

Henceforth presented details are divided into the following sections. An introduction with related 
works was presented in section 1, section 2 describes our approach, where we give our method 
and the rules we have used. Section 3  is about the different  evaluation  and results obtained. 

84



Section 4 comprises of Error Analysis and finally the conclusion and reference section is 
presented.

2 Our Approach

The clause identifier for Malayalam is built using CRF a machine learning technique. The CRF 
technique we have used grammatical rules as one of the major feature. The preprocessing of the 
sentences is done for part-of speech(pos) and chunking information and morphological 
information. The clause identifier has to learn the sentence structures. So here we have replaced 
the noun phrases in the sentence with a token np after preprocessing the sentence, retaining the 
morphological information of the head noun. In this Malayalam clause identifier-relative 
participle clause (RP), conditional clause (COND) and main clause (MCL) are identified. 

2.1 Conditional  Random Fields  (CRF) 
CRF  has two phases for clause boundary identification: 

1.Learning: Given a sample set X containing features {X1,........,XN} along with the set of values for 
hidden labels Y i.e. clause boundaries {Y1,...........,YN}, learn the best possible potential functions. 
2.Inference: For a given word there is some new observable x, find the most likely clause 
boundary y* 

for x, i.e. compute (exactly or approximately): 

y*=argmaxyP(y|x)                                            (1) 

For this, an undirected and acyclic graph formed which contains the set of nodes 

{Xi } U Y(V ε X), adopts the properties by Markov, is called conditional random fields (CRF). 
Clause Boundary Detection is a shallow parsing technique so, CRF is used for this. Now Let o = 
(o1,...,oT )be some observed input data sequence, such as a sequence of words in a text document, 
(the values on T input nodes of the graphical model). Let S be a set of FSM states, each of which 
is associated with a label, l (such as PERSON). Let s =(s1...sT) be some sequence of states, (the 
values on T output nodes).

Linear-chain CRF thus define the conditional probability of a state sequence given as follows

 

Where Z0 a normalization factor over all state sequences, fk (st-1,st,,o,t) −  is an arbitrary feature 
function over its arguments, and λk (ranging from −∞to∞) is a learned weight for each feature 
function. A feature function may, for example, be defined to have value 0 in most cases, and 
have value 1 if and only if st-1 is state #1 (which may have label OTHER), and st is state #2 
(which may have START or END label),and the observation at position t in o is a relative 
pronoun or a conditional marker. Higher λ weights make their corresponding FSM transitions 
more likely, so the weight λk in the above example should be positive since the word appearing is 
any clause marker (such as conditional or relative clause marker) and it is likely to be the starting 
of a clause boundary.CRF++ available in open source (Kudo  ,2005) is used in our approach.

85



2.2 Features
The vital part in any machine learning technique is to identify a proper feature set. We have used 
two types of features word level and structural level. At the word level we have considered the

• lexical word,

• its part-of-speech and

• chunk.

Words with their appropriate morphological information was considered. In the clause type 
identification task words play a crucial part as word carries the information of the clause type. 
Part-of-speech information which provides the context and definition of the words in a sentence 
is also added as a column.In Malayalam, due to rich inflection, the part-of-speech tagging of the 
words contribute more information than in English. Chunking can be considered as the first step 
towards full parsing. Here we have taken a window of size five. The structural level features are 
the grammatical rules. The first column of the input represents the word, the second column is 
the part-of- speech tag and the next column is based on the morph analysis. The last column is 
based on the grammatical rules. It is described in the section below.

2.3 Rules for identifying  clauses 

2.3.1 Relative  Participle Clauses

The relative participle clause is identified by the relative participle verb in a sentence. The 
relative participle (RP) verb will occur in three tense and 'a' is the relative participle suffix  in 
Malayalam. 

Example 1:

innale  vanna  penkutti ente anujathi anu

yesterday come-past-RP girl my sister  copula-present

(The girl who came yesterday is my sister.)

Here the RP embedded clause is “innale vanna  penkutti”, ”the girl who came yesterday”.The RP 
is always followed by the NP that it modifies. The position of the embedded clause is not an 
issue.

Beginning of the RP clause is the first subject NP preceding the word containing the RP but 
excludes the subject NP.

The RP clause boundary is determined as per the 3 rules given below.

Rule 1. RP verb can be followed by a noun phrase (NP) and a postposition  (PSP). The noun 
phrase will be inflected with case markers depending on the PSP that follows.

Example 2:

avan  thottathil     ulla pookkaLe    patti   samsarichu.

he garden-LOC     be-RP flower-PL-ACC     about   talk-past

(He talked about the flowers in the garden.)

86



Here the RP verb is ' ulla' . It is followed by ‘pookkaLe’ (NP) and 'patti' (PSP).

Rule 2.If the current token is NP and previous one is an RP verb and if the succeeding token is 
not PSP then current NP token is marked as clause end.

Example 3:

Aa        valiya      veedu     enikku        venam.

That     big-RP     house      I-DAT     want.

(I want that big house.)

Rule 3. The RP clause can also have RP verb followed by PSP without NP in between.

Example 4:

 Avide poya shesham ayaL  ivide  vannu.

There go-past+RP after she here come-PAST

(He came here after he went there.) 

The grammatical rules will work as follows

If the current token is np,the previous is RP verb and next word is not a PSP then the current np 
is marked as probable RP clause end.

-1 VM+RP=1

0 NP=1  RP clause end

1 PSP=0

If the current token is a PSP,the previous is a RP verb then current PSP is the probable RP clause 
end.

-1 VM+RP=1

0  PSP=1 RP clause end

If the current token is a Noun followed by a PSP and the previous is a RP verb then current PSP 
is the probable RP clause end.

-1 VM+RP=1

 0 NP=0

1 PSP=1 RP clause end

2.3.2 Conditional  Clauses

There are of two types of conditional clauses:  

(1) purely conditional and

(2) hypothetically conditional. 

The purely conditional clause will take the morpheme "-a:l" as the suffix of the verb. 

Example 5:

87



nee    nallavannam     padicha:l               tiirchayayum     passakum

you     well                  study-COND           surely              pass-FUT            

(If you study well,you will surely pass.)

Here the embedded clause is “nee nallavannam padicha:l”

The  hypothetical one will take “enkil” as clause conditional particle.

Example 6:

nii     atu    cheyyumenkil   njyan     varaam

you     it      do-FUT-COND    I        come-FUT-MOD 

(If you will do it,I will come.)  

Beginning of the clause is the first subject NP preceding the VP containing the conditional 
marker. 

The conditional clause ending is found with the rule given below.

If the current verb has a conditional marking suffix, then the current verb is marked for probable 
conditional clause end.

0 VM+CON=1 CON clause end 

Once the innermost clause start is identified the rules are being implemented  and then it is 
repeated until all the different clauses gets their boundaries. We have marked the RP clause start 
with the value 3 and clause end with -3.For Conditional it is 2 and -2 respectively.

An Example for RP clause handling can be considered.

 Example 7:

 Ushnakaattu veeshunna        karnatakayilninn      avan       wayanattil          ethi

 Hotwind    blow-PRES-RP      karnataka-LOC-PSP   he    wayanad-LOC   reach-PAST

 (From hotwind blowing karnataka, he reached wayanad.)  

We do the preprocessing for the part-of-speech and chunking information, and analyze the words 
with morphanalyser .On the preprocessed text the noun phrase is replaced with np and the head 
noun morphological information is maintained. The other outputs are altered for better 
representation in the input to the clause identifier engine. 

The altered input is shown below. 

np np n_nom  

vISunna   VM_RP    V_RP

karZNAtakayilZninnu PSP I-NP

np np n_nom 

np np n_nom

ethi VM_VGF VM_VGF

. SYM I-VGF

88



To the altered input the column representing the rules described above is added. The numbers in 
the column represent the probable clause start and end marking. Here 3 stands for probable 
relative participle clause start and -3 to for probable RP clause end. Similarly 6 is for MCL start 
and -6 is for MCL end. 

np np n_nom  3

vISunna   VM_RP    V_RP

karZNAtakayilZninnu PSP I-NP  -3

np np n_nom  6

np np n_nom

ethi VM_VGF VM_VGF -6

. SYM I-VGF

Same procedure can be followed for Conditional clauses also.

Example 8:

Melle natannu kayariya:l ksheenam ariyilla

(If (you) walk slowly (you) will not feel tired.)

Here 2 stands for probable relative participle clause start and -2 to for probable RP clause end. 
Similarly 6 is for MCL start and -6 is for MCL end.

np np n_nom 2 {CON}          {CON}

np np n_nom o o o

kayarYiyAlZ VM_COND V_COND -2 {/CON} {/CON}

np np n_nom 6 {MCL} {MCL}

np np n_nom -6 {MCL} {MCL}

. SYM I-NP o o o

3 EVALUATION AND RESULTS

We have taken 3638 sentences from tourism corpus and training to testing ratio was about 80% 
to 20%.We have tagged the sentences for Relative Participle Clauses, Conditional and Main 
clauses. We trained 2837 sentences and tested the system with 801 sentences.We have used the 
tags {RP} and {/RP} to mark the RP clause start and end and similarly {CON},{/CON} for 
Conditional clause start and end and {MCL},{/MCL} for Main clause start and end 
respectively.The sentences was first preprocessed for POS and chunking information and the 
words were morphological analyzed. The data is present in column format, with the words 
forming the first column, pos tags forming the second column, chunking information forming the 
third column, Boolean entries which obey the linguistic rules forms the fourth column and finally 
the fifth column is the clause boundary information. The training data of CoNLL had clause 
information on the fourth column, since we had to add the linguistic feature to the CRF module 
we used the fourth column for Boolean entries. The Evaluation of the system is given in Table1.

89



Clauses Actual Correct Tagged Recall Precision

RP(Open)  737  686 713 93.08 96.21

RP(Close) 578 380 483 65.74 78.67

CON(Open) 69 56 56 81.16 100

CON(Close) 76 67 68 88.16 98.53

MCL(Open) 287 209 314 72.82 66.56

MCL(Close) 514 478 543 92.99 88.03

Table1: Evaluation of the system.

4 ERROR ANALYSIS

For analysis of erroneous clause boundary marking done by the CRF, the training data was given 
for testing to the CRF system. From the results obtained it was noted that the RP clause end was 
not tagged properly when proper nouns with co-ordination marker was encountered.

Example 9:

avide     nilkkunna           balanum            krishnanum        aanu   ente  koottukar

there stand-RP          Balan  and            Krishnan   is      my   friends

(Balan and krishnan standing there are my friends.)

Also cases when 2 RP verbs where coming in succession.

Example 10:

avide     kaanunna     karangunna  silpam.

There    see-RP              rotate-RP        statue

(The rotating statue seen there.)

Conclusion
The system thus developed is the first automatic clause identifier in Malayalam .From the results 
it was shown that Conditional tags were more accurate. There was more number of RP tags in the 
starting of many sentences and it was observed that the correctness of RP opening tags was more 
than closing tags.RP opening tags had a precision of 96.21% and RP close tags had 78.67% 
precision. Reverse was the case for Conditional and MCL tags. Here we have tried using 
grammatical rules as one of the feature in Conditional Random Fields.

90



References
Carreras, X., Marquez L.(2003).Phrase recognition by filtering and ranking with per-ceptrons. 
Proceedings of RANLP-2003, Borovets, Bulgaria. pages 205– 216.

Carreras, X., Marquez L., Punyakanok V., and Roth D.(2002).Learning and inference for clause 
identification. Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Machine Learning, Finland, 
pages  35–47

Ejerhed,E.(1988).Finding clauses in unrestricted text by finitary and stochastic methods. 
Proceedings of the2nd conference on applied natural language processing, Austin, Texas, pages 
219 – 227.

Ghosh ,A. , Das,A., Bandyopadhyay,S.(2010).Clause Identification and Classification in 
Bengali. Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on South and Southeast Asian Natural Language 
Processing (WSSANLP), 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING), Beijing, pages 17-25. 

Harris, V.P. (1997).Clause Recognition in the Framework of Alignment, Mitkov, R., Nicolov, 
N.  (Eds.),Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing. John Benjamins Publishing 
Company, Amsterdam/Philadelphia, pages  417-425.   

Kudo,T.( 2005). CRF++, an open source toolkit for CRF, http://crfpp.sourceforge.net.

Lafferty, J.D., McCallum, A., and Pereira, F.C.N.(2003).Conditional Random Fields: 
Probabilistic Models For Segmenting and Labeling Sequence Data.Proceedings of the 
Eighteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, pages  282-289. 

McCallum,A. and Li,W.(2003).Early results for  named entity recognition with conditional 
random fields, feature induction and web enhanced lexicons. Proceedings of CoNLL-2003, 
Edmonton, Canada, pages 188–191.

Molina, A., Pla, F.(2002).Shallow Parsing Using Specialized HMMs. Journal of Ma-chine 
Learning Research 2, pages 595–613.

Nguyen, V., et. al.(2007). Using Conditional Random Fields for Clause Splitting. Proceedings 
of the Pacific Association for Computational Linguistics, University of Melbourne, Australia .

Orasan,C.(2000). A hybrid method for clause splitting. Proceedings of ACIDCA 2000 Corpora 
Processing, Monastir, Tunisia, pages 129 – 134.

Papageorgiou,H.V.(1997).Clause recognition in the framework of alignment.Proceedings of 
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing, John Benjamins,Publishing Company, 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia, pages  417-425.

Parveen, D. , Ansari,A. and Sanyal,R.(2011).Clause Boundary Identification using Clause 
Markers and Classifier in Urdu Language.12th International Conference on Intelligent Text 
Processing and Computational Linguistics CICLing .

Puscasu,G.(2004).A Multilingual Method for Clause Splitting. Proceedings of the 7th Annual 
Colloquium for the UK Special Interest Group for Computational Linguistics, Birmingham, 
UK.

91



Sha,F. and Pereira,F.(2003).Shallow parsing with conditional random fields.Proceedings of 
HLT- NAACL03,pages  213–220 .

Sobha,L. and Patnaik,B.N.(2002).Vasisth: An anaphora resolution system for Malayalam and 
Hindi. Symposium on Translation Support Systems. 

Tjong,E. ,Sang ,K. and Dejean ,H.(2001).Introduction to the CoNLL-2001 shared task: clause 
identification, Proceedings of the 2001 workshop on Computational Natural Language Learning 
,Toulouse,France.

Vijay Sundar Ram R., Bakiyavathi T. and Sobha L. (2009). Tamil Clause Identifier. PIMT 
Journal of Research, Patiala, Vol.2. No.1, pages 42-46. 

Vijay Sundar Ram R. and Sobha Lalitha Devi.(2008). Clause Boundary Identification Using 
Conditional  Random Fields. In Computational Linguistics and   Intelligent Text Processing, 
Springer LNCS Vol.  4919/2008,pages  140-150 .

Vilson J. Leffa(1998). Clause processing in complex sentences. Proceedings of the First 
International Conference on Language Resource & Evaluation,pages 937 – 943 .

92


