










































Social Network Analysis of Alice in Wonderland


Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 88–96,
Montréal, Canada, June 8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Social Network Analysis of Alice in Wonderland

Apoorv Agarwal1* Augusto Corvalan1** Jacob Jensen1† Owen Rambow2‡

1 Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
2 Center for Computational Learning Systems, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA

* apoorv@cs.columbia.edu ** ac3096@columbia.edu
†jej2120@columbia.edu ‡rambow@ccls.columbia.edu

Abstract

We present a network analysis of a literary
text, Alice in Wonderland. We build novel
types of networks in which links between
characters are different types of social events.
We show that analyzing networks based on
these social events gives us insight into the
roles of characters in the story. Also, static
network analysis has limitations which be-
come apparent from our analysis. We propose
the use of dynamic network analysis to over-
come these limitations.

1 Introduction

In recent years, the wide availability of digitized lit-
erary works has given rise to a computational ap-
proach to analyzing these texts. This approach has
been used, sometimes in conjunction with more tra-
ditional literary analysis techniques, to better grasp
the intricacies of several literary works. As the
field matured, new approaches and ideas gave rise
to the use of techniques, like social networks, usu-
ally reserved for quantitive fields in order to gain
new insights into the works. Recently, Elson et al.
(2010) extracted networks from a corpus of 19th
century texts in order to debunk long standing hy-
potheses from comparative literature (Elson et al.,
2010). Moretti (2011) examined a social event net-
work constructed from Hamlet in order to delve
deeper into its infamously dense character network.

While this approach is clearly powerful, it is not
without drawbacks. As Moretti (2011) points out,
undirected and unweighted networks are blunt in-
struments and limited in their use. While, as dis-
cussed below, some researchers have sought to rec-

tify these limitations, few have done so with a strict
and specific rubric for categorizing interactions.

In this paper, we annotate Lewis Carroll’s Alice in
Wonderland using a well-defined annotation scheme
which we have previously developed on newswire
text Agarwal et al. (2010). It is well suited to deal
with the aforementioned limitations. We show that
using different types of networks can be useful by al-
lowing us to provide a model for determining point-
of-view. We also show that social networks allow
characters to be categorized into roles based on how
they function in the text, but that this approach is
limited when using static social networks. We then
build and visualize dynamic networks and show that
static networks can distort the importance of char-
acters. By using dynamic networks, we can build a
fuller picture of how each character works in a liter-
ary text.

Our paper uses an annotation scheme that is well-
defined and has been used in previous computational
models that extract social events from news articles
(Agarwal and Rambow, 2010). This computational
model may be adapted to extract these events from
literary texts. However, the focus of this paper is
not to adapt the previously proposed computational
model to a new domain or genre, but to first demon-
strate the usefulness of this annotation scheme for
the analysis of literary texts, and the social networks
derived from it. All results reported in this paper
are based on hand annotation of the text. Further-
more, we are investigating a single text, so that we
do cannot draw conclusions about the usefulness of
our methods for validating theories of literature.

We summarize the contributions of this paper:

• We manually extract a social network from Al-

88



ice in Wonderland based on the definition of so-
cial events as proposed by us in (Agarwal et al.,
2010).

• We use static network analysis (in a bottom-up
approach) for creating character sketches. We
show that exploiting the distinction between
different types of social events (interaction and
observation), we are able to gain insights into
the roles characters play in this novel.

• We point certain limitations of the static net-
work analysis and propose the use of dynamic
network analysis for literary texts.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we present previous work. In Section 3,
we present a brief overview of social events. In Sec-
tion 4, we discuss the data and annotation scheme.
In Section 6, we present results on static network
analysis, and results on dynamic network analysis in
Section 7. We conclude and present future direction
of research in Section 8.

2 Literature Review

The power of network analysis in the field of liter-
ature is evidenced by the rapid rise of work and in-
terest in the field in recent years. Network extrac-
tion and analysis has been performed on subjects
as varied as the Marvel universe (Alberich et al.,
2002), Les Misérables (Newman and Girvan, 2004),
and ancient Greek tragedies (Rydberg-Cox, 2011).
Elson et al. (2010) has looked at debunking com-
parative literature theories by examining networks
for sixty 19th-century novels. Elson et al. (2010)
used natural language processing techniques to at-
tribute quoted speech to characters in the novels,
and then used this data to create networks that al-
lowed the researchers to make novel observations
about the correlation between setting and the num-
ber of characters. Because the study was limited to
quoted speech, however, a large chunk of interac-
tions (such as non-quoted dialog, observations and
thoughts) were missing from the network and sub-
sequent analysis. Our work specifically addresses
these missed cases, and in that sense our technique
for creating social networks is complementary to
that of Elson et al. (2010).

Several other researchers have found network the-
ory to be useful in the study of literature. In his study
of Dicken‘s Bleak House, Sack refines the granu-
larity of interaction types by breaking down links
by the purpose of the interaction, differentiating be-
tween conversations meant, for example, for legal
investigation vs. philanthropy. Sack (2006) also ex-
pands on the definition of ties, including face-to-face
interaction as well as what he terms “weak ties”,
which includes interactions like being involved in
the same legal suit. His links are a hybrid of quanti-
tative and qualitative. Characters are linked by inter-
action, but how these interactions are then classified
are subjective according to Sack (2006). Thus, they
do not follow a strictly defined rubric. Celikyilmaz
et al. (2010) have also worked along a similar track,
analyzing networks built based on topical similarity
in actor speech.

A theorist who has grappled with the limitations
of network analysis is Franco Moretti. In Network
Theory Plot Analysis, Moretti (2011) takes a sim-
ilar path as Elson et al. (2010), where the act of
speech signifies interaction. Moretti (2011) points
out that his close reading of the network extracted
from Hamlet is limited by several factors. First,
edges are unweighted, giving equal importance to
interactions that are a few words and long, more
involved conversations. Second, edges have no di-
rection, which eliminates who initiated each inter-
action. Moretti (2011) concludes that more rigorous
network analysis tools are needed in order to make
further headway in the field. In this paper we ex-
tract two types networks from Alice in Wonderland,
one directed and the other undirected, both of which
are weighted. We show that indeed discriminating
between uni-directional and bi-directional linkages
gives us insight into the character profiles and their
role in the novel.

Overall, the previous work has primarily focused
on turning time into space, flattening out the action
in order to bring to light something that was ob-
fuscated previously. However, time and its passage
plays a crucial role in literature. Literature is, after
all, built in layers, with successive scenes stacking
up on each other. Texts reveal information not all
at once, like a network, but in spurts. This is not
merely an unfortunate side-effect of the medium, but
a central element that is manipulated by authors and

89



is central in extracting “meaning” (Perry, 1979).
However, the static social network (SSN) medium

itself is not suited to clearly reveal these changes.
Dynamic social networks (DSN), on the other hand,
can go beyond the summary statistics of SSN. More-
over, because of their flattening effect, SSNs can
lead to inaccurate or inexact information (Berger-
Wolf et al., 2006). The DSN approach has many ap-
plications, from analyzing how terrorist cells evolve
over time (Carley, 2003), to mapping the interac-
tions in the writing community (Perry-Smith and
Shalley, 2003). One of the obstacles to using DSNs
is that they are not as straight-forward to visualize as
SSNs. In this paper, we use a visualization outlined
in Moody et al. (2005). While the visualization may
not be novel, to the best of our knowledge, DSNs
have not yet been used to observe networks extracted
from literary texts. Our goal is to push beyond the
limitations of static network analysis of literature by
adding the crucial element it lacks: dynamism.

3 Social Events

A text may describe a social network in two ways:
explicitly, by stating the type of relationship between
two individuals (e.g. Mary is John’s wife), or implic-
itly, by describing an event whose repeated instanti-
ation may lead to a stronger social relationship (e.g.
John talked to Mary). These latter types of events
are called social events (Agarwal et al., 2010). Agar-
wal et al. (2010) defined two broad types of social
events: interaction (INR), in which both parties are
aware of each other and of the social event, e.g.,
a conversation, and observation (OBS), in which
only one party is aware of the other and of the inter-
action, e.g., thinking of or talking about someone.
An important aspect of annotating social events is
taking into consideration the intention of the author:
does the author want us to notice an event between
characters or is he/she simply describing a setting of
a plot? Since our definition of social events is based
on cognitive states of characters, as described by the
author, we do not annotate a social event in Exam-
ple (2) below since there is no evidence that either
Alice or the Rabbit are aware of each other. How-
ever, in Example (1), there is clear evidence that Al-
ice notices the Rabbit but there is no evidence that
the Rabbit notices Alice as well. Therefore, there

in only a one-directional social event between these
entities called the observation (OBS) event.

1. (1) Then [Alice] {saw} the [White Rabbit] run
by her. OBS

2. (2) The [White Rabbit] ran by [Alice]. No
social event

Agarwal et al. (2010) have defined finer sub-types
of these two coarse types of events. These sub-types
include recording physical proximity of characters,
verbal and non-verbal interactions, recording if the
thought process of thinking about the other entity is
initiated by a previous event or by reading a mag-
azine or other social medium. Many of these sub-
types are irrelevant for this literary text simply be-
cause it does not describe use of technology. There
are no emails being sent (which would be a verbal
interaction which does not happen in close physical
proximity), no one is watching the other on televi-
sion etc. Therefore, for this paper, we only focus
on two broad social event types: interaction versus
observation. For details and examples of other sub-
categories please refer to (Agarwal et al., 2010).

4 Data

We annotate an abridged version of Alice in Wonder-
land from project Gutenberg.1 This version has ten
chapters, 270 paragraphs and 9611 words.

Agarwal et al. (2010) trained two annotators to
annotate social events in a well known news corpus –
Automated Content Extraction (ACE2005, (Walker,
2005)). Once trained, we used one of the annotators
to annotate the same events in Alice in Wonderland.
Unlike the ACE corpus, we did not have previous
gold annotations for entity mentions or mention res-
olution. However, since we are primarily interested
only in social events, we instructed the annotator to
all and only record entity mentions that participate
in a social event.

Since the text is fairly short, the authors of this pa-
per checked the quality of annotations during the an-
notation process. After the annotation process was
complete, one of the authors went over the annota-
tions as an adjudicator. He did not propose deletion
of any annotation. However, he proposed adding a

1http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/19551

90



couple of annotations for chapter 3 for the mouse
drying ceremony. In this scene, the mouse instructs
a group of birds to dry themselves. Lewis Carroll
refers to groups of birds using them, they. Our an-
notation manual does not handle such group forma-
tions. Do we introduce a part-of relation and asso-
ciate each bird in the group with the group mention
(marking the group mention as a separate entity) or
not? If yes, and if the group loses one entity (bird
in this case), do we mark another group entity and
associate the remaining birds with this new group
or not? In general, the problem of such groups is
hard and, to the best of our knowledge, not handled
in current entity recognition manuals. We postpone
handling the annotation of such groups for future
work.

Another point that the adjudicator raised, which
is out of scope for our current annotation manual, is
the way of handling cases where one entity interacts
with the other but mistakenly thinking that the entity
is someone else. For example, the Rabbit interacts
with Alice thinking that she is Mary Ann.

5 Social Network Analysis (SNA) metrics

In this section we briefly describe some of the
widely used SNA metrics that we use throughout the
paper for drawing conclusions about the social net-
work of Alice in Wonderland.

Notation: A network or graph, G = (N, E) is
given by a set of nodes in the network, N and a set
of edges, E. G can be represented as an adjacency
matrix A such that Ai,j = I((i, j) ∈ E). Following
are the metrics we use:
Degree centrality (Newman, 2010): A node’s degree
centrality is equal to the total number of its incoming
and outgoing edges. The number of connections is
often a good proxy for a node’s importance.
In-degree centrality (Newman, 2010): Degree cen-
trality, but summing only a node’s incoming edges.
In the undirected case, this reduces to Degree cen-
trality.
Out-Degree centrality (Newman, 2010): Degree
centrality, but summing only a node’s outgoing
edges. In the undirected case, this reduces to Degree
centrality.
Hubs (Kleinberg, 1999): A node’s hub score is its el-
ement in the largest eigenvector of AA′. This quan-

tifies how well it reliably points to high-scoring au-
thorities. Intuitively, a high Hub score means a good
directory of important nodes.
Authorities (Kleinberg, 1999): A node’s authority
score is its element in the largest Eigenvector of
A′A. This quantifies how much attention it gets
from high-scoring hubs. Intuitively, a high author-
ity score means a node of importance.

6 Static Network Analysis

In this section we present results for static network
analysis of the different types of networks extracted
from Alice in Wonderland. We use a bottom-up ap-
proach. We extract different types of social networks
and look at the profiles of characters based on these
networks and network analysis metrics. We observe
that the profiles of some characters are strikingly dif-
ferent. In this paper, we discuss three characters
whose profiles we found most interesting. We are
able to show that making a distinction between types
of networks based on directionality (who is observ-
ing whom) is indeed useful.

6.1 Data Visualization

We calculate hubs and authority weights of all the
characters in Alice in Wonderland. Since we are
using a bottom-up approach, there is a lot of data
to look at along different dimensions. We develop
a data visualization scheme that makes it easy for
us to compare profiles of characters along different
dimensions and to compare their profiles with each
other.

Following are the different dimensions that we
are interested in: 1) type of network, denoted by
set N = {OBS, INR}, 2) network analysis metric,
denoted by the set M = {Hub weight, Authority
weight}, 3) rank of a character based on type of net-
work and network analysis metric used, denoted by
the set R = {1, 2, 3, . . . 52}, and 4) absolute sepa-
ration of consecutively ranked characters for a par-
ticular network analysis metric, denoted by a con-
tinuous set S = [0, 1]. We need this last dimension
since one character may be ranked higher than an-
other, yet the separation between the absolute values
of the network analysis metric is fairly small. We
treat characters with such small separations in abso-
lute values as having the same rank. There are a to-

91



(a) Alice (b) White Rabbit (c) Mouse

Figure 1: Static networks analysis plots for three characters of Alice in Wonderland. X-axis denotes network types,
OBS, INR, Verbal and Non-verbal (inorder), Y-axis denotes network analysis metrics, Authority weight and Hub
weight. Color coding: Blue = rank 1, Green = rank 2, Red = rank 3 and all other ranks are color Black. Size of the dot
is directly proportional to separation from next lower rank, in terms of the network analysis value.

tal of four dimensions for each character, and a total
of 2 ∗ 2 ∗ 52 = 208 data points to look at (ignor-
ing the last dimension, absolute separation from the
consecutively ranked character). We represent these
four dimensions dimensions in a 2-D scatter plot as
follows:
X-axis: We plot the network types along the X-axis.
Y-axis: We plot the network analysis metric along
the Y-axis.
Color: Color of a dot denotes the rank of the char-
acter. We choose the following color coding. Blue
denotes rank one, Green denotes rank two, Red de-
notes rank three and all the remaining ranks are de-
noted by color Black. After rank three the absolute
value of the metrics plummet and are very close to
one another i.e. the separation between absolute val-
ues (of network analysis metrics) for consecutively
ranked characters is less than 0.001.
Size: The size of a dot denotes the fourth dimen-
sion i.e. the absolute separation in network analy-
sis metric of the character under consideration to the
next lower ranked character. For example, in Fig-
ure 1, rank of the Rabbit for network type OBS when
looking at the authority weight is 1 and the sepa-
ration from ranked 2 character, the Mouse, is high,
as denoted by the larger circle. Alternatively, when
looking at rank for Rabbit as a hub for network type
OBS, he is ranked 3, but there is very little separa-

tion between him and the next lowest ranked char-
acter.

This visualization enables us to compare a lot of
numbers conveniently, out of which arise three in-
teresting character profiles. These profiles yield in-
formation as to how each character functions in the
story.

6.2 Point-of-View

Alice: Alice has the highest centrality for every
network which, using the definition of protago-
nist given by Moretti (2011), makes her the pro-
tagonist of the text. However, from our analysis
we are also able to conclude that the story is be-
ing told from Alice’s perspective. Note that pro-
tagonist and perspective-holder are not always the
same. For example, The Great Gatsby is narrated
by Nick Carraway, but the protagonist is Jay Gatsby.
Even though to a reader of the text, the perspective
holder(s) might be easy to identify, to the best of our
knowledge there are no network analysis approaches
that can do this. We show that by treating interac-
tion and observation events in isolation, we are able
to conclude that Alice is the only perspective holder
in the story.

The perspective, or point of view, is the “mode (or
modes) established by an author by means of which
the reader is presented with the characters, dialog,

92



actions, setting and events” (Abrams, 1999). There
are four of these:

1. First-Person: The story is being told from the
perspective of a narrator that refers to itself as
“I” (or “we”).

2. Second-Person: Similar to first-person, but the
narrator refers to a character(s) in the story as
“you”. This form of narration is not common.

3. Third-Person Limited: Here, the narrator is
not a character in the story, but an out-
side entity that refers to other characters as
“he/she/it/they”. However, in limited, this en-
tity is limited to one focal character that the
narrator follows.

4. Third-Person Omniscient: A type of third-
person narration where the narrator has access
to the thoughts and actions of multiple charac-
ters.

For first, second and third-person limited, it is
expected that the character who is observing other
characters is the perspective holder. In order to iso-
late observations from mentions, the OBS network
should be built ignoring quoted speech. Computa-
tionally, we believe this would be a fairly easy task.
In terms of the terminology we introduce, the per-
spective holder will have observation links point-
ing to other characters but will not receive observa-
tion links. In a first-person narration, this character
will be an “I” or a name if the “I” is named. The
same case for second-person and “you.” In third-
person limited, while an entity is narrating the story,
there is one focal character whose perspective lim-
its and sometimes colors the narration. Thus, that
character will still be the one with observation links
emanating but not receiving. In third-person omni-
scient, since the narrator has access to every charac-
ter’s thoughts and actions, it is expected that many
characters would receive and emanate observation
links, while there would be an absence of charac-
ters who are emanating observation links but not re-
ceiving any. Therefore, the behavior of perspective
holding character is consistent across different types
of narrations – it is the character that emanates ob-
servation type of links but does not receive any. This
analysis extends to the case where there are multiple

character perspectives being used by seeing which
characters are sending but not receiving OBS links
and which are not. However, in the rare case where
an actor whose point-of-view is being received over-
hears himself being mentioned, this will be anno-
tated as having him receive a OBS link, thereby
throwing off the categorization. We ignore this rare
case for now.

Looking at hub and authority weights of Alice’s
OBS network (Figure 1(a)), it is apparent that all the
observation links are pointing outwards from Alice.
Alice is ranked one (color of the dot is blue) and
has a high separation from the second ranked en-
tity (size of the dot) for Hub-weight metric. A high
hub-weight rank means that most of the links are
emanating from this character. In comparison, Al-
ice’s authority-weight of OBS network is low. This
means that other characters are not talking about Al-
ice. Thus, the story must be being told from the
point-of-view of Alice.

It should be noted that for concluding who is the
perspective holder, it is important to only look at the
OBS network. The same conclusion cannot be made
if we look at the INR network. This supports our
effort to make a distinction between uni-directional
versus bi-directional links.

6.3 Character Sketch for Minor Characters
White Rabbit: The White Rabbit has a very different
profile when we look at its OBS network in com-
parison to Alice (figure 1(b)). Rabbit is ranked one
but as an authority, instead of as a hub, in the OBS
network. This means that most of the observation
links are leading to Rabbit i.e. Rabbit is being ob-
served or talked about by other characters. On the
other hand Rabbit is ranked third in INR (for which
hub and authority have the same value, since INR
is non-directional). Thus, Rabbit is frequently ob-
served and talked about, yet remains insular in his
interactions with other characters. This suggests that
Rabbit is playing some sort of unique role in the text,
where importance is being placed on his being ob-
served rather than his interactions.

Mouse: Mouse has yet another kind of profile. For
Mouse, both hub and authority weights are ranked
two and have a clear separation from the next ranked
character. We may observe that Mouse not only in-
teracts with many characters, but mentions and is

93



mentioned in abundance as well. This makes him
a very important and well-connected character in
the story, behind only Alice. Thus, we can suggest
that his role in the text is as a connector between
many characters. Mouse mentions many characters
to other characters, interacts with them and is in turn
mentioned by them.

6.4 Need for Dynamic Analysis

The need for a dynamic analysis model is made
clear in the case of Mouse. His huge importance
(overshadowing more traditionally popular charac-
ters such as the Queen and Mad Hatter) was an un-
expected result. However, this is not the whole story:
Mouse actually only appears in one scene in chap-
ters 2-3. In the scene, Alice has created a large lake
with her tears and meets Mouse, who introduces her
to many minor characters during a drying ceremony.
Outside of this ceremony, Mouse does not reappear
in the text. This one scene, while important, should
not be enough to overshadow characters such as the
Queen, who is responsible for Alice’s life or death
during the climax of the text. Thus, it is clear from
the formation of these character profiles that certain
information is being skewed by static network anal-
ysis. Most notably, the importance of time as it flows
in text is being lost. This observation is the impetus
for a new model that addresses these issues, as out-
lined in the following section.

7 Dynamic Network Analysis

Figure 2 presents plots for dynamic network analy-
sis of the different types of networks extracted from
Alice in Wonderland. We look at interaction (INR)
and observation (OBS) networks, as we did for the
previous section, except we do this for each of the
10 chapters independently of all other chapters. The
social network metrics we consider are: degree, in-
degree and out-degree centrality. Note that for an
undirected network (i.e. INR), all three network
analysis metrics are the same. In this section we
present insights about the three characters consid-
ered in the previous section (Alice, Mouse and Rab-
bit), that are lost in static network analysis.

From Figure 2, it is clear that Alice (dotted blue
line) is not the most central character in every chap-
ter, something that is lost in the static network. Con-

sider figure 2(a) i.e. degree centrality of INR net-
work. Alice ranks 2 in chapters 3, 4 (the drying
ceremony mentioned above) and 9. In chapter 9,
Alice is overshadowed by The Hatter and Rabbit.
This makes sense, as this chapter concerns Rabbit
and The Hatter being witnesses at Alice’s trial. By
breaking the story down chapter by chapter like this,
it becomes evident that although Alice is a very ac-
tive character throughout, there are moments, such
as the trial, where she is inactive, indeed powerless.
Yet as soon as the trial is over and Alice is back in
her own world in chapter 10, we see a spike as she
again takes an active role in her fate.

Figure 2(b) shows in-degree centrality for the
OBS network. This represents how often a character
is thought about or talked about by another charac-
ter. Notice that Alice is completely absent in this
network: no one thinks about or mentions her. This
is to be expected, as Alice is our guide through Won-
derland. No one mentions her because she is present
in every scene, thus any dialog about her will be-
come an interaction. Likewise, no one thinks of her
because the reader is not presented with other char-
acter’s thoughts, only Alice’s. This is consistent with
earlier observations made in the static network. In-
terestingly, Queen (solid black line) comes to dom-
inate the later chapters, as she becomes the focus of
Alice’s thoughts and mentions. Again, this spike in
Queen’s influence (Figure 2(b)) is lost in the static
network. But it is Queen who ultimately has the
power to decide the final punishment for Alice at the
end of the trial, so it is fitting that Alice’s thoughts
are fixated with her.

Figure 2(c) shows the out-degree centrality of the
OBS network, a starkly different picture. Here, we
see why Mouse (dashed red line) has such impor-
tance in the static network. Over the course of the
drying ceremony in chapter 2 and 3, he mentions a
very large number of characters. The dynamic net-
work allows us to see that while Mouse does play
a key role at one point of the story, his influence is
largely limited to that one section. Other characters
overshadow him for the rest of the text. Comparing
Mouse’s role in the in-degree centrality graph (fig-
ure 2(b)) vs. out-degree centrality (figure 2(c)), we
can see that much of Mouse’s influence comes not
from entities referring to him (in-degree), but rather
the number of entities he mentions. His importance

94



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Chapter Number

In
de

gr
ee

 C
en

tr
al

ity

Network TypeINR

 

 
Alice
Mouse
Queen
Rabbit
Hatter

(a) Degree centrality measure for INR
network

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Chapter Number

In
de

gr
ee

 C
en

tr
al

ity

Network TypeCOG

 

 
Alice
Mouse
Queen
Rabbit
Hatter

(b) In-degree centrality measure for OBS
network

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Chapter Number

O
ut

de
gr

ee
 C

en
tr

al
ity

Network TypeCOG

 

 
Alice
Mouse
Queen
Rabbit
Hatter

(c) Out-degree centrality measure for
OBS network

Figure 2: Dynamic network analysis plots for all 10 chapters of Alice in Wonderland. Each plot presents the change of
centrality values (Degree, In-degree, Out-degree) in different types of network (INR and OBS). X-axis has the chapter
numbers (one through ten) and Y-axis has the value of the relevant centrality measure.

in the piece, then, appears to be isolated to a key
chapter where he acts as a guide to introduce many
entities to the reader.

Likewise, tracing Rabbit (dash-dotted green line)
across in- and out-degree centrality of the OBS net-
work (figure 2(b) and 2(c)) gives a more fine-grained
view of how he works in the text. He is the most
mentioned in chapters 1 and 4, chapters that sand-
wich a big event, the drying ceremony of chapters
2 and 3. Likewise, he reemerges for another big
event, Alice’s trial (chapter 8, 9, 10). As previously
mentioned, Queen is the primary concern in Alice’s
mind during the length of the trial. However, Queen
is absent from the out-degree graph–she makes no
reference to off-screen characters. Rabbit, who has
a large spike in out-degree links during these chap-
ters, is the one who actually mentions a large number
of characters, while Queen focuses on interacting
with those already present. Thus, Rabbit is a charac-
ter that concerns Alice during large set-pieces, one
whose primary purpose comes in noticing and being
noticed.

We see that using a dynamic network can pro-
vide a more subtle view than using a static network.
Characters who are key in certain sections are no
longer overshadowed, like Queen, nor are their im-
portance exaggerated, like Mouse. It can also pro-
vide us with a better view of when and how a protag-
onist is most important throughout the text. Finally,
analyzing across data dimensions can provide a very
specific idea of how a character is functioning, as
seen with Rabbit.

8 Conclusion

In this paper we have motivated a computational ap-
proach to dynamic network analysis. We have hand-
annotated Lewis Carrol’s Alice in Wonderland using
a strict and well-defined annotation scheme and cre-
ated social event networks from these annotations.
From these, we have shown the usefulness of using
different types of networks to analyze different as-
pects of a text. We derive point-of-view from a so-
cial network. We also break down important charac-
ters into certain roles that describe how they function
in the text. Ultimately, we find that these roles are
limited by the static nature of social networks and
create dynamic networks. From these, we extract
a clearer picture of how these roles work, as well
as other characters overshadowed in the static net-
work. Having shown the value of such analysis, fu-
ture work will focus on adapting our computational
model (Agarwal and Rambow, 2010) for extracting
social events from a different domain (news articles)
to this new domain (literary text). We will then in-
vestigate a large number of literary texts and inves-
tigate how we can use our machinery to empirically
validate theories about literature.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank three anonymous reviewers
for very useful comments and suggestions, some of
which we intend to pursue in future work. This work
is supported by NSF grant IIS-0713548.

95



References

M.H. Abrams. 1999. A Glossary of Literary Terms. Har-
court Brace College Publisher.

Apoorv Agarwal and Owen Rambow. 2010. Automatic
detection and classification of social events. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing.

Apoorv Agarwal, Owen C. Rambow, and Rebecca J. Pas-
sonneau. 2010. Annotation scheme for social network
extraction from text. In Proceedings of the Fourth Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop.

R. Alberich, J. Miro-Julia, and F. Rossello. 2002. Marvel
universe looks almost like a real social network. eprint
arXiv:cond-mat/0202174, February.

Berger-Wolf, Tanya Y., and Jared Saia. 2006. A frame-
work for analysis of dynamic social networks. In
Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data min-
ing, KDD ’06, pages 523–528, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

K. M. Carley. 2003. Dynamic network analysis. In
R. Breiger, K. M. Carley, and P. Pattison, editors, Dy-
namic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Work-
shop Summary and Papers, pages 133–145, Washing-
ton, DC.

Asli Celikyilmaz, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Hua He, Greg
Kondrak, and Denilson Barbosa. 2010. The actor-
topic model for extracting social networks in literary
narrative. Proceedings of the NIPS 2010 Workshop –
Machine Learning for Social Computing.

David K. Elson, Nicholas Dames, and Kathleen R. McK-
eown. 2010. Extracting social networks from literary
fiction. Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
138–147.

Jon M. Kleinberg. 1999. Authoritative sources in a
hyperlinked environment. J. ACM, 46(5):604–632,
September.

James Moody, Daniel McFarland, and Skye Benderde-
Moll. 2005. Dynamic network visualization. Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology, 110(4):1206–1241, January.

Franco Moretti. 2011. Network theory, plot analysis.
New Left Review.

M. E. J. Newman and M. Girvan. 2004. Finding and
evaluating community structure in networks. Phys.
Rev. E, 69(2), February.

Mark Newman. 2010. Networks: An Introduction. Ox-
ford University Press, Inc., New York, NY, USA.

Jill E. Perry-Smith and Christina E. Shalley. 2003. The
social side of creativity: A static and dynamic social
network perspective. The Academy of Management
Review, 28(1):89–106.

Menakhem Perry. 1979. Literary dynamics: How the
order of a text creates its meanings [with an analy-
sis of faulkner’s ”a rose for emily”]. Poetics Today,
1(1/2):35–361, October.

Jeff Rydberg-Cox. 2011. Social networks and the lan-
guage of greek tragedy. Journal of the Chicago Collo-
quium on Digital Humanities and Computer Science,
1(3).

Alexander Graham Sack. 2006. Bleak house and weak
social networks. unpublished thesis, Columbia Uni-
versity.

Christopher R Walker, 2005. ACE (Automatic Content
Extraction) English Annotation Guidelines for Events
Version 5.4.3 2005.07.01. Linguistic Data Consor-
tium.

96


