










































Detection of Implicit Citations for Sentiment Detection


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 18–26,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Detection of Implicit Citations for Sentiment Detection

Awais Athar Simone Teufel
Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge

15 JJ Thomson Avenue, Cambridge CB3 0FD, UK
{awais.athar,simone.teufel}@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract

Sentiment analysis of citations in scientific pa-
pers is a new and interesting problem which
can open up many exciting new applications in
bibliometrics. Current research assumes that
using just the citation sentence is enough for
detecting sentiment. In this paper, we show
that this approach misses much of the exist-
ing sentiment. We present a new corpus in
which all mentions of a cited paper have been
annotated. We explore methods to automat-
ically identify these mentions and show that
the inclusion of implicit citations in citation
sentiment analysis improves the quality of the
overall sentiment assignment.

1 Introduction

The idea of using citations as a source of information
has been explored extensively in the field of biblio-
metrics, and more recently in the field of compu-
tational linguistics. State-of-the-art citations iden-
tification mechanisms focus either on detecting ex-
plicit citations i.e. those that consist of either the
author names and the year of publication or brack-
eted numbers only, or include a small sentence win-
dow around the explicit citation as input text (Coun-
cill et al., 2008; Radev et al., 2009; Ritchie et al.,
2008). The assumption behind this approach is that
all related mentions of the paper would be concen-
trated in the immediate vicinity of the anchor text.
However, this assumption does not generally hold
true (Teufel, 2010; Sugiyama et al., 2010). The phe-
nomenon of trying to determine a citations’s cita-
tion context has a long tradition in library sciences

(O’Connor, 1982), and its connection with corefer-
ence has been duely noted (Kim et al., 2006; Kaplan
et al., 2009). Consider Figure 1, which illustrates a
typical case.

Figure 1: Example of the use of anaphora

While the first sentence cites the target paper ex-
plicitly using the name of the primary author along
with the year of publication of the paper, the re-
maining sentences mentioning the same paper ap-
pear after a gap and contain an indirect and implicit
reference to that paper. These mentions occur two
sentences after the formal citation in the form of
anaphoric it and the lexical hook METEOR. Most
current techniques, with the exception of Qazvinian
and Radev (2010), are not able to detect linguistic
mentions of citations in such forms. Ignoring such
mentions and examining only the sentences contain-

18



ing an explicit citation results in loss of information
about the cited paper. While this phenomenon is
problematic for applications like scientific summari-
sation (Abu-Jbara and Radev, 2011), it has a particu-
lar relevance for citation sentiment detection (Athar,
2011).

Citation sentiment detection is an attractive task.
Availability of citation polarity information can help
researchers in understanding the evolution of a field
on the basis of research papers and their critiques.
It can also help expert researchers who are in the
process of preparing opinion based summaries for
survey papers by providing them with motivations
behind as well as positive and negative comments
about different approaches (Qazvinian and Radev,
2008).

Current work on citation sentiment detection
works under the assumption that the sentiment
present in the citation sentence represents the true
sentiment of the author towards the cited paper
(Athar, 2011; Piao et al., 2007; Pham and Hoffmann,
2004). This assumption is so dominant because
current citation identification methods (Councill et
al., 2008; Ritchie et al., 2008; Radev et al., 2009)
can readily identify the citation sentence, whereas
it is much harder to determine the relevant context.
However, this assumption most certainly does not
hold true when the citation context spans more than
one sentence.

Concerning the sentiment aspect of the citation
context from Figure 1, we see that the citation sen-
tence does not contain any sentiment towards the
cited paper, whereas the following sentences act as
a critique and list its shortcomings. It is clear that
criticism is the intended sentiment, but if the gold
standard is defined by looking at the citation sen-
tence in isolation, a significant amount of sentiment
expressed in the text is lost. Given that overall most
citations in a text are neutral with respect to sen-
timent (Spiegel-Rosing, 1977; Teufel et al., 2006),
this makes it even more important to recover what
explicit sentiment there is in the article, wherever it
is to be found.

In this paper, we examine methods to extract all
opinionated sentences from research papers which
mention a given paper in as many forms as we can
identify, not just as explicit citations. We present
a new corpus in which all mentions of a cited paper

have been manually annotated, and show that our an-
notation treatment increases citation sentiment cov-
erage, particularly for negative sentiment. We then
explore methods to automatically identify all men-
tions of a paper in a supervised manner. In par-
ticular, we consider the recognition of named ap-
proaches and acronyms. Our overall system then
classifies explicit and implicit mentions according to
sentiment. The results support the claim that includ-
ing implicit citations in citation sentiment analysis
improves the quality of the overall sentiment assign-
ment.

2 Corpus Construction

We use the dataset from Athar (2011) as our starting
point, which consists of 8,736 citations in the ACL
Anthology (Bird et al., 2008) that cite a target set of
310 ACL Anthology papers. The citation summary
data from the ACL Anthology Network1 (Radev et
al., 2009) is used. This dataset is rather large, and
since manual annotation of context for each citation
is a time consuming task, a subset of 20 target pa-
pers (i.e., all citations to these) has been selected
for annotation. These 20 papers correspond to ap-
proximately 20% of incoming citations in the orig-
inal dataset. They contain a total of 1,555 citations
from 854 citing papers.

2.1 Annotation

We use a four-class scheme for annotation. Every
sentence which does not contain any direct or indi-
rect mention of the citation is labelled as being ex-
cluded (x) from the context. The rest of the sen-
tences are marked either positive (p), negative (n)
or objective/neutral (o). To speed up the annotation
process, we developed a customised annotation tool.

A total of 203,803 sentences have been annotated
from 1,034 paper–reference pairs. Although this an-
notation been performed by the first author only,
we know from previous work that similar styles
of annotation can achieve acceptable inter-annotator
agreement (Teufel et al., 2006). An example anno-
tation is given in Figure 2, where the first column
shows the line number and the second one shows
the class label for the citation to Smadja (1993). It
should be noted that since annotation is always per-

1http://www.aclweb.org

19



formed for a specific citation only, sentences such as
the one at line 32, which carry sentiment but refer to
a different citation, are marked as excluded from the
context.

If there are multiple sentiments in the same sen-
tence, the sentence has been labelled with the class
of the last sentiment mentioned. In this way, a total
of 3,760 citation sentences have been found in the
whole corpus, i.e. sentences belonging to class o, n
or p, and the rest have been labelled as x. Table 1
compares the number of sentences with only the ex-
plicit citations with all explicit and implicit mentions
of those citations. We can see that including the
citation context increases the subjective sentiment
by almost 185%. The resulting negative sentiment
also increases by more than 325%. This may be at-
tributed to the strategic behaviour of the authors of
‘sweetening’ the criticism in order to soften its ef-
fects among their peers (Hornsey et al., 2008).

Figure 2: Example annotation of a citation context.

Explicit mentions All mentions
o 1, 509 3, 100
n 86 368
p 146 292

Table 1: Distribution of classes.

Another view of the annotated data is available in
Figure 3a. This is in the form of interactive HTML
where each HTML page represents all the incoming
links to a paper. Each row represents the citing pa-
per and each column square represents a sentence.
The rows are sorted by increasing publication date.

Black squares are citations with the author name and
year of publication mentioned in the text. The red,
green and gray squares show negative, positive and
neutral sentiment respectively. Pointing the mouse
cursor at any square gives the text content of the cor-
responding sentence, as shown in the Figure 3a.

The ACL Id, paper title and authors’ names are
also given at the top of the page. Similar data for the
corresponding citing paper is made available when
the mouse cursor is positioned on one of the orange
squares at the start of each row, as shown in the Fig-
ure 3b. Clicking on the checkboxes at the top hides
or shows the corresponding type of squares. There is
also an option to hide/show a grid so that the squares
are separated and rows are easier to trace. For ex-
ample, Figure 3b shows the grid with the neutral or
objective citations hidden.

In the next section, we describe the features set we
use to detect implicit citations from this annotated
corpus and discuss the results.

3 Experiments and Results

For the task of detecting all mentions of a citation,
we merge the class labels of sentences mentioning a
citation in any form (o n p). To make sure that the
easily detectable explicit citations do not influence
the results, we change the class label of all those
sentences to x which contain the first author’s name
within a 4-word window of the year of publication.

Our dataset is skewed as there are many more ob-
jective sentences than subjective ones. In such sce-
narios, average micro-F scores tend to be slightly
higher as they are a weighted measure. To avoid
this bias, we also report the macro-F scores. Fur-
thermore, to ensure there is enough data for training
each class, we use 10-fold cross-validation (Lewis,
1991) in all our experiments.

We represent each citation as a feature set in a
Support Vector Machine (SVM) (Cortes and Vapnik,
1995) framework. The corpus is processed using
WEKA (Hall et al., 2008) and the Weka LibSVM
library (EL-Manzalawy and Honavar, 2005; Chang
and Lin, 2001). For each ith sentence Si, we use the
following binary features.

• Si−1 contains the last name of the primary au-
thor, followed by the year of publication within
a four-word window.

20



(a) Sentence Text (b) Paper metadata

Figure 3: Different views of an annotated paper.

This feature is meant to capture the fact that
the sentence immediately after an explicit cita-
tion is more likely to continue talking about the
same work.

• Si contains the last name of the primary au-
thor followed by the year of publication within
a four-word window.

This feature should help in identifying sen-
tences containing explicit citations. Since such
sentences are easier to identify, including them
in the evaluation metric would result in a false
boost in the final score. We have thus excluded
all such sentences in our annotation and this
feature should indicate a negative instance to
the classifier.

• Si contains the last name of the primary au-
thor.

This feature captures sentences which contain
a reference to tools and algorithms which have
been named after their inventors, such as,

“One possible direction for future work is to
compare the search-based approach of Collins
and Roark with our DP-based approach.”

It should also capture the mentions of methods
and techniques used in the cited paper e.g.,

“We show that our approach outperforms Tur-
ney’s approach.”

• Si contains an acronym used in an explicit ci-
tation.

Acronyms are taken to be capitalised words
which are extracted from the vicinity of the
cited author’s last name using regular expres-
sions. For example, METEOR in Figure 1 is an
acronym which is used in place of a formal ci-
tation to refer to the original paper in the rest of
the citing paper.

• Si contains a determiner followed by a work
noun.

We use the following determiners D = {the,
this, that, those, these, his, her, their, such, pre-
vious, other}. The list of work nouns (tech-
nique, method, etc.) has been taken from Teufel
(2010). This feature extracts a pattern which
has been found to be useful for extracting cita-
tions in previous work (Qazvinian and Radev,
2010). Such phrases usually signal a continua-
tion of the topics related to citations in earlier
sentences. For example:

“Church et al.(1989), Wettler & Rapp (1989)
and Church & Hanks (1990) describe algo-
rithms which do this. However, the validity of
these algorithms has not been tested by system-
atic comparisons with associations of human
subjects.”

• Si starts with a third person pronoun.

The feature also tries to capture the topic con-
tinuation after a citation. Sentences starting
with a pronoun (e.g. they, their, he, she, etc.)
are more likely to describe the subject citation
of the previous sentence in detail. For example:

21



“Because Daume III (2007) views the adapta-
tion as merely augmenting the feature space,
each of his features has the same prior mean
and variance, regardless of whether it is do-
main specific or independent. He could have
set these parameters differently, but he did not.”

• Si starts with a connector.

This feature also focuses on detecting the topic
continuity. Connectors have been shown to
be effective in other context related works as
well (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown, 1997;
Polanyi and Zaenen, 2006). A list of 23 con-
nectors (e.g. however, although, moreover, etc.)
has been compiled by examining the high fre-
quency connectors from a separate set of papers
from the same domain. An example is:

“An additional consistent edge of a linear-
chain conditional random field (CRF) explicitly
models the dependencies between distant oc-
currences of similar words (Sutton and McCal-
lum, 2004; Finkel et al. , 2005). However, this
approach requires additional time complexity
in inference/learning time and it is only suit-
able for representing constraints by enforcing
label consistency.”

• Si starts with a (sub)section heading.

• Si−1 starts with a (sub)section heading.

• Si+1 starts with a (sub)section heading.

The three features above are a consequence of
missing information about the paragraph and
section boundaries in the used corpus. Since
the text extraction has been done automatically,
the section headings are usually found to be
merged with the text of the succeeding sen-
tence. For example, the text below merges the
heading of section 4.2 with the next sentence.

“4.2 METEOR vs. SIA SIA is designed to take
the advantage of loose sequence-based metrics
without losing word-level information.”

Start and end of such section boundaries can
give us important information about the scope
of a citation. In order to exploit this informa-
tion, we use regular expressions to detect if the

sentences under review contains these merged
section titles and headings.

• Si contains a citation other than the one under
review.

It is more probable for the context of a citation
to end when other citations are mentioned in
a sentence, which is the motivation behind us-
ing this feature, which might contribute to the
discriminating power of the classifier in con-
junction with the presence of a citation in the
previous sentence. For example, in the extract
below, the scope of the first citation is limited
to the first sentence only.

“Blitzer et al.(2006) proposed a structural
correspondence learning method for domain
adaptation and applied it to part-of-speech tag-
ging. Daume III (2007) proposed a simple fea-
ture augmentation method to achieve domain
adaptation.”

• Si contains a lexical hook.
The lexical hooks feature identifies lexical sub-
stitutes for the citations. We obtain these hooks
by examining all explicit citation sentences to
the cited paper and selecting the most frequent
capitalized phrase in the vicinity of the author’s
last name. The explicit citations come from all
citing papers and not just the paper for which
the features are being determined. For exam-
ple, the sentences below have been taken from
two different papers and cite the same target pa-
per (Cutting et al., 1992). While the acronym
HMM will be captured by the feature stated ear-
lier, the word Xerox will be missed.

E95-1014: “This text was part-of-speech
tagged using the Xerox HMM tagger (Cutting
et al. , 1992).”
J97-3003: “The Xerox tagger (Cutting et al.
1992) comes with a set of rules that assign an
unknown word a set of possible pos-tags (i.e. ,
POS-class) on the basis of its ending segment.”

This ‘domain level’ feature makes it possible
to extract the commonly used name for a tech-
nique which may have been missed by the
acronym feature due to long term dependen-
cies. We also extrapolate the acronym for such

22



phrases, e.g., in the example below, SCL would
also be checked along with Structural Corre-
spondence Learning.

“The paper compares Structural Correspon-
dence Learning (Blitzer et al., 2006) with (var-
ious instances of) self-training (Abney, 2007;
McClosky et al., 2006) for the adaptation of a
parse selection model to Wikipedia domains”

We also add n-grams of length 1 to 3 to this lexi-
cal feature set and compare the results obtained with
an n-gram only baseline in Table 2. N-grams have
been shown to perform consistently well in various
NLP tasks (Bergsma et al., 2010).

Class Baseline Our System
x 0.995 0.996

o n p 0.358 0.513
Avg. 0.990 0.992

Avg.(macro) 0.677 0.754

Table 2: Comparison of F -scores for non-explicit
citation detection.

By adding the new features listed above, the per-
formance of our system increases by almost 8% over
the n-gram baseline for the task of detecting citation
mentions. Using the pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum
test at 0.05 significance level, we found that the dif-
ference between the baseline and our system is sta-
tistically significant2. While the micro-F score ob-
tained is quite high, the individual class scores show
that the task is hard and a better solution may require
a deeper analysis of the context.

4 Impact on Citation Sentiment Detection

We explore the effect of this context on citation sen-
timent detection. For a baseline, we use features of
the state-of-the-art system proposed in our earlier
work (Athar, 2011). While there we used n-gram
and dependency feature on sentences containing ex-
plicit citations only, our annotation is not restricted
to such citations and we may have more than one

2While this test may not be adequate as the data is highly
skewed, we are reporting the results since there is no obvious
alternative for discrete skewed data. In future, we plan to use
the continuous probability estimates produced by the classifier
for testing significance.

sentiment per each explicit citation. For example,
in Figure 2, our 2011 system will be restricted to
analysing sentence 33 only. However, it is clear
from our annotation that there is more sentiment
present in the succeeding sentences which belongs
to this explicit citation. While sentence 34 in Fig-
ure 2 is positive towards the cited paper, the next
sentence criticises it. Thus for this explicit citation,
there are three sentences with sentiment and all of
them are related to the same explicit citation. Treat-
ing these sentences separately will result in an artifi-
cial increase in the amount of data because they par-
ticipate in the same discourse. It would also make
it impossible to compare the sentiment annotated in
the previous work with our annotation.

To make sure the annotations are comparable,
we mark the true citation sentiment to be the last
sentiment mentioned in a 4-sentence context win-
dow, as this is pragmatically most likely to be the
real intention (MacRoberts and MacRoberts, 1984).
The window length is motivated by recent research
(Qazvinian and Radev, 2010) which favours a four-
sentence boundary for detecting non-explicit cita-
tions. Analysis of our data shows that more than
60% of the subjective citations lie in this window.
We include the implicit citations predicted by the
method described in the previous section in the con-
text. The results of the single-sentence baseline sys-
tem are compared with this context enhanced system
in Table 3.

Class Baseline Our System
o 0.861 0.887
n 0.138 0.621
p 0.396 0.554

Avg. 0.689 0.807
Avg.(macro) 0.465 0.687

Table 3: F -scores for citation sentiment detection.

The results show that our system outperforms the
baseline in all evaluation criteria. Performing the
pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum testat 0.05 significance
level, we found that the improvement is statistically
significant. The baseline system does not use any
context and thus misses out on all the sentiment
information contained within. While this window-
based representation does not capture all the senti-

23



ment towards a citation perfectly, it is closer to the
truth than a system based on single sentence analysis
and is able to detect more sentiment.

5 Related Work

While different schemes have been proposed for
annotating citations according to their function
(Spiegel-Rosing, 1977; Nanba and Okumura, 1999;
Garzone and Mercer, 2000), the only recent work on
citation sentiment detection using a relatively large
corpus is by Athar (2011). However, this work does
not handle citation context. Other approaches to ci-
tation classification include work by Wilbur et al.
(2006), who annotated a 101 sentence corpus on
focus, polarity, certainty, evidence and directional-
ity. Piao et al. (2007) proposed a system to attach
sentiment information to the citation links between
biomedical papers by using existing semantic lexical
resources and NLP tools.

A common approach for sentiment detection is to
use a labelled lexicon to score sentences (Hatzivas-
siloglou and McKeown, 1997; Turney, 2002; Yu and
Hatzivassiloglou, 2003). However, such approaches
have been found to be highly topic dependent (En-
gström, 2004; Gamon and Aue, 2005; Blitzer et al.,
2007), which makes the creation of a general senti-
ment classifier a difficult task.

Teufel et al. (2006) worked on a 2,829 sentence ci-
tation corpus using a 12-class classification scheme.
While the authors did make use of the context in
their annotation, their focus was on the task of deter-
mining the author’s reason for citing a given paper.
This task differs from citation sentiment detection,
which is in a sense a “lower level” of analysis.

Some other recent work has focused on the prob-
lem of implicit citation extraction (Kaplan et al.,
2009; Qazvinian and Radev, 2010). Kaplan et al.
(2009) explore co-reference chains for citation ex-
traction using a combination of co-reference resolu-
tion techniques (Soon et al., 2001; Ng and Cardie,
2002). However, the corpus that they use consists of
only 94 citations to 4 papers and is likely to be too
small to be representative.

For citation extraction, the most relevant work is
by Qazvinian and Radev (2010) who proposed a
framework of Markov Random Fields to extract only
the non-explicit citations for a given paper. They

model each sentence as a node in a graph and ex-
periment with various window boundaries to cre-
ate edges between neighbouring nodes weighted by
lexical similarity between nodes. However, their
dataset consists of only 569 citations from 10 pa-
pers and their annotation scheme deals with neither
acronyms nor sentiment.

6 Discussion

What is the role of citation contexts in the overall
structure of scientific context? We assume a hier-
archical, rhetorical structure not unlike RST (Mann
and Thompson, 1987), but much flatter, where the
atomic units are textual blocks which carry a cer-
tain functional role in the overall scientific argument
for publication (Teufel, 2010; Hyland, 2000). Under
such a general model, citation blocks are certainly
a functional unit, and their recognition is a reward-
ing task in their own right. If citation blocks can be
recognised along with their sentiment, this is even
more useful, as it restricts the possibilities for which
rhetorical function the segment plays. For instance,
in the motivation section of a paper, before the pa-
per contribution is introduced, we often find nega-
tive sentiment assigned to citations, as any indica-
tion can serve as a justification for the current paper.
In contrast, positive sentiment is more likely to be
restricted to the description of an approach which
the authors include in their solution, or further de-
velop.

Another aspect concerns which features might
help in detecting coherent citation blocks. We have
here addressed coherence of citation contexts via
certain referring expressions, lexical hooks and also
coherence-indicating conjunctions (amongst oth-
ers). The reintroduction of citation contexts was
addressed via lexical hooks. Much more could be
done to explore this very interesting question. A
more fine-grained model of coherence might include
proper anaphora resolution (Lee et al., 2011), which
is still an unsolved task for scientific texts, and also
include models of lexical coherence such as lexical
chains (Barzilay and Elhadad, 1997) and entity co-
herence (Barzilay and Lapata, 2008).

24



7 Conclusion

In this paper, we focus on automatic detection of ci-
tation sentiment using citation context. We annotate
a new large corpus and show that ignoring the cita-
tion context would result in loss of a lot of sentiment,
specially criticism. We also report the results of the
state-of-the-art citation sentiment detection systems
on this corpus and when using this context-enhanced
gold standard definition.

References

A. Abu-Jbara and D. Radev. 2011. Coherent citation-
based summarization of scientific papers. In Proc. of
ACL.

A. Athar. 2011. Sentiment analysis of citations using
sentence structure-based features. In Proc of ACL,
page 81.

Regina Barzilay and Michael Elhadad. 1997. Using
lexical chains for text summarization. In Inderjeet
Mani and Mark T. Maybury, editors, Proceedings of
the ACL/EACL-97 Workshop on Intelligent Scalable
Text Summarization.

Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata. 2008. Modeling
local coherence: An entity-based approach. Computa-
tional Linguistics, (1):1–34.

Shane Bergsma, Emily Pitler, and Dekang Lin. 2010.
Creating robust supervised classifiers via web-scale n-
gram data. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 865–874, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

S. Bird, R. Dale, B.J. Dorr, B. Gibson, M.T. Joseph, M.Y.
Kan, D. Lee, B. Powley, D.R. Radev, and Y.F. Tan.
2008. The acl anthology reference corpus: A ref-
erence dataset for bibliographic research in computa-
tional linguistics. In Proc. of LREC.

J. Blitzer, M. Dredze, and F. Pereira. 2007. Biographies,
bollywood, boom-boxes and blenders: Domain adap-
tation for sentiment classification. In Proc. of ACL,
number 1.

C.C. Chang and C.J. Lin. 2001. LIBSVM: a li-
brary for support vector machines, 2001. Software
available at http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/
cjlin/libsvm.

C. Cortes and V. Vapnik. 1995. Support-vector networks.
Machine learning, 20(3):273–297.

I.G. Councill, C.L. Giles, and M.Y. Kan. 2008. Parscit:
An open-source crf reference string parsing package.
In Proc. of LREC, volume 2008. Citeseer.

Y. EL-Manzalawy and V. Honavar, 2005. WLSVM:
Integrating LibSVM into Weka Environment. Soft-
ware available at http://www.cs.iastate.
edu/˜yasser/wlsvm.

C. Engström. 2004. Topic dependence in sentiment clas-
sification. Unpublished MPhil Dissertation. Univer-
sity of Cambridge.

M. Gamon and A. Aue. 2005. Automatic identifica-
tion of sentiment vocabulary: exploiting low associa-
tion with known sentiment terms. In Proc. of the ACL,
pages 57–64.

M. Garzone and R. Mercer. 2000. Towards an automated
citation classifier. Advances in Artificial Intelligence.

D. Hall, D. Jurafsky, and C.D. Manning. 2008. Studying
the history of ideas using topic models. In EMNLP,
pages 363–371.

V. Hatzivassiloglou and K.R. McKeown. 1997. Predict-
ing the semantic orientation of adjectives. In Proc. of
ACL, page 181.

M.J. Hornsey, E. Robson, J. Smith, S. Esposo, and R.M.
Sutton. 2008. Sugaring the pill: Assessing rhetori-
cal strategies designed to minimize defensive reactions
to group criticism. Human Communication Research,
34(1):70–98.

Ken Hyland. 2000. Disciplinary Discourses; Social In-
teraction in Academic Writing. Longman, Harlow.

D. Kaplan, R. Iida, and T. Tokunaga. 2009. Automatic
extraction of citation contexts for research paper sum-
marization: A coreference-chain based approach. In
Proc. of the 2009 Workshop on Text and Citation Anal-
ysis for Scholarly Digital Libraries.

D. Kim, P. Webber, et al. 2006. Implicit references to
citations: A study of astronomy papers.

H. Lee, Y. Peirsman, A. Chang, N. Chambers, M. Sur-
deanu, and D. Jurafsky. 2011. Stanford’s multi-pass
sieve coreference resolution system at the conll-2011
shared task. ACL HLT 2011.

D.D. Lewis. 1991. Evaluating text categorization. In
Proc. of Speech and Natural Language Workshop,
pages 312–318.

M.H. MacRoberts and B.R. MacRoberts. 1984. The
negational reference: Or the art of dissembling. So-
cial Studies of Science, 14(1):91–94.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1987.
Rhetorical Structure Theory: A theory of text organ-
isation. ISI/RS-87-190. Technical report, Information
Sciences Institute, University of Southern California,
Marina del Rey, CA.

H. Nanba and M. Okumura. 1999. Towards multi-paper
summarization using reference information. In IJCAI,
volume 16, pages 926–931. Citeseer.

V. Ng and C. Cardie. 2002. Improving machine learning
approaches to coreference resolution. In Proc. of ACL,
pages 104–111.

25



J. O’Connor. 1982. Citing statements: Computer recog-
nition and use to improve retrieval. Information Pro-
cessing & Management, 18(3):125–131.

S.B. Pham and A. Hoffmann. 2004. Extracting positive
attributions from scientific papers. In Discovery Sci-
ence, pages 39–45. Springer.

S. Piao, S. Ananiadou, Y. Tsuruoka, Y. Sasaki, and J. Mc-
Naught. 2007. Mining opinion polarity relations of ci-
tations. In International Workshop on Computational
Semantics (IWCS). Citeseer.

L. Polanyi and A. Zaenen. 2006. Contextual valence
shifters. Computing attitude and affect in text: Theory
and applications, pages 1–10.

V. Qazvinian and D.R. Radev. 2008. Scientific paper
summarization using citation summary networks. In
Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 689–696.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

V. Qazvinian and D.R. Radev. 2010. Identifying non-
explicit citing sentences for citation-based summariza-
tion. In Proc. of ACL.

D.R. Radev, M.T. Joseph, B. Gibson, and P. Muthukrish-
nan. 2009. A Bibliometric and Network Analysis of
the field of Computational Linguistics. Journal of the
American Soc. for Info. Sci. and Tech.

A. Ritchie, S. Robertson, and S. Teufel. 2008. Com-
paring citation contexts for information retrieval. In
Proc. of ACM conference on Information and knowl-
edge management, pages 213–222. ACM.

W.M. Soon, H.T. Ng, and D.C.Y. Lim. 2001. A ma-
chine learning approach to coreference resolution of
noun phrases. Comp. Ling., 27(4):521–544.

I. Spiegel-Rosing. 1977. Science studies: Bibliometric
and content analysis. Social Studies of Science.

K. Sugiyama, T. Kumar, M.Y. Kan, and R.C. Tripathi.
2010. Identifying citing sentences in research papers
using supervised learning. In Information Retrieval &
Knowledge Management,(CAMP), 2010 International
Conference on, pages 67–72. IEEE.

S. Teufel, A. Siddharthan, and D. Tidhar. 2006. Auto-
matic classification of citation function. In Proc. of
EMNLP, pages 103–110.

Simone Teufel. 2010. The Structure of Scientific Arti-
cles: Applications to Citation Indexing and Summa-
rization. Stanford: CSLI Publications.

P.D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?: seman-
tic orientation applied to unsupervised classification of
reviews. In Proc. of ACL.

W.J. Wilbur, A. Rzhetsky, and H. Shatkay. 2006. New
directions in biomedical text annotation: definitions,
guidelines and corpus construction. BMC bioinfor-
matics, 7(1):356.

H. Yu and V. Hatzivassiloglou. 2003. Towards answering
opinion questions: Separating facts from opinions and
identifying the polarity of opinion sentences. In Proc.
of EMNLP, page 136.

26


