










































Perceptions of Alignment and Personality in Generated Dialogue


INLG 2012 Proceedings of the 7th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 40–48,
Utica, May 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Perceptions of Alignment and Personality in Generated Dialogue

Alastair J. Gill

University of Surrey
Guildford GU2 7XH, UK
A.Gill@surrey.ac.uk

Carsten Brockmann and Jon Oberlander
University of Edinburgh

Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK
Carsten.Brockmann@gmx.net

J.Oberlander@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Variation in language style can lead to differ-
ent perceptions of the interaction, and differ-
ent behaviour outcomes. Using the CRAG 2
language generation system we examine how
accurately judges can perceive character per-
sonality from short, automatically generated
dialogues, and how alignment (similarity be-
tween speakers) alters judge perceptions of the
characters’ relationship. Whilst personality
perception of our dialogues is consistent with
perceptions of human behaviour, we find that
the introduction of alignment leads to nega-
tive perceptions of the dialogues and the inter-
locutors’ relationship. A follow up evaluation
study of the perceptions of different forms of
alignment in the dialogues reveals that while
similarity at polarity, topic and construction
levels is viewed positively, similarity at the
word level is regarded negatively. We discuss
our findings in relation to the literature and in
the context of dialogue systems.

1 Introduction

Personality describes characteristics which are cen-
tral to human behaviour, and has implications for
social interactions: It can affect performance on col-
laborative processes, and can increase engagement
when incorporated within virtual agents (Hernault
et al., 2008). In addition, personality has also been
shown to influence linguistic style, both in written
and spoken language (Pennebaker and King, 1999;
Gill and Oberlander, 2002). Whilst individuals of-
ten possess individual styles of self-expression, such
as those influenced by personality, in a conversation

they may align or match the linguistic style of their
partner: For example, by entraining, or converging,
on a mutual vocabulary. Such alignment is associ-
ated with increased familiarity, trust, and task suc-
cess (Shepard et al., 2001). People also adjust their
linguistic styles when interacting with computers,
and this affects their perceptions of the interaction
(Porzel et al., 2006). However, when humans – or
machines – are faced with a choice of matching the
language of their conversational partner, this often
raises a conflict: matching the language of an in-
terlocutor may mean subduing one’s own linguistic
style. Better understanding these processes relating
to language choice and interpersonal perception can
inform our knowledge of human behaviour, but also
have important implications for the design of dia-
logue systems and user interfaces.

In this paper, we present and evaluate novel
automated natural language generation techniques,
via the Critical Agent Dialogue system version 2
(CRAG 2), which enable us to generate dynamic,
short-term alignment effects along with stable, long-
term personality effects. We use it to investigate
the following questions: Can personality be accu-
rately judged from short, automatically generated di-
alogues? What are the effects of alignment between
characters? How is the quality of the characters’ re-
lationship perceived? Additionally, in our evaluation
study we examine perceptions of the different forms
of alignment present in the dialogues, for example at
the word, phrase or polarity levels. In the following
we review relevant literature, before describing the
CRAG 2 system and experimental method, and then
presenting our results and discussion.

40



2 Background

Researchers from several traditions have studied as-
pects of similarity in dialogue, naming it: entrain-
ment, alignment, priming, accommodation, coordi-
nation or convergence. For current purposes, we
gloss over some important differences, and borrow
the term ‘alignment’, because we will go on to adopt
Pickering and Garrod’s theoretical mechanisms in
our system. Alignment usually means that if some-
thing has happened once in a dialogue (for instance,
referring to an object as a vase), it is likely to happen
again—and hence, alternatives become less likely
(for instance, referring to the same object as a jug)
(Pickering and Garrod, 2004). From this view, inter-
locutors align the representations they use in produc-
tion and comprehension and the process is an auto-
matic, labour-saving device, but there are of course
limits to periods over which alignment processes op-
erate; in corpus studies long-term adaptation pre-
dicts communicative success (Reitter, 2008). Al-
ternative approaches view similarity as a process of
negotiation leading to the establishment of common
ground (Brennan and Clark, 1996), or a relatively
conscious process resulting from attraction (Shepard
et al., 2001). Although increased similarity (conver-
gence) is generally regarded positively, it can some-
times arise during disagreement (Niederhoffer and
Pennebaker, 2002), with cultural differences influ-
encing both convergence and perceptions of others
(Bortfeld and Brennan, 1997). Wizard-of-Oz stud-
ies have also shown convergence with a natural lan-
guage interface (Brennan, 1996; Porzel et al., 2006).

Embodied conversational agents (Cassell et al.,
2000) are implemented computer characters that ex-
hibit multimodal behaviour; the technology can be
exploited to give life to automatically generated
scripted dialogues and to make them more engag-
ing (van Deemter et al., 2008; Hernault et al., 2008).
Aspects of the agents’ personalities and their inter-
ests can be pre-configured and affect their dialogue
strategies; the generation is template-based. A com-
mon way to describe personality is using the Big
Five traits: Extraversion (preference for, and behav-
ior in, social situations); Neuroticism (tendency to
experience negative thoughts and feelings); Open-
ness (reflects openness to new ideas); Agreeableness
(how we tend to interact with others); and Consci-

entiousness (how organised and persistent we are in
pursuing our goals). Relationships between person-
ality dimensions and language use appear to be ro-
bust: For instance, in monological writing (essays
and e-mails) high Extraverts use more social words,
positive emotion words, and express more certainty;
high Agreeableness scorers use more first person
singular and positive emotion words, and fewer ar-
ticles and negative emotion words (Pennebaker and
King, 1999; Gill and Oberlander, 2002).

Personality can not only be projected through, but
also perceived from, asynchronous textual commu-
nication. The extraversion dimension is generally
perceived most accurately in a variety of contexts,
while it was more difficult for raters to recognise
neuroticism (Gill et al., 2006; Li and Chignell, 2010)
Taking into account the difference between the lan-
guage actually used by people with certain person-
ality, and the language which others expect them
to use, natural language generation (NLG) systems
can exploit either to project personality. Perhaps the
closest previous work to what we present here is the
Personality Generator (PERSONAGE) (Mairesse and
Walker, 2010) which mapped psychological find-
ings relating to the personality to the components
of the NLG system (e.g., content planning, sen-
tence planning and realisation). Evaluation by hu-
man raters showed similar accuracy in perception
of extraversion in the generated language compared
with human-authored texts. There is evidence that
computer users attribute personality to interfaces,
and rate more highly those interfaces that exploit
language associated with the user’s own personal-
ity, and become more similar to the user over time
(Isbister and Nass, 2000).

We now turn to describing our automated natu-
ral language generation techniques, implemented in
CRAG 2, followed by a description of our experi-
mental method and evaluation.

3 Generation Method

Dialogues are composed by CRAG 2, a Java pro-
gram that provides a framework for generating dia-
logues between two computer characters discussing
a movie. For more details of this system, see Brock-
mann (2009). Within CRAG 2, linguistic personal-
ity and alignment are modelled using the OPENNLP

41



CCG Library (OPENCCG) natural language realiser
(White, 2006b). The realiser consults a grammar
adapted to the movie review domain to allow the
generation of utterances about the following top-
ics: Action scenes, characters, dialogue, film, music,
plot or special effects. The realiser also has access
to a set of n-gram language models, used to com-
pute probability scores of word sequences. The gen-
eral conversational language model (LM) is based
on data from the SWITCHBOARD corpus and a small
corpus of movie reviews. The general LM is used for
fallback probabilities, and is integrated with the per-
sonality and alignment language models (described
below) using linear interpolation.

3.1 Personality Models

Language models were trained on a corpus of web-
logs from authors of known personality (Nowson et
al., 2005). For each personality dimension, the lan-
guage data were divided up into high, medium and
low bands so that the probability of a word sequence
given a personality type could be derived; see Now-
son et al. (2005) for further discussion of the pos-
itively skewed distribution of the openness dimen-
sion in bloggers. Each individual weblog was used
5 times, once for each dimension. The five models
corresponding to the character’s assigned personal-
ity are uniformly interpolated to give the final per-
sonality model, which is then combined with the
general model (respective weights, 0.7 and 0.3).

3.2 Alignment via Cache Language Models

Meanwhile, alignment is modelled via cache lan-
guage models (CLMs). For each utterance to be
generated, a language model is computed based on
the utterance that was generated immediately before
it. This CLM is then combined with the personality
LM. A character’s propensity to align corresponds
to the weight given to the CLM during this combi-
nation, and can be set to a value between 0 and 1.

3.3 Character Specification and Dialogue

Generation

The characters are parameterised for their per-
sonality by specifying values (on a scale from
0 to 100) for the five dimensions: extraver-
sion (E), neuroticism (N), agreeableness (A),

conscientiousness (C) and openness (O). This pa-
rameterisation determines the extent to which utter-
ances are weighted for their overlap with the per-
sonality generation model for each trait. Also, each
character receives an agenda of topics they wish
to discuss, along with polarities (POSITIVE/NEGA-
TIVE) that indicate their opinion on each topic.

The character with the higher E score begins the
dialogue, and their first topic is selected. Once
an utterance has been generated, the other charac-
ter is selected, and the system selects which topic
should come next. This process continues until
there are no topics left on the agenda of the cur-
rent speaker. The system creates a simple XML
representation of the character’s utterance, using
the specified topic and polarity. Following the
method described in Foster and White (2004), the
basic utterance specification is transformed, using
stylesheets written in the Extensible Stylesheet Lan-
guage Transformations (XSLT) language, into an
OPENCCG logical form. We make use of the fa-
cility for defining optional and alternative inputs
(White, 2006a) and underspecified semantics to
mildly overgenerate candidate utterances.

Optional interjections (I mean, you know, sort of )
and conversational markers (right, but, and, well)
are added where appropriate given the discourse his-
tory. Using synonyms (e.g., plot = story, comedy =
humour) and combining sentence types and optional
expressions, up to 3000 possibilities are created per
utterance, and the best candidate is chosen by the
specific combination of n-gram models appropriate
for dialogue history, personality and alignment.

4 Experimental Method

4.1 Participants

Data were collected from 80 participants with a va-
riety of educational and occupational backgrounds
using an online study (via the Language Experi-
ments Portal; www.language-experiments.org). To
ensure integrity of responses, submissions taking
less than five minutes (five cases), or more than 45
minutes (one case) were examined in relation to the
other responses before being included in the analy-
sis. The demographics were as follows: 43 partici-
pants (54%) were native, and 37 (46%) non-native,
speakers of English; 34 (42%) male, 46 (58%) fe-

42



Personality Par- Propen-
Dialogue ameter Setting sity to

Type Character E N A C O Align

1) High E I 75 50 25 25 50 0
vs. Low E II 25 50 75 75 50 0 or 0.7

2) Low E I 25 50 25 25 50 0
vs. High E II 75 50 75 75 50 0 or 0.7

3) High N I 50 75 25 25 50 0
vs. Low N II 50 25 75 75 50 0 or 0.7

4) Low N I 50 25 25 25 50 0
vs. High N II 50 75 75 75 50 0 or 0.7

Table 1: Dialogue type parameter settings.

male. Median age range was 25–29 (mode = 20–
24). Other demographic information (right/left-
handedness, area of upbringing, occupation) were
collected, but are not considered here.

4.2 Materials

To be able to compare human judges’ perceptions
of characters demonstrating different personalities,
and dialogues without and with alignment, dialogues
were generated in four different dialogue types, as
shown in Table 1. Each dialogue type sets the two
computer characters to opposing extremes on either
the E or the N dimension, while keeping the respec-
tive other dimension at a middle, or neutral, level
(for example, in Dialogue Type 1, Character I is
High E, Character II is Low E, and both charac-
ters are Mid N). Furthermore, Character I is always
Low A and C, and Character II is always High A and
C. All characters are set to Mid O.

Two dialogues were generated per type, giving a
total of 8 dialogues, with aligning versions of each of
these dialogues subsequently generated (giving 16
dialogues in total). The movie under discussion and
the characters’ respective agendas and their opinions
about the topics were randomly assigned. Each dia-
logue was eight utterances long, with characters tak-
ing turns, each of them producing four utterances
altogether. In each alignment dialogue, the High
A/High C Character II aligned. The weight for the
cache language model was set to 0.7. In both align-
ing and non-aligning versions of the dialogues, ut-
terances for the non-aligning speaker were the same.
The generation of utterances for the aligning speaker

was seeded with the respective previous utterance
functioning as the dialogue history. From the list
of generated possible utterances, the top-ranked ut-
terance was chosen.

4.2.1 Example Dialogue

To give an impression of the generated dialogues,
Table 2 shows an example of Dialogue Type 1
(High E versus Low E) where the characters dis-
cuss the movie Mystic River (the first row of Ta-
ble 1 gives the full parameter settings). The other
generation parameters are (valence of opinions fol-
lows each topic): Character I, agenda (PLOT/−,
CHARACTERS/−, MUSIC/−, FILM/−); further opin-
ions (SPECIAL EFFECTS/−, ACTION SCENES/+,
DIALOGUE/−); Character II, agenda (ACTION
SCENES/+, SPECIAL EFFECTS/+, PLOT/−, DI-
ALOGUE/−); further opinions (CHARACTERS/−,
FILM/−, MUSIC/−).

Alignment is switched on for Character II, with
examples of their utterances from the non-aligning
dialogues included beneath. As can be seen, the
aligned utterances closely match the surface form
of their primes. The personality language models’
influence on language choice can be seen when the
High E Character I uses the phrase I mean I didn’t
think, while the (non-aligning) Low E Character II
prefers I (kind of) thought throughout. Finally, the
Low A/Low C Character I has a strategy of switch-
ing topics in order to follow his own agenda.

4.3 Procedure

An introductory web page explained the task and de-
scribed the four personality dimensions of interest
(E, N, A and C; adjectives relating to each personal-
ity type were included for reference after each dia-
logue). The first page also contained an example di-
alogue similar to those that would be displayed dur-
ing the experiment. The participants were then pre-
sented with eight dialogues (two per type; one with,
one without alignment). The dialogues were pre-
sented in random order and randomly chosen from
the pool of available dialogues. One complete di-
alogue was shown at a time, and the participants
were asked to judge which of the two characters
scored higher on the E, N, A and C dimensions (us-
ing the previous personality descriptions and adjec-
tives). They also answered questions probing their

43



PLOT:
I “I mean I didn’t think that the story was great.”
II “I mean the story wasn’t great.”

Without alignment:

“Yes I mean I thought that it wasn’t nicely tied up.”
CHARACTERS:

I “And I mean I thought there was no characterization at all.”
II “I mean I thought there was no characterization at all.”

Without alignment:

“Yeah there was no characterization at all I mean.”
MUSIC:

I “I mean I didn’t think that the music was great.”
II “I mean the music wasn’t great.”

Without alignment:

“Yeah I kind of thought that the music was also very bad
you know.”

FILM:
I “I mean I didn’t think the film was good.”
II “I mean the film wasn’t good.”

Without alignment:

“I mean I kind of thought that it was a bit dull.”

Table 2: Example Dialogue.

perceptions of the characters’ relationship. They as-
sessed on a seven-point Likert scale how well the
characters ‘got on’ with each other (very badly−very
well), interpreted as indicating positivity or rapport
between characters, and how smoothly the conver-
sation went (not at all smoothly−very smoothly), in-
dicating how natural and coherent the interactions
were. The participants were asked to rate each dia-
logue independently from the others.The experiment
was open to both native and non-native speakers of
English; upon supplying an email address, partici-
pants were entered into a draw for an Amazon gift
token. All data were analysed anonymously. Note
that this is a further evaluation of data previously
presented in Brockmann (2009).

5 Experimental Results

5.1 Personality perception

To study the perception of personality in our di-
alogues, a nominal logistic regression was run on
the perception ratings obtained from the judges.
Here agreement between generated personality and
rater judgements was coded as a binary value
(agreement=1; disagreement=0), and entered into
the regression model as the dependent variable
(DV). The following independent variables (IVs)
were entered into the model: Dialogue Alignment as

a binary variable (alignment=1; no alignment=0);
Personality Trait judged as a categorical variable
(“Extraversion”, “Neuroticism’”, “Agreeableness”,
“Conscientiousness”). We also included an inter-
action variable, Generated Alignment × Personality
Trait Rated. We ran this model in order to under-
stand how each of the independent variables, such
as Personality Trait judged, or combinations of vari-
ables (in the case of the interactions) best explain the
accuracy of the personality perception judgements
relative to our generated personality language (the
DV). Throughout this section we report the parame-
ter estimates and corresponding one degree of free-
dom for the more conservative Likelihood Ratio Chi
Square effect tests for N=1920 (with the exception
of the four-level variable, Personality Trait DF=3,
and Participant ID DF=79).

The whole model is significant (χ2 = 128.22,
p < .0041, R Square (U)= .05; although note that
R Square (U) is not comparable to regular R Square,
and therefore cannot be interpreted as a percentage
of variance explained; model DF= 89). To investi-
gate effects of native/non-native speaker effects on
personality judgement accuracy, this variable was
included in earlier models as a binary variable (Na-
tive Speaker: native=1; non-native=0), but no sig-
nificant effect was found (χ2 = 0.98, p = .3228).
Therefore data from all participants are included in
the analyses here, and the native/non-native variable
is not included in the model. For the interactions,
there is a significant relationship between Dialogue
Alignment and accuracy in judgement of Personal-
ity Trait (χ2 = 13.67, p = .0034). Further exami-
nation of this relationship shows that in the case of
Agreeableness, accuracy decreases when alignment
is present in the dialogue (χ2 = 10.90, p = .0010),
whereas in the case of Conscientiousness, percep-
tion accuracy significantly increases with alignment
(χ2 = 4.38, p = .0364). This is shown in Figure 1.

There is a significant main effect for Personal-
ity Trait judged (χ2 = 17.04, p = .0007): param-
eter estimates show that accuracy of judgement is
significantly more accurate for Extraversion (χ2 =
7.21, p = .0073), but less accurate for Agreeable-
ness (χ2 = 5.54, p = .0186) and Conscientiousness
(χ2 = 8.09, p = .0044). No main effect was found
for Dialogue Alignment relative to accuracy of per-
sonality judgement (χ2 = 2.16, p = .1420).

44



A C E N

Personality Trait

Ag
re

em
en

t (
G

en
er

at
ed

 P
er

so
na

lit
y 

vs
. R

at
er

 J
ud

ge
m

en
ts

)

0.
0

0.
2

0.
4

0.
6

0.
8

1.
0

●

●

No Alignment
Alignment

Figure 1: Accuracy of personality judgements.

5.2 Ratings of ‘Getting on’ and ‘Smoothness’

In the following we are interested in examining what
dialogue characteristics lead to the rater judgements
of ‘getting on’. Using an ordinal logistic regression
(DV: how well the characters were judged to ‘get
on’, seven point scale from ‘very badly’ to ‘very
well’) the following independent variables, coded as
described in the previous section, were entered into
the model: Dialogue Alignment and Native Speaker
(Personality Trait was also entered into the model,
but did not reach significance). Participant ID was
included in the model to account for the repeated
measures design. Again, we use likelihood ratio
effect tests and note parameter estimates for one
degree of freedom (N=2560). The whole model
is significant (χ2 = 1396.75, p < .0001, R Square
(U)= .15; model DF=89): A main effect for Dia-
logue Alignment (χ2 = 244.94, p < .0001), shows
alignment decreased perceptions of ‘getting on’.

Similarly, ordinal logistic regressions were used
to probe influencing factors in decisions of rating
dialogue smoothness (DV: smoothness rated on a
seven point scale from ‘not at all smoothly’ to ‘very
smoothly’). The following independent variables,
coded as described in the previous section, were en-
tered into the model: Dialogue Alignment and Na-
tive Speaker (again Personality Trait did not reach

significance for inclusion). Again, Participant ID
was included in the model to account for the re-
peated measures design (parameter estimates and
likelihood ratio effect tests are for one degree of
freedom, N=2560, Condition, DF=3; Participant
ID, DF=78). The whole model is significant (χ2 =
1291.28, p < .0001), with an R Square (U) of 0.13
(model DF=89). There are strong main effects for
Dialogue Alignment (χ2 = 188.27, p < .0001), and
Native Speaker (χ2 = 110.00, p < .0001). Examina-
tion of the parameter estimates reveals negative rela-
tionships between ratings of smoothness and Native
Speaker, and Dialogue Alignment, implying that na-
tive speakers significantly rated the dialogues as be-
ing less smooth than the non-native speakers, and
also that dialogues with alignment were rated sig-
nificantly less smooth than those without alignment.

6 Evaluation Method

To better understand the linguistic alignment pro-
cesses which drive the participants’ judgements in
the previous experiment, we performed further anal-
ysis. In particular, we coded the forms of alignment
present in each utterance of each dialogue, relative
to the previous utterance. The forms of alignment
were coded as follows: Polarity (matching a posi-
tive or negative opinion), Topic (whether the topic is
the same or shifts), Word (instances of alignment of
individual words of the previous utterance), Phrase
(alignment of phrases), Construction (alignment at
a grammatical construction level). Each instance of
alignment for a given utterance was counted, with
an overall score generated for the whole dialogue.
This coding procedure was performed by one re-
searcher and subsequently evaluated by a second,
with disputes resolved by mutual agreement. In the
following analysis we do not distinguish between di-
alogues intentionally generated with alignment and
those without, but instead include all dialogues in
the analysis to examine which objectively measured
forms of alignment relate to the judges’ perceptions
for personality, ‘getting on’ and ‘smoothness’.

7 Evaluation Results

7.1 Alignment Forms and Personality

Accuracy of judgements of personality ratings and
dialogue alignment was analysed for each of the four

45



personality traits (A, C, E, N) independently using
nominal logistic regression (DV: rater vs. gener-
ated personality agreement coded 0 or 1; IVs: occur-
rence scores for Polarity, Topic, Word, Phrase, and
Construction). For Agreeableness the whole model
is significant (χ2 = 85.74, p < .0001, R Square
(U)= .10; model DF=5, N=640), with Topic align-
ment (χ2 = 16.68, p < .0001), followed by Polar-
ity (χ2 = 10.13, p = .0015) and Construction (χ2 =
6.19, p = .0128) alignment all positively related to
perceptions of Agreeableness. For Conscientious-
ness (whole model χ2 = 11.26, p = .0465, R Square
(U)= .01; DF=5, N=640), Polarity alignment is in-
versely related to perceptions of Conscientiousness
(χ2 = 5.12, p = .0236). In the case of Neuroti-
cism and Extraversion, the models are not significant
(χ2 = 5.37, p = .3719, and χ2 = 1.49, p = .2226,
respectively; both DF=5, N=320).

7.2 Alignment Forms and ‘Getting On’ and

‘Smoothness’

The relationship between the different forms of
alignment present in the dialogues and the judges’
ratings of ‘getting on’ and ‘smoothness’ were eval-
uated in two separate ordinal logistic models, in
which they were entered as the dependent variable.
The five alignment types (Polarity, Topic, Word,
Phrase, and Construction) were entered as indepen-
dent variables. Participant ID was also entered into
the model as an independent variable, since multiple
responses were collected from each participant.

Ratings of ‘getting on’ (whole model χ2 =
1595.10, p < .0001, R Square (U)= .17; DF=84,
N=2560) show that Polarity (χ2 = 385.45, p <
.0001), Construction (χ2 = 72.30, p < .0001) and
Topic (χ2 = 16.68, p = .0014) alignment all relate to
greater scores of perceived getting on. Conversely,
Word alignment leads to reduced scores of perceived
getting on (χ2 = 14.13, p = .0002). For ratings of
dialogue ‘smoothness’ (χ2 = 1519.31, p = .0014, R
Square (U)= .16; DF=84, N=2560), again Polarity
(χ2 = 209.55, p < .0001), Topic (χ2 = 39.39, p <
.0001) and Construction (χ2 = 28.01, p < .0001)
alignment all lead to increased ratings of ‘smooth-
ness’. Similarly, Word alignment has a negative
impact upon perceptions of dialogue ‘smoothness’
(χ2 = 29.24, p < .0001).

8 Discussion

We now discuss the perception and evaluation re-
sults of the CRAG 2 system in greater detail. In
terms of personality perception, extraversion is ac-
curately perceived, with agreeableness and consci-
entiousness less so, which matches findings from
personality perception studies in other contexts, in-
cluding text based computer-mediated communica-
tion (Li and Chignell, 2010; Gill et al., 2006). It
is interesting to note, however, that alignment helps
perception of conscientiousness, but hurts ratings of
agreeableness. Reduced accuracy in perception of
agreeableness, which is important to relationships,
may have a negative impact on the use of dialogues
in collaborative settings (Rammstedt and Schupp,
2008). Further work could usefully examine ways in
which these characteristics can be generated in more
readily perceptible ways. Interestingly, personality
perception is unaffected by whether the judges are
native English speakers or not. This is a notable
finding, and apparently implies that the social infor-
mation relating to personality is available in the text
only environment, or through the generation pro-
cess, it is equally accessible to native and non-native
English speakers. Native speaking judges were more
critical in rating dialogue smoothness and characters
getting on, perhaps indicating a finer-grained aware-
ness of linguistic cues in interpersonal interaction,
or else just greater confidence in making negative
judgements of their native language.

Our finding that our generated alignment actually
decreases the perceived positivity of the relationship
is contrary to what is generally predicted by the lit-
erature (Brennan and Clark, 1996; Shepard et al.,
2001; Pickering and Garrod, 2004); but cf. Nieder-
hoffer and Pennebaker (2002). Likewise, we would
also have expected the dialogues with alignment to
have been perceived to have gone more smoothly.
However, in our evaluation of the different types
of alignment, we note that alignment per se is not
necessarily a bad thing: Generally alignment of Po-
larity, Topic, and Construction are seen positively
leading to higher ratings of ‘getting on’, ‘smooth-
ness’, and increased accurate perception of Agree-
ableness; repetition of individual words is however
viewed negatively, and leads to lower ratings of ‘get-
ting on’ and ‘smoothness’.

46



There are a number of possible explanations for
these negative responses to our generated dialogue
alignment. They hinge on understanding what is
involved in generating alignment, or similar be-
haviour, in dialogue participants. First, it could be
that our dialogues encode the ‘wrong’ type of simi-
larity. For example, the alignment and entrainment
approaches to similarity usually study task-based di-
alogues, which often focus on establishing a shared
vocabulary for referencing objects (i.e., at the word
level). In such cases, the similarity arises either
through priming mechanisms, or the establishment
of common ground. Given that we used an align-
ment model to generate similarity in our dialogues,
this kind of repetition or similarity may seem incon-
gruent or out of place in dialogues that are not task-
based (cf. negative impact of word-level alignment).

A second explanation might be that similarity re-
lates to positive outcomes when it occurs over a
longer, rather than shorter, period of time (Reit-
ter, 2008). In the current study the dialogues con-
sisted of eight turns, thus similarity was not gener-
ated over a long period. Indeed, linguistic similarity
over a longer period of time may be more consis-
tent with perceptions of social similarity, such as in-
group, rather than outgroup, membership (Shepard
et al., 2001). Indeed, in such contexts word choice
is an important feature in dialogue and would be use-
ful to incorporate into a dialogue model to simulate
ingroup membership.

Third, in communication accommodation theory
it is ‘convergence’ – the process of increasing sim-
ilarity between interlocutors – which is important,
rather than similarity alone. In the current study,
convergence was not examined since the dialogues
were generated with static levels of alignment.

So how do these findings relate back to the area of
dialogue generation for applied contexts? Similarly
to findings for the PERSONAGE system (Mairesse
and Walker, 2010), personality in our generated di-
alogues is perceived with similar accuracy to the
way humans perceive personality of other humans.
This suggests that our CRAG 2 system can create
believable characters to whom the user can poten-
tially relate while auditing the dialogues, or using a
dialogue-based interface. That alignment can have
negative effects on dialogue perception we propose
is due to the form of alignment depicted in these gen-

erated dialogues (i.e., task-based nature emphasising
similarity at the word level), rather than alignment in
general. We do not take this result to necessarily in-
dicate that alignment in generated dialogues should
be avoided. Rather, its implementation should be
carefully considered, especially to ensure that the
form of similarity achieved makes sense in the com-
municative context. Indeed, as we show in the eval-
uation of the generated dialogues, alignment at the
Polarity, Topic, and Construction levels is gener-
ally viewed positively, however in contrast align-
ment at the Word level tends to be viewed more neg-
atively. One of the key suggestions arising from this
study is that the different forms of dialogue simi-
larity cannot simply be used interchangeably, with
alignment found in task-based dialogues which may
include many instances of word-level repetition and
alignment not necessarily appropriate in non-task
dialogues, and thus not automatically resulting in
perceptions of positivity. We note that non-native
speakers were more forgiving in their ratings of the
dialogues containing alignment. Given that they
were equally able to perceive the personality of the
characters, this may be due to non-native speakers
having fewer expectations of alignment behaviour
in dialogue. Indeed in some contexts, greater align-
ment, and thus repetition, may be beneficial for non-
native speakers auditing dialogues.

To conclude, personality in our generated dia-
logues was perceived with comparable accuracy to
human texts, but alignment or similarity between
speakers – especially at the word level – regarded
negatively. We would like to see future work exam-
ine further the responses to different forms of align-
ment, including convergence, in generated dialogue.

9 Acknowledgements

We acknowledge Edinburgh-Stanford Link funding,
and the partial support of the Future and Emerging
Technologies programme FP7-COSI-ICT of the Eu-
ropean Commission (project QLectives, grant no.:
231200). We thank Amy Isard, Scott Nowson and
Michael White for their assistance in this work. A
version of the paper was presented at the Twentieth
Society for Text and Discourse conference; thanks
to Herb Clark, Max Louwerse and Michael Schober
for their insights regarding linguistic similarity.

47



References

[Bortfeld and Brennan1997] H. Bortfeld and S. E. Bren-
nan. 1997. Use and acquisition of idiomatic expres-
sions in referring by native and non-native speakers.
Discourse Processes, 23:119–147.

[Brennan and Clark1996] Susan E. Brennan and Her-
bert H. Clark. 1996. Conceptual pacts and lexi-
cal choice in conversation. Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
22(6):1482–1493, November.

[Brennan1996] Susan E. Brennan. 1996. Lexical entrain-
ment in spontaneous dialog. In International Sympo-
sium on Spoken Dialog, pages 41–44.

[Brockmann2009] Carsten Brockmann. 2009. Personal-
ity and Alignment Processes in Dialogue: Towards a

Lexically-Based Unified Model. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sity of Edinburgh, UK.

[Cassell et al.2000] Justine Cassell, Joseph Sullivan, Scott
Prevost, and Elizabeth Churchill, editors. 2000. Em-
bodied Conversational Agents. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA, USA.

[Foster and White2004] Mary Ellen Foster and Michael
White. 2004. Techniques for text planning with
XSLT. In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on NLP
and XML (NLPXML-04) at the 42nd Annual Meet-

ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics

(ACL-04), pages 1–8, Barcelona, Spain.
[Gill and Oberlander2002] Alastair J. Gill and Jon Ober-

lander. 2002. Taking care of the linguistic features of
extraversion. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual Con-
ference of the Cognitive Science Society (CogSci2002),
pages 363–368, Fairfax, VA, USA.

[Gill et al.2006] Alastair J. Gill, Jon Oberlander, and Eliz-
abeth Austin. 2006. Rating e-mail personality at zero
acquaintance. Personality and Individual Differences,
40(3):497–507.

[Hernault et al.2008] Hugo Hernault, Paul Piwek, Helmut
Prendinger, and Mitsuru Ishizuka. 2008. Generating
dialogues for virtual agents using nested textual coher-
ence relations. In Proceedings of Intelligent Virtual
Agents, pages 139–145.

[Isbister and Nass2000] Katherine Isbister and Clifford
Nass. 2000. Consistency of personality in inter-
active characters: verbal cues, non-verbal cues, and
user characteristics. International Journal of Human–
Computer Studies, 53(2):251–267.

[Li and Chignell2010] J. Li and M. Chignell. 2010. Birds
of a feather: How personality influences blog writ-
ing and reading. Int. J. Human-Computer Studies,
68:589–602.

[Mairesse and Walker2010] François Mairesse and Mari-
lyn Walker. 2010. Towards personality-based user

adaptation: Psychologically informed stylistic lan-
guage generation. User Modeling and User-Adapted
Interaction, 20(3):227–278.

[Niederhoffer and Pennebaker2002] Kate G. Niederhof-
fer and James W. Pennebaker. 2002. Linguistic style
matching in social interaction. Journal of Language
and Social Psychology, 21(4):337–360.

[Nowson et al.2005] S. Nowson, J. Oberlander, and A.J.
Gill. 2005. Weblogs, genres and individual differ-
ences. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 1666–1671.

[Pennebaker and King1999] James W. Pennebaker and
Laura A. King. 1999. Linguistic styles: Language
use as an individual difference. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 77(6):1296–1312.

[Pickering and Garrod2004] Martin J. Pickering and Si-
mon Garrod. 2004. Toward a mechanistic psychol-
ogy of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
27(2):169–225.

[Porzel et al.2006] Robert Porzel, Annika Scheffler, and
Rainer Malaka. 2006. How entrainment increases di-
alogical efficiency. In Proceedings of Workshop on on
Effective Multimodal Dialogue Interfaces.

[Rammstedt and Schupp2008] Beatrice Rammstedt and
Jürgen Schupp. 2008. Only the congruent survive –
personality similarities in couples. Personality and In-
dividual Differences, 45(6):533–535.

[Reitter2008] David Reitter. 2008. Context Effects in
Language Production: Models of Syntactic Priming in

Dialogue Corpora. Ph.D. thesis, University of Edin-
burgh, UK.

[Shepard et al.2001] Carolyn A. Shepard, Howard Giles,
and Beth A. Le Poire. 2001. Communication accom-
modation theory. In W. Peter Robinson and Howard
Giles, editors, The New Handbook of Language and
Social Psychology, chapter 1.2, pages 33–56. John Wi-
ley & Sons, Chichester, UK.

[van Deemter et al.2008] Kees van Deemter, Brigitte
Krenn, Paul Piwek, Martin Klesen, Marc Schröder,
and Stefan Baumann. 2008. Fully generated scripted
dialogue for embodied agents. Artificial Intelligence,
172(10):1219–1244.

[White2006a] Michael White. 2006a. CCG chart real-
ization from disjunctive inputs. In Proceedings of the
4th International Natural Language Generation Con-

ference (INLG-06), pages 9–16, Sydney, Australia.
[White2006b] Michael White. 2006b. Efficient realiza-

tion of coordinate structures in Combinatory Catego-
rial Grammar. Research on Language and Computa-
tion, 4(1):39–75.

48


