










































Mining wisdom


Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 54–58,
Montréal, Canada, June 8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Mining wisdom

Anders Søgaard
Center for Language Technology

University of Copenhagen
DK-2300 Copenhagen S
soegaard@hum.ku.dk

Abstract

Simple text classification algorithms perform
remarkably well when used for detecting fa-
mous quotes in literary or philosophical text,
with f-scores approaching 95%. We compare
the task to topic classification, polarity classi-
fication and authorship attribution.

1 Introduction

Mark Twain famously said that ’the difference be-
tween the right word and the almost-right word is
the difference between lightning and a lightning
bug.’ Twain’s quote is also about the importance
of quotes. A great quote can come in handy when
you are looking to inspire people, make them laugh
or persuade people to believe in a particular point of
view. Quotes are emblems that serve to remind us of
philosophical or political stand-points, world views,
perspectives that comfort or entertain us. Famous
quotes such as ’Cogito ergo sum’ (Descartes) and
’God is dead’ (Nietzsche) occur millions of times
on the Internet.

The importance of quotes has motivated publish-
ing houses to create and publish large collections of
quotes. In this process, the editor typically spends
years reading philosophy books, literature, and in-
terviews to find good quotes, but this process is both
expensive and cumbersome. In this paper, we con-
sider the possibility of automatically learning what
is a good quote, and what is not.

1.1 Related work
While there seems to have been no previous work
on identifying quotes, the task is very similar to

widely studied tasks such as topic classification, po-
larity classification, (lexical sample) word sense dis-
ambiguation (WSD) and authorship attribution. In
most of these applications, texts are represented as
bags-of-words, i.e. a text is represented as a vector
x = 〈x1, . . . , xN 〉 where each xi encodes the pres-
ence and possibly the frequency of an n-gram. It is
common to exclude stop words or closed class items
such as pronouns and adpositions from the set of n-
grams when constructing the bags-of-words. Some-
times lemmatization or word clustering is also used
to avoid data sparsity.

Topic classification is the classic problem in text
classification of distinguishing articles on a partic-
ular topic from other articles on other topics, say
sports from international politics and letters to the
editor. Several resources exist for evaluating topic
classifiers such as Reuters 20 Newsgroups. Com-
mon baselines are Naive Bayes, logistic regression,
or SVM classifiers trained on bag-of-words repre-
sentations of n-grams with stop words removed.

While newspaper articles typically consist of tens
or hundreds of sentences, famous quotes typically
consist of one or two sentences, and it is interest-
ing to compare quotation mining to work on apply-
ing topic classification techniques to short texts or
sentences (Cohen et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2005;
Khoo et al., 2006). Cohen et al. (2003) and Khoo et
al. (2006) classify sentences in email wrt. their role
in discourse. Khoo et al. (2006) argue that extend-
ing a bag-of-words representation with frequency
counts is meaningless in small text and restrict them-
selves to binary representations. They show empir-
ically that excluding stop words and lemmatization

54



both lead to impoverished results. We also observe
that stop words are extremely useful for quotation
mining.

Polarity classification is the task of determining
whether an opinionated text about a particular topic,
say a user review of a product, is positive or neg-
ative. Polarity classification is different from quo-
tation mining in that there is a small set of strong
predictors of polarity (pivot features) (Wang et al.,
2005; Blitzer et al., 2007), e.g. the polarity words
listed in subjectivity lexica, including opinionated
adjectives such as good or awful. The meaning of
polarity words is context-sensitive, however, so con-
text is extremely important when modeling polarity.

Some quotes are expressions of opinion, and there
has been some previous research on polarity classifi-
cation in direct quotations (not famous quotes). Bal-
ahur et al. (2009) present work on polarity classifica-
tion of newspaper quotations, for example. They use
an SVM classifier on a bag-of-words representation
of direct quotes in the news, but using only words
taken from subjectivity lexica as features. Drury et
al. (2011) present a strategy for polarity classifica-
tion of direct quotations from financial news. They
use a Naive Bayes classifier on a bag-of-words mod-
els of unigrams, but learn group-specific models for
analysts and CEOs.

WSD. The lexical sample task in WSD is the task
of determining the meaning of a specific target word
in context. Mooney (1996) argues that Naive Bayes
classification and perceptron classifiers are particu-
larly fit for lexical sample word sense disambigua-
tion problems, because they combine weighted evi-
dence from all features rather than select a subset of
features for early discrimination. This of course also
holds for logistic regression and SVMs. Whether
a sentence is a good quotation or not also depends
on many aspects of the sentence, and experiments
on held-out data comparing Naive Bayes with deci-
sion tree-based learning algorithms, also mentioned
in Sect. 5, clearly demonstrated that early discrimi-
nation based on single features is a bad idea. In this
respect, quotation mining is more similar to lexical
sample WSD than to topic and polarity classification
where there is a small set of pivot features.

Authorship attribution is the task of determin-
ing which of a given set of authors wrote a particular
text. One of the insights from authorship attribution

Positives
Two lives that once part are as ships that divide.
My appointed work is to awaken the divine nature that is within.
Discussion in America means dissent.
Negatives
The business was finished, and Harriet safe.
But how shall I do? What shall I say?
I am quite determined to refuse him.

Figure 1: Examples.

is that stop words are important when you want to
learn stylistic differences. Stylistic differences can
be identified from the distribution of closed class
words (Arun et al., 2009). As already mentioned,
we observe the same holds for quotation mining.

In conclusion, early-discrimination learning algo-
rithms do not seem motivated for applications such
as mining quotes where pivot features are hard to
choose a priori. Furthermore, we hypothesize that
it is better not to exclude stop words. Quotation
mining can thus in our view be thought of as an ap-
plication that is similar to sentence classification in
that famous quotes are relatively small, and similar
to authorship attribution in that style is an important
predictor of whether a sentence is a famous quote.

2 Data

We obtain the database of famous quotes from a
popular on-line collection of quotes1 and use philo-
sophical and literary text sampled from the Guten-
berg corpus as negative data. In particular we use
the portion of Gutenberg documents that is dis-
tributed in the corpora collection at NLTK.2 This
gives us a total of 44,385 positive data points (fa-
mous quotes) and 247,115 negative data points (or-
dinary sentences). In our experiments we use the
top 4,000 data points in each sample, i.e. a total of
8,000 data points, except for when we derive a learn-
ing curve later on, which uses up to 2× 20, 000 data
points. Some sample data points are presented in
Figure 1.

3 Experiment

Each data point is represented as a binary bag-of-
words - or bag-of-n-grams, really. Our initial hy-
pothesis was to include stop words and keep infor-

1http://quotationsbook.com
2http://nltk.org

55



mation about case (capital letters). Stop words are
extremely important to distinguish between literary
styles, and we speculated that quotes can be dis-
tinguished from ordinary text in part by their style.
We also speculated that there would be a tendency
to capitalize some words in quotes, e.g. ’God’, ’the
Other’, or ’the World’. Finally, we hypothesized that
including more context would be beneficial. Our in-
tuition was that sometimes larger chunks such as ’He
who’ may indicate that a sentence is a quote without
the component words being indicative of that in any
way.

To evaluate these hypotheses we considered a lo-
gistic regression classifier over bag-of-word repre-
sentations of the quotes and our neutral sentences.
We used a publicly available implementation3 of
limited memory L-BFGS to find the weights that
maximize the log-likelihood of the training data:

ŵ = arg max
w

∑
i

y(i) log
1

1 + e−w·x
+ (1− y(i))

log
e−w·x

1 + e−w·x

where w · x is the dot product of weights and bi-
nary features in the usual way. We prefer logistic re-
gression over Naive Bayes, since logistic regression
is more resistant to possible dependencies between
variables. The conditional likelihood maximization
in logistic regression will adjust its parameters to
maximize the fit even when the resulting parameters
are inconsistent with the Naive Bayes assumption.
Finally, logistic regression is less sensitive to param-
eter tuning than SVMs, so to avoid expensive param-
eter optimization we settled for logistic regression.

To test the importance of case, we did experi-
ments with and without lowercasing of all words.
To test the importance of stop words, we did experi-
ments where stop words had been removed from the
texts in advance. We also considered models with
bigrams and trigrams to test the impact of bigger
units of text (context). Finally, we varied the size
of the dataset to obtain a learning curve suggesting
how our model would perform in the limit.

3http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/

1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
n-grams (n<=x)

84

86

88

90

92

F1
 (
p
o
si
ti
v
e
s)

logregr
logregr(case)
logregr(nostop)

Figure 2: Results with n-grams of different sizes w/o
lower-casing and w/o stop words.

4 Results

We report f-scores obtained by 10-fold cross-
validation over a balanced 8,000 data points in Fig-
ure 2. The green line is our hypothesis model us-
ing n-grams of up to different lengths (1, 2 and 3).
In this model features are not lower-cased (case is
preserved), and stop words are included. This cor-
responds to our hypotheses about what would work
best for quotation mining. The green line tells us
that our unigram model is considerably better than
our bigram and trigram models. This is probably
because the bigrams and trigrams are too sparsely
distributed in our data selection.

The blue line represents results with lowercased
features. This means that features will be less sparse,
and we now see that the bigram model is slightly
better than the unigram model.

The red line represents results where stop words
have been removed. This would be a typical model
for topic classification. We see that this performs
radically worse than the other two models, suggest-
ing that our hypothesis about the usefulness of stop
words for quotation mining was correct. The obser-
vation that the bigram and trigram models without
stop words are much worse than the unigram model
without stop words is most likely due to the extra
sparsity introduced by open class trigrams.

Our main result is that with sufficient training data
the f-score for detecting famous quotes in philosoph-
ical and literary text approaches 95%. The learning
curves in Figure 3 are the results of our hypothesis

56



Source Quote
Bill Clinton’s Inaugural 1992 Powerful people maneuver for position and worry endlessly about who is in and who is out,

who is up and who is down, forgetting those people whose toil and sweat sends us here and
paves our way.

Bill Clinton’s Inaugural 1997 But let us never forget : The greatest progress we have made, and the greatest progress we
have yet to make, is in the human heart.

PTB CoNLL 2007 test When the dollar is in a free-fall , even central banks can’t stop it .
Europarl 01-17-00 Our citizens can not accept that the European Union takes decisions in a way that is, at least

on the face of it, bureaucratic .
Europarl 01-18-00 If competition policy is to be made subordinate to the aims of social and environmental

policy , real efficiency and economic growth will remain just a dream .
Europarl 01-19-00 For Europe to become the symbol of peace and fraternity , we need a bold and generous

policy to come to the aid of the most disadvantaged .

Figure 4: The sentence with highest probability of being a quote in each corpus according to our 20K logistic regression
unigram model).

0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000
data points

91.0

91.5

92.0

92.5

93.0

93.5

94.0

94.5

95.0

F1
 (
p
o
si
ti
v
e
s)

unigrams
bigrams

Figure 3: Learning curves for unigram and bigram mod-
els without lower-casing and with stop words.

model (green line in Figure 2) obtained with vary-
ing amounts of training data, from 4,000 to 40,000
data points. The learning curves also confirm that
the bigram model was suffering from sparsity with
smaller data selections, and we observe that the bi-
gram model becomes superior to the unigram model
with about 30,000 data points. The learning curves
show that F-scores for positive class approach 95%
as we add more training data.

5 Discussion

To confirm Mooney’s hypothesis that it is better to
combine weighted evidence from all features rather
than select a subset of features for early discrimi-
nation, also in the case of mining quotes, we ran a
decision tree algorithm on the same data sets used

above. The f-score for detecting quotes was consis-
tently below 65%.

The decision tree algorithm tries to find good fea-
tures for early discrimination. Interestingly, one of
the most discriminative features picked up by the
decision tree from trigram data with case preserved
was the bigram ’He who’. This feature was used
to split 500 sentences, leaving only 11 in the minor-
ity class. Other discriminative features include ’Peo-
ple’, ’we are’, ’if you have’, and ’Nothing is more’.

Similarly, we can observe remarkable differences
in marginal distributions by considering the most
frequent words in positive and negative texts. Words
such as ”who”, ”all”, ”word”, and ”things” occur
much more frequently in quotes than in more bal-
anced literary philosophical text. Interestingly ’–’
is also a very good predictor of a sentence being a
potential quote.

Finally, we ran a model on other corpora to iden-
tify novel candidates of famous quotes (Figure 4).
We ran it on texts where you would expect to find
potential famous quotes (e.g. inaugurals), as well as
on texts where you would not expect that.

6 Conclusion

Simple text classification algorithms perform re-
markably well when used for detecting famous
quotes in literary or philosophical text, with f-scores
approaching 95%. We compare the task to topic
classification, polarity classification and authorship
attribution and observe that unlike in topic classifi-
cation, stop words are extremely useful for quotation
mining.

57



References
R Arun, R Saradha, V Suresh, M Murty, and C Madha-

van. 2009. Stopwords and stylometry: a latent Dirich-
let allocation approach. In NIPS workshop on Appli-
cations for Topic Models.

Alexandra Balahor, Ralf Steinberger, Erik van der
Goot, Bruno Pouliquen, and Mijail Kabadjov. 2009.
Opinion mining on newspaper quotations. In
IEEE/WIC/ACM Web Intelligence.

John Blitzer, Mark Dredze, and Fernando Pereira. 2007.
Biographies, bollywood, boom-boxes and blenders:
Domain adaptation for sentiment classification. In
ACL.

William Cohen, Vitor Carvalho, and Tom Mitchell. 2003.
Learning to classify email into ”speech acts”. In
EMNLP.

Brett Drury, Gaël Dias, and Luis Torgo. 2011. A con-
textual classification strategy for polarity analysis of
direct quotations from financial news. In RANLP.

Anthony Khoo, Yuval Marom, and David Albrecht.
2006. Experiments with sentence classification. In
ALTW.

Raymond Mooney. 1996. Comparative experiments on
disambiguating word senses. In EMNLP.

Chao Wang, Jie Lu, and Guangquan Zhang. 2005. A
semantic classification approach for online product re-
views. In IEEE/WIC/ACM Web Intelligence.

58


