










































Up from Limited Dialog Systems!


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Future directions and needs in the Spoken Dialog Community: Tools and Data, pages 1–2,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Up from Limited Dialog Systems!

Giuseppe Riccardi
University of Trento
via Sommarive, 14
38050, Trento, Italy
riccardi@disi.unitn.it

Philipp Cimiano
Bielefeld University

Universitätsstraße 21–23
33615, Bielefeld, Germany
cimiano@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de

Alexandros Potamianos
Technical University of Crete

73100, Chania
Crete, Greece

potam@telecom.tuc.gr

Christina Unger
Bielefeld University

Universitätsstraße 21–23
33615, Bielefeld, Germany
cunger@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de

Abstract

In the last two decades, information-seeking
spoken dialog systems (SDS) have moved
from research prototypes to real-life commer-
cial applications. Still, dialog systems are lim-
ited by the scale, complexity of the task and
coverage of knowledge required by problem-
solving machines or mobile personal assis-
tants. Future spoken interaction are required
to be multilingual, understand and act on large
scale knowledge bases in all its forms (from
structured to unstructured). The Web re-
search community have striven to build large
scale and open multilingual resources (e.g.
Wikipedia) and knowledge bases (e.g. Yago).
We argue that a) it is crucial to leverage
this massive amount of Web lightly structured
knowledge and b) the scale issue can be ad-
dressed collaboratively and design open stan-
dards to make tools and resources available to
the whole speech and language community.

1 Introduction

In the last two decades, interactive spoken dialog
systems (SDS) have moved from research proto-
types to real-life commercial applications (Tur and
De Mori, 2011). Generally, SDS are built for a
specific task (e.g. call routing) with ad-hoc lim-
ited knowledge base and for a predefined target lan-
guage. However, one major limitation in commer-
cial SDS prototyping is that they are not easily and
quickly extensible and portable to new domains or
languages. Such porting requirements range from
defining (or extending) a domain ontology to hand-
crafting a new grammar or training stochastic mod-

els for speech recognition and understanding. These
are the research and engineering goals motivating
the PortDial project whose objectives include the
engagement of the whole technical community. In
the PortDial project we would like to engage re-
searchers in building resources that may be gener-
ated via top-down processes (grammars), bottom-up
processes (statistical models) or via a fusion of both.
In this position paper we want to address the crit-
ical limitations of SDS systems: a) poor ability to
cover the knowledge space and its interface to the
SDS components (speech recognition, language un-
derstanding and dialog manager) and b) collabora-
tively design open standards to make tools and re-
sources available to the whole speech and language
community.

2 Exploiting top-down knowledge

There are at least three main kinds of structured
knowledge sources that SDS modules may ex-
ploit: ontologies, grammars, and lexica. Ontolo-
gies explicitly model background knowledge about
a certain domain. In the last years, many free
and open collaboratively created resources have
emerged, including large multi-lingual corpora such
as Wikipedia, and broad-coverage ontologies, e.g.
as part of the Linked Data Cloud (Bizer et al., 2009),
either created manually or extracted automatically
from existing data (such as DBpedia or Yago). How-
ever, while also lexica such as Wiktionary are avail-
able today on the Web, ontologies typically lack in-
formation about linguistic realization. For this rea-
son, ontologies available on the Web are not di-
rectly exploitable by dialog systems. Linguistic in-

1



formation is commonly captured in grammars, that
are either hand-crafted or created by means of ma-
chine learning techniques. In order to be able to
generate high-quality grammars with as little man-
ual effort as possible, we aim at (semi) automat-
ing the knowledge-based generation of lexica and
grammars. To achieve this, it is crucial to lever-
age Web resources for enriching ontologies with
lexical and linguistic information, i.e. informa-
tion about how ontological concepts are lexicalized
in different languages, capturing in particular lex-
ical and syntactic variation (Unger et al., 2010).
This knowledge-centered grammar generation pro-
cess may be merged with methods for automatically
inferring structure from lightly annotated corpus, in-
cluding data harvested from the Web, in a bottom-
up fashion (Tur and De Mori, 2011). For a dialog
system to be able to exploit ontologies, lexica and
grammars, these three resources need to be tightly
aligned, i.e. they need to share domain-relevant vo-
cabulary. For this alignment, we propose to build on
Semantic Web standards, mainly in order to support
the incorporation of already existing data, to share
resources for SDS engineering, and facilitate collab-
orative knowledge engineering. From a larger per-
spective, such an approach has the potential of cre-
ating SDS resources (ontologies, lexica and gram-
mars) that are strongly aligned with each other as
well as with other resources available on the Web,
thus fostering the creation of an eco-system of linked
resources that can be reused to facilitate the process
of engineering and porting a dialog system to new
domains and languages.

3 Collaboratively building and sharing
knowledge

Today the lack of reusable linguistic resources and
annotated data hinders the rapid development of
spoken dialog systems in industry and academia
alike. Despite progress in standardization of the
format of SDS grammars and semantic represen-
tations, the data proper has to be hand-crafted for
new applications and languages with little or no au-
tomation available. We argue above that language
engineering technology is now mature to help cre-
ate such linguistic resources automatically or semi-
automatically using data that is either harvested

from the web or via community crowdsourcing us-
ing the “collective wisdom of expert crowds”. Al-
though providing linguistic resources and tools for
cost-effective SDS development is important and
relevant, a data pool that is not openly sharable and
continuously enriched fails its purpose. It is thus im-
portant to guarantee the sustainability of the linguis-
tic SDS resources engineered via a community that
both uses and actively develops the data pool. To-
wards this end, we envision both a free and premium
data exchange targeting non-commercial users that
can maintain and enrich the free version of the data
pool, and commercial speech services developers
that can contribute to the premium data pool via
an electronic marketplace. This is the model we
are launching within the EC-funded PortDial project
and aiming at involving the research community at
large and existing communities for sharing linguistic
resources, such as METANET and METASHARE1.
We believe that the creation of sharable SDS data
and linguistic resources for both academic and com-
mercial use will lead to the democratization of spo-
ken dialog systems development, reduce the barrier
to entry for new developers, as well as lead to im-
proved technologies for authoring speech services.

References
C. Bizer, T. Heath, and T. Berners-Lee. 2009. Linked

data-the story so far. International Journal on Seman-
tic Web and Information Systems, 14:9.

G. Tur and R. De Mori, editors. 2011. Spoken Language
Understanding: Systems for Extracting Semantic In-
formation from Speech. Wiley.

Christina Unger, Felix Hieber, and Philipp Cimiano.
2010. Generating LTAG grammars from a lexicon-
ontology interface. In Srinivas Bangalore, Robert
Frank, and Maribel Romero, editors, Proceedings of
the 10th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining
Grammars and Related Formalisms (TAG+10), pages
61–68, 06/2010.

1http://www.meta-net.eu/meta-share

2


