










































Automatically generated NE tagged corpora for English and Hungarian


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 38–46,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatically generated NE tagged corpora for English and Hungarian

Dávid Márk Nemeskey
Research Institute for

Computer Science and Automation
Hungarian Academy of Sciences

H-1111 Kende utca 13-17, Budapest
nemeskey.david@sztaki.mta.hu

Eszter Simon
Research Institute for Linguistics
Hungarian Academy of Sciences

H-1068 Benczúr utca 33, Budapest
simon.eszter@nytud.mta.hu

Abstract

Supervised Named Entity Recognizers require
large amounts of annotated text. Since manual
annotation is a highly costly procedure, reduc-
ing the annotation cost is essential. We present
a fully automatic method to build NE anno-
tated corpora from Wikipedia. In contrast to
recent work, we apply a new method, which
maps the DBpedia classes into CoNLL NE
types. Since our method is mainly language-
independent, we used it to generate corpora
for English and Hungarian. The corpora are
freely available.

1 Introduction

Named Entity Recognition (NER), the task of iden-
tifying Named Entities (NEs) in unstructured texts
and classifying them into pre-selected classes, is
one of the most important subtasks in many NLP
tasks, such as information retrieval, information ex-
traction or machine translation. The NER task
was introduced with the 6th Message Understanding
Conference (MUC) in 1995 (Grishman and Sund-
heim, 1996). In MUC shared tasks the NER con-
sists of three subtasks: entity names, temporal and
number expressions. Although there is a general
agreement in the NER community about the inclu-
sion of temporal expressions and some numerical
expressions, the most studied types are names of
persons, locations and organizations. The fourth
type, called “miscellaneous”, was introduced in the
CoNLL NER tasks in 2002 (Tjong Kim Sang, 2002)
and 2003 (Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder, 2003),
and includes proper names falling outside the three

classic types. Since then, MUC and CoNLL datasets
and annotation schemes have been the major stan-
dards applied in the field of NER.

The standard datasets are highly domain-specific
(mostly newswire) and are restricted in size. Re-
searchers attempting to merge these datasets to get
a bigger training corpus are faced with the prob-
lem of combining different tagsets and annotation
schemes. Manually annotating large amounts of
text with linguistic information is a time-consuming,
highly skilled and delicate job, but large, accurately
annotated corpora are essential for building robust
supervised machine learning NER systems. There-
fore, reducing the annotation cost is a key challenge.

One approach is to generate the resources auto-
matically, another one is to use collaborative anno-
tation and/or collaboratively constructed resources,
such as Wikipedia, Wiktionary, Linked Open Data,
or DBpedia. In this paper we combine these ap-
proaches by automatically generating freely avail-
able NE tagged corpora from Wikipedia.

The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2
we give an overview of related work. Section 3
contains a description of our method, and Section
4 shows how it is applied to Hungarian. The corpus
format is described in Section 5. In Section 6 we
present experiments and results on the newly gener-
ated datasets. Section 7 concludes the paper with a
summary.

2 Wikipedia and NER

Wikipedia (WP, see http://wikipedia.org),
a free multilingual Internet encyclopedia, written
collaboratively by volunteers, is a goldmine of infor-

38



mation: at the time of writing, WP contains about 21
million interlinked articles. Of these, 3,903,467 are
English, and 212,120 are Hungarian. WP has been
applied to several NLP tasks such as word sense dis-
ambiguation, ontology and thesaurus building, and
question answering (see Medelyan et al. (2009) for
a survey). It is recognized as one of the largest
available collections of entities, and also as a re-
source that can improve the accuracy of NER. The
most obvious utilization of WP for NER is extract-
ing gazetteers containing person names, locations or
organizations (e.g. Toral and Muñoz (2006)). Cre-
ating dictionaries of entities is also a common step
of NE disambiguation (Bunescu and Pasca, 2006;
Cucerzan, 2007). Both supervised and unsuper-
vised NER systems use such lists, see e.g. Nadeau
et al. (2006) The knowledge embodied in WP may
also be incorporated in NER learning as features,
e.g. Kazama and Torisawa (2007) showed that au-
tomatic extraction of category labels from WP im-
proves the accuracy of a supervised NE tagger.

Another approach to improve NER with WP is
the automatic creation of training data. Richman
and Schone (2008) built corpora for less commonly
taught languages annotated with NE tags. They
used the inherent category structure of WP to de-
termine the NE type of a proposed entity. Nothman
et al. (2008) used a similar method to create a NE
annotated text in English. They transformed the WP
links into NE annotations by classifying the target
articles into standard entity classes. Their approach
to classification is based primarily on category head
nouns and the opening sentences of articles where
definitions are often given.

Our approach to recognize and classify NEs in
corpora generated from WP was to map the DBpedia
ontology classes to standard NE tags and assign
these to WP entities (see more details in Section
3.1). Except for the Semantically Annotated Snap-
shot of the English WP (SASWP) (Zaragoza et al.,
2007), no such automatically built corpora are freely
available. SASWP provides a wide range of lin-
guistic information: POS tags, dependency labels,
WordNet super senses and NE annotation accord-
ing to WSJ and CoNLL tagsets. Even though the
SASWP NEs were tagged by the best available open
source taggers, the tags provided here, being based
on the manual judgement of thousands of WP volun-

teers, are more reliable. Given the huge number of
WP articles we can build sufficiently large corpora
for less resourced languages as well, as our method
is largely language-independent. We demonstrate
this on Hungarian, a highly agglutinative language,
with free word order and other typological char-
acteristics detailed later in Section 4. There are
smaller, manually annotated CoNLL-style datasets,
but the one presented here is the first automatically
NE annotated corpus for Hungarian.

3 Creating the English Corpus

Our goal is to create a large NE annotated corpus,
automatically generated from WP articles. We fol-
lowed a similar path to Nothman et al. (2008) and
broke down the process into four steps:

1. Classify WP articles into entity classes.

2. Parse WP and split articles into sentences.

3. Label named entities in the text.

4. Select the sentences for inclusion in the corpus.

In this section, we describe how these steps were
implemented. This section explains the general ap-
proach and its execution for English; Section 4 de-
scribes how the idea is adapted to Hungarian.

3.1 Articles as Entities

Many authors, such as Kazama and Torisawa (2007)
and Nothman et al. (2008) used semi-supervised
methods based on WP categories and text to clas-
sify articles into NE types. To avoid the inevitable
classification errors, we obtain entity type informa-
tion from the DBpedia knowledge base (Bizer et al.,
2009), which presents type, properties, home pages,
etc. information about pages in WP in structured
form. With DBpedia we have high precision infor-
mation about entity types at the expense of recall:
of the 3,903,467 English WP pages, 1,470,293 are
covered by DBpedia (as of 18 March, 2012).

The types in DBpedia are organized into a class
hierarchy, available as an OWL1 ontology contain-
ing 320 frequent entity categories, arranged into
a taxonomy under the base class owl:Thing.

1http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/

39



Most of the classes belong to the 6 largest sub-
hierarchies: Person, Organisation, Event,
Place, Species and Work. The taxonomy is
rather flat: the top level contains 44 classes and there
are several nodes with a branching factor of 20.

The type of entities is extracted automatically
from WP categories. However, the mapping be-
tween WP categories and classes in the DBpedia
ontology is manually defined. This, together with
the fact that the existence of the reference ontology
prevents the proliferation of categories observable in
WP (Bizer et al., 2009), ensures that type informa-
tion in DBpedia can be considered gold quality.

From the available NER annotation standards we
elected to use the CoNLL (Tjong Kim Sang and De
Meulder, 2003) NE types. It is not difficult to see
the parallels between the DBpedia sub-hierarchies
Person, Organisation and Place and the
CoNLL NE types PER, ORG and LOC. The fourth
category, MISC is more elusive; according to the
CoNLL NER annotation guide2, the sub-hierarchies
Event and Work belong to this category, as well as
various other classes outside the main hierarchies.

While the correspondence described above holds
for most classes in the sub-hierarchies, there
are some exceptions. For instance, the class
SportsLeague is part of the Organisation
sub-hierarchy, but according to the CoNLL anno-
tation scheme, they should be tagged as MISC. To
avoid misclassification, we created a file of DBpedia
class–NE category mappings. Whenever an entity is
evaluated, we look up its class and the ancestors of
its class, and assign to it the category of the class
that matches it most closely. If no match is found,
the entity is tagged with O.

As of version 3.7, the DBpedia ontology allows
multiple superclasses, making a directed acyclic
graph3. Since selecting the right superclass, and
hence, CoNLL tag, for classes with more than one
parent cannot be reliably done automatically, the
class-to-category mapping had to be determined
manually. The only such class in version 3.7,
Library, can be traced back to both Place and
Organisation; its CoNLL tag is LOC. Using the
mapping thus created, we compile a list that contains

2http://www.cnts.ua.ac.be/conll2003/ner/annotation.txt
3http://blog.dbpedia.org/2011/09/11/dbpedia-37-released-

including-15-localized-editions

all entities in DBpedia tagged with the appropriate
CoNLL category.

We note here that our method can be trivially
modified to work with any tagset compatible with
the DBpedia ontology (indeed, the DBpedia classes
define a NE tagset themselves), but we leave the ex-
ploration of these possibilities for future work.

3.2 Parsing Wikipedia

WP is a rich source of information; in addition to
the article text, a huge amount of data is embedded
in infoboxes, templates, and the category structure.
Our task requires only the links between the articles
and the article text. In addition to in-article links,
our method takes advantage of the redirect and in-
terlanguage links, available as SQL dumps. The
English corpus is based on the WP snapshot as of
January 15, 2011. The XML files were parsed by
the mwlib parser4, the raw text was tokenized by a
modified version of the Punkt sentence and word to-
kenizers (Kiss and Strunk, 2002). For lemmatization
we used the Wordnet Lemmatizer in NLTK (Bird et
al., 2009), and for part-of-speech tagging the Hun-
POS tagger (Halácsy et al., 2007).

3.3 Named Entity Labeling

In order to automatically prepare sentences where
NEs are accurately tagged, two tasks need to be per-
formed: identifying entities in the sentence and tag-
ging them with the correct tag. Sentences for which
accurate tagging could not be accomplished must be
removed from the corpus. Our approach is based on
the work of Nothman et al. (2008). The WP cross-
references found in the article text are used to iden-
tify entities. We assume that individual WP articles
describe NEs. A link to an article can then be per-
ceived as a mapping that identifies its anchor text
with a particular NE.

The discovered entities are tagged with the
CoNLL label assigned to them in the entity list ex-
tracted from DBpedia. If the link target is not in
the entity list, or the link points to a disambiguation
page, we cannot determine the type of the entity, and
tag it as UNK for subsequent removal from the cor-
pus. Links to redirect pages are resolved to point in-
stead to the redirect target, after which they are han-

4http://code.pediapress.com

40



dled as regular cross-references. Finally, sentences
with UNK links in them are removed from the cor-
pus.

The following sub-sections describe how the
method explained above can be improved to in-
crease precision, sentence coverage and to account
for peculiarities in the English orthography and the
CoNLL guidelines.

3.3.1 Non-entity Links
Strictly speaking, our original assumption of

equating WP articles with NEs is not valid: many
pages describe common nouns (Book, Aircraft),
calendar-related concepts (March 15, 2007), or other
concepts that fall outside the scope of NER. To in-
crease sentence coverage, we modified the algorithm
to prevent it from misclassifying links to these pages
as unknown entities and discarding the sentence.

Common noun links are filtered by POS tags; if a
link contains no NNPs, it is ignored.

Time expression links require special attention, be-
cause dates and months are often linked to the
respective WP pages. We circumvented this
problem by compiling a list of calendar-related
pages and adding them to the main entity list
tagged with the CoNLL category O.

Lowercase links for entities referred to by common
nouns, such as republic to Roman Republic are
not considered NEs and are ignored.

3.3.2 Unmarked Entities
In a WP article, typically only the first occurrence

of a particular entity is linked to the corresponding
page. Subsequent mentions are unmarked and often
incomplete – e.g. family names are used instead of
full names. To account for such mentions, we ap-
ply Nothman’s (2008) solution. For each page, we
maintain a list of entities discovered in the page so
far and try to associate capitalized words in the ar-
ticle text with these entities. We augment the list
with the aliases of every entity, such as titles of redi-
rect pages that target it, the first and last names in
case of a PER entity and any numbers in the name.
If the current page is a NE, the title and its aliases
are added to the list as well; moreover, as WP usu-
ally includes the original name of foreign entities in

the article text, localized versions of the title are also
added to the list as aliases. Nothman’s solution used
a trie to store the entity list, while we use a set, with
more alias types than what he used. We expect more
precise tagging from our slightly more rigorous so-
lution.

3.3.3 Special Cases
Derived words According to the CoNLL guide-

lines, words derived from NEs are tagged as
MISC. We complied with this rule by tagging
each entity whose head is not a noun, as well
as when the link’s anchor text is not contained
in the entity’s name, as MISC. The most promi-
nent example for such entities are nationalities,
which can be linked to their home country, a
LOC; e.g. Turkish to Turkey. Our solution as-
signs the correct tag to these entities.

First word in a sentence As first words are always
capitalized, labeling them is difficult if they are
unlinked and not contained in the entity alias
set. We base the decision on the POS tag of
the first word: if it is NNP, we tag it as UNK;
otherwise, O.

Reference cleansing Page titles and anchor texts
may contain more than just the entity name.
Personal titles are part of the entity name in
WP, but not in CoNLL, and punctuation marks
around the entity may become part of the link
by mistake. We tag all punctuation marks after
the entity name as O.

To handle personal titles, we extracted a list
from the WP page List of titles, which con-
tains titles in many languages. We manually
removed all titles that also function as given
names, such as Regina. If a link to a PER or
UNK entity, or an unlinked entity starts with, or
consists solely of a title in the list, we tag the
words that make up the title as O.

Incidental capitalization Various non-NNP words
in English are capitalized: names of months,
the pronoun I, and non-entity acronyms such as
RSVP. While the latter two types are unlikely to
appear in WP text, we assembled a list of these
words and tag them as O unless they are part of
the alias set.

41



3.4 Sentence Filtering

As mentioned above, sentences with words tagged
as UNK are discarded. Furthermore, there are many
incomplete sentences in the WP text: image cap-
tions, enumerations items, contents of table cells,
etc. On the one hand, these sentence fragments may
be of too low quality to be of any use in the tra-
ditional NER task. On the other hand, they could
prove to be invaluable when training a NER tag-
ger for User Generated Content, which is known to
be noisy and fragmented. As a compromise we in-
cluded these fragments in the corpus, but labelled
them as “low quality”, so that users of the corpus
can decide whether they want to use them or not. A
sentence is labelled as such if it either lacks a punc-
tuation mark at the end, or it contains no finite verb.

4 Creating the Hungarian Corpus

The procedure described in the previous section was
used to generate the Hungarian corpus as well. How-
ever, typological differences posed several prob-
lems. In this section we describe the differences be-
tween the two languages related to labeling NEs, and
the changes they prompted in the method.

4.1 Parsing the Hungarian Wikipedia

Although Hungarian is reckoned to be a less re-
sourced language, and it is not supported in NLTK,
several high quality language processing tools have
been developed for Hungarian in recent years. For
tokenization and sentence segmentation we used an
in-house statistical tool tailored for Hungarian. It
has been trained on the largest manually annotated
Hungarian corpus (Csendes et al., 2004), and it
handles the peculiarities of Hungarian orthography,
such as the periods placed after numbers in date ex-
pressions. Lemmatization was performed by Hun-
Morph (Trón et al., 2005) and HunDisambig, an
in-house disambiguator to select the right analysis
based on the word context.

For the most part Hungarian expresses grammat-
ical elements within a word form using affixes.
HunMorph outputs KR-codes (Kornai et al., 2004),
which, in addition to the POS category, also in-
clude inflectional information, making it much bet-
ter suited to agglutinative languages than Penn Tree-
bank POS tags. One shortcoming of the KR-code is

that it does not differentiate between common and
proper nouns. Since in Hungarian only proper nouns
are capitalized, we can usually decide whether a
noun is proper based on the initial letter. However,
this rule can not be used if the noun is at the be-
ginning of a sentence, so sentences that begin with
nouns have been removed from the corpus.

4.2 Named Entity Labeling in Hungarian

For well-resourced languages, DBpedia has interna-
tionalized chapters, but not for Hungarian. Instead,
the Hungarian entity list comprises of the pages in
the English list that have their equivalents in the
Hungarian WP. Two consequences follow. First,
in order to identify which pages denote entities in
the Hungarian WP, an additional step is required,
in which the Hungarian equivalents of the English
pages are added to the entity list. The English titles
are retained because (due to the medium size of the
Hungarian WP) in-article links sometimes point to
English articles.

Second, entities without a page in the English WP
are absent from the entity list. This gives rise to two
potential problems. One is that compared to En-
glish, the list is relatively shorter: the entity/page
ratio is 12.12%, as opposed to the 37.66% of the En-
glish WP. The other, since mostly Hungarian people,
places and organizations are missing, a NER tagger
that takes the surface forms of words into account
might be mislead as to the language model of entity
names. To overcome these problems, the list has to
be extended with Hungarian entity pages that do not
have a corresponding English page. We leave this
for future work.

To annotate our corpus with NE tags, we chose
to follow the annotation guidelines of the largest
human-annotated NER corpus for Hungarian, the
Szeged NER corpus (Szarvas et al., 2006). It is sim-
ilar to CoNLL standards: contains newswire texts,
comprises ca. 200,000 tokens, and is annotated with
NE class labels in line with the CoNLL annotation
scheme. However, the convention of what consti-
tutes a NE is slightly different for Hungarian.

4.2.1 Special cases
The Szeged NER guideline relies heavily on the

rules of capitalization to decide which words should
be marked as NEs. The following concepts are not

42



train test precision recall F-measure
Szeged NER Szeged NER 94.50 94.35 94.43
huwiki huwiki 90.64 88.91 89.76
huwiki Szeged NER 63.08 70.46 66.57
Szeged NER with wikilists Szeged NER 95.48 95.48 95.48
Szeged NER with wikitags Szeged NER 95.38 94.92 95.15

Table 1: Hungarian results.

proper nouns in Hungarian, and thus are not consid-
ered as NEs: names of languages, nationalities, reli-
gions, political ideologies; adjectives derived from
NEs; names of months, days, holidays; names of
special events and wars.

There is another special case in Hungarian: unlike
in English, the number of compound words is quite
large, and NEs can also be subject to compounding.
In this case the common noun following the NE is
joined with a hyphen, so they constitute one token.
However, the joint common noun can modify the
original sense of NE, depending on the semantics
of the common noun. For example in the compound
Nobel-dı́j [‘Nobel Prize’] the common noun changes
the labeling from PER to MISC, while in the case
of the compound WorldCom-botrány [‘WorldCom
scandal’] the NE tag changes from ORG to O. The
solution to this problem is not obvious, and needs
more investigation.

5 Data Description

The corpora are available under the Creative Com-
mons Attribution-Sharealike 3.0 Unported License
(CC-BY-SA), the same license under which the text
of WP is released. The data files can be freely down-
loaded from http://hlt.sztaki.hu. The
corpora will also be distributed through the META-
SHARE network, which is an open, distributed fa-
cility for exchanging and sharing resources, and is
one of the lines of action of META-NET, a Network
of Excellence funded by the European Commission.

The files are in multitag format. Content lines
are tab separated; there is one column for the tokens
plus one column per tagset. Sentence boundaries are
marked by empty lines. The linguistic features in-
clude the lemmatized form of the word and its POS
tag. Two NE tags are included with each word: the
most specific DBpedia category it belongs to and the

CoNLL NE tag. While the NE tags can be consid-
ered as a “silver standard”, the linguistic features are
provided on a “best-effort” basis.

6 Evaluation

Having the obvious advantages, an automatically
generated corpus can not serve as a gold standard
dataset. Then what can we do with silver standard
corpora? They can be very useful for improving
NER in several ways: (a) for less resourced lan-
guages, they can serve as training corpora in lieu of
gold standard datasets; (b) they can serve as sup-
plementary or independent training sets for domains
differing from newswire; (c) they can be sources of
huge entity lists, and (d) feature extraction.

To evaluate our corpora we used a maximum en-
tropy NE tagger (Varga and Simon, 2007), which
was originally developed for labeling NEs in Hun-
garian texts, but can be tuned for different languages
as well. Corpus-specific features (e.g. NP chunks,
WP links) were removed to get better comparability,
so the feature set consists of gazetteer features; sen-
tence start and end position; Boolean-valued ortho-
graphic properties of the word form; string-valued
surface properties of the word form; and morpho-
logical information.

We used the CoNLL standard method for evalu-
ation. According to this, an automatic labeling is
correct if it gives the same start and end position,
and the same NE class as the gold standard. Based
on this, precision and recall can be calculated, and
the F-measure, as usual, the harmonic mean of these
two values.

6.1 Wikipedia data

Our automatic annotation process retains all of the
WP sentences which remained after our two-step fil-
tering method, so sentences without NEs are also in-

43



enwiki enwiki filtered CoNLL huwiki huwiki filtered Szeged NER
token 60,520,819 21,718,854 302,811 19,108,027 3,512,249 225,963
NE 3,169,863 3,169,863 50,758 456,281 456,281 25,896
NE density 5.23% 14.59% 16.76% 2.38% 12.99% 11.46%

Table 2: Corpus size and NE density.

train test precision recall F-measure
CoNLL CoNLL 85.13 85.13 85.13
enwiki enwiki 72.46 73.33 72.89
enwiki CoNLL 56.55 49.77 52.94
CoNLL with wikilists CoNLL 86.33 86.35 86.34
CoNLL with wikitags CoNLL 85.88 85.94 85.91

Table 3: English results.

cluded in the corpus. The rationale behind this is
that we wanted to reserve the original distribution
of names in WP as much as possible. However, after
further investigation of the NE density in our corpora
and gold standard corpora, we decided not to include
the sentences without NEs in evaluation datasets.

Table 2 summarizes the data regarding corpus
size and NE density. The English (enwiki) and the
Hungarian WP (huwiki) corpora originally have the
NE density of 5.23% and 2.38%, respectively. In
comparison to the gold standard datasets (CoNLL,
Szeged NER) these counts are quite low. It can be
due to the difference between domains: newswire
articles usually contain more NEs, typically ORG.
The other reason might be that we discarded sen-
tences containing unidentified NEs (cf. Section 3).

6.2 Experiments and results

The English WP corpus was evaluated against itself
and a manually annotated English corpus. Since the
filtered English WP corpus, containing only the sen-
tences with NEs, is still very large, our experiments
were performed with a sample of 3.5 million tokens,
the size of our filtered Hungarian corpus, divided
into train and test sets (90%-10%).

For English cross-corpus evaluation the CoNLL-
2003 corpus was chosen. As is well known, train-
ing and testing across different corpora decreases F-
measure. Domain differences certainly affect NER
performance, and the different annotation schemes
pose several compatibility problems. Nothman et

al. (2008) showed that each set of gold standard
training data performs better on corresponding test
sets than on test sets from other sources. The sit-
uation here is similar (see Table 3 for results): the
NE tagger trained on WP does not achieve as high
performance tested against CoNLL test set (enwiki-
CoNLL) as one trained on its own train set (enwiki-
enwiki).

WP-derived corpora can also be used for improv-
ing NER accuracy in other ways. First, we collected
gazetteer lists from the corpus for each NE category,
which improved the overall F-measure given to the
NE tagger training and testing on CoNLL dataset
(CoNLL with wikilists). A second trial was label-
ing the CoNLL datasets by the model trained on WP
corpus, and giving these labels as extra features to
the next CoNLL train (CoNLL with wikitags). Both
methods result in improved F-measure on CoNLL
test set.

Since in Hungarian NE tagging we followed the
Szeged NER corpus annotation guidelines, we per-
formed the experiments on this dataset. Hungarian
results are similar to the English ones (see Table 1),
the only difference is that F-measures for Hungarian
are significantly higher. This can be due to the fact
that the MISC category for Hungarian contains less
types of names, thus the inconsistency of this class
is smaller (cf. Section 4). In contrast to the CoNLL
corpus, the Szeged NER corpus was accurately an-
notated with an inter-annotator agreement over 99%.

Due to the quite good F-measure of training on
44



our Hungarian train corpus and testing on the corre-
sponding test set, our Hungarian corpus can serve
as a training corpus to build NE taggers for non-
newswire domains.

7 Conclusion

We have presented freely available NE tagged cor-
pora for English and Hungarian, fully automati-
cally generated from WP. In contrast to the meth-
ods used so far for automatic annotation of NEs in
WP texts, we applied a new approach, namely map-
ping DBpedia ontology classes to standard CoNLL
NE tags, and assigning them to WP entities. Follow-
ing Nothman (2008), the process can be divided into
four main steps: classifying WP articles into entity
classes; parsing WP and splitting articles into sen-
tences; labeling NEs in the text; and selecting sen-
tences for inclusion in the corpus.

The huge amount of WP articles opens the pos-
sibility of building large enough corpora for other-
wise less resourced languages such as Hungarian.
Due to the particularities of Hungarian, some steps
are slightly different, and special linguistic phenom-
ena pose several problems related to the NER task to
solve.

Automatically generated corpora can be useful for
improving NER in more ways. We showed that
gazetteer lists extracted from our corpora, and train-
ing with extra features given by the model trained
on our corpora, improve F-measure. Moreover, our
Hungarian corpus can serve as a training corpus for
more general domains than the classic newswire.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by OTKA grant no.
82333 and the CESAR project under the ICT Pol-
icy Support Programme (grant no. 271022). The
authors are grateful to Attila Zséder for his work on
Wikipedia parsing and to András Kornai for his in-
sightful comments.

References
Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, Edward Loper. 2009. Natural

Language Processing with Python. O’Reilly Media
Inc.

Christian Bizer, Jens Lehmann, Georgi Kobilarov, Sören
Auer, Christian Becker, Richard Cyganiak, Sebastian

Hellmann. 2009. DBpedia – A Crystallization Point
for the Web of Data. In: Journal of Web Semantics:
Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web,
Issue 7, pages 154–165.

B. Bunescu and M. Pasca. 2006. Using encyclope-
dic knowledge for named entity disambiguation. In:
Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 9–16.

Dóra Csendes, János Csirik, Tibor Gyimóthy. 2004. The
Szeged Corpus: A POS tagged and Syntactically An-
notated Hungarian Natural Language Corpus. In: Pro-
ceedings of TSD 2004, vol. 3206, pages 41–49.

S. Cucerzan. 2007. Large-scale named entity disam-
biguation based on Wikipedia data. In: Proceedings
of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning. Prague, Czech Republic,
June 2007. pages 708–716.

Ralph Grishman and B. Sundheim. 1996. Message Un-
derstanding Conference – 6. In: Proc. International
Conference on Computational Linguistics.

P. Halácsy, A. Kornai and Cs. Oravecz. 2007. Hunpos –
an open source trigram tagger. In: Proceedings of the
45th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 209–212.

Jun’ichi Kazama and Kentaro Torisawa. 2007. Exploit-
ing Wikipedia as External Knowledge for Named En-
tity Recognition. In: Proceedings of the 2007 Joint
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 698–707.

Tibor Kiss, Jan Strunk. 2006. Unsupervised Multilin-
gual Sentence Boundary Detection. In: Computa-
tional Linguistics, 32 (4): pages 485–525.

András Kornai, Péter Rebrus, Péter Vajda, Péter Halácsy,
András Rung, Viktor Trón. 2004. Általános célú
morfológiai elemző kimeneti formalizmusa (The out-
put formalism of a general-purpose morphological an-
alyzer). In: Proceedings of the 2nd Hungarian Com-
putational Linguistics Conference.

Olena Medelyan, David Milne, Catherine Legg, and Ian
H. Witten. 2009. Mining meaning from Wikipedia.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
67: 716–754.

David Nadeau, Peter D. Turney and Stan Matwin. 2006.
Unsupervised named entity recognition: Generating
gazetteers and resolving ambiguity. In: Proceedings
of the 19th Canadian Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, volume 4013 of LNCS, pages 266–277.

Joel Nothman, James R. Curran, and Tara Murphy. 2008.
Transforming Wikipedia into Named Entity Training
Data. In: Proceedings of the Australasian Language
Technology Workshop, Vol 6., pages 124–132.

45



Joel Nothman, Tara Murphy and James R. Curran. 2009.
Analysing Wikipedia and Gold-Standard Corpora for
NER Training. In: Proceedings of the 12th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the ACL, pages 612–
620.

Alexander E. Richman and Patrick Schone. 2008. Min-
ing Wiki Resources for Multilingual Named Entity
Recognition. In: Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages
1–9.

György Szarvas, Richárd Farkas, András Kocsor. 2006.
A highly accurate Named Entity corpus for Hungar-
ian. In: Proceedings of International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation.

Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang. 2002. Introduction to
the CoNLL-2002 shared task: Language-independent
named entity recognition. In: Proceedings of the 6th
Conference on Natural Language Learning, pages 1–
4, Taipei, Taiwan.

Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang and Fien De Meulder. 2003. In-
troduction to the CoNLL-2003 shared task: Language-
independent named entity recognition. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 7th Conference on Natural Language
Learning, pages 142–147, Edmonton, Canada.

A. Toral and R. Muñoz. 2006. A proposal to automati-
cally build and maintain gazetteers for Named Entity
Recognition by using Wikipedia. In: EACL 2006.

Viktor Trón, György Gyepesi, Péter Halácsy, András Ko-
rnai, László Németh, Dániel Varga. 2005. Hunmorph:
open source word analysis. In: Proceedings of the
ACL 2005 Workshop on Software.

Dániel Varga and Eszter Simon. 2007. Hungarian named
entity recognition with a maximum entropy approach.
Acta Cybernetica, 18: 293–301.

H. Zaragoza and J. Atserias and M. Ciaramita and G.
Attardi. 2007. Semantically Annotated Snapshot of
the English Wikipedia v.1 (SW1). http://www.
yr-bcn.es/semanticWikipedia

46


