



















































Towards merging common and technical lexicon wordnets


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex-III), pages 147–160,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Towards Merging Common and Technical Lexicon 
Wordnets 

Raquel AMARO1  Sara MENDES1,2 

(1) Center of Linguistics of the University of Lisbon,  

Av. Professor Gama Pinto 2, 1649-003 Lisbon, Portugal 

(2) Universitat Pompeu Fabra 

Roc Boronat, 138, Barcelona, Spain 

{ramaro,sara.mendes}@clul.ul.pt 

ABSTRACT 

The growing amount of available information and the growing importance given to the 
access to technical information enhance the potential role of NLP applications in enabling 
users to deal with information for a variety of knowledge domains. In this process, lexical 
resources are crucial. 

Using and comparing already existent wordnets for common and technical lexica, we set 
up a basis for integrating these resources without losing their specific information and 
properties.  We demonstrate their compatibility and discuss strategies to overcome the 
issues arrising in their merging, namely aspects concerning conceptual variation, subnet 
and synset merging, and the incorporation of technical and non-technical information in 
definitions.  

As we are using models of the lexicon that mirror the organization of the mental lexicon, 
the accomplishment of this goal can provide insights on the type of relations holding 
between common lexical items and terms. Also, the results of integrating such resources 
can contribute to the better intercommunication between experts and non-experts, and 
provide a useful resource for NLP, particularly for tools simultaneously serving specialist 
and non-specialist publics.  

KEYWORDS : wordnet, technical lexicon, common lexicon, merging.  

1 Introduction 

Since its appearance, Princeton WordNet (Miller et al., 1990; Fellbaum, 1998) has been the 
main database used in NLP research and applications. With a strong psychological 
motivation, relational models of the lexicon have played a leading role in machine lexical 
knowledge representation. WordNet potential as a resource for NLP has also been explored in 
tasks typically associated to domain-specific information, such as systems for information 
extraction and document indexing, retrieval and preservation, and applications for technical 
domains such as Law (Peters et al., 2006), Medicine (Elhadad & Sutaria, 2007) or Urbanism 
(Lacasta et al., 2008). Although manifesting a number of shortcomings (Bodenreider et al., 
2003; Bodenreider & Burgun, 2002; Burgun & Bodenreider, 2001; Magnini & Strapparava, 
2001), which reflect the lack of domain expertise of lexicographers developing it and the fact 
that it was not originally built for domain-specific applications (Smith & Fellbaum, 2004), 
WordNet potential to model technical lexica is made apparent by research showing that 
concept-based resources (ontologies, thesauri and wordnets) have great usability in teaching 

147



(Mudraya, 2006; Fuentes, 2001; Robinson, 1989; Hutchinson & Waters, 1981) or improving 
mutual understanding between specialist and non-specialist publics (Elhadad & Sutaria, 
2007). 

The globalization of most activities, alongside technology development, produced significant 
changes both in the relation between specialist and non-specialist publics and in different 
aspects of terminology. Recent studies on the use of computer-based tools for technical 
domains point to a mismatch between technical lexical information incorporated in such tools 
and non-expert discourse employed by lay users (Slaughter, 2002; Tse & Soergel, 2003; 
McCray & Tse, 2003). Moreover, while the use of terms by professionals is expected to be 
subject to control by standardization efforts, the highly contextually dependent usage of terms 
by lay persons is much more difficult to capture. All these factors make the combination of 
common and specialized language resources more and more crucial. The importance of 
encoding domain-specific information in the WordNet model has also been remarked in the 
last years. In this context, there has been a considerable amount of research dedicated to the 
integration of domain-specific information into generic synsets (Magnini et al., 2002; Vossen, 
2001; Magnini & Cavaglià, 2000) or to the determination of the relevance of common lexicon 
synsets with respect to specific domains (Buitelaar & Sacaleanu, 2001). In parallel, there have 
been several efforts to develop dedicated wordnets for technical domains, such as Medicine 
(Buitelaar & Sacaleanu, 2002; Smith & Fellbaum, 2004), Geography (Giunchiglia et al., 
2009), or the Maritime domain (Roventini & Marinelli, 2004).   

Research on integrating specialist taxonomies and common lexicon taxonomies (Pedersen et 
al., 2010) has also been developed, as well as on merging domain-specific lexical resources 
with WordNet (Bosch, n/d). Following from this research, in this paper we compare a 
common lexicon wordnet with wordnets for ten technical domains built for Portuguese, 
setting up the bases for integrating both resources without losing specific information and 
properties. We expect the merging of technical and common lexica to raise several challenges, 
particularly regarding mismatches in sense differentiation and the encoding of relevant 
conceptual relations in models that reflect the organization of the mental lexicon. 
Accomplishing our goal will set the grounds for providing a useful resource to the research 
community, particularly to researchers working with domain-specific NLP tools 
simultaneously serving specialist and non-specialist publics. 

2 Comparing common and technical lexicon wordnets  

The work depicted in this paper is framed by research on wordnets developed for technical 
domains and on the characteristics of terms and specialized language, as well as on the 
interface between common and technical lexicon. We use two existing resources, a common 
lexicon wordnet – WordNet.PT1 – and ten domain-specific wordnets for different technical 
domains – LexTec2, and compare them with regard to different aspects, namely the amount of 
variants per synset, the type of relations used and the density of the network of relations. Both 
resources have been independently encoded and revised manually within the general 
framework of EuroWordNet. WordNet.PT (WN.PT) currently has about 18,000 lexical 
entries, covering all the main part-of-speech (PoS). We consider a subset of the database 
(15,000 lexical units) which covers the most salient daily life communication topics (food, 
clothing, sports, education, geography, transportation, etc.). LexTec covers more than 8,000 
lexical units from all the main PoS and was built following the same development strategies 

                                                           
1 WordNet.PT (Marrafa 2001, 2002), available online at http://www.clul.ul.pt/clg/wordnetpt/index.html. 
2 LexTec (Marrafa et al. 2009), available online at http://www.instituto-camoes.pt/lextec/. 

148



and relations used in WN.PT. LexTec is balanced between ten different domains: Banking, 
Commerce, Economy and Business Management, Energy, Environment, Insurance, 
International Trade Law, Telecommunications, and Tourism. 

We expect this comparison to allow us to identify contrasts and similarities between common 
and technical lexicon, which not only can be contrasted to previous work but also can be used 
for designing sound strategies for integrating both resources without losing their specific 
information and properties. This is not a trivial task, particularly since the common lexicon 
tends to reflect and integrate popular lexicalizations in specific domains. The taxonomies 
reflecting popular lexicalizations have been argued to be significantly less elaborate at both the 
upper and lower levels than in the corresponding technical lexica (Medin & Aran, 1999). Also, 
popular terms tend to cover a larger range of referent types than technical terms, i.e. to be less 
precise, while others may cover only part of the extension of their technical counterparts. The 
information in Table 1 allows for identifying similarities and differences between technical 
and common lexica regarding phenomena such as PoS distribution and synonymy. 

  N V Adj. PN Average 

WN.PT 

lexical entries (%) 74.3% 8.4% 8.5% 8.9%  

synsets (%) 73.6% 8.5% 9.3% 8.7% 

average variant/synset 1.28 1.26 1.16 1.30 1.27 

LexTec 

lexical entries (%) 77.1% 3.6% 3.3% 16.0%  

synsets (%) 77.5% 5.2% 5.0% 12,4% 

average variant/synset 1.71 1.18 1.14 2.21 1.71 

TABLE 1 – PoS distribution and density in terms of synonymy relations of WN.PT and LexTec 

In terms of PoS distribution, the larger percentage of nominal nodes in LexTec (77.5% of 
nouns and 12.4% of proper nouns), and consequent smaller percentage of the other PoS, is 
consistent with what is generally assumed, specifically that the description of a given domain 
is mainly constituted by nominal expressions (Cabré, 1998: 36). However, when it comes to 
the ratio between variants and synsets, technical lexica would be expected to have a lower 
ratio, since the "form and content of terms tends towards an unambiguous relationship" 
(Cabré, 1998: 116). Despite the precision characteristic of specialized discourse, the existence 
of synonymy in terminology has long been acknowledged (Daille et al., 1996; Freixa, 2002; 
Cabré, 2008; Montiel-Ponsoda et al., 2011, Aguado-de-Cea & Montiel-Ponsoda, 2012). 
Moreover, the integration of English terms in the terminology of other languages, sometimes 
co-existing with variants in these languages, is also to be considered. Table 1 confirms this and 
makes apparent that synonymy is a distinctive feature of the technical lexicon with regard to 
the common lexicon. To verify whether these characteristics apply generally and equally to 
different domains, we looked into the numbers regarding individual domains (Table 2).  

Table 2 presents the PoS distribution and the density of synonymy relations for 6 technical 
wordnets. These regard specifically chosen domains: Banking; Environment; Energy; 
Telecommunications; Construction; and Tourism. The first four are more classical knowledge 
domains, rich in terminology. Construction was selected as it includes terms from Civil 
Engineering, Architecture, but also lexicalizations of traditional construction methods and 
materials. As to Tourism, its selection was motivated by the fact of it being a more recent and 
interdisciplinary area, including aspects of Social Sciences, Economics and Commerce, but 
also very familiar to lay publics, as they interact directly and regularly with tourism products. 

 

149



  N V Adj. PN Average 

Environment 

lexical entries (%) 66.5% 3.0% 7.0% 23.6%  

synsets (%) 67.5% 4.9% 11.0% 16.6% 

average variant/synset 1.75 1.07 1.13 2.53 1.78 

Energy 

lexical entries (%)  78.8% 2.5% 3.8% 14.8%  

synsets (%) 80.2% 4.3% 6.2% 9.3% 

average variant/synset 1.77 1.01 1.10 2.87 1.80 

Telecom 

lexical entries (%) 77.9% 3.8% 0.9% 17.4%  

synsets (%) 82.1% 3.3% 1.5% 13.1% 

average variant/synset 1.98 2.38 2.76 2.76 2.08 

Banking 

lexical entries (%) 87.5% 2.0% 1.1% 9.4%  

synsets (%) 87.0% 3.8% 2.3% 7.0% 

average variant/synset 2.19 1.12 1.10 2.94 2.17 

Construction 

lexical entries (%) 83.2% 5.1% 5.2% 6.5%  

synsets (%) 83.5% 6.8% 6.5% 3.2% 

average variant/synset 1.49 1.12 1.20 3.00 1.49 

Tourism 

lexical entries (%) 48.1% 4.5% 4.1% 43.4%  

synsets (%) 50.9% 5.5% 5.2% 38.3% 

average variant/synset 1.34 1.15 1.11 1.61 1.42 

TABLE 2 – PoS distribution and synonymy relation density per technical domain 

PoS distribution in these individual domains reflects the general tendency of technical lexica: 
nominal nodes are predominant, although the proportion between nouns and proper nouns 
can be considerably different, ranging from 87% of common nouns and 7% of proper nouns 
(Banking) to 51% of common nouns and 38% of proper nouns (Tourism). The ratios of 
variants per synset also show significant differences, ranging from an average of 2.17 
(Banking) to an average of 1.42 (Tourism). Construction and Tourism are the two domains 
with the lower ratio, hence closer to WN.PT in this regard. These numbers seem to indicate a 
higher proximity of these technical domains to common lexicon, which is not surprising since 
non-specialist speakers interact regularly and directly with contents from these domains.  

2.1 Lexical-conceptual relations and network density 

WordNet.PT and LexTec are lexical-conceptual databases built within the same theoretical 
framework, using the same set of relations (exceptions being MANNER and CAUSE relations, not 
used in LexTec). In what concerns the relations used, LexTec presents a higher percentage of 
HYPERONYMY (24.8% VS. 19.4%),  INSTANTIATION (8% VS. 4.2%) and CORRELATION (18.7% vs. 
9.3%) relations. In contrast, WN.PT has a higher incidence of MERONYMY and HOLONYMY 
relations (10.4 vs. 6.1% and 10.1% vs. 5.6%, respectively),  and IS A CHARACTERISTIC OF/HAS AS 
A CHARACTERISTIC relation (12.2% vs. 3.9%). Some of these differences are directly related to 
the PoS distribution in both resources: INSTANTIATION is the relation linking proper nouns to 
the nominal nodes they instantiate, thus the higher incidence rate of this relation in LexTec. 
With regard to the IS A CHARACTERISTIC OF/HAS AS A CHARACTERISTIC relation, it establishes a 
link between nominal nodes and their salient and definitional characteristics, denoted by 
adjectives (see Mendes (2009)). The higher incidence of this relation in WN.PT  is not 
independent from the higher proportion of adjective nodes in this resource.  The higher 
percentage of CORRELATION relations in LexTec is also expected since "concepts are related to 
other concepts in the specific field they together constitute" (Cabré, 1998:116). Also, since 

150



nominal expressions are more common in technical language, it is more likely for this type of 
relations to be more relevant in technical wordnets given that there are not many technical 
verbs mediating the nodes in domain-specific wordnets, as shown in (1). 

  

 

 

 

Also, it is predictable that HYPERONYMY relations have a strong weight on the overall number 
of relations in technical lexica, since the specification of concepts, expressed in wordnets 
through HYPERONYMY/HYPONYMY relations, is known to be quite productive in terminology 
(Daille et al., 1996; Freixa, 2002; Burgun & Bodenreider, 2001; Roventini & Marinelli, 2004; 
Cabré, 2008; Montiel-Ponsoda et al., 2011; among others). Moreover, it is generally assumed 
that when a term, for some reason, becomes part of the common lexicon, it usually loses some 
of its technical meaning, denoting a broader, less specialized concept (Aguado-de-Cea & 
Montiel-Ponsoda, 2012; Meyer & Mackintosh, 2000). Being so, the less specification of the 
concepts denoted is bound to be correlated to shallower HYPERONYMY trees.  

Finally, there is also a significant difference in terms of the density3 of these networks: WN.PT 
presents a density of 4.5; while that of LexTec amounts only to 3.2. However, we feel that no 
strong claims can be made in this respect based on this data since WN.PT is a single wordnet, 
which potentiates the number of nodes available for linking, while for technical language we 
are working with a set of separate wordnets, each corresponding to a given domain and whose 
individual size is far from being close to that of WN.PT.  

3 Merging technical and common lexicon wordnets 

The merging of technical and common lexica raises several issues. Contrasts concerning sense 
differentiation and the establishment of the relevant semantic and conceptual relations with 
other lexical-conceptual units are bound to arise since these derive directly from the meaning 
of each unit. And yet, merging common and technical lexica is unquestionably linguistically 
motivated since specialists always maintain the ability to use common lexicon for 
communicating with non-specialist speakers, or even with other specialists when terminology 
for new concepts does not exist (Cabré, 1998), thus never entirely replacing common lexicon 
with specialized language. This way, the study of the issues involved in the merging of 
technical and common lexica in models mirroring the organization of the mental lexicon, 
besides contributing to address a growing need in the scientific community and provide it 
with a useful and differentiated language resource, can also provide some insights on the type 
of relations existing between these differentiated subsets of the lexicon. In this section, we 
present a typology of cases we are confronted with when merging two resources with the 
characteristics described earlier, illustrating each situation with examples from the databases, 
and focusing on the issues to be accounted for. 

                                                           
3 Network density is calculated by summing all the relations encoded in the database and dividing them by the 
number of synsets represented.  

(1) 

151



3.1 Conceptual variations 

Sense discrimination covering domain-specific concepts and common lexicon can result in 
polysemy and semantic overlapping (Sagri et al. 2004, Pederson et al. 2010, Chen et al. 2011). 
Differences in the ontological nature of the concepts are expected and can range between what 
we will call compatible, semi-compatible and incompatible conceptual variations.  

Compatible conceptual variations correspond to the cases where the concept denoted by 
technical synsets is more precise and specialized, but otherwise similar to and compatible with 
the concept denoted by a corresponding common lexicon synset (see (2))4: 

(2)  WN.PT: {gasóleo}N [liquid fuel, oil derivative, used in diesel engines] (diesel) 
  HYPONYM OF  {combustível}N (fuel) 

{derivado}N (derivative) 

LexTec: {gasóleo, dieselenglish}N [liquid fuel, composed mainly of hydrocarbons and 
obtained by oil distillation, brown colored, with an intense smell, denser and less 
inflammable than gasoline, used in compression combustion engines] (diesel) 

  HYPONYM OF  {combustível}N (fuel) 

{derivado do petróleo}N (oil derivative) 

Semi-compatible conceptual variations include cases like that of (3), where concept 
specialization entails intermediary hyperonyms – expressing technical specification not 
existing in the common lexicon –, the concept denoted by both technical and common lexicon 
synsets being nonetheless the same.  

(3)  WN.PT: {ladrilho, mosaico}N [flat building material, square or rectangular, typically made of 
ceramic, used to cover walls and floor] (tile) 

  HYPONYM OF {material de construção}N (building material) 

LexTec: {ladrilho, mosaico}N [covering that consists of one piece, typically a rectangular 
ceramic plate, that is applied on the floor or on the wall](tile) 
HYPONYM OF {revestimento}N (covering)  

HYPONYM OF {material de construção}N (building material) 

Incompatible conceptual variations, in (4), refer to cases where the concepts denoted by 
technical and common lexica, though closely related, are not the same, as made apparent by 
the hyponymy chain.  

(4)   WN.PT: {sótão}N [floor of a building, with a low ceiling, immediately under the roof] (attic, 
garret, loft) 

  HYPONYM OF {piso, andar}N (floor, level, story)  
HYPONYM OF  {parcela}N (parcel) 

LexTec: {sótão}N [annex situated immediately under the roof of a building, typically 
considered for storage] (attic) 
 HYPONYM OF {dependência}N (annex)  

HYPONYM OF {construção}N (construction)  
HYPONYM OF {estrutura}N (structure) 

These three types of possible situations call for different merging strategies. Cases like (2) can 
be almost straightforwardly merged, involving only the use of labels already available in the 
WordNet model (see Section 3.3). In the case of semi-compatible conceptual variations, 

                                                           
4 The information in the examples provided is given in the following format: {synset}POS [gloss] (English 
translation). Underlined expressions correspond to variants associated to usage information, given in subscript 
characters, such as registry or origin (in the case of borrowed expressions, for instance). 

152



besides the merging of synsets, it is also necessary to assure an adequate subnet merger to 
integrate both technical and common lexica relations and nodes without information loss. 
Finally, in the case of incompatible conceptual variations, it is not possible to perform a direct 
merging, since the concepts denoted are distinct. Being so, these cases should be treated as 
any other case of homonymy in wordnets, where each concept denoted corresponds to a 
separate node in the network, as suggested by Pedersen et al. (2010:3184).  

However, as illustrated by (4), the relation between common and technical concepts is a very 
salient relation, which moreover can provide useful information both for NLP applications 
and human users. Considering the relations available in the WordNet model, the closest 
candidate to link these synsets would be the NEAR SYNONYMY relation5, but this relation fails to 
cover this particular situation. Near synonyms are lexical units that do not pass the tests that 
motivate their belonging to the same synset: near synonyms are necessarily co-hyponyms, 
and have a stronger connection with each other than with their other co-hyponyms, which is 
not the case here. In this case, there are two different denotations (concepts), related to two 
different ways of conceiving and eventually lexicalizing a referent that can be, more often than 
not, the same. For instance, to use the example in (4), any utterance in which sótão (attic) 
occurs will refer to the upper part of a building, independently of whether the speaker is using 
the technical or common lexicon concept. This way, what seems to be at stake here is a shared 
reference, i.e. some type of co-reference relation, which requires a further and deeper study of 
this phenomenon and its properties. 

3.2 Subnet variation and merging 

One of the difficulties expected in the process of merging technical and common lexicon 
wordnets concerns the differences in the networks of relations established between 
compatible and semi-compatible synsets, which derive from conceptual variation. The 
example below illustrates this situation considering the synset {combustível} (fuel) and its 
relations in WN.PT (in black) and in LexTec (in orange)6.  

The graphical representation presented in Figure 1 illustrates the adaptations necessary, 
namely the overlapping, duplication and marking of the compatible synsets in both databases, 
as described in the literature (Roventini & Marinelli, 2004; Roventini et al., 2000; Magnini & 
Speranza, 2001), to assure the visualization of each net individually. Roventini & Marinelli 
(2004) present a strategy to connect the databases through plug-in relations, considering that 
all upward relations (hyperonymy) from a given plugged-in node are taken from the common 
lexicon wordnet, while all other relations are taken from the technical one (Roventini & 
Marinelli, 2004: 196). This strategy does not prevent information loss, though.  

To assure that all the relations in WN.PT and LexTec are considered, all relations are added, 
including those involving semi-compatible synsets (like {combustível}N (fuel) and {gás 
natural}N (natural gas)) and horizontal relations (such as ROLE relations) originally only 
present in one of the subnets. This strategy goes along the lines of the work of Bosch (n/d), 
although this author defends a partial merging that protects technical acceptions over general 
ones. In the strategy put forth in this work we do not argue for a proeminence of one resource 

                                                           
5 We refer here to NEAR SYNOMYNY relation as defined in  Vossen (2002:19). Near synonyms with different PoS 
are linked in EuroWordNet by the xpos_NEAR_SYNONYMY relation. 
6  The complete network of relations for these synsets in WN.PT and LexTec are available in 
http://www.clul.ul.pt/clg/wordnetpt/index.html and in http://www.instituto-camoes.pt/lextec/, respectively. 

153



over the other, but rather outline a method for combining both resources maintaining their 
characteristics and properties and avoiding information loss. When overlapping, the relations 
and respective target nodes are analyzed regarding conceptual variation, in a new iteration of 
the process described above. In what concerns subtypes of relations (such as subspecified 
ROLE vs. ROLE PATIENT, for instance) finer-grained relations replace general ones. To maintain 
the possibility of separating the subnets merged, technical nodes have to be labeled, as well as 
individual lexicalizations in each synset, distinguishing lexical items pertaining to technical 
language, as described in the next section. 

 

FIGURE 1 - merged network of relations for {combustível} (fuel) 

3.3 Synset merging 

The merging of compatible and semi-compatible synsets, besides requiring the insertion of 
intermediary hyperonyms when necessary, can also involve the treatment and encoding of 
lexical units in each set of synonyms. In the type of merging targeted in our work, lexical units 
can pertain both to common and technical lexica, and this information has to be overtly 
stated.  EuroWordNet, the framework within which the resources considered in this paper 
have been developed, already allows for the tagging of technical lexical units through usage 
labels (Vossen 2002:106). This way, in merged synsets – which are part of both common 
lexicon and technical subnets – all lexical units have to be individually marked, as exemplified 
in (5), where C stands for common lexicon and E stands for the technical domain of Energy. 

(5)  a. {combustívelC,E}N (fuel) 
b. {queroseneC,E, petróleoC, petróleo de iluminaçãoE, petróleo iluminanteE}N (kerosene) 

c. {combustãoC,E, queimaE}V (combustion) 

The marking of the different lexical units requires only the definition of usage labels to 
include all the technical domains considered, as well as the common lexicon. With regard 
to making decisions involving the use of specific lexical units in common and technical 

154



contexts, this calls for corpora analyses and experts' advice, as discussed in Burgun & 
Bodenreider (2001), Magnini et al. (2002) or Smith & Fellbaum (2004), among others. 

3.4 Incorporating common and technical information in definitions 

Wordnets are characterized by having synsets as their basic unit and by the fact that the 
meaning of each unit is determined by its relations in the network. This way, in wordnets, 
definitions or glosses constitute additional information used to aid human users, to provide 
examples of use or complementary information considered useful, especially when nodes are 
not available for linking. Even though not part of the WordNet model, definitions can provide 
helpful information in many situations, both to human users and to NLP tools.  Considering 
this, in this section we focus on strategies to incorporate common and technical information 
in definitions avoiding potential incongruities and leaving open the possibility of using either 
subnet (common or technical) individually, in a process that can be developed automatically 
(Chen et al., 2011). 

Our basic methodology consists in considering the lexical-conceptual relations encoded in 
wordnets to build definitions. Beginning with the common lexicon subnet, the definition 
starts by stating the hyperonym and then all the horizontal relations which correspond to 
definitional properties of the concept. Non-definitional relations are disregarded, namely 
hyponymy relations and all relations marked as reversed. CO-RELATES WITH relations are 
typically accessory (i.e. not essential to the definition of the meaning of the lexical unit), 
although sometimes they provide relevant information, as illustrated in (6). The same 
procedure is applied with regard to the technical subnet. This methodology results in some 
level of repetition, as shown in the example below, which can be avoided by controlling the 
information in common in the first and second part of the definition and omitting it from the 
second part. The parts regarding the common and technical lexicon are separated by semi-
colons and, following the previous color scheme, technical information is presented in orange. 
For purposes of explanation, redundant information is presented in brackets: 

(6) a. WN.PT definitional relations for {tile}N: IS HYPONYM OF {building material}N, HAS AS A 
CHARACTERISTIC {flat}Adj and {glazed}Adj, CO-RELATES WITH {wall}N and {floor}N, IS INVOLVED 

IN {tile}V 

b. LexTec definitional relations for {tile}N: IS HYPONYM OF {covering}N, CO-RELATES WITH 
{wall}N and {fixative mortar}N, IS INVOLVED IN {pave}V, {paving}N,  {lay}V, {laying}N, {tile}V and 
{untile}V 

c. definition: flat and glazed building material used to cover walls and floor; constitutes a 
covering that is paved, layed or tiled (to walls and floor) with fixative mortar 

This two-part definition can function for both subnets individually: in the case where 
redundant information is maintained, it is just a matter of presenting the first or the second 
part of the definition for an individual visualization of the common or the technical subnet, 
respectively; where redundant information is avoided, the first part of the definition is 
presented for common lexicon subnet visualization and the whole definition is presented for 
technical lexicon subnet visualization. In our perspective, it is preferable to maintain the 
redundant information, since on the one hand the individual visualization of technical subnets 
becomes more coherent, and on the other the visualization of both parts of the definition 
simultaneously can help to obviate the conceptual variations between common and technical 
lexica.  

155



4 Final remarks and future work 

Following from previous research on relational models of the lexicon and on the interface 
between common and specialized languages, this paper presents a comparison of existing 
wordnets for common and technical lexica for Portuguese, focusing on their contrasts and 
similarities, to set the basis for a merging that preserves the specific information and 
properties of these resources. We discuss strategies to overcome the issues to be accounted for 
in the merging of these particular lexica, namely in what concerns conceptual variation, 
subnet and synset merging and the incorporation of technical and non-technical information 
in the definitions associated to each node.  

As pinpointed throughout the paper, several issues deserve nonetheless further attention and 
constitute topics for future work. In particular, concerning semi-compatible synsets, the 
number of intermediary hyperonyms allowed while preserving a compatible conceptual 
variation between common and technical synsets, directly related to the study of the depth of 
hyperonymy trees in both lexica, needs to be addressed and motivated. Also, research on 
possible co-reference relations between incompatible yet related synsets requires further 
work, possibly applying strategies of corpora analysis, and expert and non-expert users 
surveys, as suggested by Smith & Fellbaum (2004). The validation of the usage of specific 
lexical units in common and technical lexica is a related issue, which can be addressed using 
this kind of approaches. Finally, and based on the strategies defined and presented in this 
paper,  future work naturally comprises the implementation of methods for collecting and 
merging synsets from both resources automatically or semi-automatically, based on 
approaches like the ones put forth, for instance, by Vossen (2001), Buitelaar & Sacaleanu 
(2002) or Tse & Soergel (2003), this way assuring a cost-efficient feasibility of the merging. 

Acknowledgments 

The work presented here has been supported by Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia post-
doctoral fellowships SFRH/BPD/75904/2011 and SFRH/BPD/79900/2011. The authors also 
whish to thank the remarks of the anonymous reviewers that contrubuted to the final version 
of this paper. 

156



References  

Aguado-de-Cea, G. & Montiel-Ponsoda, E. (2012). Term variants in ontologies. In 
Proceedings of the 30th International Conference of AESLA, April, Spain (pp. 19-31). 

Bodenreider, O. & Burgun, A. (2002). Characterizing the definitions of anatomical 
concepts in WordNet and specialized sources. In Proceedings of the First Global 
WordNet Conference, Mysore, India (pp. 223-230). 

Bodenreider, O., Burgun, A. & Mitchell, J.A. (2003) Evaluation of WordNet as a source 
of lay knowledge for molecular biology and genetic diseases: a feasibility study. In 
Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 95, 379-384. 

Pedersen, B., Nimb, S. & Braasch, A. (2010), Merging specialist taxonomies and folk 
taxonomies in wordnets - a case study of plants, animals and foods in the Danish 
wordnet. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation, LREC 2010, Valletta, Malta (pp. 223-230).  

Buitelaar, P. & Sacaleanu, B. (2001). Ranking and selecting synsets by domain relevance. 
In Proceedings of the NAACL 2001 Workshop on WordNet and Other Lexical 
Resources, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 

Buitelaar, P. & Sacaleanu, B. (2002). Extending synsets with medical terms. In 
Proceedings of First Global WordNet Conference, Mysore, India. 

Burgun, A. & Bodenreider, O. (2001). Comparing terms, concepts and semantic classes in 
WordNet and the Unified Medical Language System. In Proceedings of the NAACL 2001 
Workshop on WordNet and Other Lexical Resources, Pittsburgh, Pensylvania (pp. 77-82). 

Cabré, M. T. (2008). El principio de poliedricidad: la articulación de lo discursivo, lo 
cognitivo y lo lingüístico en Terminología. In IBÉRICA 16, 9-36. 

Cabré, T. (1998). Terminology. Theory, methods and applications, Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins Publishing. 

Chen, R.-C., Bau, C.-T. & Yeh, C.J. (2011) Merging domain ontologies based on the 
WordNet system and Fuzzy Formal Concept Analysis techniques. In Applied Soft 
Computing, 11(2), March 2011. 

Daille, B., Habert, B., Jacquemin, C. & Royauté, J. (1996). Empirical observation of term 
variations and principles for theirdescription. In Terminology 3 (2), 197-257. 

Elhadad, N. & Sutaria, K. (2007). Mining a Lexicon of Technical Terms and Lay 
Equivalents. In ACL BioNLP Workshop Proceedings, Prague, Czech Republic (pp. 49-56). 

Fellbaum, C. (1998) (Ed.). WordNet: an electronical lexical database. Cambridge: The 
MIT Press. 

Freixa, J. (2002). La variació terminològica: anàlisi de la variació denominativa en 
textos de diferent grau d'especialització de l'àrea de medi ambient. Doctoral 
dissertation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona. 

Fuentes, A. C. (2001). Lexical Behaviour in Academic and Technical Corpora: Implications 
for ESP Development. In Language Learning & Tecnhology, vol.5, nº 3, 106-129. 

157



Giunchiglia, F., Maltese, V., Farazi, F. & Dutta, B. (2009). GeoWordNet: a resource for geo-spatial 
applications. Technical Report #DISI-09-071: http://eprints.biblio.unitn.it/1777/1/071.pdf. 

Hutchinson, T. & Waters, A. (1981). Performance and competence in ESP. In Applied 
Linguistics 2/1. 

Lacasta, J., Nogueras-Isso, J., Zarazaga-Soria, P. & Muro-Medrano, R. (2008). 
Generating an urban domain ontology through the merging of cross-domain lexical 
ontologies. In Conceptual Models for Urban Practitioners, Bologna: Società Editrice 
Esculapio, pp. 69-84. 

Magnini, B. & Cavaglià, G. (2000). Integrating subject field codes into WordNet. In 
Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC-2000), Athens, Greece. 

Magnini, B. & Speranza, M. (2001). Integrating Generic and Specialized Wordnets. In  
Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing, RANLP-2001, Tzigov 
Chark, Bulgaria (pp. 149-153). 

Magnini, B. & Strapparava, C. (2001). Using WordNet to improve user modelling in a 
web document recommender system. In Proceedings of the NAACL 2001 Workshop on 
WordNet and Other Lexical Resources, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 

Magnini, B., Strapparava, C., Pezzulo, G. & Gliozzo, A. (2002). Comparing Ontology-
Based and Corpus-Based Domain Annotations in WordNet. In Proceedings of First 
Global WordNet Conference, Mysore, India (pp. 146-154). 

Marrafa, P. (2002): "The Portuguese WordNet: General Architecture and Semantic 
Internal Relations", DELTA. 

Marrafa, P. (2001): WordNet do Português - Uma base de dados de conhecimento 
linguístico, Instituto Camões. 

Marrafa, P., R. Amaro, R. P. Chaves, S. Lourosa & S. Mendes (2009), LexTec – Léxico 
Técnico do Português: Ambiente, Banca, Comércio, Construção, Energia, Seguros, 
Turismo, Telecomunicações, Direito Comercial Internacional e Economia e Gestão de 
Empresas, Instituto Camões. 

McCray, A.T. & Tse, T. (2003). Understanding search failures in consumer health information 
systems. In Proceedings of the American Medical Informatics Symposium (pp. 430-434). 

Medin, D.L. & Adran, S. (1999) (Eds.). Folkbiology. Cambridge: The MIT Press. 

Mendes, S. (2009) Syntax and Semantics of Adjectives in Portuguese: analysis and 
modelling, PhD thesis, Universidade de Lisboa. 

Meyer, I. & Mackintosh, K. (2000). L’étirement du sens terminologique: aperçu du 
phénomène de la déterminologisation. In H. Béjoint & P. Thoiron (Eds.). Le Sens en 
terminologie, Lyon, France: Presses de l'Université Lumière Lyon 2. 

Miller, G.A., Beckwith, R., Fellbaum, C., Gross, D. & Miller, K.J.  (1990). Introduction to 
WordNet: An online lexical database. International Journal of Lexicography, 3(4), 235-44. 

158



Montiel-Ponsoda, E., Aguado-de-Cea, G. & McCrae, J. (2011). Representing term 
variation in lemon. In WS 2 Workshop Extended Abstracts, 9th International Conference 
on Terminology and Artificial Intelligence (TIA 2011), Paris, France (pp. 47–50). 

Mudraya, O. (2006). Engineering English: A lexical frequency instructional model. In 
English for Specific Purposes 25, Elsevier, 235-256. 

Peters, W., Sagri, M., Tiscornia D. & Castagnoli, S. (2006). The LOIS Project. In Proceedings 
of Linguistic Resources Evaluation Conference (LREC'06), Genova, Italy (pp. 23-27). 

Robinson, P.J. (1989). A rich view of lexical competence. In ELT Journal, vol. 43/3, 
Oxford University Press, 274-282. 

Roventini, A., Alonge, A., Calzolari, N., Magnini, B., Bertagna, F. (2000). ItalWordNet: a 
large semantic database for Italian. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference 
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC'00), Athens, Greece. 

Roventini, A. & Marinelli, R. (2004). Extending the Italian WordNet with the Specialized 
Language of the Maritime Domain. In P. Sojka, K. Pala, P. Smrz, C. Fellbaum & P. 
Vossen (Eds.). Proceedings of the Global WordNet Conference 2004 (GWC 2004), (pp. 
193-198). Brno: Masaryk University. 

Sagri, M.T., Tiscornia, D. & Bertagna, F. (2004). Jur-WordNet. In P. Sojka, K. Pala, P. 
Smrz, C. Fellbaum & P. Vossen (Eds.). Proceedings of the Global WordNet Conference 
2004 (GWC 2004), Brno: Masaryk University (pp. 305-310). 

Slaughter, L. (2002). Semantic relationships in health consumer questions and 
physicians’ answers: a basis for representing medical knowledge and for concept 
exploration interfaces. Doctoral dissertation, University of Maryland at College Park. 

Smith, B. & Fellbaum, C. (2004). Medical WordNet: a New Methodology for the 
Construction and Validation of Information Resources for Consumer Health. In 
Proceedings of COLING 2004, Geneva, Switzerland. 

Tse, T. & Soergel, D. (2003). Procedures for mapping vocabularies from non-
professional discourse. A case study: ‘consumer medical vocabulary’. In Proceedings of 
the Annual Meeting of the American Society for Information. 

van den Bosch, A. (no date), Merging domain thesauri with a generic Wordnet: A case 
study with the Dutch Army Museum, http://www.rnaproject.org/whitepapers.aspx 

Vossen, P. (2001). Extending, trimming and fusing wordnet for technical documents. In 
Proceedings of the NAACL 2001 Workshop on WordNet and Other Lexical Resources, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 

Vossen, P. (2002) (Ed.). EuroWordNet General Document, EuroWordNet Project LE2-4003 & 
LE4-8328 report, University of Amsterdam, http://vossen.info/docs/2002/EWNGeneral.pdf. 

159




