










































Generating Grammar Exercises


The 7th Workshop on the Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 147–156,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generating Grammar Exercises

Laura Perez-Beltrachini
Université de Lorraine
LORIA, UMR 7503

Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy
F-54500, France

laura.perez@loria.fr

Claire Gardent
CNRS, LORIA, UMR 7503

Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy
F-54500, France

claire.gardent@loria.fr

German Kruszewski
Inria, LORIA, UMR 7503

Villers-lès-Nancy
F-54600, France

german.kruszewski@inria.fr

Abstract

Grammar exercises for language learning fall
into two distinct classes: those that are based
on “real life sentences” extracted from exist-
ing documents or from the web; and those that
seek to facilitate language acquisition by pre-
senting the learner with exercises whose syn-
tax is as simple as possible and whose vo-
cabulary is restricted to that contained in the
textbook being used. In this paper, we in-
troduce a framework (called GramEx) which
permits generating the second type of gram-
mar exercises. Using generation techniques,
we show that a grammar can be used to
semi-automatically generate grammar exer-
cises which target a specific learning goal; are
made of short, simple sentences; and whose
vocabulary is restricted to that used in a given
textbook.

1 Introduction

Textbooks for language learning generally include
grammar exercises. Tex’s French Grammar 1 for in-
stance, includes at the end of each lecture, a set of
grammar exercises which target a specific pedagog-
ical goal such as learning the plural form of nouns

1Tex’s French Grammar http://www.laits.
utexas.edu/tex/ is an online pedagogical reference
grammar that combines explanations with surreal dialogues
and cartoon images. Tex’s French Grammar is arranged like
many other traditional reference grammars with the parts of
speech (nouns, verbs, etc.) used to categorize specific grammar
items (gender of nouns, irregular verbs). Individual grammar
items are carefully explained in English, then exemplified in a
dialogue, and finally tested in self-correcting, fill-in-the-blank
exercises.

or learning the placement of adjectives. Figure 1
shows the exercises provided by this book at the end
of the lecture on the plural formation of nouns. As
exemplified in this figure, these exercises markedly
differ from more advanced learning activities which
seek to familiarise the learner with “real world sen-
tences”. To support in situ learning, this latter type
of activity presents the learner with sentences drawn
from the Web or from existing documents thereby
exposing her to a potentially complex syntax and to
a diverse vocabulary. In contrast, textbook grammar
exercises usually aim to facilitate the acquisition of
a specific grammar point by presenting the learner
with exercises made up of short sentences involving
a restricted vocabulary.

As shall be discussed in the next section, most ex-
isting work on the generation of grammar exercises
has concentrated on the automatic creation of the
first type of exercises i.e., exercises whose source
sentences are extracted from an existing corpus. In
this paper, we present a framework (called GramEx)
which addresses the generation of the second type of
grammar exercises used for language learning i.e.,
grammar exercises whose syntax and lexicon are
strongly controlled. Our approach uses generation
techniques to produce these exercises from an exist-
ing grammar describing both the syntax and the se-
mantics of natural language sentences. Given a ped-
agogical goal for which exercises must be produced,
the GramEx framework permits producing Fill in the
blank (FIB, the learner must fill a blank with an ap-
propriate form or phrase) and Shuffle (given a set of
lemmas or forms, the learner must use these to pro-
duce a phrase) exercises that target that specific goal.

147



Give the plural form of the noun indicated in parentheses.
Pay attention to both the article and the noun.
1. Bette aime _____ . (le bijoux)
2. Fiona aime ______ . (le cheval)
3. Joe-Bob aime ______ américaines. (la bière)
4. Tex n’aime pas ______ . (le choix)
5. Joe-Bob n’aime pas ______ difficiles. (le cours)
6. Tammy n’aime pas ______ . (l’hôpital)
7. Eduard aime ______. (le tableau)
8. Bette aime ______ de Tex. (l’oeil)
9. Tex aime ______ français. (le poète)
10. Corey aime ______ fraı̂ches. (la boisson)
11. Tammy aime ______ américains. (le campus)
12. Corey n’aime pas ______ . (l’examen)

Figure 1: Grammar exercises from the Tex’s French Grammar textbook

The exercises thus generated use a simple syntax and
vocabulary similar to that used in the Tex’s French
Grammar textbook.

We evaluate the approach on several dimensions
using quantitative and qualitative metrics as well as a
small scale user-based evaluation. And we show that
the GramEx framework permits producing exercises
for a given pedagogical goal that are linguistically
and pedagogically varied.

The paper is structured as follows. We start by
discussing related work (Section 2). In Section 3,
we present the framework we developed to generate
grammar exercises. Section 4 describes the exper-
imental setup we used to generate exercise items.
Section 5 reports on an evaluation of the exercise
items produced and on the results obtained. Section
6 concludes.

2 Related Work

A prominent strand of research in Computer Aided
Language Learning (CALL) addresses the automa-
tion of exercise specifications relying on Natural
Language Processing (NLP) techniques (Mitkov et
al., 2006; Heilman and Eskenazi, 2007; Karama-
nis et al., 2006; Chao-Lin et al., 2005; Coniam,
1997; Sumita et al., 2005; Simon Smith, 2010; Lin
et al., 2007; Lee and Seneff, 2007). Mostly, this
work targets the automatic generation of so-called
objective test items i.e., test items such as multiple
choice questions, fill in the blank and cloze exercise
items, whose answer is strongly constrained and can
therefore be predicted and checked with high accu-
racy. These approaches use large corpora and ma-
chine learning techniques to automatically generate
the stems (exercise sentences), the keys (correct an-

swers) and the distractors (incorrect answers) that
are required by such test items.

Among these approaches, some proposals target
grammar exercises. Thus, (Chen et al., 2006) de-
scribes a system called FAST which supports the
semi-automatic generation of Multiple-Choice and
Error Detection exercises while (Aldabe et al., 2006)
presents the ArikiTurri automatic question genera-
tor for constructing Fill-in-the-Blank, Word Forma-
tion, Multiple Choice and Error Detection exercises.
These approaches are similar to the approach we
propose. First, a bank of sentences is built which are
automatically annotated with syntactic and morpho-
syntactic information. Second, sentences are re-
trieved from this bank based on their annotation and
on the linguistic phenomena the exercise is meant to
illustrate. Third, the exercise question is constructed
from the retrieved sentences. There are important
differences however.

First, in these approaches, the source sentences
used for building the test items are selected from
corpora. As a result, they can be very complex
and most of the generated test items are targeted
for intermediate or advanced learners. In addition,
some of the linguistic phenomena included in the
language schools curricula may be absent or insuf-
ficiently present in the source corpus (Aldabe et al.,
2006). In contrast, our generation based approach
permits controlling both the syntax and the lexicon
of the generated exercices.

Second, while, in these approaches, the syntactic
and morpho-syntactic annotations associated with
the bank sentences are obtained using part-of-speech
tagging and chunking, in our approach, these are
obtained by a grammar-based generation process.

148



As we shall see below, the information thus asso-
ciated with sentences is richer than that obtained by
chunking. In particular, it contains detailed linguis-
tic information about the syntactic constructs (e.g.,
cleft subject) contained in the bank sentences. This
permits a larger coverage of the linguistic phenom-
ena that can be handled. For instance, we can re-
trieve sentences which contain a relativised cleft ob-
ject (e.g., This is the man whom Mary likes who
sleeps) by simply stipulating that the retrieved sen-
tences must be associated with the information Cleft
Object).

To sum up, our approach differs from most exist-
ing work in that it targets the production of syntac-
tically and lexically controlled grammar exercises
rather than producing grammar exercises based on
sentences extracted from an existing corpus.

3 Generating Exercises

Given a pedagogical goal (e.g., learning adjective
morphology), GramEx produces a set of exercise
items for practicing that goal. The item can be ei-
ther a FIB or a shuffle item; and GramEx produces
both the exercise question and the expected solution.

To generate exercise items, GramEx proceeds in
three main steps as follows. First, a generation
bank is constructed using surface realisation tech-
niques. This generation bank stores sentences that
have been generated together with the detailed lin-
guistic information associated by the generation al-
gorithm with each of these sentences. Next, sen-
tences that permit exercising the given pedagogical
goal are retrieved from the generation bank using a
constraint language that permits defining pedagog-
ical goals in terms of the linguistic properties as-
sociated by the generator with the generated sen-
tences. Finally, exercises are constructed from the
retrieved sentences using each retrieved sentence to
define FIB and Shuffle exercises; and the sentence
itself as the solution to the exercise.

We now discuss each of these steps in more detail.

3.1 Constructing a Generation bank

The generation bank is a database associating sen-
tences with a representation of their semantic con-
tent and a detailed description of their syntactic and
morphosyntactic properties. In other words, a gen-

Sentence realisation:
”Tammy a une voix douce”
Lemma-features pairs:
{”lemma”: ”Tammy”,
”lemma-features”: {anim:+,num:sg,det: +,wh:-,cat:n,
func:suj,xp: +, gen:f},
”trace”: {propername}},
{”lemma”: ”avoir”,
”lemma-features”: {aux-refl:-,inv:-,cat:v,pers:3,pron:-,
num:sg,mode:ind, aspect:indet,tense:pres,stemchange:-,
flexion:irreg},
”trace”: {CanonicalObject,CanonicalSubject,n0Vn1}},
{”lemma”: ”un”,
”lemma-features”: {wh:-,num:sg,mass:-,cat:d,
gen:f,def:+},
”trace”: {determiner}},
{”lemma”: ”voix”,
”lemma-features”: {bar:0,wh:-,cat:n,num:sg,
mass:-,gen:f,flexion:irreg,
”trace”: {noun}},
{”lemma”: ”doux”,
”lemma-features”: {num:sg,gen:f,flexion:irreg,cat:adj},
”trace”: {Epith,EpithPost}}

Figure 2: Morphosyntactic information associated by
GraDe with the sentence Tammy a un voix douce

eration bank is a set of (Si, Li, σi) tuples where Si is
a sentence, Li is a set of linguistic properties true of
that sentence and σi is its semantic representation.

To produce these tuples, we use the GraDe gram-
mar traversal algorithm described in (Gardent and
Kruszewski, 2012). Given a grammar and a set
of user-defined constraints, this algorithm gener-
ates sentences licensed by this grammar. The user-
defined constraints are either parameters designed to
constrain the search space and guarantee termina-
tion (e.g., upper-bound on the number and type of
recursive rules used or upper-bound on the depth of
the tree build by GraDe); or linguistic parameters
which permit constraining the output (e.g., by spec-
ifying a core semantics the output must verbalise or
by requiring the main verb to be of a certain type).
Here we use GraDe both to generate from manu-
ally specified semantic input; and from a grammar
(in this case an existing grammar is used and no
manual input need to be specified). As explained
in (Gardent and Kruszewski, 2012), when generat-
ing from a semantic representation, the output sen-
tences are constrained to verbalise that semantics but
the input semantics may be underspecified thereby
allowing for morpho-syntactic, syntactic and tem-
poral variants to be produced from a single se-
mantics. For instance, given the input semantics

149



L1:named(J bette n) A:le d(C RH SH) B:bijou n(C)
G:aimer v(E J C), GraDe will output among others
the following variants:

Bette aime le bijou (Bette likes the jewel),
Bette aime les bijoux (Bette likes the jewels),
C’est Bette qui aime le bijou (It is Bette who
likes the jewel), C’est Bette qui aime les bijoux
(It is Bette who likes the jewel), Bette aimait le
bijou (Bette liked the jewel), Bette aimait les
bijoux (Bette liked the jewels), ...

When generating from the grammar, the output
is even less constrained since all derivations com-
patible with the user-defined constraints will be pro-
duced irrespective of semantic content. For instance,
when setting GraDe with constraints restricting the
grammar traversal to only derive basic clauses con-
taining an intransitive verb, the output sentences in-
clude among others the following sentences:

Elle chante (She sings), La tatou chante-t’elle?
(Does the armadillo sing?), La tatou chante
(The armadillo sings), Chacun chante -t’il
(Does everyone sing? ), Chacun chante (Ev-
eryone sings), Quand chante la tatou? (When
does the armadillo sing?), ...

Figure 2 shows the linguistic properties associ-
ated with the sentence Tammy a une voix douce
(Tammy has a soft voice) by GraDe. To gener-
ate exercises, GramEx makes use of the morpho-
syntactic information associated with each lemma
i.e., the feature-value pairs occurring as values of the
lemma-features fields; and of their linguistic proper-
ties i.e., the items occurring as values of the trace
fields.

3.2 Retrieving Appropriate Sentences

To enable the retrieval of sentences that are appropri-
ate for a given pedagogical goal, we define a query
language on the linguistic properties assigned by
GraDe to sentences. We then express each peda-
gogical goal as a query in that language; and we use
these queries to retrieve from the generation bank
appropriate source sentences. For instance, to re-
trieve a sentence for building a FIB exercise where
the blank is a relative pronoun, we query the gen-
eration bank with the constraint RelativePronoun.
This will return all sentences in the generation bank
whose trace field contains the RelativePronoun

item i.e., all sentences containing a relative pronoun.
We then use this sentence to build both the exercise
question and its solution.

3.2.1 GramEx Query Language
We now define the query language used to retrieve

sentences that are appropriate to build an exercise
for a given pedagogical goal. Let B be a genera-
tion bank and let (Si, Li, σi) be the tuples stored in
B. Then, a GramEx query q permits retrieving from
B the set of sentences Si ∈ (Si, Li, σi) such that
Li satisfies q. In other words, GramEx queries per-
mit retrieving from the generation bank all sentences
whose linguistic properties satisfy those queries.

The syntax of the GramEx query language is as
follows:

BoolExpr → BoolTerm
BoolTerm → BoolFactor | BoolTerm ∨ BoolFactor
BoolFactor → BoolUnary | BoolFactor ∧ BoolUnary
BoolUnary → BoolPrimary | ¬ BoolPrimary
BoolPrimary → PrimitiveCond | ( BoolExpr ) | [ BoolExpr ]
PrimitiveCond → traceItem | feature = value

In words: the GramEx query language permits
defining queries that are arbitrary boolean con-
straints on the linguistic properties associated by
GraDe with each generated sentence. In addi-
tion, complex constraints can be named and reused
(macros); and expressions can be required to hold
on a single lexical item ([ BoolExpr] indicates that
BoolExpr should be satisfied by the linguistic prop-
erties of a single lexical item).

The signature of the language is the set of gram-
matical (traceItem) and morpho-syntactic proper-
ties (feature = value) associated by GraDe with
each generated sentence where traceItem is any
item occurring in the value of a trace field and
feature = value any feature/value pair occurring
in the value of a lemma-features field (cf. Fig-
ure 2). The Table below (Table 1) shows some of the
constraints that can be used to express pedagogical
goals in the GramEx query language.

3.2.2 Query Examples
The GramEx query language allows for very spe-

cific constraints to be expressed thereby providing
fine-grained control over the type of sentences and
therefore over the types of exercises that can be pro-
duced. The following example queries illustrate this.

150



Grammatical Properties (traceItem)
Argument Cleft, CleftSUbj, CleftOBJ, ...,
Realisation InvertedSubj

Questioned, QuSubj, ...
Relativised, RelSubj ...
Pronominalised, ProSubj, ...

Voice Active, Passive, Reflexive
Aux tse, modal, causal
Adjective Predicative,Pre/Post nominal
Adverb Sentential, Verbal
Morpho-Syntactic Properties (feature=value)
Tense present,future,past
Number mass, count, plural, singular
Inflexion reg,irreg

Table 1: Some grammatical and morpho-syntactic prop-
erties that can be used to specify pedagogical goals.

(1) a. EpithAnte
Tex pense que Tammy est une jolie tatou (Tex
thinks that Tammy is a pretty armadillo)

b. [Epith ∧ flexion: irreg]
Tex et Tammy ont une voix douce (Tex and
Tammy have a soft voice)

c. POBJinf ∧ CLAUSE
POBJinf ≡ (DE-OBJinf ∨ A-OBJinf)
CLAUSE ≡ Vfin∧¬Mod ∧ ¬CCoord∧ ¬Sub
Tammy refuse de chanter (Tammy refuses to
sing)

Query (1a) shows a query for retrieving sentences
containing prenominal adjectives which uses the
grammatical (traceItem) property EpithAnte associ-
ated with preposed adjectives.

In contrast, Query (1b) uses both grammatical and
morpho-syntactic properties to retrieve sentences
containing a postnominal adjective with irregular in-
flexion. The square brackets in the query force the
conjunctive constraint to be satisfied by a single lex-
ical unit. That is, the query will be satisfied by sen-
tences containing a lexical item that is both a post-
nominal adjective and has irregular inflexion. This
excludes sentences including e.g., a postnominal ad-
jective and a verb with irregular inflexion.

Finally, Query (1c) shows a more complex case
where the pedagogical goal is defined in terms of
predefined macros themselves defined as GramEx
query expressions. The pedagogical goal is de-
fined as a query which retrieves basic clauses
(CLAUSE) containing a prepositional infinitival ob-
ject (POBJinf). A sentence containing a preposi-

tional infinitival object is in turn defined (second
line) as a prepositional object introduced either by
the de or the à preposition. And a basic clause (3rd
line) is defined as a sentence containing a finite verb
and excluding modifiers, clausal or verb phrase co-
ordination (CCORD) and subordinated clauses2

3.3 Building Exercise Items

In the previous section, we saw the mechanism used
for selecting an appropriate sentence for a given
pedagogical goal. GramEx uses such selected sen-
tences as source or stem sentences to build exercise
items. The exercise question is automatically gen-
erated from the selected sentence based on its asso-
ciated linguistic properties. Currently, GramEx in-
cludes two main types of exercises namely, Fill in
the blank and Shuffle exercises.

FIB questions. FIB questions are built by remov-
ing a word from the target sentence and replacing it
with either: a blank (FIBBLNK), a lemma (FIBLEM)
or a set of features used to help the learner guess
the solution (FIBHINT). For instance, in an exercise
on pronouns, GramEx will use the gender, number
and person features associated with the pronoun by
the generation process and display them to specify
which pronominal form the learner is expected to
provide. The syntactic representation (cf. Figure 2)
associated by GraDe with the sentence is used to
search for the appropriate key word to be removed.
For instance, if the pedagogical goal is Learn Sub-
ject Pronouns and the sentence retrieved from the
generation bank is that given in (2a), GramEx will
produce the FIBHINT question in (2b) by search-
ing for a lemma with category cl (clitic) and feature
func=subj and using its gender value to provide the
learner with a hint constraining the set of possible
solutions.

(2) a. Elle adore les petits tatous
(She loves small armadillos)
b. ... adore les petits tatous (gender=fem)

Shuffle questions. Similarly to FIB questions,
shuffle exercise items are produced by inspecting
and using the target derivational information. More
specifically, lemmas are retrieved from the list of

2The expressions CCoord and Sub are themselves defined
rather than primitive expressions.

151



lemma-feature pairs. Function words are (option-
ally) deleted. And the remaining lemmas are “shuf-
fled“ (MSHUF). For instance, given the source sen-
tence (2a), the MSHUF question (2b) can be pro-
duced.

(3) a. Tammy adore la petite tatou
a. tatou / adorer / petit / Tammy

Note that in this case, there are several possible
solutions depending on which tense and number is
used by the learner. For such cases, we can either
use hints as shown above to reduce the set of pos-
sible solutions to one; or compare the learner’s an-
swer to the set of output produced by GraDe for the
semantics the sentence was produced from.

4 Experimental Setup

We carried out an experiment designed to assess the
exercises produced by GramEx. In what follows, we
describe the parameters of this experiment namely,
the grammar and lexicons used; the input and the
user-defined parameters constraining sentence gen-
eration; and the pedagogical goals being tested.

4.1 Grammar and Lexicon
The grammar used is a Feature-Based Lexicalised
Tree Adjoining Grammar for French augmented
with a unification-based compositional semantics.
This grammar contains around 1300 elementary
trees and covers auxiliaries, copula, raising and
small clause constructions, relative clauses, infini-
tives, gerunds, passives, adjuncts, wh-clefts, PRO
constructions, imperatives and 15 distinct subcate-
gorisation frames.

The syntactic and morpho-syntactic lexicons used
for generating were derived from various existing
lexicons, converted to fit the format expected by
GraDe and tailored to cover basic vocabulary as de-
fined by the lexicon used in Tex’s French Grammar.
The syntactic lexicon contains 690 lemmas and the
morphological lexicon 5294 forms.

4.2 Pedagogical Goals
We evaluate the approach on 16 pedagogical goals
taken from the Tex’s French Grammar book. For
each of these goals, we define the corresponding
linguistic characterization in the form of a GramEx
query. We then evaluate the exercises produced by

the system for each of these queries. The pedagog-
ical goals tested are the following (we indicate in
brackets the types of learning activity produced for
each teaching goal by the system):

• Adjectives: Adjective Order (MSHUF), Adjec-
tive Agreement (FIBLEM), Prenominal adjec-
tives (FIBLEM), Present and Past Participial
used as adjectives (FIBLEM), Regular and Ir-
regular Inflexion (FIBLEM), Predicative adjec-
tives (MSHUF)

• Prepositions: Prepositional Infinitival Object
(FIBBLNK), Modifier and Complement Prepo-
sitional Phrases (FIBBLNK)

• Noun: Gender (FIBLEM), Plural form (FI-
BLEM), Subject Pronoun (FIBHINT).

• Verbs: Pronominals (FIBLEM), -ir Verbs in
the present tense (FIBLEM), Simple past (FI-
BLEM), Simple future (FIBLEM), Subjunctive
Mode (FIBLEM).

4.3 GraDe’s Input and User-Defined
Parameters

GraDe’s configuration As mentioned in Sec-
tion 3, we run GraDe using two main configura-
tions. In the first configuration, GraDe search is con-
strained by an input core semantics which guides the
grammar traversal and forces the output sentence to
verbalise this core semantics. In this configuration,
GraDe will only produce the temporal variations
supported by the lexicon (the generated sentences
may be in any simple tense i.e., present, future,
simple past and imperfect) and the syntactic varia-
tions supported by the grammar for the same MRSs
(e.g., active/passive voice alternation and cleft argu-
ments).

Greater productivity (i.e., a larger output/input ra-
tio) can be achieved by providing GraDe with less
constrained input. Thus, in the second configura-
tion, we run GraDe not on core semantics but on the
full grammar. To constrain the search, we specify a
root constraint which requires that the main verb of
all output sentences is an intransitive verb. We also
set the constraints on recursive rules so as to exclude
the inclusion of modifiers. In sum, we ask GraDe to
produce all clauses (i) licensed by the grammar and
the lexicon; (ii) whose verb is intransitive; and (iii)

152



which do not include modifiers. Since the number
of sentences that can be produced under this con-
figuration is very large, we restrict the experiment
by using a lexicon containing a single intransitive
verb (chanter/To sing), a single common noun and a
single proper name. In this way, syntactically struc-
turally equivalent but lexically distinct variants are
excluded.

Input Semantics We use two different sets of in-
put semantics for the semantically guided configura-
tion: one designed to test the pedagogical coverage
of the system (Given a set of pedagogical goals, can
GramEx generate exercises that appropriately target
those goals?); and the other to illustrate linguistic
coverage (How much syntactic variety can the sys-
tem provide for a given pedagogical goal?).

The first set (D1) of semantic representations con-
tains 9 items representing the meaning of exam-
ple sentences taken from the Tex’s French Gram-
mar textbook. For instance, for the first item
in Figure 1, we use the semantic representation
L1:named(J bette n) A:le d(C RH SH) B:bijou n(C)
G:aimer v(E J C). With this first set of input seman-
tics, we test whether GramEx correctly produces the
exercises proposed in the Tex’s French Grammar
book. Each of the 9 input semantics corresponds to
a distinct pedagogical goal.

The second set (D2) of semantic representations
contains 22 semantics, each of them illustrating dis-
tinct syntactic configurations namely, intransitive,
transitive and ditransitive verbs; raising and control;
prepositional complements and modifiers; sentential
and prepositional subject and object complements;
pronominal verbs; predicative, attributive and par-
ticipial adjectives. With this set of semantics, we
introduce linguistically distinct material thereby in-
creasing the variability of the exercises i.e., making
it possible to have several distinct syntactic configu-
rations for the same pedagogical goal.

5 Evaluation, Results and Discussion

Using the experimental setup described in the previ-
ous section, we evaluate GramEx on the following
points:

• Correctness: Are the exercises produced by the
generator grammatical, meaningful and appro-

priate for the pedagogical goal they are associ-
ated with?

• Variability: Are the exercises produced linguis-
tically varied and extensive? That is, do the ex-
ercises for a given pedagogical goal instantiate
a large number of distinct syntactic patterns?

• Productivity: How much does GramEx support
the production, from a restricted number of se-
mantic input, of a large number of exercises?

Correctness To assess correctness, we randomly
selected 10 (pedagogical goal, exercise) pairs for
each pedagogical goal in Section 4.2 and asked two
evaluators to say for each pair whether the exer-
cise text and solutions were grammatical, meaning-
ful (i.e., semantically correct) and whether the ex-
ercise was adequate for the pedagogical goal. The
results are shown in Table 3 and show that the sys-
tem although not perfect is reliable. Most sources of
grammatical errors are cases where a missing word
in the lexicon fails to be inflected by the generator.
Cases where the exercise is not judged meaningful
are generally cases where a given syntactic construc-
tion seems odd for a given semantics content. For
instance, the sentence C’est Bette qui aime les bi-
joux (It is Bette who likes jewels) is fine but C’est
Bette qui aime des bijoux although not ungrammati-
cal sounds odd. Finally, cases judged inappropriate
are generally due to an incorrect feature being as-
signed to a lemma. For instance, avoir (To have) is
marked as an -ir verb in the lexicon which is incor-
rect.

Grammatical Meaningful Appropriate
91% 96% 92%

Table 3: Exercise Correctness tested on 10 randomly se-
lected (pedagogical goal, exercise pairs)

We also asked a language teacher to examine 70
exercises (randomly selected in equal number across
the different pedagogical goals) and give her judg-
ment on the following three questions:

• A. Do you think that the source sentence se-
lected for the exercise is appropriate to practice
the topic of the exercise? Score from 0 to 3 ac-
cording to the degree (0 inappropriate - 3 per-
fectly appropriate)

153



Nb. Ex. 1 2 4 5 6 12 17 18 20 21 23 26 31 37 138
Nb. Sem 1 4 6 1 4 3 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

Table 2: Exercise Productivity: Number of exercises produced per input semantics

• B. The grammar topic at hand together with
the complexity of the source sentence make
the item appropriate for which language level?
A1,A2,B1,B2,C13

• C. Utility of the exercise item: ambiguous (not
enough context information to solve it) / correct

For Question 1, the teacher graded 35 exercises as
3, 20 as 2 and 14 as 1 pointing to similar problems
as was independently noted by the annotators above.
For question B, she marked 29 exercises as A1/A2,
24 as A2, 14 as A2/B1 and 3 as A1 suggesting that
the exercises produced are non trivial. Finally, she
found that 5 out of the 70 exercises lacked context
and were ambiguously phrased.

Variability For any given pedagogical goal, there
usually are many syntactic patterns supporting learn-
ing. For instance, learning the gender of common
nouns can be practiced in almost any syntactic con-
figuration containing a common noun. We assess the
variability of the exercises produced for a given ped-
agogical goal by computing the number of distinct
morpho-syntactic configurations produced from a
given input semantics for a given pedagogical goal.
We count as distinct all exercise questions that are
derived from the same semantics but differ either
in syntax (e.g., passive/active distinction) or in mor-
phosyntax (determiner, number, etc.). Both types of
differences need to be learned and therefore produc-
ing exercises which, for a given pedagogical goal,
expose the learner to different syntactic and morpho-
syntactic patterns (all involving the construct to be
learned) is effective in supporting learning. How-
ever we did not take into account tense differences
as the impact of tense on the number of exercises
produced is shown by the experiment where we gen-
erate by traversing the grammar rather than from a

3A1, A2, B1, B2 and C1 are reference levels established
by the Common European Framework of Reference for
Languages: Learning, Teaching, Assessment (cf. http:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_European_
Framework_of_Reference_for_Languages) for
grading an individual’s language proficiency.

semantics. Table 4 shows for each (input semantics,
teaching goal) pair the number of distinct patterns
observed. The number ranges from 1 to 21 distinct
patterns with very few pairs (3) producing a single
pattern, many (33) producing two patterns and a fair
number producing either 14 or 21 patterns.

Nb. PG 1 2 3 4 5 6
Nb. sent 213 25 8 14 10 6

Table 6: Pedagogical Productivity: Number of Teaching
Goals the source sentence produced from a given seman-
tics can be used for

Productivity When used to generate from seman-
tic representations (cf. Section 4.3), GramEx only
partially automates the production of grammar ex-
ercises. Semantic representations must be manually
input to the system for the exercises to be generated.
Therefore the issue arises of how much GramEx
helps automating exercise creation. Table 5 shows
the breakdown of the exercises produced per teach-
ing goal and activity type. In total, GramEx pro-
duced 429 exercises out of 28 core semantics yield-
ing an output/input ratio of 15 (429/28). Further, Ta-
ble 2 and 6 show the distribution of the ratio be-
tween (i) the number of exercises produced and the
number of input semantics and (ii) the number of
teaching goals the source sentences produced from
input semantics i can be used for. Table 6 (peda-
gogical productivity) shows that, in this first exper-
iment, a given input semantics can provide material
for exercises targeting up to 6 different pedagogi-
cal goals while Table 2 (exercise productivity) shows
that most of the input semantics produce between 2
and 12 exercises4.

When generating by grammar traversal, under the
constraints described in Section 4, from one input

4If the input semantics contains a noun predicate whose gen-
der is underspecified, the exercise productivity could be dou-
bled. This is the case for 4 of the input semantics in the dataset
D2; i.e. an input semantics containing the predicates tatou n(C)
petit a(C) will produce variations such as: la petite tatou (the
small armadillo (f)) and le petit tatou (the small armadillo (m)).

154



Nb. SP 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 14 21
(S,G) 3 33 16 7 2 4 6 1 4 1 2 6

Table 4: Variability: Distribution of the number of distinct sentential patterns that can be produced for a given peda-
gogical goal from a given input semantics

Pedagogical Goal FIBLEM FIBBLNK MSHUF FIBHINT
Preposition — 28 — —
Prepositions with infinitives — 8 — —
Subject pronouns–il — — — 3
Noun number 11 — — —
Noun gender — 49 — —
Adjective order — — 30 —
Adjective morphology 30 — — —
Adjectives that precede the noun 24 — — —
Attributive Adjectives — — 28 —
Irregular adjectives 4 — — —
Participles as adjectives 4 — — —
Simple past 78 — — —
Simple future 90 — — —
-ir verbs in present 18 — — —
Subjunctive mode 12 — — —
Pronominal verbs 12 — — —
Total 236 78 30 3

Table 5: Number and Types of Exercises Produced from the 28 input semantics

90 exercises are generated targeting 4 different ped-
agogical goals (i.e. 4 distinct linguistic phenomena).

6 Conclusion

We presented a framework (called GramEx) for gen-
erating grammar exercises which are similar to those
often used in textbooks for second language learn-
ing. These exercises target a specific learning goal;
and, they involve short sentences that make it eas-
ier for the learner to concentrate on the grammatical
point to be learned.

One distinguishing feature of the approach is the
rich linguistic information associated by the gen-
erator with the source sentences used to construct
grammar exercises. Although space restriction pre-
vented us from showing it here, this information
includes, in addition to the morphosyntactic infor-
mation and the grammatical properties illustrated in
Figure 2 and Table 1 respectively, a semantic rep-
resentation, a derivation tree showing how the parse
tree of each sentence was obtained and optionally,
an underspecified semantics capturing the core pred-
icate/argument and modifier/modifiee relationships

expressed by each sentence. We are currently ex-
ploring how this information could be used to ex-
tend the approach to transformation exercises (e.g.,
passive/active) where the relation between exercise
question and exercise solution is more complex than
in FIB exercises.

Another interesting question which needs further
investigation is how to deal with exercise items that
have multiple solutions such as example (3) above.
Here we plan to use the fact that underspecified se-
mantics in GraDe permits associating many variants
with a given semantics.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the language teacher, Tex’s
French Grammar developers, and the anonymous re-
viewers for their useful comments. The research
presented in this paper was partially supported
by the European Fund for Regional Development
within the framework of the INTERREG IV A Alle-
gro Project5.

5http://www.allegro-project.eu/ and http:
//talc.loria.fr/-ALLEGRO-Nancy-.html

155



References

Itziar Aldabe, Maddalen Lopez de Lacalle, Montse Mar-
itxalar, Edurne Martinez, and Larraitz Uria. 2006.
Arikiturri: an automatic question generator based on
corpora and nlp techniques. In Proceedings of the
8th international conference on Intelligent Tutoring
Systems, ITS’06, pages 584–594, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Springer-Verlag.

Liu Chao-Lin, Wang Chun-Hung, Gao Zhao-Ming, and
Huang Shang-Ming. 2005. Applications of lexical
information for algorithmically composing multiple-
choice cloze items. In Proceedings of the second
workshop on Building Educational Applications Us-
ing NLP, EdAppsNLP 05, pages 1–8, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Chia-Yin Chen, Hsien-Chin Liou, and Jason S. Chang.
2006. Fast: an automatic generation system for gram-
mar tests. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL on
Interactive presentation sessions, COLING-ACL ’06,
pages 1–4, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

David Coniam. 1997. A preliminary inquiry into using
corpus word frequency data in the automatic genera-
tion of english language cloze tests. CALICO Journal,
14:15–33.

Claire Gardent and German Kruszewski. 2012. Gener-
ation for grammar engineering. In 11th International
Conference on Natural Language Generation (ENLG).

Michael Heilman and Maxine Eskenazi. 2007. Ap-
plication of automatic thesaurus extraction for com-
puter generation of vocabulary questions. In Proceed-
ings of Speech and Language Technology in Education
(SLaTE2007), pages 65–68.

Nikiforos Karamanis, Le An Ha, and Ruslan Mitkov.
2006. Generating multiple-choice test items from
medical text: A pilot study. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Natural Language Generation
Conference, pages 111–113, Sydney, Australia.

John Lee and Stephanie Seneff. 2007. Automatic gener-
ation of cloze items for prepositions. Proceedings of
Interspeech, pages 2173–2176.

Yi-Chien Lin, Li-Chun Sung, and Meng Chang Chen.
2007. An Automatic Multiple-Choice Question Gen-
eration Scheme for English Adjective Understandings.
In Workshop on Modeling, Management and Gener-
ation of Problems/Questions in eLearning, the 15th
International Conference on Computers in Education
(ICCE 2007), pages pages 137–142.

Ruslan Mitkov, Le An Ha, and Nikiforos Karamanis.
2006. A computer-aided environment for generating
multiple-choice test items. Natural Language Engi-
neering, 12(2):177–194.

Adam Kilgarriff Simon Smith, P.V.S Avinesh. 2010.
Gap-fill Tests for Language Learners: Corpus-Driven
Item Generation. In Proceedings of ICON-2010: 8th
International Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing.

Eiichiro Sumita, Fumiaki Sugaya, and Seiichi Ya-
mamoto. 2005. Measuring non-native speakers’ pro-
ficiency of english by using a test with automatically-
generated fill-in-the-blank questions. In Proceedings
of the second workshop on Building Educational Ap-
plications Using NLP, EdAppsNLP 05, pages 61–68,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

156


