










































Disfluencies as Extra-Propositional Indicators of Cognitive Processing


Proceedings of the ACL-2012 Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational Linguistics (ExProM-2012),
pages 1–9, Jeju, Republic of Korea, 13 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Disfluencies as Extra-Propositional Indicators of Cognitive Processing
Kathryn Womack

Dept. of ASL
& Interpreting Edu.
kaw8159@rit.edu

Wilson McCoy
Dept. of Interactive

Games & Media
wgm4143@rit.edu

Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm
Dept. of English

coagla@rit.edu

Cara Calvelli
College of Health
Sciences & Tech.

cfcscl@rit.edu

Jeff B. Pelz
Center for

Imaging Science
pelz@cis.rit.edu

Pengcheng Shi
Computing &

Information Sciences
spcast@rit.edu

Anne Haake
Computing &

Information Sciences
anne.haake@rit.edu

Rochester Institute of Technology

Abstract

We explore filled pause usage in spontaneous
medical narration. Expert physicians viewed
images of dermatological conditions and pro-
vided a description while working toward a
diagnosis. The narratives were analyzed for
differences in filled pauses used by attending
(experienced) and resident (in-training) physi-
cians and by male and female physicians. At-
tending physicians described more and used
more filled pauses than residents. No differ-
ence was found by speaker gender. Acoustic
speech features were examined for two types
of filled pauses: nasal (e.g. um) and non-nasal
(e.g. uh). Nasal filled pauses were more of-
ten followed by longer silent pauses. Scores
capturing diagnostic correctness and diagnos-
tic thoroughness for each narrative were com-
pared against filled pauses. The number of
filled and silent pauses trends upward as cor-
rectness scores increase, indicating a tentative
relationship between filled pause usage and
expertise. Also, we report on a computational
model for predicting types of filled pause.

1 Introduction

Although they are often not consciously realized,
disfluencies are common in everyday speech. In an
overview of several studies, Fox Tree (1995) esti-
mates that approximately 6% of speech is disflu-
ent. Disfluencies include filled pauses, silent pauses,
edited or repeated words, and sounds such as clear-
ing one’s throat or click noises. Disfluencies affect
the way that listeners comprehend speech in learn-
ing situations (Barr, 2003), formulate opinions of

the speaker as being more or less fluent (Lövgren
and van Doorn, 2005), and even parse grammatically
complex sentences (Bailey and Ferreira, 2003).

Since disfluencies are generally absent in writ-
ten text, they are irrelevant when analyzing text for
extra-propositional meaning, such as uncertainty or
modality (Vincze et al., 2008, for example). In con-
trast, when studying meaning in spoken language,
disfluencies provide information about a speaker’s
cognitive state. For example, they might indicate
cognitive load, uncertainty, confidence, thoughtful-
ness, problems in reasoning, or stylistic preferences
between individuals or groups of individuals. We
study filled pauses (e.g. um and uh) and leave other
disfluency types for future work.

The presence of filled pauses could indicate
context-dependent facets of cognitive reasoning pro-
cesses. We examine filled pauses present in the
speech of highly-trained dermatologists who were
shown images of dermatological conditions and
asked to provide a description and diagnosis. We
look at the difference between two different types
of filled pauses: those with nasal consonants, such
as um; and those without nasal consonants, such as
uh. We build a computational model to confirm find-
ings that nasal and non-nasal filled pauses differ by
prosodic and contextual features. In addition, we
first compare whether there is a difference between
filled pause use for variables such as level of physi-
cian expertise and gender. We also examine the rela-
tionship of correctness in the diagnostic process with
respect to filled pause use.

There is evidence that filled pauses indicate cog-
nitive processing difficulties and could change the

1



speaker’s intended meaning or the listener’s per-
ceived meaning of an utterance. However, such im-
plicit meanings are severely understudied in previ-
ous work, especially in specialized, high-stakes do-
mains such as medical diagnostics. Little is under-
stood about what factors impact the linguistic behav-
ior of using certain filled pauses rather than others,
and how the use of filled pauses differs based on
level of expertise, gender, or diagnostic correctness.
Looking into these differences is useful to form a
better understanding of the relationship between lan-
guage and specialized decision-making processes.
More specifically, it is necessary to improve the un-
derstanding of how speakers’ use of filled pauses
differs based on the context of speech and how
they change the meaning and reception of speech in
extra-propositional ways.

2 Previous Work

Filled pauses in English include monosyllables with
and without nasal consonants, such as um and uh re-
spectively. Filled pauses are most common in un-
structured, spontaneous speech, but they are also
present in prompted, structured speech; and occur
in both monologues and dialogues.

Much research has been done into hedging, nega-
tion, and other propositional features that change
the meaning or modality of phrases (Morante and
Sporleder, in press). Less research has been done
into the usage of filled pauses and their relation-
ship to certainty and speculation. It has been shown
that disfluencies are used to indicate uncertainty in
speakers’ forthcoming statements or to indicate that
the speaker is engaged in the discourse but working
to formulate their response (Brennan and Williams,
1995; Smith and Clark, 1993). These studies found
that speakers less confident of their answers take
longer to answer and use more disfluencies.

Recent studies have suggested that disfluencies
provide meaningful information about the speaker’s
cognitive or linguistic processes (Arnold et al.,
2003; Bortfeld et al., 2001; Corley and Stewart,
2008; Oviatt, 1995, for example), and are uninten-
tional indications that the speaker is having difficulty
formulating upcoming speech.

More specifically, it has been shown that the two
major categories of filled pauses, i.e. nasal and non-

nasal, are specific indicators of the level of cognitive
load, with nasal filled pauses indicating higher load
and non-nasal filled pauses indicating lower load.
Barr (2001) performed an experiment in which a
speaker described one of several visible images to
a listener who then selected the image being de-
scribed. In this study as well as in Barr and Seyfid-
dinipur (2010), listeners focused on a topic that was
new to the discourse or exceptionally complex when
they heard the speaker say um. Although they did
not differentiate between nasal and non-nasal filled
pauses, Arnold et al. (2003; 2007) found in similar
experiments that filled pauses often preceded unfa-
miliar or complex objects.

There is evidence that speakers use filled pauses
to indicate different processing difficulties. Clark
and Fox Tree (2002) describe four different filled
pauses that are annotated in the corpora they use.
These are uh, um, and their elongated versions u:h
and u:m. They argue that each of these corresponds
to a different following pause time with uh being
followed by the shortest pause time, then u:h, um,
and u:m followed by the longest. It is important to
note that their primary corpus is the London-Lund
Corpus of Spoken English, in which the pause times
were annotated based on the transcriber’s estimate of
pause time in units of “one light foot” or “one stress
unit” (Clark and Fox Tree, 2002, p. 80) rather than
measured in seconds.1

However, studies on filled pauses by Barr (2001)
and Smith and Clark (1993) measured the duration
of silent pauses in seconds and confirm that um was
followed by longer silent pauses than uh. The hy-
pothesis suggested by Barr, Clark and Fox Tree, and
Smith and Clark is that uh indicates a minor delay
and lower level of cognitive difficulty while um in-
dicates a major delay due to higher level of difficulty
in speech planning and production.

On the other hand, a study by O’Connell and
Kowal (2005) refuted the findings of Clark and Fox
Tree and showed that specific filled pauses could
not predict pause time in their corpus of TV inter-
views. O’Connell and Kowal’s corpus was six in-
terviews conducted by various TV personnel with

1The difference between listeners’ perception of duration
and actual duration is an important one because perceptual and
actual duration do not always match (Megyesi and Gustafson-
Capkova, 2002; Spinos et al., 2002).

2



Hillary Clinton because these “professional speak-
ers” (O’Connell and Kowal, 2005, p. 560) should
be more likely to use filled pauses according to con-
vention. However, speech in public TV interviews is
likely to be pre-planned and highly self-monitored
by the speakers, and it may not be appropriate to
consider this situation a model for spontaneous, less
formal, and less public speech. It has been shown
that rate and use of filled pauses can vary widely
within certain fields (Schachter et al., 1991), in situ-
ations that are more or less structured (Oviatt, 1995),
and depending on the formality of the situational
context (Bortfeld et al., 2001).

3 Data, Annotation, and Methods

Data were acquired from a study involving 16 der-
matologists, including 12 attending physicians and 4
residents. The participants were evenly split for gen-
der. These physicians were shown 50 images of dif-
ferent dermatological conditions and asked to pro-
vide a description and diagnosis of each. In a mod-
ification of the Master-Apprentice scenario (Beyer
and Holtzblatt, 1997), each observer explained his
or her thoughts and processes to a student who was
silent. These are monologues; however, the Master
has the feeling of interaction and of dialogue.

Audio of each description was recorded while
eye-movements were tracked. The relationship be-
tween eye-movements and extra-propositional fea-
tures will be the topic of a later study. The audio files
were manually single-annotated and time-aligned at
the word level in Praat, a software for acoustic and
phonetic analysis (Boersma, 2001). A section of
the spoken narrative with time-alignment is pictured
in Figure 1. Praat and Python scripts were used to
computationally extract measurements of pitch, in-
tensity, and duration for words, silent pauses, and
narratives. In total, there were 800 audio-recorded
narratives. At this time, 707 of these narratives have
been time-aligned and annotated and only these are
used in this study.

Four transcribers worked independently on time-
alignment, and they were given instructions by one
coordinator. Every spoken token was included in
the transcriptions, including filled pauses, extra-
linguistic sounds such as clicks, repairs, and silent
pauses. Annotators were instructed to mark only

Figure 1: Screenshot of the program Praat which was
used to time-align each narrative and extract acoustic
prosodic information about the physicians’ speech.

silent pauses that were longer than 30 milliseconds,
because it has been shown that pauses under 20-30
ms are not consistently perceived by listeners in dis-
course (Kirsner et al., 2002; Lövgren and van Doorn,
2005).

After word-level time-alignment, each narrative
was independently annotated by three expert derma-
tologists who did not participate in the original data
elicitation procedure. Each narrative was examined
for medical lesion morphology (the description of
the condition), differential diagnosis (possible diag-
nostic conditions), and final diagnosis (the diagno-
sis that the observer found most likely). These inde-
pendent experts annotated the physicians’ diagnostic
correctness for the three steps of the diagnostic pro-
cess. They annotated medical lesion morphology as
correct, incorrect, correct but incomplete, or none,
indicating that no medical morphology was given.
Final diagnosis was labeled as correct, incorrect, or
none, and differential diagnosis was rated as yes, no,
or no differential given. An analysis of the annotated
data set is discussed by McCoy et al. (Forthcoming
2012).

4 Results and Discussion

4.1 Types of Filled Pauses

Nasal filled pauses included hm and um and non-
nasal filled pauses included ah, er, and uh. We an-
alyzed nasal and non-nasal filled pauses as groups
rather than each individual filled pause because the
number of filled pauses within each category was not
balanced. Higher token counts of uh and um were
identified, with fewer ah, er, and hm filled pauses. In
comparing use of nasal and non-nasal filled pauses,

3



FPs No. Dur. St. Dev. %
hm 78 0.48 s 0.20 2%
um 1439 0.51 s 0.19 36%
Total
(nasal)

1517 0.50 s 0.19 38%

ah 23 0.46 s 0.23 1%
er 9 0.26 s 0.09 <1%
uh 2401 0.36 s 0.16 61%
Total (non-
nasal)

2433 0.36 s 0.16 62%

Total (all) 3950 0.42 s 0.19 100%

Table 1: Total number of each type of filled pause (FPs)
with mean duration in seconds, standard deviation of the
mean duration, and percentage of all filled pauses.

we considered all 707 narratives. The number of to-
kens and average duration for each filled pause is
given in Table 1.

The average filled pause duration was slightly
longer for nasal than for non-nasal, likely due to the
segmental quality.

In total, 38% of the filled pauses in our data set are
nasal. However, observers vary widely in their indi-
vidual usage, from one observer who used 22 non-
nasal (10%) and 189 nasal (90%) filled pauses to an
observer at the other extreme who used 562 non-
nasal (97%) and only 19 nasal (3%) filled pauses.
Some people seem to have a tendency to use one
type of filled pause over the other.

Clark and Fox Tree (2002) found that nasal filled
pauses were more often followed by silent pauses
and that those silences were on average longer than
that of non-nasal filled pauses. Our data are consis-
tent with this as shown in Tables 2 and 3,2 and Fig-
ure 2. Of the total nasal filled pauses, 70% were fol-
lowed by a silent pause, whereas only 41% of non-
nasal filled pauses were followed by a silent pause.

The mean duration of silent pauses following
nasal filled pauses was 1.5 s while non-nasal was 1.1
s, which indicates a difference significant enough
that it could be recognized by a listener. These find-
ings show that nasal filled pauses are good indica-
tors of continuing delay, which supports Clark and
Fox Tree’s hypothesis that nasal and non-nasal filled

2The data were analyzed using two-sample t-tests assuming
unequal variances.

Nasal
(hm, um)

Non-nasal
(ah, er, uh)

p

Dur. of FPs 0.50 s 0.36 s < 0.01
Dur. of FPs +
SILs

2.46 s 1.37 s < 0.01

No. of FPs 1517 2433 n/a

Table 2: Mean duration in seconds of filled pauses (FPs),
and mean duration of the filled pause including the span
of any preceding and following silences. If there were no
silences, only the duration of the filled pause was used to
calculate the mean.

Nasal
(hm, um)

Non-nasal
(ah, er, uh)

p

Dur. of pre.
SILs

1.19 s 1.15 s 0.4

No. of pre.
SILs

1167 1197 n/a

Dur. of foll.
SILs

1.50 s 1.07 s < 0.01

No. of foll.
SILs

1059 1006 n/a

Table 3: Mean duration in seconds of silent pauses (SILs)
preceding filled pauses, silent pauses following filled
pauses, and the number of tokens for each. Durations
were only considered if there was a silence, so the num-
ber of silences was different for each calculation.

Figure 2: The percentage of nasal and non-nasal filled
pauses with a preceding silent pause, following silent
pause, and a silent pause both preceding and following.

pauses are used to indicate different levels of diffi-
culty in speech planning. Taken with the results of
experiments by Barr (2001) that nasal filled pauses
are more often used before a topic that is relatively

4



complex or new to discourse, it seems that nasal
filled pauses indicate a higher level of cognitive dif-
ficulty than non-nasal filled pauses.

In their previously-mentioned study, Clark and
Fox Tree also found that nasal filled pauses were
more often preceded by delays and that those delays
were longer. Similarly, in our data 77% of the nasal
filled pauses were preceded by silences, compared
with 49% of non-nasal.

No difference was found in the mean duration of
preceding silences, however. Although this conclu-
sion is tentative, it seems that the duration of the
preceding pause could be the maximum length of
silence a speaker feels is permissible before needing
to indicate their continuing participation in the dis-
course. This supports Jefferson’s (1989) findings of
a “standard maximum silence” of around 1 second
in discourse. At that point, the speaker could need
to signal that they have more to say, using a nasal
filled pause if they anticipate a long delay or a non-
nasal filled pause if they anticipate a shorter delay.
The longer duration of surrounding silent pauses for
nasal filled pauses also supports the conclusion that
they indicate higher cognitive load and more pre-
planning. This critical finding highlights the im-
portance of considering filled pauses in computa-
tional modeling and hint at their potential usefulness
across phenomena of extra-propositional meaning.

4.2 Gender
Traditional stereotypes have held that women are
less confident speakers than men. When women and
men use the same number of hedge words or mod-
ifiers, women are judged more harshly as sounding
passive or uncertain (Bradley, 1981). Although dif-
ferent rates and ratios of filled pauses were identi-
fied, Acton (2011), Binnenpoorte et al. (2005), and
Bortfeld et al. (2001) all found that women used a
lower rate of filled pauses than men. Acton also
found that women consistently used a higher ratio
of nasal filled pauses.

Our data were analyzed at the level of diagnostic
narrative based on the means of: number of filled
pauses, filled pauses per second, the percentage of
filled pauses (i.e. the rate per 100 words), the num-
ber of nasal filled pauses, and the percentage of nasal
filled pauses. The difference between the means was
not statistically significant, confirmed by the com-

puted p-score.3 Hence, our data do not support a dif-
ference in men’s and women’s use of filled pauses.

There are several possible explanations for this.
For example, it has been shown that women tend
to be more conscious of their speaking style than
men because they are aware of the stereotyping men-
tioned previously (Gordon, 1994), and they may
make more effort to speak clearly. Acton (2011) and
Bortfeld et al. (2001) noted different usage of filled
pauses by men and women in different situations.
Whereas our results point to gender neutrality and
refute the common gender bias as well as findings
of previous studies, we recognize that our results
could reflect that this study involved a largely ho-
mogeneous professional and educational group. The
studies mentioned thus far used corpora consisting
of casual conversations in various situations with in-
dividuals of various backgrounds. Further research
into gender differences in expert fields could clarify
this factor further.

4.3 Level of Expertise

Our data were analyzed based on the means per nar-
rative, similar to Section 4.2, but comparing levels
of expertise (attending versus resident physicians).
Attending physicians’ narratives had a longer mean
duration and significantly more words. Attending
physicians also used more filled pauses, a higher rate
of filled pauses per 100 words, and a higher percent-
age of nasal filled pauses (see Table 4).4

One probable explanation for the difference is that
the experienced attendings noticed more about the
image, leading them to give more information about
their thought processes and go into more detail than
residents. It is possible also that the attendings’
experience could have provided them with a larger
conceptual space and options to explore. This ex-
plains the longer narrative time and the higher num-
ber of words used. Many of the dermatological
terms used are highly complex and may require ex-
planation on the part of the observer, and other stud-

3The mean of each category was determined for each ob-
server, and then analyzed using a two-sample t-test. In total, we
had 355 narratives from males and 352 from females.

4These results were calculated using the mean of each ob-
server and each narrative. A paired t-test was used to compare
means for residents on each image against means for attendings
on each image.

5



For Narra-
tives

Attendings’
Means

Residents’
Means

p

Total Dur. 46.1 s 33.8 s < 0.01
No. of Words 85.7 50.9 < 0.01
No. of FPs 6.3 1.9 < 0.01
% FPs 8% 4% < 0.01
% Nasal FPs 0.4% 0.2% < 0.01

Table 4: Analysis considered, at the narrative level, at-
tending and resident physicians’ mean total duration,
number of words (including filled and silent pauses),
number of filled pauses (FPs), percentage of filled pauses
of total words (total words includes pauses; without
pauses, this rate would be higher), and percentage of
nasal filled pauses of total filled pauses.

ies have found that the filled pause rate increases as
the utterance length increases (Oviatt, 1995; Bort-
feld et al., 2001), so one would expect to see more
filled pauses used in longer descriptions.

One issue with our data is that the number of at-
tending physicians and the number of resident physi-
cians is not balanced. We had 592 narratives done by
12 attendings and 115 done by 4 residents. All val-
ues were calculated using means so the values are
not weighted based on the number of narratives ana-
lyzed. However, we have previously mentioned that
personal preference plays a role in the usage of filled
pauses, and we have a wider variety of attending ob-
servers than resident observers. It could be that our
resident observers happened to be the kinds of peo-
ple who do not use many filled pauses.

4.4 Diagnostic Correctness

Three scores were determined for each narrative.
The first score was the holistic expert score provided
by the expert annotators, based on “relevancy, thor-
oughness, and accuracy” of each narrative from 1
to 3 with 3 being the best. The second score was
an overall correctness score which spanned from
0 to 3, with one-third of a point given per inde-
pendent annotator for each step (i.e. medical lesion
morphology, differential diagnosis, and final diag-
nosis) if correct and 13 ∗ 0.5 points given for cor-
rect but incomplete. The last score was the not-
given score which, similar to the correctness score,
spanned from 0 to 3 with one-third of a point given
per annotator for each step if the original observer

Figure 3: Average number of filled pauses per narrative
by observer (y-axis) against the holistic expert score, cor-
rectness score, and not-given score (x-axis).

did not provide that information.5

Correlation between these three scores and the
number or rate of words, filled pauses, and silent
pauses was not strong enough to make predictions,
indicating that more factors than just the scores
should be considered. However, certain trends were
evident. As the holistic expert and correctness
scores improved, the means of narratives’ total du-
ration in seconds and total number of words also in-
creased. This finding, combined with the fact that
experienced physicians spoke more and had higher
average correctness and expert scores, indicates that
verbal behavior can reflect both heightened concep-
tual knowledge and level of expertise.

The number of filled pauses per narrative, num-
ber of silent pauses per narrative, and the total dura-
tion of filled and silent pauses (per narrative) also in-
creased as the holistic expert and correctness scores
improved and the not-given score decreased. The
graph of filled pauses in Figure 3 indicates that the
increase in the number of filled and silent pauses in-
volve more cognitive processing. That the not-given
score tends to inversely decrease could indicate very
little cognitive processing (e.g., if an observer was
so unsure that they did not even hazard a guess).

The number and percentage of nasal filled pauses,
as opposed to non-nasal filled pauses, increased at

5There was not a strong correlation between the holistic ex-
pert, correctness, and not-given scores, but each score measured
different criteria. The mean holistic expert score was 2.3 with
a standard deviation of 0.5; the mean correctness score was 1.6
with a standard deviation of 0.8; and the mean not-given score
was 0.26 with a standard deviation of 0.16.

6



a slightly higher rate as the holistic expert and cor-
rectness scores increased. This could indicate that
nasal filled pauses indicate a higher cognitive load
and therefore more consideration in the decision-
making process. However, as discussed in Section
4.1, this corpus has more non-nasal than nasal filled
pauses and some observers have a particular prefer-
ence, so this would need to be controlled and inves-
tigated further.

5 Computational Model of Filled Pauses
Based on Speech Features

A computational model was developed to classify
filled pauses as either nasal or non-nasal,6 based
on features discussed in our analysis and in previ-
ous work. This model performs above a majority
class baseline, supporting our findings that there are
differences between the two types of filled pauses,
given the features that we have examined, which can
be captured by a computational model.

The features considered for classification were
total duration and number of words in the narra-
tive; duration, intensity, mean pitch, minimum pitch,
and maximum pitch of the filled pause;7 the filled
pause’s time and word position in the narrative; time
and word position as a percentage of the total narra-
tive; and length of silent pauses8 on each side of the
filled pause. The CFS subset evaluation features se-
lection algorithm was first applied. The filled pause
duration, maximum pitch, left silence length, and
right silence length were maintained as features for
classification; other features were not used further.

The widely used J48 decision tree algorithm in
Weka9 was used to classify our data, which allowed
us to visualize our model. The experimental ap-
proach was guided by the relatively small size of
the dataset. We wanted to avoid over- or under-
interpretation of results based on just a small held-
out test set. The data were shuffled and partitioned
differently during tuning and testing to ensure dis-

6We also made a fine-grained model to classify specific
filled pauses ah, er, hm, uh, and um. It had 70% accuracy but
was generally unable to identify the least-often occurring ah, er,
and hm filled pauses, so it is not reported on here.

7Pitch features were extracted considering gender: 75-300
Hz for men and a 100-500 Hz for women.

8If there was no silence, the value was 0.
9See http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/.

Predicted
Nasal Non-nasal

Actual
Nasal 900 617

Non-nasal 462 1971

Table 5: Confusion matrix of classification results.

tinct identities of the data splits so that parameters
were not tuned on test folds. The algorithm’s pa-
rameters were tuned using 5-fold cross-validation;
the best-performing fold’s parameters were chosen.
The data were then shuffled anew and split into 10
folds with each fold being the test set for one experi-
mental run. Results are reported on the final 10-fold
cross-validation case.

The baseline for this model was 62% because the
majority class, non-nasal filled pauses, comprised
that percentage of the data set. Our model cor-
rectly classified 73% of the instances, performing
11% above the baseline. A confusion matrix of the
classifier output is shown in Table 5. The model per-
forms best for non-nasal filled pauses, likely because
they are more common.

The output of the decision tree indicated that du-
ration of the filled pause was the most important fea-
ture. As discussed in Section 4.1, this corresponds
with our previous statistical findings as well as those
of Clark and Fox Tree (2002) that there is a differ-
ence in duration of filled pauses. The next most
important features were the left and right silence
lengths, also supported by our analysis as well as
by Clark and Fox Tree (2002) and Barr (2001). The
last selected feature was the maximum pitch of the
filled pause, possibly due to phonemic qualities.

This computational model mirrors the findings of
Section 4.1 that the duration of filled pauses and of
surrounding silent pauses are a differentiating fac-
tor between nasal and non-nasal filled pauses and
that the contextual surroundings of each filled pause
type are different. The finding that the two distinct
types of filled pauses behave differently in this do-
main could also aid language processing systems for
clinicians in the medical field. Further research into
filled pause and other speech phenomena in each
step of the diagnostic process (i.e. medical lesion
morphology, differential diagnosis, and final diag-
nosis) could also be explored in future work.

7



6 Conclusion

The results of this study underscore the need for fur-
ther research into the production of disfluencies, es-
pecially in decision making situations and in special-
ized fields such as dermatology. Future work will
further explore their connection with highly relevant
extra-propositional meaning phenomena in diagnos-
tic verbal behaviors such as certainty, confidence,
correctness, and thoroughness.

This study has shown that the two main types of
filled pauses, nasal and non-nasal, differ in their us-
age. Nasal filled pauses are more likely to be pre-
ceded and followed by silent pauses, and these fol-
lowing silent pauses are more likely to be longer.
These findings are reinforced by the computational
model which identified the duration of the filled
pause, duration of surrounding silences, and pitch
as important for classification of filled pause type.

That longer and more frequent silent pauses sur-
round nasal filled pauses supports the hypothesis
that nasal filled pauses indicate a higher level of cog-
nitive load (Clark and Fox Tree, 2002) or a topic that
is new to the discourse or unusually complex (Barr,
2001; Barr and Seyfiddinipur, 2010).

The lack of differences in use of filled pauses by
speaker gender given the differences found by Ac-
ton (2011), Binnenpoorte et al. (2005), and Bortfeld
et al. (2001) shows that more research is needed to
understand gender variation in speech.

Another finding was that level of expertise in-
fluenced the use of filled pauses and overall narra-
tive length. On average, attending physicians spoke
longer, said more, used more filled pauses, and had
a higher percentage of nasal filled pauses. Attend-
ing physicians also had slightly higher holistic ex-
pert and correctness scores and were more likely to
provide medical lesion morphology, differential di-
agnosis, and final diagnosis. We believe that attend-
ing physicians likely noticed more about the images
due to their experience.

The differences by level of expertise (in our study,
between attending and resident physicians) need to
be verified and compared with more data and in non-
medical fields. The differences could also be re-
lated to teaching experience of the attending physi-
cians, so further research could compare experi-
enced physicians who are also teachers with those

who are not, and if their speaking style affects stu-
dents’ comprehension. In general, differences in lin-
guistic behaviors in relation to levels of expertise
deserve more research, and might have long-term
implications for development of clinical decision-
support and training systems.

The information used by the physicians in our
study was limited; they were only shown images
of dermatological conditions without being able to
examine the patient, run diagnostic tests, or have
a patient history. This may have changed their
the behavior, along with factors such as the dif-
ficulty of diagnosis of each image and their role
in the Master-Apprentice scenario. Understanding
how these variables affect the diagnostic process
of physicians could help us understand how disflu-
encies are impacted by the contexts of diagnostic
decision-making.

The differences found between the use of filled
pauses based on level of expertise and on the correct-
ness of narratives seem to indicate that filled pauses
could provide partial information about the experts’
decision-making process as well as level of confi-
dence and certainty. This is especially important
in the medical domain in order to understand how
physicians’ verbal behaviors are interpreted by other
physicians as well as by patients and students.

We recently collected a similar, larger data set and
we plan to further examine differences based on ex-
pertise in this new corpus. In the recent data collec-
tion, observers were also asked to rate their level of
certainty about the diagnosis. This provides the op-
portunity to examine the relationship between disflu-
encies and certainty. We have eye-tracking data for
both studies and future work will also look at eye-
movements in relation to the use of filled and silent
pauses, certainty, expertise level, and cognitive load.

Acknowledgements

Supported in part by NIH 1 R21 LM010039-01A1,
NSF IIS-0941452, RIT GCCIS Seed Funding, and
RIT Research Computing (http://rc.rit.edu). We
thank Lowell A. Goldsmith, M.D. and the anony-
mous reviewers for their comments, and Dr. Rubén
Proaño for input on statistical analysis.

8



References

Eric K. Acton. 2011. On gender differences in the dis-
tribution of um and uh. University of Pennsylvania
Working Papers in Linguistics, 17(2).

Jennifer E. Arnold, Maria Fagnano, and Michael K.
Tanenhaus. 2003. Disfluencies signal theee, um, new
information. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
32(1):25–36.

Jennifer E. Arnold, Carla L. Hudson Kam, and
Michael K. Tanenhaus. 2007. If you say thee uh you
are describing something hard: The on-line attribution
of disfluency during reference comprehension. Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 33(5):914–930.

Karl G.D. Bailey and Fernanda Ferreira. 2003. Disfluen-
cies affect the parsing of garden-path sentences. Jour-
nal of Memory and Language, 49:183–200.

Dale J. Barr and Mandana Seyfiddinipur. 2010. The role
of fillers in listener attributes for speaker disfluency.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 25(4):441–455.

Dale J. Barr. 2001. Trouble in mind: Paralinguistic
indices of effort and uncertainty in communication.
Oralité and gestualité: Communication Multimodale,
Interaction, pages 597–600.

Dale J. Barr. 2003. Paralinguistic correlates of con-
ceptual structure. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
10(2):462–467.

Hugh Beyer and Karen Holtzblatt. 1997. Contextual De-
sign: Defining Customer-Centered Systems. Morgan
Kaufmann.

Diana Binnenpoorte, Christophe Van Bael, Els den Os,
and Lou Boves. 2005. Gender in everyday speech and
language: A corpus-based study. Interspeech, pages
2213–2216.

Paul Boersma. 2001. Praat, a system for doing phonetics
by computer. Glot International, pages 341–345.

Heather Bortfeld, Silvia D. Leon, Johnathan E. Bloom,
Michael F. Schober, and Susan E. Brennan. 2001.
Disfluency rates in conversation: Effects of age, re-
lationship, topic, role, and gender. Language and
Speech, 44(2):123–147.

Patricia Hayes Bradley. 1981. The folk-linguistics of
women’s speech: an empirical investigation. Commu-
nication Monographs, 48(1):78–91.

Susan E. Brennan and Maurice Williams. 1995. The
feeling of another’s knowing: Prosody and filled
pauses as cues to listeners about the metacognitive
states of speakers. Journal of Memory and Language,
34:383–398.

Herbert H. Clark and Jean E. Fox Tree. 2002. Using uh
and um in spontaneous speaking. Cognition, 84:73–
111.

Martin Corley and Oliver W. Stewart. 2008. Hesitation
disfluencies in spontaneous speech: The meaning of
um. Lang. and Linguistics Compass, 2(4):589–602.

Jean E. Fox Tree. 1995. The effects of false starts and
repetitions on the processing of subsequent words in
spontaneous speech. Journal of Memory and Lan-
guage, 34:709–738.

Elizabeth Gordon. 1994. Sex differences in language:
Another explanation? American Speech, 69(2):215–
221.

Gail Jefferson. 1989. Notes on a possible metric which
provides for a ‘standard maximum’ silence of approx-
imately one second in conversation. In Derek Roger
and Peter Bull, editors, Conversation, chapter 8, pages
166–196. Multilingual Matters, Clevedon, UK.

Kim Kirsner, John Dunn, Kathryn Hird, Tim Parkin, and
Craig Clark. 2002. Time for a pause. Proc. of the
9th Australian Int’l. Conf. on Speech Science & Tech.,
pages 52–57.

Tobias Lövgren and Jan van Doorn. 2005. Influence of
manipulation of short silent pause duration on speech
fluency. Proceedings of DiSS05, pages 123–126.

Wilson McCoy, Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm, Cara Calvelli,
Jeff Pelz, Pengcheng Shi, and Anne Haake.
Forthcoming-2012. Linking uncertainty in physi-
cians’ narratives to diagnostic correctness. Proc. of
the ExProM 2012 Workshop.

Beata Megyesi and Sofia Gustafson-Capkova. 2002.
Production and perception of pauses and their linguis-
tic context in read and spontaneous speech in Swedish.
ICSLP 7.

Roser Morante and Caroline Sporleder. in press. Modal-
ity and negation: An introduction to the special issue.
Computational Linguistics.

Daniel C. O’Connell and Sabine Kowal. 2005. uh
and um revisited: Are they interjections for signal-
ing delay? Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
34(6):555–576.

Sharon Oviatt. 1995. Predicting and managing spo-
ken disfluencies during human-computer interaction.
Computer Speech and Language, 9:19–35.

Stanley Schachter, Nicholas Christenfeld, Bernard Rav-
ina, and Frances Bilous. 1991. Speech disfluency and
the structure of knowledge. JPSP, 60(3):362–367.

Vicki L. Smith and Herbert H. Clark. 1993. On the
course of answering questions. Journal of Memory
and Language, 32:25–38.

Anna-Marie R. Spinos, Daniel C. O’Connell, and Sabine
Kowal. 2002. An empirical investigation of pause no-
tation. Pragmatics, 12(1):1–9.

Veronika Vincze, György Szarvas, Richárd Farkas,
György Móra, and János Csirik. 2008. The bioscope
corpus: Biomedical texts annotated for uncertainty,
negation, and their scopes. BMC Bioinformatics, 9.

9


