










































Annotating Archaeological Texts: An Example of Domain-Specific Annotation in the Humanities


Proceedings of the 6th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 134–138,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12-13 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotating Archaeological Texts:
An Example of Domain-Specific Annotation in the Humanities

Francesca Bonin
SCSS and CLCS,

Trinity College Dublin,
Ireland

Fabio Cavulli
University of Trento,

Italy

Aronne Noriller
University of Trento,

Italy

Massimo Poesio
University of Essex, UK,

University of Trento,
Italy

Egon W. Stemle
EURAC,

Italy

Abstract

Developing content extraction methods for
Humanities domains raises a number of chal-
lenges, from the abundance of non-standard
entity types to their complexity to the scarcity
of data. Close collaboration with Humani-
ties scholars is essential to address these chal-
lenges. We discuss an annotation schema for
Archaeological texts developed in collabora-
tion with domain experts. Its development re-
quired a number of iterations to make sure all
the most important entity types were included,
as well as addressing challenges including a
domain-specific handling of temporal expres-
sions, and the existence of many systematic
types of ambiguity.

1 Introduction

Content extraction techniques – so far, mainly used
to analyse news and scientific publications – will
play an important role in digital libraries for the
humanities as well: for instance, certain types of
browsing that content extraction is meant to sup-
port, such as entity, spatial and temporal brows-
ing, could sensibly improve the quality of reposito-
ries and their browsing. However, applying content
extraction to the Humanities requires addressing a
number of problems: first of all, the lack of large
quantities of data; then, the fact that entities in these
domains, additionally to adhering to well established
standards, also include very domain-specific ones.

Archaeological texts are a very good example of
the challenges inherent in humanities domains, and
at the same time, they deepen the understanding of

possible improvements content extraction yields for
these domains. For instance, archaeological texts
could benefit of temporal browsing on the basis of
the temporal metadata extracted from the content
of the publication (as opposed to temporal brows-
ing based on the date of publication), more than bi-
ological publications or general news. In this pa-
per, we discuss the development of a new annota-
tion schema: it has been designed specifically for
use in the archaeology domain to support spatial and
temporal browsing. To our knowledge this schema
is one of only a very few schemata for the annota-
tion of archaeological texts (Byrne et al., 2010), and
Humanities domains in general (Martinez-Carrillo
et al., 2012) (Agosti and Orio, 2011). The paper
is structured as follows. In Section 2 we give a
brief description of the corpus and the framework in
which the annotation has been developed; in Section
3, we describe a first annotation schema, analysing
its performance and its weaknesses; in Section 4 we
propose a revised version of the annotation schema,
building upon the first experience and, in Section 5,
we evaluate the performance of the new schema, de-
scribing a pilot annotation test and the results of the
inter-annotator agreement evaluation.

2 Framework and Corpus Description

The annotation process at hand takes place in the
framework of the development of the Portale della
Ricerca Umanistica / Humanities Research Portal
(PRU), (Poesio et al., 2011a), a one-stop search fa-
cility for repositories of research articles and other
types of publications in the Humanities. The por-
tal uses content extraction techniques for extract-

134



ing, from the uploaded publications, citations and
metadata, together with temporal, spatial, and en-
tity references (Poesio et al., 2011b). It provides ac-
cess to the Archaeological articles in the APSAT /
ALPINET repository, and therefore, dedicated con-
tent extraction resources needed to be created, tuned
on the specificities of the domain. The corpus of
articles in the repository consists of a complete col-
lection of the journal Preistoria Alpina published by
the Museo Tridentino di Scienze Naturali. In order
to make those articles accessible through the por-
tal, they are tokenized, PoS tagged and Named En-
tity (NE) annotated by the TEXTPRO1 pipeline (Pi-
anta et al., 2008). The first version of the pipeline
included the default TEXTPRO NE tagger, Enti-
tyPro, trained to recognize the standard ACE entity
types. However, the final version of the portal is
based on an improved version of the NEtagger ca-
pable of recognising all relevant entities in the AP-
SAT/ALPINET collection (Poesio et al., 2011b; Ek-
bal et al., 2012)

3 Annotation Schema for the
Archaeological Domain

A close collaboration with the University of Trento’s
“B. Bagolini” Laboratory, resulted in the develop-
ment of an annotation schema, particularly suited
for the Archaeological domain, (Table 1). Dif-
ferently from (Byrne et al., 2010), the work has
been particularly focused on the definition of spe-
cific archaeological named entities, in order to cre-
ate very fined grained description of the documents.
In fact, we can distinguish two general types of
entities: contextual entities, those that are part of
the content of the article (as PERSONs, SITEs,
CULTUREs, ARTEFACTs), and bibliographical en-
tities, those that refer to bibliographical information
(as PubYEARs, etc.) (Poesio et al., 2011a).

In total, domain experts predefined 13 entities,
and also added an underspecification tag for dealing
with ambiguity. In fact, the archaeological domain
is rich of polysemous cases: for instance, the term
’Fiorano’ refers to a CULTURE, from the Ancient
Neolithic, that takes its name from the SITE, ’Fio-
rano’, which in turn is named from Fiorano Mod-
enese; during the first annotation, those references

1http://textpro.fbk.eu/

NE type Details
Culture Artefact assemblage characterizing

a group of people in a specific time and place
Site Place where the remains of human

activity are found (settlements, infrastructures)
Artefact Objects created or modified by men

(tools, vessels, ornaments)
Ecofact Biological and environmental remains

different from artefacts but culturally relevant
Feature Remains of construction or maintenance

of an area related with dwelling activities
(fire places, post-holes, pits, channels, walls, ...)

Location Geographical reference
Time Historical periods
Organization Association (no publications)
Person Human being discussed in the text (Otzi the

Iceman, Pliny the Elder, Caesar)
Pubauthor Author in bibliographic references
Publoc Publication location
Puborg Publisher
Pubyear Publication year

Table 1: Annotation schema for Named Entities in the
Archaeology Domain

were decided to be marked as underspecified.

3.1 Annotation with the First Annotation
Schema and Error Analysis

A manual annotation, using the described schema,
was carried out on a small subset of 11 articles of
Preistoria Alpina (in English and Italian) and was
used as training set for the NE tagger; the latter
was trained with a novel active annotation technique
(Vlachos, 2006), (Settles, 2009). Quality of the ini-
tial manual annotation was estimated using qualita-
tive analyses for assessing the representativeness of
the annotation schema, and quantitative analyses for
measuring the inter-annotator agreement. Qualita-
tive analyses revealed lack of specificity of the entity
TIME and of the entity PERSON. In fact, the anno-
tation schema only provided a general TIME entity
used for marking historical periods (as Mesolitic,
Neolithic) as well as specific dates (as 1200 A.D.)
and proposed dates(as from 50-100 B.C.), although
all these instances need to be clearly distinguished in
the archaeological domain. Similarly, PERSON had
been used for indicating general persons belonging
to the document’s contents and scientists working on
the same topic (but not addressed as bibliographical
references). For the inter-annotator agreement on
the initial manual annotation, we calculated a kappa
value of 0.8, which suggest a very good agreement.
Finally, we carried out quantitative analyses of the

135



NE Type Details
Culture Artefact assemblage characterizing

a group of people in a specific time and place
Site Place where the remains of human

activity are found (settlements, infrastructures)
Location Geographical reference
Artefact Objects created or modified by men

(tools, vessels, ornaments, ...)
Material Found materials (steel)
AnimalEcofact Animal remains different from

artefacts but culturally relevant
BotanicEcofact Botanical remains as trees and plants
Feature Remains of construction or maintenance related

with dwelling activities (fire places, post-holes)
ProposedTime Dates that refer to a range of years

hypothesized from remains
AbsTime Exact date, given by a C-14 analysis
HistoricalTime Macro period of time referring

to time ranges in a particular area
Pubyear Publication year
Person Human being, discussed in the text

(Otzi the Iceman, Pliny the Elder, Caesar)
Pubauthor Author in bibliographic references
Researcher Scientist working on similar topics or persons

involved in a finding
Publoc Publication location
Puborg Publisher
Organization Association (no publications)

Table 2: New Annotation Schema for Named Entities in
the Archaeology Domain

automatic annotation. Considering the specificity
of the domain the NE tagger reached high perfor-
mances, but low accuracy resulted on the domain
specific entities, such as SITE, CULTURE, TIME
(F-measures ranging from 34% to 70%) In particular
SITE, LOCATION, and CULTURE, TIME, turned
out to be mostly confused by the system. This result
may be explained by the existence of many polyse-
mous cases in the domain, that annotators used to
mark as underspecified.
This cross-error analysis revealed two main prob-
lems of the adopted annotation schema for Archaeo-
logical texts: 1) the lack of representativeness of the
entity TIME and PERSON, used for marking con-
current concepts, 2) the accuracy problems due to
the existence of underspecified entities.

4 A Revised Annotation Schema and
Coding Instructions

Taking these analyses into consideration, we devel-
oped a new annotation schema (Table 2): the afore-
mentioned problems of the previous section were
solved and the first schema’s results were outper-
formed in terms of accuracy and representativeness.

The main improvements of the schema are:

1. New TIME and PERSON entities

2. New decision trees, aimed at overcoming un-
derspecification and helping annotators in am-
biguous cases.

3. New domain specific NE such as: material

4. Fine grained specification of
ECOFACT: AninmalEcofact and
BotanicEcofact.

Similarly to (Byrne, 2006), we defined more fine
grained entities, in order to better represent the
specificity of the domain; however, on the other
hand, we also could find correlations with he
CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model (Crofts et al.,
2011). 2

4.1 TIME and PERSON Entities
Archaeological domain is characterized by a very
interesting representation of time. Domain experts
need to distinguish different kinds of TIME annota-
tions.
In some cases, C-14 analysis, on remains and arte-
facts, allow to detected very exact dating; those
cases has been annotated as AbsTIME. On the other
hand, there are cases in which different clues, given
by the analysis of the settlements (technical skills,
used materials, presence of particular species), al-
low archaeologists to detect a time frame of a pos-
sible dating. Those cases have been annotated as
ProposedTime (eg. from 50-100 B.C).
Finally, macro time period, such as Neolithic,
Mesolithic, are annotated as HistoricalTIME:
interestingly, those macro periods do not refer to an
exact range of years, but their collocation in time de-
pends on cultural and geographical factors.

4.2 Coding Schema for Underspecified Cases
In order to reduce ambiguity, and helping coders
with underspecified cases, we developed the follow-
ing decision trees:

2The repertoire of entity types in the new annotation scheme
overlaps in part with those in the CIDOC CRM: for instance,
AbsTime and PubYears are subtypes of E50 (Date), Historical-
Time is related to E4 (Period), Artefact to E22 (Man Made Ob-
ject), etc.

136



SITE vs LOCATION: coders are suggested to mark
as LOCATION only those mentions that are clearly
geographical references (eg. Mar Mediterraneo,
Mediterranean Sea); SITE has to be used in all
other cases (similar approach to the GPE markable
in ACE); CULTURE vs TIME:
a) coders are first asked to mark as
HistoricalTIME those cases in which the
mention belongs to a given list of macro period
(such as Neolithic, Mesolithic):

• eg.: nelle societa’ Neolitiche (in Neolithic so-
cieties).

b) If the modifier does not belong to that list,
coders are asked to try an insertion test: della cul-
tura + ADJ, (of the ADJ culture) :

• lo Spondylus e’ un simbolo del Neolitico Danu-
biano = lo Spondylus e’ un simbolo della cul-
tura Neolitica Danubiana (the Spondylus is
a symbol of the Danubian Neolithic = the
Spondylus is a symbol of the Danubian Ne-
olithic culture).

• la guerra fenicia != la guerra della cultura dei
fenici (Phoenician war != war of the Phoeni-
cian culture).

Finally, cases in which tests a) and b) fail, coders are
asked to mark and discuss the case individually.

5 Inter-Annotator Agreement and
Evaluation

To evaluate the quality of the new annotation
schema, we measured the inter-annotator agreement
(IAA) achieved during a first pilot annotation of two
articles from Preistoria Alpina. The IAA was cal-
culated using the kappa metric applied on the enti-
ties detected by both annotators, and the new schema
reached an overall agreement of 0.85. In Table 3, we
report the results of the IAA for each NE class. Inter-
estingly, we notice a significant increment on prob-
lematic classes on SITE and LOCATION, as well as
on CULTURE. 3

Annotators performed consistently demonstrating
the reliability of the annotation schema. The new

3Five classes are not represented by this pilot annotation
test; however future studies will be carried out on a significantly
larger amount of data.

NE Type Total Kappa
Site 50 1.0
Location 13 0.76
Animalecofact 3 0.66
Botanicecofact 6 -0.01
Culture 4 1.0
Artefact 18 0.88
Material 11 0.35
Historicaltime 6 1.0
Proposedtime 0 NaN
Absolutetime 0 NaN
Pubauthor 48 0.95
Pubyear 32 1.0
Person 2 -0.003
Organization 7 0.85
Puborg 0 NaN
Feature 36 1.0
Publoc 2 -0.0038
Coordalt 0 NaN
Geosistem 0 NaN
Datum 2 1.0

Table 3: IAA per NE type: we report the total number of
NE and the kappa agreement.

entities regarding coordinates and time seem also to
be well defined and representative.

6 Conclusions

In this study, we discuss the annotation of a very spe-
cific and interesting domain namely, Archaeology:
it deals with problems and challenges common to
many other domains in the Humanities. We have de-
scribed the development of a fine grained annotation
schema, realized in close cooperation with domain
experts in order to account for the domain’s pecu-
liarities, and to address its very specific needs. We
propose the final annotation schema for annotation
of texts in the archaeological domain. Further work
will focus on the annotation of a larger amount of
articles, and on the development of domain specific
tools.

Acknowledgments

This study is a follow up of the research supported
by the LiveMemories project, funded by the Au-
tonomous Province of Trento under the Major
Projects 2006 research program, and it has been
partially supported by the ’Innovation Bursary’ pro-
gram in Trinity College Dublin.

137



References
M. Agosti and N. Orio. 2011. The cultura project:

Cultivating understanding and research through adap-
tivity. In Maristella Agosti, Floriana Esposito, Carlo
Meghini, and Nicola Orio, editors, Digital Libraries
and Archives, volume 249 of Communications in
Computer and Information Science, pages 111–114.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

E. J. Briscoe. 2011. Intelligent information access
from scientific papers. In J. Tait et al, editor, Current
Challenges in Patent Information Retrieval. Springer.

P. Buitelaar. 1998. CoreLex: Systematic Polysemy and
Underspecification. Ph.D. thesis, Brandeis University.

K. Byrne and E. Klein, 2010. Automatic extraction of
archaeological events from text. In Proceedings of
Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in
Archaeology, Williamsburg, VA

K. Byrne, 2006. Proposed Annotation for Entities and
Relations in RCAHMS Data.

N. Crofts, M. Doerr, T. Gill, S. Stead, and M. Stiff.
2011. Definition of the CIDOC Conceptual Reference
Model. ICOM/CIDOC CRM Special Interest Group,
2009.

A. Ekbal, F. Bonin, S. Saha, E. Stemle, E. Barbu,
F. Cavulli, C. Girardi, M. Poesio, 2012. Rapid
Adaptation of NE Resolvers for Humanities Domains
using Active Annotation. In Journal for Language
Technology and Computational Linguistics (JLCL) 26
(2):39–51.

A. Herbelot and A. Copestake. 2011. Formalising and
specifying underquantification. In Proceedings of the
Ninth International Conference on Computational
Semantics, IWCS ’11, pages 165–174, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA.

A. Herbelot and A. Copestake 2010. Underquantifica-
tion: an application to mass terms. In Proceedings
of Empirical, Theoretical and Computational Ap-
proaches to Countability in Natural Language,
Bochum, Germany, 2010.

B. Magnini, E. Pianta, C. Girardi, M. Negri, L. Romano,
M. Speranza, V. Bartalesi Lenzi, and R. Sprugnoli.
I-CAB: the Italian Content Annotation Bank: pages
963–968.

A.L. Martinez Carrillo, A. Ruiz, M.J. Lucena, and J.M.
Fuertes. 2012. Computer tools for archaeological
reference collections: The case of the ceramics of the
iberian period from andalusia (Spain). In Multimedia
for Cultural Heritage, volume 247 of Communications
in Computer and Information Science, Costantino
Grana and Rita Cucchiara, editors, pages 51–62.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

M. Palmer, H. T. Dang, and C. Fellbaum. 2007. Making
fine-grained and coarse-grained sense distinctions,
both manually and automatically. Natural Language
Engineering, 13(02):137–163.

E. Pianta, C. Girardi, and R. Zanoli. 2008. The textpro
tool suite. In Proceedings of 6th LREC, Marrakech.

M. Poesio, P. Sturt, R. Artstein, and R. Filik. 2006.
Underspecification and Anaphora: Theoretical Issues
and Preliminary Evidence. In Discourse Processes
42(2): 157-175, 2006.

M. Poesio, E. Barbu, F. Bonin, F. Cavulli, A. Ekbal,
C. Girardi, F. Nardelli, S. Saha, and E. Stemle. 2011a.
The humanities research portal: Human language
technology meets humanities publication repositories.
In Proceedings of Supporting Digital Humanitites
(SDH), Copenhagen.

M. Poesio, E. Barbu, E. Stemle, and C. Girardi. 2011b.
Structure-preserving pipelines for digital libraries. In
Proceedings of LaTeCH, Portland, OR.

J. Pustejovsky. 1998. The semantics of lexical under-
specification. Folia Linguistica, 32(3-4):323?348.

J. Pustejovsky and M. Verhagen. 2010. Semeval-2010
task 13 : Evaluating events, time expressions, and
temporal relations. Computational Linguistics, (June
2009):112–116.

B. Settles. 2009. Active learning literature survey.
Computer Sciences Technical Report 1648, University
of Wisconsin–Madison.

A. Vlachos. 2006. Active annotation. In Proceedings
EACL 2006 Workshop on Adaptive Text Extraction and
Mining, Trento.

138


