










































Rules Design in Word Segmentation of Chinese Micro-Blog


Proceedings of the Second CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference on Chinese Language Processing, pages 90–94,
Tianjin, China, 20-21 DEC. 2012

Rules Design in Word Segmentation of Chinese Micro-Blog 

 

 

Zong Hao Derek F. Wong Lidia S.Chao 

NLP
2
CT Research Group, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of  

Macau, Macau SAR, China 
{MB15463, DerekFw, Lidiac}@umac.mo 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

This paper proposed a Hidden Markov 

Model (HMM) based tokenizer for Chi-

nese micro-blog texts. Comparing with 

normal Chinese texts, micro-blog texts 

contain more uncertainties. These uncer-

tainties are generally aroused by the irreg-

ular use of bloggers (such as network 

words, dialect words, wrong written char-

acters, mixture of foreign words and sym-

bols, etc.). Besides the lack of the annotat-

ed training corpus is also a restriction in 

solving this task. Hence the segmentation 

for micro-blogs is much more difficult 

than that of general text, we present an 

HMM based segmentation model integrat-

ed with a pre and post correction module. 

The evaluation results show that the pro-

posed approach can achieve an F-measure 

of 90.98% on test set of 5,000 sentences. 

1 Introduction 

Word segmentation is a common task in Chinese 

information processing. This task is to split a 

character sequence into many small groups by 

inserting a space between two neighbor groups. 

Each group, as a Chinese word, represents an 

independent meaning. For example, given a 

character sequence “李明是个好人” (Li Ming is 

a good man); the segmentation result will be “李

明 /是/个/好人”. We select this task as our re-
search target because it is a very common task 

and many scholars had done a lot of experiments 

on it. We can easily compare our method with 

others’, more importantly, segmentation is nor-

mally the first step to process the Chinese text. 

The quality of it may seriously affect on the later 

processing. 

Micro-blog has more uncertainties than nor-

mal Chinese text. For instance, the micro-blog 

texts contain a large number of network words 

like “打酱油” and “楼主” which are easily to be 
mis-segmented due to the arbitrary nature of lan-

guage. The dialect words and wrong written 

words are also easily to be mis-segmented ac-

cording to a limited knowledge of these. 

To accomplish this task, many approaches had 

been proposed. The first adapted and efficient 

approach is the Maximum Matching (Wong & 

Chan, 1996). Its segmentation accuracy is de-

pending on the quality of system dictionary. Sys-

tem dictionary is a manual defined lexicon that it 

contains the majority of standardized words. 

However, with the development of language, 

new words are springing up. The system diction-

ary cannot track of newly born vocabularies. 

Several years later machine learning approaches 

had been applied. The Maximum Entropy (Shi, 

2005) achieved the highest accuracy among 
most of the tasks in SIGHAN-2005 Bake-off

1
 

Segmentation contest. During the same contest 

Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) (Zhou et al, 

2005) has the best performance in solving the 

out-of-vocabulary (OOV) problem. Hidden Mar-

kov Model (HMM) (Zhang et al, 2003) is anoth-

er efficient approach in Chinese segmentation. It 

has an efficient approach in handling the word 

ambiguity
2
 issue.  Furthermore it achieved the 

best result in the first Chinese segmentation 

competition
3
. 

The most two common issues in Chinese seg-

mentation are OOV and ambiguity. In this word 

we assume that the some existing segmentation 

                                                 
1
 http://www.sighan.org/swclp4/ 

2
 Example: “长春市长春饭店” can be segmented as “长春 

市长 春 饭店” or “长春市 长春 饭店”. So this sentence is 
ambiguity. 
3
 Proceedings of the Second SIGHAN Workshop on Chi-

nese Language Processing task2: Chinese segmentation. 

90



tool is already very good. Based on this tool we 

designed several rules to modify the segmenta-

tion result to overcome its inadaptation for this 

domain. 

2 Task Specialty 

Comparing with normal Chinese text segmenta-

tion, micro-blog text segmentation has to over-

come more difficulties due to the arbitrary nature 

of language. We will show this in detail in the 

following sections. 

Network words: thanks to the speed of spread 

in the internet age, a large amount of irregular 

words had been widely emerged and accepted. 

These words such as “屌丝” (diao si) usually 
have the rich connotation and can represent the 

heartfelt idea. Therefore although the network 

words are irregularly written and some of them 

even are not grammatical, they are still widely 

used. 

Accent words: accent words such as “木有” 

(mu you) and “酱紫” (jiang zi) are nonstandard 
pronounced words. These words are widely used 

because it can show their accent and sounds cute. 

Wrong written words: these words such as “

戒子” (jie zi) (refer to “戒指” (ring)) and “针贬” 

(zhen bian) (refer to “针砭” (zheng bin)) are very 
are hard to be recognized by the current segmen-

tation approaches. 

The mixture of foreign words: many people 

like to write with foreign words such as words or 

phrases of “打 (da) ball” (play basketball) and “

很 (hen) down” (very disappointed). It is very 
popular and common in some specific topic. Us-

ing these words can express the richest meaning 

with the less characters. 

3 Rules design for Chinese micro-blog 
segmentation 

Chinese micro-blog texts are unrestrained. In this 

task we followed the tagging schema of “Speci-

fication for Corpus Processing at Peking Univer-

sity”
4
 in the design of our model.  

In this word, under the assumption that a seg-

mentation system for general text is already good 

, for a special domain we only need to do some 

modification to make the segmentation result 

better. The main frame of this system is using 

ICTCLAS
5
 as the segmentation tool. Based on it 

                                                 
4
 http://www.icl.pku.edu.cn/icl_groups/corpus/coprus-

annotation.htm 
5
 http://www.ictclas.org/index.html 

result, we do a group of preprocessing and post-

processing to get a better result. 

After analyzed the 500 sentences train corpo-

ra, we found that there are some rules in the 

segmentation that it is very difficult to use other 

approaches to recognize them. Therefore we de-

signed rules as the pre-processing and post-

processing of this system. 

Pre-processing rules 

The rules designed for preprocessing are the 

URL and E-mail address. In ICTCLAS, URL 

and E-mail address cannot be segmented at all 

and these mis-segmented URL and E-mail ad-

dress may encounter more segmentation errors 

later. 

This system used regular expression
6
 to define 

the segmentation rules for URL and E-mail ad-

dress. Figure 1 showed the improvement after 

applying the preprocessing rules. 

 

 
Figure 1. Improvement after preprocessing add-

ed.  

 

Postprocessing rules 

These rules are generated after analyzing the 

fragments of ICTCLAS2011’s segmentation re-

sult. The fragments revealed that the IC-

TCLAS2011 cannot segment the roll-call system 

in micro-blog which will frequently occur in mi-

cro-blog texts. For instance, “@一移已易 -

YEE33333” will be segmented as “@/一/移/已/

易/-YEE33333” while the right segmentation is 

“@/一移已易/-/YEE33333”. Error about this is 
complicated and we believed that if the system 

                                                 
6
 Regular expression referenced from 

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression 

0.78

0.8

0.82

0.84

0.86

0.88

0.9

0.92

0.94

Precision Recall F-
measure

ICTCLAS2011 Preprocessing added

91



use rules as the segmentation constrain, this error 

will be totally correct. 

The detail of this  roll-call system rules is fol-

lowed: 

1. If the text starts with a group of meaningful 
Chinese words, use normal segmentation 

strategy (ICTCLAS). For example, “@花心

女想要去流浪 1989” should be segmented 

as “@/花/心/女/想/要/去/流浪/1989” 
2. If the text starts with a group of meaningless 

Chinese characters, group these characters 

together. For example, “@ 一 移 已 易 -

YEE33333” should be segmented as “@/一

移已易/- /YEE33333” rather than “@/一/移/

已/易/ - /YEE33333”. 
3. If the text starts with an account ID, the ID 

characters should be grouped together. Ex-

ample: “@super_lv” should be segmented as 

“@/super_lv”. 

4. When the symbol “-” or “_” is between Eng-
lish and Chinese. If the left is Chinese and 

the right is English the symbol should be 

segmented alone. Else it should group to the 

English. Example: “@ 一 移 已 易 -

YEE33333” should be segmented as “@/一

移已易 /-/YEE33333”, “@小丁_Vic” seg-

mented as “@/小丁 /_/Vic”, “@12th_章 ” 

segmented as “@/12th_/章”, “@BETTY-萍

萍” segmented as “@/BETTY-/萍萍” 
5. If the roll-call system contains Chinese per-

sonal name, the surname should be separat-

ed. Example:  “@刘 彦友 2527” should be 

segmented as “@/刘/彦友/2527”. 
Beside the roll-call system, two other rules are 

also applied in this system. 

1. For continuous symbols “.” And “。”, every 
three of them should be a group. For instance, 

“…..” should be segmented as “…/..” and 

“。。。。。。” should be segmented as 

“。。。/。。。”. 
2. For continuous mimetic words, they should 

grouped together. For example “哈哈哈哈哈

哈哈” should be segmented as “哈哈哈哈哈

哈哈” and “呵呵呵呵呵呵” should be seg-

mented as “呵呵呵呵呵”. 
Figure 2 showed the improve after postpro-

cessing added. 

 

Figure 2. Improvement after postprocessing 

added  

 

 Although the improvement is not very obvi-

ous, we can ensure that all the special case cov-

ered by these rules will be completely correct. 

4 External Dictionary 

In order to overcome the sparsity of training data, 

an external dictionary is necessary. 

To get a micro-blog related dictionary we ref-

erenced a famous Chinese Input Method: Sou-

gou
7
 Input. We got the network dictionary (9850 

words) and applied in this system. But mechani-

cally added this network dictionary did not im-

prove the result a lot. Therefore we analyzed the 

detail terms in this dictionary. We found that 

many terms like “祝妈妈身体健康”(wish mom 
healthy) did not be segmented. Then we use IC-

TCLAS again to segment the terms in this dic-

tionary and group all singer character together. 

For example: “醉驾” (drunk driving) will be 

segmented as “醉/驾”, then we group these two 

singer characters together as “醉驾”. 
Figure 3 showed the improvement after ap-

plied the external dictionary. 

                                                 
7
 http://pinyin.sogou.com/ 

0.85

0.86

0.87

0.88

0.89

0.9

0.91

0.92

0.93

Precesion Recall F-measure

ICTCLAS+Preprocessing

ICTCLAS+Preprocessing+Postprocessing

92



 
Figure 3. Improvement after external diction-

ary added 

5 Named Entity Recognition 

After applied all approaches above the evaluation 

result still can not reach the state-of-the-art, the 

segmentation error showed that the named enti-

ties encountered much error. Then named entity 

recognition procedure imported into this system. 

Chinese Named Entity Recognition (NER) is 

more complex than English Named Entity 

Recognition because it contains a segmentation 

step before. In this system NER is playing a very 

important role. For those unlabeled data, it will 

do NER first. If this system recognizes that the 

name in this text is not a Named Entity (NE), it 

will directly assert that this text belongs to the 

OTHER class. If the name in the text is a NE, we 

will then mark all the NE in this text to help the 

later work. 

Before we do NER we have to do the Chinese 

segmentation and Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging. 

Here this system used ICTCLAS  2011 with ad-

ditional user dictionary to improve the segmenta-

tion and POS tagging accuracy. 

Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) is the 

most popular approach to do NER task. This ap-

proach is easy to implement and usually achieve 

a very high accuracy. A Study on Features of the 

CRFs-based Chinese Named Entity Recognition 

(Duan & Zheng, 2011) did a lot of work on this 

task and gave a conclusion of the feature selec-

tion. This system also used CRFs to do  the NER. 

The CRFs toolkit adopted in this system  is 

CRF++
8
  toolkit and used feature is three single 

characters (before, current, after), three POS tags 

(before, current, after), some suffix and prefix 

(s/f) information and three segmentation label 

sets (before, current, after). The training data set 

is January-June People’s Daily 1998. We get F-

measure 91.4% from our test set. 

Figure 4 showed the improvement of NER 

added into this system. 

 

 
Figure 4. Improvement after NER added 

6 Conclusion 

This paper proposed a modification of ICTCLAS 

a basic segmentation tool for the Chinese micro-

blog segmentation. These modifications contain 

preprocessing, postprocessing in rule level, an 

external network dictionary with a little amelio-

ration and a named entity recognition. All these 

modifications improved the original segmenta-

tion result in 8.4 percent which is a very obvious 

improvement in Chinese segmentation. However 

due to the time limit, there are still some other 

issues we had not considered such as wrong writ-

ten error and the mixture of foreign words. 

Table 1 showed our final evaluation result in 

SIGHAN-2012 Bake-off Task 1. 

 

Precision 0.9000 

Recall 0.9199 

F-measure 0.9098 

All right sentences 1,388 

All right sentence rate 27.76% 

Table 1. Final evaluation result 

                                                 
8
 CRF++: Yet Another Toolkit [CP/OL]. 

  http://crfpp.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/doc/index.html 

0.85

0.86

0.87

0.88

0.89

0.9

0.91

0.92

0.93

0.94

0.95

Precision Recall F-measure

ICTCLAS+Preprocessing+Postprocessing

External Dictionary added

0.87

0.88

0.89

0.9

0.91

0.92

0.93

0.94

0.95

0.96

Precision Recall F-Measure

ICTCLAS+PRE&POST processing+ Dict

NER added

93



 

 The reason why we get a large decrease may 

be that the train corpora is so small that we have 

not anticipated any other error in the test set. 

 

Acknowledgments 
This work was partially supported by the Re-

search Committee of University of Macau under 

grant UL019B/09-Y3/EEE/LYP01/FST, and also 

supported by Science and Technology Develop-

ment Fund of Macau under grant 057/2009/A2. 

References  

Wong, P. & Chan, C. 1996. Chinese word segmenta-

tion based on maximum matching and word bind-

ing force, Proceedings of the 16th conference on 

Computational linguistics-Volume 1, 200–203. 

Shi, W. 2005. Chinese Word Segmentation Based On 

Direct Maximum Entropy Model, Proceedings of 

the Fourth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Lan-

guage Processing. 

Zhang, H.P. and Liu, Q and Cheng, X.Q and Zhang, 

H and Yu, H.K 2003. Chinese lexical analysis us-

ing hierarchical hidden markov model, Proceed-

ings of the second SIGHAN workshop on Chinese 

language processing-Volume 17, 63-70. 

Duan, H. and Zheng, Y. 2011. A study on features of 

the CRFs-based Chinese Named Entity Recogni-

tion, International Journal of Advanced Intelli-

gence-Volume 3, 287-294. 

94


