










































Incorporating Linguistic Knowledge in Statistical Machine Translation: Translating Prepositions


Proceedings of the Workshop on Innovative Hybrid Approaches to the Processing of Textual Data (Hybrid2012), EACL 2012, pages 106–114,
Avignon, France, April 23 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Incorporating Linguistic Knowledge in
Statistical Machine Translation: Translating Prepositions

Reshef Shilon
Dept. of Linguistics
Tel Aviv University

Israel

Hanna Fadida
Dept. of Computer Science

Technion
Israel

Shuly Wintner
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Haifa
Israel

Abstract

Prepositions are hard to translate, because
their meaning is often vague, and the choice
of the correct preposition is often arbitrary.
At the same time, making the correct choice
is often critical to the coherence of the out-
put text. In the context of statistical ma-
chine translation, this difficulty is enhanced
due to the possible long distance between
the preposition and the head it modifies, as
opposed to the local nature of standard lan-
guage models. In this work we use mono-
lingual language resources to determine the
set of prepositions that are most likely to
occur with each verb. We use this informa-
tion in a transfer-based Arabic-to-Hebrew
statistical machine translation system. We
show that incorporating linguistic knowl-
edge on the distribution of prepositions sig-
nificantly improves the translation quality.

1 Introduction

Prepositions are hard to translate. Prepositional
phrases modify both nouns and verbs (and, in
some languages, other parts of speech); we only
focus on verbs in this work. When a preposi-
tional phrase modifies a verb, it can function as
a complement or as an adjunct of the verb. In
the former case, the verb typically determines the
preposition, and the choice is rather arbitrary (or
idiomatic). In fact, the choice of preposition can
vary among synonymous verbs even in the same
language. Thus, English think takes either of or
about, whereas ponder takes no preposition at all
(we view direct objects as prepositional phrases
with a null preposition in this work.) Hebrew hkh
“hit” takes the accusative preposition at, whereas
the synonymous hrbic “hit” takes l “to”. Arabic
tfAdY “watch out” takes a direct object or mn

“from”, whereas A$fq “be careful of” takes En
“on” and tHrz “watch out” takes mn “from”.1

In the latter case, where the prepositional
phrase is an adjunct, the choice of preposition
does convey some meaning, but this meaning is
vague, and the choice is often determined by the
noun phrase that follows the preposition (the ob-
ject of the preposition). Thus, temporals such
as last week, on Tuesday, or in November, loca-
tives such as on the beach, at the concert, or in
the classroom, and instrumentals such as with a
spoon, are all translated to prepositional phrases
with the same preposition, b “in”, in Hebrew
(b+šbw‘ š‘br, b+ywm šliši, b+nwbmbr, b+ym,
b+qwncrT, b+kth, and b+kp, respectively).

Clearly, then, prepositions cannot be translated
literally, and the head that they modify, as well
as the object of the preposition, have to be taken
into account when a preposition is chosen to be
generated. Standard phrase-based statistical ma-
chine translation (MT) does not always succeed
in addressing this challenge, since the coherence
of the output text is determined to a large extent
by an n-gram language model. While such lan-
guage models can succeed to discriminate in fa-
vor of the correct preposition in local contexts, in
long-distance dependencies they are likely to fail.

We propose a method for incorporating lin-
guistic knowledge pertaining to the distribution
of prepositions that are likely to occur with verbs
in a transfer-based statistical machine translation
system. First, we use monolingual language re-
sources to rank the possible prepositions that var-
ious verbs subcategorize for. Then, we use this
information in an Arabic-to-Hebrew MT system.

1To facilitate readability we use a transliteration of He-
brew using Roman characters; the letters used, in Hebrew
lexicographic order, are abgdhwzxTiklmnspcqršt. For Ara-
bic we use the transliteration scheme of Buckwalter (2004).

106



The system is developed in the framework of Stat-
XFER (Lavie, 2008), which facilitates the explicit
expression of synchronous (extended) context-
free transfer rules. We use this facility to im-
plement rules that verify the correct selection of
prepositions by the verbs that subcategorize them.
We show that this results in significant improve-
ment in the translation quality.

In the next section we briefly survey related
work. Section 3 introduces the Stat-XFER frame-
work in which our method is implemented. We
present the problem of translating prepositions
between Hebrew and Arabic in Section 4, and dis-
cuss possible solutions in Section 5. Our proposed
method consists of two parts: acquisition of verb-
preposition mappings from corpora (Section 6),
and incorporation of this knowledge in an actual
transfer-based MT system (Section 7). Section 8
provides an evaluation of the results. We conclude
with suggestions for future research.

2 Related Work

An explicit solution to the challenges of translat-
ing prepositions was suggested by Trujillo (1995),
who deals with the problem of translating spa-
tial prepositions between Spanish and English
in the context of a lexicalist transfer-based MT
framework. Trujillo (1995) categorizes spatial
prepositions according to a lexical-semantic hier-
archy, and after parsing the source language sen-
tence, uses the representation of prepositions in
the transfer process, showing improvement in per-
formance compared to other transfer-based sys-
tems. This requires resources much beyond those
that are available for Arabic and Hebrew.

More recent works include Gustavii (2005),
who uses transformation-based learning to infer
rules that can correct the choice of preposition
made by a rule-based MT system. Her reported
results show high accuracy on the task of cor-
rectly generating a preposition, but the overall
improvement in the quality of the translation is
not reported. Li et al. (2005) focus on three En-
glish prepositions (on, in and at) and use Word-
Net to infer semantic properties of the immedi-
ate context of the preposition in order to correctly
translate it to Chinese. Again, this requires lan-
guage resources that are unavailable to us. Word-
Net (and a parser) are used also by Naskar and
Bandyopadhyay (2006), who work on English-to-
Bengali translation.

The closest work to ours is Agirre et al. (2009),
who translate from Spanish to Basque in a rule-
based framework. Like us, they focus on prepo-
sitional phrases that modify verbs, and include
also the direct object (and the subject) in their ap-
proach. They propose three techniques for cor-
rectly translating prepositions, based on informa-
tion that is automatically extracted from monolin-
gual resources (including verb-preposition-head
dependency triplets and verb subcategorization)
as well as manually-crafted selection rules that
rely on lexical, syntactic and semantic informa-
tion. Our method is similar in principle, the
main differences being: (i) we incorporate lin-
guistic knowledge in a statistical decoder, facil-
itating scalability of the MT system, (ii) we use
much more modest resources (in particular, we do
not parse either of the two languages), and (iii) we
report standard evaluation measures.

Much work has been done regarding the auto-
matic acquisition of subcategorization frames in
English (Brent, 1991; Manning, 1993; Briscoe
and Carroll, 1997; Korhonen, 2002), Czech
(Sarkar and Zeman, 2000), French (Chesley and
Salmon-alt, 2006), and several other languages.
The technique that we use here (Section 6) can
now be considered standard.

3 Introduction to Stat-XFER

The method we propose is implemented in the
framework of Stat-XFER (Lavie, 2008), a statis-
tical machine translation engine that includes a
declarative formalism for symbolic transfer gram-
mars. A grammar consists of a collection of syn-
chronous context-free rules, which can be aug-
mented by unification-style feature constraints.
These transfer rules specify how phrase struc-
tures in a source-language correspond and trans-
fer to phrase structures in a target language, and
the constraints under which these rules should
apply. The framework also includes a trans-
fer engine that applies the transfer grammar
to a source-language input sentence at runtime,
and produces collections of scored word- and
phrase-level translations according to the gram-
mar. Scores are based on a log-linear combination
of several features, and a beam-search controls the
underlying parsing and transfer process.

Crucially, Stat-XFER is a statistical MT
framework, which uses statistical information
to weigh word translations, phrase correspon-

107



dences and target-language hypotheses; in con-
trast to other paradigms, however, it can utilize
both automatically-created and manually-crafted
language resources, including dictionaries, mor-
phological processors and transfer rules. Stat-
XFER has been used as a platform for develop-
ing MT systems for Hindi-to-English (Lavie et
al., 2003), Hebrew-to-English (Lavie et al., 2004),
Chinese-to-English, French-to-English (Hanne-
man et al., 2009) and many other low-resource
language pairs, such as Inupiaq-to-English and
Mapudungun-to-Spanish.

In this work, we use the Arabic-to-Hebrew MT
system developed by Shilon et al. (2010), which
uses over 40 manually-crafted rules. Other re-
sources include Arabic morphological analyzer
and disambiguator (Habash, 2004), Hebrew mor-
phological generator (Itai and Wintner, 2008) and
a Hebrew language model compiled from avail-
able corpora (Itai and Wintner, 2008).

While our proposal is cast within the frame-
work of Stat-XFER, it can be in principle adapted
to other syntax-based approaches to MT; specif-
ically, Williams and Koehn (2011) show how to
employ unification-based constraints to the target-
side of a string-to-tree model, integrating con-
strain evaluation into the decoding process.

4 Translating prepositions between
Hebrew and Arabic

Modern Hebrew and Modern Standard Arabic,
both closely-related Semitic languages, share
many orthographic, lexical, morphological, syn-
tactic and semantic similarities, but they are still
not mutually comprehensible. Machine transla-
tion between these two languages can indeed ben-
efit from the similarities, but it remains a chal-
lenging task. Our current work is situated in the
framework of the only direct MT system between
these two languages that we are aware of, namely
Shilon et al. (2010).

Hebrew and Arabic share several similar prepo-
sitions, including the frequent b “in, at, with”
and l “to”. However, many prepositions exist in
only one of the languages, such as Arabic En “on,
about” or Hebrew šl “of”. Hebrew uses a preposi-
tion, at, to introduce definite direct objects (which
motivates our choice of viewing direct objects as
special kind of prepositional phrases, which may
sometimes be introduced by a null preposition).
The differences in how the two languages use

prepositions are significant and common, as the
following examples demonstrate.

(1) AErb
expressed.3ms

Al+wzyr
the+minister

En
on

Aml+h
hope+his

‘The minister expressed his hope’ (Arabic)

h+šr
the+minister

hbi’
expressed.3ms

at
acc

tqwt+w
hope+his

‘The minister expressed his hope’ (Hebrew)

(2) HDr
attended.3ms

Al+wzyr
the+minister

Al+jlsp
the+meeting

‘The minister attended the meeting’ (Arabic)

h+šr
the+minister

nkx
attended.3ms

b+
in

h+išibh
the+meeting

‘The minister attended the meeting’ (Hebrew)

In (1), the Arabic preposition En “on, about”
is translated into the Hebrew accusative marker
at. In contrast, (2) demonstrates the opposite case
where the Arabic direct object (no preposition)
is translated into a Hebrew prepositional phrase
introduced by b “in”. Clearly, despite the lex-
ical and semantic similarity between many He-
brew and Arabic prepositions, their licensing by
semantically-equivalent verbs is different in both
languages.

An important issue is the selection of prepo-
sitions to model. We focus on a small list of
the most common prepositions in both languages.
The list was constructed by counting prepositions
in monolingual corpora from the news domain in
the two languages (500K tokens in Arabic, 120K
tokens in Hebrew). In total, the Arabic data in-
cludes 70K prepositions, which comprise 14% of
the corpus tokens, whereas the Hebrew data in-
cludes 19K prepositions, or 16% of the tokens.
Not surprisingly, the most frequent prepositions
were those that are commonly used to introduce
complements. The data are listed in Table 1.

Based on these data, we decided to focus on
the set of top nine Arabic prepositions (fy, l, b,
mn, ElY, AlY, En, mE and the direct object), and
the top six Hebrew prepositions (b, l, m, ‘l, ‘m,
and the direct object), comprising over 80% of all
preposition occurrences in our corpora.2 These
are also the most common complement-preceding
prepositions, and therefore pose the main chal-
lenge for the task of machine translation.

2The preposition k “as” is omitted since it is translated
directly to itself in most cases.

108



Arabic Hebrew
Rank Preposition Count %

∑
% Preposition Count %

∑
%

1 fy “in” 13128 18.7 18.7 b “in” 6030 31.6 31.6
2 dir-obj 12626 17.9 36.7 l “to” 3386 17.7 49.3
3 l “to” 9429 13.4 50.1 dir-obj 3250 17.0 66.3
4 b “in, with” 7253 10.3 60.4 m “from” 1330 6.9 73.3
5 mn “from” 6859 9.7 70.2 ‘l “on” 1066 5.5 78.9
6 ElY “on” 5304 7.5 77.8 k “as” 354 1.8 80.7
7 AlY “to” 4458 6.3 84.1 ‘m “with” 338 1.7 82.5
8 En “on, about” 1871 2.6 86.8 bin “between” 191 1.0 84.6
9 mE “with” 1380 1.9 88.8 ‘d “until” 159 0.8 85.4

10 byn “between” 1045 1.4 90.3 lpni “before” 115 0.6 86.0

Table 1: Counts of Arabic and Hebrew most frequent prepositions. The columns list, for each preposition, its
count in the corpus, the percentage out of all prepositions, and the accumulated percentage including all the
higher-ranking prepositions.

5 Possible solutions

In order to improve the accuracy of translating
prepositions in a transfer-based system, several
approaches can be taken. We discuss some of
them in this section.

First, accurate and comprehensive statistics can
be acquired from large monolingual corpora of
the target language regarding the distribution of
verbs with their subcategorized prepositions and
the head of the noun phrase that is the object of
the preposition. As a backoff model, one could
use a bigram model of only the preposition and
the head of the following noun phrase, e.g., (on,
Wednesday). This may help in the case of tempo-
ral and locative adjuncts that are less related to the
preceding verb. Once such data are acquired, they
may be used in the process of scoring hypotheses,
if a parser is incorporated in the process.

One major shortcoming of this approach is the
difficulty of acquiring the necessary data, and in
particular the effect of data sparsity on the accu-
racy of this approach. In addition, a high quality
parser for the target language must be available,
and it must be incorporated during the decoding
step, which is a heavy burden on performance.

Alternatively, one could acquire lexical and
semantic mappings between verbs, the type of
their arguments, the selectional restrictions they
impose, and the possible prepositions used to
express such relations. This can be done us-
ing a mapping from surface forms to lexical on-
tologies, like WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), and
to a syntactic-semantic mapping like VerbNet
(Schuler, 2005) which lists the relevant preced-

ing preposition. Similar work has been done by
Shi and Mihalcea (2005) for the purpose of se-
mantic parsing. These lexical-semantic resources
can help map between the verb and its possible
arguments with their thematic roles, including se-
lectional restrictions on them (expressed lexically,
using a WordNet synset, like human or concrete).

The main shortcoming of this solution is that
such explicit lexical and semantic resources ex-
ist mainly for English. In addition, even when
translating into English, this information can only
assist in limiting the number of possible preposi-
tions but not in determining them. For example,
one can talk about the event, after the event, or at
the event. The information that can determine the
correct preposition is in the source sentence.

Finally, a potential solution is to allow trans-
lation of source-language prepositions to a lim-
ited set of possible target-language prepositions,
and then use both target-language constraints on
possible verb-preposition matches and an n-gram
language model to choose the most adequate so-
lution. Despite the fact that this solution does
not model the probability of the target preposition
given its verb and the original sentence, it limits
the number of possible translations by taking into
account the target-language verb and the possible
constraints on the prepositions it licenses. This
method is also the most adequate for a scenario
that employs a statistical decoder, such as the one
used in Stat-XFER. This is the solution we advo-
cate in this paper. We describe the acquisition of
Hebrew verb–preposition statistics in the follow-
ing section, and the incorporation of this knowl-
edge in a machine translation system in Section 7.

109



6 Acquisition of verb–preposition data

To obtain statistics on the relations between verbs
and prepositions in Hebrew we use the The-
Marker, Knesset and Arutz 7 corpora (Itai and
Wintner, 2008), comprising 31M tokens. The cor-
pora include 1.18M (potentially inflected) verb to-
kens, reflecting 4091 verb (lemma) types.

The entire corpus was morphologically ana-
lyzed and disambiguated (Itai and Wintner, 2008).
We then collected all instances of prepositions
that immediately follow a verb; this reflects the
assumption that such prepositions are likely to be
a part of the verb’s subcategorization frame. A
special treatment of the direct object case was re-
quired, because a Hebrew direct object is intro-
duced by the accusative marker at when it is defi-
nite, but not otherwise. Since constituent order in
Hebrew is relatively free, the noun phrase that im-
mediately follows the verb can also be its subject.
Therefore, we only consider such noun phrases
if they do not agree with the verb in gender and
number (and are therefore not subjects).

We then use maximum likelihood estimation to
obtain the conditional probability of each prepo-
sition following a verb. The result is a database
of verb-preposition pairs, with an estimate of
their probabilities. Examples include nkll “be in-
cluded”, for which b “in” has 0.91 probability;
hstpq “be satisfied” b “in” (0.99); xikh “wait” l
“to” (0.73); ht‘lm “ignore” m “from” (0.83); and
htbss “base” ‘l “on” (0.93). Of course, some other
verbs are less clear-cut.

From this database, we filter out verb-
preposition pairs whose score is lower than a cer-
tain threshold. We are left with a total of 1402
verbs and 2325 verb-preposition pairs which we
use for Arabic-to-Hebrew machine translation, as
explained in the next section. Note that we cur-
rently ignore the probabilities of the prepositions
associated with each verb; we only use the prob-
abilities to limit the set of prepositions that are li-
censed by the verb. Ranking of these prepositions
is deferred to the language model.

7 Incorporating linguistic knowledge

We implemented the last method suggested in
Section 5 to improve the quality of the Arabic-
to-Hebrew machine translation system of Shilon
et al. (2010) as follows.

First, we modified the output of the Hebrew

{OBJ_ACC_AT,0}
OBJ::OBJ [NP] -> ["AT" NP]
(X1::Y2)
((X1 def) = +)
((Y2 prep) = AT) #mark preposition
(X0 = X1)
(Y0 = Y2

{OBJ_PP,0}
OBJ::OBJ [PREP NP] -> [PREP NP]
(X1::Y1)
(X2::Y2)
((Y0 prep) = (Y1 lex)) #mark prep.
(X0 = X1)
(Y0 = Y1)

{OBJ_NP_PP_B, 0}
OBJ::OBJ [NP] -> ["B" NP]
(X1::Y2)
((Y0 prep) = B) #mark preposition
(X0 = X1)
(Y0 = Y2)

Figure 1: Propagating the surface form of the preposi-
tion as a feature of the OBJ node.

morphological generator to reflect also, for each
verb, the list of prepositions licensed by the verb
(Section 6). Stat-XFER uses the generator to gen-
erate inflected forms of lemmas obtained from a
bilingual dictionary. Each such form is associ-
ated with a feature structure that describes some
properties of the form (e.g., its gender, number
and person). To the feature structures of verbs
we add an additional feature, ALLOWED PREPS,
whose value is the list of prepositions licensed by
the verb. For example, the feature structure of the
Hebrew verb sipr “tell” is specified as:

(allowed_preps = (*OR* at l))

Thus, whenever the Hebrew generator returns an
inflected form of the verb sipr, the feature AL-
LOWED PREPS lists the possible prepositions at
and l “to”, that are licensed by this verb.

Then, we modified the transfer grammar to en-
force constraints between the verb and its objects.
This was done by adding a new non-terminal node
to the grammar, OBJ, accounting for both direct
and indirect objects. The idea is to encode the ac-
tual preposition (in fact, its surface form) as a fea-
ture of the OBJ node (Figure 1), and then, when
a sentence is formed by combining a verb with its
subject and object(s), to check the value of this

110



{S_VB_NP_OBJ_swap, 1}
S::S [VB NP OBJ] -> [NP VB OBJ]
(X1::Y2)
(X2::Y1)
(X3::Y3)
((X1 num) = singular) # Arabic agr.
((X1 per) = (X2 per))
((Y1 num) = (Y2 num)) # Hebrew agr.
((Y1 gen) = (Y2 gen))
((Y1 per) = (Y2 per))
((Y2 allowed_preps) = (Y3 prep))

Figure 2: Enforcing agreement between a verb VB and
its object OBJ on the Hebrew side.

feature against the ALLOWED PREPS feature of
the verb (Figure 2).

Consider Figure 1. The first rule maps an Ara-
bic direct object noun phrase to a Hebrew direct
object, and marks the preposition at on the He-
brew OBJ node as the value of the feature PREP.
The second rule maps an Arabic prepositional
phrase to Hebrew prepositional phrase, marking
the Hebrew OBJ (referred to here as Y1 lex)
with the value of the feature PREP. The third rule
maps an Arabic noun phrase to a Hebrew preposi-
tional phrase introduced by the preposition b “in”.

The rule in Figure 2 enforces sentence-
level agreement between the feature AL-
LOWED PREPS of the Hebrew verb (here, Y2
allowed preps) and the actual preposition of
the Hebrew object (here, Y3 prep).

To better illustrate the effect of these rules, con-
sider the following examples, taken from the sys-
tem’s actual output (the top line is the Arabic in-
put, the bottom is the Hebrew output). There
can be four types of syntactic mappings between
Arabic and Hebrew arguments: (NP, NP), (NP,
PP), (PP, NP) and (PP, PP). Examples (3) and (4)
demonstrate correct translation of the Arabic di-
rect object into the Hebrew direct object (with and
without the Hebrew definite accusative marker at,
respectively). Example (5) demonstrates the cor-
rect translation of the Arabic direct object to a
Hebrew PP with the preposition l “to”. Exam-
ple (6) demonstrates the correct translation of an
Arabic PP introduced by En “on, about” to a He-
brew direct object, and Example (7) demonstrates
the translation of Arabic PP introduced by b “in,
with” into a Hebrew PP introduced by ‘m “with”.

(3) rAyt
see.past.1s

Al+wld
the+boy

raiti
see.past.1s

at
acc.def

h+ild
the+boy

‘I saw the boy’

(4) rAyt
see.past.1s

wldA
boy.acc.indef

raiti
see.past.1s

ild
boy

‘I saw a boy’

(5) Drb
hit.past.3ms

Al+Ab
the+father

Al+wld
the+boy

h+ab
the+father

hrbic
hit.past.3ms

l+
to

h+ild
the+boy

‘The father hit the boy’

(6) AErb
express.past.3ms

Al+wzyr
the+minister

En
on

Aml+h
hope+his

h+šr
the+minister

hbi’
express.past.3ms

at
acc.def.

tqwt+w
hope+his
‘The minister expressed his hope’

(7) AjtmE
meet.past.3ms

Al+wzyr
the+minister

b+
in

Al+wld
the+boy

h+šr
the+minister

npgš
meet.past.3ms

’m
with

h+ild
the+boy

‘The minister met the boy’

In (3), the input Arabic NP is definite and is
marked by accusative case. A designated rule
adds the string at before the corresponding He-
brew output, to mark the definite direct object.
We create a node of type OBJ for both (direct)
objects, with the feature PREP storing the lexical
content of the preposition in the target language.
Finally, in the sentence level rule, we validate that
the Hebrew verb licenses a direct object, by uni-
fying the feature PREP of OBJ with the feature
ALLOWED PREPS of the verb VB.

In (4), a similar process occurs, but this time no
additional at token is added to the Hebrew output
(since the direct object is indefinite). The same
preposition, at, is marked as the PREP feature of
OBJ (we use at to mark the direct object, whether
the object is definite or not), and again, the fea-
ture PREP of OBJ is validated against the feature
ALLOWED PREPS of VB.

111



Example (5) is created using a rule that maps
an Arabic direct object to a Hebrew prepositional
phrase introduced by a different preposition, here
l “to”. Such rules exist for every Hebrew prepo-
sition from the set of common prepositions we
focus on, since we have no prior knowledge of
which preposition should be generated. We mark
the lexical preposition l on the feature PREP of the
Hebrew OBJ node, and again, this is validated in
the sentence level against the prepositions allowed
by the verb.

In example (6) we use rules that map an Ara-
bic prepositional phrase to a Hebrew noun phrase.
Here, the Arabic preposition is not translated at
all, and the Hebrew definite accusative marker at
is added, depending on the definiteness of the He-
brew noun phrase. The only difference in ex-
ample (7) compared to previous examples is the
translation of the Arabic preposition into a differ-
ent Hebrew preposition. This is implemented in
the bilingual lexicon, in a lexical entry that maps
the Arabic preposition b “in, with” to the Hebrew
preposition ‘m “with”.

These rules help to expand the lexical vari-
ety of the prepositions on one hand (as in Ex-
ample (7)), while at the same time disqualify-
ing some hypotheses that employ prepositions
that are not licensed by the relevant verb, us-
ing unification-style constraints. After this pro-
cess, the lattice may still include several different
hypotheses, from which the decoder statistically
chooses the best one.

8 Evaluation

To evaluate the contribution of the proposed
method, we created a test set of 300 sentences
from newspaper texts, which were manually
translated by three human translators. Of those,
we selected short sentences (up to 10 words), for
which the bilingual lexicon used by the system
had full lexical coverage. This resulted in a set
of 28 sentences (still with three reference transla-
tions each), which allowed us to focus on the ac-
tual contribution of the preposition-mapping so-
lution rather than on other limitations of the MT
system. Unfortunately, evaluation on the entire
test set without accounting for full lexical cover-
age yields such low BLEU scores that the compar-
ison between different configurations of the sys-
tem is meaningless.

As a baseline system, we use exactly the same

setup, but withhold any monolingual linguistic
knowledge regarding verb-prepositions relations:

1. We omit the restrictions (stated in the gram-
mar) on which prepositions Hebrew verbs li-
cense, such that each verb can be followed
by each preposition.

2. We limit the lexical variance between
prepositions in the lexicon, to only allow
translation-pairs that occur in the bilingual
dictionary. For example, we use the map-
ping of Arabic ElY “on” to Hebrew ‘l “on”
(which occurs in the bilingual dictionary),
but remove the mapping of Arabic ElY “on”
to Hebrew b “in”, which does not carry the
same meaning.

Table 2 lists the BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and
METEOR (Denkowski and Lavie, 2011) scores of
both systems.

BLEU METEOR
Baseline 0.325 0.526
With prepositions 0.370 0.560

Table 2: Automatic evaluation scores.

The system that incorporates linguistic knowl-
edge on prepositions significantly (p < 0.05) out-
performs the baseline system. A detailed analysis
of the obtained translations reveals that the base-
line system generates prepositions that are not li-
censed by their head verb, and the language model
fails to choose the hypothesis with the correct
preposition, if such a hypothesis is generated at
all.

As an example of the difference between the
outputs of both systems, consider Figure 3. The
Arabic input is given in (8). The output of the
system that incorporates our treatment of preposi-
tions is given in (9). Here, the Hebrew verb hdgiš
“emphasize” is followed by the correct definite
accusative marker at. The output of the baseline
system is given in (10). Here, the Hebrew verb
aišr “approve” is followed by the wrong preposi-
tion, ‘l “on”, which is not licensed in this loca-
tion. Consequently, the lexical selections for the
following words of the translation differ and are
not as fluent as in (9), and the output is only par-
tially coherent.

112



(8) Akd
emphasize.past.3ms

AlHryry
AlHaryry

ElY
on

AltzAm+h
obligation+his

b+
in

Al+byAn
the+announcement

Al+wzAry
the+ministerial

l+
to

Hkwmp
government

Al+whdp
the+unity

Al+wTnyp
the+national

‘Alharyry emphasized his obligation in the ministerial announcement to the national government’

(9) alxriri
Alharyry

hdgiš
emphasize.past.3ms

at
def.acc

xwbt+w
obligation+his

b+
in

h+hwd’h
the+announcement

h+mmšltit
the+governmental

l+
to

mmšlt
government

h+axdwt
the+unity

h+lawmit
the+national

‘Alharyry emphasized his obligation in the governmental announcement to the national
government’

(10) alxriri
Alharyry

aišr
confirm.past.3ms

’l
on

zkiwn
permit

šl+w
of+his

b+
in

h+hwd’h
the+announcement

h+mmšltit
the+governmental

l+
to

mmšlt
government

h+axdwt
the+unity

h+lawmit
the+national

‘Alharyry confirmed on his permit in the governmental announcement to the national
government’

Figure 3: Example translation output, with and without handling of prepositions.

9 Conclusion

Having emphasized the challenge of (machine)
translation of prepositions, specifically between
Hebrew and Arabic, we discussed several solu-
tions and proposed a preferred method. We ex-
tract linguistic information regarding the corre-
spondences between Hebrew verbs and their li-
censed prepositions, and use this knowledge for
improving the quality of Arabic-to-Hebrew ma-
chine translation in the context of the Stat-XFER
framework. We presented encouraging evaluation
results showing that the use of linguistic knowl-
edge regarding prepositions indeed significantly
improves the quality of the translation.

This work can be extended along various di-
mensions. First, we only focused on verb argu-
ments that are prepositional phrases here. How-
ever, our Hebrew verb-subcategorization data in-
clude also information on other types of comple-
ments, such as subordinate clauses (introduced by
the complementizer š “that”) and infinitival verb
phrases. We intend to extend our transfer gram-
mar in a way that will benefit from this informa-
tion in the future. Second, we currently do not use
the weights associated with specific prepositions
in our subcategorization database; we are looking
into ways to incorporate this statistical informa-
tion in the decoding phase of the translation.

Furthermore, our database contains also statis-
tics on the distribution of nouns following each
preposition (which are likely to function as the
heads of the object of the preposition); such in-
formation can also improve the accuracy of trans-
lation, and can be incorporated into the system.
Another direction is to acquire and incorporate
similar information on deverbal nouns, which li-
cense the same prepositions as the verbs they
are derived from. For example, xtimh ’l hskm
“signing.noun an agreement”, where the Hebrew
preposition ‘l “on” must be used, as in the cor-
responding verbal from xtm ’l hskm “signed.verb
an agreement”. We will address such extensions
in future research.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Alon Itai, Alon Lavie, and Gen-
nadi Lembersky for their help. This research was
supported by THE ISRAEL SCIENCE FOUN-
DATION (grant No. 137/06).

References
Eneko Agirre, Aitziber Atutxa, Gorka Labaka, Mikel

Lersundi, Aingeru Mayor, and Kepa Sarasola.
2009. Use of rich linguistic information to trans-
late prepositions and grammar cases to Basque. In
Proceedings of the XIII Conference of the European

113



Association for Machine Translation, EAMT-2009,
pages 58–65, May.

Michael R. Brent. 1991. Automatic acquisition of
subcategorization frames from untagged text. In
Proceedings of the 29th annual meeting on Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 209–214.

Ted Briscoe and John Carroll. 1997. Automatic ex-
traction of subcategorization from corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th ACL Conference on Applied Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 356–363.

Tim Buckwalter. 2004. Buckwalter Arabic Morpho-
logical Analyzer Version 2.0. Linguistic Data Con-
sortium, Philadelphia.

Paula Chesley and Susanne Salmon-alt. 2006. Au-
tomatic extraction of subcategorization frames for
French. In Proceedings of the Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference, LREC-2006.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2011. Meteor
1.3: Automatic metric for reliable optimization and
evaluation of machine translation systems. In Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 85–91.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. Language, Speech and
Communication. MIT Press.

Ebba Gustavii. 2005. Target language preposition se-
lection – an experiment with transformation-based
learning and aligned bilingual data. In Proceedings
of EAMT-2005, May.

Nizar Habash. 2004. Large scale lexeme based
arabic morphological generation. In Proceedings
of Traitement Automatique du Langage Naturel
(TALN-04), Fez, Morocco.

Greg Hanneman, Vamshi Ambati, Jonathan H. Clark,
Alok Parlikar, and Alon Lavie. 2009. An improved
statistical transfer system for French–English ma-
chine translation. In StatMT ’09: Proceedings of
the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation, pages 140–144.

Alon Itai and Shuly Wintner. 2008. Language re-
sources for Hebrew. Language Resources and Eval-
uation, 42(1):75–98, March.

Anna Korhonen. 2002. Subcategorisation acquisi-
tion. Ph.D. thesis, Computer Laboratory, Univer-
sity of Cambridge. Techical Report UCAM-CL-
TR-530.

Alon Lavie, Stephan Vogel, Lori Levin, Erik Pe-
terson, Katharina Probst, Ariadna Font Llitjós,
Rachel Reynolds, Jaime Carbonell, and Richard
Cohen. 2003. Experiments with a Hindi-to-English
transfer-based MT system under a miserly data sce-
nario. ACM Transactions on Asian Language Infor-
mation Processing (TALIP), 2(2):143–163.

Alon Lavie, Shuly Wintner, Yaniv Eytani, Erik Peter-
son, and Katharina Probst. 2004. Rapid prototyp-
ing of a transfer-based Hebrew-to-English machine
translation system. In Proceedings of TMI-2004:

The 10th International Conference on Theoretical
and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation,
Baltimore, MD, October.

Alon Lavie. 2008. Stat-XFER: A general search-
based syntax-driven framework for machine trans-
lation. In Alexander F. Gelbukh, editor, CICLing,
volume 4919 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 362–375. Springer.

Hui Li, Nathalie Japkowicz, and Caroline Barrière.
2005. English to Chinese translation of preposi-
tions. In Balázs Kégl and Guy Lapalme, editors,
Advances in Artificial Intelligence, 18th Conference
of the Canadian Society for Computational Stud-
ies of Intelligence, volume 3501 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 412–416. Springer, May.

Christopher D. Manning. 1993. Automatic acqui-
sition of a large subcategorization dictionary from
corpora. In Proceedings of the 31st annual meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 235–242.

Sudip Kumar Naskar and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay.
2006. Handling of prepositions in English to
Bengali machine translation. In Proceedings of
the Third ACL-SIGSEM Workshop on Prepositions,
pages 89–94.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and
Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for auto-
matic evaluation of machine translation. In ACL
’02: Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
311–318.

Anoop Sarkar and Daniel Zeman. 2000. Automatic
extraction of subcategorization frames for Czech.
In Proceedings of the 18th conference on Compu-
tational linguistics, pages 691–697.

Karin Kipper Schuler. 2005. Verbnet: a broad-
coverage, comprehensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. the-
sis, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

Lei Shi and Rada Mihalcea. 2005. Putting pieces
together: Combining framenet, verbnet and word-
net for robust semantic parsing. In Alexander F.
Gelbukh, editor, CICLing, volume 3406 of Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, pages 100–111.
Springer.

Reshef Shilon, Nizar Habash, Alon Lavie, and Shuly
Wintner. 2010. Machine translation between He-
brew and Arabic: Needs, challenges and prelimi-
nary solutions. In Proceedings of AMTA 2010: The
Ninth Conference of the Association for Machine
Translation in the Americas, November.

Indalecio Arturo Trujillo. 1995. Lexicalist machine
translation of spatial prepositions. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Cambridge, April.

Philip Williams and Philipp Koehn. 2011. Agree-
ment constraints for statistical machine translation
into German. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 217–226,
Edinburgh, Scotland, July.

114


