










































Opinum: statistical sentiment analysis for opinion classification


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, pages 29–37,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Opinum: statistical sentiment analysis for opinion classification

Boyan Bonev, Gema Ramı́rez-Sánchez, Sergio Ortiz Rojas
Prompsit Language Engineering

Avenida Universidad, s/n. Edificio Quorum III.
03202 Elche, Alicante (Spain)

{boyan,gramirez,sortiz}@prompsit.com

Abstract

The classification of opinion texts in positive
and negative can be tackled by evaluating sep-
arate key words but this is a very limited ap-
proach. We propose an approach based on the
order of the words without using any syntac-
tic and semantic information. It consists of
building one probabilistic model for the posi-
tive and another one for the negative opinions.
Then the test opinions are compared to both
models and a decision and confidence mea-
sure are calculated. In order to reduce the
complexity of the training corpus we first lem-
matize the texts and we replace most named-
entities with wildcards. We present an accu-
racy above 81% for Spanish opinions in the
financial products domain.

1 Introduction

Most of the texts written by humans reflect some
kind of sentiment. The interpretation of these sen-
timents depend on the linguistic skills and emo-
tional intelligence of both the author and the reader,
but above all, this interpretation is subjective to the
reader. They don’t really exist in a string of charac-
ters, for they are subjective states of mind. Therefore
sentiment analysis is a prediction of how most read-
ers would react to a given text.

There are texts which intend to be objective and
texts which are intentionally subjective. The latter is
the case of opinion texts, in which the authors inten-
tionally use an appropriate language to express their
positive or negative sentiments about something. In
this paper we work on the classification of opinions

in two classes: those expressing positive sentiment
(the author is in favour of something) and those ex-
pressing negative sentiment, and we will refer to
them as positive opinions and negative opinions.

Sentiment analysis is possible thanks to the opin-
ions available online. There are vast amounts of text
in fora, user reviews, comments in blogs and social
networks. It is valuable for marketing and sociolog-
ical studies to analyse these freely available data on
some definite subject or entity. Some of the texts
available do include opinion information like stars,
or recommend-or-not, but most of them do not. A
good corpus for building sentiment analysis systems
would be a set of opinions separated by domains. It
should include some information about the cultural
origin of authors and their job, and each opinion
should be sentiment-evaluated not only by its own
author, but by many other readers as well. It would
also be good to have a marking of the subjective and
objective parts of the text. Unfortunately this kind
of corpora are not available at the moment.

In the present work we place our attention at the
supervised classification of opinions in positive and
negative. Our system, which we call Opinum1, is
trained from a corpus labeled with a value indicat-
ing whether an opinion is positive or negative. The
corpus was crawled from the web and it consists of a
160MB collection of Spanish opinions about finan-
cial products. Opinum’s approach is general enough
and it is not limited to this corpus nor to the financial
domain.

There are state-of-the-art works on sentiment
1An Opinum installation can be tested from a web interface

at http://aplica.prompsit.com/en/opinum

29



analysis which care about differentiating between
the objective and the subjective part of a text. For
instance, in the review of a film there is an objec-
tive part and then the opinion (Raaijmakers et al.,
2008). In our case we work directly with opinion
texts and we do not make such difference. We have
noticed that in customer reviews, even when stating
objective facts, some positive or negative sentiment
is usually expressed.

Many works in the literature of sentiment anal-
ysis take lexicon-based approaches (Taboada et al.,
2011). For instance (Hu and Liu, 2004; Blair-
Goldensohn et al., 2008) use WordNet to extend
the relation of positive and negative words to other
related lexical units. However the combination of
which words appear together may also be impor-
tant and there are comparisons of different Ma-
chine learning approaches (Pang et al., 2002) in
the literature, like Support Vector Machines, k-
Nearest Neighbours, Naive-Bayes, and other classi-
fiers based on global features. In (McDonald et al.,
2007) structured models are used to infer the senti-
ment from different levels of granularity. They score
cliques of text based on a high-dimensional feature
vector.

In the Opinum approach we score each sentence
based on its n-gram probabilites. For a complete
opinion we sum the scores of all its sentences. Thus,
if an opinion has several positive sentences and it fi-
nally concludes with a negative sentence which set-
tles the whole opinion as negative, Opinum would
probably fail. The n-gram sequences are good at
capturing phrasemes (multiwords), the motivation
for which is stated in Section 2. Basically, there
are phrasemes which bear sentiment. They may
be different depending on the domain and it is rec-
ommendable to build the models with opinions be-
longing to the target domain, for instance, financial
products, computers, airlines, etc. A study of do-
main adaptation for sentiment analysis is presented
in (Blitzer et al., 2007). In Opinum different clas-
sifiers would be built for different domains. Build-
ing the models does not require the aid of experts,
only a labeled set of opinions is necessary. Another
contribution of Opinum is that it applies some sim-
plifications on the original text of the opinions for
improving the performance of the models.

In the remainder of the paper we first state the mo-

tivation of our approach in Section 2, then in Sec-
tion 3 we describe in detail the Opinum approach.
In Section 4 we present our experiments with Span-
ish financial opinions and we state some conclusions
and future work in Section 5.

2 Hypothesis

When humans read an opinion, even if they do
not understand it completely because of the techni-
cal details or domain-specific terminology, in most
cases they can notice whether it is positive or nega-
tive. The reason for this is that the author of the opin-
ion, consciously or not, uses nuances and structures
which show a positive or negative feeling. Usually,
when a user writes an opinion about a product, the
intention is to communicate that subjective feeling,
apart from describing the experience with the prod-
uct and giving some technical details.

The hypothesis underlying the traditional
keyword or lexicon-based approaches (Blair-
Goldensohn et al., 2008; Hu and Liu, 2004) consist
in looking for some specific positive or negative
words. For instance, “great” should be positive and
“disgusting” should be negative. Of course there
are some exceptions like “not great”, and some
approaches detect negation to invert the meaning of
the word. More elaborate cases are constructions
like “an offer you can’t refuse” or “the best way to
lose your money”.

There are domains in which the authors of the
opinions might not use these explicit keywords. In
the financial domain we can notice that many of the
opinions which express the author’s insecurity are
actually negative, even though the words are mostly
neutral. For example, “I am not sure if I would get
a loan from this bank” has a negative meaning. An-
other difficulty is that the same words could be posi-
tive or negative depending on other words of the sen-
tence: “A loan with high interests” is negative while
“A savings account with high interests” is positive.
In general more complex products have more com-
plex and subtle opinions. The opinion about a cud-
dly toy would contain many keywords and would be
much more explicit than the opinion about the con-
ditions of a loan. Even so, the human readers can
get the positive or negative feeling at a glance.

The hypothesis of our approach is that it is pos-

30



sible to classify opinions in negative and positive
based on canonical (lemmatized) word sequences.
Given a set of positive opinions Op and a set of
negative opinions On, the probability distributions
of their n-gram word sequences are different and
can be compared to the n-grams of a new opin-
ion in order to classify it. In terms of statistical
language models, given the language models M p

and M n obtained from Op and On, the probability
ppo = P (o|Op) that a new opinion would be gener-
ated by the positive model is smaller or greater than
the probability pno = P (o|ON ) that a new opinion
would be generated by the negative model.

We build the models based on sequences of
canonical words in order to simplify the text, as ex-
plained in the following section. We also replace
some named entities like names of banks, organiza-
tions and people by wildcards so that the models do
not depend on specific entities.

3 The Opinum approach

The proposed approach is based on n-gram language
models. Therefore building a consistent model is the
key for its success. In the field of machine transla-
tion a corpus with size of 500MB is usually enough
for building a 5-gram language model, depending on
the morphological complexity of the language.

In the field of sentiment analysis it is very diffi-
cult to find a big corpus of context-specific opinions.
Opinions labeled with stars or a positive/negative la-
bel can be automatically downloaded from differ-
ent customers’ opinion websites. The sizes of the
corpora collected that way range between 1MB and
20MB for both positive and negative opinions.

Such a small amount of text would be suitable for
bigrams and would capture the difference between
“not good” and “really good”, but this is not enough
for longer sequences like “offer you can’t refuse”.
In order to build consistent 5-gram language mod-
els we need to simplify the language complexity by
removing all the morphology and replacing the sur-
face forms by their canonical forms. Therefore we
make no difference between “offer you can’t refuse”
and “offers you couldn’t refuse”.

We also replace named entities by wildcards: per-
son entity, organization entity and company entity.
Although these replacements also simplify the lan-

guage models to some extent, their actual purpose
is to avoid some negative constructions to be as-
sociated to concrete entities. For instance, we do
not care that “do not trust John Doe Bank” is neg-
ative, instead we prefer to know that “do not trust
company entity” is negative regardless of the entity.
This generality allows us to better evaluate opinions
about new entities. Also, in the cases when all the
opinions about some entity E1 are good and all the
opinions about some other entity E2 are bad, entity
replacement prevents the models from acquiring this
kind of bias.

Following we detail the lemmatization process,
the named entities detection and how we build and
evaluate the positive and negative language models.

3.1 Lemmatization

Working with the words in their canonical form is
for the sake of generality and simplification of the
language model. Removing the morphological in-
formation does not change the semantics of most
phrasemes (or multiwords).

There are some lexical forms for which we keep
the surface form or we add some morphological in-
formation to the token. These exceptions are the
subject pronouns, the object pronouns and the pos-
sessive forms. The reason for this is that for some
phrasemes the personal information is the key for
deciding the positive or negative sense. For instance,
let us suppose that some opinions contain the se-
quences

ot = “They made money from me”,

oi = “I made money from them”.

Their lemmatization, referred to as L0(·), would be2

L0(ot) = L0(oi) = “SubjectPronoun make money
from ObjectPronoun”,

Therefore we would have equally probable
P (ot|Mp) = P (oi|Mp) and P (ot|Mn) =
P (oi|Mn), which does not express the actual
sentiment of the phrasemes. In order to capture this

2The notation we use here is for the sake of readability and
it slightly differs from the one we use in Opinum.

31



kind of differences we prefer to have

L1(ot) = “SubjectPronoun 3p make money
from ObjectPronoun 1p”,

L1(oi) = “SubjectPronoun 1p make money
from ObjectPronoun 3p”.

The probabilities still depend on how many times do
these lexical sequences appear in opinions labeled as
positive or negative, but with L1(·) we would have
that

P (ot|Mp) < P (oi|Mp),
P (ot|Mn) > P (oi|Mn),

that is, oi fits better the positive model than ot does,
and vice versa for the negative model.

In our implementation lemmatization is per-
formed with Apertium, which is an open-source
rule-based machine translation engine. Thanks to
its modularized architecture (described in (Tyers et
al., 2010)) we use its morphological analyser and
its part-of-speech disambiguation module in order
to take one lexical form as the most probable one,
in case there are several possibilities for a given sur-
face. Apertium currently has morphological anal-
ysers for 30 languages (most of them European),
which allows us to adapt Opinum to other languages
without much effort.

3.2 Named entities replacement

The corpora with labeled opinions are usually lim-
ited to a number of enterprises and organizations.
For a generalization purpose we make the texts in-
dependent of concrete entities. We do make a differ-
ence between names of places, people and organiza-
tions/companies. We also detect dates, phone num-
bers, e-mails and URL/IP. We substitute them all by
different wildcards. All the rest of the numbers are
substituted by a “Num” wildcard. For instance, the
following subsequence would have aL2(oe) lemma-
tization + named entity substitution:

oe = “Joe bought 300 shares

of Acme Corp. in 2012”

L2(oe) = “Person buy Num share
of Company in Date”

The named entity recognition task is integrated
within the lemmatization process. We collected a
list of names of people, places, companies and orga-
nizations to complete the morphological dictionary
of Apertium. The morphological analysis module is
still very fast, as the dictionary is first compiled and
transformed to the minimal deterministic finite au-
tomaton. For the dates, phone numbers, e-mails, IP
and URL we use regular expressions which are also
supported by the same Apertium module.

Regarding the list of named entities, for a given
language (Spanish in our experiments) we download
its Wikipedia database which is a freely available re-
source. We heuristically search it for organizations,
companies, places and people. Based on the number
of references a given entity has in Wikipedia’s arti-
cles, we keep the first 1.500.000 most relevant en-
tities, which cover the entities with 4 references or
more (the popular entities are referenced from tens
to thousands of times).

Finally, unknown surface forms are replaced by
the “Unknown” lemma (the known lemmas are low-
ercase). These would usually correspond to strange
names of products, erroneous words and finally to
words which are not covered by the monolingual
dictionary of Apertium. Therefore our approach is
suitable for opinions written in a rather correct lan-
guage. If unknown surfaces were not replaced, the
frequently misspelled words would not be excluded,
which is useful in some domains. This is at the cost
of increasing the complexity of the model, as all mis-
spelled words would be included. Alternatively, the
frequently misspelled words could be added to the
dictionary.

3.3 Language models

The language models we build are based on n-gram
word sequences. They model the likelihood of a
wordwi given the sequence of n−1 previous words,
P (wi|wi−(n−1), . . . , wi−1). This kind of models as-
sume independence between the word wi and the
words not belonging to the n-gram, wj , j < i − n.
This is a drawback for unbounded dependencies
but we are not interested in capturing the complete
grammatical relationships. We intend to capture
the probabilities of smaller constructions which may
hold positive/negative sentiment. Another assump-
tion we make is independence between different sen-

32



tences.
In Opinum the words are lemmas (or wildcards

replacing entities), and the number of words among
which we assume dependence is n = 5. A max-
imum n of 5 or 6 is common in machine transla-
tion where huge amounts of text are used for build-
ing a language model (Kohen et al., 2007). In our
case we have at our disposal a small amount of data
but the language is drastically simplified by remov-
ing the morphology and entities, as previously ex-
plained. We have experimentally found that n > 5
does not improve the classification performance of
lemmatized opinions and could incur over-fitting.

In our setup we use the IRSTLM open-source li-
brary for building the language model. It performs
an n-gram count for all n-grams from n = 1 to
n = 5 in our case. To deal with data sparseness
a redistribution of the zero-frequency probabilities
is performed for those sets of words which have not
been observed in the training set L(O). Relative fre-
quencies are discounted to assign positive probabil-
ities to every possible n-gram. Finally a smoothing
method is applied. Details about the process can be
found in (Federico et al., 2007). For Opinum we run
IRSTLM twice during the training phase: once tak-
ing as input the opinions labeled as positive and once
taking the negatives:

M p ← Irstlm (L (Op))
M n ← Irstlm (L (On))

These two models are further used for querying new
opinions on them and deciding whether it is positive
or negative, as detailed in the next subsection.

3.4 Evaluation and confidence

In the Opinum system we query the M p ,M n mod-
els with the KenLM (Heafield, 2011) open-source
library because it answers the queries very quickly
and has a short loading time, which is suitable for
a web application. It also has an efficient mem-
ory management which is positive for simultaneous
queries to the server.

The queries are performed at sentence level. Each
sentence s ∈ ot is assigned a score which is the log
probability of the sentence being generated by the
language model. The decision is taken by compar-
ing its scores for the positive and for the negative

models. For a given opinion ot, the log-probability
sums can be taken:

dot =
∑
s∈ot

logP (s|M p)−
∑
s∈ot

logP (s|M n) ≷
?

0

If this difference is close to zero, |dot |/wot < ε0,
it can be considered that the classification is neutral.
The number of words wot is used as a normalization
factor. If it is large, |dot |/wot > ε1, it can be con-
sidered that the opinion has a very positive or very
negative sentiment. Therefore Opinum classifies the
opinions with qualifiers: very/somewhat/little posi-
tive/negative depending on the magnitude |dot |/wot
and sign(dot), respectively.

The previous assessment is also accompanied by a
confidence measure given by the level of agreement
among the different sentences of an opinion. If all its
sentences have the same positivity/negativity, mea-
sured by sign(dsj ), sj ∈ o, with large magnitudes
then the confidence is the highest. In the opposite
case in which there is the same number of positive
and negative sentences with similar magnitudes the
confidence is the lowest. The intermediate cases are
those with sentences agreeing in sign but some of
them with very low magnitude, and those with most
sentences of the same sign and some with different
sign. We use Shannon’s entropy measure H(·) to
quantify the amount of disagreement. For its esti-
mation we divide the range of possible values of d
in B ranges, referred to as bins:

Hot =
B∑

b=1

p(db) log
1

p(db)
.

The number of bins should be low (less than 10),
otherwise it is difficult to get a low entropy mea-
sure because of the sparse values of db. We set two
thresholds η0 and η1 such that the confidence is said
to be high/normal/low if Hot < η0, η0 < Hot < η1
or Hot > η1, respectively

The thresholds ε, η and the number of bins B
are experimentally set. The reason for this is that
they are used to tune subjective qualifiers (very/little,
high/low confidence) and will usually depend on the
training set and on the requirements of the applica-
tion. Note that the classification in positive or neg-
ative sentiment is not affected by these parameters.

33



From a human point of view it is also a subjective
assessment but in our setup it is looked at as a fea-
ture implicitly given by the labeled opinions of the
training set.

4 Experiments and results

In our experimental setup we have a set of positive
and negative opinions in Spanish, collected from a
web site for user reviews and opinions. The opin-
ions are constrained to the financial field including
banks, savings accounts, loans, mortgages, invest-
ments, credit cards, and all other related topics. The
authors of the opinions are not professionals, they
are mainly customers. There is no structure required
for their opinions, and they are free to tell their ex-
perience, their opinion or their feeling about the en-
tity or the product. The users meant to communicate
their review to other humans and they don’t bear in
mind any natural language processing tools. The au-
thors decide whether their own opinion is positive or
negative and this field is mandatory.

The users provide a number of stars as well: from
one to five, but we have not used this information. It
is interesting to note that there are 66 opinions with
only one star which are marked as positive. There
are also 67 opinions with five stars which are marked
as negative. This is partially due to human errors,
a human can notice when reading them. However
we have not filtered these noisy data, as removing
human errors could be regarded as biasing the data
set with our own subjective criteria.

Regarding the size of the corpus, it consists of
9320 opinions about 180 different Spanish banks
and financial products. From these opinions 5877
are positive and 3443 are negative. There is a total of
709741 words and the mean length of the opinions
is 282 words for the positive and 300 words for the
negative ones. In the experiments we present in this
work, we randomly divide the data set in 75% for
training and 25% for testing. We check that the dis-
tribution of positive and negative remains the same
among test and train.

After the L2(·) lemmatization and entity substitu-
tion, the number of different words in the data set is
13067 in contrast with the 78470 different words in
the original texts. In other words, the lexical com-
plexity is reduced by 83%. Different substitutions

play a different role in this simplification. The “Un-
known” wildcard represents a 7,13% of the origi-
nal text. Entities were detected and replaced 33858
times (7807 locations, 5409 people, 19049 com-
panies, 502 e-mails addresses and phone numbers,
2055 URLs, 1136 dates) which is a 4,77% of the
text. There are also 46780 number substitutions, a
7% of the text. The rest of complexity reduction is
due to the removal of the morphology as explained
in Subsection 3.1.

In our experiments, the training of Opinum con-
sisted of lemmatizing and susbstituting entities of
the 6990 opinions belonging the training set and
building the language models. The positive model
is built from 4403 positive opinions and the neg-
ative model is built from 2587 negative opinions.
Balancing the amount of positive and negative sam-
ples does not improve the performance. Instead, it
obliges us to remove an important amount of pos-
itive opinions and the classification results are de-
creased by approximately 2%. This is why we use
all the opinions available in the training set. Both
language models are n-grams with n ∈ [1, 5]. Hav-
ing a 37% less samples for the negative opinions
is not a problem thank to the smoothing techniques
applied by IRSTLM. Nonetheless if the amount of
training texts is too low we would recommend tak-
ing a lower n. A simple way to set n is to take
the lowest value of n for which classification perfor-
mance is improved. An unnecessarily high n could
overfit the models.

The tests are performed with 2330 opinions (not
involved in building the models). For measuring the
accuracy we do not use the qualifiers information
but only the decision about the positive or negative
class. In Figure 1 we show the scores of the opin-
ions for the positive and negative models. The score
is the sum of scores of the sentences, thus it can be
seen that longer opinions (bigger markers) have big-
ger scores. Independence of the size is not necessary
for classifying in positive and negative. In the diag-
onal it can be seen that positive samples are close
to the negative ones, this is to be expected: both
positive and negative language models are built for
the same language. However the small difference
in their scores yields an 81,98% success rate in the
classification. An improvement of this rate would be
difficult to achieve taking into account that there is

34



Test Original Spanish text Meaning in English Result

Similar
words,
different
meaning

“Al tener la web, no pierdes
el tiempo por teléfono.”

As you have the website you
don’t waste time on the phone. Positive

“En el telfono os hacen perder
el tiempo y no tienen web.”

They waste your time on the phone
and they don’t have a website. Negative

“De todas formas me
solucionaron el problema.” Anyway, they solved my problem. Positive

“No hay forma de que
me solucionen el problema.”

There is no way to make them
solve my problem. Negative

A negative
opinion
of several
sentences

“Con XXXXXX me fue muy bien.” I was fine with XXXXXX. Positive
“Hasta que surgieron los problemas.” Until the problems began. Negative
“Por hacerme cliente me regalaban
100 euros.”

They gave me 100 euros for
becoming a client. Positive

“Pero una vez que eres cliente
no te aportan nada bueno.”

But once you are a client, they
they do not offer anything good. Negative

“Estoy pensando cambiar de banco.” I am considering switching toanother bank. Negative

The complete
opinion

“Con XXXXXX me fue muy
[. . .] cambiar de banco.”

I was fine with XXXXXX
[. . .] switching to another bank. Negative

Table 1: Some tests on Opinum for financial opinions in Spanish.

noise in the training set and that there are opinions
without a clear positive or negative feeling. A larger
corpus would also contribute to a better result. Even
though we have placed many efforts in simplifying
the text, this does not help in the cases in which a
construction of words is never found in the corpus.
A construction could even be present in the corpus
but in the wrong class. For instance, in our corpus
“no estoy satisfecho” (meaning “I am not satisfied”)
appears 3 times among the positive opinions and 0
times among the negative ones. This weakness of
the corpus is due to sentences referring to a money
back guarantee: “si no esta satisfecho le devolvemos
el dinero” which are used in a positive context.

Usually in long opinions a single sentence does
not change the positiveness score. For some exam-
ples see Table 4. In long opinions every sentence is
prone to show the sentiment except for the cases of
irony or opinions with an objective part. The per-
formance of Opinum depending on the size of the
opinions of the test set is shown in Figure 2. In Fig-
ure 3 the ROC curve of the classifier shows its sta-
bility against changing the true-positive versus false-
negative rates. A comparison with other methods
would be a valuable source of evaluation. It is not
feasible at this moment because of the lack of free
customers opinions databases and opionion classi-
fiers as well. The success rate we obtain can be com-

pared to the 69% baseline given by a classifier based
on the frequencies of single words.

−2500 −2000 −1500 −1000 −500 0
−2500

−2000

−1500

−1000

−500

0

Similarity to positive LM

S
im

ila
ri
ty

 t
o

 n
e

g
a

ti
v
e

 L
M

Similarity to the Language Models and text sizes (Test set)

Figure 1: Relation between similarity to the models (x
and y axis) and the relative size of the opinions (size of
the points).

The query time of Opinum on a standard com-
puter ranges from 1, 63 s for the shortest opinions to
1, 67 s for those with more than 1000 words. In our
setup, most of the time is spent in loading the mor-
phological dictionary, few milliseconds are spent in
the morphological analysis of the opinion and the
named entity substitution, and less than a millisec-
ond is spent in querying each model. In a batch

35



0 500 1000 1500

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

Opinion size (characters)

e
v
e
n
ts

Distribution of test−text sizes

 

 

Successes

Errors

Figure 2: Number of successful and erroneous classifi-
cations (vertical axis) depending on the size of the test
opinions (horizontal axis).

mode, the morphological analysis could be done
for all the opinions together and thousands of them
could be evaluated in seconds. In Opinum’s web in-
terface we only provide the single opinion queries
and we output the decision, the qualifiers informa-
tion and the confidence measure.

5 Conclusions and future work

Opinum is a sentiment analysis system designed for
classifying customer opinions in positive and neg-
ative. Its approach based on morphological sim-
plification, entity substitution and n-gram language
models, makes it easily adaptable to other classifica-
tion targets different from positive/negative. In this
work we present experiments for Spanish in the fi-
nancial domain but Opinum could easily be trained
for a different language or domain. To this end an
Apertium morphological analyser would be neces-
sary (30 languages are currently available) as well
as a labeled data set of opinions. Setting n for the n-
gram models depends on the size of the corpus but
it would usually range from 4 to 6, 5 in our case.
There are other parameters which have to be exper-
imentally tuned and they are not related to the pos-
itive or negative classification but to the subjective
qualifier very/somewhat/little and to the confidence
measure.

The classification performance of Opinum in
our financial-domain experiments is 81,98% which
would be difficult to improve because of the noise in

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1
ROC on test set

False positive rate

T
ru

e
 p

o
s
it
iv

e
 r

a
te

Figure 3: Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve
of the Opinum classifier for financial opinions.

the data and the subjectivity of the labeling in posi-
tive and negative. The next steps would be to study
the possibility to classify in more than two classes
by using several language models. The use of an
external neutral corpus should also be considered in
the future.

It is necessary to perform a deeper analysis of the
impact of lexical simplification on the accuracy of
the language models. It is also very important to
establish the limitations of this approach for differ-
ent domains. Is it equally successful for a wider do-
main? For instance, trying to build the models from
a mixed set of opinions of the financial domain and
the IT domain. Would it work for a general domain?

Regarding applications, Opinum could be trained
for a given domain without expert knowledge. Its
queries are very fast which makes it feasible for free
on-line services. An interesting application would
be to exploit the named entity recognition and as-
sociate positive/negative scores to the entities based
on their surrounding text. If several domains were
available, then the same entities would have differ-
ent scores depending on the domain, which would
be a valuable analysis.

References
Philipp Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch,

M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen, C.
Moran, R. Zens, C. Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Constantin and
E. Herbst. 2007. Moses: open source toolkit for sta-

36



tistical machine translation. Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Meeting of the ACL on Interactive Poster and
Demonstration Sessions, pp. 177–180. Prague, Czech
Republic, 2007.

Sasha Blair-Goldensohn, Tyler Neylon, Kerry Hannan,
George A. Reis, Ryan Mcdonald and Jeff Reynar.
2008. Building a sentiment summarizer for local ser-
vice reviews. In NLP in the Information Explosion
Era, NLPIX2008, Beiging, China, April 22nd, 2008.

Hu, Minqing and Liu, Bing. 2004. Mining and sum-
marizing customer reviews. Proceedings of the tenth
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowl-
edge discovery and data mining, Seattle, WA, USA,
2004.

Ryan McDonald, Kerry Hannan, Tyler Neylon, Mike
Wells and Jeff Reynar. 2007. Structured Models for
Fine-to-Coarse Sentiment Analysis. Proceedings of
the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Com-
putational Linguistics, 2007.

John Blitzer, Mark Dredze and Fernando Pereira. 2007.
Biographies, bollywood, boomboxes and blenders:
Domain adaptation for sentiment classification. ACL,
2007.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment Classification using
Machine Learning Techniques. EMNLP, 2002.

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, Kimberly
Voll, Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-based meth-
ods for sentiment analysis. Computational Linguis-
tics, Vol. 37, Nr. 2, pp. 267–307, June 2011.

Stephan Raaijmakers, Khiet P. Truong and Theresa Wil-
son. 2008. Multimodal Subjectivity Analysis of Mul-
tiparty Conversation. EMNLP, 2008.

Tyers, F. M., Snchez-Martnez, F., Ortiz-Rojas, S. and
Forcada, M. L. 2010. Free/open-source resources
in the Apertium platform for machine translation re-
search and development. The Prague Bulletin of
Mathematical Linguistics, No. 93, pp. 67–76, 2010.

Marcello Federico and Mauro Cettolo. 2007. Efficient
Handling of N-gram Language Models for Statistical
Machine Translation. ACL 2007 Workshop on SMT,
Prague, Czech Republic, 2007.

Kenneth Heafield. 2011. KenLM: Faster and Smaller
Language Model Queries. ACL 6th Workshop on SMT,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011.

37


