










































The Future of Spoken Dialogue Systems is in their Past: Long-Term Adaptive, Conversational Assistants


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Future directions and needs in the Spoken Dialog Community: Tools and Data, pages 11–12,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Future of Spoken Dialogue Systems is in their Past:
Long-Term Adaptive, Conversational Assistants

David Schlangen
Faculty of Linguistics and Literary Studies

Bielefeld University, Germany
david.schlangen@uni-bielefeld.de

Abstract

A sketch of dialogue systems as long-term
adaptive, conversational agents.

1 Introduction

“Show me the lecture notes from last year”, you say
to your bow-tied virtual assistant. It does, but un-
fortunately, “this will not do. Pull up all the new
articles I haven’t read yet”. Your assistant obliges,
pointing your attention to a “new article from your
friend, Jill Gilbert”. A video call later, your lec-
ture preparation is done—Jill will actually give it,
via video link—and you go on with your day.

This of course describes the first scene from Ap-
ple’s “Knowledge Navigator” concept video (Apple
Computer Inc., 1987; Colligan, 2011). Not much
of what that video showed was actually technically
possible at the time, but it captured the promise of
personalized natural language interfaces that many
people saw and hoped would be realised soon. Hav-
ing to deal with the constraints of reality, however,
research and development of spoken dialogue inter-
faces had to set itself the more modest aim of replac-
ing, in certain settings, mouse and keyboard, rather
than personal assistants.

Recent years have seen two developments that
bring that more ambitious goal back into focus.
First, the required basic technologies such as speech
recognition and speech synthesis have matured to a
state where they begin to allow the necessary flexi-
bility of spoken in- and output. Second, it has be-
come not only possible but completely unremark-
able for large portion of the population to carry with

them sensor-rich, networked computing devices—
their smartphones—during large parts of their day.

In this position paper, I’d like to sketch what
the opportunities are that this situation offers, for
the creation of dialogue systems that are long-term
adaptive and conversational, and act as assistants,
not interfaces.

2 Long-Term Adaptive ...

The fact that users carry with them the same device
(or class of devices; it only matters that access is
constant), provides the chance of repeated interac-
tions with what is understood to be the same system.
To make use of this, the system must
• learn from errors / miscommunications, by im-

proving internal models (acoustic model, language
model, semantic models: how are tasks structured
for particular user); and it must
• build up personal common ground:

– What has been refered to previously, and how?
Which tasks have been done together, and how?
– Which situations have been shared? (Where a
multi-sensor device can have detailed situational in-
formation.)
While the first point mostly describes current prac-
tice (user adaptation of speech resources), there is
much to be explored in the building up of common
ground with a technical device.

3 ... Conversational ...

Interaction with these systems must be less driven by
fixed system-intiative, and be more conversational:
• User and system must be able to mean more

than they say, by making use of context, both from

11



the ongoing conversation as well as from the com-
mon ground that was built up over previous interac-
tion.
• Systems should be responsive, incremental,

providing feedback where required; realising a tight
interaction loop, not strict turn-based exchanges.

• Things will go wrong, so error handling needs
to be graceful and natural, using the full range
of conversational repair devices (Schlangen, 2004;
Purver, 2004); including handing off tasks to other
modalities if expected success rate is low.

• Conversations express and project personality,
emotionality, sociality; systems need to model the
dynamics of this as part of their modelling of the
conversation.
Again, these are active areas of research (for re-
sponsive systems, see e.g. (Skantze and Schlangen,
2009; Buß et al., 2010; Schlangen et al., 2010); for
error handling / acting under uncertainty, see e.g.
(Williams and Young, 2007); for social aspects of
dialogue, see e.g. (Kopp, 2010)); pulling them to-
gether in this kind of application will likely provide
new challenges and insights for all of them.

4 ... Assistants

Of course, the systems will need to provide actual
services, for it at all to come to repeated conversa-
tions. While providing the services lies outside the
domain of speech research, there are some unique
requirements that conversational access poses:

• To be usefully embeddable into conversational
systems, back-end applications are needed that are
interaction-ready; e.g., by providing confindence in-
formation about their results, and, building on this,
by suggesting ways to improve quality through ad-
ditional information.

• Not all back-end services are under the control
of the application developer or provide APIs, and the
semantic web is not going to happen. The reach of a
virtual assistant can be increased if it can be taught
to do tasks like use a website to book a train. Some
promising first work in this direction exists (Allen et
al., 2007).

5 Resources

Building dialogue systems is always hard, as many
different components need to be integrated. Systems

as sketched above bring the additional challenge of
requiring work on mobile platforms; a framework
that provides the required interfaces and infrastruc-
ture would be very helpful.

References
James F. Allen, Nathanael Chambers, George Ferguson,

Lucian Galescu, Hyuckchul Jung, Mary Swift, and
William Taysom. 2007. PLOW: A collaborative task
learning agent. In Proceedings of the National Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligens (AAAI), Vancouver, BC,
Canada.

Apple Computer Inc. 1987. The knowledge navigator
concept video. http://youtu.be/HGYFEI6uLy0.

Okko Buß, Timo Baumann, and David Schlangen. 2010.
Collaborating on utterances with a spoken dialogue
system using an isu-based approach to incremental
dialogue management. In Proceedings of the SIG-
dial 2010 Conference, pages 233–236, Tokyo, Japan,
September.

Bud Colligan. 2011. How the knowl-
edge navigator video came about, Nov.
http://www.dubberly.com/articles/how-the-
knowledge-navigator-video-came-about.html.

Stefan Kopp. 2010. Social resonance and embodied
coordination in face-to-face conversation with artifi-
cial interlocutors. Speech Communication, 52(6):587–
597.

Matthew Purver. 2004. The Theory and Use of Clar-
ification Requests in Dialogue. Ph.D. thesis, King’s
College, Unversity of London, London, UK, August.

David Schlangen, Timo Baumann, Hendrik Buschmeier,
Okko Buß, Stefan Kopp, Gabriel Skantze, and Ramin
Yaghoubzadeh. 2010. Middleware for incremental
processing in conversational agents. In Proceedings
of the SIGdial 2010 Conference, pages 51–54, Tokyo,
Japan, September.

David Schlangen. 2004. Causes and strategies for re-
questing clarification in dialogue. In Proceedings of
the 5th Workshop of the ACL SIG on Discourse and
Dialogue, Boston, USA, April.

Gabriel Skantze and David Schlangen. 2009. Incre-
mental dialogue processing in a micro-domain. In
Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (EACL 2009), pages 745–753, Athens, Greece,
March.

Jason Williams and Steve Young. 2007. Partially ob-
servable Markov decision processes for spoken dialog
systems. Computer Speech and Language, 21(2):231–
422.

12


