



















































Enhancing Lemmatization for Mongolian and its Application to Statistical Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 115–124,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Enhancing Lemmatization for Mongolian and  
its Application to Statistical Machine Translation 

Odbayar Chimeddorj  Atsushi Fujii 

Graduate School of Information Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology  
2-12-1 Ookayama, 152-8552, Japan 

chimeddorj.o.aa AT m.titech.ac.jp 

ABSTRACT 

Lemmatization is crucial in natural language processing and information retrieval especially for 

highly inflected languages, such as Finnish and Mongolian. The state-of-the-art method of 

lemmatization for Mongolian does not need a noun dictionary and is scalable, but errors of this 

method are mainly caused by problems related to part of speech (POS) information. To resolve 

this problem, we integrate POS tagging and lemmatization for Mongolian. We evaluate the 

effectiveness of our method and its contribution to statistical machine translation.  

 

KEYWORDS : Morphological segmentation, Lemmatization, Mongolian language, Statistical 

Machine Translation.  

1 Introduction 

In Mongolian, two different alphabets are used, Cyrillic and Mongolian. While the Cyrillic 

alphabet is mainly used in Mongolia, the Mongolian alphabet is mainly used in the Inner 

Mongolian Autonomous Region of China. Depending on the alphabet used, the writing system is 

also different in Mongolian. In this paper, we focus only on the Mongolian language that uses the 

Cyrillic alphabet, which will be termed “Mongolian” hereafter. 

In Mongolian, which is an agglutinative language, each sentence is segmented on a phrase-by-

phrase basis. A phrase consists of a content word, such as a noun or a verb, and one or more 

suffixes, such as postpositional participles. A content word can potentially be inflected when 

concatenated with suffixes. 

Identifying the original forms of content words is crucial for natural language processing and 

information retrieval. In information retrieval, normalizing index terms can involve either 

lemmatization or stemming. Lemmatization identifies the original form of an inflected word, 

whereas stemming identifies a stem, which is not necessarily a word. Lemmatization is especially 

crucial for highly inflected languages, such as Finish and Mongolian. For example, one of the 

longest phrases in Mongolian “хамтралжуулагдсанаараа” consists of a stem (хам-), four 

derivational (-т -р -(а)л -ж) and five inflectional (-уул - (а)гд -сан -аар -аа) suffixes. This 

phrase is translated into 11 words in English as in the following example sentence.  

Mongolian: Тосгоныхон хамтралжуулагдсанаараа илүү сайн амьдрах 
болов. 

English: Village people, in that they were caused to be organized into 

collective farms, improved their lives. 

115



In this paper, we enhance an existing lemmatization method for Mongolian by using parts of 

speech annotation and apply our method to statistical machine translation for English to 

Mongolian. 

2 Related work 

Ehara et al. (2007) proposed a morphological analysis method for Mongolian-to-Japanese 

transfer-based machine translation. Ehara et al. manually produced Mongolian morphological 

inflectional rules, a suffix dictionary, and a lexicon for a morphological analyzer for Japanese. 

Their method uses these resources and lemmatizes an input phrase to generate its Japanese 

translation phrase by transferring the morphological structure. 

Purev et al. (2005) proposed a method for morphological analysis targeting Mongolian using PC-

KIMMO (Antworth, 1990). PC-KIMMO is based on a finite-state two-level morphological 

description approach (Koskenniemi, 1983). Purev et al. produced 36 two-level morphological 

rules for Mongolian, and used a lexicon consisting of 29,266 words (6,199 nouns, 18,551 verbs, 

and 4,516 adjectives) and 223 affixes. The accuracy of Purev et al's method for two novels was 

60.5%. Errors were mainly due to out-of-dictionary words and contradictions between manually-

written rules. 

Sanduijav et al. (2005) proposed a lemmatization method for Mongolian verbs and nouns. This 

method uses a dictionary that was automatically produced by generating every possible 

combination of words and suffixes with manually-written morphological rules. Like Purev et al., 

this method also does not correctly lemmatize out-of-dictionary words.  

Khaltar and Fujii (2009) proposed a state-of-the-art lemmatization method for Mongolian, which 

uses a suffix dictionary and a number of rules for suffix segmentation and vowel insertion. 

Unlike the above methods, this method does not need a noun dictionary and is therefore scalable. 

In addition, Khaltar and Fujii showed that their method experimentally outperformed Sanduijav 

et al. (2005). Therefore, we enhance Khaltar and Fujii’s method with parts of speech information, 

and explain the method in details in following. 

Given a phrase consisting of a content word and one or more suffixes, Khaltar and Fujii’s method 

removes the suffixes and extracts the content word. In addition, the rules are used to identify the 

original form of the extracted content word. However, because details of the lemmatization 

process can vary depending on the part of speech (POS) for the target content word, a verb 

dictionary is used to determine whether the target content word is a verb or not. Because new 

verbs are created less frequently than nouns, they use a verb dictionary, but not a noun dictionary.  

Thus, this method is robust against out-of-dictionary words, compared with other existing 

methods.  

However, Khaltar and Fujii’s method is associated with three problems. First, their method often 

misrecognizes an out-of-dictionary verb as a noun and consequently lemmatizes the target phrase 

incorrectly. Second, their method incorrectly lemmatizes a content word that is associated with 

more than one POS. For example, a phrase “орон” is either a verb phrase consisting of “ор” (to 

enter) and “он” (serial verb suffix) or a noun phrase consisting of only a noun “орон” (country), 

as shown in examples (1) and (2), respectively. We also show an English translation below each 

sentence. 

116



 

(1) дотогш ор+он алга болов 

          Verb+Suffix 

(someone) went inside and disappeared 

(2) олон орон цөмийн эрчим хүч хэрэглэдэг 

          Noun 

many countries use nuclear energy 

For another example, the word “хамгийн” in Mongolian means “most” in English, and its 

syntactic function is superlative for adjectives and adverbs. Because its lexical structure is same 

as “хамаг” (whole or all) + “-ийн” (genitive case), “хамгийн” can be misrecognized as a noun 

concatenated with an inflectional suffix. Third problem is related to phrases that have the same 

surface form and POS but different meaning and morphological structure. For example, the word 

“уусан” can be two different inflected verbs depending on the context, as shown below. 

(3) уух + сан → уусан 

to drink + past tense → drank 

Би өчигдөр анх удаа япон ногоон цай уусан 

Yesterday, I drank Japanese green tea for the first time. 

(4) уусах + н → уусан 

to fade/melt + serial verb suffix → faded and [another verb] 

Мөс усанд уусан алга болов 

Ice melted into water and disappeared. 

In the above examples, knowing only the POS of “уусан” is insufficient to segment it correctly 

even consulting to the verb dictionary because both usages in (3) and (4) are verbs. Therefore, it 

is necessary to know its inflection from the sentence content. 

3 Our method for lemmatization 

To resolve the three problems associated with Khaltar and Fujii (2009) described in Section 2, we 

combine their method and POS tagging. For the first problem, we can use POS information to 

distinguish nouns and verbs in target phrases. For the second problem, we can identify the POS 

for an ambiguous word depending on the context and use the corresponding lemmatization 

process. For the third problem, the POS annotation used in our method includes inflectional 

structure for verbs and nouns. For example, a POS annotation for a noun phrase is distinguished 

whether it is inflected or not. If inflected, the POS annotation also carries inflection type such as 

plural, genitive, and possessive. 

In practice, we perform POS tagging for an input sentence and then use Khaltar and Fujii’s 

method to perform lemmatization on a phrase-by-phrase basis. Training the POS tagging needs 

only POS annotated corpus, instead it does not need lemmatization. Our method consists of three 

components: POS annotation of input sentence, extracting target phrases with their POS 

information and lemmatizing target phrase by Khaltar and Fujii’s method. The procedure of our 

lemmatization method is shown in following with a step-by-step example. 

117



Step 1. олон орон цөмийн эрчим хүч хэрэглэдэг 
Many countries use nuclear energy 

 

Step 2. олон орон цөмийн эрчим хүч хэрэглэдэг 
  JJ        N        NG         N       N         VP 

 

Step 3. олон орон цөмийн эрчим хүч хэрэглэдэг 
              nuclear+genitive            to use+present 

             N       NG           N      N         VP 

 

Step 4. олон орон цөм+ийн эрчим хүч хэрэглэ+дэг 
                      N+genitive                    V+present 

In the above example, a sentence in Mongolian is segmented through three steps. Step 1 is POS 

tagging on an input sentence. Step 2 is extracting target phrases with their POS information. In 

Step 3, the target phrases are lemmatized by Khaltar and Fujii’s method by consulting with POS 

information. As shown in the example, two target phrases are identified according to POS 

annotation: цөмийн and хэрэглэдэг (“nuclear” and “to use” in English, respectively). The 

example also shows examples of (1) and (2) mentioned in Section 2. The phrase орон 

(“countries” in English) is incorrectly lemmatized as a verb instead of noun in Khaltar and Fujii’s 

method. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Overview 

We conducted two separate experiments to evaluate our lemmatization method for Mongolian. In 

Section 4.2, our method is evaluated on lemmatizing verb and noun phrases, and the result is 

compared to the Khaltar and Fujii’s method. In Section 4.3, we evaluate the effectiveness of 

Khaltar and Fujii’s and our methods in statistical machine translation (SMT). 

For POS tagging purpose, we used a statistical POS tagger “TnT” (Thorsten, 2000) and a 5 M 

word Mongolian corpus, in which each word is manually annotated with its POS tag and 

inflectional structure (Jaimai and Chimeddorj, 2008), for training purposes. This corpus consists 

of common domains such as laws, novels and news. 

4.2 Evaluating lemmatization accuracy 

In the evaluation of lemmatization, we used the same test data as in Khaltar and Fujii (2009), 

which consists of 183 newspaper articles (hereafter “News”) and 1,467 technical abstracts 

(hereafter “Tech”) for Mongolian. Furthermore, we targeted on the noun and verb phrases of the 

test data due to the most inflectional POS in Mongolian and the NLP and IR application. The 

amount of the targeted phrases is shown in Table 1. 

118



 

Test data Noun phrase Verb phrase 

In types In tokens In types In tokens 

News 5,201 14,538 5,086 11,723 

Tech 15,982 73,625 4,797 37,477 

Total 21,899 86,554 9,880 49,200 

TABLE 1 – Target phrase types and tokens for the experiment. 

As shown in Table 1, we targeted on 31,779 types of phrases of which 21,899 are noun phrases 

and 9,880 are verb phrases, respectively.  

First, the test data was tagged with the TnT. We found that the accuracy for POS tagging was 

93.8%. Second, the phrases shown in Table 4 were extracted from News and Tech with their POS 

tags, and each of them was given to the lemmatization method with its POS information. Finally, 

the result of the lemmatization was compared with human assessed correct answers. The total 

accuracy of Khaltar and Fujii’s method was 73.4% while that of our method was 86.6%, as 

shown in Table 2. Furthermore, the accuracy of lemmatization for the Mongolian was improved 

substantially for verb phrases and slightly for noun phrases by using POS information. 

Test data 
Khaltar and Fujii Our method 

Nouns Verbs Total Nouns Verbs Total 

News  85.5% 54.2% 70.0% 89.5% 84.4% 86.9% 

Tech 84.8% 43.3% 75.2% 86.1% 88.0% 86.5% 

Total 84.9% 48.9% 73.4% 86.9% 86.1% 86.6% 

TABLE 2 – Accuracy of lemmatization by phrase types. 

As shown in Table 2, the accuracy of the lemmatization on the noun and verb phrase types is 

improved for the both domain (News by 16.9% and Tech by 11.3%). In addition, we evaluated 

the performance of our method on the total tokens of the test data (Table 3). As a result, the total 

improvements are 9.2% on News and 10.6% on Tech. 

Test data 
Khaltar and Fujii Our method 

Nouns Verbs Total Nouns Verbs Total 

News  87.1% 75.1% 81.7% 91.0% 90.8% 90.9% 

Tech 96.0% 60.1% 83.8% 96.9% 84.0% 92.5% 

Total 94.5% 63.6% 82.9% 96.9% 85.6% 93.5% 

TABLE 3 – Accuracy of lemmatization by phrase tokens. 

As shown in Tables 2 and 3, the results of our method are higher than that of Khaltar and Fujii’s 

method in the both of phrase types and phrase tokens. 

We manually analyzed the errors in our method, and found seven types of errors in lemmatizing 

noun phrases (Table 4), and six types of errors in lemmatizing verb phrases (Table 5), 

respectively. 

119



 

Error (# in News/Tech) Examples Correct 

(a) Incorrect suffix 

removal (221/831) 

дайнд → дай 
noun + dative 

in the war 

дайн 
war 

(b) Incorrect vowel 

insertion (139/719) 

үнийг → үн 
noun + accusative 

price 

үнэ 
price 

(c) Soft sign insertion 

(9/198) 

сургуулийн → сургуули 
noun + genitive 

of school 

сургууль 
school 

(d) Irregular plural 

suffix (108/116) 

охид → охид 
noun + plural 

girls 

охин 
girl 

(e) Special possessive 

suffix (84/218) 

ахынхаа → ахын 
noun + genitive + possessive 

my brother’s 

ах 
brother 

(f) POS ambiguity 

(21/77) 

орноос → ор 
noun + ablative 

from country 

орон 
country 

(h) Incorrect POS 

tagging (63/268) 

угаар → уг 
noun 

smoke 

угаар 
smoke 

TABLE 4 – Errors of our method for noun phrases. 

 

Error (# in News/Tech) Example Correct 

(i) Incorrect suffix 

removal (302/236) 
ярьжээ → ярьж 
verb + past 

told (to tell) 

ярь 
to tell 

(j) Incorrect vowel 

insertion (86/69) 
идэвхжисэн → идэвхэж 
verb + past 

activated 

идэвхж 
to 

active 

(k) Soft sign insertion 

(9/7) 
дэвшиж→дэвшь 
verb + serial verb suffix 

advanced 

дэвш 
to 

advance 

(l) Ignored by POS 

tagging (198/148) 
авчихлаа → авчих 
verb + past perfect + past 

have just taken 

ав 
to take 

(m) POS ambiguity 

(11/13) 
үрж → үр 
verb 

multiply 

үрж 
multiply 

(n) Incorrect POS 

tagging (100/83) 
уудагийг → уудаг 
verb + present + accusative case 

that it drinks 

уу 
to drink 

TABLE 5 – Errors of our method for verb phrases. 

120



As shown in Table 4, the most dominant errors in the noun phrase lemmatization are (a) and (b). 

Error (a) is a suffix homonym problem. In Mongolian, many suffixes are similar in their surface 

form, but different in their meaning or its opposite (similar in their meaning and different in their 

surface form). For resolving Error (a), only POS and syntactical function (such as cases, plural, 

etc) information is insufficient. It needs more detail lexical information to recognize the suffix 

boundaries. Error (b) is caused by the contradiction among the vowel insertion rules and the 

irregular concatenation form as well.  In addition, Error (c) is similar to the Error (b). For correct 

vowel insertion needs more linguistic analysis for appropriate rule descriptions. Errors (d) and (e) 

can be resolved by simple heuristics. Error (d) needs a dictionary for irregular nouns while Error 

(e) can be solved by extending the segmentation rule. In the previous method, the segmentation 

rule did not consider the special possessive suffix.  

Errors (f) and (h) are related to the POS tagging process. Although some cases of POS ambiguity 

(mentioned in the section 2) are solved in this work, there are other more ambiguous phrases, 

which the POS tagging in this work is not enough to resolve. Furthermore, the incorrect POS 

tagged phrases lead to the inappropriate lemmatization process as causing the error (h). 

As shown in Table 5, errors from (i) to (k) are the same problems as in the noun errors. The 

errors from (l) to (n) are related to the POS tagging. Errors (m) and (n) are also the same errors in 

the noun lemmatization while Error (l) is caused by that the POS tagging used in this work 

ignores some inflectional functions of verbs. As a result, such verb suffixes are not removed.  

4.3 Evaluating the contribution of lemmatization to SMT 

In this experiment, we evaluated the effectiveness of our lemmatization method for English-

Mongolian (En-Mn) phrase-based SMT. Khaltar and Fujii’s method was also evaluated for 

comparison. We used Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) with the standard configuration and GIZA++ 

(Och et al., 2003) with the grow-diag-final-and heuristic for word-alignment. Our parallel data set 

was collected from web sites (http://www.legalinfo.mn/ and http://mongolia.usembassy.gov/), 

and consists of law and news domains. Example En-Mn sentence pairs in our data are shown 

below. 

En1: Occupational safety and health measures shall not involve any expenditure for 

the workers . 

Mn1: Хөдөлмөрийн аюулгүй байдал , эрүүл ахуйн арга хэмжээтэй 

холбогдох аливаа зардлыг ажилчид хариуцахгүй . 

En2: Agriculture even holds a key to delivering new forms of clean energy . 

Mn2: Үүнтэй зэрэгцээд хөдөө аж ахуй нь цэвэр эрчим хүчний шинэ 

төрлийг бий болгоход ч голлох үүрэг гүйцэтгэж байна . 

The numbers of sentence pairs for training a translation model, tuning parameters, and testing 

were 24 K, 2 K, and 500, respectively. We used SRILM (Stolcke et al., 2011) and a 5-gram word 

language model in Mongolian was produced from 106 K sentences in Mongolian.  

We compared two types of SMT methods for English-Mongolian: an SMT with lemmatization 

for noun and verb phrases in Mongolian (WL) and an SMT without lemmatization (WOL). We 

used BLEU (Papineniet al., 2002) for evaluation purposes. While translations in Mongolian 

produced by WL were lemmatized inherently, translations by WOL and reference translations 

were not lemmatized. To compare BLEU values for WOL and WL strictly, we segmented the 

121



translations by WOL and the reference translations using the same lemmatization method as WL. 

Table 6 shows BLEU values for different SMT methods. 

WOL1 38.74 

Khaltar and Fujii 38.43 

WOL2 39.11 

Our method 40.48 

TABLE 6 – BLEU values for different SMT methods. 

In Table 6, there are four SMT methods. Two of them are WLs ("Khaltar and Fujii" and "Our 

method") and the remaining methods are WOL1 and WOL2. While our lemmatization method 

was used in "Our method" and the output of WOL2, Khaltar and Fujii’s method was used in 

"Khaltar and Fujii" and the output of WOL1. Looking at Table 6, the BLEU value for Khaltar 

and Fujii's method was smaller than that for WOL1. In other words, Khaltar and Fujii's method 

was not effective in terms of SMT. However, the BLEU value for our method was greater than 

that for WOL2. In addition, we performed a statistical testing (Koehn, 2004) and found that the 

difference between our method and WOL2 in BLEU was statistically significant with the 95% 

confidence level. We can conclude that our lemmatization for Mongolian was effective for 

English-Mongolian SMT. 

Conclusion 

In this paper, we proposed a lemmatization method, which identifies the original form of the 

content word in a Cyrillic Mongolian phrase. Although the state-of-the-art method does not need 

a noun dictionary and is therefore scalable, this method incorrectly lemmatizes out-of-dictionary 

verbs and words associated with more than one part of speech (POS). To resolve this problem, 

our method first performs statistical POS tagging for an input phrase and then performs the 

lemmatization. To evaluate the effectiveness of our method, we targeted noun and verb phrases in 

newspaper articles and technical abstracts. Experimental results showed that our method 

substantially improved the accuracy of the state-of-the-art lemmatization method. We also 

applied our lemmatization method to English-Mongolian SMT and showed that our 

lemmatization method improved BLEU values for SMT experimentally.  

Future work includes improving lemmatization rules for special noun possessive suffixes and a 

dictionary for irregular plural nouns. In addition, more linguistic analysis is necessary for 

statistically resolving the vowel insertion and the suffix homonym problems. Further research is 

necessary to obtain more improvement over English-Mongolian SMT. It needs to determine the 

effective phrases for the segmentation of Mongolian. 

References 

Thorsten Brants (2000). TnT – A Statistical Part-of-Speech Tagger, In Proceedings of the Sixth 

Applied Natural Language Processing Conference. 

Terumasa Ehara, Suzushi Hayata, and Nobuyuki Kimura (2007). Mongolian to Japanese 

Machine Translation System – Focused on Translation Selection, In Proceedings of the 2nd 

International Symposium on Information and Language Processing. 

Antworth Evan (1990). PC-KIMMO: A Two-level Processor for Morphological Analysis, 

Summer Institute of Linguistics, Inc. 

122



Purev Jaimai and Odbayar Chimeddorj (2008). POS Tagging for Mongolian, In Proceedings of 

Sixth Workshop on Asian Language Processing, IJCNLP2008. 

Purev Jaimai, Tsolmon Zundui, Altangerel Chagnaa, and Cheol-Young Ock (2005). PC-

KIMMO-based Description of Mongolian Morphology, In Proceeding of International Journal 

of Information Processing Systems, Vol. 1, No.1. 

Badam-Osor Khaltar and Atsushi Fujii (2009). A Lemmatization method for Mongolian and its 

application to indexing for information retrieval, Information Processing & Management, Vol. 

45, No.4, pp.438-451. 

Philipp Koehn (2007). Statistical Significance Tests for Machine Translation Evaluation. In the 

Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 

Barcelona, Spain. 

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola 

Bertoldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej 

Bojar, Alexandra Constantin, and Evan Herbst (2007). Moses: Open source toolkit for statistical 

machine translation. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL, Demonstration 

session, Prague, Czech Republic. 

Koskenniemi Kimmo (1983). Two-level morphology: a general computational model for word-

form recognition and production, Publication No. 11. Helsinki: University of Helsinki 

Department of General Linguistics. 

Franz Josef Och, Hermann Ney (2003). A Systematic Comparison of Various Statistical 

Alignment Models, Computational Linguistics, volume 29, number 1, pp. 19-51. 

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. (2002). Bleu: a method for 

automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL2002, pages 311–318, 

Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 

Enkhbayar Sanduijav, Takehito Utsuro, and Satoshi Sato (2005). Mongolian phrase generation 

and morphological analysis based on phonological and morphological constraints, Journal of 

Natural Language Processing, Vol. 12, No. 5, pp.185-205. (In Japanese). 

Andreas Stolcke, Jing Zheng, Wen Wang and Victor Abrash (2011). SRILM at Sixteen: Update 

and Outlook. In Proceedings of IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding 

Workshop, Waikoloa, Hawaii. 

123




