










































Hedge Detection as a Lens on Framing in the GMO Debates: A Position Paper


Proceedings of the ACL-2012 Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational Linguistics (ExProM-2012),
pages 70–79, Jeju, Republic of Korea, 13 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Hedge Detection as a Lens on Framing in the GMO Debates:
A Position Paper

Eunsol Choi∗, Chenhao Tan∗, Lillian Lee∗, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil∗ and Jennifer Spindel†
∗Department of Computer Science, †Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics

Cornell University
ec472@cornell.edu, chenhao|llee|cristian@cs.cornell.edu, jes462@cornell.edu

Abstract

Understanding the ways in which participants
in public discussions frame their arguments is
important in understanding how public opin-
ion is formed. In this paper, we adopt the po-
sition that it is time for more computationally-
oriented research on problems involving fram-
ing. In the interests of furthering that goal,
we propose the following specific, interesting
and, we believe, relatively accessible ques-
tion: In the controversy regarding the use
of genetically-modified organisms (GMOs) in
agriculture, do pro- and anti-GMO articles dif-
fer in whether they choose to adopt a more
“scientific” tone?

Prior work on the rhetoric and sociology of
science suggests that hedging may distin-
guish popular-science text from text written
by professional scientists for their colleagues.
We propose a detailed approach to studying
whether hedge detection can be used to un-
derstanding scientific framing in the GMO de-
bates, and provide corpora to facilitate this
study. Some of our preliminary analyses sug-
gest that hedges occur less frequently in scien-
tific discourse than in popular text, a finding
that contradicts prior assertions in the litera-
ture. We hope that our initial work and data
will encourage others to pursue this promising
line of inquiry.

1 Introduction

1.1 Framing, “scientific discourse”, and GMOs
in the media

The issue of framing (Goffman, 1974; Scheufele,
1999; Benford and Snow, 2000) is of great im-

portance in understanding how public opinion is
formed. In their Annual Review of Political Science
survey, Chong and Druckman (2007) describe fram-
ing effects as occurring “when (often small) changes
in the presentation of an issue or an event produce
(sometimes large) changes of opinion” (p. 104);
as an example, they cite a study wherein respon-
dents answered differently, when asked whether a
hate group should be allowed to hold a rally, depend-
ing on whether the question was phrased as one of
“free speech” or one of “risk of violence”.

The genesis of our work is in a framing question
motivated by a relatively current political issue. In
media coverage of transgenic crops and the use of
genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in food, do
pro-GMO vs. anti-GMO articles differ not just with
respect to word choice, but in adopting a more “sci-
entific” discourse, meaning the inclusion of more
uncertainty and fewer emotionally-laden words? We
view this as an interesting question from a text anal-
ysis perspective (with potential applications and im-
plications that lie outside the scope of this article).

1.2 Hedging as a sign of scientific discourse

To obtain a computationally manageable character-
ization of “scientific discourse”, we turned to stud-
ies of the culture and language of science, a body
of work spanning fields ranging from sociology to
applied linguistics to rhetoric and communication
(Gilbert and Mulkay, 1984; Latour, 1987; Latour
and Woolgar, 1979; Halliday and Martin, 1993; Baz-
erman, 1988; Fahnestock, 2004; Gross, 1990).

One characteristic that has drawn quite a bit of
attention in such studies is hedging (Myers, 1989;

70



Hyland, 1998; Lewin, 1998; Salager-Meyer, 2011).1

Hyland (1998, pg. 1) defines hedging as the ex-
pression of “tentativeness and possibility” in com-
munication, or, to put it another way, language cor-
responding to “the writer withholding full commit-
ment to statements” (pg. 3). He supplies many
real-life examples from scientific research articles,
including the following:

1. ‘It seems that this group plays a critical role in
orienting the carboxyl function’ (emphasis Hy-
land’s)

2. ‘...implies that phytochrome A is also not nec-
essary for normal photomorphogenesis, at least
under these irradiation conditions’ (emphasis
Hyland’s)

3. ‘We wish to suggest a structure for the salt of
deoxyribose nucleic acid (D.N.A.)’ (emphasis
added)2

Several scholars have asserted the centrality of hedg-
ing in scientific and academic discourse, which cor-
responds nicely to the notion of “more uncertainty”
mentioned above. Hyland (1998, p. 6) writes, “De-
spite a widely held belief that professional scientific
writing is a series of impersonal statements of fact
which add up to the truth, hedges are abundant in
science and play a critical role in academic writing”.
Indeed, Myers (1989, p. 13) claims that in scien-
tific research articles, “The hedging of claims is so
common that a sentence that looks like a claim but
has no hedging is probably not a statement of new
knowledge”.3

Not only is understanding hedges important to un-
derstanding the rhetoric and sociology of science,
but hedge detection and analysis — in the sense of
identifying uncertain or uncertainly-sourced infor-
mation (Farkas et al., 2010) — has important appli-
cations to information extraction, broadly construed,
and has thus become an active sub-area of natural-
language processing. For example, the CoNLL 2010

1In linguistics, hedging has been studied since the 1970s
(Lakoff, 1973).

2This example originates from Watson and Crick’s land-
mark 1953 paper. Although the sentence is overtly tentative,
did Watson and Crick truly intend to be polite and modest in
their claims? See Varttala (2001) for a review of arguments re-
garding this question.

3Note the inclusion of the hedge “probably”.

Shared Task was devoted to this problem (Farkas
et al., 2010).

Putting these two lines of research together, we
see before us what appears to be an interesting in-
terdisciplinary and, at least in principle, straightfor-
ward research program: relying on the aforemen-
tioned rhetoric analyses to presume that hedging is
a key characteristic of scientific discourse, build a
hedge-detection system to computationally ascertain
which proponents in the GMO debate tend to use
more hedges and thus, by presumption, tend to adopt
a more “scientific” frame.4

1.3 Contributions

Our overarching goal in this paper is to convince
more researchers in NLP and computational linguis-
tics to work on problems involving framing. We
try to do so by proposing a specific problem that
may be relatively accessible. Despite the apparent
difficulty in addressing such questions, we believe
that progress can be made by drawing on observa-
tions drawn from previous literature across many
fields, and integrating such work with movements
in the computational community toward considera-
tion of extra-propositional and pragmatic concerns.
We have thus intentionally tried to “cover a lot of
ground”, as one referee put it, in the introductory
material just discussed.

Since framing problems are indeed difficult, we
elected to narrow our scope in the hope of making
some partial progress. Our technical goal here, at
this workshop, where hedge detection is one of the
most relevant topics to the broad questions we have
raised, is not to learn to classify texts as being pro-
vs. anti-GMO, or as being scientific or not, per se.5

Our focus is on whether hedging specifically, con-
sidered as a single feature, is correlated with these
different document classes, because of the previous
research attention that has been devoted to hedging
in particular and because of hedging being one of the
topics of this workshop. The point of this paper is

4However, this presumption that more hedges characterize a
more scientific discourse has been contested. See section 2 for
discussion and section 4.2 for our empirical investigation.

5Several other groups have addressed the problem of try-
ing to identify different sides or perspectives (Lin et al., 2006;
Hardisty et al., 2010; Beigman Klebanov et al., 2010; Ahmed
and Xing, 2010).

71



thus not to compare the efficacy of hedging features
with other types, such as bag-of-words features. Of
course, to do so is an important and interesting di-
rection for future work.

In the end, we were not able to achieve satisfac-
tory results even with respect to our narrowed goal.
However, we believe that other researchers may be
able to follow the plan of attack we outline below,
and perhaps use the data we are releasing, in order
to achieve our goal. We would welcome hearing the
results of other people’s efforts.

2 How should we test whether hedging
distinguishes scientific text?

One very important point that we have not yet ad-
dressed is: While the literature agrees on the impor-
tance of hedging in scientific text, the relative de-
gree of hedging in scientific vs. non-scientific text is
a matter of debate.

On the one side, we have assertions like those of
Fahnestock (1986), who shows in a clever, albeit
small-scale, study involving parallel texts that when
scientific observations pass into popular accounts,
changes include “removing hedges ... thus con-
ferring greater certainty on the reported facts” (pg.
275). Similarly, Juanillo, Jr. (2001) refers to a shift
from a forensic style to a “celebratory” style when
scientific research becomes publicized, and credits
Brown (1998) with noting that “celebratory scien-
tific discourses tend to pay less attention to caveats,
contradictory evidence, and qualifications that are
highlighted in forensic or empiricist discourses. By
downplaying scientific uncertainty, it [sic] alludes to
greater certainty of scientific results for public con-
sumption” (Juanillo, Jr., 2001, p. 42).

However, others have contested claims that the
popularization process involves simplification, dis-
tortion, hype, and dumbing down, as Myers (2003)
colorfully puts it; he provides a critique of the rel-
evant literature. Varttala (1999) ran a corpus anal-
ysis in which hedging was found not just in pro-
fessional medical articles, but was also “typical of
popular scientific articles dealing with similar top-
ics” (p. 195). Moreover, significant variation in use
of hedging has been found across disciplines and au-
thors’ native language; see Salager-Meyer (2011) or
Varttala (2001) for a review.

To the best of our knowledge, there have been no
large-scale empirical studies validating the hypoth-
esis that hedges appear more or less frequently in
scientific discourse.

Proposed procedure Given the above, our first
step must be to determine whether hedges are more
or less prominent in “professional scientific” (hence-
forth “prof-science’’) vs. “public science” (hence-
forth “pop-science”) discussions of GMOs. Of
course, for a large-scale study, finding hedges re-
quires developing and training an effective hedge de-
tection algorithm.

If the first step shows that hedges can indeed be
used to effectively distinguish prof-science vs. pop-
science discourse on GMOs, then the second step is
to examine whether the use of hedging in pro-GMO
articles follows our inferred “scientific” occurrence
patterns to a greater extent than the hedging in anti-
GMO articles.

However, as our hedge classifier trained on the
CoNLL dataset did not perform reliably on the dif-
ferent domain of prof-science vs. pop-science dis-
cussions of GMOs, we focus the main content of this
paper on the first step. We describe data collection
for the second step in the appendix.

3 Data

To accomplish the first step of our proposed pro-
cedure outlined above, we first constructed a prof-
science/pop-science corpus by pulling text from
Web of Science for prof-science examples and from
LexisNexis for pop-science examples, as described
in Section 3.1. Our corpus will be posted online
at https://confluence.cornell.edu/display/llresearch/
HedgingFramingGMOs.

As noted above, computing the degree of hedg-
ing in the aforementioned corpus requires access to
a hedge-detection algorithm. We took a supervised
approach, taking advantage of the availability of the
CoNLL 2010 hedge-detection training and evalua-
tion corpora, described in Section 3.2

3.1 Prof-science/pop-science data: LEXIS and
WOS

As mentioned previously, a corpus of prof-science
and pop-science articles is required to ascertain
whether hedges are more prevalent in one or the

72



Dataset Doc type # docs # sentences Avg sentence length Flesch reading ease
Prof-science/pop-science corpus

WOS abstracts 648 5596 22.35 23.39
LEXIS (short) articles 928 36795 24.92 45.78

Hedge-detection corpora
Bio (train) abstracts, articles 1273, 9 14541 (18% uncertain) 29.97 20.77
Bio (eval) articles 15 5003 (16% uncertain) 31.30 30.49
Wiki (train) paragraphs 2186 11111 (22% uncertain) 23.07 35.23
Wiki (eval) paragraphs 2346 9634 (23% uncertain) 20.82 31.71

Table 1: Basic descriptive statistics for the main corpora we worked with. We created the first two. Higher Flesch
scores indicate text that is easier to read.

other of these two writing styles. Since our ultimate
goal is to look at discourse related to GMOs, we re-
strict our attention to documents on this topic.

Thomson Reuter’s Web of Science (WOS), a
database of scientific journal and conference arti-
cles, was used as a source of prof-science samples.
We chose to collect abstracts, rather than full scien-
tific articles, because intuition suggests that the lan-
guage in abstracts is more high-level than that in the
bodies of papers, and thus more similar to the lan-
guage one would see in a public debate on GMOs.
To select for on-topic abstracts, we used the phrase
“transgenic foods” as a search keyword and dis-
carded results containing any of a hand-selected list
of off-topic filtering terms (e.g., “mice” or “rats”).
We then made use of domain expertise to manually
remove off-topic texts. The process yielded 648 doc-
uments for a total of 5596 sentences.

Our source of pop-science articles was Lexis-
Nexis (LEXIS). On-topic documents were collected
from US newspapers using the search keywords “ge-
netically modified foods” or “transgenic crops” and
then imposing the additional requirement that at
least two terms on a hand-selected list7 be present
in each document. After the removal of duplicates
and texts containing more than 2000 words to delete
excessively long articles, our final pop-science sub-
corpus was composed of 928 documents.

7The term list: GMO, GM, GE, genetically modified, ge-
netic modification, modified, modification, genetic engineer-
ing, engineered, bioengineered, franken, transgenic, spliced,
G.M.O., tweaked, manipulated, engineering, pharming, aqua-
culture.

3.2 CoNLL hedge-detection training data 8

As described in Farkas et al. (2010), the motivation
behind the CoNLL 2010 shared task is that “distin-
guishing factual and uncertain information in texts is
of essential importance in information extraction”.
As “uncertainty detection is extremely important for
biomedical information extraction”, one component
of the dataset is biological abstracts and full arti-
cles from the BioScope corpus (Bio). Meanwhile,
the chief editors of Wikipedia have drawn the at-
tention of the public to specific markers of uncer-
tainty known as weasel words9: they are words or
phrases “aimed at creating an impression that some-
thing specific and meaningful has been said”, when,
in fact, “only a vague or ambiguous claim, or even
a refutation, has been communicated”. An example
is “It has been claimed that ...”: the claimant has not
been identified, so the source of the claim cannot be
verified. Thus, another part of the dataset is a set
of Wikipedia articles (Wiki) annotated with weasel-
word information. We view the combined Bio+Wiki
corpus (henceforth the CoNLL dataset) as valuable
for developing hedge detectors, and we attempt to
study whether classifiers trained on this data can be
generalized to other datasets.

3.3 Comparison
Table 1 gives the basic statistics on the main datasets
we worked with. Though WOS and LEXIS differ in
the total number of sentences, the average sentence
length is similar. The average sentence length in Bio
is longer than that in Wiki. The articles in WOS
are markedly more difficult to read than the articles

8http://www.inf.u-szeged.hu/rgai/conll2010st/
9http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weasel word

73



in LEXIS according to Flesch reading ease (Kincaid
et al., 1975).

4 Hedging to distinguish scientific text:
Initial annotation

As noted in Section 1, it is not a priori clear whether
hedging distinguishes scientific text or that more
hedges correspond to a more “scientific” discourse.
To get an initial feeling for how frequently hedges
occur in WOS and LEXIS, we hand-annotated a
sample of sentences from each. In Section 4.1, we
explain the annotation policy of the CoNLL 2010
Shared Task and our own annotation method for
WOS and LEXIS. After that, we move forward in
Section 4.2 to compare the percentage of uncertain
sentences in prof-science vs. pop-science text on
this small hand-labeled sample, and gain some ev-
idence that there is indeed a difference in hedge oc-
currence rates, although, perhaps surprisingly, there
seem to be more hedges in the pop-science texts.

As a side benefit, we subsequently use the
hand-labeled sample we produce to investigate the
accuracy of an automatic hedge detector in the
WOS+LEXIS domain; more on this in Section 5.

4.1 Uncertainty annotation

CoNLL 2010 Shared Task annotation policy As
described in Farkas et al. (2010, pg. 4), the data an-
notation polices for the CoNLL 2010 Shared Task
were that “sentences containing at least one cue
were considered as uncertain, while sentences with
no cues were considered as factual”, where a cue
is a linguistic marker that in context indicates un-
certainty. A straightforward example of a sentence
marked “uncertain” in the Shared Task is ‘Mild blad-
der wall thickening raises the question of cystitis.’
The annotated cues are not necessarily general, par-
ticularly in Wiki, where some of the marked cues
are as specific as ‘some of schumann’s best choral
writing’, ‘people of the jewish tradition’, or ‘certain
leisure or cultural activities’.

Note that “uncertainty” in the Shared Task def-
inition also encompassed phrasing that “creates an
impression that something important has been said,
but what is really communicated is vague, mislead-
ing, evasive or ambiguous ... [offering] an opinion
without any backup or source”. An example of such

Dataset % of uncertain sentences
WOS (estimated from 75-sentence sample) 20
LEXIS (estimated from 78-sentence sample) 28
Bio 17
Wiki 23

Table 2: Percentages of uncertain sentences.

a sentence, drawn from Wikipedia and marked “un-
certain” in the Shared Task, is ‘Some people claim
that this results in a better taste than that of other diet
colas (most of which are sweetened with aspartame
alone).’; Farkas et al. (2010) write, “The ... sentence
does not specify the source of the information, it is
just the vague term ‘some people’ that refers to the
holder of this opinion”.

Our annotation policy We hand-annotated 200
randomly-sampled sentences, half from WOS and
half from LEXIS10, to gauge the frequency with
which hedges occur in each corpus. Two annota-
tors each followed the rules of the CoNLL 2010
Shared Task to label sentences as certain, uncertain,
or not a proper sentence.11 The annotators agreed on
153 proper sentences of the 200 sentences (75 from
WOS and 78 from LEXIS). Cohen’s Kappa (Fleiss,
1981) was 0.67 on the annotation, which means that
the consistency between the two annotators was fair
or good. However, there were some interesting cases
where the two annotators could not agree. For ex-
ample, in the sentence ‘Cassava is the staple food of
tropical Africa and its production, averaged over 24
countries, has increased more than threefold from
1980 to 2005 ... ’, one of the annotators believed
that “more than” made the sentence uncertain. These
borderline cases indicate that the definition of hedg-
ing should be carefully delineated in future studies.

4.2 Percentages of uncertain sentences
To validate the hypothesis that prof-science articles
contain more hedges, we computed the percentage

10We took steps to attempt to hide from the annotators any
explicit clues as to the source of individual sentences: the sub-
set of authors who did the annotation were not those that col-
lected the data, and the annotators were presented the sentences
in random order.

11The last label was added because of a few errors in scraping
the data.

74



of uncertain sentences in our labeled data. As shown
in Table 2, we observed a trend contradicting ear-
lier studies. Uncertain sentences were more frequent
in LEXIS than in WOS, though the difference was
not statistically significant12 (perhaps not surprising
given the small sample size). The same trend was
seen in the CoNLL dataset: there, too, the percent-
age of uncertain sentences was significantly smaller
in Bio (prof-science articles) than in Wiki. In order
to make a stronger argument about prof-science vs
pop-science, however, more annotation on the WOS
and LEXIS datasets is needed.

5 Experiments

As stated in Section 1, our proposal requires devel-
oping an effective hedge detection algorithm. Our
approach for the preliminary work described in this
paper is to re-implement Georgescul’s (2010) algo-
rithm; the experimental results on the Bio+Wiki do-
main, given in Section 5.1, are encouraging. Then
we use this method to attempt to validate (at a larger
scale than in our manual pilot annotation) whether
hedges can be used to distinguish between prof-
science and pop-science discourse on GMOs. Un-
fortunately, our results, given in Section 5.2, are
inconclusive, since our trained model could not
achieve satisfactory automatic hedge-detection ac-
curacy on the WOS+LEXIS domain.

5.1 Method

We adopted the method of Georgescul (2010): Sup-
port Vector Machine classification based on a Gaus-
sian Radial Basis kernel function (Vapnik, 1998; Fan
et al., 2005), employing n-grams from annotated cue
phrases as features, as described in more detail be-
low. This method achieved the top performance in
the CoNLL 2010 Wikipedia hedge-detection task
(Farkas et al., 2010), and SVMs have been proven
effective for many different applications. We used
the LIBSVM toolkit in our experiments13.

As described in Section 3.2, there are two separate
datasets in the CoNLL dataset. We experimented on
them separately (Bio, Wiki). Also, to make our clas-
sifier more generalizable to different datasets, we

12Throughout, “statistical significance” refers to the student
t-test with p < .05.

13http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/libsvm/

also trained models based on the two datasets com-
bined (Bio+Wiki). As for features, we took advan-
tage of the observation in Georgescul (2010) that the
bag-of-words model does not work well for this task.
We used different sets of features based on hedge
cue words that have been annotated as part of the
CoNLL dataset distribution14. The basic feature set
was the frequency of each hedge cue word from the
training corpus after removing stop words and punc-
tuation and transforming words to lowercase. Then,
we extracted unigrams, bigrams and trigrams from
each hedge cue phrase. Table 3 shows the number
of features in different settings. Notice that there are
many more features in Wiki. As mentioned above,
in Wiki, some cues are as specific as ‘some of schu-
mann’s best choral writing’, ‘people of the jewish
tradition’, or ‘ certain leisure or cultural activities’.
Taking n-grams from such specific cues can cause
some sentences to be classified incorrectly.

Feature source #features
Bio 220
Bio (cues + bigram + trigram) 340
Wiki 3740
Wiki (cues + bigram + trigram) 10603

Table 3: Number of features.

Best cross-validation performance
Dataset (C, γ) P R F

Bio (40, 2−3) 84.0 92.0 87.8
Wiki (30, 2−6) 64.0 76.3 69.6

Bio+Wiki (10, 2−4) 66.7 78.3 72.0

Table 4: Best 5-fold cross-validation performance for Bio
and/or Wiki after parameter tuning. As a reminder, we
repeat that our intended final test set is the WOS+LEXIS
corpus, which is disjoint from Bio+Wiki.

We adopted several techniques from Georgescul
(2010) to optimize performance through cross vali-
dation. Specifically, we tried different combinations
of feature sets (the cue phrases themselves, cues +

14For the Bio model, we used cues extracted from Bio. Like-
wise, the Wiki model used cues from Wiki, and the Bio+Wiki
model used cues from Bio+Wiki.

75



Evaluation set Model P R F
WOS+LEXIS Bio 54 68 60
WOS+LEXIS Wiki 38 54 45
WOS+LEXIS Bio+Wiki 21 93 34
Sub-corpus performance of the model based on Bio

WOS Bio 58 73 65
LEXIS Bio 52 64 57

Table 5: The upper part shows the performance on WOS
and LEXIS based on models trained on the CoNLL
dataset. The lower part gives the sub-corpus results for
Bio, which provided the best performance on the full
WOS+LEXIS corpus.

unigram, cues + bigram, cues + trigram, cues + uni-
gram + bigram + trigram, cues + bigram + trigram).
We tuned the width of the RBF kernel (γ) and the
regularization parameter (C) via grid search over the
following range of values: {2−9, 2−8, 2−7, . . . , 24}
for γ, {1, 10, 20, 30, . . . , 150} for C. We also tried
different weighting strategies for negative and pos-
itive classes (i.e., either proportional to the number
of positive instances, or uniform). We performed 5-
fold cross validation for each possible combination
of experimental settings on the three datasets (Bio,
Wiki, Bio+Wiki).

Table 4 shows the best performance on all three
datasets and the corresponding parameters. In the
three datasets, cue+bigram+trigram provided the
best performance, and the weighted model con-
sistently produced superior results to the uniform
model. The F1 measure for Bio was 87.8, which
was satisfactory, while the F1 results for Wiki were
69.6, which were the worst of all the datasets.
This resonates with our observation that the task on
Wikipedia is more subtly defined and thus requires
a more sophisticated approach than counting the oc-
currences of bigrams and trigrams.

5.2 Results on WOS+LEXIS

Next, we evaluated whether our best classifier
trained on the CoNLL dataset can be generalized to
other datasets, in particular, the WOS and LEXIS
corpus. Performance was measured on the 153 sen-
tences on which our annotators agreed, a dataset
that was introduced in Section 4.1. Table 5 shows
how the best models trained on Bio, Wiki, and

Evaluation set (C, γ) P R F
WOS + LEXIS (50, 2−9) 68 62 65

WOS (50, 2−9) 85 73 79
LEXIS (50, 2−9) 57 54 56

Table 6: Best performance after parameter tuning
based on the 153 labeled WOS+LEXIS sentences; this
gives some idea of the upper-bound potential of our
Georgescul-based method. The training set is Bio, which
gave the best performance in Table 5.

Bio+Wiki, respectively, performed on the 153 la-
beled sentences. First, we can see that the perfor-
mance degraded significantly compared to the per-
formance for in-domain cross validation. Second, of
the three different models, Bio showed the best per-
formance. Bio+Wiki gave the worst performance,
which hints that combining two datasets and cue
words may not be a promising strategy: although
Bio+Wiki shows very good recall, this can be at-
tributed to its larger feature set, which contains all
available cues and perhaps as a result has a very high
false-positive rate. We further investigated and com-
pared performance on LEXIS and WOS for the best
model (Bio). Not surprisingly, our classifier works
better in WOS than in LEXIS.

It is clear that there exist domain differences be-
tween the CoNLL dataset and WOS+LEXIS. To bet-
ter understand the poor cross-domain performance
of the classifier, we tuned another model based on
the performance on the 153 labeled sentences us-
ing Bio as training data. As we can see in Table
6, the performance on WOS improved significantly,
while the performance on LEXIS decreased. This
is probably caused by the fact that WOS is a col-
lection of scientific paper abstracts, which is more
similar to the training corpus than LEXIS, which is
a collection of news media articles15. Also, LEXIS
articles are hard to classify even with the tuned
model, which challenges the effectiveness of a cue-
words frequency approach beyond professional sci-
entific texts. Indeed, the simplicity of our reim-
plementation of Georgescul’s algorithm seems to
cause longer sentences to be classified as uncer-
tain, because cue phrases (or n-grams extracted from

15The Wiki model performed better on LEXIS than on WOS.
Though the performance was not good, this result further rein-
forces the possibility of a domain-dependence problem.

76



cue phrases) are more likely to appear in lengthier
sentences. Analysis of the best performing model
shows that the false-positive sentences are signifi-
cantly longer than the false-negative ones.16

Dataset Model % classified uncertain
WOS Bio 16

LEXIS Bio 19
WOS Tuned 15

LEXIS Tuned 14

Table 7: For completeness, we report here the percentage
of uncertain sentences in WOS and LEXIS according to
our trained classifiers, although we regard these results as
unreliable since those classifiers have low accuracy. Bio
refers to the best model trained on Bio only in Section 5.1,
while Tuned refers to the model in Table 6 that is tuned
based on the 153 labeled sentences in WOS+LEXIS.

While the cross-domain results were not reliable,
we produced preliminary results on whether there
exist fewer hedges in scientific text. We can see that
the relative difference in certain/uncertain ratios pre-
dicted by the two different models (Bio, Tuned) are
different in Table 7. In the tuned model, the differ-
ence between LEXIS and WOS in terms of the per-
centage of uncertain sentences was not statistically
significant, while in the Bio model, their difference
was statistically significant. Since the performance
of our hedge classifier on the 153 hand-annotated
WOS+LEXIS sentences was not reliable, though,
we must abstain from making conclusive statements
here.

6 Conclusion and future work

In this position paper, we advocated that researchers
apply hedge detection not only to the classic moti-
vation of information-extraction problems, but also
to questions of how public opinion forms. We pro-
posed a particular problem in how participants in de-
bates frame their arguments. Specifically, we asked
whether pro-GMO and anti-GMO articles differ in
adopting a more “scientific” discourse. Inspired by
earlier studies in social sciences relating hedging to
texts aimed at professional scientists, we proposed

16Average length of true positive sentences : 28.6, false pos-
itive sentences 35.09, false negative sentences: 22.0.

addressing the question with automatic hedge de-
tection as a first step. To develop a hedge clas-
sifier, we took advantage of the CoNLL dataset
and a small annotated WOS and LEXIS dataset.
Our preliminary results show there may exist a gap
which indicates that hedging may, in fact, distin-
guish prof-science and pop-science documents. In
fact, this computational analysis suggests the possi-
bility that hedges occur less frequently in scientific
prose, which contradicts several prior assertions in
the literature.

To confirm the argument that pop-science tends
to use more hedging than prof-science, we need
a hedge classifier that performs more reliably in
the WOS and LEXIS dataset than ours does. An
interesting research direction would be to develop
transfer-learning techniques to generalize hedge
classifiers for different datasets, or to develop a gen-
eral hedge classifier relatively robust to domain dif-
ferences. In either case, more annotated data on
WOS and LEXIS is needed for better evaluation or
training.

Another strategy would be to bypass the first step,
in which we determine whether hedges are more
or less prominent in scientific discourse, and pro-
ceed directly to labeling and hedge-detection in pro-
GMO and anti-GMO texts. However, this will not
answer the question of whether advocates in debates
other than on GMO-related topics employ a more
scientific discourse. Nonetheless, to aid those who
wish to pursue this alternate strategy, we have col-
lected two sets of opinionated articles on GMO (pro-
and anti-); see appendix for more details.

Acknowledgments We thank Daniel Hopkins and
Bonnie Webber for reference suggestions, and the
anonymous reviewers for helpful and thoughtful
comments. This paper is based upon work sup-
ported in part by US NSF grants IIS-0910664 and
IIS-1016099, a US NSF graduate fellowship to JS,
Google, and Yahoo!

References

Amr Ahmed and Eric P Xing. Staying informed: su-
pervised and semi-supervised multi-view topical
analysis of ideological perspective. In EMNLP,
pages 1140–1150, 2010.

Charles Bazerman. Shaping Written Knowledge:

77



The Genre and Activity of the Experimental Ar-
ticle in Science. University of Wisconsin Press,
Madison, Wis., 1988.

Beata Beigman Klebanov, Eyal Beigman, and
Daniel Diermeier. Vocabulary choice as an indi-
cator of perspective. In ACL Short Papers, pages
253–257, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2010. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Robert D. Benford and David A. Snow. Framing
processes and social movements: An overview
and assessment. Annual Review of Sociology, 26:
611–639, 2000.

Richard Harvey Brown. Toward a democratic sci-
ence: Scientific narration and civic communica-
tion. Yale University Press, New Haven, 1998.

Dennis Chong and James N. Druckman. Framing
theory. Annual Review of Political Science, 10:
103–126, 2007.

Jeanne Fahnestock. Accommodating Science. Writ-
ten Communication, 3(3):275–296, 1986.

Jeanne Fahnestock. Preserving the figure: Consis-
tency in the presentation of scientific arguments.
Written Communication, 21(1):6–31, 2004.

Rong-En Fan, Pai-Hsuen Chen, and Chih-Jen Lin.
Working set selection using second order in-
formation for training support vector machines.
JMLR, 6:1889–1918, December 2005. ISSN
1532-4435.

Richárd Farkas, Veronika Vincze, György Móra,
János Csirik, and György Szarvas. The CoNLL-
2010 shared task: Learning to detect hedges and
their scope in natural language text. In CoNLL—
Shared Task, pages 1–12, 2010.

Joseph L. Fleiss. Statistical Methods for Rates
and Proportions. Wiley series in probability and
mathematical statistics. John Wiley & Sons, New
York, second edition, 1981.

Maria Georgescul. A hedgehop over a max-margin
framework using hedge cues. In CONLL—
Shared-Task, pages 26–31, 2010.

G. Nigel Gilbert and Michael Joseph Mulkay. Open-
ing Pandora’s box: A sociological analysis of sci-
entists’ discourse. CUP Archive, 1984.

Erving Goffman. Frame analysis: An essay on the
organization of experience. Harvard University
Press, 1974.

Alan G. Gross. The rhetoric of science. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1990.

Michael Alexander Kirkwood Halliday and
James R. Martin. Writing science: Literacy and
discursive power. Psychology Press, London
[u.a.], 1993.

Eric A Hardisty, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Philip
Resnik. Modeling perspective using adaptor
grammars. In EMNLP, pages 284–292, 2010.

Ken Hyland. Hedging in scientific research articles.
John Benjamins Pub. Co., Amsterdam; Philadel-
phia, 1998.

Napoleon K. Juanillo, Jr. Frames for Public Dis-
course on Biotechnology. In Genetically Modified
Food and the Consumer: Proceedings of the 13th
meeting of the National Agricultural Biotechnol-
ogy Council, pages 39–50, 2001.

J. Peter Kincaid, Robert P. Fishburne, Richard L.
Rogers, and Brad S. Chissom. Derivation of new
readability formulas for navy enlisted personnel.
Technical report, National Technical Information
Service, Springfield, Virginia, February 1975.

George Lakoff. Hedges: A study in meaning cri-
teria and the logic of fuzzy concepts. Journal of
Philosophical Logic, 2(4):458–508, 1973.

Bruno Latour. Science in action: How to follow sci-
entists and engineers through society. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1987.

Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar. Laboratory life:
The social construction of scientific facts. Sage
Publications, Beverly Hills, 1979.

Beverly A. Lewin. Hedging: Form and function
in scientific research texts. In Genre Studies in
English for Academic Purposes, volume 9, pages
89–108. Universitat Jaume I, 1998.

Wei-Hao Lin, Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and
Alexander Hauptmann. Which side are you on?
identifying perspectives at the document and sen-
tence levels. In CoNLL, 2006.

Greg Myers. The pragmatics of politeness in sci-
entific articles. Applied Linguistics, 10(1):1–35,
1989.

78



Greg Myers. Discourse studies of scientific popular-
ization: Questioning the boundaries. Discourse
Studies, 5(2):265–279, 2003.

Françoise Salager-Meyer. Scientific discourse and
contrastive linguistics: hedging. European Sci-
ence Editing, 37(2):35–37, 2011.

Dietram A. Scheufele. Framing as a theory of media
effects. Journal of Communication, 49(1):103–
122, 1999.

Vladimir N. Vapnik. Statistical Learning Theory.
Wiley-Interscience, 1998.

Teppo Varttala. Remarks on the communicative
functions of hedging in popular scientific and spe-
cialist research articles on medicine. English for
Specific Purposes, 18(2):177–200, 1999.

Teppo Varttala. Hedging in scientifically oriented
discourse: Exploring variation according to dis-
cipline and intended audience. PhD thesis, Uni-
versity of Tampere, 2001.

7 Appendix: pro- vs. anti-GMO dataset

Here, we describe the pro- vs. anti-GMO dataset we
collected, in the hopes that this dataset may prove
helpful in future research regarding the GMO de-
bates, even though we did not use the corpus in the
project described in this paper.

The second step of our overall procedure out-
lined in the introduction — that step being to ex-
amine whether the use of hedging in pro-GMO arti-
cles corresponds with our inferred “scientific” oc-
currence patterns more than that in anti-GMO ar-
ticles — requires a collection of opinionated arti-
cles on GMOs. Our first attempt to use news me-
dia articles (LEXIS) was unsatisfying, as we found
many articles attempt to maintain a neutral position.
This led us to collect documents from more strongly
opinionated organizational websites such as Green-
peace (anti-GMO), Non GMO Project (anti-GMO),
or Why Biotechnology (pro-GMO). Articles were
collected from 20 pro-GMO and 20 anti-GMO or-
ganizational web sites.

After the initial collection of data, near-duplicates
and irrelevant articles were filtered through cluster-
ing, keyword searches and distance between word
vectors at the document level. We have collected

762 “anti” documents and 671 “pro” documents.
We reduced this to a 404 “pro” and 404 “con”
set as follows. Each retained “document” con-
sists of only the first 200 words after excluding the
first 50 words of documents containing over 280
words. This was done to avoid irrelevant sections
such as Educators have permission to reprint arti-
cles for classroom use; other users, please contact
editor@actionbioscience.org for reprint permission.
See reprint policy.

The data will be posted online at
https://confluence.cornell.edu/display/llresearch/
HedgingFramingGMOs.

79


