










































Illinois-Coref: The UI System in the CoNLL-2012 Shared Task


Proceedings of the Joint Conference on EMNLP and CoNLL: Shared Task, pages 113–117,
Jeju Island, Korea, July 13, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Illinois-Coref: The UI System in the CoNLL-2012 Shared Task

Kai-Wei Chang Rajhans Samdani Alla Rozovskaya Mark Sammons Dan Roth
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

{kchang10|rsamdan2|rozovska|mssammon|danr}@illinois.edu

Abstract

The CoNLL-2012 shared task is an extension
of the last year’s coreference task. We partici-
pated in the closed track of the shared tasks in
both years. In this paper, we present the im-
provements of Illinois-Coref system from last
year. We focus on improving mention detec-
tion and pronoun coreference resolution, and
present a new learning protocol. These new
strategies boost the performance of the system
by 5% MUC F1, 0.8% BCUB F1, and 1.7%
CEAF F1 on the OntoNotes-5.0 development
set.

1 Introduction

Coreference resolution has been a popular topic of
study in recent years. In the task, a system requires
to identify denotative phrases (“mentions”) and to
cluster the mentions into equivalence classes, so that
the mentions in the same class refer to the same en-
tity in the real world.

Coreference resolution is a central task in the
Natural Language Processing research. Both the
CoNLL-2011 (Pradhan et al., 2011) and CoNLL-
2012 (Pradhan et al., 2012) shared tasks focus on
resolving coreference on the OntoNotes corpus. We
also participated in the CoNLL-2011 shared task.
Our system (Chang et al., 2011) ranked first in two
out of four scoring metrics (BCUB and BLANC),
and ranked third in the average score. This year,
we further improve the system in several respects.
In Sec. 2, we describe the Illinois-Coref system
for the CoNLL-2011 shared task, which we take as
the baseline. Then, we discuss the improvements
on mention detection (Sec. 3.1), pronoun resolu-
tion (Sec. 3.2), and learning algorithm (Sec. 3.3).

Section 4 shows experimental results and Section 5
offers a brief discussion.

2 Baseline System

We use the Illinois-Coref system from CoNLL-2011
as the basis for our current system and refer to it as
the baseline. We give a brief outline here, but fo-
cus on the innovations that we developed; a detailed
description of the last year’s system can be found in
(Chang et al., 2011).

The Illinois-Coref system uses a machine learn-
ing approach to coreference, with an inference pro-
cedure that supports straightforward inclusion of do-
main knowledge via constraints.

The system first uses heuristics based on Named
Entity recognition, syntactic parsing, and shallow
parsing to identify candidate mentions. A pair-
wise scorer w generates compatibility scores wuv
for pairs of candidate mentions u and v using ex-
tracted features φ(u, v) and linguistic constraints c.

wuv = w · φ(u, v) + c(u, v) + t, (1)

where t is a threshold parameter (to be tuned). An
inference procedure then determines the optimal set
of links to retain, incorporating constraints that may
override the classifier prediction for a given mention
pair. A post-processing step removes mentions in
singleton clusters.

Last year, we found that a Best-Link decoding
strategy outperformed an All-Link strategy. The
Best-Link approach scans candidate mentions in a
document from left to right. At each mention, if cer-
tain conditions are satisfied, the pairwise scores of
all previous mentions are considered, together with
any constraints that apply. If one or more viable

113



links is available, the highest-scoring link is selected
and added to the set of coreference links. After the
scan is complete, the transitive closure of edges is
taken to generate the coreference clusters, each clus-
ter corresponding to a single predicted entity in the
document.

The formulation of this best-link solution is as fol-
lows. For two mentions u and v, u < v indicates
that the mention u precedes v in the document. Let
yuv be a binary variable, such that yuv = 1 only if
u and v are in the same cluster. For a document d,
Best-Link solves the following formulation:

arg maxy
∑

u,v:u<v
wuvyuv

s.t
∑

u<v
yuv ≤ 1 ∀v,

yuw ∈ {0, 1}.

(2)

Eq. (2) generates a set of connected components
and the set of mentions in each connected compo-
nent constitute an entity. Note that we solve the
above Best-Link inference using an efficient algo-
rithm (Bengtson and Roth, 2008) which runs in time
quadratic in the number of mentions.

3 Improvements over the Baseline System

Below, we describe improvements introduced to the
baseline Illinois-Coref system.

3.1 Mention Detection
Mention detection is a crucial component of an end-
to-end coreference system, as mention detection er-
rors will propagate to the final coreference chain.
Illinois-Coref implements a high recall and low
precision rule-based system that includes all noun
phrases, pronouns and named entities as candidate
mentions. The error analysis shows that there are
two main types of errors.

Non-referential Noun Phrases. Non-referential
noun phrases are candidate noun phrases, identified
through a syntactic parser, that are unlikely to re-
fer to any entity in the real world (e.g., “the same
time”). Note that because singleton mentions are not
annotated in the OntoNotes corpus, such phrases are
not considered as mentions. Non-referential noun
phrases are a problem, since during the coreference
stage they may be incorrectly linked to a valid men-
tion, thereby decreasing the precision of the system.

To deal with this problem, we use the training data
to count the number of times that a candidate noun
phrase happens to be a gold mention. Then, we re-
move candidate mentions that frequently appear in
the training data but never appear as gold mentions.
Relaxing this approach, we also take the predicted
head word and the words before and after the men-
tion into account. This helps remove noun phrases
headed by a preposition (e.g., the noun “fact” in the
phrase “in fact”). This strategy will slightly degrade
the recall of mention detection, so we tune a thresh-
old learned on the training data for the mention re-
moval.

Incorrect Mention Boundary. A lot of errors in
mention detection happen when predicting mention
boundaries. There are two main reasons for bound-
ary errors: parser mistakes and annotation incon-
sistencies. A mistake made by the parser may be
due to a wrong attachment or adding extra words
to a mention. For example, if the parser attaches
the relative clause inside of the noun phrase ”Pres-
ident Bush, who traveled to China yesterday” to a
different noun, the algorithm will predict ”President
Bush” as a mention instead of ”President Bush, who
traveled to China yesterday”; thus it will make an er-
ror, since the gold mention also includes the relative
clause. In this case, we prefer to keep the candi-
date with a larger span. On the other hand, we may
predict ”President Bush at Dayton” instead of ”Pres-
ident Bush”, if the parser incorrectly attaches the
prepositional phrase. Another example is when ex-
tra words are added, as in ”Today President Bush”.

A correct detection of mention boundaries is cru-
cial to the end-to-end coreference system. The re-
sults in (Chang et al., 2011, Section 3) show that the
baseline system can be improved from 55.96 avg F1
to 56.62 in avg F1 by using gold mention boundaries
generated from a gold annotation of the parsing tree
and the name entity tagging. However, fixing men-
tion boundaries in an end-to-end system is difficult
and requires additional knowledge. In the current
implementation, we focus on a subset of mentions
to further improve the mention detection stage of the
baseline system. Specifically, we fix mentions start-
ing with a stop word and mentions ending with a
punctuation mark. We also use training data to learn
patterns of inappropriate mention boundaries. The
mention candidates that match the patterns are re-

114



moved. This strategy is similar to the method used
to remove non-referential noun phrases.

As for annotation inconsistency, we find that in a
few documents, a punctuation mark or an apostrophe
used to mark the possessive form are inconsistently
added to the end of a mention. The problem results
in an incorrect matching between the gold and pre-
dicted mentions and downgrades the performance of
the learned model. Moreover, the incorrect mention
boundary problem also affects the training phase be-
cause our system is trained on a union set of the pre-
dicted and gold mentions. To fix this problem, in
the training phase, we perform a relaxed matching
between predicted mentions and gold mentions and
ignore the punctuation marks and mentions that start
with one of the following: adverb, verb, determiner,
and cardinal number. For example, we successfully
match the predicted mention “now the army” to the
gold mention “the army” and match the predicted
mention “Sony ’s” to the gold mention “Sony.” Note
that we cannot fix the inconsistency problem in the
test data.

3.2 Pronoun Resolution

The baseline system uses an identical model for
coreference resolution on both pronouns and non-
pronominal mentions. However, in the litera-
ture (Bengtson and Roth, 2008; Rahman and Ng,
2011; Denis and Baldridge, 2007) the features
for coreference resolution on pronouns and non-
pronouns are usually different. For example, lexi-
cal features play an important role in non-pronoun
coreference resolution, but are less important for
pronoun anaphora resolution. On the other hand,
gender features are not as important in non-pronoun
coreference resolution.

We consider training two separate classifiers with
different sets of features for pronoun and non-
pronoun coreference resolution. Then, in the decod-
ing stage, pronoun and non-pronominal mentions
use different classifiers to find the best antecedent
mention to link to. We use the same features for
non-pronoun coreference resolution, as the baseline
system. For the pronoun anaphora classifier, we use
a set of features described in (Denis and Baldridge,
2007), with some additional features. The aug-
mented feature set includes features to identify if a
pronoun or an antecedent is a speaker in the sen-

Algorithm 1 Online Latent Structured Learning for
Coreference Resolution
Loop until convergence:

For each document Dt and each v ∈ Dt
1. Let u∗ = max

u∈y(v)
wT φ(u, v), and

2. u′ = max
u∈{u<v}∪{∅}

wT φ(u, v) + ∆(u, v, y(v))

3. Let w← w + ηwT (φ(u′, v)− φ(u∗, v)).

tence. It also includes features to reflect the docu-
ment type. In Section 4, we will demonstrate the im-
provement of using separate classifiers for pronoun
and non-pronoun coreference resolution.

3.3 Learning Protocol for Best-Link Inference

The baseline system applies the strategy in (Bengt-
son and Roth, 2008, Section 2.2) to learn the pair-
wise scoring function w using the Averaged Percep-
tron algorithm. The algorithm is trained on mention
pairs generated on a per-mention basis. The exam-
ples are generated for a mention v as
• Positive examples: (u, v) is used as a positive

example where u < v is the closest mention to
v in v’s cluster
• Negative examples: for all w with u < w < v,

(w, v) forms a negative example.
Although this approach is simple, it suffers from

a severe label imbalance problem. Moreover, it does
not relate well to the best-link inference, as the deci-
sion of picking the closest preceding mention seems
rather ad-hoc. For example, consider three men-
tions belonging to the same cluster: {m1: “Presi-
dent Bush”, m2: “he”, m3:“George Bush”}. The
baseline system always chooses the pair (m2,m3)
as a positive example because m2 is the closet men-
tion of m3. However, it is more proper to learn the
model on the positive pair (m1,m3), as it provides
more information. Since the best links are not given
but are latent in our learning problem, we use an on-
line latent structured learning algorithm (Connor et
al., 2011) to address this problem.

We consider a structured problem that takes men-
tion v and its preceding mentions {u | u < v} as
inputs. The output variables y(v) is the set of an-
tecedent mentions that co-refer with v. We define
a latent structure h(v) to be the bestlink decision
of v. It takes the value ∅ if v is the first mention

115



Method
Without Separating Pronouns With Separating Pronouns

MD MUC BCUB CEAF AVG MD MUC BCUB CEAF AVG

Binary Classifier (baseline) 70.53 61.63 69.26 43.03 57.97 73.24 64.57 69.78 44.95 59.76
Latent-Structured Learning 73.02 64.98 70.00 44.48 59.82 73.95 65.75 70.25 45.30 60.43

Table 1: The performance of different learning strategies for best-link decoding algorithm. We show the results
with/without using separate pronoun anaphora resolver. The systems are trained on the TRAIN set and evaluated on
the CoNLL-2012 DEV set. We report the F1 scores (%) on mention detection (MD) and coreference metrics (MUC,
BCUB, CEAF). The column AVG shows the averaged scores of the three coreference metrics.

System MD MUC BCUB CEAF AVG

Baseline 64.58 55.49 69.15 43.72 56.12
New Sys. 70.03 60.65 69.95 45.39 58.66

Table 2: The improvement of Illinois-Coref. We report
the F1 scores (%) on the DEV set from CoNLL-2011
shared task. Note that the CoNLL-2011 data set does not
include corpora of bible and of telephone conversation.

in the equivalence class, otherwise it takes values
from {u | u < v}. We define a loss function
∆(h(v), v, y(v)) as

∆(h(v), v, y(v)) =

{
0 h(v) ∈ y(v),
1 h(v) /∈ y(v).

We further define the feature vector φ(∅, v) to be a
zero vector and η to be the learning rate in Percep-
tron algorithm. Then, the weight vector w in (1) can
be learned from Algorithm 1. At each step, Alg. 1
picks a mention v and finds the Best-Link decision
u∗ that is consistent with the gold cluster. Then, it
solves a loss-augmented inference problem to find
the best link decision u′ with current model (u′ = ∅
if the classifier decides that v does not have coref-
erent antecedent mention). Finally, the model w is
updated by the difference between the feature vec-
tors φ(u′, v) and φ(u∗, v).

Alg. 1 makes learning more coherent with infer-
ence. Furthermore, it naturally solves the data im-
balance problem. Lastly, this algorithm is fast and
converges very quickly.

4 Experiments and Results

In this section, we demonstrate the performance of
Illinois-Coref on the OntoNotes-5.0 data set. A pre-
vious experiment using an earlier version of this data

can be found in (Pradhan et al., 2007). We first show
the improvement of the mention detection system.
Then, we compare different learning protocols for
coreference resolution. Finally, we show the overall
performance improvement of Illinois-Coref system.

First, we analyze the performance of mention de-
tection before the coreference stage. Note that sin-
gleton mentions are included since it is not possible
to identify singleton mentions before running coref-
erence. They are removed in the post-processing
stage. The mention detection performance of the
end-to-end system will be discussed later in this sec-
tion. With the strategy described in Section 3.1, we
improve the F1 score for mention detection from
55.92% to 57.89%. Moreover, we improve the de-
tection performance on short named entity mentions
(name entity with less than 5 words) from 61.36 to
64.00 in F1 scores. Such mentions are more impor-
tant because they are easier to resolve in the corefer-
ence layer.

Regarding the learning algorithm, Table 1 shows
the performance of the two learning protocols
with/without separating pronoun anaphora resolver.
The results show that both strategies of using a pro-
noun classifier and training a latent structured model
with a online algorithm improve the system perfor-
mance. Combining the two strategies, the avg F1
score is improved by 2.45%.

Finally, we compare the final system with the
baseline system. We evaluate both systems on the
CoNLL-11 DEV data set, as the baseline system
is tuned on it. The results show that Illinois-Coref
achieves better scores on all the metrics. The men-
tion detection performance after coreference resolu-
tion is also significantly improved.

116



Task MD MUC BCUB CEAF AVG

English (Pred. Mentions) 74.32 66.38 69.34 44.81 60.18
English (Gold Mention Boundaries) 75.72 67.80 69.75 45.12 60.89
English (Gold Mentions) 100.00 85.74 77.46 68.46 77.22
Chinese (Pred Mentions) 47.58 37.93 63.23 35.97 45.71

Table 3: The results of our submitted system on the TEST set. The systems are trained on a collection of TRAIN and
DEV sets.

4.1 Chinese Coreference Resolution

We apply the same system to Chinese coreference
resolution. However, because the pronoun proper-
ties in Chinese are different from those in English,
we do not train separate classifiers for pronoun and
non-pronoun coreference resolution. Our Chinese
coreference resolution on Dev set achieves 37.88%
MUC, 63.37% BCUB, and 35.78% CEAF in F1
score. The performance for Chinese coreference is
not as good as the performance of the coreference
system for English. One reason for that is that we
use the same feature set for both Chinese and En-
glish systems, and the feature set is developed for
the English corpus. Studying the value of strong fea-
tures for Chinese coreference resolution system is a
potential topic for future research.

4.2 Test Results

Table 3 shows the results obtained on TEST, using
the best system configurations found on DEV. We
report results on both English and Chinese coref-
erence resolution on predicted mentions with pre-
dicted boundaries. For English coreference resolu-
tion, we also report the results when using gold men-
tions and when using gold mention boundaries1.

5 Conclusion

We described strategies for improving mention de-
tection and proposed an online latent structure al-
gorithm for coreference resolution. We also pro-
posed using separate classifiers for making Best-
Link decisions on pronoun and non-pronoun men-
tions. These strategies significantly improve the
Illinois-Coref system.

1Note that, in Ontonotes annotation, specifying gold men-
tions requires coreference resolution to exclude singleton men-
tions. Gold mention boundaries are provided by the task orga-
nizers and include singleton mentions.

Acknowledgments This research is supported by the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
Machine Reading Program under Air Force Research
Laboratory (AFRL) prime contract no. FA8750-09-C-
0181 and the Army Research Laboratory (ARL) under
agreement W911NF-09-2-0053. Any opinions, findings,
and conclusion or recommendations expressed in this ma-
terial are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the view of the DARPA, AFRL, ARL or the US
government.

References
E. Bengtson and D. Roth. 2008. Understanding the value

of features for coreference resolution. In EMNLP.
K. Chang, R. Samdani, A. Rozovskaya, N. Rizzolo,

M. Sammons, and D. Roth. 2011. Inference proto-
cols for coreference resolution. In CoNLL.

M. Connor, C. Fisher, and D. Roth. 2011. Online latent
structure training for language acquisition. In IJCAI.

P. Denis and J. Baldridge. 2007. A ranking approach to
pronoun resolution. In IJCAI.

S. Pradhan, L. Ramshaw, R. Weischedel, J. MacBride,
and L. Micciulla. 2007. Unrestricted Coreference:
Identifying Entities and Events in OntoNotes. In
ICSC.

S. Pradhan, L. Ramshaw, M. Marcus, M. Palmer,
R. Weischedel, and N. Xue. 2011. CoNLL-2011
shared task: Modeling unrestricted coreference in
OntoNotes. In CoNLL.

S. Pradhan, A. Moschitti, N. Xue, O. Uryupina, and
Y. Zhang. 2012. CoNLL-2012 shared task: Modeling
multilingual unrestricted coreference in OntoNotes. In
CoNLL.

A. Rahman and V. Ng. 2011. Narrowing the modeling
gap: a cluster-ranking approach to coreference resolu-
tion. Journal of AI Research, 40(1):469–521.

117


