










































Crowdsourced Comprehension: Predicting Prerequisite Structure in Wikipedia


The 7th Workshop on the Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 307–315,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Crowdsourced Comprehension:
Predicting Prerequisite Structure in Wikipedia

Partha Pratim Talukdar
Machine Learning Department

Carnegie Mellon University
ppt@cs.cmu.edu

William W. Cohen
Machine Learning Department

Carnegie Mellon University
wcohen@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

The growth of open-access technical publica-
tions and other open-domain textual informa-
tion sources means that there is an increas-
ing amount of online technical material that
is in principle available to all, but in prac-
tice, incomprehensible to most. We propose
to address the task of helping readers com-
prehend complex technical material, by us-
ing statistical methods to model the “prereq-
uisite structure” of a corpus — i.e., the se-
mantic impact of documents on an individual
reader’s state of knowledge. Experimental re-
sults using Wikipedia as the corpus suggest
that this task can be approached by crowd-
sourcing the production of ground-truth labels
regarding prerequisite structure, and then gen-
eralizing these labels using a learned classifier
which combines signals of various sorts. The
features that we consider relate pairs of pages
by analyzing not only textual features of the
pages, but also how the containing corpora is
connected and created.

1 Introduction and Motivation

Nicholas Carr has argued in his recent popular book
“The Shallows” that existing Internet technologies
encourage “shallow” processing of recent and pop-
ular information, at the expense of “deeper”, con-
templative study of less immediately-accessible in-
formation (Carr, 2011) . While Carr’s hypothesis is
difficult to formalize rigorously, it seems intuitively
plausible. For instance, user-generated content from
Twitter and Facebook is mainly comprised of short,
shallow snippets of information. Most current re-
search in AI (and more broadly in computer science)
does not seem likely to reverse this trend: e.g., work

in crowdsourcing has concentrated on tasks that can
be easily decomposed into small pieces, and much
current NLP research aims at facilitating short-term
“shallow” goals, such as answering well-formulated
questions (e.g., (Kwok et al., 2001)) and extracting
concrete facts (e.g., (Etzioni et al., 2006; Yates et al.,
2007; Carlson et al., 2010)). This raises the ques-
tion: what can AI do to facilitate deep, contempla-
tive study?

In this paper we address one aspect of this larger
goal. Specifically, we consider automation of a
novel task—using AI methods to facilitate the “deep
comprehension” of complex technical material. We
conjecture that the primary reason that technical
documents are difficult to understand is lack of mod-
ularity: unlike a self-contained document written for
a general reader, technical documents require cer-
tain background knowledge to comprehend—while
that background knowledge may also be available in
other on-line documents, determining the proper se-
quence of documents that a particular reader should
study is difficult.

We thus formulate the problem of comprehending
technical material as a probabilistic planning prob-
lem, where reading a document is an operator that
will probabilistically change the state of knowledge
K(u, t) of a user u at time t, in a manner that de-
pends on u’s prior knowledge K(u, t − 1). Solving
this task requires, among other things, understand-
ing the effect of reading individual documents d —
specifically, the concepts that are explained by d,
and the concepts that are prerequisites for compre-
hending d. This paper addresses this problem. In
particular, we consider predicting whether one page
in Wikipedia is a prerequisite of another.

More generally, we define the “prerequisite struc-

307



CRF

Statistical_model

Graphical_model

Discriminative_model Markov_random_field

Parameter_learning

Maximum_likelihood

Hidden_Markov_Model

Viterbi_algorithm

random_variable

probability_distribution

variable_mathematics

Conditional_independence

Gradient_descent

Baum_Welch_algorithmMarkov_chain

Inference dynamic_programming Expectional_maximization_algorithm

Figure 1: The prerequisite structure rooted at the page “Conditional Random Fields”, omitting nodes that would
already be known a typical CS graduate student.

Variable (Mathematics) Random Variable Probability Distribution
Conditional Independence Statistical Model Graphical Model

Discriminative Model Markov Random Field
Gradient Descent Parameter Learning Maximum Likelihood

Inference Dynamic Programming Viterbi Algorithm
Markov Chain Expectation Maximization Algorithm Baum Welch Algorithm

Hidden Markov Model CRF

Figure 2: A plan for comprehending “Conditional Random Fields” (to be read left-to-right, top-to-bottom). Horizontal
lines indicate breaks between independent sections of the subgraph.

ture” for a corpus as a graph, where nodes are con-
cepts to comprehend, and a directed edge d → d′
corresponds to the assertion “understanding d′ is a
prerequisite to understanding d”. For Wikipedia, we
assume a one-to-one correspondence between doc-
ument titles and concepts explicated by (i.e., post-
conditions of) these documents. Figure 2 presents
a small example of a prerequisite structure, and in-
dicates how it might be used to construct a plan for
comprehending a specific concept.

Focusing on Wikipedia has several advantages.
First, it is densely linked, and hence a document d
will likely be linked directly to any prerequisite page
d′. (However, not all hyperlinks will indicate a pre-
requisite.) Second, Wikipedia’s standardized format
makes textual analysis easier. Finally, there is a great
deal of social information available about how docu-
ments are used by the Wikipedia community. These
properties make it easy for us to explore the infor-
mativeness of different types of information with re-
spect to predicting prerequisite structure.

Our overall plan for producing a prerequisite
structure for a corpus is first, to use crowdsourc-

ing approaches to obtain a subset of the prerequisite
structure; and second, to extrapolate this structure
to the entire corpus using machine learning. Below,
we first describe datasets that we have collected,
based on five technical concepts in Wikipedia from
five different fields. We then outline the specifics of
our procedure for annotating prerequisite structure,
using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, and demonstrate
that meaningful signals about prerequisite structure
can be obtained using a classifier that exploits sev-
eral sources: graph analysis of Wikipedia’s link
graph; graph analysis of a bipartite graph relating
Wikipedia pages to Wikipedians that have edited
these pages; and textual analysis. We complete our
experimental analysis of the prerequisite-structure
prediction task by discussing and evaluating the de-
gree to which prerequisite-structure prediction is
domain-independent, and the degree to which differ-
ent subareas of Wikipedia (e.g., biology vs computer
science) require different predictors.

After discussing related work, we return in the
concluding remarks to the overarching goal of fa-
cilitating comprehension, and discuss the relation-

308



Target Concept #Nodes #Edges #Edits
Global Warming 19,170 501,608 1,490,967
Meiosis 19,811 444,100 880,684
Newton’s Laws of Motion 15,714 436,035 795,988
Parallel Postulate 14,966 363,462 858,785
Public-key cryptography 16,695 371,104 1,003,181

Table 1: Target concepts used in the experiments.

ship of the current study to these goals. Specifi-
cally we note that facilitating comprehension also
requires understanding a user’s goals, and her initial
state of knowledge, in addition to understanding the
prerequisite structure of the corpus. We also discuss
the relationship between planning and prerequisite-
structure prediction and suggest that use of appro-
priately robust planning methods may lead to good
comprehension plans, even with imperfectly pre-
dicted prerequisite structure.

2 Experiments

As discussed above, we focus in this paper
on predicting prerequisite structure in Wikipedia.
While most Wikipedia pages are accessible to a
general reader, there are many pages that de-
scribe technical concepts, such as “conditional
random fields”, “cloud radiative forcing”, and
“Corticotropin-releasing factor”. Most of these tech-
nical pages are not self-contained: for instance,
to read and comprehend the page on “conditional
random fields”, one will have to first understand
“graphical model”, and so on, as suggested by Fig-
ure 1. In this section, we evaluate the following
questions:

• Can we train a statistical classifier for prereq-
uisite classification in a target domain, where
the classifier is trained on out of domain (i.e.,
non-target domain) data annotated using Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk service?

• What are the effects of different types of signals
on the performance of such a classifier?

• How does out of domain training compare to in
domain training?

2.1 Experimental Setup
For our experiments, we choose five targets from
differing areas for experimentation, listed in Table 1.

Several of the techniques we used are based on graph
analysis. The full graphs associated with Wikipedia
are unwieldy to use for experimentation because of
their size: therefore, for each target concept, we ex-
tracted a moderate-sized low-conductance subgraph
of Wikipedia’s link graph containing the target, us-
ing a variant of the PageRank-Nibble algorithm (An-
dersen et al., 2006).1. As parameters we used α =
0.15 and � = 10−7, yielding graphs with approx-
imately 15-20,000 nodes and 350-500,000 edges
each. We also collected the edit history for each
page in every subgraph forming a second graph for
each sub-domain 2. On average, each page from
these subgraphs had been edited about 20 times, by
about 8 unique editors. Details are given in Table 1.

For classification, we used a Maximum Entropy
(MaxEnt) classifier. Given a pair of Wikipedia pages
x = (d, d

′
) connected by a directed edge (hyperlink)

from d to d
′
, the classifier will predict with probabil-

ity p(+1|x) whether the main concept in page d′ is
a prerequisite for the main concept in page d. The
classifier has the form

p(y|x) = exp(w · φ(x, y))∑
y′∈Y exp(w · φ(x, y

′))
, y ∈ Y = {−1,+1}

where φ(x, y) is a feature function which represents
the pair of pages x = (d, d

′
) in a high dimensional

space, and w is the parameter vector of the classifier
which is estimated from training data. We use the
Mallet package3 to train and evaluate classifiers. For
the experiments in this paper, we shall exploit the
following types of features:

WikiHyperlinks: Features include the random
walk with restart (RWR) score (Tong et al.,
2006) of the target concept page d

′
starting

from the source page d. Additional features
include the PageRank score of the target and
source pages.

1Specifically, we used the “ApproximatePageRank” method
from (Andersen et al., 2006) to find a set of nodes S containing
a low-conductance subgraph, but did not prune S to find the
lowest-conductance subgraph of it with a “sweep”. The version
of Wikipedia’s link graph we used was DBPedia’s version 3.7
(Auer et al., 2007)

2Specifically, a bipartite graph connecting pages and editors.
We used a version of Wikipedia’s edit history extracted by other
researchers (Leskovec et al., 2010), discarding edits marked as
“minor” by the editor.

3Mallet package: http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/

309



Domain
Time (s) / Worker

# HITs κ
Evaluation / HIT

Meiosis 38 3 400 0.50
Public-key Cryp. 26 3 200 0.63
Parallel Postulate 41 3 200 0.55
Newton’s Laws 20 5 400 0.47
Global Warming 14 5 400 0.56
Average 27.8 - - 0.54

Table 2: Statistics about the Gold-standard data prepared
using Amazon Mechanical Turk. Also shown are the
averaged κ statistics-based inter-annotator agreement in
each domain. The last row corresponds to the κ value
averaged across all five domains.

WikiEdits: This includes one feature—the
analogous RWR score on the graph of edit in-
formation.

WikiPageContent: Features in this category
are derived from the contents of the two
Wikipedia pages d and d

′
. Examples include:

the category identity of the source page; the
category identity of the target page; whether
the titles of d

′
and d are mentioned in the first

sentence of d; the name of the first section in d
which contains a link to d

′
; whether there is any

overlap in categories between the two pages;
whether d is also linked from d

′
; and the log of

the number of times d′ is linked form d. We use
the JWPL library (http://jwpl.googlecode.com)
for efficient and structured access to Wikipedia
pages from a recent dump obtained on Jan 4,
2012.

2.1.1 Gold-standard Annotation from
Mechanical Turk4

In order to evaluate different prerequisite classi-
fication systems and also to train the MaxEnt clas-
sifier, we collected gold prerequisite decisions us-
ing Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT). Since prepar-
ing annotated gold data for entire graphs in Table 1
would be prohibitively expensive, we used the fol-
lowing strategy to sample a smaller subgraph from
the larger domain-specific subgraph, which in turn
will be used for training and evaluation purposes.
Preliminary investigation suggested that most of the
pages in the prerequisite structure rooted at a target

4Amazon Mechanical Turk: http://mturk.amazon.com

concept d are connected to d via many short hyper-
link paths. Hence, for each target domain, we first
selected the top 20 nodes with highest RWR scores,
relative to the target concept, in the subgraph for that
target concept (as listed in Table 1.) We then sam-
pled a total of 400 edges from these selected nodes,
with outgoing edges from a node sampled with a fre-
quency proportional to its RWR score. Thus, using
this strategy, we selected up to 400 pairs of pages
(d, d

′
), where each pair has a hyperlink from d to d′.

Classification of a pair of hyperlinked Wikipedia
pages (d, d

′
) into one of the four following classes

constituted a Human Intelligence Task (HIT): (1) d
′

is a prerequisite of d; (2) d is a prerequisite of d
′
; (3)

the two pages are unrelated; (4) Don’t know. Sub-
sequently, based on the feedback from the workers,
a fifth option was also added: the two concepts are
related, but they don’t have any prerequisite relation-
ship between them. Based on the available workers
and turnaround time, the number of assignments per
HIT (i.e., number of unique workers assigned to a
particular HIT) was either 3 or 5; and the number
of HITs used was either 200 or 400. Depending on
the hardness of domain and availability of workers
opting to work on a domain, reward per HIT assign-
ment was varied from $0.02 (for Global Warming
and Newton’s Laws) to $0.08 (for Public-key Cryp-
tography, Meiosis and Parallel Postulate). This data
collection stage spanning all five domains was com-
pleted in about a week at a total cost of $278. Statis-
tics about the data are presented in Table 25.

Starting with the AMT data collected as above,
we next created a binary-labeled training dataset,
where each instance corresponds to a pair of pages.
We ignored all “Don’t Know” labels, treated option
(1) above as vote for the corresponding prerequisite
edge, and treated all other options as votes against.
We then assigned the final label for a node pair using
majority vote (breaking ties arbitrarily).

2.1.2 Consistency of labels
In contrast to standard setup of gold data prepara-

tion where a single annotator is guaranteed to pro-
vide feedback on every instance, the situation in
case of Mechanical Turk-based annotation is differ-
ent, as the workers are at liberty to choose the HITs
(or instances) they want to work on. This makes

5The dataset is available upon request from the authors.

310



40

50

60

70

80

Meiosis Public Key Para. Postulate Newton’s Law Global Warming Average

Performance Comparison for Prerequisite Prediction

A
cc

u
ra

cy
Random Baseline MaxEnt Classifier

Figure 3: Comparison of performance between the Max-
Ent classifier (right bar in each group) against a random
baseline (left bar in each group) in all five domains. On
average, the MaxEnt classifier results in an 8.6% absolute
improvement in accuracy.

standard κ statistics-based inter-annotator computa-
tion (Fleiss, 1981) inapplicable in the current set-
ting. We circumvented this problem by first select-
ing all workers with at least 100 feedbacks, and then
computing pairwise κ statistics between all pairs of
these frequent workers. These κ statistics were aver-
aged across each domain, and also averaged across
all domains. The results, also shown in Table 2,
show moderate agreement (recall that κ = 0 indi-
cates no correlation). We are encouraged to observe
that moderate level of agreement is possible even in
this setting, where there is no control over worker
background and quality. We next explore whether
this level of agreement is sufficient to train statisti-
cal classifiers.

2.2 Prerequisite Classification

In this section, we explore whether it is possible to
train a MaxEnt classifier to determine prerequisite
structure in a target domain, with the training per-
formed in “leave one domain out” manner, where
the training data originates from domains other than
the target domain. For example, for classifications in
the target domain, say “Global Warming”, we train
the classifier with annotated data from the remaining
four domains (or whatever domains are available).
We note that training on “out of domain”, if it is
successful, has several benefits. First, a successful
training strategy in this setup removes any need to
have labeled data in each target domain of interest,

which is particularly relevant as labeled data is ex-
pensive to prepare. Second, a classifier trained just
once can be repeatedly used across multiple domains
without requiring retraining.

Accuracies of MaxEnt classifiers trained using the
“leave one domain out” strategy are shown in Fig-
ure 3; we report the test accuracy on each target do-
main, as well as the average across domains. Perfor-
mance of a random classifier is presented as a base-
line. Classes in the train and test sets were balanced
by oversampling the minority class. From Figure 3,
we observe that it is indeed possible to train pre-
requisite classifiers in an out of domain setting, us-
ing data from the Amazon Mechanical Turk service;
on average, the classifier outperforms the random
baseline with 8.6% absolute improvement in classi-
fication accuracy. We also experimented with other
rule-based classifiers6, and in all cases, the trained
MaxEnt classifier outperformed these baselines. Al-
though more sophisticated training strategies and
more clever feature engineering would likely yield
further improvements, we find it encouraging that
even a relatively straightforward classification tech-
nology along with a basic set of features was able to
achieve significant improvement in performance on
the novel task of prerequisite prediction.

2.3 Feature Ablation Experiments
The MaxEnt classifier evaluated in the previous
section had access to all three types of features:
WikiEdits, WikiHyperLinks, and WikiPageContent,
as described in the beginning of this section. In or-
der to evaluate the contribution of each such sig-
nal, we created ablated versions of the full Max-
Ent classifier which uses only one of these three
subsets. We call these thee variants: MaxEnt-
WikiEdits, MaxEnt-WikiHyperLinks, and MaxEnt-
WikiPageContent, respectively. Average accuracies
across all five domains comparing these three vari-
ants, in comparison to the Random baseline and
the full classifier (MaxEnt-Full, as in previous sec-
tion) are presented in Table 3. From this, we ob-
serve that all three variants perform better than the
random baseline, with maximum gains achieved
by the MaxEnt-WikiPageContent classifier, which
uses page content-based features exclusively. We

6For example, classify d
′

as a prerequisite for d if d
′

is
linked from the first paragraph in d.

311



System Accuracy
Random 50.22
MaxEnt-WikiEdits 51.62
MaxEnt-WikiHyperlinks 52.70
MaxEnt-WikiPageContent 57.84
MaxEnt-Full 58.82

Table 3: Comparison of accuracies (averaged across all
five domains) of the full MaxEnt classifier with its ablated
versions which use a subset of the features, and also the
random baseline. The full classifier, which exploits all
three types of signals (viz., WikiEdits, WikiHyperlinks,
and WikiPageContent) achieves the highest performance.

Domain
Wiki- Wiki- WikiPage-

All
Edits HyperLinks Content

Meiosis 5.4 2.4 0.3 1
Public-key

-0.7 -1.8 15.1 17.1
Crypto.
Parallel 3.1 6.1 11.7 14.7
Postulate
Newton’s

-0.2 6.2 3.9 3.9
Laws
Global

-7.7 0.1 5.8 6.8
Warming

Table 4: Accuracy gains (absolute) relative to the Ran-
dom baseline achieved by the full MaxEnt classifier as
well as its ablated versions trained with three different
subsets of the full classifier. Positive gains are marked in
bold.

also note that the full classifier MaxEnt-Full, is
able to effectively combine three types of signals
improving performance even further. In Table 4,
we present a per-domain breakdown of the gains
achieved by these four classifiers over the random
baseline. From this, we observe that the MaxEnt-
WikiEdits classifier outperforms the random base-
line only in 2 out of 5 domains. This might be due
to the fact that the MaxEnt-WikiEdits uses uses only
one feature—the RWR score of the target page rela-
tive to the source page on the Wikipedia edits graph.
We hope that use of more discriminating features
should further help this classifier. From Table 4, we
also observe that MaxEnt-WikiHyperLinks is able to
outperform the random baseline in 4 out of 5 cases,
and the MaxEnt-WikiPageContent (as well as the
full classifier) outperforms the random baseline in
all 5 domains, sometimes with large gains (as in the
case of Public-key Cryptography domain).

40

50

60

70

80

Meiosis Public Key Para. Postulate Newton’s Laws Global Warming Average

Effect of Out of Domain vs In Domain Training

A
cc

u
ra

cy

Out of Domain Training In Domain Training

Figure 4: Accuracy comparison of out of domain (left bar
in each group) and in domain training (right bar in each
group) for the five domains. From this we observe that
good generalization performance is possible even when
there is no in domain training data available.

2.4 Effect of Out of Domain Training

All the classifiers evaluated in previous sections
were trained in an out of domain setting, i.e., the
training data originated from domains outside the
domain in which the classifier is applied and eval-
uated. This has several benefits, as noted above. An
alternative and more standard way to train classi-
fiers is to have the training and evaluation data be
from the same domain (below, the in-domain set-
ting). While such a classifier will require labeled
training from each domain of interest, it is nonethe-
less of interest to compare in-domain and out-of-
domain learning. If there are substantive differences,
this could be used to improve prerequisite-structure
predictor in a subdomain (e.g., biology), or may
suggest alternative training methods (e.g., involving
transfer learning).

Motivated by this, for each domain, we com-
pare the performances of the out-of-domain and in-
domain classification performances. The results are
shown in Figure 4. On average, we observe that the
out-of-domain classifier is able to achieve 93% of
the performance of the in-domain classifier. We note
that this is encouraging for domain-independent
prerequisite-structure prediction, as this suggests
that for the prerequisite classification task, close to
optimal (i.e., in-domain performance) is possible
when the classifiers are trained in an out-of-domain
setting.

312



3 Related Work

We believe the task of prerequisite structure predic-
tion to be novel; however, it is clearly related to a
number of other well-studied research problems.

In light of our emphasis on Wikipedia, a con-
nection can be drawn between identifying prerequi-
sites and measuring the semantic relatedness of con-
cepts using Wikipedia’s link structure (Yeh et al.,
2009). We consider here a related but narrower
question, namely whether an inter-page link will im-
prove comprehension for a specific reader.

In the area of intelligent tutoring and educational
data mining, recent research has looked at enriching
textbooks with authoritative web content (Agrawal
et al., 2010). Also, the problem of detecting pre-
requisite structure from differential student perfor-
mance on tests has been considered (e.g., (Pavlik
et al., 2008; Vuong et al., 2011)). Our proposal con-
siders discovering prerequisite structure from text,
rather than from exercises, and relies on different
signals.

Research in adaptive hypermedia (surveyed else-
where (Chen and Magoulas, 2005)) has goals similar
to ours. Most adaptive hypermedia systems operate
in narrow domains, which precludes use of some of
the crowd-based signals we consider here. In this lit-
erature, a distinction is often made between “adapt-
ability” (the ability for a user to modify a presenta-
tion of hypermedia) and “adaptivity” (the ability of
a system to adapt to a user’s needs.) In this frame-
work, our project focuses on adding “adaptivity” to
existing corpora via a prerequisite structure, and our
principle contribution to this area is identifying tech-
niques that learn to combine textual features and so-
cial, crowd-based signals in order to usefully guide
comprehension.

Another related area is data-mining logs of Web
usage, as surveyed by Pierrakos et al (Pierrakos
et al., 2003). Our focus here is on facilitating a
particular type of Web usage, comprehension, rather
than more commonly-performed tasks like site nav-
igation and purchasing.

A number of “open education” resources exist, in
which information can be organized into sharable
modules with known prerequisites between them
(e.g., Connexions (Baraniuk, 2008)). We focus here
on discovering prerequisite structure with machine-

learning methods rather than simply encoding it.
Similarly, a Wikimedia project7 has developed in-
frastructure allowing a user to manually assemble
Wikipedia pages into e-books. Our focus is on guid-
ing the process of finding and ordering the sections
of these books, not the infrastructure for generating
them. We also note that one widely-used way for
complex technical concepts to be broadly commu-
nicated is by writers or teams of writers, and pre-
vious researchers have investigated understanding
how collaborative writers work (Noël and Robert,
2004), and even developed tools for collaborative
writing (Zheng et al., 2006). Our work focuses on
tools to empower readers, rather than writers.

4 Conclusion

In this paper, we motivated the goal of “crowdsourc-
ing” the task of helping readers comprehend com-
plex technical material, by using machine learning
to predict prerequisite structure from not only docu-
ment text, but also crowd-generated data such as hy-
perlinks and edit logs. While it is not immediately
obvious that this task is feasible, our experiments
suggest that relatively reliable features to predict
prerequisite structure exist, and can be successfully
combined using standard machine learning methods.

To achieve the broader goal of facilitating com-
prehension, predicting prerequisite structure is not
enough. Another important subproblem is using pre-
dicted prerequisites to build a feasible plan. As part
of ongoing work, we are exploring use of modern
optimization methods (such as Integer Linear Pro-
gramming) to compute “reading plans” that mini-
mize a weighted linear combination of expected user
effort and probability of plan “failure”8.

We also plan to explore another major subprob-
lem associated with facilitating comprehension—
personalizing a reading plan. Clearly, even if d′ is
a prerequisite for d, a user interested in d need not
first read a page explaining d′, if she already under-
stands d′; instead, a reading plan based on prereq-
uisite structure should be adjusted based on what is
believed about the user’s prior knowledge state. In

7See http://en.labs.wikimedia.org/wiki/Wiki to print, the
“Wiki to Print” project.

8A plan “failure” means that the plan not actually satisfy all
necessary prerequisites, leading to imperfect comprehension on
the part of the reader after she executes the plan.

313



the context of Wikipedia comprehension, one possi-
ble signal for predicting an individuals’ prior knowl-
edge is the Wikipedia edit log: if we assume that
editors tend to edit things they know, the edit log
indicates which concepts tend to be jointly known,
and hence collaborative-filtering methods might be
able to more completely predict a user’s knowledge
given partial information about her knowledge—just
as collaborative-filtering is often used now to extrap-
olate user preference’s from knowledge of others’
joint preferences.

Besides contributing to the goal of facilitating
comprehension, we believe that the specific problem
of predicting prerequisite structure in Wikipedia is
a task of substantial independent interest. Prereq-
uisite structure can be thought of as a sort of ex-
planatory discourse structure, which is overlaid on
a hyperlink graph; hence, scaling up our methods
and applying them to all of Wikipedia would iden-
tify a canonical broad-coverage instance of such ex-
planatory discourse. This could be re-used for other
tasks much as lexical resources like WordNet are:
for instance, consider identifying explanatory dis-
course in an external technical text (e.g., a textbook)
by soft-matching it to the Wikipedia structure, us-
ing existing techniques to match the external text to
Wikipedia (Agrawal et al., 2010; Mihalcea and Cso-
mai, 2007; Milne and Witten, 2008).

Acknowledgments

This research has been supported in part by DARPA
(under contract number FA8750-09-C-0179), and
Google. Any opinions, findings, conclusions and
recommendations expressed in this paper are the au-
thors’ and do not necessarily reflect those of the
sponsors. We are thankful to the anonymous review-
ers for their constructive comments

References

Agrawal, R., Gollapudi, S., Kenthapadi, K., Srivastava,
N., and Velu, R. (2010). Enriching textbooks through
data mining. In Proceedings of the First ACM Sympo-
sium on Computing for Development, page 19. ACM.

Andersen, R., Chung, F., and Lang, K. (2006). Local
graph partitioning using pagerank vectors. In Founda-
tions of Computer Science, 2006. FOCS’06. 47th An-
nual IEEE Symposium on, pages 475–486. IEEE.

Auer, S., Bizer, C., Kobilarov, G., Lehmann, J., Cyga-
niak, R., and Ives, Z. (2007). Dbpedia: A nucleus
for a web of open data. In Aberer, K., Choi, K.-S.,
Noy, N., Allemang, D., Lee, K.-I., Nixon, L., Golbeck,
J., Mika, P., Maynard, D., Mizoguchi, R., Schreiber,
G., and Cudr-Mauroux, P., editors, The Semantic Web,
volume 4825 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 722–735. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.

Baraniuk, R. (2008). Challenges and opportunities for
the open education movement: A Connexions case
study, pages 229–246. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts.

Carlson, A., Betteridge, J., Kisiel, B., Settles, B., Hr-
uschka Jr, E., and Mitchell, T. (2010). Toward an ar-
chitecture for never-ending language learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI), pages 1306–1313.

Carr, N. (2011). The shallows: What the Internet is doing
to our brains. WW Norton & Co Inc.

Chen, S. and Magoulas, G. (2005). Adaptable and adap-
tive hypermedia systems. IRM Press.

Etzioni, O., Banko, M., and Cafarella, M. (2006). Ma-
chine reading. In Proceedings of the National Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence.

Fleiss, J. (1981). The measurement of interrater agree-
ment. Statistical methods for rates and proportions,
2:212–236.

Kwok, C., Etzioni, O., and Weld, D. (2001). Scaling
question answering to the web. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems (TOIS), 19(3):242–262.

Leskovec, J., Huttenlocher, D., and Kleinberg, J. (2010).
Governance in social media: a case study of the
wikipedia promotion process. In AAAI International
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM
’10). AAAI.

Mihalcea, R. and Csomai, A. (2007). Wikify!: linking
documents to encyclopedic knowledge. In CIKM, vol-
ume 7, pages 233–242.

Milne, D. and Witten, I. (2008). Learning to link with
wikipedia. In Proceeding of the 17th ACM conference
on Information and knowledge management, pages
509–518. ACM.

Noël, S. and Robert, J. (2004). Empirical study on
collaborative writing: What do co-authors do, use,
and like? Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW), 13(1):63–89.

Pavlik, P., Cen, H., Wu, L., and Koedinger, K. (2008).
Using item-type performance to covariance to improve
the skill acquisition of an existing tutor. In Proc. of
the 1st International Conference on Educational Data
Mining.

Pierrakos, D., Paliouras, G., Papatheodorou, C., and Spy-
ropoulos, C. (2003). Web usage mining as a tool for

314



personalization: A survey. User Modeling and User-
Adapted Interaction, 13(4):311–372.

Tong, H., Faloutsos, C., and Pan, J.-Y. (2006). Fast ran-
dom walk with restart and its applications. In Proceed-
ings of the Sixth International Conference on Data
Mining, ICDM ’06.

Vuong, A., Nixon, T., and Towle, B. (2011). A method
for finding prerequisites within a curriculum. In Proc.
of the 4th International Conference on Educational
Data Mining.

Yates, A., Cafarella, M., Banko, M., Etzioni, O., Broad-
head, M., and Soderland, S. (2007). Textrunner: Open
information extraction on the web. In Proceedings of
Human Language Technologies: The Annual Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Demonstrations, pages
25–26. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yeh, E., Ramage, D., Manning, C., Agirre, E., and Soroa,
A. (2009). Wikiwalk: random walks on wikipedia
for semantic relatedness. In Proceedings of the 2009
Workshop on Graph-based Methods for Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 41–49. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Zheng, Q., Booth, K., and McGrenere, J. (2006). Co-
authoring with structured annotations. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in com-
puting systems, pages 131–140. ACM.

315


