










































Toward a Virtual Assistant for Vulnerable Users: Designing Careful Interaction


Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Speech and Multimodal Interaction in Assistive Environments, pages 13–17,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Toward a Virtual Assistant for Vulnerable Users:
Designing Careful Interaction

Ramin Yaghoubzadeh
Sociable Agents Group, CITEC

Bielefeld University; PO Box 100131
33501 Bielefeld, Germany

ryaghoub@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de

Stefan Kopp
Sociable Agents Group, CITEC

Bielefeld University; PO Box 100131
33501 Bielefeld, Germany

skopp@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de

Abstract

The VASA project develops a multimodal as-
sistive system mediated by a virtual agent that
is intended to foster autonomy of communica-
tion and activity management in older people
and people with disabilities. Assistive systems
intended for these user groups have to take
their individual vulnerabilities into account. A
variety of psychic, emotional as well as behav-
ioral conditions can manifest at the same time.
Systems that fail to take them into account
might not only fail at joint tasks, but also risk
damage to their interlocutors. We identify im-
portant conditions and disorders and analyze
their immediate consequences for the design
of careful assistive systems.

1 Introduction

In 2001, the World Health Organization consoli-
dated previous taxonomies of somatic and mental
functions and the everyday needs of human beings
into the comprehensive International Classification
of Functioning, Disability and Health ICF (WHO,
2001). Older people, as well as people with im-
pairments, often need support from others to satisfy
those basic needs, among which are activities related
to self-care, to mobility, but also to communication
and management of the daily activities and the so-
cial environment. For many older people, a catas-
trophic event, most often either a fall or the passing
of their spouse, leads to their sudden loss of auton-
omy and subsequent submission into stationary care.
In the latter case, the loss of their day structure is
frequently the intermediate cause. The same effect

can be observed for many disabled people of all ages
who must make a transition from assisted living to
stationary care. Here, specialized systems that assist
in preserving autonomy in a spectrum of daily need
fulfillment can potentially be of great benefit.

The present paper introduces the VASA project
(“Virtual Assistants and their Social Acceptability”),
which in cooperation with a health-care foundation
examines how both older patients and people with
various impediments, congenital or acquired, both
in stationary and assisted living, can be provided
with technical assistance to maintain autonomy for
as long as possible. Importantly, we are not focus-
ing on physical assistance, but on supporting a per-
son’s capability for organizing a social environment
(WHO ICF d9205: ‘Socializing’) and managing the
day structure generally (d230: ‘Carrying out daily
routine’). These two tasks turned out to be crucial in
our analysis with the health care personnel. We thus
aim to develop an assistive system for (1) managing
daily routine and weekly appointments with the user,
and (2) accessing a video call interface for contact-
ing acquaintances or care personnel (d360: ‘Using
communication devices and techniques’).

But how should such a system meet its user, and
what criteria should guide the system interface de-
sign? Research has shown that older users are
far more likely to employ a ‘social’ conversation
style with a system (Wolters et al., 2009). The
VASA project explores the use of a ”virtual assis-
tant”, an humanoid conversational agent that fea-
tures natural-language and touchscreen input and
human-like communicative behavior (speech, ges-
ture; see Fig. 1 for the current running prototype).

13



Figure 1: The VASA system. Left side: natural-language
calendar management; right side: video call interface.

In this paper we review work on related systems for
older people and people with disabilities. We then
argue that beside the general goal of maximizing us-
ability for this specific user group, there is an en-
hanced vulnerability of these users that calls for spe-
cial care in interaction design; we substantiate this
view by an analysis of potential mental conditions
of the prospective users along with discussions of
what requirements arise from them.

2 Related work

Generally, assistive systems are driven by task rea-
soning systems as well as components for human-
computer interaction, which can be specialized for
older or disabled persons. Modern systems that
attempt to provide a “natural” interaction are be-
ing developed and evaluated, including touch-screen
and haptic interfaces and interfaces capable of un-
derstanding and generating natural language, all of
them providing an immediacy between communica-
tive intentions and their execution that makes them
suitable especially for users without technical exper-
tise, with reduced sensorimotor skills or reduced ca-
pability for learning new interaction paradigms, as is
frequently the case with older or impaired persons.

The performance of such systems in terms of suit-
able operation in interaction, successful task com-
pletion, and user-reported satisfaction, has been
subject to systematic evaluation under controlled
conditions: The performance of speech recogni-
tion systems has been compared between base-line
users and people with varying degrees of dysarthria
(breathiness, dysfluencies, involuntary noises). Off-
the-shelf speech recognition systems have higher
failure rates with dysarthric speakers (Raghaven-
dra et al., 2001). Mildly and moderately dysarthric

speakers can attain a recognition accuracy of 80%
in dictation systems, breath exercises and phonation
training improve performance (Young and Mihai-
lidis, 2010). Vipperla et al. (2009) compared speech
recognition for younger and older users, reporting
an 11% baseline increase in word error rates for the
latter group, attributed to both acoustic and linguis-
tic causes. The Stardust project succeeded in very
high single-word recognition rates on small dictio-
naries in patients with severe dysarthria, enabling
them to control their environment by voice (Hawley
et al., 2007). Fager et al. (2010) implemented a mul-
timodal prototype system that combined ASR with
a word prediction model and a capability to enter an
initial letter, leading to an accuracy of > 80%; not-
ing that other conditions, such as a reduced visual
field or ataxia, had to be addressed with technical
solutions for each individual. Jian et al. (2011) de-
signed a system for direction giving for seniors, sug-
gesting specific design guidelines addressing typi-
cal perceptive, motor, attentive and cognitive impair-
ments of older users. The evaluation of their multi-
modal system (speech and touch/image) led to posi-
tive results with respect to effectivity, efficiency and
user-reported satisfaction.

3 Careful Interaction with Vulnerable
People: Analysis

The more autonomously assistive systems act, the
higher the potential negative effects they can conse-
quentially cause. This is especially true for robotic
systems, since their extension into the physical
world entails possible harmful effects if proper rea-
soning or safety precautions should be breached by
unanticipated events. But even without physical ma-
nipulation, real damage can still be done. This might
be due to misunderstandings, leading to wrong as-
sumptions in the system, and hence to actions be-
ing performed on behalf, but actually to the detri-
ment, of the user. It might, however, also be due to
the wrong things being communicated, or communi-
cated in an inappropriate manner, leading to unnec-
essary negative appraisal, discomfort, or triggering
of a negative psychic condition in the user. While
unlikely to cause damage in an interaction with the
average healthy interactant, this issue is of the ut-
most importance for many potential user groups.

14



Frail or potentially unstable users are arguably
among those who can derive the greatest benefits
from easily accessible assistive systems, enabling
them to perform tasks which they might else not,
or no longer, perform, thus preserving their auton-
omy. However, they are at the same time affected by
a multitude of possible cognitive, psychic and emo-
tional conditions and behavioral anomalies that can
occur simultaneously. Each of these conditions en-
tails special constraints for interactive systems, ei-
ther for the interaction channels, for the contents,
or for both. Several factors have been accounted
for in existing systems: Reduced perceptive faculty
(vision, hearing), reduced motor abilities (ataxia),
and attention and memory impairments, mitigated
by best-practice rules (Jian et al., 2011). Attempts
to account for users with mild dementia have been
made, such as in the ISISEMD project. Avoiding
a deep hierarchy of dialogue structures and provid-
ing extra information (repetition, paraphrase) rather
than maximum parsimony are paramount in cases of
impaired memory and abstraction faculty, whereas
people with learning difficulties need a system that
operates without extensive training (of the user).

For systems that strive to provide long-term sup-
port to a specific person, adaptation to that per-
son is of vital importance – by employing user
models that are adapted either manually or using
learning algorithms. System behavior should be
adapted both in the content provided as well as the
form it is provided in, to enable a working rela-
tionship that is both effective and pleasant for the
user (Yaghoubzadeh and Kopp, 2011). This alone
however is insufficient; since the vulnerability of
the actual clientele in VASA is considerable, each
of the encountered mental conditions has to be an-
alyzed and additional dialogue constraints be en-
forced before autonomous interactions can be per-
mitted. There is a variety of such factors that
have not yet been comprehensively addressed, but
might cause critical damage to some interactants
if not considered. The following section captures
the most frequently encountered phenomena, which
were identified in dialogue with care personnel:

• Depression and Bipolar Disorder: Roughly
ten percent of the population suffer from de-
pression at some point in their lives. Depres-

sion increases the risk for suicide ten- to twen-
tyfold (Sadock et al., 2007). Bipolar disor-
der manifests in episodic effects, where sen-
sations of racing thoughts and heightened ac-
tivity (mania) and listlessness and social pas-
sivity (severe depression) alternate or occur si-
multaneously; depressive relapses in particular
are points of vulnerability (Hill and Shepherd,
2009). There are successes in detecting depres-
sive states from facial and voice cues at > 80%
rate (Cohn et al., 2009). A good practice is
to employ mitigation strategies when breaking
bad news to the user (Brown and Levinson,
1987; Fraser, 1980), e.g. by presenting obliga-
tions as options (Williams, 2011), or present-
ing the “bad news” simultaneously with “good
news”. We provide for discussion another re-
quirement for interactive systems in this case:
The system must not produce ambiguously in-
terpretable answers – consider a catastrophic
answer of “okay” as an affirmative response to
a wrongly parsed utterance that was actually an
expression of intent for suicide, a frequent phe-
nomenon with risk patients (Kelly, 2009).

• Borderline Personality Disorder: This type
of disorders, characterized by emotional insta-
bility, can lead to anxiety, social insecurity and
depression, but also inappropriate outbursts of
anger. Anger management techniques are em-
ployed to inhibit the expression of such anger
(Swaffer and Hollin, 2009). An assistive sys-
tem should be able to cope with impulses of
anger, and as a bare minimum interrupt the in-
teraction and offer to resume it at a later point.
The EmoVoice system, for instance, can clas-
sify emotional features in natural language with
good rates (Vogt et al., 2008), and could be
used to identify anger.

• Epilepsy: Patients with acquired brain injuries
frequently suffer from epilepsy. Even short (pe-
tit mal) epileptic seizures can lead to tempo-
rary absence and periods of confusion and dis-
orientation (APA, 2000). In such a situation,
the patient may utter irrational sentences or be
silent altogether. An assistive system should be
able to detect these irrational deviations from

15



the course of conversation, and fill the user in
again, abort the conversation, or call for help.

• Panic: Proneness to panic attacks can result
from a multitude of afflictions and is hard to
predict. In the event of a panicking interactant,
the system should not take steps that could fur-
ther exacerbate the situation. According to lit-
erature (Gournay and Denford, 2009), panic at-
tacks are generally unable to do any real harm
and subside quickly. Therefore, passivity from
the system’s side, in a neutral mode, is the mini-
mal appropriate behavior. Panicking people are
most likely not able to perform in interaction as
successfully as usual – systems that should still
be operable by a user in this situation must pro-
vide minimalistic shortcuts to essential features
(i.e. a “panic button” for emergencies).

• Anxiety: Special care must be taken in the de-
sign of systems aimed at people with social
anxiety. Interactants might be hesitant to open
a conversation even with an artificial system.
The system could take the initiative by simply
opening with a short utterance about the task
domain (Williams, 2011).

• Phobias and Impulse Control Disorders:
Phobic disorders and obsessive-compulsive
disorders can be triggered by environmental
cues (Gournay and Denford, 2009). User inter-
faces have to take this into account, and avoid
presenting stimuli that could act as potential
triggers (e.g. people with an insect phobia
should neither be presented with pictures of in-
sects, nor their verbal mention). The same pre-
cautions are valid in the case of addictions.

Any interactive system, and in particular systems
that do not only provide information but can also be
made to perform tasks autonomously on behalf of
the user, must be designed with all possible afflic-
tions of all possible users in mind, not only as a wise
legal precaution, but also as an ethical obligation to
the designer. We argue that, quite unlike the ‘best
practices’ of user interface design, there is no degree
of optionality to the implementation of the above
constraints and countermeasures, but that it must be
performed with all musterable diligence. Some con-
straints are especially hard to meet in open-world

systems (e.g. with free Internet access), since the
contents presented are harder to predict.

Note that the set of conditions presented above
is by no means comprehensive. For instance, we
have, for now, altogether omitted an incorporation
of autism-spectrum disorders or of functional psy-
choses such as schizophrenia, paraphrenia and para-
noia – which are not uncommon in the older popu-
lation (Ashton and Keady, 2009).

4 Summary

The VASA project is developing a multimodal
natural-language agent-mediated assistance system
for older people and patients with disabilities for
enhancing their autonomy in the everyday tasks
of communication and activity management. The
clientele is afflicted with a variety of cognitive, psy-
chic, and emotional conditions that have to be dealt
with with extreme care and entail a necessity for spe-
cific safety mechanisms which will be implemented
for VASA in coordination with the care person-
nel. We attempted to identify common conditions
of older and impaired patients that should be con-
sidered and resolved in any assistive system (or in-
deed any autonomous interactive system) that might
communicate with them. Factors that could lead
to a detrimental outcome of such an interaction in-
clude depression, emotional instability, disorienta-
tion, panic, anxiety and phobia. Some constraints
on the design rationale for such systems can pro-
vide a mitigation of those risks: avoiding ambigu-
ity in the system’s utterances, coping with anger, ir-
rationality and panic by employing appropriate sys-
tem responses, capability for system-side initiative,
and preventing inadvertent stimulation of disorders.
Since the field of potential interactants for generic
assistive systems is vast, as any inspection of a larger
health-care institution will show, more discussion in
the research community should aim at establishing a
stable ontology of their special needs and the rami-
fications for the design of careful assistive systems.

Acknowledgments

This research is supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in the Center of
Excellence in Cognitive Interaction Technology
(CITEC).

16



References
American Psychiatric Association. 2000. Diagnostic

and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders DSM-IV-
TR, Fourth Edition. American Psychiatric Publishing,
Inc., Arlington, VA.

Peter Ashton and John Keady. 2009. Mental disorders
of older people. Newell & Gournay (eds.), Mental
Health Nursing: an Evidence-Based Approach, 341–
370. Churchill Livingstone, Philadelphia, PA.

Paul Brown and Stephen Levinson. 1987. Politeness.
Some Universals in Language Usage. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge.

Jeffrey F. Cohn, Tomas Simon Kruez, Iain Matthews,
Ying Yang, Minh Hoai Nguyen, Margara
Tejera Padilla, Feng Zhou, and Fernando de la Torre.
2009. Detecting Depression from Facial Actions and
Vocal Prosody. Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent
Interaction and Workshops (ACII 2009), 1–7. IEEE,
Amsterdam.

Susan K. Fager, David R. Beukelman, Tom Jakobs, and
John-Paul Hosom. 2010. Evaluation of a Speech
Recognition Prototype for Speakers with Moderate
and Severe Dysarthria: A Preliminary Report Aug-
mentative and Alternative Communication, 26(4):267-
277.

Bruce Fraser. 1980. Conversational mitigation. Journal
of Pragmatics, 4:341–350.

Kevin Gournay and Lindsay Denford. 2009. Pho-
bias and Rituals. Newell & Gournay (eds.), Mental
Health Nursing: an Evidence-Based Approach, 207–
224. Churchill Livingstone, Philadelphia, PA.

Mark S. Hawley, Pam Enderby, Phil Green, Stuart Cun-
ningham, Simon Brownsell, James Carmichael, Mark
Parker, Athanassios Hatzis, Peter ONeill, and Rebecca
Palmer. 2007. A speech-controlled environmental
control system for people with severe dysarthria. Med-
ical Engineering & Physics, 29(5):586–593.

Robert Gareth Hill and Geoff Shepherd. 2009. Disorders
of Mood: Depression and Mania. Newell & Gournay
(eds.), Mental Health Nursing: an Evidence-Based
Approach, 165–185. Churchill Livingstone, Philadel-
phia, PA.

Cui Jian, Nadine Sasse, Nicole von Steinbüchel-
Rheinwall, Frank Schafmeister, Hui Shi, Carsten
Rachuy, and Holger Schmidt. 2011. Towards effec-
tive, efficient and elderly-friendly multimodal interac-
tion. Proceedings of the 4th International Conference
on Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive Envi-
ronments (PETRA 2011), article 45, 1–8. ACM, New
York, NY.

Sarah Kelly. 2009. Suicide and Self-Harm. Newell &
Gournay (eds.), Mental Health Nursing: an Evidence-

Based Approach, 187–206. Churchill Livingstone,
Philadelphia, PA.

Parimala Raghavendra, Elisabet Rosengren, and Sheri
Hunnicutt. 2001. An investigation of different de-
grees of dysarthric speech as input to speaker-adaptive
and speaker-dependent recognition systems. Augmen-
tative and Alternative Communication, 17(4):265-275.

Benjamin J. Sadock, Harold I. Kaplan, and Virginia A.
Sadock. 2007. Kaplan & Sadock’s Synopsis of Psychi-
atry: Behavioral Sciences/Clinical Psychiatry. Lip-
pincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia.

Tracey Swaffer and Clive R. Hollin. 2009. Anger and
Impulse Control. Newell & Gournay (eds.), Mental
Health Nursing: an Evidence-Based Approach, 267–
289. Churchill Livingstone, Philadelphia, PA.

Ravichander Vipperla, Maria Wolters, Kallirroi Georgila,
and Steve Renals. 2009. Speech input from older
users in smart environments: Challenges and perspec-
tives. HCI (6): Universal Access in Human-Computer
Interaction, Intelligent and Ubiquitous Interaction En-
vironments , LNCS 5615:117–126. Springer, Heidel-
berg.

Thurid Vogt, Elisabeth André, and Nikolaus Bee. 2008.
EmoVoice - A framework for online recognition of
emotions from voice. Proceedings of the 4th IEEE
tutorial and research workshop on Perception and In-
teractive Technologies for Speech-Based Systems (PIT
2008), 188–199. Springer, Heidelberg.

Val Williams. 2011. Disability and discourse : analysing
inclusive conversation with people with intellectual
disabilities. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, West Sus-
sex / Malden, MA.

World Health Organization. 2001. International Clas-
sification of Functioning, Disability and Health: ICF,
WHO, Geneva, Switzerland.

Maria Wolters, Kallirroi Georgila, Johanna D. Moore,
and Sarah E. MacPherson. 2009. Being Old Doesn’t
Mean Acting Old: How Older Users Interact with Spo-
ken Dialog Systems. ACM Transactions on Accessible
Computing (TACCESS), 2(1):1–39.

Ramin Yaghoubzadeh and Stefan Kopp. 2011. Creat-
ing familiarity through adaptive behavior generation
in human-agent interaction. Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents
(IVA 2011), LNCS(LNAI) 6895:195–201. Springer,
Heidelberg.

Victoria Young and Alex Mihailidis. 2010. Difficulties in
Automatic Speech Recognition of Dysarthric Speakers
and Implications for Speech-Based Applications Used
by the Elderly: A Literature Review. Assistive Tech-
nology, 22(2):99–112.

17


