










































Distinguishing Contact-Induced Change from Language Drift in Genetically Related Languages


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Workshop on Computational Models of Language Acquisition and Loss, pages 1–9,
Avignon, France, April 24 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Distinguishing Contact-Induced Change from Language Drift in
Genetically Related Languages

T. Mark Ellison
Psychology

University of Western Australia
Mark.Ellison@uwa.edu.au

Luisa Miceli
Linguistics

University of Western Australia
lmiceli@cyllene.uwa.edu.au

Abstract

Languages evolve, undergoing repeated
small changes, some with permanent ef-
fect and some not. Changes affecting a
language may be independent or contact-
induced. Independent changes arise inter-
nally or, if externally, from non-linguistic
causes. En masse, such changes cause
isolated languages to drift apart in lexical
form and grammatical structure. Contact-
induced changes can happen when lan-
guages share speakers, or when their speak-
ers are in contact.

Frequently, languages in contact are re-
lated, having a common ancestor from
which they still retain visible structure.
This relatedness makes it difficult to distin-
guish contact-induced change from inher-
ited similarities.

In this paper, we present a simulation of
contact-induced change. We show that it
is possible to distinguish contact-induced
change from independent change given (a)
enough data, and (b) that the contact-
induced change is strong enough. For a par-
ticular model, we determine how much data
is enough to distinguish these two cases at
p < 0.05.

1 Introduction

Evolutionary change happens when structures are
copied, the copying is inexact, and the survival of
copies is uncertain. Many structures undergo this
kind of reproduction, change and death: biologi-
cal organisms, fashions, languages. Often evolu-
tionary change leaves little or no trace, except for
those copies which are present at the moment. In
these cases, determining the evolutionary history

of a family of structures involves comparing sur-
viving copies and making inferences from where
they correspond and where they differ.

Language is, for the most part, one of those
cases. Most languages have not had a writing
system until recently, and so their history has
left no direct trace. Since the 18th century, lin-
guists have been comparing languages to recon-
struct both common parents and individual histo-
ries for these languages (Jones, 1786; Schleicher,
1861; Brugmann, 1884, for example).

In this paper, we hope to contribute to this effort
by presenting a formal model of a particular kind
of evolutionary change, namely contact-induced
change, and placing limits on when its past pres-
ence can be inferred from synchronic evidence.

Contact-induced change can happen when
speakers of different languages come in contact,
or where there is a sizeable group of bi- or multi-
linguals. We distinguish two different types.
One type, contact-induced assimilation (CIA)
changes languages so that they become more sim-
ilar to each other. This is the type of contact-
induced change that is most obvious and that has
been best studied. The consensus is that it can
affect all sub-systems of a language depending
on the intensity of contact (see eg. Thomason &
Kaufman 1988). The other type, less frequently
noticed and only recently receiving attention (see
eg. François 2011, Arnal 2011), is contact-
induced differentiation (CID) where the change
acts specifically to make the languages less sim-
ilar. This type of contact-induced change pre-
dominantly affects the parts of a language which
speakers are most conscious of being distinct: the
phonological forms of morphemes and words.

It is hard to isolate contact-induced change in

1



related languages from the effects of common in-
heritance or normal independent drift. In lan-
guages in contact over a long period of time, it
is impossible to tell whether the dropping of any
single cognate is the result of chance variation or
the action of a differentiation process. Likewise,
if languages are compared using a single-valued
measure of similarity (such as fraction of cog-
nates in a Swadesh list), the effects of more or less
contact-induced changes cannot be distinguished
from a greater or lesser time-depth since the com-
mon ancestor. This is shown in figure 1.

Less

contact−induced differentiation

contact−induced assimilation

separated earlier

separated later

Similarity More

Figure 1: shows the problem of identifying contact-
induced change between related languages. Contact-
induced assimilation and having a more recent com-
mon ancestor can both account for language similari-
ties. Contact-induced differentiation accounts for less
similarity, but so does positing a remoter common an-
cestor that allows time for more independent drift re-
sulting in greater differentiation without contact. A
single similarity measure is insufficient to separate
time-depth from contact-induced change.

Contact-induced change is, however, different
from independent drift. If it is detectable at all, it
will be because it creates different counts of syn-
onyms and different proportions of cognates, than
drift alone. Thus, with enough data, it should pos-
sible to distinguish the effects of time-depth and
contact-induced change. This paper presents the
results of a simulation to determine just how much
data would be enough.

1.1 Overview

Section 2 discusses contact-induced change, and
CID in particular. While it is easy to find instances
of CIA, eg. borrowing a word from one language
to another, it is harder to find unarguable cases of
CID. They can be found, however, and some of
these are discussed in section 2.2.

Section 3 describes language as a bundle of re-
lations. Language changes can then be modelled
as changes in these relations. A formal account of

independent and contact-induced changes in rela-
tions is given, as the underpinnings for the next
section.

This next section (section 4) investigates how
much data is needed to develop 95% certainty that
contact-induced change has occurred as opposed
to independent change alone. As might be ex-
pected, the weaker the CIA or CID pressure, the
more evidence needed to distinguish the types of
change.

The final section considers the implications
of the research, and situates it within a larger
programme of investigation into contact-induced
change.

1.2 Terminology

This paper uses terms from mathematics and lin-
guistics. The term relation will only be used in
its mathematical sense of a potentially many-to-
many association from elements in one set, the
domain, to elements in another, the range. An as-
sociation between a domain element and a range
element will be called a link. We introduce the
term doppels to describe words from different
languages which have had a common origin, or
are so similar that they might be presumed to have
a common origin. These differ from cognates in
two ways. Although cognates must have had a
common origin, doppels need not – they may just
look like they do. Also, where there is a common
origin, cognates must have evolved with the lan-
guage as a whole, while doppels may be the result
of borrowing. Etymologically, doppel is a doppel
of the German Doppel, duplicate, copy, double.

2 Contact-Induced Change in Natural
Languages

It is impossible to study language history without
being aware of the impact of contact on languages
all around the world, not least in the current
age of globalisation. However, while the most
transparent and best known process of contact-
induced assimilation, word borrowing, has been
a focus in historical linguistics, some other assim-
ilatory phenomena and almost all differentiating
processes are only recently receiving attention.

2.1 Contact-Induced Assimilation

Contact-induced assimilation (CIA) describes any
process which causes two languages to become
more similar. The increased similarity could be

2



the result of: more doppels between the lan-
guages, due to one language borrowing from an-
other; convergent phonology, as a large commu-
nity of bilinguals use a single phonemic inventory
for both languages; or convergent syntax and mor-
phology. This last may occur as the speech of
weak bilinguals, dropping rich morphology and
using a lot of word-for-word translations in their
non-native tongues, impacts the entire commu-
nity.

English itself exemplifies the extent to which
borrowing can make languages similar. Finken-
staedt and Wolff (1973) found that Latin and
French (including Old Norman) have each con-
tributed more words to Modern English than its
Germanic parent language has. English speakers
consequently often find it easier to learn a Ro-
mance language than a Germanic one.

Metatypy (Ross, 2006) is one type of contact-
induced change at the grammatical level. Lan-
guages engaged in metatypy, such as Kannada and
Marathi in the Indian village of Kupwar, can come
to have (nearly) identical grammatical and mor-
phological organisation; the languages only differ
in their lexical forms. One result is that it is easy
to translate from one language to the other, sim-
ply by replacing a morpheme in one language by
its form in the other.

CIA seems to be much more common than
CID. This may, however, be due to the fact that
it is much easier to detect, because similarity is
inherently less likely to occur by chance than dis-
similarity.

2.2 Contact-Induced Differentiation

Because dissimilatory change is sometimes, but
not always, hard to detect, many of the known
cases of it arise because it is done deliberately and
speakers report that they are doing it. Thoma-
son (2007) gives two principal motivations for
this kind of deliberate change: (a) a desire or
need to increase the difference between one’s own
speech and someone else’s, and (b) a desire or
need to keep outsiders at a distance. However, the
two recent studies already mentioned – François
(2011) and Arnal (2011) – describe how this type
of change may arise without ”differentiation” per
se being the primary motivation (see François
2011:229-30 in particular).

A situation that fits the first description is
that found in one of the dialects of Lambayeque

Quechua where speakers systematically distort
their words in order to make their speech dif-
ferent from that of neighbouring dialects. One
of the processes used involves the distortion of
words by metathesis giving, for example: /yaw.ra/
from /yawar/, /-tqa/ from /taq/, /-psi/ from /pis/
and /kablata /from /kabalta/ (Thomason 2007:51).
This kind of process clearly gives rise to a system
with different phonotactics.

There is also anecdotal evidence that non-
Castilian languages of the Iberian Peninsula have
undergone deliberate differentiation. Wright
(1998) reports that some late-medieval Por-
tuguese avoided using words similar or identi-
cal to the corresponding Castilian words when
a less similar synonym was available, while Vi-
dal (1998) reports the same behaviour among the
Catalan. More recently Arnal (2011) has de-
scribed further differentiating change to Catalan
lexical forms due to increased levels of Span-
ish/Catalan bilingualism among native Spanish
speakers, following the establishment of Catalan
as a co-official language in 1983. There have also
been processes of differentiation at play in Gali-
cian, where purists have promoted alternatives to
items shared with Castilian (Posner and Green,
1993; Beswick, 2007). These in turn are bal-
anced by movements to assimilate Galician with
Portuguese.

François (2011) describes the strong tendency
for languages spoken in the Torres and Banks is-
lands of northern Vanuatu to diverge in the forms
of their words, resulting in a pattern where closely
related languages that would be expected to have
high levels of cognacy, instead exhibit highly dis-
tinctive vocabularies.

Perhaps the most extreme example of change
aimed at increasing the difference in one’s own
speech is that of the Uisai dialect of Buin,
a language spoken in Papua New Guinea on
Bougainville island. Laycock (1982:34) reports
that Uisai shows diametrically opposed noun cat-
egories to other dialects. The markers for cate-
gory 1 in Uisai occur only with category 2 else-
where, and vice-versa. In this particular parame-
ter these dialects are significantly more different
than would be expected by chance.

The desire to differentiate languages in this way
doesn’t necessarily imply hostility or antagonism.
Laycock also reports an opinion from the Sepik
region of Papua New Guinea: it wouldn’t be any

3



good if we all talked the same, we like to know
where people come from.

One of the reasons for the current work is to
create the tools which might let us see whether
these efforts to change languages, for social or po-
litical reasons, actually have a lasting effect on the
vocabulary, or whether they are at best ephemeral
(see eg. Thomason & Kaufman 1988, Ross 2007,
Aikhenvald 2002; and François 2011, Arnal 2011
on differentiation).

3 Evolutionary Change in Relations

In this section, we explore the formal model that
we will use to distinguish normal, independent
change from contact-induced change. The first
step is to model languages as a bundle of relations.
Modelling language in this way is not new, but is
rarely made explicit.

3.1 Language as a Bundle of Relations

Much language structure can be expressed as rela-
tions between different spaces. For example, the
lexicon can be regarded as a relation between the
space of meanings available in a language and the
phonological forms of morphemes expressing that
meaning. There can be meanings represented by
multiple forms, such as ready and prepared, or
forms with multiple meanings such as fire in the
sense of burning or terminating employment.

Another language relation maps phonemes-in-
contexts to phones that can realise them. Phone-
mic distinctions may collapse in some contexts,
such as with the final devoicing of obstruents in
Polish, so that distinct phonemes are realised with
the same phone. Likewise, the same phoneme,
even in the one context, may be realised by mul-
tiple phones; the Portuguese phoneme /K/ is re-
alised as [K], [ö], [G] or even [r], with multiple
possible realisations even for the one speaker.

So both the lexicon and phonetic realisation can
be modelled with relations.

3.2 Primitive Changes on Relations

If some important language structures are rela-
tional, an interesting question is what sort of evo-
lutionary changes can effect these relations. This
subsection explores a number of minimal changes
which can effect relations. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first time that language
changes have been characterised this way. The

starting point is a simple relation between a do-
main and a range, as shown in figure 2.

A

B

C

1

2

3

Domain Range

Figure 2: shows a relation from a small domain to a
similarly-sized range.

The first kind of change is a global substitution,
see figure 3. This is where a change of permuta-
tion or merger applies to elements of either the
domain or the range. All of the pairs which con-
tain the affected elements are modified, hence the
name.

A

B

C

1

2

3

Domain Range

A

B

C 3

Domain Range

12

Figure 3: shows a global substitution: range elements
1 and 2 are merged, preserving all links. It is called
a global substitution as every link with 1 or 2 in the
range now has 12 as its range element.

Modifications of the phonetic relation can be of
this kind. For example, when Gaelic – both Irish
and Scottish – merged [D] into [G], the change af-
fected both lexical /D/ in closed class words, such
as the preposition <dha>, /Da/, to, as well as lex-
ical /D/ in open class words such as <duine>,
/duñ@/, person. This was a global substitution.

More frequently met are small changes, we will
call local mutations. These involve either the in-
sertion of a single link, or the deletion of a single
link.

A

B

C

1

2

3

Domain Range

X

Figure 4: shows two separate local mutations in a re-
lation: a deletion marked by an X on the link, and an
insertion shown as a dotted arrow.

Gloabl changes can be expressed as local
changes combined with relation composition.

4



The lexical relation associates meanings with the
phonological forms, which may take the form
phonemes in contexts. The phonemic map then
projects these onto their phonetic realisations.

If a single link in the phoneme realisation map
is dropped, then all lexical meanings expressed
using that phoneme-in-context can no longer re-
alise it with that phone. If a single link is added
to the phonetic relation, then all lexical meanings
expressed using that phoneme-in-context can now
realise it with the new phone. This multiplier
effect on changes means single sound changes
can have a disproportionate effect on the simi-
larity of cognate forms in two languages. Elli-
son and Kirby (2006) presented a similarity mea-
sure which bypasses this superficial difference:
pairs of domain elements are compared for the
similarity of the corresponding sets of range el-
ements, and these similarity values are then com-
pared cross-linguistically. This measure mitigates
the effect of global substitutions.

The iterated application of local mutational
changes to language structures is called drift.
In traditional models of language history, it is
the primary mechanism for explaining difference,
while the shared parent language is the primary
explanation of similarity.

3.3 Contact-induced change

So far, we have only looked at change arising
in independent relations. Change, in language at
least, is often the result of contact with the corre-
sponding relational structure in another language.
Figure 5 shows two relations between the same
domain and range, superimposed. Later diagrams
will use this same superimposed representation in
describing contact-induced changes.

A

B

C

1

2

3

Domain Range

Figure 5: shows two relations simultaneously: the
links from one are shown with thick arrows, those from
the other with thin. Links common to both relations are
doppels.

In considering contact-induced change, it is
worth noting that the change need not be sym-
metrical between the languages involved. If one

language is spoken by a dominant, larger popu-
lation, it may see no reason to differentiate itself
from the language of a smaller community. The
smaller community may feel that language differ-
entiation is a way to protect its identity. Whatever
the reason, we shall call the relation undergoing
differentiation the assimilating or differentiating
relation, and the relation it is pushing away from,
or pull towards, the reference relation.

Contact-induced assimilation or CIA can con-
sist of the insertion of a new link into the relation,
or the deletion of a link in the relation. As assim-
ilation is about making the relations more similar,
so insertion applies to create doppels where the
reference relation has a link and the assimilating
relation does not. Likewise assimilation applies
to delete links where the reference relation does
not have a link but the assimilating relation does.
Examples of this kind of assimilation are shown
in figure 6.

A

B

C

1

2

3

Domain Range

X

Figure 6: shows contact-induced assimilation (CIA)
as an insertion shown as a dotted line and a deletion
marked with an X. Existing links of the assimilating
relation are shown thin, while those of the reference
relation are shown thick. In CIA, links are more likely
to be inserted to make a doppel, and deleted where no
doppel exists.

The reverse is true in cases of contact-induced
differentiation – see figure 7. The differentiating

A

B

C

1

2

3

Domain Range
X

Figure 7: shows contact-induced differentiation (CID)
in the form of an insertion shown as a dotted line and
a deletion marked with an X. Existing links of the dif-
ferentiating relation are shown thin, while those of the
reference relation are shown thick. In CID, links are
more likely to be deleted if they have a doppel, and
inserted where they do not.

relation is more likely to delete a link which is half
of a doppel than delete other links. Likewise, it is

5



more likely to create a link where there is none
in the reference relation, rather than borrow a link
from it.

4 When can CIA/CID be Inferred?

This paper addresses the question: how much data
is required to distinguish cases of contact-induced
change from similarity due to a common ancestor
and differences due to drift? The question will
be addressed in terms of relations and the types
of changes covered in section 3.2 and section 3.3.
To render the problem tractable, we need an addi-
tional assumption about the lexical relations: they
have the form described in section 4.1.

4.1 RPOFs

We restrict lexical relations to RPOFs. An RPOF
is a reverse of a partial onto function, in other
words, a relation such that each element of the
domain participates in at least one link, while each
element in the range participates in at most one
link. An example of such a relation appears in
figure 8. If the lexical relation in a language is

A

B

1

2

3

Domain Range

Figure 8: shows an RPOF relation. In RPOFs, each
element of the domain has at least one link, while each
element of the range has at most one link.

an RPOF, then each meaning is expressible with
at least one morphemic form, and each potential
form expresses exactly one meaning, or else is not
used in the language. In other words, the language
has no homophones.

This assumption is usually only mildly inaccu-
rate. For some languages, however, such as Chi-
nese, mono-syllabic morphemes are frequently
homophonous. The analysis presented here may
fail for languages of this kind.

The advantage of using RPOFs is that their
structure can be summarised by a cardinality
function – a partial function from natural num-
bers to natural numbers. This function associates
with any cardinality of range subset the number
of elements of the domain which associate with
a range set of exactly that size. For example, the
relation shown in figure 8 maps one input onto

two outputs, while it maps the second input to
a single output. Thus its cardinality function is
{2 : 1, 1 : 1}. Such specifications completely
characterise an RPOF relation upto permutation
of either the domain or range.

One of the effects of assuming RPOF structure
for the lexical relation is that we do not allow the
sole link from any domain element to undergo
deletion. This is because all domain elements
must retain at least a single link. For the lexi-
cal relation, this has the fairly likely consequence
that the sole morpheme representing a meaning is
unlikely to be lost, while if there are multiple syn-
onyms, one might fall out of use.

4.2 Pairs of RPOFs

When we are comparing RPOFs evolved from
a common parent, we can characterise their re-
lationship, upto permutation of the domain and
range, by frequency counts over triples. The
triples are numbers describing how many ele-
ments of the range a domain element links to:
solely in relation 1, in both relations (ie, the num-
ber of doppels), and solely in relation 2. For each
triple, we count the number of domain elements
which have the correspondingly sized projections
on the range. This kind of summarisation allows
us to describe the similarity of two lexical rela-
tions with a few hundred numbers if we limit our-
selves to, say, domain elements linking to at most
10 range elements in either relation.

4.3 Significance Testing

It easy to evaluate the posterior likelihood of a
set of data associating a counting number with
each triple, D ∈ NTriples, given a model M ∈
Dist(Triples) in the form of a distribution over
triples. The triple associated with each domain el-
ement is assumed to be the result of independent
processes – in other words, we assume that the
number of doppel and non-doppel forms associ-
ated with a meaning is independent of the num-
bers associated with other meanings.

P (D|M) =
∏

t∈Triples

M(t)D(t)

We can evaluate the likelihood of one model
M1 generating data at the frequencies produced
by a second model M2. The posterior probability
of the data relative to the second model is shown

6



in equation (1), while the probability of generat-
ing that data from the model which did indeed
generate it is shown in equation (2).

P (M2|M1) =
∏

t∈Triples

M1(t)
M2(t) (1)

P (M2|M2) =
∏

t∈Triples

M2(t)
M2(t) (2)

The likelihood ratio, i.e. the ratio of posterior
likelihoods of M2 and M1, is shown in equation
(3).

P (M2|M1)

P (M2|M2)
=

∏

t∈Triples

M1(t)

M2(t)

M2(t)

(3)

This ratio expresses the amount of information
we are likely to gain about which distribution is
correct as a result of looking at a single data item.
In terms of RPOF relations, this single data item
is the triple of counts for relation-1-only, doppels,
and relation-2-only associated with a meaning. If,
as assumed above, the counts associated with each
domain element are independent, then the likeli-
hood ratio is raised to the power of the number N
of items seen.

P (M2|M1)

P (M2|M2)

N

= [
∏

t∈Triples

M1(t)

M2(t)

M2(t)

]N (4)

To establish a chance prediction at p < 0.05,
we merely need to know that P (M2|M1) <
P (M2|M2), and then determine the minimum
level of N for which the ratio in equation (4) is
less than 1/19. This number of items generated
from the target distribution would allow it to be
distinguished from chance at a ratio of 19 : 1.

Determining the correct value for N here is
a general problem known as power analysis.
For standard experimental designs and corre-
sponding statistics, the power analysis can be
found in many texts, such as that by (Bausell
and Li, 2006), and many computing libraries
such as the pwr library for power analysis
in R (see http://cran.r-project.org/
web/packages/pwr/). Where the model de-
sign is as complex as that described here, the
power analysis must be constructed from first
principles.

It is often easier to work with this quantity in in-
formational rather than probabilistic form, where
it takes the form shown in equation (5).

− log
P (M2|M1)

P (M2|M2)

= −
∑

t∈Triples

M2(t) log
M1(t)

M2(t)
(5)

The quantity in equation (5) is the well-known
Kullback-Liebler divergence DKL(M2||M1) of
the two distributions, also known as the discrim-
ination information. Significance is achieved
when this value multiplied by the number of data
items is greater than log2(19) = 4.2479.

4.4 Models with and without
Context-Induced Change

The construction of the no-CIA/CID and the with-
CIA/CID distributions makes use of four parame-
ters.

In the non-context model:

insertion of a link combines the probability
α of making a change at all for any given
domain element, with the probability β/(1+
β) that the change will be the addition rather
than deletion of a link, into a likelihood of
adding a link per domain element of αβ/(1+
β).

deletion of a link combines the probability α
of making a change at all for any given do-
main element, with the probability 1.0/(1 +
β) that the change will be to a deletion, with
the number m of links to select from for that
domain element, so the probability of delet-
ing any of those links is α/(m + mβ).

In the case of CIA/CID, we only consider the
impact of contact on deletion. The per-link prob-
ability of deletion α/(m + mβ) is modified by a
parameter γ indicating how strong the effects of
contact are. Positive γ brings about CIA – with
shared links less likely to be dropped than others,
while negative γ develops CID – shared links are
more likely to be dropped than others. The prob-
ability of dropping any given doppel link from a
given range node is (1−γ)z, and of any unshared
link is z where nd is the number of doppel links
from the domain element, and nu the number of

7



unshared links in the differentiating relation, and
z is given in equation (6).

z =
α

((1− γ)nd + nu)(1 + β)
(6)

4.5 Simulation Results

The above model was used to generate distribu-
tions over triples for non-CIA/CID relation pairs,
and relation pairs with additional CIA/CID pro-
cesses. The number of iterations of the mutation
process with or without CIA/CID was fixed at 100
in creating the generating distribution M2. The
parameter α was fixed at 0.1 and β at 0.5. The
value for β was chosen to approximately repro-
duce the single-language distribution of range-set
sizes for Castillian as computed from the Spanish
wordnet. The bias parameter γ was varied from
−0.5 to 0.5 in steps of 0.1. For each level of
bias, a search was made over non-CIA/CID distri-
butions at different depths from the common an-
cestor – this is the parameter N – until the dis-
tribution with the least K-L divergence from the
generated distribution was found. This found dis-
tribution M1 represents the null hypothesis, that
the data arose without CIA/CID bias.

The number of data items needed to achieve
significant recognition of the presence of
CIA/CID bias is 4.2479/DKL(M1||M2). The
results for various levels of γ are shown in figure
9.

γ N S D

-0.5 118 3128 0.091
-0.4 115 4364 0.096
-0.3 111 6839 0.101
-0.2 108 13800 0.107
-0.1 104 47378 0.114
0.1 95 30913 0.133
0.2 90 7331 0.145
0.3 85 2793 0.160
0.4 79 1278 0.178
0.5 72 654 0.203

Figure 9: Tabulation of number S of data items needed
to achieve significance and the number of iterations N
of the best non-CIA/CID model, and fraction of dop-
pels remaining D, against CIA/CID bias parameter γ.
Note that fewer data items are needed to recognise sig-
nificant assimilatory bias (positive values for γ) than
differentiating bias (negative values of γ) at the same
strength.

5 Conclusion

This paper has looked at different ways that re-
lations may evolve from a common parent struc-
ture. They may undergo local mutational changes,
global substitutions, independent changes, or
those triggered by contact with other relations. In
one class of relations, with reasonable assump-
tions, it is clear that a large, but possible, amount
of data needs to be adduced to ascertain that CIA
and/or CID have occured, rather than just shared
origin and independent drift.

In historical linguistics, this opens the door, for
testing whether the impressionistic accounts of
CID are reflected in the distributional properties
of the languages concerned. It may also be possi-
ble to circumvent the onerous data requirements,
by bringing in data from multiple independent re-
lations within the language, such as those defining
morphological structure and phonology, as well as
the lexicon.

As mentioned in the introduction, this work
is part of a larger programme by the authors to
develop statistical tools able to show that CID
has taken place, if it has. This work is partly
driven by the need to account historically for the
low cognacy but high structural similarity be-
tween nearby Australian languages. In the Daly
River area, adjacent languages with very similar
phonology, syntax and morphology show remark-
ably low cognacy counts, often around 8% (Har-
vey, 2008). One possible explanation for this is a
powerful CID imperative acting over a short time
depth to differentiate the vocabularies of the lan-
guages. The result presented in this paper sug-
gests that with sufficient lexical data, direct statis-
tical evidence could be found if this is indeed the
correct explanation.

There are potential uses for this work beyond
historical linguistics as well. The model might as-
sist in some cases of plagiarism detection, for ex-
ample, where two students worked together on an
assignment, and then set out to deliberately differ-
entiate them by altering vocabulary. Similar anal-
ysis of documents might reflect other reasons for
reworking a text, such as to give it a new identity
for a new setting.

8



References

A. Aikhenvald. 2002. Language contact in Amazonia.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Antoni Arnal. 2011. Linguistic changes in the catalan
spoken in catalonia under new contact conditions.
Journal of Language Contact, 4:5–25.

R. Barker Bausell and Yu-Fang Li. 2006. Power
Analysis for Experimental Research: A Practical
Guide for the Biological, Medical and Social Sci-
ences. Cambridge University Press, March.

Jaine E. Beswick. 2007. Regional nationalism in
Spain: language use and ethnic identity in Galicia.
Multilingual Matters.

Karl Brugmann. 1884. Zur frage nach den
verwandtschaftverhltnissen der indogermanischen
sprachen. Internationale Zeitschrift fr allgemeine
Sprachwissenschaft, 1:226–56.

T. Mark Ellison and Simon Kirby. 2006. Measur-
ing language divergence by intra-lexical compari-
son. In ACL, pages 273–80, Sydney.

Thomas Finkenstaedt and Dieter Wolff. 1973. Or-
dered profusion: studies in dictionaries and the En-
glish lexicon. C Winter.

Alexandre François. 2011. Social ecology and lan-
guage history in the northern vanuatu linkage: a tale
of divergence and convergence. Journal of Histori-
cal Linguistics, 1:175–246.

Mark Harvey. 2008. Proto-Mirndi: a discontinuous
language family in northern Australia. Pacific Lin-
guistics, Canberra.

Sir William Jones. 1786. The third anniversary dis-
course, delivered 2nd february, 1786: on the hindus.
Asiatick Researches, 1:415–31.

Donald C. Laycock. 1982. Melanesian linguistic di-
versity: a melanesian choice? In R.J. May and
H. Nelson, editors, Melanesia: beyond diversity,
pages 33–38. Australian National University Press,
Canberra.

Rebecca Posner and John N. Green. 1993. Bilingual-
ism and Linguistic Conflict in Romance. Walter de
Gruyter.

Malcolm D. Ross. 2006. Metatypy. In K. Brown, edi-
tor, Encylcopedia of language and linguistics. Else-
vier, Oxford, 2nd ed edition.

Malcolm Ross. 2007. Calquing and metatypy. Jour-
nal of Language Contact, Thema, 1:116–43.

August Schleicher. 1861. Compendium der
vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen
Sprachen. Hermann Bhlau, Weimar.

Sarah Grey Thomason and Terrence Kaufman. 1988.
Language contact, creolization, and genetic linguis-
tics. University of California Press, Berkeley & Los
Angeles.

Sarah Grey Thomason. 2007. Language contact and
deliberate change. Journal of Language Contact,
Thema, 1:41–62.

Carrasquer Vidal. 1998. Untitled post in ’Cladistic
language concepts’ thread, HISTLING mailing list,
Oct.

Roger Wright. 1998. Untitled post in ’Cladistic lan-
guage concepts’ thread, HISTLING mailing list,
Oct.

9


