



















































Semantic Parsing of Tamil Sentences


Proceedings of the Workshop on Machine Translation and Parsing in Indian Languages (MTPIL-2012), pages 15–22,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Semantic Parsing of Tamil Sentences 

Balaji J , Geetha  T V, Ranjani Parthasara thi 
Dept of CSE & IST, 

Anna University, Chennai – 600 025  
jkb.8in@gmail.com, tv_g@hotmail.com, 

ranjani.parthasarathi@gmail.com  

ABSTRACT  

In this paper, we propose a rule-based approach for the identificat ion of semantic sub-graphs 
from Tamil sentences. In order to achieve the goal of semantic sub -graph identification and 
construction, we use a semantic graph based representation called Univ ersal Networking 
Language (UNL), which is a directed acyclic graph representation. To identify and build the 
semantic sub-graphs, we classify the ru les based on morpho-semantic features which include 
word associated features and context based features . The rules are performed in two stages; one 
while build ing the simple UNL graphs and one after the simple UNL graphs construction. We 
have identified 18 rules for sub-graph identification and construction.  

Keywords: Nested graphs, Universal Networking Language, Semantic Graph representation  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

15



1. Introduction 

Semantic interpretation and representation of natural language texts is an important task 
of natural language processing. A number o f semantic representations have been used to 
represent natural language using conceptual representations. Graph based semantic 
representations such as semantic networks (Masterman, 1961) is a declarative g raphic 
representation consisting of definit ional, assertional, implicational, executable, learning and 
hybrid networks.  Silv io (1961) proposed correlational nets based on the relations such as part -
whole, case relations, instance, subtype and dependence relations. Yet  another graph 
representation that Hays (1964) proposed dependency graphs based on minimal syntactic units 
and conceptual graphs (Sowa, 1976) represents relations using inferences of first order logic. 
Similar semantic graph representation which contains semantic relat ions and attributes is 
Universal Networking Language (UNL) relations (UNDL, 1997) consists of 46 relat ions include 
agent, object, place, time, conjunction, disjunction, co-occurrence, content, quantity etc. represent 
semantics of natural language.  Our work focuses on the identificat ion of sub -graphs of semantic 
graphs for which we use UNL representation. The detailed  study on UNL is described in section 
3. Identify ing sub-graphs from a semantic graph though a difficu lt task is necessary to obtain the 
boundaries between complex semantic entities and which in turn helps in understanding the 
complete meaning conveyed by a natural language sentence.  

In this paper, we focus on identifying sub-graphs and building a nested graph structure 
for different types of natural language sentences  in morphologically rich and relatively free word 
order languages. In this paper, we describe the identification of semantic sub-graphs from Tamil, 
a morphologically rich and relat ively free word order language. Here, we define two set of rules 
one based on word associated features and another based on context oriented features to build a 
hyper-graph or nested UNL graph (NG) structure to represent sub-graphs of different phrases and 
clauses of sentences. We build the nested graph structure in two  stages; one, the identification of 
sub-graphs while building simple graphs (SG) and second, the identification of sub-graphs after 
the simple g raph (SG) construction. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the 
related works carried out using nested graph structure. Section 3 discusses the nested UNL 
graphs and the rules defined for sub-graph identification and construction. The evaluation and 
performance of the defined rules are investigated in section 4. Finally, section 5 concluded with 
future enhancements.    

2. Related Work 

Since we are focusing on the identification and construction of nested UNL graphs, first we 
discuss UNL in detail and the other similar semantic graph representations in this section. UNL 
(UNDL, 2011) is an electronic language designed to represent semantic data extracted from 
natural language texts . UNL consists of Universal words (UWs) represents concepts, relations 
represent the semantic relat ionship between concepts and attributes represents mood, aspect, 
tense etc. UNL representation is a directed acyclic graph representation in which nodes are 
concepts and links are relations exist between the concepts.  

(Blanc, 2000) described the French UNL Deconverter in which the issues in representing the 
semantic characteristics of predicative concepts have been discussed.  Dikonov (2008) d iscussed 
the representation of UNL graphs by segmenting complex graphs into simple graphs by applying 
rules based on propositions. Coreferential links are also considered in segmenting the UNL 

16



graphs. (Jain &Damani, 2008) described the identification of scopes by relative positions in a 
phrase structure tree. The author classified the relat ions into cumulative and others. In the same 
vein, this paper also focuses on the identification of sub-graphs of UNL semantic graphs. 

Similar to the graph based semantic representation discussed above Che in et  al (1997) 
presented a general framework for nested graphs provided with morphis m which is a mapping 
between two graphs that induces reflexive and transitive relations for defining nested conceptual 
graphs in preorder. The simple conceptual graphs have been generalized by reasoning of objects 
based on projection operation. A survey on frequent sub-graph discovery has been described by 
(Krishna et al, 2011) in which the popular graph mining algorithms have been compared. The 
author also discussed the essential factors of various graph algorithms fo r d iscovering the sub -
graphs.  

 In this paper, we focus on the identification and construction of semantic UNL nested 
graphs from Tamil sentences. Unlike other sub-graph identifications for languages such as 
French and English, we use the word  associated features and context based features such as UNL 
semantic relat ions instead of parsing the sentences. However, the other approaches for UNL 
nested graph identification explored some UNL relations, we also exp lore more UNL relations in 
the sub-graph identification.    

3. Nested UNL Graphs representation 

The UNL representation is said to be a hyper-graph, when it consist of several 
interlinked or subordinate sub-graphs. These sub-graphs are represented as hyper-nodes and 
correspond to the concept of dependent (subordinate) clauses, and a predicate. They are used to 
define the boundaries between complex semantic entit ies being represented. A scope is a group 
of relations between nodes that behave as a single semantic entity in a UNL graph. For instance, 
in the sentence "John killed Mary when Peter a rrived", the dependent clause "when Peter 
arrived" describes the argument of a t ime relation and, therefore, should be represented as a 
hyper-node (i.e., as a sub-graph) as represented below: 

 

FIGURE 1 UNL graph representation with nested sub-graphs for  

“John killed Mary when Peter arrived” 

Scopes are used to segregate subordinate clauses such as adverbial clauses, adjectival clauses and 
nominal clauses. Scopes focus on identifying relations that exist between different types of 
subordinate clauses and does not focus on the relations exist be tween words. Sub-graphs are 
identified only when the semantic unity is formed by the interlinked nodes and are semantically 
ambiguous.  

17



A hypergraph can be defined as a generalizat ion of a graph in which an edge can connect 
to any number of vertices. The set of vertices of a hypergraph that is connected by an edge is 
normally associated in some way and can be considered as sub -graphs. Hypergraphs can be 
formed when nodes of one sub-graph edge may originate/ terminate from/to a sub-graph 
considered as a single entity. Therefore, hypergraph has better expressive power than an ord inary 
graph. UNL representation is a directed acyclic graph representation in which the set of nodes 
interlinked by edges can represent a single semantic entity which is formally defin ed by UNDL 
as scopes (or) hyper-nodes (or) hyper-graphs as mentioned earlier. 

Let the graph G = {N1, N2 …… Ni} where the set {N1, N2 …… Ni} consists of nodes 
connected by relations {R1, R2 ….. Rj}. From graph G, the hidden nested graphs (NG) are 
identified by a set of rules. The rules are based on morphological suffixes, POS and semantic 
informat ion associated with word  and the context. The pseudo code is for rules are given in 
Figure 2. 

3.1. Rules for Nested Graph Identification 

Balaji (2011) presented a rule-based approach for building the UNL graphs of Tamil 
sentences using morpho-semantic features. The 53 ru les defined in their approach were utilized 
for converting Tamil sentences into simple UNL graphs.  In this paper, we incorporate a new set 
of 18 ru les for sub-graph identificat ion with the existing set of 53 rules originally p roposed by 
Balaji (2011). We explore new rules based on word and context based features for the 
identification of sub-graphs during two stages one while constructing simple UNL graphs  and 
one after simple UNL graph construction has been completed. The rules defined by us are 
categorized based on two stages where they are used and have been listed below. 

The rules are performed in two stages.  

Stage 1: identify sub-graphs while constructing simple UNL graphs (SG) using features 
such as lexical and word based information conveying semantic relations between nodes 
in SGs. Sub-graphs that fall under this category are the different phrase types. 

Stage 2:  identify sub-graphs (NG) after the construction of simple graphs (SG) by 
preserving the context level informat ion in the nodes and the relations connected 
between the nodes of SGs . Sub-graphs that fall under this category are the d ifferent 
clause types.  

As discussed earlier, ru les are classified based on word associated features such as morphological 
suffix, POS, UNL semantic constraints and in certain cases the word itself which may convey 
UNL semantic relations, and the context based features such as UNL semantic relations. Thes e 
rules set are utilized in the identification and construction of nested sub -graphs.  

1) Let the nodes Ni and Njwhere i~=j, be connected with UNL relations (R) such as and, 
mod, pos. Then the UNL graph R(Ni, Nj) can be a sub-graph (NG). In the UNL representation, 
hyper-nodes are indexed by ":XX", where XX is a two-digit hyper-node index called scope-id. 

Example 1:azakiya  poonga  (beautiful park). This example has the node Ni as “azakiya” and 
node Nj as “poonga”. The nodes Ni and Nj are connected by “mod” relation and marked with 
scope-id as nested graph (NG). In  Fig 3, the scope identifier is assigned to the headword 
“poonga” of simple UNL graph. Similarly, the nested graphs are identified using other relations.   

 

18



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 2 Pseudo code for Nested UNL Graph Identification and Construction 

 

 
FIGURE 3 Simple UNL graph representation for  

“azakiya poonga” with scope id (:01) assigned to the headword of the graph 
 

2) Rule set defined above is to identify simple graphs that can be a sub-graph (i.e. node 
connected to another node can be a sub-graph) as described with an example. The next rule is to 
identify the nested graphs of types  

a)  node (N) connected to a sub-graph (SG) and vice versa NSG (or) SGN 
b) Sub-graph(SG) connected to another sub-graph (SG) SGSG1 
 
a) NSG (or) SGN 

Let the Graph (G) be represented as G (V, E) where V-Vert ices and E-
Edges 
Notations: 
Simple UNL graph – SG, Nested UNL sub-graph – NSG, Scope Identifier - 
SCP id 
Morphological suffix – MS 
Parts of Speech – POS 
UNL Relations – UNLR 
Rules – R 
Input: Natural Language Sentence 
Output: Nested UNL Graphs 
Stage1:  
Refer (Balaji et al, 2011) for building simple UNL graphs.  
If(R (MS) | |R (POS)) {   
(POS ϵ  Adject ive, Adjectival Noun, MS ϵ  Adjectival Suffix, Genitive 
case) 
 Set SCP id for SG; 
 NSG ← SCP id (SG); (SG consists of Concept-Relation-Concept 
(i.e. V-E-V)) 
} else if (R (Connectives)) {  
(Connectives ϵ  Postpositions, Conjunctions) 
 Set SCP id for SG; 
 NSG ← SCP id (SG); 
} 
Stage2: 
if (UNLR (modifier | |  conjunction | |  possessor)) { 

Set SCP id for SG; 
 NSG ← SCP id (SG); 
}  

19



Example 2: azakiya poongavil sandhiththaan (met in a  beautiful park) . This example clearly 
illustrates the need of nested graphs. The verb “sandhi” is connected to “poonga” by “plc” 
relation. The graph obtained with “plc” relation gives only the partial meaning of the sentence. 
In order to obtain the complete meaning of the sentence in a graph, we can represent in two 
ways. One is by simply connecting the nodes with the appropriate UNL relations in a sentence 
and another is by representing the sentence in which shows the exact meaning of the sentence. 
Both Fig 4 and 5 shows simple graph and nested graph representations respectively.  

 

 

FIGURE 4 Simple Graph representation of “azakiya poongavil sandhiththaan” 

 

 

FIGURE 5 Nested Graph representation of “azakiya poongavil sandhiththaan” 

b) SG  SG1 
A sub-graph is connected to another sub-graph when the UNL relat ions conveyed by the lexical 
endings such as “aal” and some natural language words, normally referred as connectives 
(mostly postpositions and conjunctions in Tamil) such as “maRRum”, “paRRi”, “enpathu” etc. 
Different clauses such as adverbial, adjectival and nominal clauses are formed based on the 
connectives and the semantic sub-graphs are identified using these connectives.  

Example3: azakiya  poonga  maRRum periya  aaRu – beautiful park and big river 

Figure 6 shows the sub-graph to sub-graph representation. When representing as a simple 
semantic graph, the headwords of both the sub-graphs “poonga” and “aaRu” are connected with 
the UNL relation “and” in which the word “maRRum” indicates “and” relation.  

    

 

FIGURE 6 Nested graph representation of “azakiya poonga maRRum periya aaRu” 

 

 

20



4. Evaluation 

We investigate our rule -based approach which consists of 18 ru les for identifying and 
constructing nested graphs using 500 sentences. Among the total of 500 sentences, 160 sentences 
contain adverbial clauses, 140 are adject ival clauses and 200 are nominal clauses. In addition to 
the different types of clauses, different phrase types are also taken into consideration for 
evaluating the set of rules. The output graphs are evaluated in an ad hoc manner. Table -1 shows 
the analysis and performance of nested rules for different types of sentences. Table-1 also shows 
the actual number of sub-graphs (in percentage) present under each category of sentences and the 
number of sub-graphs (in percentage) identified by our rules in each category of sentences. 
However, the rule-based approach produces better results, additional ru les are required to 
improve the performance of our approach. Moreover, in order to identify the sub -graphs 
automatically and make it domain independent, we are also focu sing on machine learning 
approaches for the identification and construction of nested UNL graphs. 

Table-1: Performance Evaluation of Nested UNL Graphs  

Category of sentences Precision  Recall 

Adverbial clauses 0.55 0.34 

Adjectival clauses 0.66 0.37 

Nominal clauses 0.64 0.45 

The reason behind the low recall is the number of sub -graphs correctly identified is 
comparatively low when compared  to the number of sub -graphs actually present in the corpus. 
The complex sentences can have the possibility to have incorrectly mapped concepts . This is 
because some ru les may conflict each other.  To improve the performance of our approach and to 
increase precision and recall, more number of disambiguation rules are needed.  

5. Conclusion 

In this paper, we described rules for identifying sub-graphs of UNL semantic graphs. The 
rules are classified  into d ifferent categories – one is the identificat ion of sub-graphs while 
constructing simple graphs and another is the identification of sub-graphs after simple graph 
construction. The features considered for defining the rules are word associated features such as 
morphological suffixes and POS, and  context  associated informat ion such as UNL relations. The 
defined rules are tested with health domain corpus and it produces significantly better results. 
Further, we enhance the identification of sub-graphs using machine learning approach so as to 
achieve the task to be domain independent. 

References 

Balaji J, T V Geetha, Ranjan i, and MadhanKarky, (2011), Morpho-semantic features for rule-
based tamilenconversion. Interna tiona l Journa l of Computer Applications, 26(6):11{18, Ju ly 
2011. Published by Foundation of Computer Science, New York, USA  

21



Blanc Et ienne, (2000), From the UNL hypergraph to GETA's multilevel t ree, MT 2000 
Conference, Exeter, UK 11/2000 

Ceccato, Silv io (1961) Linguistic Analysis and Programming for Mechanical Translation , 
Gordon and Breach, New York. 

Chein, Michel and Mugnier, Marie-Laure, (1997), Positive Nested Conceptual Graphs, 
Proceedings of the Fifth Interna tional Conference on Conceptua l Structures: Fulfilling Peirce's 
Dream, page 95--109 

Dikonov V, (2008), UNL Graph Structure, Informacionnye process, vol. 8 #1 

Hays, David  G. (1964) “Dependency theory: a formalism and some observations,” Language 
40:4,511-525. 

Jain, M. and Damani, O. P. (2008), English to UNL (Interlingua) Enconversion, Indian Institute 
of Technology, Bombay, India 

Masterman, Margaret (1961), Semant ic message detection for machine translation using an 
Interlingua, Proc. 1961 Interna tiona l Conf. on Machine Transla tion , 438-475. 

Sowa, John F, (1976) “Conceptual graphs for a database interface,” IBM Journa l of Research and 
Development 20:4, 336-357. 

UNDL, (2011), www.undl.org, accessed Sep. 2011 

Varun Kirshna, Ranga Suri N N R, Athithan G, (2011), A  Comparative survey of A lgorithms for 
Frequent Sub-graph Discovery, Current Science, Vol. 100, No. 2, 25, JAN 2011 

  

22


