



















































Results from the ML4HMT-12 Shared Task on Applying Machine Learning Techniques to Optimise the Division of Labour in Hybrid Machine Translation


Second ML4HMT Workshop, pages 85–90,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Results from the ML4HMT-12 Shared Task on Applying
Machine Learning Techniques to Optimise the Division of

Labour in Hybrid Machine Translation

Christ ian F EDERMANN 1 Tsuyoshi OK I TA2 Maite M ELERO3

Mar ta R. COSTA− JUSSÀ3 Toni BADIA3 Jose f VAN GENABI T H2
(1) DFKI GmbH, Language Technology Lab, Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3, D-66123 Saarbrücken, GERMANY

(2) Dublin City University, School of Computing, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, IRELAND
(3) Barcelona Media, Speech and Language Group, Diagonal 177, 08018 Barcelona, SPAIN

cfedermann@dfki.de {tokita,josef}@computing.dcu.ie
{maite.melero,marta.ruiz,toni.badia}@barcelonamedia.org

Abstract
We describe the second edition of the ML4HMT shared task which challenges participants to create
hybrid translations from the translation output of several individual MT systems. We provide an
overview of the shared task and the data made available to participants before briefly describing the
individual systems. We report on the results using automatic evaluation metrics and conclude with a
summary of ML4HMT-12 and an outlook to future work.

Keywords: Machine Translation, System Combination, Machine Learning.

85



1 Introduction
The ML4HMT-12 workshop and associated shared task are an effort to trigger a systematic in-
vestigation on improving state-of-the-art hybrid machine translation, making use of advanced
machine-learning (ML) methodologies. The first edition of the workshop (ML4HMT-11) also
road-tested a shared task (and associated data set) described and summarised in (Federmann, 2011).
The main focus of the ML4HMT-12 (and ML4HMT-11) shared task is to address the question:

Can Hybrid MT and System Combination techniques benefit from extra information
(linguistically motivated, decoding, runtime, confidence scores or other meta-data) from
the individual MT systems involved?

Participants are invited to build hybrid MT systems and/or system combinations by using the output
of several MT systems of different types, as provided by the organisers. While participants are
encouraged to explore machine learning techniques to explore the additional meta-data information
sources, other approaches aimed at general improvements in hybrid and combination based MT are
welcome to participate in the challenge. For systems that exploit additional meta-data information
the challenge is that additional meta-data is highly heterogeneous and specific to individual systems.

One of the core objectives of the challenge is to build an MT combination (or more generally a hybrid
MT) mechanism, where possible making effective use of the system-specific MT meta-data output
produced by the participating individual MT systems as provided by the challenge development
set data comprising outputs of four distinct MT systems and various meta-data annotations. The
development set provided by the organisers can be used for tuning the combination or hybrid systems
during the development phase.

2 Datasets
The organisers of the ML4HMT-12 shared task provide two data sets, one for the language pair
Spanish→English (ES-EN), the other for Chinese→English (ZH-EN).
ES-EN Participants are given a development bilingual data set aligned at a sentence level. Each

"bilingual sentence" contains:

1. the source sentence;
2. the target (reference) sentence; and
3. the corresponding translations from four individual component MT systems, based on

different machine translation paradigms (Apertium (Ramírez-Sánchez et al., 2006);
Lucy (Alonso and Thurmair, 2003); two different variants of Moses (Koehn et al., 2007):
PB-SMT and HPB-SMT).

The output has been automatically annotated with system-internal meta-data information
derived from the translation process of each of the systems.

ZH-EN A corresponding data set for Chinese→English with output translations from three systems
(Moses; ICT_Chiero (Mi et al., 2009); Huajian RBMT) was prepared. Again, system output
has been automatically annotated with system-internal meta-data information.

In total, with the development data participants received 20,000 translations per system for training
and had to translate a test set containing 3,003 sentences (“newstest2011”) for Spanish→English,
while for the other language pair Chinese→English, a total of 6,752 training sentences per system
were available while the test set had a size of 1,357 sentences.

86



3 Participants

We received six submissions for the Spanish→English translation task and none for
Chinese→English. Below, we will briefly describe the participating systems.

3.1 DCU-Alignment

The authors of (Wu et al., 2012) incorporate alignment information as additional meta-data into
their system combination module which does not originally utilise any alignment information
provided by the individual MT systems producing the candidate translations. The authors add
alignment information provided by one of the MT systems, the Lucy RBMT engine, into the internal,
monolingual, alignment process. Unfortunately, the extracted alignment is often already a subset of
alignments calculated by the monolingual aligner in the system combination and hence the approach
does not augment the overall system combination performance as much as expected.

3.2 DCU-QE1

The submission described in (Okita et al., 2012a) incorporates a sentence-level Quality Estimation
(QE) score as meta-data into their system combination module. Recently, QE or confidence
estimation technology has advanced. It measures the quality of translations without references. The
core idea is to incorporate this knowledge into the system combination module through an improved
backbone selection.

3.3 DCU-QE2

The work described in (Okita et al., 2012a) also explains how one can incorporate a sentence-level
Quality Estimation score to do the data selection process. The authors designed, hence, a method
only based on Machine Learning. The translated output tends to preserve the translation quality as
is expected, which results in a high Meteor score. The idea in this paper is to select one of the given
translation outputs by QE score where a sentence-level QE technology is to measure the confidence
estimation for the translation output.

3.4 DCU-DA

The authors of (Okita et al., 2012b) utilised unsupervised topic/genre classification results as meta-
data, feeding into their system combination module. Since this module has access to topic/genre
information, an MT system can take advantage of this information. MT systems are tuned to
particular topic/genre groups and only compute translations for documents in this group, hence the
performance of such MT systems may improve.

3.5 DCU-LM

This submission incorporates latent variables as meta-data into the system combination module.
Information about those latent variables are supplied by a probabilistic neural language model. This
language model can be trained on a huge monolingual corpus, with the disadvantage that the training
of such a model takes considerable time. In fact, the LM used for ML4HMT-12 was small due to
the huge cost of training, resulting in only small performance gains.

87



Spanish→English
Score 1best R3 DCU-DA DCU-LM DCU-QE1 DFKI

Meteor 0.30692 0.32226 0.32124 0.31684 0.31712 0.32303
NIST 7.4296 7.4291 7.6771 7.5642 7.6481 7.2830

BLEU 0.2614 0.2524 0.2634 0.2562 0.2587 0.2570

Table 1: Translation quality of ML4HMT-12 submissions measured using Meteor, NIST, and BLEU
scores for language pair Spanish→English. Best system per metric printed in bold face.

3.6 DFKI
This submission implements a method for system combination based on joint, binarised feature
vectors as introduced in (Federmann, 2012b). It can be used to combine several black-box source
systems. The authors first define a total order on the given translation output which can be used to
partition an n-best list of translations into a set of pairwise system comparisons. Using this data, they
train an SVM-based classification model and show how this classifier can be applied to combine
translation output on the sentence level.

4 Results
Similar to the first edition of the ML4HMT shared task (ML4HMT-11), we aim to run both
an automatic and a manual evaluation campaign. We consider three automatic scoring metrics,
namely Meteor (Denkowski and Lavie, 2011), NIST (Doddington, 2002), and BLEU (Papineni
et al., 2002), which are all well-renowned evaluation metrics commonly used for MT evaluation.
Manual evaluation is currently being conducted using the Appraise software toolkit as described in
(Federmann, 2012a). Table 1 summarises the results for all participating systems.

5 Conclusion

System DFKI performed best in terms of Meteor score1 while system DCU-DA achieved best
performance for NIST and BLEU scores. It will be interesting to see how these findings correlate
with the results from manual evaluation, something we will report on in future work.

If technically feasible, we also intend to apply the algorithms submitted to the Spanish→English
portion of the Shared Task to the second language pair, Chinese→English.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Technological
Development of the European Commission through the T4ME contract (grant agreement: 249119)
as well as by Science Foundation Ireland (Grant No. 07/CE/I1142) as part of the Centre for Next
Generation Localisation (http://www.cngl.ie/) at Dublin City University. We are grateful
to the organisers of COLING for supporting ML4HMT-12. Also, we are greatly indebted to
all members of our program committee for their excellent and timely reviewing work and useful
comments and feedback. Last but not least we want to express our sincere gratitude to all participants
of the shared task for their interesting submissions.

1Which, in the first edition of the ML4HMT shared task, had shown the best correlation with human judgments. A finding
that will be investigated in more detail once results from the manual evaluation of ML4HMT-12 are available.

88



References
Alonso, J. A. and Thurmair, G. (2003). The Comprendium Translator system. In Proceedings of
the Ninth Machine Translation Summit, New Orleans, USA.

Denkowski, M. and Lavie, A. (2011). Meteor 1.3: Automatic Metric for Reliable Optimization and
Evaluation of Machine Translation Systems. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation, pages 85–91, Edinburgh, Scotland. ACL.

Doddington, G. (2002). Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation Quality Using n-gram
Co-occurrence Statistics. In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Human
Language Technology Research, HLT ’02, pages 138–145, San Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

Federmann, C. (2011). Results from the ML4HMT Shared Task on Applying Machine Learning
Techniques to Optimise the Division of Labour in Hybrid Machine Translation. In Proceedings
of the International Workshop on Using Linguistic Information for Hybrid Machine Translation
(LIHMT 2011) and of the Shared Task on Applying Machine Learning Techniques to Optimise
the Division of Labour in Hybrid Machine Translation (ML4. Shared Task on Applying Machine
Learning Techniques to Optimise the Division of Labour in Hybrid Machine Translation (ML4HMT-
11), pages 110–117, Barcelona, Spain. META-NET.

Federmann, C. (2012a). Appraise: An Open-Source Toolkit for Manual Evaluation of Machine
Translation Output. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics (PBML), 98:25–35.

Federmann, C. (2012b). A Machine-Learning Framework for Hybrid Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of the 35th Annual German Conference on Artificial Intelligence (KI-2012), pages
37–48, Saarbrücken, Germany. Springer, Heidelberg.

Koehn, P., Hoang, H., Birch, A., Callison-Burch, C., Federico, M., Bertoldi, N., Cowan, B., Shen,
W., Moran, C., Zens, R., Dyer, C., Bojar, O., Constantin, A., and Herbst, E. (2007). Moses: Open
Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of ACL Demo and Poster
Sessions, pages 177–180. ACL.

Mi, H., Liu, Y., Xia, T., Xiao, X., Feng, Y., Xie, J., Xiong, H., Tu, Z., Zheng, D., Lu, Y., and Liu,
Q. (2009). The ICT Statistical Machine Translation Systems for the IWSLT 2009. In Proceedings
of the International Workshop on Spoken Language Translation, pages 55–59, Tokyo, Japan.

Okita, T., Rubino, R., and van Genabith, J. (2012a). Sentence-level quality estimation for mt
system combination. In Proceedings of the Second Shared Task on Applying Machine Learning
Techniques to Optimise the Division of Labour in Hybrid Machine Translation (ML4HMT-12),
Mumbai, India. Accepted for publication.

Okita, T., Toral, A., and van Genabith, J. (2012b). Topic modeling-based domain adaptation for
system combination. In Proceedings of the Second Shared Task on Applying Machine Learning
Techniques to Optimise the Division of Labour in Hybrid Machine Translation (ML4HMT-12),
Mumbai, India. Accepted for publication.

Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J. (2002). BLEU: A Method for Automatic
Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’02, pages 311–318, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. ACL.

89



Ramírez-Sánchez, G., Sánchez-Martínez, F., Ortiz-Rojas, S., Pérez-Ortiz, J. A., and Forcada, M. L.
(2006). Opentrad apertium open-source machine translation system: an opportunity for business
and research. In Proceeding of Translating and the Computer 28 Conference.

Wu, X., Okita, T., van Genabith, J., and Liu, Q. (2012). System combination with extra alignment
information. In Proceedings of the Second Shared Task on Applying Machine Learning Techniques
to Optimise the Division of Labour in Hybrid Machine Translation (ML4HMT-12), Mumbai, India.
Accepted for publication.

90


