










































Detecting Shibboleths


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Joint Workshop of LINGVIS & UNCLH, pages 72–80,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 24 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Detecting Shibboleths

Jelena Prokić
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität

j.prokic@lmu.de

Çağrı Çöltekin
University of Groningen
c.coltekin@rug.nl

John Nerbonne
University of Groningen
j.nerbonne@rug.nl

Abstract

A SHIBBOLETH is a pronunciation, or,
more generally, a variant of speech that
betrays where a speaker is from (Judges
12:6). We propose a generalization of the
well-known precision and recall scores to
deal with the case of detecting distinctive,
characteristic variants when the analysis is
based on numerical difference scores. We
also compare our proposal to Fisher’s linear
discriminant, and we demonstrate its effec-
tiveness on Dutch and German dialect data.
It is a general method that can be applied
both in synchronic and diachronic linguis-
tics that involve automatic classification of
linguistic entities.

1 Introduction and Background
The background of this contribution is the line of
work known as DIALECTOMETRY (Séguy, 1973;
Goebl, 1982), which has made computational
work popular in dialectology. The basic idea of
dialectometry is simple: one acquires large sam-
ples of corresponding material (e.g., a list of lex-
ical choices, such as the word for carbonated
soft drink, which might be ‘soda’, ‘pop’, ‘tonic’
etc.) from different sites within a language area,
and then, for each pair of samples, one counts
(or more generally measures) the difference at
each point of correspondence. The differences
are summed, and, given representative and suffi-
ciently large samples, the results characterizes the
degree to which one site differs from another.

Earlier work in dialectology mapped the dis-
tributions of individual items, recording lines of
division on maps, so-called ISOGLOSSES, and
then sought bundles of these as tell-tale indica-
tors of important divisions between DIALECT AR-

EAS. But as Chambers & Trudgill (1998) note,
the earlier methodology is fraught with prob-
lems, many of which stem from the freedom of
choice with respect to isoglosses, and their (nor-
mal) failure to ‘bundle’ neatly. Nerbonne (2009)
notes that dialectometry improves on the tradi-
tional techniques in many ways, most of which
stem from the fact that it shifts focus to AGGRE-
GATE LEVEL of differences. Dialectometry uses
large amounts of material; it reduces the sub-
jectivity inherent in choosing isoglosses; it fre-
quently analyzes material in ways unintended by
those who designed dialect data collection efforts,
including more sources of differences; and finally
it replaces search for categorical overlap by a sta-
tistical analysis of differences.

Dialectometry does not enjoy overwhelming
popularity in dialectology, however, and one of
the reasons is simply that dialectologists, but also
laymen, are interested not only in the aggregate
relations among sites, or even the determination
of dialect areas (or the structure of other geo-
graphic influence on language variation, such as
dialect continua), but are quite enamored of the
details involved. Dialectology scholars, but also
laymen, wish to now where ‘coffee’ is ordered (in
English) with a labialized /k/ sound ([kwOfi]) or
where in Germany one is likely to hear [p] and
where [

>
pf] in words such as Pfad ‘path’ or Pfund

‘pound’.

Such characteristic features are known as SHIB-
BOLETHS, following a famous story in the old
testament where people were killed because of
where they were from, which was betrayed by
their inability to pronounce the initial [S] in the
word ‘shibboleth’ (Judges 12:6). We propose a
generalization of the well-known precision and

72



recall scores, appropriate when dealing with dis-
tances, and which are designed to detect distinc-
tive, characteristic variants when the analysis is
based on numerical difference scores. We also
compare our proposal to Fisher’s linear discrim-
inant, and we demonstrate its effectiveness on
Dutch and German dialect data. Finally we eval-
uate the success of the proposal by visually ex-
amining an MDS plot showing the distances one
obtains when the analysis is restricted to the fea-
tures determined to be characteristic.

The paper proceeds from a dialectometric per-
spective, but the technique proposed does not as-
sume an aggregate analysis, only that a group of
sites has been identified somehow or another. The
task is then to identify characteristic features of
(candidate) dialect areas.

1.1 Related Work

Wieling and Nerbonne (2011) introduced two
measures seeking to identify elements character-
istic of a given group, REPRESENTATIVENESS
and DISTINCTIVENESS. The intuition behind rep-
resentativeness is simply that a feature increases
in representativeness to the degree that it is found
at each site in the group. We simplify their defi-
nition slightly as they focus on sound correspon-
dences, i.e. categorical variables, while we shall
formulate ideas about features in general.

Representativeness(f, g) =
|gf |
|g|

where f is a feature (in their case sound corre-
spondence) in question, g is the set of sites in a
given cluster, and gf denotes the set of sites where
feature f is observed.

As Wieling (2012) notes, if one construes the
sites in the given group as ‘relevant documents’
and features as ‘queries’, then this definition is
equivalent to RECALL in information retrieval
(IR).

The intuition behind distinctiveness is similar
to that behind IR’s PRECISION, which measures
the fraction of positive query responses that iden-
tify relevant documents. In our case this would be
the fraction of those sites instantiating a feature
that are indeed in the group we seek to character-
ize. In the case of groups of sites in dialectologi-
cal analysis, however, we are dealing with groups
that may make up significant fractions of the en-
tire set of sites. Wieling and Nerbonne therefore

introduced a correction for ‘chance instantiation’.
This is derived from the relative size of the group
in question:

RelSize(g) = |g||G|

RelOcc(f, g) = |g
f |
|Gf |

Distinct(f, g) = RelOcc(f,g)−RelSize(g)1−RelSize(g)

where, G is the set of sites in the larger area of
interest.

As a consequence, smaller clusters are given
larger scores than clusters that contain many ob-
jects. Distinctiveness may even fall below zero,
but these will be very uninteresting cases — those
which occur relatively more frequently outside
the group under consideration than within it.

Critique

There are two major problems with the earlier
formulation which we seek to solve in this pa-
per. First, the formulation, if taken strictly, applies
only to individual values of categorical features,
not to the features themselves. Second, many
dialectological analyses are based on numerical
measures of feature differences, e.g., the edit dis-
tance between two pronunciation transcriptions or
the distance in formant space between two vowel
pronunciations (Leinonen, 2010).

We seek a more general manner of detecting
characteristic features below, i.e. one that applies
to features, and not just to their (categorical) val-
ues and, in particular, one that can work hand in
hand with numerical measures of feature differ-
ences.

2 Characteristic Features
Since dialectometry is built on measuring differ-
ences, we assume this in our formulation, and we
seek those features which differ little within the
group in question and a great deal outside that
group. We focus on the setting where we exam-
ine one candidate group at a time, seeking fea-
tures which characterize it best in distinction to
elements outside the group.

We assume therefore, as earlier, a group g that
we are examining consisting of |g| sites among a
larger area of interest G with |G| sites including
the sites s both within and outside g. We further
explicitly assume a measure of difference d be-
tween sites, always with respect to a given feature

73



f . Then we calculate a mean difference with re-
spect to f within the group in question:

d̄gf =
2

|g|2 − |g|
∑

s,s′∈g
df (s, s

′)

and a mean difference with respect f involving
elements from outside the group:

¯
d6gf =

1

|g|(|G| − |g|)
∑

s∈g,s′ 6∈g
df (s, s

′)

We then propose to identify characteristic features
as those with relatively large differences between
¯
d6gf and d̄

g
f . However, we note that scale of these

calculations are sensitive to a number of factors,
including the size of the group and the number of
individual differences calculated (which may vary
due to missing values). To remedy the difficul-
ties of comparing different features, and possibly
very different distributions, we standardize both
¯
d6gf and d̄

g
f and calculate the difference between

the z-scores, where mean and standard deviation
of the difference values are estimated from all dis-
tance values calculated with respect to feature f .
As a result, we use the measure

¯
d6gf − d̄f
sd(df )

−
d̄gf − d̄f
sd(df )

where df represents all distance values with re-
spect to feature f (the formula is not simplified
for the sake of clarity). We emphasize that we
normalized the difference scores for each feature
separately. Had we normalized with respect to all
the differences, we would only have transformed
the original problem in a linear fashion.

Note that this formulation allows us to apply
the definitions to both categorical and to numer-
ical data, assuming only that the difference mea-
sure is numerical. See illustration in Figure 1.

For this work we used a difference function that
finds the aggregated minimum Levenshtein dis-
tance between two sites as calculated by Gabmap
(Nerbonne et al., 2011). However, we again em-
phasize that the benefit of this method in compari-
son to others proposed earlier is that it can be used
with any feature type as long as one can define
a numerical distance metric between the features.
Regardless of the type of data set, some distance
values between certain sites may not be possible
to calculate, typically due to missing values. This

S

Figure 1: Illustration of the calculation of a distance
function. Our proposal compares the mean distance
of all pairs of sites within a group, including all those
shown on the left (in blue) to the mean distance of the
pairs of sites where the first is within the group and the
second outside it.

may affect the scale and the reliability of the av-
erage distance calculations presented above. For
the experiments reported below, we calculated av-
erage scores only if the missing values did not ex-
ceed 20% of the total values used in the calcula-
tion.

Fisher’s Linear Discriminant

The formulation we propose looks a good deal
like the well-known Fisher’s linear discriminant
(FLD) (Schalkoff, 1992, 90ff), which maximizes
the differences in means between two data sets
with respect to (the sum of) their variances.

S =
σ2between
σ2within

But FLD is defined for vectors, while we wish
to generalize to cases where only differences are
guaranteed to be numerical measures. The mean
of categorical features, for example, is undefined.
We might imagine applying something like FLD
in the space of differences, but note that low vari-
ance does not necessarily correspond to a tightly
knit group in difference space. If we measure the
differences among all the pairs of sites in a can-
didate group, each of which realizes a given cate-
gorical feature differently, the mean difference of
pairs will be one (unit) and the variance zero. Dif-
ference spaces are simply constructed differently.

Silhouette method

We also note relation of our approach to the
SILHOUETTE method introduced by Rousseeuw
(1987) used to evaluate clustering validity. The
silhouette method is used to determine the optimal
number of clusters for a given dataset. It starts
from data that has already been clustered using

74



any of the (hierarchical or flat) clustering tech-
niques. For every object i in the data (these would
be sites in clustering to detect dialect groups) it
calculates the average dissimilarity to all other ob-
jects in the same cluster a(i), and the average dis-
similarity to all objects in all other clusters (for
every cluster separately). After the distances to
all other clusters are computed, the cluster with
the smallest average distance (b(i)) to the object
in question is selected as the most appropriate one
for that object. The silhouette s(i) is calculated as

s(i) =
b(i)− a(i)

max{a(i), b(i)}

Values close to 1 indicate that the object is ap-
propriately clustered, while negative values indi-
cate that the object should have been clustered in
its neighbouring cluster. By comparing silhouette
values obtained by clustering into different num-
bers of groups, this technique indicates an optimal
clustering.

We compare average distances within groups to
average distance to objects outside groups with re-
spect to individual features, making our proposal
different. A second point of difference is that we
aim not to score ‘groupings’, but rather how char-
acteristic specific features are for a given group-
ing.

3 Experimental set up
The method we propose is tested on Dutch and
German dialect data. We use Levenshtein algo-
rithm in order to calculate the distances between
the sites and Ward’s clustering method to group
the sites. In this section we give a brief descrip-
tion of the data and the clustering procedure.

Dutch data set

Dutch dialect data comes form the Goeman-
Taeldeman-Van Reenen Project1 that comprises
1876 items collected from more than 600 loca-
tions in the Netherlands and Flanders. The data
was collected during the period 1979-1996, tran-
scribed into IPA and later digitalized. It consists
of inflected and uninflected words, word groups
and short sentences. More on this project can be
found in Goeman and Taeldeman (1996).

The data used in this paper is a subset of
the GTRP data set and consist of the pronunci-
ations of 562 words collected at 613 location in

1http://www.meertens.knaw.nl

the Netherlands and Flanders. It includes only
single word items that show phonetic variation.
Multi-word items and items that show morpho-
logical, rather than phonetic variation, were ex-
cluded from the analysis. Items where multiple
lexemes per site are possible were also excluded.2

German data set

German dialect data comes from the project
‘Kleiner Deutscher Lautatlas — Phonetik’ at the
‘Forschungszentrum Deutscher Sprachatlas’ in
Marburg. In this project a number of sentences
from Georg Wenker’s huge collection of Ger-
man dialects (1870s-1880s)3 were recorded and
transcribed in the late 1970s and early 1990s
(Göschel, 1992). The aim of the project was to
give an overview of the sound structure of mod-
ern German dialects.

In this paper we use a small subset of the data
that consists of the transcriptions of 40 words. We
have selected only words that are present at all or
almost all 186 locations evenly distributed over
Germany.

Distance matrices

The distances between each pair of sites within
each of the two data sets were calculated using
the Levenshtein algorithm (Levenshtein, 1966).
This method is frequently used in dialect com-
parison to measure the differences between two
sites (Nerbonne et al., 1996; Heeringa, 2004). It
aligns two strings and calculates the number of
mismatching segments in two strings. The total
distance between two sites is the average distance
between all compared strings collected at those
two sites. For the method proposed in this paper,
any other method whose output is a numerical dis-
tance metric between the features can be applied.
The final result is a site × site distance matrix,
that can later be analyzed by means of clustering
or, alternatively, using a dimensionality reduction
technique such multidimensional scaling.

We analyze two distance matrices using Ward’s
clustering algorithm, also known as the minimal
variance algorithm. We use MDS plots (as im-
plemented in Gabmap (Nerbonne et al., 2011)) as
a visual basis to choose the optimal number for
clusters for the two data sets. The choice of the

2The data set used in this paper can be downloaded from
http://www.gabmap.nl/ app/examples/.

3See, too, the Digitaler Wenker Atlas (DiWA) project,
http://www.3.diwa.info/

75



appropriate clustering algorithm is a difficult task
as is the determination of the number of signif-
icant groups (Prokić and Nerbonne, 2008), but
these questions are not the subjects of this pa-
per. At the risk of repeating ourselves, we empha-
size that our focus in this paper is not the choice
of clustering method or the determination of the
most significant (number of) groups. We do not
even assume that the groups were obtained via
clustering, only that candidate groups have some-
how been identified. We focus then on finding the
most characteristic features for a given group of
sites. In the next section we present the results
of applying our method to the Dutch and German
data sets.

Evaluation

We evaluate success in the task of selecting items
characteristic of an area by using MDS to ana-
lyze a distance matrix obtained from only that
item. We then project the first, most important
MDS dimension to a map asking whether the orig-
inal group of sites indeed is identified. Note that
in successful cases the area corresponding to the
group may be shaded either as darker than the rest
or as lighter. In either case the item (word) has
served to characterize the region and the sites in
it.

We also experimented with clustering to ana-
lyze the distances based on the pronunciations of
the candidate characteristic shibboleths, but single
word distances unsurprisingly yielded very unsta-
ble results. For that reason we use MDS.

4 Results

Dutch

We examine a clustering of the distance matrix
for Dutch varieties with six clusters, which we
present in Figure 2.

The clustering algorithm identified Frisian
(dark green), Low Saxon (Groningen and Over-
ijsel, light blue), Dutch Franconian varieties
(pink), Limburg (dark blue), Belgian Brabant
(red) and West Flanders (light green) dialect
groups. For each feature (word) in our data set
and for each group of sites (cluster) we calculated
the differences within the given site and also with
respect to each of the other five groups in order
to determine which words differ the least within
the given group and still differ a great deal with
respect to the sites outside the group. The top five

Figure 2: Six dialect groups in Dutch speaking area.

words for each group of sites are presented in Ta-
ble 1.

The results obtained show that the same word
could be prominent for more than one cluster;
for example, the word scheiden is scored highly
in two different dialect groups. In Figure 3 we
present maps of Dutch language area that are
based on the pronunciations of the best scoring
words for each of the six groups of sites. For
each word we calculated the Levenshtein distance
and analyzed the resulting distance matrices using
MDS. In maps in Figure 3 we present the first ex-
tracted dimension, which always explains most of
the variation in the data.4 We also supply the de-
gree to which the extracted dimensions correlate
with the distances in the input matrix.

Maps in Figure 3 reveal that the best scoring
word does indeed identify the cluster in question.
For example, the map in Figure 3(a) reveals that
based on the pronunciation of word vrijdag the
Frisian-speaking area is internally homogeneous
and distinct from the rest of the sites. No other
groups can be identified in the map. In Figure 3(b)
we present the analysis of a distance matrix based
on the pronunciation of the word wonen ‘live’ that
was found to be relevant for the Low Saxon area.
The map shows two areas, Low Saxon and West
Flanders, where it was also among top 10 best
scored words, as two distinct areas.5

4The only exception is Figure 3(b) where we present sec-
ond dimension.

5These two areas are both known for pronouncing the slot
’n in final unstressed syllables of the form /@n/ as a syllabic
nasal that has assimilated in place to the preceding conso-
nant.

76



(a) vrijdag (r = 0.78), selected as most character-
istic of the Frisian area.

(b) wonen (r = 0.54), characteristic both of Low
Saxon (in the northeast) but also of West Flanders
(southwest).

(c) durven (r = 0.54), characteristic of Franco-
nian Dutch.

(d) wegen (r = 0.59), characteristic of Limburg.

(e) gisteren (r = 0.60), selected as characteristic
of Belgian Brabant.

(f) heet (r = 0.58), selected as characteristic of
West Flanders, but in fact not awfully successful in
distinguishing exactly that area.

Figure 3: Dutch dialect area based on the pronunciation of words (a) vrijdag, (b) wonen, (c) durven, (d) wegen,
(f) heet and (e) gisteren selected as characteristic of respective areas.

77



Frisian Low Saxon Franconian Limburg West Flanders Belg.Brabant
2.891217 vrijdag 1.881354 wonen 1.131973 durven 2.317413 wegen 1.605255 heet 1.968656 gisteren
2.808631 zoet 1.875302 dopen 1.101160 maanden 2.048480 schoenen 1.587253 weten 1.803535 gewoon
2.659577 geven 1.784224 scheiden 1.096989 metselen 2.015069 schaven 1.573224 weer 1.794680 gal
2.618426 draden 1.747136 bijten 1.073387 houden 1.979678 schapen 1.567049 keuren 1.764176 kleden
2.606748 dun 1.721321 worden 1.054981 dorsen 1.956787 scheiden 1.548940 horen 1.753901 wippen

Table 1: Five most characteristic words for each Dutch dialect variety.

Figure 4: Two dialect groups in Germany.

German

We ran the same analysis for the German data set.
In Figure 4 we present the two largest groups in
the cluster analysis of the distances obtained using
40 words. We might have examined more groups,
but we wished to examine results based on larger
groups as well.

We focus on the top-level, two-way split that
divides Germany into north and south.6 These ar-
eas correspond with the traditional division into
Low German on one hand, and Middle and High
German on the other. Just as with the Dutch data,
for every word in the data set and for each group
of sites we calculate the distances with respect to
the word in order to see how well the words char-
acterize one of the two dialect groups. The results
are presented in Table 2. Because we are exam-
ining a two-way split, it is not surprising that the
same words sometimes characterize the areas (in-
versely).

In Figures 5(a) and 5(b) we present the MDS
maps based on the distances derived from com-

6In anticipation of worries about the analysis we hasten
to add that more finely discriminated groups may also be
distinguished. That is not our purpose here.

North South
1.057400 weisse 1.056600 gefahre
1.011804 gefahre 0.909610 gross
0.982128 bleib 0.825211 weisse
0.920354 Ochse 0.764463 Pfeffer
0.831812 gross 0.755694 baue

Table 2: Five most prominent words for two dialect
groups in Germany. Because we examine a two-way
split, some words characterize both areas.

paring the words weisse and gefahre, which were
two best ranked words.

The word weisse shows only small differences
within the north, which is illustrated by the light-
colored northern part of Germany in Figure 5(a).
The map in Figure 5(b) shows an even clearer split
highlighting the High German area based on the
best ranked word found by our method. This word
shows also low variation in the Low German area
(second best scored), which is also clearly visible
in Figure 5(b).

5 Conclusions
In this paper we have presented a method to de-
tect the most characteristic features of a candidate
group of linguistic varieties. The group might be
one obtained from cluster analysis, but it might
also be obtained from correspondence analysis
(Cichocki, 2006), or it might simply be another
group identified for theoretical or extra-linguistic
reasons (geography or social properties).

The method is applicable to any feature type as
long as one can define a numerical distance met-
ric between the elements. In particular the method
maybe applied to categorical data whose differ-
ences are individually zero or one, or to vowels
characterized by the Euclidean distance between
formant vectors (or pairs), and it may be applied
to edit distance measures applied to phonetic tran-
scriptions. The proposed method is therefore not
constrained in its application to only the categor-
ical features, as the proposal in Wieling & Ner-
bonne (2011) was.

Essentially the method seeks items that differ
minimally within a group but differ a great deal

78



(a) weisse (r = 0.63) (b) gefahre (r = 0.59)

Figure 5: First MDS dimensions based on the pronunciation of words (a) weisse and (b) gefahre.

with respect to elements outside it. We crucially
limited its application to elements that were in-
stantiated at least 20% of the sites, and we used
normalized z-scores in order to improve the com-
parability of the measurements.

We demonstrated the effectiveness of the pro-
posed method on real dialect data by trying to
identify the words that show low variation within
a given dialect area, and high variation outside a
given area. We evaluate the results of these ex-
periments by visually examining the distances in-
duced from single words. Although this indicated
that the technique is performing well, we concede
that alternative evaluations would be worth while,
e.g. simply mapping the density of low distances
between pairs in the distance matrix. This awaits
future work.

The proposed method can be used in dialectom-
etry to automatically identify characteristic fea-
tures in dialect variation, while at the same time it
offers traditional dialectologists insights into the
details involved. Its application may also not be
limited to dialectology (including dialectometry).
It is a general method that can be applied in other
branches of linguistics, such as historical linguis-
tics or typology, that deal with language classifi-
cation at various levels.

The method proposed in this paper might also
find use in the evaluation of clustering, specifi-
cally in helping researchers to determine the opti-
mal number of groups in a clustering solution. It

might then result in a modification of the silhou-
ette technique discussed earlier.

Application of computational methods in di-
alectology and historical linguistics is still not
generally accepted. This state of affairs is due less
to the questions that the groups of researchers are
trying to answer, and more to the methods they are
using to reach their goals. Bringing them together
is a challenging task. The method we propose can
analyse large amounts of data without losing sight
of the linguistic details.

References
J.K. Chambers and Peter Trudgill. 1998. Dialectol-

ogy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Wladyslaw Cichocki. 2006. Geographic variation in

Acadian French /r/: What can correspondence anal-
ysis contribute? Literary and Linguistic Comput-
ing, 21(4):529–542. Special Issue, J.Nerbonne &
W.Kretzschmar (eds.), Progress in Dialectometry:
Toward Explanation.

Hans Goebl. 1982. Dialektometrie: Prinzip-
ien und Methoden des Einsatzes der Numerischen
Taxonomie im Bereich der Dialektgeographie.
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften,
Wien.

Antonie Goeman and Johan Taeldeman. 1996.
Fonologie en morfologie van de nederlandse di-
alecten. een nieuwe materiaalverzameling en twee
nieuwe atlasprojecten. Taal en Tongval, 48:38–59.

Joachim Göschel. 1992. Das Forschungsinstitut für
Deutsche Sprache “Deutscher Sprachatlas”. Wis-

79



senschaftlicher Bericht, Das Forschungsinstitut für
Deutsche Sprache, Marburg.

Wilbert Heeringa. 2004. Measuring Dialect Pro-
nunciation Differences using Levenshtein Distance.
Ph.D. thesis, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen.

Therese Leinonen. 2010. An Acoustic Analysis of
Vowel Pronunciation in Swedish Dialects. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Groningen.

Vladimir I. Levenshtein. 1966. Binary codes ca-
pable of correcting insertions, deletions and rever-
sals. Cybernetics and Control Theory, 10(8):707–
710. Russian orig. in Doklady Akademii Nauk SSR
163(4), 845–848, 1965.

John Nerbonne, Wilbert Heeringa, Erik van den Hout,
Peter van der Kooi, Simone Otten, and Willem
van de Vis. 1996. Phonetic distance between dutch
dialects. In Gert Durieux, Walter Daelemans, and
Steven Gillis, editors, CLIN VI: Proc. from the Sixth
CLIN Meeting, pages 185–202. Center for Dutch
Language and Speech, University of Antwerpen
(UIA), Antwerpen.

John Nerbonne, Rinke Coleand, Charlotte Gooskens,
Peter Kleiweg, and Therese Leinonen. 2011.
Gabmap: A web application for dialectology. Di-
alectologia, Special issue II:65–89.

John Nerbonne. 2009. Data-driven dialectology. Lan-
guage and Linguistics Compass, 3(1):175–198.

Jelena Prokić and John Nerbonne. 2008. Recogniz-
ing groups among dialects. International Journal of
Humanities and Arts Computing, 2(1-2):153–172.
DOI: 10.13366/E1753854809000366.

Peter J. Rousseeuw. 1987. Silhouettes: a graphical aid
to the interpretation and validation of cluster analy-
sis. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathe-
matics, 20:53–65.

Robert Schalkoff. 1992. Pattern Recognition: Statisti-
cal, Structural and Neural Approaches. John Wiley,
New York.

Jean Séguy. 1973. La dialectométrie dans l’atlas lin-
guistique de gascogne. Revue de Linguistique Ro-
mane, 37(145):1–24.

Martijn Wieling and John Nerbonne. 2011. Bipar-
tite spectral graph partitioning for clustering di-
alect varieties and detecting their linguistic fea-
tures. Computer Speech and Language, 25:700–
715. DOI:10.1016/j.csl.2010.05.004. Published on-
line May 21, 2010.

Martijn Wieling. 2012. A Quantitative Approach to
Social and Geogrpahical Dialect Variation. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Groningen.

80


