



















































Delayed Tree Locality and the Status of Derivation Structure


Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms (TAG+11), pages 99–107,
Paris, September 2012.

Delayed Tree Locality and the Status of Derivation Structures 

 
 

Joan Chen-Main 
Institute for Research in Cognitive Science 

University of Pennsylvania 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA 

chenmain@seas.upenn.edu 
 

 
 

 

 
 

Abstract 

While the derived trees yielded by TAG 
derivations are uncontroversially taken to 
correspond to phrase structure, the status of 
TAG derivation structures as more than a 
record of TAG operations is less certain. An 
attractive possibility is to interpret the 
derivation structure as some representation of 
semantic meaning, such as a dependency 
analysis. However, the literature has 
identified cases where doing so is 
problematic (Rambow et al., 1995, Candito 
and Kahane, 1998, Frank and van Genabith, 
2001, Gardent and Kallmeyer, 2003, 
Kallmeyer and Romero 2008), including what 
has been referred to as the Missing Link 
Problem: predicates which should have a 
dependency link are unconnected in the 
derivation structure. This paper shows that 
delayed tree-local MC-TAG (Chiang and 
Scheffler, 2008) provides a solution for 
certain types of missing links. Further, we 
observe that the regular form 2-level TAG 
solutions to the Missing Link Problem given 
in (Dras et al., 2004) can be reinterpreted 
using delayed tree-local MC-TAG: the object 
level derivations of the 2-level TAG 
derivations can be converted into legal 1-
delayed tree-local MCTAG derivations. Thus, 
delayed tree-locality maintains the possibility 
that TAG derivation structures can be more 
meaning-laden than solely a record of the 
combination of trees. 

1 Introduction 
In the mainstream generative approaches to 
grammatical structure, there is typically no 
distinction between a derivation of a sentence 
and its phrase structure. For example, in 

Chomsky’s (1995) Minimalist Program 
(formalized by Stabler (1997) and its precusors, 
the history of a valid derivation is taken to be the 
phrase structure of a grammatical construction: 
composition determines constituency. In 
contrast, a derivation in a tree-rewriting 
formalism, such as TAG, allows for an additional 
level of representation. As a mathematical object, 
each TAG derivation yields a string, a derived 
tree, and a derivation structure. When TAG is 
used for linguistic analysis, the string and 
derived tree uncontroversially correspond to the 
grammatical sentence and its phrase structure, 
respectively, but the status of the derivation 
structure as more than a record of TAG 
operations is less certain.  

An attractive possibility is to interpret the 
derivation structure as some representation of 
semantic meaning, such as a dependency analysis 
(e.g. Rambow and Joshi, 1997), and, indeed, 
there is body of work that explores the degree to 
which it is possible to equate the TAG derivation 
tree with a dependency analysis. This line of 
inquiry has identified cases where doing so is 
problematic (Rambow et al., 1995, Candito and 
Kahane, 1998, Frank and van Genabith, 2001, 
Gardent and Kallmeyer, 2003, Kallmeyer and 
Romero 2008), including what has been referred 
to as the Missing Link Problem. This particular 
mismatch stems from the way extraction is 
handled in TAG-style analyses when part of a 
lower clause ends up in the higher clause. In such 
cases, clausal complementation is carried out 
using adjoining. The resulting “stretching apart” 
of substructure in the tree for the lower clause 
eliminates the need for traces, and is a hallmark 
of TAG accounts of phenomena such as raising 
and successive-cyclic wh-movement in English. 

99



The problem arises when more than one instance 
of this kind of adjoining occurs in the same tree. 

The proposed solutions to the Missing Link 
Problem can be divided into two kinds of 
approaches. The Missing Link Problem naturally 
led to the question of how to address the 
computation of TAG semantics in general, and 
the first kind of response can be roughly 
characterized as modification of the object on 
which semantics is computed, for example, by 
“enriching” the derivation structure with 
additional links (Kallmeyer, 2002), computing 
meaning based on the derived phrase structure 
tree instead of the derivation tree (Gardent and 
Kallmeyer, 2003, Frank and van Genabith, 
2001), and encoding meaning in both the 
derivation and derived tree (Kallmeyer and 
Romero, 2008). The development of TAG 
semantics is a significant and related 
contribution, but for the purposes of this paper, it 
is important to note that the status of the 
derivation tree is not the primary concern of this 
area of research. 

A second type of solution to the Missing Link 
Problem can roughly be characterized as 
modifications to the grammar such that the 
derivation structures better align with the desired 
dependency analyses. These include proposals 
that are more powerful that TAGs, such as set-
local MCTAGs (Weir, 1988) and D-tree 
Substitution Grammar (Rambow et al., 1995), as 
well as some that are weakly TAG-equivalent., 
such as regular form 2-level TAG (Dras et al., 
2004). These proposals do not include a full 
semantics for TAG, but they preserve the 
intuition that the derivation structure is a 
meaning-carrying level of representation. The 
derivation structure need not be the object over 
which semantics is computed to be useful. Note, 
for example, that the Prague Dependency 
Treebank (PDT 2.0) is annotated with multiple 
layers, with the analytical layer encoding what 
are deemed “dependency relations” and the 
tectogrammatical layer encoding what is taken to 
be the “underlying deep structure” of the 
sentence (Hajič et al, 2006). It is also worth 
noting that when the derivations of TAGs and 
TAG variants are converted into the form of 
dependency structures (in the style of Kulhmann, 
2007, Bodirsky et al., 2005), their formal 
properties as a class inform us with respect to 
coverage of dependency treebanks (Chen-Main 
and Joshi, 2012). 

The observations reported here fall under the 
second kind of response. The big picture goal is 

to understand the role of the derivation structure. 
With the intuition that the derivation structure’s 
role reaches beyond a record of operations as a 
backdrop, this paper begins to pursue the kind of 
answers afforded us by the recently introduced 
delayed tree-local MC-TAG formalism (Chiang 
and Scheffler, 2008). Delayed tree-local 
MCTAG is weakly-equivalent to standard TAG,1 
but it permits linguistic dependencies to be 
retained that are not necessarily retained in 
alternative TAG variants. This has already 
proven useful in linguistic analyses of anaphor 
binding (Chiang and Scheffler, 2008), non-local 
right node raising (Han et al., 2010), binding 
variables (Storoshenko and Han, 2010), and clitic 
climbing (Chen-Main et al. 2012). Here, we 
explore how the formalism deals with 
constructions whose standard TAG (or MCTAG) 
derivations result in missing links. We also 
observes that the solutions to the Missing Link 
Problem given in (Dras et al., 2004) can be 
reinterpreted as 1-delayed tree-local MCTAG 
derivations. We see that the increased flexibility 
of delayed tree-locality is advantageous not only 
for syntactic analyses, but also for maintaining 
the possibility that TAG derivation structures can 
be more meaning-laden than solely a record of 
the combination of trees.  

This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
reviews two situations in which The Missing 
Link Problem arises. Section 3 first reviews 
delayed tree-local MCTAG before turning to a 
solution to one of the types of the Missing Link 
Problem. Section 4 addresses the second type of 
the Missing Link Problem. Following a brief 
review the regular form 2-level TAG solution to 
given in (Dras et al., 2004), we see how the 
solution can be recast as a delayed tree-local 
MCTAG derivation. Section 5 includes further 
discussion, raising some open questions, and 
concludes the paper.  

2 The Missing Link Problem Revisited 
Consider the construction in (1) (from Dras et al., 
2004), in which raising and cyclic wh-movement 
co-occur. 
 
 
                                                            
1 Delayed tree-local MCTAG is related to tree-local 
MCTAG with flexible composition (Joshi et al., 2003). 
Chiang and Scheffler (2008) show their weak equivalence 
by showing how any derivations in MCTAG with flexible 
composition can be converted into a 2-delayed tree-local 
MCTAG derivation. However, delayed tree-local MCTAG 
is not a formalization of MCTAG with flexible composition. 

100



(a)       (b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1. a) TAG derivation for What does Mary think that John seems to like?  
b) Derivation structure for (a) 

 
 
(a) (b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. a) Derivation for Does Gabriel seem to be likely to enjoy gnocchi?: Legal in 1-delayed tree-

local MCTAG, illegal in tree-local and set-local MCTAG  
(b) Derivation structure for (a) with delay marked with a dashed box 

TP

C'

T'

VP

V

T

C'*t

C

does NP

think

k

k

NP

Mary

to

TP

C'

T'

VP

V

T

NP

NP

like

C

j

j

CP

NP

that

t
John

NP
what

NP

VP

T'*V

seems

T'

T

to

likely

VP

T'

AdvP

T'*Adv

V

T

be

T'

T'*V

seem

t

T VP

k

kC


to

VP

V

T

NP

enjoy

C'

C TP

T'NP

NP

gnocchi

NP

Gabriel

k

C

does

 seem seem

gnocchilikelyGabriel

enjoy

does

like

seem John seemswhat

Mary

101



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 3: A 2-delayed tree-local MCTAG derivation. Delays are marked with dashed boxes.  
(Figure taken from Chiang and Scheffler (2008).) 

 
 

(1) What does Mary think that John seems to 
like? 

 
The derivation for (1), shown in Figure 1a, 
combines the standard TAG treatment of both 
these phenomena: Both the seems-tree for the 
raising construction and the thinks-tree for the 
bridge construction adjoin into the like-tree. The 
resulting two-fold problem can be seen in the 
corresponding derivation structure shown in 
Figure 1b: 1) the bridge verb think and the most 
embedded verb like, which have no semantic 
dependency, are connected with an edge while 2) 
the bridge verb think and the raising verb seems, 
which should have a semantic dependency, are 
unconnected. 

This case is an example of the more general 
problem that can arise when several trees are 
adjoined into distinct nodes of the same tree. 
Thus, we also see the Missing Link Problem 
arise when other long distance dependencies co-
occur with raising, e.g. Rambow et al.’s (1995) 
example, given in (2), in which topicalization out 
of an embedded clause interacts with raising. 

 
(2) Small spicy hotdogs, he claims Mary seems 
to adore. 
 

Dras et al. (2004) discuss a similar case 
involving subject-auxiliary inversion in 
conjunction with raising. A yes-no question like 
(3) is typically handled used multi-component 
TAG, with the structure for does and structure of 
seem as members of the same elementary tree 
set. The difficulty arises when another level of 
embedding is added, as in (4). 

 
(3) Does Gabriel seem to enjoy gnocchi? 
(4) Does Gabriel seem to be likely to enjoy 

gnocchi? 
 

A dependency ought to link seem to to be likely, 
with another link between to be likely and enjoy. 

To derive (4) with the desired dependencies, the 
tree set containing does and seem must combine 
with to be likely before combing into the enjoy-
tree. This derivation is shown in Figure 2. 
However, this derivation is neither tree-local nor 
set-local. (The to be likely tree cannot adjoin into 
the seem tree without adjoining into a foot node, 
and would also not yield the desired 
dependencies.) An alternative would be to permit 
multiple adjoining (Schabes and Shieber, 1994), 
but with predicative trees. A derivation structure 
for such a derivation, however, would link both 
seem and to be likely directly to enjoy, without 
the desired link between seem and to be likely.  

3 Delayed Tree-Local MCTAG and 
Desired Links 

3.1 k-Delayed Tree-Local MCTAG 
The delayed tree-local variant of MCTAG 
specifies a way to relax the restriction that all 
components of a multi-component set must 
combine into the same tree during the same 
derivational step. Each use of a multicomponent 
set introduces a delay into the derivation. A 
delay is the union of the paths in the derivation 
structure from each component of an MC-set S to 
the lowest node that dominates all members of S. 
A k-delayed tree-local MCTAG permits each 
node in the derivation structure to be a member 
of at most k delays. Figure 3 replicates the 
example of a 2-delayed tree-local derivation 
given in Chiang and Scheffler (2008). The 
dashed boxes mark the delays. Thus, a valid k-
delayed tree local MCTAG derivation permits 
members of the same MC set to compose into 
different trees, so long as all members of the MC 
set eventually compose into the same tree 
without requiring any node to belong to more 
than k delays. 

102



3.2 A Solution for Raising and Subj-Aux 
Inversion 

In contrast to the traditional tree-local and set-
local variants of MCTAG, 1 delayed tree-local 
MCTAG does permit the derivation given in 
Figure 2 for our problematic raising and subj-aux 
inversion example. The derivation structure is 
given in Figure 2b, with the delay indicated by a 
dashed box. The two components of the seem 
tree set eventually both combine into the enjoy 
tree. However, the β component first adjoins into 
the to be likely tree and the combined phrase 
structure adjoins into the enjoy tree, while the α 
component (into which does substitutes) 
combines directly into the enjoy tree. This yields 
a link seem between to be likely and a link 
between to be likely and enjoy.2 

This example illustrates how delayed tree-
locality provides a straightforward solution in 
cases where two predicative trees are ultimately 
contiguous in the derived tree, but tree-locality 
and set-locality do not permit a derivation. The 
added flexibility of delayed tree-locality allows 
for a derivation in which the two predicative 
trees are combined, yielding the desired link in 
the derivation structure. 

4 Borrowing from Regular Form Two-
level TAG 

We turn now to how to deal with the more 
typical cases of the Missing Link Problem, 
where several trees are adjoined into distinct 
nodes of the same tree. To allow the predicative 
trees to combine in the desired order, we will 
need to modify the shapes of the tree. The 
strategy is to conform the derivational shape of 
this case to the derivational shape of the case 
above where the two predicative trees are 
ultimately contiguous in the derived tree. We 
appeal to the solution given in Dras et al. (2004) 
and show how it can be recast as a 1-delayed 
tree-local MCTAG derivation. 

4.1 Regular Form Two-level TAG Solution 
for Raising and Wh-movement 

Dras et al. (2004) propose a regular form 2-level 
TAG, with a meta-level grammar that generates 
                                                            
2 When using multi-component sets, the question arises as 
to how to interpret multiple links from the same set. I 
assume that the link between the component containing the 
lexical anchor of the set and its target is the primary link for 
the set. Something more may need to be said about links to 
the other components, but my chief concern here is to 
ensure that the previously missing links are now present. 

possible derivation structures and an object level 
grammar that yields derived phrase structures. 
Consider the object level derivation given in 
Figure 5 for example (1). At the object level, the 
derivation looks similar to a standard TAG 
derivation in that the combinatory operations 
combine pieces of phrase structure. The 
derivation structure for the object level (shown in 
Figure 5b), however, is the end product of a 
derivation at the meta-level. At the meta-level, 
the trees are pieces of object-level derivations. 
Figure 4a shows how the meta-level grammar 
generates the object-level derivation structure in 
Figure 5b. Figure 4b shows the history of this 
meta-level derivation. It is the derivation 
structure at this level which Dras et al. (2004) 
take to encode dependencies. Their goal is to 
match the meta-level derivation structure with a 
reasonable dependency analysis. 

A key aspect to their analysis is that the tree 
anchored by a verb can be split into two parts. 
Consider the A[like] meta-level tree in Figure 4a. 
The αS[like] node and βS/VP[like] node 
correspond to separate pieces of structure at the 
object level. As can be seem in Figure 5a, the 
αS[like] tree contains the verb itself while the 
βS/VP[like] tree contains the position for the 
subject.  It is in the meta-grammar that the two 
parts are elementary tree local. As the authors 
themselves note, this is strikingly similar to a 
multi-component TAG approach, but their 
proposed derivation would not be tree-local in 
the original sense. 

Note also that Dras et al. (2004) modifies the 
shapes of the trees by using a feature unification 
TAG where all non-terminals have the label X, 
but have top and bottom features that must be 
identical at the end of the derivation. A non-
terminal node’s part-of-speech or phrasal 
category is no longer its label, but rather, one of 
its features. However, in the figures that follow, 
the part-of-speech or phrasal category feature is 
graphically represented as a node label. It is 
crucial to adopt the modified shape of the trees to 
allow the predicative trees to combine as desired. 
The material that previously intervened between 
the think tree and the seem tree, forcing the two 
trees to be adjoined into different nodes in the 
like tree in Figure 1, is moved in two ways: 1) 
“that” is moved into a different tree, the seems 
tree, and 2) the position for the subject of like is 
extracted from the like tree as a separate piece of 
structure. Now, think may adjoin into seems, 
which later adjoins into like. The subject position  

103



(a)         (b)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 4: a) 2LTAG meta-level derivation for What does Mary think that John seems to like?  
b) derivation structure for (a)  

(Adapted from Dras et al. (2004)) 
 
 

 
(a)       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 5: a) 2LTAG object-level derivation for What does Mary think that John seems to like?  
b) derivation structure for (a) 

(Adapted from Dras et al. (2004)) 

104



(a) (b) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 6. (a) 1-delayed tree-local MC-TAG Derivation for What does Mary think that John seems to 
like? (b) Derivation structure for (a) with delay marked with a dashed box 

 
 
of like adjoins into seems, achieving the correct 
word order. 

4.2 Translating into Delayed Tree-local 
MCTAG 

It is straightforward to convert Dras et al.’s 
object level derivation into an MC-TAG 
derivation that abides by 1-delayed tree-locality. 
Instead of treating the tree for like and the tree 
for its subject as part of the same object at the 
meta-level, the delayed tree-local approach treats 
the elementary object for like as a 2-component 
set.  Figure 6 is almost identical to Figure 5. The 
only differences are the braces denoting the 2-
component set and the dashed box indicating the 
delay. 3  Note that delayed tree-locality as 
formalized in (Chiang and Scheffler, 2008) does 
permit a component to be combine into another 
component from the same MC-set. This means 
that the derivational steps that were prohibited 
under tree-locality and set-locality, i.e. the β 
component of the like set adjoins into the seems 
tree, which in turn adjoins into the α component 

                                                            
3 See footnote 2 for comments on interpreting links from the 
same MC-set. 

of the like set, are now legal. As in the regular 
form 2-level TAG solution, the desired link 
between think and seems is no longer missing 
and the undesired link between think and like is 
no longer present 

We have already presented a solution for 
constructions involving both raising and subject-
Aux inversion, but we note that the alternative 
regular form 2-level TAG solution given in Dras 
et al. (2004) can also be converted into a 1-
delayed tree-local derivation. 

5 Conclusion and Discussion 
The observation that delayed tree-locality can 
provide a solution for at least two types of 
missing links bears on questions specific to the 
formalism as well as more general issues. With 
respect to k-delayed tree-local MCTAG, we can 
frame this work as complementing work 
exploiting the formalism for linguistic analysis. 
Whereas the analyses in Chiang and Scheffler 
(2008), Han et al., (2010), Storoshenko and Han 
(2010), and Chen-Main et al. (2012) can tell us 
something about the coverage of k-delayed tree-
local MCTAG (for a specific k) at the phrase 

S

VP*NP

seems

S

VP*

S/VPC

that V

e

to

VP

V

V

NP

NP

like i

S

S/VPj

NP

Mary

S

S

VP

S*V

think

V

does NP

John

NP

what

NP


like like

 like

seem what

likethink

JohnMary

105



structure level, this paper demonstrates the kind 
of “coverage” that the formalism provides at the 
derivation structure level.  

We also see how one of the derivational 
sequences that is, thus far, unique to delayed 
tree-local MCTAGs can be utilized. As shown in 
Figure 6, one component of an MC set ultimately 
combines into another component belonging to 
the same set. This allows what other TAG 
variants previously treated as contiguous pieces 
of structure to be treated instead as a 
multicomponent set. 

Additionally, the observation that the regular 
form 2-level TAG derivations given by Dras et 
al. (2004) can be straightforwardly viewed as 
legal 1-delayed tree-local MCTAG derivations 
adds a linguistic dimension to Chiang and 
Scheffler’s (2008) assertion that it is possible to 
give a formulation of TAG with flexible 
composition as a special case of regular-form 2-
level TAG. As suggested by a reviewer, a 
sensible future avenue would be to see if other 
analyses that use multiple levels (or dimensions) 
can be restated in delayed tree-local MCTAG, 
particularly for phenomena that have been 
challenging for standard TAG (e.g. Rogers’ 
(2004) analysis of scrambling). 

Turning to broader issues, this paper revisits 
the question of what linguistic information, if 
any, is encoded in a derivation structure. It also 
raises the related question of what exactly a 
dependency analysis is and what linguistic 
information it carries. Chen-Main and Joshi 
(2012) show how TAG derivation structures 
(interpreted in the form of dependency 
structures) can be the basis for measuring 
complexity and a means for assessing coverage 
of large scale corpora, but they steer away from 
claims about the meaning that might be encoded. 
As noted in the introduction, work on TAG 
semantics appears to have reached a consensus 
that the derivation structure is not the appropriate 
representation for computing semantics. The 
introduction of delayed tree-local MCTAG, 
however, renews the viability of interpreting the 
derivation tree as a dependency analysis. The 
degree to which this is possible can lead to two 
additional research avenues. One is that we retain 
the current non-derivation structure based 
approach to TAG semantics and wrestle with 
distinguishing between a dependency analysis 
and semantic analysis. The other is to reevaluate 
the coverage that is possible when TAG 
semantics uses a delayed tree-local MCTAG 
derivation structure as the object on which 

semantics is computed. Either avenue should 
lead to a greater understanding of the role of the 
derivation structure. 

Acknowledgments 
The author would like to thank Aravind K. Joshi 
and the TAG+ reviewers for their comments, 
despite not yet having found the time to properly 
address them. 

References  
Manuel Bodirsky, Marco Kuhlmann, and Mathias 

Möhl. 2005. Well-nested drawings as models of 
syntactic structure.  In 10th Conference of Formal 
Grammar and 9th Meeting on Mathematics of 
Language, Edinburgh, UK. 

Marie-Hélène Candito and Sylvain Kahane. 1998. 
Can the TAG derivation tree represent a semantic 
graph? An answer in the light of Meaning-Text 
Theory. In Proceedings of TAG+4, Philadelphia, 
USA. 

Joan Chen-Main, Tonia Bleam, and Aravind K. Joshi. 
2012. Delayed Tree-Locality, Set-locality, and 
Clitic Climbing. In Proceedings of TAG+11, Paris, 
France. 

Joan Chen-Main and Aravind.K. Joshi. 2012. A 
Dependency Perspective on the Adequacy of  
Tree Local Multi-component Tree Adjoining 
Grammar. Journal of Logic and Computation. 
doi:10.1093/logcom/exs012 

David Chiang and Tatjana Scheffler. 2008. Flexible 
Composition and Delayed Tree-Locality. In 
Proceedings of TAG+9, Tübingen, Germany. 

Noam Chomsky. 1995. The Minimalist Program. MIT 
Press, Boston,  Massachusetts. 

Mark Dras, David Chiang and William Schuler. 2004. 
On Relations of Constituency and Dependency 
Grammars. Research on Language and 
Computation 2(2), 281-305. Hermes Science 
Publishers, Paris, France. 

Anette Frank and Josef van Genabith. 2001 GlueTag: 
Linear Logic based Semantics for LTAG - and 
what it teaches us about LFG and LTAG.  In M. 
Butt and T. Holloway King, editors, Proceedings of 
the LFG01 Conference, Hong Kong. p 104-126. 

Claire Gardent and Laura Kallmeyer. 2003. Semantic 
Construction in FTAG. In Proceedings of EACL 
2003, Budapest, Hungary. 123-130. 

Jan Hajič, Jarmila Panevová, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila 
Panevová, Petr Sgall, Petr Pajas, Jan ?těpánek, Jiří 
Havelka, and Marie Mikulová. 2006. Prague 
Dependency Treebank 2.0 LDC2006T01, 
Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia 

106



Chung-Hye Han, David Potter, and Dennis Ryan 
Storoshenko. 2010. Non-local Right Node Raising: 
an Analysis Using Delayed Tree-Local MC-TAG. 
In Proceedings of TAG+10, New Haven, USA. 

Aravind K. Joshi, Laura Kallmeyer, and Maribel 
Romero. 2003. Flexible composition in LTAG: 
quantifier scope and inverse linking. In H. Bunt 
and R. Muskens (eds.), Computing Meaning 3. 
Kluwer. 

Laura Kallmeyer. 2002. Using an Enriched TAG 
Derivation Structure as Basis for Semantics In 
Proceedings of TAG+6, Universitá di Venezia. 

Laura Kallmeyer and Maribel Romero. 2008. Scope 
and Situation Binding in LTAG using Semantic 
Unification. Research on Language and 
Computation 6(1), 3-52. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, the Netherlands. 

Marco Kuhlmann. 2007. Dependency Structures and 
Lexicalized Grammars. PhD thesis, Saarland 
University, Saarbrücken, Germany. 

Owen Rambow and Aravind K. Joshi. 1997 A formal 
look at dependency grammars and phrase structure 
grammars, with special consideration of word-
order phenomena. In L. Wanner, ed. Recent Trends 

in Meaning-Text Theory, 167-190. John 
Benjamins, Amsterdam and Philadelphia. 

Owen Rambow, K, Vijay-Shanker, and David Weir. 
1995. D-Tree grammars. In Proceeding of the 33rd 
Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL-95), Cambridge, 
USA. 151-158. 

James Rogers. 2004. On scrambling, another 
perspective. In Proceedings of TAG+7, Vancouver, 
Canada. 

Yves Schabes and Stuart Shieber. 1994. An 
alternative conception of tree-adjoining derivation. 
Computational Linguistics, 20(1), 91-121. 

Edward P. Stabler. 1997. Derivational minimalism. In 
Proceedings of Logical Aspects of Computational 
Linguistics, 68-95. 

Dennis Ryan Storoshenko and Chung-Hye Han. 2010. 
Binding Variables in English: An Analysis using 
Delayed Tree Locality. In Proceedings of TAG+10, 
New Haven, USA. 

David Weir. 1988. Characterizing mildly context-
sensitive grammar formalisms. PhD dissertation, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

 

107


