










































Advanced Visual Analytics Methods for Literature Analysis


Proceedings of the 6th EACL Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 35–44,
Avignon, France, 24 April 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Advanced Visual Analytics Methods for Literature Analysis

Daniela Oelke
University of Konstanz

Data Analysis and Visualization
Konstanz, Germany

oelke@inf.uni-konstanz.de

Dimitrios Kokkinakis
Språkbanken

Department of Swedish
University of Gothenburg

Gothenburg, Sweden
dimitrios.kokkinakis@gu.se

Mats Malm
Department of Literature,

History of Ideas and Religion
University of Gothenburg

Gothenburg, Sweden
mats.malm@lit.gu.se

Abstract

The volumes of digitized literary collec-
tions in various languages increase at a
rapid pace, which results also in a growing
demand for computational support to ana-
lyze such linguistic data. This paper com-
bines robust text analysis with advanced
visual analytics and brings a new set of
tools to literature analysis. Visual ana-
lytics techniques can offer new and unex-
pected insights and knowledge to the liter-
ary scholar. We analyzed a small subset of a
large literary collection, the Swedish Liter-
ature Bank, by focusing on the extraction of
persons’ names, their gender and their nor-
malized, linked form, including mentions
of theistic beings (e.g., Gods’ names and
mythological figures), and examined their
appearance over the course of the novel. A
case study based on 13 novels, from the
aforementioned collection, shows a number
of interesting applications of visual analyt-
ics methods to literature problems, where
named entities can play a prominent role,
demonstrating the advantage of visual liter-
ature analysis. Our work is inspired by the
notion of distant reading or macroanalysis
for the analyses of large literature collec-
tions.

1 Introduction

Literature can be studied in a number of different
ways and from many different perspectives, but
text analysis - in a wide sense - will surely always
make up a central component of literature stud-
ies. If such analysis can be integrated with ad-
vanced visual methods and fed back to the daily
work of the literature researcher, then it is likely

to reveal the presence of useful and nuanced in-
sights into the complex daily lives, ideas and be-
liefs of the main characters found in many of the
literary works. Therefore, the names of all char-
acters appearing in literary texts can be one such
line of enquiry, which is both an important sub-
field of literature studies (literary onomastics) and
at the same time the result obtained by a mature
language technology (named entity recognition)
which can be turned into a tool in aid of text anal-
ysis in this field. (Flanders et al., 1998) discuss
that references to one type of names, namely that
of people, are of intrinsic interest because they re-
veal networks of friendship, enmity, and collab-
oration; familial relationships; and political al-
liances. People’s names can be an appropriate
starting point for research on biographical, his-
torical, or literary issues, as well as being a key
linguistic and textual feature in its permutations
and usage.

We argue that the integration of text analysis
and visualization techniques, which have turned
out to be useful in other scientific fields such as
bioinformatics (Nature Methods, 2010), could be
put to effective use also in literature studies. We
also see an opportunity to devise new ways of ex-
ploring the large volumes of literary texts being
made available through national cultural heritage
digitization projects.

Digitized information and the task of storing,
generating and mining an ever greater volume of
(textual) data becomes simpler and more efficient
with every passing day. Along with this opportu-
nity, however, comes a further challenge: to create
the means whereby one can tap this great poten-
tiality and engage it for the advancement of (sci-
entific) understanding and knowledge mining.

35



We apply a supra-textual perspective to the
analysis of literary texts by encompassing a rather
global visualization of a document. As a case
study, we have analyzed a subset, 13 novels, of the
Swedish Literature Bank1 collection through two
levels of inquiry by focusing on person names,
their gender and their normalized, linked form,
including mentions of theistic beings (e.g. Gods’
names and mythological characters), and examin-
ing their appearance in sentences, paragraphs and
chapters.

Our aim is to explore the usage of alterna-
tive visualization means that provide additional
insight by showing the data at higher resolution
levels or that permit an analysis of the devel-
opment of the story in the course of the text.
The employed visualization techniques are scal-
able enough to display several novels at once and
therefore allow a literature scholar to compare dif-
ferent literary texts to each other. By combining
advanced natural language processing techniques
with visualization techniques, we aim to allow
the user to rapidly focus on key areas of interest
(based on name mentions) and provide the ability
to discover e.g. semantic patterns in large collec-
tions of text. Therefore, our work is based on in-
dividual texts, by looking for certain patterns of
variation based on a particular named entity type.
Our work is also inspired by the notions of distant
reading or macroanalysis applied to the analyses
of literature collections which we find appealing
for the research we describe. However, we do not

1The Swedish Literature Bank (Litteraturbanken,
http://litteraturbanken.se) is a co-operation
between the Swedish Academy, the Royal Library of
Sweden, the Royal Swedish Academy of Letters, History
and Antiquities, the Language Bank of the University of
Gothenburg, the Swedish Society for Belles Lettres, and
the Society of Swedish Literature in Finland. The Swedish
Literature Bank also focuses on neglected authors and
genres, effectively establishing a set of ’minor classics’
alongside the canonical works. So far, mainly texts in
Swedish are available, but over time, selected works will
be offered in translation as well. Currently, the Swedish
Literature Bank offers literary works either as searchable
e-text, as facsimiles of the original edition, as PDF files or
as EPUB files - often in more than one format. The texts
are available free of charge and the software is developed
as open source. The website is directed towards the general
public and students and teachers at every level, as well as
towards scholars. The digital texts are based on printed first
editions or on later scholarly editions. They are carefully
proof-read, thus establishing a basis for scholarly work. For
the common reader, introductions and essays provide fresh
perspectives on the classics.

consider such techniques to be used as a substitu-
tion for reading a book sequentially but as a useful
supplement.

2 Background

Computer-assisted literary criticism is a rather
young field in literature analysis (Juola, 2008).
Typically, researchers in literary studies use com-
puters only to collect data that is afterwards ana-
lyzed conventionally. Yet, there are some cases
in which the computer has already proven use-
ful, e.g., for the analysis of prosody and poetic
phonology or for comparing an author’s revisions
(from version to version). Computer-assisted
studies have also been performed in the context
of sequence analysis in the past, such as assigning
quoted passages to speakers and locating them in
the sequence of the text (Butler, 1992).

2.1 Distant Reading and Macroanalysis

(Moretti, 2005) coined the term ”distant reading”
in which ”the reality of the text undergoes a pro-
cess of deliberate reduction and abstraction”. Ac-
cording to this view, understanding literature is
not accomplished by studying individual texts, but
by aggregating and analyzing massive amounts
of data. This way it becomes possible to detect
possible hidden aspects in plots, the structure and
interactions of characters becomes easier to fol-
low enabling experimentation and exploration of
new uses and development that otherwise would
be impossible to conduct, e.g., quantifying the dif-
ference between prose styles.

Distant reading or its near synonym macroanal-
ysis is a technique to analyze literature, as op-
posed to ”close reading” of a text that is the care-
ful, sustained interpretation of a brief passage of
text where great emphasis is placed on the par-
ticular over the general, paying close attention to
individual words, syntax, and the order in which
sentences and ideas unfold as they are read. The
most fundamental and important difference in the
two approaches/terms is that the macroanalytic
approach reveals details about texts that are for all
intents and purposes unavailable to close-readers
of the texts. Distant reading is in no way meant
to be a replacement for close readings and in tra-
ditional humanities, as Moretti puts it (Schulz,
2011), ”distant reading should supplant, not sup-
plement, close reading”.

36



2.2 Visual Analytics for Literature Analysis

Visual Analytics is ”the science of analytical rea-
soning facilitated by visual interactive interfaces”
(Thomas et al., 2005). The central idea of visual
analytics is that by tightly integrating the human
expert and the machine, the strengths of both can
be leveraged in the analysis process. Visual An-
alytics has been applied successfully to many ap-
plication domains in the past such as text analysis,
geographical data analysis, security applications,
(computational) biology or multimedia data.2

However, visual analytics is not often used in
the context of literature analysis. Commonly, a
text is read sequentially and then analyzed by the
researcher bit by bit. Only during recent years
some literary scholars have started to employ vi-
sualization techniques in their studies.

One of them is Franco Moretti, who advocated
the usage of visual representations such as graphs,
maps, and trees for literature analysis (Moretti,
2005). (Vuillemot et al., 2009) suggested the us-
age of word clouds and self-organizing graphs and
presented a tool that allows to analyze a novel
interactively with respect to several properties.
In (Plaisant et al., 2006) a tabular representation
that is enriched with visual symbols was used to
present the results of an automatic algorithm for
detecting erotic statements. (Rydberg-Cox, 2011)
generated social network graphs of characters in
Greek tragedies, based on information taken from
linguistic dependency treebanks, which permit to
visualize the interactions between characters in
the plays. Furthermore, scatterplot views allowed
the user to search for correlations between sev-
eral variables of the meta data that comes with the
novels. Rohrer et al. (1998) experimented with
using implicit surfaces to compare single docu-
ments with respect to the most frequent terms and
to visualize a document collection.

Pixel-based visualizations come with the ad-
vantage that the documents can be analyzed at
a higher resolution level. The Compus system
(Fekete and Dufournaud, 2000) used dense pixel
displays to visualize the structure of richly anno-
tated XML documents of books of the 16th cen-
tury. Keim and Oelke (2007) focused more on the
analysis of documents with respect to certain text

2Cf. proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Vi-
sual Analytics Science and Technology (IEEE VAST),
http://visweek.org/.

properties to compare authors with respect to their
writing style or to learn more about the character-
istics of a literary book. The two techniques also
differ from each other in terms of how structural
information is encoded and how they deal with
the problem of overplotting that occurs if a pixel
encodes several feature values.

3 Named Entity Recognition

Named entity recognition (NER) is an important
supporting technology with many applications in
various human language technologies. It has
emerged in the context of information extraction
(IE) and text mining (TM). The automatic recog-
nition and marking-up of names (in a wide sense)
and some other related kinds of information - e.g.,
time and measure expressions and/or terminology
- has turned out to be a recurring basic require-
ment. Hence, NER has become core language
technology of great significance to numerous ap-
plications and a wide range of techniques (Jack-
son and Moulinier, 2007).

In our study involving 19th century fiction, we
use a slightly adapted NER system to the lan-
guage used in fiction around the turn of the twenti-
eth century (Borin and Kokkinakis, 2010). More-
over, the nature and type of named entities vary,
depending on the task under investigation or the
target application. In any case, person, location
and organization names are considered ’generic’.
The system we applied implements a rather fine-
grained named entity taxonomy with several main
named entity types and subtypes but for our case
study we chose to only use the type person which
usually incorporates people’s names (forenames,
surnames), groups of people, animal/pet names,
mythological names, theonyms and the like. Note
that we haven’t performed any formal evaluation
of the entity or the gender annotation in this work.
In previous studies, based on data from the same
source and applying the same NER-tools (Borin
et al., 2007), we have shown high figures on pre-
cision and recall (96-98%) on, particularly, person
recognition.

3.1 Gender Attribution
Current NER systems are limited to the recog-
nition of a small set of entity types without at-
tempting to make finer distinctions between them.
The system we use goes beyond this in the sense
that it attempts to also automatically determine

37



the referential gender of all person entities. Ref-
erential gender relates linguistic expressions, both
persons and groups of individuals, to ”female”,
”male” or ”gender-indefinite”. This is an impor-
tant constraint which contributes to better perfor-
mance in subsequent language processing appli-
cations based on NER, such as anaphora resolu-
tion, by filtering-out of gender-incompatible can-
didates (Evans and Orasan, 2000). The approach
to gender discrimination is based on applying a
combination of the following heuristics:

• NER has a high accuracy in identifying per-
son names, a large number of which are as-
signed gender. A pre-classified list of 16,000
common first names assigns gender to com-
monly used first names. This way a first dis-
tinction is already being made between enti-
ties that carry gender. The list has been ac-
quired from various internet sites.

• Use of gender-marked pronouns in the vicin-
ity of person entities (a simplistic form of
pronoun resolution where simple decisions
are made by matching a genderless per-
son entity with a gender bearing personal
pronouns, han ’he’, hans ’his’, hon ’she’
and hennes ’her’). Also, various types of
honorifics and designators, manually pre-
categorized into gender groups, provide the
evidence that is explored for the annota-
tion of both animate instances but also their
gender. Inherent characteristics for a large
group of these designators (e.g., morpholog-
ical cues), indicate biological gender. Exam-
ples of gender-bearing male designators are
e.g. the nouns baron and herr ’Mr’, and ad-
jectives with suffix bearing gender, namely
-e, such as starke ’strong’, hygglige ’kind’
and gamle ’old’; while female-bearing des-
ignators are e.g. tant ’aunt’ and fru ’wife’.
Gender is also captured using a simplified set
of suffix matching rules, such as -inna/innan,
-erska/erskan (typical suffixes for female)
and -man/mannen, -iker/ikern (typical suf-
fixes for male).

• Labeling consistency is a technique that op-
erates over the whole annotated text. This
module reviews the annotations made so
far, in order to support gender attribution of
unassigned cases based on unambiguous pre-

vious gender assignments. This is a sim-
ple but robust approach that does not rely
on pre-compiled statistics of any kind. In
order to capture such consistency we em-
ploy a two stage labeling approach. Dur-
ing the first stage, we note the instances of
person entities with unknown gender, and
search for a context where the same entity
has been assigned gender (male, female) due
to a gender-indicating context and for which
no other occurrences of the same entity are
found in the document with a different gen-
der. If this is the case, then all occurrences
of that entity are assigned the same gender
throughout the document. During the sec-
ond stage, the system investigates if there
are any conflicting, ambiguous annotations
for gender for which the local context and
the supporting resources (e.g., first names’
gazetteer) cannot decide the gender attribu-
tion. If this is the case and more than one
possible annotation for gender is recorded,
we choose the most frequently assigned gen-
der label for the entity in question, in case of
a tie we mark the gender as unknown.

3.2 Name Linking
Since the same name can be referred to in vari-
ous ways, extracting named entities alone is not
sufficient for many tasks. Therefore, mapping
and linking multiple linguistic variations to a sin-
gle referent is necessary. We apply a simplified
form of co-reference resolution based on salient
features and pattern matching that links (hope-
fully) all mentions that refer to a single per-
son entity. Consider the aggregated occurrences
for the name O’Henny appearing in the novel
”Clownen Jac” [lb904603] (1930). All 92 oc-
currences of the figure O’Henny will be linked
to the same individual since there is sufficient
and reliable evidence which is based on gender
match, no annotation conflicts (i.e. other individ-
ual named Denny or Henny with the same gender)
and orthographic characteristics: O’Henny (58);
Denny (19); Denny O’Henny (7); Henny-Denny
(4); Denny-Henny (3); Henny (1).

4 Material

Prose fiction is just one type of textual material
that has been brought into the electronic ”life” us-
ing large scale digitized efforts. But it must be

38



considered an essential source within many disci-
plines of humanities (history, religion, sociology,
linguistics etc.) and social studies and an invalu-
able source for understanding the movements of
society by its ability to demonstrate what forces
and ideas are at work in the society of its time.
Prose fiction is complex and difficult to use not
only because of interpretational complexity but
also because of its limited availability.

The Swedish Literature Bank, and its sister
project ”the 19th Century Sweden in the Mirror
of Prose Fiction”, aims to change this by devel-
oping a large representative corpus which mir-
rors society at given points in time, chronologi-
cally selected in such a way that historical com-
parisons can be made. A substantial part of the
material is all fiction, written in the original and
published separately for the first time, that ap-
peared in Swedish starting from the year 1800
and collected during consecutive twenty year in-
tervals. The material provides a whole century of
evolution and social, aesthetic, scientific, techni-
cal, cultural, religious and philosophical change.
Out of this data we selected the literary produc-
tion, 13 novels, of a single author, namely Hjal-
mar Bergman (1883-1931). The selected novels
(followed by their id) are:

• Savonarola (1909); id=lb443177
• Amourer (1910); id=lb1611717
• Hans nåds testamente (1910); id=lb1611719
• Vi Bookar, Krokar och Rothar (1912);

id=lb494265
• Loewenhistorier (1913); id=lb1631349
• Falska papper (1916); id=lb1525006
• Herr von Hancken (1920); id=lb1524996
• Farmor och Vår Herre (1921); id=lb1187656
• Eros’ begravning (1922); id=lb1470072
• Chefen fru Ingeborg (1924); id=lb1524995
• Flickan i frack (1925); id=lb1470073
• Kerrmans i paradiset (1927); id=lb1317426
• Clownen Jac (1930); id=lb904603

5 Visual Exploration of the Data

In this chapter we report on our experiences with
different visualization techniques that can be em-
ployed for analyzing novels with respect to the
characters involved in the plot. Besides net-
work representations two alternative, not as well

known, visualization techniques are tested. Our
goal is to learn about their strengths and weak-
nesses with respect to the task and identify chal-
lenges that are specific for the field. We show how
visualization can be used to gain insight into lit-
erary work that otherwise would be much more
laborious to get.

5.1 Network representation

Traditionally, persons in a novel are analyzed in
terms of the relations that exist between them.
Obviously, graph visualizations are well suited for
representing this kind of information. Figure 1
shows a person network for the novel ”Eros’ be-
gravning” (’Eros’ funeral’) (1922). Nodes repre-
sent characters of the plot and an edge is inserted
between two persons if they co-occur in at least
one sentence of the novel.3 In such a represen-
tation it is easy to identify protagonists that are
connected to many other characters (e.g., Ludwig
von Battwyhl or Olga Willman-Janselius). Fur-
thermore, it is possible to see clusters of char-
acters. Figure 1 also shows that Casimir Brut is
the person that connects the two main groups of
characters of the novel, in the sense that he in-
troduces one group of characters to another. The
thickness of an edge encodes the number of times
that two names co-occur which could be regarded
as the strength of the relationship. A strong con-
nection seems to exist between Brita Djurling and
Ludwig von Battwyhl but also between Hans Hinz
Faber and Gruber. It is interesting to see that
Gruber is only weakly connected with other char-
acters of the plot but almost exclusively occurs
together with Hans Hinz Faber. Presumably, be-
cause Hans Hinz Faber was the faithful servant of
Gruber.

The example shows that network representa-
tions can provide interesting insight with respect
to the relationship between different persons in
the plot. However, one question that this plot can-
not answer is how these relationships evolve over
the course of the novel.

5.2 Summary Plots

Summary plots are tabular representations in
which each column represents a text unit (here:

3Note that using co-occurrence can be just considered an
approximation. More advanced methods would be needed
to ensure that all and only well-established relationships be-
tween characters are extracted.

39



#Schamil

Judit

Olle

Casimir Brut

Betty Willman

Karolina Willman

Schüler

Maturin

Henrik

Grädel

Hans Hinz Faber

Filemon

Lovisa

Erik Jansson

Baukis

Gruber

Lizzy Willman

Brita Djurling

Karl-Herman

Anna-Lisa Willman

Karl-August

Lotten Brenner

Ludwig von Battwyhl

Jan-Petter Janselius

Olga Willman-Janselius

Lasse

Lisa

Alexander

Katarina

Bolla

Nathan SpeibachMaria
Sara Schönthal

Willman
Hieron

Theander

Anna-Lisa Djurling

Joachim Brut

Sven LagerKalle Mager

Figure 1: Network representation based on the co-occurrences of the person names in ”Eros’ begravning”

a chapter) and each line corresponds to a person
of the novel. Table cells are colored according
to the frequency of the character in the specific
text unit (normalized with respect to the number
of words in the chapter). The person names are
sorted in descending order according to the over-
all frequency of the person name in the novel.

In such a heatmap-like representation it is easy
to see which characters co-occur in a chapter but
also how this develops in the course of the docu-
ment. Do always the same persons meet? Is there
one main protagonist in the book that is almost
always present or is the story line more complex
in terms of characters? Being able to answer this
kind of questions provides the analyst with insight
about the development of the story that would not
be visible in a person network.

Figure 2 shows the summary plot for the novel
”Eros’ begravning” in which some interesting
characteristics become apparent. For example,
some person names are only mentioned in a
specific chapter (see lines of Hans Hinz Faber,
Grädel, Schmil, Lisbeth etc.). Besides, the chap-
ters differ significantly with respect to the num-
ber of unique person names that are mentioned.

The first and the last chapter are the ones in
which most characters are mentioned whereas in
the third chapter only four characters play a role.

A closer look into the text reveals that the novel
consists of a ”frame text”, where different peo-
ple meet and tell each other stories. The stories
constitute chapters in the novel, and thus become
a bit like short stories. The first chapter, which
does not have a title, introduces a large number of
people. This number of participating people then
decreases during the course of the following sto-
ries (chapters), but towards the end of each chap-
ter the discussion is returned to the overall story
once again, where people are talking with each
other about various things before the next story
starts. Also, in the individual chapters there exist
people who do not participate outside of a single
chapter.

5.3 Literature Fingerprints

Summary plots allow literature scholars to see
which characters co-occur in one chapter. How-
ever, they do not permit to analyze the usage of
the person names within one chapter. In contrast
to this, pixel-based visualizations avoid such ag-

40



lb1470072, red = Olga Willman-Janselius, green = other name 

1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 

4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
6 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 3: Literature Fingerprint for the novel ”Eros’ begravning”. Red pixels mark mentions of the protagonist
”Olga Willman-Janselius, green pixels highlight the position of other names.

Figure 2: Summary plot for novel ”Eros’ begravning”
(’Eros’ funeral’).

gregation and enable an inspection of the data on
a much higher resolution level.

We use the literature fingerprinting technique
(Keim and Oelke, 2007) to inspect the novel
”Eros’ begravning” in more detail. Each pixel
represents one word. Pixels are arranged from left
to right and top to bottom and are grouped accord-
ing to chapters. The color of a pixel can be used
to encode a value. In this case pixels were colored
in red if they represent the name of the most fre-

quent protagonist, Olga Willman-Janselius, and
in green if another name was mentioned. The
technique is scalable enough to display the whole
book at this high resolution level. However, the
colored pixels are sparse and would likely be lost
in the sea of uncolored pixels. We therefore use
semi-transparent halos around the colored pixels
to increase their visual saliency. (For more vi-
sual boosting techniques for pixel-based visual-
izations see (Oelke et al., 2011)). In this visualiza-
tion it is now possible to see where in the course
of the novel the main protagonist, Olga Willman-
Janselius, plays a role. Furthermore, it becomes
obvious that there are parts in which almost no
person name at all is mentioned. This is in line
with the fact that the book tells several separate
stories that are integrated at the end of each chap-
ter into the overall story (see also explanation in
section 5.2).

Alternatively, we also could have highlighted
the positions of several names using one color per
protagonist to compare their distribution. This
way an analyst can learn about the relations be-
tween different characters. However, the number
of different names that can be highlighted at the
same time is restricted by the human ability to dis-
tinguish different colors easily (cf. (Ware, 2008)).

Figure 4 shows fingerprints for all 13 novels.
Again each pixel represents a word but this time
all words that neither are a name of a person nor
of a theistic being are disregarded. This way a

41



M
al

e 
Fe

m
al

e 
U

n
kn

o
w

n
 

G
o

d
s 

In
cl

u
d

es
 n

ew
 d

at
a 

Vi Bookar, Krokar … (1912)                 Savonarola (1909)                              Clownen Jac (1930)                              Kerrmans i paradiset (1927) 

Amourer (1910)                                    Hans nåds testamente (1910)          Chefen fru Ingeborg (1924)                Loewenhistorier (1913) 

Herr von Hancken (1920)                    Eros‘ begravning (1922)                     Farmor och Vår Herre (1921)            Falska papper (1916) 

Flickan i frack (1925) 

Figure 4: Fingerprints for the 13 novels. Color is used to encode the three categories male, female, gods.

focus is put on the order in which the mentions of
the three categories (male, female, gods) appear.
Words that the algorithm recognized as a name
but could not assign to one of the categories are
marked as unknown and are colored in white.

Some interesting patterns become visible in the
visualization. One book (first one in the second
row) sticks out because of its high number of men-
tions of theistic beings. ”Amourer” [lb1611717]
(1910) is a collection of short stories. The last
story, ”The False Cristoforo”, varies the theme of
Christopher, who carried Jesus Christ across the
river which results in the peak of names of theis-
tic beings that can be observed at the end of the
book.

Another interesting observation is that in the
beginning of the book ”Kerrmans i paradiset”
[lb1317426] (1927) (last one in first row), male
characters are clearly dominant which is almost
reversed in the book’s second part. A closer look
into the book reveals that this is because the book
is divided into two main parts. The first part
is more about prestige and position in society,

i.e., social games with other men, while the sec-
ond part is more personal and relates clearly to
women. The summary plot of the book (Figure
5) reveals that there are not fewer male characters
involved in the second part of the book but overall
they are less frequently mentioned. At the same
time, female characters that had in the first part of
the book only a minor role become more domi-
nant in the plot.

5.4 Discussion

Each of the visualization techniques that we ex-
perimented with has its strengths and weaknesses
if used for the analysis of a novel with respect to
its characters. Person networks come with the ad-
vantage that they can show relationships between
characters. This way clusters of persons that form
a group within the story become visible. In con-
trast to this, summary plots can only show co-
occurrence within a chapter (or smaller text unit).
But their strength is to show the development of
the set of persons involved in the plot. In such a
tabular representation it is easy to compare the in-

42



Male characters 

Female characters 

Figure 5: Summary plot for the novel ”Kerrmans i paradiset”. Lines are grouped according to the two categories
male / female and are sorted within each category according to the overall frequency of the characters.

volvement of different characters across the doc-
ument. Even more details are provided by the
literature fingerprinting technique. Because the
technique is very scalable, every single word can
be visualized. Coloring is used to encode text
properties of interest. Again, the development of
the characters across a document is visible, this
time even within single chapters. However, com-
pared to the summary plot technique, fewer per-
son names can be distinguished.

Obviously, a combination of the three tech-
niques is advisable for analyzing novels with re-
spect to the persons involved. But our comparison
of the three techniques also allows us to identify a
missing type of visualization: One that is able to
show the development of the story in terms of the
characters involved and at the same time is able to
display their relationships.
Furthermore, the techniques lead to interesting in-
sight but these newly generated hypotheses need
to be checked in the text. A tighter integration of
the actual text source into the visualization tools
could therefore be a valuable extension.

6 Conclusions

The combination of robust text analysis with vi-
sual analytics brings a new set of tools to litera-
ture analysis, provides powerful insights on docu-
ment collections, and advances our understanding

of the evolution of human behavior, society, tech-
nological advancement and cultural trends. As
a matter of fact, (Michel, 2010), introduced the
term ”Culturomics”, i.e. the application of high-
throughput data collection, digital book archives
and the like, and analysis to the study of hu-
man culture and we believe that novel insights to-
wards this direction can be gained by combining
such technologies. In this paper we have shown
that quantifiable data such as (person) names can
be identified, extracted, and visualized in novel
ways.

In the future we intend to further extend the ca-
pabilities for visual literature analysis. One re-
search goal is the development of a visualization
technique that allows to investigate the develop-
ment of a story across a novel but at the same
time shows the relationships between the char-
acters. Furthermore, we believe that interactive
visual analysis tools (instead of static visualiza-
tions) open up additional possibilities for litera-
ture scholars to explore the large volumes of dig-
itized literary collections that are nowadays avail-
able.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Zukunftskolleg
of the University of Konstanz and the Centre of
Language Technology in Gothenburg.

43



References
Yevgeni Berzak, Michal Richter, Carsten Ehrler and

Todd Shore. 2011. Information Retrieval and Vi-
sualization for the Historical Domain. Language
Technology for Cultural Heritage - Theory and Ap-
plications of Natural Language Processing. Pp.
197–212. Springer.

Lars Borin and Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2010. Liter-
ary Onomastics and Language Technology. Liter-
ary Education and Digital Learning. Methods and
Technologies for Humanities Studies. Pp. 53–78.
IGI Global.

Lars Borin, Dimitrios Kokkinakis and Leif-Jran Ols-
son. 2007. Naming the past: Named entity and
animacy recognition in 19th century Swedish litera-
ture. Proceedings of the ACL Workshop: Language
Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaTeCh).
Prague. Pp. 1–8.

Christopher S. Butler. 1992. Computers and Written
Texts. Basil Blackwell.

Richard Evans and Constantin Orasan. 2000. Im-
proving anaphora resolution by identifying ani-
mate entities in texts. Proceedings of the Dis-
course Anaphora and Anaphor Resolution Collo-
quium (DAARC) 2000. Lancaster, UK. Pp. 154–
162.

Jean-Daniel Fekete and Nicole Dufournaud. 2000.
Compus: visualization and analysis of structured
documents for understanding social life in the 16th
century. Proceedings of the fifth ACM conference
on Digital libraries. San Antonio, Texas, United
States. Pp. 47–55, ACM.

Julia Flanders, Syd Bauman, Paul Caton and Mavis
Cournane. 1998. Names proper and improper: Ap-
plying the TEI to the classification of proper nouns.
Computers and the Humanities. 31(4), pp. 285–
300.

Peter Jackson and Isabelle Moulinier. 2007. Natural
language processing for online applications: Text
retrieval, extraction and categorization. Amster-
dam: John Benjamins.

Patrick Juola. 2008. Killer applications in digital
humanities. Literary and Linguistic Computing.
23(1): 73–83.

Daniel A. Keim and Daniela Oelke. 2007. Literature
Fingerprinting: A New Method for Visual Literary
Analysis. Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST).
Pp. 115–122.

Jean-Baptiste Michel et al. 2010. Quantita-
tive Analysis of Culture Using Millions of
Digitized Books. Science 331 (6014): 176.
”http://www.sciencemag.org/content/early/2010/12/
15/science.1199644”.

Franco Moretti. 2005. Graphs, maps, trees: abstract
models for a literary history. R. R. Donnelley &
Sons.

Nature Methods. 2010. Visualizing biological data.
Supplement to Nature Publishing Group journals.
7 (3s): S1-S68.

Daniela Oelke, Halldor Janetzko, Svenja Simon, Klaus
Neuhaus and Daniel A. Keim. 2011. Visual
Boosting in Pixel-based Visualizations. Computer
Graphics Forum. 30 (3): 871-880.

Catherine Plaisant, James Rose, Bei Yu, Loretta Auvil,
Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, Martha Nell Smith,
Tanya Clement and Greg Lord. 2006. Exploring
erotics in Emily Dickinson’s correspondence with
text mining and visual interfaces. Proceedings of
the 6th ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on Digital
libraries. Pp. 141-150, ACM.

Randall M. Rohrer, David S. Ebert, and John L. Sibert.
1998. The Shape of Shakespeare: Visualizing Text
using Implicit Surfaces. Proceedings of the 1998
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization. Pp.
121-129.

Jeff Rydberg-Cox. 2011. Social Networks and
the Language of Greek Tragedy. Journal of the
Chicago Colloquium on Digital Humanities and
Computer Science. 1(3): 1-11.

Kathryn Schulz. 2011. The Mechanic
Muse - What Is Distant Reading? The
New York Times - Sunday Book Review.
Page BR14. ”http://www.nytimes.com/
2011/06/26/books/review/the-mechanic-muse-
what-is-distant-reading.html”.

James J. Thomas and Kristin A. Cook. 2005. Illu-
minating the Path: The Research and Development
Agenda for Visual Analytics. National Visualization
and Analytics Center.

Romain Vuillemot, Tanya Clement, Catherine Plaisant
and Amit Kumar. 2009. What’s Being Said Near
”Martha”? Exploring Name Entities in Literary
Text Collections. Proceedings of the IEEE Sympo-
sium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
(VAST). Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA. Pp. 107–
114.

Colin Ware. 2008. Visual Thinking for Design. Mor-
gan Kaufmann.

44


