



















































Morphological Analyzer for Kokborok


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on South and Southeast Asian Natural Language Processing (SANLP), pages 41–52,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Morphological Analyzer for Kokborok 

Khumbar Debbarma
1
 Braja Gopal Patra

2
 Dipankar Das

3
 Sivaji Bandyopadhyay

2 

(1) TRIPURA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, Agartala, India 
(2) JADAVPUR UNIVERSITY, Kolkata, India 

(3) NATIONAL INSTITUTE_OF TECHNOLOGY, Meghalaya, India 

khum_10jan@yahoo.co.in, brajagopal.cse@gmail.com, 

dipankar.dipnil2005@gmail.com,sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.com 

ABSTRACT 

Morphological analysis is concerned with retrieving the syntactic and morphological properties 

or the meaning of a morphologically complex word. Morphological analysis retrieves the 

grammatical features and properties of an inflected word. However, this paper introduces the 

design and implementation of a Morphological Analyzer for Kokborok, a resource constrained 

and less computerized Indian language. A database driven affix stripping algorithm has been used 

to design the Morphological Analyzer. It analyzes the Kokborok word forms and produces 

several grammatical information associated with the words. The Morphological Analyzer for 

Kokborok has been tested on 56732 Kokborok words; thereby an accuracy of 80% has been 

obtained on a manual check.  

 

KEYWORDS : Morphology Analyzer, Kokborok, Dictionary, Stemmer, Prefix, Suffix. 

41



1 Introduction 

Kokborok is the native language of Tripura and is also spoken in the neighboring states like 

Assam, Manipur, Mizoram as well as the countries like Bangladesh, Myanmar etc., comprising of 

more than 2.5 millions
1
 of people. Kokborok belongs to the Tibeto-Burman (TB) language falling 

under the Sino language family of East Asia and South East Asia
2
. Kokborok shares the genetic 

features of TB languages that include phonemic tone, widespread stem homophony, subject-

object-verb (SOV) word order, agglutinative verb morphology, verb derivational suffixes 

originating from the semantic bleaching of verbs, duplication or elaboration.  Kokborok is written 

in the script similar to Roman script. 

In general, morphological analysis is the first step to analyze the source language whereas 

morphology is the field of linguistics that studies the structure of words. The Morphological 

Analyzer takes one word at a time and produces its structure, syntactic and morphological 

properties or sometimes the meaning of a morphologically complex word (Dhanalakshmi et al., 

2009). The morphological structure of an agglutinative language is unique and capturing its 

complexity using machines and generate in presentable format is a challenging job. Various 

approaches are used for building morphological analyzers such as Brute force method, root 

driven approach, affix stripping etc. (Rajeev et al., 2007; Parakh and Rajesha, 2011).  

However, a morphological analyzer is an essential and basic tool for building any language 

processing application for a natural language e.g., Machine Translation system. Morphological 

Analyzers are essential technologies for most text analysis applications like Information Retrieval 

(IR) and Summarization etc. The most obvious applications are found in the areas of 

lexicography and computational linguistics.  

For example, with respect to the word "dogs", we can say that the "dog" is the root form, and„s‟ 

is the affix. Here the affix gives the number information of the root word. Thus, morphological 

analysis is found to be centered on the analysis and generation of the word forms. It deals with 

the internal structure of the words and how those words can be formed. Morphology also plays an 

important role in applications such as spell checking, electronic dictionary interfacing and 

information retrieving systems, where it is important that words that are only morphological 

variants of each other are identified and treated similarly. In natural language processing (NLP) 

and especially in machine translation (MT) systems, we need to identify words in texts in order to 

determine their syntactic and semantic properties (Parakh and Rajesha, 2011). Morphological 

study helps us by providing rules for analyzing the structure and formation of the words. 

Several Morphological Analyzers have been developed in different languages using both rule 

based and statistical methods. Moreover, different approaches to Morphanalyzer for English have 

already been developed such as in (Minnen et al., 2001). On the other hand, many Morphological 

Analyzers for Indian Languages have also been developed such as in Hindi (Goyal and Lehal, 

2008),  Bengali (Das and Bandyopadhyay, 2010), Malayalam (Rajeev et al., 2007), Manipuri 

(Choudhury et al., 2004; Singh and Bandyopadhyay, 2005) and for four of the languages, viz., 

Assamese, Bengali, Bodo and Oriya (Parakh and Rajesha, 2011). Manipuri is quite similar to 

Kokborok as it falls under Sino language family and an accuracy of 75% was achieved in 

(Choudhury et al., 2004). To the best of our knowledge, no previous work has been done on 

                                                           
1 http://tripura.nic.in/ 
2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kokborok 

42



developing Morphological Analyzer for Kokborok language, though a stemmer has been 

developed for Kokborok language (Patra et al., 2011) and its reported average accuracy is 82.9%.  

This paper focuses on designing of a database driven affix stripping based Morphological 

Analyzer in Kokborok. In general, the Kokborok words have complex agglutinative structures. In 

the present work, a Kokborok morphological analyzer has been developed to analyze the input 

Kokborok sentence and for each surface level word to produce the root word(s) and associated 

information like lexical category of the roots, the prefix and/or the suffix using three dictionaries 

namely root, prefix and suffix. The morphological analyzer uses the Kokborok root words and 

their associated information, e.g., part of speech information, category of the verbal bound root 

(action/ dynamic, static) from the Kokborok to English bilingual root dictionary. 

The rest of the paper is organized in the following manner. Section 2 provides details of 

Kokborok word morphology whereas Section 3 provides an elaborative description of the 

Morphological Analyzer. Next, Section 4 describes the implementation of Morphological 

Analyzer while Section 5 presents the results and analysis. Finally, conclusions and future 

directions have been presented. 

2 Kokborok Word Morphology 

Kokborok language is highly agglutinative and rich in morphology. The verb morphology is 

more complex compared to noun morphology. Kokborok words can be easily formed by 

affixations. 

2.1 Verb Morphology 

Most verbs have a monosyllabic root, and the main method for processing verb phrases is to add 

suffixes to the root. Kokborok verbs always occur in bound form to which multiple affixes are 

added to give the tense, manner of action. The suffixes can be classified in three layers at least 

(Jacquesson, 2008): 

 The immediate layer, just after the root, concerns for instance locative markers: the action 

may reach far away, or go from up to down etc. 

 The medium layer after the locative information concerns actancy: this is the kingdom of 

factitive, passives, reciprocals etc. 

 The outer layer is the so called Tense Aspect Modality (TAM) area, where indications of 

Tense, Aspect and Mode are given. 

2.1.1 Inflectional Morphology 

Inflectional morphology derives words from another word from acquiring certain grammatical 

features but maintaining the same part of speech or category. There are a number of inflectional 

suffixes indicating tense of the verb of a sentence. Inflectional morphology is more productive 

than derivational morphology. First, inflectional morphology is paradigmatic, i.e., every 

Kokborok verb exhibits a paradigm with each inflectional marker as illustrated in the Table 1. 

 

 

43



Inflectional affix Inflection type Verb English meaning 

O Aorist Chaho eats 

Anǝ Future Chahanǝ Will eat 

Na Verbal noun Chahna eat 

TABLE 1 – Inflectional Paradigm of Verb Chah. 

2.1.2 Derivational Morphology 

The derivational morphology can be divided into three different levels viz., first level derivation, 

second level derivation and third level derivation as given in Tables 2, 3 and 4. There are non-

category changing derivational suffixes and category changing derivational suffixes. 

Suffix Meaning Use and Meaning 

-sa- Upwards <Up> Look up 

-khlai- Downwards<Dw> Look down 

-laŋ- Away from speaker<Lat> take away 

-gra- First in order<Pri> Go first 

TABLE 2 – First Level Derivation. 

Suffix Meaning Use and Meaning 

-sa- Upwards <Up> Look up 

-khlai- Downwards<Dw> Look down 

-laŋ- Away from speaker<Lat> take away 

TABLE 3 – Second Level Derivation. 

Suffix Meaning/ feature Use and meaning 

-o- Aorist<Aor> Go 

-anǝ- Near future<Ftp> Will go(may be next year) 

-nai- Future<Fut> Will go (on the verge of going) 

-kha- Past<Pf> Went 

-li-ja Negative <Pf>Neg Did not go 

-kho- Still<Pf> Still 

-ja- Negative Not go 

-glak- Negative Will not be going 

TABLE 4 – Third Level Derivation. 

2.2 Noun Morphology 

Monosyllabic nouns are relatively rare in Kokborok where bisyllabic formations are dominant. 

This is due to the widespread process of compounding, either true compounding when two 

lexical roots form a new word. 

44



2.2.1 Inflectional Morphology 

The sole nominal inflectional category is case marking. The category is highly productive, both 

formally and semantically. The following Table 5 shows the paradigmatic nature of case 

marking.  

Inflectional Affix Type Surface Words 

-ni Genitive & ablative  Nokni,musukni „from house,cows‟ 

-no Accusative & dative Chwngno ,bono „us,to him‟ 

-o Locative e& illative Or-o ,bisiŋ-o ‘here, inside’ 

TABLE 5 – Nature of Case Marking. 

2.2.2 Derivational Morphology 

Derivational morphology is not productive in that there are apparently arbitrary restrictions on 

which suffixes may occur with the different categories of nouns. There are no categories of 

gender and number in Kokborok. No accord of any kind on this respect. Gender is marked as 

number only when needed not when items have to be feminine or masculine, singular and plural.  

 Gender: the male role is marked by suffix –la in tokla (cock). It is unlikely that joŋgla 
(frog) can be explained by this suffix. The suffix –jǝk denotes the feminine gender as in 

sajǝk (daughter). 

 Size: However the suffixes –ma and –sa forms an antonymic couple specialized in big and 

small.since –sa also means offspring or young as in toksa(chicken), tǝima(river), 

tǝisa(stream). 

 Number: plural is in –rok and mostly for animates and also used in pronouns. For example 
cherai (child), cherairok (children). 

3 The Morphological Analyzer 

The proposed architecture of Morphological Analyzer is shown in Figure 1. The Morphological 

Analyzer is composed mainly of three modules: Tokenizer, Stemmer and Morphological 

Analyzer. 

 Tokenizer: This module breaks the Kokborok sentence in to its constituent words or tokens 

for analysis. 

 Stemmer: it strips the word in to root and affixes. 

 Morphological analyzer: it analyzes various types of word structures and combines the 

features associated with the affixes and tags the word. 

3.1 Dictionary Development 

3.1.1 Affix Dictionary 

Altogether 91 affixes are there out of which 76 are suffixes and 19 are prefixes. The various 

affixes are associated with words belonging to different part of speech to give resultant words 

with a particular meaning. The statistics of affixes are given in Tables 6 and Table 7. 

 

45



Tokenizer Stemmer

Morphological 

Analyzer(Tagging 

& feature 

combination)

Affix Dictionary
Root Dictionary

Input Sentence

Analyzed 

Text

Stemming 

rules

 

FIGURE 1 –Architecture of Morphological Analyzer for Kokborok 

 

Type No. of prefix No. of suffix 

Derivational 9 15 

Inflectional 10 61 

TABLE 6 – Statistics of Prefix types. 

 

Lcat No. of prefix No. of Suffix 

Noun 13 10 

Verb 6 44 

Adjective 0 22 

TABLE 7 – Statistics of Suffix types. 

Table 8 shows the affix dictionary entries where lcat, pers and emph are the features associated 

with each affix. 

Kokborok_prefix Icat pers Emph 

Masema Verb 2 Emph 

TABLE 8 – Affix Dictionary Entries. 

3.1.2 Root Dictionary 

Altogether 2000 Kokborok root words have been collected, digitized and stored along with the 

associated information in root dictionary and the dictionary stores attribute of each Kokborok 

root words such as the part of speech (POS) and its English meaning. Root Dictionary has been 

developed by stemming the corpus collected from the Bible and the story books and the stemmed 

data are checked manually. Then we have assigned the POS and the English meaning manually. 

46



The stemming algorithm used for the development of root dictionary is given below and Table 9 

shows the root dictionary entries. 

Kokborok POS English 

Achuk Verb Sit 

TABLE 9 – Root Dictionary Entries. 

3.2 Stemming algorithm for generating Root Words 

The algorithm is designed to remove both multiple suffixes as well as prefixes from the inflected 

words. It has been observed that the boundary of root words in Kokborok change after addition of 

suffixes (Patra et al., 2012). Thus we have added some rules in the algorithm as boundary 

changes after addition of suffixes. The algorithm is given below. 

3.2.1 Prefix Stripping Algorithm 

1. repeat the step 2 until all the prefixes are removed 

2. read the prefix, 

if matched then store it in array and decrease the length of string 

else read another prefix. 

3. If length of string >2 then go for suffix stripping, else exit 

3.2.2 Suffix Stripping Algorithm 

1. repeat the step 2 until all the suffixes are removed 
2. read the largest suffix, 

if matched then check for rules. 

then store it in array and decrease the length of string  

else read another suffix. 

3. exit. 

We have achieved an accuracy of 85.5% by maximum suffix striping algorithm, where we striped 

maximum suffix first. There is no case of under stemming seen as we striped largest suffix 

first. The overall statistics of accuracies on major categories like verb, noun, adjective 

and adverbs are given in Table 10. In this case out of the total error, there are 69.3% 

mis-stemming and 30.7% over-stemming. For example, 
Over- stemming: sumano(input)suma+no(output)  

Desired output: suman+o 

Mis-stemming: tongo(input)= tonk +o (output) 
Desired output: tong+o 

 

Categories Accuracy 

Noun 72% 

Verb 79% 

Adjective 87% 

Adverbs 96% 

Table 11 – Results of Morphological Analyzer. 

 

47



We have observed more number of errors in case of proper nouns or nouns, because the 

occurrence of proper nouns or nouns is more in the sentences. Some words have 

alphabet pairs similar to the affixes leading to over stemming for example: 

Mis-stemming: Kothmano Kothman+o (after stemming which is incorrect) 

Desired output: Kothma+no 

In case of verbs, error occurs due to the order of stemming of word for example 

Mis-stemming: Malwi  ma+lwi(error if prefix stemmed first) 

Desired output: Mal+wi(correct) 

There are less number of errors in Adjectives and those are due to presence of alphabets 

similar to affix in the word. For example bw+rwichwk (error since bw is in prefix list), 

but “bwrwichwk” is a single words. Numbers of errors in case of adverbs are negligible.  

4 Implementation Details 

The Morphological Analyzer has been used in the present work for identification of word class 
features and sentence type. Broadly, there are five types of words that can be handled by this 

Morphological Analyzer. 

Free words are formed without any affixation or compounding. E.g. Borok (people). Words with 

multiple prefixes and suffixes, such word occurs in the pattern given below. Where P, RW, S 

stands for prefix, root word and suffix respectively. 

P + RW  For e.g., bupha (my father)  

RW+S       For e.g., Khumbarno (to Khumbar)  

P+RW+S.  For e.g. Bukumuini (His/Her Brother In Law‟s)  

P+RW+S+S…  For e.g., Ma(P)+thang (to go)+lai(S)+nai(S)Mathanglainai(need to go)  

RW+RW…  For e.g., Khwn (Flower)+Lwng(Garden)Khwmlwng(Flowergarden)  

RW+S+RW+S.  For e.g., Hui(RW)(to hide)+jak(S)+hui(RW)+jak(S)+wi(S)  Hujakhujakwi 

(Without Being Seen)  

Compound words are formed by compounding among various words belonging to different part 

of speech. The various pattern of compounding is given below.  

Noun + Noun 

Noun + Adjective 

Pronoun + Noun + Noun 

4.1 Algorithm for implementing the Morphological Analyzer 

1. Give input Kokborok sentences to the tokenizer module. 

2. Tokenize each sentence to words 

3. Repeat from step 4 to 7 until each word is analysed 

4. Check if the word is in dictionary 

5. If match not found stem the word in to root and affixes 

6. Check for the pattern given above with the help of root and affix dictionary. If match is 

found apply rules, combine grammatical features and tag the word. If not found then 

send the word to complex word handler. 

48



7. Complex word handler will stem the word with the help of root dictionary. If match 

found then will tag accordingly, otherwise tag it a unknown words. 

8. Exit. 

The flow chart of the Morphological Analyzer is shown in Figure. 2.  

5 Evaluation 

In the segmentation of words, we tested two methods: (i) First affix isolation, then detection of 

root and (ii) First detection of root, then isolation of affixes. In the former case there is overhead 

due to repeated access to the root dictionary. On the other hand, the later approach needs a single 

pass in the root dictionary. The first approach handles the orthographic complexity well and the 

second strategy is much faster in comparison with the former. The Morphological Analyzer has 

been tested using the corpus. The unanalysed words have been tagged by the analyzer as 

unknown (unk) and after manual check it has been found out that maximum number of unknown 

words belong to proper noun, thus later on it was tagged as NNP. The Morph Analyzer was 

tested again and it has seen that it is giving a better result. Errors have been calculated on the 

basis of words wrongly tagged, unanalyzed words and words tagged as unk out of total input 

words. Correctness of Kokborok Morphological Analyzer is shown in Table 11. There are some 

unknown words which could not be analyzed based on rules available and due to unavailability 

of root word dictionary, are effectively reducing the performance of Morphology Analyzer. The 

words in Kokborok can be easily formed by affixations and compounding, so the number of 

unknown words are relatively large. The accuracy of the Morphanalyzer can be further improved 

by introducing more numbers of linguistic rules and adding more root words to the dictionary. 

Break in to words

Input Sentence

Check in dictionary for 

a match

Stem the word in to root 

and affixes(multiple)

Match ?

Check the root and 

affixes(prefix/suffix)

Match ?

Combine features applying 

rules

Last word?

Yes

No

Analyzed 

text

Yes

Take next word

Check for 

Compound word

Match ?

No

Yes

NO

tag

Yes

NO

 

FIGURE 2 – Flowchart of Kokborok Morphological Analyzer. 

49



 

 Based on unanalyzed words 

tagged as UNK 

After UNK words tagged as 

NNP 

Total input words 56732 56732 

Analyzed words 42549 45386 

Unanalyzed words 14183 11346 

%age of analysed words 75% 80% 

%age of errors 25% 20% 

TABLE 11 – Results of Morphological Analyzer. 

Conclusion and Future Work 

In the present work, the development of a Kokborok Morphological Analyzer has been described. 

The analyzer uses three dictionaries of morphemes viz., root, prefix and suffix. The root 

dictionary stores the related information of the corresponding roots. The stemmer performs with 

an accuracy of 85.5% considering the inflectional and derivational suffixes. The Analyzer can 

classify the word classes and sentence types based on the affix information. In Kokborok, word 

category is not so distinct except Noun. The verbs are under bound category. The verb 

morphology is more complex than that of noun. The distinction between the noun class and verb 

classes is relatively clear; the distinction between nouns and adjectives is often vague. Thus, the 

assumption made for word categories depend upon the root category and affix information. 
Currently, we use a sequential search of a stem from the root dictionary because of its smaller 

size. Further a part of root may also be a prefix which leads to wrong tagging. In the stripping of 

the morphemes the various morphemes pattern combinations are tested. The morphology driven 
Kokborok POS tagging is very much dependent on the morphological analysis and lexical rules 

of each category. 

The Natural Language Processing tools need more text corpus with better transfer rules and 

techniques to achieve quality output. The performance of the various Kokborok NLP tools that 

have been developed in the present work need to be improved by experimenting with various 

machine learning approaches with more training data. Future works include the developments of 

automatic Morphological Analyzer using some machine learning algorithms. The exploration and 

identification of additional linguistics factors that can be incorporated into the Morphological 

Analyzer to improve the performance is an important future task. 

References 

Choudhury, S., Singh, L., Borgohain, S. and Das, P. (2004). Morphological analyzer for 

Manipuri: Design and Implementation. Applied Computing, 123-129. 

Das, A. and Bandyopadhyay, S. (2010). Morphological Stemming Cluster Identification for 

Bangla. Knowledge Sharing Event-1: Task, 3. 

Debbarma, Binoy and Debbarma, Bijesh (2001). Kokborok Terminology P-I, II, III, English-

Kokborok-Bengali. Language Wing, Education Dept., TTAADC, Khumulwng, Tripura. 

Debbarma, K., Patra, B. G., Debbarma, S., Kumari, L. and Purkayastha, B. S. (2012). 

Morphological analysis of Kokborok for universal networking language dictionary. In 

50



Proceedings of 1st International Conference on Recent Advances in Information Technology 

(RAIT), pages 474-477. IEEE. 

Dhanalakshmi, V., Kumar, M. A., Rekha, R. U., Kumar, C. A., Soman, K. P. and Rajendran, S. 

(2009). Morphological Analyzer for Agglutinative Languages Using Machine Learning 

Approaches. In Proceedings of International Conference on Advances in Recent Technologies 

in Communication and Computing (ARTCom'09), pages 433-435. IEEE. 

Goyal, V. and Lehal, G. S. (2008). Hindi Morphological Analyzer and Generator. 

In Proceedings of First International Conference on Emerging Trends in Engineering and 

Technology (ICETET'08). pages 1156-1159. IEEE. 

Jacquesson, F. (2008). A Kokborok Grammar. Published by Kokborok tei Hukumu Mission. 

Minnen, G., Carroll, J. and Pearce, D. (2001). Applied morphological processing of 

English. Natural Language Engineering, 7(3), 207-223. 

Parakh, M. and Rajesha, N. (2011). Developing Morphological Analyzers for Four Indian 

Languages Using A Rule Based Affix Stripping Approach. In Proceedings of Linguistic Data 

Consortium for Indian Languages, CIIL, Mysore. 

Patra, B. G., Debbarma, K., Debabarma, S., Das, D., Das, A. and Bandyopadhyay, S. (2012). A 

light Weight Stemmer for Kokborok. In Proceedings of the 24th Conference on Computational 

Linguistics and Speech Processing (ROCLING 2012), pages 318-325, Yuan Ze University, 

Chung-Li, Taiwan. 

Rajeev, R. R., Rajendran, N. and Sherly, E. (2007). A Suffix Stripping Based Morph Analyzer 

for Malayalam Language. Morph Analyzer Science Congress. 

Singh, T. D. and Bandyopadhyay, S. (2005). Manipuri morphological analyzer. In Proceedings 

of the Platinum Jubilee International Conference of LSI. University of Hyderabad, India. 

51




