










































System paper for CoNLL-2012 shared task: Hybrid Rule-based Algorithm for Coreference Resolution.


Proceedings of the Joint Conference on EMNLP and CoNLL: Shared Task, pages 118–121,
Jeju Island, Korea, July 13, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Hybrid Rule-based Algorithm for Coreference Resolution ∗

Heming Shou1,2 Hai Zhao1,2†
1Center for Brain-Like Computing and Machine Intelligence,

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2MOE-Microsoft Key Laboratory for Intelligent Computing and Intelligent Systems

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
shouhm@gmail.com, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

This paper describes our coreference resolu-
tion system for the CoNLL-2012 shared task.
Our system is based on the Stanford’s dcore-
f deterministic system which applies multiple
sieves with the order from high precision to
low precision to generate coreference chains.
We introduce the newly added constraints and
sieves and discuss the improvement on the o-
riginal system. We evaluate the system using
OntoNotes data set and report our results of
average F-score 58.25 in the closed track.

1 Introduction

In this paper, our coreference resolution system for
CoNLL-2012 shared task (Pradhan et al., 2012) is
summarized. Our system is an extension of Stan-
ford’s multi-pass sieve system, (Raghunathan et al.,
2010) and (Lee et al., 2011), by adding novel con-
straints and sieves. In the original model , sieves are
sorted in decreasing order of precision. Initially each
mention is in its own cluster. Mention clusters are
combined by satisfying the condition of each sieve
in the scan pass. Through empirical studies, we pro-
posed some extensions and algorithms for further-
more enhancing the performance.

∗This work was partially supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 60903119 and Grant
No. 61170114), the National Research Foundation for the Doc-
toral Program of Higher Education of China under Grant No.
20110073120022, the National Basic Research Program of Chi-
na (Grant No. 2009CB320901) and the European Union Sev-
enth Framework Program (Grant No. 247619).

†corresponding author

Many other existing systems applied supervised
or unsupervised (Haghighi and Klein, 2010) learn-
ing models. The classical resolution algorithm was
proposed by (Soon et al., 2001). Semantic knowl-
edge like word associations was involved by (Kob-
dani et al., 2011). Most of the supervised learning
models in CoNLL-2011 shared task (Chang et al.,
2011)(Björkelund and Nugues, 2011) used classi-
fiers (Maximum Entropy or SVM) to train the mod-
els for obtaining the pairwise mention scores. How-
ever, the training process usually takes much longer
time than unsupervised or deterministic systems. In
contrast, (Raghunathan et al., 2010) proposed a rule-
based model which obtained competitive result with
less time.

Two considerable extensions to the Stanford mod-
el in this paper are made to guarantee higher pre-
cision and recall. First, we recorded error pattern-
s from outputs of the original Stanford system and
found that the usual errors are mention boundary
mismatches, pronoun mismatches and so on. To
avoid the irrational coreference errors, we added
some constraints to the mention detection for elim-
inating some unreasonable mention boundary mis-
matches. Second, we added some constraints in the
coreference sieves based on the errors on the training
set and the development set.

We participated in the closed track and received
an official F-score (unweighted mean of MUC,
BCUBED and CEAF(E) metric) of 58.25 for En-
glish. The system with our extensions is briefly in-
troduced in Section 2. We report our evaluation re-
sults and discuss in Section 3.

118



2 System Architecture

The original Stanford system consists of three
stages: mention detection, coreference resolution
and post-processing. The mention detection stage
is for extracting mentions with a relative high re-
call. The coreference resolution stage uses multiple
sieves to generate coreference clusters. The post-
processing stage makes the output compatible with
the shared task and OntoNotes specifications (Prad-
han et al., 2007), e.g. removing singletons, apposi-
tive, predicate nominatives and relative pronouns.

2.1 Mention Detection

Our system mainly focuses on making extension-
s for mention detection and coreference resolution.
From error analysis, we found that mention bound-
aries caused many precision and recall errors. For
example, for the gold mention Robert H. Chandross,
an economist for Lloyd’s Bank in New York, the o-
riginal system only extracts Robert H. Chandross as
the mention and links it with he in the following sen-
tence. This mismatch leads to both precision and re-
call errors since the mention with longer boundary
is not detected but the shorter one is used. Another
example which omits today in the phrase for the pre-
dicted mention is mentioned in (Lee et al., 2011) and
this boundary mismatch also accounts for precision
and recall errors. Some other examples may be like
this: Auto prices had a big effect in the PPI, and at
the CPI level they won’t, the gold mentions are Au-
to prices, the PPI, the CPI level and they while the
original system only finds out auto prices. Consid-
ering these boundary mismatches, it is not hard for
us to categorize the error types.

By observation, most boundary problems happen
in the following cases:

• The predicted mention is embedded in the gold
mention.

• The gold mention is embedded in the predicted
mention.

• Some gold mentions are totally omitted.

It is very rare for the case that predicted mention
overlaps with the gold mention but no one includes
the other.

For the first and second cases, some analysis and
constraint about prefix and postfix of phrases are ap-
plied to get predicted mentions as precise as gold
mentions. For the example mentioned above, the
clause ,an economist ... which modifies the person
Robert H. Chandross is annexed to the person name
mention. We also append time and other modifiers
to the original mention. As for the third case, we al-
low more pronouns and proper nouns to be added to
the list of mentions.

2.2 Sieve Coreference

Like the constraints on the extension to the mention
detection stage, our system also generates error re-
ports for the sieve passes. While our system is rule-
based and it also works without training data sets,
some statistical information is also helpful to detect
and avoid errors.

The first extension we used is a direct way to uti-
lize the training data and the development data. We
simply record the erroneous mention pairs in the
train and development sets with distance and sieve
information. One of the most common errors is that
when mentions with particular types appear twice
in the same sentence, the original system often puts
them into the same cluster. For example, there are
often two or more you or person names in the dia-
logue, however, the different occurrences are treat-
ed as coreference which produces precision errors.
To address this problem, we convert proper noun-
s to type designator, e.g. Paul as Man Name. Then
we use the formatted error pairs as constraints on the
sieve passes since some pairs mostly cause precision
errors. If the checking pair matches up some records
in the errors with the same sieve information and the
error frequency is over a threshold, we must discard
this pair in this sieve pass.

Another difference between our system and the S-
tanford system is the semantic similarity sieve. For
each sieve pass, the current clusters are built by
stronger sieves ( sieves in the earlier passes ). The S-
tanford system selects the most representative men-
tion from a mention cluster to query for semantic
information. The preference order is:

1. mentions headed by proper nouns

2. mentions headed by common nouns
119



3. nominal mentions

4. pronominal mentions

In our system, we not only select the most rep-
resentative one but compare all the types above, i.e,
select the longest string in each type of this clus-
ter. When applying semantic sieves, we also com-
pare representative mention for each type and make
synthesized decisions by the number of types which
have similar semantic meanings.

We also made some modifications on the sieves
and their ordering in the original system. For Prop-
er Head Word Match mentioned in (Lee et al., 2011),
the Pronoun distance which indicates sentence dis-
tance limit between a pronoun and its antecedent.
We change the value from 3 to 2.

3 Experiments and Results

Table 1: CoNLL-2012 Shared Task Test Results
Metric Recall Precision F1

MD 75.35 72.08 73.68
MUC 63.46 62.39 62.92

BCUBED 65.31 68.90 67.05
CEAF(M) 55.68 55.68 55.68
CEAF(E) 44.20 45.35 44.77
BLANC 69.43 75.08 71.81

OFFICIAL - - 58.25

Table 2: Comparison between original system and our
system on the development set

metric original our system
MUC F 61.64 62.31
MUC P 58.65 59.58
MUC R 64.95 65.29

BCUBED F 68.61 69.87
BCUBED P 67.23 68.81
BCUBED R 70.04 70.97

Our system enhanced the precision and recall of
the original system of (Lee et al., 2011). The table 1.
shows the official result for the CoNLL-2012 shared
task. The recall of our mention detection approach
is 75.35% while the precision is 72.08%. The fi-
nal official score 58.25 is the unweighed mean of

MUC, BCUBED and CEAF(E). Although the test
set is different from that of the previous year, com-
paring with the original system, our result of MD
and MUC shows that our improvement is meaning-
ful. The table 2. indicates the improvement from
our system over the original system evaluated by the
development set. Since experiments with seman-
tic knowledge like WordNet and Wikipedia cannot
give better performance, we omit the semantic func-
tion for generating test result. Our explanation is
that the predicted mentions are still not precise e-
nough and the fuzziness of the semantic knowledge
might cause conflicts with our sieves. If the seman-
tic knowledge tells that two mentions are similar and
possibly can be combined while they do not satisfy
the sieve constraints, it will be very hard to make a
decision since we cannot find an appropriate thresh-
old to let the semantic suggestion pass through.

4 Conclusion

In this paper we made a series of improvements on
the existing Stanford system which only uses deter-
ministic rules. Since the rules are high dimensional,
i.e., the rules that are adopted in the system may de-
pend on the states of the ongoing clustering process,
it is not feasible to apply it in the statistical learning
methods since take the intermediate results into con-
sideration will be. The experimental results show
that our improvements are effective. For this task,
we added constraints on the mention detection stage
and the coreference resolution stage. We also added
new sieves and conduct a group of empirical studies
on semantic knowledge. Our results give a demon-
stration that the deterministic model for coreference
resolution is not only simple and competitive but al-
so has high extendibility.

References
Anders Björkelund and Pierre Nugues. 2011. Exploring

lexicalized features for coreference resolution. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifteenth Conference on Computation-
al Natural Language Learning: Shared Task, pages
45–50, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Kai-Wei Chang, Rajhans Samdani, Alla Rozovskaya,
Nick Rizzolo, Mark Sammons, and Dan Roth. 2011.
Inference protocols for coreference resolution. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifteenth Conference on Computation-

120



al Natural Language Learning: Shared Task, pages
40–44, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Aria Haghighi and Dan Klein. 2010. Coreference reso-
lution in a modular, entity-centered model. In Human
Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 385–393, Los An-
geles, California, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Hamidreza Kobdani, Hinrich Schuetze, Michael
Schiehlen, and Hans Kamp. 2011. Bootstrapping
coreference resolution using word associations. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 783–792, Portland,
Oregon, USA, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Heeyoung Lee, Yves Peirsman, Angel Chang, Nathanael
Chambers, Mihai Surdeanu, and Dan Jurafsky. 2011.
Stanford’s multi-pass sieve coreference resolution sys-
tem at the conll-2011 shared task. In Proceedings of
the Fifteenth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning: Shared Task, pages 28–34, Port-
land, Oregon, USA, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Sameer S. Pradhan, Lance A. Ramshaw, Ralph M.
Weischedel, Jessica MacBride, and Linnea Micciulla.
2007. Unrestricted coreference: Identifying entities
and events in ontonotes. In ICSC, pages 446–453.

Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Olga Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. 2012. CoNLL-
2012 shared task: Modeling multilingual unrestrict-
ed coreference in OntoNotes. In Proceedings of the
Sixteenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL 2012), Jeju, Korea.

Karthik Raghunathan, Heeyoung Lee, Sudarshan Ran-
garajan, Nathanael Chambers, Mihai Surdeanu, Dan
Jurafsky, and Christopher Manning. 2010. A multi-
pass sieve for coreference resolution. In Proceedings
of EMNLP 2010.

Wee Meng Soon, Hwee Tou Ng, and Daniel Chung Yong
Lim. 2001. A machine learning approach to coref-
erence resolution of noun phrases. Comput. Linguist.,
27(4):521–544, December.

121


