










































Dialogue Systems Using Online Learning: Beyond Empirical Methods


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Future directions and needs in the Spoken Dialog Community: Tools and Data, pages 7–8,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Dialogue Systems Using Online Learning: Beyond Empirical Methods ∗

Heriberto Cuayáhuitl
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence

Saarbrücken, Germany
hecu01@dfki.de

Nina Dethlefs
Heriot-Watt University
Edinburgh, Scotland

n.s.dethlefs@hw.ac.uk

Abstract

We discuss a change of perspective for train-
ing dialogue systems, which requires a shift
from traditional empirical methods to online
learning methods. We motivate the applica-
tion of online learning, which provides the
benefit of improving the system’s behaviour
continuously often after each turn or dialogue
rather than after hundreds of dialogues. We
describe the requirements and advances for di-
alogue systems with online learning, and spec-
ulate on the future of these kinds of systems.

1 Motivation

Important progress has been made in empirical
methods for training spoken or multimodal dialogue
systems over the last decade. Nevertheless, a differ-
ent perspective has to be embraced if we want dia-
logue systems to learn on the spot while interacting
with real users. Typically, empirical methods op-
erate cyclically as follows: collect data, provide the
corresponding annotations, train a statistical or other
machine learning model, evaluate the performance
of the learned model, and if satisfactory, deploy the
trained model in a working system. The disadvan-
tage of this approach is that while data is still be-
ing collected subsequent to deployment, the system
does not optimize its behaviour anymore (cf. step-
wise learning, the solid blue line in Fig. 1). In con-
trast, dialogue systems with online learning tackle
this limitation by learning a machine learning model

∗This research was funded by the EC’s FP7 programmes
under grant agreement no. ICT-248116 (ALIZ-E) and under
grant agreement no. 287615 (PARLANCE).

Tr
a
in

in
g
 a

c
ti

v
it

y

Online

learning

Offline

learning

Collected dialogues

Figure 1: Learning approaches for dialogue systems.
Whilst offline learning aims for discontinuous learning,
online learning aims for continuous learning while inter-
acting with users in a real environment.

continuously often from unlabeled or minimally la-
beled data (cf. dotted red line in Fig. 1). So whilst
empirical methods train models after hundreds of di-
alogues, online learning methods refine the system
models after each user turn or each dialogue. In the
rest of the paper we discuss the requirements, ad-
vances and potential future of these kind of systems.

2 Online Learning Systems: Requirements

Several requirements arise for the development of
successful online learning systems. First of all, they
need to employ methods that are scalable for real-
world systems and the modelling of knowledge in
sufficient detail. Second, efficient learning is a pre-
requisite for learning from an ongoing interaction
without causing hesitations or pauses for the user.
Third, learnt models should satisfy a stability crite-
rion that guarantees that the learning agent’s perfor-
mance does not deteriorate over time, e.g. over the
course of a number of interactions, due to the newly
accumulated knowledge and behaviours. Fourth,

7



systems should employ a knowledge transfer ap-
proach in which they master new tasks they are con-
fronted with over their life span by transferring gen-
eral knowledge gathered in previous tasks. Fifth, on-
line learning sytems should adopt a lifelong learn-
ing approach, arguably without stopping learning.
This implies making use of large data sets, which
can be unlabeled or partially labeled due to the costs
that they imply. Finally, in the limit of updating the
learned models after every user turn, the online and
offline learning methods could be the same as long
as they meet the first three requirements above.

3 Online Learning Systems: Advances

Several authors have recognised the potential bene-
fits of online learning methods in previous work.

Thrun (1994) presents a robot for lifelong learn-
ing that learns to navigate in an unknown office en-
vironment by suggesting to transfer general purpose
knowledge across tasks. Bohus et al. (2006) de-
scribe a spoken dialogue system that learns to op-
timise its non-understanding recovery strategies on-
line through interactions with human users based on
pre-trained logistic regression models. Cuayáhuitl
and Dethlefs (2011) present a dialogue system in the
navigation domain that is based on hierarchical rein-
forcement learning and Bayesian Networks and re-
learns its behaviour after each user turn, using indi-
rect feedback from the user’s performance. Gašić et
al. (2011) present a spoken dialogue system based
on Gaussian Process-based Reinforcement Learn-
ing. It learns directly from binary feedback that
users assign explicitly as rewards at the end of each
dialogue and that indicate whether users were happy
or unhappy with the system’s performance. From
these previous investigations, we can observe that
online learning systems can take both explicit and/or
implicit feedback to refine their trained models.

4 Online Learning Systems: Future

While previous work has made important steps, the
problem of lifelong learning for spoken dialogue
systems is far from solved. Especially the follow-
ing challenges will need to receive attention: (a) fast
learning algorithms that can retrain behaviours after
each user turn with stable performance; and (b) scal-
able methods for optimizing multitasked behaviours

at different levels and modalities of communication.
In addition, we envision online learning systems

with the capability of transfering knowledge across
systems and domains. For example: a dialogue act
classifier, an interaction strategy, or a generation
strategy can be made transferable to similar tasks.
This could involve reasoning mechanisms to infer
what is known/unknown based on past experiences.
The idea of learning from scratch every time a new
system is constructed will thus be avoided. In this
regard, the role of the system developer in these
kinds of systems is not only to specify the system’s
tasks and learning environment, but to constrain and
bootstrap the system behaviour for faster learning.
All of these capabilities will be possible using on-
line learning with a lifelong learning perspective.

5 Tools and Data

Currently there are software tools for training mod-
els but they are more suitable for offline learning.1

Software tools for online learning remain to be de-
veloped and shared with the community. In addi-
tion, since building a dialogue system typically re-
quires a tremendous amount of effort, researchers
working on learning approaches should agree on
standards to facilitate system development. Finally,
since dialogue data is an often lacking resource in
the community, the online learning perspective may
contribute towards reducing the typical chicken and
egg problem, due to dialogue knowledge being more
readily transferable across domains, subject to on-
line adaption towards particular domains.

References

Dan Bohus, Brian Langner, Antoine Raux, Alan Black,
Maxine Eskenazi, and Alexander Rudnicky. 2006.
Online Supervised Learning of Non-Understanding
Recovery Policies. In Proc. IEEE SLT.

Heriberto Cuayáhuitl and Nina Dethlefs. 2011. Optimiz-
ing Situated Dialogue Management in Unknown Envi-
ronments. In Proc. INTERSPEECH.

Milica Gašić, Filip Jurčı́ček, Blaise Thomson, Kai Yu,
and Steve Young. 2011. On-line policy optimisation
of spoken dialogue systems via interaction with human
subjects. In Proc. IEEE ASRU.

Sebastian Thrun. 1994. A Lifelong Learning Perspective
for Mobile Robot Control. In Proc. IEEE/RSJ/GI.

1www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/

8


