










































Preface to Papers for GenChal


INLG 2012 Proceedings of the 7th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 134–135,
Utica, May 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Preface

Generation Challenges 2012 (GenChal’12) was the sixth of the annual Genera-
tion Challenges umbrella events for shared-task evaluation activities in natural lan-
guage generation. It followed five previous events: the Pilot Attribute Selection
for Generating Referring Expressions (ASGRE) Challenge hosted by UCNLG+MT
in Copenhagen, Denmark in 2007; Referring Expression Generation (REG) Chal-
lenges at INLG’08 in Ohio, US; Generation Challenges 2009 at ENLG’09 in Athens,
Greece; Generation Challenges 2010 at INLG’10 in Trim, Ireland, and, most re-
cently, Generation Challenges 2011 at ENLG’11 in Nancy, France. More informa-
tion about all these events can be found via the links on the Generation Challenges
homepage (http://www.nltg.brighton.ac.uk/research/genchal12).

Like its predecessor events, GenChal’12 had a Future Task Proposals Track
where researchers were invited to submit papers describing ideas for shared tasks
to be run in the future. The responses to this call are the last three papers in the
GenChal’12 part of the present volume. White’s paper on a Syntactic Paraphrase
Reranking task is explicitly proposed as a further development on the outcomes
of the Surface Realisation task, with the emphasis on methods to rank realisation
alternatives. Banik et al.’s KBGen task proposal focuses on generation of text from
structured knowledge sources, while Bouayad-Agha et al.’s proposal focuses on
methods for content determination in NLG from semantic web data.

GenChal’12 also included a progress report on the Surface Realisation shared
task, currently organised by Anja Belz, Bernd Bohnet, Simon Mille, Leo Wanner
and Michael White. The report, which can be found at the beginning of the Gen-
Chal’12 part of this volume, describes current work on the SR Task’s common-
ground input representations and plans for the next edition of the task, SR’13.

The GenChal’12 session at INLG’12 included two further presentations, one
an update report on the Question Generation Challenge organised by Vasile Rus,
Arthur Graesser and Paul Piwek, which did not run this year. The other was a
summary report on the second edition of the Helping Our Own task (HOO’12) or-
ganised by Robert Dale, whose full results session was this year hosted at BEA’12.
HOO’12 was based on a much more focused task definition than its 2011 prede-
cessor. While HOO’11 addressed the automatic correction of a very broad range
of errors in scientific articles in English by non-native authors, this year’s edition
was centred on errors related to the use of determiners and prepositions. This focus
was partly motivated by the results of HOO’11. HOO’12 attracted 14 participating
teams.

Preparations are already underway for a seventh NLG shared-task evaluation
event next year, Generation Challenges 2013, which may be organised as part of
ENLG’13. Hopefully, this will include new tasks from among those proposed in

134



the Future Task Proposals Track of GenChal’11 and GenChal’12. Many of the
new proposals share an emphasis on fostering collaboration with members of other
research communities, and will, it is to be hoped, serve to broaden the interest in
tasks related to the generation of natural language.

Many people contribute to making Generation Challenges happen each year.
This year, we would like to thank in particular the INLG’12 organisers, Barbara di
Eugenio and Susan McRoy for hosting GenChal’12, and the shared task organising
teams for all their hard work.

June 2012 Anja Belz and Albert Gatt

Generation Challenges Steering Committee:

Anja Belz, University of Brighton, UK
Robert Dale, Macquarie University, Australia
Albert Gatt, University of Malta and Unversity of Aberdeen, UK
Kevin Knight, ISI, University of Southern California, USA
Alexander Koller, Saarland University, Germany
Chris Mellish, Aberdeen University, UK
Johanna Moore, Edinburgh University, UK
Amanda Stent, Stony Brook University, USA
Kristina Striegnitz, Union College, USA

135


