










































PREFER: Using a Graph-Based Approach to Generate Paraphrases for Language Learning


The 7th Workshop on the Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 80–85,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

 

 

PREFER: Using a Graph-Based Approach to Generate Paraphrases for 

Language Learning 

  

Mei-Hua Chen*, Shih-Ting Huang+, Chung-Chi Huang*, Hsien-Chin Liou**, Jason S. Chang+ 

  * Institute of Information Systems and Applications 
+ Department of Computer Science 

**  Department of Foreign Languages and Literature 

National Tsing Hua University  

HsinChu, Taiwan, R.O.C. 30013 

{chen.meihua,koromiko1104,u901571,hsienchin,jason.jschang}@gmail.com 

  

  

Abstract 

Paraphrasing is an important aspect of language 

competence; however, EFL learners have long 

had difficulty paraphrasing in their writing 

owing to their limited language proficiency. 

Therefore, automatic paraphrase suggestion 

systems can be useful for writers. In this paper, 

we present PREFER
1
, a paraphrase reference 

tool for helping language learners improve their 

writing skills. In this paper, we attempt to 

transform the paraphrase generation problem 

into a graphical problem in which the phrases 

are treated as nodes and translation similarities 

as edges. We adopt the PageRank algorithm to 

rank and filter the paraphrases generated by the 

pivot-based paraphrase generation method. We 
manually evaluate the performance of our 

method and assess the effectiveness of 

PREFER in language learning. The results 
show that our method successfully preserves 

both the semantic meaning and syntactic 

structure of the query phrase. Moreover, the 

students’ writing performance improve most 

with the assistance of PREFER.  

1. Introduction 

Paraphrasing, or restating information using 

different words, is an essential part of productive 

language competence (Fuchs, 1980; Mel’čuk, 1992; 

Martinot, 2003). However, EFL learners have 

difficulty paraphrasing in their writing partly 

                                                 
1
 http://140.114.89.231/PREFER 

because of their insufficient lexical knowledge 

(Abasi et al. 2006; Chandrasoma et al. 2004). If 

they are provided with direct and substantial 

support while writing, they may be able to express 

their thoughts more fluently. Unfortunately, few 

paraphrase reference tools have been developed to 

provide instant assistance to learners in their 

writing process. In the light of the pressing need 

for paraphrase reference tools, we develop 

PREFER, a paraphrasing assistant system to help 

EFL learners vary their expression during writing.  

Over the past decade, paraphrasing techniques 

have played an important role in many areas of 

Natural Language Processing, such as machine 

translation, and question answering. However, very 

few studies have been conducted concerning the 

application of automatic paraphrase generation 

techniques in language learning and teaching.  

In this paper, we treat the paraphrase generation 

problem as a graph-related problem. We adopt the 

PageRank algorithm (Page et al., 1999) to generate 

paraphrases based on the assumption that a page 

with more incoming links is likely to receive a 

higher rank. Meanwhile, a page which is linked by 

a higher ranked page should transitively be ranked 

higher. We take advantage of transitivity of 

relevance to rank and filter the paraphrases 

generated by the pivot-based method (i.e., phrase 

are treated as paraphrases if they share the same 

translations) of Bannard and Callison-Burch 

(2005).  

The advantage of the pivot approach is that the 

generated paraphrases are exactly semantically 

equivalent to the query phrase. However, its 

80



 

 

quality of the paraphrases highly correlates with 

that of the techniques of bilingual alignment. To 

overcome such limitation, we use the PageRank 

algorithm to refine the generated paraphrases. In 

other words, we leverage the PageRank algorithm 

to find more relevant paraphrases that preserve 

both meaning and grammaticality for language 

learners. The results of a manual evaluation and a 

system assessment show that our approach and 

system perform well. 

2. Related Work 

A number of studies have investigated EFL leaners’ 

paraphrase competence. For example, Campbell 

(1987) reveals that language proficiency 

significantly affects paraphrasing competence. 

McInnis (2009) reports that paraphrasing task is 

more difficult for L2 students than that for L1 

students. According to Milicevic (2011), L2 

learners propose less valid paraphrases than native 

speakers. These findings indicate that EFL students 

have problems in paraphrasing. In view of this, we 

develop PREFER, a paraphrase reference tool, for 

helping English learners with their writing. 

Paraphrase generation, on the other hand, has 

been an area of active research and the related 

work has been thoroughly surveyed in 

Androutsopoulos and Malakasiotis (2010) as well 

as in Madnani and Dorr (2010). In the rest of this 

section, we focus on reviewing the methods related 

to our work.  

One prominent approach to paraphrase 

generation is based on bilingual parallel corpora. 

For example, Bannard and Callison-Burch (2005) 

propose the pivot approach to generate phrasal 

paraphrases from an English-German parallel 

corpus. With the advantage of its parallel and 

bilingual natures of such a corpus, the output 

paraphrases do preserve semantic similarity. 

Callison-Burch (2008) further places syntactic 

constraints on generated paraphrases to improve 

the quality of the paraphrases. In this paper, we 

generate paraphrases adopting the pivot-based 

method proposed by Bannard and Callison-Burch 

(2005) in the first round. Then we use a 

graph-based approach to further ensure paraphrase 

candidates preserve both meaning and 

grammaticality. 

In a study more closely related to our work, 

Kok and Brockett (2010) take a graphical view of 

the pivot-based approach. They propose the Hitting 

Time Paraphrase algorithm (HTP) to measure 

similarities between phrases. The smaller the 

number of steps a random walker goes from one 

node to the other, the more likely these two nodes 

are paraphrases. The main difference between their 

work and ours lies in the definition of the graph. 

While they treat multilingual phrases as nodes, we 

treat only English phrases as nodes. Besides, we 

define the edges between nodes as semantic 

relation instead of bilingual alignment. 

In contrast to the previous work, we present a 

graph-based method for refining the paraphrases 

generated by the pivoting approach. Our goal is to 

consolidate the relation between paraphrases to 

provide learners with more and better paraphrases 

which are helpful in expanding their lexical 

knowledge. 

3. Graph-Based Paraphrase Generation 

In this section, we describe how we use the 

PageRank algorithm to rank and filter the 

paraphrases generated by the pivot-based method. 

3.1 Graph Construction 

We first exploit the pivot-based method proposed 

by Bannard and Callison-Burch (2005) to populate 

our graph G using of candidate paraphrases 

cP={             } from a bilingual parallel 
corpus B for a query phrase q. Each phrase in cP is 

also represented as a node in G. Note that the 

query phrase q is excluded from cP.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 1.  A simple graph G. Note that the cp1 and 

   
  

 will be linked iff    
  

 is the paraphrase of q 

and is also the paraphrase of      

 

q 

cP 

𝑐𝑝    𝑐𝑝
 
   

𝑐𝑝  
𝑐𝑝    

81



 

 

Graph G only contains the paraphrases cpi 

whose probabilities are higher than a certain 

threshold ε
2
 as nodes. In addition, each cpi is 

linked to the query phrase q with edge e which is 

weighted by the probability  (   | ). Furthermore, 
we establish the edges among the phrases in cP. 

An example graph is shown in Figure 1. By 

repeating the previous steps, for each phrase cp1, 
cp2,... in cP, we find their corresponding 

paraphrases,         
 
  

        and 

         
 
  

       …., and discard the 

paraphrases that are not in cP. Once the phrases are 

linked with their paraphrases, the graph G is 

created.  

In this paper, we also place a constraint that a 

paraphrase of a phrase q must neither be a 

substring nor a superstring of q. These strings are 

usually aligned with the same foreign language 

phrase while they are not paraphrases at all. For 

example, “play an important” and “play an 

important role in” are excluded for “play an 

important role”. This has the effect of reducing 

some of the noise generated by the pivot-based 

method.   

3.2 Graph-Based Paraphrase Generation 

We then refine the generated paraphrases adopting 

the PageRank algorithm proposed by Page et al. 

(1999). Consider a graph consisting of a set of 

webpages on the Web V and a set of hyperlinks E. 

The PageRank algorithm assigns a value PR to 

each webpage as their importance measurement. 

The PR value of a certain page u is defined 

iteratively as the following equation: 

  ( )   ∑
  ( )

 ( )
                   ( )

    

 

where Bu is a set of pages linked to u and L(.) 

denotes the number of outbound links from a page 

v.  

Intuitively, by using formula (1) iteratively, we 

are able to calculate the PR values for all nodes 

and thus extract relatively important paraphrases. 

However, the original PageRank algorithm does 

not take the weight of each edge into consideration. 

That is, the PageRank algorithm treats all links 

equally when distributing rank scores. Treating all 

links equally in paraphrase generation task might 

                                                 
2
 We set ε to be 0.01. 

lose some linguistic properties. For this, we 

consider the importance of edges of the nodes and 

weight the edges based on the paraphrase 

probability in the pivot-based approach using 

 (      )  ∑ ( |  ) ( |  )

 

      ( )  

Formula (2) represents the probability that the 

phrase u is the paraphrase of the phrase v. f refers 

to shared translations of v and u. Then for each 

iteration of the PageRank calculation, we reassign 

the PR value for all u in V to be PR’(u) as:  

   ( )   ∑
 (   )  ( )

 ( )
           ( )

    

 

Instead of treating all edges equally, formula (3) 

integrates the weights of inbound link and 

outbound link edges (see Section 4 for the 

performance differences with and without 

weighting edges). 

4. Results 

In this section, we first present our experimental 

setting. Then evaluation results are reported. 

4.1 Experimental Setting 

In this paper, word alignments were produced by 

Giza++ toolkit (Och and Ney, 2003) over a set of 

Danish-English section (containing 1,236,427 

sentences) of the Europarl corpus, version 2 

(Koehn, 2002).  

We compared our graph-based approach with a 

strong baseline, the pivot-based method with 

syntactic constraint (SBP) (Callison-Burch, 2008) 

utilizing the same Danish-English corpus. We also 

investigate the contribution of adding the edge 

weights to the PageRank algorithm by building 

two models, PR representing the method of the 

PageRank algorithm without weights and PRw 

representing the method of the weighted PageRank 

algorithm, for comparison.   

To assess the performance of our method, we 

conducted a manual evaluation. We asked an 

experienced English lecturer to randomly select 

100 most commonly used and meaningful phrases 

from 30 research articles in the discipline of 

Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL). A 

total of 88 unique phrases were used as our test set 

for evaluation excluding 12 phrases not existing in 

the Europarl corpus. For each phrase, we extracted 

82



 

 

the corresponding candidate paraphrases and chose 

top 5 for evaluation. Two raters, provided with a 

simplified scoring standard used by Callison-Burch 

(2008), manually evaluate the accuracy of the top 

ranked paraphrases of each phrase by score 0, 1 

and 2. It is worth noting that the raters were asked 

to score each paraphrase candidate by considering 

its appropriateness in various contexts. In this 

evaluation, we strictly deemed a paraphrase to be 

correct if and only if both raters scored 2.  The 

inter-annotator agreement was 0.63.   

The coverage was measured by the number of 

correct answers within top 5 candidates. The 

precision was measured by the number of correct 

answers within the returned answers. 

On the other hand, to assess the effectiveness of 

PREFER in language learning, we carried out an 

experiment with 55 Chinese-speaking EFL college 

freshmen, who had at least six years of formal 

instruction from junior to senior high schools and 

were estimated to be at the intermediate level 

regarding their overall English competence. The 

students were randomly divided into three groups. 

They were asked to paraphrase seven short 

paragraphs in the pre-test with no system support, 

and then paraphrase another seven short 

paragraphs in the post-test using three different 

tools: PREFER (P), LONGMAN Dictionary of 

Contemporary English Online (L), and 

Thesaurus.com (T). A total of 22 default phrases 

(http://140.114.75.22/share/examples.htm) were 

embedded in the paragraphs in the pre- and 

post-tests, targeted at comparing the quality and 

quantity of students’ paraphrasing performance. 
Students were not restricted to paraphrase these 

embedded phrases. Instead, they were encouraged 

to replace any possible phrases or even restructure 

sentences. We had two experienced native-speaker 

TESL (Teaching English as a Second Language) 

lecturers to score the students’ paraphrasing 

performance. 

4.2 Experimental Results 

4.2.1 Manual Evaluation 

As shown in Table 1, PRw achieved both good 

precision and coverage. Moreover, PR and PRw 

performed better than SBP in both coverage and 

precision. Also, the result that the performance of 

PRw is better than that of PR implies that PRw is 

able to generate more semantically and 

syntactically correct paraphrases. However, the 

precision of 0.19 indicates that there is still room to 

improve the paraphrase generation model.  

 

 

 

  PR PRw SBP 

Coverage 0.17 0.18 0.07 

Precision 0.17 0.19 0.10 

Table 1: The measurement of paraphrases. 

 
Additionally, Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) is 

also reported. Here, MRR is defined as a measure 

of how much effort needed to locate the first 

appropriate paraphrase for the given phrase in the 

ranked list of paraphrases. The MRR score of PRw 

(0.53) outperformed PR (0.51) and SBP (0.47). It 

demonstrated that the PRw model facilitates the 

high ranking of good paraphrases (i.e., paraphrases 

with meaning and grammaticality preserved would 

be ranked high).  

4.2.2. Evaluation on Language Learning  

The second evaluation is to assess the effectiveness 

of PREFER applied to CALL. We used a 

comparison method to measure the extent to which 

EFL learners achieved good performance in 

paraphrasing.  

 
Table 2. Comparison of paraphrasing performance 

among students using three different reference tools.  

 

As seen in the first row of Table 2, the students’ 

writing performance improved most with the 

assistance of PREFER (i.e., group P), compared 

with group L and group T. We further analyzed 

and compared the number of the rephrased phrases 

and the correct paraphrases, and the rate of 

    P L T 

improvement of paraphrasing 

task 
38.2% -31.6% -6.2% 

all 

paraphrasable 

phrases 

rephrased 38.4% -23.2% 9.5% 

correct 53.3% -17.5% 4.6% 

correctness rate  7.9% 4.9% -3.1% 

22 default 

phrases 

rephrased 68% -16% 28% 

correct 100% -5% 31% 

correctness rate 13.6% 7.9% 1.5% 

83



 

 

correctness students achieved using different 

reference tools among our testing paraphrase 

candidates (see the middle and bottom panels of 

Table 2). Obviously, the students consulting 

PREFER achieved substantial paraphrasing 

improvement in all three aspects of both all and 

default phrases. But the other two groups seemed 

unable to manage well the paraphrasing task with 

traditional way of phrase information. This limited 

information seems insufficient to enable students 

to familiarize themselves with proper usages of 

phrases which might lead to improper 

paraphrasing. 

In short, PREFER outperformed the other two 

reference tools in assisting EFL learners in their 

paraphrasing task. 

5. Conclusion and Future Work   

In this paper, we treat the paraphrase generation 

problem as a graphical problem. We utilize the 

PageRank algorithm to rank and filter the 

paraphrases generated using the pivot-based 

method. The results show that our method 

significantly produces better paraphrases in both 

precision and coverage compared with the 

syntactically-constrained pivot method of 

Callison-Burch (2008). Additionally, PREFER 

does benefit learners’ writing performance. 

 In order to conduct a more comprehensive 

evaluation, we plan to adapt the in-context 

evaluation metric introduced by Callison-Burch et. 

al (2008). A larger test set would be generated 

manually to evaluate the performance of our 

paraphrase system. In addition, we will implement 

various kinds of baseline systems such as Kok and 

Brockett (2010) and Chan et al. (2011) to provide a 

more competitive comparison. 

Many avenues exist for future research and 

improvement. For example, we would like to 
extend paraphrasing consecutive n-gram phrases to 
inconsecutive ones such as ones with incomplete 

transitive verbs (e.g., “provide someone with 

something”). Besides, we are interested in 

weighting edges using syntactic and semantic 

relation in our graph-based method to further 

improve the quality of generated paraphrases. 

 

 

 

References  

Ali R. Abasi, Nahal Akbari, and Barbara Graves. 2006. 

Discourse appropriation, construction of identities, 

and the complex issue of plagiarism: ESL students 

writing in graduate school. Journal of Second 

Language Writing, 15, 102–117. 

Ion Androutsopoulos and Prodromos Malakasiotis. 2010. 

A Survey of Paraphrasing and Textual Entailment 

Methods. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 

38, 135–187. 

Colin Bannard and Chris Callison-Burch. 2005. 

Paraphrasing with bilingual parallel corpora. In 

Proceedings of ACL, pp. 597-604. 

Chris Callison-Burch. 2008. Syntactic constraints on 

paraphrases extracted from parallel corpora. In 

Proceedings of EMNLP, pp. 196–205. 

Chris Callison-Burch, Trevor Cohn, and Mirella Lapata. 

2008. ParaMetric: an automatic evaluation metric for 

paraphrasing. In Proceedings of the 22nd 

International Conference on Computational 

Linguistics, pp. 97-104. 

Cherry Campbell. 1990. Writing with others’ words: 

Using background reading text in academic 

compositions. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language 

writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 

211-30). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 

Press. 

Tsz Ping Chan, Chris Callison-Burch and Benjamin Van 

Durme. 2011. Reranking Bilingually Extracted 

Paraphrases Using Monolingual Distributional 

Similarity. In Proceedings of the GEMS 2011 

Workshop on GEometrical Models of Natural 

Language Semantics, pp. 33-42.  

Ranamukalage Chandrasoma, Celia Thompson, and 

Alastair Pennycook. 2004. Beyond plagiarism: 

Transgressive and nontransgressive intertextuality. 

Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 3(3), 

171–194. 

Catherine Fuchs. 1980. Paraphrase et théorie du 

langage. Contribition à une histoire des theories 

linguistiques contemporaines et à la construction 

d’une théorie énonciative de la paraphraase. Thèse 

de doctorat. Paris: Université Paris VII. 

Philipp Koehn. 2002. Europarl: A multilingual corpus 

for evaluation of machine translation. Unpublished, 

http://www.isi.edu/~koehn/europarl/. 

Stanley Kok and Chris Brockett. 2010. Hitting the right 

paraphrases in good time. In Proceedings of 

NAACL/HLT, pp. 145-153. 

84



 

 

Nitin Madnani and Bonnie J. Dorr. 2010. Generating 

phrasal and sentential paraphrases: A survey of 

data-driven methods. Computational Linguistics, 

36(3):341–388. 

Claire Martinot. 2003. Pour une linguistique de 

l’acquisition. La reformulation: du concept descriptif 

au concept explicatif. Langage et Société, 2(104); 

147-151. 

Lara McInnis. 2009. Analyzing English L1 and L2 

Paraphrasing Strategies through Concurrent Verbal 

Report and Stimulated Recall Protocols. MA Thesis. 

Toronto: University of Toronto. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 1992. Paraphrase et lexique: la théorie 

Sens-Texte et le Dictionnaire explicatif et 

combinatoire. In: Mel’čuk, I. et al., Dictionnaire 

explicatif et combinatoire du français contemporain. 

Recherches lexico-sémantiques III. Montréal: Presses 

de l’Université de Montréal; 9-59. 

Jasmina Milićević and Alexandra Tsedryk. 2011. 

Assessing and Improving Paraphrasing Competence 

in FSL. In Proceedings of the 5th International 

Conference on Meaning- Text Theory, pp. 175-184. 

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic 

comparison of various statistical alignment models. 

Computational Linguistics, 29(1): 19-51. 

Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, Terry 

Winograd. 1999. The PageRank Citation Ranking: 

Bringing Order to the Web. Technical Report. pp. 

1999-66, Stanford University InfoLab. 

 

85


