



















































Introducing Kashmiri Dependency Treebank


Proceedings of the Workshop on Machine Translation and Parsing in Indian Languages (MTPIL-2012), pages 53–60,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Introducing Kashmiri Dependency Treebank 

Linguistic Data Consortium for Indian Languages, CIIL Mysore 

Shahid Mushtaq Bhat 

Shahid.bhat3@gmail.com 

 

ABSTRACT 

Treebank is a basic language resource for training and testing 

syntactic parser which forms a key module in various NLP systems 

like machine translation system. This paper reports an ongoing 

research of building dependency treebank for Kashmiri 

(KashTreeBank) and discusses some main annotation issues. The 

paper is based on the pilot annotation of 500 sentences.  

KEYWORDS: Corpus, Annotation, Dependency, V2 Phenomenon   

1. Introduction 

Treebank is a set of corpora annotated with skeletal syntactic 

information, such as POS tags for words level and syntactic tags for 

beyond word level (Kristin Jacque, 2006). It is essentially a machine 

readable repository of syntactic structures of a language. 

KashTreeBank
1
 is a small scale Kashmiri dependency treebank, 

based on Paninian Computational Grammar-PCG (Bharati, et al. 

1994). Sanchay (See Singh 2006) has been used for syntactic 

annotations. The present treebank is in the initial stage of 

development in which annotation of 2361 sentences has been taken 

up. So far, POS annotation of 888 sentences has been completed, out 

                                                           
1 KashTreeBank is a personal effort on part of the researcher which was initially 
conceived as a summer school project in IASNLP 2011. 
 

53



of which 500 sentences are further annotated at chunk & inter-chunk 

dependency level, manually by using the afore mentioned interface.  

2. Kashmiri and Resource Poor Scenario 

‘Kashmiri’ is one of the 22 scheduled languages as per the 8th 

schedule of the Indian constitution. It is mainly spoken in the greater 

region of “Kashmir”. There are 6 million Kashmiri speakers (see 

Ethnologue, 2006). Kashmiri is a Dardic language (Grierson, 1915), 

classified with its sister language Shina, under a separate group 

within Indo-Aryan family. It is inflectionally rich language with 

extensive V2 phenomenon & pronominal clitics. It is mainly written 

in modified Persio-Arabic script with writing convention from right 

to left. It is the only language in Dardic group which has a written 

tradition. Since, it has been never used as an official language or the 

medium of instruction; the text is produced in limited domains, 

predominantly, in literature. Very little computational and language 

resources are available for Kashmiri. It is only 3-4 years back that 

some initial efforts started in this direction at LDC-IL and 

University of Kashmir (ldcil.org & kashmirizaban.com). These 

efforts resulted in some basic language resources.  

3. Corpus 

The treebanks are usually based on contemporary newspaper texts, 

which have the practical advantage of being relatively easily 

accessible. For example, the Wall Street Journal part of the Penn 

Treebank (See Marcus et al. 1993). This has been very influential as 

a model for treebanks across the world but newspaper corpus is not 

readily available for Kashmiri as it is for English. However, for the 

current work, the use of newspaper corpus was avoided in initially 

for the only reason that it comprises of very lengthy sentences which 

were very hard to annotate in the beginning. Therefore, 500 

sentences corpus was created by manually inputting the text from 

54



the short stories. The idea was that these stories consist of relatively 

shorter sentences (4 to 30 Words in length) which would be easier to 

annotate, hence, to prepare a basic guideline would be an easy job. 

Later on, 1861 sentences from a newspaper “Sangarmaal” (political 

domain) were added to the existing corpus.   

4. Framework and The Grammar Formalism  

For the current work, PCG has been used for syntactic annotation 

which is actually a variant of dependency grammar (Kiparsky & 

Staal, 1969). This model helps to capture the syntacto-semantic 

relations in a sentence. Sentence is considered as a series of 

modifier-modified relations with a primary modified, main verb, the 

root of the dependency tree. The elements which modify main verb 

are its arguments or adjuncts that participate in the action specified 

by the verb. The relations of these participants with the verb are 

called karaka. Since, Kashmiri is an inflectionally rich language; 

there are clear cut markers or postpositions (vibaktis) on the 

arguments and adjuncts that participate in an action/event. Such 

syntactic cues can be very instrumental in identifying the relation of 

an argument or adjunct with its root, the main verb. There is almost 

one-to-one relation between the karakas & the case 

markers/postpositions in many constructions. Such correspondences 

between karaka & vebhakti along with TAM features are very 

helpful in syntactic annotation and handling relatively free word-

order (Bharati et al. 1993). 

5. Some Important Annotation Issues 

Initially, Hindi annotation guideline was used to experiment with 

Kashmiri corpus and to frame a rough Kashmiri annotation 

guideline. Though, it covered most of the dependency relations 

occurring in the corpus but there were many remaining issues 

related to V2 phenomenon, discontinuity in complex predicates, 

55



distinction between coordinating and subordinating conjuncts, 

pronominal clitics, handling of discourse elements, etc which were 

resolved after initial pilot annotation of 500 sentences. These issues 

are briefly explained below with the help of some representative 

dependency trees:  

I. V2 Phenomenon and Discontinuous Verb Group 

      1. asi    A:s   doshvun’  bA:tsan      tam’-sInz    seyThaa       

          we   had    both    husband-wife      it’s          immense   

          nikhath     gA:mIts   

           hatred        went 

          We both husband wife had developed immense hatred of it.  

In this example, shown in Fig.1, tense auxiliary “A:s” (آس/FRAGP) 

and main verb “gAmIts” (گٲٕمژ/VGF) are discontinuous (non-

contiguous) with three intervening NPs. The auxiliary verb occurs 

mostly at second position and the main verb at sentence final 

position of the sentence. It is called V2 phenomenon which is 

similar to German and Yiddish. Since the root of the sentence is 

finite verb group, the main issue was whether to posit AUX or VM 

as the root of the sentence; given the discontinuity in finite verb 

group (VGF). Initially, FRAGP tag (used to handle discontinuity in 

Hindi treebank) was used for AUX and it was treated as a root of the 

sentence. The relation between FRAGP & VGF was shown by 

arbitrary FRAGof arch (see Fig.1) Later on, the decision to posit 

FRAGP (AUX) as head vis-à-vis root of sentence was revised and 

VGF (VM) was taken as head. This decision was made in 

consonance with the theory behind PCG which holds that only 

content words can be heads.  

56



II. Complex Predicates and their Discontinuity  

2. zA:hir   chu   ki   Akis     aasi     akh  kitaab  pasand                              

obvious  is   that  one  will-have one  book     like          

               tI     beykis     aasi       byaakh   kitaab   pasand.  

               and   other   will-have   other     book      like 

        It is obvious that one likes one book and other likes other book. 

Identification of complex predicates (CP) and their extraction is 

already a complex problem in syntactic parsing but it is more 

complicated in Kashmiri where both discontinuous and continuous 

CPs occurs. The noun/adjective/verb part of CP occurs apart from 

the light verb which takes second position due to V2 phenomenon. 

While annotation, the noun/adjective/verb part is being attached to 

the light verb (VGF) with relation label, Part-of (Pof), as shown in 

Fig.3, the nominal part of the CP “pasand” (پَسٛند/NP) is attached to 

the light verb “aasi” (  آسہ/VGF) by (Pof) arch. 
III. Coordinating and Subordinating Conjuncts 

In shown in Fig.3, no distinction is maintained between coordinating 

and subordinating or embedding phenomena as both relations are 

represented by the (ccof) archs in the tree. However, it is important 

to maintain the distinction by positing separate relations (ccof for 

coordination & ccsof for subordination). Coordination conjunct 

(CCP) is taken as head of the sentence as shown in Fig.3 as well as 

Fig.2, joining the roots (verb groups) of the two independent clauses 

by (ccof) relations.  

IV. Pronominal Clitics 

3. Yami-is           yi         behtar      zon-un      ti      thovn-as  

               For-whom whatever   better      know-3C  that    kept-3C      

57



               lekhith.  

               written 

For whom whatever he deemed better he kept that in his/her destiny.  

Pronominal clitics are the characteristic feature of Kashmiri. Certain 

pronominal arguments are dropped from the argument structure but 

are gets cliticised as verbal inflection shown in Fig.2, the light verb 

lekhith thovn-as (لیکھتھ تھونَس) is inflected for second person 

pronominal clitic (–as) and completes the argument structure even 

without the presence of free pronominal arguments. So it is not 

important to posit dummy argument, instead a feature of clitic can 

be added to the light verb head.   

 

 

FIGURE.1 Simple Sentence showing V2 Phenomenon  

 

 

58



 

 

 

FIGURE.2 Sentence showing Pronominal Clitic  

 

FIGURE.3 Sentence Showing Discontinuous Complex Predicate, 

Coordination and Sub-ordination 

59



4. Conclusion 

In this paper we explored some annotation issues raised during the 

pilot phase of annotation for KashTreeBank. We have used the 

already developed dependency annotation scheme of Hindi-Urdu to 

Kashmiri and found to a greater extent it could capture almost all the 

phenomenon of Kashmiri that occurred in 500 sentences except 

some phenomenon peculiar to Kashmiri as discussed above. The 

output of this work is a dependency annotation guideline for 

Kashmiri treebank. The guideline will be applied to the newspaper 

corpus, some part of which has been already annotated according 

with BIS POS annotation scheme. Since, POS annotation of the 

current 500 sentences has been carried out on the basis of ILMT 

scheme; the Kashmiri dependency guideline needs many changes 

before applying to the newspaper corpus in future. 

References 

Abeille, A./Clement, L./Toussenel, F. (2003). Treebanks: Building 

and Using Parsed Corpora. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 

Bharati, Akshar, Chaitanya, Vineet and Sangal, Rajeev. (1995). 

Natural Language Processing: A Paninian Perspective. Prentice-

Hall of India: New Delhi 

Begum Rafiya, Husain, Samar, Dhwaj Arun, Sharma, Dipti Misra, 

Lakshmi Bai, Rajeev Sangal. (2008). Dependency Annotation 

Scheme for Indian languages. In Proceedings of International Joint 

Conference on Natural Language Processing. 

Vempaty, Chaitanya, Naidu, Viswanatha, Husain, Samar, Kiran, 

Ravi, Bai, Lakshmi, Sharma, Dipti M., and Sangal, Rajeev. (2010). 

Issues in Analyzing Telugu Sentences towards Building a Telugu 

Treebank. In Proceedings of  CICLING 2010. 

 

60


