










































Domain Adaptation of a Dependency Parser with a Class-Class Selectional Preference Model


Proceedings of the 2012 Student Research Workshop, pages 43–48,

Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Domain Adaptation of a Dependency Parser 
with a Class-Class Selectional Preference Model 

 

 

Abstract 

When porting parsers to a new domain, many 
of the errors are related to wrong attachment 
of out-of-vocabulary words. Since there is no 
available annotated data to learn the 
attachment preferences of the target domain 
words, we attack this problem using a model 
of selectional preferences based on domain-
specific word classes. Our method uses Latent 
Dirichlet Allocations (LDA) to learn a 
domain-specific Selectional Preference model 
in the target domain using un-annotated data. 
The model provides features that model the 
affinities among pairs of words in the domain.  
To incorporate these new features in the 
parsing model, we adopt the co-training 
approach and retrain the parser with the 
selectional preferences features. We apply this 
method for adapting Easy First, a fast non-
directional parser trained on WSJ, to the 
biomedical domain (Genia Treebank). The 
Selectional Preference features reduce error by 
4.5% over the co-training baseline. 

1 Introduction 
Dependency parsing captures a useful representation 
of syntactic structure for information extraction. For 
example, the Stanford Dependency representation has 
been used extensively in domain-specific relation 
extraction tasks such as BioNLP09 (Kim, Ohta et al. 
2009) and BioNLP11 (Pyysalo, Ohta et al. 2011). One 
obstacle to widespread adoption of such syntactic 
representations is that parsers are generally trained on 
a specific domain (typically WSJ news data) and it has 
often been observed that the accuracy of dependency 
parsers drops significantly when used in a domain 
other than the training domain.  

Domain adaptation for dependency parsing has been 
explored extensively in the CoNLL 2007 Shared Task 
(Nivre, Hall et al. 2007). The objective in this task is 
to adapt an existing parser from a source domain in 
order to achieve high parsing accuracy on a target 
domain in which no annotated data is available. 
Common approaches include self-training (McClosky, 
Charniak et al. 2006), using word distribution features 
(Koo, Carreras et al. 2008) and co-training (Sagae and 
Tsujii 2007) . Dredze et al. (Dredze, Blitzer et al. 
2007) explored a variety of methods for domain 
adaptation, which consistently showed little 
improvement and concluded that domain adaptation 
for dependency parsing is indeed a hard task. 
Typically, parsing accuracy drops from 90+% in-
domain to 80-84% in the target domain. 
When porting parsers to the target domain, many of 
the errors are related to wrong attachment of out-of-
vocabulary words, i.e., words which were not 
observed when training on the source domain. Since 
there is not sufficient annotated data to learn the 
attachment preferences of the target domain words, 
we attack this problem using a model of selectional 
preferences based on domain-specific word classes.  
Selectional preferences (SP) describe the relative 
affinity of arguments and head of a syntactic relation. 
For example, in the sentence: “D3 activates receptors 
in blood cells from patients”, the preposition “from” 
may be attached to either “cells” or “receptors”. 
However, the head word “cells” has greater affinity to 
“patients” than the candidate “receptors” would have 
towards "patients". Note that this preference is highly 
context-specific. 
Several methods for learning SP (not in the context of 
domain adaptation) have been proposed. Commonly, 
these methods rely on learning semantic classes for 
arguments and learning the preference of a predicate 
to a semantic class. These semantic classes may be 
derived from manual knowledge bases such as 
WordNet or FrameNet, or semantic classes learned 
from large corpora. Recently, Ritter et al. (2010) and 

Raphael Cohen* Yoav Goldberg** Michael Elhadad 
Ben Gurion University of the Negev 

Department of Computer Science 
POB 653 Be’er Sheva, 84105, Israel 

{cohenrap,yoavg,elhadad}@cs.bgu.ac.il 

∗Supported by the Lynn and William Frankel Center for 
Computer Sciences, Ben Gurion University 
**Current affiliation: Google Inc. 

43



Séaghdha (2010) both present induction methods of 
SP of verb-arguments using LDA (Blei, Ng et al. 
2003). Hartung and Frank (2011) extended the LDA-
based approach to learning preference for adjective-
noun phrases.  
In this work, we tackle the task of domain adaptation 
by developing a domain-specific SP model. Our initial 
observation is that parsers fail on the target domain 
when trying to attach domain-specific words not seen 
during training. We observe as many as 15% of the 
words are unknown when applying a WSJ-trained 
parser on Genia and PennBioIE data, compared to 
only 2.5% in-domain. Parsers trained on the source 
domain cannot learn attachment preferences for such 
words. Our motivation is, therefore, to attempt to learn 
attachment preferences for domain specific words 
using un-annotated data. Specifically, we focus on 
acquiring a domain-specific SP model.  
Our approach consists of using the low-accuracy 
source-domain parser on large quantities of in-domain 
sentences. We extract from the resulting parse trees a 
collection of syntactically related pairs of words. We 
then train an LDA model over these pairs of words 
and derive a domain-specific model of lexical 
affinities between pairs of words.  We finally re-train 
a parser model to exploit this domain-specific data.  
To this end, we use the approach of co-training, which 
consists of identifying reliable parse trees in the target 
domain in an unsupervised manner using an ensemble 
of two distinct parsers, and extending the annotated 
training set with these reliable parse trees. Co-training 
alone significantly reduces the proportion of unknown 
words in the re-trained parser – in the extended co-
training dataset, we observe that the unknown words 
rate drops from 15% to 4.5%. Data sparseness, 
however, remains an issue: 1/3 of the domain-specific 
words added to the model by co-training appear only 
once in the extended training set, and we observe that 
many of the attachment errors are concentrated in a 
few syntactic configurations (e.g., head(V or N)-prep-
pobj, N-N or head(N)-Adj).  We extend co-training by 
introducing our SP model, which is class-based and 
specific to these difficult syntactic configurations. 
Our method reduces error in the Genia Treebank 
(Tateisi, Yakushiji et al. 2005) by 3.5% over co-
training. Introducing additional distributional lexical 
features (Brown clusters learned in-domain), further 
reduces error to a total 4.5% reduction. Overall, our 
parser achieves an accuracy of 83.6% UAS on the 
Genia domain without annotated data in this domain. 

2 Our Approach 
To understand the difficulty of domain adaptation, we 
applied our parser trained on the WSJ news domain to 
the Genia and measured observed errors.  Most of the 
errors were found in a small set of syntactic 
configurations: verb-prep-noun, noun-adjective, noun-
noun (together these relations make up 32 % of the 
errors).  
For example: in “nuclear factor-kappa-B DNA-
binding activity” the parser chooses “factor-kappa-B” 
as the head of “nuclear” instead of “activity”. We 
observe that these errors involve domain-specific 
vocabulary, and are difficult to disambiguate for non-
expert humans as well. Accordingly, we try to acquire 
a domain-specific model of word-pairs affinities.  Our 
parsing model (EasyFirst) allows us to use such bi-
lexical features in an efficient manner.  Because of 
data sparseness, however, we aim to acquire class-
based features, and decide to model these lexical 
preferences using the LDA approach. 
Our method proceeds in two stages: 
1. Learn selectional preferences from an 

automatically parsed corpus using LDA on 
selected syntactic configurations 

2. Integrate the preferences into the parsing model as 
new features using co-training. 

2.1 Learning Selectional Preferences 
Following (Ritter, Mausam et al. 2010) and (Séaghdha 
2010), we model lexical affinity between words in 
specific syntactic configurations using LDA.  
Traditionally, LDA learns a set of "topics" from 
observed documents, based on observed word co-
occurrences. In our case, we form artificial documents, 
which we call syntactic contexts, by collecting head-
daughter pairs from parse trees. A syntactic context is 
constructed for each head word, which contains the 
related words to which it was found attached.  
In the collection process, we identify two syntactic 
configurations that yield high error rates: head-prep-
noun and noun-adj. We collect two types of syntactic 
contexts: the preposition contexts contain the set of 
nouns related to the head through any preposition and 
the adjective contexts contain the set of adjectives 
directly related to the head noun. We then learn an 
LDA model on each of these contexts collections.  We 
use Mallet (McCallum 2002) to learn topic models 
with hyper-parameter optimization(Wallach, Mimno 
et al. 2009). The optimal number of topics is selected 
empirically based on model fit to held-out data. 

44



The resulting topics represent latent semantic classes 
of the daughter words. We define a measure of shared 
affinity between a head word h and a candidate 
daughter word d (in a given configuration) s: 
𝐴𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑦 ℎ,𝑑 =    𝑃(𝑐|ℎ) ∗ 𝑃(𝑐|𝑑)    !∈!"#$%&  where P(c|h) is 
the predicted probability of topic c given the syntactic 
context associated to head word h. That is, when we 
apply the LDA model on the syntactic context of h, 
we assign topics to each of the associated daughter 
words and count their proportion. Note that this 
affinity measure may predict a non-zero affinity to a 
pair (h, d) even though this word pair has never been 
observed. The result is a class-class SP model with 
reduced dimensionality compared to word-word 
models based for example on PMI.  Table 1 lists 
examples of learned topics. Note that these topics are 
high-quality semantic clusters that reflect domain 
semantics, with marked differences between the news 
and bio-medical domains. 
2.2  Co-training to exploit domain features 
At this stage, we have acquired a domain-specific 
model of word affinity that exploits semantic classes 
and depends on specific syntactic configurations 
(head-prep-obj and noun-adj).  We now attempt to 
exploit this model to adapt our source parser to the 
target domain.  To this end, we want to re-train the 
parser using new features based on the SP model in 
addition to the original features.  We use the 
framework of co-training to achieve this goal (Sagae 

and Tsujii 2007): we use two different parsers: Easy-
First (Goldberg and Elhadad 2010) and MALT (Nivre, 
Hall et al. 2006) trained on the same WSJ source 
domain. We apply these two parsers on a large set of 
target-domain sentences. We select those sentences 
where the 2 parsers agree (produce identical trees) and 
add them to the original source-domain training set. 
We thus obtain an extended training set with many in-
domain samples. We can now re-train the parser using 
the new SP features. 
2.3 SP as features for the Easy First parser 
We use the deterministic non-directional Easy-First 
parser for re-training. This parser incrementally adds 
edges between words starting with the easier decisions 
before continuing to difficult ones. Simple structures 
are first created and their information is available 
when deciding how to connect complex ones. Easy-
First operates in 𝑂(𝑛𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑛) time compared to 𝑂(𝑛!) 
of graph-based parsers such as MST (McDonald, 
Pereira et al. 2005). 
As a baseline we use the features provided in the 
Easy-First distribution. We extend these features with 
pair-wise affinity measures based on our SP model. 
The affinity measure ranges from 0 to 1. We bin this 
measure into (low, medium, high, very-high) binary 
features. When attaching a preposition to its parent, 
we add one more feature: the affinity of the head 
candidate with the preposition's daughter (the pobj).  
In addition to these pair-wise features, we also 

Source Relation Type Semantic Class Arguments Predicates 
BLLIP Argà 

Prep à 
Predicate 

Show Business  
 

actors clips soundtrack genre taping characters 
roles immortalized starred costumes premise 
screening featured performances poster 
trumpeted star retrospective clip script 
 

film show movie films movies shows television 
series stage theater program production version 
music hollywood broadway 

BLLIP Argà 
Prep à 
Predicate 

Sports quarterbacks starters pitcher pitchers 
quarterback coaching receiver linebackers 
cornerback outfielder baseman fullback  

team game league teams games time field players 
years baseball year rules nfl seasons level player 
leagues nba club history school state 

BLLIP Argà 
Prep à 
Predicate 

Work Position jockeying groom groomed relegate relieved 
unwinding jockeyed selected selecting 
appointing disqualify named  

job post position draft positions candidate team 
one jobs which role posts successor 

Genia Argà 
Prep à 
Predicate 

Cell-cycle 
process 

stages stage process steps committed block 
regulator acquire switch points needed directs 
determinant il-21 proceeds arrest regulators 
relate d3  

differentiation development activation  maturation 
cycle hematopoiesis infection commitment 
lymphopoiesis stage lineage selection 
erythropoiesis cascade 

Genia Argà 
Prep à 
Predicate 

Cells and 
growing 
conditions 

supernatants co-culture co-cultured replication 
medium surface chemotaxis supernatant beta 
migration cocultured cultures 
hyporesponsiveness  

cell monocyte lymphocyte pbmc macrophage line 
blood neutrophil cd dc leukocyte t eosinophil 
fibroblast platelet keratinocyte 

Genia Adjectiveà 
Noun 

Protein activity 
and regulation 

factor-induced tnfalpha-induced agonist-
induced thrombin-induced il-2-induced factor-
alpha-induced il-1beta-induced cd40-induced 
rankl-induced augmented il-4-induced  

expression activation production phosphorylation 
response proliferation activity binding secretion 
apoptosis differentiation translocation release 
signaling adhesion synthesis generation 

Table 1 High affinity classes in the Class-Class Selectional Preferences model extracted with LDA. Classes 1-5 are from preposition head/object 
pairs (e.g “groomed for position” fits the third topic) and class 6 are adjective modifier pairs. Classes 1-3 are from Bllip (un-annotated WSJ corpus) 
(Charniak, Blaheta et al. 2000) while classes 4-6 are from a corpus composed of Medline abstracts from the Genia (see section 5.1). Class 4 contains 
arguments and predicates concerning cell-cycle process. In class 5 arguments are cell growing conditions and predicates are types of cells. 

45



introduce features that correspond to the latent topic 
class of the words according to each of the 2 acquired 
LDA models (this introduces one binary feature for 
each topic).  These latent semantic class features are 
similar in nature to distributional lexical features as 
used in (Koo, Carreras et al. 2008). 
The EasyFirst parser combines partial trees bottom-
up. When deciding whether to attach the partial tree 
"from patients" to either "cells" or "receptors", we 
compute the affinities of "cells/patients" and 
"receptors/patients". Our model produces features 
indicating medium affinity for “receptors from 
patients” and a high affinity for cells from patients”. 
3 Experiments and Evaluation 
3.1 Genia Treebank 
The Genia Treebank (Tateisi, Yakushiji et al. 2005) 
contains 18K sentences from the biomedical domain, 
transformed into dependency trees 1  using (De 
Marneffe, MacCartney et al. 2006) 2 . The corpus 
contains 2.3K sentences longer than 40 tokens that 
were excluded from the evaluation. The treebank was 
divided into test and development sets of equal size.  
We created an un-annotated corpus of 200K sentences 
by querying Medline with the same query terms used 
to create Genia. We used the Genia POS Tagger on 
this dataset (Tsuruoka, Tateishi et al. 2005). The 
corpus was parsed with Easy-First and MALT (arc-
eager, polynomial) to create co-training data, yielding 
21K sentences with 100% agreement. 
The parsed corpus of 200K sentences was used to 
produce selectional preference models for adjective-
nouns, with 200 topics, and for head-prep-object with 
300 topics. We used word lemmas for each pair when 
preparing syntactic contexts for LDA training (see 
Table 2).  
Relation #  Pairs # Daughter # Heads 
preposition 360,041 1,727 2,391 
adjective 384,347 1,570 2,003 
 Table 2. Statistics for the training data of the SP model. 
3.2 Coverage 
Many of the features learned in training a parser are 
lexicalized; this is an important factor in the drop in 
accuracy when parsing in a new domain.  
To understand the nature of the contribution of the 
features learned by our SP model, we calculated the 
coverage of the features acquired in two unsupervised 
methods: Brown clustering and our SP classes. We 

                                                        
1 We use the PTB version of Genia created by Illes Solt. 
2 We convert using the Stanford Parser bundle. 

count the number of tokens in the Treebank which 
gain a feature at training time (we ignore punctuation, 
coordination and preposition tokens). Our SP model 
covers 53% of the tokens in the test set. Brown 
clusters calculated with the implementation of Liang 
(2005) achieve coverage of 73%.  Brown clusters 
features are also class-based distributional features 
based on n-gram language models, but do not take 
into account syntactic configurations. 
3.3 Adaptation Evaluation 
We use a number of baselines for the adaptation task. 
Three parsers were evaluated on the target domain: 
Easy-First, MST second order and MALT arc-eager 
with a polynomial kernel. We report UAS scores of 
trees of length < 40 without punctuation. 
The first baseline setting for each parser is the model 
trained on WSJ sections 2-21.  The second baseline 
we report is co-training using WSJ 2-21 combined 
with the 21K full agreement parse trees extracted from 
Medline, but without new features. 
Parser Training 

Data 
Features UAS (Exact 

Match) 
 

MST WSJ 2-21  79.6 (10)  
MALT WSJ 2-21  81.1 (16.6)  
Easy-First WSJ 2-21  80.5 (12.3)  
MST Co-Training  81.3 (14.1)  
MALT Co-Training  82.1 (16.5)  
Easy-First Co-Training  82.8 (16.2)  
Easy-First Co-Training +Brown Clusters 83.1 (17) +0.3 
Easy-First Co-Training +SP-Lexicalized 83.0 (16.9) +0.2 
Easy-First Co-Training +SP-Lexicalized 

+SP-Classes 
83.4 (16.6) +0.6 

Easy-First Co-Training +SP-Lexicalized 
+SP-Classes 
+Brown Clusters 

83.6 (17.2) +0.8 

Easy-First GeniaTB 
Dev 

 89.8 (28.6)  

Table 3. Accuracy for different parser settings on Genia test set.  
The best performing adapted model trains with co-training data 
and combines SP and Brown clusters as features.  
In Table 3, we see that the combined SP-Features 
improved the co-training baseline by 0.6%, a 
significant error reduction of 3.5% (p-value < 0.01).  
We list improvement when introducing only pair-wise 
SP features, and when adding SP-based semantic 
classes. The effect is also additive with the Brown 
clusters features, producing an improvement of 0.8% 
when combined (error reduction of 4.5%). 
To evaluate the model adapted for Genia on the 
general biomedical domain, we used the PennBioIE 
Treebank . This dataset contains 6K sentences from 
different biomedical domains. We compared 3 models 
(see Table 4):  
1. Easy-First, MALT and MST trained on WSJ. 
2. Easy-First with co-training on Genia. 

46



3. Easy-First with co-training on Genia with 
Selectional Preference features. 

Domain adaptation to Genia carried over to the 
closely related PennBioIE dataset, demonstrating the 
generalization capability of the method. 
Parser Training Data Features UAS  
MALT WSJ 2-21  78.8  
MST WSJ 2-21  81.4  
Easy-First WSJ 2-21  79.8  
Easy-First Co-Training  81.9  
Easy-First Co-Training +SP-Lexicalized 

+SP-Classes 
+Brown Clusters 

82.2 +0.3 

Table 4. Accuracy of parsers on PennBioIE Treebank.  
3.4 Error Analysis 
We compare the parser using the SP pair-wise features 
for preposition attachment to the co-trained baseline 
on Genia. The overall accuracy of the parser is 
improved by 0.2%. However, the two models agree 
only on 90% of the edges, indicating the new SP 
features play a very active role when parsing. 
For “E3330 inhibited this induced promoter activity in 
a dose-dependent manner”, the co-trained parser 
chose “activity” as the head of “in” instead of 
“inhibited”. The affinity feature in our model for 
(“inhibited”, “manner”) shows affinity of high (40-
60%) compared to low (5-20%) for the wrong pair 
("activity", "manner"). The same change occurs for 
“LysoPC attenuates activation during inflammation 
and athero-sclerosis”, where the improved model 
prefers the pair (“attenuates”, “inflammation”) to the 
pair (“activation”, “inflammation”) which was chosen 
by the co-trained model. 
The modest overall improvement is due to errors 
introduced by the new model. In “Tissue obtained 
from ectopic pregnancies may identify the mechanism 
of trophoblast invasion in ectopic pregnancies”, the 
correct governor of “in” is “invasion”. However, the 
SP model ranks the affinity of (“invasion”, 
“pregnancies”) lower than that of (“mechanism”, 
“pregnancies”). 
Most of the improvement of the full SP model 
(+0.6%) comes from an improvement in the N-N 
relation from 83% to 84.9% (11% error reduction), 
this improvement is due to semantic classes features 
learned on the relations of noun-adjective and head-
prep-pobj. 
3.5 Effect on NER 
Since most of the improvement comes from the N-N 
relation, we expect improvement for downstream 
applications such as Named Entity Recognition, a 
basic task frequently used in the biomedical domain. 

We use the portion of the Genia Treebank covered by 
the Genia NER corpus (Kim, Ohta et al. 2004). We 
expect the inner tokens of a named entity to be 
connected by relation of N-N or N-Adj. We evaluate 
the accuracy of these two relations for NE tokens. The 
Easy-First with co-training baseline produces 
accuracy of 82.9% on this specific set of relations, 
improved by the SP model to 84.4%, a reduction in 
error of 8.7%. 
4 Related Work 
4.1 Learning of Selectional Preference 
Preference of predicate-argument pairs has been 
studied in depth with a number of approaches. Resnik 
(1993) suggested a class-based model for preference 
of predicates combining WordNet classes with mutual 
information techniques for associating an argument 
with a predicate class from WordNet.  
Another approach models words in a corpus as 
context vectors (Erk and Pado 2008; Turney and 
Pantel 2010) for discovering predicate or argument 
classes using large corpora or the Web. 
Recently, semantic classes were successfully induced 
using LDA topic modeling. These methods have 
shown success in modeling verb argument 
relationship to a single predicate (Ritter, Mausam et 
al. 2010) or a predicate pair (Séaghdha 2010), as well 
as for adjective-noun preference (Hartung and Frank 
2011).  
4.2 Learning SP for improving dependency 

parsing  
The argument-predicate choice learned in SP is 
directly related to the decision of creating an edge 
between them in a parse tree. Van Noord (2007) 
modeled verb-noun preferences using pointwise 
mutual information (PMI) using an automatically 
parsed corpus in Dutch. Association scores of pairs 
were added as features improving the accuracy 
significantly from 87.4% to 87.9%.  
Nakov and Hearst (Nakov and Hearst 2005) focused 
on resolving PP attachments and coordination. They 
used co-occurrence counts from web queries in order 
to estimate selectional restrictions. 
Zhou et al. (2011) used N-gram counts from Google 
search and Google V1 to deduce word-word 
attachment preferences. They used these counts in a 
pair-wise mutual information (PMI) scheme as 
features for improving parsing in the News domain 
(WSJ) and adaptation for biomedical domain. Their 
evaluation showed improvement of 1% on WSJ 

47



section 23 over the vanilla MST parser and a 
significant increase in the domain adaptation problem.  
4.3 Domain adaptation of dependency parsing 
Domain adaptation for dependency parsing has been 
studied mostly in regard to the CoNLL 2007 shared 
task (Nivre, Hall et al. 2007). Both of the leading 
methods included learning from a parser ensemble. 
Attardi et al.’s (2007) used a weak parser in order to 
identify common parsing errors and overcome those in 
the training of a stronger parser. Sagae and Tsujii 
(2007) used two different parsers to parse un-
annotated in-domain data and used the trees where the 
two parsers agreed to augment the training corpus.  
Dredze et al. (2007) approached the “closed” problem, 
i.e., without using additional un-annotated data. They 
used the PennBioIE Treebank and applied a number 
of adaptation techniques: (1) features concerning NPs 
such as chunking information and frequency; (2) word 
distribution features; (3) features encoding 
information from diverse parsers; (4) target focused 
learning – giving greater weight in training to 
sentences which are more likely in a target domain 
language model.  These methods have not improved 
accuracy over the baseline of the MST parser 
(McDonald, Pereira et al. 2005) trained on WSJ.  
5 Conclusion 
Learning class-class selectional preferences from a 
large in-domain corpus assists dependency parsing 
significantly. We have suggested a method for 
learning selectional preference classes for a specific 
domain using an existing parser and a standard 
implementation of LDA topic modeling. The SP 
model can be used for estimating the affinity between 
a pair of tokens or simply as a feature of semantic 
class association. This approach is faster when 
querying the model for the affinity of a pair of words 
than a PMI model suggested by Zhou et al.(2011). 
While covering fewer tokens in the target test set than 
Brown clusters, the method achieved a higher 
improvement of parsing performance. Furthermore, 
some of the improvement was additive and reduced 
UAS error by 4.5% compared to a strong co-training 
baseline. 
6 References  
Attardi, G., F. Dell’Orletta, et al. (2007). Multilingual dependency 

parsing and domain adaptation using DeSR. ACL. 
Blei, D. M., A. Y. Ng, et al. (2003). "Latent dirichlet allocation." 

JMLR 3: 993-1022. 
Charniak, E., D. Blaheta, et al. (2000). "Bllip 1987-89 wsj corpus 

release 1." LDC. 

De Marneffe, M. C., B. MacCartney, et al. (2006). Generating 
typed dependency parses from phrase structure parses. LREC. 

Dredze, M., J. Blitzer, et al. (2007). Frustratingly hard domain 
adaptation for dependency parsing. CoNLL 2007. 

Erk, K. and S. Pado (2008). A structured vector space model for 
word meaning in context. EMNLP 2008: 897-906. 

Goldberg, Y. and M. Elhadad (2010). An efficient algorithm for 
easy-first non-directional dependency parsing. NAACL 2010: 
742-750. 

Hartung, M. and A. Frank (2011). Exploring Supervised LDA 
Models for Assigning Attributes to Adjective-Noun Phrases. 
ACL. 

Kim, J.-D., T. Ohta, et al. (2009). Overview of BioNLP'09 shared 
task on event extraction. Current Trends in Biomedical NLP, 
ACL: 1-9. 

Kim, J.-D., T. Ohta, et al. (2004). Introduction to the bio-entity 
recognition task at JNLPBA. Proceedings of the International 
Joint Workshop on Natural Language Processing in 
Biomedicine and its Applications. Geneva, Switzerland, 
Association for Computational Linguistics: 70-75. 

Koo, T., X. Carreras, et al. (2008). Simple semi-supervised 
dependency parsing. ACL 2008: 595-603. 

Liang, P. (2005). Semi-supervised learning for natural language, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 

McCallum, A. K. (2002). "Mallet: A machine learning for 
language toolkit." 

McClosky, D., E. Charniak, et al. (2006). Effective self-training 
for parsing, ACL. 

McDonald, R., F. Pereira, et al. (2005). Non-projective 
dependency parsing using spanning tree algorithms. EMNLP: 
523-530. 

Nakov, P. and M. Hearst (2005). Using the web as an implicit 
training set: application to structural ambiguity resolution. 
EMNLP, Association for Computational Linguistics: 835-842. 

Nivre, J., J. Hall, et al. (2007). The CoNLL 2007 Shared Task on 
Dependency Parsing, CoNLL 2007. s. 915-932. 

Nivre, J., J. Hall, et al. (2006). Maltparser: A data-driven parser-
generator for dependency parsing. 

Noord, G. v. (2007). Using self-trained bilexical preferences to 
improve disambiguation accuracy. 10th International 
Conference on Parsing Technologies, ACL: 1-10. 

Pyysalo, S., T. Ohta, et al. (2011). "Overview of the Entity 
Relations (REL) supporting task of BioNLP 2011." ACL HLT 
2011 1(480): 83. 

Ritter, A., Mausam, et al. (2010). A latent dirichlet allocation 
method for selectional preferences. ACL 2010: 424-434. 

Sagae, K. and J.-i. Tsujii (2007). Dependency parsing and domain 
adaptation with LR models and parser ensembles. EMNLP-
CoNLL 2007: 1044-1050. 

Séaghdha, D. (2010). Latent variable models of selectional 
preference. ACL 2010: 435-444. 

Tateisi, Y., A. Yakushiji, et al. (2005). Syntax Annotation for the 
GENIA corpus. ACL. 

Tsuruoka, Y., Y. Tateishi, et al. (2005). "Developing a robust part-
of-speech tagger for biomedical text." AII: 382-392. 

Turney, P. D. and P. Pantel (2010). "From frequency to meaning: 
Vector space models of semantics." JAIR 37(1): 141-188. 

Wallach, H., D. Mimno, et al. (2009). "Rethinking LDA: Why 
priors matter." NIPS 22: 1973–1981. 

Zhou, G., J. Zhao, et al. (2011). Exploiting web-derived 
selectional preference to improve statistical dependency parsing. 
ACL. 

48


