










































Directions for Research on Spoken Dialog Systems, Broadly Defined


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Future directions and needs in the Spoken Dialog Community: Tools and Data, pages 3–4,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Directions for Research on Spoken Dialog Systems, Broadly Defined∗

Nigel G. Ward
University of Texas at El Paso
El Paso, Texas 79968, USA
nigelward@acm.org

Abstract

To increase impact and accelerate progress,
the spoken dialog systems research commu-
nity should work on four shareable things that
will also engage and support sister fields of
science and engineering.

1 To Reach Out to the VoiceXML
Community, a Commercial-Dialogs
Corpus

Although many people are frustrated with the com-
mercial dialog systems they use every day, spoken
dialog systems research has been only sporadically
relevant to these issues. Although service inter-
actions are pervasive in everyday life, and can be
rich and interesting, the vast majority of attempts
to model and engineer them have attempted to op-
timize efficiency and surface-goal completion. The
results are all around us, from crudely scripted up-
selling attempts at fast food restaurants to stilted di-
alog systems that tediously elicit the pieces of infor-
mation needed to complete a database query. One
reason is that the research community has come to
shun most practical dialog types, perhaps to avoid
seeming old-fashioned or being tainted by low ex-
pectations, or perhaps due to a misperception that
industry is addressing these issues. A resource that
would help progress here would be a commercial-
dialogs corpora that is shareable by all.

Personally, I would like this corpus to be one with
a truly exemplary person in the service role, some-
one who puts customers at ease, develops rapport,

∗This work was supported by NSF Award IIS-0914868.

brings humor and sparkle, and makes them want to
call back. Having several thousand short dialogs
where diverse customers call in to that person, and
modeling how she handles them, would take us a
long way to understanding responsive and adaptive
behaviors. Even prototype systems built on such di-
alogs could help set the agenda for future genera-
tions of commercial dialog systems.

2 To Reach Out to the Applied Linguistics
Communities, Dialog Analysis Tools

Although many people are fascinated by language
and dialog, spoken dialog systems research has only
sporadically tapped this enthusiasm. For example,
researchers in the conversation analysis tradition and
teachers of foreign languages, not to mention many
undergraduates, love to explore patterns of dialog.
However spoken dialog research so far has produced
scant findings about language behavior that are in-
teresting to and graspable by non-engineers.

Personally, I think the biggest opportunity here in-
volves tools to support non-technical people in dis-
covering things themselves. Even amateurs, such
as high school science fair participants, should be
able to satisfy curiosity or confirm hunches, and ex-
perience the joy of systematically examining dia-
log phenomena. Our community ought to be pro-
ducing tools and toolsets that support the complete
workflow in such inquiries, eclectically supporting
tagging, searching, juxtaposing clips and so on,
and supporting both perceptually-based analysis and
quantitative analysis in an integrated way. In par-
ticular we need to go beyond in-lab solutions (Ward
and Al Bayyari, 2006) to develop robust toolsets that

3



can be used effectively without months of training.

3 To Reach Out to the Psycholinguistics
Community, Modeling-Related Goals

Although many people are curious about how com-
munication feats are achieved daily by human
minds, spoken dialog research has only sporadically
raised questions of real scientific interest. The spo-
ken dialog community ought to formulate one or two
high-profile grand-challenge problems that would
inspire and bring people together, either coopera-
tively or in competition. Rather than “dialog man-
agement” and systems-type problems, these should
be framed as “dialog modeling” problems, to make
it clear that they are true scientific problems, and
formulated so that they can be addressed more em-
pirically and/or more theoretically, without requir-
ing researchers to work with end-to-end systems.
Such purer formulations should also help focus on
questions of the fundamental human perceptions and
abilities involved here, and how they vary with age,
personality, language and culture.

Personally I think the most central and dialog-
specific issues in our field are those relating to inter-
personal coordination. Topics here have been nib-
bled at, perhaps most saliently in the study of turn-
taking phenomena. Possible grand challenges may
relate to topics such as “dialog dynamics” and “pre-
diction of the interlocutor’s actions,” but formulating
these problems so that they are general, and yet rel-
evant and tractable, has been difficult (Ward, 2010;
Ward et al., 2010).

4 To Reach Out to the Speech Processing
Community, More Open Models

First, although speech generation and speech synthe-
sis researchers are currently looking for new chal-
lenges, beyond correctness and intelligibilty, the di-
alog systems community has only sporadically of-
fered them interesting goals. These systems need
somehow to be able to express the richness of the
attitudes, structures, and intentions people convey in
dialog, in real time, and we ought to provide spec-
ifications for this. Personally I think that multi-
dimensional vector-space models of dialog states,
situations, and intentions have promise here, and
that these can best be developed by bottom-up em-

pirical studies (Ward and Vega, 2012 submitteda),
one of which suggests that the important dimensions
of dialog include, at least, in rough order of impor-
tance: who has the floor, the activity level, topic
aging and transition, turn taking, seeking vs. estab-
lishing grounding, empathy, and sympathy, lexical
access and planning processes, dominance, confi-
dence, affect and attitude, rhetorical structure and
strategy, and indications of concentration and in-
volvement.

Second, although research on emotion and other
nonverbal aspects of speech is advancing, this has
only sporadically been guided by the needs of dia-
log systems. We ought to be thinking more about
how emotion, attitude, stance, and related dimen-
sions of communication are used in dialog. Person-
ally I think that empirical studies of prosody, again,
can be informative.

Third, although speech recognition researchers
are adding flexibility and incrementality, speech rec-
ognizers’ interactions with the dialog manager are
still very limited. In particular, the role of the dialog
model in telling the recognizer what words are likely
to come next, that is, its role in language modeling,
is still underdeveloped. Personally I think we need
dialog models that track more aspects of the dialog,
and do so continuously, and supply that information
to the recognizer (Ward and Vega, 2012 submittedb).

References
Nigel Ward and Yaffa Al Bayyari. 2006. A case study

in the identification of prosodic cues to turn-taking:
Back-channeling in Arabic. In Interspeech 2006 Pro-
ceedings.

Nigel G. Ward and Alejandro Vega. 2012, submitteda.
A bottom-up exploration of the dimensions of dialog
state in spoken interaction. In Sigdial.

Nigel G. Ward and Alejandro Vega. 2012, submittedb.
Towards empirical dialog-state modeling and its use in
language modeling. In Interspeech.

Nigel G. Ward, Olac Fuentes, and Alejandro Vega. 2010.
Dialog prediction for a general model of turn-taking.
In Interspeech.

Nigel G. Ward. 2010. The challenge of modeling dialog
dynamics. In Workshop on Modeling Human Commu-
nication Dynamics, at Neural Information Processing
Systems.

4


