










































A rule-based approach to unknown word recognition in Arabic


Proceedings of the Twelfth Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Computational Morphology and Phonology (SIGMORPHON2012), pages 35–41,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A rule-based approach to unknown word recognition in Arabic 

 
 

Lynne Cahill 
NLTG, University of Brighton

Lewes Rd, Brighton 
BN2 4GJ, UK 

L.Cahill@brighton.ac.uk 

 

 

 

Abstract 

This paper describes a small experiment to 
test a rule-based approach to unknown word 
recognition in Arabic. The morphological 
complexity of Arabic presents its challenges 
to a variety of NLP applications, but it can al-
so be viewed as an advantage, if we can tap 
into the complex linguistic knowledge associ-
ated with these complex forms. In particular, 
the derived forms of verbs can be analysed 
and an educated guess at the likely meaning of 
a derived form can be predicted, based on the 
meaning of a known form and the relationship 
between the known form and the unknown 
one. The performance of the approach is test-
ed on the NEMLAR Written Arabic Corpus. 

1 Introduction 

The Semitic languages, especially Arabic, are lin-
guistically interesting for a number of reasons, and 
are attracting more and more attention for both 
linguistic and socio-political reasons. One of the 
aspects of Arabic that makes it particularly inter-
esting to linguists, namely the morphological com-
plexity, is at once both appealing and the source of 
potential practical problems. It is appealing to lin-
guists, for whom it offers interesting challenges in 
their descriptive frameworks, but for builders of 
NLP applications, it represents a significant chal-
lenge. In this paper, we are particularly interested 
in the derivational aspects of the morphology, 
whereby verb stems are derived from triliteral 
roots in well defined formal ways, and with vary-
ing degrees of regularity in the meanings of those 
derived forms.  

Another aspect of the Arabic language that makes 
it both interesting and challenging is the fact that it 
is not actually a single language. There are many 
varieties of Arabic, with rather different status. 
Classical Arabic (CA) is the language of the Ko-
ran, and the historical ancestor of the other varie-
ties. Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) is the modern 
version of CA and is, broadly speaking, the univer-
sal (i.e. not regional) standard variety of Arabic. 
Until recently, CA and MSA were the only varie-
ties that were written – other, regional, varieties 
were only spoken. The situation is rapidly chang-
ing, with electronic communication increasingly 
involving written versions of the regional varieties. 
Even in traditional written forms, such as news 
reports, the vocabulary used in different geograph-
ical regions is different. For example, Khoja 
(2001) found that the percentage of out of vocabu-
lary items in news reports from Egypt and Qatar 
was around double that found in Saudi news re-
ports, Saudi Arabic being much closer to MSA 
than the other two regional varieties. Ways in 
which the present approach may assist in this prob-
lem will be discussed later. 

The approach we describe here depends on a hier-
archically organised lexicon, based on the DATR 
lexical representation language (Evans and Gazdar, 
1996). The PolyLex lexical framework (Cahill and 
Gazdar, 1999) was developed originally with lan-
guages like English, German and Dutch in mind, 
but has been shown to lend itself to the description 
of Arabic templatic morphology (Cahill, 2007, 
2010). The inheritance of information by default in 
this framework is fundamental to the approach we 
describe. 

The problem to which we seek a solution is not one 
unique to Arabic. Any NLP system which wants to 

35



process naturally occurring text will always have 
to deal to some degree with the problem of un-
known or out of vocabulary (OOV) items. Whether 
these items are neologisms, errors or names, they 
need to be handled in some way. Solutions to this 
particular problem are unlikely to have a large sta-
tistical impact on the success rates of the pro-
cessing applications, but that does not mean that 
they are not worth finding. While it is undoubtedly 
the case that many applications will work perfectly 
well with a word recognition rate of, say, 95%, 
supported by statistical approaches  which provide 
syntactic information, there are other applications 
for which full semantic interpretation is desirable, 
if not necessary. It is such applications that the cur-
rent paper addresses. We are only addressing a part 
of the problem, as this approach does not help rec-
ognise names or errors. 

The particular approach described in this paper is 
based on the observation that a native speaker who 
encounters a word they have not seen before may, 
if that word is related to others that they do know, 
be able to make an educated guess at not only the 
syntactic category, but also the meaning of that 
word. To a large degree, that guesswork involves 
the specific context that the word occurs in, but 
native speakers will also have more abstract struc-
tural knowledge about their language which allows 
them to make guesses about words on the basis of 
their internal structure. For example, if an English 
speaker knows the word “confuse” and hears the 
word “confuser”, even though they have most like-
ly never before come across the latter, they will be 
able to at least guess that it means “someone/thing 
that confuses”. Of course, with derivation the 
meaning relationship is not always transparent. So 
a person encountering the word “decider” for the 
first time may be surprised to find that it does not 
mean “one who decides” but rather a deciding 
match/game etc.. Such issues and other limitations 
of this approach will be discussed later. 

2 Previous approaches 

There has been a lot of work on how to handle 
OOV items, largely based on statistical approach-
es. Some are language independent (see e.g. Attia 
et al (2010), Adler et al (2008)) while others focus 
on specific languages (see e.g. Habash and 
Rambow (2005, 2007) and Marsi et al (2005) on 
Arabic and Adler and Elhadad (2006) on Hebrew, 

another Semitic language with similar morphologi-
cal structure). The work by Habash and Rambow, 
for example, employs a form of morphological 
expansion to handle OOV items, but only makes 
use of the inflectional morphology of Arabic, not 
the derivational morphology as in the current ap-
proach. 

 
Other approaches to morphological analysis in Ar-
abic include methods to deal with OOV items. For 
example, Beesley and Karttunen (2003), describe a 
two-level approach which includes a general meth-
od for guessing OOV words which could certainly 
apply to some degree to Arabic, but it would not be 
able to take into account the linguistic (specifically 
semantic) information which is at the heart of the 
present approach. 

3 PolyLex/PolyOrth 

The PolyLex project (Cahill and Gazdar, 1999) 
developed multilingual lexicons of the morphology 
and phonology of English, German and Dutch, im-
plemented in the lexical representation language 
DATR (Evans and Gazdar, 1996) which allows for 
default inheritance. Therefore, aspects of these 
languages that were shared could be inherited by 
default by each language.  

In addition to the aspects of inter- and intra-
language default inheritance, the other aspect of 
the PolyLex framework which contributes to the 
unknown word processing proposed here is the use 
of phonological structures, specifically syllables, to 
define morphological structures and relationships. 
Thus, in PolyLex, the lexical entries consist of 
specifications of the phonological forms of the syl-
lable constituents (onset, peak and coda). These 
can be determined by morpho-syntactic features. 
For example, the English word man has default 
values for the onset (/m/), peak (/æ/) and coda 
(/n/), but a further value for the peak in the plural 
(/ɛ/).  This is represented in DATR as1: 

<phn syl1 onset> == m 
<phn syl1 peak> == { 
<phn syl1 coda> == n 
<phn syl1 peak plur> == E. 

The PolyOrth project (Cahill et al. 2006) further 
developed the representation so that orthographic 

                                                           
1 In the DATR code, the SAMPA machine readable alphabet 
(Wells, 1989) is used. 

36



forms are derived by means of a combination of 
phoneme-grapheme mappings and spelling rules. 
Both types of information include phonological 
and morphological determinants, so that, for ex-
ample, the default mapping for any particular pho-
neme will depend on both its phonological position 
(is it in the onset or coda?) and on its morphologi-
cal position (is it in a stem or an affix?). Both types 
of information are defined by means of Finite State 
Transducers (FSTs) 2 . This framework has been 
implemented and tested on English, German and 
Dutch, and now extended to Arabic (Cahill, 2010). 
The Arabic lexicon allows for forms to be defined 
in Arabic script, Roman transliteration or phono-
logical representation. 

4 Arabic verbal morphology 

The Arabic languages have around 280 million 
speakers. They belong to the Semitic language 
family, and share many linguistic features with 
other Semitic languages, such as Hebrew and Mal-
tese. Much work in both theoretical and computa-
tional linguistics has focused on the so-called 
templatic morphology of the Semitic languages.  

The key area of Arabic morphology addressed in 
this paper is the verbal derivation. Verbs in Arabic 
are typically based on a tri-literal root, consisting 
of three consonants. Inflectional variation involves 
interdigitating these consonants with vowels which 
indicate the tense, aspect and mood. In addition, 
the three consonants can be differently arranged 
(doubled, swapped etc.) to form distinct Forms (or 
measures, also known as binyanim 3 , especially 
when applied to Hebrew). These are essentially 
derivations and form distinct verbs with different 
meanings. For example, the tri-literal root k-t-b has 
the core meaning “write”. The forms katabtu and 
aktubtu, represent the active perfective and active 
imperfective first person singular forms of “write”, 
namely, “I wrote” and “I write”. The second Form 
or measure verb k-tt-b also has the inflectional var-
iations, but has the meaning “cause to write”, thus 
the two actual forms kattabtu and akttabtu have the 

                                                           
2 The PolyOrth project was inspired by Herring (2006). How-
ever, while Herring uses one-stage FSTs, the PolyOrth project 
used two levels of FST, including a separate treatment of 
“post-lexical” spelling rules.  
3 We will use the term “Form”, capitalised to avoid confusion 
with the more usual use of “form”. 

meanings “I caused (someone) to write” and “I 
cause (someone) to write” respectively. 

There are fifteen different Forms in CA, but fewer 
in the modern varieties. In MSA there are ten that 
are commonly found, although two more are found 
rarely. The regional varieties all make use of few-
er. While some of the Forms have clear transparent 
meanings, others have far less clear or apparently 
random meaning relations.  

The following descriptions of the meanings of the 
ten Forms is adapted from Scheindlin (2007): 

I. The basic Form – all verbs have this form. 
May be transitive or intransitive. 

II. Almost always transitive. If a verb exists 
in both Form I and II then I will often be 
intransitive and II transitive (write (I) → 
cause to write (II)). If I is transitive then II 
may be ditransitive. II may also involve an 
intensifying of the meaning on I, e.g. kill 
(I) → massacre (II). 

III. May involve reciprocity, e.g. follow (I) → 
alternate (III).  

IV. Like II, mostly transitive, and often 
matched with intransitive in I. 

V. Often involves a reflexive element, e.g. 
know (I) → teach (II) → learn (V). 

VI. Like III, often involves reciprocity, e.g. 
fight (I) → fight each other (VI). 

VII. Mostly reflexive, resultative or passive. 
Roots that are transitive in I are intransi-
tive in VII. E.g. break (I) → be broken 
(VII). 

VIII. Often reflexive for verbs that are transitive 
in I, e.g. divide (I) → part (VIII). 

IX. Very restricted in application, only apply-
ing to verbs indicating colours and de-
fects, e.g. turn yellow. 

X. Often associated with asking for some-
thing associated with the Form I verb, e.g. 
pardon (I) → apologise (ask for pardon) 
(X). 

As is clear from these descriptions, the meaning 
relationships are not fully predictable, but they can 
give some hints as to the likely meaning of an un-
known verb. As the framework relies on default 
inheritance, the assumption that any definitions 
may be overridden by more specific information 
means that even very approximate definitions are 
still valuable. 

37



5 Arabic in syllable-based morphology 

A small sample lexicon of Arabic in the PolyLex 
framework is presented in Cahill (2007). What 
makes this account different from most accounts of 
the morphology of the Semitic languages is that it 
requires no special apparatus to allow for the defi-
nition of so-called “templatic” morphology, but 
makes use of the same kind of equations as are 
required for ablaut and consonant devoicing, for 
example, that are found in English, German and 
Dutch.  

5.1 The default, Form I root 
The main part of the account addresses a single 
verb root, namely k.t.b, ‘write’, and generates all 
possible Form stems for perfective, imperfective 
and participle, active and passive. The approach is 
based on defining the leaves of syllable-structure 
trees, with the consonants of the triliteral stems 
occupying the onset and coda positions, and the 
vowels (syllable peaks) being defined according to 
the morphosyntactic specification, as in the exam-
ple of man above. To illustrate this, the figure be-
low shows the default structure for a triliteral root, 
with no vowels specified. The default structure is a 
disyllabic root, with the first consonant occupying 
the onset of the first syllable, the second consonant 
occupying the onset of the second syllable and the 
third consonant occupying the coda of the second 
syllable4. 

 

 
 

Figure 1: the structure of /katab/ 

                                                           
4 The syllable position is indicated by simple numbering. Syl-
lables can be counted from either right of left. For languages 
which largely use suffixation, it makes more sense to count 
from the right, as for Arabic here. 

5.2 The other Form stems 
As described in Cahill (2007), the remaining nine 
forms have their default structure defined in simi-
lar terms. Figure 2 depicts the inheritance of forms 
from each other. This inheritance is for the syllable 
structure definitions, so the Form II structure is the 
same as the Form I structure except that the first 
coda has the value of the second root consonant, 
the same as the onset of the second syllable. The 
definitions are all incremental, so that each Form 
specification only supplies one or two pieces of 
information. 

5.3 Meanings 
The original lexicon was designed to demonstrate 
that the complex relationships between phonologi-
cal, morphological and orthographic forms in Ara-
bic could be captured in the PolyLex/PolyOrth 
architecture. There was no semantic information in 
the lexicons at all. For the present experiment, we 
have added very basic semantic information for the 
100 verbs we have included. Most of these are 
Form I verbs, but there are some Form II, Form IV 
and Form V verbs. Where possible, we have repre-
sented the meanings of the verbs of Forms other 
than I in terms that can be generalised. For exam-
ple, the verb apologise has the meaning expressed 
as ASK FOR PARDON5.  

 
The lexical hierarchy, in addition, defines a default 
meaning expression for each Form. For Form VIII, 
for example, this is: 
 
<meaning> == ask for “<formI meaning>” 
 
which says that the meaning is simply the string 
“ask for” followed by the meaning for Form I for 
the root6.  
 
 
 

5.4 The full lexicon 

                                                           
5 For this small experiment, the exact representation of the 
meanings is not important. It is assumed that in a genuine 
application will have its representations which would be in-
cluded in the lexicon, or for which a mapping can be defined. 
6 The quotes around the path <form1 meaning> indicate that it 
is to be evaluated at the original query node, i.e. the root node 
in DATR.  

root

syl2 syl1

t

b

k

38



As stated above, the lexicon we are working from 
has only 100 verbs. There are no verb roots for 
which we have more than one Form. This is a very 
small number, but for each verb in the lexicon 
there are a theoretically possible further nine verbs 
which may be derived from the same root. The 
lexicon will recognise any theoretically possible 
verb from the roots it knows about, although it 
does not have semantic information explicitly pro-
vided for a large proportion of these verbs.  

6 Using the lexicon for word recognition 

The highly structured, hierarchical lexicons are not 
designed to be used as they are within NLP appli-
cations. The information in them is cached in a 
lookup table which can be used for either genera-
tion or comprehension, with entries which look 
like this:  

 
-k-t كتب

b     
katab stem p, 

a 
k-
t-
b 

I write 

 
 كتتب

k-
tt-b   

kattab stem p, 
p 

k-
t-
b 

II [cause 
to 
write] 

 
The first column is the form in Arabic script, the 
second is the transliteration, the third is one possi-
ble full (vowelised) form, the fourth and fifth give 
the morphological analysis, the sixth is the triliteral 
root it is derived from, the seventh is the Form and 
the last is the translation. The first row, which has 
the Form I entry, has a translation which was pro-

vided explicitly in the lexicon but the second gets 
its meaning by default. This is indicated by the 
square brackets.  In use in an application, these 
meanings would be used more cautiously, possibly 
in conjunction with other methods, especially mak-
ing use of context.  
 
The lookup table often provides more than one 
possible entry for a single form, especially when 
the form is unvowelised.  
 

6.1 Testing 
In order to test the approach, we tested the recogni-
tion of all verbs in the NEMLAR written corpus 
(Attiyya et al., 2005). The corpus provides versions 
with POS tagging, which enabled us to extract 
each verb. There were a total of just over 40,000 
forms tagged as verbs, approximately 11,000 of 
them unique forms. Initial tests only took those 
forms which were tagged as having neither prefix 
nor suffix, a total of 1274 verb forms7. These in-
cluded forms which were inflectionally distinct, 
and once these forms were collapsed, the total 
number of verb forms is 577. Of these, 32 occurred 
in our initial lexicon of 100 verbs.  
 
These tests showed that of the remaining 545 un-
known verbs, 84 could apparently be analysed as 
derived forms of one of our existing verbs. This 
                                                           
7 The decision to use only those forms without prefix of suffix 
was simply made to make the testing process simpler and to 
ensure that the results were not skewed by the presence of 
consonants in prefixes or suffixes. 

Figure 2: The inheritance of Forms 

Verb/Form I 

Form II Form III Form IV Form V 

Form VI 

Form VII Form VIII 

Form IX Form X 

39



was determined by checking the main entries in an 
online Arabic dictionary and comparing the mean-
ings given to those generated by the lexicon. This 
was a very promising figure, given the very small 
size of the lexicon.8 

 
In the next testing phase we looked more closely at 
these forms. There are two ways in which the anal-
yses may not be appropriate. The analysis might 
not be an appropriate (or at least not the most ap-
propriate) one. This is not a major problem since 
we are dealing with a situation in which we fre-
quently have multiple possible analyses for a word, 
so generating a number of possibilities from which 
an application must choose is exactly what is re-
quired. The second issue is the question of whether 
the meanings generated are useful. In order to 
check this we manually compared the generated 
meanings against the actual meanings for a sample 
of the verbs in question. We found that just over 
half of the verbs we checked had meanings which 
were at least clearly connected to the generated 
meaning. For example, the stem  عللم (teach) is 
clearly related to the stem علم (know), and turns out 
to be the second Form (“cause to X”) of the root 
for which know is the first Form. 

6.2 Analysis of results 
The verbs for which meanings were generated fit 
into three broad categories. First there are verbs for 
which the derived Form appears in dictionaries 
with the same meaning as that for Form I, possibly 
as one of its meanings. Thus, for example, the 
Form VIII verb ktatab had the meaning “wrote”, 
the same as the Form I katab. There were 23 verbs 
in our set of 84 for which this was the case. 
 
The second category consists of verbs for which 
the meaning is related in the way suggested by our 
earlier analysis. 22 of the verbs came into this cat-
egory.9  
 
Finally, the last category consists of verbs whose 
meaning is not related in the way suggested. This 
is the most problematic class, and unfortunately the 
largest in the small test set we are working with. 

                                                           
8 There were some difficulties with transliteration which mean 
that these figures may not be fully accurate. 
9 This is clearly a case of subjective judgement, and from a 
non-native speaker these judgements may not be accurate.  

However, in most, indeed nearly all, of these cases, 
the generated meaning was not wildly different 
from that in the dictionary. Closer inspection sug-
gests that simply improving the meaning relations, 
and allowing more than one additional possible 
lexicon entry for some Forms would improve the 
performance significantly. 
 

 

7 Discussion and conclusion 

This paper has described a small experiment to test 
a novel rule-based approach to unknown word 
recognition in Arabic. Although testing is at an 
early stage, the initial results are promising.  
 
The experiment described is intended to address a 
small part of the overall problem of unknown 
words. In some respects it can be viewed as more 
of a technique for extending an existing lexicon 
than for dealing with OOV items at runtime. How-
ever, it would be possible to enable an application 
to have access to the default lexical information at 
runtime, to allow this.  
 
Another area in which the above technique may 
prove particularly useful is in the processing of 
regional varieties of Arabic. As stated above, 
Khoja (2001) found that even texts apparently 
written in MSA were twice as likely to have un-
known words in texts from Egypt and Qatar than 
from Saudi Arabia. This suggests some variation in 
the vocabulary, most likely involving “leakage” of 
vocabulary items from Egyptian and Qatari Arabic 
into the MSA used by those speakers. As the mor-
phological patterns of derived verbs are different in 
the different regional varieties, taking these pat-
terns into account will provide further possible in-
terpretations. The PolyLex structure allows the 
definition of similarities and differences between 
the lexicons of languages and dialects that are 
closely related.  

7.1 Limitations and future work 
The experiment described here is a very small 
scale one, and the lexicon is extremely small. The 
representation of meaning is also extremely simpli-
fied. It is possible that the approach described 
simply could not be scaled up to a size useful for 
an application. However, there is a range of ways 

40



of representing meaning, including linking to an 
external ontology, which could also be implement-
ed in the lexicon described. 

 
The next phase of work is to fully evaluate the re-
sults of the initial tests, followed by further more 
extensive testing. It is envisaged that an iterated 
cycle of testing and extension of the lexicon could 
lead to a lexicon large enough to be useful and ro-
bust enough to handle significant (if still small) 
numbers of OOV items. 
 
Subsequently, and further down the line, develop-
ment of a lexicon (or lexicons) for the vocabulary 
of regional varieties, linked to the MSA lexicon in 
the PolyLex framework will help to exploit the 
similarities. That is, the lexicon for, say, Egyptian 
Arabic assumes that, by default, words are the 
same as in MSA, with only those words (mor-
phemes, phonemes etc.) which differ requiring 
specification.  

Acknowledgements 
 
The work described here was partly supported by 
the ESRC (Economic and Social Research Coun-
cil, UK) as part of the project: RES-000-22-3868 
Orthography, phonology and morphology in the 
Arabic lexicon. We are grateful to the anonymous 
reviewers for their helpful comments. 

References 
 
Adler, Meni and Michael Elhadad. () An Unsupervised 

Morpheme-Based HMM for Hebrew Morphologi-
cal Disambiguation. COLING-ACL 2006, pp. 665-
672. 

Adler, Meni, Yoav Goldberg, David Gabay and Michael 
Elhadad. (2008) Unsupervised Lexicon-Based Re-
solution of Unknown Words for Full Morphologi-
cal Analysis. ACL-08 : HLT, pp. 728-36. 

Atiyya, Muhammed, Khalid Choukri and Mustafa Ya-
seen. (2005) The NMELAR Written Corpus ELDA. 

Attia, Mohammed, Jennifer Foster, Deirdre Hogan, Jo-
seph Le Roux, Lamia Tounsi and Josef van Gena-
bith. (2010) Handling Unknown Words in 
Statistical Latent-Variable Parsing Models for 
Arabic, English and French. NAACL HLT 
Workshop on Statistical Parsing of Morphologi-
cally Rich Languages. pp. 67-75. 

Beesley, Kenneth and Lauri Karttunen. (2003) Finite 
State Morphology Chicago : CSLI. 

Cahill, Lynne. (2010) A Syllable-based Approach to 
verbal Morphology in Arabic. Workshop on Semi-
tic Languages,  LREC2010, Malta, 2010. 

Cahill, Lynne. (2007) A Syllable-based Account of 
Arabic Morphology. In Abdelhadi Soudi, Antal 
van der Bosch and Günther Neumann (eds.) Ara-
bic Computational Morphology Dordrecht : Sprin-
ger. pp. 45-66. 

Cahill, Lynne, Jon Herring and Carole Tiberius, 
“PolyOrth: Adding Orthography to a Phonological 
Inheritance Lexicon”,  Fifth International Work-
shop on Writing Systems, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 
October 2006 (available at 
http://www.nltg.brighton.ac.uk/projects/polyorth). 

Cahill, Lynne and Gazdar, Gerald. (1999) The PolyLex 
architecture : multilingual lexicons for related lan-
guages. Traitement Automatique des Langues, 
40 :2, pp. 5-23. 

Evans, Roger and Gazdar, Gerald. (1996) DATR : a 
language for lexical knowledge representation. 
Computational Linguistics, 22 :2, pp. 167-216.  

Habash, Nizar and Owen Rambow. (2007) Arabic 
Diacritization through Full Morphological Tag-
ging. NAACL HLT 2007pp. 53-56. 

Habash, Nizar and Owen Rambow. (2005) Arabic To-
kenization, Part-of-Speech Tagging and Morpho-
logical Disambiguation in One Fell Swoop. ACL 
2005, pp. 573-80. 

Herring, J. (2006) Orthography and the lexicon, PhD 
dissertation, University of Brighton. 

Khoja, Shereen. (2001) APT: Arabic Part-of-speech 
Tagger. Proceedings of the Student Workshop at 
the Second Meeting of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (NAACL2001). 

Marsi, Erwin, Antal van den Bosch and Abdelhadi 
Soudi. (2005) Memory-based morphological anal-
ysis, generation and part-of-speech tagging of Ar-
abic. ACL Workshop on Computational 
Approaches to Semitic Languages. pp. 1-8. 

Scheindlin, Raymond P. (2007) 501 Arabic verbs 
Haupage: Barron. 

Wells, John. (1989) Computer-coded phonemic notation 
of individual languages of the European Community. 
Journal of the International Phonetic Association, 
19 :1, pp. 31-54. 

 

41


