










































Bridging Gaps for Spoken Dialog System Frameworks in Instructional Settings


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Future directions and needs in the Spoken Dialog Community: Tools and Data, pages 21–22,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Bridging Gaps for Spoken Dialog System Frameworks in Instructional
Settings

Gina-Anne Levow
Department of Linguistics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195 USA

levow@u.washington.edu

Abstract

Spoken dialog systems frameworks fill a cru-
cial role in the spoken dialog systems com-
munity by providing resources to lower bar-
riers to entry. However, different user groups
have different requirements and expectations
for such systems. Here, we consider the par-
ticular needs for spoken dialog systems toolk-
its within an instructional setting. We discuss
the challenges for existing systems in meet-
ing these needs and propose strategies to over-
come them.

1 Introduction

A key need in the spoken dialog systems community
is a spoken dialog system development framework.
Such systems fulfill fundamental roles in lowering
barriers to entry for development of spoken dialog
systems, providing baseline systems for comparabil-
ity, and supporting novel experimental extensions.
There are many characteristics that are desirable for
a shared spoken dialog system resource, including:

• Availability: Systems should be provided on
an on-going basis, with continuing support, up-
dates, and maintenance.

• Ease-of-use: Systems should be easy to use and
provide an environment in which systems are
easy to develop.

• Platform-independence: Systems be usable on
a wide variety of architectures, if installed, or
provided on an accessible platform, such as a
website.

• Application access: Systems should provide
a range of exemplar applications within the
framework.

• Flexibility and extensibility: Systems should
enable integration of diverse technology com-
ponents and facilitate a wide range of experi-
mental configurations.

• Robustness: Systems should enable state-of-
the-art performance for diverse applications.

• Affordability: Systems should be free if possi-
ble, or provided at pricing that is not prohibitive
for different user groups.

However, these systems also serve diverse groups
of users, from senior research developers to students
building their first spoken dialog systems. While
these users share many requirements, their relative
importance naturally varies. Research developers
will likely place greater emphasis on system robust-
ness, extensibility, and flexibility, for example to
incorporate alternative speech recognizers, speech
synthesizers, or dialog managers. Those using such
systems in an instructional setting will place greater
importance on ease-of-use, platform portability or
independence, availability, affordability, and access
to reference applications. Below, we will discuss
some of the challenges for systems trying to meet
these needs. Then we will describe two popular cur-
rent solutions and how they satisfy the needs of these
different groups. Lastly we will present some addi-
tional needs for spoken dialog systems frameworks
to bridge gaps in dialog systems for instructional
use.

A variety of systems have been developed that ad-
dress many of these needs, but all suffer from signif-

21



icant limitations. Availability and affordability have
posed some of the knottiest problems. For example,
many of the Galaxy Communicator research sys-
tems, such as those by University of Colorado (Pel-
lom et al., 2001), MIT, and CMU, were made avail-
able to the research community. However, many of
the systems are no longer available, usable, or sup-
ported, as research groups have disbanded and sys-
tems architectures have changed. Maintaining sys-
tems over time requires group and community com-
mitment, facilitated by an open-source framework.
Other toolkits and frameworks have become prob-
lematic due to conflicts between availability and af-
fordability. The long-popular CSLU toolkit (Sutton
and Cole, 1997) has recently shifted to a commercial
footing. Similarly, several industry platforms have
provided free non-commercial VoiceXML hosting,
as a simple spoken dialog development environ-
ment. However, at least one of these systems has
recently shifted to a paid-only status. The environ-
ment changes rapidly. Of three freely available aca-
demic systems and five VoiceXML platforms listed
in a 2009 survey (Jokinen and McTear, 2009), two
have already gone to paid status as of late 2011.

Two frameworks have emerged in recent years as
popular SDS frameworks: the Ravenclaw/Olympus
framework (Bohus et al., 2007) and VoiceXML,
hosted on one of the industrial platforms, such as
Nuance’s Cafe or Voxeo1. However, they do seem
to address the needs of different user groups. Raven-
claw/Olympus has been more widely adopted in the
research community: it is robust, flexible, exten-
sible, open-source, provides diverse use cases, and
has an active support and development community.
In contrast, the VoiceXML platforms have proven
popular in an instructional setting, as attested by the
large number of online homework assignments em-
ploying VoiceXML. These VoiceXML frameworks
offer very simple, easy-to-use environments that are
largely platform-independent, include basic support
and tutorials, and provide simple baseline applica-
tions. Given VoiceXML’s extensive role in indus-
try settings, they also provide an advantage in terms
of direct practical experience for students and in
terms of broad resources and support. In an instruc-
tional setting, Ravenclaw/Olympus’ relative com-

1http://cafe.bevocal.com; http://www.voxeo.com

plexity, Windows platform and software dependence
in instructional environments where linux has be-
come predominant, and smaller resource base rep-
resent hurdles. While the VoiceXML platforms ex-
cel in these dimensions, their very simplicity and
ease-of-use are limiting. Students are often look-
ing for existing applications of moderate interesting
complexity as a basis for extension and experimenta-
tion. Most typical example applications are simpler
than those given for Olympus, and the platform is
severely limiting for more advanced users and tasks.
For example, many VoiceXML frameworks do not
even support user-defined pronunciations. Lastly,
these VoiceXML platforms rely on the generosity of
the industrial teams, which can readily evaporate as
has already happened with Tellme Studio.

Ideally, for instructional use, we would like to
bridge the gap between the too-simple, restrictive
VoiceXML frameworks and the more challenging
but more flexible and powerful Ravenclaw/Olympus
framework, to allow students and instructors to
transition more smoothly from one to the other.
On the VoiceXML side, a community-supported
VoiceXML platform would reduce dependence on
industry platforms. Access to VoiceXML applica-
tions of greater complexity, comparable to Let’s Go!
or Communicator tasks, would allow more inter-
esting experiments within a course’s limited span.
Lastly, porting Ravenclaw/Olympus to linux would
allow easier adoption in a wider range of academic
programs.

References
D. Bohus, Antoine Raux, Thomas K. Harris, Maxine Es-

kenazi, and Alexander I. Rudnicky. 2007. Olympus:
an open-source framework for conversational spoken
language interface research. In Bridging the Gap:
Academic and Industrial Research in Dialog Technol-
ogy workshop at HLT/NAACL 2007.

Kristiina Jokinen and Michael F. McTear. 2009. Spoken
Dialogue Systems. Morgan & Claypool Publishers.

B. Pellom, W. Ward, J. Hansen, K. Hacioglu, J. Zhang,
X. Yu, and S. Pradhan. 2001. University of Colorado
dialog systems for travel and navigation.

Stephen Sutton and Ronald Cole. 1997. The cslu toolkit:
rapid prototyping of spoken language systems. In Pro-
ceedings of the 10th annual ACM symposium on User
interface software and technology, UIST ’97, pages
85–86, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

22


