










































Graph Based Similarity Measures for Synonym Extraction from Parsed Text


Proceedings of the TextGraphs-7 Workshop at ACL, pages 20–24,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Graph Based Similarity Measures for Synonym Extraction from Parsed Text

Einat Minkov
Dep. of Information Systems

University of Haifa
Haifa 31905, Israel

einatm@is.haifa.ac.il

William W. Cohen
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

Pittsburgh, PA 15213
wcohen@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

We learn graph-based similarity measures for
the task of extracting word synonyms from a
corpus of parsed text. A constrained graph
walk variant that has been successfully ap-
plied in the past in similar settings is shown to
outperform a state-of-the-art syntactic vector-
based approach on this task. Further, we show
that learning specialized similarity measures
for different word types is advantageous.

1 Introduction

Many applications of natural language processing
require measures of lexico-semantic similarity. Ex-
amples include summarization (Barzilay and El-
hadad, 1999), question answering (Lin and Pantel,
2001), and textual entailment (Mirkin et al., 2006).
Graph-based methods have been successfully ap-
plied to evaluate word similarity using available on-
tologies, where the underlying graph included word
senses and semantic relationships between them
(Hughes and Ramage, 2007). Another line of re-
search aims at eliciting semantic similarity measures
directly from freely available corpora, based on the
distributional similarity assumption (Harria, 1968).
In this domain, vector-space methods give state-of-
the-art performance (Padó and Lapata, 2007).

Previously, a graph based framework has been
proposed that models word semantic similarity from
parsed text (Minkov and Cohen, 2008). The un-
derlying graph in this case describes a text cor-
pus as connected dependency structures, accord-
ing to the schema shown in Figure 1. The toy
graph shown includes the dependency analysis of
two sentences: “a major environmental disaster is

Figure 1: A joint graph of dependency structures

under way“, and “combat the environmental catas-
trophe”. In the graph, word mentions (in circles)
and word types (in squares) are both represented
as nodes. Each word mention is linked to its
corresponding word type; for example, the nodes
“environmental3” and “environmental204” represent
distinct word mentions and both nodes are linked
to the word type “environmental”.1 For every edge
in the graph, there exists an edge in the oppo-
site direction (not shown in the figure). In this
graph, the terms disaster and catastrophe are re-
lated due to the connecting path disaster−→ disaster3
amod−inverse

−→ environmental3 −→ environmental −→
environmental204

amod
−→ catastrophe204 −→ catastrophe .

Given a query, which consists of a word of inter-
est (e.g., ‘disaster’), various graph-based similarity
metrics can be used to assess inter-node relatedness,
so that a list of nodes ranked by their similarity to
the query is returned to the user. An advantage of
graph-based similarity approaches is that they pro-
duce similarity scores that reflect structural infor-

1We will sometimes refer to word types as terms.

20



mation in the graph (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg,
2003). Semantically similar terms are expected to
share connectivity patterns with the query term in
the graph, and thus appear at the top of the list.

Notably, different edge types, as well as the paths
traversed, may have varying importance for differ-
ent types of similarity sought. For example, in the
parsed text domain, noun similarity and verb sim-
ilarity are associated with different syntactic phe-
nomena (Resnik and Diab, 2000). To this end, we
consider a path constrained graph walk (PCW) al-
gorithm, which allows one to learn meaningful paths
given a small number of labeled examples and incor-
porates this information in assessing node related-
ness in the graph (Minkov and Cohen, 2008). PCW
have been successfully applied to the extraction of
named entity coordinate terms, including city and
person names, from graphs representing newswire
text (Minkov and Cohen, 2008), where the special-
ized measures learned outperformed the state-of-
the-art dependency vectors method (Padó and Lap-
ata, 2007) for small- and medium-sized corpora.

In this work, we apply the path constrained graph
walk method to the task of eliciting general word
relatedness from parsed text, conducting a set of ex-
periments on the task of synonym extraction. While
the tasks of named entity extraction and synonym
extraction from text have been treated separately in
the literature, this work shows that both tasks can be
addressed using the same general framework. Our
results are encouraging: the PCW model yields su-
perior results to the dependency vectors approach.
Further, we show that learning specialized similar-
ity measures per word type (nouns, verbs and adjec-
tives) is preferable to applying a uniform model for
all word types.

2 Path Constrained Graph Walks

PCW is a graph walk variant proposed recently that
is intended to bias the random walk process to fol-
low meaningful edge sequences (paths) (Minkov
and Cohen, 2008). In this approach, rather than as-
sume fixed (possibly, uniform) edge weight param-
eters Θ for the various edge types in the graph, the
probability of following an edge of type ℓ from node
x is evaluated dynamically, based on the history of
the walk up to x.

The PCW algorithm includes two components.
First, it should provide estimates of edge weights
conditioned on the history of a walk, based on train-
ing examples. Second, the random walk algorithm
has to be modified to maintain historical information
about the walk compactly.

In learning, a dataset of N labelled example
queries is provided. The labeling schema is binary,
where a set of nodes considered as relevant answers
to an example query ei, denoted as Ri, is specified,
and graph nodes that are not explicitly included in
Ri are assumed irrelevant to ei. As a starting point,
an initial graph walk is applied to generate a ranked
list of graph nodes li for every example query ei. A
path-tree T is then constructed that includes all of
the acyclic paths up to length k leading to the top
M+ correct and M− incorrect nodes in each of the
retrieved lists li. Every path p is associated with
a maximum likelihood probability estimate Pr(p)
of reaching a correct node based on the number of
times the path was observed in the set of correct and
incorrect target nodes. These path probabilities are
propagated backwards in the path tree to reflect the
probability of reaching a correct node, given an out-
going edge type and partial history of the walk.

Given a new query, a constrained graph walk vari-
ant is applied that adheres both to the topology of the
graph G and the path tree T . In addition to tracking
the graph node that the random walker is at, PCW
maintains pointers to the nodes of the path tree that
represent the walk histories in reaching that graph
node. In order to reduce working memory require-
ments, one may prune paths that are associated with
low probability of reaching a correct node. This of-
ten leads to gains in accuracy.

3 Synonym Extraction

We learn general word semantic similarity measures
from a graph that represents a corpus of parsed text
(Figure 1). In particular, we will focus on evalu-
ating word synonymy, learning specialized models
for different word types. In the experiments, we
mainly compare PCW against the dependency vec-
tors model (DV), due to Padó and Lapata (2007).
In the latter approach, a word wi is represented
as a vector of weighted scores, which reflect co-
occurrence frequency with words wj , as well as

21



properties of the dependency paths that connect the
word wi to word wj . In particular, higher weight
is assigned to connecting paths that include gram-
matically salient relations, based on the obliqueness
weighting hierarchy (Keenan and Comrie, 1977).
For example, co-occurrence of word wi with word
wj over a path that includes the salient subject rela-
tion receives higher credit than co-occurrences over
a non-salient relation such as preposition. In addi-
tion, Padó and Lapata suggest to consider only a
subset of the paths observed that are linguistically
meaningful. While the two methods incorporate
similar intuitions, PCW learns meaningful paths that
connect the query and target terms from examples,
whereas DV involves manual choices that are task-
independent.

3.1 Dataset

To allow effective learning, we constructed a dataset
that represents strict word synonymy relations for
multiple word types. The dataset consists of 68 ex-
amples, where each example query consists of a sin-
gle term of interest, with its synonym defined as a
single correct answer. The dataset includes noun
synonym pairs (22 examples), adjectives (24) and
verbs (22). Example synonym pairs are shown in
Table 1. A corpus of parsed text was constructed
using the British National Corpus (Burnard, 1995).
The full BNC corpus is a 100-million word col-
lection of samples of written and spoken contem-
porary British English texts. We extracted rele-
vant sentences, which contained the synonymous
words, from the BNC corpus. (The number of ex-
tracted sentences was limited to 2,000 per word.)
For infrequent words, we extracted additional ex-
ample sentences from Associated Press (AP) arti-
cles included in the AQUAINT corpus (Bilotti et al.,
2007). (Sentence count was complemented to 300
per word, where applicable.) The constructed cor-
pus, BNC+AP, includes 1.3 million words overall.
This corpus was parsed using the Stanford depen-
dency parser (de Marneffe et al., 2006).2. The parsed
corpus corresponds to a graph that includes about
0.5M nodes and 1.7M edges.

2http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml

Nouns movie : film
murderer : assassin

Verbs answered : replied
enquire : investigate

Adjectives contemporary : modern
infrequent : rare

Table 1: Example word synonym pairs: the left words are
used as the query terms.

3.2 Experiments

Given a query like {term=“movie”}, we would like
to get synonymous words, such as film, to appear
at the top of the retrieved list. In our experimental
setting, we assume that the word type of the query
term is known. Rather than rank all words (terms) in
response to a query, we use available (noisy) part of
speech information to narrow down the search to the
terms of the same type as the query term, e.g. for the
query “film” we retrieve nodes of type τ =noun.

We applied the PCW method to learn separate
models for noun, verb and adjective queries. The
path trees were constructed using the paths leading
to the node known to be a correct answer, as well
as to the otherwise irrelevant top-ranked 10 terms.
We required the paths considered by PCW to in-
clude exactly 6 segments (edges). Such paths rep-
resent distributional similarity phenomena, allowing
a direct comparison against the DV method. In con-
ducting the constrained walk, we applied a thresh-
old of 0.5 to truncate paths associated with lower
probability of reaching a relevant response, follow-
ing on previous work (Minkov and Cohen, 2008).
We implemented DV using code made available by
its authors,3 where we converted the syntactic pat-
terns specified to Stanford dependency parser con-
ventions. The parameters of the DV method were
set to medium context and oblique edge weighting
scheme, which were found to perform best (Padó
and Lapata, 2007). In applying a vector-space based
method, a similarity score needs to be computed be-
tween every candidate from the corpus and the query
term to construct a ranked list. In practice, we used
the union of the top 300 words retrieved by PCW as
candidate terms for DV.

We evaluate the following variants of DV: hav-

3http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/̃ pado/dv.html

22



Nouns Verbs Adjs All

CO-Lin 0.34 0.37 0.37 0.37
DV-Cos 0.24 0.36 0.26 0.29
DV-Lin 0.45 0.49 0.54 0.50
PCW 0.47 0.55 0.47 0.49
PCW-P 0.53 0.68 0.55 0.59
PCW-P-U 0.49 0.65 0.50 0.54

Table 2: 5-fold cross validation results: MAP

ing inter-word similarity computed using Lin’s mea-
sure (Lin, 1998) (DV-Lin), or using cosine similarity
(DV-Cos). In addition, we consider a non-syntactic
variant, where a word’s vector consists of its co-
occurrence counts with other terms (using a win-
dow of two words); that is, ignoring the dependency
structure (CO-Lin).

Finally, in addition to the PCW model described
above (PCW), we evaluate the PCW approach in set-
tings where random, noisy, edges have been elimi-
nated from the underlying graph. Specifically, de-
pendency links in the graph may be associated with
pointwise mutual information (PMI) scores of the
linked word mention pairs (Manning and Schütze,
1999); edges with low scores are assumed to rep-
resent word co-occurrences of low significance, and
so are removed. We empirically set the PMI score
threshold to 2.0, using cross validation (PCW-P).4

In addition to the specialized PCW models, we also
learned a uniform model over all word types in these
settings; that is, this model is trained using the union
of all training examples, being learned and tested us-
ing a mixture of queries of all types (PCW-P-U).

3.3 Results

Table 2 gives the results of 5-fold cross-validation
experiments in terms of mean average precision
(MAP). Since there is a single correct answer per
query, these results correspond to the mean recipro-
cal rank (MRR).5 As shown, the dependency vec-
tors model applied using Lin similarity (DV-Lin)
performs best among the vector-based models. The
improvement achieved due to edge weighting com-

4Eliminating low PMI co-occurrences has been shown to be
beneficial in modeling lexical selectional preferences recently,
using a similar threshold value (Thater et al., 2010).

5The query’s word inflections and words that are seman-
tically related but not synonymous were discarded from the
ranked list manually for evaluation purposes.

pared with the co-occurrence model (CO-Lin) is
large, demonstrating that syntactic structure is very
informative for modeling word semantics (Padó and
Lapata, 2007). Interestingly, the impact of applying
the Lin similarity measure versus cosine (DV-Cos)
is even more profound. Unlike the cosine measure,
Lin’s metric was designed for the task of evaluating
word similarity from corpus statistics; it is based on
the mutual information measure, and allows one to
downweight random word co-occurrences.

Among the PCW variants, the specialized PCW
models achieve performance that is comparable to
the state-of-the-art DV measure (DV-Lin). Further,
removing noisy word co-occurrences from the graph
(PCW-P) leads to further improvements, yielding
the best results over all word types. Finally, the
graph walk model that was trained uniformly for all
word types (PCW-P-U) outperforms DV-Lin, show-
ing the advantage of learning meaningful paths. No-
tably, the uniformly trained model is inferior to
PCW trained separately per word type in the same
settings (PCW-P). This suggests that learning spe-
cialized word similarity metrics is beneficial.

4 Discussion

We applied a path constrained graph walk variant to
the task of extracting word synonyms from parsed
text. In the past, this graph walk method has been
shown to perform well on a related task, of extract-
ing named entity coordinate terms from text. While
the two tasks are typically treated distinctly, we have
shown that they can be addressed using the same
framework. Our results on a medium-sized cor-
pus were shown to exceed the performance of de-
pendency vectors, a syntactic state-of-the-art vector-
space method. Compared to DV, the graph walk ap-
proach considers higher-level information about the
connecting paths between word pairs, and are adap-
tive to the task at hand. In particular, we showed that
learning specialized graph walk models for different
word types is advantageous. The described frame-
work can be applied towards learning other flavors
of specialized word relatedness models (e.g., hyper-
nymy). Future research directions include learning
word similarity measures from graphs that integrate
corpus statistics with word ontologies, as well as im-
proved scalability (Lao and Cohen, 2010).

23



References

Regina Barzilay and Michael Elhadad. 1999. Text sum-
marizations with lexical chains, in Inderjeet Mani and
Mark Maybury, editors, Advances in Automatic Text
Summarization. MIT.

Matthew W. Bilotti, Paul Ogilvie, Jamie Callan, and Eric
Nyberg. 2007. Structured retrieval for question an-
swering. In SIGIR.

Lou Burnard. 1995. Users Guide for the British National
Corpus. British National Corpus Consortium, Oxford
University Computing Service, Oxford, UK.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In
LREC.

Zellig Harria. 1968. Mathematical Structures of Lan-
guage. Wiley, New York.

Thad Hughes and Daniel Ramage. 2007. Lexical seman-
tic relatedness with random graph walks. In EMNLP.

Edward Keenan and Bernard Comrie. 1977. Noun
phrase accessibility and universal grammar. Linguis-
tic Inquiry, 8.

Ni Lao and William W. Cohen. 2010. Fast query exe-
cution for retrieval models based on path constrained
random walks. In KDD.

Liben-Nowell and J. Kleinberg. 2003. The link predic-
tion problem for social networks. In CIKM.

Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. Discovery of infer-
ence rules for question answering. Natural Language
Engineering, 7(4).

Dekang Lin. 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering of
similar words. In COLING-ACL.

Chris Manning and Hinrich Schütze. 1999. Founda-
tions of Statistical Natural Language Processing. MIT
Press.

Einat Minkov and William W. Cohen. 2008. Learning
graph walk based similarity measures for parsed text.
In EMNLP.

Shachar Mirkin, Ido Dagan, and Maayan Geffet. 2006.
Integrating pattern-based and distributional similarity
methods for lexical entailment acquisition. In ACL.

Sebastian Padó and Mirella Lapata. 2007. Dependency-
based construction of semantic space models. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 33(2).

Philip Resnik and Mona Diab. 2000. Measuring verb
similarity. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society.

Stefan Thater, Hagen F’́urstenau, and Manfred Pinkal.
2010. Contextualizing semantic representations using
syntactically enriched vector models. In ACL.

24


