



















































Integrating Incremental Speech Recognition and POMDP-Based Dialogue Systems


Proceedings of the 13th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL), pages 275–279,
Seoul, South Korea, 5-6 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Integrating Incremental Speech Recognition and POMDP-based Dialogue
Systems

Ethan O. Selfridge†, Iker Arizmendi‡, Peter A. Heeman†, and Jason D. Williams1

† Center for Spoken Language Understanding, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA
‡AT&T Labs – Research, Shannon Laboratory, Florham Park, NJ, USA

1Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA
{selfridg,heemanp}@ohsu.edu

iker@research.att.com jason.williams@microsoft.com

Abstract

The goal of this paper is to present a first
step toward integrating Incremental Speech
Recognition (ISR) and Partially-Observable
Markov Decision Process (POMDP) based di-
alogue systems. The former provides sup-
port for advanced turn-taking behavior while
the other increases the semantic accuracy of
speech recognition results. We present an In-
cremental Interaction Manager that supports
the use of ISR with strictly turn-based dia-
logue managers. We then show that using
a POMDP-based dialogue manager with ISR
substantially improves the semantic accuracy
of the incremental results.

1 Introduction and Background

This paper builds toward integrating two distinct
lines of research in spoken dialogue systems: in-
cremental speech recognition (ISR) for input, and
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
(POMDPs) for dialogue management.

On the one hand, ISR improves on whole-
utterance speech recognition by streaming results to
the dialogue manager (DM) in real time (Baumann
et al., 2009; Skantze and Schlangen, 2009). ISR
is attractive because it enables sophisticated system
behavior such as interruption and back-channeling.
However, ISR output is particularly error-prone, and
often requires a specialized dialogue manager to be
written (Buß and Schlangen, 2011; Schlangen and
Skantze, 2009).

1Work done while at AT&T Labs - Research

On the other hand, POMDP-based dialogue man-
agers improve on traditional approaches by (in part)
tracking a distribution over many possible dialogue
states, rather than just one, thereby improving ro-
bustness to speech recognition errors (Williams and
Young, 2007; Thomson and Young, 2010; Young
et al., 2010). The overall aim of combining these
two lines of research is to improve the robustness of
error-prone ISR output.

To our knowledge only one study to date has com-
bined ISR and POMDPs. Lu et al. (2011) show
how 1-best ISR hypotheses can be used within a sin-
gle dialogue turn. This work is different than the
present paper, where we use N-Best lists of ISR re-
sults across multiple turns of a dialogue.

Specifically, this paper makes two contributions.
First, as a foundation, we introduce an Incremental
Interaction Manager (IIM) that enables ISR to be
used within the traditional turn-based dialogue man-
agement framework. The IIM confers many, but not
all, of the benefits of ISR without requiring mod-
ification to a traditional dialogue manager. Thus,
in theory, any existing dialogue system architecture
could use ISR with the addition of an IIM. Second,
we show that pairing our IIM with a POMDP-based
dialogue manager yields a substantial improvement
in accuracy for incremental recognition results at the
dialogue level.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 de-
scribes the IIM, section 3 describes the POMDP in-
tegration, sections 4 and 5 describe experiments and
results, and section 6 concludes.

275



Table 1: Example IIM operation. P = partial ISR result; A = dialogue action.

Original Copied
ISR IIM DM state DM state DM Action
Prompt: “Where are you leaving from?”
yew Rej. P 0 0 -
ridge Acc. P / Rej. A 0 0 “I’m sorry...”
mckee Acc. P / Acc. A 0 1 “Ok, Mckee...”
mckeesport Acc. P / Acc. A 0 2 “Ok, Mckeesport..”
mckeesport center Acc. P / Rej. A 0 2 “Ok, Mckeesport..”
Prompt: “Ok, Mckeesport. Where are you going to?”
pitt Acc. P / Rej. A 2 4 “I’m sorry...”
pittsburgh Acc. P / Acc. A 2 5 “Ok, Pittsburgh...”

2 Incremental Interaction manager

The Incremental Interaction Manager (IIM) medi-
ates communication between the incremental speech
recognizer and the DM. The key idea is that the
IIM evaluates potential dialogue moves by apply-
ing ISR results to temporary instances of the DM.
The IIM copies the current state of the DM, pro-
vides the copied DM with a recognition result, and
inspects the action that the copied DM would take.2

If the action does not sufficiently advance the dia-
logue (such as re-asking the same question), the ac-
tion is rejected and the copied DM is discarded. If
the action advances the dialogue (such as asking for
or providing new information), then that action is
immediately executed.

The system should gracefully handle revisions
following a premature action execution, and a copy-
ing procedure is a viable solution for any DM. When
a revision is received, a second copy of the original
DM is made and the new ISR result is passed to that
second copy; if that second copy takes an action that
advances the dialogue and is different from the ac-
tion generated by the first copy, then the first action
is terminated, the first copy of the DM is discarded,
the second action is initiated, and the second copy
assumes the position of the first copy. Additional
revisions can be handled by following the same pro-
cedure. Terminating a speech action and immedi-
ately starting another can be jarring (“Say a city /
Ok, Boston...”), which can be mitigated by preced-

2If the DM design does not force a state transition following
a result then the DM supplies the the action without copying.

ing actions with either a sound or simple silence (at
the expense of some response delay). Once recog-
nition is complete, the copied DM is installed as the
new original DM.

Many ISR results can be discarded before passing
them to the DM. First, only incremental results that
could correspond to complete user utterance are con-
sidered: incomplete results are discarded and never
passed to the DM. In addition, ISR results are of-
ten unstable, and it is undesirable to proceed with
an ISR result if it will very likely be revised. Thus
each candidate ISR result is scored for stability (Sel-
fridge et al., 2011) and results with scores below a
manually-set threshold are discarded.

Table 1 shows an example of the recognizer, the
IIM, and the DM. For sake of clarity, stability scores
are not shown. The system asks “Where are you
leaving from?” and the user answers “Mckeesport
Center.” The IIM receives five ISR results (called
partials), rejecting the first, yew, because its stabil-
ity score is too low (not shown). With the second,
ridge, it copies the DM, passes ridge to the copy,
and discards the action of the copied DM (also dis-
carded) because it does not advance the dialogue. It
accepts and begins to execute the action generated
by the third partial, mckee. The fourth partial revises
the action, and the fifth action is rejected since it is
the same. The original DM is then discarded and the
copied DM state is installed in its place.

Overall, the IIM enables a turn-based DM to en-
joy many of the benefits of ISR – in particular, the
ability to make turn-taking decisions with a com-
plete account of the dialogue history.

276



3 Integrating ISR with a POMDP-based
dialogue manager

A (traditional) dialogue manager based on a partially
observable Markov decision process (POMDP DM)
tracks a probability distribution over multiple hid-
den dialogue states called a belief state (Williams
and Young, 2007).3 As such, POMDP DMs read-
ily make use of the entire ASR N-Best list, even
for low-confidence results — the confidence level of
each N-Best list item contributes proportionally to
the probability of its corresponding hidden state.

It is straightforward to integrate ISR and a
POMDP DM using the IIM. Each item on the N-
Best list of an incremental result is assigned a confi-
dence score (Williams and Balakrishnan, 2009) and
passed to the POMDP DM as if it were a complete
result, triggering a belief state update. Note that this
approach is not predicting future user speech from
partial results (DeVault et al., 2009; Lu et al., 2011),
but rather (tentatively) assuming that partial results
are complete.

The key benefit is that a belief state generated
from an incremental result incorporates all of the
contextual information available to the system from
the start of the dialogue until the moment of that
incremental result. By comparison, an isolated in-
cremental result includes only information from the
current utterance. If the probability models in the
POMDP are estimated properly, belief states should
be more accurate than isolated incremental results.

4 Experimental design

For our experiments we used a corpus of 1037 calls
from real users to a single dialogue system that pro-
vides bus timetable information for Pittsburgh, PA
(a subsequent version of Williams (2011)). This di-
alogue system opened by asking the caller to say a
bus route number or “I don’t know”; if the system
had insufficient confidence following recognition, it
repeated the question. We extracted the first 3 re-
sponses to the system’s bus route question. Often
the system did not need to ask 3 times; our exper-
imental set contained 1037 calls with one or more
attempts, 586 calls with two or more attempts, and

3It also uses reinforcement learning to choose actions, al-
though in this paper we are not concerned with this aspect.

356 calls with three or more attempts. These utter-
ances were all transcribed, and tagged for the bus
route they contained, if any: 25% contained neither
a route nor “I don’t know”.

We ran incremental speech recognition on each
utterance using Lattice-Aware Incremental Speech
Recognition (Selfridge et al., 2011) on the AT&T
WATSONSM speech recognizer (Goffin et al., 2005)
with the same rule-based language models used in
the production system. On average, there were
5.78, 5.44, and 5.11 incremental results per utter-
ance (plus an utterance-final result) for the first, sec-
ond, and third attempts. For each incremental result,
we noted its time stamp and interpretation: correct,
if the interpretation was present and correct, other-
wise incorrect. Each incremental result included an
N-Best list, from which we determined oracle accu-
racy: correct if the correct interpretation was present
anywhere on the most recent ISR N-Best list, other-
wise incorrect.

Each incremental result was then passed to the
IIM and POMDP DM. The models in the POMDP
DM were estimated using data collected from a dif-
ferent (earlier) time period. When an incremental
result updated the belief state, the top hypothesis
for the route was extracted from the belief state and
scored for correctness. For utterances in the first at-
tempt, the belief state was initialized to its prior; for
subsequent attempts, it incorporated all of the prior
(whole-turn) utterances. In other words, each at-
tempt was begun assuming the belief state had been
running up to that point.

5 Results and Discussion

We present results by showing instantaneous seman-
tic accuracy for the raw incremental result (base-
line), the top belief state, and oracle. Instantaneous
semantic accuracy is shown with respect to the per-
cent of the total recognition time the partial is rec-
ognized at. An utterance is incorrect if it has no in-
cremental result before a certain percentage.

We show 2 sets of plots. Figure 1 shows only in-
cremental recognition results and excludes the end-
of-utterance (phrase) results; Figure 2 shows incre-
mental recognition results and includes phrase re-
sults. It is useful to view these separately since the
phrase result, having access to all the speech, is sub-

277



Figure 1: Instantaneous semantic accuracy of incremental results, excluding phrase-final results

Figure 2: Instantaneous semantic accuracy of incremental and phrase-final results

stantially more accurate than the incremental results.
Figure 1 shows that the POMDP is more accu-

rate than the raw incremental result (excluding end-
of-phrase results). Its performance gain is minimal
in attempt 1 because the belief is informed only by
the prior. In attempt 2 and 3, the gain is larger
since the belief also benefits from the previous at-
tempts. Since the top POMDP result in subsequent
attempts is sometimes already correct (because it
incorporates past recognitions), the POMDP some-
times meets and occasionally exceeds the oracle dur-
ing the early portions of attempts 2 and 3.

Figure 2 shows that when end-of-phrase recog-
nition results are included, the benefit of the belief
state is limited to the initial portions of the second
and third turns. This is because the POMDP mod-
els are not fit well to the data: the models were
estimated from an earlier version of the system,
with a different user base and different functionality.
Identifying and eliminating this type of mismatch
is an important issue and has been studied before
(Williams, 2011).

Taken as a whole, we find that using belief track-
ing increases the accuracy of partials by over 8%
(absolute) in some cases. Even though the final
phrase results of the 1-best list are more accurate

than the belief state, the POMDP shows better ac-
curacy on the volatile incremental results. As com-
pared to the whole utterance results, incremental re-
sults have lower 1-best accuracy, yet high oracle ac-
curacy. This combination is a natural fit with the
POMDPs belief state, which considers the whole N-
Best list, effectively re-ranking it by synthesizing in-
formation from dialogue history priors.

6 Conclusion

This paper has taken a step toward integrating ISR
and POMDP-based dialogue systems. The Incre-
mental Interaction Manager (IIM) enables a tradi-
tional turn-based DM to make use of incremental
results and enjoy many their benefits. When this
IIM is paired with a POMDP DM, the interpreta-
tion accuracy of incremental results improves sub-
stantially. In the future we hope to build on this work
by incorporating Reinforcement Learning into turn-
taking and dialogue action decisions.

Acknowledgments

Thanks to Vincent Goffin for help with this work,
and to the anonymous reviewers for their comments
and critique. We acknowledge funding from the
NSF under grant IIS-0713698.

278



References

T. Baumann, M. Atterer, and D. Schlangen. 2009.
Assessing and improving the performance of speech
recognition for incremental systems. In Proc. NAACL:
HLT, pages 380–388. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

O. Buß and D. Schlangen. 2011. Dium–an incremen-
tal dialogue manager that can produce self-corrections.
Proceedings of semdial.

David DeVault, Kenji Sagae, and David Traum. 2009.
Can i finish? learning when to respond to incremental
interpretation results in interactive dialogue. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGDIAL 2009 Conference, pages 11–
20, London, UK, September. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

V. Goffin, C. Allauzen, E. Bocchieri, D. Hakkani-Tur,
A. Ljolje, S. Parthasarathy, M. Rahim, G. Riccardi,
and M. Saraclar. 2005. The AT&T WATSON speech
recognizer. In Proceedings of ICASSP, pages 1033–
1036.

D. Lu, T. Nishimoto, and N. Minematsu. 2011. Decision
of response timing for incremental speech recogni-
tion with reinforcement learning. In Automatic Speech
Recognition and Understanding (ASRU), 2011 IEEE
Workshop on, pages 467–472. IEEE.

D. Schlangen and G. Skantze. 2009. A general, ab-
stract model of incremental dialogue processing. In
Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 710–718. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

E.O. Selfridge, I. Arizmendi, P.A. Heeman, and J.D.
Williams. 2011. Stability and accuracy in incremen-
tal speech recognition. In Proceedings of the SIGdial
2011.

G. Skantze and D. Schlangen. 2009. Incremental dia-
logue processing in a micro-domain. In Proceedings
of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
745–753. Association for Computational Linguistics.

B. Thomson and S. Young. 2010. Bayesian update of di-
alogue state: A pomdp framework for spoken dialogue
systems. Computer Speech & Language, 24(4):562–
588.

J.D. Williams and S. Balakrishnan. 2009. Estimating
probability of correctness for asr n-best lists. In Proc
SIGDIAL, London, United Kingdom.

J.D. Williams and S. Young. 2007. Partially observable
markov decision processes for spoken dialog systems.
Computer Speech & Language, 21(2):393–422.

J.D. Williams. 2011. An empirical evaluation of a sta-
tistical dialog system in public use. In Proceedings of

the SIGDIAL 2011 Conference, pages 130–141. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

S. Young, M. Gasic, S. Keizer, F. Mairesse, J. Schatz-
mann, B. Thomson, and K. Yu. 2010. The hidden
information state model: A practical framework for
pomdp-based spoken dialogue management. Com-
puter Speech & Language, 24(2):150–174.

279


