



















































Delayed Tree-Locality, Set-locality, and Clitic Climbing


Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms (TAG+11), pages 1–9,
Paris, September 2012.

Delayed Tree-Locality, Set-locality, and Clitic Climbing 

 
 

Joan Chen-Main*, Tonia Bleam+, and Aravind K. Joshi* 
*Institute for Research in Cognitive Science +Department of Linguistics 

University of Pennsylvania University of Maryland 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA College Park, MD 20742, USA 

{chenmain, joshi)@seas.upenn.edu tbleam@umd.edu 
 

 
 

 

 
 

Abstract 

Since Bleam's (2000) initial claim that 
capturing clitic climbing patterns in Romance 
requires the descriptive power of set-local 
MCTAG (Weir, 1988), alternative 
approaches to relaxing tree-locality 
restrictions have been developed, including 
delayed tree-local MCTAG (Chiang and 
Scheffler, 2008), which, unlike set-local 
MCTAG, is weakly equivalent to standard 
TAG. This paper compares 2-delayed tree-
local MCTAG with set-local MCTAG in 
terms of how well the two formalisms can 
account for the clitic climbing data. We 
confirm that 2-delay tree-local MCTAG has 
the formal expressivity to cover the data by 
proposing an explicit grammar to do so. 
However, we also find that the constraint on 
set locality is particularly well-suited for 
capturing these clitic climbing patterns. I.e., 
though globally less restrictive, set-local 
MCTAG appears to be restrictive in just the 
right way in this specific case. 

1 Introduction 
Bleam (2000) argues that capturing patterns of 
clitic climbing in Spanish requires the descriptive 
power of set-local multi-component TAG 
(MCTAG) (Weir, 1988); the more restrictive 
tree-local MCTAG is not sufficient. Since 
Bleam’s initial claim, alternative approaches to 
relaxing locality restrictions have been 
developed. Delayed tree local MCTAG, 
introduced by Chiang and Scheffler (2008), 1 is 
                                                            
1 As part of Chiang and Scheffler’s proof showing the weak 
equivalence of delayed tree-local MCTAG to standard 
TAG, they show that any tree-local MC-TAG with flexible 
composition G can be converted into a 2-delayed tree-local 

one such proposal, but unlike set-local MCTAG, 
it is weakly equivalent to standard TAG. Each 
use of a multicomponent set introduces a delay 
into the derivation. A delay is the union of the 
paths in the derivation structure from each 
component of an MC-set S to the lowest node 
that dominates all members of S. A k-delayed 
tree-local MCTAG permits each node in the 
derivation structure to be a member of at most k 
delays. Fig. 1 replicates the example of a 2-
delayed tree-local derivation given in Chiang and 
Scheffler (2008). The dashed boxes mark the 
delays. Thus, a valid k-delayed tree local 
MCTAG derivation permits members of the 
same MC set to compose into different trees, so 
long as all members of the MC set eventually 
compose into the same tree without exceeding k 
delays. Delayed tree-locality permits a limited 
amount of set-local composition, as illustrated in 
Fig.1, but it also permits some non-set-local 
derivational steps. 1-delayed and 2-delayed tree-
local MCTAG have already been employed in 
linguistic analyses of anaphor binding (Chiang 
and Scheffler, 2008), non-local right node raising 
(Han et al., 2010), and binding variables 
(Storoshenko and Han, 2010). 

This paper explores how well the additional 
descriptive power of 2-delayed tree-local 
MCTAG accommodates the available clitic 
climbing data and compares the new approach 
with the set-local MCTAG approach. In section 
2, we review the data Bleam (2000) sought to 
account for. In section 3, we review why such 
data is problematic for tree-local MCTAG and 

                                                                                          
MCTAG G’ that is weakly equivalent to G and has exactly 
the same elementary structures as G. Described informally 
as reverse adjoining (Joshi et al. 2003), it recasts some 
previously non-tree-local derivations as abiding by tree-
locality. 

1



 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

Figure 1: A 2-delayed tree-local MCTAG derivation. Delays are marked with dashed boxes.  
(Figure taken from Chiang and Scheffler (2008).) 

 
present a set-local solution, slightly modified 
from Bleam (2000). In section 4, we provide and 
discuss a 2-delayed tree local MCTAG solution 
based on a small modification to our set-local 
MCTAG solution. In section 5, we show how the 
differences between the two MCTAG variants 
yield different predictions with respect to the 
number of clitics that can climb. However, the 
predictions turn out to be untestable given 
independent constraints on clitic clusters. In 
section 6, we conclude that though set-local 
MCTAG is particularly well-suited for modeling 
clitic climbing, we cannot escape the result that 
2-delayed tree-local MCTAG eliminates the 
necessity of using set-local MCTAG. 

2 Clitic Climbing  in Romance 
Spanish exhibits a phenomenon known as clitic 
climbing, whereby (one or more) pronominal 
clitics that are thematically dependent on a verb 
in an embedded clause can optionally appear in a 
higher clause. The phenomenon is illustrated in 
(1) and (2) where the clitic lo (“it”) is 
thematically dependent on the verb leer (to read), 
but it can optionally “climb” or appear in the 
higher clause as in (2).  
 
(1) Mari quiere leer-lo 

Mari wants to.read-it 

(2) Mari lo quiere leer 
Mari it wants to.read 

 
Clitic climbing is one consequence of the more 
general phenomenon often referred to as 
restructuring (Rizzi, 1982) or clause 
reduction/union (Aissen and Perlmutter, 1983). 
These are cases where two or more clauses act as 
a single clause for purposes of clitic placement, 
NP movement (as in reflexive passive or tough-
movement), or scrambling (in German, eg.). 
Thus, dependencies (or “movements”) that are 
usually clause-bounded are possible across 
clauses just in case the intervening predicates are 
all in the class of “trigger” predicates (Aissen 
and Perlmutter, 1983). Trigger predicates are 
those that select a “defective” or “reduced” 

clausal complement, one that is tenseless, 
subjectless and that does not contain 
(intervening) functional elements such as 
sentential negation. In Bleam (2000), trigger 
verbs are analyzed as those that optionally select 
a VP complement (vs. a higher functional 
projection of the verb such as TP or CP). 

As noted in Bleam (2000) and in other work, 
clitic climbing is unbounded. There appears to be 
no grammatical limit on the number of clauses 
that can be crossed by a clitic, as long as all of 
the intervening verbs are trigger verbs.2  
  
(3) Juan quería dejar-te terminar de leer-lo 

Juan wanted to.let-you to.finish of to.read-it 
“Juan wanted to let you finish reading it” 

(4) Juan te lo quería dejar terminar de leer. 
 
Clitic clusters can involve two clitics that are 
thematically dependent in a single clause or they 
can be formed by clitics originating in different 
clauses, climbing into a single higher clause, as 
shown in (3)-(4) and (5)-(7).  
 
(5) Mari quiere permitir-te  ver-lo 

Mari wants to.permit-you to.see-it 
‘Mari wants to permit you to see it.’ 

(6) Mari te lo quiere permitir ver 

(7) Mari quiere permitir-te-lo ver 
 

When there are multiple clitics originating in 
different clauses, the clitic originating in the 
lower clause can move up one clause to join the 
other clitic, as shown in (7), but cannot “move 
past” the clitic in the higher clause, as shown in 
(8), unless it carries the second clitic along. 

 
(8) *Mari lo quiere permitir-te ver 

(9) Mari te quiere permitir ver-lo 

(10) *Mari te quiere permitir-lo ver 

                                                            
2 Of course processing becomes more difficult as the 
number of clauses increases, but speakers appear to be able 
to handle up to at least four clauses without much difficulty. 
Examples in text are adapted from Bleam (2000). 

2



(a)    (b)    (c) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(d)      (e) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

(f)      (g) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 2: Grammar fragment for deriving patterns in (5) – (10).  Three versions of quiere (a) used in 
the set-local account only, (b) used in both accounts, (c) used in the 2-delay tree-local account only; 

two versions of permitir (d) used when clitic remains low, (e) used when clitic climbs;  
two versions of ver (f) used when clitic remains low, (g) used when clitic climbs. 

 
Further, while the higher clitic can move into the 
matrix clause leaving the lower clitic in situ, as 
in (9), it cannot do so if the lower clitic has 
moved into its clause, as shown in (10). These 
constraints on clitic clustering, or “bandwagon 
effects” (Bleam 2000)3, suggest that there is a 
single position in the clause for clitics and that 
clitic clusters form a constituent. 

3 Set-local MCTAG and Clitic 
Climbing  in Romance 

To account for the clitic climbing facts in 
Spanish (and for restructuring more generally), 
Bleam (2000) adopts a defective-complement 
analysis. In the MCTAG analysis, every non-
finite clause with clitic arguments has two 
versions, illustrated for permitir (“to permit”) in 
Figs. 2(d) and (e). 2(d) is a singleton set 
containing a contiguous tree containing the verb 
                                                            
3 These phenomena were observed by Aissen and Perlmutter 
(1983) and fell out from their clause reduction analysis. 

and its full extended projection 4 , which also 
(necessarily) includes the dependent clitic(s) in a 
functional head which is agnostically labeled F. 
This version is the one utilized in cases where the 
clitic stays in the embedded clause in which it is 
thematically dependent. In the second version, 
Fig. 2(e), the tree set contains two components: 
one tree containing the verb in a VP projection, 
lacking its functional structure, and the other tree 
containing the dependent clitic (attached to a 
“higher” functional head). This version is used to 
derive cases of clitic climbing. Because the clitic 
is “loose,” it is free to attach to the functional 
structure of a higher clause in the final derived 
tree. The linguistic intuition is that in the first 
case, the presence of higher functional structure 
in the same single tree with the verb provides a 
host site for the clitic and would entail a 
contiguous tree that included both verb and clitic. 

                                                            
4 I.e., in the sense of Grimshaw (1991), the functional 
projections that accompany a verb. 

t

e VP

TP

F'

quiere

DP

Mari

FP

F

V

i

T

i FP

t

e VP

TP

F'

quiere

DP

Mari

FP

F

V

i

T

i FP

(NA)

t

e

VP

VP

TP

F'

quiere

DP

Mari

FP

F

V

i

T

i

te

e

te

TP

FP

V

Vi

F

i

Cl

F

F k t k

T VP

permitir XP(NA)

Vi t k

VP

XP

permitirte

kF*

F

Cl



tloe

e

TP

FP

V

ver V i

F

i

Cl

F

F k tk

T VP

lo

F*

F

Cl
k

V tk

VP

ver



3



In the second case, the lack of higher functional 
structure necessitates a “loose” clitic in a 
separate component. 

Trigger verbs (such as querer “to want”) are 
clausal complement taking verbs that are flexible 
in the type of complement they take. They can 
either take a VP complement, in which case clitic 
climbing occurs due to the selection of the 
defective complement tree set (e.g. Fig. 2 (e) or 
(g)); or they can take a full FP complement (e.g. 
Fig. 2 (d) or (f)), in which case there will be no 
clitic climbing, due to the selection of the non-
defective complement tree which necessarily 
contains the clitic. Note that the trees for the 
tensed trigger verb, quiere, in Figs. 2 (a) and (b), 
are exactly alike except that one takes an FP 
complement while the other takes a VP 
complement. 5 , 6 Non-trigger verbs (that do not 
trigger restructuring) will only have the option of 
taking a non-defective complement (FP or CP). 

The set-local derivation of (6), where both 
clitics originate in separate clauses but end up 
clustering together in a single clause, is given in 
Fig. 3. The derivation involves the tree sets in 
Fig. 2 (b), (e), and (g). The VP tree for the most 
embedded verb, ver, substitutes into the VP node 
of the permitir tree, while the component with 
the clitic lo adjoins into the component with the 
clitic te. This creates a derived multi-component 
set, one component with the embedded verbs and 
the other with the clitics. The former substitutes 
into the VP verb complement position of the 
matrix tree and the latter adjoins into the F node 
of the same tree. 

As should be clear from the derivation in Fig. 
3, multi-component TAG is necessary to account 
for clitic climbing if we want to maintain the idea 
that a verb and its dependent clitic need to be 
represented in the same elementary object. 
Furthermore, as shown in Bleam (2000), set-
local MCTAG permits an account for cases such 
as (6) that preserves the linguistic intuition that 
the clitics combine with one another to form a 
cluster, while tree-local MCTAG cannot. 
Although the more powerful set-local MCTAG 
must be adopted, requiring set-locality still 
constrains the possible derivations in ways that 
are linguistically relevant. Note that traditional 

                                                            
5 The trees given here are modified from Bleam (2000) in 
that the clitic host site F is higher than the verb in T(ense) in 
the tensed clause. This difference is justified in Appendix A.   
6 The XP complement node in Fig. 2(d-e) is a short-cut for 
indicating two separate trees, one taking an FP complement 
and one taking a VP (representing the fact that “permitir” is 
a trigger verb). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Figure 3: MCTAG derivation (set-local and also 

2-delay tree-local) for climbed clitic clusters 
 

set-local MCTAG does not allow for the ver 
component of Fig. 2(g) to substitute into the 
permitir tree in (d) while the component for the 
clitic lo remains unattached. The clitic may not 
“jump over” the permitir clause and adjoin 
directly into the matrix quiere tree. This non-set-
local derivation is shown schematically in Fig. 4. 
Hence, clitics cannot climb past a clause without 
combining with other clitics in the intermediate 
clause, forcing them to all move together. 
Against a backdrop of reasonable linguistic 
assumptions, we see that the Bandwagon Effects 
are derived by the formal properties of set-local 
MCTAG. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Derivation that is illegal in set-local 
MCTAG but legal in 2-delay tree-local MCTAG 

t

e

VP

VP

TP

F'

quiere

DP

Mari

FP

F

V

i

T

i

Vi t k

VP

XP

permitirte

kF*

F

Cl



lo

F*

F

Cl
k

V tk

VP

ver





4



(a) (b) (c) (d) 
 
 

 

 

 

 
Figure 5. Derivation structures for examples (6), (5), (7), and (9), respectively, with delays marked 

 
One final note is in order. Kulick (2000) 

identifies two types of constructions which he 
claims remain incorrectly prohibited by the 
Bleam analysis: constructions where clitic 
climbing co-occurs with raising or with long 
distance wh-movement. We show in Appendix A 
that set-local MCTAG actually is able to handle 
this data. 

4 2-Delayed Tree-Local MCTAG and 
Clitic Climbing  in Romance 

Recall that in Bleam’s set-local account, a 
sentence with two climbed clitics is formed by 
combining the two clitics and combining the two 
embedded predicates. This derivation is 
permitted in 2-delayed tree-local MCTAG. 
Fig.5(a) is the derivation tree for the derivation in 
Fig. 3 with delays marked. Note that the shape of 
Fig. 5(a) is exactly that of the example 2-delayed 
MCTAG derivation given in Fig.1. By 
considering the shapes of the derivations 
permitted by 2-delayed tree-local MCTAG, we 
can conclude that some account must be possible 
for the clitic climbing data presented here. 

Recall also that it is the prohibition against the 
kind of derivation depicted in Fig. 4 in set-local 
MCTAG that ruled out the patterns exemplified 
by (8) and (10) where clitics ungrammatically do 
not cluster. Since the derivation in Fig. 4 is 
permitted by delayed tree-local MCTAG, the 
challenge for providing a 2-delayed MCTAG 
analysis of available clitic climbing data is how 
to avoid overgeneration. 

It turns out that only a minor modification to 
the  grammar fragment used for our set-local 
MCTAG account is needed to provide a 2-
delayed tree-local MCTAG account of the data at 
hand. By adding a null adjoining constraint to the 
tree in Fig. 2(a), we obtain the tree in Fig. 2(c). 
Using the tree in Fig. 2(c) instead allows for the 
derivation of the grammatical patterns of clitic 
climbing in (5)-(7), and (9) while blocking the 
ungrammatical patterns in (8) and (10). Crucially, 
we assume clitics have a single position in the 

clause, which we represent here as an F node. 
(Thus, clitics adjoin to F but not V or T.) We 
maintain the general analysis of the two patterns 
of clitic placement utilized in the set local 
MCTAG account: When the clitic does not climb, 
the derivation involves a singleton tree set for the 
embedded verb which includes an F node for 
hosting a clitic. For examples (6), (7), and (9), 
when a clitic does climb, the derivation involves 
a set where the projection of the verb tree is too 
low to include an F node and the clitic is 
represented in a separate elementary tree. As in 
the set-local account, this captures the intuition 
that restructuring phenomena, such as clitic 
climbing, involves the selection of some type of 
reduced clause. Fig. 5 shows the derivation 
structures for the grammatical patterns in (5)-(7) 
and (9). The shapes of the derivations are, in fact, 
the same as those for set-local MCTAG, which 
the reader can verify. 
Where the two accounts differ, however, is 
clearer when we consider how the unattested 
patterns in (8) and (10) are blocked. Let us 
consider the necessary tree sets for each example 
in turn. In (8), the clitic associated with the most 
embedded clause, lo, has climbed into the matrix 
clause while the clitic associated with the next 
highest clause, te, remains in its unclimbed post-
verbal position. Since a successful derivation of 
(8) would require a host site for the climbed clitic 
lo in the matrix clause, the derivation would 
necessarily involve the tree set in Fig. 2(b). The 
quiere tree in 2(c) cannot host a clitic due to the 
null adjoining constraint on its F node. The 
postverbal position of te implies that the singleton 
set 2(d), whose root is labeled FP, should be used 
in deriving (8). However, Fig. 2(b) takes only a 
VP as quiere’s complement, not an FP, so the 
two sets cannot combine. Using the set in Fig. 
2(e) instead will allow the component with 
permitir to substitute into quiere’s tree, but the 
component with the clitic will not have a position 
following permitir to adjoin into. Thus, neither 
available option for permitir and te will 
successfully yield (8). 

permitir (te) 

ver (lo)



(Mari) quiere

permitir (te)



permitir (te) 

ver (lo)ver (lo)



(Mari) quiere

permitir (te)



permitir (te)

ver (lo)

(Mari) quiere 

ver (lo)ver (lo)

(Mari) quiere



permitir (te)



5



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 6. A 3-delayed tree-local MCTAG derivation. Delays are marked with dashed boxes.

In (10), the clitic associated with the most 
embedded clause, lo, has climbed into the next 
highest clause while the clitic associated with 
that clause, te, has climbed up to the matrix 
clause. As with (8), a successful derivation of 
(10) would require a host site for the climbed 
clitic in the matrix clause. Thus, the derivation 
would necessarily involve the tree in Fig. 2(b). 
Since both clitics climb, the derivation must 
involve the sets in Figs. 2(e) and (g), where the 
clitic is a separate component. This is 
unproblematic for deriving the positions for 
permitir and te: the permitir component 
substitutes into the VP node in the quiere tree 
while the te component adjoins into the F node. 
The lo component of Fig. 2(g), however, has no 
F node following permitir into which to adjoin. It 
can only adjoin into the F node of the te 
component or the F node of the matrix clause, 
which would yield the attested (6), not the 
unattested (10). 

We see that our 2-delayed tree-local account 
depends on Fig. 2(b) having only VP (and not 
FP) as its verbal complement. That is, in this 
account, the possibility of taking an FP 
complement is linked to the presence of a null 
adjoining constraint, as instantiated in Fig. 2(c). 
It is the null adjoining constraint on the F node 
that blocks clitic climbing into the matrix clause, 
not the formal properties of 2-delayed tree-local 
MCAG. This machinery is available, but the use 
is not linguistically motivated beyond the goal of 
deriving the observed clitic climbing patterns.7 

                                                            
7 Another option is to propose a quiere tree without an F 
node, i.e. we could posit that the matrix tree involved in 
clitic climbing is larger than the tree involved in non-
climbing cases. However, the null adjoining account 
adopted above can also correctly rule out the the possibility 
of a clitic originating in clause 3 and moving to clause 
1,crossing over an intermediate clitic from clause 2, when 
clause 1 itself contains a clitic.  

i)    Juan te permitió hacerle leerlo 
ii) *Juan te lo permitió hacerle leer. 

5 Clitic Clusters and a 2-Delayed Tree-
Local MCTAG Prediction 

As we have seen above, the set-local MCTAG 
account for climbed clusters of two clitics can be 
straightforwardly recast as a 2-delayed tree local 
MCTAG derivation. This does not, however, 
hold for the derivations of the two MCTAG 
variants in general. Consider, for example, the 
derivation in Figure 6. This is a straightforward 
set-local MCTAG derivation, but it is not a 2-
delayed tree-local MCTAG derivation. Here, β21 
and β22 are members of three delays, making it a 
3-delayed tree-local MCTAG derivation. 

In the context of clitic climbing, this translates 
into different predictions regarding the number 
of clitics that can originate in different clauses 
and form a climbed clitic cluster. The set-local 
account permits an unbounded number of multi-
component clitic-verb sets to combine with each 
other, thus predicting that an unbounded number 
of clitics may form a climbed clitic cluster (in 
principle). In contrast, the 2-delayed MCTAG 
allows only two multi-component clitic-verb sets 
to combine with each other before combining 
into the same tree. This restriction predicts that it 
should not be possible to create a clitic cluster 
containing three clitics that originate in three 
different clauses and then climb into a fourth 
clause. More generally, a k-delayed tree-local 
MCTAG permits at most k clitics, each of which 
originates from a different clause, to form a 
climbed cluster. In testing this prediction, we 
find that speakers do not accept climbed clusters 
of greater than two, which appears at first to rule 
in favor of 2-delayed TL-MCTAG. However, 
this would only distinguish between the two 
variants if we could establish that clusters of 
three clitics are acceptable when they do not each 
originate from a separate clause. This turns out 
not to be the case: 3-clitic combinations are ruled 
out in cases where two of the clitics originate in 
one clause and the third clitic originates in a 
different clause, as shown in (11). 

 

β02 

β01 

β01 β02 

6



(11) a.  Juan no  quiere  permitir-le  
Juan neg  wants  to.permit 3p.dat  
escribir-te-la  
to.write- 2p-3p.fem.acc 

‘Juan doesn’t want to permit him/her to 
write it to you.’ 

 b. *Juan no quiere permitir-se8-te-la escribir 
 c. *Juan no se te la quiere permitir escribir 
 
The picture that emerges is that clusters of three 
clitics are difficult for speakers to accept for 
reasons that are independent of the combinatory 
operations that combine multiple clauses. Thus, 
Romance does not allow us to test the prediction 
due to restrictions on clitic clusters in general.9 
Although the data given here is inconclusive, the 
section serves to illustrate how the two MCTAG 
variants differ and identify the kind of data 
pattern that would distinguish between the two. 

6 Conclusions 
This paper demonstrates that although clitic 
climbing originally appeared to require formal 
power beyond that of tree-local MCTAG, the 
introduction of the weakly equivalent delayed 
tree-local MCTAG can account for the same 
body of data. Our set-local MCTAG account can, 
in fact, be translated into a 2-delayed tree-local 
MCTAG account with the addition of a null 
adjoining constraint to one of the trees in the set-
local grammar: the quiere tree in Fig. 2(a) is 
replaced with the tree in Fig. 2(c). The 2-delayed 
account also retains the set-local account’s 
reliance on the absence/presence of a functional 
node to host a clitic within the complement 
clause. 

Where the two differ, however, is how the 
work of capturing the Bandwagon Effect is 
accomplished.  In the set-local account, the 
Bandwagon Effects follow as a consequence of 
the permissible combinatory operations.  
Unattested patterns would require non-set-local 
derivations. In contrast, these non-set-local 
derivations are legal 2-delayed tree-local 
MCTAG derivations. The work of ruling these 
out to capture the Bandwagon Effects relies 
instead on the use of node labels and the null 
adjoining constraint. Both of these are legitimate, 

                                                            
8 This le is converted to se by a morphological rule known 
as the “Spurious se rule.” 
9 The prediction also appears to be untestable in Serbian and 
Italian due to independent constraints.  Thanks to Dave 
Kush, Ivana Mitrovic, Christina Tortora, and Raffaella 
Zanuttini (pc).  

computationally “safe” parts of TAG variants. 
However, as there is no obvious linguistic 
motivation for this particular use of a null 
adjoining constraint, from a linguist’s standpoint, 
there is preference for the set-local analysis. It is 
interesting to note that despite its increased 
power in general, set-locality, in conjunction 
with linguistic facts, has just the right kind of 
restrictiveness to capture clitic climbing patterns, 
making the formalism a particularly good fit in 
this specific domain. This also suggests that we 
may wish to investigate other ways to modify 
tree-locality to permit a limited amount of set-
local derivational steps with the goal of capturing 
the clitic climbing data more succinctly than the 
delayed tree-locality account given here. 

The elegance of the set-local MCTAG 
account, however, should not obscure the 
conclusion that delayed tree-locality makes it 
possible to avoid the increased generative power 
of set-local MCTAG. We are aware of only two 
cases for which it has been argued that 
permitting set-local composition is necessary: 
clitic climbing in Romance, which we have 
discussed here, and double causatives in 
Japanese (Heycock, 1986). The shape of the set-
local MCTAG derivation for the double 
causatives is the same as that given for a two-
clitic cluster which has climbed. Just as the set-
local analysis for the two-clitic cluster is also a 
legal 2-delayed tree-local analysis, so too is 
Heycock’s set-local analysis for Japanese 
causatives a legal 2-delayed tree-local analysis. 
We are led to conclude that 2-delayed tree-local 
MCTAG eliminates the necessity of using set-
local MCTAG not only for clitic climbing, but 
for all cases in which set-local composition was 
previously argued to be required. 

Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank the anonymous 
reviewers, Dave Kush, and Jeff Lidz for their 
helpful feedback, and Juan Uriagereka, Raffaella 
Zanuttini, Christina Tortora, Dave Kush, Ivana 
Mitrovec, Carmen Rio Rey and Leticia Pablos 
for their assistance with data. 

Appendix A: Set-local Solutions for Clitic 
Climbing and Adjoined Predicates 
Despite the increased derivational power of set-
local MCTAG, Kulick (2000) identifies two 
types of constructions which he claims remain 
incorrectly prohibited by the Bleam (2000) 
analysis: constructions where clitic climbing

7



(a)        (b)     (c) 
 

 

  

Figure 7: 1-delay tree-local MCTAG derivations which are not set-local. (a) schematic of derivation 
(b) schematic of derivation of clitic climbing with a raising verb (c) derivation structure with delay 

marked. ((a) and (b) taken from Kulick (2000)) 
 
co-occurs with raising, as in (12), or with long 
distance wh-movement, as in (13). 
 
(12)  a. Luis suele comer-las 
 b. Luis las suele comer 
 Luis them tends to eat 
 ‘Luis tends to eat them’ 

(13)  a. Que quiere mostrar-te Juan 
 What wants to-show-to-you Juan 
 ‘What did Juan want to show to you?’ 
 b. Que te quiere mostrar Juan 
 

The difficulty lies in combining the classic 
TAG accounts for raising and for wh-movement 
with the account developed for clitic climbing. In 
the former, both accounts involve adjoining of 
the matrix verb into the complement clause, thus 
“stretching apart” material in the lower clause. In 
the latter, clitic climbing is handled by positing 
an MC-set in which the clitic is its own 
component that adjoins into its host verbal 
element. A sentence like (12), then, would 
appear to require a derivation where the 
component for the clitic adjoins into the raising 
verb, which subsequently adjoins into the 
infinitival verb, the set-mate of the clitic. This is 
shown schematically in Fig. 7, taken from Kulick 
(2000). Such a derivation, where the clitic first 
combines into a tree while its set-mate remains 
uncombined, is not set-local. 

However, as we show here, the tree set for 
“comer” assumed by Kulick is ruled out under 
Bleam’s analysis. One of the key aspects of 
Bleam’s (2000) analysis was that the size of the 
verb’s tree determined whether the clitic was 
“loose” (instantiated as a separate tree in the tree 
set), and thus free to climb. Since the canonical 
position of the subject is above the position of 
the clitic, a tree anchored by comer and also 
having a position for a canonical subject must 
also contain a dependent clitic, as shown in Fig. 
8(a). Thus, example (12), which combines 
raising and clitic climbing, will require trees as in 

Fig. 8, where the raising verb suele adjoins in 
above the verb but below the clitic.10 
 
(a)   (b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 8: Trees for deriving example (12):  
cliting climbing co-occurs with raising. 

 
The second type of example, (13), can be 

handled in a similar way, preserving the 
traditional TAG analysis of long distance wh-
movement in which the verb and its dependent 
wh-expression (argument) are stretched apart 
through adjoining. Assuming that the wh-
expression is in the specifier of CP (of the 
mostrar tree) and that the clitic is in a projection 
below CP, we posit a contiguous tree for the 
mostrar clause, and its wh-expression and clitic 
dependents, as in Fig. 9(a). 

The matrix clause (quiere) must then adjoin in 
below the clitic. This requires us to adopt some 
crucial assumptions about the position of the 
post- verbal subject in wh-questions in Spanish.11 
We assume the canonical pre-verbal position of 
the subject to be the specifier of FP. However, 
the (non-canonical) post-verbal subject in wh-
questions in Spanish (and Italian) has been 
argued to be in a lower position than that of 
canonical subjects (see Rizzi 1982, Torrego 1984, 
Suñer 1994). Following these standard sources, 
we posit the auxiliary tree in Fig. 9(b) for the 
matrix quiere Juan clause. In this tree the verb 
 
                                                            
10 Note that suele is tensed and that tensed verbs are 
standardly assumed to move to T in Spanish; thus, we 
assume that root and foot nodes for the auxiliary tree for 
suele are TP (or T’).  
11 Note that the position for the post-verbal subject “Juan” is 
assumed to originate in the elementary tree for “quiere” that 
becomes the matrix clause in this example.  

suele

(Luis) comer (las)

(Luis) comer (las)





t

T'*

T

T'

VP

Vsuele

i

i

e

DP

FP

F'

FLuis

ClF k

las

TP

T'

tcomer k

8



(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(b) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Figure 9: Trees for deriving example (13):  
cliting climbing co-occurs with wh-movement. 

 
has moved past the subject, and the subject is a 
right-branching specifier of VP.12  

Consequences of adopting this analysis to 
account for Kulick’s data are (contra Bleam, 
2000), (1) that not all cases of clitic climbing are 
a result of a “loose” clitic in a tree set; and (2) 
that not all infinitival verbs are in a pre-clitic 
position in the elementary tree.13 But note that by 
adopting these relatively minor changes to the 
original analysis, the set-local analysis can 
handle these (apparent counter-) examples. In 
fact, for the particular examples mentioned here, 
tree-local MCTAG would be sufficient, but 
considering similar cases but with clitic climbing 
from multiple clauses would again require set-
locality rather than tree-locality. It should be 
                                                            
12 Alternatively, Ordoñez 1998 argues that, in general, VOS 
sentences in Spanish are derived via (a) movement of the 
verb to T, (b) the subject remaining in its base position, 
specifier of VP (left-branching), and (c) scrambling of the 
object (in this case a TP) to a position below T but above 
the in situ subject. This is illustrated below: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13 Trees such as Fig. 8(a) will necessarily require adjoining 
of a tensed verb at TP in order to ensure appropriate case-
licensing of the nominative subject and to ensure that the 
clitic has an appropriate verbal host. (In Spanish, clitics 
precede tensed verbs, but follow untensed verbs.) This can 
be accomplished via an obligatory adjoining constraint, 
plausibly as a top and bottom feature mismatch in a TAG 
system with features. 

clear from the main text of the paper that these 
particular set-local MCTAG derivations are also 
legal 2-delayed tree-local MCTAG derivations. 

References  
Judith Aissen and David Perlmutter. 1983. Clause 

Reduction in Spanish. In D. Perlmutter (ed) Studies 
in Relational Grammar. (1976) 

Tonia Bleam. 2000. Clitic climbing and the power of 
Tree Adjoining Grammer, In Anne Abeillé and 
Owen Rambow, eds., Tree adjoining grammars: 
Formalisms, linguistic analysis, and processing, 
193-220. CSLI Publications, Stanford. (1994) 

David Chiang and Tatjana Scheffler. 2008. Flexible 
Composition and Delayed Tree-Locality. In 
Proceedings of TAG+9, Tübingen, Germany. 

Jane Grimshaw. 1991. Extended projection. Ms., 
Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts. 

Chung-Hye Han, David Potter, and Dennis Ryan 
Storoshenko. 2010. Non-local Right Node Raising: 
an Analysis Using Delayed Tree-Local MC-TAG. 
In Proceedings of TAG+10, New Haven, USA. 

Caroline Heycock. 1986. The structure of the 
Japanese causative. Technical Report MS-CIS-87-
55, University of Pennsylvania. 

Aravind K. Joshi, Laura Kallmeyer, and Maribel 
Romero. 2003. Flexible composition in LTAG: 
quantifier scope and inverse linking. In H. Bunt 
and R. Muskens (eds.), Computing Meaning 3. 
Kluwer. 

Seth Kulick. 2000. Constraining Non-Local 
Dependencies in Tree Adjoining Grammar: 
Computational and Linguistic Perspectives. PhD 
dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, USA. 

Francisco Ordoñez. 1998. Post-verbal Asymmetries in 
Spanish. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 
16, 313-346. 

Luigi Rizzi. 1982. Issues in Italian Syntax. Foris. 

Dennis Ryan Storoshenko and Chung-Hye Han. 2010. 
Binding Variables in English: An Analysis using 
Delayed Tree Locality. In Proceedings of TAG+10, 
New Haven, USA. 

Margarita Suñer. 1994. V-Movement and the 
Licensing of Argumental Wh-Phrases in Spanish. 
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 12, 335-
372. 

Esther Torrego. 1984. On Inversion in Spanish and 
Some of its Effects. Linguistic Inquiry 15, 103-129. 

David Weir. 1988. Characterizing mildly context-
sensitive grammar formalisms. PhD dissertation, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

t

T

V'[+tense]quiere

TP*

VP

V

TP

DP

Juan

e te

VP

TP

FP

[-tense]

DP

que

CP

F

k

TClF k

tmostrar

t

T

TP

[+tense]

k

iquiere
VP

VP

TP*

tV

DP V'

Juan

i

k

9


