










































Can Machine Learning Algorithms Improve Phrase Selection in Hybrid Machine Translation?


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 113–118,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Can Machine Learning Algorithms Improve
Phrase Selection in Hybrid Machine Translation?

Christian Federmann
Language Technology Lab

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3, D-66123 Saarbrücken, GERMANY

cfedermann@dfki.de

Abstract

We describe a substitution-based, hybrid
machine translation (MT) system that has
been extended with a machine learning
component controlling its phrase selection.
Our approach is based on a rule-based MT
(RBMT) system which creates template
translations. Based on the generation parse
tree of the RBMT system and standard
word alignment computation, we identify
potential “translation snippets” from one or
more translation engines which could be
substituted into our translation templates.
The substitution process is controlled by a
binary classifier trained on feature vectors
from the different MT engines. Using a set
of manually annotated training data, we are
able to observe improvements in terms of
BLEU scores over a baseline version of the
hybrid system.

1 Introduction

In recent years, the overall quality of machine
translation output has improved greatly. Still,
each technological paradigm seems to suffer from
its own particular kinds of errors: statistical MT
(SMT) engines often show poor syntax, while
rule-based MT systems suffer from missing data
in their vocabularies. Hybrid approaches try to
overcome these typical errors by combining tech-
niques from both (or even more) paradigms in an
optimal manner.

In this paper we report on experiments with an
extended version of the hybrid system we develop
in our group (Federmann and Hunsicker, 2011;
Federmann et al., 2010). We take the output from
an RBMT engine as “translation template” for our

hybrid translations and substitute noun phrases1

by translations from one or several MT engines2.
Even though a general increase in quality could be
observed in previous work, our system introduced
errors of its own during the substitution process.
In an internal error analysis, these degradations
could be classified in the following way:

- external translations were incorrect;

- the structure degraded through substitution;

- phrase substitution failed.

Errors of the first class cannot be corrected, as we
do not have an easy way of knowing when the
translation obtained from an external MT engine
is incorrect. The other classes could, however, be
eliminated by introducing additional steps for pre-
and post-processing as well as by improving the
hybrid substitution algorithm itself. So far, our
algorithm relied on many, hand-crafted decision
factors; in order to improve translation quality and
processing speed, we decided to apply machine
learning methods to our training data to train a
linear classifier which could be used instead.

This paper is structured in the following way.
After having introduced the topics of our work in
Section 1, we give a description of our hybrid MT
system architecture in Section 2. Afterwards we
describe in detail the various decision factors we

1We are focusing on noun phrases for the moment as
these worked best in previous experiments with substitution-
based MT; likely because they usually form consecutive
spans in the translation output.

2While this could be SMT systems only, our approach
supports engines from all MT paradigms. If not all features
inside our feature vectors can be filled using the output of
some system X , we use defaults as fallback values.

113



have defined and how these could be used in fea-
ture vectors for machine learning methods in Sec-
tion 3. Our experiments with the classifier-based,
hybrid MT system are reported in Section 4. We
conclude by giving a summary of our work and
then provide an outlook to related future work in
Section 5.

2 Architecture

Our hybrid machine translation system combines
translation output from:

a) the Lucy RBMT system, described in more
detail in (Alonso and Thurmair, 2003), and

b) one or several other MT systems, e.g.
Moses (Koehn et al., 2007), or Joshua (Li et
al., 2009).

The rule-based component of our hybrid system
is described in more detail in section 2.2 while we
provide more detailed information on the “other”
systems in section 2.3.

2.1 Basic Approach
We first identify noun phrases inside the rule-
based translation and compute the most proba-
ble correspondences in the translation output from
the other systems. For the resulting phrases, we
apply a factored substitution method that decides
whether the original RBMT phrase should be kept
or rather be replaced by one of the candidate
phrases. As this shallow substitution process may
introduce errors at phrase boundaries, we perform
several post-processing steps that clean up and
finalise the hybrid translation result. A schematic
overview of our hybrid system and its main com-
ponents is given in figure 1.

2.2 Rule-Based Translation Templates
We obtain the “translation template” as well as
any linguistic structures from the RBMT system.
Previous work with these structures had shown
that they are usually of a high quality, supporting
our initial decision to consider the RBMT output
as template for our hybrid translation approach.
The Lucy translation output can include markup
that allows to identify unknown words or other
phenomena.

The Lucy system is a transfer-based RBMT
system that performs translation in three phases,
namely analysis, transfer, and generation. Tree

Figure 1: Schematic overview of the architecture of
our substitution-based, hybrid MT system.

structures for each of the translation phases can
be extracted from the Lucy system to guide the
hybrid system. Only the 1-best path through the
three phases is given, so no alternative translation
possibilities can be extracted from the given data;
a fact that clearly limits the potential for more
deeply integrated hybrid translation approaches.
Nonetheless, the availability of these 1-best trees
already allowed us to improve the translation
quality of the RBMT system as we had shown in
previous work.

2.3 Substitution Candidate Translations

We use state-of-the-art SMT systems to create
statistical, phrase-based translations of our input
text, together with the bidirectional word align-
ments between the source texts and the transla-
tions. Again, we make use of markup which helps
to identify unknown words as this will later be
useful in the factored substitution method.

Translation models for our SMT systems were
trained with lower-cased and tokenised Europarl
(Koehn, 2005) training data. We used the LDC
Gigaword corpus to train large scale language
models and tokenised the source texts using the
tokenisers available from the WMT shared task
website3. All translations are re-cased before they
are sent to the hybrid system together with the
word alignment information.

3Available at http://www.statmt.org/wmt12/

114



The hybrid MT system can easily be adapted
to support other translation engines. If there is no
alignment information available directly, a word
alignment tool is needed as the alignment is a
key requirement for the hybrid system. For part-
of-speech tagging and lemmatisation we used the
TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994).

2.4 Aligning RBMT and SMT Output
We compute alignment in several components of
the hybrid system, namely:

source-text-to-tree: we first find an alignment
between the source text and the correspond-
ing analysis tree. As Lucy tends to subdivide
large sentences into several smaller units, it
sometimes becomes necessary to align more
than one tree structure to a source sentence.

analysis-transfer-generation: for each of the
analysis trees, we re-construct the path from
its tree nodes, via the transfer tree, to the
corresponding generation tree nodes.

tree-to-target-text: similarly to the first align-
ment process, we find a connection between
generation tree nodes and the corresponding
translation output of the RBMT system.

source-text-to-tokenised: as the Lucy RBMT
system works on non-tokenised input text
and our SMT systems take tokenised input,
we need to align the original source text with
its tokenised form.

Given the aforementioned alignments, we can
then correlate phrases from the rule-based trans-
lation with their counterparts from the statistical
translations, both on source or target side. As
our hybrid approach relies on the identification of
such phrase pairs, the computation of the differ-
ent alignments is critical to achieve a good system
combination quality.

All tree-based alignments can be computed
with a very high accuracy. However, due to the
nature of statistical word alignment, the same
does not hold for the alignment obtained from the
SMT systems. If the alignment process produces
erroneous phrase tables, it is very likely that Lucy
phrases and their “aligned” SMT matches simply
do not fit the “open slot” inside the translation
template. Or put the other way round: the better
the underlying SMT word alignment, the greater
the potential of the hybrid substitution approach.

2.5 Factored Substitution

Given the results of the alignment process, we
can then identify “interesting” phrases for substi-
tution. Following our experimental setup from the
WMT10 shared task, we again decided to focus
on noun phrases as these seem to be best-suited
for in-place swapping of phrases.

To avoid errors or problems with non-matching
insertions, we want to keep some control on the
substitution process. As the substitution process
proved to be a very difficult task during previous
experiments with the hybrid system, we decided
to use machine learning methods instead. For this,
we refined our previously defined set of decision
factors into values v ∈ R which allows to com-
bine them in feature vectors xi = v1 . . . vp. We
describe the integration of the linear classifier in
more detail in Section 3.

2.6 Decision Factors

We used the following factors:

1. frequency: frequency of a given candidate
phrase compared to total number of candi-
dates for the current phrase;

2. LM(phrase): language model (LM) score of
the phrase;

3. LM(phrase)+1: phrase with right-context;

4. LM(phrase)-1: phrase with left-context;

5. Part-of-speech match?: checks if the part-
of-speech tags of the left/right context match
the current candidate phrase’s context;

6. LM(pos) LM score for part-of-speech (PoS);

7. LM(pos)+1 PoS with right-context;

8. LM(pos)-1 PoS with left-context;

9. Lemma checks if the lemma of the candidate
phrase fits the reference;

10. LM(lemma) LM score for the lemma;

11. LM(lemma)+1 lemma with right-context;

12. LM(lemma)-1 lemma with left-context.

115



2.7 Post-processing Steps
After the hybrid translation has been computed,
we perform several post-processing steps to clean
up and finalise the result:

cleanup first, we perform some basic cleanup
such as whitespace normalisation;

multi-words then, we take care of multi-word
expressions. Using the tree structures from
the RBMT system we remove superfluous
whitespace and join multi-words, even if
they were separated in the substituted phrase;

prepositions finally, prepositions are checked as
experience from previous work had shown
that these contributed to a large extent to the
amount of avoidable errors.

3 Machine Learning-based Selection

Instead of using hand-crafted decision rules in the
substitution process, we aim to train a classifier on
a set of annotated training examples which may be
better able to extract useful information from the
various decision factors.

3.1 Formal Representation
Our training set D can be represented formally as

D = {(xi, yi)|xi ∈ Rp, yi ∈ {−1, 1}}ni=1 (1)

where each xi represents the feature vector for
sentence i while the yi value contains the anno-
tated class information. We use a binary classifi-
cation scheme, simply defining 1 as “good” and
−1 as “bad” translations. In order to make use of
machine learning methods such as decision trees
(Breiman et al., 1984), SVMs (Vapnik, 1995), or
the Perceptron (Rosenblatt, 1958) algorithm, we
have to prepare our training set with a sufficiently
large number of annotated training instances. We
give further details on the creation of an annotated
training set in section 4.1.

3.2 Creating Hybrid Translations
Using suitable training data, we can train a binary
classifier (using either a decision tree, an SVM, or
the Perceptron algorithm) that can be used in our
hybrid combination algorithm.

The pseudo-code in Algorithm 1 illustrates how
such a classifier can be used in our hybrid MT
decoder.

Algorithm 1 Decoding using linear classifier
1: good candidates← []
2: for all substitution candidates Ci do
3: if CLASSIFY(Ci) == “good” then
4: good candidates← Ci
5: end if
6: end for
7: Cbest ← SELECT-BEST(good candidates)
8: SUBSTITUTE-IN(Cbest)

We first collect all “good” translations using the
CLASSIFY() operation, then choose the “best”
candidate for substitution with SELECT-BEST(),
and finally integrate the resulting candidate
phrase into the generated translation using
SUBSTITUTE-IN(). SELECT-BEST() could
use system-specific confidences obtained during
the tuning phase of our hybrid system. We are
still experimenting on its exact definition.

4 Experiments

In order to obtain initial experimental results, we
created a decision-tree-based variant of our hy-
brid MT system. We implemented a decision tree
learning module following the CART algorithm
(Breiman et al., 1984). We opted for this solution
as decision trees represent a straightforward first
step when it comes to integrating machine learn-
ing into our hybrid system.

4.1 Generating Training Data
For this, we first created an annotated data set. In
a nutshell, we computed feature vectors and po-
tential substitution candidates for all noun phrases
in our training data4 and then collected data from
human annotators which of the substitution candi-
dates were “good” translations and which should
rather be considered “bad” examples. We used
Appraise (Federmann, 2010) for the annotation,
and collected 24,996 labeled training instances
with the help of six human annotators. Table 1
gives an overview of the data sets characteristics.

Translation Candidates

Total “good” “bad”

Count 24,996 10,666 14,330

Table 1: Training data set characteristics

4We used the WMT12 “newstest2011” development set
as training data for the annotation task.

116



Hybrid Systems Baseline Systems

Baseline +Decision Tree Lucy Linguatec Moses Joshua

BLEU 13.9 14.2 14.0 14.7 14.6 15.9

BLEU-cased 13.5 13.8 13.7 14.2 13.5 14.9

TER 0.776 0.773 0.774 0.775 0.772 0.774

Table 2: Experimental results comparing baseline hybrid system using hand-crafted decision rules to a decision-
tree-based variant; both applied to the WMT12 “newstest2012” test set data for language pair English→German.

4.2 Experimental Results

Using the annotated data set, we then trained a
decision tree and integrated it into our hybrid sys-
tem. To evaluate translation quality, we created
translations of the WMT12 “newstest2012” test
set, for the language pair English→German, with
a) a baseline hybrid system using hand-crafted de-
cision rules and b) an extended version of our hy-
brid system using the decision tree.

Both hybrid systems relied on a Lucy trans-
lation template and were given additional trans-
lation candidates from another rule-based sys-
tem (Aleksic and Thurmair, 2011), a statistical
system based on the Moses decoder, and a sta-
tistical system based on Joshua. If more than one
“good” translation was found, we used the hand-
crafted rules to determine the single, winning
translation candidate (implementing SELECT-
BEST in the simplest, possible way).

Table 2 shows results for our two hybrid sys-
tem variants as well as for the individual base-
line systems. We report results from automatic
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2001) scoring and also
from its case-sensitive variant, BLEU-cased.

4.3 Discussion of Results

We can observe improvements in both BLEU
and BLEU-cased scores when comparing the
decision-tree-based hybrid system to the baseline
version relying on hand-crafted decision rules.
This shows that the extension of the hybrid sys-
tem with a learnt classifier can result in improved
translation quality.

On the other hand, it is also obvious, that the
improved hybrid system was not able to outper-
form the scores of some of the individual base-
line systems; there is additional research required
to investigate in more detail how the hybrid ap-
proach can be improved further.

5 Conclusion and Outlook

In this paper, we reported on experiments aiming
to improve the phrase selection component of a
hybrid MT system using machine learning. We
described the architecture of our hybrid machine
translation system and its main components.

We explained how to train a decision tree based
on feature vectors that emulate previously used,
hand-crafted decision factors. To obtain training
data for the classifier, we manually annotated a
set of 24,996 feature vectors and compared the
decision-tree-based, hybrid system to a baseline
version. We observed improved BLEU scores
for the language pair English→German on the
WMT12 “newstest2012” test set.

Future work will include experiments with
other machine learning classifiers such as SVMs.
It will also be interesting to investigate what other
features can be useful for training. Also, we
intend to experiment with heterogeneous feature
sets for the different source systems (resulting in
large but sparse feature vectors), adding system-
specific annotations from the various systems and
will investigate their performance in the context
of hybrid MT systems.

Acknowledgments

This work has been funded under the Seventh
Framework Programme for Research and Tech-
nological Development of the European Commis-
sion through the T4ME contract (grant agreement
no.: 249119). The author would like to thank
Sabine Hunsicker and Yu Chen for their support in
creating the WMT12 translations, and is indebted
to Hervé Saint-Amand for providing help with the
automated metrics scores. Also, we are grateful to
the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feed-
back and comments.

117



References
Vera Aleksic and Gregor Thurmair. 2011. Personal

translator at wmt2011. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
303–308, Edinburgh, Scotland, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Juan A. Alonso and Gregor Thurmair. 2003. The
Comprendium Translator system. In Proceedings
of the Ninth Machine Translation Summit, New Or-
leans, USA.

L. Breiman, J. Friedman, R. Olshen, and C. Stone.
1984. Classification and Regression Trees.
Wadsworth and Brooks, Monterey, CA.

Christian Federmann and Sabine Hunsicker. 2011.
Stochastic parse tree selection for an existing rbmt
system. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 351–357,
Edinburgh, Scotland, July. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Christian Federmann, Andreas Eisele, Yu Chen,
Sabine Hunsicker, Jia Xu, and Hans Uszkoreit.
2010. Further experiments with shallow hybrid mt
systems. In Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation and Met-
ricsMATR, pages 77–81, Uppsala, Sweden, July.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Christian Federmann. 2010. Appraise: An open-
source toolkit for manual phrase-based evaluation
of translations. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference
Chair), Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, Mike Ros-
ner, and Daniel Tapias, editors, Proceedings of the
Seventh International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta,
may. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch,
Chris Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola
Bertoldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine
Moran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar,
Alexandra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007.
Moses: Open source toolkit for statistical machine
translation. In Proc. of ACL Demo and Poster Ses-
sions, pages 177–180, Jun.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the MT Summit 2005.

Zhifei Li, Chris Callison-Burch, Chris Dyer, San-
jeev Khudanpur, Lane Schwartz, Wren Thornton,
Jonathan Weese, and Omar Zaidan. 2009. Joshua:
An open source toolkit for parsing-based machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 135–139,
Athens, Greece, March. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and
Wei-Jing Zhu. 2001. Bleu: a method for automatic

evaluation of machine translation. IBM Research
Report RC22176(W0109-022), IBM.

F. Rosenblatt. 1958. The Perceptron: A probabilistic
model for information storage and organization in
the brain. Psychological Review, 65:386–408.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing, Manchester, UK.

Toby Segaran. 2007. Programming Collective In-
telligence: Building Smart Web 2.0 Applications.
O’Reilly, Beijing.

V. N. Vapnik. 1995. The nature of statistical learning
theory. Springer, New York.

118


