










































BART goes multilingual: The UniTN / Essex submission to the CoNLL-2012 Shared Task


Proceedings of the Joint Conference on EMNLP and CoNLL: Shared Task, pages 122–128,
Jeju Island, Korea, July 13, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

BART goes multilingual: The UniTN / Essex submission to the CoNLL-2012
Shared Task

Olga Uryupina‡ Alessandro Moschitti‡ Massimo Poesio‡†
‡University of Trento
† University of Essex

uryupina@gmail.com, moschitti@disi.unitn.it, massimo.poesio@unitn.it

Abstract

This paper describes the UniTN/Essex sub-
mission to the CoNLL-2012 Shared Task on
the Multilingual Coreference Resolution. We
have extended our CoNLL-2011 submission,
based on BART, to cover two additional lan-
guages, Arabic and Chinese. This paper fo-
cuses on adapting BART to new languages,
discussing the problems we have encountered
and the solutions adopted. In particular, we
propose a novel entity-mention detection algo-
rithm that might help identify nominal men-
tions in an unknown language. We also dis-
cuss the impact of basic linguistic information
on the overall performance level of our coref-
erence resolution system.

1 Introduction

A number of high-performance coreference resolu-
tion (CR) systems have been created for English in
the past decades, implementing both rule-based and
statistical approaches. For other languages, how-
ever, the situation is far less optimistic. For Ro-
mance and German languages, several systems have
been developed and evaluated, in particular, at the
SemEval-2010 track 1 on Multilingual Coreference
Resolution (Recasens et al., 2010). For other lan-
guages, individual approaches have been proposed,
covering specific subparts of the task, most com-
monly pronominal anaphors (cf., for example, (Iida
and Poesio, 2011; Arregi et al., 2010) and many oth-
ers).

Two new languages, Arabic and Chinese, have
been proposed for the CoNLL-2012 shared task

(Pradhan et al., 2012). They present a challeng-
ing problem: the systems are required to pro-
vide entity mention detection (EMD) and design a
proper coreference resolver for both languages. At
UniTN/Essex, we have focused on these parts of the
task, relying on a modified version of our last-year
submission for English.

Most state-of-the-art full-scale coreference reso-
lution systems rely on hand-written rules for the
mention detection subtask.1 For English, such rules
may vary from corpus to corpus, reflecting specifics
of particular guidelines (e.g. whether nominal pre-
modifiers can be mentions, as in MUC, or not, as in
most other corpora). However, for each corpus, such
heuristics can be adjusted in a straightforward way.
Creating a robust rule-based EMD module for a new
language, on the contrary, is a challenging issue that
requires substantial linguistic knowledge.

In this paper, we advocate a novel approach, re-
casting parse-based EMD as a statistical problem.
We consider a node-filtering model that does not rely
on any linguistic expertise in a given language. In-
stead, we use tree kernels (Moschitti, 2008; Mos-
chitti, 2006) to induce a classifier for mention NP-
nodes automatically from the data.

Another issue to be solved when designing a
coreference resolution system for a new language
is a possible lack of relevant linguistic information.
Most state-of-the-art CR algorithms rely on rela-
tively advanced linguistic representations of men-
tions. This can be seen as a remarkable shift

1Statistical EMD approaches have been proved useful for
ACE-style coreference resolution, where mentions are basic
units belonging to a restricted set of semantic types.

122



from knowledge-lean approaches of the late nineties
(Harabagiu and Maiorano, 1999). In fact, modern
systems try to account for complex coreference links
by incorporating lexicographic and world knowl-
edge, for example, using WordNet (Harabagiu et al.,
2001; Huang et al., 2009) or Wikipedia (Ponzetto
and Strube, 2006). For languages other than English,
however, even the most basic properties of mentions
can be intrinsically difficult to extract. For example,
Baran and Xue (2011) have shown that a complex al-
gorithm is needed to identify the number property
of Chinese nouns.

Both Arabic and Chinese have long linguistic tra-
ditions and therefore most grammar studies rely on
terminology that can be very confusing for an out-
sider. For example, several works on Arabic (Hoyt,
2008) mention that nouns can be made definite with
the suffix “Al-”, but this is not a semantic, but syn-
tactic definiteness. Without any experience in Ara-
bic, one can hardly decide how such “syntactic defi-
niteness” might affect coreference.

In the present study, we have used the informa-
tion provided by the CoNLL organizers to try and
extract at least some linguistic properties of men-
tions for Arabic and Chinese. We have run several
experiments, evaluating the impact of such very ba-
sic knowledge on the performance level of a coref-
erence resolution system.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In
the next section we briefly describe the general ar-
chitecture and the system for English, focusing on
the adjustments made after the last year competition.
Section 3 is devoted to new languages: we first dis-
cuss our EMD module and then describe the proce-
dures for extracting linguistic knowledge. Section 4
discusses the impact of our solutions to the perfor-
mance level of a coreference resolver. The official
evaluation results are presented in Section 5.

2 BART

Our CoNLL submission is based on BART (Versley
et al., 2008). BART is a modular toolkit for corefer-
ence resolution that supports state-of-the-art statisti-
cal approaches to the task and enables efficient fea-
ture engineering. BART has originally been created
and tested for English, but its flexible modular archi-
tecture ensures its portability to other languages and

domains.
The BART toolkit has five main components: pre-

processing pipeline, mention factory, feature extrac-
tion module, decoder and encoder. In addition, an
independent LanguagePlugin module handles all the
language specific information and is accessible from
any component.

The architecture is shown in Figure 1. Each mod-
ule can be accessed independently and thus adjusted
to leverage the system’s performance on a particular
language or domain.

The preprocessing pipeline converts an input doc-
ument into a set of linguistic layers, represented
as separate XML files. The mention factory uses
these layers to extract mentions and assign their
basic properties (number, gender etc). The fea-
ture extraction module describes pairs of mentions
{Mi, Mj}, i < j as a set of features. At the
moment we have around 45 different feature ex-
tractors, encoding surface similarity, morpholog-
ical, syntactic, semantic and discourse informa-
tion. Note that no language-specific information
is encoded in the extractors explicitly: a language-
independent representation, provided by the Lan-
guage Plugin, is used to compute feature val-
ues. For CoNLL-2012, we have created two addi-
tional features: lemmata-match (similar to string
match, but uses lemmata instead of tokens) and
number-agreement-du (similar to commonly
used number agreement features, but supports dual
number).

The encoder generates training examples through
a process of sample selection and learns a pairwise
classifier. Finally, the decoder generates testing ex-
amples through a (possibly distinct) process of sam-
ple selection, runs the classifier and partitions the
mentions into coreference chains.

2.1 Coreference resolution in English
The English track at CoNLL-2012 can be considered
an extension of the last year’s CoNLL task. New
data have been added to the corpus, including two
additional domains, but the annotation guidelines re-
main the same.

We have therefore mainly relied on the CoNLL-
2011 version of our system (Uryupina et al., 2011)
for the current submission, providing only minor ad-
justments. Thus, we have modified our preprocess-

123



POS Tagger

Merger

Mention Tagger

Parser

Preprocessing

Mention

Factory

Coreference

chains

(entities)

Language Plugin

Unannotated

Text

Feature
Extractor

Learner
Machine

Encoder/
Decoder

Figure 1: BART architecture

ing pipeline to operate on the OntoNotes NE-types,
mapping them into MUC types required by BART.
This allows us to participate in the closed track, as
no external material is used any longer.

Since last year, we have continued with our exper-
iments on multi-objective optimization, proposed in
our CoNLL-2011 paper (Uryupina et al., 2011). We
have extended the scope of our work to cover differ-
ent machine learning algorithms and their parame-
ters (Saha et al., 2011). For CoNLL-2012, we have
re-tested all the solutions of our optimization exper-
iments, picking the one with the highest score on the
current development set.

Finally, our recent experiments on domain se-
lection (Uryupina and Poesio, 2012) suggest that,
at least for some subparts of OntoNotes, a sys-
tem might benefit from training a domain-specific
model. We have tested this hypothesis on the
CoNLL-2012 data and have consequently trained
domain-specific classifiers for the nw and bc do-
mains.

3 Coreference resolution in Arabic and
Chinese

We have addressed two main issues when develop-
ing our coreference resolvers for Arabic and Chi-
nese: mention detection and extraction of relevant
linguistic properties of our mentions.

3.1 Mention detection
Mention detection is rarely considered to be a sepa-
rate task. Only very few studies on coreference reso-
lution report on their EMD techniques. Existing cor-
pora of coreference follow different approaches to
mention annotation: this includes defining mention
boundaries (basic vs. maximal NPs), alignment pro-
cedures (strict vs. relaxed with manually annotated
minimal spans vs. relaxed with automatically ex-
tracted heads), the position on singleton and/or non-
referential mentions (annotated vs. not).

The CoNLL-2011/2012 guidelines take a very
strict view on mention boundaries: only the maxi-
mal spans are annotated and no approximate match-
ing is allowed. Moreover, the singleton mentions
(i.e. not participating in coreference relations) are
not marked. This makes the mention detection task
for OntoNotes extremely challenging, especially for
the two new languages: on the one hand, one has
to provide exact boundaries; on the other hand, it is
hard to learn such information explicitly, as not all
the candidate mentions are annotated.

Most CoNLL-2011 systems relied on hand-
written rules for the mention detection subtask. This
was mainly possible due to the existence of well-
studied and thoroughly documented head-detection
rules for English, available as a description for reim-
plementing (Collins, 1999) or as a downloadable
package. Consider the following example:

(1) ..((the rising price)NP2 of (food)NP3)NP1 ..
124



In this fragment, three nominal phrases can be iden-
tified, with the first one (“the rising price of food”)
spanning over the two others (“the rising price”) and
(“food”). According to the OntoNotes annotation
guidelines, the second noun phrase cannot be a men-
tion, because it is embedded in an upper NP and they
share the same head noun. The third noun phrase, on
the contrary, could be a mention—even though it’s
embedded in another NP, their heads are different.
Most CoNLL-2011 participants used as a backbone
a heuristic discarding embedded noun phrases.

For less-known languages, however, this heuris-
tic is only applicable as long as we can compute an
NP’s head reliably. Otherwise it’s hard to distinguish
between candidate mentions similar to NP1 and to
NP2 in the example above.

A set of more refined heuristics is typically ap-
plied to discard or add some specific types of men-
tions. For example, several studies (Bergsma and
Yarowsky, 2011) have addressed the issue of detect-
ing expletive pronouns in English. Again, in the ab-
sence of linguistic expertise, one can hardly engi-
neer such heuristics for a new language manually.

We have investigated the possibility of learn-
ing mention boundaries automatically from the
OntoNotes data. We recast the problem as an NP-
node filtering task: we analyze automatically com-
puted parse trees and consider all the NP-nodes to be
candidate instances to learn a classifier of correct vs.
incorrect mention nodes. Clearly, this approach can-
not account for mentions that do not correspond to
NP-nodes. However, as Table 1 shows, around 85-
89% of all the mentions, both for Arabic and Chi-
nese, are NP-nodes.

train development
NP-nodes % NP-nodes %

Arabic 24068 87.23 2916 87.91
Chinese 88523 85.96 12572 88.52

Table 1: NP-nodes in OntoNotes for Arabic and Chinese:
total numbers and percentage of mentions.

We use tree kernels (Moschitti, 2008; Moschitti,
2006) to induce a classifier that labels an NP node
and a part of the parse tree that surrounds it as
±mention. Two integer parameters control the se-
lection of the relevant part of the parse tree, allowing

for pruning the nodes that are far above or far below
the node of interest.

Our classifier is supposed to decide whether an
NP-node is a mention of a real-world object. Such
mentions, however, are annotated in OntoNotes as
positive instances only when they corefer with some
other mentions. The classifier works as a preproces-
sor for a CR system and therefore has no information
that would allow it to discriminate between single-
ton vs. non-singleton mentions. One can investigate
possibilities for joint EMD and CR to alleviate the
problem. We have adopted a simpler solution: we
tune a parameter (cost factor) that controls the pre-
cision/recall trade-off to bias the classifier strongly
towards recall.

We use a small subset (1-5%) of the training data
to train the EMD classifier. We tune the EMD pa-
rameters to optimize the overall performance: we
run the classifier to extract mentions for the whole
training and development sets, run the coreference
resolver and record the obtained result (CoNLL
score). The whole set of parameters to be tuned
comprise: the size of the training set for EMD, the
precision-recall trade-off, and two pruning thresh-
olds.

3.2 Extracting linguistic properties
All the features implemented in BART use some
kind of linguistic information from the mentions.
For example, the number-agreement feature
first extracts the number properties of individual
mentions. For a language supported by BART, such
properties are computed by the MentionFactory. For
a new language, they should be provided as a part of
the mention representation computed by some ex-
ternal preprocessing facilities. The only obligatory
mention property is its span— the sequence of rel-
evant token ids—all the properties discussed below
are optional.

The following properties have been extracted for
new languages directly from the CoNLL table:

• sentence id

• sequence of lemmata

• speaker (Chinese only)

Coordinations have been determined by analyz-
ing the sequence of PoS tags: any span containing

125



a coordinate conjunction is a coordination. They are
always considered plural and unspecified for gender,
their heads correspond to their entire spans.

For non-coordinate NPs, we extract the head
nouns using simple heuristics. In Arabic, the first
noun in a sequence is a head. In Chinese, the last
one is a head. If no head can be found through this
heuristic, we try the same method, but allow for pro-
nouns to be heads, and, as a default, consider the
whole span to be the head.

Depending on the PoS tag of the head noun, we
classify a mention as an NE, a pronoun or a nomi-
nal (default). For named entities, no further mention
properties have been extracted.

We have compiled lists of pronouns for both Ara-
bic and Chinese from the training and development
data. For Arabic, we use gold PoS tags to classify
pronouns into subtypes, person, number and gender.
For Chinese, no such information is available, so we
have consulted several grammar sketches and lists of
pronouns on the web. We do not encode clusivity2

and honorifics.3

For Arabic, we extract the gender and number
properties of nominals in the following way. First,
we have processed the gold PoS tags to create a list
of number and gender affixes. We compute the prop-
erties of our mentions by analyzing the affixes of
their heads. In a number of constructions, however,
the gender is not marked explicitly, so we have com-
piled a gender dictionary for Arabic lemmata on the
training and development data. If the gender can-
not be computed from affixes, we look it up in the
dictionary.

Finally, we have made an attempt at computing
the definiteness of nominal expressions. For Arabic,
we consider as definites all mentions with definite
head nouns (prefixed with “Al”) and all the idafa
constructs with a definite modifier.4 We could not
compute definiteness for Chinese reliably.

2In some dialects of Chinese, a distinction is made between
the first person plural inclusive (“you and me”) and the first
person exclusive (“me and somebody else”) pronouns.

3In Chinese, different pronouns should be used address-
ing different persons, reflecting the relative social status of the
speaker and the listener.

4Idafa-constructs are syntactic structures, conveying, very
roughly speaking, genitive semantics, commonly used in Ara-
bic. Their accurate analysis requires some language-specific
processing.

4 Evaluating the impact of kernel-based
mention detection and basic linguistic
knowledge

To adopt our system to new languages, we have fo-
cused on two main issues: EMD and extraction of
linguistic properties. In this section we discuss the
impact of each factor on the overall performance.
Table 2 summarizes our evaluation experiments. All
the figures reported in this section are CoNLL scores
(averages of MUC, B3 and CEAFe) obtained on the
development data.

To evaluate the impact of our kernel-based EMD
(TKEMD), we compare its performance against two
baselines. The lower bound, “allnp”, considers all
the NP-nodes in a parse tree to be candidate men-
tions. The upper bound, “goldnp” only considers
gold NP-nodes to be candidate mentions. Note that
the upper bound does not include mentions that do
not correspond to NP-nodes at all (around 12% of
all the mentions in the development data, cf. Table 1
above).

We have created three versions of our corefer-
ence resolver, using different amounts of linguistic
knowledge. The baseline system (Table 2, first col-
umn) relies only on mention spans. The system it-
self is a reimplementation of Soon et al. (2001), but,
clearly, only the string-matching feature can be com-
puted without specifying mention properties.

A more advanced version of the system (second
column) uses the same model and the same feature
set, but relies on mention properties, extracted as de-
scribed in Section 3.2 above. The final version (third
column) makes use of all the features implemented
in BART. We run a greedy feature selection algo-
rithm, starting from the string matching and adding
features one by one, until the performance stops in-
creasing.

For Chinese, our EMD approach has proved to be
useful, bringing around 1.5-2% improvement over
the “allnp” baseline for all the versions of the coref-
erence resolver. The module for extracting mention
properties has only brought a moderate improve-
ment. This is not surprising, as we have not been
able to extract many relevant linguistic properties,
especially for nominals. We believe that an improve-
ment can be achieved on the Chinese data by incor-
porating more linguistic information.

126



baseline +linguistics +linguistics
+features

Arabic
allnp 45.47 46.15 46.32
TKEMD 46.98 47.44 49.07
goldnp 51.08 63.27 64.55

Chinese
allnp 50.72 51.04 51.40
TKEMD 53.10 53.33 53.53
goldnp 57.78 57.30 57.98

Table 2: Evaluating the impact of EMD and linguistic
knowledge: CoNLL F-score.

For Arabic, the linguistic properties could poten-
tially be very helpful: on gold NPs, our linguistically
rich system outperforms its knowledge-lean coun-
terpart by 13 percentage points. Unfortunately, this
improvement is mirrored only partially on the fully
automatically acquired mentions.

5 Official results

Table 3 shows the official results obtained by our
system at the CoNLL-2012 competition.

Metric Recall Precision F-score
English

MUC 61.00 60.78 60.89
BCUBED 63.59 68.48 65.95
CEAF (M) 52.44 52.44 52.44
CEAF (E) 41.42 41.64 41.53
BLANC 67.40 72.83 69.65

Arabic
MUC 41.33 41.66 41.49
BCUBED 65.77 69.23 67.46
CEAF (M) 50.82 50.82 50.82
CEAF (E) 42.43 42.13 42.28
BLANC 65.58 70.56 67.69

Chinese
MUC 45.62 63.13 52.97
BCUBED 59.17 80.78 68.31
CEAF (M) 52.40 52.40 52.40
CEAF (E) 48.47 34.52 40.32
BLANC 68.72 80.76 73.11

Table 3: BART performance at CoNLL-2012: official re-
sults on the test set.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we have discussed our experiments
on adapting BART to two new languages, Chinese
and Arabic, for the CoNLL-2012 Shared Task on
the Multilingual Coreference Resolution. Our team
has some previous experience with extending BART
to cover languages other than English, in particular,
Italian and German. For those languages, however,
most of our team members had at least an advanced
knowledge, allowing for more straightforward engi-
neering and error analysis. Both Arabic and Chi-
nese present a challenge: they require new mention
detection algorithms, as well as special language-
dependent techniques for extracting mention prop-
erties.

For Arabic, we have proposed several simple ad-
justments to extract basic morphological informa-
tion. As our experiments show, this can potentially
lead to a substantial improvement. The progress,
however, is hindered by the mention detection qual-
ity: even though our TKEMD module outperforms
the lower bound baseline, there is still a lot of
room for improvement, that can be achieved after
a language-aware error analysis.

For Chinese, the subtask of extracting relevant lin-
guistic information has turned out to be very chal-
lenging. We believe that, by elaborating on the
methods for assigning linguistic properties to nomi-
nal mentions and combining them with the TKEMD
module, one can boost the performance level of a
coreference resolver.

7 Acknowledgments

The research described in this paper has been par-
tially supported by the European Community’s Sev-
enth Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) un-
der the grants #247758: ETERNALS – Trustworthy
Eternal Systems via Evolving Software, Data and
Knowledge, and #288024: LIMOSINE – Linguis-
tically Motivated Semantic aggregation engiNes.

127



References

Olatz Arregi, Klara Ceberio, Arantza Dı́az De Illar-
raza, Iakes Goenaga, Basilio Sierra, and Ana Zelaia.
2010. A first machine learning approach to pronom-
inal anaphora resolution in Basque. In Proceedings
of the 12th Ibero-American conference on Advances in
artificial intelligence, IBERAMIA’10, pages 234–243,
Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.

Elizabeth Baran and Nianwen Xue. 2011. Singular or
plural? Exploiting parallel corpora for Chinese num-
ber prediction. In Proceedings of the Machine Trans-
lation Summit XIII.

Shane Bergsma and David Yarowsky. 2011. NADA:
A robust system for non-referential pronoun detec-
tion. In Proceedings of the Discourse Anaphora and
Anaphor Resolution Colloquium, Faro, Portugal, Oc-
tober.

Michael Collins. 1999. Head-Driven Statistical Models
for Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania.

Sanda Harabagiu and Steven Maiorano. 1999.
Knowledge-lean coreference resolution and its rela-
tion to textual cohesion and coherence. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL Workshop On The Relation Of Dis-
course/Dialogue Structure And Reference.

Sanda Harabagiu, Răzvan Bunescu, and Steven Maio-
rano. 2001. Text and knowledge mining for coref-
erence resolution. In Proceedings of the 2nd Meeting
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 55–62.

Frederick Hoyt. 2008. The Arabic noun phrase. In
The Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguis-
tics. Leiden:Brill.

Zhiheng Huang, Guangping Zeng, Weiqun Xu, and Asli
Celikyilmaz. 2009. Effectively exploiting WordNet
in semantic class classification for coreference resolu-
tion. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing.

Ryu Iida and Massimo Poesio. 2011. A cross-lingual
ILP solution to zero anaphora resolution. In Proceed-
ings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 804–813.

Alessandro Moschitti. 2006. Efficient convolution ker-
nels for dependency and constituent syntactic trees.
In Proceedings of European Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 318–329.

Alessandro Moschitti. 2008. Kernel methods, syntax and
semantics for relational text categorization. In Pro-
ceeding of the International Conference on Informa-
tion and Knowledge Management, NY, USA.

Simone Paolo Ponzetto and Michael Strube. 2006.
Exploiting semantic role labeling, WordNet and

Wikipedia for coreference resolution. In Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association of Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 192–199.

Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Olga Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. 2012. CoNLL-
2012 shared task: Modeling multilingual unrestricted
coreference in OntoNotes. In Proceedings of the
Sixteenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL 2012), Jeju, Korea.

Marta Recasens, Lluı́s Màrquez, Emili Sapena,
M.Antònia Martı́, Mariona Taulé, Véronique Hoste,
Massimo Poesio, and Yannick Versley. 2010.
SemEval-2010 Task 1: Coreference resolution in
multiple languages. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations
(SemEval-2010), Uppsala, Sweden.

Sriparna Saha, Asif Ekbal, Olga Uryupina, and Massimo
Poesio. 2011. Single and multi-objective optimiza-
tion for feature selection in anaphora resolution. In
Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing.

Wee Meng Soon, Hwee Tou Ng, and Daniel Chung Yong
Lim. 2001. A machine learning approach to corefer-
ence resolution of noun phrases. Computational Lin-
guistic, 27(4):521–544.

Olga Uryupina and Massimo Poesio. 2012. Domain-
specific vs. uniform modeling for coreference resolu-
tion. In Proceedings of the Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference.

Olga Uryupina, Sriparna Saha, Asif Ekbal, and Mas-
simo Poesio. 2011. Multi-metric optimization for
coreference: The UniTN / IITP / Essex submission to
the 2011 CONLL shared task. In Proceedings of the
Fifteenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL 2011).

Yannick Versley, Simone Paolo Ponzetto, Massimo Poe-
sio, Vladimir Eidelman, Alan Jern, Jason Smith,
Xiaofeng Yang, and Alessandro Moschitti. 2008.
BART: a modular toolkit for coreference resolution. In
Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics on Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 9–12.

128


