










































Parsing Simplified Chinese and Traditional Chinese with Sentence Structure Grammar


Proceedings of the Second CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference on Chinese Language Processing, pages 179–187,
Tianjin, China, 20-21 DEC. 2012

Parsing Simplified Chinese and Traditional Chinese with Sentence 

Structure Grammar 

 

 

Xiangli Wang  
Japan Patent Information Organization, 

Tokyo, Japan 

xiangli_wang@japio.or.jp 

Terumasa Ehara 

Yamanashi Eiwa College,  

Yamanashi, Japan 

eharate@{yamanashi-eiwa, 

y-eiwa}.ac.jp 

 

Yuan Li 

The University of Tokyo,  

Tokyo, Japan 
liyuan@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp 

  

 

Abstract 

 

We present a challenge to parse simplified 

Chinese and traditional Chinese with a same 

rule-based Chinese grammatical resource---

Chinese Sentence Structure Grammar: CSSG, 

which was developed based on a new gram-

mar formalism idea: Sentence Structure 

Grammar: SSG. We participate in the simpli-

fied Chinese parsing task and the traditional 

Chinese parsing task of CLP 2012 with a same 

rule-based chart parser implemented the CSSG. 

The experiments show that the CSSG that was 

developed for covering simplified Chinese 

constructions can also analyze most traditional 

Chinese constructions.  

1 Introduction 

Chinese divides into simplified Chinese that is 
used in the mainland of China and Singapore, 

and traditional Chinese that is used in Taiwan 

and Hang Kong. Some treebank resources like 

Penn Chinese Treebank: CTB, Peking University 

Treebank: PKU, and Tsinghua Chinese Tree-

bank: TCT had been built for training simplified 

Chinese parser (Yu, et al. 2010) while Sinica 

Treebank was developed for parsing traditional 

Chinese (Chen et al., 1999). Limit to our 

knowledge, there are still not grammatical re-

sources that analyze both simplified Chinese and 

traditional Chinese.  

Recently, a rule-based Chinese grammatical 

resource --- Chinese Sentence Structure Gram-

mar: CSSG had been developed based on the 

idea of Sentence Structure Grammar: SSG 

(Wang and Miyazaki, 2007; Wang et al., 2011, 

Wang et al., 2012). The CSSG was developed to 

cover most constructions that are listed in well-

discussed simplified Chinese grammatical litera-

tures (Zhu, 1982; Liu et al., 1996; Fan, 1998; 

Xue and Xia, 2000), and many phenomena that 

are not discussed in above literatures but very 

typical and used frequently by Chinese native 

speakers. 

We assume that a rule-based grammatical re-

source should analyze both simplified Chinese 

and traditional Chinese if there are no obvious 

differences between their grammatical construc-

tions. Aiming at verifying this assumptions, we 
participate in the simplified Chinese parsing task 

(task 3) and the traditional Chinese parsing task 

(task 4) of CLP 2012 with the same rule-based 

parser that was implemented the grammatical 

resource CSSG.  

CSSG includes two parts of resources: the 

grammatical rules and a simplified Chinese mor-

phological dictionary. We transfer the simplified 

Chinese characters of the dictionary to traditional 

Chinese characters for obtaining a traditional 

Chinese morphological dictionary. We parse the 

test data of task 3 and task 4 with the same 

CSSG rules but different morphological diction-

aries (simplified or traditional Chinese charac-

ters). We convert CSSG parsing trees to TCT-

style trees and Sinica-style trees for participating 
in the evaluations of the two tasks.  The experi-

ments show that the CSSG rules can parse both 

simplified Chinese and traditional Chinese, but 

179



the performance of the latter is lower than the 

former. We noticed that a few traditional Chinese 

constructions are different from simplified Chi-

nese.  

This paper is organized as bellow: in section 2, 

we introduce what is CSSG; in section 3, we 

compare CSSG with TCT and Sinica Treebank; 

in section 4, we analyze the experimental results 

of the two tasks; in the last section, we conclude 

our work. 

2 Chinese Sentence Structure Grammar 

Chinese Sentence Structure Grammar: CSSG is a 

rule-based Chinese grammatical resource that 

was developed based on the idea of Sentence 

Structure Grammar: SSG.  

SSG is a new idea to formalize grammatical 

rules. Sentence Structure Grammar has 3 main 

ideas (Wang et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2012): 

1) Treat the construction of a sentence as a 
whole, which consists of a predicate (or more) 

and its semantic-related constituents. 

2) Classify predicate verbs according to their 
semantic properties. 

3) Indicate the semantic relations between pred-
icate and its semantic-related constituents di-

rectly on parsing tree. 

 
Predicate Ex. Sematic roles 

Vad 飞/fly Agent, Direction 

Vaod 扔/throw Agent, Object, Direction 

Vaol 放/put Agent, Object, Location 

 

Table 1: examples of the predicate classification of 

CSSG 
 

SSG is a kind of context-free grammar, but it 

differs from Phrase Structure Grammar: PSG: 1) 

the latter describes a sentence with some context-

free phrase rules, but the former treats a sentence 

as a whole sentential construction, which con-

sists of a predicate (or more) and its semantical-

ly-related constituents; 2) the former classify 

predicate verbs according to their semantic prop-

erties. For instance, as shown in figure 1, “停

/park” and “飞 /fly” have different semantic 

properties. “停/park” is a kind of verb that needs 
an agent, an object and a location. In contrast, 

“飞/fly” is a kind of verb that needs an agent and 
a direction. As shown in table 1, predicate verbs 

can be classified according to their semantic 

properties; 3) the latter does only syntactic anal-

ysis while the former does syntactic analysis and 

semantic analysis simultaneously. The semantic 

role set of SSG should be designed based on the 

idea of the deep cases in Case Grammar, which a 

linguistic theory proposed by Fillmore (1968). 

 

 
 

Figure 1: the semantic properties of verbs like “停

/park” and “飞/fly” 
 

For instance, a) is a passive construction. b) is 

the PSG rule set while c) is the SSG rule set to 

analyze a). Figure 2 and figure 3 show the SSG 

parsing tree and the PSG parsing tree of a). As 

shown in figure 2, the SSG parsing tree provide 

not only syntactic information like “np” and “sp” 

but sematic roles, like “Agent”, “Object” and 

“Location”, which indicate the semantic relations 

between the predicate and its semantic-related 

constituents. Syntactic parsing and sematic pars-

ing can be done simultaneously with the formal 

grammatical framework SSG. 

a. 车/car 被/by 约翰/John 停/park 在/at 停车场/car-park 
The car is parked at the car-park by John 

b. Rule1:s np vp 
Rule2: vp pp vp 

Rule3: vp v pp 

Rule4: ppp np 

Rule5: np n 

Rule6: sp sq 

c. Rule1: s  Object  bei  Agent  Vaol  at  Location 
Rule2: Object np 

Rule3: Agent np 

Rule4: Location sp 

Rule5: np n 

Rule6: sp sq 

 

 
 

Figure 2: the SSG parsing tree of (a) 

 

180



 
 

Figure 3: the PSG parsing tree of (a) 

 

In CSSG, predicates are classified into 52 

types according to their sematic properties. Table 

1 shows some examples of the predicate classifi-

cation. For instance, the type of verbs like “买

/buy” or “拿/take” have same semantic property. 
They correspond to the same predicate-argument 

structure that is shown as figure 4. In CSSG, 

such semantic relations between a predicate and 

its arguments are showed on parsing rules direct-

ly. For instance, figure 5 shows the CSSG pars-

ing tree of d): “买/buy” is the predicate, “他/he” 

is the agent case, “书店/bookshop” is the source 

case, “书/book” is the object case and “家/home” 

is the goal case. “把/ba” and “回/back” are treat-
ed as case-markers. 

d. 他/he 从/from 书店/bookshop 把/ba 书/book 买/buy 

回/back 家/home 
He buys a book at the bookshop and takes it back home. 

 
 

Figure 4: the semantic properties of the verbs like “买

/buy” or “拿/take” 
 

 
 

Figure 5: the CSSG parsing tree of (d) 
 

CSSG includes two parts of resources: 8,511 

grammatical rules and a morphological diction-

ary that contains 45,086 morphological entries.   

The CSSG rules cover most constructions of 

simplified Chinese. Besides most constructions 

are listed in well-discussed simplified Chinese 

grammatical literatures (Zhu, 1982; Fan, 1998; 

Liu et al., 1996; Xue and Xia, 2000), the CSSG 

rules also cover many phenomena that were not 

discussed in above literatures but very typical 

and used frequently. For instance, e) is a ba-

construction, f) is a bei-construction, g) is a topic 

construction, h) is not only a topic construction 

but a ba-construction and i) is not only a ba-

construction but also a bei-construction. We ob-

served many phenomena and found that there is a 

common feature in these different constructions, 

it is that one noun phrase “苹果 皮/skin of ap-
ples” is split into two parts, which have posses-
sive relation each other but appear different syn-

tactic positions in a sentence. Such constructions 

are called as “apple-skin constructions” in 

CSSG, and the possessive relation between the 

two split parts is indicated on the parsing tree. 

The CSSG rules analyze e), f), g), h) and i) as 

shown in figure 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10.  “Object_of0” 

and “ Ojbect_of1” show the possessive relation 

between “苹果/apple” and “皮/skin”. Apple-skin 
constructions are used frequently by Chinese na-

tive speakers. We can make many sentences with 

them. 

e. 约翰/John 把/ba 苹果/apple 削/peal 了/le 皮/skin 
John pealed the apple’s skin 

f. 苹果/apple 被/by约翰/him 削/peal了/le 皮/skin 
The skin of apples was pealed by John 

g. 苹果/apple约翰/John 削/peal 了/le 皮/skin 
The apple, John pealed its skin  

h. 苹果/apple 约翰/John 把/ba 皮/skin 削/peal 了/le 
The apple, John pealed its skin 

i. 苹果/apple 被/by 约翰/John 把/ba 皮/skin 削/peal 了
/le 

The skin of apples was pealed by John 

 
 

Figure 6: the CSSG parsing tree of (e) 

 

The morphological dictionary of the CSSG in-

cludes two kinds of information: the morphology 

and its POS tag. Table 2 shows a small morpho-

logical dictionary for parsing a). The CSSG dic-

tionary contains 45,086 simplified Chinese mor-

181



phology entries. Table 3 shows the details of the 

dictionary. The word segmentation criteria and 

POS tag set of the CSSG were designed original-

ly.  

 
 

Figure 7: the CSSG parsing tree of (f) 

 

 
 

Figure 8: the CSSG parsing tree of (g) 

 

 
 

Figure 9: the CSSG parsing tree of (h) 

 

 
 

Figure 10: the CSSG parsing tree of (i) 

 

Comparing with the existing Chinese tree-

banks, the design of the POS tag set of CSSG has 

some distinctive features. The major differences 

are: 1) verbs are classified according to their se-

matic properties; 2) some functional words are 

treated as a part of verbs in the existing treebanks 

are treated as Case-markers; 3) the localizers are 

divided into locative localizers and temporal lo-

calizers. 

For instance, “买回 /buy-back” is treated as 
one word in either TCT or CTB or Sinica Tree-

bank, but in CSSG, as shown in figure 5, “买回

/buy-back” is split into two words: “买/buy” and 

“回/back”. “买/buy” is a predicate verb while 

“回/back” is a case-maker that marks a goal case. 
 

Word POS tag 

车/car n 

约翰/John n 

停/park Vaol 

在/at at 

停车场/car-park sq 

被/by bei 

 

Table 2: a small dictionary for parsing (a) 
 

part-of-speech amount 

verbs 6,878 

nouns 26,191 

adverbs 1,992 

nominal verbs 5,028 

temporal words 865 

locative words 151 

noun-modifier 2,439 

measure words 446 

pronouns 49 

modal verbs 23 

case markers 45 

locative localizer 15 

temporal localizer 17 

others 947 

total 45,086 

 

Table 3: the details of the CSSG dictionary 

 

j. 桌子/table后/behind 
Behind the table 

k. 回/go-back 家/home 后/after 
After going back home 

        
 

Figure 11: the CSSG parsing trees of (j) and (k) 

 

In every existing Chinese treebank, the words 

like “前” and “后” are treated as localizers. 

However, either “前” or “后” contains two no-
tions: a locative notion and a temporal notion. 

For instance, “后/behind” in j) shows a location 

while “后/after” in k) indicates a period of time. 
In CSSG, such words are divided into two kinds 

of POSs: locative localizers and temporal local-

182



izers. A locative localizer leads a locative phrase 

while a temporal localizer leads a temporal 

phrase (as shown in figure 11). 

3 Comparison between TCT, Sinica 
Treebank and CSSG 

3.1 Tsinghua Chinese Treebank and 
CSSG 

Tsinghua Chinese Treebank: TCT (Zhou, 2004) 

is used as the training data for the simplified 

Chinese parsing task.  TCT and CSSG are very 

different grammatical resources. 
 

 CSSG TCT 

Formalism SSG PSG 

Form Grammatical rules Treebank 

Word segmentation 

criteria 

Original Original 

POS tag set Original Original 

Phrase tag set Original Original 

Semantic role set Original none 

 

Table 4: the differences between CSSG and TCT 
 

Their main differences are: 1) they were de-

veloped based on different formal grammatical 

framework. As shown in figure 2 and 3, the for-

mer is based on Context-free Phrase Structure 

Grammar: PSG while the latter is based on an-

other kind of Context-free grammar formalism 

idea---Sentence Structure Grammar: SSG. Since 

PSG parses sentences in syntactic level but SSG 

analyze sentences more deeply, CSSG provides 

both syntactic information and semantic roles 

while TCT shows only syntactic information. 

Figure 2 is a CSSG parsing tree of a) that repre-

sents both phrase information and sematic role 

information. Figure 3 is a TCT parsing tree that 

shows only syntactic information; 2) CSSG is a 

rule-based grammatical resource while TCT is a 

Treebank. The designers and developers of the 

treebanks are usually different people.  

The designers draw up the annotation scheme 

first, then the developers annotate parsing trees 

according to the annotation scheme and their 

own intuition; in contrast, the designer and the 

developer of CSSG is the same person who de-

signed and developed the CSSG rules introspec-

tively to cover most simplified Chinese construc-

tions; 3) both of them define the word segmenta-

tion criteria and POS tag set originally. For in-

stance, as shown in figure 12 and figure 13, TCT 

treats “来自 /come-from” as one verb while 

CSSG treats “来自/come-from” as two words: 

“来/come” is a predicate verb and “自/from” is 
treated as a case-marker that mark a source case 

for describing semantic roles precisely; 4) they 

design the phrase tag set originally. As shown in 

figure 12 and 13, verb phrases appear in TCT 

while there are no verb phrases in CSSG; their 

definitions of prepositional phrase are different; 

as shown in figure 11: CSSG and 14: TCT, both 

j) and k) are treated as locative phrases in TCT 

while j) is treated as a locative phrase and k) is 

treated as a temporal phrase in CSSG. Table 4 

shows the differences between TCT and CSSG 

briefly. 

 
 

Figure 12: the TCT parsing tree of (l) 

 

l. 约翰/John 来/come 自/from 美国/America 
John comes from America 

 
 

Figure 13: the CSSG parsing tree of (l) 

 

  
 

Figure 14: the TCT parsing trees of (j) and (k) 

3.2 Sinica Treebank and CSSG 

Sinica Treebank (Chen et al., 1999) is used as the 

training data for the traditional Chinese parsing 

task. CSSG are quite different from Sinica Tree-

bank. 

m. 那個/that人/person 把/ba 老鼠/rat 帶/take 回/ back-to

茅屋/cottage 
That man takes the rat back to the cottage 

183



n. 約翰/John 從/from 房間/room 拿/take 出/out 一本/a 

書/book 
John takes a book out of the room 

 
 

Figure 15: the TCT parsing trees of (j) and (k) 

 

 
 

Figure 16: the Sinica parsing tree of (m) 

 

They differ from each other in 6 respects: 1) 

Sinica Treebank consists of traditional Chinese 

parsing trees while CSSG is developed for cover-

ing simplified Chinese constructions; 2) the for-

mer is a rule-based grammatical resource while 

the latter is a Treebank; 3) both Sinica Treebank 

and CSSG represent syntactic and semantic in-

formation simultaneously, but their formal 

grammatical framework are different. Sinica 

Treebank is based on Information-based Case 

Grammar: ICG, which is a kind of unification-

based formalism, and describe syntactic and se-

mantic information in lexical entries (Chen and 

Huang, 1990); in contrast, CSSG is based on 

Sentence Structure Grammar: SSG, which is a 

kind of context-free grammar formalism that in-

dicate both syntactic and semantic constraints in 

grammatical rules directly; 4) they define the 

word segmentation criteria and POS tag set orig-

inally. For instance, as figure 16 and 17 shown, 

“那個/that” is treated as one word in Sinica Tree-

bank, but treated as two words in CSSG. “帶回

/take-back” is one word in Sinica Treebank while 

it is split into a verb “帶/take” and a case-marker 

“回/back” that marks a goal case “茅屋/cottage” in 

CSSG; 5) they define the phrase tag set original-

ly. For instance, the word “后” can lead not only 
a locative constituent like j) but a temporal con-

stituent such as k). In Sinica Treebank, Both j) 

and k) are analyzed as a locative phrase (shown 

in figure 15); in contrast, the locative constituent 

is treated as a locative phrase while the temporal 

constituent is treat a temporal phrase in CSSG 

(shown in figure 10); 6) they define semantic 

role set originally. Their designs of the semantic 

role sets are very different. Figure 16 shows the 

Sinica-tree while figure 17 represents the CSSG 

tree of m). “老鼠/rat”  is treated as a goal case 

and “茅屋/cottage” is analyzed as a location case 

in Sinica Treebank while “老鼠/rat” is regarded 

as an object case and “茅屋/cottage” is analyzed 
as a goal case in CSSG.  As shown in figure 18 

and 19, the source case “從 /from 房間 /room” in 

CSSG is treated as a location case in Sinica 

Treebank. Table 5 shows the differences between 

these two resources briefly. 
 

 CSSG Sinica Treebank 

Character Simplified Traditional 

Formalism SSG ICG 

Form Grammatical 

rules 

Treebank 

Word segmentation 

criteria 

Original Original 

POS tag set Original  Original  

Phrase tag set Original Original 

Semantic role set Original Original 

 

Table 5: the differences between CSSG and Sinica 

Treebank 

 

 
 

Figure 17: the CSSG parsing tree of (m) 

 

  
Figure 18: the Sinica parsing tree of (n) 

184



  
 

Figure 19: the CSSG parsing tree of (n) 

 

4 Experimental Results 

4.1 Experimental Setting 

There are two parsing tasks in CLP2012: the 

simplified Chinese parsing task (task 3) and the 

traditional Chinese parsing task (task 4). Task 3 

includes two subtasks: CCG parsing task and 

PSG parsing task while Task 4 includes two sub-

tasks: sentence parsing task and semantic role 

labeling task. For each sub-task, there are two 

tracks: the closed track and the open track. Our 

tasks are all in the open tracks. We participate in 

the open tracks of the PSG parsing sub-task of 

task 3 and both the two sub-tasks of task 4. 

CSSG includes the grammatical rules and a 

simplified Chinese morphological dictionary. For 

participating in both simplified Chinese parsing 

task and traditional Chinese parsing task, we 

transfer the simplified Chinese characters of the 

dictionary of CSSG to traditional Chinese char-

acters to obtain a traditional Chinese morpholog-

ical dictionary.  

For instance, the simplified Chinese sentence 

a) can be transferred into a traditional Chinese 

sentence o). As shown in figure 2 and 20, a) and 

o) have the same construction. We can parse o) 

also with CSSG if there was a traditional Chinese 

morphological dictionary shown in table 6. We 

can transfer the small dictionary shown in table 1 

to traditional Chinese characters to obtain the 

dictionary shown in table 6. 

 
Word POS tag 

車/car n 

約翰/John n 

停/park Vaol 

在/at at 

停車場/car-park sq 

被/by bei 

 

Table 6: some samples of traditional CSSG dictionary 
 

o. 車/car 被/by 約翰/John 停/park 在/at 停車場/car-park 
The car is parked at the car-park by John 

We parse simplified Chinese test data from 

task 3 with the parser implemented the grammat-

ical rules and the simplified morphological dic-

tionary while we parse the traditional Chinese 

test data from task 4 with the parser implemented 

the same grammatical rules and the traditional 

morphological dictionary. Since the scale of the 

dictionaries is not large enough, there are some 

unknown words for CSSG in both test data of 

task 3 and task 4. We add the unknown words to 

CSSG dictionaries before parsing. 

 

 
 

Figure 20: the CSSG parsing tree of (o) 

 

 
 

Figure 21: the input and output of (a) of the CSSG 

parser 
 

As figure 21 shown: 1) the CSSG parser con-

sists of three parts: the grammatical rules, a mor-

phological dictionary and a chart parsing engine; 

2) the input is a word-segmented sentence and 

the output is a CSSG parsing tree; 3) since there 

is not yet a postager based on CSSG, we have to 

parse all possible POS tag lists of a sentence with 

the CSSG parser.  

185



After parsing the test data, we convert the 

CSSG parsing trees and make them are as similar 

as possible to TCT trees and Sinica-Treebank 

trees. 

4.2 Evaluation Results 

Table 7, 8 and 9 summarize the evaluation re-

sults of the simplified Chinese parse task 1: PSG 

parsing evaluation.  

Table 7 shows the performance of the POS tag 

conversion from CSSG to TCT.  Table 8 shows 

the results of the constituent boundary recogni-

tion. Table 9 represents the evaluation results of 

the parsing (both phrase boundaries and phrase 

labels recognition).  

 
type P R F1 

nouns 74.4% 87.9% 80.6% 

verbs 94.1%  94.1% 94.1% 

others 62.7%  56.9% 59.7% 

overall 71.3%  71.3% 71.3% 

 

Table 7: the result for POS tag recognition  
 

correct gold system P R F1 

85 92 158 53.8% 92.4% 68.0% 

 

Table 8: the result for phrase boundary recognition 

 

correct gold system P R F1 

85 92 158 42.4% 72.8% 53.6% 

 

Table 9: the result for both phrase boundary and label 

recognition 

 

Table 10 and 11 summarize the evaluation re-

sults of the two subtasks of the traditional Chi-

nese parsing task. Table 10 presents the results of 

the parsing sub-task while table 11 shows the 

results of the semantic labeling sub-task. 
 

Micro-averaging Macro-averaging 

P R F1 P R F1 

47.7% 40.1% 43.6% 53.6% 42.0% 47.1% 

 

Table 10: the results of the parsing task 
 

Micro-averaging Macro-averaging 

P R F1 P R F1 

20.4% 22.6% 21.4% 23.3% 24.2% 23.7% 

 

Table 11: the results for the semantic labeling task 

 

4.3 Discussion 

As we anticipated, the evaluation results are low-

er than the real performance of the CSSG parser.  

There are three reasons should be considered: 

1) because of the large differences between the 

design of CSSG and the two gold data: Sinica 

Treebank and CSSG, it is impossible to convert 

some CSSG trees to TCT trees or Sinica-

Treebank trees. For instance, k) is treated as a 

temporal phrase in CSSG, so it does not corre-

spond to any phrase in TCT or Sinica Treebank; 

2) there is much inaccuracy in tree-conversion 

works. As shown in table 7 and 8, the system 

phrase counts is 158, that is much more than the 

gold phrase counts 92 so that the recall scores 

(92.4% and 72.8%) are much higher than the 

precision scores (68.0% and 53.6%). We 

checked the evaluation data and found that we 

converted noun phrases of CSSG like p) to TCT 

format like q), which might be counted as two 

noun phrases; 3) As shown in figure 16, 17, 18 

and 19, the design of the semantic role set of 

CSSG are very different from Sinica Treebank, 

so we can only convert a small number of semat-

ic roles correctly.  

p. (np (nnp (n 葡萄牙) (n 政府) ) ) 

q. (np (np (n 葡萄牙) (n 政府) ) ) 

As discussed above, the evaluation results do 

not reflect the real performance of the CSSG par-

ser because of the large differences between 

CSSG and the two gold data. We expect that 

more neutral evaluation metrics would be drawn 

up for the open parsing task.  

The experiments show that the evaluation re-

sults of the traditional Chinese parsing task are 

lower than the simplified Chinese parsing task. 

One of the possible reasons is that there are some 

differences between the constructions of simpli-

fied Chinese and traditional Chinese. We noticed 

that a few traditional Chinese constructions differ 

from simplified Chinese. For example, in tradi-
tional Chinese sentence r),  “食/food” is the di-
rect object that appears at the left side of the indi-

rect object “企鵝寶貝/penguin-baby”. We had 
ever asked some Chinese native speakers wheth-

er they think the construction like r) is grammati-

cal. Only one speaker who comes from Hang 

Kong thinks r) is a grammatical sentence while 

other speakers who come from the mainland of 

China think such constructions are ungrammati-

cal. Therefore simplified Chinese sentence s) is 

an ungrammatical sentence. For Simplified Chi-

nese native speakers, a function word “给 /to” 
should be used to lead an indirect object, like t) 

and u), or the indirect object appears at the left 

side of the direct object, such as v). The CSSG 

186



rules cover the constructions of t), u) and v) but 

not cover the constructions of r) and s). 

r. 工作人員/worker每天/every-day仍會/yet餵/ feed 食

/food 企鵝寶貝/penguin-baby 
The worker feeds foods to penguin babies everyday 

s. *工作人员/worker 每天/every-day 仍会/yet 喂/ feed 

食/food 企鹅宝贝/penguin-baby 
The worker feeds foods to penguin babies everyday 

t. 工作人员/worker每天/every-day仍会/yet喂/ feed 食

/food 给/to 企鹅宝贝/penguin-baby 
The worker feeds foods to penguin babies everyday 

u. 工作人员/worker 每天/every-day 仍会/yet 给/to 企鹅

宝贝/penguin-baby喂/ feed 食/food  
The worker feeds foods to penguin babies everyday 

v. 工作人员/worker每天/every-day仍会/yet喂/ feed企

鹅宝贝/penguin-baby食/food 
The worker feeds foods to penguin babies everyday 

5  Conclusion and Future work 

In this paper, we introduced a broad-coverage 

rule-based Chinese grammatical resource CSSG, 

which was developed based on a new grammar 

formalism idea: Sentence Structure Grammar; 

we compared briefly CSSG with a simplified 

Chinese Treebank TCT and a traditional Chinese 

resource Sinica Treebank; we also introduced our 

participation of CIPS-SIGHAN-2012 parsing 

task. We use a same rule-based chart parser im-

plemented CSSG to participate in both simplified 

Chinese parsing task and traditional Chinese 

parsing task. The experiment shows that the rule-

based grammatical resource CSSG that was de-

veloped for covering simplified Chinese con-

structions can also parse traditional Chinese sen-

tences with a lower performance. 

Since the CSSG provide rich information, it is 

possible to improve the precision and the recall 

of the evaluation task by optimizing the tree-

conversion programs.  

We prepare to open this resource to research-

ers who have an interest in it in the resent future.  

References  

Chen Feng-Yi, Pi-Fang Tsai, Keh-Jiann Chen, Chu-

Ren Hunag. 1999. The Construction of Sinica 

Treebank. Computational Linguistics and Chinese 

Language Processing, vol. 4, No. 2. pp.87-104.  

Chen Keh-jiann and Chu-Ren Huang. 1990. Infor-

mation-based Case Grammar. Proceedings of the 

13
th

 Conference on Computational Linguistics, 

Volume 2, pages 54-59.  

Fan Xiao. 1998. The types of Chinese Sentences (In 

Chinese). Shanxi Shuhai Press.  

Fillmore, Charles J. (1968). The Case for Case. In 

Bach and Harms (Ed.): Universals in Linguistic 

Theory. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 

1-88.  

Liu Yuehua, Wenyu Pan and Wei Gu. 2001.  Practi-

cal Modern Chinese Grammar (In Chinese). Bei-

jing: Commercial Press.  

Wang Xiangli, Masahiro Miyazaki. Chinese Syntactic 

Analysis Using Sentence Structure Grammar (In 

Japanese). Journal of Natural Language Processing. 

vol.14, No.2. April 2007.  

Wang Xiangli, Takuya Matsuzaki, Yusuke Miyao, 

Kun Yu, Yuan Li and Junichi Tsujii. 2011. Com-

parison between formal grammatical frameworks 

for Treebanking (In Japanese).  Proceeding of Ja-

pan Natural Language Processing. 2011.  

Wang Xiangli, Yusuke Miyao and Yuan Li. 2012. 

Chinese Grammatical resources based on Sentence 

Structure Grammar and its application on patent 

field (In Japanese).  Proceeding of Japan Natural 

Language Processing. 2012.  

Xue Nianwen and Fei Xia. 2000. The bracketing 

Guidelines for the Penn Chinese Treebank Project. 

Technical Report IRCS 00-08, University of Penn-

sylvania.  

Yu Kun, Yusuke Miyao, Takuya Matsuzaki, Xiangli 

Wang, Yaozhong Zhang, Kiyotaka Uchimoto, 

Junichi Tsujii. Comparison of Chinese Treebanks 

for Corpus-oriented HPSG Grammar Develop-
ment. Journal of Natural Language Processing 

(Special Issue on Empirical Methods for Asian 

Language Processing). April 2010.  

Zhu Dexi. 1982. Lecture Notes on Grammar (In Chi-

nese). Beijing: Commercial Press.  

Zhou Qiang. 2004. Annotation Scheme for Chinese 

Treebank (in Chinese). Journal of Chinese Infor-

mation Processing, 18(4): 1-8.  

187


