










































Visualising Linguistic Evolution in Academic Discourse


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Joint Workshop of LINGVIS & UNCLH, pages 44–48,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 24 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Visualising Linguistic Evolution in Academic Discourse
Verena Lyding

European Academy of Bolzano-Bozen
verena.lyding@eurac.edu

Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski
Saarland University

e.lapshinova@mx.uni-saarland.de

Stefania Degaetano-Ortlieb
Saarland University

s.degaetano@mx.uni-saarland.de

Henrik Dittmann
European Academy of Bolzano-Bozen

henrik.dittmann@eurac.edu

Christopher Culy
The University of Tübingen

christopher.culy@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract

The present paper describes procedures to
visualise diachronic language changes in
academic discourse to support analysis.
These changes are reflected in the distri-
bution of different lexico-grammatical fea-
tures according to register. Findings about
register differences are relevant for both lin-
guistic applications (e.g., discourse analysis
and translation studies) and NLP tasks (no-
tably automatic text classification).

1 Introduction

The present paper describes procedures to visu-
alise diachronic language changes in academic
discourse with the aim to facilitate analysis
and interpretation of complex data. Diachronic
changes are reflected by linguistic features of reg-
isters under analysis. Registers are patterns of lan-
guage according to use in context, cf. (Halliday
and Hasan, 1989).

To analyse register change, we extract lexico-
grammatical features from a diachronic corpus of
academic English, and visualise our extraction re-
sults with Structured Parallel Coordinates (SPC),
a tool for the visualisation of structured multidi-
mensional data, cf. (Culy et al., 2011).

Our approach is based on the inspection and
comparison of how different features change over
time and registers. The major aim is to deter-
mine and describe tendencies of features, which
might become rarer, more frequent or cluster in
new ways. The amount and complexity of the in-
terrelated data, which is obtained for nine disci-
plines in two time periods (see section 2) makes
the analysis more difficult.

Structured Parallel Coordinates provide a tool
for the compact visual presentation of complex
data. The visualisation of statistical values for
different linguistic features laid out over time and
register supports data analysis as tendencies be-
come apparent. Furthermore, interactive features
allow for taking different views on the data and
focussing on interesting aspects.

2 Data to Analyse

2.1 Features and theoretical background
When defining lexico-grammatical features, we
refer to Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL)
and register theory, e.g., (Quirk, 1985), (Halliday
and Hasan, 1989) and (Biber, 1995), which are
concerned with linguistic variation according to
contexts of use, typically distinguishing the three
contextual variables of field, tenor and mode of
discourse. Particular settings of these variables
are associated with the co-occurrences of certain
lexico-grammatical features, creating distinctive
registers (e.g., the language of linguistics in aca-
demic discourse). We also consider investiga-
tions of recent language change, observed, e.g.,
by (Mair, 2006), who analyses changes in prefer-
ences of lexico-grammatical selection in English
in the 1960s vs. the 1990s.

As a case study, we show an analysis of
modal verbs (falling into the contextual variable
of tenor), which we group according to (Biber,
1999) into three categories of meaning that rep-
resent three features: obligation, permission and
volition (see Table 1).

2.2 Resources
The selected features are extracted from SciTex,
cf. (Degaetano et al., 2012) and (Teich and

44



categories of meanings (feature) realisation
obligation/necessity (obligaton) can, could, may, etc.
permission/possibility/ability (permission) must, should, etc.
volition/prediction (volition) will, would, shall, etc.

Table 1: Categories of modal meanings for feature extraction

Fankhauser, 2010), an English corpus which con-
tains full English scientific journal articles from
nine disciplines (see Figure 1). The corpus covers
two time periods: the 1970/early 1980s (SaSci-
Tex) and the early 2000s (DaSciTex), and in-
cludes ca. 34 million tokens. Our focus is espe-
cially on the subcorpora representing contact reg-
isters, i.e. registers emerged out of register con-
tact, in our case with computer science: computa-
tional linguistics (B1), bioinformatics (B2), digi-
tal construction (B3), and microelectronics (B4).

COMPUTER
SCIENCE

(A)

LINGUISTICS
(C1)

CO
M

PU
TA

TI
ON

AL

LI
NG

UI
ST

IC
S

(B
1)

BIOLOGY
(C2)

BIO-

INFORM
ATICS

(B2)

ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING

(C4)

M
ICRO-

ELECTRONICS

(B4)

MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING

(C3)

DI
GI

TA
L

CO
NS

TR
UC

TI
ON

(B
3)

Figure 1: Scientific disciplines in the SciTex corpus

SciTex is annotated1 with information on to-
ken, lemma, part-of-speech and sentence bound-
ary, as well as further information on text bound-
ary, register information, etc., and can be queried
in form of regular expressions by the Corpus
Query Processor (CQP), cf. (Evert, 2005).

2.3 Feature Extraction and Analysis

To extract the above described features for the two
time slices (1970/80s and 2000s) and for all nine
registers of SciTex, we elaborate queries, which
include both lexical (based on token and lemma
information) and grammatical (based on part-of-
speech or sentence boundary information) con-
straints.

1Annotations were obtained by means of a dedicated pro-
cessing pipeline (Kermes, 2011).

Annotations on the register information allow
us to sort the extracted material according to spe-
cific subcorpora. This enables the analysis of fea-
tures possibly involved in creating distinctive reg-
isters. Comparing differences and/or common-
alities in the distribution of features for A-B-C
triples of subcorpora (e.g., A-computer science,
B1-computational linguistics, C1-linguistics, cf.
Figure 1), we analyse whether the contact disci-
plines (B-subcorpora) are more similar to com-
puter science (A-subcorpus), the discipline of ori-
gin (C-subcorpus) or distinct from both (A and C).
The two time periods in SciTex (70/80s vs. 2000s)
enable a diachronic analysis. A more fine-grained
diachronic analysis is also possible with the infor-
mation on the publication year annotated in the
corpus.

3 Analysing language changes with SPC

3.1 SPC visualisation

Structured Parallel Coordinates (Culy et al., 2011)
are a specialisation of the Parallel Coordinates
visualisation (cf. (d’Ocagne, 1885), (Inselberg,
1985), (Inselberg, 2009)) for representing mul-
tidimensional data using a two-dimensional dis-
play. Parallel Coordinates place data on vertical
axes, with the axes lined up horizontally. Each
axis represents a separate data dimension and can
hold either categorical or numerical data. Data
points on different axes are related which is indi-
cated by colored lines connecting all data items
belonging to one record.

Targeted to the application to language data,
SPC additionally provide for ordered characteris-
tics of data within and across data dimensions. In
the n-grams with frequencies/KWIC2 implemen-
tations of SPC, ordered axes represent the linear
ordering of words in text.

In our analysis of language change based on
linguistic features, we are interested in two di-
rections of changes across data sets that can be
represented by ordering: changes over time and

2www.eurac.edu/linfovis

45



changes across registers, e.g., from linguistics and
computer science to computational linguistics.

3.2 Adjustments to SPC
For the analysis of linguistic features with SPC,
we start off with the n-grams with frequencies im-
plementation. In analyzing just two time dimen-
sions the ordered aspect of SPC is not as crucial
and a similar analysis could have been done with
Parallel Coordinates. However, the setup of n-
grams with frequencies conveniently provides us
with the combination of categorical and numerical
data dimensions in one display but separated visu-
ally. For our diachronic register analysis, we cre-
ate a subcorpus comparison application where the
feature under analysis as well as some of the cor-
pus data are placed on the unordered categorical
axes, and frequencies for the two time periods are
placed on ordered axes with numerical scales. As
shown in Figure 2 below, unordered dimensions
are followed by ordered dimensions, the inverse
situation to n-grams with frequencies. To visu-
ally support the categorical nature of data on the
first three axes, SPC was adjusted to display the
connecting lines in discrete colors instead of the
default color scale shading from red to blue. To
improve the comparability of values on numerical
axes, a function for switching between compara-
ble and individual scales was added that applies to
all axes right of the separating red line. Figure 2
and 3 present numerical values as percentages on
comparable scales scaled to 100.

3.3 Interactive features for analysis
SPC provide a number of interactive features that
support data analysis. To highlight and accentuate
selected parts of the data, an axis can be put into
focus and parts of axes can be selected. Lines are
colored according to the axis under focus, and fil-
ters apply to the selected portions of axes, with the
other data rendered in gray. Users can switch be-
tween discrete colors and scaled coloring of con-
necting lines. The scales of numerical axes can be
adjusted interactively, as described above. Hover-
ing over a determined connecting line brings it out
as a slightly wider line and gives a written sum-
mary of the values of that record.

4 Interpreting Visualisation Results

Visualised structures provided by SPC supply us
with information on development tendencies, and

thus, deliver valuable material for further interpre-
tation of language variation across registers and
time.

To analyse the frequencies of modal meanings
(see Table 1) for A-B-C triples of subcorpora, we
use the subcorpus comparison option of SPC. The
interactive functionality of SPC allows us to focus
on different aspects and provides us with dynam-
ically updated versions of the visualisation.

First, by setting focus on the axis of modal
meanings, the visualisation in Figure 2 shows di-
achronic changes of the modal meanings from the
1970/80s to the early 2000s. In both time periods
the permission (blue) meaning is most prominent
and has considerably increased over time. The
volition (green) and obligation (orange) meanings
are less prominent and we can observe a decrease
of volition and a very slight decrease of obliga-
tion.

Second, by setting the axis of the registers into
focus and selecting the disciplines one by one, we
can explore whether there are changes in the use
of modal meanings between the A register, the
contact registers (B), and the respective C regis-
ters. In Figure 3, for example, computer science
and biology have been selected (gray shaded) on
the ’disciplines’ axis. For this selection, the struc-
tures starting from the ’registers’ axis represent
(1) computer science (blue) being the A regis-
ter, (2) biology (green) from the C registers, and
(3) bioinformatics (orange) from the B registers
as the corresponding contact register. In terms
of register changes, Figure 3 shows that bioin-
formatics differs in the development tendencies
(a) of permission from biology and computer sci-
ence (less increase than the former, more increase
than the latter) and (b) of obligation from biology
(decrease for biology, whereas nearly stable for
bioinformatics and computer science).

5 Conclusion and Future Work

The results described above show that Structured
Parallel Coordinates provides us with a means for
the interactive inspection of complex data sets fa-
cilitating our diachronic register analysis. The vi-
sualisation allows to gain an overview and detect
tendencies by accomodating a complex set of data
in one display (nine registers over two time peri-
ods for three meanings).

The interactive features of SPC give the possi-
bility to put different aspects of the data into fo-

46



Figure 2: Modal meanings in SciTex in the 1970/80s and 2000s

Figure 3: Modal meanings in computer science (A-subcorpus; blue), bioinformatics (from B-subcorpus; orange)
and biology (from C-subcorpus; green)

47



cus, and thus to successively zoom into specific
subsets of the data for detailed analyses. In this
way, we can determine general tendencies (e.g.,
increase of permission over time) or provide de-
tailed analyses for certain linguistic features and
registers by selecting subparts of the data and by
highlighting different data dimensions (e.g., com-
paring changes between different registers).

Future work comprises to use the data obtained
from the corpus to feed several different SPC vi-
sualisations. For example, the data presented in
Figure 2 can also be layed out to place values for
registers instead of values for time periods on the
numerical axes.

Future analyses will focus on inspecting fur-
ther tendencies in the feature development for the
three contextual variables mentioned in 2.1, e.g.,
verb valency patterns for field or conjunctive re-
lations expressing cohesion for mode. We also
aim at analysing several linguistic features at the
same time to possibly detect feature sets involved
in register variation of contact registers. Addition-
ally, a more fine-grained diachronic analysis ac-
cording to the publication years, which are anno-
tated in the corpus, might also prove to be useful.

From a technical point of view, the issue with
fully overlapping lines being displayed in one
color only will be tackled by experimenting with
semi-transparent or stacked lines. Furthermore,
SPC should in the future be expanded by a func-
tion for restructuring the underlying data to cre-
ate different layouts. This could also include the
merging of axes with categorical values (e.g., axes
registers and disciplines in Figure 2 above). Fur-
thermore on each data dimension a ’summary’
category could be introduced that would repre-
sent the sum of all individual values, and would
provide an extra point of reference for the analy-
sis. For interactive data analysis, support could be
provided to select data items based on crossings
or declination of their connecting lines.

References
Douglas Biber. 1995. Dimensions of Register Varia-

tion. A Cross-linguistic Comparison. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Douglas Biber. 1999. Longman Grammar of Spoken
and Written English. Harlow: Pearson ESL.

Chris Culy, Verena Lyding, and Henrik Dittmann.
2011. Structured Parallel Coordinates: a visualiza-
tion for analyzing structured language data. In Pro-

ceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
Corpus Linguistics, CILC-11, April 6-9, 2011, Va-
lencia, Spain, 485–493.

Stefania Degaetano-Ortlieb, Hannah Kermes, Ekate-
rina Lapshinova-Koltunski and Elke Teich. 2012.
SciTex – A Diachronic Corpus for Analyzing the
Development of Scientific Registers. In: Paul Ben-
nett, Martin Durrell, Silke Scheible & Richard J.
Whitt (eds.), New Methods in Historical Corpus
Linguistics. CLIP, Vol. 2, Narr: Tübingen.

Stefan Evert. 2005. The CQP Query Language Tuto-
rial. IMS, Universität Stuttgart.

M.A.K. Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1989. Language,
context and text: Aspects of language in a social
semiotic perspective. OUP.

Alfred Inselberg. 2009. Parallel Coordinates: VISUAL
Multidimensional Geometry and its Applications.
New York: Springer.

Alfred Inselberg. 1985. The plane with parallel coor-
dinates. The Visual Computer 1(2), pp. 69–91.

Hannah Kermes. 2011. Automatic corpus creation.
Manual. Institute of Applied Linguistics, Transla-
tion and Interpreting, Universität des Saarlandes,
Saarbrücken.

Christian Mair. 2006. Twentieth-Century English: His-
tory, Variation and Standardization. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Maurice d’Ocagne. 1885. Coordonnées Parallèles et
Axiales: Méthode de transformation géométrique
et procédé nouveau de calcul graphique déduits de
la considération des coordonnées parallèlles. Paris:
Gauthier-Villars.

Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech
and Jan Svartvik. 1985. A comprehensive grammar
of the English language. Harlow: Longman

Elke Teich and Peter Fankhauser. 2010. Exploring a
corpus of scientific texts using data mining. In:
Gries S., S. Wulff and M. Davies (eds), Corpus-
linguistic applications - Current studies, new direc-
tions. Rodopi, Amsterdam and New York, pp. 233–
247.

48


