










































Recognizing Arguing Subjectivity and Argument Tags


Proceedings of the ACL-2012 Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational Linguistics (ExProM-2012),
pages 80–88, Jeju, Republic of Korea, 13 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Recognizing Arguing Subjectivity and Argument Tags

Alexander Conrad, Janyce Wiebe, and Rebecca Hwa
Department of Computer Science

University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh PA, 15260, USA

{conrada,wiebe,hwa}@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract

In this paper we investigate two distinct
tasks. The first task involves detecting ar-
guing subjectivity, a type of linguistic sub-
jectivity on which relatively little work has
yet to be done. The second task involves
labeling instances of arguing subjectivity
with argument tags reflecting the concep-
tual argument being made. We refer to
these two tasks collectively as “recogniz-
ing arguments”. We develop a new anno-
tation scheme and assemble a new anno-
tated corpus to support our learning ef-
forts. Through our machine learning ex-
periments, we investigate the utility of a
sentiment lexicon, discourse parser, and
semantic similarity measures with respect
to recognizing arguments. By incorpo-
rating information gained from these re-
sources, we outperform a unigram baseline
by a significant margin. In addition, we ex-
plore a two-phase approach to recognizing
arguments, with promising results.

1 Introduction

Subjectivity analysis is a thriving field within
natural language processing. However, most
research into subjectivity has focused on sen-
timent with respect to concrete things such
as product debates (e.g., (Somasundaran and
Wiebe, 2009), (Yu et al., 2011)) and movie re-
views (e.g., (He et al., 2011), (Maas et al., 2011),
(Pang and Lee, 2004)). Analysis often follows
the opinion-target paradigm, in which expres-
sions of sentiment are assessed with respect to
the aspects of the object(s) under consideration
towards which they are targeted. For example,

in the domain of smartphone reviews, aspects
could include product features such as the key-
board, screen quality, and battery life.

Although sentiment analysis is interesting
and important in its own right, this paradigm
does not seem to be the best match for fine-
grained analysis of ideological domains. While
sentiment is also present in documents from
this domain, previous work (Somasundaran and
Wiebe, 2010) has found that arguing subjec-
tivity, a less-studied form of subjectivity, is
more frequently employed and more relevant
for a robust assessment of ideological positions.
Whereas sentiment conveys the polarity of a
writer’s affect towards a topic, arguing subjec-
tivity is a type of linguistic subjectivity in which
a person expresses a controversial belief about
what is true or what action ought to be taken
regarding a central contentious issue (Somasun-
daran, 2010). For example, consider this sen-
tence about health care reform:

(1) Almost everyone knows that we
must start holding insurance compa-
nies accountable and give Americans a
greater sense of stability and security
when it comes to their health care.

In a traditional opinion-target or sentiment-
topic paradigm, perhaps this sentence could be
labeled as containing a negative sentiment to-
wards a topic representing “insurance compa-
nies”, or a positive sentiment towards a topic
representing “stability” or “security”. However,
a reader of a political editorial or blog may be
more interested in why the author is negative to-

80



wards insurers, and how the author proposes to
improve stability of the healthcare system. By
focusing on the arguments conveyed through ar-
guing subjectivity, we aim to capture these kind
of conceptual reasons an author provides when
arguing for his or her position.

However, identifying when someone is arguing
is only part of the challenge. Since arguing sub-
jectivity is used to express arguments, the next
natural step is to identify the argument being
expressed through each instance of arguing sub-
jectivity. To illustrate this distinction, consider
the following three example spans:

(2) the bill is a job destroyer
(3) President Obamas signature do-
mestic policy will throw 100,000 peo-
ple out of work come January
(4) he can’t expand his business be-
cause he can’t afford the burden of
Obamacare

Each of these examples contains arguing
subjectivity, but more importantly, each ex-
presses roughly the same idea, namely, that the
recently-passed health care reform bill will cause
economic harm. This latent, shared idea giving
rise to each of the three spans is what we mean
by “argument tag”.

However, although all three are related, exam-
ple spans (2) and (3) are more similar than (4)
in terms of the notions they convey: while the
first two explicitly are concerned with the loss
of jobs, the last focuses on business expansion
and the economy as a whole. If we were to tag
these three spans with respect to the argument
that each is making, should they all receive the
same tag, or should (4)’s tag be different?

To address these challenges, we propose in this
work a new annotation scheme for identifying
arguing subjectivity and a hierarchical model for
organizing “argument tags”. In our hierarchical
model, (4) would receive a different tag from (2)
and (3), but because of the tags’ relatedness all
would share the same parent tag.

In addition to presenting this new scheme for
labeling arguing subjectivity, we also explore
sentiment, discourse, and distributional similar-

ity as tools to enhance identification and classi-
fication of arguing subjectivity. Finally, we also
investigate splitting the arguing subjectivity de-
tection task up into two distinct phases: iden-
tifying expressions of arguing subjectivity, and
labelling each such expression with an appropri-
ate argument tag.

Since no corpora annotated for arguing sub-
jectivity yet exist, we gather and annotate a cor-
pus of blog posts and op-eds about a contro-
versial topic, namely, the recently-passed “Oba-
maCare” health care reform bill.

2 Annotation Scheme

We designed our annotation scheme with two
goals in mind: identifying all spans of text which
express arguing subjectivity, and labelling each
such span with an argument tag. To address
the first goal, our annotators manually identified
and annotated spans of text containing arguing
subjectivity using the GATE environment1. An-
notators were instructed to identify spans of 1
sentence or less in which a writer “conveys a
controversial private state concerning what she
believes to be true or what action she believes
should be taken” concerning the health care re-
form debate. To train our annotators to recog-
nize arguing subjectivity, we performed several
rounds of practice on a separate dataset. Be-
tween each round, our annotators met to discuss
their annotations and resolve disagreements.

As a heuristic to help distinguish between bor-
derline sentences, we advised our annotators to
imagine disputants from each side writing the
sentence in isolation. If a disputant from either
side could conceivably write the sentence, then
the sentence is likely objective. For example,
statements of accepted facts and statistics gen-
erally fall into this category. However, if only
one side could conceivably be the author of the
sentence, it is highly likely that the sentence ex-
presses a controversial belief relevant to the de-
bate and thus should be labeled as subjective.

Next, the annotators labeled each arguing
span with an argument tag. As illustrated in
earlier examples, an argument tag represents a

1http://gate.ac.uk/

81



controversial abstract belief expressed through
arguing subjectivity. Since the meanings of
many tags may be related, we organize these
tags in a hierarchical “stance structure”. A
stance structure is a tree-based data structure
containing all of the argument tags associated
with a particular debate, organizing those tags
using “is-a” relationships. Our stance structure
contains two levels of argument tags: upper-
level “primary” argument tags and lower-level
“secondary” tags. Each primary tag has one of
the stances (either “pro” or “anti” in our case)
as its parent, while each secondary tag has a
primary tag as its parent2.

Political science “arguing dimension” ap-
proaches to debate framing analysis served, in
part, as an inspiration for our stance structure
(Baumgartner et al., 2008). Also, as illustrated
in Section 1, this approach permits us additional
flexibility, supporting classification at different
levels of specificity depending on the task at
hand and the amount of data available. We en-
vision a future scenario in which a community of
users collaboratively builds a stance structure to
represent a new topic or debate, or in which an-
alysts build a stance structure to categorize the
issues expressed towards a proposed law, such
as in the context of e-rulemaking (Cardie et al.,
2008).

Because each stance contains a large number
of argument tags, we back-off from each sec-
ondary argument tag to its primary argument
parent for the classification experiments. We
chose to do this in order to ensure that we have
a sufficient amount of data with which to train
the classifier.

3 Dataset

For this study, we chose to focus on online ed-
itorials and blog posts concerning the ongoing
debate over health insurance reform legislation
in the United States. Our intuition is that blogs
and editorials represent a genre rich in both

2Our stance structure contains an additional “aspect”
level consisting of a-priori categories adopted from politi-
cal science research. However, we do not utilize this level
of the stance structure in this work.

“pro” documents 37

“pro” sentences 1,222

“anti” documents 47

“anti” sentences 1,456

total documents 84

total sentences 2,678

Table 1: Dataset summary statistics.

arguing subjectivity

objective 683

subjective 588

argument labels

no label 683

improves healthcare access 130

improves healthcare affordability 104

people dont know truth
about bill

75

controls healthcare costs 54

improves quality of healthcare 52

helps economy 51

bill should be passed 43

other argument 79

Table 2: Arguing and argument label statistics for
the “pro” stance.

subjectivity and arguments. We collected docu-
ments written both before and after the passage
of the final “Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act” bill using the “Google Blog Search”3

and “Daily Op Ed”4 search portals. By choosing
a relatively broad time window, from early 2009
to late 2011, we aimed to capture a wide range
of arguments expressed throughout the debate.

The focus of this paper is on sentence-level
argument detection rather than document-level
stance classification (e.g., (Anand et al., 2011),
(Park et al., 2011), (Somasundaran and Wiebe,
2010), (Burfoot et al., 2011)). We treat stance
classification as a separate step preceding argu-
ing subjectivity detection, and thus provide or-
acle stance labels for our data.

We treat documents written from the “pro”

3http://www.google.com/blogsearch
4http://www.dailyoped.com/

82



arguing subjectivity

objective 913

subjective 575

argument labels

no label 913

diminishes quality of care 122

too expensive 67

unpopular 60

hurts economy 55

expands govt 52

bill is politically motivated 44

other reforms more appropriate 35

other argument 140

Table 3: Arguing and argument label statistics for
the “anti” stance.

stance and documents written from the “anti”
stance as separate datasets. Being written from
different positions, the two stances will have dif-
ferent argument labels and may employ different
styles of arguing subjectivity. Table 1 provides
an overview of the size of this dataset. Summary
statistics concerning the density of arguing and
argument labels in the two sides of the dataset
is presented in Tables 2 and 3. However, since
it can be difficult to summarize a complex ar-
gument in a short phrase, many of these labels
by themselves do not clearly convey the meaning
they are meant to represent. To better illustrate
the meanings of some of the more ambiguous la-
bels, Table 4 presents several annotated example
spans for some of the more unclear ambiguous
argument labels.

4 Agreement Study

One of our authors performed annotation of our
corpus, the broad outlines of which are sketched
in the previous section. However, to assess inter-
annotator agreement for this annotation scheme,
we recruited a non-author to independently an-
notate a subset of our corpus consisting of 384
sentences across 10 documents. This non-author
both identified spans of arguing subjectivity and
assigned argument tags. She was given a stance
structure from which to select argument tags.

improves healthcare access

“Our reform will prohibit insurance compa-
nies from denying coverage because of your
medical history.”

“Let’s also not overlook the news from last
week about the millions of younger Americans
who are getting coverage thanks to consumer
protections that are now in place.”

improves healthcare affordability

“ new health insurance exchanges will offer
competitive, consumer-centered health insur-
ance marketplaces...”

“Millions of seniors can now afford medication
they would otherwise struggle to pay for.”

people dont know truth about bill

“...the cynics and the naysayers will continue
to exploit fear and concerns for political gain.”

“Republican leaders, who see opportunities
to gain seats in the elections, have made
clear that they will continue to peddle fictions
about a government takeover of the health
care system and about costs too high to bear.”

unpopular

“The 1,000-page monstrosity that emerged in
various editions from Congress was done in by
widespread national revulsion...”

“Support for ObamaCare’s repeal is broad,
and includes one group too often overlooked
during the health care debate: America’s doc-
tors.”

expands govt

“...the real goal of the health care overhaul
was to enact the largest entitlement program
in history...”

“the new bureaucracy the health care legisla-
tion creates is so complex and indiscriminate
that its size and cost is ’currently unknow-
able.’ ”

bill is politically motivated

“...tawdry backroom politics were used to sell
off favors in exchange for votes.”

“From the wildly improper gifts to senators
like Nebraska’s Ben Nelson to this week’s
backroom deals for unions...”

Table 4: Example annotated spans for several argu-
ment labels.

83



metric recall precision f-measure

agr 0.677 0.690 0.683

kappa for overlapping annotations 0.689

Table 5: Inter-annotator span agr (top) and argu-
ment label kappa on overlapping spans (bottom).

In assessing inter-annotator agreement on this
subset of the corpus, we must address two levels
of agreement, arguing spans and argument tags.

At first glance, how to assess agreement
of annotated arguing spans is not obvious.
Because our annotation scheme did not enforce
strict boundaries, we hypothesized that both
annotators would both frequently see an in-
stance of arguing subjectivity within a local
region of text, but would disagree with respect
to where the arguing begins and ends. Thus, we
adopt from (Wilson and Wiebe, 2003) the agr
directional agreement metric to measure the
degree of annotation overlap. Given two sets
of spans A and B annotated by two different
annotators, this metric measures the fraction
of spans in A which at least partially overlap
with any spans in B. Specifically, agreement is
computed as:

agr(A B) = A matching BA

When A is the gold standard set of annota-
tions, agr is equivalent to recall. Similarly, when
B is the gold standard, agr is equivalent to pre-
cision. For this evaluation, we treat the dataset
annotated by our primary annotator as the gold
standard. Table 5 presents these agr scores and
f-measures for the arguing spans.

Second, we measure agreement with respect
to the argument tags assigned by the two an-
notators. Continuing to follow the methodol-
ogy of (Wilson and Wiebe, 2003), we look at
each pair of annotations, one from each anno-
tator, which share at least a partial overlap.
For each such pair, we assess whether the two
spans share the same primary argument tag.
Scores for primary argument label agreement in
terms of Cohen’s kappa are also presented in Ta-
ble 5. Since this kappa score falls within the

range of 0.67 ≤ K ≤ 0.8, according to Krippen-
dorf’s scale (Krippendorff, 2004) this allows us
to draw tentative conclusions concerning a sig-
nificant level of tag agreement.

5 Methods

As discussed earlier, recognizing arguments can
be thought of in terms of two related but dif-
ferent tasks: recognizing a type of subjectivity,
and labeling instances of that subjectivity with
tags. We refer to the binary arguing subjectiv-
ity detection task as “arg”, and to the multi-
class argument labeling task as “tag”. For the
“tag” task, we create eight classes: one for each
of the seven most-frequent labels, and an eighth
into which we agglomerate the remaining less-
frequent labels. We only consider the sentences
known to be subjective (via oracle information)
for the “tag” task.

We also perform a “combined” task. This
third task is conceptually similar to the “tag”
task, except that all sentences are considered
rather than only the subjective sentences. In ad-
dition to the eight classes used by “tag”, “com-
bined” adds an additional class for non-arguing
sentences. Finally, we also perform a two-stage
“arg+tag” task. In this two-stage task, the in-
stances labeled as subjective by the “arg” clas-
sifier are passed as input to the “tag” classifier.
The intuition behind this two-phase approach is
that the features most useful for identifying ar-
guing subjectivity may not be the most useful
for discriminating between argument tags, and
vice versa. For all of our classification tasks,
we treat both the “pro” and “anti” stances
separately, building separate classifiers for each
stance for each of the above tasks.

In general, we perform single-label classifi-
cation at the sentence level. However, sen-
tences containing multiple labels pose a chal-
lenge. Since this was an early exploratory work
on a very difficult task, we decided to handle
this situation by splitting sentences containing
multiple labels into separate instances for the
purpose of learning, assigning a single label to
each instance. However, only about 3% of the
sentences in our corpus contained multiple la-

84



bels. Thus, replacing this splitting step in the
future with another method that does not re-
quire oracle information, such as choosing the
label which covers the most words in the sen-
tence, is a reasonable simplification of the task.

Since discourse actions, such as contrasting,
restating, and identifying causation, play a sub-
stantial role in arguing, we hypothesize that in-
formation about the discourse roles played by
a span of text will help improve classification.
Although discourse parsers historically haven’t
been found to be effective for subjectivity anal-
ysis, a new parser (Lin et al., 2010) trained on
the Penn Discourse TreeBank (PDTB) tagset
(Prasad et al., 2008) has recently been released.
Previous work has demonstrated that this parser
can reliably detect discourse relationships be-
tween adjacent sentences (Lin et al., 2011), and
the PDTB tagset, being relatively flat, is con-
ducive to feature engineering for our task.

To give a feeling for the kind of discourse re-
lations identified by this parser, the following
example illustrates a concession relation identi-
fied in the corpus by the parser. The italicized
text represents the concession, while the bolded
text indicates the overall point that the author
is making. The underlined word was identified
by the parser as an explicit concessionary clue.

(7) the health care reform legisla-
tion that President Obama now seems
likely to sign into law , while an
unlovely mess , will be remembered
as a landmark accomplishment .

Using this automatic information, we define
features indicating the discourse relationships by
which the instance is connected to surrounding
text. Specifically, the class of discourse rela-
tionship connecting the target instance to the
previous instance, the relationship connecting it
to the following instance, and any internal dis-
course relationships by which the parts of the
instance are connected to each other are each
added as features. Since PDTB contains many
fine-grained discourse relations, we replace each
discourse relationship type inferred by the dis-
course parser with the parent top-level PDTB

discourse relationship class. We arrive at a total
of 15 binary discourse relationship features: (4
top-level classes + “other”) x (connects to pre-
vious + connects to following + internal connec-
tion) = 15. We refer to these features as “rels”.

As illustrated in our earlier examples, while
arguing subjectivity is different from sentiment,
the two types of subjectivity are often related.
Thus, we investigate incorporating sentiment
information based on the presence of unigram
clues from a publically-available sentiment lexi-
con5 (Wilson, 2005). Each clue in the lexicon is
marked as being either “strong” or “weak”.

We found that this lexicon was producing
many false hits for positive sentiment. Thus, a
span containing a minimum of two positive clues
of which at least one is marked as “strong”, or
three positive “weak” clues, is augmented with a
feature indicating positive sentiment. For nega-
tive sentiment the threshold is slightly lower, at
one “strong” clue or two “weak” clues. These
features are referred to as “senti”.

A challenge to argument tag assignment is the
broad diversity of language through which in-
dividual entities or specific actions may be ref-
erenced, as illustrated in Examples (2-4) from
Section 1. To address this problem, we in-
vestigate expanding each instance with terms
that are most similar, according to a distribu-
tional model generated from Wikipedia articles,
to the nouns and verbs present within the in-
stance (Pantel et al., 2009). We refer to these
features as “expn”, where n is the number of
most-similar terms with which to expand the in-
stance for each noun or verb. We experiment
with values of n = 5 and n = 10.

Subjectivity classification of small units of
text, such as individual microblog posts (Jiang
et al., 2011) and sentences (Riloff et al., 2003),
has been shown to benefit from additional con-
text. Thus, we augment the feature representa-
tion of each target sentence with features from
the two preceding and two following sentences.
These additional features are modified so that
they do not fall within the same feature space

5downloaded from http://www.cs.pitt.edu/mpqa/
subj_lexicon.html

85



feat.
abbrev.

elaboration

unigram

senti 2 binary features indicating posi-
tive or negative sentiment based on
presence of lexicon clues

rels 15 binary features indicating kinds
of discourse relationships and how
they connect instance to surround-
ing text

exp5 for each noun and verb in instance,
expand instance with top 5 most
distributionally similar words

exp10 for each noun and verb in instance,
expand instance with top 10 most
distributionally similar words

Table 6: Overview of features used in the arguing
and argument experiments.

as the features representing the target sentence.

Using the Naive Bayes classifier within the
WEKA machine learning toolkit (Hall et al.,
2009), we explore the impact of the features de-
scribed above on our four experiment configu-
rations. We perform our experiments using k-
fold cross-validation, where k equals the num-
ber of documents within the stance. The test
set for each fold consists of a single document’s
instances. For the “pro” dataset k = 37, while
for the “anti” dataset k = 47.

6 Results

Table 7 presents the accuracy scores from each of
our stand-alone classifiers across combinations
of feature sets. Each feature set consists of
unigrams augmented with the designated addi-
tional features, as described in Section 5. To
evaluate the “tag” classifier in isolation, we use
oracle information to provide this classifier with
only the subjective instances. To assess signif-
icance of the performance differences between
feature sets, we used the Pearson Chi-squared
test with Yates continuity correction.

Expansion of nouns and verbs with
distributionally-similar terms (“exp5”, “exp10”)
plays the largest role in improving classifier

features arg tag comb.

unigram baseline 0.610 0.425 0.458

senti 0.614 0.426 0.459

rels 0.614 0.422 0.462

senti, rels 0.618 0.424 0.465

exp5 0.635 0.522 0.482

exp5, senti 0.638 0.515 0.486

exp5, rels 0.640 0.522 0.484

exp5, senti, rels 0.643 0.516 0.484

exp10 0.645 0.517 0.488

exp10, senti 0.647 0.515 0.489

exp10, rels 0.642 0.512 0.490

exp10, senti, rels 0.644 0.513 0.490

Table 7: Classifier accuracy for differing feature sets.
Significant improvement (p < 0.05) over baseline is
boldfaced (0.05 < p < 0.1 italicized). Underline in-
dicates best performance per column.

performance. While differences between con-
figurations using “exp5” versus “exp10” were
generally not significant, all of the configu-
rations incorporating some version of term
expansion outperformed the unigram baseline
by either a statistically significant margin
(p < 0.05) or by a margin that approached
significance (0.05 < p < 0.1).

Sentiment features consistently produce im-
provements in accuracy for the “arg” and “com-
bined” tasks. While these improvements are
promising, the lack of a significant margin of im-
provement when incorporating sentiment is sur-
prising. Since sentiment lexicons are known to
be highly domain-dependent (Pan et al., 2010),
it may be the case that, having been learned
from a general news corpus, the sentiment lexi-
con employed in this work is not the best match
for the domain of “ObamaCare” blogs and edito-
rials. Similarly, the discourse features also fail to
produce significant improvements in accuracy.

Finally, we aim to test our hypothesis that
separating the “arg” and “tag” phases results in
improvement beyond treating the two in a single
“combined” phase. The first step of our hierar-
chy involves normal classification of all sentences
using the “arg” classifier. Next, all sentences
judged to contain arguing subjectivity by “arg”

86



arg features tag features acc.

exp5, senti, rels
exp5 0.506
exp5, rels 0.506
exp10 0.501

exp10
exp5 0.514

exp5, rels 0.513
exp10 0.512

exp10, senti
exp5 0.514

exp5, rels 0.513
exp10 0.512

Table 8: Accuracies of two-stage classifiers across dif-
ferent combinations of feature sets for the “arg” and
“tag” phases. Italics indicate improvement over the
top “combined” configuration which approaches sig-
nificance (0.05 < p < 0.1). Underline indicates best
overall performance.

are passed to the “tag” classifier to have an ar-
gument tag assigned. We choose three promis-
ing feature sets for the “arg” and “tag” phases,
based on best performance in isolation.

Results of this hierarchical experiment are
presented in Table 8. We evaluate the hi-
erarchical system against the best-performing
“combined” single-phase systems from Table 7.
While all of the hierarchical configurations beat
the best “combined” classifier, none beats the
top combined classifier by a significant margin,
although the best configurations approach sig-
nificance (0.05 < p < 0.1).

7 Related Work

Much recent work in ideological subjectivity
detection has focused on detecting a writer’s
stance in domains of varying formality, such as
online forums, debating websites, and op-eds.
(Anand et al., 2011) demonstrates the usefulness
of dependency relations, LIWC counts (Pen-
nebaker et al., 2001), and information about re-
lated posts for this task. (Lin et al., 2006) ex-
plores relationships between sentence-level and
document-level classification for a stance-like
prediction task.

Among the literature on ideological subjectiv-
ity, perhaps most similar to our work is (Soma-
sundaran and Wiebe, 2010). This paper investi-
gates the impact of incorporating arguing-based

and sentiment-based features into binary stance
prediction for debate posts. Also closely related
to our work is (Somasundaran et al., 2007). To
support answering of opinion-based questions,
this work investigates the use of high-precision
sentiment and arguing clues for sentence-level
sentiment and arguing prediction.

Another active area of related research focuses
on identifying important aspects towards which
sentiment is expressed within a domain. (He
et al., 2011) approaches this problem through
topic modeling, extending the joint sentiment-
topic (JST) model which aims to simultaneously
learn sentiment and aspect probabilities for a
unit of text. (Yu et al., 2011) takes a different
approach, investigating thesaurus methods for
learning aspects based on groups of synonymous
nouns within product reviews.

8 Conclusion

In this paper, we explored recognizing argu-
ments in terms of arguing subjectivity and ar-
gument tags. We presented and evaluated a
new annotation scheme to capture arguing sub-
jectivity and argument tags, and annotated a
new dataset. Utilizing existing sentiment, dis-
course, and distributional similarity resources,
we explored ways in which these three forms
of knowledge could be used to enhance argu-
ment recognition. In particular, our empirical
results highlight the important role played by
distributional similarity in all phases of detect-
ing arguing subjectivity and argument tags. We
have also provided tentative evidence suggesting
that addressing the problem of recognizing argu-
ments in two separate phases may be beneficial
to overall classification accuracy.

9 Acknowledgments

This material is based in part upon work sup-
ported by National Science Foundation award
#0916046. We would like to thank Patrick Pan-
tel for sharing his thesaurus of distributionally
similar words from Wikipedia with us, Amber
Boydstun for insightful conversations about de-
bate frame categorization, and the anonymous
reviewers for their useful feedback.

87



References

Pranav Anand, Marilyn Walker, Rob Abbott,
Jean E. Fox Tree, Robeson Bowmani, and Michael
Minor. 2011. Cats rule and dogs drool!: Classi-
fying stance in online debate. In WASSA, pages
1–9, Portland, Oregon, June.

F.R. Baumgartner, S.D. Boef, and A.E. Boydstun.
2008. The decline of the death penalty and the dis-
covery of innocence. Cambridge University Press.

Clinton Burfoot, Steven Bird, and Timothy Bald-
win. 2011. Collective classification of congres-
sional floor-debate transcripts. In ACL, pages
1506–1515, Portland, Oregon, USA, June.

Claire Cardie, Cynthia Farina, Adil Aijaz, Matt
Rawding, and Stephen Purpura. 2008. A study in
rule-specific issue categorization for e-rulemaking.
In DG.O, pages 244–253.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: an update.
SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., 11:10–18, November.

Yulan He, Chenghua Lin, and Harith Alani. 2011.
Automatically extracting polarity-bearing topics
for cross-domain sentiment classification. In ACL,
pages 123–131, Portland, Oregon, USA, June.

Long Jiang, Mo Yu, Ming Zhou, Xiaohua Liu, and
Tiejun Zhao. 2011. Target-dependent twitter
sentiment classification. In ACL, pages 151–160,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June.

K. Krippendorff. 2004. Content analysis: an intro-
duction to its methodology. Sage.

Wei-Hao Lin, Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and
Alexander Hauptmann. 2006. Which side are you
on?: identifying perspectives at the document and
sentence levels. In CoNLL, pages 109–116.

Ziheng Lin, Hwee Tou Ng, and Min-Yen Kan. 2010.
A pdtb-styled end-to-end discourse parser. CoRR.

Ziheng Lin, Hwee Tou Ng, and Min-Yen Kan. 2011.
Automatically evaluating text coherence using dis-
course relations. In ACL, pages 997–1006, Port-
land, Oregon, USA, June.

Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham,
Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher
Potts. 2011. Learning word vectors for sentiment
analysis. In ACL, pages 142–150, Portland, Ore-
gon, USA, June.

Sinno Jialin Pan, Xiaochuan Ni, Jian tao Sun, Qiang
Yang, and Zheng Chen. 2010. Cross-domain senti-
ment classification via spectral feature alignment.
In WWW.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2004. A sentimental
education: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity

summarization based on minimum cuts. In ACL,
pages 271–278, Barcelona, Spain, July.

Patrick Pantel, Eric Crestan, Arkady Borkovsky,
Ana-Maria Popescu, and Vishnu Vyas. 2009.
Web-scale distributional similarity and entity set
expansion. In EMNLP, pages 938–947, Morris-
town, NJ, USA.

Souneil Park, Kyung Soon Lee, and Junehwa Song.
2011. Contrasting opposing views of news arti-
cles on contentious issues. In ACL, pages 340–349,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June.

James W Pennebaker, Roger J Booth, and Martha E
Francis. 2001. Linguistic inquiry and word count
(liwc): Liwc2001. Linguistic Inquiry, (Mahwah,
NJ):0.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The penn discourse treebank 2.0.
In LREC, May.

Ellen Riloff, Janyce Wiebe, and Theresa Wilson.
2003. Learning subjective nouns using extraction
pattern bootstrapping. In CoNLL, pages 25–32.

Swapna Somasundaran and Janyce Wiebe. 2009.
Recognizing stances in online debates. In ACL-
AFNLP, pages 226–234.

Swapna Somasundaran and Janyce Wiebe. 2010.
Recognizing stances in ideological on-line debates.
In CAAGET, pages 116–124.

Swapna Somasundaran, Theresa Wilson, Janyce
Wiebe, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2007. Qa with atti-
tude: Exploiting opinion type analysis for improv-
ing question answering in on-line discussions and
the news. In ICWSM.

Swampa Somasundaran. 2010. Discourse-Level Re-
lations for Opinion Analysis. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of Pittsburgh, USA.

Theresa Wilson and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Annotat-
ing opinions in the world press. In SIGdial, pages
13–22.

Theresa Wilson. 2005. Recognizing contextual
polarity in phrase-level sentiment analysis. In
EMNLP, pages 347–354.

Jianxing Yu, Zheng-Jun Zha, Meng Wang, and Tat-
Seng Chua. 2011. Aspect ranking: Identifying
important product aspects from online consumer
reviews. In ACL, pages 1496–1505, Portland, Ore-
gon, USA, June.

88


