










































MinkApp: Generating Spatio-temporal Summaries for Nature Conservation Volunteers


INLG 2012 Proceedings of the 7th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 17–21,
Utica, May 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

MinkApp: Generating Spatio-temporal Summaries for Nature Conservation
Volunteers

Nava Tintarev, Yolanda Melero, Somayajulu Sripada,
Elizabeth Tait, Rene Van Der Wal, Chris Mellish

University of Aberdeen
{n.tintarev, y.melero, yaji.sripada,

elizbeth.tait, r.vanderwal, c.mellish@abdn.ac.uk}@abdn.ac.uk

Abstract

We describe preliminary work on generat-
ing contextualized text for nature conservation
volunteers. This Natural Language Genera-
tion (NLG) differs from other ways of describ-
ing spatio-temporal data, in that it deals with
abstractions on data across large geographi-
cal spaces (total projected area 20,600 km2),
as well as temporal trends across longer time
frames (ranging from one week up to a year).
We identify challenges at all stages of the clas-
sical NLG pipeline.

1 Introduction

We describe preliminary work on summarizing
spatio-temporal data, with the aim to generate con-
textualized feedback for wildlife management vol-
unteers. The MinkApp project assesses the use
of NLG to assist volunteers working on the Scot-
tish Mink Initiative (SMI). This participatory initia-
tive aims to safeguard riverine species of economic
importance (e.g., salmon and trout) and species of
nature conservation interest including water voles,
ground nesting birds and other species that are ac-
tively preyed upon by an invasive non-native species
- the American mink (Bryce et al., 2011).

2 Background

Our test ground is one of the world’s largest
community-based invasive species management
programs, which uses volunteers to detect, and sub-
sequently remove, American mink from an area of
Scotland set to grow from 10,000 km2 in 2010 to

20,600 km2 by the end of 2013 (Bryce et al., 2011).
Such a geographical expansion means that an in-
creasing share of the monitoring and control work is
undertaken by volunteers supported by a fixed num-
ber of staff. An important contribution of volunteers
is to help collect data over a large spatial scale.

Involving members of the public in projects such
as this can play a crucial role in collecting observa-
tional data (Silvertown, 2009). High profile exam-
ples of data-gathering programmes, labelled as cit-
izen science, include Galaxy Zoo and Springwatch
(Raddick et al., Published online 2010; Underwood
et al., 2008). However, in such long-term and wide
ranging initiatives, maintaining volunteer engage-
ment can be challenging and volunteers must get
feedback on their contributions to remain motivated
to participate (Silvertown, 2009). NLG may serve
the function of supplying this feedback.

3 Related work

We are particularly interested in summarizing raw
geographical and temporal data whose semantics
need to be computed at run time – so called spatio-
temporal NLG. Such extended techniques are stud-
ied in data-to-text NLG (Molina and Stent, 2010;
Portet et al., 2009; Reiter et al., 2005; Turner et
al., 2008; Thomas et al., Published online 2010).
Generating text from spatio-temporal data involves
not just finding data abstractions, but also determin-
ing appropriate descriptors for them (Turner et al.,
2008). Turner et. al (2008) present a case study in
weather forecast generation where selection of spa-
tial descriptors is partly based on domain specific
(weather related) links between spatial descriptors

17



and weather phenomena. In the current project we
see an opportunity to investigate such domain spe-
cific constraints in the selection of descriptors over
larger temporal and spatial scales.

4 Current Status

Over 600 volunteers currently notify volunteer man-
agers of their ongoing mink recording efforts. Our
work is informed by in-depth discussions and inter-
views with the volunteer managers, as well as 58
(ground level) volunteers’ responses to a question-
naire about their volunteering experience. The set of
volunteers involves different people, such as conser-
vation professionals, rangers, landowners and farm-
ers with the degree of volunteer involvement varying
among them. Most volunteers check for sightings:
footprints on a floating platform with a clay-based
tracking plate (raft hereafter) readily used by mink,
or visual sightings on land or water. Others set and
check traps, and (much fewer volunteers) dispatch
trapped mink.1 In terms of feedback, volunteers cur-
rently receive regional quarterly newsletters, but tai-
lored and contextualized feedback is limited to spo-
radic personal communication, mostly via email.2

4.1 Why NLG in this context?

Where the initiative has been successful, mink sight-
ings are sparse. Such a lack of sightings can be de-
motivating for volunteers and leads to a situation in
which negative records are seldom recorded (Beirne,
2011). As one volunteer stated: “Nothing much hap-
pens on my raft so my enthusiasm wanes.” Also,
73% of the volunteers who completed the ques-
tionnaire said they checked their raft at the recom-
mended frequency of every two weeks. Similarly,
72% said that they got in touch with their manager
rarely or only every couple of months – when they
needed more clay or saw footprints. NLG based
feedback could motivate volunteers by informing
them about the value of negative records. If they
were to stop because of a lack of interest, mink are
likely to reinvade the area.

1Traps are only placed once a sighting has occurred. Once
placed, by law a trap must be checked daily.

2In this project, we are using a corpus based on newsletters
from the North Scotland Mink Project and the Cairngorms Wa-
ter Vole Conversation Project.

In addition, volunteers who work alone can be
isolated and lack natural mechanisms for informa-
tion exchange with peers. We postulate that giving
the volunteers contextualized feedback for an area
gives them a better feeling for their contribution to
the project and a better sense of how the initiative is
going overall. A need for this has already been felt
by volunteers: “Knowing even more about progress
in the catchment would be good - and knowing in de-
tail about water vole returning and latest mink sight-
ings. It would be helpful to learn about other neigh-
boring volunteers captures sightings in ‘real time’.”

5 Approach

In this section we describe the generation of text in
terms of a classic NLG pipeline, (Reiter and Dale,
2000), while addressing the additional tasks of in-
terpreting the input data (from volunteers) to mean-
ingful messages that achieve the desired communi-
cation goals: providing information to, as well as
motivating volunteers. The NLG system which will
generate these texts is actively under development.

5.1 Gold standard
Our nearest comparison is a corpus of domain spe-
cific conservation newsletters containing text such
as the one below. These newsletters give us an idea
of the type of structure and lexical choice applied
when addressing volunteers, using both temporal
and spatial summaries. However, these texts are not
contextualized, or adapted to a particular volunteer.

“With an ever expanding project area, we
are progressing exceptionally well achiev-
ing and maintaining areas free of breed-
ing mink through-out the North of Scot-
land. Currently, the upper Spey, upper
Dee and Ythan appear to be free of breed-
ing mink, with only a few transients pass-
ing through...”

We would like to improve on these existing texts
and aim to generate texts that are tailored and con-
sider the context of the volunteer. The text below is
developed from a template supplied from a volunteer
manager in the process of corpus collection. In the
following sections we describe the steps and chal-
lenges involved in the process of generating such a
text.

18



“Thank you for your helpful contribution!
You may have not seen any signs this time,
but in the last week two people in the Spey
catchment have seen footprints on their
rafts. This means there might be a female
with a litter in your neighborhood – please
be on the lookout in the coming weeks!
Capturing her could mean removing up to
6 mink at once!”

5.2 Example input

The data we receive from volunteers includes pos-
itive and negative records from raft checks (every
14 days), visual sightings, and mink captures. Each
record contains a geographical reference (x and y co-
ordinate) and a timestamp. In addition, for trapped
mink we may know the sex (male, female, or un-
known) and age (juvenile, adult, or unknown).

5.3 Data analysis and interpretation

Spatial trends. The current version of the system
can reason over geographical information, defin-
ing various notions of neighborhood.3 For a given
point the following attributes can be used to describe
its neighborhood: geographical region (catchment
and subcatchment), Euclidean distance from another
point, and relative cardinal direction to another point
(north, south, east, west). The system reasons about
sightings and captures using facts such as:

• This point (on land or water) is in the Dee
catchment.

• Three neighbors have seen footprints (within a
given time window).

• One neighbor has caught a mink (within a given
time window).

• The nearest mink footprint is 15 km north east
of this point.

The definition of neighborhood will differ accord-
ing to domain specific factors. Euclidean distance
appears to be the most likely candidate for use, be-
cause sightings may belong to different geographic

3The reasoning is performed using the opensource GIS
Java library Geotools, http://geotools.org, retrieved
Jan 2012

regions (catchments) but be very close to each other.
More importantly, the definition of neighborhood is
likely to depend on the geographic region (e.g. ar-
eas differ in terms of mink population density with
mountainous regions less likely to be utilized than
coastal regions).

Temporal trends. Aside from geographic trends,
the system will also be used to portray temporal
trends. These look at the change in sightings be-
tween two time intervals, identifying it as a falling,
rising or steady trend in mink numbers. We are
primarily observing trends between different years,
but also taking into consideration the ecology of the
mink including their behavior in different seasons
and for quantification. For example, we need to be
able to decide if an increase from 0 to 5 mink sight-
ings in an area during breeding is worth mentioning
– most likely it is, as this a common size for a litter.
Another example is the definition of a ‘cleared’ area
- Example 1 below describes a stable zero trend over
a longer period of time.

...Currently, the upper Spey, upper Dee and Ythan
appear to be free of breeding mink...

(1)

5.4 Document planning

Content determination While useful on its own,
the text that could be generated from the data analy-
sis and interpretation described above is much more
useful when domain specific rules are applied. Ex-
ample 2 describes a significant year-on-year increase
for a given definition of neighborhood, during breed-
ing season.

IF ( (month >= 6 AND month <9)
AND sightingsLastYear(area) == 0
AND sightingsThisYear >= 5 )
THEN feedback +=
“It looks like the area has been reinvaded.
We should get ready to trap them to keep this
area mink free.”

(2)
Example rule 2 is applied in the breeding season (ca
June-Aug.). It will be given a score which signi-
fies its relative importance compared to other de-
rived content to allow prioritization. For example,

19



if there are both female and male captures in a re-
gion, it would be more important to speak about the
female capture. This is because the capture of breed-
ing mink has a much larger positive impact on the
success of the initiative.4 This importance should
be reflected in texts such as: ...Capturing her could
mean removing up to 6 mink at once!...

Document structuring Since our goal is to moti-
vate as well as inform, the structure of the text will
be affected. If we consider the example text in Sec-
tion 5.1, we can roughly divide it into three summary
types:

• Personal - “Thank you for your helpful contri-
bution! You may have not seen any signs this
time.”

• Neighbor - “In the last week two people in the
Spey catchment have seen small footprints on
their rafts.”

• Biology - “There might be a female with a litter
in your neighborhood ... Capturing her could
mean removing up to 6 mink at once!”

If, in contrast to the previous example, a volun-
teer would capture a mink, then the neighborhood
summary can be used to emphasize the importance
of rare captures.

“IF currentMonth == August AND
capture == true AND nCapturesInSummer == 0”

(3)
The feedback for rule 3 might read something

like: “Well done! So far, this was the only mink cap-
tured during the breeding season in the Spey catch-
ment!”

5.5 Microplanning
Microplanning will need to consider the aggrega-
tion of spatio-temporal data that happens on a deeper
level e.g., for a given catchment and year. This ag-
gregation is likely to result in a surface aggregation
as well deeper data aggregation, such as the catch-
ments in Example 1. In terms of lexical choice, the
system will have to use domain appropriate vocabu-
lary. The latter example refers to “breeding mink”,

4Established adult females with litters.

which informs the reader that their capture has a
large impact on population control. Another exam-
ple of lexical choice may be “quieter autumn” to de-
note a decrease in mink for an area.

The best way to communicate neighborhood to
volunteers is still an open question. The texts in
our corpus describe neighborhoods in terms of geo-
graphic regions (catchments and subcatchments, e.g.
Spey). However, Euclidean distance may be more
informative, in particular close to catchment bound-
aries.

6 Challenges

There are several key challenges when generating
motivating text for nature conservation volunteers,
using spatio-temporal NLG.

One challenge is to tailor feedback texts to in-
dividuals according to their motivations and infor-
mation needs. In line with previous research in
affective NLG (de Rosis and Grasso, 2000; Belz,
2003; Sluis and Mellish, 2010; Tintarev and Mas-
thoff, 2012; Mahamood and Reiter, 2011), we con-
tinue to study the factors which are likely to have
an effect on volunteer motivation. So far we have
worked together with volunteer managers. We col-
lected a corpus of texts, written by the managers,
that are tailored to motivate different volunteer per-
sonas, and conducted interviews and a focus group
with them. While we found that the mink managers
tailored texts to different personas, interviews indi-
cated that the biggest factor to tailor for was the def-
inition of neighborhood. Some volunteers are inter-
ested in a local update, while others are interested in
a larger overview.

A second, related challenge, regards correctly
defining the reasoning over spatio-temporal facts
e.g., quantifying the magnitude of significant
changes (increases and decreases in sightings and
captures) for different seasons, regions, and the time
frames over which they occur. We believe this will
lead to generating text referring to more compound
abstractions such as mink free areas, or re-invasion.

A final challenge brought out by the interviews
is to supply varied feedback that helps volunteers to
continue to learn about mink and their habitat. This
is a challenge for both content determination and mi-
croplanning.

20



References

Christopher Beirne. 2011. Novel use of mark-recapture
framework to study volunteer retention probabilities
within an invasive non-native species management
project reveals vocational and temporal trends. Mas-
ter’s thesis, University of Aberdeen.

Anja Belz. 2003. And now with feeling: Developments
in emotional language generation. Technical Report
ITRI-03-21, Information Technology Research Insti-
tute, University of Brighton.

Rosalind Bryce, Matthew K. Oliver, Llinos Davies, He-
len Gray, Jamie Urquhart, and Xavier Lambin. 2011.
Turning back the tide of american mink invasion at an
unprecedented scale through community participation
and adaptive management. Biological Conservation,
144:575–583.

Fiorella de Rosis and Floriana Grasso, 2000. Affective
Interactions, volume 1814 of Lecture Notes in Artifi-
cial Intelligence, chapter Affective Natural Language
Generation. Springer-Verlag.

Saad Mahamood and Ehud Reiter. 2011. Generating af-
fective natural language for parents of neonatal infants.
In ENLG.

Martin Molina and Amanda Stent. 2010. A knowledge-
based method for generating summaries of spatial
movement in geographic areas. International Journal
on Artificial Intelligence Tools, 19(3):393–415.

Francois Portet, Ehud Reiter, Albert Gatt, Jim Hunter,
Somayajulu Sripada, Yvonne Freer, and Cindy Sykes.
2009. Automatic generation of textual summaries
from neonatal intensive care data. Artificial Intelli-
gence, 173:789–816.

M. Jordan Raddick, Georgia Bracey, Pamela L. Gay,
Chris J. Lintott, Phil Murray, Kevin Schawinski,
Alexander S. Szalay, and Jan Vandenberg. Published
online 2010. Galaxy zoo: Exploring the motivations
of citizen science volunteers. Astronomy Education
Review, 9(1), 010103, doi:10.3847/AER2009036.

Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building natural
language generation systems. Cambridge University
Press.

Ehud Reiter, Somayajulu Sripada, Jim Hunter, Jin Yu,
and Ian Davy. 2005. Choosing words in computer-
generated weather forecasts. Artificial Intelligence,
167:137–169.

Jonathan Silvertown. 2009. A new dawn for citizen sci-
ence. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 24:467–471.

Ielka Van der Sluis and Chris Mellish, 2010. Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Generation, volume
5980 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, chap-
ter Towards Empirical Evaluation of Affective Tactical
NLG. Springer, Berlin / Heidelberg.

Kavita E. Thomas, Somayajulu Sripada, and Matthijs L.
Noordzij. Published online 2010. Atlas.txt: Ex-
ploring linguistic grounding techniques for commu-
nicating spatial information to blind users. Journal
of Universal Access in the Information Society, DOI
10.1007/s10209-010-0217-5.

Nava Tintarev and Judith Masthoff. 2012. Evaluating
the effectiveness of explanations for recommender sys-
tems: Methodological issues and empirical studies on
the impact of personalization. User Modeling and
User-Adapted Interaction, (to appear).

Ross Turner, Somayajulu Sripada, Ehud Reiter, and Ian
Davy. 2008. Using spatial reference frames to gener-
ate grounded textual summaries of georeferenced data.
In INLG.

Joshua Underwood, Hilary Smith, Rosemary Luckin, and
Geraldine Fitzpatrick. 2008. E-science in the class-
room towards viability. Computers & Education,
50:535–546.

21


