



















































Translations of Ambiguous Hindi Pronouns to Possible Bengali Pronouns


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 125–134,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Translations of Ambiguous Hindi Pronouns to 

Possible Bengali Pronouns 

Sanjay Chatterji, Arnab Dhar, Sudeshna Sarkar, Anupam Basu 

Department of Computer Sc. & Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India 

Email: {schatt,arnabdhar,sudeshna,anupam}@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in 

ABSTRACT 

In a Hindi to Bengali transfer based machine translation system the baseline lexical 
transfer module replaces a Hindi word by its most frequent Bengali translation. Some 
pronouns in Hindi can have multiple translations in Bengali. The choices of actual 
translations have big impact on the accessibility of the translated sentence. The list of 
Hindi pronouns is small and their corresponding Bengali translations may be judged 
using a set of rules. In this paper, we are working on the translations of ambiguous 
Hindi pronouns to possible Bengali pronouns. We observed the uses of Hindi pronouns 
in a Hindi corpus and formulated the translation rules based on their translations in 
parallel Bengali corpus. 

1 Introduction 

Hindi and Bengali both originated from Old Indo-Aryan family of languages and are 
similar in structure. They have lot of similarities even though there are differences in the 
form of uses and positions of the words in corresponding sentences. According to Koul 
(2008), Hindi pronouns can be broadly categorized into seven types namely, Personal, 
Demonstrative, Indefinite, Relative-Correlative, Possessive, Interrogative and Reflexive. 
Among these Hindi pronouns some are used both as Personal, Demonstrative, and 
Relative-Correlative pronouns. In Bengali, there are different pronouns for each of these 
uses.  As the list of Hindi such pronouns is small and their uses are limited, it is possible 
to differentiate each use and find their Bengali translations using a set of linguistic rules. 

In a transfer based machine translation system source language words and phrases are 
transferred to suitable target language words and phrases. A baseline lexical transfer 
module transfers words and phrases to their most frequent translations. If a word is 
ambiguous then the module which finds its sense in the current context is referred to as 
Word Sense Disambiguator (WSD). Word sense disambiguation can be done using 
statistical and rule based approaches. Identifying uses of pronouns is one of the WSD 
tasks. 

In this paper, we propose rules for disambiguating ambiguous Hindi pronouns which 
will be translated to different Bengali pronouns in different constructs. We have 
developed these rules by analysing the sentences in a large Hindi corpus taken from 
Hindi story books, newspapers, web etc. and their translations in the parallel Bengali 
corpus. The rules are discussed with example Hindi sentences and their corresponding 
Bengali translations. The effects of the rules applied in the Hindi to Bengali transfer 
based Machine Translation (MT) system are evaluated and analysed. 

125



2 Related Work 

The correlative clauses in Hindi correlative constructions are discussed and analysed by 
Bhatt (2003), Kachru (1973), Srivastav (1991), Dayal (1996), etc. They have given 
extensive study on the use of Dem-XP adjunction structures (a noun phrase headed by a 
demonstrative pronoun) in the correlative constructions. Similar correlative clauses are 
also available in Bengali as discussed by Dasgupta (1980), Bagchi (1994), etc. 

Dash (2000) has developed a system to identify and analyse Bengali pronouns in corpus 
data. They have explored the morphological structure of Bengali pronouns in the corpus. 
The morphological structures of Bengali words (including pronouns) are also analysed 
by Bhattacharya et al. (2005). Prasad (2000) have investigated the uses of Hindi 
pronouns in corpus data. 

A few attempts have been made in formatting rules for translating pronouns for some 
language pairs. For example, Patel and Pareek (2010) have analysed the influence of 
grammatical properties in the translation of Hindi words (including pronouns) to 
Gujarati.  

Some work has been done on the analysis of the pronouns which are used as anaphora in 
Hindi and Bengali languages. A shared task has been carried out on anaphora resolution 
on these languages in ICON 2011 and the results of the participants are discussed in 
Sobha et al. (2011). 

3 Translation Rules for Ambiguous Hindi Pronouns 

Most of the Hindi pronouns have single translation in Bengali. Some of such pronouns 
which occur frequently in the corpus are listed in Table 1 with the corresponding Bengali 
translations. The transliteration into Roman using Itrans and English translations of 
these examples are also included.  

Hindi 

Pronoun 

Bengali 

Translation 

English 

Translation 

Hindi 

Pronoun 

Bengali 

Translation 

English 

Translation 

 (mai.N) (Ami) I (kauna)  (ke) who 
 (tui) you-

familiar 
 (kyA)  (ki) what 

 (tumi) you-normal कब (kaba) কখন(kakhana) when 
 (Apani) you-formal तव (taba) তখন(takhana) then 

TABLE 1 – List of some Hindi pronouns that have single translations in Bengali. 

Some Hindi pronouns are used to demonstrate both animate and inanimate nouns and 
as third person personal pronouns. For these three uses a single Hindi pronoun is used 
where in Bengali there are dedicated pronouns for each use. Given such a Hindi 
pronoun, we have to find its use in the corresponding sentence and translate it to 
corresponding Bengali pronoun. In this paper, we consider three such pronouns namely 

(yaha), (baha), and (jo) and identify their translation rules. 

126



Unlike Hindi, in certain cases classifiers are added to Bengali nouns and pronouns. We 
discuss the rules of adding the classifiers and case markers (suffixes) with the Bengali 
translations of the Hindi pronouns. 

3.1 Handling (yaha) 

Three different constructions of the Hindi pronoun (yaha) are shown below. 

1. The noun being demonstrated is present in the surface. 

2. The noun being demonstrated is absent and the absent noun is inanimate. 

3. The noun being demonstrated is absent and the absent noun is animate. In this 
case, the pronoun is usually a third person personal pronoun. 

In the first two cases the corresponding Bengali pronoun is . The singular 
classifiers (TA) or (Ti), the plural classifiers (gulo) or (guli), and the case 
markers (র (ra),  (ke),  (te), etc) are added with the Bengali nouns being 
demonstrated in the first case and with the Bengali pronouns in the second case where 
the noun is not present in the surface.  

In the third case the corresponding Bengali pronoun is (e). In this case, as the noun 
indicated by the pronoun does not follow it in the surface, the pronoun can be considered as 

personal pronoun. However, the features of the noun to which the pronoun is indicating is used 

when translated in Bengali. The singular classifier (Zero) and the plural classifier  (rA) 
is added with this pronoun when the indicated noun is animate. The Bengali pronoun (ei) is 
used when the indicated noun is inanimate and the singular classifiers (TA) or (Ti) and 
the plural classifiers (gulo) or (guli) are added with it. 

Example sentences for each construction of this Hindi pronoun and their translations in 
Bengali and English are shown in Table 2. 

Hindi 
Pronoun 

Us-
es 

Hindi Example 
Bengali 

Translation 
English 

Translation 

(yaha) 

1 
   | 

(yaha la.DakA merA 
bhAi hai.) 

 
(ei chheleTA AmAra 

bhAi.) 

This boy is 
my brother. 

2 | (yaha 
merA hai. )  

This is mine. 

3 ? (yaha 
kauna hai.) 

? (e ke?) Who is he? 

TABLE 2 – Examples of different constructions of Hindi pronoun  

3.2 Handling (baha) in simple construction 

The Hindi pronoun (baha) has the similar constructions as mentioned in Section 3.1. 
The rules of adding the classifiers and case markers are also similar In the first two 
cases the corresponding Bengali pronoun is (oi) and in the third case the 

127



corresponding Bengali pronoun is (o). Example sentences for each construction of this 
Hindi pronoun and their translations in Bengali and English are shown in Table 3. 

Hindi 
Pronoun 

Us-
es 

Hindi Example 
Bengali 

Translation 
English 

Translation 

(baha) 

1 
 

 
(oi bA.DiTA AmAra.) 

That home is 
mine. 

2  (baha 
merA hai.)  

That is mine. 

3 | (baha 
yA rahA hai.) 

|(o yAchchhe.) He is going. 

TABLE 3 – Examples of different constructions of Hindi pronoun  

3.3 Handling  (jo) - (baha) in relative-correlative construction 

The Hindi relative pronoun (jo) and the Hindi correlative pronoun (baha) have the 
similar constructions as mentioned in Section 3.1. The rules of adding the classifiers and 
case markers are also similar  In the first two cases the Bengali translations of these 
pronouns are (yei) and (sei) and in the third case these are (ye) and (se),

. In the third case when the Bengali plural classifier  (rA) is added with the 
pronouns then the orthographic changes are  (ye+rA=yArA) and  
(se+rA=tArA). Example sentences for each of these constructions for Hindi pronouns 
(jo) and (baha) and their translations in Bengali and English are shown in Table 4.  

Hindi 
Pronoun 

Us-
es 

Hindi Example 
Bengali 

Translation 
English 

Translation 

(jo) and 
बह (baha) 

1 

बह घर 

  |

 

| 

 

My home is 
your home 

too. 

2 
    बह |

 

   | 

 

Do what I am 
telling. 

3 
बह

| 
 

| 

 

Who is 
standing is 
my brother. 

TABLE 4 – Examples of different constructions of Hindi pronouns (jo) and  

The Hindi relative pronoun (jo) is sometimes followed by  (kUchha), सब (saba), 
etc. to indicate an abstract amount of things. In these cases the pronoun is translated to 
Bengali pronoun  (yA). An example of such construction is given below.   

 छ    बह सब  | (jo kUchha mai.Nne mA.ngA hai baha saba milA hai.) 

     সব | (yA kichhu Ami cheYechhi sei saba peYechhi.) 

128



Those which I wanted I got. 

According to Section 3.2 and the current section, different translations of Hindi pronoun 
and its inflected forms are shown in Table 5. Each empty cell indicates that the 

corresponding inflected form does not have the corresponding construction. 

 

 

TABLE 5 – Translations of different forms of  

3.4 Handling Hindi pronominal suffixes 

Hindi nominal suffixes  (ko),  (kA),  (se),  (pe), etc. are also used with Hindi 
pronouns. Different uses of these Hindi pronominal suffixes have different Bengali 
translations. The most frequent corresponding Bengali pronominal suffixes are  (ke), 
র (ra),  (theke), এ (e), etc. The suffixes which have different translations can be 
disambiguated with the help of rules. 

We have identified the rules of translating the pronominal Hindi suffix  (ko) as 
discussed below. Then, the rules for translating the Hindi suffix  (se) are discussed. 

The Hindi pronouns (ise) and (isako) as well as the Hindi pronouns 
and (usako) are used interchangeably. Now, (ise) and (use) Hindi 
pronouns have different Bengali translations for the following two different cases. 

1. If these pronouns indicate the things or persons to whom something is told, 
given, etc. then their corresponding translations are (eke) and (oke). In 
this case the Hindi word (ise) is + (yaha+ko) and (use) is +
(baha+ko). The corresponding Bengali translations are + (e+ke) and +
(o+ke), respectively.  

2. If these pronouns indicate the things (inanimate) which are being kept, given, 
etc. then their corresponding translations are (eiTA) (alternatively 
(eiTAke)) and (oiTA) (alternatively (oiTAke)). In this case the Hindi 
word (ise) is +0 (yaha+0) and (use) is +0 (baha+0). The 
corresponding Bengali translations are + (ei+TA) and + (oi+TA). 

The noun being indicated by these two pronouns can be animate or inanimate in the 
first case and are inanimate in the second case. Examples for each of these two uses of 

   (usa)   

Simple 1     

Simple 2     

Simple 3     

Correlative 1     

Correlative 2     

Correlative 3     

129



Hindi pronouns and their translations in Bengali and English are shown in Table 6. 

Ca
se 

Hindi Example Bengali Translation English 
Translation 

1  
(isalie ise brahmaku.nDa kahA 

yAtA hai.) 

 

(isalie use DA.nTatA hu.N.) 

 
(eijanya eke brahmakuNDa 

balA haYa.) 
 

(eijanya oke baki.) 

That's why it 
is called 

Brahmakund. 
That's why I 
scold him. 

2 (ise tuma rakha lo.) 

 
(use Thika se rakho.) 

 
(eiTA tumi rekhe dAo.) 

 
(oiTA Thika kare rAkho.) 

Keep it with 
you. 

Keep that 
carefully. 

TABLE 6 – Examples of different uses of Hindi pronouns and  

The Hindi pronoun (use) is also used as correlative pronoun and then its Bengali 
translations are (tAke) and (seiTA) (alternatively (seiTAke)) for these 
two cases, respectively.  

The Hindi pronominal suffix or postposition (se) can be translated to different Bengali 
suffixes and postpositions similar to the case on noun as discussed in Mukhopadhyay et 
al. (2008). Following are some examples of Hindi pronoun (usase) ( +  
(baha+se)) and its translations in Bengali and English, respectively. 

 (usase kuchha mata kaho.) 

  (oke kichhu bolo nA.) 
 Don't tell him anything. 

 (usase kuchha hI durI para merA ghara hai.) 

   (okhAna theke kichhu durei AmAra ghara.) 
 My home is near to that place. 

 (yaha ghara usase banA huA hai.) 

   (ei gharaTA oiTA diYe bAnAno.) 
 This home is made of that. 

3.5 Handling इस (isa), उस (usa),  (yahA.N) and  (uhA.N) 

There are some pronouns which are translated differently when they occur as inflected 
form in the surface. The Hindi pronouns इस (isa) and उस (usa) are used as 
demonstrative pronouns when they are not inflected and then their Bengali translations 
are এই (ei) and ওই (oi), respectively. When they are inflected, then the roots are 
translated as এ (e) and ও (o), respectively. 

Similarly, the Hindi pronouns  (yahA.N) and  (uhA.N) are translated to Bengali 
pronouns  (ekhAne) and  (okhAne) when they are not inflected and to Bengali 
pronouns  (ekhAna) and  (okhAna) when they are inflected. 

130



The examples of uses of such pronouns are shown below with Bengali and English 
translations. In the first example, first उस (usa) is not inflected and second उस (usa) is 
inflected and the corresponding translations are ওই (oi) and ও (o), respectively. In the 
second example, first उ  (uhA.N) is inflected and second  (uhA.N) is not inflected 
and the corresponding translations are ও  (okhAna) and  (okhAne), respectively. 

उस      मत  | (usa la.Dake ko usake bAre me.n mata bolo.) 
ওই  ওর    | (oi chheleTAke ora sambandhe bolo nA.) 
Don’t tell that boy about him. 

(उ  )   | (uhA.N se uhA.N yAo.) 
ও     | (okhAna theke okhAne yAo.) 
Go from there to there. 

4 Implementation 

To apply the rules for translating Hindi pronouns to Bengali it is important to decide 
whether the noun being demonstrated is present in the surface and to identify the 
animacy (whether animate or inanimate) of the demonstrated nouns. Based on these 
observations and the suffix value given by the Hindi morphological analyzer we translate 
them using the proposed rules. 

4.1 Identifying Animacy 

If the demonstrated noun is absent, then the animacy is not implicit. In this case, 
generally, the verb and the dependency relations provide the clue. The subjects (karta) of 
some activities like  (khAnA),  (khelanA), etc. are animate and their objects 
(karma) are inanimate. The indirect objects (gauna karma) of some activities like  
(bolanA),  (denA), etc. are animate and their direct objects (mukhya karma) are 
inanimate. We have listed 2 such types of verbs to identify the animacy. 

Sometimes we get the animacy information from other nouns or pronouns. The animacy 
of the noun of proposition (samanadhikaran) is same as the animacy of the 
corresponding subject (karta). Hindi question words also contain the animacy 
information which is same as the animacy of the corresponding subjects (karta). For 
example,  (kauna) is animate and  (kyA) is inanimate Hindi question words. We 
have copied the animacy features based on these agreements. 

4.2 Deciding whether the demonstrated noun is present in the 
surface 

Generally, if the demonstrated noun is present then it will immediately follow the 
pronoun. Sometimes, the demonstrative pronoun and the demonstrated noun are 
intervened by some adjectives. However, the nouns followed by these pronouns are not 
always the ones being demonstrated. In the following examples, the noun (ghara) is 
not being demonstrated. We hypothesize that if the immediately followed noun is not 
inflected (except pluralized) and no verb or conjunct immediately follow that noun then 
that noun is being demonstrated. We have implemented the decision module based on 

131



this hypothesis. 

 | (yaha ghara nahI.N hai.)   | (yaha ghara kA darabAjA hai.) 
| (eiTA bA.Di naYa.)            | (eiTA bA.Dira darajA.) 

This is not a home.               This is the door of the home. 

5 Evaluation 

We have used 100 Hindi sentences for testing the proposed rules. We are considering 
personal and demonstrative pronouns. There are 129 such pronouns in these test 
sentences. Out of them 19 are unique roots and remaining are the inflections of these 19 
roots. The detailed analyses of translations of pronouns are discussed below. 

5.1 Analysis 

The baseline transfer based MT system replaces these pronouns by their most frequent 
translations. Among 129 pronouns 103 pronouns are translated correctly by this baseline 
system. Then, the rules proposed in this paper are used as the transfer grammar rules in 
this baseline system. The 103 correct translations of the baseline system are also 
translated correctly by the modified system. Among other 26 other translations 21 are 
modified correctly (total 124 correct translations) using the rules and 5 are either not 
modified or the modification is also incorrect. 

Examples of input Hindi sentences from the 100 test sentences and their Bengali 
translations using the baseline and modified systems are shown and discussed below. 
Correct modifications are made boldface and others are underlined. 

1. Hindi Input:        , वह    । (jo puNya 
brahmaku.nDa me.n snAna se milatA hai, baha kahI.n nahI.n milatA hai.) 
English Translation: The favour you will get by bathing in Brahmakunda, that 
is not available anywhere. 
Baseline Output:      ,    | (yA puNya 
brahmakunDe snAna theke mele, se kothAo mele nA.) 
Modified Output:     ,    | (yei puNya 
brahmakunDe snAna theke mele, seiTA kothAo mele nA.) 

2. Hindi Input:    इन      ,       (jo 
bhI bhakta ina ma.ndiro.n me.n darshana hetu Ate hai.n, be inase pUjA jarUra 
karabAte hai.n.) 
English Translation: Whoever followers come in this temple for holy witness, 
those definitely worship by him. 
Baseline Output: ও  এ    ,  এর_    

| (yAo bhakta e mandire darshanera janya Ase, tArA era_theke pUjA 
niHsandehe karAYa.) 
Modified Output: ও  এই    ,  _    

| (yeio bhakta ei mandire darshanera janya Ase, tArA eke_diYe pUjA 
niHsandehe karAYa.) 

132



5.2 Evaluation of Effect of Rules in Machine Translation 

The translations of the 100 sentences by the baseline and the modified MT systems are 
used for automatic evaluation. Three reference translations are used to calculate the 
BLEU and NIST scores. The averages of three scores with respect to three different 
reference translations are shown in Table 7. 

 BLEU NIST 

Baseline MT system 0.1660 4.2142 

Modified MT system 0.1669 4.2514 

TABLE 7 – BLEU and NIST scores of the Baseline and Modified MT systems. 

6 Conclusion 

The problems in machine translation can be handled by capturing comprehensive and 
unified rules for different categories of words. This process is lengthy for some class of 
words like noun, verb, etc. where there are a large number of ambiguities. But the class 
of words in which the number of ambiguity is limited, there the rules may be helpful. For 
example, the proposed rules for translating ambiguous Hindi pronouns to Bengali may 
be implemented easily to solve the pronominal ambiguities. 

The statistical way of learning the rules for each category is a quick solution for the 
overall translation problems. The automatically learned rules for translation of Hindi 
pronouns to Bengali can be compared with these manually created rules in future. The 
effect of these rules in other applications like, anaphora resolution, question answering, 
etc. should also be tested in future. 

Acknowledgement 

This work is partially supported by the ILMT project sponsored by TDIL program of 
MCIT, Govt. of India. We would like to thank all the members in Communication 
Empowerment Lab, IIT Kharagpur. 

References 

Bagchi, T. (1994). Bangla Correlative Pronouns, Relative Clause Order and D-Linking, 
in M. Butt, T. H. King, and G. Ramchand (eds.), Theoretical Perspectives on Word Order 
in South Asian Languages, CSLI Lecture Notes, No. 50, CSLI, Stanford, California, pp. 
13–30. 

Bhatt, R. (2003). Locality in Correlatives. In Natural Language & Linguistic Theory, 
Vol. 21, No. 3, pp. 485–541. 

Bhattacharya, S., Choudhury, M., Sarkar, S., and Basu, A. (2005). Inflectional 
morphology synthesis for Bengali noun, pronoun and verb systems, in Proceedings of 
the national conference on computer processing of Bangla (NCCPB), pp. 34–43. 

133



Dash, N. S. (2000). Bangla Pronouns - a Corpus Based Study. In Literary and 
Linguistic Computing, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 433-443. 

Dasgupta, P. (1980). Questions and Relative and Complement Clauses in a Bangla 
Grammar. unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, New York University. 

Dayal, V. (1996). Locality in Wh-Quantification: Questions and Relative Clauses in 
Hindi. Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy, No. 62, Kluwer, Dordrecht. 

Kachru, Y. (1973). Some Aspects of Pronominalization and Relative Clause Con-
struction in Hindi-Urdu, in B. B. Kachru (ed.), Papers on South Asian Linguistics, Vol. 
3.2, Studies in the Linguistic Sciences, Department of Linguistics, University of Illinois, 
Urbana, pp. 87–103. 

Koul, O. N. (2008). Book Title: Modern Hindi Grammar. Dunwoody Press, Springfield, 
VA 22150, USA. 

Mukhopadhyay, S., Barik, B., and Sarkar, S. (2008). Problems of Transfer Grammar: 
The Hindi Postpositional Correlatives in Bangla. In Proceedings of 6th International 
Conference on Natural Language Processing (ICON 2008), Pune, India. 

Patel, K. A., and Pareek, J. S. (2010). Rule base to resolve translation problems due to 
differences in gender properties in sibling language pair Gujarati-Hindi. In 
Proceedings of Computer and Communication Technology (ICCCT), pp.776-781. 

Prasad, R. (2000). A Corpus Study of Zero Pronouns in Hindi: An Account Based on 
Centering Transition Preferences. In Proceedings of DAARC 2000, Discourse Anaphora 
and Reference Resolution Conference. Lancaster University, 66-71. 

Sobha, L., Bandyopadhyay, S., Ram, V. S., and A., Akiladeswari. (2011). NLP Tool 
Contest @ICON2011 on Anaphora Resolution in Indian Languages. In Proceedings of 
ICON2011 NLP Tools Contest: Anaphora Resolution in Indian Languages, Chennai, 
India. 

Srivastav, V. (1991). The Syntax and Semantics of Correlatives. Natural Language and 
Linguistic Theory 9, pp. 637–686. 

 

 

134


