



















































Automatic Generation of the Universal Word Explanation from UNL Ontology


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex-III), pages 137–146,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Multilingual Universal Word Explanation Generation from 
UNL Ontology 

Khan Md. Anwarus Salam
1,3 

Hiroshi Uchida
1,2   Tetsuro Nishino

3 

(1) UNDL Foundation, Tokyo, Japan. 
(2) United Nation University, Tokyo, Japan. 

(3) The University of Electro-Communications, Tokyo, Japan. 

salamkhan@uec.ac.jp, uchida@undl.org, nishino@uec.ac.jp 

ABSTRACT 

To develop a common language, it is essential to have enough vocabulary to express all the 

concepts contained in all the world languages. Those vocabularies can only be developed by 

native speakers and should be defined by formal ways. Considering the situation, at this moment 

Universal Networking Language (UNL) is the best solution as the common language, and 

Universal Words (UWs) are the most promising candidates to represent all the world concepts in 

different languages. However, UWs itself are formal and not always to be understandable for 

human. To ensure every language speakers can create the correct UWs dictionary entry, we need 

to provide the explanation of UWs in different natural languages for humans. As there are 

millions of UWs, it is very expensive to manually build the UWs explanation in all natural 

languages. To solve this problem, this research proposes the way to auto generate the UWs 

explanation in UNL, using the property inheritance based on UW System. Using UNL 

DeConverter from that UNL the system can generate the explanation in more than 40 languages.  

KEYWORDS : UNL; Ontology; Word Semantics; NLP; 

1 Introduction 

To break the language barrier we need to have an artificial common language. For developing 

such a common language, it is essential to have enough vocabulary to express all the concepts 

contained in all the world languages. Because, human can understand the dictionary entries by 

reading the explanation (or meaning) of concepts in natural language. However, those concept 

dictionaries in different languages can only be developed by native speakers. Those universal 

concepts should be defined by formal ways. 

Considering the situation, at this moment Universal Networking Language (UNL) is the best 

solution and Universal Words (UWs) are the most promising candidates. UNL represents natural 

language sentences as a semantic network with hyper nodes. In this semantic network, nodes 

represent concepts and arcs represent relations between concepts. These concepts are referred as 

UWs. UWs themselves are formal but not always to be understandable by human. As human 

should provide the dictionary entries in different language, it is essential to have UWs 

explanation in different natural language. As there are millions of UWs, it is very expensive to 

manually build all the UWs explanation in all natural languages.  

UNL Ontology is a semantic network with hyper nodes. It contains UW System which describes 
the hierarchy of the UWs in lattice structure, all possible semantic co-occurrence relations between 
each UWs and UWs definition in UNL. With the property inheritance based on UW System, 
possible relations between UWs can be deductively inferred from their upper UWs and this 
inference mechanism reduces the number of binary relation descriptions of the UNL Ontology. In 

137



the topmost level UWs are divided into four categories: adverbial concept, attributive concept, 
nominal concept and predicative concept.  

Since UNL Ontology provides the semantic background of each UWs, the goal of this research is 

to auto generate the UWs meaning from UNL Ontology. Current UNL ontology contains around 

1466598 unique concepts or UWs. So the goal of this research is to auto generate the natural 

language explanation for all these UWs. UNL ontology is developed in general domain.  

Beside UNL Ontology there are other popular lexical resources available in general domain like 

WordNet (Miller, 1995), EDR dictionary etc. However, from other general ontologies currently it 

is not possible to auto generate the explanation for the concepts in different languages. To 

generate such explanation automatically, this research has been inspired from the unique 

architectural design of UNL (Uchida et. al. 1999). As the UNL systems are successfully 

implemented and became available online recently, it is possible to utilize UNL architecture now. 

The original idea of auto generating the explanation for different concepts in different languages 

is very new. There is no other existing ontology available which attempted to auto generate the 

explanation in different languages from the ontology itself.  

This research proposes the way to auto generate the UWs explanation in UNL from the semantic 

background provided by UNL Ontology. The system first discover a graph the 

SemanticWordMap, which contains all direct and deductively inferred relations for one particular 

UW from the UNL Ontology. Using UNL DeConverter from that UNL the system can generate 

the explanation in more than 40 languages.  This auto generated explanation will help the human 

to understand the UWs meaning to provide their corresponding dictionary entries. So beside the 

general users, this system is useful for the UWs dictionary builders and the editors. 

With the property inheritance based on UW System, the system converts SemanticWordMap 

relations into UNL graph using rule-based approach. Finally from this UNL graph, UNL 

DeConverter generates the UWs meaning in different natural languages. 

 

2 BACKGROUND  

2.1 Universal Networking Language (UNL) 

UNL initiative was originally launched in 1996 as a project of the Institute of Advanced 
Studies of the United Nations University (UNU/IAS)

1
. UNL was first introduced to public in 1999 

(Uchida et. al. 1999). In 2001, the United Nation University set up the UNDL Foundation
2
, to be 

responsible for the development and management of the UNL project. In 2005, a new technical 
manual of UNL was published (Uchida et. al. 2005), which defined UNL as an information and 
knowledge representation language for computer. UNL has all the components to represent 
knowledge described in natural languages. UWs constitute the vocabulary of UNL and each 
concept of natural languages has unique UW. A UW of UNL is defined in the following format: 

<uw> =:: <headword>[<constraint list>] 

Here, headword of a UW is an English expression which can be a word, a compound word, a 
phrase or a sentence. UWs are the basic elements for constructing one UNL expression of a 

                                                           
1http://www.ias.unu.edu/ 
2http://www.undl.org/ 

138



sentence or a compound concept. So keys to the information in UNL database are UW. UWs are 
inter-linked with other UWs using “relations” to form the UNL expressions of sentences. These 
relations specify the role of each word in a sentence. Using "attributes" it can express the 
subjectivity of author. Currently, UWs are available for many languages such as Arabic, Bengali, 
Chinese, English, French, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Mongolian, Russian, Spanish, and so forth. 

Each UWs are interlinked with each other through the UW System in the UNL Ontology. 
Master definitions for UWs describe all relations that a UW can hold. A minimum set of relations 
is used as constraints of UW for the purpose to make a UW distinguishable from sibling UWs.  

2.2 UNL Ontology 

UNL Ontology is a lattice structure where UWs are inter-connected through relations including 
hierarchical relations such as icl (a-kind-of) and iof (an-instance-of). UNL Ontology includes 
possible relations between UWs, UWs definition and UNL system hierarchy.  In the UNL 
Ontology, all possible semantic co-occurrence relations, such as 'agt', 'obj', etc, between UWs are 
defined based on the UW System. Every possible semantic co-occurrence relation is defined 
between the two most general UWs in the hierarchy of the UW System that can have the relation. 
With the property inheritance characteristic of the UW System, possible relations between lower 
UWs are deductively inferred from their upper UWs and this inference mechanism reduces the 
number of binary relation descriptions of the UNL Ontology. In the topmost level UWs are 
divided into 4 categories adverbial concept, attributive concept, nominal concept and predicative 
concept.  

 

FIGURE 1 – UWs hierarchy in UNL Ontology. 
Figure 1 shows the topmost level of partial UNL Ontology where the black directed lines 

represent “icl” relation and dotted directed lines represent “agt” relations. In Figure 1 we only 

139



expanded partial “nominal concept” until “dog(icl>mammal)”  to give a brief overview of the 
UNL Ontology. In UNL Ontology each UWs have incoming and outgoing relations with other 
UWs, which define the semantic background.  For example in Figure 1 “animal(icl>living thing)” 
has two incoming relations, “agt” from “eat(agt>animal,obj>food)”, and “icl” from “volitional 
thing”. “animal(icl>living thing)” has only one outgoing relation “icl” to “mammal(icl>animal)”. 
As possible relations between lower UWs are deductively inferred from their upper UWs, we can 
infer that “mammal(icl>animal)”, “canine(icl>mammal)” and “dog (icl>mammal)” also has an 
incoming relation “agt” from “eat(agt>animal,obj>food)”.  

2.3 UNL Explorer  

UNL Explorer
3
 is a web based application, which combines all the components of UNL system 

to be accessible online. UNL Explorer users can translate the documents in various languages such 
as UNL, English, Japanese and Arabic etc. UNL Society members can add or edit information 
using UNL Explorer. It allows users to view the UNL Ontology which contains UWs hierarchy (a 
lattice structure) in a plain tree form. It can also display incoming and outgoing relationships for 
each UW.  

 

FIGURE 2 – UW search result for “wear” from UNL Ontology 
UNL Explorer provides UNL Enconverter for natural language to UNL conversion. It also 

provides UNL Deconverter for UNL to natural language conversion. Both UNL EnConverter and 
Deconverter support different languages such as Chinese, English, Japanese and so forth. UNL 

                                                           
3http://www.undl.org/unlexp/ 

140



Explorer users can browse UNL Ontology from the Universal Words frame in the left side. Figure 
2 shows sample UNL Ontology search result for the word “wear”. 

UNL Explorer also provides an advanced search facility. Users can check incoming and 
outgoing relationships using this facility. Both UNL Ontology search mechanism is accessible for 
computer program using UNL Explorer API. However, to use this API, user need to be a UNL 
society member by signing an agreement with UNDL Foundation. 

3 Multilingual Explanation Generation 

The system framework for the multilingual explanation generation of the UWs is illustrated in 
Figure 3. The input of this system is one UW and the output of the system is the meaning of that 
UW in natural language such as English. For the given UW, the system first discover a 
SemanticWordMap, which contains all direct and deductively inferred relations for one particular 
UW from the UNL Ontology. So input of this step is one UW and output of this step is the 
WordMap graph. In next step we convert the WordMap graph into UNL using conversion rules. 
This conversion rules can generate “From UWs only” and “From UNL Ontology”, based on user’s 
requirement. So input of this step is the WordMap graph and Output is the UNL expression. In the 
final step we describe in natural language by converting the UNL expression using UNL 
DeConverter, provided by UNL Explorer. 

 

FIGURE 3 - System framework for multilingual explanation generation for UWs 

3.1 SemanticWordMap 

To discover inferred relationships, the system first discovers the SemanticWordMap (Salam et. 
el. 2011), which contains all direct and deductively inferred relations for one particular UW from 
the UNL Ontology. Edges of this graph are the relations of UNL Ontology. In UNL Ontology each 
relation is connected from “fromUW” to “toUW”. Starting from a given UW we discover the 
SemanticWordMap graph which includes deductively inferred relationships. A maximum search 
depth is established to limit the size of the graph.  

 

141



 

FIGURE 4- SemanticWordMap algorithm 

To discover the SemanticWordMap graph from UNL Ontology user has to give a particular 
UW. First the algorithm adds that UW into the wordMap graph. For each outgoing relation from 
that UW, it add toUW into the wordMap and then recursively call SemanticWordMap(toUW) to 
discover the relations from toUW. Then for each incoming relationship it adds the fromUW with 
relation into the wordMap graph. If the relationship is not “icl”, it adds the expanded graph by 
recursively calling SemanticWordMap(fromUW). As UNL Ontology contains a huge number of 
UWs and relationships, we have a heuristic approach to limit the SemanticWordMap graph to 
produce meaningful and specific information. So the algorithm keep discovering the graph until it 
reach maximum search depth or if it reach the topmost UW. Finally it returns the wordMap graph 
which contains all the UW relations.  

For example, Figure 5 shows the partial SemanticWordMap for dog(icl>mammal). The output 
of this first step is the SemanticWordMap discovered from UNL Ontology. Here dotted arrows 
represent “agt” relations and black arrows are “icl” relations. 

142



 

FIGURE 5- Partial SemanticWordMap for dog(icl>mammal) 

3.2 Convert SemanticWordMap Into UNL 

In this step we convert SemanticWordMap relations into UNL using some generalized rules. 

We first categorize the UWs into several categories such as “do”, “is-a”, “occur” and “be”. In 

general “do” categories represent actions, “is-a” represent features, “occur” represents changes 

and “be” represents status. Due to the property inheritance characteristic of the UNL Ontology, 

possible relations between lower UWs are deductively inferred from their upper UWs. Using 

SemanticWordMap we deductively infer the relationship with dog(icl>mammal). For example 

from Figure 3 we can say that UWs walk(agt>animal) and die(agt>animal)  are related with 

dog(icl>mammal) as well.  

TABLE I.  CATEGORIZED RELATIONS FOR DOG(ICL>MAMMAL) 

UW 
Categorized from SemanticWordMap 

UW Categories Description 

DOG 

(icl>mammal) 
do  whine, walk, die…. 

 Is-a canine, mammal, animal, .. 

143



Table I shows the categorized relations from SemanticWordMap for the UW dog(icl>mammal), 

and the generated description categorized into several UW relationship types. Steven Pinker 

pointed out that there are specified connections between verbs and object types in (Pinker, 2007). 

In this direction, we have manually identified such rules. After categorization we can convert the 

relations into UNL expression using different rules for each category. All these rules are 

currently designed by human.  

After categorization we can convert the relations into UNL expression using different rules for 

each category. For example Figure 6 shows UWs relation derived from SemanticWordMap. To 

convert these category UWs relations into UNL, we use the following “Rule 1”: 

(Rule 1: do)  If (isaKindof(UW2,”do”)) agt(UW3:08.@entry.@ability,UW1:00.@topic) 

 

 

FIGURE 6: do relations derived from SemanticWordMap 

Rule 1 check whether UW2 is related with “do” by using “isaKindof (UW2,”do”). For example 

if isaKindof(“do (agt>dog)”,”do”) = TRUE, then the generated UNL is: 

agt(whine(agt>dog):08.@entry.@ability,dog(icl>mammal):00.@topic) 

 

FIGURE 7: icl relations derived from SemanticWordMap 

Figure 7 shows “icl” relation derived from SemanticWordMap. To convert this UWs into UNL 

we use following “Rule 2”: 

(Rule 2: is-a)  If (isaKindof(UW1,UW2)) icl(uw1:09, uw2:0F) 

Rule 2 check whether UW1 has “icl” relationship by using “isaKindof (UW1,UW2). For 

example isaKindof(“dog (icl>mammal)”,”canine(icl>mammal)”) = TRUE, so the generated UNL 

is: icl(dog(icl>mammal):09,     canine(icl>mammal): 0F) 

The above mechanism works for UWs under “nominal concepts”. For other types of UWs such 

as “attributive concepts” we need to use different set of rules. For the UW 

write(agt>person,obj>report), we can get the partial SemanticWordMap as shown in Figure 7. 

From Figure 8 using from UWs only we can get UNL expression for “Person write a report”. 

However in the meaning of the UW we should not use that concept. Instead we can use 

immediate higher UW concept. So in this case instead of “write” we can use “produce”. By 

replacing person with someone we can get the UNL expression for “Someone produce a report”. 

In this way, using different rules the system can convert SemanticWordMap relations into UNL. 

144



 

 

 

 

FIGURE 8: UNL Relations from UWs only 

3.3 Describe in natural language 

Finally, we used UNL DeConverter to convert the UNL expressions into natural languages. UNL 

DeConverter is a language independent generator that provides a framework for syntactic and 

morphological generation as well as co-occurrence-based word selection for natural collocation. 

It can deconvert UNL expressions into a variety of native languages, using a number of linguistic 

data such as Word Dictionary, Grammatical Rules and Co-occurrence Dictionary of each 

language. We used UNL DeConverter to convert the UNL into several natural languages such as 

English, Japanese etc.  

3.4 Implementation in UNL Explorer 

Finally the explanation can be expressed in different natural languages such as in English, 

Japanese or other languages using UNL DeConverter. Determining this kind of relationship can 

be very useful for knowledge engineering. For experiment we implemented the proposed method 

in UNL Explorer. Our implementation could successfully produce 1466598 UWs explanation in 

UNL. Table II shows some sample UWs explanation generated by the proposed method. Here, 

we only reported sample explanations in English and Japanese, together with the UNL 

expression. 

TABLE II.  SAMPLE UWS MEANINGS AUTO GENERATED USING OUR PROPOSED MECHANISM 

Universal 

Word 

Explanation Generated from UNL Ontology in Different Languages 

English Japanese UNL 

write(agt>

person,obj

>report)  

Someone 

produce a 

report 

誰かが報告書
を作成する 

agt(produce(icl>manufacture(agt>thing,obj

>thing)):08.@entry,  someone:00.@topic) 

obj(produce(icl>manufacture(agt>thing,obj

>thing)):08,  report(icl>account) :0I) 

Dog 

(icl>mam

mal) 

Dog is a 

canine, 

mammal and 

animal. Dog 

can eat, whine, 

walk and die. 

犬は犬、哺乳

類 や 動 物 で

す。犬は、食

べて駄々をこ

ね る 、 歩 い

て、死ぬこと

ができます。 

aoj(:01.@entry,dog(icl>mammal):00) 

and:01(animal(icl>living thing):0S.@entry, 

mammal(icl>animal):0H) 

and:01(mammal(icl>animal):0H,canine(icl>t

ooth):09.@indef)  

145



Using UNL expressions and UNL DeConverter it is possible to generate the explanation in more 

than 40 languages as well. However, the quality of the explanation depends on the quality of that 

language DeConverter. Therefore precision of the system highly relies on UNL DeConverter and 

the semantic background provided by UNL Ontology. As the users of this system are the editors 

of UNL Ontology, it helps them to improve the quality of manually built UNL ontology. The 

UNL dictionary builders can also differentiate the UWs from the natural language explanation 

without understanding the UNL language. 

Conclusion  

In this research we proposed the way to auto generate the meaning of each UWs using UNL 
Ontology. However, UNL Ontology by nature is a growing resource with millions of UWs. As 
UWs are not always understandable by human, the explanatory sentences are needed to develop 
necessary UWs for every language. For explaining UWs meaning it is necessary to auto generate 
from the same representation. Using our proposed solution computer can auto generate the 
meaning of UWs in more than 40 natural languages.  

References 

George A. Miller. 1995. WordNet: A Lexical Database for English. Communications of the 

ACM Vol. 38, No. 11: 39-41. 

H. Uchida, M. Zhu, and T. Della Senta. “The Universal Networking Language”, 2nd ed. UNDL 

Foundation, 2005. 

H. Uchida, M. Zhu, T. Della Senta. “A gift for a millenium”. Tokyo: IAS/UNU. 1999.. 

Khan Md. Anwarus Salam, Hiroshi Uchida and Tetsuro Nishino. “How to Develop Universal 

Vocabularies Using Automatic Generation of the Meaning of Each Word”, 7th International 

Conference on Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Engineering (NLPKE'11), 

Tokushima, Japan. ISBN: 978-1-61284-729-0. Page 243 – 246. 2011. 

Steven Pinker. The Stuff of Thought: Language As a Window Into Human Nature. USA. 2007. 

146


