



















































Bidirectional Bengali Script and Meetei Mayek Transliteration of Web Based Manipuri News Corpus


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on South and Southeast Asian Natural Language Processing (SANLP), pages 181–190,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Bidirectional Bengali Script and Meetei Mayek 
Transliteration of Web Based Manipuri News Corpus 

Thoudam Doren Singh 

Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (CDAC) 
Gulmohor Cross Road No 9, Juhu 

Mumbai-400049, India 

thoudam.doren@gmail.com 

ABSTRACT 

The transliteration has attracted interest of several sections of researchers. Several techniques of 

transliteration have been developed and used – both statistical based approaches and rule based 

approaches. In the present method, a simple but effective rule based technique is developed for 

the transliteration between Bengali script and Meetei Mayek script of written Manipuri text. 

Typically, transliteration is carried out between two different languages –one as a source and the 

other as a target. But, for the languages which use more than one script, it becomes essential to 

introduce transliteration between the scripts. This is the reason why the present task is carried out 

between Bengali script and Meetei Mayek for Manipuri language. The proposed rule based 

approach points out the importance of deeper linguistic rule integration in the process by making 

use of the monosyllabic characteristics of Manipuri language. The Bengali script to Meetei 

Mayek transliteration system based on the proposed model gives higher precision and recall 

compared to the statistical model. But, in contrast to that, the statistical based approach gives 

higher precision and recall compared to the rule based approach for the reverse transliteration. 

 

KEYWORDS : Meetei Mayek, Bengali Script, Transliteration, Monosyllabic  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

181



1 Introduction 

Manipuri language is in eighth schedule of the constitution of India and spoken approximately by 

three million people mainly in the state of Manipur in India and in the neighbouring countries 

namely Bangladesh and Myanmar. It is a less privileged Tibeto-Burman language and highly 

agglutinative in nature, influenced and enriched by the Indo-Aryan languages of Sanskrit origin 

and English. The Manipuri or Meeteiron is represented using two different scripts, viz. Bengali 

script and Meetei Mayek (also known as Meitei Mayek). So, it is essential to produce a Manipuri 

text both in Bengali script as well as Meetei Mayek. The Meetei Mayek is the original script used 

to represent Manipuri language. It may be noted that Manipuri is the only Tibeto-Burman 

language which has its own script. We carry out transliteration to cope up with different writing 

systems by converting from one writing system to another writing system between Bengali script 

and Meetei Mayek. Transliteration is used in several applications of natural language processing 

such as machine translation, named entity transliteration, out of vocabulary transliteration and 

cross lingual information retrieval etc. The proposed rule based approach points out the 

importance of deeper linguistic rule integration in the transliteration process by making use of the 

monosyllabic characteristics. Natural language processing tasks for Manipuri language is at the 

very initial stage and most of the tools available so far do not perform at the required measure 

and more importantly, there is not enough digitized Manipuri language resources, be it 

monolingual or bilingual.  

2 Related Work 

The transliteration models can be categorized as grapheme based, phoneme-based and hybrid 

based. The grapheme based model (Li et al, 2004) is the direct orthographic mapping and only 

uses orthography-related features while phoneme based model (Knight and Graehl, 1998) works 

on phonetic correspondence to generate the target text. The hybrid method refers to the 

combination of several different models which may use other knowledge source. The papers by 

(Gao, 2004), (Knight and Graehl, 1998), (Virga and Khudanpur, 2003) report the attempt to build 

statistical transliteration model. In this approach, the transliteration model performance is limited 

by what it sees during the training process from the training data. This approach faces one 

important challenge to disambiguate the noise introduced during the training process for reverse / 

backward transliteration. The reason behind is that some of the silent syllable may be lost due to 

the noisy model as in the case of Chinese-English transliteration (Yang et al, 2008). Some of the 

researchers devised methods to improve the statistical approach by making use of bilingual 

resources. 

Manipuri is a resource constrained language and a bilingual resource is very limited (Singh and 

Bandyopadhyay, 2010a). The first Manipuri to English transliteration is reported for the named 

entities using modified joint source channel model (Ekbal et al., 2006) and is used in the parallel 

corpora extraction from comparable news corpora (Singh and Bandyopadhyay, 2010b) and 

reused in the Manipuri to English example based machine translation system (Singh and 

Bandyopadhyay, 2010c) and Phrase Based Statistical Machine Translation (PBSMT) system 

development (Singh and Bandyopadhyay, 2011). The performance of the rule based approach is 

improved by integrating syllable based unit as transliteration unit (TU) in the present grapheme 

based approach. However, Manipuri being a tonal language, there is loss of accents for the tonal 

words. There is essence of intonation in Manipuri text; but differentiation between Bengali 

182



characters such as ি  (i) and    (ee) or    (u) and    (oo) cannot be made using Meetei Mayek. 
This increases the lexical ambiguity on the transliterated Manipuri words in Meetei Mayek script.  

To the best of our knowledge, the present task of transliterating from Meetei Mayek to Bengali is 

the first attempt so far. This attempt is essential for the generation who are accustomed to Bengali 

script only prior to full fledged reinstatement of Meetei Mayek at schools, offices and 

administrative levels. 

3 The Manipuri News Corpus 

The web walked into the ACL meetings starting in 1999 as a source of linguistic data. In recent 

times, there are online Manipuri news websites available such as 

http://www.thesangaiexpress.com/ where the news items are published in both Manipuri and 

English. Some other websites are http://www.ifp.co.in/ published in English; 

http://www.poknapham.in/ published in Manipuri and http://www.hueiyenlanpao.com/ is 

published in both English and Manipuri (in both Bengali script and Meetei Mayek script). 

However, the Manipuri news is available only in PDF format from these websites. A web based 

Manipuri news corpus collection is reported (Singh and Bandyopadhyay, 2010a) using the 

Bengali script in Unicode format. The resource constrained Manipuri language news corpus is 

collected from http://www.thesangaiexpress.com/. At present, there is a Manipuri news 

monolingual corpus of 4 million wordforms in Bengali script Unicode format. Our experiment 

makes use of this corpus on news domain. The news items cover national and international news, 

brief news, editorial, letter to editor, articles, sports etc. The local news coverage is more than the 

national and international news in these websites. The corpus is tokenized and cleaned to 

minimise spelling errors. 

4 Manipuri scripts and Linguistic Features 

Manipuri uses two different scripts – Bengali Script
1
 and Meetei Mayek

2
 (Unicode range: ABC0-

ABFF of Unicode Standard Version 6.0) also known as Meitei Mayek script to some linguists. 

The Bengali script has 52 consonants and 12 vowels. The Meetei Mayek has 27 letters (Iyek 

Ipee), 8 dependent vowel signs (Cheitap Iyek), 8 final consonants (Lonsum Iyek), 10 digits 

(Cheising Iyek) and 3 punctuation (Cheikhei, Lum Iyek and Apun Iyek). The transliteration 

models convert source text to target text based on the phonetic equivalent mapping. Though there 

can be direct one-to-one mapping for the 27 Meetei Mayek letter (Iyek Ipee) to Bengali script,  

there are some Bengali scripts which does not have a one-to-one direct mapping to Meetei Mayek 

such as ( ঋ,  ক্ষ,   , ঞ,    etc.) which has resulted in the loss of target representation. This is the 
most basic problem with grapheme based transliteration system. An important question is – how 

do we handle these characters in Manipuri text with Bengali script for the transliteration into 

Meetei Mayek. An expert level agreement on mapping these characters to Meetei Mayek is the 

need of the hour in order to improve the rules based transliteration performance between the two 

scripts. 

                                                           
1 http://unicode.org/charts/PDF/U0980.pdf 
2 http://unicode.org/charts/PDF/UABC0.pdf 

183



5 Bengali script to Meetei Mayek Transliteration 

Our method has two advantages. Firstly, there is a sizable monolingual Manipuri news corpus 

available to be used. Secondly, our method can be improved by including syllable based 

transliteration unit to the existing list of TU. Concretely, there are two phases involved in our 

approach. In the first phase, we split the individual words into syllables, and then a syllable based 

searching can be employed to revise the result. In the second phase, for any syllable unit or TU 

match, it is searched from the list of TUs and the corresponding mapping unit is picked up from 

the mapping table and the syllables are concatenated to form the target word. Two different 

models are developed – baseline and monosyllabic based model. 

5.1 Baseline Model 

As a baseline system, a grapheme based – that is character to character and numeral to numeral 

transliteration is carried out. A hand crafted one-to-one mapping rule between Bengali script and 

Meetei Mayek is established and transliteration is carried out. However, there is no exact one-to-

one correspondence between each phoneme associated with each Bengali script grapheme and 

Meetei Mayek grapheme. A direct one-to-one grapheme for the conjuncts between Bengali script 

and Meetei Mayek is not possible based on the order of appearance of each character. This model 

has several drawbacks including the mishandling of conjuncts. Hence, this model does not give a 

reasonably good transliteration. So, the several NLP tools developed using the transliterated 

corpus using this model suffers very badly in terms of performance. 

5.2 Syllable Based Model 

As a baseline system, a grapheme based – that is character to character and numeral to numeral 

transliteration is carried out. There is no one-to-one correspondence between phoneme associated 

with the Bengali script grapheme and Meitei Mayek grapheme. So, a hand crafted rule between 

this is established and transliteration is carried out. This scheme has several drawbacks including 

the mishandling of conjuncts. There is no direct one-to-one grapheme for the conjuncts as well. 

Thus, the injective function behaviour does not suit between the two character sets for 

transliteration. Hence, this model does not give a reasonably good transliteration.  

Bengali Script Meetei Mayek 

ষ, স, শ,  ছ K (Sam) 
ন, ণ e (Na) 
ট, ত f (Til) 
থ, ঠ F (Thou) 
য়, য \ (Yang) 
দ, ড r (Dil) 
ঢ, ধ R (Dhou) 
উ, ঊ B (Un) 
ই, ঈ T (Ee) 

র, ড়, ঢ় j (Rai) 
ি ,    g (Inap) 
  ,    b (Unap) 

TABLE 1 – Many-to-One mapping table. 

184



Based on the above observation, there is no possibility of one-to-one mapping between the two 

scripts for all the Meitei Mayek scripts as given in table 1, a syllable based transliteration model  

is developed. One of the most significant shortfalls is that – the conjuncts which are appearing in 

the Bengali representations need to be addressed as a single transliteration unit. Use of conjuncts 

using Bengali script of Manipur text is very common and large in numbers. The overall conjunct 

representation is many-to-many characters in nature for the bilingual transliteration task of 

Bengali-Manipuri language pair. Some of the example words using the conjuncts are given as: 

প্রেসন  wDjlKe   (press-na) 
িডিিকিক   rgKfDjgdsg (district-ki) 

প্রসক্রেটিরক্রয়ত্তা  KlsDjlfjg\lGf (secretariate-ta) 
প্রেক্ররাল   wlfDjOM (petrol) 

And the Bengali script conjuncts and its constituents along with the Meetei Mayek notation for 

the above examples are as given below:  

প্রে   ে +   র + প্র          wDjl 
িি   ষ + ট +   র + ি     KfDjg 

প্রে  ক + র + প্র       sDjl 
প্ররা  ট + র + প্র া   fDjO 

One of the observations is that vowels presentation of Bengali and Meetei Mayek is not in the 

same order. Again, the প্র  (l-e) is a constituent of প্র া ( O-o) and প্র   ( y -ou) . This may result in 
the misinterpretation in case of character by character transliteration. Over and above, the 

conjuncts need to be fragmented down towards its basic units. In such occurrences the one-to-one 

mapping fails to work as given in the order. So, a better solution to this problem is addressed in 

the proposed syllable based model. Since Manipuri is monosyllabic and highly agglutinative, it is 

essential to analyze at the syllable level for each word. Each syllable can be represented by a 

group of characters also termed as transliteration unit (TU). Inside this TU, there can be 

conjuncts such as (ঙ+ক = ঙ্ক) .In this syllable based model, the monosyllabic TU with the highest 
number of characters are picked from a table, i.e., a many-to-many model. This table maintains 

the Bengali TU and its corresponding Meetei Mayek representation as shown in table 2. The step 

is repeated towards the smaller conjuncts up to single character level. This technique is 

specifically effective for the transliteration of the same language with different scripts. 

Bengali Script Meetei Mayek 

প্ররা fDjO 
প্রে sDjl 
প্রে wDjl` 
িি KfDjg 

TABLE 2 – Sample transliteration unit mapping between Bengali and Meitei Mayek scripts 

The mapping tables have been prepared at different levels with separate tables for single 

characters and conjuncts with two or more than two characters. The single character mapping 

table contains 72 entries and the multiple characters mapping table consists of 738 entries. There 

are conjuncts of 2, 3 and 4 characters. Sub-tables for each of the conjuncts are prepared. The 

many-to-many character based syllables are collected from the news corpus based on its 

185



occurrence and iterative procedure till it covers the written text in the corpus followed by one-to-

one mapping. First of all, we split the transliteration candidate TCi in the word list into syllables, 

{s1, s2,…..sn}. Then this syllable sequence is used as a query for syllable-based searching and 

mapping using the mapping table.  An input word can be represented by a vector of syllables {s1, 

s2,…..sn}. The syllables are the units to construct a word. The algorithm for search and map 

starts using the mapping table with highest degree of many-to-many mapping table. This reduces 

the overall complexity still keeping the performance high. Figure 1 shows two examples of 

convergence due to phonetic similarity of TU from Bengali script to Meetei Mayek. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  (a)      (b) 

FIGURE 1 – Two examples of convergence of TU from Bengali Script to Meitei Mayek. 

5.3 Modified Joint Source Channel 

The problem of machine transliteration has been studied extensively in the paradigm of the noisy 

channel model. A Bengali script to Meetei Mayek script transliteration of Manipuri news text is 

developed based on Modified Joint Source Channel Model for transliteration (Ekbal et al, 2006). 
A bilingual training set of Bengali script and their respective Meetei Mayek transliterations, has 

been created. This bilingual training set is automatically analyzed to acquire mapping knowledge 

in order to transliterate new Bengali script to Meetei Mayek. Transliteration units (TUs) are 

extracted from the Bengali script to Meetei Mayek counterparts. Some examples are given below: 
 

(a) মিনে র (ꯃꯅꯤꯄꯨꯔ)   [manipur]  ম | িন | ে  | র    

ꯃꯅꯤꯄꯨꯔ   ꯃ | ꯅꯤ | ꯄꯨ | ꯔ 

 রাজকুমার (ꯔꯥꯖꯀꯨꯃꯥꯔ) [rajkumar]  রা | জ | কু | মা | র   

ꯔꯥꯖꯀꯨꯃꯥꯔ  ꯔꯥ | ꯖ | ꯀꯨ | ꯃꯥ | ꯔ 

(b) অিিনন্দন (ꯑꯚꯤꯅꯟ꯭ꯗꯟ)  [abhinandan]  অ | িি | ন | ন্দ | ন 

ꯑꯚꯤꯅꯟ꯭ꯗꯟ  ꯑ |  ꯚꯤ | ꯅ | ꯟ꯭ꯗ |  ꯟ 

The TUs are the lexical units for machine transliteration. The Bengali script is divided into 

Transliteration Units (TU) with patterns C+M, where C represents a consonant or a vowel or a 

conjunct and M represents the vowel modifier or matra. The system learns mappings 

automatically from the bilingual training set of 20,000 entries. Aligned TUs along with their 

ꯁꯤ 

স  
 িশ 

 
শ  
 

িছ 
 

ছ  

িস 

ꯁꯨ 

স  
 

শু 
 শ  
 

ছ  
 

ছ  

স  

186



contexts are automatically derived from this bilingual training set to generate the collocation 

statistics.Transliteration units (TUs) are extracted from the Bengali script and the corresponding 

Meetei Mayek words, and Bengali script TUs are associated with their Meetei Mayek 

counterparts along with the TUs in context. 

6 Meetei Mayek to Bengali Script Transliteration 

The reverse/backward transliteration of Bengali to Meetei Mayek is carried out using the same 

mapping tables. This Meetei Mayek to Bengali transliteration faces several challenges using 

linguistics rules. Based on the table 2, the many-to-one mapping is one-to-many mapping for 

Meetei Mayek to Bengali script transliteration thus it suffers very badly due to probability 

distribution based on the number of target characters. A one-to-one map is not feasible option. A 

step to enhance the performance of the transliteration is to consider the preceding few characters 

and following few characters of the TU to be transliterated as a context in order to forecast the 

most likely target TU. This enables to choose the right mapping by a certain factor.  However, in 

case of a single character TU, this approach does not help much. 

In the Meetei Mayek to Bengali transliteration, there are certain limitations which are caused by 

many-to-one character mapping and identification and addressing of the right representation of 

Bengali. However, this issue can be further addressed using possible language model and its 

probability parameters. One typical example of many-to-one transliteration such as ষ, স, শ and 
ছ to K (as given in the Table 2) which results in the lost of tone that could affect other NLP 
activities such as various lexical ambiguity of word sense disambiguation, POS tagging etc using 

the transliterated corpus. The convergence shown in figure 1 has to be resolved for the backward 

transliteration through a statistical approach since the exploration and establishment of rules is 

quite difficult for such cases for the Meetei Mayek to Bengali script transliteration process. 

Similarly, there are several other cases of many-to-one and one-to-many sets in between Bengali 

script and Meetei Mayek. For such instances, the transliteration deems to face the difficulty to 

make the right choice of the target TU using the rule based approach. 

7 Evaluation 

Once the experimental corpus is decided, a metric to measure the system’s precision and recall is 

required. The appropriate metric depends on the scenario in which the transliteration system is to 

be used. The human evaluation takes enormous time compared to automatic evaluation. In our 

present task, we used 50,000 wordforms as gold standard reference test set. Table 3 gives the 

precision and recall of the different transliteration systems. 

Transliteration model Baseline Model Syllable Based Model Modified Joint 
Source Channel 

Model 

Precision Recall Precision Recall Precision Recall 

Bengali to Meetei Mayek 
68.31 65.23 96.23 94.57 93.23 92.45 

Meetei Mayek to Bengali 
59.56 58.87 89.78 88.56 93.43 91.97 

TABLE 3 – Precision and Recall of the Transliteration Models 

187



Conclusion and Discussion 

A bidirectional transliteration system between Bengali script and Meetei Mayek of Manipuri text 

is developed exploiting the monosyllabic characteristics of Manipuri language. The system 

abruptly outperforms compared to the baseline transliteration systems of this language using the 

given two scripts. Since, the Meetei Mayek script is in the process of induction at different 

administrative and academic levels, there is a need still for Meetei Mayek to be transliterated 

back to Bengali script to reach other section of Manipuri speakers who know only the Bengali 

script. The grapheme based approach works well for the transliteration of the same language 

using the two different scripts. In future, statistical model for transliteration between Bengali 

script and Meetei Mayek can be experimented using a decent size of training data collected from 

different sources. Over and above, the Meetei Mayek to Bengali script transliteration has the 

shortfall using the same TU list using the linguistics rules and a statistical approach is the 

alternative to yield a better result. 

 

Acknowledgments 

I, sincerely, thank Dr. Zia Saquib, Executive Director, CDAC (Mumbai), Prof. Sivaji 

Bandyopadhyay, Jadavpur University, Kolkata and the anonymous reviewers for their support 

and valuable comments. 

 

 

References 

Ekbal, A., Sudip K. N., Bandyopadhyay, S. (2006). A Modified Joint Source-Channel Model 

for Transliteration, Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, 

Pages 191–198, Sydney.  

Gao, W. (2004). Phoneme-based Statistical Transliteration of Foreign Name for OOV Problem. 

A thesis of Master. The Chinese University of Hong Kong.  

Knight, K. and Graehl, J. (1998). Machine Transliteration. Computational Linguistics 24(4).  

Li, H., Zhang, M., and Su, J. (2004). A joint source-channel model for machine transliteration. 

In Proc. 42nd ACL Annual Meeting, pages 159–166, Barcelona, Spain. 

Singh, T. D., Bandyopadhyay, S. (2010a). Web Based Manipuri Corpus for Multiword NER 

and Reduplicated MWEs Identification using SVM, Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on South 

and Southeast Asian Natural Language Processing (WSSANLP), the 23rd International 

Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING), Pages 35–42, Beijing.  

Singh, T. D., Bandyopadhyay, S. (2010b) Semi Automatic Parallel Corpora Extraction from 

Comparable News Corpora, In the International Journal of POLIBITS, Issue 41 (January – June 

2010), ISSN 1870-9044, Pages 11-17.  

Singh, T. D., Bandyopadhyay, S. (2010c). Manipuri-English Example Based Machine 

Translation System, International Journal of Computational Linguistics and Applications 

(IJCLA), ISSN 0976-0962, Pages 147-158.  

188



Singh, T. D., Bandyopadhyay, S. (2011). Integration of Reduplicated Multiword Expressions 

and Named Entities in a Phrase Based Statistical Machine Translation System, Proceedings of 

the 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, Pages 1304–1312, 

Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 8 – 13.  

Virga, P., Khudanpur, S. (2003). Transliteration of proper names in cross-lingual information 

retrieval. In Proc. of the ACL workshop on Multilingual Named Entity Recognition.  

Yang, F., Zhao, J., Zou, B., Liu, K., Liu, F. (2008). Chinese-English Backward Transliteration 

Assisted with Mining Monolingual Web Pages, Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 541–549, 

Columbus, Ohio, USA, June.  

189




