










































Semantic distance and terminology structuring methods for the detection of semantically close terms


Proceedings of the 2012 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2012), pages 20–28,
Montréal, Canada, June 8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Semantic distance and terminology structuring methods for the
detection of semantically close terms

Marie Dupuch
CNRS UMR 8163 STL

Université Lille 1&3
59653 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France

dupuchm@hotmail.fr

Laëtitia Dupuch
Université Toulouse III Paul Sabatier

France
laetitia1dupuch@hotmail.com

Thierry Hamon
LIM&BIO (EA3969) UFR SMBH

Université Paris 13, France
thierry.hamon@univ-paris13.fr

Natalia Grabar
CNRS UMR 8163 STL

Université Lille 1&3
59653 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France

natalia.grabar@univ-lille3.fr
Abstract

The identification of semantically similar lin-
guistic expressions despite their formal differ-
ence is an important task within NLP appli-
cations (information retrieval and extraction,
terminology structuring...) We propose to de-
tect the semantic relatedness between biomed-
ical terms from the pharmacovigilance area.
Two approaches are exploited: semantic dis-
tance within structured resources and termi-
nology structuring methods applied to a raw
list of terms. We compare these methods and
study their complementarity. The results are
evaluated against the reference pharmacovigi-
lance data and manually by an expert.

1 Introduction

When an automatic system is able to identify that
different linguistic expressions convey the same or
similar meanings, this is a positive point for several
applications. For instance, when documents refer-
ring to muscle pain or cephalgia are searched, in-
formation retrieval system can also take advantage
of the synonyms, like muscle ache or headache, to
return more relevant documents and in this way to
increase the recall. This is also a great advantage
for systems designed for instance for text mining,
terminology structuring and alignment, or for more
specific tasks such as pharmacovigilance.

The pharmacovigilance area covers the identifi-
cation of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) in order
to improve the vigilance on the health products.
Pharmacovigilance reports are traditionally encoded
with normalised terms from the dedicated termi-
nologies, such as MedDRA (Medical Dictionary for

Drug Regulatory Activities) (Brown et al., 1999).
MedDRA is a relatively fine-grained terminology
with nearly 90,000 terms. This means that a given
pharmacovigilance report can be coded with dif-
ferent terms which have close meaning (Fescharek
et al., 2004), like muscle pain and muscle ache or
headache and cephalgia: although formally differ-
ent the terms from these pairs have the same mean-
ing. The difficulty is then to detect their semantic
closeness. Indeed, if this semantic information is
available, reports from the phramacovigilance data-
banks and mentionning similar adverse events can
be aggregated: the safety signal is intensified and
the safety regulation process is improved.

In order to aggregate the pharmacovigilance re-
ports, several types of semantic information from
MedDRA are used: (1) different hierarchical levels
of MedDRA between the five levels available; (2)
the SMQs (Standardized MedDRA Queries) which
group together terms associated to a given medical
condition such as Acute renal failure, Angioedema
or Embolic and thrombotic events; and (3) specific
resources (Bousquet et al., 2005; Iavindrasana et al.,
2006; Alecu et al., 2008; Jaulent and Alecu, 2009).
The SMQs are defined by groups of experts through
a long and meticulous work consisting of the man-
ual study of the MedDRA structure and of the anal-
ysis of the scientific literature (CIOMS, 2004). 84
SMQs have been created so far. They become the
gold standard data of the pharmacovigilance area.
However, the SMQs currently suffer from the lack of
exhausitivity (Pearson et al., 2009): the set of SMQs
is not exhaustive because this is an ongoing work.
We assume that automatic approaches can be ex-

20



ploited to systematize and accelerate the process of
recruiting the semantically related MedDRA terms
and to build the SMQs. We propose to exploit two
approaches: methods dedicated to the terminology
structuring and semantic distance approaches. We
compare and combine the generated results. For the
evaluation, we compare the results with the existing
SMQs and also analyse them manually with an ex-
pert. Our work is different from previous work be-
cause we exploit the whole set of the available Med-
DRA terms, we apply several methods to cluster the
terms and we perform several types of evaluation.

2 Material

We exploit two kinds of material: material issued
from MedDRA and specific to the pharmacovigi-
lance area (sections 2.1 and 2.3), and linguistic re-
sources issued from general and biomedical lan-
guages (section 2.2). The MedDRA terms are struc-
tured into five hierarchical levels: SOC (System Or-
gan Class) terms belong to the first and the high-
est level, while LLT (Lowest Level Terms) terms be-
long to the fifth and the lowest level. Terms from
the fourth level PT (Preferred Terms) are usually ex-
ploited for the coding of the pharmacovigilance re-
ports. They are also used for the creation of SMQs.
A given PT term may belong to several SMQs.

2.1 Ontology ontoEIM
ontoEIM is an ontology of ADRs (Alecu et al.,
2008) created through the projection of MedDRA
to SNOMED CT (Stearns et al., 2001). This projec-
tion is performed thanks to the UMLS (NLM, 2011),
where an important number of terminologies are al-
ready merged and aligned, among which MedDRA
and SNOMED CT. The current rate of alignment of
the PT MedDRA terms with SNOMED CT is weak
(version 2011): 51.3% (7,629 terms). Projection of
MedDRA to SNOMED CT allows to improve the
representation of the MedDRA terms:

• the structure of the MedDRA terms is parallel
to that of SNOMED CT, which makes it more
fine-grained (Alecu et al., 2008). The num-
ber of hierarchical levels within the ontoEIM
reaches 14, instead of five levels in MedDRA;

• the MedDRA terms receive formal defini-
tions: semantic primitives which decompose

the meaning. MedDRA terms can be described
along up to four axes from SNOMED CT, ex-
emplified here through the term Arsenical ker-
atosis: (1) Morphology (type of abnormal-
ity): Squamous cell neoplasm; (2) Topogra-
phy (anatomical localization): Skin structure;
(3) Causality (agent or cause of the abnormal-
ity): Arsenic AND OR arsenic compound; and
(4) Expression (manifestation of the abnormal-
ity): Abnormal keratinization. The formal def-
initions are not complete. For instance, only
12 terms receive formal definitions along these
four axes and 435 along three axes. This is due
to the incomplete alignment of the MedDRA
terms and to the fact these four elements are
not relevant for every term (their absence is not
always problematic).

2.2 Linguistic resources
Linguistic resources provide three kinds of pairs
of synonym words: (1) Medical synonyms ex-
tracted from the UMLS 2011AA (n=228,542) and
then cleaned up (n=73,093); (2) Medical syn-
onyms acquired from three biomedical terminolo-
gies thanks to the exploitation of their composition-
ality (Grabar and Hamon, 2010) (n=28,691); (3)
Synonyms from the general language provided by
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) (n=45,782). Among
the pairs of words recorded in these resources, we
can find {accord, concordance}, {aceperone, ac-
etabutone}, {adenazole, tocladesine}, {adrenaline,
epinephrine} or {bleeding, hemorrhage}. The last
two pairs are provided by medical and general re-
sources. However, the pair {accord, concordance}
is provided only by medical resources.

2.3 Standardized MedDRA Queries
We exploit 84 SMQs as reference data. Among these
SMQs, we distinguish 20 SMQs which are struc-
tured hierarchically. We also exploit 92 sub-SMQs,
which compose these 20 hierarchical SMQs.

3 Methods

Our method consists into four main steps (figure 1):
(1) computing of the semantic distance and similar-
ity between the MedDRA terms and their cluster-
ing (section 3.1), (2) the application of the termi-
nology structuring methods to acquire semantic re-

21



Abdominal abscess

Abdominal cavity

T

Abscess morphology

M

Pharyngal abscess

M

Neck structure

T

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

1
o

o

o6

5

o 2

o 3

o
7

4o

POS−tagging

Syntactic analysis

Detection of
hierarchical relations

Detection of
synonymy relations

ontoEIM resource (Zhong et al, 2002)

(Leacock & Chodorow, 1998)

Computing of the semantic distance Clustering of MedDRA terms
and similarity

Term structuring

Lexical inclusion

Synoterm + resources

Genia tagger

Ogmios platform

YaTeA

Pre−processing

M
er

g
in

g
 o

f 
th

e 
cl

u
st

er
s

Clustering within directed graphs

Evaluation
Radius

HAC (with the R project)

SMQs

Hierarchical SMQs

sub−SMQs

Semantic distance and similarity approaches

Terminology structuring approach

(Rada et al, 1989)

Strongly connected components

Faster

Faster

Raw list of

MedDRA
terms

Figure 1: General schema of the experiment composed of four steps: (1) semantic distance approaches, (2) terminology
structuring approaches, (3) their combination and (4) their evaluation

lations between MedDRA terms and their cluster-
ing (section 3.2), (3) the merging of these two sets
of clusters (section 3.3), (4) the evaluation of the
merged clusters (section 3.4). We exploit Perl lan-
guage, R1 project and several NLP tools.

3.1 Semantic distance approach

The semantic distance and similarity approach is ap-
plied to the 7,629 PT MedDRA terms and their for-
mal definitions from ontoEIM. The two main steps
are: computing the distance or similarity (section
3.1.1) and clustering of terms (section 3.1.2).

3.1.1 Computing the semantic distance
Because we work with a tree-structured resource,

we exploit edge-based algorithms to compute the
distance or similarity between two terms t1 and t2:
two semantic distances (Rada (Rada et al., 1989)
and Zhong (Zhong et al., 2002)) and one seman-
tic similarity (Leacock and Chodorow, 1998). In
the following, we call them semantic distance al-
gorithms. For each algorithm, three paths may be
exploited: between the MedDRA terms but also be-
tween the elements of their formal definitions on
two axes (morphology M and topography T often
involved in diagnostics (Spackman and Campbell,

1http://www.r-project.org

1998)). For the illustration, let’s consider two Med-
DRA terms, Abdominal abscess and Pharyngeal ab-
scess defined as follows:

• Abdominal abscess: M = Abscess morphology,
T = Abdominal cavity structure

• Pharyngeal abscess: M = Abscess morphol-
ogy, T = Neck structure

The shortest paths sp are computed between these
two MedDRA terms and between their formal defi-
nitions, whose hierarchical structure is also inherited
from SNOMED CT. The weight of edges is set to 1
because all the relations are of the same kind (hier-
archical), and the value of each shortest path corre-
sponds to the sum of the weights of all its edges. The
semantic distance sd are then exploited to compute
the unique distance between the ADR terms from

MedDRA:

∑
i∈{ADR,M,T}

Wi ∗ sdi(t1, t2)∑
i∈{ADR,M,T}

Wi
, where the

three axes {ADR,M, T} respectively correspond
to terms meaning the ADR, axis Morphology M
and axis Topography T ; t1 and t2 are two ADR
terms; Wi is the coefficient associated with each
of the three axes; and sdi is the semantic distance
computed on a given axis. We carry out several ex-

22



head
component component

expansion head
component component

expansion

pain muscle ache muscle

Figure 2: Syntactically analyzed terms (muscle pain and muscle ache) into their head and expansion components

periments. Semi-matrices 7629*7629 with semantic
distance between the terms are built.

3.1.2 Clustering of terms
An unsupervised creation of clusters is applied to

the semi-matrices. We exploit two approaches:

• R radius approach: every MedDRA term is
considered a possible center of a cluster and its
closest terms are clustered with it. The thresh-
olds tested correspond to the following inter-
vals: 2 and 3 for Rada, [0; 5.059] for LCH and
[0; 0.49] for Zhong. The intersection of these
clusters is not empty.

• HAC hierarchical ascendant classification is
performed through the R Project tools (hclust
function). Iteratively, this function chooses the
best centers for terms and builds the hierar-
chy of terms by progressively clustering those
which are closest to these centers. Then the
unique cluster with all the terms is split up.
Several splitting values between 100 and 7,000
are tested. These clusters are exclusive.

Clusters created with the radius approach are
merged in order to eliminate smaller clusters in-
cluded in bigger clusters and in order to aggregate
clusters which have an important intersection be-
tween them. For the intersection, we test several in-
tersection values within the interval [10; 90], which
means that two compared clusters may have between
10% and 90% of common terms.

3.2 Terminology structuring approach
The terminology structuring methods are applied to
a raw list of 18,209 MedDRA PTs. They allow
the detection of semantic relations between these
terms. The POS-tagging is done with Genia tag-
ger (Tsuruoka et al., 2005) and the syntactic analy-
sis with the YATEA parser (Aubin and Hamon, 2006).
Three kinds of methods are applied for the acquisi-
tion of synonymy and hierarchical relations: lexical
inclusions (section 3.2.1), morpho-syntactic variants

(section 3.2.2) and compositionality (section 3.2.3).
The terms are then clustered (section 3.2.4).

3.2.1 Lexical inclusion and hierarchy
The lexical inclusion hypothesis (Kleiber and

Tamba, 1990), which states that when a given term
is lexically included at the head syntactic position
in another term there is a semantic subsumption be-
tween them, allows to identify hierarchical relations
between terms. For instance, on figure 2, the short
term pain is the hierarchical parent and the long term
muscle pain is its hierarchical child because pain is
the syntactic head of muscle pain. The lexical inclu-
sions are computed on POS-tagged and syntactically
analyzed terms. We compute two kinds of lexical in-
clusions:
• syntactic dependencies on minimal syntactic

heads: the parent term corresponds to the short-
est lexical form of the syntactic head. For in-
stance, within the term kaolin cephalin clotting
time, the minimal head is time;
• syntactic dependencies on maximal syntactic

heads: the parent term is the most complete lex-
ical form of the syntactic head. Within the same
term kaolin cephalin clotting time, the maximal
head is cephalin clotting time.

Parent and child terms have to be MedDRA terms.

3.2.2 Morpho-syntactic variants
We exploit Faster (Jacquemin, 1996) for the in-

dentification of morpho-syntactic variants between
the PT terms. This tool applies several transforma-
tion rules, such as insertion (cardiac disease/cardiac
valve disease), morphological derivation (artery
restenosis/arterial restenosis) or permutation (aorta
coarctation/coarctation of the aorta). Each transfor-
mation rule is associated with hierarchical or syn-
onymy relations: the insertion introduces a hierar-
chical relation (cardiac valve disease is more spe-
cific than cardiac disease), while the permutation in-
troduces a synonymy relation. When several trans-
formations are involved, the detected relations may

23



be ambiguous: gland abscess and abscess of sali-
vary gland combines permutation (synonymy) and
insertion (hierarchy) rules. In such cases the hierar-
chical relation prevails.

3.2.3 Compositionality and synonymy
The synonymy relations are acquired in two ways.

First, the synonymy relation is established between
two simple MedDRA terms if this relation is pro-
vided by the linguitistic resources. Second, the
identification of synonym relations between com-
plex terms relies on the semantic compositionality
(Partee, 1984). Hence, two complex terms are con-
sidered synonyms if at least one of their compo-
nents at the same syntactic position (head or ex-
pansion) are synonyms. For instance, on figure 2,
given the synonymy relation between the two words
pain and ache, the terms muscle pain and muscle
ache are also identified as synonyms (Hamon and
Nazarenko, 2001). Three transformation rules are
applied: on the head component (figure 2), on the
expansion component and on both of them. We per-
form several experiments: each medical synonymy
resource is first used individually and then in com-
bination with WordNet.

3.2.4 Clustering of terms
The sets of terms related through the lexical in-

clusions are considered as directed graphs: the terms
are the nodes of the graph while the hierarchical re-
lations are the directed edges. We partition these di-
rected graphs and identify clusters of terms which
could correspond to or be part of the SMQs. Among
connected components and strongly connected com-
ponents, we choose to generate the strongly con-
nected components: they allow an intersection be-
tween clusters which means that a given term may
belong to several clusters (this is also the case with
the SMQs). Thus, within the directed graphs G we
have to identify the maximal sub-graphs H of G
where for each pair {x, y} of the nodes from H ,
there exists a directed edge from x to y (or from y to
x). To improve the coverage of the obtained clusters,
we also add the synonyms: if a term has a synonymy
relation with the term from a cluster then this term
is also included in this cluster. From a graph theory
point of view, the initial graph is augmented with
two edges going from and to the synonyms.

Methods and relationships #relations
Hierarchical relations

Maximal syntactic head 3,366
Minimal syntactic head 3,816
Morpho-syntactic variants 743

Medical synonyms
3 biomedical terminologies 1,879
UMLS/Filtered UMLS 190
Morpho-syntactic variants 100

Medical synonyms and WordNet
3 biomedical terminologies 1,939
UMLS/Filtered UMLS 227

Table 1: Hierarchical and synonymy relations generated
by terminology structuring methods

3.3 Merging of clusters from two approaches
We merge the clusters generated by the two ap-
proaches. The merging is performed on the inter-
section between the clusters. As previously, we test
intersection values within the interval [10; 90].

3.4 Evaluation
We give judgments on: (1) the correctness of the
generated relations, (2) their relevance according to
the reference data, (3) their relevance according to
the manual evaluation by an expert. The evaluation
is performed with three measures: precision P (per-
centage of the relevant terms clustered divided by
the total number of the clustered terms), recall R
(percentage of the relevant terms clustered divided
by the number of terms in the corresponding SMQ)
and F-measure F1. The association between the
SMQs and the clusters relies on the best F1.

4 Results

Semantic relations acquired with terminology struc-
turing are indicated in table 1. There is a small
difference between relations acquired through maxi-
mal and minimal syntactic heads, although the influ-
ence of medical resources for the acquisition of syn-
onymy varies according to the resources. WordNet
slightly increases the number of synonyms. Faster
generates a large set of hierarchical and synonymy
relations. MedDRA terms have also been processed
with semantic distance and clustered. The best
thresholds with the radius clustering are 2 for Rada,

24



Approach Hierarchical SMQs SMQs and sub-SMQs
#clusters interval mean #clusters interval mean

Semantic distance 2,667 [2; 1,206] 73 2,931 [2; 546] 17
Structuring (hierarchical) 690 [1; 134] 3.69 748 [1; 117] 3.43
Structuring (hierarchical+synonymy) 690 [1; 136] 4.11 748 [1; 119] 3.82
Merging (hierarchical) 2,732 [1; 1,220] 72.40 2,998 [1; 563] 24.44
Merging (hierarchical+synonymy) 2,732 [1; 1,269] 75.94 2,998 [1; 594] 26.03

Table 2: Number of clusters and their size (the interval and the mean number of terms per cluster) for individual
approaches and for their merging computed for hierarchical SMQs and also for SMQs and sub-SMQs

 0

 20

 40

 60

 80

 100

 0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80

precision
recall

f−measure

(a) Semantic distance

 0

 20

 40

 60

 80

 100

 0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80

precision
recall

f−measure

(b) Terminology structuring

Figure 3: Results (precision, recall and F-measure) for semantic distance and terminology structuring approaches

4.10 for LCH and 0 for Zhong. With the HAC, the
best results are obtained with 300 classes (number of
terms per class is within the interval [1; 98], mean
number of terms per class is 25.34). Our results
show that the best parameters for the semantic dis-
tance are the Rada distance, radius approach and no
formal definitions, while the best parameters for the
terminology structuring are maximal syntactic head
with hierarchical relations by Faster augmented with
synonyms. For the merging of the clusters we apply
50% intersection for hierarchical SMQs and 80% in-
tersection for SMQs and sub-SMQs. We exploit and
discuss these results. The percentage of the Med-
DRA terms involved by the terminology structur-
ing is the 32% with hierarchical relations, it reaches
40% when the synonymy is also considered. With
semantic distance, all the terms from ontoEIM (51%
of the MedDRA) are used.

Table 2 provides information on clusters: num-

ber of clusters, number of terms per cluster (their
interval and the mean number of terms per cluster).
In table 2, we first indicate the results for the indi-
vidual approaches, and then when the merging of
the approaches is performed. We observe that the
merging has a positive effect on the number and the
size of clusters: data generated by the individual ap-
proaches (and by synonymy) are complementary.

4.1 Correctness of the semantic relations
A manual analysis of the generated hierarchical re-
lations indicates that these relations are always cor-
rect: the constraint involved through the syntac-
tic analysis guarantees correct propositions. Nev-
ertheless, we observed a small number of syntac-
tic ambiguities. They appear within 144 pairs (5%)
with maximal syntactic heads and correspond to
pairs like: {anticonvulsant drug level, drug level},
{blood smear test, smear test}, {eye movement dis-
order, movement disorder}. Thus, within the first

25



 0

 20

 40

 60

 80

 100

 0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80

precision
recall

f−measure

Figure 4: Results (precision, recall and F-measure) ob-
tained when the two approaches are merged

pair, there is an ambiguity on drug as two de-
pendencies seem possible: {anticonvulsant drug
level, drug level} as proposed by the system and
{anticonvulsant drug level, level}. But whatever the
syntactic analysis performed, the semantic relations
are correct.

4.2 Relevance of the generated clusters

Figures 3 and 4 provide quantitative evaluation of
the clusters: semantic distance (figure 3(a)), termi-
nology structuring (figure 3(b)), merging of these
two sets (figure 4). On figure 3, we can observe
that there is a great variability among the SMQs and
the two approaches. The positive result is that these
approaches are indeed complementary: their merg-
ing slightly increases performance. An analysis of
the clusters generated with terminology structuring
shows that: (1) hierarchical relations form the basis
of the clusters: they correspond to 96% of the in-
volved terms and show 69% precision. Only three
clusters do not contain hierarchical relations; (2)
Faster relations are involved in 50% of clusters and
show precision between 75 and 85%; (3) one third
of the clusters contains synonymy relations, which
precision varies between 55 and 69%; (4) relations
acquired with the UMLS resources are involved in
14% of clusters while their precision is only 38%.

We also performed a detailed qualitative analysis
of several SMQs and clusters with an expert. Table 3
presents the analysis for three SMQs: Angioedema,
Embolic and thrombotic events, arterial and Haemo-

dynamic oedema, effusions and fluid overload. It
indicates the number of terms in the SMQ and in
the corresponding clusters clu, as well as the num-
ber of common terms between them com and the
performance (precision P , recall R and F-measure
F ) when computed against the reference data Ref-
erence and also after the analysis performed by the
expert After expertise. The results obtained with
the two approaches are indicated: semantic dis-
tance sd and terminology structuring struc, as well
as their merging merg. In the colums Reference,
we can observe that the best F-measure values are
obtained with the terminology structuring method
for the SMQ Haemodynamic oedema, effusions and
fluid overload (F=45) and with the semantic distance
for the SMQ Embolic and thrombotic events, arte-
rial (F=32). The merging of the two methods sys-
tematically improves the results: in the given exam-
ples, for all three SMQs.

A detailed analysis of the generated noise indi-
cates that across the SMQs we have similar situa-
tions: we generate false positives (terms non rele-
vant for the medical conditions, such as Pulmonary
oedema, Gestational oedema, Spinal cord oedema
for the SMQ Angioedema), but also the SMQs may
contain non relevant terms or may miss relevant
terms (thus, Testicular oedema, Injection site ur-
ticaria, Bronchial eodema are missing in the SMQ
Angioedema). The expert evaluation (columns Af-
ter expertise in table 3) attempts to analyse also the
quality of the SMQs. The corrected performance
of the clusters is improved in several points, which
indicates that automatic approaches may provide a
useful basis for the creation of SMQs.

5 Discussion

Despite the incompleteness of the ontoEIM re-
source, the semantic distance approach is quite ef-
ficient and provides the core terms for the building
of the SMQs. Among the several algorithms tested,
the most simple algorithm (Rada et al., 1989), which
exploits the shortest path, leads to the best results,
while the additional information on the hierarchi-
cal depth exploited by other algorithms appears non
useful. The clustering method which allows the gen-
eration of non-disjoint clusters is the most efficient
as MedDRA terms may belong to several SMQs.

26



Number of terms Reference After expertise
SMQs SMQ clu com P R F P R F
Angioedemasd 52 32 13 40 25 30 43 26 33
Angioedemastruc 52 31 19 61 36 45 61 36 45
Angioedemamerg 52 33 21 63 42 50 71 48 57
Embolic and thrombotic events...sd 132 159 48 30 36 32 32 39 35.2
Embolic and thrombotic events...struc 132 13 12 92 9 16 92 9 16
Embolic and thrombotic events...merg 132 130 49 38 37 37.5 47 46 46.5
Haemodynamic oedema, effusions...sd 36 22 7 32 20 24 54 33 41
Haemodynamic oedema, effusions...struc 36 31 13 42 36 39 84 72 78
Haemodynamic oedema, effusions...merg 36 35 16 46 44 45 86 83 84.5

Table 3: Comparison between the two approaches (semantic distance sd and terminology structuring struc) and the
merging of the two approaches merg for three SMQs: Angioedema, Embolic and thrombotic events, arterial and
Haemodynamic oedema, effusions and fluid overload

Traditionnal classification methods, which produce
disjoint clusters, are less efficient for this task.

It has been surprising to observe that the contri-
bution of the generated hierarchical relations is so
important (table 1) and that these relations appear to
be so often correct for the creation of SMQs. In-
deed, because PT terms belong to the same hierar-
chical level of MedDRA, they should be hierarchi-
cally equivalent between them. In reality, within a
cluster, we can find several hierarchical levels of the
PT terms. This means that the hierarchical structure
of MedDRA could be more fine-grained and that in-
termediate hierarchical levels could be created. As
for the generated synonymy relations, their number
is low and they contribute in a lesser way to the
building of the clusters: this means that the PTs are
semantically differentiated between them.

Finally, the merging of these two approaches is
beneficial for the generation of clusters: the per-
formance is improved, although slightly. The two
approaches provide indeed complementary results.
The low recall and F-measure are due to the material
and methods exploited: ontoEIM contains only 51%
of the MedDRA terms to be processed while the ex-
ploited terminology structuring methods are not able
to detect more common features between the terms.

The difference between the results obtained
against the reference data and after the expert eval-
uation (table 3) show that the reference data are not
very precise. In previous work, it has already been
observed that some important PT terms can be miss-

ing in the SMQs (Pearson et al., 2009). With the
proposed automatic methods we could find some of
these terms. It has been also demonstrated that the
SMQs are over-inclusive (Mozzicato, 2007; Pear-
son et al., 2009). In the proposed analysis of the
SMQs, we have also found terms which have too
large meaning and which should not be included in
the SMQs.

6 Conclusion and Perspectives

We have applied two different approaches to the
clustering of pharmacovigilance terms with simi-
lar or close meaning. We performed a comparison
of the results obtained with these two approaches
and analysed their complementarity. Several experi-
ments have been carried out in order to test different
parameters which may influence the performance of
the methods. Although the automatic creation of the
SMQs is a difficult task, our results seem to indi-
cate that the automatic methods may be used as a
basis for the creation of new SMQs. The precision
of the clusters is often satisfactory, while their merg-
ing leads to the improvement of their completeness.
These approaches generate complementary data and
their combination provides more performant results.

Future studies will lead to the identification of
other parameters which influence the quality of clus-
ters and also other factors which may be exploited
for the merging of clusters. More robust distances
and clustering methods will also be used in future
work, as well as approaches for a better acquisi-

27



tion and evaluation of the hierarchical structure of
SMQs. We plan also to design corpora-based meth-
ods which may also to increase the recall of the re-
sults. We will perform an exhaustive analysis of the
nature of semantic relations which can be observed
within the SMQs and propose other methods to fur-
ther improve the coverage of the clusters. Different
filters will be tested to remove the true false posi-
tive relations between terms. The results will also
be evaluation by several experts, which will allow to
assess the inter-expert variation and its influence on
the results. Besides, the obtained clusters will also
be evaluated through their impact on the pharma-
covigilance tasks and through the exploring of the
pharmacovigilance databases.

References
I Alecu, C Bousquet, and MC Jaulent. 2008. A case

report: using snomed ct for grouping adverse drug re-
actions terms. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak, 8(1):4–4.

S Aubin and T Hamon. 2006. Improving term extrac-
tion with terminological resources. In FinTAL 2006,
number 4139 in LNAI, pages 380–387. Springer.

C Bousquet, C Henegar, A Lillo-Le Louët, P Degoulet,
and MC Jaulent. 2005. Implementation of auto-
mated signal generation in pharmacovigilance using a
knowledge-based approach. Int J Med Inform, 74(7-
8):563–71.

EG Brown, L Wood, and S Wood. 1999. The medical
dictionary for regulatory activities (MedDRA). Drug
Saf., 20(2):109–17.

CIOMS. 2004. Development and rational use of stan-
dardised MedDRA queries (SMQs): Retrieving ad-
verse drug reactions with MedDRA. Technical report,
CIOMS.

C Fellbaum. 1998. A semantic network of english: the
mother of all WordNets. Computers and Humanities.
EuroWordNet: a multilingual database with lexical se-
mantic network, 32(2-3):209–220.

R Fescharek, J Kübler, U Elsasser, M Frank, and
P Güthlein. 2004. Medical dictionary for regulatory
activities (MedDRA): Data retrieval and presentation.
Int J Pharm Med, 18(5):259–269.

N Grabar and T Hamon. 2010. Exploitation of linguis-
tic indicators for automatic weighting of synonyms
induced within three biomedical terminologies. In
MEDINFO 2010, pages 1015–9.

T Hamon and A Nazarenko. 2001. Detection of syn-
onymy links between terms: experiment and results.
In Recent Advances in Computational Terminology,
pages 185–208. John Benjamins.

J Iavindrasana, C Bousquet, P Degoulet, and MC Jaulent.
2006. Clustering WHO-ART terms using semantic
distance and machine algorithms. In AMIA Annu Symp
Proc, pages 369–73.

Christian Jacquemin. 1996. A symbolic and surgical ac-
quisition of terms through variation. In S. Wermter,
E. Riloff, and G. Scheler, editors, Connectionist, Sta-
tistical and Symbolic Approaches to Learning for Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 425–438, Springer.

MC Jaulent and I Alecu. 2009. Evaluation of an ontolog-
ical resource for pharmacovigilance. In Stud Health
Technol Inform, pages 522–6.

G Kleiber and I Tamba. 1990. L’hyperonymie revisitée :
inclusion et hiérarchie. Langages, 98:7–32, juin.

C Leacock and M Chodorow, 1998. Combining local
context and WordNet similarity for word sense iden-
tification, chapter 4, pages 305–332.

P Mozzicato. 2007. Standardised MedDRA queries:
their role in signal detection. Drug Saf, 30(7):617–9.

NLM, 2011. UMLS Knowledge Sources Manual. Na-
tional Library of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland.
www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/.

Barbara H. Partee. 1984. Compositionality. In F. Land-
man and F. Veltman, editors, Varieties of formal se-
mantics. Foris, Dordrecht.

RK Pearson, M Hauben, DI Goldsmith, AL Gould,
D Madigan, DJ O’Hara, SJ Reisinger, and
AM Hochberg. 2009. Influence of the Med-
DRA hierarchy on pharmacovigilance data mining
results. Int J Med Inform, 78(12):97–103.

R Rada, H Mili, E Bicknell, and M Blettner. 1989. De-
velopment and application of a metric on semantic
nets. IEEE Transactions on systems, man and cyber-
netics, 19(1):17–30.

K Spackman and K Campbell. 1998. Composi-
tional concept representation using SNOMED: To-
wards further convergence of clinical terminologies.
In Journal of American Medical Informatics Associ-
ation (JAMIA), pages 740–744.

MQ Stearns, C Price, KA Spackman, and AY Wang.
2001. SNOMED clinical terms: overview of the de-
velopment process and project status. In AMIA, pages
662–666.

Y Tsuruoka, Y Tateishi, JD Kim, T Ohta, J McNaught,
S Ananiadou, and J Tsujii. 2005. Developing a ro-
bust part-of-speech tagger for biomedical text. LNCS,
3746:382–392.

J Zhong, H Zhu, J Li, and Y Yu. 2002. Concep-
tual graph matching for semantic search. In 10th
International Conference on Conceptual Structures,
ICCS2002, LNCS 2393, Springer Verlag, pages 92–
106.

28


