










































Question Ranking and Selection in Tutorial Dialogues


The 7th Workshop on the Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 1–11,
Montréal, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Question Ranking and Selection in Tutorial Dialogues

Lee Beckera and Martha Palmer 2a and Sarel van Vuuren 3a and Wayne Ward 4a,b
aThe Center for Computational Language and Education Research (CLEAR)

University of Colorado Boulder
bBoulder Language Technologies

{lee.becker,martha.palmer,sarel.vanvuuren}@colorado.edu
wward@bltek.com

Abstract

A key challenge for dialogue-based intelligent
tutoring systems lies in selecting follow-up
questions that are not only context relevant
but also encourage self-expression and stimu-
late learning. This paper presents an approach
to ranking candidate questions for a given di-
alogue context and introduces an evaluation
framework for this task. We learn to rank us-
ing judgments collected from expert human
tutors, and we show that adding features de-
rived from a rich, multi-layer dialogue act
representation improves system performance
over baseline lexical and syntactic features to
a level in agreement with the judges. The ex-
perimental results highlight the important fac-
tors in modeling the questioning process. This
work provides a framework for future work
in automatic question generation and it rep-
resents a step toward the larger goal of di-
rectly learning tutorial dialogue policies di-
rectly from human examples.

1 Introduction

Socratic tutoring styles place an emphasis on elicit-
ing information from the learner to help them build
their own connections to the material. The role of a
tutor in a Socratic dialogue is to scaffold the material
and present questions that ultimately lead the student
to an “A-ha!” moment. Numerous studies have il-
lustrated the effectiveness of Socratic-style tutoring
(VanLehn et al., 2007; Rose et al., 2001; Collins and
Stevens, 1982); consequently recreating the behav-
ior on a computer has long been a goal of research

in Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS). Recent suc-
cesses have shown the efficacy of conversational ITS
(Graesser et al., 2005; Litman and Silliman, 2004;
Ward et al., 2011b), however these systems are still
not as effective as human tutors, and much improve-
ment is needed before they can truly claim to be So-
cratic. Furthermore, development and tuning of tu-
torial dialogue behavior requires significant human
effort.

While our overarching goal is to improve ITS
by automatically learning tutorial dialogue strategies
directly from expert tutor behavior, we focus on the
crucial subtask of selecting follow-up questions. Al-
though asking questions is only a subset of the over-
all tutoring process, it is still a complex process that
requires understanding of the dialogue state, the stu-
dent’s ability, and the learning goals.

This work frames question selection as a task of
scoring and ranking candidate questions for a spe-
cific point in the tutorial dialogue. Since dialogue
is a dynamic process with multiple correct possibil-
ities, we do not restrict ourselves only to the moves
and questions found in a corpus of transcripts. In-
stead we posit “What if we had a fully automatic
question generation system?” and subsequently use
candidate questions hand-authored for each dialogue
context. To explore the mechanisms involved in
ranking follow-up questions against one other, we
pair these questions with judgments of quality from
expert human tutors and extract surface form and
dialogue-based features to train machine learning
classification models to rank the appropriateness of
questions for specific points in a dialogue.

Our results show promise with our best question

1



ranking models exhibiting performance on par with
expert human tutors. Furthermore these experiments
demonstrate the utility and importance of rich dia-
logue move annotation for modeling decision mak-
ing in conversation and tutoring.

2 Background and Related Works

Learning tutorial dialogue policies from corpora is
a growing area of research in natural language pro-
cessing and intelligent tutoring systems. Past studies
have made use of hidden Markov models (Boyer et
al., 2009a) and reinforcement learning (Chi et al.,
2010; Chi et al., 2009; Chi et al., 2008) to discover
tutoring strategies. However, these approaches are
typically optimized to maximize learning gains, and
are not necessarily focused on replicating human tu-
tor behavior. Other work has explored specific fac-
tors in questioning such as when to ask “why” ques-
tions (Rose et al., 2003), provide hints (Tsovaltzi
and Matheson, 2001), or insert discourse markers
(Kim et al., 2000).

There is also an expanding body of work that ap-
plies ranking algorithms toward the task of ques-
tion generation (QG) using approaches such as over-
generation-and-ranking (Heilman and Smith, 2010),
language model ranking (Yao, 2010), and heuristics-
based ranking (Agarwal and Mannem, 2011). While
the focus of these efforts centers on issues of gram-
maticality, fluency, and content selection for auto-
matic creation of standalone questions, we move to
the higher level task of choosing context appropri-
ate questions. Our work merges aspects of these
QG approaches with the sentence planning tradi-
tion from natural language generation (Walker et al.,
2001; Rambow et al., 2001). In sentence planning
the goal is to select lexico-structural resources that
encode communicative action. Rather than select-
ing representations, we use them directly as part of
the feature space for learning functions to rank the
questions’ actual surface form realization. To our
knowledge there has been no research in ranking the
quality and suitability of questions within a tutorial
dialogue context.

Because questioning tactics depend heavily on the
curriculum and choice of pedagogy, we ground our
investigations within the context of the My Science
Tutor (MyST) intelligent tutoring system (Ward et

al., 2011b), a conversational virtual tutor designed
to improve science learning and understanding for
students in grades 3-5 (ages 8-11). Students using
MyST investigate and discuss science through nat-
ural spoken dialogues and multimedia interactions
with a virtual tutor named Marni. The MyST dia-
logue design and tutoring style is based on a ped-
agogy called Questioning the Author (QtA) (Beck
et al., 1996) which emphasizes open-ended ques-
tions and keying in on student language to promote
self-explanation of concepts, and its curriculum is
based on the Full Option Science System (FOSS) 1

a proven system for inquiry based learning.

3 Data Collection

3.1 MyST Logfiles and Transcripts
For these experiments, we use MyST transcripts col-
lected in a Wizard-of-Oz (WoZ) condition with a hu-
man tutor inserted into the interaction loop. Project
tutors trained in both QtA and in the tutorial sub-
ject matter served as the wizards. During a ses-
sion tutors were responsible for accepting, overrid-
ing, and/or authoring system actions. Tutor wizards
were also responsible for setting the current dialogue
frame to indicate which of the learning goals was
currently in focus. Students talked to MyST via mi-
crophone while MyST communicates using Text-to-
Speech (TTS) in the WoZ setting. A typical MyST
session revolves around a single FOSS lesson and
lasts approximately 15 minutes. To obtain a dia-
logue transcript, tutor moves are taken directly from
the system logfile, while student speech is manu-
ally transcribed from audio. In addition to the di-
alogue text, MyST records additional information
such as timestamps and the current dialogue frame
(i.e. learning goal). In total we make use of tran-
scripts from 122 WoZ dialogues covering 10 units
on magnetism and electricity and 2 in measurement
and standards.

3.2 Dialogue Annotation
Lesson-independent analysis of dialogue requires
a level of abstraction that reduces a dialogue to
its underlying actions and intentions. To address
this need we use the Dialogue Schema Unifying
Speech and Semantics (DISCUSS) (Becker et al.,

1http://www.fossweb.com

2



2011), a multidimensional dialogue move taxon-
omy that captures both the pragmatic and seman-
tic interpretation of an utterance. Instead of us-
ing one label, a DISCUSS move is a tuple com-
posed of three dimensions: Dialogue Act, Rhetor-
ical Form, Predicate Type. Together these labels
account for the action, function, and content of an
utterance. This scheme draws from past work in
task-oriented dialogue acts (Bunt, 2009; Core and
Allen, 1997), tutorial act taxonomies (Pilkington,
1999; Tsovaltzi and Karagjosova, 2004; Buckley
and Wolska, 2008; Boyer et al., 2009b) discourse
relations (Mann and Thompson, 1986) and question
taxonomies (Graesser and Person, 1994; Nielsen et
al., 2008).

Dialogue Act (22 tags): The dialogue act dimen-
sion is the top-level dimension in DISCUSS, and its
values govern the possible values for the other di-
mensions. Though the DISCUSS dialogue act layer
seeks to replicate the learnings from other well-
established taxonomies like DIT++ (Bunt, 2009) or
DAMSL (Core and Allen, 1997) wherever possible,
the QtA style of pedagogy driving our tutoring ses-
sions dictated the addition of two tutorial specific
acts: marking and revoicing. A mark act highlights
key words from the student’s speech to draw atten-
tion to a particular term or concept. Like with mark-
ing, revoicing keys in on student language, but in-
stead of highlighting specific words, a revoice act
will summarize or refine the student’s language to
bring clarity to a concept.

Rhetorical Form (22 tags): Although the dia-
logue act is useful for identifying the speaker’s in-
tent, it gives no indication of how the speaker is ad-
vancing the conversation. The rhetorical form re-
fines the dialogue act by providing a link to its sur-
face form realization. Consider the questions “What
is the battery doing?” and “Which one is the bat-
tery?”. They would both be labeled with Ask dia-
logue acts, but they elicit two very different kinds
of responses. The former, which elicits some form
of description, would be labeled with a Describe
rhetorical form, while the latter is seeking to Iden-
tify an object. Similarly an Assert act from a tutor
could be coupled with a Describe rhetorical form to
introduce new information or with a Recap to recon-
vey a major point.

Predicate Type (19 tags): Beyond knowing the

Reliability Metric DA RF PT
Cohen’s Kappa 0.75 0.72 0.63
Exact Agreement 0.80 0.66 0.56
Partial Agreement 0.89 0.77 0.68

Table 1: Inter-annotator agreement for DISCUSS types
(DA=Dialogue Act, RF=Rhetorical Form, PT=Predicate
Type)

propositional content of an utterance, it is useful to
know how the entities and predicates in a response
relate to one another. A student may mention several
keywords that are semantically similar to the learn-
ing goals, but it is important for a tutor to recognize
whether the student’s language provides a deeper de-
scription of some phenomena or if it is simply a su-
perficial observation. The Predicate Type aims to
categorize the semantic relationships a student may
talk about; whether it is a Procedure, a Function, a
Causal Relation, or some other predicate type.

3.2.1 Annotation
All transcripts used in this experiment have been

annotated with DISCUSS labels at the turn level. A
reliability study using 15% of the transcripts was
conducted to assess inter-rater agreement of DIS-
CUSS tagging. This consisted of 18 doubly anno-
tated transcripts comprised of 828 dialogue utter-
ances.

To assess inter-rater reliability we use Cohen’s
Kappa (κ) (Carletta, 1996). Because DISCUSS per-
mits multiple labels per instance, we compute a κ
value for each label and provide a mean for each
DISCUSS dimension. To get an additional sense of
agreement, we use two other metrics: exact agree-
ment and partial agreement. For each of these met-
rics, we treat each annotators’ annotations as a per
class bag-of-labels. For exact agreement, each an-
notators’ set of labels must match exactly to receive
credit. Partial agreement is defined as the number
of intersecting labels divided by the total number
of unique labels. Together these statistics help to
bound the reliability of the DISCUSS annotation.
Table 1 lists all three metrics broken down by DIS-
CUSS dimension. The κ values show fair agreement
for the dialogue act and rhetorical form dimensions,
whereas the predicate type shows more moderate
agreement. This difference reflects the relative diffi-

3



culty in labeling each dimension, and the agreement
as a whole illustrates the open-endedness of the task.

3.3 Question Authoring

While the long-term plan for this work is to inte-
grate fully automatic question generation into a tu-
toring system, for this study we opted to use manu-
ally authored questions. This allows us to remain
focused on learning to identify context appropri-
ate questions rather than confounding our experi-
ments with issues of question grammaticality and
well-formedness. Even though using multiple au-
thors would provide greater diversity of questions,
to avoid repeated effort and to maintain consistency
in authoring we trained a single question author
in both the FOSS material and MyST QtA tech-
niques. Although he was free to author any ques-
tion he found appropriate, our guidelines primar-
ily emphasized authoring by making permutations
aligned with DISCUSS dimensions while also per-
mitting the author to incorporate changes in word-
ing, learning-goal content, and tutoring tactics. For
example, we taught him to consider how QtA moves
such as Revoicing, Marking, or Recapping could al-
ter otherwise similar questions. To minimize the risk
of rater bias, we explicitly told our author to avoid
using positive feedback expressions such as “Good
job!” or “Great!”. Table 2 illustrates how the com-
binations of DISCUSS labels, QtA tactics, and dia-
logue context drives the question generation process.

To simulate the conditions available to both the
human WoZ and computer MyST tutors, the author
was presented with the entire dialogue history pre-
ceding the decision point, the current dialogue frame
(learning goal), and any visuals that may be on-
screen. Question authoring contexts were manually
selected to capture points where students provided
responses to tutor questions. This eliminated the
need to account for other dialogue behavior such as
greetings, closings, or meta-behavior, and allowed
us to focus on follow-up style questions. Because
these question authoring contexts came from actual
tutorial dialogues, we also extracted the original turn
provided by the tutor, and we filtered out turns that
did not contain questions related to the lesson con-
tent. Our corpus has 205 question authoring contexts
comprised of 1025 manually authored questions and
131 questions extracted from the original transcript

yielding 1156 questions in total.

3.4 Ratings Collection
To rate questions, we enlisted the help of four tu-
tors who had previously served as project tutors and
wizards. The raters were presented with much of
the same information used during question author-
ing. The interface included the entire dialogue his-
tory preceding the question decision point and a list
of up to 6 candidate questions (5 manually authored,
1 taken from the original transcript if applicable). To
give a more complete tutoring context, raters also
had access to the lessons’ learning goals and the in-
teractive visuals used by MyST.

Previous studies in rating questions (Becker et al.,
2009) have found poor inter-rater agreement when
rating questions in isolation. To decrease the task’s
difficulty we instead ask raters to simultaneously
score all candidate questions. Because we did not
want to bias raters, we did not specify specific cri-
teria for question quality. Instead we instructed the
raters to consider the question’s role in assisting stu-
dent understanding of the learning goals and to think
about factors such as tutorial pacing, context appro-
priateness, and content. Scores were collected us-
ing an ordinal 10-point scale ranging from 1 (low-
est/worst) to 10 (highest/best).

Each set of questions was rated by at least three
tutors, and rater assignments were selected to ensure
raters never score questions from sessions they tu-
tored themselves. In total we collected ratings for
1156 question representing a total of 205 question
contexts distributed across 30 transcripts.

3.4.1 Rater Agreement
Because these judgments are subjective, a key

challenge in this work centers on understanding to
what degree the tutors agree with one another. Since
our goal is to rank questions and not to score ques-
tions, we convert each tutors scores for a given con-
text into a rank-ordered list. To compute inter-
rater agreement in ranking, we use Kendall’s-Tau
(τ ) rank correlation coefficient. This measure is a
non-parametric statistic that quantifies the similarity
in orderings of data, and it is closely tied to AUC,
the area under the receiver operating characteristics
(ROC) curve. Though Kendall’s-τ can vary from -1
to 1, its value is highly task dependent, and it is typ-

4



. . .
T: Tell me more about what is happening with the electricity in a complete circuit.
S: Well the battery sends all the electricity in a circuit to the motor so the motor starts to go.

Candidate Question Frame Element DISCUSS
Q1 Roll over the switch and then in your own

words, tell me again what a complete or
closed circuit is all about.

Same Same Direct/Task/Visual
Ask/Describe/Configuration

Q2 How is this circuit setup? Is it open or closed? Same Same Ask/Select/Configuration
Q3 To summarize, a closed circuit allows the

electricity to flow and the motor to spin. Now
in this circuit, we have a new component. The
switch. What is the switch all about?

Diff Diff Assert/Recap/Proposition
Direct/Task/Visual
Ask/Describe/Function

Q4 You said something about the motor spinning
in a complete circuit. Tell me more about that.

Same Same Revoice/None/None
Ask/Elaborate/CausalRelation

Table 2: Example dialogue context snippet and a collection of candidate questions. The frame, element, and DISCUSS
columns show how the questions vary from one another.

ically lower when the range of possible choices is
narrow as it is in this task. To get a single score we
average τ values across all sets of questions (con-
texts) and all pairs of raters. The mean value for all
pairs of raters and contexts is τ = 0.1478. The inter-
rater statistics are shown in table 3. While inter-rater
agreement is fairly modest, we do see lots of vari-
ation between different pairs of tutors. Addition-
ally, we found that a pair of raters agreed on the top
rated question 33% of the time. This suggests that
despite their common training and experience, the
raters may be using different criteria in rating.

To assess the tutors’ internal consistency, we had
each tutor re-rate 60 sets of questions approximately
two months after their first trial, and we computed
self-agreement Kendall’s-τ values using the method
above. These statistics are listed in the bottom row
of table 3. In contrast with the inter-rater agreement,
self-agreement is much more consistent giving fur-
ther evidence for a difference in criteria. Together
self and inter-rater agreement help bound expected
system performance in ranking.

4 Automatic Ranking

Because we are more interested in learning to pre-
dict which questions are more suitable for a given
tutoring scenario than we are in assigning specific
scores to questions, we approach the task of ques-
tion selection as a ranking task. To create a gold-

rater A rater B rater C rater D
rater A X 0.2590 0.1418 0.0075
rater B 0.2590 X 0.1217 0.2370
rater C 0.1418 0.1217 X 0.0540
rater D 0.0075 0.2370 0.0540 X
mean 0.1361 0.2059 0.1058 0.0995
self 0.4802 0.4022 0.2327 0.3531

Table 3: Inter-rater rank agreement (Kendall’s-τ ). The
bottom row is the self-agreement for contexts they rated
in two separate trials.

standard for training and evaluation we first need to
convert the collective ratings for a set of questions
into a rank-ordered list. While the most straight-
forward way to make this conversion is to average
the ratings for each item, this approach assumes all
raters operate on the same scale. Furthermore, a sin-
gle score does not account for how a question re-
lates to other candidate questions. Instead we create
a single rank-order by tabulating pairwise wins for
all pairs of questions qi, qj , (i 6= j) within a given
dialogue context C. If rating(qi) > rating(qj),
questions qi receives a win. This is summed across
all raters for the context. The question(s) with the
most wins has rank 1. Questions with an equal num-
ber of wins are considered tied and are given the av-
erage ranking of their ordinal positions. For exam-
ple if two questions are tied for second place, they

5



are each assigned a ranking of 2.5.
Using this rank-ordering we then train a pairwise

classifier to learn a preferences function (Cohen et
al., 1998) that determines if one question has a bet-
ter rank than another. For each question qi within a
contextC, we construct a vector of features φi. For a
pair of questions qi and qj , we then create a new vec-
tor using the difference of features: Φ(qi, qj , C) =
φi − φj . For training, if rank(qi) < rank(qj), the
classification is positive otherwise it is negative. To
account for the possibility of ties, and to make the
difference measure appear symmetric, we train both
combinations (qi, qj) and (qj , qi). During decoding,
we run the trained classifier on all pairs and tabulate
wins using the approach described above.

For our experiments we train pairwise classi-
fiers using Mallet’s Maximum Entropy (McCallum,
2002) and SVMLight’s Support Vector Machines
models (Joachims, 1999). We also use SVMRank

(Joachims, 1999), which performs the same max-
imum margin separation as SVMLight, but uses
Kendall’s-τ as a loss function to optimize for rank
ordering. We run SVMRank with a linear kernel
and model parameters of c = 2.0 and � = 0.0156.
For MaxEnt, we use Mallet’s default model param-
eters. Training and evaluation are carried out us-
ing 10-fold cross validation (3 transcripts per fold,
approximately 7 dialogue contexts per transcript).
Folds are partitioned by FOSS unit, to ensure train-
ing and evaluation are on different lessons. To ex-
plore the impact of DISCUSS representations on this
question ranking task, we train and evaluate models
by incrementally adding additional information ex-
tracted from the DISCUSS annotation.

4.1 Features

When designing features for this task, we wanted to
capture the factors that may play a role in the tutor’s
decision making process during question selection.
When rating, scorers may consider factors such as
the question’s surface form, lesson relevance, con-
textual relevance. The subsections below detail the
motivations and intuitions behind these factors.

4.1.1 Surface Form Features
When presented with a list of questions, a rater

likely bases the decision on his or her initial reaction
to the questions’ wording. In some cases, wording

may supercede any other decisions regarding edu-
cational value or dialogue cohesiveness. Question
verbosity is captured by the number of words in the
question feature. Analysis of rater comments also
suggested that preferences are often tied to the ques-
tion’s form and structure. A rough measure of form
comes from the Wh-word features to mark the pres-
ence of the following question words: who, what,
why, where, when, which, and how. Additionally we
use the bag-of-part-of-speech-tags (POS) features to
provide another aspect of the question’s structure.

4.1.2 Lexical Similarity Features

Past work (Ward et al., 2011a) has shown that en-
trainment, the process of automatic alignment be-
tween dialogue partners, is a useful predictor of
learning and is a key factor in facilitating a success-
ful conversation. For question selection, we hypoth-
esize that successful tutors ask questions that dis-
play some degree of semantic entrainment with stu-
dent utterances. In MyST-based tutoring, dialogue
actions are driven by the goal of eliciting student re-
sponses that address the learning goals for the les-
son. Consequently, choosing an appropriate ques-
tion may depend on how closely student responses
align with the learning goals. To model both en-
trainment and lexical similarity we extract features
for unigram and bigram overlap of words, word-
lemmas, and part-of-speech tags between the pairs
below.

• The candidate question and the student’s last
utterance
• The candidate question and the last tutor’s ut-

terance
• The candidate question and the text of the cur-

rent learning goal
• The candidate question and the text of the other

learning goals

Example learning goals for a lesson on circuits are
provided in table 4. The current learning goal is sim-
ply the learning goal in focus at the point of question
asking according to the MyST logfile. Other learn-
ing goals are all other goals for the lesson. Using
the example from the table, if goal 2 is the current
learning goal, then goals 1 and 3 are the other goals.

6



Goal 1: Wires carry electricity and can connect
components

Goal 2: Bulb receives electricity and transforms
electricity into heat

Goal 3: A circuit provides a pathway for energy
to flow

Table 4: Example learning goals

4.1.3 DISCUSS Features
The lexical and surface form features provide

some cues about the content of the question, but
they do not account for the action or intent in tutor-
ing. The DISCUSS annotation allows us to bridge
between the question’s semantics and pragmatically
and focus on what differentiates one question from
another. Basic DISCUSS features include bags of
Dialogue Acts (DA), Rhetorical Forms (RF), and
Predicate types (PT) found in the question’s DIS-
CUSS annotation. We capture the question’s dia-
logue cohesiveness with binary features indicating
whether or not the question’s RF and PT match those
found in the previous student and tutor turns.

4.1.4 Contextualized DISCUSS Features
In tutoring, follow-up questions are licensed by

the questions that precede them. For example a tutor
may be less likely to ask how an object functions un-
til after the object has first been identified by the stu-
dent. Along a different dimension, a tutor’s line of
questioning may change to match a student’s under-
standing of the material. Struggling students may re-
quire additional opportunities to explain themselves,
while advanced students may benefit more from a
more rapid pace of instruction.

We model the conditional relevance of moves
by computing dialogue act transition probabilities
from our corpus of DISCUSS annotated tutorial di-
alogues. Although DISCUSS allows multiple tags
per dialogue turn, we simplify probability calcula-
tions by treating each DISCUSS tuple as a separate
event, and tallying all pairs of turn-turn labels. A
DISCUSS tuple consists of a Dialogue Act (DA),
Rhetorical Form (RF), and Predicate Type (PT),
and we use different subsets of the tuple to com-
pute the transition probabilities listed in equations 1-
3. All probabilities are computed using Laplace-
smoothing. When extracting features, we sum the

log of the probabilities for each DISCUSS label
present in the question.

MyST models dialogue as a sequence of seman-
tic frames which correspond to specific learning
goals. For natural language understanding, MyST
uses Phoenix semantic grammars (Ward, 1994) to
identify which elements within these frames have
been filled. To account for student progress in ques-
tion asking, we compute the conditional probabil-
ity of a DISCUSS label given the percentage of el-
ements filled in the current dialogue frame (equa-
tion 4). This progress percentage is discretized into
bins of 0-25%, 25-50%, 50-75%, and 75-100%.

p(DA,RF, PTquestion|DA,RF, PTstud. turn) (1)

p(DA,RFquestion|DA,RFstudent turn) (2)

p(PTquestion|PTstudent turn) (3)

p(DA,RF, PTques.|% elements filled) (4)

4.2 Evaluation

To evaluate our systems’ performance in ranking,
we use two measures commonly used in information
retrieval: the Mean Kendall’s-τ measure described
in section 3.4.1 and Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR).
MRR is the average of the multiplicative inverse of
the rank of the highest ranking question across all
contexts. To account for ties we use the Tau-b vari-
ant of Kendall’s-τ , and for MRR we compute re-
ciprocal rank by averaging the system rankings for
all of the questions tied for first. To obtain a gold-
standard ranking for comparison, we combine indi-
vidual raters’ ratings using the approached described
in section 4.

5 Results and Discussion

We trained several models to investigate how differ-
ent feature classes influence overall performance in
ranking. The results for these experiments are listed
in Table 5. Because we found comparable perfor-
mance between MaxEnt and SVMLight, we only
report results for MaxEnt and SVMRank models.
In addition to MRR and Kendall’s-τ , we list the
number of concordances and discordances in pair-
wise classification to give the reader another sense
of the accuracy associated with rank agreement.

Random Baseline: On average, assigning ran-
dom ranks will yield mean τ=0 and MRR=0.408.

7



Model Features Mean Num. Num. Pairwise MRR
Kendall’s-τ Concord. Discord. Accuracy

MaxEnt CONTEXT+DA+PT+MATCH+POS- 0.211 1560 974 0.616 0.516
SVMRank CONTEXT+DA+PT+MATCH+POS- 0.190 1725 1154 0.599 0.555
MaxEnt CONTEXT+DA+RF+PT+MATCH+POS- 0.185 1529 1014 0.601 0.512
MaxEnt DA+RF+PT+MATCH+POS- 0.179 1510 1009 0.599 0.503
MaxEnt DA+RF+PT+MATCH+ 0.163 1506 1044 0.591 0.485
MaxEnt DA+RF+PT+ 0.147 1500 1075 0.583 0.480
MaxEnt DA+RF+ 0.130 1458 1082 0.574 0.476
MaxEnt DA+ 0.120 1417 1076 0.568 0.458
SVMRank Baseline 0.108 1601 1278 0.556 0.473
MaxEnt Baseline 0.105 1410 1115 0.558 0.448

Table 5: System scores by feature set and and machine learning model. Presence or absence of specific features is
denoted with a ‘+’ or ‘-’ otherwise the label refers to a set of features. The Baseline features consist of the Surface Form
and Lexical Similarity features described in sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.2. POS are the bag-of-POS surface form features.
DA, RF, and PT refer to the DISCUSS presence features for the Dialogue Act, Rhetorical Form, and Predicate Type
dimensions described in section 4.1.3. MATCH refers specifically to the RF and PT match features. CONTEXT
refers to the Contextualized DISCUSS features described in section 4.1.4. The best scores for each column appear in
boldface.

-1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 -0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0

10

20

30

40

50

Fr
e
q
u
e
n
cy

τmean=0.211

-1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 -0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Kendall's Tau(τ) Range

0

10

20

30

40

50

Fr
e
q
u
e
n
cy

τmean=0.105

Figure 1: Distribution of per-context Kendall’s-τ values
for the top-scoring system (top), and the baseline system
(bottom).

Baseline System: Our baseline system used all
of the surface form and lexical similarity features
described above. This set of features achieves the
highest rank agreement (τ = 0.105) using max-
imum entropy and the highest MRR (0.473) with
SVMRank . This improvement over the random
baseline suggests there is a correlation between a
question’s ranking and its surface form.

DISCUSS System: Table 5 shows system per-
formance steadily improves as additional DISCUSS
features are included in the model. When us-

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.35

0.40

p
(R

a
n
k)

1/MRR=1.80

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Mean System Rank

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.35

0.40

p
(R

a
n
k)

1/MRR=2.11

Figure 2: Distribution of per-context system ranks for the
highest rated question for the top-scoring system (top),
and the baseline system (bottom). These ranks are the
inverse of the reciprocal rank used to calculate MRR.

ing DISCUSS features, removing the part-of-speech
features gives an additional bump in performance
suggesting that there is an overlap in information
between DISCUSS representations and POS tags.
Finally, adding contextualized DISCUSS features
pushes our ranking models to their highest level
of agreement with τ = 0.211 using MaxEnt and
MRR=0.555 using SVMRank . Inspection of the
MRR values shows that without taking into account
the possibility of ties the baseline system selects

8



the top-ranked question in 44/205 (21.4%) contexts.
While the system with the best MRR score, correctly
chooses the top-ranked question in 71/205 (34.6%)
contexts – a rate comparable to how often a pair of
raters agreed on the number-one item (33.4%).

Application of the Wilcoxon signed-rank test
shows the DISCUSS system exhibits statistically
significant improvement over the baseline system in
its distribution of Kendall’s-τ values (n = 205, z =
7350, p < 0.001) and distribution of reciprocal
ranks (n = 205, z = 3739, p < 0.001). Figures 1
and 2 give visual confirmation of this improvement,
and highlight the overall reduction in negative τ val-
ues as well as the greater-than-50% increase in like-
lihood of selecting the best question first.

To get another perspective on system perfor-
mance, we evaluated our human raters on the gold-
standard rankings from the subset of questions used
for assessing internal agreement. This yielded a
mean τ between 0.2589 and 0.3619. If we remove
ratings so that the gold-standard does not include the
rater under evaluation, tutor performance drops to
a range of 0.1523 to 0.2432, which is roughly cen-
tered around the agreement exhibited by our best-
performing system.

Looking at the impact of learning algorithms
we see that SVMRank tends to perform better on
MRR while the pairwise maximum entropy mod-
els yield higher τ ’s. One possible explanation for
this discrepancy may stem from the ranking algo-
rithms’ different treatment of ties. The pairwise
model permits ties, whereas the scores produced by
SVMRank produce a strict order. Without ties, it is
difficult to exactly match the raters’ orderings which
had numerous ties, which can in turn produce an
overall higher number of concordances and discor-
dances than the pairwise classification model.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

We have introduced a framework for learning and
evaluating models for ranking and selecting ques-
tions for a given point in a tutorial dialogue. Fur-
thermore these experiments show that it is feasible
to learn this behavior by coupling predefined ques-
tions with ratings from trained tutors. Supplement-
ing our baseline surface form and lexical similarity
features with additional features extracted from the

dialogue context and DISCUSS dialogue act anno-
tation improves system performance in ranking to a
level on par with expert human tutors. These results
illustrate how question asking depends not only on
the form of the question but also on the underlying
dialogue action, function and content.

In the near future we plan to train models on indi-
vidual tutors to investigate which factors drive in-
dividual preferences in question asking. We also
plan to characterize system performance using auto-
matically labeled DISCUSS annotation. Lastly, we
feel these results provide a natural starting point to
explore automatic generation of questions from the
DISCUSS dialogue move representation.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by grants from the
NSF (DRL-0733322, DRL-0733323), the IES
(R3053070434) and the DARPA GALE program
(Contract No. HR0011-06-C-0022, a supplement
for VerbNet attached to the subcontract from the
BBN-AGILE Team). Any findings, recommenda-
tions, or conclusions are those of the author and do
not necessarily represent the views of NSF, IES, or
DARPA.

References
Manish Agarwal and Prashanth Mannem. 2011. Auto-

matic gap-fill question generation from text books au-
tomatic gap-fill question generation from text books
automatic gap-fill questions from text books. In Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Innovative Use of
NLP for Building Educational Applications.

I. L. Beck, M. G. McKeown, J. Worthy, C. A. San-
dora, and L. Kucan. 1996. Questioning the au-
thor: A year-long classroom implementation to engage
students with text. The Elementary School Journal,
96(4):387–416.

L. Becker, R. D. Nielsen, and W. Ward. 2009. What a
pilot study says about running a question generation
challenge. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on
Question Generation, Brighton, England, July.

L. Becker, W. Ward, S. van Vuuren, and M. Palmer. 2011.
Discuss: A dialogue move taxonomy layered over se-
mantic representations. In In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Computational Semantics
(IWCS) 2011, Oxford, England, January 12-14.

K.E. Boyer, E.Y. Ha, M. Wallis, R. Phillips, M.A. Vouk,
and J.C. Lester. 2009a. Discovering tutorial dialogue

9



strategies with hidden markov models. In Proceed-
ings of the 14th International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence in Education (AIED ’09), pages 141–148,
Brighton, U.K.

K.E. Boyer, W.J. Lahti, R. Phillips, M. D. Wallis, M. A.
Vouk, and J. C. Lester. 2009b. An empirically derived
question taxonomy for task-oriented tutorial dialogue.
In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Question
Generation, pages 9–16, Brighton, U.K.

M. Buckley and M. Wolska. 2008. A classification of
dialogue actions in tutorial dialogue. In Proceedings
of COLING 2008, pages 73–80. ACL.

H. C. Bunt. 2009. The DIT++ taxonomy for functional
dialogue markup. In Proc. EDAML 2009.

Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifi-
cation tasks: The kappa statistic. Computational Lin-
guistics, 22(2):pp. 249–254.

M. Chi, P. Jordan, K. VanLehn, and M. Hall. 2008. Re-
inforcement learning-based feature selection for devel-
oping pedagogically effective tutorial dialogue tactics.
In Ryan S. Baker, Tiffany Barnes, and Joseph Becker,
editors, Proceedings of the 1st International Confer-
ence on Educational Data Mining, pages pp258–265.

M. Chi, P. W. Jordan, K. VanLehn, and D. J. Litman.
2009. To elicit or to tell: Does it matter? In Artifi-
cial Intelligence in Education, pages 197–204.

M. Chi, K. VanLehn, and D. Litman. 2010. Do micro-
level tutorial decisions matter: Applying reinforce-
ment learning to induce do micro-level tutorial deci-
sions matter. In Vincent Aleven, Judy Kay, and Jack
Mostow, editors, Preceedings of the 10th Internation
Confernce on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS 2010).

William W. Cohen, Robert E. Schapire, and Yoram
Singer. 1998. Learning to order things. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 10 (NIPS
1998).

A. Collins and A. Stevens. 1982. Goals and methods for
inquiry teachers. Advances in Instructional Psychol-
ogy, 2.

M. G. Core and J.F. Allen. 1997. Coding dialogs with the
DAMSL annotation scheme. In AAAI Fall Symposium,
pages 28–35.

A.C. Graesser and N.K. Person. 1994. Question ask-
ing during tutoring. American Educational Research
Journal, 31:104–137.

A.C. Graesser, P. Chipman, B.C Haynes, and A. Olney.
2005. Autotutor: An intelligent tutoring system with
mixed-initiative dialogue. IEEE Transactions in Edu-
cation, 48:612–618.

M. Heilman and N. A. Smith. 2010. Good question! sta-
tistical ranking for question generation. In Proceed-
ings of NAACL/HLT 2010.

T. Joachims. 1999. Making large-scale svm learning
practical. In B. Schölkopf, C. Burges, and A. Smola,
editors, Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vector
Learning. MIT-Press.

J.H. Kim, M. Glass, R. Freedman, and M.W. Evens.
2000. Learning the use of discourse markers in tuto-
rial dialogue learning the use of discourse markers in
tutorial dialogue. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.

D. Litman and S. Silliman. 2004. Itspoke: An intel-
ligent tutoring spoken dialogue system. In Compan-
ion Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
Conference: 4th Meeting of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(HLT/NAACL).

W.C. Mann and S.A Thompson. 1986. Rhetorical struc-
ture theory: Description and construction of text struc-
tures. In In Proceedings of the Third International
Workshop on Text Generation, August.

A. K. McCallum, 2002. MALLET: A Machine Learning
for Language Toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.

R. D. Nielsen, J. Buckingham, G. Knoll, B. Marsh, and
L. Palen. 2008. A taxonomy of questions for ques-
tion generation. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
the Question Generation Shared Task and Evaluation
Challenge, September.

R.M. Pilkington. 1999. Analysing educational dis-
course: The discount scheme. Technical Report 99/2,
Computer Based Learning Unit, University of Leeds.

Owen Rambow, Monica Rogati, and Marilyn A. Walker.
2001. Evaluating a trainable sentence planner for a
spoken dialogue system evaluating a trainable sen-
tence planner for a spoken dialogue system. In Pro-
ceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2001).

C.P. Rose, P. Jordan, M. Ringenberg, S. Siler, K. Van-
Lehn, and A. Weinstein. 2001. A comparative evalu-
ation of socratic versus didactic tutoring. In Proceed-
ings of Cognitive Sciences Society.

C.P. Rose, D. Bhembe, S. Siler, R. Srivastava, and
K. VanLehn. 2003. The role of why questions in ef-
fective human tutoring. In Proceedings of Artificial
Intelligence in Education (AIED 2003).

D. Tsovaltzi and E. Karagjosova. 2004. A view on dia-
logue move taxonomies for tutorial dialogues. In Pro-
ceedings of SIGDIAL 2004, pages 35–38. ACL.

D. Tsovaltzi and C. Matheson. 2001. Formalising hint-
ing in tutorial dialogues. In In EDILOG: 6th workshop
on the semantics and pragmatics of dialogue, pages
185–192.

K. VanLehn, A.C. Graesser, G.T. Jackson, P. Jordan,
A. Olney, and C.P. Rose. 2007. When are tutorial
dialogues more effective than reading? Cognitive Sci-
ence, 31(1):3–62.

10



Marilyn A. Walker, Owen Rambow, and Monica Rogati.
2001. SPOT: A trainable sentence planner. In Pro-
ceedings of the North American Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (NAACL).

A. Ward, D. Litman, and M. Eskenazi. 2011a. Predict-
ing change in student motivation by measuring cohe-
sion between predicting change in student motivation
by measuring cohesion between tutor and student. In
Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Innovative Use
of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages
136–141.

W. Ward, R. Cole, D. Bolaños, C. Buchenroth-Martin,
E. Svirsky, S. van Vuuren, T. Weston, J. Zheng, and
L. Becker. 2011b. My science tutor: A conversa-
tional multi-media virtual tutor for elementary school
science. ACM Transactions on Speech and Language
Processing (TSLP), 7(4), August.

W. Ward. 1994. Extracting information from sponta-
neous speech. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Speech and Language Processing (IC-
SLP).

Xuchen Yao. 2010. Question generation with minimal
recursion semantics. Master’s thesis, Saarland Uni-
versity.

11


