










































Temporal Classification of Medical Events


Proceedings of the 2012 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2012), pages 29–37,
Montréal, Canada, June 8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Temporal Classification of Medical Events

Preethi Raghavan∗, Eric Fosler-Lussier∗, and Albert M. Lai†
∗Department of Computer Science and Engineering

†Department of Biomedical Informatics
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA

{raghavap, fosler}@cse.ohio-state.edu, albert.lai@osumc.edu

Abstract

We investigate the task of assigning medi-
cal events in clinical narratives to discrete
time-bins. The time-bins are defined to cap-
ture when a medical event occurs relative to
the hospital admission date in each clinical
narrative. We model the problem as a se-
quence tagging task using Conditional Ran-
dom Fields. We extract a combination of lexi-
cal, section-based and temporal features from
medical events in each clinical narrative. The
sequence tagging system outperforms a sys-
tem that does not utilize any sequence infor-
mation modeled using a Maximum Entropy
classifier. We present results with both hand-
tagged as well as automatically extracted fea-
tures. We observe over 8% improvement in
overall tagging accuracy with the inclusion of
sequence information.

1 Introduction

There has been a lot of interest in building timelines
of medical events from unstructured patient narra-
tives (Jung et al., 2011; Zhou and Hripcsak, 2007).
Creating a timeline from longitudinal clinical text
requires learning temporal relations such as before,
simultaneous, includes, overlaps, begins, ends and
their inverses between medical events found within
and across patient narratives (Allen, 1981). How-
ever, learning temporal relations for fine-grained
temporal ordering of medical events in clinical text
is challenging: the temporal cues typically found in
clinical text may not always be sufficient for this
task.

An important characteristic of a clinical narrative
is that the medical events in the same narrative are
more or less semantically related by narrative dis-
course structure. However, medical events in the
narrative are not ordered chronologically. Thus, the
clinical narrative structure is not always temporally
coherent.

Moreover, extracting precise temporal features
for highly accurate temporal ordering of medical
events is difficult as the temporal relationship be-
tween medical events is varied and complicated.
Zhou and Hripcsak (2007) identify six major cate-
gories of temporal expressions from a corpus of dis-
charge summaries: “date and time,” “relative date
and time,” “duration,” “event-dependent temporal
expression,” “fuzzy time,” and “recurring times.”
Their study of temporal expressions in clinical text
indicates that relative time (e.g., ever since the
episode 2 days ago) may be more prevalent than ab-
solute time (e.g., 06/03/2007). Further, temporal ex-
pressions may be fuzzy where “history of cocaine
use” may imply that cocaine use started 2 years ago
or 10 years ago.

In this paper, we address a relatively simpler task
of assigning medical events to coarsely defined time-
bins. The time-bins, way before admission, before
admission, on admission, after admission, after dis-
charge, are defined based on the relative temporal
distance of the medical event from the admission
date, which is the only explicit date almost always
found in each clinical narrative. We extract fea-
tures based on narrative structure as well as tempo-
ral expressions to label a sequence of medical events
from each clinical narrative with a highly probable

29



HISTORY   PHYSICAL                                 DATE:  06/03/2007 

NAME:  Smith Jack                           MR#:  XXX-XX-XXXX 

ATTENDING PHYSICIAN:  Bill Payne  MD             DOB:  02/28/1960 

CHIEF COMPLAINT 

Chest pain and arm infection. 

HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS 

Patient is a 48-year-old male with history of cocaine use hypertension who presents with chest pain  

which started 2 days ago . He did not having  chest pain yesterday but ever since the episode 2 days ago  

he has felt a little weaker.  He did have chest pain today and this is what prompted him to come to the  

ER.  He also  notices that he has had some infections under his arms.  He states that he had to have an  

abscess I and D 3 or 4 months ago under his arm and 2 to 3 weeks ago he noticed some more spots and  

these spots have now grown and now are under both arms. Currently he is chest pain free. His blood  

pressure upon presentation was 189/106. 

REVIEW OF SYSTEMS 

On exam initial blood pressure was 189/106 current blood pressure 148/83 with heart rate of 74  

respirations  16.  Heart regular rhythm.  No murmurs.   Arms:  He does have tender areas right greater  

than left under the arm. Difficult to tell if there is any erythema but  obvious cellulitis sludge abscess  

under the right arm which is tender. 

ASSESSMENT/PLAN 

1. Chest pain history of cocaine with T-wave inversions in the inferior leads.  Currently he is chest pain 
free.  We will check a 2-D echocardiogram.  Consult Cardiology for a stress test.   

2. Axillary abscesses.  Consult Surgery for I and D.  We will place on IV vancomycin pain control. 

3. Cocaine abuse.  Encouraged to quit. 

 
1 

 
 

 
2 

 
 

 
3 

 
 

 
4 

 
 

 
5 

 
 

 
6 

 
 

 
7 

 
 

 
8 

 
 

 
9 

 
 

Figure 1: Excerpt from a de-identified clinical narrative
(cn1) written for a patient in 2007. Medical events are
underlined. Enumerated events (in circles) are used as an
example later in Table 1.

sequence of time-bins using Conditional Random
Fields (CRFs). The learned time-bins can be used
as an informative temporal feature for tasks such
as fine-grained temporal ordering of medical events
and medical event coreference resolution.

2 Motivation

Clinical narratives are medical reports that contain
unstructured text documenting the medical history
of the patient. Medical events are temporally-related
concepts in clinical narratives that describe medical
conditions affecting the patient’s health, or tests and
procedures performed on a patient. Sample excerpts
from two different clinical notes (cn1 and cn2) of
the same patient, generated over time, are shown in
Figures 1 and 2. We can see from the examples that
narrative structure moves back and forth in time and
is not temporally coherent. We use cn1 and cn2 as
running examples throughout the paper.

The medical events assigned to time-bins in each
clinical narrative allow us to derive a coarse tempo-
ral order between medical events within and across
the longitudinal medical history of the patient. Since
we learn time-bins centered around admission in
each narrative and we also know the admission date
and perhaps the discharge dates in cn1 and cn2, we
can derive a coarse partial order across the medi-

HISTORY   PHYSICAL                                 DATE:  06/17/2007 

NAME:  Black Jack                           MR#:  XXX-XX-XXXX 

ATTENDING PHYSICIAN:  Jack Payne  MD             DOB:  02/28/1960 

He is a 48-year-old African American gentleman with a history of cocaine use and hypertension. He  

has hidradenitis of both axilla resected. The patient is MRSA positive on IV antibiotics at the present  

time.  The patient's physical condition is excellent but he had MRSA in the axilla for hidradenitis that  

was devastating.  The wounds now are very large but he is wound vac and being changed to alginate.  

Both axilla show major wounds of 20-25 cm in diameter and 4-5 cm deep in overall size and he has  

excoriations on his chest from the tape.  The plan is to change him from vac to alginate and see him  

in a week. 

Figure 2: Excerpt from another de-identified clinical nar-
rative (cn2) for the same patient written in later in 2007.
Medical events are underlined.

cal events in cn1 and cn2. This is shown in Fig-
ure 3. Even if the discharge dates are not known,
we still know that the admission date (A1) of cn1
is 6/03/2007 and A2 of cn2 is 06/17/2007. Thus,
A2 > A1, and all the time-bins in cn2 that are on or
after admission would have happened after A2. The
partially ordered time-bins can now be used for tasks
such as medical concept coreference resolution.

In cross narrative coreference resolution tasks,
we can prune the space of candidate pairs of med-
ical events by ruling out portions of clinical nar-
ratives that will not have any coreferring medical
events. For example, in the timeline shown in Fig-
ure 3, the medical events in time-bins admission, af-
ter admission and discharge of cn2 will not corefer
with any medical event in cn1. Further, when men-
tions of the same medical events occur in different
time-bins, it could mean that they are the same in-
stance of the medical event and they corefer. For
instance, cocaine abuse and cocaine use. Similarly,
MRSA positive is assigned to time-bin on admission
whereas MRSA is assigned to before admission and
both mentions of MRSA corefer.

3 Related Work

The Timebank (Pustejovsky et al., 2003) corpus of
annotated newswire text is widely used for tempo-
ral relation learning. The TempEval challenges have
often focused on extracting different types of tempo-
ral relations from Timebank (Verhagen et al., 2009).
In Timebank, events are typically verbs that denote
change in state. Since the notion of an event in Time-
bank is different from medical events in clinical text,
it is not possible to directly train models on Time-
bank and apply them to clinical text. The THYME
work (Savova et al., 2009) extends TimeML to the

30



    A1 D1 

   A2 D2 

cocaine use 
 
hypertension 

 chest pain 
  
abscess 

chest 
pain 
  
     
 
arm  
infection 

heart regular  
rhythm 

cellulitis 

2-D 
echocardiogram 

stress test 

MRSA 
positive 

hidradenitis of axilla  
resected 
 
 
MRSA in the axilla for 
hidradenitis 

wounds 

wound vac 

IV antibiotics 

alginate cocaine use 
 
hypertension 

way before before admission after discharge 

before admission after discharge 
way before 

p1-cn1 

p1-cn2 

Figure 3: Medical events in clinical narratives cn1 and cn2 for patient p1 assigned to time-bins. A1 is the admission
date in cn1 and D1 is the discharge date. Similarly A2 is the admission date in cn2 and D2 is the discharge date. Thus,
we have, A1 < D1, D1 < A2, A2 < D2

medical domain to create layered annotation to be
used for event linking. Boland et al. (2012) identify
the temporal knowledge representation requirements
of clinical eligibility criteria and develop a frame-
based representation designed to support semantic
annotation for temporal expressions in eligibility cri-
teria. However, the nature of data found in eligibility
criteria is different from clinical narratives.

Previous attempts at learning temporal relations
between medical events in clinical text include Jung
et al. (2011) and Zhou et al. (2006). Gaizauskas et
al. (2006) learn the temporal relations before, after,
is included between events from a corpus of clinical
text much like the event-event relation TLINK learn-
ing in Timebank (Pustejovsky et al., 2003). How-
ever, the corpora used in these studies are not freely
available. A comprehensive survey of temporal rea-
soning in medical data is provided by Zhou and
Hripcsak (2007).

The task addressed in this paper is at a higher
level than the temporal relation learning or tempo-
ral ordering task. Without getting into fine-grained
temporal ordering, we define coarse time-bins and
classify medical events into one of the time-bins.

We work with a similar motivation of being able
to answer clinical trial eligibility criteria with tem-
poral constraints. However, while they model the
temporal information in eligibility criteria, we pro-
cess the temporal information and medical events
in the clinical narrative to assign events to time-
bins. The learned time-bins are a step towards fine-
grained temporal ordering of medical events in clin-
ical text. More importantly, we also demonstrate

how automatic feature extraction for this task gives
us promising results, though not as good as using
hand-tagged features.

4 Problem Description

A patient could have multiple clinical narratives,
generated over a period of time, representing the pa-
tient’s longitudinal medical history. Returning to the
examples in Figures 1 and 2, in this section we de-
scribe how such clinical narratives are translated into
a temporal-bin assignment problem.

4.1 Medical event representation

Medical events in clinical narratives often have a
time duration with a corresponding start and stop
time, for example, history of hypertension (Zhou et
al., 2006). In this example, hypertension started at
some point before admission and is present to the
current date. Time duration based representation is
essential to learning the exact fine-grained tempo-
ral order of medical events within and across clin-
ical narratives. In order to keep the task of classi-
fying medical events into coarse time-bins relatively
simple and easy to learn, we use a time-point nota-
tion for representing medical events. Each mention
of a medical event is assigned to a time-bin with-
out taking into consideration whether it denotes the
beginning or end of that event. We also do not dif-
ferentiate between coreferences of the same medical
event. Thus, if chest pain is mentioned in the past
medical history and the same chest pain continues
to persist in the after admission time-bin, the two
different mentions of chest pain get anchored to dif-

31



ferent time-bins. Similarly, cocaine use started in
the history of the patient and cocaine abuse still per-
sists. We assign the two different mentions of this
medical event into different time-bins.

4.2 Time-bins
As mentioned earlier, we learn to classify medical
events into one of the following time-bins: way be-
fore admission, before admission, on admission, af-
ter admission, after discharge. The intuition behind
each time-bin label is as follows. The time-bin way
before admission is intended to capture all medical
events that happened in the past medical history of
the patient but are not mentioned as being directly
related to the present illness. Before admission cap-
tures events that occurred before admission and are
related to the present illness. On admission captures
medical events that occur on the day of admission.
After admission captures medical events that occur
between admission and discharge (during the hospi-
tal stay or clinic visit). Finally, medical events that
are supposed to occur in the future after the patient
is discharged belong to the class after discharge.

Further, the time duration of each time-bin varies
based on the patient. For instance, the hospital stay
of a patient could be 4 days or 1 month or a year.
This makes it very difficult to define exact time-bins
based on the intuitions described above. In order
to make the problem more precise and consistent
across different patients, we restrict way before ad-
mission to events that happened more than a year
ago and before admission to events that occurred in
the same year before admission. If it is unclear as
to when in the past the medical event occurred, we
assume it happened way before admission.

5 Learning time-bin assignments
We model the problem of classifying medical events
to time-bins as a sequence tagging task using CRFs
(Lafferty et al., 2001). CRFs are a joint model of
label sequence conditioned on the observation.

For the task proposed in this paper, an observation
sequence is composed of medical events in the order
in which they appear in a clinical narrative, and the
state sequence is the corresponding label sequence
of time-bins. Each label in the label sequence could
be any one of the time-bins way before admission
(wa), before admission (ba), on admission (a), after

admission (aa), after discharge (ad). Thus, given
a sequence of medical events in narrative order we
learn a corresponding label sequence of time-bins
{wb, b, a, aa, ad}.

The probability of time-bin (label) sequence y,
given a medical event (input) sequence x, is given
by,

P (Y |X) = exp
∑

i

(S(x, y, i) + T (x, y, i)) (1)

where i is the medical event index and S and T are
the state and transition features respectively. State
features S consider the label of a single medical
event and are defined as,

S(x, y, i) =
∑

j

λjsj(y, x, i) (2)

Transition features consider the mutual dependence
of labels yi−1 and yi (dependence between the time-
bins of the current and previous medical event in the
sequence) and are given by,

T (x, y, i) =
∑

k

µktk(yi−1, yi, x, i) (3)

where sj and tk are the state and transition feature
functions. Above, sj is a state feature function, and
λj is its associated weight and tj is a transition func-
tion, and µj is its associated weight. In contrast to
the state function, the transition function takes as in-
put the current label as well as the previous label,
in addition to the data. The mutual dependence be-
tween the time-bins of the current and previous med-
ical events is observed frequently in sections of the
text describing the history of the patient. Around
40% of the medical events in gold standard corpus
demonstrate such dependencies.

The Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) model (Berger
et al., 1996) estimates the probability of a time-bin
given the observed medical event. In this case, we
are interested in finding the time-bin with the maxi-
mum estimated probability.

6 Feature Space

We extract features from medical event sequences
found in each clinical narrative. The extracted
feature-set captures narrative structure in terms of
the narrative type, sections, section transitions, and

32



position in document. The medical event and the
context in which it is mentioned is captured with
the help of lexical features. The temporal features
resolve temporal references and associate medical
events with temporal expressions wherever possible.

6.1 Section-based features

Determining the document-level structure of a clin-
ical narrative is useful in mapping medical events
to time-bins. This can be achieved by identifying
different sections in different types of clinical narra-
tives and relating them to different time-bins. The
section in which the medical event is mentioned
tells us something about when it occurred. Li et al.
(2010) train a hidden Markov model (HMM) to map
a sequence of sections to 15 possible known section
types in free-text narratives with high accuracy.

Commonly found sections in discharge sum-
maries and history and physical reports include:
“past medical history,” “history of present illness,”
“findings on admission,” “physical examination,”
“review of systems,” “impression,” and “assess-
ment/plan.” On the other hand, radiology notes tend
to have sections describing “indication,” “‘com-
parison,” “findings” and “impression”. Similarly,
pathology notes may have sections including “clini-
cal history,” “specimen received,” “laboratory data”
and “interpretation.” While some sections talk about
patient history, some other sections describe the pa-
tient’s condition after admission, or plans after dis-
charge. However, some clinical notes like cn2 in
Figure 2 may not have any section information.

The combined feature representing the type of
clinical narrative along with the section can be infor-
mative. Section transitions may also indicate a tem-
poral pattern for medical events mentioned across
those sections. For instance, “past medical history”
(way before admission), followed by “history of
present illness” (way before admission), followed by
“findings on admission” (on admission), followed
by “physical examination” (after admission), fol-
lowed by “assessment/plan” (discharge). Medical
events in different types of sections may also exhibit
different temporal patterns. A “history of present ill-
ness” section may start with diseases and diagnoses
30 years ago and then proceed to talk about them in
the context of a medical condition that happened few
years ago and finally describe the patient’s condition

on admission.
In addition to the section information, we also use

other features extracted from the clinical narrative
structure such as the position of the medical concept
in the section and in the narrative.

6.2 Lexical features

Bigrams are pairs of words that occur in close prox-
imity to each other, and in a particular order. The
bigrams preceding the medical event in the narra-
tive can be useful in determining when it occurred.
For instance, “history of cocaine use and hyper-
tension,” “presents with chest pain,” “have chest
pain,” “since the episode,” etc. If the preceding bi-
gram contains a verb, we also extract the tense of the
verb as a feature. However, tense is not always help-
ful in learning the time of occurrence of a medical
event. Consider the following line from cn2 in Fig-
ure 2, “He has hidradenitis of both axilla resected.”
Though “has” is in present tense, the medical event
has actually occurred in the history and is only being
observed and noted now. Additionally, we also ex-
plicitly include the preceding bigrams and the tense
of verb for the previous and next medical event as a
feature for the current medical event.

Every medical event that occurs above a certain
frequency threshold in all the clinical narratives of
a particular patient is also represented as a binary
feature. More frequent medical events tend to occur
in the history of the patient, for example, cocaine
use. We use a threshold of 3 in our experiments.
The medical event frequency in also calculated in
combination with other features such as the type of
clinical narrative and section type.

6.3 Dictionary features

The UMLS1 includes a large Metathesaurus of con-
cepts and terms from many biomedical vocabular-
ies and a lexicon that contains syntactic, morpho-
logical, and orthographic information for biomed-
ical and common words in the English language.
We map each medical event to the closest concept
in the UMLS Metathesaurus and extract its seman-
tic category. The semantic categories in UMLS in-
clude Finding, Disease or Syndrome, Therapeutic
or Preventative procedure, Congenital abnormality,

1https://uts.nlm.nih.gov/home.html

33



and Pathologic Function. The intuition behind this is
that medical events associated with certain semantic
categories may be more likely to occur within cer-
tain time-bins. For instance, a medical event classi-
fied as “Congenital abnormality” may be more likely
to occur way before admission.

6.4 Temporal features

Temporal features are derived from any explicit
dates that fall in the same sentence as the medical
concept. The gold-standard corpus contains anno-
tations for temporal anchors for events. Although
there are no explicit dates in cn1 and cn2, there may
be narratives where there are mentions of dates such
as fever on June 7th, 2007. In some cases, there
may also be indirect references to dates, which tell
us when the medical event occurred. The reference
date with respect to which the indirect temporal ref-
erence is made depends on the type of note. In case
of history and physical notes, the reference date is
usually the admission date. For instance, chest pain
which started 2 days ago, this would mean chest
pain which started 2 days before admission. Since
the admission date is 06/03/2007, chest pain would
have started on 06/01/2007. Similarly, 3 to 4 months
ago resolves to February 2007 or March 2007 and 2
to 3 weeks ago resolves to first or second week of
May 2007. Whenever, the exact date is fuzzy, we as-
sume the date that is farthest from the reference date
as accurate. So in case of these examples, February
2007 and first week of May 2007 are assumed to be
correct. We also calculate the difference between ad-
mission date and these dates associated with medical
events. Another fuzzy temporal expression is “his-
tory of,” where history could mean any time frame
before admission. We assume that any medical event
mentioned along with “history of” has occurred way
before admission.

Other implicit temporal expressions can be found
in phrases such as upon presentation yesterday, to-
day, at the present time, and now. Upon presen-
tation, at the present time, today, and now resolve
to the admission date 06/03/2007 and yesterday
resolves to the day before admission 06/02/2007.
There are some other implicit temporal expressions
expressed relative to medical events, for example,
ever since the episode 2 days ago he has felt a little
weaker. Here, episode refers to chest pain and since

chest pain happened 2 days ago, ever since then up
to the present time would resolve to the time period
between 06/01/2007 and 06/03/2007. This time pe-
riod is associated with weaker.

7 Corpus

We use annotators that are students or recently grad-
uated students from diverse clinical backgrounds
with varying levels of clinical experience to anno-
tate a corpus of clinical narratives from the medical
center. The corpus consists of narratives specifically
from MRSA cases and consists of admission notes,
radiology and pathology reports, history and physi-
cal reports and discharge summaries. The features
marked by the annotators include medical events;
corresponding time-bin; corresponding UMLS con-
cept identifier; the UMLS semantic category; tem-
poral expressions; the link between temporal expres-
sions and medical events, if any; and the section un-
der which the medical event is mentioned, if any.
The annotators marked 1854 medical events across
5 patients and 51 clinical narratives. The annotation
agreement across our team of annotators is high; all
annotators agreed on 89.5% of the events and our
overall inter-annotator Cohen’s kappa statistic (Con-
ger, 1980) for medical events was 0.865.

While we found the inter-annotator agreement
for medical event UMLS concept identifiers to be
lower than for medical events and temporal expres-
sions, agreement was still very high. We discov-
ered that in many cases there was either a dis-
crepancy in the granularity to which the medical
events were coded or whether or not clinical judg-
ment was used in selecting the concept identifier.
For example, all of our annotators marked “B-Cell
CLL” as an event. Three of them coded this term
as “C0023434: Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia.”
Two others coded this event as “C0475774: B-cell
chronic lymphocytic leukemia variant.” While both
could be considered correct annotations for “B-Cell
CLL,” C0475774 is the more specific term. In
another example, all of the annotators marked the
phrase “white blood cell count of 10,000.” For this
situation, one of them selected “C0750426: white
blood cell count increased,” while another selected
“C0023508: White Blood Cell count procedure.” In
contrast, the other three selected different concept

34



identifiers, applying clinical judgment to the medi-
cal events. One other annotator selected “C0860797:
differential white blood cell count normal.”

We use this gold-standard corpus for our exper-
iments. We conduct two sets of experiments with
the clinical narratives in this corpus: 1) Medical
event, Time-bin experiments using hand-tagged fea-
tures from the corpus and 2) Medical event, Time-
bin experiments using automatically extracted fea-
tures from the corpus.

8 Experiments

We first conducted experiments using the hand-
tagged features in our corpus. Based on these
features, we generated the section-based, lexical,
dictionary and temporal features described in the
previous sections. We used 10-fold cross vali-
dation in all our experiments. We use the Mal-
let2 implementation of CRFs and MaxEnt. CRFs
are trained by Limited-Memory Broyden-Fletcher-
Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS) for our experiments. The
per-class accuracy values of both sequence tagging
using CRFs and using a MaxEnt model are indicated
in Table 3.

When modeled as a multi-class classification task
using MaxEnt, we get an average precision of 81.2%
and average recall of 71.4% whereas using CRFs we
obtain an average precision of 89.4% and average
recall of 79.2%. In order to determine the utility
of temporal features, we do a feature ablation study
with the temporal features removed. In this case
the average precision of the CRF is 79.5% and av-
erage recall is 67.2%. Similarly, when we remove
the section-based features, the average precision of
the CRF is 82.7% and average recall is 72.3%. The
section-based features seems to impact the precision
of the on admission and after admission time-bins
the most.

We compare our approach for classifying medi-
cal events to time-bins with the following baseline
model. We assign medical events to time-bins based
on the type of narrative, any explicit dates and sec-
tion in which they occur. Each section is associated
with a pre-defined time-bin. In the case of the sec-
tions in cn1, any medical event under “history of
present illness” is before admission, “review of sys-

2http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/

Medical Event Baseline MaxEnt CRF Gold
1©cocaine use ba wa wa wa
2©hypertension ba wa wa wa
3©chest pain ba ba ba ba
4©episode ba ba ba ba
5©chest pain ba ba a a
6©infections ba wa ba ba
7©abscess ba ba ba ba
8©spots ba ba ba ba
9©chest pain free ba wa a a

Table 1: Time-bin predictions by the section baseline
method, MaxEnt model and CRF for a subset of medi-
cal events marked in cn1 in Figure 1.

Class(time-bin) Section baseline
P R

way before admission (wa) 56.3 61.4
before admission (ba) 60.2 57.5
on admission (a) 63.8 59.1
after admission (aa) 57.5 68.2
after discharge (ad) 52.3 55.1

Table 2: Per-class precision (P) and recall (R) for medical
events, time-bins using hand-tagged extracted features.

tems” is after admission and “assessment/plan” is
discharge. If the narrative has a “past medical his-
tory” or a similar section, the events mentioned un-
der it would be assigned to way before admission.
Partial results of (medical event, time-bin) assign-
ment in cn2 as per this baseline can be seen in Table
1. However, this baseline does not work for clinical
narratives like cn2 that do not have any section in-
formation. This model gives us an average precision
of 58.02% and average recall of 60.26% across the 5
time-bins. Per-class predictions for the baseline are
shown in Table 2.

The most common false positives for the before
admission class are medical events belonging to on
admission. This may be due to lack of temporal fea-
tures to indicate that the event happened on the same
day as admission. Frequently, medical events that
belong to the aa, ba and wa time-bin get classified
as after discharge. One of the reasons for this could
be misleading section information in case of histori-
cal medical events mentioned in the assessment/plan
section.

Next, we conduct experiments using automati-
cally extracted features. This is done as follows. The
medical events are extracted using MetaMap, which
recognizes medical concepts and codes them using

35



Class(time-bin) MaxEnt CRF
P R P R

way before admission (wa) 72.4 63.5 79.8 66.7
before admission (ba) 83.4 80.8 92.0 92.4
on admission (a) 76.6 72.1 87.5 75.2
after admission (aa) 88.6 82.1 93.6 99.1
after discharge (ad) 85.2 58.7 94.3 62.5

Table 3: Per-class precision (P) and recall (R) for medical
events, time-bins using hand-tagged extracted features.

UMLS (Aronson, 2001). Based on this UMLS code,
we can extract the semantic category associated with
the code. Compared to the 1854 medical events
marked by the annotators, MetaMap identifies 1257
medical events, which are a subset of the 1854. The
UMLS coding by the annotators is more contextu-
ally relevant and precise. We use a rule-based al-
gorithm to identify and extract document structure
based features such as sections from clinical narra-
tives. The rules are formulated based on commonly
occurring sections in our corpus. We extract lines
that are all upper-case, and longer than a word and
use their stemmed representation to sort them by fre-
quency of occurrence in the corpus. While parsing
the text in each clinical narrative, on encountering
a line that matches a section title from the frequent
list, all subsequent lines are associated with that title
until a new section title is encountered. In case of the
lexical features, we extract bigrams and calculate the
tense of the verb preceding the medical event using
the Stanford NLP software.3 The temporal features
are extracted with the help of TimeText developed
by Zhou and Hripcsak (2007) that automatically an-
notates temporal expressions in clinical text. How-
ever, it is not able to capture many of the implicit
temporal references. Following this, a temporal ex-
pression is linked to a medical event if it occurs in
the same sentence as the medical event.

The average precision and recall of the Max-
Ent model using automatically extracted features is
74.3% and 66.5% respectively. Sequence tagging
using CRFs gives us an average precision and recall
of 79.6% and 69.7% respectively. Although the re-
sults are not as good as using hand-tagged features,
they are certainly promising. One reason for the loss
in accuracy could be because the automatically cal-
culated temporal features are not as precise as the

3http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/

Gold-standard Features
P R

ME 81.2 71.4
CRF 89.4 79.2
CRF(no temp. feats) 79.5 67.2
CRF(no section feats) 82.7 72.3

Automatic Features
P R

ME 74.3 66.5
CRF 79.6 69.7
Baseline (P;R) 58.02 60.26

Table 4: Overall Result Summary: Average precision
(P) and recall (R) with manually annotated gold-standard
features, automatically extracted features and the base-
line.

hand-tagged ones. These results are summarized in
Table 4.

9 Conclusion

We investigate the task of classifying medical events
in clinical narratives to coarse time-bins. We de-
scribe document structure based, lexical and tempo-
ral features in clinical text and explain how these
feature are useful in time-binning medical events.
The extracted feature-set when used in a sequence
tagging framework with CRFs gives us high accu-
racy when compared with a section-based baseline
or a MaxEnt model. The learned time-bins can
be used as an informative feature for tasks such as
fine-grained ordering of medical events and medical
event coreference resolution. We also experiment
with hand-tagged vs. automatically extracted fea-
tures for this task and observe that while automati-
cally extracted features show promising results, they
are not as good as using hand-tagged features for this
task.

Acknowledgments
The project described was supported by the
National Center for Research Resources,
Grant UL1RR025755, KL2RR025754, and
TL1RR025753, and is now at the National
Center for Advancing Translational Sciences,
Grant 8KL2TR000112-05, 8UL1TR000090-05,
8TL1TR000091-05. The content is solely the re-
sponsibility of the authors and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the NIH.

36



References
James F. Allen. 1981. An interval-based representation

of temporal knowledge. In IJCAI, pages 221–226.
Alan R. Aronson. 2001. Effective mapping of biomed-

ical text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap
program. Proc of AMIA Symposium, pages 17–21.

Adam Berger, Stephen Della Pietra, and Vincent Della
Pietra. 1996. A maximum entropy approach to nat-
ural language processing. Computational Linguistics,
22:39–71.

Mary Regina Boland, Samson W. Tu, Simona Carini, Ida
Sim, and Chunhua Weng. 2012. EliXR: An Approach
to Eligibility Criteria Extraction and Representation.
Proc of AMIA Clinical Research Informatics Summit.

Anthony J. Conger. 1980. Integration and generalization
of kappas for multiple raters. In Psychological Bul-
letin Vol 88(2), pages 322–328.

Rob Gaizauskas, Henk Harkema, Mark Hepple, and An-
drea Setzer. 2006. Task-oriented extraction of tem-
poral information: The case of clinical narratives.
In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Sym-
posium on Temporal Representation and Reasoning,
TIME ’06, pages 188–195.

Hyuckchul Jung, James Allen, Nate Blaylock, Will
de Beaumont, Lucian Galescu, and Mary Swift. 2011.
Building timelines from narrative clinical records: ini-
tial results based-on deep natural language under-
standing. In Proceedings of BioNLP 2011 Workshop,
BioNLP ’11, pages 146–154.

John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando C. N.
Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields: Probabilis-
tic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data.
In Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, ICML ’01, pages 282–
289.

Ying Li, Sharon Lipsky Gorman, and Noemie Elhadad.
2010. Section classification in clinical notes using su-
pervised hidden markov model. In IHI, pages 744–
750.

James Pustejovsky, José M. Castaño, Robert Ingria,
Roser Sauri, Robert J. Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer,
Graham Katz, and Dragomir R. Radev. 2003.
TimeML: Robust specification of event and temporal
expressions in text. In New Directions in Question An-
swering ’03, pages 28–34.

Guergana Savova, Steven Bethard, Will Styler, James
Martin, Martha Palmer, James Masanz, and Wayne
Ward. 2009. Towards temporal relation discovery
from the clinical narrative. Proc of AMIA Symposium,
pages 568–572.

Marc Verhagen, Robert J. Gaizauskas, Frank Schilder,
Mark Hepple, Jessica Moszkowicz, and James Puste-
jovsky. 2009. The TempEval challenge: identifying

temporal relations in text. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 43(2):161–179.

Li Zhou and George Hripcsak. 2007. Temporal rea-
soning with medical data - a review with emphasis
on medical natural language processing. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics, pages 183–202.

Li Zhou, Genevieve B. Melton, Simon Parsons, and
George Hripcsak. 2006. A temporal constraint struc-
ture for extracting temporal information from clinical
narrative. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, pages
424–439.

37


