










































Intonosyntactic Data Structures: The Rhapsodie Treebank of Spoken French


Proceedings of the 6th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 85–94,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12-13 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Intonosyntactic Data Structures: 
The Rhapsodie Treebank of Spoken French

Kim Gerdes

LPP, Sorbonne nouvelle & 
CNRS /

NLPR, Institute of Auto-
mation, Chinese Academy 

of Sciences
kim@gerdes.fr

Sylvain Kahane
Anne Lacheret
Arthur Truong

Modyco, Université 
Paris Ouest Nanterre & CNRS
sylvain@kahane.fr
anne@lacheret.fr 

arthur_truong@hotmail.com

Paola Pietrandrea

Modyco, Université Paris 
Ouest Nanterre & CNRS /

Lattice, CNRS
paolapietrandrea 

@gmail.com

Abstract

In this work, we present the data structures that were 
developed for the Rhapsodie project, an intonosyntactic 
annotation project of spoken French. Phoneticians and 
syntacticians work on different base units: a time 
aligned sound file for the former, and a partially or-
dered list of tokens for the latter. The alignment be-
tween the sound-file and the tokens is partial and non-
trivial. We propose to encode this data with a small set 
of interconnected structures: lists, constituent trees, and 
directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). Our query language 
remains simple, similar to the Annis Query language, 
as the precedence and including relations are handled in 
accordance with the requested objects and their type of 
alignment: The order between prosodic units is time-
based, whereas the order between syntactic units is lex-
eme-based.

1 Introduction

Our work results  from a corpus  development 
project of Spoken French, Rhapsodie,  set  up for 
the  study of  the syntax-prosody interface. An 
intonosyntactic corpus has to allow  corpus-based 
studies on the relation between prosody and syn-
tax, which implies the recognition of prosodic 
structures, syntactic structures, and the relation be-
tween them. In spite of the abundance of work on 
treebanks, very few attempt to annotate spoken 
language, and even less spontaneous speech. We 
are aware of the Switchboard Corpus (Meteer et 
al. 1995), which is annotated with phrase struc-
tures, disfluencies, and illocutionary acts; the 
CHRISTINE Treebank (Rahman  &  Sampson 
2000) is annotated with phrase structure, like  the 
British component of the International Corpus of 
English (Nelson et al. 2002); the treebanks of Eng-

lish, German, and Japanese, created within the 
VERBMOBIL project (Hinrichs et al. 2000) have 
the Negra-style (Brants 2000) mixed annotation of 
functionally augmented constituent structures, the 
Venice Italian Treebank (Delmonte 2009) annotat-
ed with dependency and phrase structures, the Es-
ter treebank for French (Cerisara et al. 2010, de-
pendency annotation on radio transcripts), the 
CNG (Spoken Dutch Corpus; Schuurman et al. 
2004, dependency annotation on spontaneous 
speech, skipping over disfluencies),  the  Hong 
Kong corpus (Cheng et al. 2008, prosodic annota-
tion  of  prominence,  tone,  key  and  termination). 
We may add to this list the C-Oral Rom Corpus 
(Cresti and Moneglia 2005). The C-Oral Rom 
does not include an annotation of syntactic con-
stituency or syntactic relations (what we call mi-
crosyntactic annotation), but is endowed with a 
rich macrosyntactic annotation (see below for the 
micro/macrosyntactic distinction).

1.1 Data-structures
The commonly used structures of spoken data an-
notation do not allow any complex syntactic anno-
tation and inversely, syntactic formats are difficult 
to adapt or link to spoken data, because the nature 
of the data is profoundly different: Syntax is com-
monly based on a chain of lexemes and spoken 
data annotation consists of classifying time-
aligned segments of the sound-file. Spontaneous 
spoken language has the additional twist that we 
have multiple tiers of partially overlapping speech.
In this article we present the complete data struc-
ture of an intono-syntactic corpus of spontaneous 
spoken French. We show the complex relations 
that exist between prosodic and syntactic units and 

85



how we resolved multiple problems arising in the 
complex process of partial alignment. The goal is 
to obtain a non-redundant data-structure where the 
same syntactic or prosodic units can be part of dif-
ferent tree-structures, resulting in a highly com-
plex acyclic graph structure as the common base 
structure of linguistic annotation. We describe the 
XML import and export format and the internal 
SQL representation of the data structure as well as 
the query language allowing for cross domain 
queries between syntax and prosody.

The Rhapsodie corpus is the result  of a four-
year  project  funded by the  French National  Re-
search Agency (ANR). The corpus is made up of 
57 samples of spoken French (5 minutes on aver-
age)  mainly  drawn  from  existing  corpora  of 
spoken French for a total of 3 hours and 33 000 
words and distributed under a Creative Commons 
licence  at  http://www.projet-rhapsodie.fr.  It  syn-
thesizes  and formalizes various approaches to the 
syntactic and prosodic analysis of spoken French, 
in  particular  research  stemming  from  the  Aix 
school (Blanche-Benveniste et al. 1990, Deulofeu 
et al. 2010). The project provides  a treebank en-
dowed with both: 

 a complete microsyntactic and macrosyntactic 
annotation  (microsyntax: morpho-syntactic 
and functional (dependency)  annotation; 
macrosyntactic:  illocutionary groupings of 
maximal microsyntactic units, including dis-
course markers, dislocations, reported speech, 
parentheses, etc.)

 a rich prosodic annotation including perceptu-
ally identified phenomena such as promi-
nences, breaks, disfluencies; phonetic align-
ments; detailed acoustic measurements; a large 
range of melodic contours; and annotation of 
prosodic macrostructures. 

Moreover, a number of tools necessary to conduct 
a complete analysis at the interface of prosody, 
microsyntax and macrosyntax are provided.

1.2 Existing tools for the annotation of spo-
ken language

The  tools  commonly  used  for  editing  prosodic 
transcription and aligning them to the signal (Praat 
(Boersma,  Paul  &  Weenink  2012;  Delais-Rous-
sarie et al. 2003), WinPitch (Martin 2000), Exmer-
alda (Schmidt 2004)) allow for different segmen-
tations of the same sample: different types of seg-
ments  are  stored  in  different  independent  tiers. 

This tier-based approach can simulate constituent 
structures by time-aligning bigger segments in one 
tier with smaller segments in another tier. Yet, this 
does  not  allow for  an  explicit  encoding of  con-
stituent structure, because one segment cannot be 
linked to another segment. Therefore, neither con-
stituency  based  nor  dependency  based  syntactic 
structures can be described in the commonly used 
tools for prosodic annotation.

1.3 Treebank query tools
Inversely, the plenitude of tools that have been de-
veloped for tree-banking (visualization, annota-
tion, correction, and search) are all token based. A 
well-known versatile tool is Annis (Zeldes et al. 
2009)  which allows for import, visualization, and 
search of various annotation formats and multiple 
annotations of the same text with segments, con-
stituent trees, and dependency trees, all stored in a 
united XML format called Paula (Chiarcos et al. 
2008). Annis  is completely token based  and al-
though the tokens can be time-aligned, the Paula 
format is not well-adapted to spoken data, because 
we would have to choose the phonemic transcrip-
tion as the base units and define the tokens (called 
markables in Paula) on this base  transcription. 
This implies that all precedence relations are sym-
bolic and not time-based and all order relations are 
based on the most fine-grained list of tokens. 
Moreover, as we will see, all lexemes cannot be 
decomposed into phonemes and the set of lexemes 
needs an independent (partial) order relation.

2 Linguistic annotation

2.1 Syntactic annotation
We have annotated two cohesive levels of syntax: 
microsyntax and macrosyntax.

Microsyntax describes the syntactic relations 
which are usually encoded through dependency 
trees or phrase structure trees. These relations are 
annotated in all the major syntactic treebanks such 
as the Penn Treebank, the Prague Treebank, the 
French Treebank, the Copenhagen Dependency 
Treebank, etc.

Macrosyntax can be regarded as an intermedi-
ate level between syntax and discourse. This level 
describes and classifies the sequences that  make 
up one and only one illocutionary act as well as 
the relations holding between these sequences. We 

86



have identified the macrosyntactic structure of our 
corpus  on  purely  discursive  and  syntactic  argu-
ments  whereas  in  the  C-Oral  Rom  corpus, 
macrosyntactic units are regarded as functional in-
terpretations of prosodic units (Cresti 2005).

The annotation of macrosyntax is essential to 
account for a number of cohesion phenomena typ-
ical of spoken discourse and in particular of 
French spoken discourse, because of the high fre-
quency of paratactic phenomena that characterize 
this language. See for example (1)
(1) moi < ma mère < le salon < c’est de la moquette //

me < my mother < the living room < it's carpet
'My mother's living room is carpeted'

The microsyntactic and macrosyntactic phenome-
na have been encoded independently from one an-
other in a  modular,  partially computer-aided ap-
proach  relying  on  collaborative  online  tools 
(Deulofeu et al. 2010). The annotation provides an 
analysis of all linguistic utterances of the samples 
and includes  a complete annotation and a func-
tional tagging of what we call  pile structures: By 
piles we intend the multiple realization of the 
same  structural position, which occurs in coordi-
nation (2), reformulation (3), disfluency (4), and 
correction (5) phenomena  (Gerdes  &  Kahane 
2009): 
(2) nous  avons  été  sous très  gros  bombardements 

{ américains | ^puis anglais } // (D003) 
we have been under very heavy bombing { American |  
^then English }

(3) tu arrives place aux Herbes avec { une | une } sorte 
{ de halle |  "quoi" { de |de |de } structure mé-
tallique } // (M001) 
you arrive Square of Herbs with {a | a } kind { of hall |  
"like" {of | of | of } metalic structure }

(4) alors < { { j'a~ | j'avais } beaucoup | j'avais beau-
coup } trop peur de m'installer ( comme ça ) seule { 
d~ | dans } la brousse //  (D204)
well < {{ I had | I had } too | I had too } much fear to set-
tle (like that) alone {i~ | in } the jungle

(5) c'est la crise générale { { des | des } Français |} //+ 
{(  "enfin" des Français//) |  (pas simplement des 
Français "hein"//) | { { des | de } l'humanité | ^et de 
la lecture } } // (D004)
it's  the general  crisis  {{ of |  of } the Frenchmen|}  //+
{("well" of the Frenchmen//) | (not simply of the French-
men  "huh"//)  |  {{  of  the  |  of  }  humanity  |  ^and  of 
reading }}//

Albeit extremely frequent in spoken language, pile 
relations, which can be seen as a particular type of 
microsyntactic relation, are  often disregarded in 
corpus annotation. By extensively annotating and 
tagging pile phenomena we could guarantee an ex-

haustive microsyntactic annotation of all our data, 
including disfluencies, repetitions, reformulations 
generally considered as performance errors and 
commonly not analyzed in spoken languages tree-
banks (see for instance the CNG). 

In more general terms, we have provided a 
complete categorical and functional tagging for 
every word of the corpus, including discourse 
markers, which are integrated into the syntactic 
representation at the macrosyntactic level.

2.2 Prosodic annotation
As for prosody, we built on the theoretical hypoth-
esis formulated by the Dutch-IPO school (‘t Hart 
et al. 1990) stating that, out of the whole of infor-
mation  characterizing  the  acoustic  domain,  only 
some perceptual cues selected by the listener are 
relevant for linguistic communication. On this ba-
sis  we  decided  to  manually  annotate  only  three 
perceptual phenomena characterizing real produc-
tions:  prominences,  pauses  and  disfluencies 
(Avanzi et al. 2010, Smith 2011).

We have annotated perceptual syllabic salience 
in speech context by using a gradual labeling dis-
tinguishing between strong, weak, and zero promi-
nences. Strong prominences mark intonation pack-
ages  and  weak  prominences  mark  rhythmic 
groups. Metrical feet are marked by prominences 
outside words.1 Periods (Lacheret-Dujour & Vic-
torri 2002) are ended by an occurrence of a pause 
of at least 300 ms, detection of an F0 pitch move-
ment reaching a certain amplitude and of a “jump” 
and  the  absence  of  disfluency or  a  “uh”  in  the 
vicinity of the pause.

Various studies have shown the usefulness of 
seeing prosody as a tree structure (Tepperman & 
Narayanan  2008,  Gibbon  2003)  consisting  of 
prosodic constituents of different levels. Building 
on the syllabic salience labeling, we were able to 
generate the totality of the prosodic tree structure 
made up of a hierarchy of prosodic segments char-
acterized by more or less prominent frontiers. We 
1 Words are inflected forms of lexemes or amalgams of two 
lexemes (see section 3.2). A word has an orthographic, a pho-
netic, and a syllabized form. For example in  une extraordi-
naire aventure 'an extraordinary adventure', the word extraor-
dinaire has  the  phonetic  form /ekstrordinEr/ and  the  syl-
labized form /nekstrordinE/, due to the liaisons between the 
words. Words are linked to two types of child nodes: the pho-
nemes  and  the  syllables,  providing  two,  possibly  different, 
time alignments. These links may not be one to one: In the 
example table 1, we see the word  il 'it' and  y 'there' sharing 
the same phoneme.

87



identified global macro-prosodic units called peri-
ods, which are iteratively divided into intonational 
packages, rhythmic groups, feet, and syllables.

We generate prototypical-stylized melodic con-
tours for all  prosodic  and  syntactic  units. The 
availability in the Rhapsodie Treebank of these 
various contours will allow the user to build 
various lexicons of intonational contours in an 
extremely flexible way according to his  or  her 
research goals. In more general terms, it should be 
highlighted that these annotation choices have al-
lowed us on the one hand to identify the primitives 
of prosodic structure independently from any ref-
erence to syntax or pragmatics, and, on the other 
hand, to provide all the elements needed for a 
complete prosodic analysis of linguistic units.

3 Formal properties of the structure

3.1 Prosodic structure
Our  prosodic structure consists of a  hierarchy 

of segments of various levels: In the general case, 
a  sample consists of speech turns that are seg-
mented into periods. The periods are composed of 
prosodic packages that in turn are divided into in-
tonational packages, which are divided into rhyth-
mic groups. The rhythmic  groups have two types 
of incompatible segmentations: feet and words. 
However, each foot and word is composed of syl-
lables. The syllables are the smallest prosodic 
units, they are composed  of  phonemes  and  can 
combine to form (the syllabized form of) words.2 

2 In the example table, fille /Fij/ 'girl' is monosyllabic, but due 
to liaison with the following word, /j/ forms a syllable  with 
the following vowel and is a child of the next word.  In the 
same way, the words  il and  y corresponding to the phonetic 
form /j/ have an empty syllabized form, because /j/ forms a 
syllable with the vowel of the next word a /a/.

Table 1 shows the decomposition of a period in its 
prosodic components.
This structure corresponds to a non-recursive con-
stituency-like representation of prosody (as  the 
number of levels is predetermined in our prosodic 
model), however, the fact that feet and phonologi-
cal words are segmentations of the same level im-
plies that we have in fact two constituent trees, 
one including feet, the other including words. All 
other nodes are shared between the two con-
stituent trees. Thus, our structure should be seen 
as a constituent DAG rather than a  set  of con-
stituent trees.

The terminal nodes of those structures are gen-
erally phonemes, but the structures have terminal 
nodes at various levels, because pauses are not 
further developed, for example a pause between 
two rhythmic groups, is not developed all the way 
down to the foot level.

Another complication stems  from the segmen-
tation of the sound into speech turns, where in the 
case of overlaps (i.e. two people speaking at the 
same time), for technical reasons, a segmentation 
into units with a higher granularity is possible for 
at most one of the speakers. If one of the speakers 
is analyzable, this segment is handled just as any 
other non-overlapping part where the periods and 
subsequent segments are children of the analyz-
able speech turn. The unanalyzable parts of the 
overlaps have no further segmentation into finer 
grained segments. In case the sound of both speak-
ers cannot be further analyzed, the unanalyzable 
segments of both speakers will share the same 
“overlap”  node, which again gives  a DAG struc-
ture and not a simple tree. 

Each point of the time line is thus included in 
at most one element of each level (or is exactly at 
the border of two) with the exception of speech 
turns, where overlaps can occur.

per do~ k@ ja a y n2 z9n Fi j@ a bi je tu ta~ nwaR
pkg do~ k@ ja a y n2 z9n Fi j@ a bi je tu ta~ nwaR
rhg do~ k@ ja a y n2 z9n Fi j@ a bi je tu ta~ nwaR
feet do~ k@ ja a y n2 z9n Fi j@ a  bi je tu ta~ nwaR
pree W W S W W
syl do~ k@ ja y n2 Z9n Fi j@ a bi je tu ta~ nwaR
ph d o~ k @ j a y n 2 Z 9 n F i j @ a b i j e t u t a~ n w a R

w/ort donc euh il y a une jeune fille euh habillée tout en noir
w/ph do~k @ j a yn2 Z9n Fij @ abije tut a~ nwaR
w/syl do~ k@ ja yn2 Z9n Fi j@ abije tu ta~ nwaR

english so uh there is a young girl uh dressed all in black

Table 1: Structure of the phonetic and orthographic tiers:
per:period, pkg: packages, rhg: rhythmic groups, feet: metrical feet, pree: preeminences (on syllables), 
syl: syllables, ph: phonemes, w: word (with three forms: ort: orthographic, ph: phonetic, syl: syllabized)

88



3.2 Syntactic structure
Just as phonemes are the base units of the prosodic 
structure, lexemes are the base units of syntax. All 
our syntactic structures are  aligned on the lex-
emes. Most lexemes are time-aligned, i.e. we can 
determine the beginning and end of the utterance 
on the timeline because most lexemes correspond 
to words for which we have the time-alignment 
via the alignment of their phonemes. Some lex-
emes, however, are not time-aligned, for two dif-
ferent reasons:

Contrarily to the prosodic side of the data, gen-
erally, overlaps can be transcribed for all speakers. 
Nevertheless, the alignment of the words is not 
systematic and we do not access any time-align-
ment for lexemes contained in the overlap.

Secondly, we have lexemes that are not in a 
one-to-one relation with words. The most promi-
nent case for French are porte-manteau words like 
au /o/ that are composed of two lexemes (À + LE, 
'to + the') and contraction like il y a ‘there is’ pro-
nounced /ja/ rather than /ilia/.3

This implies that the order of lexemes is nond-
eductible  from the alignment  of  the lexemes on 
the time line and has to be provided independent-
ly. Contrarily, to the order of time-aligned prosod-
ic structures, the order of the lexemes is a partial 
order, i.e. we do not have a precedence relation 
between any pair of lexemes. This is due to over-
laps, where two speakers can produce lexemes at 
the same time.

The fact that a spoken corpus needs two orders 
for the annotation, a temporal order and a struc-
tural order, partially aligned, was anticipated and 

3 Due to technical reasons of our  alignment  process  where 
lexemes were aligned to tokens, we encounter a similar situa-
tion when a token contains two lexemes due to elisions (c'est 
= CE + ÊTRE 'this + be' and l'ami = LE + AMI 'the + friend').

formalized by Bird & Liberman (2001). Their for-
malization  was  implemented  for  the  AN.ANA.S 
corpus  by  Voghera  &  Cutugno  2009,  however, 
without addressing our central problem of the du-
ality of time-aligned and non time-aligned items. 
Contrarily to Bird & Liberman, we prefer to intro-
duce an order on lexemes rather than to introduce 
abstract points with only structural order relations 
with the relevant time points (that is the start and 
end points of the time aligned units). 

Figure 1 shows an extract from the Rhapsodie 
corpus containing a speech turn overlap: The tran-
scription is followed by a lexical graph where 
some lexemes have been produced in parallel and 
thus have no mutual order, for example onéreux 
'onerous' has no order relation with ouais 'yeah'.
The syntactic annotation consists of various con-
stituent and dependency structures. The macrosyn-
tactic structure is a constituent tree. The maximal 
macrosyntactic unit we consider is the illocution-
ary unit  (IU),  which  is  divided  into  one  central 
component,  the  kernel,  bearing  the  illocutionary 
force, and some peripheral components. The next 
examples are annotated following the conventions 
exposed  in  Deulofeu  et  al.  (2010),  which  are 
equivalent to the associated constituent tree.
(6) là < par contre < ça doit être plus onéreux // (D005)

there < however < it got to be more onerous

The macrosyntatctic tree is recursive because IUs 
can themselves  contain other IUs, for instance in 

L1: là par contre ça doit être | plus onéreux |
L2: | ouais il faut | faut compter autour de soixante soixante-dix 
L1: there on the contrary it must be | more onerous  |
L2: | yeah you got   | got to count around sixty seventy

      plus–onéreux
là–par–contre–ça–doit–être faut–compter–autour–de–soixante–soixante-dix 
       ouais–il–faut

              more–onerous
there–on_the–contrary–that–must–be                  got–to_count–around–sixty–seventy 
               yeah–you–got

Figure 1: Transcription and lexical graph in case of overlap of speech turns

IU

prekernel

là

prekernel

par contre

kernel

ça doit être plus onéreux

89



the following case of reported speech, ça ce sont 
les anglais forms an embedded illocutionary unit.
(7) ^et ^puis quand il a entendu le bombardement 

anglais { le de~ | le dernier soir } < il a dit [ ça < ce 
sont les anglais // ] // 
^and  ^then  when  he  heard  the  English  bombing  
{ the la~ | the last evening } < he said [ that < this  
are the English]

A dependency structure is commonly not a tree 
but a DAG (Tesnière 1959, Hudson 1990, Gerdes 
& Kahane 2011) because in some constructions, 
certain nodes are assigned multiple heads. For ex-
ample, coordinations and other pile structures can 
have a symmetrical and an asymmetrical analysis. 
In  the symmetrical analysis  of  (8) dix-huit  and 
dix-neuf are coheads of the determiner phrase dix-
huit ou dix-neuf and thus both dependent of ans, 
whereas in the asymmetrical  analysis, dix-huit 
governs ou, which governs dix-neuf. We want a 
structure that subsumes both of these analyses 
which implies a graph (and not a tree) structure of 
our dependency analysis. We also add a paradig-
matic link between the two conjuncts.
(8) enfin < j'avais l'air d'avoir {dix-huit | ^ou dix-neuf } 

ans (D201)
so < I had the appearance to have {18|^or 19} years
'Well, I looked like 18 or 19'

More precisely, we can type the two dependency 
links between ans 'years'  and its determiners in a 
way to privilege one of the two links.4

The dependency analysis of Rhapsodie has no 
projectivity constraint, but we disallow directed 
cycles.5 A dependency DAG canonically induces a 
4 Some authors like Mel'čuk 1988 consider that the first con-
joint is systematically the head. However, in the case of left 
headed coordinative structures we have good reasons to con-
sider the second conjoint as preeminent because of closer 
prosodic and agreement ties between the latter conjoint and 
the head.
5 For instance, some analyses of wh-words, like Tesnière 
(1959), see a double syntactic position of the relative pro-

constituent tree, the tree of maximal projections of 
each lexeme. Note that in case of a node with mul-
tiple governors, the projection does not induce a 
partition of the lexemes, as the resulting con-
stituents overlap and the projection of the node 
with governors appears (at least) twice in the re-
sulting constituent tree. This constituent tree has 
discontinuous constituents if and only if the de-
pendency DAG is non-projective (Lecerf 1961).

Note that,  next  to  the  macrosyntactic con-
stituent tree and the constituency induced by de-
pendency, we consider a third constituent struc-
ture, consisting of the piles with their layers, be-
cause many piles are not microsyntactic con-
stituents (like for instance the disfluencies in (4)).

4 Implementation

4.1 Internal  data  exchange  and  export 
format

We developed an XML format  for  internal  data 
exchange  during  the  annotation  process  and  for 
export of the final treebank. The format is well-ad-
apted to our specific needs: It allows for time-a-
ligned,  partially time-aligned and only indirectly 
time-aligned DAGs of  tokens,  and two types  of 
tree  structures,  dependency-like  and  constitu-
ency-like trees, on any of the token DAGs. For ex-
ample, the syntactic annotation is based on the (in-
complete, see above) time-alignment of the tran-
scription. This is linked to another DAG of tokens 
where precedence relations are added based on the 
order of the transcription. This list is then linked 
to the lexemes. This linking is non trivial as it con-
tains two-to-one relations (e.g parce que 'because') 
and one-to-two relations (e.g. au = À + LE 'to the').

The development of the format was guided by 
the Paula format and existing TEI  norms. On the 

noun, one as the complementizer and a second as the pronoun 
saturating a syntactic position inside of the relative clause. 
The dependency representation of this analysis causes a di-
rected cycle.

IU

intro

et

intro

puis

prekernel

quand il ... dernier soir

kernel

il a dit IU

prekernel

ça

kernel

ce sont les anglais

90



one hand, the multiple token DAGs make the for-
mat slightly more complex than Paula, on the oth-
er hand, the single file structure and the limitation 
to  the  two types  of  tree-structure  allowed us  to 
slightly simplify Paula: A dependency graph is a 
simple list of relations on a token DAG, and con-
stituency is  encoded using directly the XML-in-
herent  constituency structure  (whereas  in  Paula, 
higher nodes have an explicitly encoded governor 
relations with the nodes it is composed of).

4.2 The structure of the database
Our treebank consists of three types of structures: 
different  sets  of  segments  on which hold prece-
dence relations (partially induced from the time-
alignment),  constituent  trees,  and  dependency 
graphs.   We have decided to pre-compute  and 
store in the Rhapsodie database the whole of 
acoustic correlates associated with each syntactic 
unit and each perceived prosodic event. It is there-
fore possible to search not only F0 tracks but also 
durations of segments, speech rates, temporal 
characteristics of a melodic contour, speech rate, 
intonational register, etc.

Each unit is stored in a “unit” table, with an at-
tribute specifying its type (“syllable”, “iu”, ...). All 
the details of a unit (start time, end time, textual 
value, flow, particular attributes ...) are stored in 
an “attribute” table, with columns notably refer-
ring to the name of the attribute, its value, and the 
identifier of the corresponding unit.  Relational 
tables store the different links between the units.6 

6A first table refers to the “parent to child” relations, and in-
cludes two columns giving respectively the identifier of the 
parent and the identifier of the child. This table also provides 
two columns which indicate the place of the child unit among 
the other children of the parent, from the left and from the 
right. A second table stores the transitive closure of the “par-
ent to child” table. We also have two tables storing the “di-
rect” dependency relations between lexemes and their transi-
tive closure (the “indirect” relations). The data base also pro-
vides tables to store the precedence and succession relations 
between units. In such tables, there are two columns corre-
sponding to the identifiers of the left and right units. We also 
have to distinguish the temporal order (for the prosodic units) 
and the lexeme based order (for  the syntactic  units). Many 
segments  of  our  annotation can  thus  appear  twice  with  an 
identical span; once as a phonological group, once as a syn-
tactic group. The database stores them separately, while keep-
ing the identical time-alignment  via  the linking to the pho-
neme tier.

4.3 Rhapsodie QL
We  developed  the  Rhapsodie  Query  Language 
based on the Annis Query Language (Zeldes et al. 
2009). Our goal was to keep the full  descriptive 
power of AnnisQL while adapting the language to 
the needs of intonosyntactic corpus searches. The 
differences are mainly caused by the multiple par-
tial  precedence  relations  that  our  trees  are  built 
upon and the rather numerical than symbolic char-
acter of the prosodic queries. Even queries cross-
ing prosody and syntax are particularly simple as 
both annotations share the same constituency tree 
encoding. Moreover, we wanted to provide  dir-
ectly in the query language some simple mathem-
atical functions for statistical studies of the cor-
pus.
The Rhapsody QL covers the whole intono-syn-
tactic structure of the corpus and allows to specify 
constraints on every level. 
A query in RQL is composed of three parts:

 The definition of variables and their unit 
types:
◦ $x1 = phone; $x2 = ui; ...

 The constraints to be applied on these vari-
ables. Such constraints correspond to “paths” 
through the structure  to  attain  the  nodes  on 
which we want to define restrictions. To each 
level corresponds a unit type and a tree depth, 
where we want to define a restriction, or sev-
eral restrictions with Boolean operators. A lev-
el is described between brackets.
For example, we define a “group”, and we 
want this group to be “rhythmic strong”  or 
“rhythmic weak”, or we want the group to be 
included in a period whose duration exceed 5 
seconds:
$gr = group; CONSTRAINT ( [$gr.type  = 
''rhythmic strong'' | $gr.type  =  ''rhythmic 
weak''] | [$gr] in* [period.duration>5] )7

 The results: the specific attributes of the spe-
cific units we want to get.
If we take the last example and we want to re-
turn the duration of the groups which satisfy 
the constraint, and also we want to take the 
textual value of the last phone of these groups 

7 We have defined a variable “$gr” whose type is “group”, 
and we have two paths separated by the “OR” boolean: [$gr.-
type=''rhythmic strong'' | $gr.type = "rhythmic weak"].
[$gr] in* [period.duration>5] consists in starting from the 
“group” level, to go up to the parent level “period” with the 
large child to parent relation “in*”, and to restrict the level 
“period”.

91



when this phone is not an “a”, we continue the 
request  by:RETURN [$gr].duration; [$gr] 
in*(rl1) [phone.text!=''a''].text;
We asked for two results:
[$gr].duration: the duration of the selected 
groups
[$gr] ni*(rl1) [phone.text=''!a''].text: for each 
group, we search the last phone child (“rl1”: 
the first from right to left), we precise we do 
not want an “a”, and we ask to return  the at-
tribute “text” (ni is the parent to child relation, 
the converse relation of in).

RhapsodieQL also provides  functions, which will 
take as argument numbers, strings, queries, or re-
cursive function calls. For instance, if we want the 
ratio between the  mean of the duration of the 
rhythmic groups and the mean of the duration of 
all the groups, we will ask:

 ratio(mean(RETURN[group.type=''rhythmic
%''].duration;!),mean(RETURN [group].dur-
ation;!))

5 Conclusion

The development of both the prosodic and the 
syntactic annotation schemata was guided by the 
objective of modeling the interplay between 
prosody and syntax in discourse structuring. In or-
der to achieve this goal we decided not to con-
strain the complexity of spontaneous speech pro-
ductions within the limits of a given model of lin-
guistic representation selected a priori. Rather we 
borrowed and formalized general representation 
principles from various  compatible data-oriented 
models –  such as the Dutch-IPO school for pros-
ody, dependency grammars, and the macrosyntact-
ic theory of syntax. Building on the difficulties we 
encountered in the annotation task, we induced 
and refined our formal models of syntactic and 
prosodic representations. We incrementally adap-
ted our annotation to these emerging models. Tra-
ditional annotation schemata could not be applied 
due to our choice of not neglecting what is usually 
considered as “performance” phenomena:  hesita-
tions,  disfluencies,  incomplete  utterances,  dialo-
gical  completion  of  syntactic  structures,  paren-
theses, overlaps, grafts, etc.

The choice of giving a unified representation 
of prosodic and syntactic phenomena has raised a 
number of new theoretical and practical issues. 

1. We found that whereas prosodic units are all 
time-aligned,  syntactic  constituents  are 
aligned on lexemes,  i.e.,  on units  which are 
only partially time-aligned. 

2. Our database considers therefore two types of 
orders for our structures: time on the one hand 
and  partial  order  of  lexemes  on  the  other 
hand. These two orders are partially aligned to 
one another. 

3. Several constituent structures are considered: 
two hierarchies for prosody (rhythmic groups 
can be independently partitioned into  words 
or  metric  feet)  and  three  hierarchies  for 
macrosyntax, microsyntax, and piles.

4. Our  dependency  structure  is  represented 
through a directed acyclic graph rather than a 
tree.  This  representation has  been chosen to 
account  for  the  various  possible  analyses  of 
the syntactic structures of a pile.

RhapsodieQL, the query language developed for 
parsing our data structures, extends previous query 
languages as it allows the user to simultaneously 
explore time-based and lexeme-based structures 
and to cross-search prosody and syntax.

This corpus allows to answer some important 
questions concerning spoken language in general 
and spoken French in particular:

 The hypothesis of the dependency connectivity 
of prosodic constituents (Mertens 1987)

 The prosodic structure of cleft sentences.
 The prosodic contours of left and right dislo-

cated elements (pre- and post-kernels)
 The  frequency  in  spoken  language  of  non-

canonical  sentences,  i.e.  illocutionary  units 
which are not realized by complete verbal de-
pendency units.

 The study of prosodic differences between co-
ordination  and  reformulation  (Kahane  & 
Pietrandrea 2012)

The free status of the Rhapsodie corpus and the 
corresponding tools as well as the existing prosod-
ic and deep syntactic annotations provide a good 
basis for additional and competing levels of syn-
tactic,  prosodic,  and  semantic  analyses.  Further 
levels  of  annotation on the corpus could for  in-
stance include a complete discourse structure and 
coreference  annotation,  which  will  allow  for  a 
deeper study of the prosodic realizations of infor-
mation packaging (the communicative structure). 

92



References

Avanzi M., Simon A.-C., Goldman J.-Ph., Auchlin A. 
2010.  C-PROM.  An  annotated  corpus  for  French 
prominence studies. Prosodic Prominence: Perceptu-
al  and  Automatic  Identification,  Proc.  Speech 
Prosody, Chicago.

Bird S.,  Liberman M. 2001. A formal framework for 
linguistic  annotation.  Speech  Communication, 
33(1,2), 23-60.

Boersma P., Weenink D. 2012. Praat: doing phonetics 
by computer  [Computer  program].  Version 5.3.10, 
http://www.praat.org/.

Brants Th. 2000. Inter-annotator agreement for a Ger-
man newspaper corpus, Proc. LREC.

Cerisara C.,  Gardent C.,  Anderson C. 2010. Building 
and Exploiting a Dependency Treebank for French 
Radio  Broadcast.  Proc.  9th  international  workshop 
on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT9), Tartu 
: Estonie

Cheng W., Greaves C., Warren M.  2008. Discourse In-
tonation  systems.  A  Corpus-driven  Study  of  Dis-
course Intonation The Hong Kong Corpus of Spoken 
English (Prosodic). Benjamins.

Cresti  E.  2005.  Notes  on  lexical  strategy,  structural 
strategies  and  surface  clause  indexes  in  the  C-
ORAL-ROM spoken corpora. In E. Cresti, M. Mon-
eglia (2005),  209-256. 

Cresti  E.,  Moneglia  M.  (eds.)  2005.  C-ORAL-ROM. 
Integrated  reference  corpora  for  spoken  romance 
languages, DVD + vol., Benjamins.

Chiarcos C., Dipper S., Götze M., Leser U., Lüdeling 
A.,  Ritz J.,  Stede M. 2008. A Flexible Framework 
for Integrating Annotations from Different Tools and 
Tag Sets. Traitement Automatique des Langues, 49.

Delais-Roussarie  E.,  Meqqori  A.,  Tarrier  J.-M. 2003. 
Annoter et segmenter des données sous Praat. In E. 
Delais-Roussarie, J. Durand (eds.). Corpus et Varia-
tion en Phonologie. Presses Universitaires du Mirail. 

Delmonte R. 2009. Treebanking in VIT:  from Phrase 
Structure  to  Dependency  Representation,  in  S. 
Nirenburg (ed.),  Language Engineering for Lesser-
Studied  Languages,  IOS  Press,  Amsterdam,  The 
Netherlands, 51-80.

Deulofeu J., Dufort L., Gerdes K., Kahane S., Pietran-
drea P. 2010. Depends on what the French say: Spo-
ken  corpus  annotation  with  and  beyond  syntactic 
function,  The Fourth  Linguistic  Annotation  Work-
shop (LAW IV), 8 p.

Gerdes K., Kahane S. 2009. Speaking in Piles. Paradig-
matic Annotation of a Spoken French Corpus. Proc. 
Corpus Linguistics Conference, Liverpool.

Gerdes K.,  Kahane S.  2011,  Defining  dependencies 
(and  constituents),  Proceedings  of  Depling, 
Barcelona.

Gibbon  D.  .2003.  Corpus-based  syntax-prosody  tree 
matching. Proc. Eurospeech 2003, Geneva.

Hinrichs  E.  W.,  Bartels  J.,  Kawata  Y.,  Kordoni  V., 
Telljohann H. (2000) The VERBMOBIL Treebanks. 
In  W.  Zuehlke,  E.  G.  Schukat-Talamazzini  (eds.), 
Proc. KONVENS 2000 Sprachkommunikation, ITG-
Fachbericht 161, 107-112. VDE Verlag. 

Hudson  R.  1990.  English  Word  Grammar.  Oxford: 
Blackwell.

Kahane  S.,  Pietrandrea  P.  2012.  Les  parenthétiques 
comme « Unités  Illocutoires  Associées  » :  un ap-
proche macrosyntaxique, in M. Avanzi & J. Glikman 
(éd.),  Les  Verbes  Parenthétiques  :  Hypotaxe, 
Parataxe ou Parenthèse ?, Linx, 61, 19 p.

Lacheret-Dujour A., Victorri B. 2002. La période into-
native  comme  unité  d’analyse  pour  l’étude  du 
français  parlé  :  modélisation  prosodique  et  enjeux 
linguistiques.  Verbum,  M.  Charolles  (ed),  Nancy, 
55-72

Lacheret  A.,  Obin  N.,  Avanzi  M.  2010.  Design  and 
evaluation of shared prosodic annotation for sponta-
neous  French  speech:  from  expert  knowledge  to 
non-expert annotation", Proc.  4th Linguistic Annota-
tion Workshop (LAWIV), Uppsala, 265-273.

Lecerf  Y.  1961.  Une  représentation  algébrique  de  la 
structure  des  phrases  dans  diverses  langues  na-
turelles", C. R. Acad. Sc., Paris.

Martin Ph. 2000. WinPitch 2000: a tool for experimen-
tal phonology and intonation research, Proc. Prosody 
2000 Workshop, Kraków, Pologne.

Mel’čuk  I.  1988.  Dependency  Syntax:  Theory  and 
Practice. The SUNY Press, Albany, N.Y.

Mertens,  P.  1987. L'intonation du français.  De la de-
scription  linguistique  à  la  reconnaissance  automa-
tique. Unpublished Ph.D., Univ. Leuven, Belgium.

Meteer M. et al. rev. by A. Taylor. 1995. Dysfluency 
Annotation Stylebook for the Switchboard Corpus.

Nelson G., Wallis S., Aarts B. (eds.) 2002. Exploring 
Natural Language: Working with the British Compo-
nent  of  the  International  Corpus  of  English,  John 
Benjamins Publishing Company,  Varieties  of  Eng-
lish Around the World G29.

93



Pulgram E. 1970. Syllable,  Word, Nexus, Cursus. La 
Haye: Mouton.

Rahman A., Sampson G. R. 2000. Extending grammar 
annotation standards to spontaneous speech. In J.M. 
Kirk  (ed.),  Corpora  Galore:  Analyses  and  Tech-
niques in Describing English,  Amsterdam: Rodopi, 
295-311.

Schmidt T. 2004. Transcribing and annotating spoken 
language  with  EXMARaLDA.  Proc.  LREC-Work-
shop on XML-based richly annotated corpora.

Schuurman I., Goedertier W., Hoekstra H., N. Oostdijk, 
R. Piepenbrock,  Schouppe M. 2004. Linguistic an-
notation of the Spoken Dutch Corpus: If we had to 
do it all over again ..., Proc. LREC, Lisbon, 57-60.

Silverman K.,  Beckman M., Pitrelli  J.,  Ostendorf M., 
Wightman  C.,  Price  P.,  Pierrehumbert  J., 
Hirschberg,  J. 1992. TOBI:  a standard for labeling 
English prosody", Proc. ICSLP-1992, 867-870.

Smith, C. 2011. Naïve Listeners’ Perceptions of French 
Prosody Compared to the Predictions of Theoretical 
Models. Proc. 3rd IDP conference, 349-335

‘t  Hart  J.,  Collier  R.,  Cohen  A.  2006.  A  perceptual 
study  of  intonation,  an  experimental  phonetic  ap-
proach  to  speech  melody,  Cambridge  University 
Press.

Tepperman J.,  Narayanan S. 2008. Using articulatory 
representations to detect segmental errors in nonna-
tive  pronunciation.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Speech, 
Audio and Language Processing, 16(1):8-22.

Tesnière  L.  1959,  Éléments  de  syntaxe  structurale, 
Klincksieck, Paris 1959

Voghera M.,  Cutugno F. AN.ANA.S.: aligning text to 
temporal  syntagmatic  progression  in Treebanks.  In 
Proceedings of the fifth Corpus Linguistics Confer-
ence, Liverpool 20-23 July. 2009

Zeldes A., Ritz J., Lüdeling A., Chiarcos C. 2009. AN-
NIS: A Search Tool for Multi-Layer Annotated Cor-
pora. Proc. Corpus Linguistics 2009, Liverpool, UK.

94


