










































Identifying Claimed Knowledge Updates in Biomedical Research Articles


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 10–17,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identifying Claimed Knowledge Updates  

in Biomedical Research Articles 

Ágnes Sándor Anita de Waard 
Xerox Research Centre Europe Elsevier Labs, USA 

Agnes.Sandor@xrce.xerox.com A.Dewaard@elsevier.com 

 
 

Abstract 

Key knowledge components of biological 

research papers are conveyed by 

structurally and rhetorically salient 

sentences that summarize the main findings 

of a particular experiment. In this article 

we define such sentences as Claimed 

Knowledge Updates (CKUs), and propose 

using them in text mining tasks. We 

provide evidence that CKUs convey the 

most important new factual information, 

and thus demonstrate that rhetorical 

salience is a systematic discourse structure 

indicator in biology articles along with 

structural salience. We assume that CKUs 

can be detected automatically with state-of-

the-art text analysis tools, and suggest 

some applications for presenting CKUs in 

knowledge bases and scientific browsing 

interfaces. 

1 Introduction 

Biomedical research articles describe newly 

discovered biological findings, and in doing so, 

update the readers’ knowledge on a particular 

topic. These two functions of research articles – 

describing reality and updating knowledge in a 

field – mobilize different forms of linguistic 

expression: on the one hand, in order to describe 

pieces of reality, the authors refer to biological 

objects and relationships among them, and on the 

other hand, they shape the way in which new 

knowledge is inserted into existing accumulated 

knowledge, through argumentation, discourse and 

rhetorical structure. The designers of text mining 

systems are increasingly aware of the importance 

of integrating both aspects into annotation 

schemes, and thus models of argumentation, 

discourse and rhetorical structure are becoming 

integrated with models of biological reality in 

modern annotation systems, such as described in 

Liakata et al. (2010), Nawaz et al. (2010), Wilbur 

et al. (2006), Sándor (2007), Teufel (1999) and  

Collier (2006). 

Models of biological knowledge are commonly 

mapped to well-defined linguistic elements like 

named entities (mostly noun phrases), relationships 

between the entities (mostly predicates), and these 

are reliably detected with state-of-the-art text-

mining tools (e.g., Nawaz et al. 2010). But the 

detection of argumentation, discourse and 

rhetorical structures, and the association of 

linguistic expressions with these elements, is far 

less straightforward. The great number of proposed 

approaches already makes it clear that it is difficult 

to provide easily applicable and generally accepted 

annotation guidelines, which can easily be 

implemented in a web-based environment. An 

ideal discourse annotation system would be 

straightforward to use, and it would not require any 

learning – in the same way that using hyperlinks is 

a straightforward way to create references. Such an 

annotation model should also provide a substantial 

improvement to users who want to find relevant 

new knowledge.  

Here, we propose a simple discourse annotation 

model to detect the main new knowledge claims in 

biology research papers. We also propose some 

suggestions for the implementation of the 

automatic detection of this model. 

 

2 Claimed Knowledge Updates 
 

Biomedical articles contain a great number of 

biological propositions, but not all of them are 

equally relevant: some are central claims, while 

others merely support the findings; some are 

factual, while others are merely hypothesized. The 

authors often summarize their main findings in the 

10



title, section titles and caption titles. In addition to 

these  –   structurally  defined  –  summaries,     the  

authors also formulate their main findings in 

rhetorically salient sentences. This rhetorical 

salience is conveyed via metadiscourse, by which 

the authors explicitly attribute the findings to 

themselves, and state that they are based on the 

current empirical work, such as: “Our results 

demonstrate”, “In the present study we identified”.  

We will call biological propositions summarized in 

such structurally or rhetorically salient sentences 

Claimed Knowledge Updates (CKU).    

We hypothesize that a listing of the CKUs in a 

paper constitutes new main knowledge provided in 

that paper, and thus we propose that their detection 

may play an important role in text mining.  

We define CKUs as follows:   

1. A CKU expresses a verbal or nominal 
proposition about biological entities.  

2. A CKU is a new proposition. 

3. The authors present the CKU as factual. 
4. A CKU is derived from the experimental work 

described in the article. 

5. The ownership of the proposition is attributed 
to the author(s) of the article. 

6. 4) and 5) are either explicitly expressed or are 
implicitly conveyed by a structural position as 

title, section or caption title. 

As an example, Table 1 contains some CKUs from 

an article on Spinal Muscular Atrophy (Akten et 

al., 2011). The metadiscourse indicating CKUs is 

given in bold.  

In studying this paper, we found a striking 

regularity in the appearance of CKUs throughout 

the article: the Abstract, the Introduction, the 

Results and the Discussion sections are repeat the 

same CKUs, as follows: 
 in the Abstract they appear as a list of findings;  

 in the Introduction, they are inserted within the 
context of previous knowledge;  

 in the Results section, they are explained 
within the context of the authors’ work, and 

thus provide empirical evidence;  

and finally,  

 in the Discussion, they are presented in the 
perspective of the advances in the research 

domain.   

In other words, the four predefined structural units 

of research articles give an indicator of the 

underlying CKU organization. This regularity 

shows that rhetorical salience is systematically 

related to structural organization, and thus that the 

placement of the CKUs in the text can be a marker 

for discourse structure in biological research 

articles.

 

  3   Automatic detection of CKUs 
 

  According   to our definition, a  CKU  is  a  factual     

  proposition   referring    to   a   bio-event,   and   its  

  discourse   function  is    updating   knowledge:  its  

  source is the author of the current  article,   and   its  

  basis  is  the  experimental findings of the    current  

 

Table 1. Sentences and CKUs from Akten et al.

Sentence CKU 

Here we used mass 

spectrometry to 

identifyHuD as a novel 

neuronal SMN-interacting 

partner. 

HuD is a neuronal 

SMN-interacting 

partner. 

Our analysis of known 

HuD-associated mRNAs in 

neurons identified cpg15 

mRNA as a highly abundant 

mRNA in HuDIPs compared 

with other known targets of 

HuD, such as GAP43 and 

Tau. 

cpg15 mRNA is a 

highly abundant 

mRNA in HuDIPs 

Our finding that SMN 

protein associates with HuD 

protein and the HuD target 

cpg15 mRNA in neurons led 

us to ask whether SMN 

deficiency affects the 

abundance or cellular 

distribution of cpg15 

mRNA. 

SMN protein 

associates with HuD 

protein 

SMN protein 

associates with cpg15 

mRNA 

11



 

 
 

Title Abstract Introduction Results Figures Discussion Citation 
Event 

representation 

Interaction 

of survival 

of motor 

neuron 

(SMN) and 

HuD 

proteins 

[with m 

RNA 

cpg15rescue

s motor 

neuron 

axonal 

deficits] 

Here we 

used mass 

spectrometry 

to 

identifyHuD 

as a novel 

neuronal 

SMN-

interacting 

partner. 

 

Here we 

identifyHuD 

asa novel 

interacting 

partner of 

SMN,  

Together 

with our co-

IP data, 

these results 

indicate that 

SMN 

associates 

with HuD in 

motor 

neurons 

 

SMN 

interacts 

with HuD. 

Our MS and 

co-IP data 

demonstrat

e a strong 

interaction 

between 

SMN and 

HuD in 

spinal motor 

neuron 

axons. 

Furthermore, 

these 

findings are 

consistent 

with recent 

studies 

demonstrati

ng that the 

interaction 

of HuD with 

the spinal 

muscular 

atrophy 

(SMA) 

protein SMN 

… 

Entity1: 

HuD 

 

Entity2: 

SMN 

 

Relation: 

Interaction 

 

Location: 

Motor 

neurons 

 

Table 2. The same bio-event repeated in the different sections of the paper, a citation, and its 

representation 

article, and its basis is the experimental findings of 

the current article. The discourse function is 

indicated either by the proposition’s structural 

position within the article or by metadiscourse.  

We suggest detecting CKUs in three steps, 

combining state-of-the art document processing 

tools:  

1. identifying structural discourse markers;  
2. identifying rhetorical discourse markers,  
3. extracting factual bio-events.  
 

Structural indicators, i.e. the title, section titles 

or figure captions, are detected through markup in 

a straightforward way, if the article is encoded in a 

structured document format (e.g., XML). If this is 

not the case, a special conversion tool should be 

applied, as described in e.g. Déjean and Meunier 

(2007) to convert unstructured documents to 

structured documents. 

Metadiscourse indicators, which convey both 

that the source of the new knowledge is attributed 

to the author(s) and that it is factual, such as “here 

we demonstrate”, “our results identify”, etc. could 

be detected by local pattern-matching rules in the 

majority of cases, since the authors often use 

highly recurring forms to express them. However, 

in some cases the expressions are somewhat more 

complex, and thus do not match local patterns. In 

order to ensure better performance, which is 

important due to the relevance and relatively small 

number of the claims to detect, we could apply the 

concept-matching methodology as described in 

Sándor (2007), which takes syntactic dependencies 

into account. This methodology consists of 

identifying specific kinds of metadiscourse as the 

realizations of patterns of concepts, which are 

present as semantic features in syntactically 

connected words and expressions. 

To detect CKUs, we assume that these are 

indicated minimally by two co-occurring concepts: 

a first concept, which we call DEICTIC, and which 

conveys reference to the current work (here, we, 

our, these), and a second concept, which is a 

subclass of what we call MENTAL_OPERATION 

(identify, demonstrate, find, etc.). This specific 

subclass is a list of verbs and their nominalizations 

that belong to the category of “certainty verbs” in 

Thomas and Hawes (1994). This minimal pattern 

detects expressions like “we identify” or “our 

finding”. In expressions like “these results 

indicate” or “our data demonstrate”, the DEICTIC 

concept is linked to the certainty verb in an indirect 

way, since it is the modifier of the subject of the 

certainty verb.  

This subject refers to the “base” factor of the 

bio-event (i.e. the indication comes from “results”, 

and the demonstration from “data”, see De Waard 

and Pander Maat (2009)), and thus it is also part of 

the metadiscourse. Its relevant semantic feature is 

called SCOPE in the concept-matching systems. In 

12



summary, CKU-specific metadiscourse is covered 

by the pattern DEICTIC + SCOPE + 

MENTAL_OPERATION, where the “+” sign 

indicates a syntactic relationship. 

Consider the three sentences containing CKUs 

in Table 1. The metadiscourse is in bold: 

(1) Here we used mass spectrometry to identify 
HuD as a novel neuronal SMN-interacting 

partner. 

(2) Our analysis of known HuD-associated 
mRNAs in neurons identified cpg15 mRNA as 

a highly abundant mRNA in HuDIPs 

compared with other known targets of HuD, 

such as GAP43 and Tau. 

(3) Together with our co-IP data, these results 
indicate that SMN associates with HuDin 

motor neurons, and that these two proteins 

colocalize in granules within motor neuron 

axons. 

While (3) follows a straightforward local pattern, 

in sentences (1) and (2) the relationship between 

“we” and “identify” and “our analysis” and 

“identify” needs deep syntactic analysis. This 

analysis is carried out by the Xerox Incremental 

Parser (XIP) (Aït et al. 2000), on top of which we 

have implemented concept-matching rules for 

detecting metadiscourse indicating CKUs.  

   We developed a simple concept-matching 

grammar based on the rules described above, and 

assessed the results of the automatic detection of 

the rhetorical indicators of CKUs in two papers. 

With respect to our manual annotation of CKUs 

the coverage is 81% and 80% and the precision is 

62% and 51% respectively.  

   Once the metadiscourse is detected, another 

module should be applied for detecting bio-events, 

i.e. factual propositions that involve biological 

entities. This step can be executed by a state-of-

the-art biological parser that detects factual bio-

events, like the one by Nawaz et al. (2010). 

Subsequent integration of factual bio-event 

extraction should improve the precision, because 

the metadiscourse by itself does not guarantee the 

factuality of the bio-events, as in the following 

sentence: 

(4) Our findings provide further support for the   
hypothesis that SMN can associate with 

multiple RBPs to regulate axonal mRNA 

levels in neurons, and that the different SMN–

RBP complexes may be defined by their 

mRNA contents. 

4   Validation: are CKUs indeed the main 

claims? 

To test whether CKUs represent indeed the main 

claims of biology papers we carried out the 

following checks:   

1. First, we asked a domain specialist both to 
validate the CKUs as main claims, and select 

them in two of full-text papers. 

2. Second, we analyzed how a source paper is 

cited in other papers, and investigated whether 

the descriptions given in the referring texts 

correspond to the CKUs in the cited papers. 

We discuss these forms of validation in turn.  

4.1   Validation by domain specialists 

We carried out the validation in two steps. In the 

first step we manually highlighted the CKUs in 

two papers according to the definition given in 

section 2, above, and asked a biologist to select the 

sentences that were relevant claims of the article. 

In this step all the CKUs have been validated. This 

indicates that if biologists are provided with a list 

of CKUs annotated by non-specialists based on 

discourse indicators, they do get access to relevant 

claims of the articles. 

In the second step we asked the biologist to 

highlight the sentences that conform to the 6 points 

of our definition of CKUs. In the first article she 

selected 26 sentences, out of which only 12 

sentences were conform to the definition of CKUs. 

The article contains 4 further CKUs, which the 

biologist did not select. Out of the 14 sentences 

that were highlighted by the biologist and that did 

not satisfy the definition of CKUs, 5 do not satisfy 

one important criterion of CKUs, that of factuality. 

The remaining 9 sentences were factual, but did 

not explicitly attribute the proposition to the 

authors of the article, i.e. did not contain 

metadiscourse that characterizes CKUs.  In the 

second article the biologist selected 48 sentences, 

out of which 24 were indeed CKUs, and there is no 

more CKU is the article. Similarly to the first 

article, 3 out of the remaining sentences were not 

factual and 21 did not contain metadiscourse. 

This experiment leads us to three interesting 

observations: 

1. A list of CKUs is meaningful for the biologist, 
however, CKUs do not provide an exhaustive 

and well-definable list of main claims. 

13



2. The definition of the CKUs is difficult to apply 
for a biologist who is not trained in rhetorical 

analysis. 

3. The notion of a “main claim” is not 
straightforward to define formally. 

4.2   Citing sentences collection 

Work on citation-based summarization (e.g. 

Kaplan et al., 2009, Jbara and Radev, 2011, Nakov 

et al., 2004) focuses on creating ‘a summation of 

multiple scholars’ viewpoints […] using its set of 

citation sentences’. If we accept the premise of this 

work, which is that a collection of citation 

sentences offer a good overview of the cited 

papers, then CKUs should be well-represented in 

the collection of cited sentences.  As a second 

check, we identified a collection of 20 citations of 

a full-text paper (Voorhoeve et al., 2006) and 

compared the citing sentences to the CKUs 

detected in this paper. We found that in all cases 

the citing sentences could be linked back to the 

CKUs (and indeed offer a good summary of the 

cited paper).  

5   Discussion 

5.1   Related work 

De Waard and Pander Maat (2012) propose a 

model for epistemic classification of bio-events 

that consists of three parts: epistemic value (from 

factual through various degrees of certainty until 

lack of knowledge); base (grounding for the 

knowledge: reasoning, data or unidentified); source 

(author, named external source, implicit, 

attribution to the author, nameless external source, 

no source of knowledge). Each bio-event is 

characterized by a combination of the three factors. 

CKUs represent a special case in this system: their 

epistemic value is factual, their base is data derived 

from the work described in the article, and their 

source is the author. Whereas De Waard and 

Pander Maat do not differentiate among the 

various combinations of the factors, we propose to 

handle this unique combination on its own right, 

since it fulfills a special discourse function in the 

article, which facilitates access to the main claims.  

    Each of the three factors that characterize CKUs 

is taken into account in various text-mining 

systems, however, to our knowledge, no other 

system defines a discourse function in terms of 

these three factors. Nawaz et al. (2010) detect 

factual bio-events, but they do not detect 

authorship and base. The same holds for the 

annotation guidelines developed by and Wilbur et 

al. (2006). Teufel (2000) considers authorship but 

does not consider factuality and base. Blake (2010) 

differentiates among several kinds of base and 

considers only factual bio-events, but does not 

consider authorship.  

Jaime-Sisó (2011) makes the same observation 

as we do: the authors summarize and repeat the 

main findings in every section of the articles. She 

attributes this phenomenon to the authors’ 

adaptation to electronic publishing, where there is 

the possibility to navigate in the text. Repetition 

facilitates this navigation. Based on interviews 

with researchers and the analysis of 20 biology 

articles, she concludes that summarizing sentences 

that repeat the main findings in each section of 

biology articles are crucial both in writing and 

reading practices:  “Aware of the scientists’ 

reading practices, both editors and writers 

contribute to ensure that, whatever section of the 

text is scanned, and regardless of the reasons of 

approaching the article, the reader obtains the most 

newsworthy information, as if each of the sections 

could stand alone.” (p. 87) “Noteworthy 

information” is mostly expressed by CKUs, 

although Jaime-Sisó does not provide a rhetorically 

based definition of summarizing sentences. 

5.2   Proposed applications 

We argue that the detection of Claimed Knowledge 

Updates constitutes a relevant goal for text-mining. 

CKUs are systematically signaled either by their 

position within the paper or by specific rhetorical 

discourse markers. This demonstrates that they 

constitute a systematic discourse organizing factor 

of articles. Moreover, CKUs can be detected by 

integrating state-of-the-art tools.  

The detection of new factual knowledge could 

be useful in several tasks, such as summarization, 

information extraction, updating ontologies and 

knowledge bases, etc.  

In particular, we wish to propose two use cases: 

first, the identification of CKUs could improve the 

output of automated knowledge bases that rely on 

text mining. Several text mining systems aim to 

provide multi-dimensional characterizations of bio-

events, both academic systems such as 

14



MEDIE
1
and iHoP

2
, and commercial systems such 

as Ariadne
3
and BEL

4
. In none of these systems, 

however, are the various bio-events detected 

differentiated according to their role in updating 

knowledge. Showing only the CKUs, and not all 

the claims, would greatly enhance the efficiency 

and use of these automated knowledge bases. For 

example, the output of the query ‘LATS2’ as a 

subject in MEDIE returned the following 

sentences:  

1. LATS2 is a member of the LATS tumor 
suppressor family.   

2. The differences in the expression levels of the 
LATS2, S100A2 and hTERT genes in different 

types of NSCLC are significant.   

3. LATS2 is a new member of the LATS tumour 
suppressor family.   

4. Among the growing list of putative Mdm2-
regulated proteins are several proteins playing 

a key role in the control of cell proliferation 

such as pRb, E2F1/DP1, Numb, Smads, Lats2 

or IGF-1R.  

5. In addition, modulation of novel target genes 
such as LATS2 and GREB1 were identified to 

be mediated by Nrf2.   

6. Here, we show that LATS proteins 
(mammalian orthologs of Warts) interact 

directly with YAP in mammalian cells and that 

ectopic expression of LATS1, but not LATS2, 

effectively suppresses the YAP phenotypes  

7. The tumor suppressor genes NEO1 and 
LATS2, and the estrogen receptor gene ESR1, 

all have binding sites for p53 and hsa-mir-

372/373. 

 

It is clear - even without studying the textual 

context - that not all of these sentences refer to a 

new finding pertaining to LATS2, which is what 

the user would like to see, and what a CKU parser 

would provide.  

A second possible application of CKU detection 

could be the presentation of CKUs as metadata in 

biomedical publications, to aid the navigation 

within and among collections of biology articles. 

This is illustrated in a mock-up (Figure), which 

extends the PNAS publication scheme with an 

additional column presenting CKUs. The column 
                                                           
1http://www.nactem.ac.uk/medie/ 
2http://www.ihop-net.org/UniPub/iHOP/ 
3http://www.ariadnegenomics.com/ 
4 http://www.openbel.org 

in the middle is a part of the standard PNAS 

layout, and it points to the past, i.e. to existing 

articles that the current article draws on. But the 

third new column on the right extracts CKUs put 

forward in the current article. According to where 

the CKUs are, the readers can learn what type of 

arguments they could find to support them in the 

text to the left: in the introduction - background 

knowledge; in the results - experiments; in the 

discussion - various other links and implications; 

in the Figures - the illustration of the experiments. 

To support both of these applications, CKUs 

could be marked up by the authors of the article 

during authoring or submission, making use of 

tools that identify CKUs. The systematic 

annotation of CKUs by the authors could provide 

them with a structural template against which they 

could check the article’s coherence, and act in a 

role similar to a Structured Digital Abstract, 

proposed by Gerstein et al. (2007), as a ‘computer-

readable summary of pertinent facts’. These CKUs 

could then be added directly to a bio-event 

representation framework, where biological 

entities, interaction types, locations, etc. are 

structurally marked for easy information 

extraction. In this way, the user can easily track the 

grounding of a specific bio-event in past work, 

present experiments and future possibilities– and 

eventually, do better science. 

15



 

 

 

Figure Mockup of presenting CKUs in publications

 

Acknowledgements 

We are indebted and deeply grateful to Prof. 

Maryanne Martone from the University of San 

Diego for her generous help in annotating the 

CKUs in our texts, and to our anonymous 

reviewers for helping us improve this paper. 

References  

Salah Aït-Mokhtar, Jean-Pierre Chanod, and Claude 

Roux. 2002. Robustness beyond shallowness: 

incremental dependency parsing. Natural Language 

Engineering, 8(2/3):121-144. 

Amjad Abu-Jbara and Dragomir Radev. 2011. Coherent 

Citation-Based Summarization of Scientific Papers. 

Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 

500–509, Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011  

Akten, Bikem, Min JeongKye, Le T. Hao, Mary H. 

Wertz, Sasha Singh, DuyuNie, Jia Huang, Tanuja T. 

Merianda, Jeffery L. Twiss, Christine E. Beattie, 

Judith A. J. Steen, and Mustafa Sahin. 2011. 

Interaction of survival of motor neuron (SMN) and 

HuD proteins with mRNA cpg15 rescues motor 

neuron axonal deficits, ProcNatlAcadSci U S A. 

2011 Jun 21;108(25):10337-42. 

Catherine Blake. 2010. Beyond genes, proteins, and 

abstracts: Identifying scientific claims from full-text 

biomedical articles. Journal of Biomedical 

Informatics archive Volume 43 Issue 2, April, 2010 

Pablo Ciccarese, Elizabeth Wu, June Kinoshita, Gwen 

Wong, Marco Ocana, Alan Ruttenberg, and Tim 

Clark. 2008. The SWAN Biomedical Discourse 

Ontology.J Biomed Inform. 2008 Oct;41(5):739-51. 

Epub 2008 May 4.. PMID: 18583197 

HervéDejean and Jean-Luc Meunier. 2007.  Logical 

Document conversion: combining functional and 

formal knowledge. Symposium on Document 

Engineering, Winnipeg, Canada, August 28-31, 

2007. 

Mark Gerstein, Michael Seringhausand and Stanley 

Field. 2007. Structured digital abstract makes text 

mining easy, Nature 447, 142 (10 May 2007) | 

doi:10.1038/447142a 

Mercedes Jaime-Sisó. 2011. Summarizing Findings: An 

All-Pervasive Move In Open Access Biomedical 

Research Articles Involves Rephrasing Strategies. In 

Researching Specialized Languages.Studies in 

Corpus Linguistics 47.Edited by Bhatia, Vijay, 

Sánchez Hernández, Purificación and Pérez-Paredes, 

Pascual.Published by John Benjamins. Pp. 71-88. 

Amjadabu Jbara and Dragomir R. Radev. 2011. 

Coherent citation-based summarization of scientific 

16



papers. In Proceedings of ACL 2011, Portland, 

Oregon, 2011. 

Dain Kaplan, Ryu Iida and Takenobu Tokunaga. 2009. 

Automatic Extraction of Citation Contexts for 

Research Paper Summarization: A Coreference-chain 

based Approach, Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop 

on Text and Citation Analysis for Scholarly Digital 

Libraries, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 88–95, Suntec, 

Singapore, 7 August 2009. 

Maria Liakata, Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan and 

Colin Batchelor. 2010. Corpora for conceptualisation 

and zoning of scientific papersProceedings of the 

Seventh conference on International Language 

Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Malta. 

Yoko Mizuta, Anna Korhonen, Tony Mullen, and Nigel 

Collier. 2006. Zone analysis in biology articles as a 

basis for information extraction.International Journal 

of Medical Informatics. 75(6): 468-487. 

Preslav I. Nakov, Ariel S. Schwartz, A., and Marti 

Hearst. 2004. Citances: Citation Sentences for 

Semantic Analysis of Bioscience Text, in the 

SIGIR'04 Workshop on Search and Discovery in 

Bioinformatics. 

Raheel Nawaz, Paul Thompson, John McNaught, 

Sophia Ananiadou. 2010.  Meta-Knowledge 

Annotation of Bio-Events. Proceedings of the 

Seventh International Conference on Language 

Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2010). 

Cameron Neylon. 2012. Network Enabled Research: 

Maximise scale and connectivity, minimise friction, 

Blog post, February 2012, 

http://cameronneylon.net/blog/network-enabled-

research/ 

Ágnes Sándor. 2007. Modeling metadiscourse 

conveying the author's rhetorical strategy in 

biomedical research abstracts. Revue Française de 

Linguistique Appliquée 200(2):97--109. 

Simone Teufel. 1999. Argumentative Zoning: 

Information Extraction from ScientificText. PhD 

Thesis. 

Simone Teufel and Marc Moens. 2000. What's yours 

and what's mine: Determining intellectual attribution 

in scientific text. Proceedings of the 2000 Joint 

SIGDAT conference on Empirical methods in natural 

language processing and very large corpora. 

Sarah Thomas and Thomas P. Hawes. 1994. Reporting 

Verbs in Medical Journal Articles. English for 

Specific Purposes, v13 n2 p129-48 1994. 

P. Mathijs Voorhoeve, Carlos le Sage, et. Al. 2006. A 

genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-

373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors. Cell. 

2006 Mar 24;124(6):1169-81. 

Anita de Waard, Simon Buckingham Shum, Annamaria 

Carusi, Jack Park, Mathias Samwald, and Ágnes 

Sándor. 2009. Hypotheses, evidence and 

relationships: The HypER approach for representing 

scientific knowledge claims. In: Proceedings 8th 

International Semantic Web Conference, Workshop 

on Semantic Web Applications in Scientific 

Discourse. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 

Springer Verlag: Berlin, 26 Oct 2009, Washington 

DC. 

Anita de Waard and Henk Pander Maat 2009. 

Categorizing Epistemic Segment Types in Biology 

Research Articles. Workshop on Linguistic and 

Psycholinguistic Approaches to Text Structuring 

(LPTS 2009), September 21-23 2009 

Anita de Waard,. and Pander Maat., H.P.M., 2012.  

Workshop on Detecting Structure in Scientific 

Discourse, ACL 2012, Jeju Island, Korea (this 

workshop).  

W. John Wilbur, Andrey Rzhetsky and Hagit Shatkay. 

2006. New directions in biomedical text annotation: 

definitions, guidelines and corpus construction, BMC 

Bioinformatics, vol. 7, no. (356) 

 

17


