










































KBGen - Text Generation from Knowledge Bases as a New Shared Task


INLG 2012 Proceedings of the 7th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 141–145,
Utica, May 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

KBGen – Text Generation from Knowledge Bases as a New Shared Task

Eva Banik1, Claire Gardent2, Donia Scott3, Nikhil Dinesh4, and Fennie Liang5

1ebanik@comp-ling.co.uk, Computational Linguistics Ltd, London, UK
2claire.gardent@loria.fr, CNRS, LORIA, Nancy, France

3D.R.Scott@sussex.ac.uk, School of Informatics, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
4dinesh@ai.sri.com, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA

5fennie.liang@cs.man.ac.uk, School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, UK

1 Introduction

In this paper we propose a new shared task, KB-
Gen, where the aim is to produce coherent descrip-
tions of concepts and relationships in a frame-based
knowledge base (KB). We propose to use the AURA
knowledge base for the shared task which contains
information about biological entities and processes.
We describe how the AURA KB provides an appli-
cation context for NLG and illustrate how this ap-
plication context generalizes to other biology KBs.
We argue that the easy availability of input data and
a research community – both domain experts and
knowledge representation experts – which actively
uses these knowledge bases, along with regular eval-
uation experiments, creates an ideal scenario for a
shared task.

2 Application Context and Motivation

One of the research challenges in the knowledge rep-
resentation community is to model complex knowl-
edge in order to be able to answer complex ques-
tions from a knowledge base (see e.g. the Deep
Knowledge Representation Challenge Workshop at
KCAP 20111). There are several applications of
such knowledge bases, perhaps most recently and
most prominently in the bioinformatics and educa-
tional informatics domain, where there are available
knowledge bases and reasoners that help scientists
answer questions, explain connections between con-
cepts, visualize complex processes, and help stu-
dents learn about biology. These uses of a knowl-
edge base are however difficult to implement with-

1http://sites.google.com/site/dkrckcap2011/home

out presenting the resulting answers and explana-
tions to the user in a clear, concise and coherent way,
which often requires using natural language.

2.1 The AURA Knowledge Base

The AURA biology knowledge base developed by
SRI International (Gunning et al., 2010) encodes in-
formation from a biology textbook (Reece et al.,
2010)2. The purpose of this knowledge base is
to help students understand biological concepts by
allowing them to ask questions about the material
while reading the textbook. The KB is built on top
of a generic library of concepts (CLIB, Barker et al.,
2001), which are specialized and/or combined to en-
code biology-specific information, and it is orga-
nized into a set of concept maps, where each con-
cept map corresponds to a biological entity or pro-
cess. The KB is being encoded by biologists and
currently encodes over 5,000 concept maps.

The AURA KB and its question answering sys-
tem is integrated with an electronic textbook appli-
cation3. The applicaton allows the students to ask
complex questions about relationships between con-
cepts, which are answered by finding a possible path
between the two concepts. The results are presented
to the students as graphs, for example the answer
produced by the system in response to the question
“what is the relationship between glycolysis and glu-
cose?” is illustrated in Fig 1.

These graphs are simplified representations of

2The development of the AURA knowledge base and related
tools and applications was funded by Vulcan Inc.

3A demo of the application will be presented in the demo
session at INLG 2012

141



Figure 1: Relationship between glycolysis and glucose

a path in the knowledge base that connects two
concepts, because presenting the full concept map
where the path was found would make it difficult for
the students to clearly see the relationship. However,
this simplification often obscures the connection by
not showing relevant information.

Given the inclusion of a few more relations from
the concept map of glycolysis (Fig 2), the answer to
the question could be generated as a complex sen-
tence or a paragraph of text, for example: “Phos-
phorylation of glucose is the first step of the energy
investment phase of glycolysis” or “In the first step
of the energy investment phase of glycolysis, called
phosphorylation, hexokinase catalyses the synthesis
of glucose-6-phosphate from glucose and a phos-
phate ion.”

2.2 BioCyc

Another situation in which graph-based representa-
tions are presented to the user is metabolic pathway
and genome databases, such as the BioCyc knowl-
edge base. BioCyc describes the genome, metabolic
pathways, and other important aspects of organisms
such as molecular components and their interactions
and currently contains information from 1,763 path-

Figure 2: Concept map of glycolysis

way/genome databases4.
When users query parts of the BioCyc knowledge

base, the system automatically produces a graph
to visualize complex biological processes. For ex-
ample, Fig 3 illustrates an automatically generated
graph from the knowledge base which shows the
process of glycolysis in an E. coli cell. Hovering the
mouse over the ⊕ and 	 signs on the graph brings
up popups with additional information about gene
expressions , detailed chemical reactions in the pro-
cess, enzymes activated by certain chemicals, etc..

Figure 3: The process of glycolysis in E.coli

3 Input Data for Generation

Although there is a clear benefit from visualizing
complex processes in a graph form, one also has to

4http://www.biocyc.org

142



be well-versed in the notation and details of biolog-
ical processes in order to make sense of these rep-
resentations. Students of biology and non-experts
would certainly benefit from a more detailed ex-
planation of the process, presented as a few para-
phraphs of text along with graphs to emphasize the
most salient features of processes.

The paths and relations returned by reasoning al-
gorithms also present a good opportunity to pro-
vide inputs for natural language generation. These
chunks of data typically contain the right amount of
data because they consist of the information needed
to answer a question or describe a concept. Ad-
ditionally, many knowledge bases (including both
BioCyc and AURA) are encoded in a frame-based
representation, which has the advantage that frames
naturally correspond to linguistic units.

Frame-based systems (Minsky, 1981) are based
around the notion of frames or classes which repre-
sent collections of concepts. Each frame has an as-
sociated set of slots or attributes which can be filled
either by specific values or by other frames. Intu-
itively, frames correspond to situations, and each ter-
minal in the frame corresponds to answers to ques-
tions that could be asked about the situation, in-
cluding the participants in the situation, causes and
consequences, preceding and following situations,
purpose, etc. Frame-based representations may ei-
ther contain frames of generic concepts or instance
frames which represent information about particular
instances. Frames also have a kind-of slot, which
allows the assertion of a frame taxonomy, and the
inheritance of slots.

In the knowledge representation community,
frame-based representations are popular because
they make the encoding process more intuitive.
From a natural language generation perspective,
each frame (or a set of slots) corresponds to a lin-
guistic unit (sentence, noun phrase, clause, verb
phrase, etc), depending on the type of the frame and
the slots it contains. This organization of concepts
and relations in the knowledge base makes it easier
to select chunks of data from which coherent texts
can be generated.

Slots in these frame-based representations also
naturally correspond to the kind of flat semantic
representations and dependency structures that have
served as input to surface realization (Koller and

Striegnitz, 2002; Carroll and Oepen, 2005; White,
2006; Gardent and Kow, 2007; Nakatsu and White,
2010).

4 The shared task

We propose two tracks for the KBGen shared task: a
“complex surface realization” track, where the task
is to generate complex sentences from shorter in-
puts, and a “discourse generation” track, where the
task is to generate longer texts made up from several
paragraphs. In the following, we describe the data
set from which the input to generation will be se-
lected; the methology we plan to use to extract text
size input for the generation challenge; and the two
tracks making up the KBGen challenge.

4.1 The AURA knowledge base as Input
Dataset

We propose to use the AURA knowledge base as
input data for the shared task for several reasons.
AURA contains a number of relations and therefore
provides varied input for generation5. The AURA
knowledge base contains linguistic resources that
can be used for generation (a morphological lexi-
con and a list of synonyms for each concept) and
the electronic textbook provides an application con-
text to evaluate the generated texts. There are regular
evaluation efforts to assess the educational benefits
of using the textbook application, and the next round
of these experiments will involve over 400 students
and biology teachers who will use the application
over an extended period of time. The evaluation of
the outputs generated for the shared task could form
part of these experiments.

4.2 Selecting Text Size Content for the Shared
Task

We propose to select data from the knowledge base
manually or semi-automatically, by selecting a set
of concepts to be described and including relevant
relations associated with the concepts. We would
first select a set of concept maps that are encoded in
most detail and have been reviewed by the encoders
for quality assurance. The input data for each con-
cept will then be a manually selected set of frames

5If there is interest, the systems developed to generate from
AURA could also be applied to the BioCyc data, which has a
more restricted set of relations.

143



from the concept map. The selected relations will be
reviewed one more time for quality and consistency
to filter out any errors in the data.

If there is interest in the community, we can
also envision a content selection challenge which
could provide input to the generation task. Although
frames in the knowledge base correspond well to
chunks of data for generation of descriptions, con-
tent selection for other communicative goals is far
from a trivial problem. One such challenge could
be for example comparing two concepts, or explain-
ing the relation between a process and its sub-type
(another process that is taxonomically related, but
different in certain parts).

4.3 Complex Surface Realization Track

For the complex surface realization track, a small
number of frames would be selected from the knowl-
edge base along with a small number of other rel-
evant relations (e.g., important parts or properties
of certain event participants, or certain relations be-
tween them, depending on the context). The output
texts to be generated would be complex sentences
describing the central entity/event in the data, or the
relationship between two concepts, such as the gly-
colysis example in section 2.1. This task would
involve aggregation and generating intrasentential
pronouns governed by syntax where necessary, but
it would not require the generation of any discourse
anaphora or referring expressions.

This track will differ from the deep generation
track of the Surface Realization Shared Task both in
form and in content. The form of the KBGen input
is a concept map extracted from an ontology rather
than a deep semantics extracted by conversion from
dependency parse trees. Similarly, its content is that
of a biology knowledge base rather than that of the
Penn Treebank textual corpus.

4.4 Discourse Generation Track

Inputs for the discourse generation task would in-
clude most frames from the concept map of an entity
or process. The output would be longer paragraphs
or 2-3 paragraphs of text, typically a description of
the subevents, results, etc, of a biological process,
or the description of the structure and function of an
entity. This task would involve text structuring and
the generation of pronouns.

4.5 Lexical Resources and potential
multilingual tracks

The knowledge base provides a mapping from con-
cepts to lexical items and a list of synonyms. It
also provides information about how specific slots
in event frames are mapped onto prepositions.

If there is interest in the community, the lex-
ical resources corresponding to the selected con-
tent could be translated to different languages semi-
automatically: the translation could be attempted
first automatically, with the help of available biol-
ogy/medical lexicons, and then the output would be
hand-corrected. Candidate languages for a multilin-
gual challenge would be French and Spanish. To
run the multilingual tracks we would need to create
multilingual development and test data and would
need to have access to French/Spanish speaking bi-
ologists.

5 Evaluation

Evaluation of the generated texts could be done both
with automatic evaluation metrics and using human
judgements. Automatic evaluation metrics could in-
clude BLUE (Papineni et al., 2002) or measuring
Levenshtein distance (Levenshtein, 1966) from hu-
man written texts. To obtain human judgements, bi-
ologists will be asked to compose texts conveying
the same content as the input for the generated texts.
The human-written texts will be presented to sub-
jects along with the generated outputs to obtain flu-
ency judgements, but the subjects will not be told
which kind of text they are judging. The evaluation
campaign could be coordinated with the evaluation
of the knowledge base and the electronic textbook
application, and/or publicized on social networking
sites or mechanical turk.

6 Next Steps

We invite feedback on this proposal with the aim
of refining our plan and discussing a suitable input
representation for the shared task in the next few
months. If there is sufficient interest in the shared
task, we would make the input data available in the
agreed format in late 2012, with the first evaluation
taking place in 2013. We would like to hear any
comments/suggestions/critisisms about the plan and
we are actively looking for people who would be in-

144



terested in getting involved in planning and running
the challenge.

References

Barker, K., B. Porter, and P. Clark. 2001. A library of
generic concepts for composing knowledgebases.
In Proceedings of the 1st Int Conf on Knowledge
Capture (K-Cap’01), 14–21.

Carroll, J., and S. Oepen. 2005. High efficiency real-
ization for a wide-coverage unification grammar.
2nd IJCNLP .

Gardent, C., and E. Kow. 2007. A symbolic ap-
proach to near-deterministic surface realisation
using tree adjoining grammar. In In 45th Annual
Meeting of the ACL.

Gunning, D., V. K. Chaudhri, P. Clark, K. Barker,
Shaw-Yi Chaw, M. Greaves, B. Grosof, A. Leung,
D. McDonald, S. Mishra, J. Pacheco, B. Porter,
A. Spaulding, D. Tecuci, and J. Tien. 2010.
Project halo update - progress toward digital aris-
totle. AI Magazine Fall:33–58.

Koller, Alexander, and Kristina Striegnitz. 2002.
Generation as dependency parsing. In Proceed-
ings of ACL.

Levenshtein, Vladimir I. 1966. Binary codes capable
of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals.
Soviet Physics Doklady 10:707–710.

Minsky, Marvin. 1981. Mind design, chapter A
Framework for Representing Knowledge, 95–
128. MIT Press.

Nakatsu, Crystal, and Michael White. 2010. Gen-
erating with discourse combinatory categorial
grammar. submitted to Linguistic Issues in Lan-
guage Technology .

Papineni, Kishore, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and
Wei jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. 311–318.

Reece, Jane B., Lisa A. Urry, Michael L. Cain,
Steven A. Wasserman, Peter V. Minorsky, and
Robert B. Jackson. 2010. Campbell biology. Pear-
son Publishing.

White, Michael. 2006. Ccg chart realization from
disjunctive inputs. In Proceedings of the Fourth

International Natural Language Generation Con-
ference, 12–19. Sydney, Australia: Association
for Computational Linguistics.

145


