










































Re-tweeting from a linguistic perspective


Proceedings of the 2012 Workshop on Language in Social Media (LSM 2012), pages 46–55,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Re-tweeting from a Linguistic Perspective

Aobo Wang Tao Chen
Web IR / NLP Group (WING)

National University of Singapore
13 Computing Link, Singapore 117590

{wangaobo,taochen,kanmy}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Min-Yen Kan

Abstract

What makes a tweet worth sharing? We
study the content of tweets to uncover linguis-
tic tendencies of shared microblog posts (re-
tweets), by examining surface linguistic fea-
tures, deeper parse-based features and Twitter-
specific conventions in tweet content. We
show how these features correlate with a func-
tional classification of tweets, thereby catego-
rizing people’s writing styles based on their
different intentions on Twitter. We find that
both linguistic features and functional classi-
fication contribute to re-tweeting. Our work
shows that opinion tweets favor originality
and pithiness and that update tweets favor di-
rect statements of a tweeter’s current activity.
Judicious use of #hashtags also helps to en-
courage retweeting.

1 Introduction

Tweeting1 is a modern phenomenon. Complement-
ing short message texting, instant messaging, and
email, tweeting is a public outlet for netizens to
broadcast themselves. The short, informal nature of
tweets allows users to post often and quickly react to
others’ posts, making Twitter an important form of
close-to-real-time communication.

Perhaps as a consequence of its usability, form,
and public nature, tweets are becoming an im-
portant source of data for mining emerging trends

This research is supported by the Singapore National Re-
search Foundation under its International Research Centre Sin-
gapore Funding Initiative and administered by the IDM Pro-
gramme Office, under grant 252-002-372-490.

1More generally known as microblogging, in which the post
is termed a microblog.

and opinion analysis. Of particular interest are
retweets, tweets that share previous tweets from oth-
ers. Tweets with a high retweet count can be taken
as a first cut towards trend detection.

It is known that social network effects exert
marked influence on re-tweeting (Wu et al., 2011;
Recuero et al., 2011). But what about the content
of the post? To the best of our knowledge, little is
known about what properties of tweet content moti-
vate people to share. Are there content signals that
mark a tweet as important and worthy of sharing?

To answer these questions, we delve into the data,
analyzing tweets to better understand posting behav-
ior. Using a classification scheme informed by pre-
vious work, we annotate 860 tweets and propagate
the labeling to a large 9M corpus (Section 2). On
this corpus, we observe regularities in emoticon use,
sentiment analysis, verb tense, named entities and
hashtags (Section 3), that enable us to specify fea-
ture classes for re-tweet prediction. Importantly, the
outcome of our analysis is that a single holistic treat-
ment of tweets is suboptimal, and that re-tweeting is
better understood with respect to the specific func-
tion of the individual tweet. These building blocks
allow us to build a per-function based re-tweet pre-
dictor (Section 4) that outperforms a baseline.

2 Linguistically Motivated Tweet
Classification

Before we can label tweets for more detailed classi-
fication, we must decide on a classification scheme.
We first study prior work on tweet classification be-
fore setting off on creating our own classification for
linguistic analysis.

46



Early ethnographic work on tweets manually cre-
ated classification schemes based on personal, di-
rect observation (Java et al., 2009; Kelly, 2009).
Other work is more focused, aiming to use their
constructed classification scheme for specific sub-
sequent analysis (Naaman et al., 2010; Sriram et
al., 2010; Ramage et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2010).
All schemes included a range of 5–9 categories, and
were meant to be exhaustive. They exhibit some reg-
ularity: all schemes included categories for informa-
tion sharing, opinions and updates. They vary on
their classification’s level of detail and the intent of
the classification in the subsequent analysis.

Most closely related to our work, Naaman et
al. (2010) focused on distinguishing salient user ac-
tivity, finding significant differences in posts about
the tweeting party or about others that were reported
by manually classifying tweets into nine categories,
sampled from selected users. However, while their
paper gave a useful classification scheme, they did
not attempt to operationalize their work into an au-
tomated classifier.

Other works have pursued automated classifica-
tion. Most pertinent is the work by Sriram et
al. (2010), who applied a Naı̈ve Bayes learning
model with a set of 8 features (author ID, presence of
shortened words, “@username” replies, opinionated
words, emphasized words, currency and percentage
signs and time phrases) to perform hard classifica-
tion into five categories. To identify trending top-
ics, Zubiaga et al. (2011) performed a similar clas-
sification, but at the topic level (as opposed to the
individual tweet level) using aggregated language-
independent features from individual tweets. Ram-
age et al. (2010) introduced four salient dimensions
of tweets – style, status, social, substance. Individ-
ual terms and users were characterized by these di-
mensions, via labeled LDA, in which multiple di-
mensions could be applied to both types of objects.

While the previous work provides a good
overview of the genre and topic classification of
tweets, their analysis of tweets have been linguis-
tically shallow, largely confined to word identity
and Twitter-specific orthography. There has been no
work that examines the discoursal patterns and con-
tent regularities of tweets. Understanding microblog
posts from a deeper linguistic perspective may yield
insight into the latent structure of these posts, and be

useful for trend prediction. This is the aim of our
work.

2.1 Classification Scheme

We hypothesize that people’s intentions in posting
tweets determine their writing styles, and such in-
tentions can be characterized by the content and lin-
guistic features of tweets. To test this hypothesis, we
first collect a corpus of manually annotated tweets
and then analyze their regularities. In construct-
ing our classification annotation scheme, we are in-
formed by the literature and adopt a two-level ap-
proach. Our coarser-grained Level-1 classification
generalization is an amalgam of the schemes in Naa-
man et al. and Sriram et al.’s work; while our finer-
grained, Level-2 classification further breaks down
the Update and Opinion classes, to distinguish lin-
guistic regularities among the subclasses. The left
two columns of Table 1 list the categories in our
scheme, accompanied by examples.

2.2 Dataset Collection

We collected three months of public tweets (from
July to September in 2011) through Twitter’s
streaming API2. Non-English tweets were removed
using regular expressions, incurring occasional er-
rors. We note that tweets containing URLs are
often spam tweets or tweets from automated ser-
vices (e.g., Foursquare location check-ins) (Thomas
et al., 2011), and that any retweet analysis of such
tweets would need to focus much more on the
linked content rather than the tweet’s content. We
thus removed tweets containing URLs from our
study. While this limits the scope of our study,
we wanted to focus on the (linguistic quality of)
content alone. The final dataset explicitly iden-
tifies 1,558,996 retweets (hereafter, RT-data) and
7,989,009 non-retweets. To perform further analy-
sis on Twitter hashtags (i.e., “#thankyousteve”), we
break them into separate words using the Microsoft
Data-Driven Word-Breaking API3. This also ben-
efits the classification task in terms of converting
hashtags to known words.

2http://dev.twitter.com/docs/
streaming-api

3http://web-ngram.research.microsoft.
com/info/break.html

47



Table 1: Our two-level classification with example tweets.

Level-1 Level-2 Motivation Example retweets Corpus count (%)

Opinion
Abstract Present opinions towards ab-

stract objects.
God will lead us all to the right person for our lives. Have
patience and trust him.

291 (33.8%)

Concrete Present opinions towards con-
crete objects.

i feel so bad for nolan. Cause that poor kid gets blamed for
everything, and he’s never even there.

99 (11.5%)

Joke Tell jokes for fun. Hi. I’m a teenager & I speak 3 languages: English, Sar-
casm, & Swearing (; #TeenThings

86 (10.0%)

Update Myself Update my current status. first taping day for #growingup tomorrow! So excited. :) 168 (19.6%)Someone Update others’ current status. My little sister still sleep ... 66 (7.7%)
Interaction Seek interactions with others. #Retweet If you’re #TeamFollowBack 81 (9.4%)
Fact Transfer information. Learnt yesterday: Roman Empire spent 75% of GDP on

infrastructure. Roads, aqueducts, etc.
23 (2.7%)

Deals Make deals. Everybody hurry! Get to Subway before they stop serving
LIMITED TIME ONLY item ’avocados’.

29 (3.4%)

Others Other motivations. Ctfu Lmfao At Kevin Hart ;) 17 (2.0%)

We employed U.S.-based workers on Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk to annotate a random subset of the
preprocessed tweets. We collected annotations for
860 tweets (520 retweets; 340 non-retweets) ran-
domly sampled from the final dataset, paying 10
cents per block of 10 tweets labeled. Each tweet was
labeled by 3 different workers who annotated using
the Level-2 scheme. Gold standard labels were in-
ferred by majority. Inter-annotator agreement via
Fleiss’ κ showed strong (0.79) and modest (0.43)
agreement at Level-1 and Level-2, respectively.

Table 1’s rightmost columns illustrate the distri-
bution of the annotated tweets on each category.
From our Level-1 classification, Opinion, Update
and Interaction, make up the bulk of the tweets in
the annotated sample set. The remaining categories
of Facts, Deals and Others make up only 8.1% in
total. We thus focus only on the three major groups.

2.3 Labeled LDA Classification

Given the labeled data, we first observed that tweets
in different classes have different content and lan-
guage usage patterns. For example, tweets belong-
ing to Opinion display more of an argumentative
nature, exhibiting a higher use of second person
pronouns (e.g., “you”, “your”), modal verbs (e.g.,
“can”, “could”, “will”, “must”), and particular ad-
verbs (e.g., “almost”, “nearly”) than the other two
groups. These observations lead us to employ the
classifier that make use of words’ co-occurrence fea-
ture to categorize tweets.

Hence, we adopt Labeled LDA, which extends
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003)
by incorporating supervision at the document level

(here, tweet-level), enabling explicit models of text
content associated with linguistic features. In adopt-
ing this methodology, we follow (Ramage et al.,
2009) previous work on tweet classification. Fea-
tures are encoded as special tokens to not overlap
the tokens from the tweet content.

Tweets arguing in one style tend to share similar
linguistic features. For example in Table 1, Update
talks about ongoing events using present tense; and
Opinion uses conjunctions to compose and connect
ideas. To discover how people talk differently across
genres of tweets, we extract five sets of linguistic
features from each tweet, namely Tense4, Discourse
Relations5, Hashtags, Named Entities6, and Interac-
tion Lexical Patterns7.

We use default parameter settings for Labeled
LDA. All the combinations of features were tested to
find the best performing feature set. Table 2 quanti-
fies the contribution of each feature and demonstrate
the result from the best combination, as measured by
Weighted Average F-Measure (WAFM). Compared
to the performance of using baseline feature set us-
ing tweet content alone, the use of linguistic features
improve the performance accordingly, with the ex-
ception of the use of named entities which reduced
performance slightly, and hence was removed from
the final classifier’s feature set.

4Using the OpenNLP toolkit.
5Using (Lin et al., 2010)’s parser.
6Using the UW Twitter NLP tools (Ritter et al., 2011).
7Defined as Boolean matches to the following regular

expressions: “RT @[username]...”, “...via @[username]...”,
“Retweeting @[username]...”,“Follow me if...”, “retweet
@[username]...”, “...RT if...” and “Retweet if...”

48



Scheme C CI CT CD CH CE CITDH
Level-1 .625 .642 .635 .637 .629 .611 .670
Level-2 .413 .422 .427 .432 .415 .409 .451

Table 2: Weighted average F-measure results for
the labeled LDA classification. Legend: C: tweet
context; I: Interaction; T: Tense; D: Discourse Rela-
tions; H: Hashtags; E: Named Entities.

Require: Training set L; Test collection C; Evaluation set E;
Iteration count I
function incrementalTraining(L,C,E,)

M ← labeledLDATraining(L)
e← evaluate(M ,E)
for ci�C and i < I do

ri ← predictLabel(ci,M )
rselected ←pickItemsWithHighConfidence(ri);
L′ ← add(rselected) into L
M ′ ← retrainLDAModel(L′)
e′ ← evaluate(M ′,E)
if e′ is better than e then M ← m′; e← e′;
else return M
i← i+ 1
keepLog(e′)

return M

Figure 1: Pseudocode for incremental training.

2.4 Automated Classification

Starting with the best performing model trained on
the Level-1 schema (the CITDH feature set), we au-
tomatically classified the remaining tweets, using
the incremental training algorithm described in Fig-
ure 1. The 860 annotated tweets were randomly split
into a training set L and evaluation set E with a
5:1 ratio. The 9M unannotated tweets form the test
collection C. ci is assigned by randomly selecting
1000 tweets from C. I is computed as the size of
C divided by the size of ci. Note that retraining
becomes more expensive as the dataset L′ grows.
Thus, we greedily generate a locally-optimal model,
which completes after 6 iterations.

From the result of automatically labeled dataset,
we see that the Opinion dominates the collection
in count (44.6%), followed by Interaction (28.4%)
and Update (20.5%). This result partially agrees
with the manual classification results in Naaman et
al. (2010), but differs in their Information Sharing
category, which is broken down here as Facts, Deals
and Others. We believe the discrepancies are due to
the differences between the two datasets used. Their
retweets were sampled from selected users who are

active participants, and did not include tweets from
organizations, marketers and dealers; in our case, the
tweets are generally sampled without constraints.

3 Analysis of Linguistic Features

We now dissect retweets using the 1.5M RT-data de-
fined in Section 2.2. We do this from a linguistic
perspective, based on observations on the values and
correlations among the features used for the auto-
matic classification.

3.1 Emoticons and Sentiment
Emoticons such as smilies – :) – and frownies –
:( – and their typographical variants, are prevalent
in tweets. Looking at the distribution of emoticons,
we find that 2.88% of retweets contain smilies and
0.26% contain frownies. In other words, smileys are
used more often than frownies.

To give an overall picture of how sentiment is
distributed among retweets, we employed the Twit-
ter Sentiment Web API service (Go et al., 2009) to
obtain polarity. Figure 2 shows that while neutral
tweets dominate in all three classes, there are more
negative tweets in the Interaction than in the other
two. Such negative interactive comments usually
find their use in sharing negative experiences in a
dialogue or with their followers. “Yeah I hate talk-
ing IN my phone. RT @Jadon Don’t you guys hate
talking in the phone” is a representative example.

Figure 2: Sentiment distribution of retweets.

Previous works have leveraged emoticons to au-
tomatically build corpora for the sentiment detection
task, through labeling tweets with smilies (frownies)
as true positive (negative) instances (Read, 2005;
Alexander and Patrick, 2010; Cui et al., 2011), and
training statistical classification models on the re-
sult. We wish to verify the veracity of this hy-
pothesis. Do emoticons actually reflect sentiment in

49



Table 3: Manual sentiment annotation results and
confusion matrix. Bolded numbers highlight the er-
ror caused by neutral posts.

Positive Neutral Negative
Retweets with smilies 55 (27.5%) 140 (70%) 5 (2.5%)
Retweets with frownies 9 (4.5%) 118 (59%) 73(36.5%)
Predicted Positive 43 30 0
Predicted Neutral 11 206 12
Predicted Negative 7 29 62

retweets? To answer the question, we randomly sub-
selected 200 retweets with smilies and another 200
with frownies from RT-data, and then manually la-
beled their sentiment class after removing the emoti-
cons. Table 3’s top half shows the result.

While our experiment is only indicative, neutral
posts are still clearly the majority, as indicated by
bold numbers. Simply labeling the sentiment based
on emoticons may mistake neutral posts for emo-
tional ones, thus introducing noise into training data.
“Fishers people have no idea how lawrence kids are,
guess they do now :)” is such an example.

To demonstrate this effect, we evaluated Go et
al. (2009)’s API on our annotated corpus. We
present the confusion matrix in bottom half of Ta-
ble 3. A common error is in mistaking neutral tweets
as positive or negative ones, as indicated by the bold
numbers. Given that the detector is trained on the
corpus, in which neutral tweets with smiles (frown-
ies) are labeled as positive (negative) ones, the detec-
tor may prefer to label neutral tweets as sentiment-
bearing. This observation leads us to believe that
more careful use of emoticons could improve senti-
ment prediction for tweets and microblog posts.

3.2 Verb Tense

We analyze the tense of the verbs in retweets, us-
ing a simplified inventory of tenses. We assign two
tenses to verbs: past and present. Tense is assigned
per-sentence; tweets that consist of multiple sen-
tences may be assigned multiple tenses. Based on
our statistics, one notable finding is that Update has
a higher proportion of past tense use (33.70%) than
Opinion (14.9%) and Interaction (24.2%). This val-
idates that updates often report past events and verb
tense is a more crucial feature for Updates.

Building on the previous section, we ask our-
selves whether sentiment is correlated with verb

Figure 3: Tenses (l) and specific times (r) and their
sentiment.

tense use. Interestingly, the results are not uniform.
Figure 3 shows our analysis of positive and negative
(omitting neutral) sentiments as they co-occur with
verb tense in our corpus. It shows that people tend
to view the past negatively (e.g., “I dont regret my
past, I just regret the times I spent with the wrong
people”), whereas emotions towards current event
do not have any obvious tendency. A case in point is
in the use of “today” and “yesterday” as time mark-
ers related to present and past use. Figure 3 shows
the number of tweets exhibiting these two words and
their sentiment. The results are quite marked: tweets
may be used to complain about past events, but look
optimistically about things happening now.

3.3 Named Entities

To study the diversity of named entities (NEs) in
retweets, we used UW Twitter NLP Tools (Ritter et
al., 2011) to extract NEs from RT-data. 15.9% of
retweets contain at least one NE, indicating that NEs
do play a large role in retweets.

So what types of NEs do people mention in their
tweets? From each of our primary Level-1 classes,
we selected the top 100 correctly recognized NEs,
in descending order of frequency. We then standard-
ized variants (i.e. “fb” as a variant of “Facebook”),
and manually categorized them against the 10-class
schema defined by Ritter et al. (2011).

Table 4: The distribution of top 100 named entities8.

Class Opinion Update Interaction
PERSON 41.2% 44.7% 38.8%
GEO-LOC 7.8% 28.9% 25.4%
COMPANY 15.7% 6.6% 10.4%
PRODUCT 5.9% 5.3% 6.0%
SPORTS-TEAM 2.0% 5.3% 1.5%
MOVIE 7.8% 5.3% 7.5%
TV-SHOW 3.9% 0.0% 3.0%
OTHER 15.7% 3.9% 7.5%

50



Table 4 displays the distribution of the different
classes of NEs, by frequency. People’s names rep-
resent the largest portion in each class, of which
the majority are celebrities. Geographical locations
– either countries or cities – make up the second
largest class for Update and Interaction, account-
ing for 28.9% and 25.4%, respectively, whereas they
take only 7.8% of Opinion. A possible reason is that
people prefer to broadcast about events (with loca-
tions mentioned) or discuss them through Update
and Interaction classes, respectively. “California,
I’m coming home.” is a typical example.

3.4 Hashtags

Previous work (Cunha et al., 2011) showed that pop-
ular hashtags do share common characteristics, such
as being short and simple. We want to push more in
our analysis of this phenomenon. We organize our
hashtag analysis around three questions: (a) Do peo-
ple have any positional preference for embedding
hashtags? (b) Are there any patterns to how peo-
ple form hashtags? and (c) Is there any relationship
between such patterns and their placement?

To answer these questions, as shown in Table 5,
we extracted the hashtags from RT-data and catego-
rized them by the position of their appearance (at
the beginning, middle, or end) of tweet. 69.1% of
hashtags occur at the end, 27.0% are embedded in
the middle, and 8.9% occur at the beginning. In Fig-
ure 4, we plot the frequency and length (in charac-
ters) of the hashtags with respect to their position,
which shows that the three placement choices lead
to different distributions. Beginning hashtags (here-
after, beginners) tend to peak around a length of 11,
while middlers peaked at around 7. Enders feature
a bimodal distribution, favoring short (3) or longer
(11+) lengths. We found these length distributions
are artifacts of how people generate and (function-
ally) use the hashtags.

Beginners are usually created by concatenating
the preceding words of a tweet, therefore, the com-
mon patterns are subject+verb (e.g.,“#IConfess”),
subject+verb+object (e.g., “#ucanthaveme”), and
similar variants. Middlers, often acting as a syn-
tactic constituent in a sentence, are usually used

8The other two classes, facility and band, are not found in
the top 100 NEs.

Table 5: Hashtags and example tweets.

Position Tweets
Beginning #ihateitwhen random people poke you on facebook
Middle I just saw the #Dodgers listed on Craig’s List.

End Success is nothing without someone you love to shareit with. #TLT
Goodmorning Tweethearts....wishing u all blessed
and productive day! #ToyaTuesday

Figure 4: Length distribution of sampled hashtags.

to highlight tweet keywords, which are single-word
nouns (e.g.,“#Scorpio” and “#Dodgers”). Enders
provide additional information for the tweets. A
popular ender pattern is Twitter slang that have been
used enough to merit their own Twitter acronym,
such as “#TFB” (Team Follow Back), and “#TLT”
(Thrifty Living Tips). Another popular form is
concatenating multiple words, indicating the time
(“#ToyaTuesday”), the category (“#Tweetyquote”) or
the location (“#MeAtSchool”). Knowing such hash-
tag usage can aid downstream applications such as
hashtag suggestion and tweet search.

3.5 Discourse Relations

In full text, textual units such as sentences and
clauses work together to transmit information and
give the discourse its argumentive structure. How
important is discourse in the microblog genre, given
its length limitation? To attempt an answer to this
question, we utilized the end-to-end discourse parser
proposed by Lin et al. (2010) to extract PDTB-styled
discourse relations (Prasad et al., 2008) from RT-
data. Figure 5 shows the proportion of the five most
frequent relations. 68.0% of retweets had at least
one discourse relation – per class, this was 55.2%
of Opinion, 44.7% of Interaction, and 21.6% of Up-
date. Within Opinions, we find that negative opin-
ions are often expressed using a Synchrony relation
(i.e., negative tweet: “I hate when I get an itch at a

51



Figure 5: The distribution of five selected discourse
relations.

place where my hand can’t reach.” ), while positive
and neutral opinions prefer Condition relations (i.e.,
positive tweet: “If I have a girlfriend :) I will tell her
beautiful everyday.” ).

3.6 Sentence Similarity

“On Twitter people follow those they wish they knew. On
Facebook people follow those they used to know.”

We round out our analysis by examining the sen-
tence structure of retweets. Sometimes it is not
what you say but on how you say it. This adage
is especially relevant to the Opinion class, where
we observed that the craftiness of a saying influ-
ences its “retweetability”. This can be reflected in
tweets having parallel syntactic structure, which can
be captured by sentence similarity within a tweet,
as illustrated in the quote/tweet above. We em-
ploy the Syntactic Tree Matching model proposed
by Wang et al. (2009) on tweets to compute this
value. This method computes tree similarity using
a weighted version of tree kernels over the syntactic
parse trees of input sentences. When we set the sim-
ilarity threshold to 0.2 (determined by observation),
723 retweets are extracted from the Opinion class of
which over 500 (70%) are among the top 5% most
retweeted posts (by count). Examining this set re-
veals that they are more polarized (22.6% positive,
23.2% negative) than the average Opinion (14.7%
and 16.9%, respectively).

4 Predicting Retweets

Given the diversity in function which we have illus-
trated in our linguistic analyses in the previous sec-
tions, we argue that whether a tweet is shared with
others is best understood by modeling each func-

tion (Level-1) class independently. We validate this
claim here, by showing how independently build-
ing classification models for the Opinion, Update
and Interaction classes outperforms an agglomer-
ated retweet predictor.

Previous research have found that features rep-
resenting the author’s profile (e.g., number of fol-
lowers), tweet metadata (time interval between
initial posting and current checkpoint, previously
retweeted) and Twitter-specific features (URL pres-
ence) weight heavily in predicting retweets (Suh et
al., 2010; Peng et al., 2011; Hong et al., 2011). In
contrast, our study is strictly about the content and
thus asks the question whether retweeting can be
predicted from the content alone.

Before we do so, we call attention to a caveat
about retweet prediction that we feel is important
and unaccounted for in previous work: the actual
probability of retweet is heavily dependent on how
many people view the tweet. Twitter tracks the fol-
lower count of the tweet’s author, which we feel is
the best approximation of this. Thus we do not per-
form retweet count prediction, but instead cast our
task as:

Given the content of a tweet, perform a multi-class
classification that predicts its range of retweet per fol-
lower (RTpF) ratio.

4.1 Experiment and Results
We first examine RTpF distribution over the 9M
tweets in the dataset. Figure 6 plots RTpF rank
against retweet count on both normal and log-log
scales. While the normal scale seems to show a
typical exponential curve, the log-log scale reveals
a clear inflection point that corresponds to an RTpF
of 0.1. We use this inflection point to break the pre-
dicted RTpF values into three ordinal classes: no
retweets (“N”, RTpF = 0), low (“L”, RTpF < 0.1),
and high (“H”, RTpF ≥ 0.1).

We use 10-fold cross validation logistic regres-
sion in Weka3 (Hall et al., 2009) to learn predic-
tion models. The regression models use both binary
presence-of feature classes (quotation; past, present
tense; 16 types of discourse relations; 10 NE types;
3 hashtag positions) as well as normalized numeric
features (tweet length, hashtag count, sentence sim-
ilarity, 3 sentiment polarity strengths). Note that the
models reported here do not factor the content (lexi-

52



(a) Normal scale (b) Logarithmic scale

Figure 6: Retweet per follower (RTpF) ratio rank
versus retweet count. The highlighted point shows
the boundary between classes H and L.

Class F̄1 Salient Features Feature Weight

Opinion 0.57
Sentence Similarity 10.34
Conjunction -21.09
Quotation -19.2

Update 0.54
Sentence Similarity -2.81
Past -5.2
Present 1.3

Interaction 0.53 Sentence Similarity -55.33Hashtag Count 5.34
All w/ L-1 class 0.52 Sentence Similarity 9.8
All w/o L-1 class 0.42 Hashtag Count 22.03

Table 6: Logistic regression results. Salient features
also shown with their respective weight, where a +ve
value denotes a +ve contribution to retweet volume.

cal items) directly, but represent content through the
lens of the feature classes given.

We build individual regression models for the
three major Level-1 classes, and aggregate models
that predict RTpF for all three classes. The two ag-
gregate models differ in that one is informed of the
Level-1 class of the tweets, while the other is not.
We report average F-measure in Table 6 over the
three RTpF classes (“N”, “L” and “H”). Adding the
Level-1 classification improves the RTpF prediction
result by 10% in terms of average F1. This results
validate our hypothesis – we see that building sepa-
rate logistic models for each class improves classifi-
cation results uniformly for all three classes.

4.2 Remarks

We make a few conjectures based on our observa-
tions, in concluding our work:

1. Getting your Opinion retweeted is easier when
your readership feels a sense of originality, pithiness
and wittiness in your post. “If you obey all the rules,
you miss all the fun - Katharine Hepburn” exempli-
fies these factors at conflict: while being witty in

exhibiting parallel syntactic structure (high sentence
similarity), it has a low RTpF. Perhaps followers are
unsurprised when they find such beautiful words are
not originally the poster’s. Tweets having complex
conjoined components and multiple clauses also ex-
hibit a negative RTpF tendency – find a short and
simple way of getting your message across.

2. Update tweets show the least bias towards any
particular feature, exhibiting little weight towards
any one convention. Update tweets prefer simple
tenses, eschewing perfect and progressive variants.
Perhaps followers are more curious about what you
are doing now but not what you have done.

3. Sentence similarity negatively affects retweet-
ing among Interaction tweets. This implies that peo-
ple prefer direct sounds to well-designed proverbs in
the daily interaction, which is mostly in the form of
question answering or voting.

4. Globally, the presence and count of hashtags is
correlated with retweeting, but this effect is greatly
lessened when Level-1 class features are used. This
further validates the importance of our functional
classification of tweets.

5 Conclusion

People tweet for different reasons. Understanding
the function of the tweet is interesting in its own
right, but also useful in predicting whether it will be
shared with others. We construct a two-level classi-
fication informed by prior work and have annotated
a corpus of 860 tweets.

Employing Labeled LDA, we propagated our an-
notations to a large 9M tweet corpus and inves-
tigated the linguistic characteristics of the 1.5M
retweets. We created a model to predict the level
of retweeting per follower given a tweet’s content.

Finally, to further encourage investigation on
these topics, we have made the annotated corpus and
the two tools described in this paper – the functional
classifier and the retweet predictor – available to the
public to test and benchmark against9.

In future work, we plan to combine the content
analysis from this study with known social, time and
linked URL features to see whether content features
can improve a holistic model of retweeting.

9http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/tweets/

53



References
Pak Alexander and Paroubek Patrick. 2010. Twitter as a

corpus for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In
Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10).
European Language Resources Association (ELRA).

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, Michael I. Jordan, and
John Lafferty. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 3:2003.

Jilin Chen, Rowan Nairn, Les Nelson, Michael Bernstein,
and Ed H. Chi. 2010. Short and tweet: Experiments
on recommending content from information streams.
In CHI 2010.

Anqi Cui, Min Zhang, Yiqun Liu, and Shaoping Ma.
2011. Emotion tokens: Bridging the gap among mul-
tilingual twitter sentiment analysis. In AIRS, volume
7097 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
238–249. Springer.

Evandro Cunha, Gabriel Magno, Giovanni Comarela,
Virgilio Almeida, Marcos André Gonçalves, and
Fabricio Benevenuto. 2011. Analyzing the dynamic
evolution of hashtags on twitter: a language-based ap-
proach. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Language
in Social Media (LSM 2011), pages 58–65, Portland,
Oregon, June. ACL.

Alec Go, Richa Bhayani, and Lei Huang. 2009. Twitter
sentiment classication using distant supervision. Tech-
nical report, Stanford University.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: an update.
SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., 11(1):10–18, November.

Liangjie Hong, Ovidiu Dan, and Brian D. Davison. 2011.
Predicting popular messages in twitter. In Proceed-
ings of the 20th international conference companion
on World wide web, WWW ’11, pages 57–58, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Akshay Java, Xiaodan Song, Tim Finin, and Belle Tseng.
2009. Why we twitter: An analysis of a microblog-
ging community. In Proceedings of WebKDD/SNA-
KDD 2007, volume 5439 of LNCS, pages 118–138.

Ryan Kelly. 2009. Twitter study august 2009:
Twitter study reveals interesting results about us-
age. http://www.pearanalytics.com/
blog/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/
Twitter-Study-August-2009.pdf, August.

Ziheng Lin, Hwee Tou Ng, and Min-Yen Kan. 2010.
A pdtb-styled end-to-end discourse parser. Technical
report, School of Computing, National University of
Singapore.

Mor Naaman, Jeffrey Boase, and Chih-Hui Lai. 2010.
Is it really about me?: message content in social
awareness streams. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM

conference on Computer supported cooperative work,
CSCW ’10, pages 189–192, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Huan-Kai Peng, Jiang Zhu, Dongzhen Piao, Rong Yan,
and Ying Zhang. 2011. Retweet modeling using con-
ditional random fields. In ICDM 2011 Workshop on
Data Mining Technologies for Computational Collec-
tive Intelligence.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The penn discourse treebank 2.0. In
Proceedings of LREC.

Daniel Ramage, David Hall, Ramesh Nallapati, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2009. Labeled lda: a super-
vised topic model for credit attribution in multi-labeled
corpora. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
EMNLP ’09, pages 248–256, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
ACL.

Daniel Ramage, Susan Dumais, and Dan Liebling. 2010.
Characterizing microblogs with topic models. Inter-
national AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Me-
dia, 5(4):130–137.

Jonathon Read. 2005. Using emoticons to reduce de-
pendency in machine learning techniques for senti-
ment classification. In Proceedings of the ACL Stu-
dent Research Workshop, ACLstudent ’05, pages 43–
48, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. ACL.

Raquel Recuero, Ricardo Araujo, and Gabriela Zago.
2011. How does social capital affect retweets? In
Lada A. Adamic, Ricardo A. Baeza-Yates, and Scott
Counts, editors, ICWSM. The AAAI Press.

Alan Ritter, Sam Clark, Mausam, and Oren Etzioni.
2011. Named entity recognition in tweets: An ex-
perimental study. In Proceedings of the 2011 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 1524–1534, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bharath Sriram, Dave Fuhry, Engin Demir, Hakan Fer-
hatosmanoglu, and Murat Demirbas. 2010. Short text
classification in twitter to improve information filter-
ing. In Proceedings of the 33rd international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in in-
formation retrieval, SIGIR ’10, pages 841–842, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Bongwon Suh, Lichan Hong, Peter Pirolli, and Ed H.
Chi. 2010. Want to be retweeted? large scale ana-
lytics on factors impacting retweet in twitter network.
In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE Second International
Conference on Social Computing, SOCIALCOM ’10,
pages 177–184, Washington, DC, USA. IEEE Com-
puter Society.

54



Kurt Thomas, Chris Grier, Justin Ma, Vern Paxson, and
Dawn Song. 2011. Design and evaluation of a real-
time url spam filtering service. In Proceedings of
the 2011 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy,
SP ’11, pages 447–462, Washington, DC, USA. IEEE
Computer Society.

Kai Wang, Zhaoyan Ming, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2009.
A syntactic tree matching approach to finding similar
questions in community-based qa services. In Pro-
ceedings of the 32nd international ACM SIGIR con-
ference on Research and development in information
retrieval, SIGIR ’09, pages 187–194, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Shaomei Wu, Jake M. Hofman, Winter A. Mason, and
Duncan J. Watts. 2011. Who says what to whom on
twitter. In Proceedings of the World Wide Web Confer-
ence.

Arkaitz Zubiaga, Damiano Spina, Vı́ctor Fresno, and
Raquel Martı́nez. 2011. Classifying trending topics:
a typology of conversation triggers on twitter. In Pro-
ceedings of the 20th ACM international conference on
Information and knowledge management, CIKM ’11,
pages 2461–2464, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

55


