










































Using Link Analysis to Discover Interesting Messages Spread Across Twitter


Proceedings of the TextGraphs-7 Workshop at ACL, pages 15–19,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using Link Analysis to Discover Interesting Messages Spread Across Twitter

Min-Chul Yang† and Jung-Tae Lee‡ and Hae-Chang Rim†
†Dept. of Computer & Radio Communications Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea

‡Research Institute of Computer Information & Communication, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
{mcyang,jtlee,rim}@nlp.korea.ac.kr

Abstract

Twitter, a popular social networking service,
enables its users to not only send messages
but re-broadcast or retweet a message from an-
other Twitter user to their own followers. Con-
sidering the number of times that a message is
retweeted across Twitter is a straightforward
way to estimate how interesting it is. How-
ever, a considerable number of messages in
Twitter with high retweet counts are actually
mundane posts by celebrities that are of inter-
est to themselves and possibly their followers.
In this paper, we leverage retweets as implicit
relationships between Twitter users and mes-
sages and address the problem of automati-
cally finding messages in Twitter that may be
of potential interest to a wide audience by us-
ing link analysis methods that look at more
than just the sheer number of retweets. Exper-
imental results on real world data demonstrate
that the proposed method can achieve better
performance than several baseline methods.

1 Introduction

Twitter (http://twitter.com) is a popular so-
cial networking and microblogging service that en-
ables its users to share their status updates, news,
observations, and findings in real-time by posting
text-based messages of up to 140 characters, called
tweets. The service rapidly gained worldwide pop-
ularity as a communication tool, with millions of
users generating millions of tweets per day. Al-
though many of those tweets contain valuable in-
formation that is of interest to many people, many
others are mundane tweets, such as “Thanks guys

for the birthday wishes!!” that are of interest only to
the authors and users who subscribed to their tweets,
known as followers. Finding tweets that are of po-
tential interest to a wide audience from large volume
of tweets being accumulated in real-time is a crucial
but challenging task. One straightforward way is to
rely on the numbers of times each tweet has been
propagated or retweeted by readers of the tweet.
Hong et al. (2011) propose to regard retweet count
as a measure of popularity and present classifiers for
predicting whether and how often new tweets will be
retweeted in the future. However, mundane tweets
by highly popular users, such as celebrities with
huge numbers of followers, can record high retweet
counts. Alonso et al. (2010) use crowdsourcing to
categorize a set of tweets as “only interesting to au-
thor and friends” and “possibly interesting to others”
and report that the presence of a URL link is a single,
highly effective feature for distinguishing interest-
ing tweets with more than 80% accuracy. This sim-
ple rule, however, may incorrectly recognize many
interesting tweets as not interesting, simply because
they do not contain links. Lauw et al. (2010) suggest
several features for identifying interesting tweets but
do not experimentally validate them.

In this study, we follow the definition of inter-
esting tweets provided by Alonso et al. (2010) and
focus on automatic methods for finding tweets that
may be of potential interest to not only the authors
and their followers but a wider audience. Since
retweets are intended to spread tweets to new audi-
ences, they are often a recommendation or, accord-
ing to Boyd et al. (2010), productive communica-
tion tool. Thus, we model Twitter as a graph con-

15



sisting of user and tweet nodes implicitly connected
by retweet links, each of which is formed when one
user retweets what another user tweeted. We present
a variant of the popular HITS algorithm (Kleinberg,
1999) that exploits the retweet link structure as an
indicator of how interesting an individual tweet is.
Specifically, we draw attention on the fact that not all
retweets are meaningful. Some users retweet a mes-
sage, not because of its content, but only because
they were asked to, or because they regard retweet-
ing as an act of friendship, loyalty, or homage to-
wards the person who originally tweeted (Boyd et
al., 2010). The algorithm proposed in this paper is
designed upon the premise that not all retweet links
are created equal, assuming that some retweets may
carry more importance or weight than others. Welch
et al. (2011) and Romero et al. (2011) similarly ex-
tend link analysis to Twitter, but address essentially
different problems. We conduct experiments on real
world tweet data and demonstrate that our method
achieves better performance than the simple retweet
count approach and a similar recent work on Twitter
messages (Castillo et al., 2011) that uses supervised
learning with a broad spectrum of features.

2 Proposed Method

We treat the problem of finding interesting tweets as
a ranking problem where the goal is to derive a scor-
ing function which gives higher scores to interesting
tweets than to uninteresting ones in a given set of
tweets. To derive the scoring function, we adopt a
variant of HITS, a popular link analysis method that
emphasizes mutual reinforcement between authority
and hub nodes (Kleinberg, 1999).

Formally, we model the Twitter structure as di-
rected graph G = (N,E) with nodes N and di-
rectional edges E. We consider both users U =
{u1, . . . , unu} and tweets T = {t1, . . . , tnt} as
nodes and the retweet relations between these nodes
as directional edges. For instance, if tweet ta, cre-
ated by user ua, retweets tb, written by user ub, we
create a retweet edge eta,tb from ta to tb and another
retweet edge eua,ub from ua to ub.

1 Strictly speak-
ing,G has two subgraphs, one based only on the user
nodes and another based on the tweet nodes. Instead
of running HITS on the tweet subgraph right away,

1Note that two user nodes can have multiple edges.

we first run it on the user subgraph and let tweets in-
herit the scores from their publishers. Our premise
is that the scores of a user is an important prior in-
formation to infer the scores of the tweets that the
user published.

User-level procedure: We first run the algorithm
on the user subgraph. ∀ui, we update the authority
scores A(ui) as:∑
∀j:euj,ui∈E

|{uk ∈ U : euj ,uk ∈ E}|
|{k : euj ,uk ∈ E}|

×H(uj) (1)

Then, ∀ui, we update the hub scores H(ui) to be:∑
∀j:eui,uj∈E

|{uk ∈ U : euk,uj ∈ E}|
|{k : euk,uj ∈ E}|

×A(uj) (2)

A series of iterations is performed until the scores
are converged. After each iteration, the author-
ity/hub scores are normalized by dividing each of
them by the square root of the sum of the squares
of all authority/hub values. When this user-level
stage ends, the algorithm outputs a function SUA :
U → [0, 1], which represents the user’s final au-
thority score, and another function SUH : U →
[0, 1], which outputs the user’s final hub score. Note
that, unlike the standard HITS, the authority/hub
scores are influenced by edge weights that reflect the
retweet behaviors of individual users. The idea here
is to dampen the influence of users who devote most
of their retweet activities toward a very few other
users, such as celebrities, and increase the weight
of users who retweet many different users’ tweets.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the parameter,
we have done some preliminary experiments. The
column Userfrom in Table 1 shows the retweet be-
havior of users who retweeted tweets belonging to
“uninteresting” and “interesting” classes observed
in our Twitter dataset. The values are calculated
by the ratio of all other users that a user retweeted
to all retweet outlinks from the user; a value closer
to 1 means that outlinks are pointed to many dif-
ferent users.2 We observe that the value for users
who retweeted interesting tweets is shown to be
higher, which means that they tend to retweet mes-
sages from many different users, more than users
who retweeted uninteresting ones.

2For calculating the ratios, we limit the target to users who
retweeted two or more times in our dataset.

16



Class Userfrom F = α #
Not Interesting 0.591 0.252 1985
Possibly Interesting 0.711 0.515 1115
Both 0.634 0.346 3100

Table 1: Dataset analysis.

Tweet-level procedure: After the user-level
stage, we start computing the scores of the tweet
nodes. In each iteration, we start out with each tweet
node initially inheriting the scores of its publisher.
Let P : T → U be a function that returns the pub-
lisher of a given tweet. ∀ti, we update A(ti) to be:

SUA(P (ti)) +
∑

∀j:etj ,ti∈E
F (etj ,ti)×H(tj) (3)

Then, ∀ti, we update H(ti) to be:

SUH (P (ti)) +
∑

∀j:eti,tj∈E
F (eti,tj )×A(tj) (4)

where F (eta,tb) is a parameter function that returns
α > 1 if P (ta) is not a follower of P (tb) and 1 other-
wise. It is intuitive that if users retweet other users’
tweets even if they are not friends, then it is more
likely that those tweets are interesting. The column
F = α in Table 1 shows the ratio of all unfollow-
ers who retweeted messages in a particular class to
all users who retweeted messages in that class, ob-
served in our dataset. We observe that users retweet
interesting messages more, even when they do not
follow the publishers. Similar observation has also
been made by Recuero et al. (2011). After each it-
eration, the authority/hub scores are normalized as
done in the user-level. After performing several it-
erations until convergence, the algorithm finally out-
puts a scoring function STA : T → [0, 1], which rep-
resents the tweet node’s final authority score. We use
this function to produce the final ranking of tweets.

Text pattern rules: We observe that in some
cases users retweet messages from their friends, not
because of the contents, but via retweet requests to
simply evoke attention. To prevent useless tweets
containing such requests from receiving high author-
ity scores, we collect 20 simple text pattern match-
ing rules that frequently appear in those tweets.
Specifically, we let the rules make influence while

updating the scores of tweets by modifying the sum-
mations in Eq. (3) and (4) respectively as:∑

∀j:etj ,ti∈E
F (etj ,ti)×R(ti)×H(tj) (5)

∑
∀j:eti,tj∈E

F (eti,tj )×R(tj)×A(tj) (6)

where R(t) is a rule-based function that returns 0 if
tweet t contains one of the pre-defined text patterns
and 1 otherwise. Such patterns include “RT this if”
and “If this tweet gets RT * times I will”.

3 Experiment and Discussion

Our Twitter dataset is collected during 31 days of
October 2011, containing 64,107,169 tweets and
2,824,365 users. For evaluation, we generated 31
immediate Twitter graphs composed of 1.5 million
retweet links in average and 31 initially ranked lists
of tweets, each consisting of top 100 tweets created
on a specific date of the month with highest retweet
counts accumulated during the next 7 days. Two an-
notators were instructed to categorize each tweet as
interesting or not, by inspecting its content as done
in the work of Alonso et al. (2010). In case of dis-
agreement (about 15% of all cases), a final judgment
was made by consensus between the two annotators.
We observe that the ratio of tweets judged to be in-
teresting is about 36%; the column ‘#’ in Table 1
shows the actual counts of each class. The goal of
this evaluation is to demonstrate that our method is
able to produce better ranked lists of tweets by re-
ranking interesting tweets highly.

Table 2 reports the ranking performance of vari-
ous methods in terms of Precisions @10 and @20,
R-Precision, and MAP. We compare our approach
to four baselines. The first baseline, #RT, is obvi-
ously based on retweet counts; tweets with higher
retweet counts are ranked higher. The second base-
line, #URL+#RT, favors tweets that contain URL
links (Alonso et al., 2010). Since it is less likely for
a tweet to contain more than one link, we addition-
ally use #RT to break ties in tweet ranking. Thirdly,
HITSoriginal, is the standard HITS algorithm run on
both user and tweet subgraphs that calculates author-
ity/hub scores of a node purely by the sum of hub
values that point to it and the sum of authority val-
ues that it points to, respectively, during iterations;

17



Method P@10 P@20 R-Prec MAP
#RT 0.294 0.313 0.311 0.355
#URL+#RT 0.245 0.334 0.362 0.361
HITSoriginal 0.203 0.387 0.478 0.465
MLmessage 0.671 0.645 0.610 0.642
MLall 0.819 0.795 0.698 0.763
HITSproposed 0.881 0.829 0.744 0.807

Table 2: Performance of individual methods

no other influential factors are considered in the cal-
culations. Lastly, we choose one recent work by
Castillo et al. (2011) that addresses a related prob-
lem to ours, which aims at learning to classify tweets
as credible or not credible. Although interestingness
and credibility are two distinct concepts, the work
presents a wide range of features that may be ap-
plied for assessing interestingness of tweets using
machine learning. For re-implementation, we train
a binary SVM classifier using features proposed by
Castillo et al. (2011), which include features from
users’ tweet and retweet behavior, the text of the
tweets, and citations to external sources; we use
the probability estimates of the learned classifier for
re-ranking.3 We use leave-one-out cross validation
in order to evaluate this last approach, denoted as
MLall. MLmessage is a variant that relies only on
message-based features of tweets. Our method, with
α empirically set to 7, is denoted as HITSproposed.

We observe that #RT alone is not sufficient mea-
sure for discovering interesting tweets. Additionally
leveraging #URL helps, but the improvements are
only marginal. By manually inspecting tweets with
both high retweet counts and links, it is revealed
that many of them were tweets from celebrities with
links to their self-portraits photographed in their
daily lives, which may be of interest to their own
followers only. HITSoriginal performs better than
both #RT and #URL across most evaluation met-
rics but generally does not demonstrate good per-
formance. MLmessage always outperform the first
three significantly; we observe that tweet lengths
in characters and in words are the two most effec-
tive message-based features for finding interesting
tweets. The results of MLall demonstrates that more

3We do not use some topic-based features in (Castillo et al.,
2011) since such information is not available in our case.

Method P@10 P@20 R-Prec MAP
HITSproposed 0.881 0.829 0.744 0.807
w/o User 0.677 0.677 0.559 0.591
w/o Tweet 0.861 0.779 0.702 0.772
w/o Rule 0.858 0.81 0.733 0.781

Table 3: Contributions of individual stages.

reasonable performance can be achieved when user-
and propagation-based features are combined with
message-based features. The proposed method sig-
nificantly outperforms all the baselines. This is a
significant result in that our method is an unsuper-
vised approach that relies on a few number of tweet
features and does not require complex training.

We lastly report the contribution of individual
procedures in our algorithm in Table 3 by ablat-
ing each of the stages at a time. “w/o User” is
when tweet nodes do not initially inherit the scores
of their publishers. “w/o Tweet” is when tweets
are re-ranked according to the authority scores of
their publishers. “w/o Rule” is when we use Eq.
(3) and (4) instead of Eq. (5) and (6) for updating
tweet scores. We observe that the user-level proce-
dure plays the most crucial role. We believe this is
because of the ability of HITS to distinguish good
“hub-users”. Since authoritative users can post ordi-
nary status updates occasionally in Twitter, we can-
not always expect them to create interesting content
every time they tweet. However, good hub-users4

tend to continuously spot and retweet interesting
messages; thus, we can expect the tweets they share
to be interesting steadily. The role of hubs is not as
revealed on the tweet side of the Twitter graph, since
each tweet node can only have at most one retweet
outlink. The exclusion of text pattern rules does not
harm the overall performance much. We suspect this
is because of the small number of rules and expect
more improvement if we add more effective rules.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Ministry of Knowl-
edge Economy of Korea, under the title “Develop-
ment of social web issue detection-monitoring &
prediction technology for big data analytic listening
platform of web intelligence (10039158)”.

4Often referred to as content curators (Bhargava, 2009).

18



References
Omar Alonso, Chad Carson, David Gerster, Xiang Ji, and

Shubha U. Nabar. 2010. Detecting uninteresting con-
tent in text streams. In Proceedings of the SIGIR 2010
Workshop on Crowdsourcing for Search Evaluation,
CSE ’10, pages 39–42.

Rohit Bhargava. 2009. Manifesto for the content curator:
The next big social media job of the future? http:
//rohitbhargava.typepad.com/.

Danah Boyd, Scott Golder, and Gilad Lotan. 2010.
Tweet, tweet, retweet: Conversational aspects of
retweeting on twitter. In Proceedings of the 2010 43rd
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
HICSS ’10, pages 1–10.

Carlos Castillo, Marcelo Mendoza, and Barbara Poblete.
2011. Information credibility on twitter. In Proceed-
ings of the 20th international conference on World
wide web, WWW ’11, pages 675–684.

Liangjie Hong, Ovidiu Dan, and Brian D. Davison. 2011.
Predicting popular messages in twitter. In Proceed-
ings of the 20th international conference companion
on World wide web, WWW ’11, pages 57–58.

Jon M. Kleinberg. 1999. Authoritative sources in a hy-
perlinked environment. J. ACM, 46(5):604–632.

Hady W. Lauw, Alexandros Ntoulas, and Krishnaram
Kenthapadi. 2010. Estimating the quality of postings
in the real-time web. In Proceedings of the WSDM
2010 Workshop on Search in Social Media, SSM ’10.

Raquel Recuero, Ricardo Araujo, and Gabriela Zago.
2011. How does social capital affect retweets? In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th International AAAI Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media, ICWSM ’11, pages 305–
312.

Daniel M. Romero, Wojciech Galuba, Sitaram Asur, and
Bernardo A. Huberman. 2011. Influence and passiv-
ity in social media. In Proceedings of the 2011 Euro-
pean Conference on Machine Learning and Principles
and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases,
ECML-PKDD ’11, pages 18–33.

Michael J. Welch, Uri Schonfeld, Dan He, and Junghoo
Cho. 2011. Topical semantics of twitter links. In Pro-
ceedings of the 4th International Conference on Web
Search and Web Data Mining, WSDM ’11, pages 327–
336.

19


