










































Towards Adaptation of Linguistic Annotations to Scholarly Annotation Formalisms on the Semantic Web


Proceedings of the 6th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 75–84,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12-13 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards Adaptation of Linguistic Annotations to Scholarly Annotation 
Formalisms on the Semantic Web 

 
Karin Verspoor*† Kevin Livingston† 

*National ICT Australia †University of Colorado Denver 
Victoria Research Lab 12801 E 17th Ave, MS 8303 

Melbourne VIC 3010 Australia Aurora, CO 80045 USA 
karin.verspoor@nicta.com.au kevin.livingston@ucdenver.edu 

  
 

Abstract 

This paper explores how and why the 
Linguistic Annotation Framework might be 
adapted for compatibility with recent more 
general proposals for the representation of 
annotations in the Semantic Web, referred 
to here as the Open Annotation models. We 
argue that the adapted model, in addition to 
being interoperable with other annotations 
and annotation tools, also resolves some 
representational limitations and semantic 
ambiguity of the original data model. 

1 Introduction 

Formal annotation of language data is an activity 
that dates back at least to the classic work of 
Kucera and Francis on the Brown Corpus (Kucera 
1967). Many annotation representations have been 
developed; some proposals are specific to a given 
corpus, e.g., the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al. 
1993)) or type of annotation, e.g., CONLL 
dependency parse representation1), while others 
aim towards standardization and interoperability, 
most recently the Linguistic Annotation 
Framework 2  (LAF) (ISO 2008). All such 
proposals, however, are closely tied to the 
requirements of linguistic annotation. 

Annotation, however, is not an activity limited 
to language data but rather is a general scholarly 
activity used both by the humanist and the 
scientist. It is a method by which scholars organize 

                                                 
1 http://conll.cemantix.org/2012/data.html 
2 http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/papers/LAF.pdf 

existing knowledge and facilitate the creation and 
sharing of new knowledge. Museum artifacts are 
annotated with meta-data relating to artist or date 
of creation, or semantic descriptors for portions of 
the artifacts (e.g. an eye of a statue) (Hunter & Yu 
2011). Medieval manuscripts or ancient maps are 
annotated with details resulting from careful study 
(Sanderson et al. in press). Beyond scholarship, 
annotation is becoming increasingly pervasive in 
the context of social media, such as Flickr tags on 
images or FaceBook comments on news articles. 
Recognition of the widespread importance of 
annotation has resulted in recent efforts to develop 
standard data models for annotation (Ciccarese et 
al. 2011; Hunter et al. 2011), specifically targeting 
Web formalisms in order to take advantage of 
increasing efforts to expose information on the 
Web, such as through Linked Data initiatives3. 

In this paper, we will explore the adoption of the 
more general scholarly annotation proposals for 
linguistic annotation, and specifically look at LAF 
in relation to those proposals. We will show that 
with a few adaptations, LAF could move into use 
within the Semantic Web context, and, 
importantly, achieve compatibility with data 
models under development in the broader scholarly 
annotation community. 

This generalization of the model is particularly 
pertinent to collaborative annotation scenarios; 
exposing linguistic annotations in the de facto 
language of the Semantic Web, the W3C’s 
Resource Description Framework (RDF), provides 
several advantages that we will outline below. 

                                                 
3 http://linkeddata.org/ 

75



2 Characteristics of the Semantic Web 

There are two converging cultures within the 
Semantic Web community (Ankolekar et al. 2008) 
– one of providing structured data, and one of 
promoting community sharing of data. Sharing is 
supported by four principles of linked data (Bizer 
et al. 2009): 
1. Use URIs (Uniform Resource Identifiers) as 

names for things. 
2. Use HTTP URIs so that people can look up 

those names. 
3. When someone looks up a URI, provide useful 

information, using standards. 
4. Include links to other URIs, so that they can 

discover more things. 
These principles are built on top of the basic 

technology of the Web, HTTP and URIs, and 
represent best practices for making structured data 
available on the Web. They are the foundation for 
any Semantic Web model.  

RDF provides a generic graph-based data model 
for structuring and relating information, through 
simple assertions. The RDF model encodes data in 
the form of subject, predicate, object triples. The 
predicate specifies how the subject and object are 
related. The linked data principles mean that the 
subject and predicates of an RDF triple are 
typically dereferenceable URIs representing 
concepts or entities. 

3 The relevance of the Semantic Web for 
linguistic annotation 

There are several clear reasons to explore a 
linguistic annotation formalism that is compatible 
with general Semantic Web annotation efforts. 
Some are not unique to the Web, but there do exist 
some special opportunities in the Web context. 

3.1 Interoperability  
Interoperability refers to enabling different entities 
(agents, services) to exchange information. 
Interoperability is impeded by both the syntax and 
format of data representations, and also by the 
ability to accurately represent the semantics of one 
data source in another. 

Data can be exchanged in an ad hoc manner, for 
instance by having an individual system 
understand the syntax and semantics of the  
information produced by a given source and 

translating or mapping that information to an 
internal representation. However, this leads to 
significant duplication of effort, with each system 
having to manage data import and conversion from 
a given source independently. 

Data compatibility problems also exist when 
attempting to use multiple data sources 
simultaneously. If two independent sources refer to 
“annotation 1” do they mean the same annotation 
or different annotations? And if these annotations 
are different are the tools processing them equally 
aware of the distinction? 

The Semantic Web overcomes syntax and 
format issues through the use of RDF. While 
agreeing on semantics will continue to be 
challenging, the use of unique and resolvable URIs 
goes a long way toward formalizing meaning, or at 
least agreeing on references. Additionally as the 
use of more formal subsets of RDF, such as OWL, 
grows, more precise definitions of concepts will 
also become available. 

3.2 Information Sharing and Reuse 
Interoperability in turn enables reuse of 
information. The results of any annotation effort 
are generally intended to be shared. Agreement on 
a standard representation of annotations, with a 
consistent semantics, facilitates integration. 

With interoperability, tools can directly build on 
annotations made by others. For the natural 
language processing community, this has several 
potentially significant advantages. Individual 
research groups need not build an end-to-end 
processing pipeline, but can reuse existing 
annotations over a common resource. For domains 
where there are commonly used shared document 
sets, such as standard annotated corpora used for 
training or testing, or document repositories that 
are the primary target of a body of text-related 
work – e.g. the Medline repository of biomedical 
journal abstracts – annotations can be made 
available for incorporation into downstream 
processing, without the need for re-computation 
and to ensure consistency. Tokens, parts of speech, 
even syntactic structures and basic named entities, 
can all be computed once and made available as a 
starting point for subsequent processing. 

Where there is considerable investment in linked 
data, such as the biomedical domain, it also opens 
the possibility of taking advantage of external 
resources in language processing algorithms: if a 

76



document has been semantically annotated by a 
domain expert, or semantically connected to 
external information, those annotations can be used 
to enable more sophisticated analysis of that 
document. For instance, (Livingston et al. 2010) 
demonstrated that incorporating existing 
background knowledge about proteins when 
extracting biological activation events from 
biological texts allows some inherent ambiguities 
in recognizing those events to be resolved. 

3.3 Web-scale collaboration and analysis 
Targeting the semantic web provides new 

opportunities in terms of collecting, analyzing and 
summarizing data both within and across 
annotation sets on the web. The methods on the 
Semantic Web for creating and providing data are 
fundamentally “open-world” and allow for data to 
be added at any time.  

The Web is the natural place for collaborative 
annotation activities, which is by necessity a 
distributed activity. Whether a collaborative 
annotation project is undertaken by a focused 
community of interest or by crowd sourcing, using 
semantic models that can represent and document 
contradiction or multiple competing views allows 
data to be collected and aggregated from multiple 
sources. 

Collaboration is also about coordinating and 
cooperating with the consumers of annotation. The 
Semantic Web has defined ways in which data can 
be shared and distributed to others. This includes 
the preference for resolvable URIs, such that 
automated tools can seek out data and definitions 
as needed. Additionally data is being provided 
through access points, such as SPARQL end 
points. Vocabularies exist for documenting what is 
in a dataset, such as VoID (Alexander & 
Hausenblas 2009), and there is work underway to 
standardize data sharing within domains, for 
example health care and life science.4 

The availability of Linked Open Data also 
enables unforeseen novel use of the data. This is 
evident in the large number of popular “mash-ups” 
connecting existing tools and data in new ways to 
provide additional value. Tools even exist for end-
users to create mash-ups, such as Yahoo! Pipes5. 
                                                 
4 http://www.w3.org/blog/hcls/ 
5 http://pipes.yahoo.com/pipes/ 

3.4 Availability of tools 
Adoption of Semantic Web standards for 
annotation makes available mature and 
sophisticated technologies for annotation storage 
(e.g. triple-stores) and to query, retrieve, and 
reason over the annotations (e.g. SPARQL).  

Perhaps of particular interest to the 
computational linguistics community are tools 
under development to visualize and manipulate 
annotation information in the dynamic context of 
the web. For instance, the DOMEO tool (Ciccarese 
et al. in press) provides support for display of 
annotation over the text of biomedical journal 
publications in situ, by adopting strategies for 
managing dynamic HTML. The Utopia Documents 
tool (Attwood et al. 2010) is oriented towards 
annotation of PDF documents and provides 
visualization of annotations that dynamically link 
to web content. The Utopia tool has been recently 
updated to consume Annotation Ontology content6. 

Finally, enabling compatibility of linguistic 
annotation tools with Semantic Web standards 
opens up the possibility of making those tools 
useful to a much broader community of annotators. 

4 RDF data models for annotation 

Beyond fundamental Semantic Web compatibility, 
we believe that linguistic annotation formalisms 
can benefit from compatibility with the Web-based 
scholarly annotation models. We are aware of two 
such models, namely, the Annotation Ontology 
(Ciccarese et al. 2011) and the Open Annotation 
Collaboration (OAC) (Hunter et al. 2011) models. 
Each of these models incorporates elements from 
the earlier Annotea model (Kahan et al. 2002). 
These two groups have now joined together to 
bring their existing proposals together, through the 
Open Annotation W3C community group7. As a 
result, we will focus on their commonalities, and 
use the OAC model and terminology for the 
purposes of our discussion. We refer to the models 
collectively as the Open Annotation models. 

4.1 High-level model for scholarly annotation 
The basic high-level data model of the two primary 
Open Annotation models defines an Annotation as 
                                                 
6 http://www.scivee.tv/node/26720 
7 http://www.w3.org/community/openannotation/ 

77



an association created between two elements, a 
Body or content resource and (one or more) Target 
resources. The annotation provides some 
information about the target through the 
connection to the body. For instance, an annotation 
may relate the token “apple” in a text (the target of 
the annotation) to the concept of an apple, perhaps 
represented as WordNet (Fellbaum 1998a) synset 
“apple#1” (the body of the annotation). 

Figure 1 shows the base model defined in the 
OAC model. The model, following linked data 
principles, assumes that each element of an 
annotation is a web-addressable entity that can be 
referenced with a URI. 

Annotations can be augmented with meta-data, 
e.g. the author or creation time of the annotation. 
The model allows for each element of the 
annotation – the annotation itself, the target, and 
the body – to have different associated meta-data, 
such as different authors. Other features of the 
OAC model are that it can accommodate 
annotations over not only textual documents, but 
any media type including images or videos (for 
details, see the OAC model8). Text fragments are 
typically referred to using character positions. 

4.2 Graph Annotations 
The initial use cases for Open Annotation focused 
on single target-concept relationships, formalized 
as an expectation that the body of an Annotation be 
a single web resource. Recently, an extension that 
supports representation of collections of statements 
as the body of an annotation has been proposed 
(Livingston et al. 2011). In a revision of that 
extension (Livingston, personal communication), a 
GraphAnnotation is connected to a Body which is 
not a single web resource, but a set of RDF 
statements captured in a construct known as a 
named graph (Carroll et al. 2005). The named 
graph as a whole has a URI. 
                                                 
8 http://www.openannotation.org/spec/beta/ 

This extension enables complex semantics to be 
associated with a resource, as well as supporting 
fine-grained tracking of the provenance of 
compositional annotations. These developments 
make possible the integration of linguistic 
annotation with the scholarly annotation models.  

5  Adapting LAF to Open Annotation 

The Linguistic Annotation Framework, or LAF, 
(ISO 2008) defines an abstract data model for 
annotations which consists of nodes and edges. 
Both nodes and edges can be elaborated with 
arbitrary feature structures, consisting of feature-
value pairs. Nodes can link via edges to other 
nodes, or directly to regions in the primary data 
being annotated. An example of a LAF annotation 
is shown in Figure 2. 

While LAF has made significant progress 
towards unified, unambiguous annotation 
representations, adopting some representation 
decisions of the Open Annotation models will not 
only facilitate interoperability with those models, 
but also resolve some ambiguities and limitations 
inherent to the LAF model.  

5.1 High-level representation compatibility 
At a high level, the LAF model aligns well with 
the Open Annotation RDF models. Fundamentally, 
the LAF model is based on directed graphs, as is 
RDF. The abstract data model in LAF consists of a 
referential structure for associating annotations 
with primary data, and a feature structure for the 
annotation content. These are similar to the Open 
Annotation notions of target and body. 

Importantly, these models agree that the source 
material being annotated is separate from the 
annotations. In other words, stand-off annotation is 
assumed. In a web context, this is particularly 
significant as it is often not possible to directly 
manipulate the underlying resource. It also 
facilitates collaborations and distribution, as 

 
Figure 1: Base model for OAC8. 

 
Figure 2: A sample LAF annotation, 

based on (Ide & Suderman 2007) 

78



annotations can be individually distributed and sets 
of annotations from different sources can be 
collected and used simultaneously. 

5.2 Changes to LAF for Open Annotation 
In order to facilitate integration of LAF with the 
Open Annotation models currently under 
development, a few changes would be required. A 
key difference is the separation in the Open 
Annotation models of three distinct elements: a 
target, a body, and the annotation itself, relating 
the previous two. These distinctions allow relations 
between any two elements to be made explicit and 
unambiguous, and further allow more detailed 
provenance tracking (Livingston et al. 2011).  

5.2.1 Annotation content 
In the LAF model, feature structures can be added 
to any node in the annotation graph. It has been 
shown that feature structures can be losslessly 
represented in RDF (Denecke 2002; Krieger & 
Schäfer 2010). In the XML serialization of LAF, 
GrAF (Ide & Suderman 2007), feature structures 

are represented within an annotation. An example 
of a LAF annotation from that paper is in Figure 2.  

In an Open Annotation model, the LAF feature 
structure corresponds to the body of the annotation. 
Figures 3 and 4 show several possibilities for 
representing the information in Figure 2 in a model 
compatible with the Open Annotation proposals. 
The most literal transformation for the part of 
speech annotation msd:16, Figure 3:OAa, utilizes 
an explicit feature structure representation in the 
body, consistent with automated feature structure 
transformations (Denecke 2002; Krieger & Schäfer 
2010). Since RDF prefers URIs, concepts in the 
Open Annotation model are made explicit 
(pointing to an external definition for the Penn 
Treebank category of “NN”, ptb:NN), in contrast 
to the LAF string representation of the feature and 
value. A named feature value pair is not 
necessarily needed and the concept could be 
annotated to directly, as is shown in Figure 3:OAb. 
This example, although much simpler, does lose 
the ability to refer to the specific instance. An 
instance could therefore be reified so that it could 
be referred to later, as is shown in Figure 3:OAc. 

5.2.2 Named graphs 
A GraphAnnotation explicitly separates the 
annotation from its content and provides a handle 
for the content as a whole, separate from the 
handle for the annotation, through reification of the 
content graph. The content of Figure 2 is 
represented as GraphAnnotations in Figure 4. The 
graph encapsulation clearly delineates which 
assertions are part of which annotation. For 
example, the hasConstituent relation from fs23 to 
fs16 in Figure 4 is part of the g23 graph, which is 
the body of the ga23 annotation, even though it 
shares concepts with the g16 graph. 

 
Figure 4: Open Annotation compatible representation of 

Figure 2 using GraphAnnotations. Graph contents are 
surrounded by dotted lines connected to their name. 

 

 
Figure 3: Options for an Open Annotation-compatible representation of the annotation msd:16 of Figure 2. Ovals 

represent instances, classes are boxed, and relations are italic labels on directed edges from subject to object. 
 

79



The separation of annotation and content also 
allows explicit provenance relations to be 
represented. For example, the relationship between 
the annotation for the NN part of speech 
(msd:ga16) and the annotation for the NP 
(ptb:ga23) as a kiao:basedOn relation (Livingston 
et al. 2011), indicating that the phrasal annotation 
is based on the part of speech annotation. This 
allows us to identify how analyses build on one 
another, and perform error attribution. 

LAF annotations consist of feature structures, 
which have functional properties (restricted to only 
one object value per key), and a set of edges that 
connect nodes, which may have an unclear or 
ambiguous interpretation (see section 5.2.4). RDF-
based graph annotations avoid these issues as they 
can directly contain any set of assertions in the 
annotation body that an annotator wishes to 
express. This includes capturing relations that are 
not functional, and information that might only be 
implicit in a LAF edge. This body representation is 
both more expressive and more explicit. 

The greater expressivity and simpler structure of 
RDF based annotations can be clearly seen in 
contrasting Figure 5 with Figure 6. Both figures 
depict the same subset of information from a 
PropBank example in Section 3 of (Ide & 

Suderman 2007). Figure 5 represents a verbatim 
translation of the LAF following the feature 
structure in RDF conventions. In this figure, as in 
the original LAF figure, the proposition elements 
are distributed across 3 feature structures, for the 
relation (rel), arg1, and the proposition itself. In 
contrast, Figure 6 uses individual RDF triples in 
the annotation bodies; the representation is not 
only more succinct, it more naturally expresses the 
semantics of the information, with the relation and 
its argument within the same content graph. The 
pb:arg1 relation in Figure 6 alleviates the need for 
the entire ga04 annotation in Figure 5. Arguably it 
was an intentional choice by Ide and Suderman 
(2007) to use a LAF node/annotation instead of a 
LAF edge. However, this and other examples point 
to arbitrary selection of nodes and edges in LAF, 
with little surrounding semantics to ground them. 
While it is true that users must understand the 
semantics of any model to use it, the framework of 
RDF and the linked data best practices provide a 
structure for explicitly and formally defining the 
concepts and links, facilitating interoperability. 

5.2.3 Target objects 
There are differences in how these models refer to 
specific region of a resource. LAF reifies structures 
to represent text spans but necessitates the use of a 
separate document enumerating (character-based) 
source text segmentation; subsequent annotations 
refer to those segments. The Open Annotation 
models have in common that they introduce a 
separate object (node in the graph) to point to the 
appropriate segment of the resource. OAC uses 

 
Figure 6: Streamlined representation of Figure 5, using 
a single feature structure for the core proposition (fs6). 

 
Figure 5: Literal RDF translation of a GrAF Propbank 
annotation representation from (Ide & Suderman 2007) 

80



fragment URIs or ConstrainedTargets. The 
Annotation Ontology uses a construct called a 
Selector. While the details vary slightly, these 
constructs are encoding essentially equivalent 
information and attaching it to a reified entity. 

LAF further encourages only creating non-
overlapping spans at the segmentation level. This 
appears to be due to properties of the particular 
XML-based segmentation language chosen by 
LAF influencing the model. This characteristic 
impedes representation of annotations over other 
linguistic modalities, such as speech streams, as 
noted by Cassidy (2010). An additional 
segmentation document is unnecessary in the Open 
Annotation approaches; the models do not restrict 
the organization of different aspects of the 
annotations across documents or web resources. 

The use of separate reified entities as the target 
of annotations also allows locations to be specified 
in any number of ways. As discussed above, the 
models employ various strategies for this and 
therefore can flexibly accommodate different 
requirements for different media sources. 

In Figure 4, we show a proposed treatment of 
targets in the case of embedded linguistic objects, 
i.e. linguistic constructs that build on other 
constructs. We suggest that the target of a higher-
order constituent such as a noun phrase consists of 
the target(s) of its constituent parts. In our 
example, it is a single target that is shared between 
the part of speech annotation and the NP 
annotation. For a more complex set of constituents, 
such as the elements of a dependency relation, the 
targets may refer to a collection of non-contiguous 
spans of the source document. For example, the 
annotation ga06 in Figure 6 would have multiple 
targets (not shown), one for each constituent piece. 

5.2.4 Graph Edges 
Edges between nodes in LAF do not always have a 
clear interpretation. Edges are often left untyped; 
in this case an unordered constituency relationship 
is assumed. For transparency, an edge type that 
specifically defines the semantics of the 
relationship would be preferable to avoid any 
potential ambiguity. 

Furthermore, the LAF model allows feature 
structures to be added to edges, as well as nodes. 
We agree with Cassidy (Cassidy 2010) that the 
intended use of this is likely to produce typed 
edges, and not to produce unique instance data for 

each edge. However, this is another source of 
ambiguity in the LAF representation. For example, 
annotations are sometimes directly connected to 
edges in the segmentation document (Ide & 
Romary 2006). 

In the LAF model, the body and the annotation 
itself can at times appear conflated. When an edge 
connects two nodes it is unclear if that edge 
contains information that relates to the body of the 
annotation or metadata about the annotation itself. 
In LAF it sometimes appears to be both. There is a 
single link in the LAF representation in Figure 2 
from ptb:23 to msd:16. This link simultaneously 
encodes information about the target of the 
annotation, the representation of the body of the 
annotation, and the provenance of the annotation. 
The Open Annotation models provide for more 
explicit and detailed representations. This single 
ambiguous arc in LAF can be represented 
accurately as three triples. In Figure 4, these are 
the hasTarget link from ptb:ga23, the 
hasConstituent link relating parts of the annotation 
body, and the basedOn link recording provenance. 

5.3 Web Linguistic Category representation 
A challenge that must be addressed in moving LAF 
to the Web context is the need for resolvable and 
meaningful URIs as names for resources, per the 
Linked Data principles. LAF intentionally avoids 
defining or requiring the use of standard or 
semantically typed identifiers in its feature 
structures. However, to enable true interoperability 
as an exchange formalism, semantic 
standardization is important. 

While there are many standard names and 
tagsets that are used in the NLP community, for 
instance the Penn Treebank tags (Marcus et al. 
1993), and there are recent efforts to formally 
specify and standardize linguistic categories (e.g. 
ISOcat (Kemps-Snijders et al. 2008)) the use of 
URIs to capture such names is not widespread. 
Recent efforts (Windhouwer & Wright 2012) show 
the use of the ISOcat data category registry terms 
as URIs, e.g. the category of verb is represented as 
http://www.isocat.org/datcat/DC-1424. 
The OLiA reference model explicitly tackles 
mapping among existing terminology resources for 
linguistic annotation (Chiarcos 2010), e.g. ISOcat 
and GOLD (Farrar & Langendoen 2003). A 
specific example of mapping part of speech tags 
from an existing category system can be found in 

81



(Schuurman & Windhouwer 2011). Such mappings 
will be necessary for any tag set used by 
annotations on the Semantic Web; while the work 
is not complete there is clear movement towards 
Linked Data compatibility for linguistic data. 

Recent efforts to standardize of lexical 
representation in RDF, e.g. the W3C Ontology-
Lexica Community Group 9  and the Working 
Group on Open Data in Linguistics10, also will 
contribute to improved reuse and systematicity of 
annotations, and may in fact greatly simplify 
annotations at the lexical level. The lemon model 
(Buitelaar et al. 2011), for instance, provides for an 
ontology-based (RDF) representation of lexical 
information. Such lexical entries could be used 
directly as the content of an annotation, associating 
a word with its word form information, including 
all of the elements currently captured in, e.g., a 
LAF feature structure for a token.  

5.4 DADA: LAF in RDF 
The DADA annotation store (Cassidy 2010) 
provides an adaptation of LAF to RDF. We review 
it here for completeness; it is the only other work 
we are aware of that addresses the representation 
of LAF in RDF. However, this implementation 
does not conform entirely to the structure of the 
current scholarly annotation proposals. 

Although the DADA model explicitly reifies 
anchors in a document, each anchor refers to only a 
single location in the document. A span of text that 
is the target of an annotation is captured by two or 
more such anchors and the span as a whole is not 
explicitly reified. Additional properties must be 
used to associate that structure with the annotation, 
in essence conflating the annotation with its target. 

In some uses, the annotation in DADA appears 
conflated with its body. For instance, in Figure 3 of 
(Cassidy 2010) a type-specific relation (biber) is 
used to connect the annotation (s1) to the body, 
making it necessary to understand the annotation’s 
content before that content can be located. That is, 
a system cannot know generically which relation to 
follow to access annotation content. Additionally, 
the model treats relations that could best be 
interpreted as existing between annotation content 
(e.g. a temporal relationship between two events) 
                                                 
9 http://www.w3.org/community/ontolex/ 
10 http://wiki.okfn.org/Working_Groups/Linguistics 

as a direct relationship between two annotations, 
instead of between their denoted content (the 
events). The proposed DADA representation of 
LAF is similar to the OAa subfigure of Figure 3. It 
therefore suffers from the same limitations with 
respect to attribution and provenance as the 
original LAF model. 

6 Conclusions and Future Work 

In this paper, we have examined linguistic 
annotation efforts from the perspective of the 
Semantic Web. We have identified several reasons 
to bring linguistic annotation practices in line with 
more general web-based standards for scholarly 
annotation, and specifically examined what would 
be required to make Linguistic Annotation 
Framework representations compatible with the 
Open Annotation model.  

While the required changes are not trivial due to 
some variation in how LAF has been applied, they 
will result in several key benefits: (1) explicit, 
semantically typed concepts and relations for the 
content of annotations; (2) the opportunity for 
more expressivity in the content of annotations; (3) 
a representation which formally separates the 
construct of an annotation itself from both the 
content and the document targets of the annotation, 
enabling significantly richer source attribution and 
tracking; and (4) increased clarity and specificity – 
and hence, reusability – of the annotations 
produced based on the model. 

In future work, we will refine our proposals for 
the representation of linguistic annotations in an 
Open Annotation-compatible model through 
discussion with the broader linguistic annotation 
community. We plan to release a version of the 
CRAFT Treebank (Verspoor et al. in press) in 
Open Annotation RDF based on those proposals. 

 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Mike Bada for critiquing 
our proposals. We also thank Steve Cassidy for 
helpful discussions about DADA and LAF, and for 
providing examples to explore.  

This work was supported by Award No. 2011-
02048-05 from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation 
to KV. Additional support came from NIH grant 
3T15 LM00945103S1 to KL. KV receives funding 
through NICTA, which is supported by the 
Australian Government as represented by the 

82



Department of Broadband, Communications and 
the Digital Economy and the Australian Research 
Council through the ICT Centre of Excellence 
program. 

References  
Alexander, K. & M. Hausenblas. 2009. Describing 

linked datasets-on the design and usage of 
void, the vocabulary of interlinked datasets, 
2009. 

Ankolekar, A., M. Krötzsch, T. Tran & D. Vrandecic. 
2008. The two cultures: Mashing up Web 2.0 
and the Semantic Web. Web Semantics: 
Science, Services and Agents on the World 
Wide Web 6.70-75. 

Attwood, T. K., D. B. Kell, P. McDermott, J. Marsh, S. 
R. Pettifer & D. Thorne. 2010. Utopia 
documents: linking scholarly literature with 
research data. Bioinformatics 26.i568-i74. 

Bizer, Christian, Tom Heath & Tim Berners-Lee. 2009. 
Linked Data—The Story So Far. International 
Journal on Semantic Web and Information 
Systems 5.1-22. 

Buitelaar, Paul, Philipp Cimiano, John McCrae, Elena 
Montiel-Ponsoda & Thierry Declerck. 2011. 
Ontology Lexicalisation: The lemon 
Perspective. Paper presented at the 9th 
International Conference on Terminology and 
Artificial Intelligence, Paris. 

Carroll, J.J., C. Bizer, P. Hayes & P. Stickler. 2005. 
Named graphs, provenance and trust, 2005. 

Cassidy, Steve. 2010. Realisation of LAF in the DADA 
Annotation Server. Paper presented at the Fifth 
Joint ISO-ACL/SIGSEM Workshop on 
Interoperable Semantic Annotation  (ISA-5), 
Hong Kong. 

Chiarcos, Christian. 2010. Grounding an Ontology of 
Linguistic Annotations in the Data Category 
Registry. Paper presented at the Language 
Resource and Language Technology Standards 
workshop at LREC 2010, Malta. 

Ciccarese, Paolo, Marco Ocana & Tim Clark. in press. 
Domeo: a web-based tool for semantic 
annotation of online documents. J Biomed 
Semantics. 

Ciccarese, Paolo, Marco Ocana, Leyla Garcia Castro, 
Sudeshna Das & Tim Clark. 2011. An open 
annotation ontology for science on web 3.0. 
Journal of Biomedical Semantics 2.S4. 

Denecke, Matthias. 2002. Signatures, Typed Feature 
Structures and RDFS. Paper presented at the 
Language, Resources and Evaluation 
Conference. 

Farrar, Scott & Terry Langendoen. 2003. A linguistic 
ontology for the semantic web. GLOT 
International 7.1-4. 

Fellbaum, C. 1998a. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical 
Database (Language, Speech, and 
Communication) Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
The MIT Press. 

Hunter, J., T. Cole, R. Sanderson & H. Van de Sompel. 
2011. The open annotation collaboration: A 
data model to support sharing and 
interoperability of scholarly annotations, 2011. 

Hunter, J. & C. Yu. 2011. Assessing the Value of 
Semantic Annotation Services for 3D Museum 
Artefacts. Paper presented at the Sustainable 
Data from Digital Research Conference, 
Melbourne. 

Ide, Nancy & Laurent Romary. 2006. Representing 
Linguistic Corpora and Their Annotations. 
Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Fifth 
Language Resources and Evaluation 
Conference. 

Ide, Nancy & Keith Suderman. 2007. GrAF: A Graph-
based Format for Linguistic Annotations. Paper 
presented at the Linguistic Annotation 
Workshop at ACL 2007, Prague. 

ISO. 2008. ISO TC37 SC4 WG1. In Language resource 
management -- Linguistic Annotation 
Framework. 

Kahan, J., M.R. Koivunen, E. Prud'Hommeaux & R.R. 
Swick. 2002. Annotea: An Open RDF 
Infrastructure for Shared Web Annotations. 
Computer Networks 39.589-608. 

Kemps-Snijders, Marc, Menzo Windhouwer, Peter 
Wittenburg & Sue Ellen Wright. 2008. 
Corralling Data Categories in the Wild. Paper 
presented at the Sixth International Conference 
on Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC'08). 

Krieger, HU & U Schäfer. 2010. DL Meet FL: A 
Bidirectional Mapping between Ontologies and 
Linguistic Knowledge. Paper presented at the 
23rd International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics. 

Kucera, H., and W. N. Francis. 1967. Computational 
analysis of present-day American English: 
Brown University Press. 

Livingston, Kevin, Michael Bada, Lawrence Hunter & 
Karin M Verspoor. 2011. An Ontology of 
Annotation Content Structure and Provenance. 
Paper presented at the Proc Intelligent Systems 
in Molecular Biology: Bio-ontologies SIG. 

Livingston, Kevin, Helen L. Johnson, Karin Verspoor & 
Lawrence E. Hunter. 2010. Leveraging Gene 
Ontology Annotations to Improve a Memory-
Based Language Understanding System. Paper 
presented at the Fourth IEEE International 

83



Conference on Semantic Computing (IEEE 
ICSC2010). 

Marcus, Mitchell, Beatrice Santorini & Mary Ann 
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a Large 
Annotated Corpus of English: The Penn 
Treebank. Computational Linguistics 19.313-
30. 

Sanderson, R., B. Albritton, R. Schwemmer & H. Van 
de Sompel. in press. Shared Canvas: A 
Collaborative Model for Medieval Manuscript 
Layout. International Journal of Digital 
Libraries. 

Schuurman, Ineke & Menzo Windhouwer. 2011. 
Explicit Semantics for Enriched Documents. 
What Do ISOcat, RELcat and SCHEMAcat 
Have To Offer? Paper presented at the 2nd 
Supporting Digital Humanities conference 
(SDH 2011), Copenhagen. 

Verspoor, Karin, K. Bretonnel Cohen, Arrick 
Lanfranchi, Colin Warner, Helen L. Johnson, 
Christophe Roeder, Jinho D. Choi, Christopher 
Funk, Yuriy Malenkiy, Miriam Eckert, 
Nianwen Xue, Jr. William A. Baumgartner, 
Michael Bada, Martha Palmer & Lawrence E. 
Hunter. in press. A corpus of full-text journal 
articles is a robust evaluation tool for revealing 
differences in performance of biomedical 
natural language processing tools. BMC 
Bioinformatics. 

Windhouwer, Menzo & Sue Ellen Wright. 2012. 
Linking to Linguistic Data Categories in 
ISOcat. Linked Data in Linguistics, ed. by C. 
Chiarcos, S. Nordhoff & S. Hellmann, 99-107: 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

 

 

84


