



















































A Structured Approach for Building Assamese Corpus: Insights, Applications and Challenges


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 21–28,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

A Structured Approach for Building Assamese Corpus: Insights, Applications 

and Challenges 

Prof. Shikhar Kr. Sarma1 Himadri Bharali1 Ambeswar Gogoi1 Ratul Ch. Deka1 Anup Kr. Barman1  

(1) DEPT. OF IT, GAUHATI UNIVERSITY, Guwahati - 781014, India 

sks001@gmail.com, himadri0001@gmail.com, ambeswar@gmail.com, 

rdeka8258@gmail.com, anupbarman.gu@gmail.com  

ABSTRACT 

To study about various naturally occurring phenomenons on natural language text, a well structured text corpus is very 

much essential. The quality and structure of a corpus can directly influence on performance of various Natural 

Language Processing applications. Assamese is one of the major Indian languages used by the people of north east 

India. Language technology development works in Assamese language have been started at various levels, and research 

and development works started demanding a structured and well covered Assamese Corpus in UNICODE format. Here 

we present various issues and problems related to building an Assamese text corpus. We review our experience with 

constructing one such corpus including about 1.5 million words of Assamese language. It will provide a significant 

effort by serving as an important research tool for language and NLP researchers.  

KEYWORDS: Assamese, Corpus, linguistics, Natural Language Processing.  

21



1  Introduction 

Language corpora are extensively used in language technology and linguistic researches. There arose a tremendous 

interest in building and developing computerized language corpora in recent few years. The study of digital corpora of 

various languages offers the students and the researchers an opportunity to work with language data with variety of 

tools and techniques in terms of computational procedures and programs. 

Assamese is one of India’s national languages and belongs to the Indo-Aryan language Family. It is spoken by about 15 

million people. The matter of fact is that Assamese lacks computational linguistic resources. There are no prior 

computational works on this language, spoken widely in north-east India. Recently, researchers have begun to involve 

in the development and enrichment of the language of Assamese in the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP). 

Such NLP activities demanded the need of building up a large amount of corpora in the languages. 

The term ‘corpus’ is used to refer to a collection of linguistic data (covering spoken and written) in a language for some 

specific purposes and these data are to be stored, managed and analysed in digital format. A corpus may be quite small, 

for instance, consisting of 50,000 words or texts, or very large, consisting of millions of words. The Cambridge 

International Corpus collected by Cambridge University Press contains 700 million words or text and it has being 

increased all the time. The Brown Corpus, the first computer based corpus, comprising one million words of edited 

written American English, was created at Brown University in early sixties. Corpus is assumed to be a representative of 

a given language so as to make it useful for linguistic analysis. The word ‘corpus’ is derived from Latin meaning 

‘body’. Theoretically, corpus is (C)apable (O)f  (R)epresenting (P)otentially (U)nlimited (S)elections of texts.
1
  

Corpus is the basis of all kinds of linguistic researches. The scope of corpus is a vast one. The areas of corpus-based 

researches are – grammatical studies of specific linguistic construction, building of reference grammar, lexicography, 

language variation and dialectology, historical linguistics, translation studies, language acquisition, language pedagogy, 

and natural language processing and so on. 

The need of language corpora has given rise to the study of corpus linguistics. It is not a branch in linguistics, but a 

methodology which helps in pursuing linguistic research. From the very beginning, modern corpus linguistics has been 

closely associated with the development of computer software for corpus analysis. In modern corpus linguistics, the 

linguists and the computer scientists share a common goal that it is important to depend on the real or actual 

language data (speech or written) for carrying out any kind of linguistic analysis. Moreover, it is an approach which 

satisfies two main purposes: how people use language in day-to-day communication and to build up intelligent system 

to interact with human beings. 

2 Related Study 

Modern day corpora are of various types. In fact, it is a very crucial task of classifying language corpora into different 

types. However, written corpus, spoken corpus, general corpus, monolingual corpus, bilingual corpus, un-annotated 

corpus, annotated corpus, parallel and learner corpus are worth mentioning. 

India is a land of diverse linguistic groups. But in comparison to other advanced countries, it possesses no language 

corpora due to the lack of language technology development. All the linguistic researches are done in traditional mode. 

But recently it has made a deliberate attempt to build digital language corpus. Generation of corpora could enhance 

various linguistic and NLP developments and thus protect languages from extinction.  

The Kolhapur corpus of Indian Languages, created at the Shivaji University, Kolhapur in 1988. It consists of 

approximately one million words of Indian English data. But it fails to represent Indian national language used in the 

country. 

The urge to build corpora in Indian languages is fueled by the all round growth of language technology in India. 

Consequently, the Department of Electronics (DOE), Govt. of India begun corpus development from 1991. The 

technology development for Indian languages (TDIL) programme had taken initiation in building machine-readable 

corpora of nearly 10 million words within three years for all Indian national languages. Indian Institute of Technology 

(IIT), Kanpur was entrusted to develop tool for language processing and machine-aided translation system from English 

to Indian languages. However, the Department of Electronics (DOE) could develop corpora of 3 million words for each 

Indian language and had to suspend further continuation by the end of 1994. 

Later on some Indian experts had decided to start more corpus generation and processing. The Ministry of Information 

Technology (MIT), Govt. of India, Department of Information Technology (DIT), the Central Institute of Indian 

Languages (CIIL), Mysore had taken steps to create corpora in major Indian languages (Hindi, Nepali, Marathi, 

Konkini, Assamese, Manipuri, Kannada, Sanskrit, Bangla, Telegu, Tamil, Gujrati, Oriya, Punjabi, Malayalam, Urdu, 

Kashmiri). These corpora are in UNICODE and annotated according to the Corpus Encoding Standard (CES) 

guidelines. 

                                         
1
  Dash, N.S. (2005) Corpus Linguistics and Language Technology: With Reference to Indian Languages, New Delhi, 

Mittal Publication  

22



3 Text Corpus Generation In Assamese 

In the present study, we mainly deal with the building the structure of Assamese un-annotated raw corpus comprising 

approximately 1.5 million words (total 1,577,750 words) and also try to highlight the problems faced during the process 

of building it. This huge collection of texts would be helpful in the linguistic and non-linguistic studies, cross-linguistic 

comparisons and, all other areas of language technologies.  

There are various issues that are associated with the design, development and management of corpus. Such issues vary 

according to the type and utility of the corpus. In fact, speech corpus development is different from text corpus. 

Developing a text corpus in Assamese is concerned with the issues like the overall size or length of corpus, selection of 

the type of genres, the number of text and range of writers, data collection, computerizing the data and validation of raw 

corpus. These are discussed below: 

1. The overall size or length of the corpus  
Size or length of corpus is an important factor of consideration.  The overall size of Assamese corpus is determined as 

1.5 million words (total 1,577,750 words). But before determining the length of the corpus, certain decisions are taken 

such as – availability of resources, time for data collection and computerizing them. So far as time factor is concerned, 

the present corpus is expected to be completed within approximately two years. The matter of fact is that the length of a 

corpus is determined not by focusing on the overall length of the corpus, but focusing more on the internal structure of 

the corpus: the number of genres is to be included in the corpus, the length and number of individual text samples. The 

expected words would be collected from three main categories: Media, learned material and literature. These main 

categories are again divided into some sub-categories.  And accordingly, the collection of the total 1.5 million words is 

shown in below table: 

 

Main 

Category 

Category Sub-category Expected 

words per 

category 

Root category 

count 

Media    637000  

 Newspaper  337500  

  News   

  Sports   

  Editorials   

  Reports   

  Letter   

  Cartoon   

  Horoscope   

  Arts related news   

  Science related news   

  Cookery    

  Reviews   

  Obituaries    

  Classified ads   

  Publicity   

  Trivia   

 Magazine  299500  

  Film   

  Women’s   

  Informative/General   

  Children   

  Others   

Learned 

Material 

   229250 

 Science  116250  

  Biology   

  Botany   

  Computer   

  Geoscience   

  Chemistry   

23



  Mathematics   

  Physics   

  Medicine   

  Zoology   

  Others   

 Arts  113000  

  Economics   

  Linguistics   

  History   

  Psychology   

  Sociology   

  Law   

  Politics   

  Philosophy   

  Religion   

  Other   

Literature    711500 

 Short fiction  120000  

  Light fiction   

  Sentimental fiction   

  Science fiction   

  Detective fiction   

  Serious fiction   

 Criticism  52500  

  Plays   

  Theatre   

  Novels   

  Short stories   

 Theatre  75000  

  Full length plays   

  Comedy   

  Tragedy   

  Art plays   

  Light theatre   

 Novel  300000  

  Full length novel   

  Sentimental novel   

  Science fiction   

  Detective novel   

  Historical novel   

  Art novel   

  Auto-biographical novel   

  Other light fiction   

 Trivia  15000  

  Jokes   

  Anecdotes   

  Fables   

  Current riddles   

  Proverbs   

 Art and craft  37000  

 Letter  18500  

  Administrative   

24



  Personal   

 Didactic material  75000  

  Encyclopaedia   

  School and college texts   

   Total 1577750 

TABLE 1– Representation of the collection of 1.5 million words from various genres. 
2. Selection of genres included in the corpus 
Genres are selected keeping in mind the purpose and utility of a corpus. A large number of written genres are included 

in Assamese corpus. These genres are listed in the Table 1 and they represent the language in true sense. Importantly, in 

selecting the genres we do not consider the poetry since the language structure is very much flexible depending on the 

writer’s views.   

3. Determining the number of text and  range of writers included in the corpus 
After selecting the genres, next task is to determine how many the numbers of texts and the range of writers to be 

included in the corpus of Assamese. There are a huge number of texts available in the languages, but we are very 

selective in determining the number of texts. Similarly, in the selection of the range of authors, we give importance to 

both eminent authors and little-known authors. In the selection of newspaper and magazines, we are very much 

selective. In case learned material, we try to cover up all necessary domains (as shown in Table 1).  Regarding the text 

selection we also consider the time factors so that we can include texts from various time periods. 

4. Collecting data 
Data collection is a crucial task of building a corpus. There are various ways to collect written texts for Assamese 

corpus such as buying printed texts, use of library (with necessary permission), photocopying and scanning the texts etc. 

In this context, the issue of copyright is well maintained.  

5. Computerizing data 
After data collection, we prepare for entering those data in an electronic format. It is a very laborious process. And most 

importantly these data are only typed by the native speaker of Assamese language because a non-native speaker is not 

familiar with the writing style of a given language.  

The composer has the most important task of entering the metadata also. He has to give certain information about the 

text, for example, genre of the text, type of the text (report, fiction, drama, article etc.), the name of the text, the name of 

author and editor, name of publisher, date of publication, place of publication, the page numbers of the texts etc. 

6. Validating the raw corpus 
The process of validating the whole raw corpus starts just after the completion of entering the computerized data. It is 

done by the experts (must be a native speaker) who possesses linguistic knowledge of Assamese. Sometimes, the data 

compiler validates the data himself. But the cross-validation of the data is best deserved. 

4 Problems Faced During the Overall Process of Building of the Corpus: 

1. Problem of availability of data 

In corpus building of Assamese corpus, if the composer sometimes fails to find out certain selected text material, then 

he can replace that selected text by another text to that corresponding author. Besides certain academic materials like 

engineering and medical books are not generally found written in Assamese language. In such cases, we need to replace 

those materials with some other related materials available in the language. 

2. Linguistic problem 

In computerizing the data, it is seem to face certain linguistic problem such as 

 Spelling error 
The compiler faces certain spelling errors in the text materials. And it is the task of the compiler to enter the correct 

forms of the word in computerizing the data. Some of the common spelling errors are dealt with in building Assamese 

corpus mentioned below: (AS: Assamese Sentence; TF: Transliterated Assamese Form; ET: English Translation)  

Error: AS: সমিচীন, দগূগা, ঩ুৰস্কাৰ 
TF: samiciin, duurgaa, puraskaar 

Correct: AS: সিীচীন, দগুগা, ঩ুৰষ্কাৰ 
TF: samiiciin, durgaa, purashkaraar 

ET: suitable, goddess Durga, award  

 Spelling variation 
In Assamese language, there are certain words which have more than one accepted spellings. These spelling varies from 

text to text depending on the writer’s acceptance. Sometimes the composer seems to become confused seeing spelling 

variation for the same word in the text materials. He has to take crucial decision in this regard of selecting different 

spelling forms of the same word. In Assamese texts also such kinds of spelling variations are very frequent. Depending 

on the frequency of the different word forms, the composer has to keep all of them in the digital files. For example: 

To represent river Ganga, two accepted spellings are গংগা (gangaa: river Ganga), গঙ্গা (gangaa: river Ganga) 
To represent office, two accepted spellings are কাৰ্গালয় (kaarjyaalay: office), কাৰ্গযালয় (kaarjyaalay: office) 

25



 Syntactic error 
Syntactic errors are commonly found in Assamese texts and it is the responsibility of the compiler to write the correct 

forms. For example 

Error: AS: িানুহজন ঘৰলল ৰ্াি। 
TF: maanuhjan gharaloi zaam. 

Correct: AS: িানুহজন ঘৰলল ৰ্াফ। 
TF: maanuhjan gharaloi zaaba. 

ET: The man will go to home. 

 Dialectical variation 
Assamese corpus texts contain a large amount of dialect words. These words are retained as it is. For example 

AS:িাকজনীয়য় ককেঁ চুৱায় াৰ কহনাহয়ে িয়ৰিয়ৰ। 
TF: maakjaniiye kecuwator henaahate mare 

ET: The mother has deep love for her baby. 

AS: ‘ঐ আ঩া, এইপায়ল আহ’, িানুহজয়ন িাে লগায়ল। 
ET: Hello boy, come here, the man called.   

TF: ‘oi aapaa, eiphaale aah,’ maanuhjane maat lagaale. 

 Junk characters 
Junk characters are occurred profusely in the texts due to typing error. In Assamese texts too, junk characters are dealt 

with care. For instance 

Error: AS: ঩ূূূজা, কিৌয়ূৌ, আৰুূু etc. 
TF: puuuujaa, mouou, aaruu 

Correct: AS: ঩ূজা, কিৌ, আৰু 
TF: puujaa, mou, aaru  

ET: worship, bee, and 

 Incomplete sentence 
Incomplete sentences in the texts create problem for the compiler. It is important to avoid incomplete sentences while 

entering the data by the compiler. Incomplete sentence found in Assamese text materials is given below: 

Error: AS: ডকাইমেৰ কথা শুমন িানুহজয়ন … 
TF: dakaatir kathaa shuni maanuhjane … 

ET: hearing about the robbery the man … 

Correct: AS: ডকাইমেৰ কথা শুমন িানুহজয়ন উচ঩ খাই উঠিল।  
TF: dakaatir kathaa shuni maanuhjane ucap khai uthil. 

ET: hearing about the robbery the man became shocked. 

 Hyphenated words 
Assamese possesses hyphenated word forms. But these are not uniform in all the texts. Therefore, hyphens between 

words are removed in Assamese texts, except reduplicated forms. 

Error: AS: লায়হ-লায়হ, লয়গ-লয়গ 
TF: laahe-laahe, lage-lage 

ET: slowly, instantly 

Correct: AS: লায়হ লায়হ, লয়গ লয়গ 
TF: laahe-laahe, lage-lage 

ET: slowly, instantly 

 Punctuation markers 
In some texts, punctuation markers like full stop, comma, dash etc. are not marked uniformly. Two or more sentences 

are joined together without any overt connectors. In that case, the compiler puts appropriate punctuation markers 

reading out the data in the texts. Some of these errors are commonly found while building Assamese corpus, such as 

Error1: AS: ককৌটিলযই মলম঩কাৰৰ গুণাগুণ মফচাৰ কমৰ ককয়ছ কৰ্ মলম঩কায়ৰ ককৱল আখৰয়কই া মলমখফ জামনয়লই নহ’ফ। 
TF:  koutilyai lipikaarar gunagun bicar kari koise ze lipikaare kewal aakharkeitaa likhib janilei nahaba 

ET: after examining the writer’s creations Kautilya commented that it is not sufficient for the writer only to know how 

to write  

Error2: AS: িূমতগৰ কথা কেষ নহ’ল খঙয়ে লালজীয়য় ৰুদ্ৰ িূমতগ ধমৰয়ল 
TF: muurtir kathaa shekh nahal khangate laalajiiye rudra muurti dharile 

ET: Murtty did not completed his speech Lalaji became raged in anger  

Correct1: AS: ককৌটিলযই মলম঩কাৰৰ গুণাগুণ মফচাৰ কমৰ ককয়ছ কৰ্, ‘মলম঩কায়ৰ ককৱল আখৰয়কই া মলমখফ জামনয়লই নহ’ফ।’ 
TF: koutilyai lipikaarar gunagun bicar kari koise ze, ‘lipikaare kewal aakharkeitaa likhib janilei nahaba।’ 
ET: After examining the writer’s creations Kautilya commented that, ‘it is not sufficient for the writer only to know how 

to write.’ 

26



Correct2: AS: িূমতগৰ কথা কেষ নহ’ল। খঙয়ে লালজীয়য় ৰুদ্ৰ িূমতগ ধমৰয়ল। 
TF: muurtir kathaa shekh nahal. khangate laalajiiye rudra muurti dharile 

ET: Murtty did not complete his speech. Lalaji became raged in anger. 

Conclusion 

In this paper, we have presented a description of processes involved in creating the raw corpus in Assamese and also a 

discussion on the problems faced during the process. Corpus is being regarded as a multi-dimensional in nature. Corpus 

in Assamese opens up new avenues in the field of language technology, communication, exchange of information, 

language education and linguistic activities etc. In the future, it should be our great responsibility to create bigger 

corpora, consisting of billions of words, in our native language. Besides, steps are to be taken in annotating the raw 

corpus which would result in building morphological analyzer, spell checking tool, concordancer, machine translation, 

speech recognition etc. in the language of Assamese. 

References 

 Bora, L.S. (2006). Asamiya Bhasar Ruptattva, M/s Banalata, 2006.   
Goswami, G. C. (2009). Asamiya Vyakaran Pravesh, 3rd edition. Bina Library, Guwahati. 2009. 

Goswami, G. C. (2004). Asamiya Vyakaranar Maulik Vicar Pravesh, 4
th edition. Bina Library, Guwahati. 2009. 

Aston, G (Ed. 2004) Learning with Corpora. Cambridge: Cambridge University press. 
Jayaram, B.D and  Rajyashree, S.K.: Corpora in Indian Languages. Central Institute of Languages Manasagangotri, 
Mysore 570006, India. 

Jayaram, B.D. (1996). Development of Corpora in Indian Languages: Problems and Suggested Solutions. Paper 
presented at workshop of Indian Language Corpus and its applications at CIIL, Mysore. 

Ganesan, M: Tamil Corpus Generation and Text Analysis: Annamalai University, Annamalainagar, Tamilnadu, 
India. 

Jaimai Purev  and Chimeddorj Obdayar. (2008). Corpus Building for Mongolian Language in Proceedings The 6th 
Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008  

Steven  A. and Steven B. (2010). The Human Language Project: building a universal corpus of the world's 
languages. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Uppsala, 
Sweden. 

N.S. Dash (2005). Corpus Languistics and Language Technology with Reference to Indian languages: Mitali 

Publication, New Delhi. 

Charles F. Mayer: English Corpus Linguistics An Introduction.  Published by the press Syndicate  of the 

University of Cambridge. 

Stella E.O. Tagnin: A Multilingual Learner Corpus in Brazil. Published: Rodopi. 

McEnery and Andrew Wilson: Corpus Linguistics. Published by Edinburge University press. 

Michael McCarthy: Touchstone From Corpus to Course Book. Published by the syndicate of the University of 

Cambridge. 

Kenji Imamura and Eiichiro Sumita (2002). Bilingual Corpus Cleaning Focusing on Translation Literality. In: 7th 

International Conference on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP-2002). 

Dash, Niladri Sekhar: Language corpora. A Mittal Publication. 

Dash, Niladri Sekhar. (2004). Language corpora: Present Indian Need. In the Proceedings of the SCALLA 2004 

Working Conference. 

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz: Building a Large Annotated Corpus of English: 

The Penn Treebank. Published in: Journal Computational Linguistics - Special issue on using large corpora: II. 

Motaz K. Saad, Wesam Ashour. (2010) OSAC: Open Source Arabic Corpora: Published at the 6th International 

conference on Electrical and Computer System (EECS,10), Nov.25-26,2010, Lefke, North Cyprus. 

27




