










































Towards Quality-Adaptive Spoken Dialogue Management


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Future directions and needs in the Spoken Dialog Community: Tools and Data, pages 49–52,
Montréal, Canada, June 7, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards Quality-Adaptive Spoken Dialogue Management

Stefan Ultes, Alexander Schmitt, Wolfgang Minker
Dialogue Systems - Ulm University

Albert-Einstein-Allee 43
89081 Ulm, Germany

{stefan.ultes,alexander.schmitt,wolfgang.minker}@uni-ulm.de

Abstract

Information about the quality of a Spoken Di-
alogue System (SDS) is usually used only for
comparing SDSs with each other or manually
improving the dialogue strategy. This infor-
mation, however, provides a means for inher-
ently improving the dialogue performance by
adapting the Dialogue Manager during the in-
teraction accordingly. For a quality metric to
be suitable, it must suffice certain conditions.
Therefore, we address requirements for the
quality metric and, additionally, present ap-
proaches for quality-adaptive dialogue man-
agement.

1 Introduction

For years, research has been focused on enabling
Spoken Dialogue Systems (SDSs) to behave more
adaptively to the user’s expectations and needs.
Möller et al. (2009) presented a taxonomy for qual-
ity of human-machine interaction, i.e., Quality of
Service (QoS) and Quality of Experience (QoE). For
QoE, several aspects are identified. They contribute
to good user experience, e.g., interaction quality, us-
ability and acceptability. These aspects can be com-
bined to the term User Satisfaction (US), describ-
ing the degree by which the user is satisfied with the
system’s performance. The dialogue community has
been investigating this aspect for years. Most promi-
nently is the PARADISE framework by Walker et al.
(2000) which maps objective performance metrics
of an SDS to subjective user ratings.

Recent work mostly discusses how to evaluate
Spoken Dialogue Systems. However, the issue of

how this information can be useful for improv-
ing dialogue performance remains hardly addressed.
Hence, we focus on exploring techniques for incor-
porating dialogue quality information into the Dia-
logue Manager (DM). This is accompanied by the
problem of defining characteristics of a suitable dia-
logue quality metric.

In Section 2, we present related work both on
measuring dialogue quality and on approaches for
incorporating user state information into the DM.
In Section 3, requirements for a quality metric are
presented along with a suitable example. Section 4
presents our ongoing and future work on incorpo-
rating quality measures into dialogue strategies. Fi-
nally, Section 5 concludes this work.

2 Related Work

In recent years, several studies have been published
on determining the qualitative performance of a
SDS. Engelbrecht et al. (2009) predicted User Sat-
isfaction on a five-point scale at any point within the
dialogue using Hidden Markov Models (HMMs).
Evaluation was based on labels the users applied
themselves during a Wizard-of-Oz experiment. To
guarantee for comparable conditions, the dialogue
flow was controlled by predefined scenarios creat-
ing transcripts with equal length for each scenario.

Further work based on HMMs was presented by
Higashinaka et al. (2010). The HMM was trained on
US rated at each exchange. These exchange ratings
were derived from ratings for the whole dialogue.
The authors compare their approach with HMMs
trained on manually annotated exchanges achieving
a better performance for the latter.

49



In order to predict US, Hara et al. (2010) created
n-gram models from dialogue acts (DA). Based on
dialogues from real users interacting with a music
retrieval system, overall ratings for the whole dia-
logue have been labeled on a five point scale after
the interaction. An accuracy (i.e., rate of correctly
predicted ratings) of 34% by a 3-gram model was
the best performance which could be achieved.

Dealing with true User Satisfaction, Schmitt et al.
presented their work about statistical classification
methods for automatic recognition of US (Schmitt
et al., 2011b). The data was collected in a lab
study where the users themselves had to rate the
conversation during the ongoing dialogue. Labels
were applied on a scale from 1 to 5. Perform-
ing automatic classification using a Support Vector
Machine (SVM), they achieved an Unweighted Av-
erage Recall (UAR) of 49.2 (i.e., average rate of
correctly predicted ratings, compensated for unbal-
anced data).

An approach for affective dialogue modeling
based on Partially Observable Markov Decision
Processes (POMDPs) was presented by Bui et al.
(2007). Adding stress to the dialogue state enables
the dialogue manager to adapt to the user. To make
belief-update tractable, the authors introduced Dy-
namic Decision Networks as means for reducing
complexity.

Pittermann et al. (2007) presented another ap-
proach for adaptive dialogue management. The au-
thors incorporated emotions by modeling the dia-
logue in a semi-stochastic way. Thus, an emotional
dialogue model was created as a combination of a
probabilistic emotional model and probabilistic dia-
logue model defining the current dialogue state.

3 Interaction Quality Metric

In order to enable the Dialogue Manager to be
quality-adaptive, the quality metric must suffice cer-
tain criteria. In this Section, we identify the impor-
tant issues and render the requirements for a suitable
quality metric.

3.1 General Aspects

For adapting the dialogue strategy to the quality of
the dialogue, the quality metric is required to imple-
ment certain characteristics. We identify the follow-

ing items:

• exchange-level quality measurement,

• automatically derivable features,

• domain-independent features,

• consistent labeling process,

• reproducible labels and

• unbiased labels.

The performance of a Spoken Dialogue System
may be evaluated either on the dialogue level or on
the exchange level. As dialogue management is per-
formed after each system-user exchange, dynamic
adaption of the dialogue strategy to the dialogue
performance requires exchange-level performance
measures. Therefor, Dialogue-level approaches are
of no use. Furthermore, previous presented meth-
ods for exchange-level quality measuring could not
achieve satisfying accuracy in predicting dialogue
quality (Engelbrecht et al., 2009; Higashinaka et al.,
2010).

Features serving as input variables for a classi-
fication algorithm must be automatically derivable
from the dialogue system modules. This is impor-
tant because other features, e.g., manually annotated
dialogue acts (Higashinaka et al., 2010; Hara et al.,
2010), produce high costs and are also not available
immediately during run-time in order to use them as
additional input to the Dialogue Manager. Further-
more, for creating a general quality metric, features
have to be domain-independent, i.e., not depending
on the task domain of the dialogue system.

Another important issue is the consistency of the
labels. Labels applied by the users themselves are
subject to large fluctuations among the different
users (Lindgaard and Dudek, 2003). As this results
in inconsistent labels, which do not suffice for creat-
ing a generally valid quality model, ratings applied
by expert raters yield more consistent labels. The
experts are asked to estimate the user’s satisfaction
following previously established rating guidelines.
Furthermore, expert labelers are also not prone to be
influenced by certain aspects of the SDS, which are
not of interest in this context, e.g., the character of
the synthesized voice. Therefore, they create less bi-
ased labels.

50



3.2 Interaction Quality

As metric, which fulfills all previously addressed
requirements, we present the Interaction Quality
(IQ) metric, see also (2011a). Based on dialogues
from the “Let’s Go Bus Information System” of the
Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh (Raux et
al., 2006), IQ is labeled on a five point scale. The
labels are (from best (5) to worst (1)) “satisfied”,
“slightly unsatisfied”, “unsatisfied”, “very unsatis-
fied” and “extremely unsatisfied”. They are applied
by expert raters following rating guidelines, which
have been established to allow consistent and repro-
ducible ratings.

Additionally, domain-independent features used
for IQ recognition have been derived from the di-
alogue system modules automatically for each ex-
change grouped on three levels: the exchange level,
the dialogue level, and the window level. As parame-
ters like ASRCONFIDENCE or UTTERANCE can di-
rectly be acquired from the dialogue modules they
constitute the exchange level. Based on this, counts,
sums, means, and frequencies of exchange level pa-
rameters from multiple exchanges are computed to
constitute the dialogue level (all exchanges up to the
current one) and the window level (the three previous
exchanges).

A corpus containing the labeled data has been
published recently (Schmitt et al., in press) contain-
ing 200 calls annotated by three expert labelers, re-
sulting in a total of 4,885 labeled exchanges. Us-
ing statistical classification of IQ based on SVMs
achieves an Unweighted Average Recall of 0.58
(Schmitt et al., 2011a).

4 Quality-Adaptive Spoken Dialogue
Management

The goal of our work is to enable Dialogue Man-
agers to directly adapt to information about the qual-
ity of the ongoing dialogue. We present two differ-
ent approaches that outline our ongoing and future
work.

4.1 Dialogue Design-Patterns for Quality
Adaption

Rule-based Dialogue Managers are still state-of-the-
art for commercial SDSs. It is hardly arguable that
making the rules quality-dependent is a promising

way for dialogue improvement. However, the num-
ber of possibilities for adapting the dialogue strategy
to the dialogue quality is high. Based on the Speech-
Cycle RPA Dialogue Manager, we are planning on
identifying common dialogue situations in order to
create design-patterns. These patterns can be ap-
plied as a general means of dealing with situations
that arise by introducing quality-adaptiveness to the
dialogue.

4.2 Statistical Quality-Adaptive Dialogue
Management

For the incorporation of Interaction Quality into a
statistical DM, two approaches have been found.

First, based on work on factored Partially Observ-
able Markov Decision Processes by Williams and
Young (2007) and similar to Bui et al. (2006), we
presented our own approach for incorporating addi-
tional user state information (Ultes et al., 2011).

In the factored POMDP by Williams and Young
(2007), the state of the underlying process is de-
fined as s = (u, g, h). To incorporate IQ, it is
extended by adding the IQ-state siq, resulting in
s = (u, g, h, siq).

Following the concept of user acts, we further in-
troduce IQ-acts iq that describe the current qual-
ity predicted by the classification algorithm for the
current exchange. Incorporating IQ acts into obser-
vation o results in the two-dimensional observation
space

O = U × IQ,

where U denotes the set of all user actions and IQ
the set of all possible Interaction Quality values.

Second, for training an optimal policy for ac-
tion selection in POMDPs, a reward function has
to be defined. Common reward functions are task-
oriented and based on task success and dialogue
length. As an example, a considerable positive re-
ward is given for reaching the task goal, a consider-
able negative reward for aborting the dialogue, and a
small negative reward for each exchange in order to
keep the dialogue short. Interaction Quality scores
offer an interesting and promising way of defining a
reward function, e.g., by rewarding improvements in
IQ. By that, strategies that try to keep the quality at
an overall high can be trained allowing for a better
user experience.

51



5 Conclusion

For incorporating information about the dialogue
quality into the Dialogue Manager, we identified
characteristics of a quality metric defining neces-
sary prerequisites for being used during dialogue
management. Further, the Interaction Quality met-
ric has been proposed as measure, which suffices all
requirements. In addition, we presented concrete ap-
proaches of incorporating IQ into the DM outlining
our ongoing and future work.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Maxine Eskenazi, Alan
Black, Lori Levin, Rita Singh, Antoine Raux and
Brian Langner from the Lets Go Lab at Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, for providing the Lets
Go Sample Corpus. We would further like to thank
Roberto Pieraccini and David Suendermann from
SpeechCycle, Inc., New York, for providing the
SpeechCycle RPA Dialogue Manager.

References

T. H. Bui, J. Zwiers, M. Poel, and A. Nijholt. 2006. To-
ward affective dialogue modeling using partially ob-
servable markov decision processes. In Proceedings
of workshop emotion and computing, 29th annual Ger-
man conference on artificial intelligence.

T. H. Bui, M. Poel, A. Nijholt, and J. Zwiers. 2007.
A tractable ddn-pomdp approach to affective dialogue
modeling for general probabilistic frame-based dia-
logue systems. In Proceedings of the 5th IJCAI Work-
shop on Knowledge and Reasoning in Practical Dia-
logue Systems, pages 34–37.

Klaus-Peter Engelbrecht, Florian Gödde, Felix Hartard,
Hamed Ketabdar, and Sebastian Möller. 2009. Mod-
eling user satisfaction with hidden markov model. In
SIGDIAL ’09: Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2009 Con-
ference, pages 170–177. ACL.

Sunao Hara, Norihide Kitaoka, and Kazuya Takeda.
2010. Estimation method of user satisfaction using
n-gram-based dialog history model for spoken dia-
log system. In Proceedings of the Seventh conference
on International Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10), Valletta, Malta, may. ELRA.

Ryuichiro Higashinaka, Yasuhiro Minami, Kohji
Dohsaka, and Toyomi Meguro. 2010. Modeling
user satisfaction transitions in dialogues from over-
all ratings. In Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2010

Conference, pages 18–27, Tokyo, Japan, September.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Gitte Lindgaard and Cathy Dudek. 2003. What is this
evasive beast we call user satisfaction? Interacting
with Computers, 15(3):429–452.

Sebastian Möller, Klaus-Peter Engelbrecht, C. Kühnel,
I. Wechsung, and B. Weiss. 2009. A taxonomy of
quality of service and quality of experience of multi-
modal human-machine interaction. In Quality of Mul-
timedia Experience, 2009. QoMEx 2009. International
Workshop on, pages 7–12, July.

Johannes Pittermann, A. Pittermann, Hong Meng, and
W. Minker. 2007. Towards an emotion-sensitive
spoken dialogue system - classification and dialogue
modeling. In Intelligent Environments, 2007. IE 07.
3rd IET International Conference on, pages 239 –246,
September.

Antoine Raux, Dan Bohus, Brian Langner, Alan W.
Black, and Maxine Eskenazi. 2006. Doing research
on a deployed spoken dialogue system: One year of
lets go! experience. In Proc. of the International Con-
ference on Speech and Language Processing (ICSLP),
September.

Alexander Schmitt, Benjamin Schatz, and Wolfgang
Minker. 2011a. Modeling and predicting quality in
spoken human-computer interaction. In Proceedings
of the SIGDIAL 2011 Conference, Portland, Oregon,
USA, June. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Alexander Schmitt, Benjamin Schatz, and Wolfgang
Minker. 2011b. A statistical approach for estimat-
ing user satisfaction in spoken human-machine inter-
action. In Proceedings of the IEEE Jordan Confer-
ence on Applied Electrical Engineering and Comput-
ing Technologies (AEECT), Amman, Jordan, Decem-
ber. IEEE.

Alexander Schmitt, Stefan Ultes, and Wolfgang Minker.
in-press. A parameterized and annotated corpus of the
cmu let’s go bus information system. In International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC).

Stefan Ultes, Tobias Heinroth, Alexander Schmitt, and
Wolfgang Minker. 2011. A theoretical framework for
a user-centered spoken dialog manager. In Proceed-
ings of the Paralinguistic Information and its Integra-
tion in Spoken Dialogue Systems Workshop, pages 241
– 246. Springer, September.

Marilyn Walker, Candace Kamm, and Diane Litman.
2000. Towards developing general models of usabil-
ity with paradise. Nat. Lang. Eng., 6(3-4):363–377.

Jason D. Williams and Steve J. Young. 2007. Par-
tially observable markov decision processes for spo-
ken dialog systems. Computer Speech and Language,
(21):393–422.

52


