



















































An Issue-oriented Syllabus Retrieval System using Terminology-based Syllabus Structuring and Visualization


Proceedings of the Workshop on Speech and Language Processing Tools in Education, pages 25–36,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

An Issue-oriented Syllabus Retrieval System based on 
Terminology-based Syllabus Structuring and Visualization 

Hideki Mima
1 

(1) School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan  

mima@t-adm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp n 

ABSTRACT 

The purpose of this research was to develop an issue-oriented syllabus retrieval system that 

combined terminological processing, information retrieval, similarity calculation-based 

document clustering, and visualization. 

Recently, scientific knowledge has grown explosively because of rapid advancements that 

have occurred in academia and society. Because of this dramatic expansion of knowledge, 

learners and educators sometimes struggle to comprehend the overall aspects of syllabi. In 

addition, learners may find it difficult to discover appropriate courses of study from syllabi 

because of the increasing growth of interdisciplinary studies programs. We believe that an issue-

oriented syllabus structure might be more efficient because it provides clear directions for users. 

In this paper, we introduce an issue-oriented automatic syllabus retrieval system that integrates 

automatic term recognition as an issue extraction, and similarity calculation as terminology-based 

document clustering. We use automatically-recognized terms to represent each lecture in 

clustering and visualization. Retrieved syllabi are automatically classified based on their included 

terms or issues. The main goal of syllabus retrieval and classification is the development of an 

issue-oriented syllabus retrieval website that will present users with distilled knowledge in a 

concise form. In comparison with conventional systems, simple keyword-based syllabus retrieval 

is based on the assumption that our methods can provide users, and, in particular, novice users 

(students), with efficient lecture retrieval from an enormous number of syllabi. The system is 

currently in practical use for issue-oriented syllabus retrieval and clustering for syllabi for the 

University of Tokyo’s Open Course Ware and for the School/Department of Engineering. 

Usability evaluations based on questionnaires used to survey over 100 students revealed that our 

proposed system is sufficiently efficient at syllabus retrieval.  

KEYWORDS: Issue oriented, syllabus retrieval, term extraction, knowledge structuring, 

visualization 

25



1 Introduction 

Recently, scientific knowledge has grown explosively because of rapid advancements that have 

occurred in academia and society.
1
 This rapid expansion of knowledge has made it increasingly 

difficult for learners and educators to comprehend the overall aspects of syllabi. In addition, 

because of the rapid growth of interdisciplinary studies programs, such as energy studies and 

earth-environmental studies, learners have found it increasingly difficult to discover appropriate 

courses of study in their syllabi.  

Syllabus retrieval is believed to be one of several solutions to these problems. In fact, 

several syllabus retrieval systems have been proposed. In general, current syllabus retrieval 

methods can be classified as query-oriented and/or issue-oriented. Although the query-oriented 

method is useful and possesses strong retrieval capabilities, it can be difficult to employ, 

especially for novices, because the generation of queries usually requires users to first clarify 

their subjects. 

The issue-oriented syllabus retrieval method was developed in an attempt to provide clear 

directions to learners. The issue-oriented syllabus structure is believed to be more efficient for 

learning and education, because it requires less knowledge about subjects (Mima et al., 2006). 

However, this system generally requires that users classify all syllabi manually in advance. This 

can be a time-consuming task. Thus, we can see that it is important to develop a more efficient 

method for automatic syllabus structuring to accelerate syllabus classification. The advantage of 

this technique is based on the assumption that automatic methods will enable more efficient 

processing of enormous amounts of syllabi texts. 

In this paper, we introduce an innovative issue-oriented automatic syllabus classification 

system. We integrate automatic term recognition as issue extraction, terminology-based 

similarity-calculation for clustering, information retrieval, and visualization. Automatically-

recognized terms are used to represent each lecture (or class) in clustering. In the system, 

provided syllabi are automatically classified and labeled according to the included terms that 

were automatically extracted. The main goal of syllabus retrieval and clustering is to develop an 

issue-oriented syllabus retrieval website that will present distilled knowledge to users in a concise 

form. The advantage of this system, in comparison with conventional syllabus retrieval or 

classification, is based on the assumption that automatic methods can efficiently process 

enormous amounts of text. The system has already been put into practical use for syllabus 

retrieval and clustering for the University of Tokyo’s Open Course Ware and for the 

School/Department of Engineering syllabi. Usability evaluations based on questionnaires used to 

survey over 100 students revealed that our proposed system is sufficiently efficient at syllabus 

retrieval. 

In the following section of this paper, we briefly explain the process of issue-oriented 

syllabi retrieval. We also provide an overview of the clustering system. In Section 2, we describe 

our proposed syllabus retrieval and classification scheme that is based on the use of 

automatically-extracted terms and on a visualization technique. In Sections 3 and 4, we discuss 

terminological processing as a feature extraction from each syllabus for similarity calculation and 

                                                           
1 For example, the Medline database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed) currently contains over 16 million 
paper abstracts in the domains of molecular biology, biomedicine, and medicine. The database is growing at a rate 
of more than 40,000 abstracts each month. 

26



visualization. In Section 5, we present our evaluations of data collected from questionnaires used 

to survey over 100 students. We relied on the collected data to analyze the usability of our 

proposed scheme and to confirm its feasibility and efficiency. In the final Section, we present a 

summary of our approach and our conclusions. 

2 System Overview 

The main purpose of this study was to develop an efficient issue-oriented syllabus retrieval 

system that would provide clear directions to learners. Our approach to this issue-oriented 

syllabus classification system is based on the following: 

- automatic term recognition (ATR) for automatic issue extraction 

- automatic term clustering (ATC) for term variation management 

- terminology-based document similarity calculation to develop syllabus classification 

- automatic class label inference to clarify general issues of the classes 

The system architecture is modular. It integrates the following components (see, Figure 1):  

- Terminology-based issue extraction (TIE) – A component that conducts automatic 

term recognition as issue extraction from syllabus texts. It includes term extraction 

and term variation management. 

- Syllabus retriever (SR) – It retrieves syllabi based on selected issues that are 

automatically extracted by TIE. It calculates similarities between each issue and each 

retrieved syllabus. Currently, we have adopted tf*idf based similarity calculation. 

- Similarity Calculation Engine(s) (SCE) – It calculates similarities between KSs 

provided from each KR component by the use of ontology developed by ODE to show 

semantic similarities between each KSs. We adopted Vector Space Model-based 

(VSM) similarity calculation and we used terms as features of VSM. Semantic 

clusters of KSs were also provided. 

- SVM-based learning (SBL) – A component that learns how to classify syllabi by 

extraction of classification patterns from features that have also been extracted by 

TFE. It then produces classification knowledge. 

- Terminology-based syllabus classification (SBC) – It calculates similarities between 

syllabi provided by the SR component by the use of terms provided from TIE to 

develop clusters of syllabi. We adopted Vector Space Model-based (VSM) similarity 

calculation. 

- Term-based label inference (TLI) – It infers representing labels for each class 

developed by TSC. We currently inferred labels based on term frequency (tf) for 

importance and document frequency (df) for generality. 

- Syllabus class visualizer (SCV) – It visualizes syllabi structures based on graph 

expression in which classes of syllabi and representing labels of classes inferred by 

(TLI) are automatically provided. 

As shown in Figure 1 and the flows by numbers, the system extracts issues automatically 

from syllabi texts in advance and produces classification of lectures based on these terms or 

issues. Then, representing labels (i.e., class labels) are also inferred by the use of terminological 

information. Finally, SVC visualizes syllabi structures with respect to selected issues. 

 

27



3 Terminological processing as an ontology development 

The lack of clear naming standards within a domain (e.g., biomedicine) makes ATR a non-trivial 

problem (Fukuda et al., 1998). Also, this lack of standards may typically cause many-to-many 

relationships between terms and concepts. In practice, two problems stem from this issue: (1) 

some terms may have multiple meanings (i.e., term ambiguity), and, conversely, (2) some terms 

may refer to the same concept (i.e., term variation). Generally, term ambiguity exerts negative 

effects on IE precision; term variation decreases IE recall. These problems reveal the difficulty 

involved in the use of simple keyword-based IE techniques. Therefore, the development of more 

sophisticated techniques, such as the identification of groups of different terms that refer to the 

same (or similar) concept(s) that could benefit from reliance on efficient and consistent 

ATR/ATC and term variation management methods, is needed. These methods are also important 

tools that can be used to organize domain-specific knowledge because terms should not be treated 

 

FIGURE 1 – The system diagram 

Syllabus 

retrieval (SR) 

Issue 

Database 
Term-based syllabus 

clustering (TSC)  

Browser  

Terminology-based issue 

extraction (TIE) 

Syllabus texts 

① 

② 
⑤ 

⑥ 

⑦ 

⑧ 

④ 

③ 

Syllabus Class            
visualizer (SCV) 

Issue-selection 

by users 

Term-based class-label 

inference (TLI) 

28



in isolation from other terms. Rather, they should be related to one another so that relationships 

that exist between corresponding concepts are, at least partially, reflected in the terminology. 

3.1 Term recognition 

For our system, we used an ATR method based on C/NC-value methods (Mima et al., 2001; 

Mima and Ananiadou, 2001). The C-value method recognizes terms by combining linguistic 

knowledge and statistical analysis. The method extracts multi-word terms,
2
 and it is not limited to 

a specific class of concepts. It is implemented as a two-step procedure. In the first step, term 

candidates are extracted by the use of a set of linguistic filters that describe general term 

formation patterns. In the second step, the term candidates are assigned termhood scores (referred 

to as C-values) based on a statistical measure. The measure amalgamates four numerical corpus-

based characteristics of a candidate term: (1) frequency of occurrence, (2) frequency of 

occurrence as a substring of other candidate terms, (3) the number of candidate terms that contain 

the given candidate term as a substring, and (4) the number of words contained in the candidate 

term. 

The NC-value method further improves the C-value results by considering the context of 

the candidate terms. The relevant context words are extracted and assigned weights based on the 

frequency with which they appear with top-ranked term candidates extracted by the C-value 

method. Subsequently, context factors are assigned to candidate terms according to their co-

occurrence with top-ranked context words. Finally, new termhood estimations, referred to as NC-

values, are calculated as a linear combination of the C-values and context factors for the 

respective terms. Evaluation of the C/NC-methods (Mima and Ananiadou, 2001) has revealed 

that contextual information improves term distribution in the extracted list because it places real 

terms closer to the top of the list. 

                                                           
2
 More than 85% of domain-specific terms are multi-word terms (Mima and Ananiadou, 2001). 

 

FIGURE 2 – Term recognition as issue extraction 

 

29



 

3.2 Term variation management 

Term variation and ambiguity have caused and continue to cause problems for ATR, as well as 

for human experts. Several methods for term variation management have been developed. For 

example, the BLAST system (Krauthammer et al., 2000) used approximate text string matching 

techniques and dictionaries to recognize spelling variations in gene and protein names. FASTR 

(Jacquemin, 2001) handles morphological and syntactic variations by means of meta-rules used 

to describe term normalization. Semantic variants are handled via WordNet. 

The basic C-value method has been enhanced by term variation management (Mima and 

Ananiadou, 2001). We consider a variety of sources from which term variation problems 

originate. In particular, we deal with orthographical, morphological, syntactic, lexico-semantic, 

and pragmatic phenomena. Our approach to term variation management is based on term 

normalization as an integral part of the ATR process. Term variants (i.e., synonymous terms) are 

addressed in the initial phase of ATR when term candidates are singled out. This differs from the 

process that is used in other approaches (e.g., FASTR handles variants subsequently by 

application of transformation rules to extracted terms). Each term variant is normalized (see, 

Table 1, as an example) and term variants that have the same normalized form are then grouped 

into classes to link each term candidate to all of its variants. In this way, a list of normalized term 

candidate classes, rather than a list of single terms, is statistically processed. The termhood is 

then calculated for a whole class of term variants, rather than for each term variant separately. 

Term variants  Normalized term 
human cancers 
cancer in humans 
human’s cancer 
human carcinoma 

}  human cancer 
TABLE 1 – Automatic term normalization 

3.3 Term clustering 

In addition to term recognition, term clustering is an indispensable component of the literature 

mining process. Because terminological opacity and polysemy are very common in molecular 

biology and biomedicine, term clustering is essential for the semantic integration of terms, the 

construction of domain ontologies, and for semantic tagging.  

In our system, ATC is performed by the use of a hierarchical clustering method in which 

clusters are merged based on average mutual information that measures the strength of the 

relationships between terms (Ushioda, 1996). The system uses terms automatically recognized by 

the NC-value method and their co-occurrences as input. A dendrogram of terms is produced as 

output. Parallel symmetric processing is used for high-speed clustering. The calculated term 

cluster information is encoded and used for calculation of semantic similarities in the SCE 

component. More precisely, the similarity between two individual terms is determined based on 

their position in a dendrogram. In addition, a commonality measure is defined as the number of 

shared ancestors between two terms in the dendrogram. A positional measure is defined as the 

 

30



sum of their distances from the root. Similarity between two terms corresponds to a ratio between 

commonality and positional measure.  

Table 3 shows a sample of automatically-recognized terms (issues) that occur in an 

Engineering domain syllabus text that consists of 850 lectures (Faculty of Engineering, 

University of Tokyo, 2006). As we can see from the Table, reasonable and representative issues 

were successfully extracted by our method. 

Further details of the methods and their evaluations can be found in Mima et al. (2001) 

and Mima and Ananiadou (2001). 

4 The Use of Visualization to Generate Issue-oriented Syllabus Structures 

In our system, the TSC, TLI, and SCV are implemented by the integration of terminology-based 

issue extraction from syllabi and by clustering of syllabi based on semantic similarities that are 

also calculated based on terms in syllabi. Graph-based visualization for the automatic generation 

of issue-oriented syllabus structures is also provided to help in retrieval of lectures. Figure 3 

shows an example of the visualization of issue-oriented syllabus structures relevant to the issue, 

“environment and energy,” that occurs in the engineering syllabus. To structure knowledge, the 

system constructs a graph in which the nodes are used to indicate relevant syllabi for the key 

issues selected by the user. Links among the syllabi indicate semantic similarities that are 

calculated by the use of terminological information developed by our TIE components. Semantic 

similarity is based on comparisons of terminological information extracted from each syllabus, 

whereas conventional similarity calculation is generally based on extracted nouns. In addition, 

the locations of each node are calculated and optimized when the graph is drawn. The distance 

between nodes depends on the closeness of their meanings. The complete algorithm of this issue-

structuring method is presented below: 

 

 

Automatically-Recognized Terms Termhood 

基礎知識 (basic knowledge) 144.55 

線形代数 (linear algebra) 77.35 

統計力学 (statistical mechanics) 74.00 

固体物理 (solid-state physics) 67.20 

ベクトル解析 (vector calculus) 65.01 

偏微分方程式 (partial differential equation) 62.40 

材料力学 (mechanics of materials) 62.13 

環境問題 (environmental issues) 60.17 

TABLE 2 – Sample of recognized issues 

 

31



begin 

    Q ← issues specified to IR 

    R ← IR(Q)  // retrieving relevant syllabi to Q and putting them into R 

    for every x in R do 

       w(Q, x) ← IRscore(Q, x)  // calculate IR score between Q and x 

 for every y in R do 

     if x ≠ y then 

  p ← Ont(x)  // retrieving terminological information of x 

  q ← Ont(y)  //                                 y 

  w(x,y) ← Sim(p,q)  // calculate similarity using p and q 

          fi 

end 

    end 

    Visualize graph based on every {w(i,j)|i=Q or iR, jR, i≠ j} 

end. 

We generate an issue-oriented syllabus structure based on (1) cluster recognition and (2) 

terminology-based cluster label inference. Cluster recognition is performed by detection of 

groups of nodes in which every combination of included nodes is strongly linked (i.e., their 

similarity exceeds a threshold). Automatic cluster label inference is performed by the use of 

terminological information included in each cluster with respect to tf (term frequency) and df 

(document frequency (i.e., term generality)). 

5 Evaluation 

We performed a practical application of the system for syllabus retrieval for the University of 

Tokyo’s Online Course Catalogue (UTOCC),
3
 for the Open Course Ware (UT-OCW)

4
 site, and 

for the syllabus-structuring (SS) site
5
 for the School/Department of Engineering. All of these 

syllabi are available to the public over the Internet. The UT-OCW’s course search system is 

designed to search the syllabi of courses posted on the UT-OCW site and on the Massachusetts 

Institute of Technology’s OCW site (MIT-OCW). In addition, OCC and SS site’s search is 

designed to search the syllabi of more than 9,000 lectures from all schools/departments at the 

University of Tokyo, and 1,600 lectures from the School/Department of Engineering at the 

University of Tokyo. Both systems display search results based on relationships that exist among 

the syllabi as a structural graphic (see, Figure 3). Based on terms that were automatically-

extracted terms (issues) from the syllabi and on similarities calculated by the use of those terms, 

the system displays the search results in a network format that uses dots and lines. In other words, 

                                                           
3 http://catalog.he.u-tokyo.ac.jp/ 
4 http://ocw.u-tokyo.ac.jp/. 
5 http://ciee.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp/. 

32



the system extracts issues from the listed syllabi. It rearranges these syllabi based on semantic 

relationships that occur in the contents. It displays the results graphically. This differs from 

conventional search engines that simply list syllabi related to keywords. Because of this process, 

we believe users will be able to search for key information and obtain results in a minimal 

amount of time. In graphic displays, as mentioned previously, relevant syllabi are shown in a 

structural graphic that uses dots and lines with cluster circles. Stronger semantic relationships that 

occur in the syllabi or clusters will be located in closer proximity on the graphic. This structure 

will enable users to find groups of courses/lectures that are closely related to some issues. It will 

also help users take courses/lectures in logical order (e.g., a user can begin with fundamental 

mathematics and proceed to applied mathematics). Furthermore, if they consult the structural 

graphic display, users will be able to instinctively find relationships among syllabi drawn from 

other faculties or universities.  

Currently, we have obtained over 2,000 hits per day, on average, from sites worldwide. 

We have provided more than 50,000 page views during the last three months.  

We conducted a usability evaluation based on questionnaires used to survey 120 novice 

students. We obtained positive statements about the efficiency of syllabus retrieval by the search 

system from more than 70% of respondents. 

Finally, we obtained 151 positive statements and 168 statements that recommended further 

improvement. Tables 3 and 4 demonstrate the breakdown for positive statements and the 

breakdown for statements that recommended further improvement, respectively. As can be seen 

in Table 3, we can reasonably state that our issue-oriented scheme and the related system is 

relatively efficient at syllabus retrieval. On the other hand, as can be seen in Table 4, we must 

continue to make further improvements. In particular, we must improve the visualization scheme 

and its scalability to link other syllabi DB and systems. 

 

FIGURE 3 – Issue-oriented syllabus structuring: Visualization sample 

33



 

Positive statements # 

Advantage of visualization 45 

Improvement in retrieval efficiency 41 

Clarity of results 22 

User-friendly interfaces 20 

Misc. 23 

Total 151 

TABLE 3 – Breakdown of positive statements 

 

Statements that recommended further improvement # 

Complexity of visualization 67 

Additional linkage to other syllabi  23 

Lack of clarity about relationships that exist among lectures 11 

Linkage to other systems (e.g., lecture management, etc.) 13 

Quality of issue extraction 10 

Difficulty of operation 5 

Speed of calculation 1 

Misc. 38 

Total 168 

TABLE 4 – Statements that recommend further improvement 

Conclusion 

We developed an issue-oriented syllabus retrieval system that combined terminological 

processing, information retrieval, similarity calculation-based document clustering, and 

34



visualization. The system provides visualizations of issue-oriented syllabus structuring during 

retrieval. This differs from conventional syllabus retrieval that solely provides a list of retrieved 

results relevant to a specific query. 

We evaluated the system based on data collected from questionnaires used to survey over 

100 students. Based on our results, we can reasonably state that the system provides relatively 

efficient syllabus retrieval. 

 

References 

Fukuda, K., Tsunoda, T., Tamura, A. and Takagi, T. (1998). Toward information extraction: 

Identifying protein names from biological papers, Proc. of PSB-98, Hawaii, pp. 3:705–716. 

Mima, H., Ananiadou, S. and Matsushima, K. (2006). Terminology-based Knowledge Mining for 

New Knowledge Discovery, ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing 

(TALIP), Vol. 5(1), pp. 74–88. 

Mima, H., Ananiadou, S. and Nenadic, G. (2001). ATRACT workbench: An automatic term 

recognition and clustering of terms. In V. Matoušek, P. Mautner, R. Mouček, K. Taušer (eds.) 

Text, Speech and Dialogue, LNAI 2166, Springer Verlag, pp. 126–133. 

Mima, H. and Ananiadou, S. (2001). An application and evaluation of the C/NC-value approach 

for the automatic term recognition of multi-word units in Japanese, International Journal of 

Terminology, Vol. 6(2), pp. 175–194. 

Krauthammer, M., Rzhetsky, A., Morozov, P. and Friedman, C. (2000). Using BLAST for 

identifying gene and protein names in journal articles. Gene 259, pp. 245–252. 

Jacquemin, C. (2001). Spotting and discovering terms through NLP. MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 

p. 378. 

Ushioda, A. (1996). Hierarchical clustering of words. In Proc. of COLING ’96, Copenhagen, 

Denmark, pp. 1159–1162.  

35




