










































Focus Group on Computer Tools Used for Professional Writing and Preliminary Evaluation of LinguisTech


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Writing, pages 39–47,
Avignon, France, April 23, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Focus Group on Computer Tools Used for Professional Writing and 
Preliminary Evaluation of LinguisTech 

 
 
 

Marie-Josée Goulet Annie Duplessis 
University of Quebec in Outaouais 

Gatineau, Quebec 
J8X 3X7, Canada 

University of Quebec in Outaouais 
Gatineau, Quebec  
J8X 3X7, Canada 

marie-josee.goulet@uqo.ca dupa08@uqo.ca 
 

 
 

 

 
 

Abstract 

This paper focuses on computer writing tools 
used during the production of documents in a 
professional setting. Computer writing tools 
include language technologies, for example 
electronic dictionaries and text correction 
software, as well as information and 
communication technologies, for example 
collaborative platforms and search engines. As 
we will see, professional writing has become 
an entirely computerised activity. First, we 
report on a focus group with professional 
writers, during which they discussed their 
experience using computer tools to write 
documents. We will describe their practices, 
point out the most important problems they 
encounter, and analyse their needs. Second, we 
describe LinguisTech, a reference web site for 
language professionals (translators, writers, 
language instructors, etc.) that was launched in 
Canada in September, 2011. We comment on a 
preliminary evaluation that we conducted to 
determine if this new platform meets 
professional writers’ needs.    

1 Introduction 
This paper focuses on computer writing tools 
used during the production of documents, be they 
letters, newsletters, policies, guidelines, releases 
or annual reports, in a professional setting, what 
we call professional writing (Beaudet, 1998). 
The importance of professional writing in private 
and public organisations is undeniable as written 
documents serve as communication between 
employees, support in decision making and 
organisational memory.  

Computer tools can be used in a variety of 
writing situations, such as learning how to write 

in schools (Kuhn et al., 2009), learning a second 
language (Milton and Cheng, 2010), and helping 
people with cognitive, visual or motor disabilities 
(Majaranta and Kari-Jouko, 2002). However, our 
knowledge and understanding of computer tools 
used by professional writers are somewhat 
limited. Which tools are used by professional 
writers? Are these tools meeting their needs? Do 
writers know what these tools can do? Kavanagh 
(1999) is one of the few authors who investigated 
such questions. In his detailed analysis of 
Microsoft Word, he demonstrated that the text 
processor mostly meets formatting and editing 
needs, and that it cannot, by far, support every 
step of the professional writing process. 
Kavanagh’s research was quite a revelation at the 
time. However, many years have passed, and we 
have seen few studies on that subject since then.  

Writers have seen their profession evolve 
over the last 20 years. First, the massive use of 
personal computers has transformed writing 
practices as writers now have to cope with 
machines (computers, printers, scanners) and 
computer tools (text processors, search engines, 
electronic messaging systems, electronic 
dictionaries, spelling checkers, and collaborative 
platforms), whose number increases each year. 
Surely, this computer revolution has simplified 
professional writers’ work as computer tools can 
help render more efficient document formatting, 
proofreading, collaborative writing, and content 
reusing, to name just a few examples. In that 
perspective, computer tools should help 
professional writers produce more documents. 
However, the number of documents that need to 
be produced in today’s society, especially in the 
service sector (Nakbi, 2002), is such that 
productivity’s expectations towards writers are 

39



great. And, as we will discuss in this paper, 
computer tools are not always well-adapted to 
professional writing.  

Also, the webification of human knowledge is 
creating new expectations in professional 
writers’ skills. While only a few years ago, 
documents written according to printing 
standards were scanned and published on the 
web as images, an increasing number of 
documents are now produced according to 
hypertext standards. Therefore, professional 
writers have to master new specialised skills, for 
example in hypertext information organisation, 
document design, and computer science 
(Kavanagh, 2006).  

The goal of this paper is twofold. First, it 
reports on an exploratory study on computer 
tools used for the production of written 
documents in the workplace (see Section 2). This 
research consisted in asking questions to 
professional writers during a focus group. We 
will present a summary of those discussions and 
analyse professional writers’ needs in terms of 
computer writing tools. Second, the paper 
describes and analyses LinguisTech, a reference 
web site for language professionals that was 
launched in Canada in September, 2011 (see 
Section 3). This preliminary evaluation will 
allow us to determine if this new platform 
actually meets professional writers’ needs.    

2 Exploratory Study on Computer 
Tools Used by Professional Writers 

2.1  Focus Group 
A focus group was conducted with volunteers. 
This method is well suited for exploring subjects, 
gathering opinions on a specific topic, and asking 
questions to participants when more details are 
needed. Participants were met together and could 
interact with each other. Eight francophone 
professional writers working in Canada’s capital 
region (Gatineau-Ottawa) participated in our 
study1. Our principal selection criteria was that 
the candidates’ main task consisted in writing 
practical texts or, at least, that this be the most 
important part of their job. The participants had 
between 3 and 12 years of experience in 
professional writing and came from different 
sectors: government and parapublic, enterprise, 

                                                           
1 As Geoffrion (1998) explains, the focus group calls for a 
small number of participants, preferably between six and 
twelve. 

non-profit organisation, professional association 
and print media.  

Prior to the focus group, it was assumed that 
professional writing had become an entirely 
computerised activity. The main objective of the 
study reported in this paper was to gather 
information on professional writers’ experience 
with computer tools. We also wanted to explore 
their thoughts on how these tools could better 
support professional writing in general. Here is a 
sample of the questions that we asked them. 
Those questions were addressed to the group, not 
to individuals.  

• In your every day job as a professional 
writer, what computer tools do you use? 

• For what specific task of the writing 
process do you use those tools?  

• Do you exclusively use computer tools or 
also printed material? 

• Do you think that using computer tools 
improve your productivity? 

• Do you have any problems using those 
computer tools? 

• How, in your opinion, could computer 
tools better help professional writers?  

• What other computer tools would you 
like to use?  
 

We organised two meetings of one and a half 
hour each, for a total of three hours. The 
meetings were recorded and transcribed, 
rendering a 27,000-word text. This text was 
analysed by identifying all relevant information 
on professional writers’ experience with 
computer tools, a step we repeated until we could 
not find any new information.  

During the focus group, we used the general 
expression computer tool to refer to any tool 
used to accomplish a task related to professional 
writing. But as we will see later, this concept 
includes two types of computer tools: language 
technologies, for example electronic dictionaries 
and text correction software, and information and 
communication technologies, for example 
collaborative platforms and search engines.  

2.2 Analytical Framework 
In order to present results from the focus group, 
we need a standard procedural model of the 
writing process. We will use Clerc’s model 
(1998, 2000), which is based on the actual 
professional writers’ practice. This model 
includes five steps: assignment analysis, 
information research, information structuring, 

40



writing and revising. Table 1 gives an overview 
of the tasks accomplished at every step of the 
writing process. 
 

Step 1: 
Assignment 
analysis 

• Meet supervisor or client 
• Define mandate 
• Establish writing strategy 

and calendar 
• Write a proposal, if 

necessary 
Step 2: 
Information 
research 

• Establish a research 
strategy 

• Collect information 
Step 3: 
Information 
structuring 

• Select information 
• Group information 
• Determine information 

ordering 
• Find the main thread 

Step 4: 
Writing 

• Put plan into words 
• Write headings 

Step 5: 
Revising 

• Evaluate information 
• Evaluate structure 
• Evaluate writing 

 
Table 1. Tasks done at different steps of the writing 
process in a professional setting (Clerc, 2000) 

 
Although this model is in general suited for 

the purpose of our research, we needed to make 
some adjustments. First, since none of the 
participants seem to be using computer tools 
during the assignment analysis (in fact, no one 
brought this step up during the discussion), we 
excluded this step from our analysis. Second, 
“Information research” was renamed 
“Information research and processing”, which 
better represents the fact that writers have to 
process (even summarily) the information during 
the research in order to evaluate information 
relevance. Third, we added the document 
transmission task but, instead of creating a new 
distinct step, we included it in the last one of the 
model. This step is thus renamed “Revising and 
document transmission”.  Table 2 shows a 
summary of the modified analytical framework.  

 
Step 1: Information research and processing 
Step 2: Information structuring 
Step 3: Writing 
Step 4: Revising and document transmission 

 
Table 2. Modified analytical framework (adapted 
from Clerc, 2000)  

 

2.3 Results 
Results will be presented according to the four 
steps of our analytical framework. 

Information Research and Processing 
Morizio (2006) defines information research as 
an operation consisting of matching an 
information need and a document. In the context 
of our study, the professional writer formulates 
an information need after receiving an 
assignment from his superior or customer. As 
expected, most of the documents consulted by 
our professional writers are in electronic format: 
files either saved on a drive or available on a 
network (intranet or internet). Professional 
writers seem to take advantage of what the web 
has to offer, consulting newspapers, annual 
reports, web pages and social networks. 
Although the content of some of these web 
documents may be questioned (the content of a 
blog for example), they are still considered as 
“interesting” sources, which indicates the 
professional writers’ interest and adaptability 
towards new forms of electronic information. 
However, the participants criticised the 
immensity of the web, which keeps growing day 
after day. If we add the fact that many documents 
found on the web are duplicated, and that the 
same document can be found in different format 
(HTML, PDF), this can really slow down the 
information gathering because the writer has to 
verify if it is in fact the same document. They do 
not blame the web for offering too much 
information, but they wish that this information 
be better organised and easier to find.  

As we said earlier, professional writers 
summarily analyse documents during the 
information gathering, and they save relevant 
documents in personal folders. We identified two 
strategies used by writers to process the 
information at this stage of the writing project2. 
One of these strategies consists in searching for 
information within documents using the search 
engine available in conventional operating 
systems. Professional writers experience 
considerable difficulties with this method: 

• They have to try many synonyms and 
lexical variants as search terms, in order 
to retrieve all relevant documents.  

• Having copied many versions of a same 
document in different folders, processing 
the results can be a lot of work because 

                                                           
2 Not all participants necessarily use both strategies. 

41



the operating system considers copies of 
the same document as distinct 
documents.      

• Still according to the participants of our 
study, search engines from conventional 
operating systems produce a lot of noise.  

 
Those remarks are not original, but they 

suggest that professional writers know which 
computer tools, or which aspects of a particular 
tool, can slow down their productivity. 
Conventional operating systems are ubiquitous in 
organisations and are relatively user-friendly, so 
we can easily understand why our participants 
use them to track documents, but it appears that 
they are not optimal for professional writers, for 
whom information research and processing can 
be impressive in terms of workload. Of course, 
all writers may not classify their documents in 
folders astutely, a step that would allow for more 
specific searches afterwards in individual folders. 
Second, some writers may not use the advanced 
functions of the search engine correctly. It would 
be interesting in further research to study writers’ 
behaviour in-vivo, allowing for more specific 
recommendations for document and information 
management. Also, other information 
management solutions should be tested in regard 
to professional writers’ needs. Could more 
specialised tools improve their effectiveness, or 
at least their satisfaction?  

The participants described a second strategy 
for processing information, which consists in 
copying and pasting parts of a source document 
(web page, email, PDF document, etc.) in a text 
file. More specifically, they create a thematic file 
in which they paste relevant parts of web 
documents, making sure that they note the 
source. As we know from other computational 
linguistics related research such as automatic 
summarisation by sentence extraction, this 
operation causes considerable information loss, 
making it difficult to interpret the information 
correctly when writing. In fact, the participants 
admitted that they often have to go back to the 
original document in order to understand the 
parts they had copied. In other words, 
professional writers need a better strategy to 
process textual electronic information. 

The copy-and-paste method is also 
problematic for at least one other aspect: the 
manipulation of the target document. 
Professional writers of our study explained 
having problems organising the parts they copy 
in the target document, especially when those 

files contain a considerable amount of pages. 
Therefore, we understand why some writers 
chose to create a home-made database (using 
Excel or Access) in which they record the name 
of the documents they consulted and the topic(s) 
associated to those documents. This information 
can then be automatically sorted, for example, by 
location, topic, or name. 

Information Structuring 
The last task before the writing step is 
information structuring. This is where the writer 
groups chunks of information and plan the 
ordering. This plan is generally written using a 
word processor, and is sometimes created 
directly in the document used to write the text. 
Surprisingly, none of the interviewed writers use 
tools such as mind mapping at this stage of the 
writing process.  

Writing 
When it comes to actually writing, participants 
use the traditional language technologies 
associated with the production of professional 
writing, such as text correction software (Word, 
Antidote 3 ), electronic dictionaries (Le Petit 
Robert, Le Grand Robert et Collins, Word 
Reference) and terminology data banks 
(Termium Plus, Le Grand dictionnaire 
terminologique). Professional writers use more 
than one language technology at once. Overall, 
they find these tools useful, an assessment that 
should reassure the language industry, which has 
put its focus on developing and promoting this 
type of tools in the past years. 

Revising and Document Transmission 
During the revising step, professional writers use 
Word’s advanced functions (track changes and 
add comments) and the other language 
technologies that we already mentioned in the 
previous section. Regarding document 
transmission (or sharing), professional writers 
favour web-based file hosting services, even 
though some of them still prefer emails. We also 
include groupware like Google Documents in 
this category. As showed in Adler et al. (2006), 
group writing is a growing practice in 
professional settings, and writers in our study 
corroborate this evolution.  

                                                           
3 As our participants write French documents, most 
language-specific tools that they use are for French textual 
data. 

42



2.4 General Conclusions 
Table 3 presents a summary of computer tools 
used for professional writing by the participants 
of the focus group. 
 
Steps of the 
writing process 

Computer tools 
used by writers 

Information 
research 
and processing 

• Web search engine 
• Email 
• Operating system 
• Office tools (text 

processor, database) 
Information 
structuring 

• Text processor 

Writing 

• Text processor 
• Text correction 

software 
• Dictionaries 
• Terminology data 

banks 

Revising and 
document 
transmission 

• Text processor 
(including advanced 
functionalities) 

• Text correction 
software 

• Dictionaries 
• Terminology data 

banks 
• File hosting service 
• Collaborative 

platform 
• Email 

 
Table 3. Summary of computer tools used by 
professional writers of the focus group 
 

Our study allows us to draw general 
conclusions on the actual practices of Canadian 
professional writers, or even those to come, 
regarding their use of computer tools. First, it 
confirms that professional writing has become an 
entirely computerised activity. In fact, except for 
the assignment analysis, step that our participants 
did not address, all tasks related to writing are 
accomplished using computer tools. While some 
tasks could still be done by hand, for example 
reading a document selected during information 
research or editing a colleague’s document 
working in the same physical environment, this 
is not what professional writers choose to do. 
Only one participant (out of eight) mentioned 
using printed dictionaries, but never exclusively. 

We also know, from this study, that 
professional writers, at least those we 
interviewed, would welcome the integration of 
additional computer tools to their workstation. In 
particular, they expressed the need for better 
information and document management 
software. This assessment is quite surprising 
considering the fact that, as Clerc (2000) notes, 
the information research can represent more than 
half of the total time dedicated to one writing 
project. However, although professional writers 
would like to use other computer tools in their 
work, they are afraid that they would not know 
how to use them. 

Professional writers also wish to see other 
specialised tools developed. For example, the 
participants would use a writing memory system 
in contexts where they reuse content such as 
producing an annual report. This idea is certainly 
not out of reach. As a matter of fact, Allen 
(1999) suggested that the concept of translation 
memory be adapted to writing technical 
documents in a controlled language. A 
preliminary inventory confirms that such tools 
still exist (for example, Author-it, Congree), but 
we will have to verify to which extent they could 
be adapted to writing practical texts in general-
purpose language.  

Professional writers have developed specific 
computerised strategies for each task related to 
written document production, using the computer 
tools that were available to them. Considering all 
the problems mentioned by the participants, it 
seems that this piece-by-piece process came to 
saturation. From information research to 
document transmission, the steps leading to the 
production of professional documents overlap, 
which results in the simultaneous presence of 
many computer tools on the writers’ workstation. 
At the least, the workstation presents a word 
processor (text that is being written, writing plan 
and other documents that need to be consulted), a 
web navigator (with many open windows or 
tabs), a messaging system, and language 
technologies.  This clutter of the workstation is 
not without consequences. Professional writers 
admitted that the numerous computer 
manipulations that are necessary to navigate 
from one tool to the other slow down their work, 
which goes against basic ergonomics.  In 
addition, some writers suggested that the 
multiplication of computer tools was interfering 
with their creativity. Table 4 summarises the 
most important problems reported by 

43



professional writers who use computer tools to 
produce documents. 

 
1. Conventional operating systems are not 
effective to retrieve information or documents 
on personal computers. 
2. Access to more specialised tools such as 
writing memory systems is difficult. 
3. Desktop is cluttered up with too many 
computer tools and windows. 
4. Training on computer tools is needed. 

 
Table 4. Most important problems reported by 
professional writers who use computer tools to 
produce documents  
 
In the next section, we will describe 
LinguisTech, a new web site dedicated to 
language professionals (translators, writers, 
language instructors, etc.), the first of its kind in 
Canada.  We conducted a preliminary evaluation 
in order to determine how useful LinguisTech 
could be especially for professional writers. 

3 Preliminary Evaluation of 
LinguisTech 

3.1 Description of LinguisTech 
LinguisTech4 was launched in September, 2011. 
It is developed by the Language Technologies 
Research Centre (LTRC) and is funded by the 
Government of Canada’s Canadian Language 
Sector Enhancement Program. LTRC describes 
LinguisTech as a toolbox for language 
professionals offering language technologies in 
both Canadian official languages (French and 
English), but also as a documentation and 
training centre, as well as a virtual community. 
We will comment more specifically on the 
Language Technologies Toolbox and on the 
Training Center, the two most developed features 
as of today. 

LinguisTech’s toolbox offers a broad 
selection of computer tools intended for language 
professionals (41 in total). The toolbox includes 
an inventory of free online tools useful for 
language-related tasks, as well as a “virtual” 
desktop with other information and language 
technologies. Computer tools included on this 
virtual desktop can be very expensive, but at the 
moment, they are available for free to Canadians 
who register and further obtain a password. 
Users can connect from any computer (Mac or 
                                                           
4 www.linguistech.ca 

PC), anywhere in the world, and access their own 
virtual computer. LinguisTech is also a 
documentation and training centre where 
language professionals can find, among other 
resources, tutorials and exercises on how to use 
computer tools (29 in total) 5.  

Table 5 presents a complete list of computer 
tools, tutorials and exercises presently available 
in LinguisTech. Tool names in italics indicate 
free online tools. Tools names in grey lines 
indicate that a tutorial or an exercise is available, 
but not the tool itself.   
 

Tutorial or exercise available? 
Office tools 
Adobe Reader X yes  
Microsoft Office yes  
Open Office no  
PDF Creator no  
Windows yes  
Search engines 
Google yes  
Library databases (uOttawa) yes  
ORBIS (uOttawa) yes  
Text correction software 
Antidote yes  
PerfectIT no 
WhiteSmoke no  
Text analysis software 
KwicKwic no  
Concept mapping tools 
CmapTools yes 
Microsoft Office Concept Mapping yes  
Text aligners 
YouAlign yes  
Concordancers 
Le Migou yes  
TextSTAT yes  
TradooIT  no  
TransSearch yes  
WeBiText  yes  
WordSmith Tools yes  
Dictionaries and terminology tools  
Diatopix yes  
DiCoInfo yes  
FranceTerme no  
Health Multi-Terminology Portal no  
Inspiration no  
InterActive Terminology for Europe yes 

                                                           
5 Tutorials and exercises are developed by the Collection of 
Electronic Resources in Translation Technologies (CERTT) 
team at the University of Ottawa (see Bowker and 
Marshman, 2011). 

44



Le grand dictionnaire terminologique yes 
lexicool.com no 
SDL MultiTerm 2009 no 
SDL International (Trados 2007) no 
SynchroTerm yes  
Terminaute no  
TerminoWeb no  
TERMIUM Plus yes  
TermoStat Web yes  
UNTerm  no  
Wiktionary yes  
WordNet yes  
Translation and localization tools 
CatsCradle yes  
Fusion Translate  no  
Linguee no  
LogiTerm  yes  
MultiTrans yes  
Online machine translation yes  
Reverso Promt yes  
SDL Passolo 2009 no  
SDL Trados Studio 2009 no  
Wordfast no  
Other resources   
Language Portal of Canada no  
Pidgin no  

 
Table 5. Computer tools, tutorials and exercises 
available in LinguisTech 

3.2 Analysis 
We address two research questions: How does 
LinguisTech respond to professional writers’ 
needs in terms of computer tools and training 
material? Can LinguisTech solve any of the 
problems mentioned by our participants? This 
preliminary evaluation of LinguisTech will be 
presented according to the four steps of our 
analytical framework. The analysis is based on 
the information obtained from the focus group 
discussions (see Subsection 2.3). It is important 
to note that LinguisTech did not exist at the time 
of the focus group, which was in March, 2011, so 
the participants could not have used it prior to the 
focus group or mentioned it during the 
discussions.  

Information Research and Processing 
During information research and processing, 
professional writers use many computer tools: 
web search engines, email services, operating 
systems, text processors, and databases. As we 
can see in Table 5, LinguisTech offers many 
useful tools in regard to this stage of the writing 

process, for example Microsoft Office and 
Windows, many of which are accompanied by a 
tutorial or an exercise. Training material is also 
available for other tools required at this stage, for 
example Google search engine. 

However, LinguisTech does not offer any 
tool, tutorial or exercise related to email, a 
service largely used by our participants to gather 
information from colleagues in the workplace. A 
forum where language professionals can share 
ideas on their profession has been recently 
created in LinguisTech. This forum will probably 
help develop a virtual community, but training 
material on how to effectively use this computer 
tool will be helpful. 

Also, our participants stated that conventional 
operating systems are not effective to retrieve 
information or documents on personal 
computers, and that more effective information 
retrieval systems are needed. At the moment, 
LinguisTech does not provide any solution to this 
problem. 

 
Information Structuring 
During information structuring, our participants 
use a text processor, which is covered in 
LinguisTech, both in terms of availability and 
training.  

Writing 
While putting ideas into words, professional 
writers use a text processor, text correction 
software, some dictionaries and terminology data 
banks. LinguisTech offers many computer tools 
related to those tasks, with tutorials and 
exercises. 

One of the problems mentioned by our 
participants was the difficulty to have access to 
specialised tools such as writing memory 
systems.  As of today, LinguisTech does not 
include any specialised tools of that kind, or 
training material on such tools. 

Revising and Document Transmission 
During the last steps of the writing process, 
professional writers use two additional tools: file 
hosting services (for example Dropbox) and 
collaborative platforms (Google Documents). 
While those computer tools seem to grow in 
popularity among professional writers, 
LinguisTech does not cover them. They are 
neither included in the toolbox, nor is there any 
training material related to them.  

45



As we reported in Subsection 2.4, the 
professional writers’ workstation is cluttered up, 
meaning that the desktop is busy with many open 
windows. LinguisTech offers many useful 
computer tools, but no interface (or environment) 
to integrate them in an ergonomic way.  
 
3.3 General Conclusions 
In conclusion, this preliminary evaluation shows 
the usefulness of LinguisTech for Canadian 
professional writers, at least those who 
participated in the focus group. Most of the 
computer tools they use during the production of 
written documents are available in LinguisTech. 
Where LinguisTech falls short is in the 
integration of more effective information and 
document management systems and specialised 
writing tools (for example authoring memory 
systems). We do not know how many 
professional writers use LinguisTech 6 , but we 
can imagine that they would expect a “reference 
web site for language professionals” to offer 
some specialised computer tools for tasks related 
to writing in a professional setting7. 

On the other hand, we have to admit that 
LinguisTech’s focus on tutorials and exercises 
addresses concerns expressed in our exploratory 
study, since the absence of training on 
information and language technologies was one 
of the major problems mentioned by our 
participants. 

Also, we think that LinguisTech could serve 
as an introduction to new tools, since our 
participants mentioned that they would welcome 
the integration of additional computer tools to 
their writing process. For example, LinguisTech 
includes concept mapping tools, which could be 
tested for information structuring, and 
concordancers, which could be tested for 
checking the correct usage of an expression 
during writing or revising. Those two categories 
of computer tools are accompanied by training 
material in LinguisTech. 

4 Conclusion 
In this paper, we presented results from a focus 
group with professional writers, in which they 

                                                           
6 As a survey on LinguisTech users’ satisfaction will be 
launched in March, 2012, we hope to have more 
information soon on that subject. 
7 Many resources are available for translation specialised 
tasks (see the list of translation and localization tools in 
Table 5).  
 

discussed their experience with computer tools 
used to produce documents in the workplace. As 
we have seen, although they would not be able to 
work without those tools, they reported a number 
of problems, namely that they do not have access 
to specialised writing tools, such as authoring 
memory systems, and that they need training on 
computer tools.  

In the second part of the paper, we briefly 
described LinguisTech, a new platform for 
language professionals launched last September 
in Canada. We concluded that LinguisTech is 
useful for professional writers since it gives 
access to many computer tools intended for 
writing purposes, and many of those tools are 
accompanied by tutorials or exercises. However, 
according to our preliminary evaluation, 
LinguisTech would be even more adapted to 
today’s professional writing if it offered more 
effective information and document management 
systems, specialised writing tools, and training 
material on collaborative platforms.  

Acknowledgments 

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers 
for their useful comments and suggestions in 
revising this paper, and Joël Bourgeoys for his 
considerable help.  

References 
Andy Adler, John C. Nash, and Sylvie Noël. 2006. 

Evaluating and Implementing a Collaborative 
Office Document System. In Interacting with 
Computers, 18(4):665-682. 

Jeffrey Allen. 1999. Adapting the Concept of 
“Translation Memory” to “Authoring Memory” for 
a Controlled Language Writing Environment. In 
Proceedings of the Twenty-First International 
Conference on Translating and the Computer, 
London. 

Céline Beaudet. 1998. Littéracie et rédaction: vers la 
définition d’une pratique professionnelle. In G.  A. 
Legault, editor, L’intervention : usages et 
méthodes. Éditions GGC, Sherbrooke, Canada, 
pages 68-88. 

Lynne Bowker, and Elizabeth Marshman. 2011. 
Towards a Model of Active and Situated Learning 
in the Teaching of Computer-Aided Translation: 
Introducing the CERTT Project. In Journal of 
Translation Studies, 13-14. To appear. 

Isabelle Clerc. 1998. L’enseignement de la rédaction 
professionnelle en milieu universitaire. In C. 
Préfontaine, L. Godard and G. Fortier, editors, 
Pour mieux comprendre la lecture et l’écriture : 
enseignement et apprentissage. Éditions Logiques, 
Montreal, pages 345-370. 

46



Isabelle Clerc, et al. 2000. La démarche de rédaction. 
Éditions Nota bene, Quebec, Canada. 

Paul Geoffrion. 1998. Le groupe de discussion. In B. 
Gauthier, editor, Recherche sociale: de la 
problématique à la collecte des données. Presses de 
l’Université du Québec, Québec, Canada, pages 
303-328. 

Éric Kavanagh. 1999. Analyse des fonctions d’un 
traitement de texte en regard des besoins du 
rédacteur professionnel. In Z. Guével and I. Clerc, 
editors, Les professions langagières à l’aube de 
l’an 2000. CIRAL, Quebec, Canada, pages 161-
182. 

Éric Kavanagh. 2006. La rédaction web : anatomie 
d’une « nouvelle » expertise. In A. Piolat, editor, 
Lire, écrire, communiquer et apprendre avec 
internet. Solal, Marseille, pages 175-201. 

Alex Kuhn, Chris Quintana, and Elliot Soloway. 
2009. Story Time : A New Way for Children to 
Write. In Proceedings of the 8th International 
Conference on Interaction Design and Children, 
pages 218-221, New York. 

Päivi Majaranta, and Räihä Kari-Jouko. 2002. Twenty 
Years of Eye Typing: Systems and Design Issues. 
In Proceedings of the 2002 Symposium on Eye 
Tracking Research and Applications, pages 15-22, 
New York.  

John Milton, and Vivying S. Y. Cheng. 2010. A 
Toolkit to Assist L2 Learners Become Independent 
Writers. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 
Workshop on Computational Linguistics and 
Writing: Writing Processes and Authoring Aids, 
pages 33-41, Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania. 

Claude Morizio. 2006. La recherche d’information. 
Armand Colin, Paris. 

Khédija Nakbi. 2002. La rédactologie : domaine, 
méthode et compétences. ASp, 37-38, pages 15-26. 
Retrieved December 7, 2011 from 
http://asp.revues.org/1428. 

47


