










































Using Parallel Features in Parsing of Machine-Translated Sentences for Correction of Grammatical Errors


Proceedings of SSST-6, Sixth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 39–48,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using Parallel Features in Parsing of Machine-Translated Sentences for
Correction of Grammatical Errors ∗

Rudolf Rosa, Ondřej Dušek, David Mareček, and Martin Popel
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
{rosa,odusek,marecek,popel}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

In this paper, we present two dependency
parser training methods appropriate for pars-
ing outputs of statistical machine transla-
tion (SMT), which pose problems to standard
parsers due to their frequent ungrammatical-
ity. We adapt the MST parser by exploiting
additional features from the source language,
and by introducing artificial grammatical er-
rors in the parser training data, so that the
training sentences resemble SMT output.

We evaluate the modified parser on DEP-
FIX, a system that improves English-Czech
SMT outputs using automatic rule-based cor-
rections of grammatical mistakes which re-
quires parsed SMT output sentences as its in-
put. Both parser modifications led to im-
provements in BLEU score; their combina-
tion was evaluated manually, showing a sta-
tistically significant improvement of the trans-
lation quality.

1 Introduction

The machine translation (MT) quality is on a steady
rise, with mostly statistical systems (SMT) dominat-
ing the area (Callison-Burch et al., 2010; Callison-
Burch et al., 2011). Most MT systems do not employ
structural linguistic knowledge and even the state-
of-the-art MT solutions are unable to avoid making
serious grammatical errors in the output, which of-
ten leads to unintelligibility or to a risk of misinter-
pretations of the text by a reader.

∗This research has been supported by the EU Seventh
Framework Programme under grant agreement n◦ 247762
(Faust), and by the grants GAUK116310 and GA201/09/H057.

This problem is particularly apparent in target lan-
guages with rich morphological inflection, such as
Czech. As Czech often conveys the relations be-
tween individual words using morphological agree-
ment instead of word order, together with the word
order itself being relatively free, choosing the cor-
rect inflection becomes crucial.

Since the output of phrase-based SMT shows fre-
quent inflection errors (even in adjacent words) due
to each word belonging to a different phrase, a
possible way to address the grammaticality prob-
lem is a combination of statistical and structural ap-
proach, such as SMT output post-editing (Stymne
and Ahrenberg, 2010; Mareček et al., 2011).

In this paper, we focus on improving SMT output
parsing quality, as rule-based post-editing systems
rely heavily on the quality of SMT output analy-
sis. Parsers trained on gold standard parse trees of-
ten fail to produce the expected result when applied
to SMT output with grammatical errors. This is
partly caused by the fact that when parsing highly in-
flected free word-order languages the parsers have to
rely on morphological agreement, which, as stated
above, is often erroneous in SMT output.

Training a parser specifically by creating a man-
ually annotated treebank of MT systems’ outputs
would be very expensive, and the application of such
treebank to other MT systems than the ones used
for its generation would be problematic. We address
this issue by two methods of increasing the quality
of SMT output parsing:

• a different application of previous works on
bitext parsing – exploiting additional features
from the source language (Section 3), and

39



• introducing artificial grammatical errors in the
target language parser training data, so that the
sentences resemble the SMT output in some
ways (Section 4). This technique is, to our
knowledge, novel with regards to its applica-
tion to SMT and the statistical error model.

We test these two techniques on English-Czech
MT outputs using our own reimplementation of the
MST parser (McDonald et al., 2005) named RUR1

parser. and evaluate their contribution to the SMT
post-editing quality of the DEPFIX system (Mareček
et al., 2011), which we outline in Section 5. We
describe the experiments carried out and present the
most important results in Section 6. Section 7 then
concludes the paper and indicates more possibilities
of further improvements.

2 Related Work

Our approach to parsing with parallel features is
similar to various works which seek to improve the
parsing accuracy on parallel texts (“bitexts”) by us-
ing information from both languages. Huang et
al. (2009) employ “bilingual constraints” in shift-
reduce parsing to disambiguate difficult syntac-
tic constructions and resolve shift-reduce conflicts.
Chen et al. (2010) use similar subtree constraints to
improve parser accuracy in a dependency scenario.
Chen et al. (2011) then improve the method by ob-
taining a training parallel treebank via SMT. In re-
cent work, Haulrich (2012) experiments with a setup
very similar to ours: adding alignment-projected
features to an originally monolingual parser.

However, the main aim of all these works is to im-
prove the parsing accuracy on correct parallel texts,
i.e. human-translated. This paper applies similar
methods, but with a different objective in mind – in-
creasing the ability of the parser to process ungram-
matical SMT output sentences and, ultimately, im-
prove rule-based SMT post-editing.

Xiong et al. (2010) use SMT parsing in translation
quality assessment, providing syntactic features to a
classifier detecting erroneous words in SMT output,
yet they do not concentrate on improving parsing ac-
curacy – they employ a link grammar parser, which

1The abbreviation “RUR” parser stands for “Rudolph’s Uni-
versal Robust” parser.

is robust, but not tuned specifically to process un-
grammatical input.

There is also another related direction of research
in parsing of parallel texts, which is targeted on pars-
ing under-resourced languages, e.g. the works by
Hwa et al. (2005), Zeman and Resnik (2008), and
McDonald et al. (2011). They address the fact that
parsers for the language of interest are of low qual-
ity or even non-existent, whereas there are high-
quality parsers for the other language. They ex-
ploit common properties of both languages and de-
lexicalization. Zhao et al. (2009) uses information
from word-by-word translated treebank to obtain ad-
ditional training data and boost parser accuracy.

This is different from our situation, as there ex-
ist high performance parsers for Czech (Buchholz
and Marsi, 2006; Nivre et al., 2007; Hajič et al.,
2009). Boosting accuracy on correct sentences is
not our primary goal and we do not intend to re-
place the Czech parser by an English parser; instead,
we aim to increase the robustness of an already ex-
isting Czech parser by adding knowledge from the
corresponding English source, parsed by an English
parser.

Other works in bilingual parsing aim to parse the
parallel sentences directly using a grammar formal-
ism fit for this purpose, such as Inversion Trans-
duction Grammars (ITG) (Wu, 1997). Burkett et
al. (2010) further include ITG parsing with word-
alignment in a joint scenario. We concentrate here
on using dependency parsers because of tools and
training data availability for the examined language
pair.

Regarding treebank adaptation for parser robust-
ness, Foster et al. (2008) introduce various kinds of
artificial errors into the training data to make the fi-
nal parser less sensitive to grammar errors. How-
ever, their approach concentrates on mistakes made
by humans (such as misspellings, word repetition or
omission etc.) and the error models used are hand-
crafted. Our work focuses on morphology errors of-
ten encountered in SMT output and introduces sta-
tistical error modelling.

3 Parsing with Parallel Features

This section describes our SMT output parsing setup
with features from analyzed source sentences. We

40



explain our motivation for the inclusion of parallel
features in Section 3.1, then provide an account of
the parsers used (including our RUR parser) in Sec-
tion 3.2, and finally list all the monolingual and par-
allel features included in the parser training (in Sec-
tions 3.3 and 3.4, respectively).

3.1 Motivation

An advantage of SMT output parsing over general
dependency parsing is that one can also make use of
source – English sentences in our case. Moreover,
although SMT output is often in many ways ungram-
matical, source is usually grammatical and therefore
easier to process (in our case especially to tag and
parse). This was already noticed in Mareček et al.
(2011), who use the analysis of source sentence to
provide additional information for the DEPFIX rules,
claiming it to be more reliable than the analysis of
SMT output sentence.

We have carried this idea further by having de-
vised a simple way of making use of this information
in parsing of the SMT output sentences: We parse
the source sentence first and include features com-
puted over the parsed source sentence in the set of
features used for parsing SMT output. We first align
the source and SMT output sentences on the word
level and then use alignment-wise local features –
i.e. for each SMT output word, we add features com-
puted over its aligned source word, if applicable (cf.
Section 3.4 for a listing).

3.2 Parsers Used

We have reimplemented the MST parser (McDonald
et al., 2005) in order to provide for a simple insertion
of the parallel features into the models.

We also used the original implementation of the
MST parser by McDonald et al. (2006) for com-
parison in our experiments. To distinguish the two
variants used, we denote the original MST parser
as MCD parser,2 and the new reimplementation as
RUR parser.

We trained RUR parser in a first-order non-
projective setting with single-best MIRA. Depen-
dency labels are assigned in a second stage by a

2MCD uses k-best MIRA, does first- and second-order
parsing, both projectively and non-projectively, and can be
obtained from http://sourceforge.net/projects/
mstparser.

MIRA-based labeler, which has been implemented
according to McDonald (2006) and Gimpel and Co-
hen (2007).

We used the Prague Czech-English Dependency
Treebank3 (PCEDT) 2.0 (Bojar et al., 2012) as the
training data for RUR parser – a parallel treebank
created from the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al.,
1993) and its translation into Czech by human trans-
lators. The dependency trees on the English side
were converted from the manually annotated phrase-
structure trees in Penn Treebank, the Czech trees
were created automatically using MCD. Words of
the Czech and English sentences were aligned by
GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003).

We apply RUR parser only for SMT output pars-
ing; for source parsing, we use MCD parser trained
on the English CoNLL 2007 data (Nivre et al.,
2007), as the performance of this parser is sufficient
for this task.

3.3 Monolingual Features
The set of monolingual features used in RUR parser
follows those described by McDonald et al. (2005).
For parsing, we use the features described below.
The individual features are computed for both the
parent node and the child node of an edge and con-
joined in various ways. The coarse morphological
tag and lemma are provided by the Morče tagger
(Spoustová et al., 2007).

• coarse morphological tag – Czech two-letter
coarse morphological tag, as described in
(Collins et al., 1999),4

• lemma – morphological lemma,

• context features: preceding coarse morpholog-
ical tag, following coarse morphological tag
– coarse morphological tag of a neighboring
node,

• coarse morphological tags in between – bag of
coarse morphological tags of nodes positioned
between the parent node and the child node,

3http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pcedt
4The first letter is the main POS (12 possible values), the

second letter is either the morphological case field if the main
POS displays case (i.e. for nouns, adjectives, pronouns, numer-
als and prepositions; 7 possible values), or the detailed POS if
it does not (22 possible values).

41



• distance – signed bucketed distance of the par-
ent and the child node in the sentence (in # of
words), using buckets 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 11.

To assign dependency labels, we use the same
set as described above, plus the following features
(called “non-local” by McDonald (2006)), which
make use of the knowledge of the tree structure.

• is first child, is last child – a boolean indicating
whether the node appears in the sentence as the
first/last one among all the child nodes of its
parent node,

• child number – the number of syntactic chil-
dren of the current node.

3.4 Parallel Features

Figure 1: Example sentence for parallel features illustra-
tion (see Table 1).

In RUR parser we use three types of parallel fea-
tures, computed for the parent and child node of an
edge, which make use of the source English nodes
aligned to the parent and child node.

• aligned tag: morphological tag following the
Penn Treebank Tagset (Marcus et al., 1993) of
the English node aligned to the Czech node

Feature Feature value on
parent node child node

word form jel Martin
aligned tag VBD NNP
aligned dep. label Pred Sb
aligned edge existence true
word form jel autem
aligned tag VBD NN
aligned dep. label Pred Adv
aligned edge existence false
word form do zahraničı́
aligned tag — RB
aligned dep. label — Adv
aligned edge existence —
word form #root# .
aligned tag #root# .
aligned dep. label AuxS AuxK
aligned edge existence true

Table 1: Parallel features for several edges in Figure 1.

• aligned dependency label: dependency label of
the English node aligned to the Czech node in
question, according to the PCEDT 2.0 label set
(Bojar et al., 2012)

• aligned edge existence: a boolean indicating
whether the English node aligned to the Czech
parent node is also the parent of the English
node aligned to the Czech child node

The parallel features are conjoined with the
monolingual coarse morphological tag and lemma
features in various ways.

If there is no source node aligned to the parent
or child node, the respective feature cannot be com-
puted and is skipped.

An example of a pair of parallel sentences is given
in Figure 1 with the corresponding values of parallel
features for several edges in Table 1.

4 Worsening Treebanks to Simulate Some
of the SMT Frequent Errors

Addressing the issue of great differences between
the gold standard parser training data and the actual
analysis input (SMT output), we introduced artificial
inconsistencies into the training treebanks, in order
to make the parsers more robust in the face of gram-
mar errors made by SMT systems. We have concen-

42



trated solely on modeling incorrect word flection,
i.e. the dependency trees retained their original cor-
rect structures and word lemmas remained fixed, but
the individual inflected word forms have been modi-
fied according to an error model trained on real SMT
output. We simulate thus, with respect to morphol-
ogy, a treebank of parsed MT output sentences.

In Section 4.1 we describe the steps we take to
prepare the worsened parser training data. Sec-
tion 4.2 contains a description of our monolingual
greedy alignment tool which is needed during the
process to map SMT output to reference transla-
tions.

4.1 Creating the Worsened Parser Training
Data

The whole process of treebank worsening consists
of five steps:

1. We translated the English side of PCEDT5 to
Czech using SMT (we chose the Moses sys-
tem (Koehn et al., 2007) for our experiments)
and tagged the resulting translations using the
Morče tagger (Spoustová et al., 2007).

2. We aligned the Czech side of PCEDT, now
serving as a reference translation, to the SMT
output using our Monolingual Greedy Aligner
(see Section 4.2).

3. Collecting the counts of individual errors, we
estimated the Maximum Likelihood probabili-
ties of changing a correct fine-grained morpho-
logical tag (of a word from the reference) into
a possibly incorrect fine-grained morphological
tag of the aligned word (from the SMT output).

4. The tags on the Czech side of PCEDT were
randomly sampled according to the estimated
“fine-grained morphological tag error model”.
In those positions where fine-grained morpho-
logical tags were changed, new word forms
were generated using the Czech morphological
generator by Hajič (2004).6

5This approach is not conditioned by availability of parallel
treebanks. Alternatively, we might translate any text for which
reference translations are at hand. The model learned in the
third step would then be applied (in the fourth step) to a different
text for which parse trees are available.

6According to the “fine-grained morphological tag error

We use the resulting “worsened” treebank to train
our parser described in Section 3.2.

4.2 The Monolingual Greedy Aligner
Our monolingual alignment tool, used in treebank
worsening to tie reference translations to MT out-
put (see Section 4.1), scores all possible alignment
links and then greedily chooses the currently highest
scoring one, creating the respective alignment link
from word A (in the reference) to word B (in the
SMT output) and deleting all scores of links from A
or to B, so that one-to-one alignments are enforced.
The process is terminated when no links with a score
higher than a given threshold are available; some
words may thus remain unaligned.

The score is computed as a linear combination of
the following four features:

• word form (or lemma if available) similar-
ity based on Jaro-Winkler distance (Winkler,
1990),

• fine-grained morphological tag similarity,

• similarity of the relative position in the sen-
tence,

• and an indication whether the word following
(or preceding) A was already aligned to the
word following (or preceding) B.

Unlike bilingual word aligners, this tool needs no
training except for setting weights of the four fea-
tures and the threshold.7

5 The DEPFIX System

The DEPFIX system (Mareček et al., 2011) applies
various rule-based corrections to Czech-English
SMT output sentences, especially of morphological
agreement. It also employs the parsed source sen-
tences, which must be provided on the input together
with the SMT output sentences.

The corrections follow the rules of Czech gram-
mar, e.g. requiring that the clause subject be in the

model”, about 20% of fine-grained morphological tags were
changed. In 4% of cases, no word form existed for the new
fine-grained morphological tag and thus it was not changed.

7The threshold and weights were set manually using just ten
sentence pairs. The resulting alignment quality was found suf-
ficient, so no additional weights tuning was performed.

43



nominative case or enforcing subject-predicate and
noun-attribute agreements in morphological gender,
number and case, where applicable. Morphological
properties found violating the rules are corrected and
the corresponding word forms regenerated.

The source sentence parse, word-aligned to the
SMT output using GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003),
is used as a source of morpho-syntactic information
for the correction rules. An example of a correction
rule application is given in Figure 2.

Some

people

came

later

Atr

Sb

Pred

Adv
pl

pl

.
AuxK

přišli
Pred
pl

Někteří

lidé

přišel

později

Atr

Sb

Pred

Adv
sg, m

pl

.
AuxK

Figure 2: Example of fixing subject-predicate agreement.
The Czech word přišel [he came] has a wrong morpho-
logical number and gender. Adapted from Mareček et al.
(2011).

The system is implemented within the
TectoMT/Treex NLP framework (Popel and
Žabokrtský, 2010). Mareček et al. (2011) feed the
DEPFIX system with analyses by the MCD parser
trained on gold-standard treebanks for parsing of
English source sentences as well as Czech SMT
output.

6 Experiments and Results

We evaluate RUR parser indirectly by using it in the
DEPFIX system and measuring the performance of
the whole system. This approach has been chosen
instead of direct evaluation of the SMT output parse
trees, as the task of finding a correct parse tree of
a possibly grammatically incorrect sentence is not
well defined and considerably difficult to do.

We used WMT10, WMT11 and WMT12 En-
glish to Czech translation test sets, newssyscomb-
test2010, newssyscombtest2011 and news-
test2012,8 (denoted as WMT10, WMT11 and

8http://www.statmt.org/wmt10,

WMT12) for the automatic evaluation. The data sets
include the source (English) text, its reference trans-
lation and translations produced by several MT sys-
tems. We used the outputs of three SMT systems:
GOOGLE,9 UEDIN (Koehn et al., 2007) and BOJAR
(Bojar and Kos, 2010).

For the manual evaluation, two sets of 1000 ran-
domly selected sentences from WMT11 and from
WMT12 translated by GOOGLE were used.

6.1 Automatic Evaluation
Table 2 shows BLEU scores (Papineni et al., 2002)
for the following setups of DEPFIX:

• SMT output: output of an SMT system without
applying DEPFIX

• MCD: parsing with MCD

• RUR: parsing with RUR (Section 3.2)

• RUR+PARA: parsing with RUR using parallel
features (Section 3.4)

• RUR+WORS: parsing with RUR trained on
worsened treebank (Section 4)

• RUR+WORS+PARA: parsing with RUR
trained on worsened treebank and using
parallel features

It can be seen that both of the proposed ways of
adapting the parser to parsing of SMT output of-
ten lead to higher BLEU scores of translations post-
processed by DEPFIX, which suggests that they both
improve the parsing accuracy.

We have computed 95% confidence intervals
on 1000 bootstrap samples, which showed that
the BLEU score of RUR+WORS+PARA was sig-
nificantly higher than that of MCD and RUR
parser in 4 and 3 cases, respectively (results
where RUR+WORS+PARA achieved a significantly
higher score are marked with ‘*’). On the other
hand, the score of neither RUR+WORS+PARA nor
RUR+WORS and RUR+PARA was ever signifi-
cantly lower than the score of MCD or RUR parser.
This leads us to believe that the two proposed meth-
ods are able to produce slightly better SMT output
parsing results.
http://www.statmt.org/wmt11,
http://www.statmt.org/wmt12

9http://translate.google.com

44



Test set WMT10 WMT11 WMT12
SMT system BOJAR GOOGLE UEDIN BOJAR GOOGLE UEDIN BOJAR GOOGLE UEDIN
SMT output *15.85 *16.57 *15.91 *16.88 *20.26 *17.80 14.36 16.25 *15.54
MCD 16.09 16.95 *16.35 *17.02 20.45 *18.12 14.35 16.32 *15.65
RUR 16.08 *16.85 *16.29 17.03 20.42 *18.09 14.37 16.31 15.66
RUR+PARA 16.13 *16.90 *16.35 17.05 20.47 18.19 14.35 16.31 15.72
RUR+WORS 16.12 16.96 *16.45 17.06 20.53 18.21 14.40 16.31 15.71
RUR+WORS+PARA 16.13 17.03 16.54 17.12 20.53 18.25 14.39 16.30 15.74

Table 2: Automatic evaluation using BLEU scores for the unmodified SMT output (output of BOJAR, GOOGLE and
UEDIN systems on WMT10, WMT11 and WMT12 test sets), and for SMT output parsed by various parser setups and
processed by DEPFIX. The score of RUR+WORS+PARA is significantly higher at 95% confidence level than the scores
marked with ‘*’ on the same data.

6.2 Manual Evaluation

Performance of RUR+WORS+PARA setup was man-
ually evaluated by doing a pairwise comparison with
other setups – SMT output, MCD and RUR parser.
The evaluation was performed on both the WMT11
(Table 4) and WMT12 (Table 5) test set. 1000 sen-
tences from the output of the GOOGLE system were
randomly selected and processed by DEPFIX, using
the aforementioned SMT output parsers. The anno-
tators then compared the translation quality of the
individual variants in differing sentences, selecting
the better variant from a pair or declaring two vari-
ants “same quality” (indefinite). They were also pro-
vided with the source sentence and a reference trans-
lation. The evaluation was done as a blind test, with
the sentences randomly shuffled.

The WMT11 test set was evaluated by two inde-
pendent annotators. (The WMT12 test set was eval-
uated by one annotator only.) The inter-annotator
agreement and Cohen’s kappa coefficient (Cohen
and others, 1960), shown in Table 3, were computed
both including all annotations (“with indefs”), and
disregarding sentences where at least one of the an-
notators marked the difference as indefinite (“with-
out indefs”) – we believe a disagreement in choos-
ing the better translation to be more severe than a
disagreement in deciding whether the difference in
quality of the translations allows to mark one as be-
ing better.

For both of the test sets, RUR+WORS+PARA sig-
nificantly outperforms both MCD and RUR base-
line, confirming that a combination of the proposed
modifications of the parser lead to its better perfor-
mance. Statistical significance of the results was

RUR+WORS+PARA with indefs without indefs
compared to IAA Kappa IAA Kappa
SMT output 77% 0.54 92% 0.74
MCD 79% 0.66 95% 0.90
RUR 75% 0.60 94% 0.85

Table 3: Inter-annotator agreement on WMT11 data set
translated by GOOGLE

confirmed by a one-sided pairwise t-test, with the
following differences ranking: RUR+WORS+PARA
better = 1, baseline better = -1, indefinite = 0.

6.3 Inspection of Parser Modification Benefits

For a better understanding of the benefits of using
our modified parser, we inspected a small number of
parse trees, produced by RUR+WORS+PARA, and
compared them to those produced by RUR.
In many cases, the changes introduced by
RUR+WORS+PARA were clearly positive. We
provide two representative examples below.

Subject Identification

Czech grammar requires the subject to be in nom-
inative case, but this constraint is often violated in
SMT output and a parser typically fails to identify
the subject correctly in such situations. By wors-
ening the training data, we make the parser more ro-
bust in this respect, as the worsening often switches
the case of the subject; by including parallel fea-
tures, especially the aligned dependency label fea-
ture, RUR+WORS+PARA parser can often identify
the subject as the node aligned to the source subject.

45



Out of the differing sentences
Annotator Baseline Differing sentences RUR+WORS+PARA better baseline better indefinite

count percent count percent count percent
SMT output 422 301 71% 79 19% 42 10%

A MCD 211 120 57% 65 31% 26 12%
RUR 217 123 57% 64 29% 30 14%
SMT output 422 284 67% 69 16% 69 16%

B MCD 211 107 51% 56 26% 48 23%
RUR 217 118 54% 53 24% 46 21%

Table 4: Manual comparison of RUR+WORS+PARA with various baselines, on 1000 sentences from WMT11 data set
translated by GOOGLE, evaluated by two independent annotators.

Out of the differing sentences
Annotator Baseline Differing sentences RUR+WORS+PARA better baseline better indefinite

count percent count percent count percent
SMT output 420 270 64% 88 21% 62 15%

A MCD 188 86 45% 64 34% 38 20%
RUR 187 96 51% 57 30% 34 18%

Table 5: Manual comparison of RUR+WORS+PARA with various baselines, on 1000 sentences from WMT12 data set
translated by GOOGLE.

Governing Noun Identification

A parser for Czech typically relies on morpho-
logical agreement between an adjective and its gov-
erning noun (in morphological number, gender and
case), which is often violated in SMT output. Again,
RUR+WORS+PARA is more robust in this respect,
aligned edge existence now being the crucial feature
for the correct identification of this relation.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

We have studied two methods of improving the pars-
ing quality of Machine Translation outputs by pro-
viding additional information to the parser.

In Section 3, we propose a method of integrat-
ing additional information known at runtime, i.e.
the knowledge of the source sentence (source), from
which the sentence being parsed (SMT output) has
been translated. This knowledge is provided by
extending the parser feature set with new features
from the source sentence, projected through word-
alignment.

In Section 4, we introduce a method of utilizing
additional information known in the training phase,
namely the knowledge of the ways in which SMT
output differs from correct sentences. We provide

this knowledge to the parser by adjusting its training
data to model some of the errors frequently encoun-
tered in SMT output, i.e. incorrect inflection forms.

We have evaluated the usefulness of these two
methods by integrating them into the DEPFIX rule-
based MT output post-processing system (Mareček
et al., 2011), as MT output parsing is crucial for the
operation of this system. When used with our im-
proved parsing, the DEPFIX system showed better
performance both in automatic and manual evalua-
tion on outputs of several, including state-of-the-art,
MT systems.

We believe that the proposed methods of improv-
ing MT output parsing can be extended beyond their
current state. The parallel features used in our setup
are very few and very simple; it thus remains to
be examined whether more elaborate features could
help utilize the additional information contained in
the source sentence to a greater extent. Modeling
other types of SMT output inconsistencies in parser
training data is another possible step.

We also believe that the methods could be adapted
for use in other applications, e.g. automatic classifi-
cation of translation errors, confidence estimation or
multilingual question answering.

46



References

Ondřej Bojar and Kamil Kos. 2010. 2010 Failures in
English-Czech Phrase-Based MT. In Proceedings of
the Joint Fifth Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation and MetricsMATR, pages 60–66, Uppsala, Swe-
den, July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ondřej Bojar, Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila Panevová,
Petr Sgall, Silvie Cinková, Eva Fučı́ková, Marie
Mikulová, Petr Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jiřı́ Semecký,
Jana Šindlerová, Jan Štěpánek, Josef Toman, Zdeňka
Urešová, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2012. Announc-
ing Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank 2.0.
In Proceedings of LREC 2012, Istanbul, Turkey, May.
ELRA, European Language Resources Association.
In print.

Sabine Buchholz and Erwin Marsi. 2006. CoNLL-X
shared task on multilingual dependency parsing. In
Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning, pages 149–164.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

David Burkett, John Blitzer, and Dan Klein. 2010.
Joint parsing and alignment with weakly synchronized
grammars. In Human Language Technologies: The
2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 127–135. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
Kay Peterson, Mark Przybocki, and Omar Zaidan.
2010. Findings of the 2010 joint workshop on sta-
tistical machine translation and metrics for machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation and MetricsMATR,
pages 17–53, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
and Omar Zaidan. 2011. Findings of the 2011 work-
shop on statistical machine translation. In Proceedings
of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, pages 22–64, Edinburgh, Scotland, July. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Wenliang Chen, Jun’ichi Kazama, and Kentaro Torisawa.
2010. Bitext dependency parsing with bilingual sub-
tree constraints. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 21–29. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Wenliang Chen, Jun’ichi Kazama, Min Zhang, Yoshi-
masa Tsuruoka, Yujie Zhang, Yiou Wang, Kentaro
Torisawa, and Haizhou Li. 2011. SMT helps bitext
dependency parsing. In EMNLP, pages 73–83. ACL.

Jacob Cohen et al. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for

nominal scales. Educational and psychological mea-
surement, 20(1):37–46.

Michael Collins, Lance Ramshaw, Jan Hajič, and
Christoph Tillmann. 1999. A statistical parser for
Czech. In Proceedings of the 37th annual meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics on
Computational Linguistics, ACL ’99, pages 505–512,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Jennifer Foster, Joachim Wagner, and Josef Van Gen-
abith. 2008. Adapting a WSJ-trained parser to gram-
matically noisy text. In Proceedings of the 46th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics on Human Language Technologies: Short
Papers, pages 221–224. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Kevin Gimpel and Shay Cohen. 2007. Discriminative
online algorithms for sequence labeling- a comparative
study.

Jan Hajič, Massimiliano Ciaramita, Richard Johans-
son, Daisuke Kawahara, Maria Antònia Martı́, Lluı́s
Màrquez, Adam Meyers, Joakim Nivre, Sebastian
Padó, Jan Štěpánek, et al. 2009. The CoNLL-
2009 shared task: Syntactic and semantic dependen-
cies in multiple languages. In Proceedings of the Thir-
teenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning: Shared Task, pages 1–18. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Jan Hajič. 2004. Disambiguation of rich inflection: com-
putational morphology of Czech. Karolinum.

Martin Haulrich. 2012. Data-Driven Bitext Dependency
Parsing and Alignment. Ph.D. thesis.

Liang Huang, Wenbin Jiang, and Qun Liu. 2009.
Bilingually-constrained (monolingual) shift-reduce
parsing. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
Volume 3-Volume 3, pages 1222–1231. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Rebecca Hwa, Philip Resnik, Amy Weinberg, Clara
Cabezas, and Okan Kolak. 2005. Bootstrapping
parsers via syntactic projection across parallel texts.
Nat. Lang. Eng., 11:311–325, September.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source
Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation. In ACL
2007, Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics Companion
Volume Proceedings of the Demo and Poster Sessions,
pages 177–180, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

47



Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and Beat-
rice Santorini. 1993. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of English: The Penn Treebank. Comput. Lin-
guist., 19:313–330, June.

David Mareček, Rudolf Rosa, Petra Galuščáková, and
Ondřej Bojar. 2011. Two-step translation with gram-
matical post-processing. In Chris Callison-Burch,
Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz, and Omar Zaidan, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation, pages 426–432, Edinburgh, UK.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ryan McDonald, Fernando Pereira, Kiril Ribarov, and
Jan Hajič. 2005. Non-projective dependency parsing
using spanning tree algorithms. In HLT ’05: Proceed-
ings of the conference on Human Language Technol-
ogy and Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 523–530, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada.

Ryan McDonald, Kevin Lerman, and Fernando Pereira.
2006. Multilingual dependency analysis with a two-
stage discriminative parser. In Proceedings of the
Tenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, CoNLL-X ’06, pages 216–220,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, and Keith Hall. 2011.
Multi-source transfer of delexicalized dependency
parsers. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
62–72. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ryan McDonald. 2006. Discriminative learning and
spanning tree algorithms for dependency parsing.
Ph.D. thesis, Philadelphia, PA, USA. AAI3225503.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Sandra Kübler, Ryan Mc-
Donald, Jens Nilsson, Sebastian Riedel, and Deniz
Yuret. 2007. The CoNLL 2007 shared task on de-
pendency parsing. In Proceedings of the CoNLL 2007
Shared Task. Joint Conf. on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), June.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A Systematic
Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment Models.
Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a Method for Automatic Eval-
uation of Machine Translation. In ACL 2002, Proceed-
ings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318, Philadel-
phia, Pennsylvania.

Martin Popel and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2010. TectoMT:
modular NLP framework. In Proceedings of the 7th
international conference on Advances in natural lan-
guage processing, IceTAL’10, pages 293–304, Berlin,
Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.

Drahomı́ra Spoustová, Jan Hajič, Jan Votrubec, Pavel Kr-
bec, and Pavel Květoň. 2007. The best of two worlds:
Cooperation of statistical and rule-based taggers for
Czech. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Balto-
Slavonic Natural Language Processing, ACL 2007,
pages 67–74, Praha.

Sara Stymne and Lars Ahrenberg. 2010. Using a gram-
mar checker for evaluation and postprocessing of sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proceedings of LREC,
pages 2175–2181.

William E. Winkler. 1990. String comparator met-
rics and enhanced decision rules in the Fellegi-Sunter
model of record linkage. In Proceedings of the Section
on Survey Research Methods (American Statistical As-
sociation), pages 354–359.

Dekai Wu. 1997. Stochastic inversion transduction
grammars and bilingual parsing of parallel corpora.
Computational Linguistics, 23(3):377–403.

Deyi Xiong, Min Zhang, and Haizhou Li. 2010. Er-
ror detection for statistical machine translation using
linguistic features. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 604–611. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Daniel Zeman and Philip Resnik. 2008. Cross-language
parser adaptation between related languages. NLP for
Less Privileged Languages, page 35.

Hai Zhao, Yan Song, Chunyu Kit, and Guodong Zhou.
2009. Cross language dependency parsing using a
bilingual lexicon. In Proceedings of the Joint Confer-
ence of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 1-Volume 1, pages
55–63. Association for Computational Linguistics.

48


