










































Annotation of Adversarial and Collegial Social Actions in Discourse


Proceedings of the 6th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 184–192,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12-13 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotation of Adversarial and Collegial Social Actions in Discourse

David B. Bracewell, Marc T. Tomlinson, Mary Brunson, Jesse Plymale,
Jiajun Bracewell, and Daniel Boerger

Language Computer Corporation
Richardson, TX 75080

{david,marc,mary,jesse,jiajun,dan}@languagecomputer.com

Abstract

We posit that determining the social goals and
intentions of dialogue participants is crucial
for understanding discourse taking place on
social media. In particular, we examine the
social goals of being collegial and being ad-
versarial. Through our early experimentation,
we found that speech and dialogue acts are not
able to capture the complexities and nuances
of the social intentions of discourse partici-
pants. Therefore, we introduce a set of 9 social
acts specifically designed to capture intentions
related to being collegial and being adversar-
ial. Social acts are pragmatic speech acts that
signal a dialogue participant’s social inten-
tions. We annotate social acts in discourses
communicated in English and Chinese taken
from Wikipedia talk pages, public forums, and
chat transcripts. Our results show that social
acts can be reliably understood by annotators
with a good level of inter-rater agreement.

1 Introduction

Discourse over social media presents a unique chal-
lenge for discourse processing, which has tradition-
ally been focused on task- (Grosz, 1978; Traum and
Hinkelman, 1992) and formal meeting- (Shriberg et
al., 2004) based discourse. In contrast, the discourse
taking place over social media is focused more on
the social engagements between participants. These
social engagements are often driven by the social
goals of the participants and not by a common goal
or task.

Social goals focus on the efforts of individuals to
fulfill roles and maintain or alter relationships with

others in a group. There are a great number of social
goals a discourse participant may undertake, such
as: maintaining the role of an authority or power
(Bramsen et al., 2011; Mayfield and Rose, 2011); or
trying to gain a new rule, such as by pursuing power
(Tomlinson et al., 2012);

In this paper, we focus on the social goal of an
individual (actor) maintaining a relationship (inten-
tion) with a second single individual (target). In par-
ticular, we wish to address the intentions of individ-
uals whose goal is related to a collegial (+ valence)
or adversarial (- valence) relationship.

Collegiality is defined as cooperating with others
in order to reach a common goal or ideal. Collegial-
ity has importance at a personal, interpersonal, and
group level. At the personal level, collegiality can be
an indicator of the degree of social support a person
has. Social support can be physical or emotional and
can have effects on job satisfaction (McCann et al.,
1997) and, in some cases, quality of life (Shapiro et
al., 2001). Collegiality is key for a productive dis-
course and collaboration. Studies show that people
who are put together in groups are more likely to be
collegial (Tajfel and Turner, 1979). Collegial groups
are more likely to have increased performance (Lit-
tle, 1982) and are more likely to reach their goals
(Campion et al., 1996).

In contrast to collegiality, adversarial behavior is
meant to explicitly point out opposition or dislike
for other participants. Adversarial individuals of-
ten are not following the cooperative principle of
dialogue as formulated in Grice’s maxims (Grice,
1975). Moreover, due the anonymity that social me-
dia provides adversarial participants often also do

184



not follow the social norm of taking face into ac-
count, such as Boella et al. (2000) suggest. The
dialogue only progresses due to the social intentions
of the other discourse participants in reaction to the
adversarial individual, e.g. defending one’s honor.

We adopt the Grosz and Sidner (Grosz and Sidner,
1986) theory of discourse, which breaks discourse
into three constituents: (1) linguistic structure; (2)
intentional structure; and (3) attentional state. We
address linguistic structure by segmenting the dis-
course based on topical shifts (Cassell et al., 2001),
which can be accomplished using methods such as
(Blei et al., 2003) or (Ambwani and Davis, 2010).
For attentional structure, we borrow from research
on local coherence by Barzilay and Lapata (2005).
The most crucial of the three constituents for the un-
derstanding of social goals is the intentional struc-
ture.

As a first attempt at capturing the intentional
structure indicative of collegial and adversarial be-
havior, we looked at using the prevailing methods in
discourse processing. Namely, we examined map-
ping dialogue acts (Allen and Core, 1997; Stolcke
et al., 1998), which pertain to the intentions of the
discourse, into these higher level social goals. How-
ever, we found that dialogue acts are not capable of
capturing the nuances of the social intentions of the
discourse participants.

Instead of focusing solely on the discourse, the in-
tentional structure of social discourse must also fo-
cus on the discourse participants and how their so-
cial goals constrain their dialogue. We argue that to
capture these social goals it is necessary to under-
stand the social intentions of the discourse partici-
pants and how they perceive the social intentions of
others. We define a social intention as the intention
of an individual to affect their social status or rela-
tionships within a group. In doing so, we consider
the social cognition of the discourse participants, it
is from cognition that the participants’ social inten-
tions are transformed into linguistic utterances.

We identify a set of 9 social acts, listed in section
3, that capture common social actions performed by
individuals whose social goal is the maintenance or
altering of a collegial or adversarial interpersonal re-
lationship. These social acts come from literature in
the fields of psychology and organizational behav-
ior and are motivated by work in discourse under-

standing. We present the results of annotating these
9 social acts for discourses communicated in Chi-
nese and English. In total, the corpus is made up of
215 English and 292 Chinese discourses.

2 Related Work

The two areas of research most related to this paper
are in social relationship extraction and discourse
processing. Work in the area of social relation-
ship extraction can be divided into several areas.
The field of socio-linguistics boasts well-established
studies of interpersonal relationships. For example,
Eggins and Slade present a thorough linguistic anal-
ysis on causal conversations that covers topics such
as humor, attitude, friendliness, and gossip (Eggins
and Slade, 1997). This is accomplished through a
comprehensive analysis of the dialogue at multiple
levels. In contrast, however, research using Natural
Language Processing to automatically identify so-
cial relationships in text is still in its infancy.

Strzalkowski et al. (2010), examine identification
of social goals by breaking them down into mid-
level social language uses. They focus on the use
of discourse features (e.g. topic control) to identify
language uses (Strzalkowski et al., 2010) that might
be indicative of some social constructs.

Another area of research that is along the lines of
determining adversarial and collegial actions is the
detection of agreement and disagreement. Wang et
al. (2011) identify agreement and disagreement in
English using conditional random fields. Similarly,
Hillard et al. (2003) detect agreement and disagree-
ment in speech transcripts using prosodic features.

The closest work to a general view of social acts is
by Bender et al. (2011). The researchers created an
annotated corpus of social acts relating to authority
claims and alignment moves. We propose that so-
cial acts are instead a broad class of speech acts that
cover a wide variety of social interactions. However,
this paper focuses on social acts which correlate to a
positive and negative valence for interpersonal rela-
tionships.

Research understanding the intentionality of dia-
logue and discourse has a long history. Some of the
earliest work in discourse processing is on speech
acts. Speech acts are actions performed by indi-
viduals when making an utterance. Austin (1962)

185



formalized the concept of speech acts by separating
them into three classes: (1) locutionary, (2) illocu-
tionary, and (3) perlocutionary. Locutionary acts
the prosody, phonetics, and semantics of the utter-
ance. Illocutionary acts are the intended functions
of the utterances of the speaker. Perlocutionary acts
are illocutionary acts that produce a certain effect in
its addressee, e.g. scaring and insulting. Much of
the work in speech acts has been focused on illocu-
tionary acts due to the work of Searle (1969).

Dialogue acts are illocutionary speech acts ex-
tended to include the internal structure, such as
grounding and adjacency pairs, of a dialogue. There
are a number of schemes for coding dialogue acts,
such as DAMSL (Allen and Core, 1997) and VERB-
MOBIL (Jekat et al., 1995). The DAMSL coding
scheme defines dialogue acts that are forward look-
ing, which are extensions of speech acts, and which
are backward looking, which relate the utterance to
previous utterances. Likewise, we define social acts
to reflect the social intention of an utterance. So-
cial acts serve a function to inform individuals about
social relationships. For example, in the statement
“get me a cup of coffee“, speech acts would focus
on identifying the set of actions that would result
from the utterance - presumably the target of the ut-
terance physically going to get a cup of coffer for
the speaker. In contrast, social acts focus on the so-
cial implicature of the statement, that the speaker is
indicating their power over the target.

Other work has focused on the coherence of dis-
course(Barzilay and Lapata, 2005; Byron and Stent,
1998; Hobbs, 1979; Mann and Thompson, 1988).
Mann and Thompson (1988) introduce Rhetorical
Structure Theory (RST), which was originally devel-
oped during the study of automatic text generation.
They posit that the coherence of a text is attributed
to the rhetorical relations between non-overlapping
texts called the nucleus and satellite. The definition
of the relations are not morphological or syntactic,
but instead are focused on function and semantics.

Barzilay and Lapata (2005) cast the local coher-
ence problem as a ranking problem. They take a
set of alternative renderings for a discourse and rank
them based on local coherence. Inspired by Center-
ing Theory they use an entity-based representation
where the role that the entities fill is taken into con-
sideration.

3 Social Acts Expressing Adversarial and
Collegial Intentions

Social interaction is the foundation of discourse.
Even task oriented discourse has many social im-
plications. One of the most common social impli-
cations of language is the expression of a desire to
establish or maintain a bond between the individu-
als, i.e. a collegial relationship. Here we also con-
sider its opposite, to sabotage others, i.e. playing the
adversary.

Collegiality is defined as cooperating with others
in order to reach a common goal or ideal. Inter-
personal collegiality is often born out of group col-
legiality, as the group defines the common bonds,
shared focus and common purpose that serve to unite
the individuals (see Gomez et al, 2011). An indi-
vidual maintains their collegial relationship with the
other members through collegial expressions, such
as supportive behavior and solidarity.

In contrast, adversarial behavior is meant to ex-
plicitly point out opposition or dislike for other par-
ticipants. An individual establishes his/her opposi-
tion to a group or an individual through such means
as disrespect and undermining the other’s efforts.

We label the discourse segment purpose, or the
social intentions of an utterance, as social acts. So-
cial acts are pragmatic speech acts that signal a di-
alogue participant’s social intentions. Social inten-
tions can range from establishing mutual bonds to
asserting dominance over another individual. These
social acts can be signaled with a variety of cue
phrases as well as through a discourse participants
observation or violation of social norms, or expecta-
tions of socially appropriate responses.

For informing a participant’s intentions to be ad-
versarial or collegial toward others, we define a set
of 9 social acts, listed in figure 1. The set of acts
presented below have been derived from work in
psychology on conflict and cooperation (Brewer and
Gardner, 1996; Deutsch, 2011; Jehn and Mannix,
2001; Owens and Sutton, 2001).

3.1 Agreement & Disagreement

Agreement can act as an affordance to an individ-
ual or as a means to establish solidarity between in-
dividuals. Likewise disagreement can act as a way
of undermining or challenging credibility. However,

186



Agreement Statements that a group member makes to indicate that he/she shares the same view about something
another member has said or done.

Challenge Credibility Attempts to discredit or raise doubt about another group members qualifications or abilities.
Disagreement Statements a group member makes to indicate that he/she does not share the same view about some-

thing another member has said or done.
Disrespect Inappropriate statements that a group member makes to insult another member of the group.

Offer Gratitude A sincere expression of thanks that one group member makes to another.
Relationship Conflict Personal, heated disagreement between individuals.

Solidarity Statements that a group member makes to strengthen the groups sense of community and unity.
Supportive Behavior Statements of personal support that one group member makes toward another.

Undermining Hostile expressions that a group member makes to damage the reputation of another group member.

Figure 1: The set of 9 social acts that capture social moves by individuals exhibiting adversarial behavior.

because of the special status of agreement and dis-
agreement we consider them as two separate social
acts.

Agreement can be manifested through simple
phrases, such as “I agree”, through negations of dis-
agreement, such as “I am not disagreeing with you”,
and through more complex phrases, such as “What
Adam says is in principle correct.” Similarly, dis-
agreement is manifested through simple “I disagree”
phrases as well as negations of agreement, such as “I
definitely do not agree with what you said.”

An example of agreement in Chinese is
同意 A所言，所以還是先繼續保護著吧。 (“I agree with
what A said, so just keep the protection.”). An
example of disagreement in Chinese is 恕本人不認同。
(“sorry, I can not agree.”).

3.2 Challenge Credibility

Challenging credibility can be used by an individ-
ual to lower the status of other group members
(Owens and Sutton, 2001). These challenges can
be in demands to prove credibility, such as “prove
your lies” and aggressive accusing questions, such
as “what does that have to do with what we are talk-
ing about?”. Challenging credibility can also occur
through gossip, such as “X doesn’t know what he
is talking about”. This tactic can be used by group
members to moderate the power of a leader who has
overstepped their boundaries (Keltner et al., 2008).

An example of Challenge Credibility in Chinese
is 不知可有其他依據？(“I do not know if you have other
evidence?”).

3.3 Disrespect

Disrespected individuals often feel they have been
unjustly treated due to the disrespectful action, caus-
ing a social imbalance between them and the perpe-
trator (Miller, 2001). This social imbalance causes a
power differential between the two individuals, thus
giving the perpetrator power over the individual. Ex-
amples of disrespect include “You are a gigantic
hypocrite you know that?” and “Do you speak En-
glish well?”

An example of Disrespect in Chinese is
你有种的话，请表明你的教派身份。 (“if you have the
guts, show your religious status.”).

3.4 Offer Gratitude

There is psychological validation for the considera-
tion of attitudes expressed by one individual towards
another. Even in the absence of any major differ-
ences within a group, the expression of an in-group
bias and out-group bias (Brewer, 1979) between in-
dividuals still takes place. Individuals within a group
are more likely to possess positive feelings for an-
other individual within the group and to rate him
or her more highly than an individual outside of the
group.

An example of Offer Gratitude in Chinese is
回應：谢谢你的意见。(“response: thanks for your opin-
ion”).

3.5 Relationship Conflict

Relationship conflict is a personal, heated disagree-
ment between individuals (Jehn and Mannix, 2001).
Individuals exhibiting relationship conflict are be-
ing adversarial. Examples of relationship conflict
include “your arrogant blathering” and “I consider

187



it offensive for you to assert that I insist on turning
every interaction into a personality conflict.”

An example of Relationship Conflict in Chinese is
久遠認為也有可能是閣下眼睛有問題，沒看見來源。(“I think it
is possible that you did not see the sources because
your eyes have a problem.”).

3.6 Solidarity
Further, language indicative of a desire for group
solidarity encapsulates the establishment and main-
tenance of shared group membership. Group mem-
bership can be expressed at either the relational level
(e.g. Father, co-worker, etc.) or the collective
level (e.g. single mothers) (Brewer and Gardner,
1996). Language indicative of a desire for group
solidarity demonstrates that an individual identifies
with the group, an important characteristic of lead-
ers (Keltner et al., 2008) and cooperators (Deutsch,
2011). This solidarity can be expressed explicitly
(e.g. “We’re all in this together”), covertly (e.g. as
through the use of inclusive first-person pronouns),
or through unconscious actions and linguistic cues,
such as the use of in-group jargon, certain syntactic
constructions, and mimicry.

An example of Solidarity in Chinese is 生日快乐！
(“Happy birthday!”).

3.7 Supportive Behavior
By definition, supportive behavior, or cooperation
towards a common goal, is an example of collegial-
ity. This type of behavior lies at the center of group
dynamics. Cooperation is correlated with both over-
all group performance and managerial ratings of
group effectiveness (Campion et al., 1996).Evidence
for cooperation manifests itself in many different
ways. Classically, there is the notion of cooperation
on a physical task (e.g. one person helping another
lift a heavy weight), or cooperation through social
support (e.g. Mary says, “John’s decision is excel-
lent”).

There are also more subtle, unconscious exam-
ples of cooperation between individuals, which can
demonstrate a certain degree of collegiality between
the individuals. One example is cooperation for the
effective use of language and the building of dia-
logue (Garrod and Pickering, 2004). Dialogue is
a complicated interaction that requires commitment
from both parties. In order to maintain a stable

conversation, participants must be willing to expend
cognitive effort to listen, understand, and form a rel-
evant response that advances the dialogue. The de-
gree to which participants are able to maintain a co-
hesive dialogue should be reflected in the collegial-
ity of the participants. If one participant is not coop-
erating, the dialogue will not progress.

An example of Supportive Behavior in Chinese is
加油啊。(“do your best.”).

3.8 Undermining

By definition undermining is meant to damage or
weaken. Undermining a goal is meant to erode the
support or weaken the stance of the goal. Individu-
als who are undermining another are demonstrating
a form of hostility, which is in direct opposition to
being supportive. Examples of undermining include
“And people you quoted aren’t historians,” “This is
making a mountain out of a molehill,” and “So you
will delete anything that YOU don’t like?”

An example of Undermining in Chinese is
就像某人说这条目是他建的就不让其他任何人修改一样荒谬。(“it
is ridiculous that certain people said that he built the
item and he will not let other people edit it.”).

4 Data Collection & Annotation

Annotations were performed on social discourses
extracted from Wikipedia talk pages, public forums,
and chat transcripts. A collection of 215 discourses
communicated in English and 292 discourses com-
municated in Chinese were annotated. Each dis-
course was annotated by 2 native-language annota-
tors.

Annotation was performed at the sentence level
with each sentence acting as an utterance. The sen-
tences were presented in the order that they appeared
in the social discourse and included speaker infor-
mation. Annotators were given the option to label
each sentence with zero or more social acts. An ex-
ample of a discourse communicated in English an-
notated with social acts is shown in Figure 2 and an
example in Chinese is shown in Figure 3.

Annotators were given the list of social acts with
their associated definitions, as shown in figure 1.
Annotation began on a small set of data with each
annotator labeling sentences based on their own in-
tuition. After this small set of data was annotated (10

188



Turn 1] Propose that this page be moved to East Timor Defence
Force as this is the closest translation of Foras de Defesa de Timor
Leste. I have worked in Timor Leste as a government advisor, in-
cluding with FDTL, and have never heard anybody ever refer to the
FDTL as Military of East Timor. P1

Turn 2] As I understand it, ’East Timor Defence Force’ is consid-
ered outdated. While it was commonly used when the force was
established, almost all english-language publications now use ’F-
FDTL’. ’Military of East Timor’ is a generic name, and I agree
that it’s rarely used and not a great title.[Agreement] I’d prefer
’Timor Leste Defence Force’ as this seems to be the direct transla-
tion, but this would be inconsistent with the other Wikipedia articles
on the country. Should we be bold and move this article to ’Timor
Leste Defence Force’?[Solidarity] P2

Turn 3] I so totally agree with you. [Agreement] ’Timor Leste De-
fence Force’ is it. [Agreement] The only reason I did not propose
that was the failure to change the country page from East Timor
to Timor Leste, a decision that I feel was extremely discourteous
of Wikipedia considering the government’s specific request that
it be referred to as Timor Leste.[Solidarity] If you have worked
there you will know that everybody uses ’Timor Leste’, even the
ADF but the Australian DFAT uses East Timor although the more
enlightened Kiwi embassy call it TL. I suggest we leave it for 48
hours to see if anyone has any strong feelings and then change it to
’ Timor Leste Defence Force’ with diverts from F-FDTL and FDTL
P1

Turn 4] I agree with that approach. [Agreement] In the interests
of consensus editing, I’ve posted a note at Talk:East Timor (in lieu
of a Wikiproject on the country) to seek other editors’ views. P2

· · ·
Turn 8] As no-one has raised any objections, I’ve just made the
move.[Supportive Behavior] P2

Turn 9] Good move, well done[Supportive Behavior] P1

Figure 2: An example discourse communicated in En-
glish with social acts labeled.

discourses) each group of annotators, i.e. one group
of 2 Chinese annotators and one group of 2 English
annotators, worked together to formulate guidelines
for what constitutes an instance of each social act in
their respective language. After the creation of the
guidelines the annotators went back to working in-
dependently.

The English portion of the corpus consisted of
21,067 sentences of which 4,486 (21.3%) were an-
notated with one or more of the nine social acts. The
Chinese portion of the corpus ended up with 24,339
sentences for which 4,260 (17.5%) had one ore more
of the nine social acts annotated.

The set of nine social acts can be naturally split
into those that are adversarial and those that are col-
legial. Thus, we first examined how well the an-

S)  1. 使用的博客经过了实认证, 特别是名人博客.

[Establish Credibility]
“ 1.  The blogs we used, especially famous people's 
blogs  implemented  real-name  authentication.
[Establish Credibility]”
2. 百科内的某些观点正是缘于博客, 却禁止对该

博客的引用. 不加入 Blog 地址的话会使得来源更难于

验证.[Establish Credibility]
“ 2. Some comments in wiki came from blogs, but it 
was forbidden to cite the blogs. It is more difficult 
to  confirm  the  sources  without  adding  the  blog 
address.[Establish Credibility]”
3. 这些内容根本不需要大众媒体验证即可确信是代表

某个知名人士的言论, 反之也不会有媒体整天围着博客

转来报道这些博文.[Establish Credibility]
“ 3.  It can be known that these contents represent 
certain  famous  person's  comment  without  the 
authentication  of  mass  media.  On  the  contrary 
there is  no media monitoring these  blogs all  day 
long and reporting these posts.[Establish Credibility]”

T) 基本上认为博客不是第二手来源。 [Disagreement] 

如果真要加入博客中的论点，最好找别的媒体报道这篇

博客中的看法的文章作为来源。[Managerial Influence]

“ Normally  it  is  considered  that  blogs  are  not 
second hand sources.[Disagreement] If you really want 
to use the comments in the blog, it is the best to 
use  the  articles  written  by  other  media  that 
reported  the  comments  in  these  blogs.[Managerial  
Influence]”

Figure 3: An example discourse communicated in Chi-
nese with social acts labeled.

notators were able to distinguish between sentences
containing adversarial and collegial social acts. We
defined the set of adversarial social acts as: Chal-
lenge Credibility, Disagreement, Disrespect, Rela-
tionship Conflict, and Undermining. The set of col-
legial social acts were defined as: Agreement, Offer
Gratitude, Solidarity, and Supportive Behavior. Ta-
ble 2 shows the mutual F-Measure for adversarial an
collegial social acts. In addition, we examined the
annotators ability to agree when a sentence had no
adversarial or collegial social act present.

Tables 2 and 3 show the mutual F-Measure for
agreement on adversarial, collegial, and neither (no
social act present) for English and Chinese respec-
tively. The English annotators had high agreement
(close to 90%) for determining if a sentence had a
collegial social act (89.7%) or neither collegial or
adversarial social act (89.4%). Their agreement for

189



English Chinese
] Annotated Kappa F-Measure ] Annotated Kappa F-Measure

Agreement (+) 295 0.38 76.5% 315 0.50 54.5%
Challenge Credibility (-) 1,113 0.36 33.8% 409 0.38 45.4%
Disagreement (-) 434 0.46 71.0% 555 0.07 13.1%
Disrespect (-) 367 0.24 53.5% 214 0.36 41.5%
Offer Gratitude (+) 108 0.44 79.9% 300 0.88 89.9%
Relationship Conflict (-) 399 0.13 21.3% 93 0.42 56.8%
Solidarity (+) 100 0.52 41.2% 574 0.41 44.0%
Supportive Behavior (+) 269 0.36 68.1% 1,034 0.84 88.2%
Undermining (-) 1,401 0.35 49.3% 766 0.49 58.0%

Table 1: The number of annotations, kappa, and F-Measure per social act. The valence of the social act is denoted in
parentheses next to the social act name, e.g. (+) for positive valence and (-) for negative valence.

F-Measure No. of Sentences
Adversarial 79.9% 3,714
Collegial 89.7% 772
Neither 89.4% 16,581
Average 87.8% –

Table 2: The mutual F-Measure for adversarial and col-
legial social acts in discourse communicated in English.

F-Measure No. of Sentences
Adversarial 73.0% 2,037
Collegial 85.5 2,222
Neither 79.9% 20,079
Average 80.3% –

Table 3: The mutual F-Measure for adversarial and colle-
gial social acts in discourses communicated in Chinese.

adversarial social acts was almost 80%, which is still
quite high. The Chinese annotators had their high-
est agreement for collegial social acts (85.5%) fol-
lowed by sentences with neither collegial or adver-
sarial social acts (79.9%). The agreement for adver-
sarial social acts was 73.0%, which is still accept-
able. In general, we hypothesize that natural dis-
course is predominately collegial and because of this
annotators have an easier time identifying and agree-
ing upon collegial social acts.

After determining that annotators can agree on
whether a sentence contained an adversarial or col-
legial social act, we examined their ability to iden-
tify individual social acts. Table 1 shows the num-
ber of sentences annotated for each social act as well
as the kappa (Cohen, 1960) and mutual F-Measure.

The kappa values range from 0.13 to 0.53 for En-
glish and 0.07 to 0.90 for Chinese. Relationship con-
flict was the most difficult to reach consensus on for
English and Disagreement was the most difficult for
Chinese. While the kappa values seem low, they are
comparable with other work in social acts and work
done in dialogue acts.

Kappa values for dialogue acts have been re-
ported as high as 0.76 for ANSWER and as low
as 0.15 for COMMITTING-SPEAKER-FUTURE-
ACTION (Allen and Core, 1997). Other work in
social acts have seen kappa values in a similar range,
such as Bender et al. (2011) who report kappa values
from 0.13 to 0.63. Given the complexities presented
by annotating the social intentions of dialogue par-
ticipants, we believe that the kappa values reported
here are acceptable.

5 Conclusion

In this work we have addressed the creation of a
multilingual corpus of utterances annotated with so-
cial actions relating to being adversarial and being
collegial. In doing so, we introduced a set of 9 so-
cial acts designed to capture the social intentions of
discourse participants. Our results show that anno-
tators can reliably agree and distinguish adversar-
ial and collegial social actions. Moreover, we also
believe that the agreement rates obtained for most
of the individual social acts are adequate given the
complexity of the task.

190



Acknowledgement

This research was funded by the Office of the Di-
rector of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence
Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA), and
through the U.S. Army Research Lab. All state-
ments of fact, opinion or conclusions contained
herein are those of the authors and should not be
construed as representing the official views or poli-
cies of IARPA, the ODNI or the U.S. Government.

References
J Allen and M Core. 1997. Draft of DAMSL: Dialog Act

Markup in Several Layers.
Geetu Ambwani and Anthony R. Davis. 2010.

Contextually-mediated semantic similarity graphs for
topic segmentation. In Proceedings of the 2010 Work-
shop on Graph-based Methods for Natural Language
Processing, TextGraphs-5, pages 60–68, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

J L Austin. 1962. How to do things with words, vol-
ume 7 of The William James lectures. Harvard Uni-
versity Press.

Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata. 2005. Modeling lo-
cal coherence: an entity-based approach. In Proceed-
ings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL ’05, pages 141–148,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Emily M. Bender, Jonathan T. Morgan, Meghan Ox-
ley, Mark Zachry, Brian Hutchinson, Alex Marin, Bin
Zhang, and Mari Ostendorf. 2011. Annotating so-
cial acts: authority claims and alignment moves in
wikipedia talk pages. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Languages in Social Media, LSM ’11, pages 48–57,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

David M. Blei, Andrew Ng, and Michael Jordan. 2003.
Latent dirichlet allocation. JMLR, 3:993–1022.

Guido Boella, Rossana Damiano, and Leonardo Lesmo.
2000. Social goals in conversational cooperation. In
Proceedings of the 1st SIGdial workshop on Discourse
and dialogue - Volume 10, SIGDIAL ’00, pages 84–93,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Philip Bramsen, Martha Escobar-Molano, Ami Patel, and
Rafael Alonso. 2011. Extracting social power rela-
tionships from natural language. In Proceedings of the
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies -
Volume 1, HLT ’11, pages 773–782, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Marilynn B. Brewer and Wendi Gardner. 1996. Who is
this ”We”? Levels of collective identity and self repre-
sentations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 71(1):83–93.

Marilynn B. Brewer. 1979. In-group bias in the minimal
intergroup situation: A cognitive-motivational analy-
sis. Psychological Bulletin, 86(2):307–324.

D. Byron and A. Stent. 1998. A preliminary model of
centering in dialog. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics and 17th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics - Volume 2, ACL ’98, pages 1475–
1477, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

M.A. Campion, E.M. Papper, and G.J. Medsker. 1996.
Relations between work team characteristics and ef-
fectiveness: A replication and extension. Personnel
psychology, 49(2):429–452.

Justine Cassell, Yukiko I. Nakano, Timothy W. Bick-
more, Candace L. Sidner, and Charles Rich. 2001.
Non-verbal cues for discourse structure. In Proceed-
ings of the 39th Annual Meeting on Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL ’01, pages 114–123,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A Coefficient of Agreement for
Nominal Scales. Educational and Psychological Mea-
surement, 20(1):37–46, April.

M. Deutsch. 2011. Cooperation and competition. Con-
flict, Interdependence, and Justice, pages 23–40.

Suzanne Eggins and Diana Slade. 1997. Analysing ca-
sual conversation. Cassell.

Simon Garrod and Martin J. Pickering. 2004. Why is
conversation so easy? Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
8(1):8–11, January.

Angel Gómez, Matthew L Brooks, Michael D
Buhrmester, Alexandra Vázquez, Jolanda Jetten,
and William B Swann. 2011. On the nature of
identity fusion: Insights into the construct and a
new measure. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 100(5):918–933.

H. P. Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In Peter Cole
and Jerry L. Morgan, editors, Syntax and semantics,
volume 3. New York: Academic Press.

Barbara J Grosz and Candice L Sidner. 1986. Attention,
Intention, and the Structure of Discourse. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 12(3):175–204.

Barbara J. Grosz, 1978. Understanding Spoken Lan-
guage, chapter Discourse Analysis. Elsevier Science.

Dustin Hillard, Mari Ostendorf, and Elizabeth Shriberg.
2003. Detection of agreement vs. disagreement in
meetings: training with unlabeled data. In Proceed-
ings of the 2003 Conference of the North American

191



Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics on Human Language Technology: companion vol-
ume of the Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003–short
papers - Volume 2, NAACL-Short ’03, pages 34–36,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Jerry R. Hobbs. 1979. Coherence and coreference *.
Cognitive Science, 3(1):90–67.

Karen A Jehn and Elizabeth A Mannix. 2001. The Dy-
namic Nature of Conflict: A Longitudinal Study of In-
tragroup Conflict and Group Performance. Academy
of Management Journal, 44(2):238.

Susanne Jekat, Ra Klein, Elisabeth Maier, Ilona Maleck,
Marion Mast, Tu Berlin, J. Joachim Quantz, and
J. Joachim Quantz. 1995. Dialogue acts in verbmo-
bil. Technical report.

D. Keltner, G.A. A Van Kleef, Serena Chen, and M.W. W
Kraus. 2008. A reciprocal influence model of so-
cial power: Emerging principles and lines of inquiry.
Advances in experimental social psychology, 40:151–
192.

Judith W Little. 1982. Norms of Collegiality and Exper-
imentation: Workplace Conditions of School Success.
American Educational Research Journal, 19(3):325–
340, January.

William C Mann and Sandra A Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical Structure Theory: Toward a Functional
Theory of Text Organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Elijah Mayfield and Carolyn Penstein Rose. 2011. Rec-
ognizing Authority in Dialogue with an Integer Linear
Programming Constrained Model. In Computational
Linguistics, pages 1018–1026. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

B S McCann, J Russo, and G A Benjamin. 1997. Hostil-
ity, social support, and perceptions of work. Journal of
occupational health psychology, 2(2):175–85, April.

D.A. Owens and R.I. Sutton. 2001. Status contests in
meetings: Negotiating the informal order. Groups at
work: Theory and research, 14:299–316.

John R. Searle. 1969. Speech Acts: An Essay in the
Philosophy of Language. Cambridge University Press.

S L Shapiro, A M Lopez, G E Schwartz, R Bootzin, A J
Figueredo, C J Braden, and S F Kurker. 2001. Quality
of life and breast cancer: relationship to psychosocial
variables. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 57(4):501–
519.

Elizabeth Shriberg, Raj Dhillon, Sonali Bhagat, Jeremy
Ang, and Hannah Carvey. 2004. The ICSI Meeting
Recorder Dialog Act (MRDA) Corpus. In Michael
Strube and Candy Sidner, editors, Proceedings of
the 5th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Di-
alogue, pages 97–100, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA, April. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Andreas Stolcke, Elizabeth Shriberg, Rebecca Bates,
Noah Coccaro, Daniel Jurafsky, Rachel Martin, Marie
Meteer, Klaus Ries, Paul Taylor, and Carol Van Ess-
Dykema. 1998. Dialog Act Modeling for Conversa-
tional Speech. In Applying Machine Learning to Dis-
course Processing, pages 98–105. AAAI Press.

Tomek Strzalkowski, George Aaron Broadwell, Jennifer
Stromer-galley, Samira Shaikh, Sarah Taylor, and Nick
Webb. 2010. Modeling Socio-Cultural Phenomena
in Discourse. In Internation Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics (Coling), number August, pages
1038–1046.

Henri Tajfel and J. C. Turner, 1979. An integrative theory
of intergroup conflict, pages 33–47. Brooks/Cole.

Marc Tomlinson, David B. Bracewell, Mary Draper, Ze-
war Almissour, Ying Shi, and Jeremy Bensley. 2012.
Pursing power in arabic on-line discussion forums. In
Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on International
Language Resources and Evaluation.

David R Traum and Elizabeth A Hinkelman. 1992. Con-
versation acts in task-oriented spoken dialogue. Com-
putational Intelligence, 8(3):575–599.

Wen Wang, Sibel Yaman, Kristin Precoda, Colleen
Richey, and Geoffrey Raymond. 2011. Detection
of agreement and disagreement in broadcast conver-
sations. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies: short papers - Volume
2, HLT ’11, pages 374–378, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

192


