










































Subjectivity Word Sense Disambiguation


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, page 2,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Subjectivity Word Sense Disambiguation
(Abstract of Invited Talk)

Janyce Wiebe
Department of Computer Science

University of Pittsburgh
Sennott Square Building, Room 5409

210 S. Bouquet St., Pittsburgh, PA 15260, U.S.A.
wiebe@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract

Many approaches to opinion and sentiment
analysis rely on lexicons of words that may be
used to express subjectivity. These are com-
piled as lists of keywords, rather than word
meanings (senses). However, many keywords
have both subjective and objective senses.
False hits – subjectivity clues used with objec-
tive senses – are a significant source of error
in subjectivity and sentiment analysis. This
talk will focus on sense-level opinion and sen-
timent analysis. First, I will give the results
of a study showing that even words judged
in previous work to be reliable opinion clues
have significant degrees of subjectivity sense
ambiguity. Then, we will consider the task
of distinguishing between the subjective and
objective senses of words in a dictionary, and
the related task of creating “usage inventories”
of opinion clues. Given such distinctions, the
next step is to automatically determine which
word instances in a corpus are being used
with subjective senses, and which are being
used with objective senses (we call this task
“SWSD”). We will see evidence that SWSD
is more feasible than full word sense disam-
biguation, because it is more coarse grained
– often, the exact sense need not be pin-
pointed, and that SWSD can be exploited to
improve the performance of opinion and sen-
timent analysis systems via sense-aware clas-
sification. Finally, I will discuss experiments
in acquiring SWSD data, via token-based con-
text discrimination where the context vector
representation is adapted to distinguish be-
tween subjective and objective contexts, and
the clustering process is enriched by pair-wise
constraints, making it semi-supervised.

2


