










































Enabling the Discovery of Digital Cultural Heritage Objects through Wikipedia


Proceedings of the 6th EACL Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 94–100,
Avignon, France, 24 April 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Enabling the Discovery of Digital Cultural Heritage Objects through
Wikipedia

Mark M Hall
Paul D Clough

Information School
Sheffield University

Sheffield, UK
m.mhall@shef.ac.uk

p.d.clough@shef.ac.uk

Oier Lopez de Lacalle1,2
1IKERBASQUE

Basque Foundation for Science
Bilbao, Spain

2School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh

Edinburgh, UK
oier.lopezdelacalle@gmail.es

Aitor Soroa
Eneko Agirre

IXA NLP Group
University of the Basque Country

Donostia, Spain
a.soroa@ehu.es
e.agirre@ehu.es

Abstract

Over the past years large digital cultural
heritage collections have become increas-
ingly available. While these provide ad-
equate search functionality for the expert
user, this may not offer the best support for
non-expert or novice users. In this paper
we propose a novel mechanism for intro-
ducing new users to the items in a collection
by allowing them to browse Wikipedia arti-
cles, which are augmented with items from
the cultural heritage collection. Using Eu-
ropeana as a case-study we demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach for encourag-
ing users to spend longer exploring items
in Europeana compared with the existing
search provision.

1 Introduction

Large amounts of digital cultural heritage (CH)
information have become available over the past
years, especially with the rise of large-scale ag-
gregators such as Europeana1, the European ag-
gregator for museums, archives, libraries, and gal-
leries. These large collections present two chal-
lenges to the new user. The first is discovering
the collection in the first place. The second is
then discovering what items are present in the
collection. In current systems support for item
discovery is mainly through the standard search
paradigm (Sutcliffe and Ennis, 1998), which is
well suited for CH professionals who are highly
familiar with the collections, subject areas, and
have specific search goals. However, for new
users who do not have a good understanding of
what is in the collections, what search keywords

1http://www.europeana.eu

to use, and have vague search goals, this method
of access is unsatisfactory as this quote from
(Borgman, 2009) exemplifies:

“So what use are the digital libraries, if
all they do is put digitally unusable in-
formation on the web?”

Alternative item discovery methodolo-
gies are required to introduce new users to
digital CH collections (Geser, 2004; Steem-
son, 2004). Exploratory search models
(Marchionini, 2006; Pirolli, 2009) that en-
able switching between collection overviews
(Hornb[Pleaseinsertintopreamble]k and Hertzum,
2011) and detailed exploration within the
collection are frequently suggested as more
appropriate.

We propose a novel mechanism that enables
users to discover an unknown, aggregated collec-
tion by browsing a second, known collection. Our
method lets the user browse through Wikipedia
and automatically augments the page(s) the user
is viewing with items drawn from the CH collec-
tion, in our case Europeana. The items are chosen
to match the page’s content and enable the user to
acquire an overview of what information is avail-
able for a given topic. The goal is to introduce
new users to the digital collection, so that they can
then successfully use the existing search systems.

2 Background

Controlled vocabularies are often seen as a
promising discovery methodology (Baca, 2003).
However, in the case of aggregated collections
such as Europeana, items from different providers
are frequently aligned to different vocabularies,
requiring an integration of the two vocabularies in

94



order to present a unified structure. (Isaac et al.,
2007) describe the use of automated methods for
aligning vocabularies, however this is not always
successfully possible. A proposed alternative is
to synthesise a new vocabulary to cover all aggre-
gated data, however (Chaudhry and Jiun, 2005)
highlight the complexities involved in then link-
ing the individual items to the new vocabulary.

To overcome this automatic clustering and vi-
sualisations based directly on the meta-data have
been proposed, such as 2d semantic maps (An-
drews et al., 2001), automatically generated tree
structures (Chen et al., 2002), multi-dimensional
scaling (Fortuna et al., 2005; Newton et al., 2009),
self-organising maps (Lin, 1992), and dynamic
taxonomies (Papadakos et al., 2009). However
none of these have achieved sufficient success to
find widespread use as exploration interfaces.

Faceted search systems (van Ossenbruggen et
al., 2007; Schmitz and Black, 2008) have arisen
as a flexible alternative for surfacing what meta-
data is available in a collection. Unlike the meth-
ods listed above, faceted search does not require
complex pre-processing and the values to display
for a facet can be calculated on the fly. However,
aggregated collections frequently have large num-
bers of potential facets and values for these facets,
making it hard to surface a sufficiently large frac-
tion to support resource discovery.

Time-lines such as those proposed by (Luo et
al., 2012) do not suffer from these issues, but are
only of limited value if the user’s interest cannot
be focused through time. A user interested in ex-
amples of pottery across the ages or restricted to
a certain geographic area is not supported by a
time-line-based interface.

The alternative we propose is to use a second
collection that the user is familiar with and that
acts as a proxy to the unfamiliar collection. (Villa
et al., 2010) describe a similar approach where
Flickr is used as the proxy collection, enabling
users to search an image collection that has no
textual meta-data.

In our proposed approach items from the unfa-
miliar collection are surfaced via their thumbnail
images and similar approaches for automatically
retrieving images for text have been tried by (Zhu
et al., 2007; Borman et al., 2005). (Zhu et al.,
2007) report success rates that approach the qual-
ity of manually selected images, however their
approach requires complex pre-processing, which

Figure 1: Architectural structure of the Wikiana sys-
tem

the dynamic nature of discovery prohibits.
Wikipedia was chosen as the discovery inter-

face as it is known to have good content cover-
age and frequently appears at the top of search
results (Schweitzer, 2008) for many topics, its
use has been studied (Lim, 2009; Lucassen and
Schraagen, 2010), and it is frequently used as
an information source for knowledge modelling
(Suchanek et al., 2008; Milne and Witten, 2008),
information extraction (Weld et al., 2009; Ni et
al., 2009), and similarity calculation (Gabrilovich
and Markovitch, 2007).

3 Discovering Europeana through
Wikipedia

As stated above our method lets users browse
Wikipedia and at the same time exposes them to
items taken from Europeana, enabling them to
discover items that exist in Europeana.

The Wikipedia article is augmented with Euro-
peana items at two levels. The article as a whole
is augmented with up to 20 items that in a pre-
processing step have been linked to the article and
at the same time each paragraph in the article is
augmented with one item relating to that para-
graph.

Our system (Wikiana, figure 1) sits between
the user and the data-providers (Wikipedia, Eu-
ropeana, and the pre-computed article augmenta-
tion links). When the user requests an article from
Wikiana, the system fetches the matching article
from Wikipedia and in a first step strips every-
thing except the article’s main content. It then
queries the augmentation database for Europeana
items that have been linked to the article and se-
lects the top 20 items from the results, as detailed
below. It then processes each paragraph and uses

95



Figure 2: Screenshot of the augmented article
“Mediterranean Sea” with the pre-processed article-
level augmentation at the top and the first two para-
graphs augmented with items as returned by the Euro-
peana API.

keywords drawn from the paragraphs (details be-
low) to query Europeana’s OpenSearch API for
items. A random item is selected from the result-
set and a link to its thumbnail image inserted into
the paragraph. The augmented article is then sent
to the user’s browser, which in turn requests the
thumbnail images from Europeana’s servers (fig.
2).

The system makes heavy use of caching to
speed up the process and also to reduce the
amount of load on the backend systems.

3.1 Article augmentation

To create the article-level augmentations we first
create a Wikipedia “dictionary”, which maps
strings to Wikipedia articles. The mapping is cre-
ated by extracting all anchor texts from the inter-
article hyperlinks2 and mapping these to the ar-
ticles they link to. For instance, the string “ro-
man coin” is used as an anchor in a link to the
Wikipedia article Roman currency3. Where
the same string points to multiple articles we se-
lect the most frequent article as the target. In the
case of ties an article is selected arbitrarily.

In a second step, we scan the subset of Eu-
ropeana selected for a European project, which
comprises SCRAN and Culture Grid collections
for English. The items in this sub-set are then
linked to Wikipedia articles. The sub-set of Euro-

2We used the 2008 Wikipedia dump to construct the dic-
tionary.

3http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_
currency

<record>
<dc:identifier>http://www.kirkleesimage...</dc:identifier>
<dc:title>Roman Coins found in 1820..., Lindley</dc:title>
<dc:source>Kirklees Image Archive OAI Feed</dc:source>
<dc:language>EN-GB</dc:language>
<dc:subject>Kirklees</dc:subject>
<dc:type>Image</dc:type>

</record>

Figure 3: Example of an ESE record, some fields have
been omitted for clarity.

peana that was processed followed the Europeana
Semantic Elements (ESE) specifications4. Figure
3 shows an example of an ESE record describ-
ing a photograph of a Roman coin belonging to
the Kirklees Image Archive. We scan each ESE
record and try to match the “dc:title” field with
the dictionary entries. In the example in figure
3, the item will be mapped to the Wikipedia ar-
ticle Roman currency because the string “ro-
man coins” appears in the title.

As a result, we create a many-to-many mapping
between Wikipedia articles and Europeana items.
The Wikiana application displays at most 20 im-
ages per article, thus the Europeana items need to
be ranked. The goal is to rank interesting items
higher, with “interestingness” defined as how un-
usual the items are in the collection. This metric
is an adaption of the standard inverse-document-
frequency formula used widely in Information
Retrieval and is adapted to identify items that have
meta-data field-values that are infrequent in the
collection. As in original IDF we diminish the
weight of values that occur very frequently in
the collection, the non-interesting items, and in-
creases the weight of values that occur rarely, the
interesting items. More formally the interesting-
ness αi of an item i is calculated as follows:

αi =
#{titlei}
µtitle

log
Ntitle

c(titlei) + 1
+

#{desci}
µdesc

log
Ndesc

c(desci) + 1
+

#{subji}
µsubj

log
Nsubj

c(subji) + 1

where #{fieldi} is the length in words of the
field of the given item i, µfield is the average length
in words of the field in the collection, Nfield is the
total number of items containing that field in the

4http://version1.europeana.eu/web/
guest/technical-requirements

96



The Roman Empire (Latin: Imperium Romanum) was
the post-Republican period of the ancient Roman civ-
ilization, characterised by an autocratic form of gov-
ernment and large territorial holdings in Europe and
around the Mediterranean.

“Latin language” OR “Ro-
man Republic” OR “An-
cient Rome” or “Autoc-
racy”

Figure 4: Example paragraph with the Wikipedia hy-
perlinks in bold. Below the search keywords extracted
from the hyperlinks and the resulting thumbnail image.

entire collection, and c(fieldi) is the frequency of
the value in that field.

Items are ranked by descending αi and the for
the top 20 items, the thumbnails for the items are
added to the top of the augmented page.

3.2 Paragraph augmentation

The items found in the article augmentation tend
to be very focused on the article itself, thus to pro-
vide the user with a wider overview of available
items, each paragraph is also augmented. This
augmentation is done dynamically when an arti-
cle is requested. As stated above the augmen-
tation iterates over all paragraphs in the article
and for each article determines its core keywords.
As in the article augmentation the Wikipedia hy-
perlinks are used to define the core keywords, as
the inclusion of the link in the paragraph indi-
cates that this is a concept that the author felt was
relevant enough to link to. For each paragraph
the Wikipedia hyperlinks are extracted, the under-
scores replaced by spaces and these are then used
as the query keywords. The keywords are com-
bined using “OR” and enclosed in speech-marks
to ensure only exact phrase matches are returned
and then submitted to Europeana’s OpenSearch
API (fig. 4). From the result set an item is ran-
domly selected and the paragraph is augmented
with the link to the item, the item’s thumbnail im-
age and its title. If there are no hyperlinks in a
paragraph or the search returns no results, then no
augmentation is performed for that paragraph.

4 Evaluation

The initial evaluation focuses on the paragraph
augmentation, as the quality of that heavily de-
pends on the results provided by Europeana’s API
and on a log-analysis looking at how users com-

Question Yes No
Familiar 18 18
Appropriate 9 27
Supports 4 32
Visually interesting 13 23
Find out more 3 33

Table 1: Evaluation experiment results reduced from
the 5-point Likert-like scale to a yes/no level.

ing to Europeana from Wikiana behave.

4.1 Paragraph augmentation evaluation

For the paragraph augmentation evaluation 18
wikipedia articles were selected from six topics
(Place, Person, Event, Time period, Concept, and
Work of Art). From each article the first para-
graph and a random paragraph were selected for
augmentation, resulting in a total set of 36 aug-
mented paragraphs. In the experiment interface
the participants were shown the text paragraph,
the augmented thumbnail image, and five ques-
tions (“How familiar are you with the topic?”,
“How appropriate is the image?”, “How well does
the image support the core ideas of the para-
graph?”, “How visually interesting is the image?”,
and “How likely are you to click on the image
to find out more?”). Each question used a five-
point Likert-like scale for the answers, with 1 as
the lowest score and 5 the highest. Neither the
topic nor the paragraph selection have a statisti-
cally significant influence on the results. To sim-
plify the analysis the results have been reduced
to a yes/no level, where an image is classified as
“yes” for that question if more than half the partic-
ipants rated the image 3 or higher on that question
(table 1).

Considering the simplicity of the augmentation
approach and the fact that the search API is not
under our control, the results are promising. 9
out of 36 (25%) of the items were classified as
appropriate. The non-appropriate images are cur-
rently being analysed to determine whether there
are shared characteristics in the query structure or
item meta-data that could be used to improve the
query or filter out non-appropriate result items.

The difficulty with automatically adding items
taken from Europeana is also highlighted by the
fact that only 13 of the 36 (36%) items were clas-
sified as interesting. While no correlation could
be found between the two interest and appro-

97



Category Sessions 1st q. Med 3rd q.
Wikiana 88 6 11 15.25
All users 577642 3 8 17

Table 2: Summary statistics for the number of items
viewed in per session for users coming from our sys-
tem (Wikiana) and for all Europeana users.

priate results, only one of the 23 uninteresting
items was judged appropriate, while 8 out of 9
of the appropriate items were also judged to be
interesting. We are now looking at whether the
item meta-data might allow filtering uninteresting
items, as they seem unlikely to be appropriate.

Additionally the approach taken by (Zhu et al.,
2007), where multiple images are shown per para-
graph, is also being investigated, as this might re-
duce the impact of non-appropriate items.

4.2 Log analysis

Although the paragraph augmentation results are
not as good as we had hoped, a log analysis shows
that the system can achieve its goal of introduc-
ing new users to an unknown CH collection (Eu-
ropeana). The system has been available online
for three months, although not widely advertised,
and we have collected Europeana’s web-logs for
the same period. Using the referer information in
the logs we can distinguish users that came to Eu-
ropeana through our system from all other Euro-
peana users. Based on this classification the num-
ber of items viewed per session were calculated
(table 2). To prevent the evaluation experiment
influencing the log analysis only logs acquired be-
fore the experiment date were used.

Table 2 clearly shows that users coming
through our system exhibit different browsing pat-
terns. The first quartile is higher, indicating that
Wikiana users do not leave Europeana as quickly,
which is further supported by the fact that 30% of
the general users leave Europeana after viewing
three items or less, while for Wikiana users it is
only 19%. At the same time the third quartile is
lower, showing that Wikiana users are less likely
to have long sessions on Europeana. The differ-
ence in the session length distributions has also
been validated using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
(p = 0.00287, D = 0.1929).

From this data we draw the hypothesis that
Wikiana is at least in part successfully attracting
users to Europeana that would normally not visit

or not stay and that it successfully helps users
overcome that first hurdle that causes almost one
third of all Europeana users to leave after viewing
three or less items.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

Recent digitisation efforts have led to large dig-
ital cultural heritage (CH) collections and while
search facilities provide access to users familiar
with the collections there is a lack of methods for
introducing new users to these collections. In this
paper we propose a novel method for discover-
ing items in an unfamiliar collection by brows-
ing Wikipedia. As the user browses Wikipedia
articles, these are augmented with a number of
thumbnail images of items taken from the un-
known collection that are appropriate to the ar-
ticle’s content. This enables the new user to be-
come familiar with what is available in the collec-
tion without having to immediately interact with
the collection’s search interface.

An early evaluation of the very straightforward
augmentation process revealed that further work
is required to improve the appropriateness of the
items used to augment the Wikipedia articles. At
the same time a log analysis of Europeana brows-
ing sessions showed that users introduced to Eu-
ropeana through our system were less likely to
leave after viewing less than three items, pro-
viding clear indication that the methodology pro-
posed in this paper is successful in introducing
new users to a large, aggregated CH collection.

Future work will focus on improving the qual-
ity of the augmentation results by including more
collections into the article-level augmentation and
by introducing an “interestingness” ranking into
the paragraph augmentation. We will also look at
evaluating the system in a task-based setting and
with existing, comparable systems.

Acknowledgements

The research leading to these results has received
funding from the European Community’s Sev-
enth Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013)
under grant agreement n◦ 270082. We ac-
knowledge the contribution of all project part-
ners involved in PATHS (see: http://www.
paths-project.eu).

98



References

Keith Andrews, Christian Gutl, Josef Moser, Vedran
Sabol, and Wilfried Lackner. 2001. Search result
visualisation with xfind. In uidis, page 0050. Pub-
lished by the IEEE Computer Society.

Murtha Baca. 2003. Practical issues in applying meta-
data schemas and controlled vocabularies to cultural
heritage information. Cataloging & Classification
Quarterly, 36(3–4):47–55.

Christine L. Borgman. 2009. The digital future is
now: A call to action for the humanities. Digital
humanities quarterly, 3(4).

Andy Borman, Rada Mihalcea, and Paul Tarau. 2005.
Picnet: Augmenting semantic resources with pic-
torial representations. In Knowledge Collection
from Volunteer Contributors: Papers from the 2005
Spring Symposium, volume Technical Report SS-
05-03. American Association for Artificial Intelli-
gence.

Abdus Sattar Chaudhry and Tan Pei Jiun. 2005. En-
hancing access to digital information resources on
heritage: A case of development of a taxonomy at
the integrated museum and archives system in sin-
gapore. Journal of Documentation, 61(6):751–776.

Chaomei Chen, Timothy Cribbin, Jasna Kuljis, and
Robert Macredie. 2002. Footprints of information
foragers: behaviour semantics of visual exploration.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
57(2):139 – 163.

Blaz Fortuna, Marko Grobelnik, and Dunja Mladenic.
2005. Visualization of text document corpus. In-
formatica, 29:497–502.

Evgeniy Gabrilovich and Shaul Markovitch. 2007.
Computing semantic relatedness using wikipedia-
based explicit semantic analysis. In Proceedings
of the 20th international joint conference on Artif-
ical intelligence, IJCAI’07, pages 1606–1611, San
Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
Inc.

Guntram Geser. 2004. Resource discovery - position
paper: Putting the users first. Resource Discovery
Technologies for the Heritage Sector, 6:7–12.

Kasper Hornbæk and Morten Hertzum. 2011. The no-
tion of overview in information visualization. In-
ternational Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
69(7-8):509 – 525.

Antoine Isaac, Stefan Schlobach, Henk Matthezing,
and Claus Zinn. 2007. Integrated access to cul-
tural heritage resources through representation and
alignment of controlled vocabularies. Library Re-
view, 67(3):187–199.

Sook Lim. 2009. How and why do college students
use wikipedia? Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 60(11):2189–
2202.

Xia Lin. 1992. Visualization for the document space.
In Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Visualiza-
tion ’92, VIS ’92, pages 274–281, Los Alamitos,
CA, USA. IEEE Computer Society Press.

Teun Lucassen and Jan Maarten Schraagen. 2010.
Trust in wikipedia: how users trust information
from an unknown source. In Proceedings of the 4th
workshop on Information credibility, WICOW ’10,
pages 19–26, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Dongning Luo, Jing Yang, Milos Krstajic, William
Ribarsky, and Daniel A. Keim. 2012. Eventriver:
Visually exploring text collections with temporal
references. Visualization and Computer Graphics,
IEEE Transactions on, 18(1):93 –105, jan.

Gary Marchionini. 2006. Exploratory search: From
finding to understanding. Communications of the
ACM, 49(4):41–46.

David Milne and Ian H. Witten. 2008. Learning
to link with wikipedia. In Proceedings of the
17th ACM conference on Information and knowl-
edge management, CIKM ’08, pages 509–518, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Glen Newton, Alison Callahan, and Michel Dumon-
tier. 2009. Semantic journal mappiong for search
visualization in a large scale article digital library.
In Second Workshop on Very Large Digital Li-
braries at ECDL 2009.

Xiaochuan Ni, Jian-Tao Sun, Jian Hu, and Zheng
Chen. 2009. Mining multilingual topics from
wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 18th international
conference on World wide web, WWW ’09, pages
1155–1156, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Panagiotis Papadakos, Stella Kopidaki, Nikos Arme-
natzoglou, and Yannis Tzitzikas. 2009. Ex-
ploratory web searching with dynamic taxonomies
and results clustering. In Maristella Agosti,
José Borbinha, Sarantos Kapidakis, Christos Pa-
patheodorou, and Giannis Tsakonas, editors, Re-
search and Advanced Technology for Digital Li-
braries, volume 5714 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 106–118. Springer Berlin / Heidel-
berg.

Peter Pirolli. 2009. Powers of 10: Modeling
complex information-seeking systems at multiple
scales. Computer, 42(3):33–40.

Patrick L Schmitz and Michael T Black. 2008. The
delphi toolkit: Enabling semantic search for mu-
seum collections. In Museums and the Web 2008:
the international conference for culture and her-
itage on-line.

Nick J. Schweitzer. 2008. Wikipedia and psychology:
Coverage of concepts and its use by undergraduate
students. Teaching of Psychology, 35(2):81–85.

Michael Steemson. 2004. Digicult experts seek out
discovery technologies for cultural heritage. Re-
source Discovery Technologies for the Heritage
Sector, 6:14–20.

99



Fabian M. Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2008. Yago: A large ontology from
wikipedia and wordnet. Web Semantics: Sci-
ence, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web,
6(3):203 – 217. World Wide Web Conference
2007Semantic Web Track.

Alistair Sutcliffe and Mark Ennis. 1998. Towards a
cognitive theory of information retrieval. Interact-
ing with Computers, 10:321–351.

Jacco van Ossenbruggen, Alia Amin, Lynda Hard-
man, Michiel Hildebrand, Mark van Assem, Borys
Omelayenko, Guus Schreiber, Anna Tordai, Vic-
tor de Boer, Bob Wielinga, Jan Wielemaker, Marco
de Niet, Jos Taekema, Marie-France van Orsouw,
and Annemiek Teesing. 2007. Searching and an-
notating virtual heritage collections with semantic-
web technologies. In Museums and the Web 2007.

Robert Villa, Martin Halvey, Hideo Joho, David Han-
nah, and Joemon M. Jose. 2010. Can an interme-
diary collection help users search image databases
without annotations? In Proceedings of the 10th
annual joint conference on Digital libraries, JCDL
’10, pages 303–312, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Daniel S. Weld, Raphael Hoffmann, and Fei Wu.
2009. Using wikipedia to bootstrap open informa-
tion extraction. SIGMOD Rec., 37:62–68, March.

Xiaojin Zhu, Andrew B. Goldberg, Mohamed Eldawy,
Charles A. Dyer, and Bradley Strock. 2007. A text-
to-picture synthesis system for augmenting commu-
nication. In The integrated intelligence track of
the 22nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI-07).

100


