










































Combining Different Summarization Techniques for Legal Text


Proceedings of the Workshop on Innovative Hybrid Approaches to the Processing of Textual Data (Hybrid2012), EACL 2012, pages 115–123,
Avignon, France, April 23 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Combining Different Summarization Techniques for Legal Text

Filippo Galgani Paul Compton
School of Computer Science and Engineering

The University of New South Wales
Sydney, Australia

{galganif,compton,achim}@cse.unsw.edu.au

Achim Hoffmann

Abstract

Summarization, like other natural language
processing tasks, is tackled with a range
of different techniques - particularly ma-
chine learning approaches, where human
intuition goes into attribute selection and
the choice and tuning of the learning algo-
rithm. Such techniques tend to apply dif-
ferently in different contexts, so in this pa-
per we describe a hybrid approach in which
a number of different summarization tech-
niques are combined in a rule-based sys-
tem using manual knowledge acquisition,
where human intuition, supported by data,
specifies not only attributes and algorithms,
but the contexts where these are best used.
We apply this approach to automatic sum-
marization of legal case reports. We show
how a preliminary knowledge base, com-
posed of only 23 rules, already outperforms
competitive baselines.

1 Introduction

Automatic summarization tasks are often ad-
dressed with statistical methods: a first type of
approach, introduced by Kupiec et al.(1995), in-
volves using a set of features of different types to
describe sentences, and supervised learning algo-
rithms to learn an empirical model of how those
features interact to identify important sentences.
This kind of approach has been very popular in
summarization; however the difficulty of this task
often requires more complex representations, and
different kinds of models to learn relevance in
text have been proposed, such as discourse-based
(Marcu, 1997) or network-based (Salton et al.,
1997) models and many others. Domain knowl-
edge usually is present in the choice of features
and algorithms, but it is still an open issue how
best to capture the domain knowledge required to
identify what is relevant in the text; manual ap-
proaches to build knowledge bases tend to be te-

dious, while automatic approaches require large
amounts of training data and the result may still
be inferior.

In this paper we present our approach to sum-
marize legal documents, using knowledge acqui-
sition to combine different summarization tech-
niques. In summarization, different kinds of in-
formation can be taken in account to locate impor-
tant content, at the sentence level (e.g. particular
terms or patterns), at the document level (e.g. fre-
quency information, discourse information) and
at the collection level (e.g. document frequencies
or citation analysis); however, the way such at-
tributes interact is likely to depend on the con-
text of specific cases. For this reason we have
developed a set of methods for identifying im-
portant content, and we propose the creation of
a Knowledge Base (KB) that specifies which con-
tent should be used in different contexts, and how
this should be combined. We propose to use the
Ripple Down Rules (RDR) (Compton and Jansen,
1990) methodology to build this knowledge base:
RDR has already proven to be a very effective
way of building KBs, had has been used success-
fully in several NLP task (see Section 2). This
kind of approach differs from the dominant super-
vised learning approach, in which we first anno-
tate text to identify relevant fragments, and then
we use supervised learning algorithms to learn a
model; one example in the legal domain being the
work of Hachey and Grover (2006). Our approach
eliminates the need for separate manual annota-
tion of text, as the rules are built by a human who
judges the relevance of text and directly creates
the set of rules as the one process, rather than an-
notating the text and then separately tuning the
learning model.

We apply this approach to the summarization of
legal case reports, a domain which has an increas-
ing need for automatic text processing, to cope
with the large body of documents that is case law.

115



Table 1: Examples of catchphrases list for two cases.

COSTS - proper approach to admiralty and commercial litigation - goods transported under bill of lading incorporating Himalaya clause
- shipper and consignee sued ship owner and stevedore for damage to cargo - stevedore successful in obtaining consent orders on motion
dismissing proceedings against it based on Himalaya clause - stevedore not furnishing critical evidence or information until after motion
filed - whether stevedore should have its costs - importance of parties cooperating to identify the real issues in dispute - duty to resolve
uncontentious issues at an early stage of litigation - stevedore awarded 75% of its costs of the proceedings
MIGRATION - partner visa - appellant sought to prove domestic violence by the provision of statutory declarations made under State
legislation - ”statutory declaration” defined by the Migration Regulations 1994 (Cth) to mean a declaration ”under” the Statutory Declarations
Act 1959 (Cth) in Div 1.5 - contrary intention in reg 1.21 as to the inclusion of State declarations under s 27 of the Acts Interpretation Act -
statutory declaration made under State legislation is not a statutory declaration ”under” the Commonwealth Act - appeal dismissed

Countries with “common law” traditions, such as
Australia, the UK and the USA, rely heavily on
the concept of precedence: on how the courts have
interpreted the law in individual cases, in a pro-
cess that is known as stare decisis (Moens, 2007),
so legal professionals: lawyers, judges and schol-
ars, have to deal with large volumes of past court
decisions.

Automatic summarization can greatly enhance
access to legal repositories; however, legal cases,
rather than summaries, often contain lists of
catchphrases: phrases that present the important
legal points of a case. The presence of catch-
phrases can aid research of case law, as they give
a quick impression of what the case is about: “the
function of catchwords is to give a summary clas-
sification of the matters dealt with in a case. [...]
Their purpose is to tell the researcher whether
there is likely to be anything in the case relevant to
the research topic” (Olsson, 1999). For this rea-
son, rather than constructing summaries, we aim
at extracting catchphrases from the full text of a
case report. Examples of catchphrases from two
case reports are shown in Table 1.

In this paper we present our approach towards
automatic catchphrase extraction from legal case
reports, using a knowledge acquisition approach
according to which rules are manually created
to combine a range of diverse methods to locate
catchphrase candidates in the text.

2 Related Work

Different kinds of language processing have
been applied to the legal domain, for exam-
ple, automatic summarization, retrieval (Moens,
2001), machine translation (Farzindar and La-
palme, 2009), and citation analysis (Zhang and
Koppaka, 2007; Galgani and Hoffmann, 2010).
Among these tasks, the most relevant to catch-
phrase extraction is the work on automatic sum-
marization, with the difference that catchphrases
usually cover many dimensions of one case, giv-
ing a broader representation than summaries. Ex-

amples of automatic summarization systems de-
veloped for the legal domain are the work of
Hachey and Grover (Hachey and Grover, 2006)
to summarize the UK House of Lords judge-
ments, and PRODSUM (Yousfi-Monod et al.,
2010), a summarizer of case reports for the Can-
LII database (Canadian Legal Information Insti-
tute) (see also (Moens, 2007) for an overview).
Both systems rely on supervised learning algo-
rithms, using sentences tagged as important to
learn how to recognize important sentences in the
text: in this case the domain knowledge is incor-
porated mainly in the choice of features. This
contrasts with our approach where the human in-
tuition goes also in the weights given to different
attributes in different contexts.

Ripple Down Rules

As we propose to use rules manually created for
specifying how to identify relevant text, our ap-
proach is based on incremental Knowledge Ac-
quisition (KA). A KA methodology which has al-
ready been applied to language processing tasks is
Ripple Down Rules (RDR) (Compton and Jansen,
1990). In RDR, rules are created by domain ex-
perts without a knowledge engineer, the knowl-
edge base is built with incremental refinements
from scratch, while the system is in use; the do-
main expert monitors the system and whenever it
performs incorrectly he or she flags the error and
provides a rule based on the case which gener-
ated the error, which is added to the knowledge
base and corrects the error. RDR is essentially an
error-driven KA approach, the incremental refine-
ment of the KB is achieved by patching the errors
it makes, in the form of exception rule structure.

The strength of RDR is easy maintenance: the
point of failure is automatically identified, the ex-
pert patches the knowledge only locally, consid-
ering the case at hand, and new rules are placed
by the system in the correct position and checked
for consistency with all cases previously correctly
classified, so that unwanted indirect effects of rule

116



interactions are avoided (Compton and Jansen,
1990). The manual creation of rules, in contrast
with machine learning, requires a smaller quantity
of annotated data, as the human in the loop can
identify the important features in a single case,
whereas learning techniques require multiple in-
stances to identify important features.

RDR have been used to tackle natural lan-
guage processing tasks with the system KAFTIE
(Pham and Hoffmann, 2004) (for summarization
in (Hoffmann and Pham, 2003)). Knowledge
bases built with RDR were shown to outperforms
machine learning in legal citation analysis (2010)
and in open information extraction (Kim et al.,
2011); while Xu and Hoffmann (2010) showed
how a knowledge base automatically built from
data can be improved using manual knowledge
acquisition from a domain expert with RDR.

3 Dataset

We use as the source of our data the legal database
AustLII1, the Australasian Legal Information In-
stitute (Greenleaf et al., 1995), one of the largest
sources of legal material on the net, which pro-
vides free access to reports on court decisions in
all major courts in Australia.

We created an initial corpus of 2816 cases
accessing case reports from the Federal Court
of Australia, for the years 2007 to 2009, for
which author-made catchphrases are given and
extracted the full text and the catchphrases of ev-
ery document. Each document contains on aver-
age 221 sentences and 8.3 catchphrases. In total
we collected 23230 catchphrases, of which 15359
(92.7%) were unique, appearing only in one doc-
ument in the corpus. These catchphrases are used
to evaluate our extracts using Rouge, as described
in Section 4.

To have a more complete representation of
these cases, we also included citation informa-
tion. Citation analysis has proven to be very use-
ful in automatic summarization (Mei and Zhai,
2008; Qazvinian and Radev, 2008). We down-
loaded citation data from LawCite2. It is a ser-
vice provided by AustLII which, for a given case,
lists cited cases and more recent cases that cite the
case. We downloaded the full texts and the catch-
phrases (where available) from AustLII, of both
cited (previous) cases and more recent cases that
cite the current one (citing cases). Of the 2816
cases, 1904 are cited at least by one other case

1http://www.austlii.edu.au/
2http://www.lawcite.org

(on average by 4.82 other cases). We collected
the catchphrases of these citing cases, searched
the full texts to extract the location where a ci-
tation is explicitly made, and extracted the con-
taining paragraph(s). For each of the 1904 cases
we collected on average 21.17 citing sentences,
and we extracted an average of 35.36 catchphrases
(from one or more other documents). From pre-
vious cases referenced by the judge, we extracted
on average 67.41 catchphrases for each case.

We also extracted, using LawCite, references to
any type of legislation made in the report. We lo-
cated in the full text the sentences where each sec-
tion or Act is mentioned; then we accessed the full
texts of the legislation on AustLII, and extracted
the title of the sections (for example, if section
477 is mentioned in the text, we extract the cor-
responding title: CORPORATIONS ACT 2001 -
SECT 477 Powers of liquidator).

Our dataset thus contains the initial 2816 cases
with given catchphrases, and all cases related
to them by incoming or outgoing citations, with
catchphrases and citing sentences explicitly iden-
tified, and the references to Acts and sections of
the law.

4 Evaluation method

As it was not reasonable to involve legal experts
in this sort of exploratory study, we looked for
a simple way to evaluate candidate catchphrases
automatically by comparing them with the author-
made catchphrases from our AustLII corpus (con-
sidered as our “gold standard”), to quickly assess
the performances of various methods on a large
number of documents. As our system extracts
sentences from text as candidate catchphrases, we
propose an evaluation method which is based on
Rouge (Lin, 2004) scores between extracted sen-
tences and given catchphrases. This method was
used also in (Galgani et al., 2012). Rouge in-
cludes several measures to quantitatively compare
system-generated summaries to human-generated
summaries, counting the number of overlapping
n-grams of various lengths, word pairs and word
sequences between two or more summaries.

Somewhat different from the standard use
of Rouge (which would involve comparing the
whole block of catchphrases to the whole block of
extracted sentences), we evaluated extracted sen-
tences individually so that the utility of any one
catchphrase is minimally affected by the others,
or by their particular order. On the other hand
we want to extract sentences that contain an en-
tire individual catchphrase, while a sentence that

117



contains small pieces of different catchphrases is
not as useful.

We therefore compare each extracted sentence
with each catchphrase individually, using Rouge.
If the recall (on the catchphrase) is higher than
a threshold, the catchphrase-sentence pair is con-
sidered a match. For example if we have a 10-
word catchphrase, and a 15 words candidate sen-
tence, if they have 6 words in common we con-
sider this as a match using Rouge-1 with a thresh-
old of 0.5, but not a match with a threshold of
0.7 (requiring at least 7/10 words from the catch-
phrase to appear in the sentence). Using other
Rouge scores (Rouge-SU or Rouge-W), the or-
der and sequence of tokens are also considered
in defining a match. In this way, once a match-
ing criterion is defined, we can divide all the sen-
tences in “relevant” sentences (those that match
at least one catchphrase) and “not relevant” sen-
tences (those that do not match any catchphrase).

Once the matches between single sentences and
catchphrases are defined for a single document
and a set of extracted (candidate) sentences, we
can compute precision and recall as:

Recall =
MatchedCatchphrases

TotalCatchphrases

Precision =
RelevantSentences

ExtractedSentences

The recall is the number of catchphrases matched
by at least one extracted sentence, divided by the
total number of catchphrases; the precision is the
number of sentences extracted which match at
least one catchphrase, divided by the number of
extracted sentences. This evaluation method gives
us a way to compare the performance of differ-
ent extraction systems automatically, by giving a
simple but reasonable measure of how many of
the desired catchphrases are generated by the sys-
tems, and how many of the sentences extracted are
useful. This is different from the use of standard
Rouge overall scores, where precision and recall
do not relate to the number of catchphrases or sen-
tences, but to the number of smaller units such
as n-grams, skip-bigrams or sequences, which
makes it more difficult to interpret the results.

5 Relevance Identification

Different techniques can be used to extract im-
portant fragments from text. Approaches such as
(Hoffmann and Pham, 2003; Galgani and Hoff-
mann, 2010) used regular expressions to recog-
nize patterns in the text, based on cue phrases or

particular terms/constructs. However, when man-
ually examining legal texts, we realised that to
recognize important content, several aspects of
the text need to be considered. Looking at one
sentence by itself is clearly not enough to decide
its importance: we must consider also document-
scale information to know what the present case
is about, and at the same time we need to look
at corpus-wide information to decide what is pe-
culiar to the present case. For this reason we de-
veloped several ways of locating potential catch-
phrases in legal text, based on different kinds of
attributes, which form the building blocks for our
rule system.

Using the NLTK library3 (Bird et al., 2009), we
collected all the words in the corpus, and obtained
a list of stemmed terms (we used the Porter stem-
mer). Then for each term (stem) of each docu-
ment, we computed the following numerical at-
tributes:

1. Term frequency (Tf): the number of occur-
rences of the term in this document.

2. AvgOcc: the average number of occurrences
of the term in the corpus.

3. Document frequency (Df): computed as the
number of document in which the term ap-
pear at least once divided by the total number
of documents.

4. TFIDF: computed as the rank of the term in
the document (i.e. TFIDF(term)=10 means
that the term has the 10 highest TFIDF value
for this document).

5. CpOcc: how many times the term occurs in
the set of all the known catchphrases present
in the corpus.

6. The FcFound score: from (Galgani 2012),
this uses the known catchphrases to compute
the ratio between how many times (that is in
how many documents) the term appears both
in the catchphrases and in the text of the case,
and how many times in the text 4 :

FcFound(t) =
NDocstext&catchp.(t)

NDocstext(t)
3http://www.nltk.org/
4Attributes 5 and 6 use information from the set of ex-

isting catchphrases. We consider this set as a general re-
source and believe that the corpus of catchphrases comprises
most of the relevant words and phrases, and as such can be
deemed a general resource and can be applied to new data
without loss of performances, as it was shown in (Galgani et
al., 2012).

118



7. CitSen: how many times the term occurs in
all the sentences (from other documents) that
cite the target case.

8. CitCp: how many times the term occurs in
all the catcphrases of other documents that
cite or are cited by the target case.

9. CitLeg: how many times the term occurs in
the section titles of the legislation cited by
the target case.

Three more non-numeric attributes were also used
for each term:

10. The Part Of Speech (POS) tag of the
term (obtained using the NLTK default part
of speech tagger, a classifier-based tagger
trained on the PENN Treebank corpus).

11. We extracted a set of legal terms from (Ols-
son, 1999), which lists a set of possible titles
and subtitles for judgements. The existence
of a term in this set is used as an attribute
(Legal).

12. If the term is a proper noun (PrpNoun), as
indicated by the POS tagger.

Furthermore, we also use four sentence-level at-
tributes:

13. Specific words or phrases that must be
present in the sentence, i.e. ”court” or
”whether”.

14. If the sentence contains a citation to another
case (HasCitCase).

15. If the sentence contains a citation to an act or
a section of the law (HasCitLaw).

16. A constraint on the length of the sentence
(Length).

When constructing our set of features, we in-
cluded different kinds of information that can be
used to recognize important content. Each of the
different features can be used to locate potential
catchphrases in a case. In (Galgani et al., 2011)
automatic extraction methods based on these at-
tributes were compared to each other, and it was
shown that citation-based methods in general out-
perform text-only methods. However, we believe
that different methods best apply to different con-
texts (for different documents and sentences), and
we propose to combine them using manually cre-
ated rules.

6 Building a Knowledge Base

Our catchphrase extraction system is based on
creating a knowledge base of rules that specify
which sentences should be extracted from the full
text, as candidate catchphrases. These rules are
acquired and organized in a knowledge base ac-
cording to the RDR methodology.

As the rules are created looking at examples,
we built a tool to facilitate the inspection of le-
gal cases. The user, for each document, can ex-
plore the relevant sentences and see which ones
are most similar to the (given) catchphrases of
the case. The interface also shows citation in-
formation, the catchphrases, relevant sentences of
cited/citing cases, and which parts of the relevant
legislation are cited. For a document the user can
see the “best” sentences: those that are more sim-
ilar to the catchphrases, or those similar to one
particular catchphrase. For each sentence, fre-
quency information is also shown, according to
the attributes described in Section 5.

In order to make a rule, the user looks at one
example of a relevant sentence, together with all
the frequency and citation information, the catch-
phrases and other information about the docu-
ment. The user can then set different constraints
for the attributes: attributes 1 to 12 refer to a sin-
gle term, with attributes 1-9 being numeric (for
these the user can specify a maximum and/or min-
imum value) while attributes 10-12 require an ex-
act value (a POS tag or a True/False value). The
user specifies how many terms which satisfy that
constraint, must be present in a single sentence
for it to be extracted (for example, there must be
at least 3 terms with FcFound > 0.1). It is also
possible to insert proximity constraints, such as:
the 3 terms must be no more than 5 tokens apart
(they must be within a window of 5 tokens). We
call this set of constraints on terms, a condition.
A rule is composed of a conjunction of condi-
tions (for example: there must be 3 terms with
FcFound > 0.1 and AvgOcc < 1 AND 2 terms
with CpOcc > 20 and CitCp > 1). There is no
limit on the number of conditions that form a rule.
The conclusion of a rule is always “the sentence
is relevant”.

To acquire rules from the user, we follow the
RDR approach, according to which the user looks
at an instance that is currently misclassified and
formulates a rule to correct the error. In our case,
the user is presented with a sentence that matches
at least one catchphrase (a relevant sentence), but
is not currently selected by the knowledge base.

119



Looking at the sentence at hand, and at the at-
tributes values for the different terms, the user
specifies a possible rule condition, and can then
test it on the entire dataset. This gives an imme-
diate idea on how useful the condition is, as the
user can see how many sentences would be se-
lected by that condition and how many of these
sentences are relevant (similar enough to at least
one catchphrase, as defined in Section 4). At the
same time the user can inspect manually other
sentences matched by the condition, and refine the
condition accordingly. When he/she is satisfied
with one condition, they can add and test more
conditions for the rule, and see other examples, to
narrow down the number of cases matched by the
rule and improve the precision while at the same
time trying to include as many cases as possible.

When looking at the number of sentences
matched by adding a condition, we can also com-
pute the probability that the improvement given
by the rule/condition is random. As initially de-
scribed in (Gaines and Compton, 1995), for a two
class problem (sentence is relevant/not relevant),
we can use a binomial test to calculate the proba-
bility that such results could occur randomly. That
is, when a condition is added to an existing rule, or
added to an empty rule we compute the probabil-
ity that the improvement is random. The probabil-
ity of selecting randomly n sentences and getting
x or more relevant sentences is:

r =
n∑

k=x

(
n

k

)
pk(1− p)n−k = n!p

x(1− p)n−x

x!(n− x)!

where p is the random probability, i.e. the propor-
tion of relevant sentences among all sentences se-
lected by the current rule. If we know how many
relevant sentences the new condition select (x),
we can calculate this probability which can guide
the user in creating a condition that minimize the
value of r.

As an example, the user may be presented with
the following sentence:

As might have been expected,
the bill of lading contains a
”Himalaya” clause in the widest terms
which is usual in such transactions.

which we know to be relevant, being similar to a
given catchphrase:

goods transported under bill of lading
incorporating Himalaya clause

Looking at the attributes the user proposes a con-
dition, for example based on the term lading and

Himalaya (that are peculiar of this document), a
possible condition is:

SENTENCE contains at least 2 terms
with CpOcc > 1 and FcFound > 0.1
and CitCp > 1 and TFIDF < 4 and
AvgOcc < 1

Testing the condition on the dataset we can see
that it matches 1392 sentences, of which 849
are relevant (precision = 0.61), those sentences
cover a total of 536 catchphrases (there are cases
in which a number of sentences match the same
catchphrase). The probability that a random con-
dition would have this precision is also computed
(10e-136). To improve the precision we can look
at the two other terms that occurs in the catch-
phrase (bill and clause) and add another condi-
tion, for example:

SENTENCE also contains at least
2 terms with CpOcc > 20 and
FcFound > 0.02 and CitCp > 1 and
isLegal and TFIDF < 16

The rule with two conditions now matches 429
sentences of which 347 are relevant (preci-
sion=0.81), covering 331 catchphrases. The prob-
ability that a random condition added to the first
one would bring this improvement is 10e-19. The
user can look at other matches of the rule, for ex-
ample:

That is to say, the Tribunal had to deter-
mine whether the applicant was, by rea-
son of his war-caused incapacity alone,
prevented from continuing to undertake
remunerative work that he had been un-
dertaking.

remunerative and war-caused are matched by the
first condition, and Tribunal and work by the sec-
ond. If the user is satisfied the rule is committed
to the knowledge base. In this way the creation,
testing and integration of the rule in the system is
done at the same time.

During knowledge acquisition this same inter-
action is repeated: the user looks at examples,
creates conditions, tests them on the dataset un-
til he/she is satisfied, and then commits the rule
to the knowledge base, following the RDR ap-
proach. When creating a rule the user is guided
both by particular examples shown by the system,
and by statistics computed on the large dataset.
Some rules of our KB are presented in Table 2.

120



Table 2: Examples of rules inserted in the Knowledge Base

SENTENCE contains at least 2 terms with Tf > 30 and CpOcc > 200 and AvgOcc < 2.5 and TFIDF < 10 within a
window of 2
SENTENCE contains at least 2 terms with Tf > 5 and CpOcc > 20 and FcFound > 0.02 and CitCp > 1 and
TFIDF < 15
and contains at least 2 terms with Tf > 5 and CpOcc > 2 and FcFound > 0.11 and AvgOcc < 0.2 and TFIDF < 5
SENTENCE contains at least 10 terms with CitCp > 10
and contains at least 6 terms with CitCp > 20
SENTENCE contains the term corporations with Tf > 15 and CitCp > 5

7 Preliminary Results and Future
Development

After building the knowledge acquisition inter-
face, we conducted a preliminary KA session to
verify the feasibility of the approach, and the ap-
propriateness of the rule language. We conducted
a KA session creating a total of 23 rules (which
took on average 6.5 minutes for each to be spec-
ified, tested and commited). These 23 rules ex-
tracted a total of 12082 sentences, of which 10565
were actually relevant, i.e. matched a least one
catchphrase, where we used Rouge-1 with a sim-
ilarity threshold of 0.5 to define a match. These
sentences are distributed among 1455 different
documents. The overall precision of the KB is
thus is 87.44% and the total number of catch-
phrases covered is 6765 (29.12% of the total).

Table 3 shows the comparison of this Knowl-
edge Base with four other methods: Random
is a random selection of sentences, Citations is
a methods that use only citation information to
select sentences (described in (Galgani et al.,
2011)); in particular it selects those sentences that
are most similar to the catchphrases of cited and
citing documents. As a state-of-the-art general
purpose summarizer, we used LexRank (Erkan
and Radev, 2004), an automatic tool that first
builds a network in which nodes are sentences
and a weighted edge between two nodes shows
the lexical cosine similarity, and then performs a
random walk to find the most central nodes in the
graphs and takes them as the summary. We down-
loaded the Mead toolkit5 and applied LexRank to
all the documents to rank the sentences. For every
method we extracted the 5 top ranked sentences.
Finally, because our rules have matches in only
1455 documents (out of a total of 2816), we used
a mixed approach in which for each document, if
there is any sentence(s) selected by the KB we se-
lect those, otherwise we take the best 5 sentences
as given by the Citation method. This method is

5www.summarization.com/mead/

Table 3: Performances measured using Rouge-1 with
threshold 0.5. SpD is the average number of extracted
sentences per document.

Method SpD Precision Recall F-measure
KB 4.29 0.874 0.291 0.437

Citations 4.56 0.789 0.527 0.632
KB+CIT 7.29 0.828 0.553 0.663
LexRank 4.87 0.563 0.402 0.469
Random 5.00 0.315 0.233 0.268

Table 4: Performances measured using Rouge-1 with
threshold 0.7. SpD is the average number of extracted
sentences per document.

Method SpD Precision Recall F-measure
KB 4.29 0.690 0.161 0.261

Citations 4.56 0.494 0.233 0.317
KB+CIT 7.28 0.575 0.265 0.363
LexRank 4.87 0.351 0.216 0.267
Random 5.00 0.156 0.098 0.120

called KB+Citations. We can see from the Ta-
ble that the Knowledge Base outperforms all other
methods in precision, followed by KB+Citations,
while KB+Citations obtains higher recall.

Note that we can vary the matching criterion (as
described in Section 4) and only consider more
strict matches, in this case only sentences more
similar to catchphrases are considered relevant.
We can see the results of setting a higher similar-
ity threshold (0.7) in Table 4. All the approaches
give lower precision and recall, but the margin of
the knowledge base over the other methods in-
creases, with a relative improvement of precision
of 40% over the citation method.

While the precision level of the KB alone is
higher than any other method, the recall is low
when compared to other approaches. We only
conducted a preliminary KA session, which took
slightly more than 2 hours. Figure 1 shows pre-
cision and recall of the KB as new rules are in-

121



serted into the system. We can assume that a more
comprehensive set of rules, capturing more sen-
tences and addressing different types of contexts,
should cover a greater number of catchphrases,
while keeping the precision at a high value; how-
ever, the rules constructe so far only fire for some
cases, and many cases are not covered at all.

Even with this limited KB, we can use the ci-
tation method as fall-back to select sentences for
those cases that are not matched by the rules. Us-
ing this approach, as we can see from Tables 3 and
4 (method KB+CIT), that obtain the highest recall
while keeping the precision very close to the pre-
cision of the KB alone.

For future work we plan not only to expand the
KB in general with more rules, in order to im-
prove recall, but also to construct rules specifi-
cally for those cases that are not already covered,
applying those rules in a selective way, only for
these of documents (and not for those which al-
ready have a sufficient number of catchphrases
candidates). In doing this we will seek to gen-
eralize our experience of applying the citation ap-
proach to documents where the KB did not pro-
duce catchphrases. We also hypothesize that the
recall level of the rules is low because they select
several sentences that are similar among them,
and thus match the same catchphrases, so that for
some documents we have a set of relevant sen-
tences which cover only some aspects of the case.
Using a similarity-based re-ranker would allow us
to discard sentences to similar to those already se-
lected.

In future developments we also plan to develop
further the structure of the knowledge base into
an RDR tree, writing exception rules (rule with
conclusion “not relevant”) that can patch the ex-
isting rules whenever an error is found. The cur-
rent knowledge base only consists of a list of rules
while the RDR methodology will let us organize
the rules so they are used in different situations
depending on which previous rule has fired.

8 Conclusion

This paper presents our hybrid approach to text
summarization, based on creating rules to com-
bine different types of statistical information
about text. In contrast to supervised learning,
where human intuition applies only to attribute
and algorithm selection, here human intuition also
applies to the organization of features in rules, but
still guided by the available dataset.

We have applied our approach to a particu-
lar summarization problem: creating catchphrases

Figure 1: Precision, Recall and F-measure as the size
of the KB increases

for legal case reports. Catchphrases are consid-
ered to be a significant help to lawyers searching
through cases to identify relevant precedents and
are routinely used when browsing documents. We
created a large dataset of case reports, correspond-
ing catchphrases and both incoming and outgoing
citations to cases and legislation. We created a
Knowledge Acquisition framework based on Rip-
ple Down Rules, and defined a rich rule language
that includes different aspects of the case under
consideration. We developed a tool that facili-
tates the inspection of the dataset and the cre-
ation of rules by selecting and specifying fea-
tures depending on the context of the present case
and using different information for different situ-
ations. A preliminary KA session shows the ef-
fectiveness of the rule approach: with only 23
rules we can obtain a significantly higher preci-
sion (87.4%) than any automatic method tried.
We are confident that a more extensive knowledge
base would further improve the performances and
cover a larger portion of the cases, improving the
recall.

References

Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper.
2009. Natural Language Processing with Python.
O’Reilly Media.

P. Compton and R. Jansen. 1990. Knowledge in con-
text: a strategy for expert system maintenance. In
AI ’88: Proceedings of the second Australian Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 292–
306, New York, NY, USA. Springer-Verlag New
York, Inc.

G. Erkan and D.R. Radev. 2004. LexRank: Graph-
based lexical centrality as salience in text summa-
rization. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
22(2004):457–479.

122



Atefeh Farzindar and Guy Lapalme. 2009. Machine
translation of legal information and its evaluation.
Advances in Artificial Intelligence, pages 64–73.

B. R. Gaines and P. Compton. 1995. Induction
of ripple-down rules applied to modeling large
databases. J. Intell. Inf. Syst., 5:211–228, Novem-
ber.

Filippo Galgani and Achim Hoffmann. 2010. Lexa:
Towards automatic legal citation classification. In
Jiuyong Li, editor, AI 2010: Advances in Artificial
Intelligence, volume 6464 of Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pages 445 –454. Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg.

Filippo Galgani, Paul Compton, and Achim Hoff-
mann. 2011. Citation based summarization of legal
texts. Technical Report 201202, School of Com-
puter Science and Engineering, UNSW, Australia.

Filippo Galgani, Paul Compton, and Achim Hoff-
mann. 2012. Towards automatic generation of
catchphrases for legal case reports. In Alexander
Gelbukh, editor, the 13th International Conference
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational
Linguistics, volume 7182 of Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pages 415–426, New Delhi, India.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.

G. Greenleaf, A. Mowbray, G. King, and P. Van Dijk.
1995. Public Access to Law via Internet: The Aus-
tralian Legal Information Institute. Journal of Law
and Information Science, 6:49.

Ben Hachey and Claire Grover. 2006. Extractive
summarisation of legal texts. Artif. Intell. Law,
14(4):305–345.

Achim Hoffmann and Son Bao Pham. 2003. To-
wards topic-based summarization for interactive
document viewing. In K-CAP ’03: Proceedings
of the 2nd international conference on Knowledge
capture, pages 28–35, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Myung Hee Kim, Paul Compton, and Yang Sok Kim.
2011. Rdr-based open ie for the web document.
In Proceedings of the sixth international conference
on Knowledge capture, K-CAP ’11, pages 105–112,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Julian Kupiec, Jan Pedersen, and Francine Chen.
1995. A trainable document summarizer. In SIGIR
’95: Proceedings of the 18th annual international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop-
ment in information retrieval, pages 68–73, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. In Stan Szpakowicz
Marie-Francine Moens, editor, Text Summarization
Branches Out: Proceedings of the ACL-04 Work-
shop, pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Daniel Marcu. 1997. From discourse structures to text
summaries. In In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop
on Intelligent Scalable Text Summarization, pages
82–88.

Q. Mei and C.X. Zhai. 2008. Generating impact-
based summaries for scientific literature. Proceed-
ings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 816–824.

Marie-Francine Moens. 2001. Innovative techniques
for legal text retrieval. Artificial Intelligence and
Law, 9(1):29–57, 03.

Marie-Francine Moens. 2007. Summarizing court de-
cisions. Inf. Process. Manage., 43(6):1748–1764.

Justice Leslie Trevor Olsson. 1999. Guide To Uni-
form Production of Judgments. Australian Institute
of Judicial Administration, Carlton South, Vic, 2nd
edition.

Son Bao Pham and Achim Hoffmann. 2004. Incre-
mental knowledge acquisition for building sophis-
ticated information extraction systems with kaftie.
In in 5th International Conference on Practical As-
pects of Knowledge Management, pages 292–306.
Springer-Verlag.

Vahed Qazvinian and Dragomir R. Radev. 2008. Sci-
entific Paper Summarization Using Citation Sum-
mary Networks. Proceedings of the 22nd Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics
(Coling 2008), pages 689–696.

Gerard Salton, Amit Singhal, Mandar Mitra, and Chris
Buckley. 1997. Automatic text structuring and
summarization. Inf. Process. Manage., 33(2):193–
207.

Han Xu and Achim Hoffmann. 2010. Rdrce: Com-
bining machine learning and knowledge acquisi-
tion. In Byeong-Ho Kang and Debbie Richards, ed-
itors, Knowledge Management and Acquisition for
Smart Systems and Services, volume 6232 of Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, pages 165–179.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.

Mehdi Yousfi-Monod, Atefeh Farzindar, and Guy La-
palme. 2010. Supervised machine learning for
summarizing legal documents. In Canadian Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence 2010, volume 6085
of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 51–
62, Ottawa, Canada, may. Springer.

Paul Zhang and Lavanya Koppaka. 2007. Semantics-
based legal citation network. In ICAIL ’07: Pro-
ceedings of the 11th international conference on Ar-
tificial intelligence and law, pages 123–130, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

123


