










































Mining Sentiments from Tweets


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, pages 11–18,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Mining Sentiments from Tweets

Akshat Bakliwal, Piyush Arora, Senthil Madhappan
Nikhil Kapre, Mukesh Singh and Vasudeva Varma

Search and Information Extraction Lab,
International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad.

{akshat.bakliwal, piyush.arora}@research.iiit.ac.in,
{senthil.m, nikhil.kapre, mukeshkumar.singh}@students.iiit.ac.in,

vv@iiit.ac.in

Abstract

Twitter is a micro blogging website, where
users can post messages in very short text
called Tweets. Tweets contain user opin-
ion and sentiment towards an object or per-
son. This sentiment information is very use-
ful in various aspects for business and gov-
ernments. In this paper, we present a method
which performs the task of tweet sentiment
identification using a corpus of pre-annotated
tweets. We present a sentiment scoring func-
tion which uses prior information to classify
(binary classification ) and weight various sen-
timent bearing words/phrases in tweets. Us-
ing this scoring function we achieve classifi-
cation accuracy of 87% on Stanford Dataset
and 88% on Mejaj dataset. Using supervised
machine learning approach, we achieve classi-
fication accuracy of 88% on Stanford dataset.

1 Introduction

With enormous increase in web technologies, num-
ber of people expressing their views and opinions
via web are increasing. This information is very
useful for businesses, governments and individuals.
With over 340+ million Tweets (short text messages)
per day, Twitter is becoming a major source of infor-
mation.

Twitter is a micro-blogging site, which is popular
because of its short text messages popularly known
as “Tweets”. Tweets have a limit of 140 characters.
Twitter has a user base of 140+ million active users1

1As on March 21, 2012. Source:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twitter

and thus is a useful source of information. Users
often discuss on current affairs and share their per-
sonals views on various subjects via tweets.

Out of all the popular social media’s like Face-
book, Google+, Myspace and Twitter, we choose
Twitter because 1) tweets are small in length, thus
less ambigious; 2) unbiased; 3) are easily accessible
via API; 4) from various socio-cultural domains.

In this paper, we introduce an approach which can
be used to find the opinion in an aggregated col-
lection of tweets. In this approach, we used two
different datasets which are build using emoticons
and list of suggestive words respectively as noisy la-
bels. We give a new method of scoring “Popularity
Score”, which allows determination of the popular-
ity score at the level of individual words of a tweet
text. We also emphasis on various types and levels
of pre-processing required for better performance.

Roadmap for rest of the paper: Related work is
discussed in Section 2. In Section 3, we describe
our approach to address the problem of Twitter
sentiment classification along with pre-processing
steps.Datasets used in this research are discussed in
Section 4. Experiments and Results are presented in
Section 5. In Section 6, we present the feature vector
approach to twitter sentiment classification. Section
7 presents as discussion on the methods and we con-
clude the paper with future work in Section 8.

2 Related Work

Research in Sentiment Analysis of user generated
content can be categorized into Reviews (Turney,
2002; Pang et al., 2002; Hu and Liu, 2004), Blogs
(Draya et al., 2009; Chesley, 2006; He et al., 2008),

11



News (Godbole et al., 2007), etc. All these cat-
egories deal with large text. On the other hand,
Tweets are shorter length text and are difficult to
analyse because of its unique language and struc-
ture.

(Turney, 2002) worked on product reviews. Tur-
ney used adjectives and adverbs for performing
opinion classification on reviews. He used PMI-IR
algorithm to estimate the semantic orientation of the
sentiment phrase. He achieved an average accuracy
of 74% on 410 reviews of different domains col-
lected from Epinion. (Hu and Liu, 2004) performed
feature based sentiment analysis. Using Noun-Noun
phrases they identified the features of the products
and determined the sentiment orientation towards
each feature. (Pang et al., 2002) tested various ma-
chine learning algorithms on Movie Reviews. He
achieved 81% accuracy in unigram presence feature
set on Naive Bayes classifier.

(Draya et al., 2009) tried to identify domain spe-
cific adjectives to perform blog sentiment analysis.
They considered the fact that opinions are mainly
expressed by adjectives and pre-defined lexicons fail
to identify domain information. (Chesley, 2006) per-
formed topic and genre independent blog classifica-
tion, making novel use of linguistic features. Each
post from the blog is classified as positive, negative
and objective.

To the best of our knowledge, there is very less
amount of work done in twitter sentiment analy-
sis. (Go et al., 2009) performed sentiment analy-
sis on twitter. They identified the tweet polarity us-
ing emoticons as noisy labels and collected a train-
ing dataset of 1.6 million tweets. They reported an
accuracy of 81.34% for their Naive Bayes classi-
fier. (Davidov et al., 2010) used 50 hashtags and 15
emoticons as noisy labels to create a dataset for twit-
ter sentiment classification. They evaluate the effect
of different types of features for sentiment extrac-
tion. (Diakopoulos and Shamma, 2010) worked on
political tweets to identify the general sentiments of
the people on first U.S. presidential debate in 2008.

(Bora, 2012) also created their dataset based on
noisy labels. They created a list of 40 words (pos-
itive and negative) which were used to identify the
polarity of tweet. They used a combination of
a minimum word frequency threshold and Cate-
gorical Proportional Difference as a feature selec-

tion method and achieved the highest accuracy of
83.33% on a hand labeled test dataset.

(Agarwal et al., 2011) performed three class (pos-
itive, negative and neutral) classification of tweets.
They collected their dataset using Twitter stream
API and asked human judges to annotate the data
into three classes. They had 1709 tweets of each
class making a total of 5127 in all. In their research,
they introduced POS-specific prior polarity features
along with twitter specific features. They achieved
max accuracy of 75.39% for unigram + senti fea-
tures.

Our work uses (Go et al., 2009) and (Bora, 2012)
datasets for this research. We use Naive Bayes
method to decide the polarity of tokens in the tweets.
Along with that we provide an useful insight on how
preprocessing should be done on tweet. Our method
of Senti Feature Identification and Popularity Score
perform well on both the datasets. In feature vec-
tor approach, we show the contribution of individual
NLP and Twitter specific features.

3 Approach

Our approach can be divided into various steps.
Each of these steps are independent of the other but
important at the same time.

3.1 Baseline

In the baseline approach, we first clean the tweets.
We remove all the special characters, targets (@),
hashtags (#), URLs, emoticons, etc and learn the
positive & negative frequencies of unigrams in train-
ing. Every unigram token is given two probability
scores: Positive Probability (Pp) and Negative Prob-
ability (Np) (Refer Equation 1). We follow the same
cleaning process for the test tweets. After clean-
ing the test tweets, we form all the possible uni-
grams and check for their frequencies in the training
model. We sum up the positive and negative proba-
bility scores of all the constituent unigrams, and use
their difference (positive - negative) to find the over-
all score of the tweet. If tweet score is > 0 then it is

12



positive otherwise negative.

Pf = Frequency in Positive Training Set

Nf = Frequency in Negative Training Set

Pp = Positive Probability of the token.

= Pf/(Pf + Nf )

Np = Negative Probability of the token.

= Nf/(Pf + Nf )

(1)

3.2 Emoticons and Punctuations Handling
We make slight changes in the pre-processing mod-
ule for handling emoticons and punctuations. We
use the emoticons list provided by (Agarwal et al.,
2011) in their research. This list2 is built from
wikipedia list of emoticons3 and is hand tagged into
five classes (extremely positive, positive, neutral,
negative and extremely negative). In this experi-
ment, we replace all the emoticons which are tagged
positive or extremely positive with ‘zzhappyzz’ and
rest all other emoticons with ‘zzsadzz’. We append
and prepend ‘zz’ to happy and sad in order to pre-
vent them from mixing into tweet text. At the end,
‘zzhappyzz’ is scored +1 and ‘zzsadzz’ is scored -1.

Exclamation marks (!) and question marks (?)
also carry some sentiment. In general, ‘!’ is used
when we have to emphasis on a positive word and
‘?’ is used to highlight the state of confusion or
disagreement. We replace all the occurrences of ‘!’
with ‘zzexclaimzz’ and of ‘?’ with ‘zzquestzz’. We
add 0.1 to the total tweet score for each ‘!’ and sub-
tract 0.1 from the total tweet score for each ‘?’. 0.1
is chosen by trial and error method.

3.3 Stemming
We use Porter Stemmer4 to stem the tweet words.
We modify porter stemmer and restrict it to step 1
only. Step 1 gets rid of plurals and -ed or -ing.

3.4 Stop Word Removal
Stop words play a negative role in the task of senti-
ment classification. Stop words occur in both pos-
itive and negative training set, thus adding more
ambiguity in the model formation. And also, stop

2http://goo.gl/oCSnQ
3http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of emoticons
4http://tartarus.org/m̃artin/PorterStemmer/

words don’t carry any sentiment information and
thus are of no use to us. We create a list of stop
words like he, she, at, on, a, the, etc. and ignore
them while scoring. We also discard words which
are of length ≤ 2 for scoring the tweet.

3.5 Spell Correction

Tweets are written in random form, without any fo-
cus given to correct structure and spelling. Spell
correction is an important part in sentiment analy-
sis of user- generated content. Users type certain
characters arbitrary number of times to put more em-
phasis on that. We use the spell correction algo-
rithm from (Bora, 2012). In their algorithm, they
replace a word with any character repeating more
than twice with two words, one in which the re-
peated character is placed once and second in which
the repeated character is placed twice. For example
the word ‘swwweeeetttt’ is replaced with 8 words
‘swet’, ‘swwet’, ‘sweet’, ‘swett’, ‘swweet’, and so
on.

Another common type of spelling mistakes oc-
cur because of skipping some of characters from the
spelling. like “there” is generally written as “thr”.
Such types of spelling mistakes are not currently
handled by our system. We propose to use phonetic
level spell correction method in future.

3.6 Senti Features

At this step, we try to reduce the effect of non-
sentiment bearing tokens on our classification sys-
tem. In the baseline method, we considered all the
unigram tokens equally and scored them using the
Naive Bayes formula (Refer Equation 1). Here, we
try to boost the scores of sentiment bearing words.
In this step, we look for each token in a pre-defined
list of positive and negative words. We use the list of
of most commonly used positive and negative words
provided by Twitrratr5. When we come across a to-
ken in this list, instead of scoring it using the Naive
Bayes formula (Refer Equation 1), we score the to-
ken +/- 1 depending on the list in which it exist. All
the tokens which are missing from this list went un-
der step 3.3, 3.4, 3.5 and were checked for their oc-
currence after each step.

5http://twitrratr.com/

13



3.7 Noun Identification
After doing all the corrections (3.3 - 3.6) on a word,
we look at the reduced word if it is being converted
to a Noun or not. We identify the word as a Noun
word by looking at its part of speech tag in English
WordNet(Miller, 1995). If the majority sense (most
commonly used sense) of that word is Noun, we
discard the word while scoring. Noun words don’t
carry sentiment and thus are of no use in our experi-
ments.

3.8 Popularity Score
This scoring method boosts the scores of the most
commonly used words, which are domain specific.
For example, happy is used predominantly for ex-
pressing the positive sentiment. In this method, we
multiple its popularity factor (pF) to the score of
each unigram token which has been scored in the
previous steps. We use the occurrence frequency of
a token in positive and negative dataset to decide on
the weight of popularity score. Equation 2 shows
how the popularity factor is calculated for each to-
ken. We selected a threshold 0.01 min support as the
cut-off criteria and reduced it by half at every level.
Support of a word is defined as the proportion of
tweets in the dataset which contain this token. The
value 0.01 is chosen such that we cover a large num-
ber of tokens without missing important tokens, at
the same time pruning less frequent tokens.

Pf = Frequency in Positive Training Set

Nf = Frequency in Negative Training Set

if(Pf −Nf ) > 1000)
pF = 0.9;

elseif((Pf −Nf ) > 500)
pF = 0.8;

elseif((Pf −Nf ) > 250)
pF = 0.7;

elseif((Pf −Nf ) > 100)
pF = 0.5;

elseif((Pf −Nf < 50))
pF = 0.1;

(2)

Figure 1 shows the flow of our approach.

Figure 1: Flow Chart of our Algorithm

4 Datasets

In this section, we explain the two datasets used in
this research. Both of these datasets are built using
noisy labels.

4.1 Stanford Dataset

This dataset(Go et al., 2009) was built automat-
ically using emoticons as noisy labels. All the
tweets which contain ‘:)’ were marked positive and
tweets containing ‘:(’ were marked negative. Tweets
that did not have any of these labels or had both
were discarded. The training dataset has ∼1.6 mil-
lion tweets, equal number of positive and negative
tweets. The training dataset was annotated into two
classes (positive and negative) while the testing data
was hand annotated into three classes (positive, neg-
ative and neutral). For our experimentation, we use
only positive and negative class tweets from the test-
ing dataset for our experimentation. Table 1 gives
the details of dataset.

Training Tweets
Positive 800,000
Negative 800,000

Total 1,600,000
Testing Tweets

Positive 180
Negative 180
Objective 138

Total 498

Table 1: Stanford Twitter Dataset

14



4.2 Mejaj
Mejaj dataset(Bora, 2012) was built using noisy la-
bels. They collected a set of 40 words and manually
categorized them into positive and negative. They
label a tweet as positive if it contains any of the pos-
itive sentiment words and as negative if it contains
any of the negative sentiment words. Tweets which
do not contain any of these noisy labels and tweets
which have both positive and negative words were
discarded. Table 2 gives the list of words which were
used as noisy labels. This dataset contains only two
class data. Table 3 gives the details of the dataset.

Positive Labels Negative Labels

amazed, amused,
attracted, cheerful,
delighted, elated,

excited, festive, funny,
hilarious, joyful,

lively, loving,
overjoyed, passion,
pleasant, pleased,
pleasure, thrilled,

wonderful

annoyed, ashamed,
awful, defeated,

depressed,
disappointed,
discouraged,
displeased,

embarrassed, furious,
gloomy, greedy,

guilty, hurt, lonely,
mad, miserable,

shocked, unhappy,
upset

Table 2: Noisy Labels for annotating Mejaj Dataset

Training Tweets
Positive 668,975
Negative 795,661

Total 1,464,638
Testing Tweets

Positive 198
Negative 204

Total 402

Table 3: Mejaj Dataset

5 Experiment

In this section, we explain the experiments carried
out using the above proposed approach.

5.1 Stanford Dataset
On this dataset(Go et al., 2009), we perform a series
of experiments. In the first series of experiments,

we train on the given training data and test on the
testing data. In the second series of experiments,
we perform 5 fold cross validation using the training
data. Table 4 shows the results of each of these ex-
periments on steps which are explained in Approach
(Section 3).

In table 4, we give results for each step emoticons
and punctuations handling, spell correction, stem-
ming and stop word removal mentioned in Approach
Section (Section 3). The Baseline + All Combined
results refers to combination of these steps (emoti-
cons, punctuations, spell correction, Stemming and
stop word removal) performed together. Series 2 re-
sults are average of accuracy of each fold.

5.2 Mejaj Dataset

Similar series of experiments were performed on
this dataset(Bora, 2012) too. In the first series of
experiments, training and testing was done on the
respective given datasets. In the second series of ex-
periments, we perform 5 fold cross validation on the
training data. Table 5 shows the results of each of
these experiments.

In table 5, we give results for each step emoticons
and punctuations handling, spell correction, stem-
ming and stop word removal mentioned in Approach
Section (Section 3). The Baseline + All Combined
results refers to combination of these steps (emoti-
cons, punctuations, spell correction, Stemming and
stop word removal) performed together. Series 2 re-
sults are average of accuracy of each fold.

5.3 Cross Dataset

To validate the robustness of our approach, we ex-
perimented with cross dataset training and testing.
We trained our system on one dataset and tested on
the other dataset. Table 6 reports the results of cross
dataset evaluations.

6 Feature Vector Approach

In this feature vector approach, we form features us-
ing Unigrams, Bigrams, Hashtags (#), Targets (@),
Emoticons, Special Symbol (‘!’) and used a semi-
supervised SVM classifier. Our feature vector com-
prised of 11 features. We divide the features into
two groups, NLP features and Twitter specific fea-
tures. NLP features include frequency of positive

15



Method Series 1 (%) Series 2 (%)
Baseline 78.8 80.1

Baseline + Emoticons + Punctuations 81.3 82.1
Baseline + Spell Correction 81.3 81.6

Baseline + Stemming 81.9 81.7
Baseline + Stop Word Removal 81.7 82.3
Baseline + All Combined (AC) 83.5 85.4

AC + Senti Features (wSF) 85.5 86.2
wSF + Noun Identification (wNI) 85.8 87.1

wNI + Popularity Score 87.2 88.4

Table 4: Results on Stanford Dataset

Method Series 1 (%) Series 2 (%)
Baseline 77.1 78.6

Baseline + Emoticons + Punctuations 80.3 80.4
Baseline + Spell Correction 80.1 80.0

Baseline + Stemming 79.1 79.7
Baseline + Stop Word Removal 80.2 81.7
Baseline + All Combined (AC) 82.9 84.1

AC + Senti Features (wSF) 86.8 87.3
wSF + Noun Identification (wNI) 87.6 88.2

wNI + Popularity Score 88.1 88.1

Table 5: Results on Mejaj Dataset

Method Training Dataset Testing Dataset Accuracy
wNI + Popularity Score Stanford Mejaj 86.4%
wNI + Popularity Score Mejaj Stanford 84.7%

Table 6: Results on Cross Dataset evaluation

NLP
Unigram (f1) # of positive and negative unigram
Bigram (f2) # of positive and negative Bigram

Twitter Specific

Hashtags (f3) # of positive and negative hashtags
Emoticons (f4) # of positive and negative emoticons

URLs (f5) Binary Feature - presence of URLs
Targets (f6) Binary Feature - presence of Targets

Special Symbols (f7) Binary Feature - presence of ‘!’

Table 7: Features and Description

16



Feature Set Accuracy (Stanford)
f1 + f2 85.34%

f3 + f4 + f7 53.77%
f3 + f4 + f5 + f6 + f7 60.12%
f1 + f2 + f3 + f4 + f7 85.89%
f1 + f2 + f3 + f4 +

f5 + f6 + f7
87.64%

Table 8: Results of Feature Vector Classifier on Stanford
Dataset

unigrams matched, negative unigrams matched, pos-
itive bigrams matched, negative bigrams matched,
etc and Twitter specific features included Emoti-
cons, Targets, HashTags, URLs, etc. Table 7 shows
the features we have considered.

HashTags polarity is decided based on the con-
stituent words of the hashtags. Using the list of pos-
itive and negative words from Twitrratr6, we try to
find if hashtags contains any of these words. If so,
we assign the polarity of that to the hashtag. For
example, “#imsohappy” contains a positive word
“happy”, thus this hashtag is considered as posi-
tive hashtag. We use the emoticons list provided
by (Agarwal et al., 2011) in their research. This
list7 is built from wikipedia list of emoticons8 and
is hand tagged into five classes (extremely positive,
positive, neutral, negative and extremely negative).
We reduce this five class list to two class by merging
extremely positive and positive class to single posi-
tive class and rest other classes (extremely negative,
negative and neutral) to single negative class. Ta-
ble 8 reports the accuracy of our machine learning
classifier on Stanford dataset.

7 Discussion

In this section, we present a few examples evaluated
using our system. The following example denotes
the effect of incorporating the contribution of emoti-
cons on tweet classification. Example “Ahhh I can’t
move it but hey w/e its on hell I’m elated right now
:-D”. This tweet contains two opinion words, “hell”
and “elated”. Using the unigram scoring method,
this tweet is classified neutral but it is actually posi-

6http://twitrratr.com/
7http://goo.gl/oCSnQ
8http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of emoticons

tive. If we incorporate the effect of emoticon “:-D”,
then this tweet is tagged positive. “:-D” is a strong
positive emoticon.

Consider this example, “Bill Clinton Fail -
Obama Win?”. In this example, there are two senti-
ment bearing words, “Fail” and “Win”. Ideally this
tweet should be neutral but this is tagged as a posi-
tive tweet in the dataset as well as using our system.
In this tweet, if we calculate the popularity factor
(pF) for “Win” and “Fail”, they come out to be 0.9
and 0.8 respectively. Because of the popularity fac-
tor weight, the positive score domniates the negative
score and thus the tweet is tagged as positive. It is
important to identify the context flow in the text and
also how each of these words modify or depend on
the other words of the tweet.

For calculating the system performance, we as-
sume that the dataset which is used here is correct.
Most of the times this assumption is true but there
are a few cases where it fails. For example, this
tweet “My wrist still hurts. I have to get it looked
at. I HATE the dr/dentist/scary places. :( Time to
watch Eagle eye. If you want to join, txt!” is tagged
as positive, but actually this should have been tagged
negative. Such erroneous tweets also effect the sys-
tem performance.

There are few limitations with the current pro-
posed approach which are also open research prob-
lems.

1. Spell Correction: In the above proposed ap-
proach, we gave a solution to spell correction
which works only when extra characters are en-
tered by the user. It fails when users skip some
characters like “there” is spelled as “thr”. We
propose the use of phonetic level spell correc-
tion to handle this problem.

2. Hashtag Segmentation: For handling hashtags,
we looked for the existence of the positive or
negative words9 in the hashtag. But there can
be some cases where it may not work correctly.
For example, “#thisisnotgood”, in this hashtag
if we consider the presence of positive and neg-
ative words, then this hashtag is tagged posi-
tive (“good”). We fail to capture the presence
and effect of “not” which is making this hash-

9word list taken from http://twitrratr.com/

17



tag as negative. We propose to devise and use
some logic to segment the hashtags to get cor-
rect constituent words.

3. Context Dependency: As discussed in one of
the examples above, even tweet text which is
limited to 140 characters can have context de-
pendency. One possible method to address this
problem is to identify the objects in the tweet
and then find the opinion towards those objects.

8 Conclusion and Future Work

Twitter sentiment analysis is a very important and
challenging task. Twitter being a microblog suffers
from various linguistic and grammatical errors. In
this research, we proposed a method which incorpo-
rates the popularity effect of words on tweet senti-
ment classification and also emphasis on how to pre-
process the Twitter data for maximum information
extraction out of the small content. On the Stanford
dataset, we achieved 87% accuracy using the scor-
ing method and 88% using SVM classifier. On Me-
jaj dataset, we showed an improvement of 4.77% as
compared to their (Bora, 2012) accuracy of 83.33%.

In future, This work can be extended through in-
corporation of better spell correction mechanisms
(may be at phonetic level) and word sense disam-
biguation. Also we can identify the target and enti-
ties in the tweet and the orientation of the user to-
wards them.

Acknowledgement

We would like to thank Vibhor Goel, Sourav Dutta
and Sonil Yadav for helping us with running SVM
classifier on such a large data.

References
Agarwal, A., Xie, B., Vovsha, I., Rambow, O. and Pas-

sonneau, R. (2011). Sentiment analysis of Twitter

data. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Languages
in Social Media LSM ’11.

Bora, N. N. (2012). Summarizing Public Opinions in
Tweets. In Journal Proceedings of CICLing 2012,
New Delhi, India.

Chesley, P. (2006). Using verbs and adjectives to auto-
matically classify blog sentiment. In In Proceedings
of AAAI-CAAW-06, the Spring Symposia on Compu-
tational Approaches.

Davidov, D., Tsur, O. and Rappoport, A. (2010). En-
hanced sentiment learning using Twitter hashtags and
smileys. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics: Posters COL-
ING ’10.

Diakopoulos, N. and Shamma, D. (2010). Characterizing
debate performance via aggregated twitter sentiment.
In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on
Human factors in computing systems ACM.

Draya, G., Planti, M., Harb, A., Poncelet, P., Roche,
M. and Trousset, F. (2009). Opinion Mining from
Blogs. In International Journal of Computer Informa-
tion Systems and Industrial Management Applications
(IJCISIM).

Go, A., Bhayani, R. and Huang, L. (2009). Twitter Sen-
timent Classification using Distant Supervision. In
CS224N Project Report, Stanford University.

Godbole, N., Srinivasaiah, M. and Skiena, S. (2007).
Large-Scale Sentiment Analysis for News and Blogs.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on We-
blogs and Social Media (ICWSM).

He, B., Macdonald, C., He, J. and Ounis, I. (2008). An
effective statistical approach to blog post opinion re-
trieval. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on
Information and knowledge management CIKM ’08.

Hu, M. and Liu, B. (2004). Mining Opinion Features in
Customer Reviews. In AAAI.

Miller, G. A. (1995). WordNet: A Lexical Database for
English. Communications of the ACM 38, 39–41.

Pang, B., Lee, L. and Vaithyanathan, S. (2002). Thumbs
up? Sentiment Classification using Machine Learning
Techniques.

Turney, P. D. (2002). Thumbs Up or Thumbs Down? Se-
mantic Orientation Applied to Unsupervised Classifi-
cation of Reviews. In ACL.

18


