










































LORIA System for the WMT12 Quality Estimation Shared Task


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 114–119,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

LORIA System for the WMT12 Quality Estimation Shared Task

Langlois David

langlois@loria.fr

Raybaud Sylvain
LORIA, Université de Lorraine

615 rue du Jardin Botanique
54602 Villers les Nancy, France

raybauds@loria.fr

Smaı̈li Kamel

smaili@loria.fr

Abstract

In this paper we present the system we sub-
mitted to the WMT12 shared task on Quality
Estimation. Each translated sentence is given
a score between 1 and 5. The score is ob-
tained using several numerical or boolean fea-
tures calculated according to the source and
target sentences. We perform a linear regres-
sion of the feature space against scores in the
range [1:5]. To this end, we use a Support Vec-
tor Machine. We experiment with two kernels:
linear and radial basis function. In our submis-
sion we use the features from the shared task
baseline system and our own features. This
leads to 66 features. To deal with this large
number of features, we propose an in-house
feature selection algorithm. Our results show
that a lot of information is already present in
baseline features, and that our feature selec-
tion algorithm discards features which are lin-
early correlated.

1 Introduction

Machine translation systems are not reliable enough
to be used directly. They can only be used to grasp
the general meaning of texts or help human transla-
tors. Confidence measures detect erroneous words
or sentences. Such information could be useful for
users to decide whether or not to post-edit translated
sentences (Specia, 2011; Specia et al., 2010) or se-
lect documents mostly correctly translated (Soricut
and Echihabi, 2010). Moreover, it is possible to use
confidence measures to compare outputs from dif-
ferent systems and to recommend the best one (He
et al., 2010). One can also imagine that confidence

measures at word-level could be also useful for a
machine translation system to automatically correct
parts of output: for example, a translation system
translates the source sentence, then, this output is
translated with another translation system (Simard
et al., 2007). This last step could be driven by confi-
dence measures.

In previous works (Raybaud et al., 2011; Raybaud
et al., 2009a; Raybaud et al., 2009b) we used state-
of-the-art features to predict the quality of a transla-
tion at sentence- and word-level. Moreover, we pro-
posed our own features based on previous works on
cross-lingual triggers (Lavecchia et al., 2008; Latiri
et al., 2011). We evaluated our work in terms of Dis-
crimination Error Trade-off, Equal Error Rate and
Normalised Mutual Information.

In this article, we compare the features used in the
shared task baseline system and our own features.
This leads to 66 features which will be detailed in
sections 3 and 4. We therefore deal with many fea-
tures. We used a machine learning approach to per-
form regression of the feature space against scores
given by humans. Machine learning algorithms may
not efficiently deal with high dimensional spaces.
Moreover, some features may be less discriminant
descriptors and then in some cases could add more
noise than information. That is why, in this article
we propose an in-house feature selection algorithm
to remove useless features.

The article is structured as follows. In Section 2,
we give an overview of our quality estimation sys-
tem. Then, in Sections 3 and 4, we describe the
features we experimented with. In section 6, we de-
scribe the algorithm we propose for feature selec-

114



tion. Then we give the results of several configura-
tions in Section 7.

2 Overview of our quality estimation
submission

Each translated sentence is assigned a score between
1 and 5. 5 means that the machine translation output
is perfectly clear and intelligible and 1 means that it
is incomprehensible. The score is calculated using
several numerical or boolean features extracted ac-
cording to the source and target sentences. We per-
form a regression of the feature space against [1 : 5].

3 The baseline features

The quality estimation shared task organizers pro-
vided a baseline system including several interesting
features. Among them, several are yet used in (Ray-
baud et al., 2011) but we give below a brief review
of the whole baseline features set1:

• Source and target sentences lengths: there is a
correlation between the sizes of source and tar-
get sentences.

• Average source token length: this is the average
number of letters of the words in the sentence.
We guess that this feature can be useful because
short words have more chance to be tool words.

• Language model likelihood of source and target
sentences: a source sentence with low likeli-
hood is certainly far from training corpus statis-
tics. There is a risk it is badly translated. A tar-
get sentence with low likelihood is not suitable
in terms of target language.

• Average number of occurrences of the words
within the target sentence: too many occur-
rences of the same word in the target sentence
may indicate a bad translation.

• Average number of translations per source
word in the sentence: for each word in the
source sentence, the feature indicates how
many words of the target sentence are indeed
translations of this word in the IBM1 table
(with probability higher than 0.2).

1Indeed, our system takes into input a set of features, and is
able to discard redundant features (see Section 6).

• Weighted average number of translations per
source word in the sentence: this feature is sim-
ilar to the previous one, but a frequent word is
given a low weight in the averaging.

• n-gram frequency based features: the baseline
system proposes to group the n-gram frequen-
cies into 4 quartiles. The features indicate how
many n-gram (unigram to trigram) in source
sentence are in quartiles 1 and 4. These fea-
tures indicate if the source sentence contains
n-grams relevant to the training corpus.

• Punctuation based features: there may exist a
correlation between punctuation of source and
target sentences. The count of punctuation
marks in both sentences may then be useful.

Overall, the baseline system proposes 17 features.

4 The LORIA features

In a previous work (Raybaud et al., 2011), we tested
several confidence measures. The Quality Measure
Task campaign constitutes a good opportunity for us
to compare our approach to others. We give below
a brief review of our features (we cite again features
which are yet presented in baseline features because
sometimes, we use a variant of them):

• lengths: three features are generated, lengths of
source and target sentences (already presented
in baseline features), and ratio of target over
source length

• n-gram based features (Duchateau et al., 2002):
each word in the source and target sentences
is given its 5-gram probability. Then, the
sentence-level score is the average of the scores
across all words in the sentence. There are 4
features: one for each language (source and tar-
get) and one for each direction (left-to-right and
right-to-left 5-gram).

• backoff n-gram based features: in the same
way, a score is assigned to a word according
to how many times the language model had to
back off in order to assign a probability to the
sequence (Uhrik and Ward, 1997). Here too,
word scores are averaged and we get 4 scores.

115



• averaged features: a common property of all n-
gram based and backoff based features is that a
word can get a low score if it is actually correct
but its neighbours are wrong. To compensate
for this phenomenon we took into account the
average score of the neighbours of the word be-
ing considered. More precisely, for every rele-
vant feature x. defined at word level we also
computed:

xleft. (wi) = x.(wi−2) ∗ x.(wi−1) ∗ x.(wi)

xcentred. (wi) = x.(wi−1) ∗ x.(wi) ∗ x.(wi+1)

xright. (wi) = x.(wi) ∗ x.(wi+1) ∗ x.(wi+2)

A sentence level feature is then calculated ac-
cording to the average of each new ”averaged
feature”.

• intra-lingual features: the intra-lingual score
of a word in a sentence is the average of the
mutual information between that word and the
other words in that sentence. Mutual informa-
tion is defined by:

I(w1, w2) = P (w1, w2)×log

(

P (w1, w2)

P (w1)P (w2)

)

(1)
The intra-lingual score of a sentence is the av-
erage of the intra-lingual scores of the words in
this sentence. There are two features, one for
each language.

• cross-lingual features: the cross-lingual score
of a word in a target sentence is the average of
the mutual information between that word and
the words in the source sentence. The cross-
lingual score of a target sentence is the average
of its constituents.

• IBM1 features: the score of the target sentence
is the average translation probability provided
by the IBM1 model.

• basic parser: this produces two scores, a bi-
nary flag indicating whether any bracketing in-
side the target sentence is correct, and one in-
dicating if the sentence ends with an end of
sentence symbol (period, colon, semi-colon,
question/exclamation/quotation mark, comma,
apostrophe, close parenthese)

• out-of-vocabulary: this generates two scores,
the number of out-of-vocabulary words in the
sentence, and the same one but normalized by
the length of the sentence. These scores are
used for both sides.

This leads to 49 features. A few ones are equiv-
alent to or are strongly correlated to baseline ones.
As we want to be able to integrate several sets of fea-
tures without prior knowledge, our system is able to
discard redundant features (see Section 6).

5 Regression

Our system predicts a score between 1 and 5 for each
test sentence. For that, we used the training corpus
to perform the linear regression of the input features
against scores given by humans. We used SVM al-
gorithm to perform this regression (LibSVM toolkit
(Chang and Lin, 2011)). We experimented two ker-
nels: linear, and radial basis function. For the radial
basis function, we used grid search to optimise pa-
rameters.

6 Feature Selection

We experimented with many features. Some of them
may be very poor predictors. Then, these features
may disturb the convergence of the training algo-
rithm of SVM. To prevent this drawback, we applied
an in-house feature selection algorithm. A feature
selection algorithm selects the most relevant features
by maximizing a criterion. Feature selection algo-
rithms can be divided into two classes: backward
and forward (Guyon and Elisseeff, 2003). Backward
algorithms remove useless features from a set. For-
ward algorithms start with an empty feature set and
insert useful features. We implemented a greedy
backward elimination algorithm for feature selec-
tion. It discards features until a quality criterion
stops to decrease. The criterion used is the Mean Av-
erage Error (MAE) calculated on the development
corpus:

MAE(s, r) =

∑n
i=1 |si − ri|

n
(2)

where s is the list of scores predicted by the sys-
tem, r is the list of scores given by experts, n is the
size of these lists.

The algorithm is described below:

116



Algorithm 1: Feature Selection algorithm

begin
Start with a set S of features
while two features in S are linearly
correlated (more than 0.999) do

discard one of them from S
Calculate MAE for S
repeat

DecreaseMax← 0
forall the feature f ∈ S do

S′ ← S \ f
Calculate newMAE for S′

if MAE-newMAE>
DecreaseMax then

DecreaseMax←
MAE-newMAE
fchosen← f

if DecreaseMax> 0 then
S ← S\ fchosen
MAE← MAE-DecreaseMax

until DecreaseMax=0;

For calculating the MAE for a feature set, several
steps are necessary: performing the regression be-
tween the features and the expert scores on the train-
ing corpus, using this regression to predict the scores
on the development corpus, calculate the MAE be-
tween the predicted scores and the expert scores on
this development corpus.

7 Results

We used the data provided by the shared task
on Quality Estimation2, without additional corpus.
This data is composed of a parallel English-Spanish
training corpus. This corpus is made of the con-
catenation of europarl-v5 and news-commentary10
corpora (from WMT-2010), followed by tokeniza-
tion, cleaning (sentences with more than 80 tokens
removed) and truecasing. It has been used for base-
line models provided in the baseline package by the
shared task organizers. We used the same train-
ing corpus to train additional language models (for-
ward and backward 5-gram with kneyser-ney dis-
counting, obtained with the SRILM toolkit) and trig-
gers required for our features. For feature extrac-

2http://dl.dropbox.com/u/6447503/resources.tbz

tion, we used the files provided by the organizers:
1832 source english sentences, their translations by
the baseline translation system, and the score given
by humans to these translations. We split these files
into a training part (1000 sentences) and a develop-
ment part (832 sentences). We used the train part
to perform the regression between the features and
the scores. We used the development corpus to opti-
mise the parameters of the regression and for feature
selection. We did not use additional provided infor-
mation such as phrase alignment, word alignment,
word graph, etc.

Table 1 presents our results in terms of MAE
and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE). MAE is de-
scribed in Formula 2, and RMSE is defined by:

RMSE(s, r) =

√

∑n
i=1(si − ri)

2

n
(3)

Each line of Table 1 gives the performance for a
set of features. BASELINE+LORIA constitutes the
union of both features BASELINE (Section 3) and
LORIA (Section 4). the ’feature selection’ column
indicates if feature selection algorithm is applied.
We experimented the SVM with two kernels: lin-
ear (LIN in Table 1) and radial basis function (RBF
in Table 1). As the radial basis function uses pa-
rameters, we proposed results with default values
(DEF) and with values optimised by grid search on
the development corpus (OPT). MAE and RMSE are
given for development corpus and for the test cor-
pus. This test corpus (and its reference scores given
by humans) is the one released for the shared 2012
task3. MAE and RMSE has been computed against
the scores given by humans to the translations in this
test corpus4.

The results show that the performance on devel-
opment corpus are always confirmed by those of the
test corpus. The BASELINE features alone achieve
already good performance, better than ours. Al-
though the differences are well inside the confidence
interval, the fusion of both sets outperforms slightly
the BASELINE. The feature selection algorithm al-
lows to gain 0.01 point. The gain is the same for

3https://github.com/lspecia/QualityEstimation/blob/master/
test set.tar.gz

4available at https://github.com/lspecia/QualityEstimation/
blob/master/test set.likert

117



the optimisation of the radial basis function param-
eters. Surprisingly, the linear kernel, simpler than
other kernels, yields the same performance as radial
basis function.

In addition to MAE and RMSE results, we stud-
ied the linear correlations between features: our ob-
jective is to check if BASELINE and LORIA com-
plement each other. We computed the linear cor-
relation between all features (BASELINE+LORIA).
This leads to 2145 values. Table 2 shows in line +/-
the number of features pairs which correlate with an
absolute score higher than thresholds 0.9, 0.8 or 0.7.
Among these pairs we give in line + the number of
pairs with positive correlation, and in line - the num-
ber of pairs with negative correlation. For lines +
and -, we give 4 numbers: number of pairs, num-
ber of LORIA-LORIA (e.g. the number of correla-
tions between a LORIA feature and another LORIA
feature) pairs, number of BASELINE-BASELINE
pairs, number of LORIA-BASELINE pairs. We re-
mark that only 6% of the pairs correlates (column
0.7, line +/-) and that the correlations are mostly be-
tween LORIA features. This last point is not sur-
prising because there are more LORIA features than
BASELINE ones. There are very few correlations
between LORIA and BASELINE features. We stud-
ied precisely the correlated pairs. There is a strong
(more than 0.9) positive correlation between n-gram
and backoff based features and their averaged fea-
ture versions. Sometimes, there is also a strong cor-
relation between ’forward’ and ’backward’ features.
Source and target sentences lengths linearly corre-
late (0.98). This is the same case for source and tar-
get language model likelihoods. There is also a high
correlation between forward and backward 5-gram
scores (0.89). There are very few negative correla-
tions between features. As they are not numerous,
one can list these pairs with correlation between -
1 and -0.7: target sentence length and target lan-
guage model probability; source sentence length and
source language model probability; ratio of OOV
words over sentence length in source sentence and
percentage of unigrams in the source sentence seen
in the SMT training corpus; and number of OOV
words in source sentence and percentage of uni-
grams in the source sentence seen in the SMT train-
ing corpus. These correlations are not surprising.
First, language model probability is not normalized

≥ 0.9 ≥ 0.8 ≥ 0.7

+/- 64 103 127
+ 56/49/3/4 94/87/3/4 117/105/6/6
- 8/0/4/4 9/0/4/5 10/0/4/6

Table 2: Statistics on the linear correlations between LO-
RIA+BASELINE features

by the number of tokens: the more tokens, the lower
probability. Second, the more OOV in the sentence,
the fewer known unigrams.

Last, we present the set of features discarded by
our feature selection algorithm. We give only this
description for the LORIA+BASELINE set, with
linear kernel. The algorithm discards 18 LORIA
features out of 49 (37%) and 3 BASELINE out of
17 (18%). The features discarded from LORIA are
mostly averaged features based on n-gram and back-
off. This is consistent with the fact that these fea-
tures are strongly correlated with n-gram and back-
off features. We remark that very few BASELINE
features are discarded: lengths of source and target
language because these features are yet included in
LORIA features, and ”average number of transla-
tions per source word in the sentence” maybe be-
cause the LORIA feature giving the average IBM1
probabilities is more precise. Last, we remark that
the target length feature is discarded, and only ratio
between target and source length is kept.

8 Conclusion

In this paper, we present our system to evaluate the
quality of machine translated sentences. A sentence
is given a score between 1 and 5. This score is pre-
dicted using a machine learning approach. We use
the training data provided by the organizers to per-
form the regression between numerical features cal-
culated from source and target sentences and scores
given by human experts. The features are the base-
line ones provided by the organizers and our own
features. We proposed a feature selection algorithm
to discard useless features. Our results show that
baseline features contain already the main part of in-
formation for prediction. Concerning our own fea-
tures, a study of the linear correlations shows that
averaged features do not provide new information
compared to n-gram and backoff features. This last

118



Dev Test
Set of features feature kernel MAE RMSE MAE RMSE

selection
BASELINE no RBF DEF 0.63 0.79 0.69 0.83
LORIA no RBF DEF 0.66 0.82 0.73 0.87
BASELINE+LORIA no RBF DEF 0.62 0.78 0.69 0.82
BASELINE+LORIA yes RBF DEF 0.61 0.77 0.69 0.83
BASELINE+LORIA no RBF OPT 0.62 0.77 0.68 0.82
BASELINE+LORIA no LIN 0.62 0.78 0.69 0.83
BASELINE+LORIA yes LIN 0.61 0.77 0.68 0.82

Table 1: Results of the various sets of features in terms of MAE and RMSE

remark is confirmed by our feature selection algo-
rithm. Our feature selection algorithm seems to dis-
card features linearly correlated with others while
keeping relevant features for prediction. Last, we
remark that the choice of kernel, optimisation of pa-
rameters and feature selection have not a strong ef-
fect on performance. The main effort may have to
be concentrated on features in the future.

References

C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin. 2011. LIBSVM:
A library for support vector machines. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Tech-
nology, 2:27:1–27:27. Software available at
http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/ cjlin/libsvm.

J. Duchateau, K. Demuynck, and P. Wambacq. 2002.
Confidence scoring based on backward language mod-
els. In Proceedings of IEEE International Confer-
ence on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, vol-
ume 1, pages 221–224.

I. Guyon and A. Elisseeff. 2003. An introduction to vari-
able and feature selection. Journal of Machine Learn-
ing Research (Special Issue on Variable and Feature
Selection), pages 1157–1182.

Y. He, Y. Ma, J. van Genabith, and A. Way. 2010. Bridg-
ing SMT and TM with translation recommendation. In
Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 622–630.

C. Latiri, K. Smaı̈li, C. Lavecchia, C. Nasri, and D. Lan-
glois. 2011. Phrase-based machine translation based
on text mining and statistical language modeling tech-
niques. In Proceedings of the 12th International Con-
ference on Intelligent Text Processing and Computa-
tional Linguistics.

C. Lavecchia, K. Smaı̈li, and D. Langlois. 2008. Dis-
covering phrases in machine translation by simulated

annealing. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Interspeech
Conference.

S. Raybaud, C. Lavecchia, D. Langlois, and K. Smaı̈li.
2009a. New confidence measures for statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Agents and Artificial Intelli-
gence, pages 61–68.

S. Raybaud, C. Lavecchia, D. Langlois, and K. Smaı̈li.
2009b. Word- and sentence-level confidence measures
for machine translation. In Proceedings of the 13th
Annual Conference of the European Association for
Machine Translation, pages 104–111.

S. Raybaud, D. Langlois, and K. Smaı̈li. 2011. ”This
sentence is wrong.” Detecting errors in machine-
translated sentences. Machine Translation, 25(1):1–
34.

M. Simard, N. Ueffing, P. Isabelle, and R. Kuhn. 2007.
Rule-based translation with statistical phrase-based
post-editing. In Proceedings of the ACL-2007 Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT-07),
pages 203–206.

R. Soricut and A. Echihabi. 2010. Trustrank: Inducing
trust in automatic translations via ranking. In Proceed-
ings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 612–621.

L. Specia, N. Hajlaoui, C. Hallett, and W. Aziz. 2010.
Predicting machine translation adequacy. In Proceed-
ings of the Machine Translation Summit XIII, pages
612–621.

L. Specia. 2011. Exploiting objective annotations for
measuring translation post-editing effort. In Proceed-
ings of the 15th Conference of the European Associa-
tion for Machine Translation, pages 73–80.

C. Uhrik and W. Ward. 1997. Confidence metrics based
on n-gram language model backoff behaviors. In Fifth
European Conference on Speech Communication and
Technology, pages 2771–2774.

119


