



















































Like a Lexicographer Weaving Her Lexical Network


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex-III), pages 1–4,
COLING 2012, Mumbai, December 2012.

Like a Lexicographer Weaving Her Lexical Network∗

Alain POLGUÈRE
Université de Lorraine, ATILF, UMR 7118, Nancy, F-54000, FRANCE

Alain.Polguere@univ-lorraine.fr

The spider attitude

The title of our talk—an implicit reference to the English cliché like a spider weaving her web—
intends to attract one’s attention to the metaphor that can be drawn between the dance of a
spider weaving her web and a new lexicographic gesture that is gradually emerging from the
work on Net-like lexical resources (Fellbaum, 1998; Baker et al., 2003; Gader et al., 2012).
Our claim is that the inherent graph structure of natural language lexicons not only determine
vocabulary acquisition and use (Wolter, 2006), but also lexicographic activity. In that respect,
reflecting on new ways to implement the task of building lexical resources is essential for
lexicographers themselves, but also for anyone interested is lexicons as mental structures. After
all, lexicographers and language learners are those who have the most direct contact with
lexical structures, through closely related activities: describing a natural phenomenon is a form
of learning through explicit conceptualization. Lexicographers often experience the fact that
by completing the description of a word they achieve a form of understanding and mastering
of this word. They do not merely transcribe word knowledge and observations made on word
behavior in speech and texts: they “acquire” the word. This makes them feel good and this
explains why lexicography is indeed extremely addictive.

Our talk title is also an implicit reference to the English collocation web of words, that is so
often used to refer to natural language lexicons as messy and too big to be embraced entities
—cf. (Murray, 1977), entitled Caught in the web of words: James A. H. Murray and the Oxford
English dictionary. Of course, webs can be seen as being essentially traps that one gets caught
in. This is so to speak the fly or innocent bug perspective. However, lexicographers ought
not be caught in the web: they can behave as spiders weaving the web. This is possible if
the model they are constructing is indeed a diagrammatic representation—in a semiotic sense
(Farias and Queiroz, 2006)—of the natural language lexicon that is being scrutinized. It is when
lexicographers run on pages, writing dictionary articles, like flies walking on a glass window,
that they have the most chance to get caught in the web of words. This is why lexicographers
have long ago introduced systems of cards and records to help them compile data on lexical
units. Lexicographic records helped lexicographers free themselves from the two-dimensional
prison of the dictionary. Their knowledge about words occupied a “volume,” that of filing
cabinets, which is more in line with the three-dimensional nature of the lexicons they had to
describe. Later, with the advent of computational lexicography, relational databases replaced
filing cabinets as convenient tools. . . and metaphors.

∗ Extended abstract for CogALex III invited lecture.

1



Towards a lexicography of virtual dictionaries

New data structures for lexical resources should come together with new ways of building
lexical models, and this is the main topic we are dealing with here. In order to propose an
alternate perspective on lexicography, one that in our opinion is more cognition-compatible
in nature, it is necessary to first eradicate a rather widespread misconception related to the
construction of lexical models. According to common perception, lexicography is all about
writing dictionaries and, therefore, any activity that targets the construction of other types of
lexical models, freed from the two-dimensional (textual) dictionary, is not “true” lexicography.
This misconception, very common among laypersons and endorsed by many natural language
researchers, originates mainly for the sheer fact that, for centuries, lexicographers had no better
medium of encoding than the text and no better physical support for their description than
sheets of paper bound together to make dictionaries. However, the dictionary—whether in
paper or electronic format—is just one among many possible incarnations of lexical models.
What is truly necessary and sufficient for a task to be termed lexicography is that:

• it targets the description of lexical units of one or more natural languages in terms of
sense, forms and all other relevant linguistic properties;

• it uses a well-defined frame of analysis that allows for a coherent and uniform description
of all lexical units;

• it is essentially a hand-made task, but with no limitation to the amount and diversity of
tools and external data that can be used to perform this task;

• it “sees big:” the greater the coverage and depth of description for each lexical unit, the
more lexicographic the task will be.

This last point is more important than it may appear: when it comes to the lexicon—its
description, as well as learning, mastering, etc.—size does matter. To take an extreme case, a
person whose only experience in the field is the description of just one or a couple of lexical
units can simply not be considered a lexicographer and the task accomplished is all but an
exercise in lexicography. By contrast, someone who has achieved the description of tens of
thousands of lexical units is no doubt an experienced lexicographer. Somewhere in between,
there is the transition from being an apprentice to being an actual lexicographer.

Notice that no mention of the formal nature of lexical models is made in the above characteri-
zation of lexicography. In fact, when the construction of a totally new, graph-based model of
lexical knowledge was proposed by WordNet initiators (Miller et al., 1990), no claim was made
on the advent of a new discipline. On the contrary, lexicography remained the reference, with
work performed by individuals called lexicographers, who were constructing datasets called
lexicographer files. And this is entirely justified as, precisely, lexicography is not about writing
dictionaries per se. This fact has already been pointed at by some dictionary-makers; (Atkins,
1996), for instance, adopts a rather visionary perspective and goes as far as to consider that
bilingual lexicography should be aiming at virtual dictionaries—cf. S. Atkins’ proposal for “real
databases, real links and virtual dictionaries” (section 2.2.1 of her paper).

From writing dictionaries to weaving lexical networks

In our talk, we take the above observations as given, including the fact that lexicography
should indeed be targeting virtual dictionaries, generated from non-textual lexical models

2



(Polguère, 2012). We illustrate how the lexicographic process of building graph-based lexical
models can benefit from tools that allow lexicographers to wade through the lexical web,
following paradigmatic and syntagmatic paths, while simultaneously weaving new links and
incrementing the lexical description. Work performed on the French Lexical Network (Gader
et al., 2012) will serve to demonstrate how the lexicographic process can be made closer
to actual navigation through lexical knowledge by the speaker. The main theoretical and
descriptive tool that makes such navigation possible is the system of lexical functions proposed
by the Meaning-Text linguistic approach (Mel’čuk, 1996). It induces the multidimensional and
non-hierarchical graph structure of the FLN that, we believe, is far better suited for designing
lexical resources than hyperonymy-based structures.

Computational aspects of the work on the French Lexical Network are dealt with in (Gader
et al., 2012). In our presentation, we focus on the actual process of weaving lexical relations.

References
Atkins, B. T. S. (1996). Bilingual Dictionaries: Past, Present and Future. In Gellerstam, M.,
Järborg, J., Malmgren, S.-G., Norén, K., Rogström, L., and Papmehl, C. R., editors, Euralex’96
Proceedings, pages 515–590, Gothenburg. Gothenburg University, Department of Swedish.

Baker, C. F., Fillmore, C. J., and Cronin, B. (2003). The Structure of the FrameNet Database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 16(3):281–296.

Farias, P. and Queiroz, J. (2006). Images, diagrams, and metaphors: Hypoicons in the context
of Peirce’s sixty-six-fold classification of signs. Semiotica, 162(1/4):287–307.

Fellbaum, C., editor (1998). WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press, Cam-
bridge MA.

Gader, N., Lux-Pogodalla, V., and Polguère, A. (2012). Hand-Crafting a Lexical Network With
a Knowledge-Based Graph Editor. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Cognitive Aspects
of the Lexicon. Enhancing the Structure and Look-up Mechanisms of Electronic Dictionaries
(CogALex III), Mumbai.

Mel’čuk, I. (1996). Lexical Functions: A Tool for the Description of Lexical Relations in
the Lexicon. In Wanner, L., editor, Lexical Functions in Lexicography and Natural Language
Processing, volume 31 of Language Companion Series, pages 37–102. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam/Philadelphia.

Miller, G. A., Beckwith, R., Fellbaum, C., Gross, D., and Miller, K. J. (1990). Introduction to
WordNet: An On-line Lexical Database. International Journal of Lexicography, 3(4):235–244.

Murray, K. M. E. (1977). Caught in the web of words: James A. H. Murray and the Oxford
English dictionary. Yale University Press, New Haven.

Polguère, A. (2012). Lexicographie des dictionnaires virtuels. In Apresjan, Y., Boguslavsky, I.,
L’Homme, M.-C., Iomdin, L., Milićević, J., Polguère, A., and Wanner, L., editors, Meanings, Texts,
and Other Exciting Things. A Festschrift to Commemorate the 80th Anniversary of Professor Igor
Alexandrovǐc Mel’̌cuk, Studia Philologica, pages 509–523. Jazyki slavjanskoj kultury Publishers,
Moscow.

Wolter, B. (2006). Lexical Network Structures and L2 Vocabulary Acquisition: The Role of L1
Lexical/Conceptual Knowledge. Applied Linguistics, 27(4):741–747.

3




