










































Population of a Knowledge Base for News Metadata from Unstructured Text and Web Data


Proc. of the Joint Workshop on Automatic Knowledge Base Construction & Web-scale Knowledge Extraction (AKBC-WEKEX), pages 35–40,
NAACL-HLT, Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Population of a Knowledge Base for News Metadata
from Unstructured Text and Web Data

Rosa Stern
Univ. Paris 7, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France

INRIA-Alpage, Paris, France
AFP-Medialab, Paris, France
rosa.stern@afp.com

Benoı̂t Sagot
INRIA-Alpage, Paris, France
benoit.sagot@inria.fr

Abstract

We present a practical use case of knowl-
edge base (KB) population at the French news
agency AFP. The target KB instances are en-
tities relevant for news production and con-
tent enrichment. In order to acquire uniquely
identified entities over news wires, i.e. tex-
tual data, and integrate the resulting KB in the
Linked Data framework, a series of data mod-
els need to be aligned: Web data resources are
harvested for creating a wide coverage entity
database, which is in turn used to link entities
to their mentions in French news wires. Fi-
nally, the extracted entities are selected for in-
stantiation in the target KB. We describe our
methodology along with the resources created
and used for the target KB population.

1 An Entity Extraction Methodology for
Knowledge Base Population

Current research conducted at the French news
agency AFP focuses on the acquisition and storage
of knowledge, particularly entities, relevant for the
news production and usable as metadata for con-
tent enrichment. This objective sets off the need
for a dedicated knowledge base (KB) relying on a
light-weight ontology of entities mappable to the
Linked Data framework. Identification of entities
such as persons, organizations and geopolitical en-
tities (GPES)1 in unstructured textual data, news
wires in French in our case, underlie the construc-
tion and enrichment of such a KB.

1These entity types are the usual focus of Information Ex-
traction systems and are defined among others by the ACE en-
tity recognition task (Doddington et al., 2004).

This specific need is met by the KB population
task, now well defined within the annual TAC ded-
icated track (Ji et al., 2011). KB population indeed
relies on the ability to link entity mentions in tex-
tual data to a KB entry (entity linking subtask, hence-
forth EL),2 which follows pioneer work in entity dis-
ambiguation (Bunescu and Pasca, 2006; Cucerzan,
2007). In a similar way to systems described in
Dredze et al. (2010) and Ji & Grishman (2011),
we conduct EL over AFP news wires in order to ob-
tain relevant entities meant to populate the target KB,
adapting these techniques to French data. This link-
ing process is based on Web data extraction for both
coverage and the purpose of Linked Data integra-
tion, which has become a widely explored trend in
news management and publishing projects, such as
the ones conducted by the BBC (Kobilarov et al.,
2009) or the New York Times (NYT).

Compared to other KB population settings, this
knowledge acquisition process is done throughout
a sequence of resources and extraction steps rather
than in a cyclic way. Instead of considering one KB
as both an entity resource and the target of the pop-
ulation task, the target KB (AFP Metadata Ontology,
henceforth AMO) is viewed as initially empty and
progressively augmented with entity instances. This
is because the use intended for AMO does not rely
on exhaustivity, but on a relevant set of entities men-
tioned in the daily news production. This set is not
fixed a priori and must be regularly updated in order
to maintain a reflection of entities’ emergence in the
news domain. For instance, not all cities in the world

2The consequent slot filling subtask associates these entries
to attributes and relations to other entities.

35



Web Data

Entity Linking 
component

entities contextual 
information (Wikipedia)

Entity Knowledge

ID
Name
Type
URI

Weight
Coordinates

Country-code
Subtype

Entity Resource (EDB)
database schema

Target KB (AMO)
ontological model

ID
Name
URI

Type
Subtype

Extracted entities

1
2 3

AAA news wires
unstructured text

Articles

Wikipedia-fr

categories

Location 
Entries

Geonames

features

DB attributes 

Keywords
Topics
Words
Dates

Entity co-occurrences

Corpus Occurrences with
selection

Figure 1: Overview of entity extraction and KB population process

need be instanciated in AMO, but the city Fukushima
should become an entry as soon as its part in major
events is stated in news wires. The relevant entity set
can then be matched to new entries and updates in
parallel documentation resources maintained at the
AFP. The KB population process is broken down
into several layers of data extraction and alignment,
as sketched in Figure 1:

Step 1 The models of GeoNames and Wikipedia are
mapped to a unified entity model; extraction from
these Web datasets based on this mapping result in
an entity database named Aleda, whose schema is
presented in section 2, along with its alignement
with Wikipedia and GeoNames data models.

Step 2 The Aleda database obtained in Step 1 pro-
vides entities for the linking step, where entity men-
tions in news wires are aligned with entries from
Aleda. This process, along with the use of a joint
resource for entity knowledge access, is described
in section 3. EL in our particular task also targets the
identification of new entities (i.e. absent from Aleda)
and attempts to deal with the problem of possible
named entity recognition errors in queries made to
the system.

Step 3 The resulting entities aligned in Aleda must
be anchored in the target KB, via instantiation of
the adequate ontological class. Contextual informa-
tion gathered during the entity extraction and linking
process can be used at this point (section 4).

2 Entity Extraction from Web Data
Step 1 in our architecture is based on two Web
datasets: the geographical database GeoNames
brings together millions of location identifiers with
associated information; Wikipedia is a wide cover-
age resource for entities, with continuous updates
and article creations for entities involved in current

events. The creation of a large-scale and unified
entity resource is achieved by defining a database
schema dedicated to entity representation, and by
aligning both Wikipedia’s and GeoNames’ model
with it. The schema considers Person, Organization
and GPE as types of entries. The building of Aleda
therefore relies on the identification of Wikipedia’s
and GeoNames’ entries to which one of these types
can be assigned.
Wikipedia Exploiting Wikipedia as a large-scale
entity resource has been the focus of numerous ef-
forts, such as (Balasuriya et al., 2009; Charton and
Torres-Moreno, 2010). Each Wikipedia article, re-
ferring to an entity, concept or notion, is referenced
under a number of categories, often fine-grained and
specific. A hierarchical or ontological organization
of these categories can be inferred (Syed et al., 2008)
but a given article is not anchored in a generic con-
ceptual class such as an entity type in a straight-
forward fashion. The present model alignment thus
consists in a mapping from Wikipedia categories to
one of the target entity types. Each article mapped
to one of these types leads to adding a corresponding
entity in Aleda. The selection and typing process of
articles as entities makes use of heuristics based on
articles’ categories and infoboxes and is achieved as
follows.

Around 100 of the most frequent infobox tem-
plates are retrieved from the articles’ structure and
manually associated with an entity type (e.g., the
Politician template is typed as Person). All articles
associated with one of these templates (23% of the
French Wikipedia) are assigned the same type. The
categories associated with these typed articles are
then considered: a category appearing mostly in ar-
ticles of a given type is associated with it. 20,328
categories are thus typed (e.g., all articles with an

36



infobox and tagged by a category such as Born in *
have been assigned the type Person, which is there-
fore associated to this category). An article is se-
lected as referring to an entity by assigning the type
with maximal category association to it. If no type
can be assigned (when no categories were associ-
ated with any type), an article’s infobox whose tem-
plate has been typed can provide the information. If
the article has no such infobox, no entity is derived
from it. Aleda’s schema is filled with attribute val-
ues extracted from each selected article: the columns
URI, name, weight are mapped to the article’s URL,
the normalized name inferred from the article’s ti-
tle and the article’s length,3 respectively. A joint ta-
ble furthermore groups possible variants or labels
for each entity; these are inferred from Wikipedia’s
redirection and disambiguation pages, which pro-
vide aliases for article titles. For person names, addi-
tional variants are automatically generated, by iden-
tifying the first, possible middle and last names.

GeoNames The model alignment from
GeoNames is fairly straightforward since all
its entries are locations. However this database is
huge and present some noisy aspects, which we
aim at avoiding by limiting the extraction to entities
considered relevant for news content enrichment
in French. Only GPEs such as countries, cities
or country divisions were selected, based on the
GeoNames feature provided. Heuristics are then
designed for further selection: all GPEs in France
are retained, as well as all non-French GPEs with
more than 200 inhabitants. Aleda’s schema is
filled with values provided by GeoNames for each
selected GPE: the columns URI, name, weight,
subtype, country-code and coordinates are mapped
to the GeoNames’ entity URL, name, number
of inhabitants, feature (such as P.PPL for popu-
lated place), ISO country code and coordinates,
respectively. The joint variants table is filled with
GeoNames’ labels indicated as French or without
language indication.

A unified entity resource of persons, organiza-
tions and GPEs4 is obtained, with 832,452 uniquely

3This value is seen as a weight in the extend that an article
size can indicate the popularity of an entity relatively to others,
particularly in cases of homonymy.

4GPEs extracted from both GeoNames and Wikipedia are
listed and associated by an owl:sameAs relation.

identified entities (33%, 62% and 5% of type Per-
son, GPE and Organization, respectively), associ-
ated with 1,673,202 variants.5

3 Text-Entity Alignment: Entity Linking
3.1 Methodology for Entity Linking
The knowledge acquisition step, crucial for the tar-
get KB population, consists in entity extraction from
a corpus of AFP news wires. This is done by aligning
detected entity mentions in news wires with entries
the Aleda database introduced in 2. This linking
component is based on the learning of a similarity
model between entity attributes, including contex-
tual ones, and a mention in a given document. It is
challenging particularly because of name variation
and ambiguity, which can prevent an accurate entity
identification. The named entity recognition (NER)
module first detects entity mentions, along with a
possible type, which become queries for the candi-
dates selection among the database entries. The en-
try with the highest similarity w.r.t. the mention and
the document is chosen. This similarity is computed
in a way comparable to a number of linking systems
(described and evaluated in Dredze et al. (2010) and
Ji & Grishman (2011)) and using the following fea-
tures:
Surface similarity The candidate’s name and la-
bels, available in the entity database, are compared
to the mention (exact, partial, null string match).
Candidate attributes The other candidate’s at-
tributes available in Aleda, such as its weight (or
popularity) and its country-code, can be indicators
in cases of ambiguity.
Contextual similarity Entity contextual knowl-
edge (associated to the entity resource for the link-
ing component in fig. 1) is made available from the
corpus of Wikipedia articles. In each article, entity
mentions (identified by hyperlinks) are surrounded
with information such as the article’s categories (i),
the most salient words of the article’s text (ii) and
the co-occurring entities in the article (iii). As news
items are indexed via keywords and topics from
AFP’s controlled vocabulary lists, (i) are mapped to
the document keywords and topics; (ii) and (iii) are

5A comparison with the NLGbAse resource (Charton and
Torres-Moreno, 2010), which has similar objectives, can be
found in (Sagot and Stern, 2012). Aleda is freely available at
gforge.inria.fr/frs/download.php/30598/

37



4

5{Paris}_Location 6
{Paris Hilton}

_Person_f 

{Hilton}
_Person_f 

{Hilton}
_Person_m 

{Hilton}
_Organization 

Figure 2: SXPipe/NP output for the segment Paris Hilton

compared to the document’s salient words and entity
mentions, respectively.

The candidate maximizing the similarity is se-
lected as the mention linking. However, this se-
lection should not occur for every query, since (i)
a number of entities mentioned in news wires don’t
have a corresponding Aleda entry and (ii) the auto-
matic NER can return a number of false mentions. In
the case of (i), the out-of-base entity (NIL) should be
output as a linking result; in (ii), the mention should
be discarded and indicate a not-an-entity reading
(NAE) rather than give rise to a false link; for the lat-
ter eventuality, features indicating ambiguities with
the common lexicon are added to the feature set.
These cases are part of the training examples and
are taken into account in the prediction by including
the NIL and NAE candidates in the ranking process.
3.2 Experiments and Evaluation
Experiments and evaluation are conducted over a
manually annotated corpus of 96 news items, dated
May-June 2009, where each entity mention’s bound-
aries and Aleda ID, if relevant, are indicated. Men-
tions referring to entities absent from Aleda are
identified by a normalized name. The corpus in-
cludes 1,476 entity mentions, referring to 610 dis-
tinct entities among which 28% are absent from
Aleda. The corpus is also annotated with the NER
system SXPipe/NP6 to add examples of false matches
to the linking model. More precisely, the NER is ap-
plied without complete disambiguation: a number
of typing and segmentation alternatives are not re-
solved at this level, but rather passed to the linking
module. The underlying idea is to leave final entity
recognition decisions to a level where knowledge
and semantic information about entities are avail-
able. Figure 2 illustrates this ambiguity preserva-
tion, where SXPipe/NP builds possible readings of a
text segment in terms of entity mentions.

In each reading built by the NER module, each
6http://alpage.inria.fr/∼sagot/sxpipe.html

mention (gold or not) is associated with a set of
candidates: all Aleda entries for which the men-
tion is a possible variant, as well as NIL and NAE
instances. All mention/candidate pairs are assigned
a class, positive for correct links and negative for
wrong ones, and form the training set for the link-
ing model. A pair consisting in a false mention and
the NAE candidate is for instance labeled as positive.
The training examples are fed to a maximum entropy
classifier7 with a 10-fold cross-validation. Based on
the resulting model, each pair is then ranked accord-
ing to the score assigned by the classifier, which
amounts to a pointwise ranking strategy. Once men-
tions are locally linked to the top-ranked candidates
in all readings, the latter must in turn be ranked in or-
der to finally disambiguate the current text segment.
This ranking is done by assigning to each reading the
score of its top-ranked candidate or, when the read-
ing contains a sequence of mentions, the minimum
of all top-ranked candidates’ scores.

On the evaluation data, the system obtains encour-
aging results of linking accuracy (A) over the set of
correctly detected entities (NER columns), compared
to the top TAC-KB population evaluation results over
English data with only correct entity mentions (ta-
ble 1). The overall task, i.e. of joint entity recogni-
tion and linking, is also measured and is not com-
parable to equivalent work to the best of our knowl-
edge. Results show that the system’s ability to de-
tect false entity mentions should be considerably im-
proved, but filters out some NER noise, which could
not be the case in a mere sequential system where all
detected mentions would be equally handled by the
linking module.

Conducted over a corpus of≈ 400,000 news items
of 2009 and 2010 on 16 news topics such as Pol-
itics, Economy or Culture, the EL step results in a
set of 46,616 distinct identified entities (35%, 50%
and 15% of GPEs, persons and organizations), along
with information retrieved from Aleda. Moreover,
each entity is associated with new information gath-
ered at each of its occurrence in the extraction cor-
pus. Hence the most frequent association of entities
with news features (see Extracted entities in fig. 1)
augment the extraction list with useful knowledge
for further integration.

7Megam: http://www.cs.utah.edu/∼hal/megam/

38



NER EL Joint NER+EL
P R F A (all/NILs) P R F NAE

AFP (French) 0.849 0.768 0.806 0.871/0.597 0.740 0.669 0.702 33%
Top TAC-KBP (English) - - - 0.821/0.891 - - - -

Table 1: NER, linking and joint results

4 Target KB Population and Enrichment
The entities identified during the previous step are
made available for the target KB population. Given
the specialized use intended for AMO in further con-
tent enrichment, a high precision rate is expected
w.r.t. its instances, which requires a phase of hu-
man intervention. However this process should not
come down to a time costly and off-putting task,
and should rely on concrete and systematic valida-
tion criteria. The extracted entities are presented to
domain specialists in order to assess their relevance
w.r.t. the KB. This judgement can leverage various
type of information, including the usage of entities
in the extraction corpus. Each entity is submitted
to validation with its Wikipedia or GeoNames URL,
which allows for an unambiguous verification of its
identity on the Web. Furthermore, candidates are
submitted in reverse frequency order: the mention
rate of an entity over a given period can by itself
indicate its relevance for a KB integration.8 The val-
idation of less frequent entities can rely in a greater
extend on contextual information derived from news
features: news topics, keywords, salient words and
co-occurring entities can indicate the level of contri-
bution of a given entity to the domain, and therefore
its usefulness as a KB instance for further content
enrichment. Moreover, the news publication dates
collected for each occurrence allow to visualize an
entity salience in a given period of time, and can in-
dicate its emergence as an important news actor at
certain event peaks.

Following this process, 5,759 relevant entities
were selected. Their concrete integration in AMO
consists in an automatic instantiation within the un-
derlying ontological model (see AMO in fig. 1). The
adequate AMO Entity subclass is determined by a
straightforward mapping from Aleda entity types to
AMO Entity subclasses. Finer subclasses, such as

8Roughly 20% of the distinct entities constitute 80% of the
total occurrences in corpus (more than 4 million mentions);
hence examining most frequent entities quickly allows for an
initial population with the most prominent instances.

Location/POI (point of interest) can be instantiated
based on GeoNames features associated with the
entity (e.g., locations with the GeoNames museum
feature are mapped to the POI subclass). The in-
stantiation process also considers useful information
available on entities: Aleda attributes - the entity
normalized name or its geographical coordinates -,
are represented in the form of an owl:dataProperty.
Knowledge elements extracted from the corpus,
such as the news topic with which the entity is most
mentioned, give rise to owl:objectProperties (whose
domain and range are the considered entity and an
adequate instance of the ontology, e.g. the Politics
instance of the NewsTopic class).

When the process described in section 3 is re-
peated over new data, i.e. over the daily news flow,
and along with regular updates of the Aleda to take
into account new entries, the entities presented to
validation can either be new w.r.t. AMO or already
present as an instance. In the latter case, the ad-
ditional information linked to the entity should be
merged with the adequate existing node. Automati-
cally identifying the adequate existing instance can
be achieved by entity resolution techniques, such as
systematic comparison of attribute values. In the
case of a new entity, a new instance should be cre-
ated as described above. This illustrates the chal-
lenge of dynamic enrichment of resources, compa-
rable to the automatic detection of neologisms in the
general language for lexical resources. This aspect
of the KB population is intended to be at the center
of further developments of our architecture.

In order to integrate AMO in the Linked Data
(LD) framework, we applied entity resolution via
URIs matches with existing LD datasets: all in-
stances defining a Wikipedia URL could be linked
to the equivalent DBpedia resource; 20% of AMO
instances after the initial population were linked to
the NYT data, thus making AMO a suitable resource
for content enrichment and Web publishing in the
news domain.

39



References

D. Balasuriya, N. Ringland, J. Nothman, T. Murphy, and
J. R. Curran. 2009. Named entity recognition in
wikipedia. In People’s Web ’09: Proceedings of the
2009 Workshop on The People’s Web Meets NLP, 10–
18, Suntec, Singapour.

R. Bunescu and M. Pasca. 2006 Using encyclopedic
knowledge for named entity disambiguation. In Pro-
ceeding of EACL, 6:9–16, Trento, Italy.

E. Charton and J.M. Torres-Moreno. 2010. Nlgbase: a
free linguistic resource for natural language process-
ing systems. In Proceedings of LREC 2010, Valletta,
Malta.

S. Cucerzan. 2007. Large-scale named entity disam-
biguation based on Wikipedia data. In Proceedings of
EMNLP-CoNLL, 708–716, Prague, Czech Republic.

G. Doddington, A. Mitchell, M. Przybocki, L. Ramshaw,
S. Strassel and R. Weischedel. 2004 The Automatic
Content Extraction (ACE) Program–Tasks, Data, and
Evaluation. In Proceedings of LREC 2004, 4:837–
840, Lisbon, Portugal

M. Dredze, P. McNamee, D. Rao, A. Gerber, and T. Finin.
2010. Entity Disambiguation for Knowledge Base
Population. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, Beijing,
China.

H. Ji and R. Grishman. 2011. Knowledge Base Popula-
tion: Successful Approaches and Challenges. In Pro-
ceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association of
Computational Linguistics, Portland (OR), USA.

H. Ji, R. Grishman and H. Trang Dang. 2011. An
Overview of the TAC2011 Knowledge Base Popula-
tion Track. In Proceedings of Text Analysis Confer-
ence (TAC2011),

G. Kobilarov, T. Scott, Y. Raimond, S. Oliver, C. Size-
more, M. Smethurst, C. Bizer and R. Lee. 2009. Me-
dia Meets Semantic Web - How the BBC Uses DB-
pedia and Linked Data to Make Connections. In The
Semantic Web: Research and Applications, Springer.

B. Sagot and R. Stern. 2011. Aleda, a free large-scale
entity database for French. In Proceedings of LREC
2012, Istanbul, Turkey.

Z. Syed, T. Finin and A. Joshi. 2008. Wikipedia as an
ontology for describing documents. In Proceedings of
the Second International Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media, 136–144, Seattle (WA), USA.

DBpedia. http://dbpedia.org/
GeoNames. Web database:
http://www.geonames.org/
Downloadable data:
http://download.geonames.org/export/
dump/

NYT. The New York Times Linked Data Web site:
http://data.nytimes.com/

Wikipedia. French Wikipedia (XML version):
http://dumps.wikimedia.org/frwiki/

40


