










































Unsupervised Vocabulary Adaptation for Morph-based Language Models


NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop: Will We Ever Really Replace the N-gram Model? On the Future of Language Modeling for HLT, pages 37–40,
Montréal, Canada, June 8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Unsupervised Vocabulary Adaptation for Morph-based Language Models

André Mansikkaniemi and Mikko Kurimo
Aalto University School of Science

Department of Information and Computer Science
PO BOX 15400, 00076 Aalto, Finland

{andre.mansikkaniemi,mikko.kurimo}@aalto.fi

Abstract

Modeling of foreign entity names is an im-
portant unsolved problem in morpheme-based
modeling that is common in morphologically
rich languages. In this paper we present an
unsupervised vocabulary adaptation method
for morph-based speech recognition. Foreign
word candidates are detected automatically
from in-domain text through the use of letter
n-gram perplexity. Over-segmented foreign
entity names are restored to their base forms in
the morph-segmented in-domain text for eas-
ier and more reliable modeling and recogni-
tion. The adapted pronunciation rules are fi-
nally generated with a trainable grapheme-to-
phoneme converter. In ASR performance the
unsupervised method almost matches the abil-
ity of supervised adaptation in correctly rec-
ognizing foreign entity names.

1 Introduction

Foreign entity names (FENs) are difficult to rec-
ognize correctly in automatic speech recognition
(ASR). Pronunciation rules that cover native words
usually give incorrect pronunciation for foreign
words. More often the foreign entity names encoun-
tered in speech are out-of-vocabulary words, previ-
ously unseen words not present in neither the lexicon
nor background language model (LM).

An in-domain LM trained on a smaller corpus re-
lated to the topic of the speech, can be used to adapt
the background LM to give more suitable probabil-
ities to rare or unseen foreign words. Proper pro-
nunciation rules for foreign entity names are needed

to increase the probability of their correct recogni-
tion. These can either be obtained from a hand-made
lexicon or by generating pronunciation rules auto-
matically using for example a trainable grapheme-
to-phoneme (G2P) converter.

In morph-based speech recognition words are
segmented into sub-word units called morphemes.
When using statistical morph-segmentation algo-
rithms such as Morfessor (Creutz and Lagus, 2005)
new foreign entity names encountered in in-domain
text corpora are often over-segmented (e.g. mcdow-
ell ⇒ mc do well). To guarantee reliable pronuncia-
tion modeling, it’s preferable to keep the lemma in-
tact. Restoring over-segmented foreign entity names
back in to their base forms is referred to as mor-
pheme adaptation in this paper.

This work describes an unsupervised approach to
language and pronunciation modeling of foreign en-
tity names in morph-based speech recognition. We
will study an adaptation framework illustrated below
in Figure 1.

In-domain text

Find FENs

Stemmer

Morpheme

adaptation

LM adaptation

Morph

segmentation

Background

corpus
Adapted LM

FEN lexicon

G2P converter

Adapted

lexicon

Figure 1: Adaptation framework.

37



The adaptation framework is centered around the
following automated steps: 1. Find foreign words in
adaptation texts, 2. Convert foreign word candidates
into their base forms, 3. Generate pronunciation
variants for the retrieved foreign entity name can-
didates using a G2P converter. Additionally, to fa-
cilitate easier and more reliable pronunciation adap-
tation, the foreign entity names are restored to their
base forms in the segmented in-domain text.

The adaptation framework will be compared to a
supervised method where the adaptation steps are
done manually. The evaluation will be done on
Finnish radio news segments.

2 Methods

2.1 Foreign Word Detection

Unsupervised detection of foreign words in text
has previously been implemented for English using
word n-ngram models (Ahmed, 2005).

Finnish has a rich morphology and using word n-
gram models or dictionaries for the detection of for-
eign words would not be practical. Many of the for-
eign words occurring in written Finnish texts could
be identified from unusual letter sequences that are
not common in native words. A letter n-gram model
trained on Finnish words could be used to identify
foreign words by calculating the average perplexity
of the letter sequence in a word normalized by its
length.

A two-step algorithm is implemented for the au-
tomatic detection of foreign words. First, all words
starting in uppercase letters in the unprocessed adap-
tation text are held out as potential foreign entity
names. The perplexity for each foreign word candi-
date is calculated using a letter-ngram model trained
on Finnish words. Words with the highest perplexity
values are the most probable foreign entity names. A
percentage threshold T for the top perplexity words
can be determined from prior information.

The most likely foreign words are fi-
nally converted into their base forms using
a Finnish stemming algorithm (Snowball -
http://snowball.tartarus.org/).

2.2 Lexicon Adaptation

For Finnish ASR systems the pronunciation dictio-
nary can easily be constructed for arbitrary words

by mapping letters directly to phonemes. Foreign
names are often pronounced according to their orig-
inal languages, which can have more complicated
pronunciation rules. These pronunciation rules
can either be manually added to a lookup dictio-
nary or generated automatically with a grapheme-
to-phoneme converter. Constructing a foreign word
lexicon through manual input involves a lot of te-
dious work and it will require a continuous effort to
keep it updated.

In this work Sequitur G2P is used, a data-
driven grapheme-to-phoneme converter based on
joint-sequence models (Bisani and Ney, 2008). A
pronunciation model is trained on a manually con-
structed foreign word lexicon consisting of 2000 for-
eign entity names with a manually given pronuncia-
tion hand-picked from a Finnish newswire text col-
lection. The linguistic origins of the foreign words
are mixed but Germanic and Slavic languages are
the most common.

The pronunciation model is used to generate the
most probable pronunciation variants for the foreign
entity name candidates found in the adaptation text.

2.3 Morpheme Adaptation

In current state of the art Finnish language model-
ing words are segmented into sub-word units (mor-
phemes) (Hirsimäki et. al, 2009). This allows the
system to cover a large number of words which re-
sult from the highly agglutinative word morphology.

Over-segmentation usually occurs for previously
unseen words found in adaptation texts. To en-
sure reliable pronunciation modeling of foreign
entity names it’s preferable to keep the lemma
intact. Mapping a whole word pronunciation
rule onto separate morphemes is a non-trivial
task for non-phonetic languages such as English.
The morphemes in the in-domain corpus will be
adapted such that all foreign words are restored
into their base forms and the base forms are added
to the morpheme vocabulary. Below is an exam-
ple. Word boundaries are labeled with the <w>-tag.

<w> oilers <w> hävisi <w> edmonton in <w> com mon
we al th <w> sta dium illa <w>

⇒

<w> oilers <w> hävisi <w> edmonton in <w> com-

monwealth <w> stadium illa <w>

38



2.4 Language Model Adaptation

The in-domain adaptation text is segmented differ-
ently depending on the foreign entity name can-
didates that are included. A separate in-domain
LM Pi(w|h) is trained for each segmentation of the
text. Linear interpolation is used to the adapt the
background LM PB(w|h) with the in-domain LM
Pi(w|h).

Padapi(w|h) = λPi(w|h) + (1− λ)PB(w|h) (1)

3 Experiments

3.1 Speech Data

Evaluation data consisted of two sets of Finnish ra-
dio news segments in 16 kHz audio. All of the
recordings were collected in 2011-2012 from YLE
Radio Suomi news and sports programs.

The first data set consisted of 32 general news
segments. The total transcription length was 8271
words. 4.8% of the words were categorized as for-
eign entity names (FEN). The second data set con-
sisted of 43 sports news segments. The total tran-
scription length 6466 was words. 7.9% of the words
were categorized as foreign entity names.

3.2 System and Models

All speech recognition experiments were run on the
Aalto speech recognizer (Hirsimäki et. al, 2009).

The background LM was trained on the Kieli-
pankki corpus (70 million words). A lexicon of 30k
morphs and a model of morph segmentation was
learnt from the same corpus as the LM using Mor-
fessor (Creutz and Lagus, 2005). The baseline lex-
icon was adapted with a manually transcribed pro-
nunciation dictionary of 2000 foreign entity names
found in Finnish newswire texts. A Kneser-Ney
smoothed varigram LM (n=12) was trained on the
segmented corpus with the variKN language model-
ing toolkit (Siivola et al., 2007).

LM adaptation data was manually collected from
the Web. On average 2-3 articles were gathered per
topic featured in the evaluation data sets. 120 000
words of text were gathered for LM adaptation on
the general news set. 60 000 words were gathered
for LM adaptation on the sports news set.

The foreign word detection algorithm and a letter
trigram model trained on the Kielipankki word list

were used to automatically find foreign entity names
in the adaptation texts and convert them into their
base forms. Different values were used as percent-
age threshold T (30, 60, and 100%).

The adaptation texts were segmented into morphs
with the segmentation model learnt from the back-
ground corpus. Morpheme adaptation was per-
formed by restoring the foreign entity name candi-
dates into their base forms. Separate in-domain vari-
gram LMs (n=6) were trained for adaptation data
segmented into morphs using each choice of T in
the foreign name detection. The background LM
was adapted with each in-domain LM separately us-
ing linear interpolation with weight λ = 0.1 chosen
based on preliminary experiments.

A pronunciation model was trained with Sequitur
G2P on the manually constructed foreign word lexi-
con. The number of the most probable pronunciation
variants m for one word to be used in lexicon adap-
tation, was tested with different values (1, 4, and 8).

4 Results

The word error rate (WER), letter error rate (LER),
and the foreign entity name error rate (FENER) are
reported in the results. All the results are presented
in Table 1.

The first experiment was run on the baseline sys-
tem. The average WER is 21.7% for general news
and 34.0% for sports. The average FENER is signif-
icantly higher for both (76.6% and 80.7%).

Supervised vocabulary adaptation was imple-
mented by manually retrieving the foreign entity
names from the adaptation text and adding their pro-
nunciation rules to the lexicon. Morpheme adapta-
tion was also applied. Compared to only using linear
interpolation (λ = 0.1) supervised vocabulary adap-
tation reduces WER by 4% (general news) and 6%
(sports news). Recognition of foreign entity names
is also improved with FENER reductions of 18%
and 24%.

Unsupervised vocabulary adaptation was imple-
mented through automatic retrieval and pronuncia-
tion generation of foreign entity names. The pa-
rameters of interest are the foreign name percentage
threshold T, determining how many foreign word
candidates are included for lexicon and morpheme
adaptation and m, the number of pronunciation vari-

39



Adaptation method Results

LM
Lexicon General News Sports News

Adaptation T[%] m WER[%] LER[%] FENER[%] WER[%] LER[%] FENER[%]
Background Baseline 21.7 5.7 76.6 34.0 11.4 80.7

Background + Adaptation

Baseline 20.6 5.3 67.8 32.0 10.7 69.4
Supervised - 1 19.8 5.0 55.7 30.1 9.8 53.1

Unsupervised

30
1 20.4 5.2 64.0 31.5 10.4 64.1
4 20.2 5.2 58.7 31.6 10.4 60.4
8 20.4 5.3 56.9 31.5 10.4 56.8

60
1 20.7 5.3 63.7 32.3 10.4 63.7
4 20.7 5.3 59.4 31.1 9.9 59.8
8 21.1 5.5 58.2 31.0 9.9 55.6

100
1 21.1 5.4 62.7 33.2 10.7 66.1
4 21.2 5.5 58.2 32.6 10.4 60.7
8 22.1 5.9 59.2 33.2 10.6 57.0

Table 1: Results of adaptation experiments on the two test sets. Linear interpolation is tested with supervised and
unsupervised vocabulary adaptation. T is the top percentage of foreign entity name candidates used in unsupervised
vocabulary adaptation, and m is the number of pronunciation variants for each word.

ants generated for each word. The best performance
is reached on the general news set with T = 30% and
m = 4 (WER = 20.2%, FENER = 58.7%), and on the
sports news set with T = 60% and m = 8 (WER =
31.0%, FENER = 55.6%).

5 Conclusion and Discussion

In this work we presented an unsupervised approach
to pronunciation and language modeling of foreign
entity names in morph-based speech recognition.

In the context of LM adaptation, foreign en-
tity name candidates were retrieved from in-domain
texts using a foreign word detection algorithm. Pro-
nunciation variants were generated for the foreign
word candidates using a grapheme-to-phoneme con-
verter. Morpheme adaptation was also applied by
restoring the foreign entity names into their base
forms in the morph-segmented adaptation texts.

The results indicate that unsupervised pronun-
ciation and language modeling of foreign entity
names is feasible. The unsupervised approach al-
most matches supervised adaptation in correctly rec-
ognizing foreign entity names. Average WER is also
very close to the supervised adaptation one despite
the increased acoustic confusability when introduc-
ing more pronunciation variants. The percentage of
foreign word candidates included for adaptation af-
fects performance of the algorithm. Including all
words starting in uppercase letters significantly de-
grades ASR results. The optimal threshold value
is dependent on the adaptation text and its foreign
word frequency and similarity to the evaluation data.

The composition of likely pronunciations of for-
eign names by Finnish speakers is not a straight-
forward task. While the native pronunciation of the
name is the favored one, the origin of the name is not
always clear, nor the definition of the pronunciation.
Additionally, the mapping of the native pronuncia-
tion to the phoneme set used by the Finnish ASR
system can only be an approximation, as well as the
pronunciations that the Finnish speakers are able to
produce. In future work we will study new methods
to model the pronunciation of the foreign names and
perform evaluations also in speech retrieval where
the recognition of names have particular importance.

References

B. Ahmed. 2005. Detection of Foreign Words and Names
in Written Text. Doctoral thesis, Pace University.

M. Bisani and H. Ney. 2008. Joint-Sequence Models for
Grapheme-to-Phoneme Conversion. Speech Commu-
nication, vol. 50, Issue 5, pp. 434-451.

M. Creutz and K. Lagus. 2005. Unsupervised Mor-
pheme Segmentation and Morphology Induction from
Text Corpora using Morfessor 1.0. Technical Report
A81, Publications in Computer and Information Sci-
ence, Helsinki University of Technology.

T. Hirsimäki, J. Pylkkönen, and M. Kurimo 2009. Im-
portance of High-order N-gram Models in Morph-
based Speech Recognition. IEEE Trans. Audio,
Speech and Lang., pp. 724-732, vol. 17.

V. Siivola, T. Hirsimäki and S. Virpioja. 2007. On Grow-
ing and Pruning Kneser-Ney Smoothed N-Gram Mod-
els. IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech and Lang., Vol. 15,
No. 5.

40


