










































Computational Analysis of Referring Expressions in Narratives of Picture Books


Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 1–7,
Montréal, Canada, June 8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Computational Analysis of Referring Expressions in 
Narratives of Picture Books 

 
 

Choonkyu Lee Smaranda Muresan Karin Stromswold 
Department of Psychology Library and Information Science Department Department of Psychology 

Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science School of Communication and Information Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science 
Rutgers University – New Brunswick Rutgers University – New Brunswick Rutgers University – New Brunswick 

choonkyu@eden.rutgers.edu smuresan@rci.rutgers.edu karin@ruccs.rutgers.edu 
 

 
 

 

 
 

Abstract 

This paper discusses successes and failures of 
computational linguistics techniques in the 
study of how inter-event time intervals in a 
story affect the narrator’s use of different 
types of referring expressions. The success 
story shows that a conditional frequency dis-
tribution analysis of proper nouns and pro-
nouns yields results that are consistent with 
our previous results – based on manual coding 
– that the narrator’s choice of referring ex-
pression depends on the amount of time that 
elapsed between events in a story. Unfortu-
nately, the less successful story indicates that 
state-of-the-art coreference resolution systems 
fail to achieve high accuracy for this genre of 
discourse. Fine-grained analyses of these fail-
ures provide insight into the limitations of cur-
rent coreference resolution systems, and ways 
of improving them. 

1 Introduction 

In theories of information structure in extended 
discourse, various factors of discourse salience 
have been proposed as determinants of information 
‘newness’ vs. ‘givenness’ (e.g., Prince, 1981). 
Based on evidence from speakers’ choice of differ-
ent types of referring expressions in referring back 
to a previously introduced discourse referent, 
scholars have discovered effects of (a) ‘referential 
distance’ (Givón, 1992), a text-based measure of 
distance between the antecedent and the re-

mention in terms of number of intervening clauses; 
(b) topic-prominence of the referent in the previous 
mention (Brennan, 1995); (c) presence of another 
candidate referent (‘competitor’) in linguistic or 
visual context (Arnold and Griffin, 2007), among 
others. In re-mentioning individuals, one can, for 
example, simply repeat names or use anaphoric 
devices, such as definite descriptions and pronouns. 

In our work, we have been investigating the role 
of mental representation of nonlinguistic situation-
al dimensions of the storyline (e.g., Zwaan, 1999) 
as an additional factor of salience in discourse or-
ganization. From the five situational dimensions of 
the event-indexing model (Zwaan and Radvansky, 
1998), we have focused on the time dimension. In 
a narrative elicitation study (Lee and Stromswold, 
submitted; Lee, 2012), we presented picture se-
quences from three wordless picture books in Mer-
cer Mayer’s “Boy, Dog, Frog series” (Mayer, 
1969; Mayer, 1974; Mayer and Mayer, 1975), and 
had 8 adults estimate the inter-event intervals in 
story time between consecutive scenes with no lin-
guistic stimuli, and had a different group of native 
English-speaking adults write stories to go along 
with the pictures. The 36 adults wrote a total of 58 
written narratives, which consisted of 2778 sen-
tences and 38936 word tokens (48 sentences and 
671 word tokens per narrative on average). The use 
of wordless picture books allows fixed target con-
tent and clear visual availability of the characters 
and their actions. 

In our previous analysis (Lee and Stromswold, 
submitted) of the effect of inter-event time inter-
vals on the narrator’s referential choice in referring  

1



        
S1) Finally though, the boy starts to get tired and de-
cides to crawl into bed. His dog joins him and soon they 
are asleep. The boy forgot to put a lid on the bottle, and 
Mr. Frog is sneaking out!  
S2) When the boy wakes up in the morning, he sees that 
Mr. Frog is gone. He is very upset that he lost his new 
friend. 
 
Figure 1. Sample ‘Long Interval’ Between Scenes S1 
and S2 (Mean Estimate: 6h 48m 45s). 

 
back to characters, we manually annotated critical 
sentences selected on the basis of the eight longest 
(mean duration = 1 hour 7 minutes 2 seconds; 
henceforth, ‘Long Intervals’) and the eight shortest 
(mean duration = 10 seconds; henceforth, ‘Short 
Intervals’) estimated intervals. Examples of a Long 
Interval and a Short Interval between scenes are 
given in Figures 1 and 2, together with sample cor-
responding narratives. For each of the 58 narratives, 
we analyzed the first sentence after a Long and 
Short Interval. Our coding of referring expressions 
involved frequency counts (ranging from 0 to 3) of 
instances of each of our Referential Types – Proper 
Names (e.g., Mr. Frog), Definite Descriptions (e.g., 
the frog), and Pronouns (e.g., he) – per critical sen-
tence. We found a significant interaction between 
Interval and Referential Type in both a chi-square 
test of association and an analysis of variance, and 
the effect generally held across participants. Our 
finding demonstrated that narrators used Proper 
Names more after Long Intervals than after Short 
Intervals in story time, and more singular-referent 
Pronouns after Short Intervals than after Long In-
tervals. 

Addressing the issue of the effect of inter-event 
interval on referential choice on a larger scale re-
quires accurate automatic methods for identifica-
tion of Referential Types and coreference 
resolution for the narratives.  In this paper we first 
present a simple computational method for analyz-
ing the entire scene descriptions after the Long and 

       
S3) After staring at the frog for two minutes he says 
"Ribbittttttt" and she screams and  throws her fork into 
the air, and falls back in her chair. Charles gets scared 
by her screaming and jumps off her plate into the air.  
S4) Luckily, he lands safely into a man's drink. He is 
mid-conversation with a beautiful lady and doesn't feel 
the new addition to his martini. 
 
Figure 2. Sample ‘Short Interval’ Between Scenes S3 
and S4 (Mean Estimate: 3s). 

 
Short Intervals to study how inter-event intervals 
affect referential choice, focusing on Proper Nouns 
and Pronouns. Our results from the automatic 
methods are consistent with the results obtained 
using manual coding of the critical sentences. Se-
cond, we present an annotation study of nine narra-
tives with coreference chains, and also discuss the 
performance of two state-of-the-art coreference 
resolution systems on a sample of our data. 

2 Inter-event Interval Effect on Referring 
Expressions: A Basic Computational 
Approach 

In order to address the question of how inter-event 
intervals affect the choice of referring expressions, 
we analyzed the frequency of Pronouns and Proper 
Nouns in scenes following the Long and Short In-
tervals.  The results in Table 1 are consistent with 
our previous results obtained based on manual cod-
ing of the critical sentences only: The ‘Long Inter-
val’ (LI) scenes and the ‘Short Interval’ (SI) scenes 
diverge in relative frequencies of our target part-
of-speech tags – Pronouns (nominal (PRP) and 
possessive (PRP$) forms) vs. Proper Names (NNP).  

One can observe that there are generally higher 
frequencies of Proper Names for the scenes after 
the Long Intervals compared to the Short Intervals, 
not only in absolute number but in relative propor-
tion to Pronouns as well. A noticeable exception, 
Scene 3 of One Frog Too Many (Mayer and  

2



Book Scene# PRP PRP$ NNP 
Frog 
Goes 
to 
Dinner 

4 (LI) 62 56 106 
5 (LI) 54 37 96 
21 (LI) 87 60 120 
9 (SI) 45 22 27 
13 (SI) 50 44 50 
14 (SI) 40 21 40 

One 
Frog 
Too 
Many 

8 (LI) 33 33 55 
19 (LI) 63 42 90 
20 (LI) 60 29 88 
3 (SI) 70 65 158 
15 (SI) 69 50 73 
23 (SI) 1 2 2 

Frog, 
Where 
Are 
You? 

2 (LI) 89 70 143 
3 (LI) 70 65 158 
18 (SI) 64 56 86 
19 (SI) 63 42 90 

Table 1. Scene-based Frequencies of Pronouns and 
Proper Names after the 16 Long and Short Intervals. 

 
Mayer, 1975), is a very early scene in the picture 
book, with many character introductions and dis-
course-newness (Prince, 1981). Even with this ex-
ception included, the association between Interval 
(Long vs. Short) and Referential Type (Pronouns 
vs. Proper Names) was significant in a new analy-
sis based on the entire scene descriptions, rather 
than just the first sentences for these scenes [χ2(1) 
= 9.50, p = .0021]. The significant effect of Inter-
val reveals that Proper Names were more common-
ly used after Long Intervals than after Short 
Intervals, and Pronouns were more commonly used 
after Short Intervals than after Long Intervals. 

The exception in Scene 3 of One Frog Too 
Many suggests, however, that excluding first few 
mentions in a coreference chain from analysis may 
reveal a stronger effect of Interval on referential 
type of re-mentions (although one mention for in-
troducing a character does not always establish 
discourse-givenness from the narrator’s perspec-
tive (Clancy, 1980)). Successful automatic 
coreference resolution would facilitate this analysis 
as well. 

3 Annotation of Referring Expressions in 
Narratives of Picture Books 

In order to provide descriptive statistics of refer-
ring expressions in our narratives of pictures books 
and to test the performance of coreference systems 

automatically in the future, we annotated 9 narra-
tives manually with coreference chains (3 narra-
tives for each of the 3 pictures books, with each 
narrative written by a different writer). Only ani-
mate entities, or characters in the stories, were con-
sidered. We used the MMAX2 annotation tool 
(Müller and Strube, 2006). A coreference schema 
is available from the Heidelberg Text Corpus 
(HTC, Malaka and Zipf, 2000) sample directory 
included in the MMAX2 package. The HTC sche-
ma allows marking a mention in terms of the dis-
course entity or coreference chain it corresponds to, 
as well as ‘np_form’ (what type of (pro)nominal it 
is), ‘grammatical_role’ (subject/object/other) and 
‘semantic_class’ (abstract/human/physical ob-
ject/other). We imported the HTC schema to anno-
tate the mention level in terms of coreference, and 
also created a ‘scene’ level for our picture-book 
narratives.  

The narratives were annotated by the authors of 
this paper independently in the initial version, and 
with adjudication for the final version. As the ref-
erents were very clear in the narratives for the pic-
ture books, there was only one case of initial 
disagreement in the authors’ coreference decisions. 
Table 2 shows statistics related to these 9 narra-
tives. 
 

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics for Each Narrative. 
 

The density of referring expressions is very high 
(~22% of tokens/words in a story are referring ex-
pressions). Densities are also consistent across nar-
ratives: Narrative #7, which was by far the longest 
one with 1109 words, also showed a very high 
density (24%). Numbers of coreference chains are 
also consistent within each target picture book re-
gardless of writer or narrative length: 8, 5, and 7 
for One Frog Too Many (Mayer and Mayer, 1975); 
13, 12, and 11 for Frog, Where Are You? (Mayer, 
1969); and 23, 21, and 26 for Frog Goes to Dinner 
(Mayer, 1974). Table 2 also shows that the longest 

3



chain contains 60 mentions, and the average chain 
has about 8 mentions. 

4 Performance of Coreference Resolution 
Systems on Narratives of Picture Books 

In computational linguistics, the increasing availa-
bility of annotated coreference corpora has led to 
developments in machine learning approaches to 
automatic coreference resolution (see Ng, 2010). 
The task of automatic NP coreference resolution is 
to determine “which NPs in a text […] refer to the 
same real-world entity” (Ng, 2010, p. 1396). Suc-
cessful coreference resolution often requires real-
world knowledge of public figures, entity relation-
ships, and aliases, beyond linguistic parameters 
such as number and gender features. 

In this paper, we have chosen two coreference 
resolution systems: Stanford’s Multi-Pass Sieve 
Coreference Resolution System (Lee et al., 2011) 
(henceforth, Stanford dcoref) and ARKref 
(O’Connor and Heilman, 2011). Stanford dcoref 
consists of an initial mention-detection module, the 
main coreference resolution module, and task-
specific post-processing. In this system, global in-
formation about the text is shared across mentions 
in the same cluster in the form of attributes such as 
gender and number. This system received the high-
est scores at a recent CoNLL shared task (Pradhan 
et al., 2011), which the authors attributed to the 
initial high-recall component (in mention detec-
tion) followed by high-precision classifiers in the 
coreference resolution sieves. ARKref is a syntac-
tically rich, rule-based within-document 
coreference system very similar to (the syntactic 
components of) Haghighi and Klein (2009). 

We analyzed in depth the performance of these 
systems on one of our narratives for Frog Goes to 
Dinner (Mayer, 1974). We expected automatic 
coreference resolution systems to show poorer per-
formance when applied to our written narratives 
than that reported in the literature, because most of 
these systems have been trained on newswire, blog, 
or conversation corpora, which – though quite a 
heterogeneous set in themselves – are not similar 
to our written narrative data. Some of the most 
noteworthy particularities of our written narrative 
collection include (a) fictional content, in which 
animals occur frequently and are greatly anthro-
pomorphized, (b) an imaginary target audience of a 
limited age range (six- to eight-year-olds), and (c) 

clear scene-by-scene demarcation in the writing 
process, with a new text input box for each new 
scene in a picture book. The first point, in particu-
lar, may limit the utility of named entity recogni-
tion (NER) and WordNet relations among 
nominals in the preprocessing steps prior to 
coreference resolution. As we discuss below, pre-
processing errors in parsing and NER did in fact 
contribute to coreference precision errors. 

Our written narratives had a lot of singleton 
mentions for secondary characters and plural com-
binations of characters. We thus evaluated the per-
formance based on the B3 measure proposed by 
Bagga and Baldwin (1998), rather than the link-
based MUC (Vilain et al., 1995).  

We computed the B3 with equal weighting for 
all mentions. Stanford dcoref achieved B3 scores of 
0.78 Precision, 0.43 Recall and 0.55 F1, while 
ARKref scores were 0.67 for precision, 0.45 for 
recall, and 0.54 for F1. Stanford dcoref includes a 
post-processing module in which singletons are 
removed, which partially contributes to the low 
recall score for the system. 

4.1 Qualitative analysis of coreference output 

In this section, we discuss the errors from both 
ARKref and Stanford dcoref in depth. The 
coreference outputs from both ARKref and Stan-
ford dcoref demonstrate that preprocessing errors 
can lead to errors downstream for coreference 
resolution. Misparsing is one of the serious issues. 
For example, in ARKref’s output for our sample 
narrative (for Frog Goes to Dinner), the third-
person singular verb waves in Billy waves goodbye 
(Scene 6) and Froggy waves goodbye (Scene 7) 
was misparsed as a plural nominal and thus a 
headword of a mention for a discourse entity, and 
these two instances were marked as coreferent. Lee 
et al. also acknowledged misparsing as a major 
problem for Stanford dcoref. 

A few surprising errors in the ARKref output in-
clude (a) marking the woman and him in the same 
clause as coreferent despite the gender mismatch, 
and (b) leaving the lady as a singleton and starting 
a new coreference chain for her in the same clause. 
It is strange that the explicitly anaphoric pronoun 
mention did not lead ARKref to link it to the iden-
tified mention the lady. 

Other noteworthy errors common to both sys-
tems’ outputs were the following: 

4



(1) inconsistent mention detection and 
coreference resolution for mentions of the frog 
character with Froggy; 

(2) failure to recognize cataphora in Without 
knowing Froggy’s in [his]i saxophone, [the saxo-
phone player]i tries to blow harder… and linking 
the pronoun to Froggy instead; 

(3) starting a new coreference chain at Scene 4 
at the mention of Billy when the referent (the boy) 
has been already introduced as Billy Smith in Scene 
1; 

(4) the same type of error for another character 
(the frog) at an indefinite NP a frog in She is so 
shocked that there is a frog in her salad. 

With regard to error (1), preprocessing results in 
the Stanford dcoref output reveal some NER errors 
in which Froggy was mislabeled as an ‘organiza-
tion,’ which, along with the absence of Froggy in 
the name gazetteer for the system (Lee et al., 2011), 
would lead to both precision and recall errors for 
Froggy, as we observed. 

Error (3) reveals the potential pitfall of overreli-
ance on headwords for mention/discourse-new de-
tection, which leads these systems to miss the 
internal structure to people’s names – namely, 
[first name + last name] for the same person, 1 
which then can be re-mentioned using just the first 
name. Although in news articles and other formal 
writing it is typical to mention a person by the last 
name (e.g., Obama rather than Barack) as long as 
the referent is clear, stories, conversations, and 
other less formal genres would make more fre-
quent use of first names of individuals for re-
mention compared to other genres.  Because the 
importance of coreference resolution is not limited 
to formal writing, coreference resolution systems 
need to incorporate name-specific knowledge, ei-
ther in preprocessing stages such as parsing and 
NER or in coreference resolution after the prepro-
cessing. 

Error (4) is not as undesirable as the other ones: 
Even for a human annotator, it is more difficult to 
make a coreference decision for a case like this one, 
in which the fact that the salad-eating lady was 
shocked would come about similarly for any frog, 
not just Froggy. Although there does not seem to 
be a rule for classifying an indefinite NP as denot-

                                                           
1 Application to East Asian languages would need to adjust to 
the opposite ‘family name + given name’ sequence, often even 
in English transliteration (e.g., Kim Jong-il). 

ing a new entity,2 training on a large corpus would 
lead to such a tendency because indefinites usually 
do indicate discourse-newness introducing a new 
discourse referent. 

In another narrative for the same picture book, 
there were two definite NPs (the woman and the 
waiter) for which the definiteness was due to the 
visual availability of the referent in the scene or a 
bridging inference (restaurant – waiter) rather than 
a previous mention. Definiteness may lead 
coreference systems to prefer assigning the men-
tion in question to an existing coreference chain 
rather than creating a new chain, but ARKref pro-
cessed both of these possibly misleading definite 
NPs successfully by creating a new coreference 
chain, and Stanford dcoref got one right and made 
a recall error for the other. On the other hand, re-
ferring to different secondary male characters simi-
larly as the man did lead to a spurious coreference 
chain linking all of these mentions. 

5 Conclusion and Future Directions 

With the NLP tools discussed above, possibilities 
abound for interesting research on narratives. 
Based on scene-based segmentation of narratives 
written for fixed target picture sequences, one can 
collect various kinds of linguistic and nonlinguistic 
data associated with the picture sequences and 
conduct regression analysis to see which factor has 
the most predictive value for linguistic variation 
such as Referential Type choice. Important factors 
include temporal and thematic (dis)continuity in 
the target content (McCoy and Strube, 1999; Vonk 
et al., 1992), and discourse salience factors (Prince, 
1981), for which we have collected measures in 
our previous work. 

Our Interval Effect finding lends support to 
McCoy and Strube’s (1999) intuition underlying 
their referring-expression generation system, for 
which they used reference time change in dis-
course as a major predictor of referential type. 
Gaining further insight into the impact of time 
change in content on referential choice in naturally 
occurring discourse can thus lead to a predictive 
model of referring expressions as well. 

In the future, we plan to use ‘semantic_class’ at-
tributes and features such as ANIMACY in the 
                                                           
2 According to Lee et al. (2011), Stanford dcoref correctly 
recognizes coreference in appositive constructions with an 
indefinite NP after the first mention. 

5



HTC schema as our task-specific filters for select-
ing just story characters. Moreover, we plan to ex-
plore other state-of-the-art coreference systems 
such as CherryPicker (Rahman and Ng, 2009). The 
NLP tools and techniques discussed above can be 
applied to cross-document coreference resolution 
as well (see Bagga and Baldwin, 1998, for discus-
sion of a meta document), although training the 
systems for narratives like ours would involve 
much more manual annotation and supervision, 
particularly because different authors usually as-
sign different names to a given character. In order 
to limit the amount of manual annotation, unsuper-
vised methods for coreference resolution (Ng, 
2008; Poon and Domingos, 2008; Haghighi and 
Klein, 2007) could be used. This, however, would 
require a larger number of picture books and hu-
man-produced narratives. 

Coreference is far from a simple phenomenon, 
both for theory and application. Nevertheless, ul-
timately it would be desirable to improve the au-
tomatic coreference resolution systems in ways 
that reflect corpus-linguistic and psycholinguistic 
findings – e.g., referential distance effects (Givón, 
1992), and the privileged status in memory of dis-
course entities in the immediately preceding clause 
(Clark and Sengul, 1979). The goal would be to 
represent as many of the interacting factors in ref-
erential choice as possible, with a weighting 
scheme or a ranking algorithm sensitive to these 
multiple factors. 

References  
Jennifer E. Arnold and Zenzi M. Griffin. 2007. The ef-

fect of additional characters on choice of referring 
expression: Everyone counts. Journal of Memory and 
Language, 56: 521-536.  

Amit Bagga and Breck Baldwin. 1998. Algorithms for 
scoring coreference chains. In Proceedings of LREC 
Workshop on Linguistic Coreference, pages 563-566. 

Susan Brennan. 1995. Centering attention in discourse. 
Language and Cognitive Processes, 10: 137-167.  

Patricia M. Clancy. 1980. Referential choice in English 
and Japanese narrative discourse. In Wallace L. 
Chafe, editor, The Pear Stories: Cognitive, Cultural, 
and Linguistic Aspects of Narrative Production. 
Ablex, Norwood, NJ. 

Herbert H. Clark and C. J. Sengul. 1979. In search of 
referents for nouns and pronouns. Memory and Cog-
nition, 7(1): 35-41. 

Thomas Givón. 1992. The grammar of referential co-
herence as mental processing instructions. Linguistics, 
30:5-55. 

Aria Haghighi and Dan Klein. 2007. Unsupervised 
coreference resolution in a nonparametric Bayesian 
model. In Proceedings of ACL 2007, pages 848–855. 

Aria Haghighi and Dan Klein. 2009. Simple coreference 
resolution with rich syntactic and semantic features. 
In Proceedings of EMNLP 2009, pages 1152–1161. 

Choonkyu Lee. 2012. Situation model and salience. The 
LSA 2012 Special Session on Information Structure 
and Discourse: In Memory of Ellen F. Prince. Port-
land, Oregon. 

Choonkyu Lee and Karin Stromswold. submitted. Situa-
tion model and accessibility: Referring expressions in 
narrative production. 

Heeyoung Lee, Yves Peirsman, Angel Chang, Nathan-
ael Chambers, Mihai Surdeanu, and Dan Jurafsky. 
2011. Stanford’s multi-pass sieve coreference resolu-
tion system at the CoNLL-2011 Shared Task. In Pro-
ceedings of the CoNLL-2011 Shared Task, pages 28-
34. 

Rainer Malaka and Alexander Zipf. 2000. Deep Map: 
Challenging IT research in the framework of a tourist 
information system. In Daniel R. Fesenmaier, Stefan 
Klein, and Dimitrios Buhalis, editors, Information 
and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2000: 
Proceedings of the International Conference in Bar-
celona, Spain, pages 15-27. Springer, Wien. 

Mercer Mayer. 1969. Frog, Where Are You? Penguin 
Books, New York. 

Mercer Mayer. 1974. Frog Goes to Dinner. Penguin 
Books, New York. 

Mercer Mayer and Marianna Mayer. 1975. One Frog 
Too Many. Penguin Books, New York. 

Kathleen F. McCoy and Michael Strube. 1999. Taking 
time to structure discourse: Pronoun generation be-
yond accessibility. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
First Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science 
Society, pages 378-383. Lawrence Erlbaum Associ-
ates, Mahwah, NJ. 

Christoph Müller and Michael Strube. 2006. Multi-level 
annotation of linguistic data with MMAX2. In Sabine 
Braun, Kurt Kohn, and Joybrato Mukherjee, editors, 
Corpus Technology and Language Pedagogy. New 
Resources, New Tools, New Methods, pages 197-214. 
Peter Lang, Frankfurt. 

Vincent Ng. 2009. Unsupervised models for coreference 
resolution. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2008, pages 
640-649. 

Vincent Ng. 2010. Supervised noun phrase coreference 
research: The first fifteen years. In Proceedings of 
ACL 2010, pages 1396-1411. 

Brendan O’Connor and Michael Heilman. 2011. 
ARKref is a Noun Phrase Coreference System. Web-
site at http://www.ark.cs.cmu.edu/ARKref/ 

6



Hoifung Poon and Pedro Domingos. 2008. Joint unsu-
pervised coreference resolution with Markov logic. 
In Proceedings of EMNLP 2008, pages 650-659. 

Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw, Mitchell Marcus, 
Martha Palmer, Ralph Weischedel, and Nianwen Xue. 
2011. CoNLL-2011 Shared Task: Modeling unre-
stricted coreference in OntoNotes. In Proceedings of 
CoNLL 2011. 

Ellen Prince. 1981. Toward a taxonomy of given-new 
information. In Peter Cole, editor, Radical Pragmat-
ics, pages 223-256. Academic Press, New York. 

Altaf Rahman and Vincent Ng. 2009. Supervised mod-
els for coreference resolution. In Proceedings of 
EMNLP 2009, pages 968-977. 

Marc Vilain, John Burger, John Aberdeen, Dennis Con-
nolly, and Lynette Hirschman. 1995. A model-
theoretic coreference scoring scheme. In Proceedings 
of the 6th Message Understanding Conference, pages 
45-52. 

Wietske Vonk, Lettica G. M. M. Hustinx, and Wim H. 
G. Simons. 1992. The use of referential expressions 
in structuring discourse. Language and Cognitive 
Processes, 7(3/4): 301-333. 

Rolf A. Zwaan. 1999. Situation models: The mental 
leap into imagined worlds. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 8(1):15-18. 

Rolf A. Zwaan and Gabriel A. Radvansky. 1998. Situa-
tion models in language comprehension and memory. 
Psychological Bulletin, 123(2):162-185. 

7


