










































First steps in checking and comparing Princeton WordNet and Estonian Wordnet


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Joint Workshop of LINGVIS & UNCLH, pages 25–29,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 24 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

 

 

First steps in checking and comparing Princeton WordNet and Esto-
nian Wordnet 

Ahti Lohk 
Tallinn University of Tech-

nology 
Raja 15-117 

Tallinn, ESTONIA 
[ahti.lohk@ttu.ee] 

Kadri Vare 
University of Tartu 

Liivi 2-308 
Tartu, ESTONIA 

[kadri.vare@ut.ee] 

Leo Võhandu 
Tallinn University of Tech-

nology 
Raja 15-117 

Tallinn, ESTONIA 
[leov@staff.ttu.ee] 

 

 

Abstract 

Each expanding and developing system 
requires some feedback to evaluate the 
normal trends of the system and also the 
unsystematic steps. In this paper two lexical-
semantic databases – Princeton WordNet 
(PrWN) and Estonian Wordnet (EstWN)- are 
being examined from the visualization point 
of view. The visualization method is 
described and the aim is to find and to point 
to possible problems of synsets and their 
semantic relations.  

1 Introduction 

Wordnets for different languages have been 
created for a quite a long time 1 ; also these 
wordnets have been developed further and 
updated with new information. Typically there is 
a special software for editing wordnets, for 
example VisDic2, WordnetLoom (Piasecki et al 
2010), Polaris (Louw, 1998). These editing tools 
often present only one kind of view of the data 
which might not be enough for feedback or for 
detecting problematic synsets/semantic relations. 
The visualization method described here can be 
used separately from the editing tool; therefore it 
provides an additional view to data present in 
wordnet.  
 For initial data PrWN version 3.03  and 
EstWN version 63 4  have been taken. PRWN 
contains of 117 374 synsets and EstWn of 51 688 
synsets. The creation of EstWN started in 1998 
within the EuroWordNet project5. At present the 
                                                           
1http://www.globalwordnet.org/ 
2http://deb.fi.muni.cz/clients-debvisdic.php 
3http://wordnet.princeton.edu/ 
4http://www.cl.ut.ee/ressursid/teksaurus/ 
5http://www.illc.uva.nl/EuroWordNet/ 

main goal is to increase EstWN with new con-
cepts and enrich EstWN with different kinds of 
semantic relations. But at the same time it is 
necessary to check and correct the concepts al-
ready present (Kerner, 2010).  
 The main idea and basic design of all 
wordnets in the project came from Princeton 
WordNet (more in Miller et al 1990). Each 
wordnet is structured along the same lines: syno-
nyms (sharing the same meaning) are grouped 
into synonym sets (synsets). Synsets are connect-
ed to each other by semantic relations, like 
hyperonymy (is-a) and meronymy (is-part-of). 
As objects of analysis only noun synsets and 
hyperonymy-hyponymy relations are considered 
(of course, it is possible to extend the analysis 
over different word classes and different seman-
tic relations). So, due to these constraints we 
have taken 82 115 synsets from PRWN (149 309 
different words in synsets) and 41 938 synsets 
from EstWN (64 747 different words in synsets). 

2 Method 

We will explain our method's main idea with a 
small artificial example. Let us have a small sep-
arated subset presented as a matrix: 
 

 
 

Figure 1. Relation-matrix and bipartite graph 
 
 In the rows of that table we have synsets 
and in columns hyperonyms. On the right side of 

25



 

 

that figure we have presented the same data as a 
bipartite graph where all column numbers are 
positioned on the upper line and all rows on the 
lower line. Every connecting line on the right 
side has been drawn between every “1”-s column 
and row number. As we see a lot of line cross-
ings there exist even in our very small example. 
It is possible to reorder the rows and columns of 
that table into optimal positions so that the num-
ber of line crossings would be minimal possible. 
If there is full order then there will be no cross-
ings of lines. 
 Generally this crossing number minimi-
zation is a NP-complete task. We are using the 
idea of Stephan Niermann's (2005) evolutionary 
algorithm to minimize the number of line cross-
ings. 
 In our example the optimal result will be: 
 

 
 

Figure 2. Reordered (arranged) relation-matrix and 
bipartite graph 

 
 As we can see there are no crossings and 
all connections are separated into two classes – 
let’s call them closed sets. We have got a nice 
and natural ordering for rows and columns.  With 
that kind of picture the relations between words 
(synsets) are easier to see and understand. We 
will present real cases from PrWN and EstWN 
later. 

3 Practical application of the method 

Next we will describe the steps that should be 
taken in order to obtain visual pictures for 
lexicographers.  
• First the word class and a semantic relation 

of interest is chosen from wordnet. For nouns 
and verbs hyperonymy and hyponymy are 
probably the most informative relations, for 
adjectives and adverbs near_synonymy (but 
of course this method allows us to choose 
different semantic relations in combination 
with different word classes).  

• In order to find closed sets we use the 
connected component separating algorithm 
for graphs given in D. Knuth (1968). For 
example using hyponym-hyperonym relation 

and word classes of nouns then there will be 
7 907 closed sets for EstWN and 15 452 
closed sets for PrWN. Every closed set is 
presented in a table as a row with different 
lengths. An arbitrary closed set is similar to 
the following picture in Figure 3.  

 

 
 
 SS1 - synset 1, SS2 - synset 2, ... 
 

Figure 3. Example of a closed set  
 

• As a next step we use all connections for 
those two sets in a wordnet to get the relation 
matrix as it is shown in Figure 1 left part. 

• Then the minimal crossing algorithm is used 
(result is seen on the right side of Figure 2).  

• As the last step a lexicographer analyzes the 
figures. 

 It is still important to mention that our 
approach is not quite useful for analyzing the 
large closed sets. The reason is that in Nierman’s 
evolutionary algorithm if the size of the matrix 
grows than the time increases with the speed 
O(n2). For example, to solve the 30x30 matrix, it 
takes 3 minutes and to solve 60x60 matrix, it 
takes 60 minutes. That is the reason why in this 
paper only closed sets that do not exceed the 30 
hyponym sets are considered. The pictures from 
closed sets (Figure 4, 5, 6) were solved as fol-
lows: Figure 4 (3 x 5 matrix) 0,28sec, Figure 5 (4 
x 11 matrix) 1,5sec, Figure 6 (4 x 12 matrix) 
1,7sec.    
 For larger closed sets it is better to use 
the modified Power Iteration Clustering method 
by Lin and Cohen (2010) instead of Niermann’s 
algorithm. 
 As a matter of fact, the largest closed set 
in EstWN has 4103 hyponyms-synsets x 405 
hyperonym-synsets and  the largest closed set in 
PrWN has 2371 hyponyms-synsets x 167 
hyperonym-synsets (Figure 3). As for large 
closed sets, it could be sensible to use only the 
relation matrix (Figure 2, left side) to detect 
where possible problematic places occur. 

4 Intermediate results 

In this paper we focus on the synsets having two 
or more hyperonyms, which is the reason of 
closed sets, since it is more likely to find prob-
lematic places in these synsets.  

26



 

 

 For example in EstWN only one 
hyperonym for a synset should ideally exist 
(Vider, 2001). In EstWN there are currently 
1 674 concepts with two hyperonyms, 145 con-
cepts with three or more hyperonyms and the 
concept which has the most hyperonyms - 9 - is 
’alkydcolour’.  
 In PrWN there are 1 442 concepts with 
two hyperonyms, 34 concepts with three or more 
hyperonyms and the concept with the most 
hyperonyms – 5 – is 'atropine'. 
 Of course in wordnets a synset can have 
multiple hyperonyms in many cases, in EstWN 
many of the onomatopoetic words, for example 
(typically they have hyperonyms which denote 
movement and sound). But also there are cases 
where one of the hyperonyms is in some ways 
more suitable than another. Even if a synset has 
multiple hyperonyms a cluster still often presents 
a homogeneous semantic field.  
 One of the purposes of the visual pictures 
is to help in detecting so called human errors, for 
example: 
• in a situation where in the lexicographic 

(manual) work a new and more precise 
hyperonym is added during editing process 
but the old one is not deleted;  

• lexicographer could not decide which 
hyperonym fits better; 

• lexicographer has connected completely 
wrong senses (or words) with hyperonymy 
relation; 

• lexicographer has not properly completed the 
domain-specific synsets etc. 

 
 The first three points can indicate the 
reason of why one synset has multiple 
hyperonym-synsets. 
 For example, in Figure 4 all the members 
of the cluster seem to form a typical set of aller-
gic and hypersensitivity conditions and illnesses. 
In EstWN currently allergies and diseases caused 
by allergies do not form such a cluster, because 
they do not share hyperonyms. But also different 
clusters exist where some problems can appear. 
 For example, in Figure 5 where all the 
other characters (suicide bomber, terrorist, spy 
etc) except ‘programmer’ are bad or criminal by 
their nature. This leads to a thought that maybe 
‘programmer’ as a hyperonym to ‘hacker’ and 
‘cracker’ is not the best; it might be that ‘pro-
grammer’ is connected with some other semantic 
relation. 
 

 
 

Figure 4. Rearranged bipartite graph, PrWN 
 

 
 

Figure 5. Rearranged bipartite graph, PrWN 

27



 

 

 
 

Figure 6. Rearranged bipartite graph, EstWN 
 

Hyperonym-synsets: 
1. ettepanek, pakkumine - proposal 
2. rituaal, talitus, ... - rituaal 
3. sakrament - sacrament 
4. võidmine - unction, anoiting 
 

Hyponym-synsets: 
4. paaripanek - marriage ritual 
6. riitus - rite 
7. viljakusrituaal - fertility rite 
3. armulaud - Holy Communion 
10. ordinatsioon - ordination 
12. ristimine - baptism 
9. konformatsioon, ... - confirmation 
11. piht, pihtimine - confession 
8. haigete salvimine, ... - extreme unction 
2. rats, ratsionaliseerimisettepanek - proposal 
for rationalization 
1. kosjaminek, kosjareis, ... - a visit to bride's 
house to make a marriage proposal 
5. religioosne rituaal - religious ritual 
 
From EstWN many problematic synsets and/or 
semantic relations were discovered by using this 
method. In Figure 6, for example, from EstWN 

there is an example of a closed set for nouns.  It 
can be seen that the word ratsionaliseerimis-
ettepanek (’proposal to rationalization’) does not 
belong to this semantic field (this semantic field 
can be named ‘different kinds of rituals’ for ex-
ample). It is strange that words 
ratsionaliseerimisettepanek (‘proposal to ration-
alization’) and kosjakäik (‘a visit to bride’s house 
to make a marriage proposal’) belong to the same 
closed set. Both these synsets share a hyperonym 
ettepanek (‘proposal’), but kosjakäik should be 
connected to ettepanek (‘proposal’) by 
is_involved relation and the hyperonym to 
kosjakäik should be ‘ritual’ instead.  
 Also the relation of hyperonyms 
võidmine ('unction') and sakrament ('sacrament'). 
should be interesting. It can be seen that all the 
semantic relations of hyperonym võidmine 
('unction') belong actually to sakrament 
('sacrament'). So it is possible to state that sacra-
ment should be hyperonym to unction. Another 
question arises with the word armulaud ('Holy 
Communion'). In principle, this word is correctly 
connected to both sacrament and ritual, but still – 
all of the hyponyms of sacrament are some sorts 
of services. These connections are probably 
missing from the system.  
 In addition, a minor detail – although 
abielu ('marriage') belongs to sacrament, it is in 
EstWN categorized only as a ritual and not even 
directly but implicitly by the word paaripanek 
('marriage ritual') 

5 Conclusion 

In order to find mistakes from closed sets it is not 
necessary to use a bipartite graph. In some cases 
only the relation-matrix will be enough (Figure 
1,2 left side). Clear created groupings can be 
considered as an advantage of bipartite graphs, 
which present the hyponym synsets connecting 
the hyperonym synsets. Often these connections 
can turn out as the problematic ones. Sometimes 
it is necessary to use the wordnet database in 
order to move a level up to understand the mean-
ing of a synset.  
 Out of the 20 arbitrarily extracted closed 
sets 6 seemed to have some problems. And in 
PrWN there were 185 closed sets with 
hyperonym synsets having at least three 
hyperonyms. This seems to be a promising start 
towards using visual pictures. The situation is 
similar in EstWN, and since EstWN is far from 
“being completed” then this method has already 

28



 

 

proven useful for lexicographers in the revision 
work.  
 To conclude, the structured bipartite 
figures are informative in following ways:  
• It is possible to use different kinds of 

semantic relations to create closed sets.  
• It is possible to detect subgroups.  
• It is possible to detect wrong and missing 

semantic relations.  

Acknowledgments 

In this paper Kadri Vare is supported by META-
NORD project (CIP-ICT-PSP.2010-4 Theme 6: 
Multilingual Web: Machine translation for the 
multilingual web); Estonian Ministry of Educa-
tion and Research (Target financed research 
theme SF0180078s08, "Development and im-
plementation of formalisms and efficient algo-
rithms of natural language processing for the 
Estonian language") and National Programme for 
Estonian Language Technology. 

References  

Ashok K. Chandra, Dexter C. Kozen, and Larry 
J.Stockmeyer. 1981. Alternation. Journal of the 
Association for Computing Machinery, 28(1):114-
133.  

Association for Computing Machinery. 1983. 
Computing Reviews, 24(11):503-512. 

Dan Gusfield. 1997. Algorithms on Strings, Trees and 
Sequences. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 

Donald E. Knuth. 1968, Fundamental Algorithms, vol. 
1 of Art of Computer Programming (Reading, MA, 
Addison-Wesley), §2.3.3. 

Frank Lin and William W. Cohen. 2010. Power 
Iteration Clustering in ICML-2010. 

George Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane 
Fellbaum, Derek Gross and Kathrine Miller. 1990. 
Introduction to WordNet: An On-line Lexical 
database. – International Journal of Lexicography 
3, 235-312.  

Kadri Kerner, Heili Orav and Sirli Parm. 2010. 
Growth and Revision of Estonian WordNet. In: 
Principles, Construction and Application of 
Multilingual Wordnets. Proceeding of the 5th 
Global Wordnet Conference: 5th Global Wordnet 
Conference; Mumbai, India. (Ed.) Bhattacha-ryya, 
P.; Fellbaum, Ch.; Vossen, P. Mumbai, India: 
Narosa Publishing House, pp 198-202. 

Kadri Vider. 2001. Eesti keele tesaurus - teooria ja 
tegelikkus Leksikograafiaseminar "Sõna tänapäeva 

maailmas" Leksikografinen seminaari "Sanat 
nykymaailmassa". Ettekannete kogumik. Toim. M. 
Langemets. Eesti Keele Instituudi toimetised 9. 
Tallinn, lk 134-156.  

Michael Louw. 1998. Polaris User's Guide. Technical 
report, Lernout & Hauspie . Antwerp, Belgium. 

Maciej Piasecki, Michal Marcinczuk, Adam Musial, 
Radoslav Ramocki and Marek Maziarz. 2010.  
WordnetLoom: a Graph-based Visual Wordnet 
Development Framework.  In Proceedings of 
IMCSIT, 469-476. 

Stefan Niermann. 2005. Optimizing the Ordering of 
Tables With Evolutionary Computation. The 
American Statistician, 59(1):41-46. 

 

29


