










































Cause-Effect Relation Learning


Proceedings of the TextGraphs-7 Workshop at ACL, pages 39–43,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Cause-Effect Relation Learning

Zornitsa Kozareva
USC Information Sciences Institute

4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA 90292-6695

kozareva@isi.edu

Abstract

To be able to answer the question What
causes tumors to shrink?, one would re-
quire a large cause-effect relation repos-
itory. Many efforts have been payed on
is-a and part-of relation leaning, however
few have focused on cause-effect learn-
ing. This paper describes an automated
bootstrapping procedure which can learn
and produce with minimal effort a cause-
effect term repository. To filter out the
erroneously extracted information, we in-
corporate graph-based methods. To evalu-
ate the performance of the acquired cause-
effect terms, we conduct three evaluations:
(1) human-based, (2) comparison with ex-
isting knowledge bases and (3) applica-
tion driven (SemEval-1 Task 4) in which
the goal is to identify the relation between
pairs of nominals. The results show that
the extractions at rank 1500 are 89% ac-
curate, they comprise 61% from the terms
used in the SemEval-1 Task 4 dataset and
can be used in the future to produce addi-
tional training examples for the same task.

1 Introduction

Over the years, researchers have successfully
shown how to build ground facts (Etzioni et
al., 2005), semantic lexicons (Thelen and Riloff,
2002), encyclopedic knowledge (Suchanek et al.,
2007), and concept lists (Katz et al., 2003).
Among the most well developed repositories are
those focusing on is-a (Hearst, 1992) and part-
of (Girju et al., 2003; Pennacchiotti and Pantel,
2006) relations. However, to be able to answer the
question “What causes tumors to shrink?”, one re-
quires knowledge about cause-effect relation.

Other applications that can benefit from cause-
effect knowledge are the relational search engines

which have to retrieve all terms relevant to a query
like: “find all X such that X causes wrinkles” (Ca-
farella et al., 2006). Unfortunately to date, there
is no universal repository of cause-effect relations
that can be used or consulted. However, one would
still like to dispose of an automated procedure that
can accurately and quickly acquire the terms ex-
pressing this relation.

Multiple algorithms have been created to learn
relations. Some like TextRunner (Etzioni et al.,
2005) rely on labeled data, which is used to train
a sequence-labeling graphical model (CRF) and
then the system uses the model to extract terms
and relations from unlabeled texts. Although very
accurate, such methods require labeled data which
is difficult, expensive and time consuming to cre-
ate. Other more simplistic methods that rely
on lexico-syntactic patterns (Hearst, 1992; Riloff
and Jones, 1999; Pasca, 2004) have shown to be
equally successful at learning relations, temporal
verb order (Chklovski and Pantel, 2004) and en-
tailment (Zanzotto et al., 2006). Therefore, in this
paper, we have incorporated an automated boot-
strapping procedure, which given a pattern rep-
resenting the relation of interest can quickly and
easily learn the terms associated with the relation.
In our case, the pattern captures the cause-effect
relation. After extraction, we apply graph-based
metrics to rerank the information and filter out the
erroneous terms.

The contributions of the paper are:

• an automated procedure, which can learn
terms expressing cause-effect relation.
• an exhaustive human-based evaluation.
• a comparison of the extracted knowledge

with the terms available in the SemEval-1
Task 4 dataset for interpreting the relation be-
tween pairs of nominals.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
The next section describes the term extraction pro-
cedure. Section 3 and 4 describe the extracted data

39



and its characteristics. Section 5 focuses on the
evaluation and finally we conclude in Section 6.

2 Cause-Effect Relation Learning

2.1 Problem Formulation
The objectives of cause-effect relation learning are
similar to those of any general open domain rela-
tion extraction problem (Etzioni et al., 2005; Pen-
nacchiotti and Pantel, 2006). The task is formu-
lated as:

Task: Given a cause-effect semantic relation expressed
through lexico-syntactic pattern and a seed example for
which the relation is true, the objective is to learn from
large unstructured amount of texts terms associated with
the relation.

For instance, given the relation cause and the
term virus for which we know that it can cause
something, we express the statement in a recursive
pattern1 “* and virus cause *” and use the pattern
to learn new terms that cause or have been caused
by something. Following our example, the recur-
sive pattern learns from the Web on the left side
terms like {bacteria, worms, germs} and on the
right side terms like {diseases, damage, contami-
nation}.

2.2 Knowledge Extraction Procedure
For our study, we have used the general Web-
based class instance and relation extraction frame-
work introduced by (Kozareva et al., 2008; Hovy
et al., 2009). The procedure is minimally super-
vised and achieves high accuracy of the produced
extractions.
Term Extraction: To initiate the learning process,
the user must provide as input a seed term Y and a
recursive pattern “X∗ and Y verb Z∗” from which
terms on the X∗ and Z∗ positions can be learned.
The input pattern is submitted to Yahoo!Boss API
as a web query and all snippets matching the query
are retrieved, part-of-speech tagged and used for
term extraction. Only the previously unexplored
terms found on X∗ position are used as seeds
in the subsequent iteration, while the rest of the
terms2 are kept. The knowledge extraction termi-
nates when there are no new extractions.
Term Ranking: Despite the specific lexico-
syntactic construction of the pattern, erroneous

1A recursive pattern is a lexico-syntactic pattern for which
one of the terms is given as input and the other one is an
open slot, allowing the learned terms to replace the initial
term directly.

2Including the terms found on Z∗ position.

extractions are still produced. To filter out
the information, we incorporate the harvested
terms on X∗ and Y ∗ positions in a directed
graph G=(V,E), where each vertex v ∈ V is
a candidate term and each edge (u, v) ∈ E
indicates that the term v is generated by the term
u. An edge has weight w corresponding to the
number of times the term pair (u, v) is extracted
from different snippets. A node u is ranked
by u=(

∑
∀(u,v)∈E w(u, v) +

∑
∀(v,u)∈E w(v, u))

which represents the weighted sum of the outgo-
ing and incoming edges to a node. The confidence
in a correct argument u increases when the term
discovers and is discovered by many different
terms. Similarly, the terms found on Z∗ position
are ranked by the total number of incoming edges
from the XY pairs z=

∑
∀(xy,z)∈E′ w(xy, z).

We assume that in a large corpus as the Web, a
correct term Z∗ would be frequently discovered
by various XY term pairs.

3 Data Collection

To learn the terms associated with a cause-effect
relation, the user can use as input any verb ex-
pressing causality3. In our experiment, we used
the verb cause and the pattern “* and <seed>
cause *”, which was instantiated with the seed
term virus. We submitted the pattern to Ya-
hoo!Boss API as a search query and collected all
snippets returned during bootstrapping. The snip-
pets were cleaned from the html tags and part-of-
speech tagged (Schmid, 1994). All nouns (proper
names) found on the left and right hand side of the
pattern were extracted and kept as potential candi-
date terms of the cause-effect relation.

Table 1 shows the total number of terms found
for the cause pattern on X∗ and Z∗ positions in 19
bootstrapping iterations. In the same table, we also
show some examples of the obtained extractions.

Term Position #Extractions Examples
X cause 12790 pressure, stress, fire,

cholesterol, wars, ice,
food, cocaine, injuries
bacteria

cause Z 52744 death, pain, diabetes,
heart disease, damage,
determination, nosebleeds
chain reaction

Table 1: Extracted Terms.

3The user can use any pattern from the thesauri of
http://demo.patrickpantel.com/demos/lexsem/thesaurus.htm

40



4 Characteristic of Learning Terms

An interesting characteristic of the bootstrapping
process is the speed of leaning, which can be mea-
sured in terms of the number of unique terms ac-
quired on each bootstrapping iteration. Figure 1
shows the bootstrapping process for the “cause”
relation. The term extraction starts of very slowly
and as bootstrapping progresses a rapid growth is
observed until a saturation point is reached. This
point shows that the intensity with which new el-
ements are discovered is lower and practically the
bootstrapping process can be terminated once the
amount of newly discovered information does not
exceed a certain threshold. For instance, instead
of running the algorithm until complete exhaus-
tion (19 iterations), the user can terminate it on
the 12th iteration.

!"#$%&'(

)%'#*(+,-,&(./"*,01'(

2"1,3$,4#%1,(./"*,01'(

21,3%5/"'(

6(
/7
(#1
,$

'(
&,
%3
",

4(

8(1,3$'(

9(1,3$'(

8:(%"4(;(.%<',(9:(

Figure 1: Learning Curve.

The speed of leaning depends on the way the
X and Y terms relate to each other in the lexico-
syntactic pattern. For instance, the more densely
connected the graph is, the shorter (i.e., fewer iter-
ations) it will take to acquire all terms.

5 Evaluation and Results

In this section, we evaluate the results of the term
extraction procedure. To the extend to which it
is possible, we conduct a human-based evalua-
tion, we compare results to knowledge bases that
have been extracted in a similar way (i.e., through
pattern application over unstructured text) and we
show how the extracted knowledge can be used
by NLP applications such as relation identification
between nominals.

5.1 Human-Based Evaluation

For the human based evaluation, we use two an-
notators to judge the correctness of the extracted
terms. We estimate the correctness of the pro-
duced extractions by measuring Accuracy as the
number of correctly tagged examples divided by
the total number of examples.

Figure 2, shows the accuracy of the bootstrap-
ping algorithm with graph re-ranking in blue and
without graph re-ranking in red. The figure shows
that graph re-ranking is effective and can separate
out the erroneous extractions. The overall extrac-
tions produced by the algorithm are very precise,
at rank 1500 the accuracy is 89%.

!"#$%&

&'
((
)#
'(
*&

!"#$

!"#%$

!"&$

!"&%$

'$

'$ ($ )$ *$"(!!$ "%!!$ '!!!$ '%!!$

""#%$

"'$

""&%$

""&!$

""#!$
"!$

Figure 2: Term Extraction Accuracy.

Next, in Table 2, we also show a detailed eval-
uation of the extracted X and Z terms. We de-
fine five types according to which the humans can
classify the extracted terms. The types are: Phys-
icalObject, NonPhysicalObject, Event, State and
Other. We used Other to indicate erroneous ex-
tractions or terms which do not belong to any of
the previous four types. The Kappa agreement for
the produced annotations is 0.80.

X Cause A1 A2 Cause Z A1 A2
PhysicalObj 82 75 PhysicalObj 15 20

NonPhysicalObj 69 66 NonPhysicalObj 89 91
Event 21 24 Event 72 72
State 29 31 State 50 50
Other 3 4 Other 5 4
Acc. .99 .98 Acc. .98 .98

Table 2: Term Classification.

5.2 Comparison against Existing Resources

To compare the performance of our approach with
knowledge bases that have been extracted in a
similar way (i.e., through pattern application over
unstructured text), we consult the freely avail-
able resources NELL (Carlson et al., 2009), Yago

41



(Suchanek et al., 2007) and TextRunner (Etzioni
et al., 2005). Although these bases contain mil-
lions of facts, it turns out that NELL and Yago
do not have information for the cause-effect rela-
tion. While the online demo of TextRunner has
query limitation, which returns only the top 1000
snippets. Since we do not have the complete and
ranked output of TextRunner, comparing results in
terms of relative recall and precision is impossible
and unfair. Therefore, we decided to conduct an
application driven evaluation and see whether the
extracted knowledge can aid an NLP system.

5.3 Application: Identifying Semantic
Relations Between Nominals

Task Description (Girju et al., 2007) introduced
the SemEval-1 Task 4 on the Classification of Se-
mantic Relations between Nominals. It consists
in given a sentence: “People in Hawaii might be
feeling <e1>aftershocks</e1> from that power-
ful <e2>earthquake</e2> for weeks.”, an NLP
system should identify that the relationship be-
tween the nominals earthquake and aftershocks is
cause-effect.
Data Set (Girju et al., 2007) created a dataset for
seven different semantic relations, one of which is
cause-effect. For each relation, the nominals were
manually selected. This resulted in the creation
of 140 training and 80 testing cause-effect exam-
ples. From the train examples 52.14% were pos-
itive (i.e. correct cause-effect relation) and from
the test examples 51.25% were positive.
Evaluation and Results The objective of our ap-
plication driven study is to measure the overlap of
the cause-effect terms learned by our algorithm
and those used by the humans for the creation
of the SemEval-1 Task4 dataset. There are 314
unique terms in the train and test dataset for which
the cause-effect relation must be identified. Out of
them 190 were also found by our algorithm.

The 61% overlap shows that either our cause-
effect extraction procedure can be used to auto-
matically identify the relationship of the nominals
or it can be incorporated as an additional feature
by a more robust system that relies on semantic
and syntactic information. In the future, the ex-
tracted knowledge can be also used to create addi-
tional training examples for the machine learning
systems working with this dataset.

Table 3 shows some of the overlapping terms in
our system and the (Girju et al., 2007) dataset.

tremor, depression, anxiety, surgery,
exposure, sore throat, fulfillment, yoga,

frustration, inhibition, inflammation, fear,
exhaustion, happiness, growth, evacuation,

earthquake, blockage, zinc, vapour,
sleep deprivation, revenue increase, quake

Table 3: Overlapping Terms.

6 Conclusion

We have described a simple web based procedure
for learning cause-effect semantic relation. We
have shown that graph algorithms can successfully
re-rank and filter out the erroneous information.
We have conduced three evaluations using human
annotators, comparing knowledge against existing
repositories and showing how the extracted knowl-
edge can be used for the identification of relations
between pairs of nominals.

The success of the described framework opens
up many challenging directions. We plan to ex-
pand the extraction procedure with more lexico-
syntactic patterns that express the cause-effect re-
lation4 such as trigger, lead to, result among oth-
ers and thus enrich the recall of the existing repos-
itory. We also want to develop an algorithm for
extracting cause-effect terms from non contigu-
ous positions like “stress is another very impor-
tant cause of diabetes”. We are also interested
in studying how the extracted knowledge can aid
a commonsense causal reasoner (Gordon et al.,
2011; Gordon et al., 2012) in understanding that
if a girl wants to wear earrings it is more likely for
her to get her ears pierced rather then get a tattoo.
This example is taken from the Choice of Plausi-
ble Alternatives (COPA) dataset5, which presents
a series of forced-choice questions such that each
question provides a premise and two viable cause
or effect scenarios. The goal is to choose a cor-
rect answer that is the most plausible cause or ef-
fect. Similarly, the cause-effect repository can be
used to support a variety of applications, includ-
ing textual entailment, information extraction and
question answering

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the reviewers for their comments and

suggestions. The research was supported by DARPA contract

number FA8750-09-C-3705.

4These patterns can be acquired from an existing para-
phrase system.

5http://people.ict.usc.edu/ gordon/copa.html

42



References
Michael Cafarella, Michele Banko, and Oren Etzioni.

2006. Relational Web Search. In World Wide Web
Conference, WWW 2006.

Andrew Carlson, Justin Betteridge, Estevam R. Hr-
uschka Jr., and Tom M. Mitchell. 2009. Coupling
semi-supervised learning of categories and relations.
In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2009 Workskop
on Semi-supervised Learning for Natural Language
Processing.

Timothy Chklovski and Patrick Pantel. 2004. Verbo-
cean: Mining the web for fine-grained semantic verb
relations. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2004, pages
33–40.

Oren Etzioni, Michael Cafarella, Doug Downey, Ana-
Maria Popescu, Tal Shaked, Stephen Soderland,
Daniel S. Weld, and Alexander Yates. 2005. Un-
supervised named-entity extraction from the web:
an experimental study. Artificial Intelligence,
165(1):91–134, June.

Roxana Girju, Adriana Badulescu, and Dan Moldovan.
2003. Learning semantic constraints for the auto-
matic discovery of part-whole relations. In Proc. of
the 2003 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics on
Human Language Technology, pages 1–8.

Roxana Girju, Preslav Nakov, Vivi Nastaste, Stan Sz-
pakowicz, Peter Turney, and Deniz Yuret. 2007.
SemEval-2007 task 04: Classification of semantic
relations between nominals. In SemEval 2007.

Andrew Gordon, Cosmin Bejan, and Kenji Sagae.
2011. Commonsense causal reasoning using mil-
lions of personal stories. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fifth Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI-11).

Andrew Gordon, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Melissa
Roemmele. 2012. Semeval-2012 task 7: Choice
of plausible alternatives: An evaluation of common-
sense causal reasoning. In Proceedings of the 6th In-
ternational Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (Se-
mEval 2012).

Marti Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In Proc. of the
14th conference on Computational linguistics, pages
539–545.

Eduard Hovy, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Ellen Riloff.
2009. Toward completeness in concept extraction
and classification. In Proceedings of the 2009 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 948–957.

Boris Katz, Jimmy Lin, Daniel Loreto, Wesley Hilde-
brandt, Matthew Bilotti, Sue Felshin, Aaron Fernan-
des, Gregory Marton, and Federico Mora. 2003.
Integrating web-based and corpus-based techniques
for question answering. In Proceedings of the

twelfth text retrieval conference (TREC), pages 426–
435.

Zornitsa Kozareva, Ellen Riloff, and Eduard Hovy.
2008. Semantic class learning from the web with
hyponym pattern linkage graphs. In Proceedings of
ACL-08: HLT, pages 1048–1056.

Marius Pasca. 2004. Acquisition of categorized named
entities for web search. In Proc. of the thirteenth
ACM international conference on Information and
knowledge management, pages 137–145.

Marco Pennacchiotti and Patrick Pantel. 2006. On-
tologizing semantic relations. In ACL-44: Proceed-
ings of the 21st International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 793–800.

Ellen Riloff and Rosie Jones. 1999. Learning dic-
tionaries for information extraction by multi-level
bootstrapping. In AAAI ’99/IAAI ’99: Proceedings
of the Sixteenth National Conference on Artificial in-
telligence.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees.

Fabian M. Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2007. Yago: a core of semantic knowl-
edge. In WWW ’07: Proceedings of the 16th inter-
national conference on World Wide Web, pages 697–
706.

Michael Thelen and Ellen Riloff. 2002. A Bootstrap-
ping Method for Learning Semantic Lexicons Using
Extraction Pattern Contexts. In Proc. of the 2002
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 214–221.

Fabio Massimo Zanzotto, Marco Pennacchiotti, and
Maria Teresa Pazienza. 2006. Discovering asym-
metric entailment relations between verbs using se-
lectional preferences. In Proceedings of the 21st In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 849–856.

43


