










































Dependency-Based Open Information Extraction


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 10–18,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Dependency-Based Open Information Extraction

Pablo Gamallo and Marcos Garcia
Centro de Investigação sobre Tecnologias da Informação (CITIUS)

Universidade de Santiago de Compostela
pablo.gamallo@usc.es marcos.garcia.gonzalez@usc.es

Santiago Fernández-Lanza
Escola Superior de Enxeñerı́a Informática

Universidade de Vigo
sflanzal@uvigo

Abstract

Building shallow semantic representations
from text corpora is the first step to perform
more complex tasks such as text entailment,
enrichment of knowledge bases, or ques-
tion answering. Open Information Extrac-
tion (OIE) is a recent unsupervised strategy
to extract billions of basic assertions from
massive corpora, which can be considered
as being a shallow semantic representation
of those corpora. In this paper, we propose
a new multilingual OIE system based on ro-
bust and fast rule-based dependency pars-
ing. It permits to extract more precise as-
sertions (verb-based triples) from text than
state of the art OIE systems, keeping a cru-
cial property of those systems: scaling to
Web-size document collections.

1 Introduction

There is an increasing interest in capturing shal-
low semantic representations from large amounts
of text, with the aim of elaborating more com-
plex semantic tasks involved in text understand-
ing, such as textual entailment, filling knowledge
gaps in text, or integration of text information
into background knowledge bases. Two recent
approaches to text understanding are interested in
shallow semantics: Machine Reading (Etzioni et
al., 2006) and Learning by Reading (Barker et al.,
2007). Both approaches aim at understanding text
by starting with a very basic representation of the
facts conveyed by the input text. In addition, they
rely on unsupervised strategies. There are, how-
ever, two significant differences between Machine
Reading and Learning by Reading:

The first difference concerns the basic repre-
sentation required at the beginning of the under-

standing process. While Machine Reading is fo-
cused on fixed structures (triples), constituted by
a relation (a verb or verb phrase) and two argu-
ments, in Learning by Reading the text is rep-
resented by means of more flexible predicate-
argument structures (n-tuples) derived from syn-
tactic dependency trees. In Learning by Reading,
on the one hand, relations with more than two ar-
guments are also extracted, and on the other, rela-
tions are not restricted to verb phrases but to what-
ever relation expressed by a dependency based
triple, (head, relation, modifier), also called Ba-
sic Element (Hovy et al., 2005). The second dif-
ference is related to the notion of text domain.
Whereas Machine Reading works on open rela-
tions and unrestricted topics and domains, Learn-
ing by Reading prefers being focused on domain-
specific texts in order to build a semantic model
of a particular topic.

One of the major contributions of Machine
Reading is the development of an extraction
paradigm, called Open Information Extraction
(OIE), which aims at extracting a large set of verb-
based triples (or assertions) from unrestricted text.
An OIE system reads in sentences and rapidly ex-
tracts one or more textual assertions, consisting
in a verb relation and two arguments, which try
to capture the main relationships in each sentence
(Banko et al., 2007). Unlike most relation ex-
traction methods which are focused on a prede-
fined set of target relations, OIE is not limited to
a small set of target relations known in advance,
but extracts all types of (verbal) binary relations
found in the text. The OIE system with best per-
formance, called ReVerb (Etzioni et al., 2011),
is a logistic regression classifier that takes as in-
put PoS-tagged and NP-chunked sentences. So,

10



it only requires shallow syntactic features to gen-
erate semantic relations, guaranteeing robustness
and scalability with the size of the corpus. One of
the main critics within the OIE paradigm against
dependency based methods, such as Learning by
Reading, concerns the computational cost asso-
ciated with rich syntactic features. Dependency
parsing could improve precision and recall over
shallow syntactic features, but at the cost of ex-
traction speed (Etzioni et al., 2011). In order to
operate at the Web scale, OIE systems needs to be
very fast and efficient.

In this paper, we describe an OIE method to
generate verb-based triples by taking into account
the positive properties of the two traditions: con-
sidering Machine Reading requirements, our sys-
tem is efficient and fast guaranteeing scalability as
the corpus grows. And considering ideas behind
Learning by Reading, we use a dependency parser
in order to obtain fine-grained information (e.g.,
internal heads and dependents) on the arguments
and relations extracted from the text. In addition,
we make extraction multilingual. More precisely,
our system has the following properties:

• Unsupervised extraction of triples repre-
sented at different levels of granularity: sur-
face forms and dependency level.

• Multilingual extraction (English, Spanish,
Portuguese, and Galician) by making use of
a multilingual rule-based parser, called Dep-
Pattern (Gamallo and González, 2011).

Our claim is that it is possible to perform
Open Information Extraction by making use of
very conventional tools, namely rule-based de-
pendency analysis and simple post-processing ex-
traction rules. In addition, we also show that we
can deal with knowledge-rich syntactic informa-
tion while remaining scalable.

This article is organized as follows. Section 2
introduces previous work on OIE: in particular it
describes three of the best known OIE systems up
to date. Next, in Section 3, the proposed method
is described in detail. Then, some experiments are
performed in Section 4, where our OIE system is
compared against ReVerb. In 5, we sketch some
applications that use the output of our OIE sys-
tem, and finally, conclusions and current work are
addressed in 6.

2 Open Information Extraction Systems

An OIE system extracts a large number of triples
(Arg1, Rel, Arg2) for any binary relation found in
the text. For instance, given the sentence “Vigo
is the largest city in Galicia and is located in the
northwest of Spain”, an OIE system should ex-
tract two triples: (Vigo, is the largest city in, Galicia)
and (Vigo, is located in, northwest of Spain). Up to
now, OIE is focused only on verb-based relations.
Several OIE systems have been proposed, all of
them are based on an extractor learned from la-
belled sentences. Some of these systems are:

• TextRunner (Banko et al., 2008): the ex-
tractor is a second order linear-chain CRF
trained on samples of triples generated from
the Penn Treebank. The input of TextRunner
are PoS-tagged and NP-chunked sentences,
both processes performed with OpenNLP
tools.

• WOE (Wu and Weld, 2010): the extractor
was learned by identifying the shortest de-
pendency paths between two noun phrases,
using training examples of Wikipedia. The
main drawback is that extraction is 30 times
slower than TextRunner.

• ReVerb (Etzioni et al., 2011; Fader et al.,
2011): the extractor is a logistic regression
classifier trained with shallow syntactic fea-
tures, which also incorporates lexical con-
straints to filter out over-specified relation
phrases. It takes as input the same features
as TextRunner, i.e., PoS-tagged and NP-
chunked sentences analyzed with OpenNLP
tools. It is considered to be the best OIE
system up to now. Its performance is 30%
higher than WOE and more than twice that
of TextRunner.

One of the most discussed problems of OIE
systems is that about 90% of the extracted triples
are not concrete facts (Banko et al., 2007) ex-
pressing valid information about one or two
named entities, e.g. “Obama was born in Hon-
olulu”. However, the vast amount of high con-
fident relational triples extracted by OIE systems
are a very useful startpoint for further NLP tasks
and applications, such as common sense knowl-
edge acquisition (Lin et al., 2010), and extrac-
tion of domain-specific relations (Soderland et al.,

11



2010). The objective of OIE systems is not to ex-
tract concrete facts, but to transform unstructured
texts into structured information, closer to ontol-
ogy formats.

Nevertheless, some linguistics problems arise.
OIE systems were trained to identify only verb
clauses within the sentences and, therefore, to
extract just binary verb-based relations from the
clause structure. It follows that they cannot be
easily adapted to learn other non-clausal relations
also found in the text. Let us take the following
sentence: “The soccer player of FC Barcelona,
Lionel Messi, won the Fifa World Player of the
Year award”. In addition to the main verb-based
relationship:

(Lionel Messi, won, the Fifa Worlds Player
of the Year award)

which could be extracted by the OIE systems in-
troduced above, it should also be important to ex-
tract other non-verbal relations found within the
noun phrases:

(Messi, is, a soccer player of FC Barcelona)
(Fifa World Player of the Year, is, an award)

However, the cited systems were not trained to
learn such a basic relations.

Besides, the OIE systems are not adapted to
process clauses denoting events with many argu-
ments. Take the sentence: “The first commercial
airline flight was from St. Petersburg to Tampa in
1914”. We should extract, at least, two or three
different relational triples from the verb clause
contained in this sentence, for instance:

(the first commercial airline flight, was from, St. Pe-
tersburg)
(the first commercial airline flight, was to, Tampa)
(the first commercial airline flight, was in, 1914)

Yet, current OIE systems are not able to perform
this multiple extraction. Even if the cited OIE
systems can identify several clauses per sentence,
they were trained to only extract one triple per
clause.

In the following, we will describe a
dependency-based OIE system that overcomes
these linguistic limitations.

3 A Dependency-Based Method for
Open Information Extraction

The proposed extraction method consists of three
steps organized as a chain of commands in a
pipeline:

Dependency parsing Each sentence of the input
text is analyzed using the dependency-based
parser DepPattern, a multilingual tool avail-
able under GPL license1.

Clause constituents For each parsed sentence,
we discover the verb clauses it contains and,
then, for each clause, we identify the verb
participants, including their functions: sub-
ject, direct object, attribute, and preposi-
tional complements.

Extraction rules A set of rules is applied on the
clause constituents in order to extract the tar-
get triples.

These three steps are described in detail below.

3.1 Dependency Parsing

To parse text, we use an open-source suite of mul-
tilingual syntactic analysis, DepPattern (Gamallo
and González, 2011). The suite includes basic
grammars for five languages as well as a compiler
to build parsers in Perl. A parser takes as input the
output of a PoS-tagger, either, FreeLing (Carreras
et al., 2004) or Tree-Tagger2. The whole process
is robust and fast. It takes 2600 words per second
on a Linux platform with 2.4GHz CPU and 2G
memory. The basic grammars of DepPattern con-
tain rules for many types of linguistic phenomena,
from noun modification to more complex struc-
tures such as apposition or coordination. However
their coverage is still not very high. We added
several rules to the DepPattern grammars in En-
glish, Spanish, Portuguese, and Galician, in order
to improve the coverage of our OIE system.

The output of a DepPattern parser consists
of sentences represented as binary dependencies
from the head lemma to the dependent lemma:
rel(head, dep). Consider the sentence “The coach
of Benfica has held a press conference in Lisbon”.

1htpp://gramatica.usc.es/pln/tools/
deppattern.htm

2http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.
de/projekte/corplex/TreeTagger/
DecisionTreeTagger.html

12



(have hold)vp

(the coach of benfica)np

subj

(a press conference)np

dobj

(in lisbon)pp

vprep

Figure 1: Constituency tree with function information

The DepPattern dependencies are the following:

spec(coach-2, the-1)
nprep(coach-2, of-3)
term(of-3, benfica-4)
aux(hold-6, have-5)
subj(hold-6, coach-2)
dobj(hold-6, conference-9)
spec(conference-9, a-7)
modif(conference-9, press-8)
vprep(hold-6, in-10)
term(in-10, lisbon-11)

The directed graph formed by these dependencies
will be the input of the following step.

3.2 Clause Constituents

In the second step, we identify the clauses of each
sentence, and, for each clause, we retain the par-
ticipants and their functions with regard to the
verb of the clause. A sentence can contain several
clauses, in particular, we identify the main clause,
relative clauses, and that-clauses.

In our example, there is just one clause consti-
tuted by a verb phrase (“have hold”) and three
participants: the subject ”the coach of benfica”,
the direct object ”a press conference”, and a
prepositional phrase ”in lisbon”. So, the objec-
tive here is to transform the dependency path built
in the first step into a partial constituency tree,
where only the constituents of the clause are se-
lected. The process of constructing the clause
constituents and the verb phrase is as follows.

Given a verb dependency (namely subj, dobj,
vprep, or attrib), we select the dependent lemma
of the clause verb and then we list all dependent
lemmas linked to the target lemma (as a head)
through the syntactic dependency path. It results
in the construction of the main phrases of the
clause, including information about the head of
the phrase. We show below the three constituents
identified from our example, where the directed
arrows stand for the internal dependencies used
for their identification (the head of each phrase is
in bold):

(a press conference)np

spec

modif

(the coach of benfica)np

spec nprep term

(in lisbon)pp

term

The verb phrase is also built in a similar way.
It contains all dependent lemmas of the verb that
are not part of the clause constituents identified
before:

(have hold)vp

aux

The three clause constituents are also provided
with information about their function with regard
to the clause verb, as Figure 1 shows. The func-
tion of a constituent inherits the name of the de-
pendent relation linking the clause verb to the
head of the constituent. For instance, the function
of (the coach of benfica)np is the name of the de-
pendent relation in subj(hold-6, coach-2), that is
subj. The clause constituents as well as the verb
phrase of each clause are the input of the extrac-
tion rules.

3.3 Extraction Rules

The third and last process consists of a small set
of simple extraction rules that are applied on the
clauses identified in the previous step. The out-
put of an extraction rule is a triple whose inter-
nal word tokens are provided with some linguistic
information: lemma, PoS tag, head of the con-
stituent, etc.

The simplest rule is applied on a clause just
containing a subject and a direct object. In such
a case, the two constituents are the arguments of
the triple, while the verb phrase is the relation.

13



In our previous example, the clause contains
three arguments: a subject (“the coach of ben-
fica”), a direct object ( “a press conference”),
and a prepositional complement (“in Lisbon”).
In this case, our strategy is similar to that of
ReVerb system, namely to consider the relation
as the verb phrase followed by a noun phrase
and ending in a preposition. For this purpose,
we have defined an extraction rule that builds
the relation of the triple using the verb phrase,
the direct object, and the head preposition of
the prepositional phrase: “have hold a press
conference in”. The two arguments are: “the
coach of benfica” and “Lisbon”. The triple
generated by our rule is represented as follows:

ARG1: the DT coach N-H of PRP benfica N
REL: have V hold V-H a DT press N confer-

ence N-H in PRP
ARG2: Lisbon N-H

which contains lemmas, PoS tags (DT, N,
PRP,...), as well as the heads (tag “H”) of the
main constituents. In addition to this syntax-
based representation, the extraction rule also
gives us a surface form of the triple with just
tokens:

(the coach of Benfica, has hold a press conference in,
Lisbon)

Table 1 shows the main rules we defined to ex-
tract triples from patterns of clause arguments.
The order of arguments within a pattern is not
relevant. The argument ’vprep’ stands for a
prepositional complement of the verb, which
consists of a preposition and a nominal phrase
(np). The third row represents the extraction rule
used in our previous example. All rules in Table
1 are applied at different clause levels: main
clauses, relative clauses and that-clauses.

As in the case of all current OIE systems,
our small set of rules only considers verb-based
clause triples and only extract one triple per
clause. We took this decision in order to make a
fair comparison when evaluating the performance
of our system against ReVerb (in the next section).
However, nothing prevents us from writing ex-
traction rules to generate several triples from one
clause with many arguments, or to extract triples
from other patterns of constituents, for instance:

patterns triples
subj-vp-dobj Arg1 = subj

Rel= vp
Arg2 = dobj

subj-vp-vprep Arg1 = subj
Rel= vp+prep (prep from vprep)
Arg2 = np (from vprep)

subj-vp-dobj-vprep Arg1 = subj
Rel= vp+dobj+prep
Arg2 = np (from vprep)

subj-vp-attr Arg1 = subj
Rel= vp
Arg2 = attr

subj-vp-attr-vprep Arg1 = subj
Rel= vp+attr+prep (from vprep)
Arg2 = np (from vprep)

Table 1: Pattern based rules to generate final triples

vp-pp-pp, noun-prep-noun, noun-noun, adj-noun,
or verb-adverb..

Finally, let us note that current OIE systems,
such as ReVerb, produces triples only in tex-
tual, surface form. Substantial postprocessing is
needed to derive relevant linguistic information
from the tuples. By contrast, in addition to surface
form triples, we also provide syntax-based infor-
mation, PoS tags, lemmas, and heads. If more
information is required, it can be easily obtained
from the dependency analysis.

4 Experiments

4.1 Wikipedia Extraction

The system proposed in this paper, hereafter
DepOE, was used to extract triples from the
Wikipedia in four languages: Portuguese, Span-
ish, Galician, and English.3 Before applying the
extractor, the xml files containing the Wikipedia
were properly converted into plaintext. The num-
ber of both sentences and extracted triples are
shown in Table 2. We used PoS-tagged text with
Tree-Tagger as input of DepPattern for the En-
glish extraction, and FreeLing for the other three
languages. Note that, unlike OIE systems de-
scribed in previous work, DepOE can be consid-
ered as being a multilingual OIE system.4

3Wikipedia dump files were downloaded at http://
download.wikipedia.org on September 2010.

4DepOE is an open source system freely available,
under GPL license, at http://gramatica.usc.es/

˜gamallo/prototypes.htm.

14



Wikipedia version sentences triples
English 78, 826, 696 47, 284, 799
Spanish 21, 208, 089 6, 527, 195
Portuguese 11, 714, 672 3, 738, 922
Galician 1, 461, 705 480, 138

Table 2: Number of sentences and triples from four
Wikipedias

It is worth mentioning that the number of ex-
tracted triples is lower than that obtained with Re-
Verb, which reaches 63, 846, 865 triples (without
considering a threshold for confidence scores).
This is due to the fact that the DepPattern gram-
mars are not complete and, then, they do not per-
form deep analysis, just partial parsing. In par-
ticular, they do not consider all types of coordi-
nation and do not deal with significant linguistic
clausal phenomena such as interrogative, condi-
tional, causal, or adversative clauses. Preliminary
evaluations of the four parsers showed that they
behave in a similar way, yet Portuguese and Gali-
cian parsers achieve the best performance, about
70% f-score.

In this paper, we do not report experimental
evaluation of the OIE system for languages other
than English.

4.2 Evaluation

We compare Dep-OE to ReVerb5, regarding the
quantity and quality of extracted triples just in En-
glish, since ReVerb only can be applied on this
language. Each system is given a set of sentences
as input, and returns a set of triples as output. A
test set of 200 sentences was created by randomly
selecting sentences from the English Wikipedia.
Each test sentence was independently examined
by two judges in order to, on the one hand, iden-
tify the triples actually contained in the sentence,
and on the other, evaluate each extraction as cor-
rect or incorrect. Incoherent and uninformative
extractions were considered as incorrect. Given
the sentence “The relationship between the Tal-
iban and Bin Laden was close”, an example of in-
coherent extraction is:

(Bin Laden, was, close)

Uninformative extractions occur when critical
information is omitted, for instance, when one of

5http://reverb.cs.washington.edu/

the arguments is truncated. Given the sentence
“FBI examined the relationship between Bin
Laden and the Taliban”, an OIE system could
return a truncated triple:

(FBI, examined the relationship between, Bin Landen)

We follow similar criteria to those defined in
previous OIE evaluations (Etzioni et al., 2011).

Concerning the decisions taken by the judges
on the extractions made by the systems, the judges
reached a very high agreement, 93%, with an
agreement score of κ = 0.83. They also reached
a high agreement, 86%, with regard to the num-
ber of triples (gold standard) found in the test sen-
tences.

The precision of a system is the number of ex-
tractions returned as correct by the system divided
by the number of returned extractions. Recall is
the number of extractions returned as correct by
the system divided by the number of triples iden-
tified by the judges (i.e., the size of the gold stan-
dard). Moreover, to compare our rule-based sys-
tem DepOE to ReVerb, we had to select a par-
ticular threshold restricting the extractions made
by ReVerb. Let us note that this extractor is a lo-
gistic regression classifier that assign confidence
scores to its extractions. We computed precision
and recall for many threshold and selected that
giving rise to the best f-score. Such a threshold
was 0.15. So, we compare DepOE to the results
given by ReVerb for those extractions whose con-
fidence score is higher than 0.15.

As it was done in previous OIE evaluations, the
judges evaluated two different aspects of the ex-
traction:

• how well the system identify correct relation
phrases,

• the full extraction task, i.e., whether the sys-
tem identifies correct triples (both the rela-
tion and its arguments).

Figures 2 and 3 represent the score average ob-
tained by the two judges. They show that DepOE
system is more precise than ReVerb. This is clear
in the full extraction task, where DepOE achieves
68% precision while ReVerb reaches 52%. By
contrast, as it was expected, DepOE has lower
recall because of the low coverage of the gram-
mars it depends on. Regarding f-score, DepOE

15



ReVerb (<= 0.15) DepOE
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

prec

recall

f-score

Figure 2: Evaluation of the extraction of triples (both
relation and its arguments) performed by DepOE and
ReVerb (with a confidence score >= 0.15).

ReVerb (<= 0.15) DepOE
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

prec

recall

f-score

Figure 3: Evaluation of the relation extraction per-
formed by DepOE and ReVerb (with a confidence
score >= 0.15).

performs better than ReVerb in the full extraction
task, but when only relations are considered, Re-
Verb achieves the highest score.

We found that most of the incorrect extractions
returned by the two systems where cases where
the relation phrase was correctly identified, but
not one of the arguments. However, there are sig-
nificant differences between the two systems con-
cerning the type of problems arising in argument
identification.

The most common errors of ReVerb are both:
incorrect identification of the first argument (arg1)
and extraction of only a truncated part of the sec-
ond argument (arg2), as in the case of coordinat-
ing conjunctions. These two problems are crucial
for ReVerb since more than 60% of incorrect ex-
tractions were cases with incorrect arguments and
correct relations. DepOE has more precise extrac-
tions of the two arguments, in particular of arg1,
since the parser is able to correctly identify the
subject. Nevertheless, it also produces many trun-
cated arg2. Let us see an example. Given the sen-
tence “Cities and towns in Romania can have the
status either of municipiu or oras”, ReVerb was
not able to identify the correct arg1 and returned
a truncated arg2:

(Romania, can have, the status)

DepOE correctly identified the subject (arg1)
but also failed to return the correct arg2:

(Cities and towns in Romania, can have, the status)

In general, when DepOE fails to correctly identify
an argument, it is often trivial to find the reason
of the problem. In the example above, arg2 was
truncated because the English grammar has not
any specific rule linking the particle “either” to
a coordinate expression. So, the improvement
of DepOE depends on improving the grammars
it is based on. Besides the low coverage of the
grammar, there are other sources of problems
concerning the correct identification of argu-
ments. In particular, it is worth mentioning that
the English version of DepOE is not provided
with an efficient Named Entity Recognition
system. This makes it difficult to correctly iden-
tify multiword arguments with Named Entities,
quantities, measures, and dates. Such a problem
was partially solved by the use of FreeLing in
the Portuguese, Spanish, and Galician DepOE
versions.

4.3 Extraction Speed

To test the system’s speed, we ran each extrac-
tor on the 100, 000 first lines of the English
Wikipedia using a Linux platform with 2.4GHz
CPU and 2GB memory. The processing time of
ReVerb was 4 minutes while that of DepOE was 5
minutes and 19 seconds. In this platform, ReVerb
is able to process 2, 500 words per second, and
DepOE 1, 650. Concerning the use of RAM, Re-
Verb requires the 27% memory of the computer,
while DepOE only needs 0.1%.

5 Applications

The extracted triples can be used for several NLP
applications. The first application we are devel-
oping is a multilingual search engine over the
triples extracted from the Wikipedia. All triples
are indexed with Apache Solr6, which enables it
to rapidly answer queries regarding the extracted
information, as in the query form of ReVerb7.

Another application is to use the extracted
triples to discover commonsense knowledge of

6http://lucene.apache.org/solr/
7http://textrunner.cs.washington.edu/reverb demo.pl

16



team play game
team win championship
team win medal
team win game
team play match
organism have DNA
organism use energy
organism recycle detritus
organism respond to selection
organism modify environment

Table 3: Some of the most frequent basic propositions
containing the words “team” and “organism”, discov-
ered by our system from Wikipedia.

specific domains. One of the goals of Learning by
Reading is to enable a computer to acquire basic
knowledge of different domains in order to im-
prove question answering systems (Hovy et al.,
2011). We assume that the head expressions of
the most frequent triples extracted from a spe-
cific domain represent basic propositions (com-
mon knowledge) of that domain.

To check this assumption, we built two domain-
specific corpora from Wikipedia: a corpus consti-
tuted by articles about sports, and another corpus
with articles about Biology. Then, we extracted
the triples from those corpora and, for each triple,
we selected just the head words of its three ele-
ments: namely the main verb (and preposition if
any) of the relation and the head nouns of the two
arguments. It resulted in a list of basic proposi-
tions of a specific domain. Table 3 shows some of
the propositions acquired following this method.
They are some of the most frequent propositions
containing two specific words, “team” and “or-
ganism”, in the subject position (arg1) of the
triples. The propositions with “team” were ex-
tracted from the corpus about sports, while those
with “organism” were acquired from the corpus
of Biology.

6 Conclusions and Current Work

We have described a multilingual Open Infor-
mation Extraction method to extract verb-based
triples from massive corpora. The method
achieves better precision than state of the art sys-
tems, since it is based on deep syntactic informa-
tion, namely dependency trees. In addition, given
that dependency analysis is performed by fast, ro-
bust, and multilingual parsers, the method is scal-

able and applied to texts in several languages: we
made experiments in English, Portuguese, Span-
ish, and Galician.

Our work shows that it is possible to perform
Open Information Extraction by making use of
knowledge-rich tools, namely rule-based depen-
dency parsing and pattern-based extraction rules,
while remaining scalable.

Even if in the experiments reported here we did
not deal with relationships that are not binary, the
use of deep syntactic information makes it easy to
build n-ary relations from such cases, for instance
complex events with internal (subject and object)
and external (time and location) arguments: “The
treaty was signed by Portugal in 2003 in Lisbon”.
Furthermore, the use of deep syntactic informa-
tion will also be useful to find important relation-
ships that are not expressed by verbs. For in-
stance, from the noun phrase “Nobel Prize”, we
should extract the basic proposition: (Nobel, is a,
prize).

In current work, we are working on synonymy
resolution for two different cases found in the ex-
tracted triples: first, the case of multiple proper
names for the same named entity and, second,
the multiple ways a relationship can be expressed.
Concerning the latter case, to solve relationship
synonymy, we are making use of classic methods
for relation extraction. Given a predefined set of
target relations, a set of lexico-syntactic patterns
is learned and used to identify those triples ex-
pressing the same relationship. This way, tradi-
tional closed information extraction could be per-
ceived as a specific task aimed at normalizing and
semantically organizing the results of open infor-
mation extraction.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the MICINN,
within the projects with reference FFI2010-14986
and FFI2009-08828, as well as by Diputación de
Ourense (INOU11A-04).

References

Michele Banko, Michael J Cafarella, Stephen Soder-
land, Matt Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. 2007.
Open information extraction from the web. In Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Michele Banko, , and Oren Etzioni. 2008. The trade-
offs between open and traditional relation extrac-

17



tion. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

K. Barker, B. Agashe, S. Chaw, J. Fan, N. Friedland,
M. Glass, J. Hobbs, E. Hovy, D. Israel, D.S. Kim,
et al. 2007. Learning by reading: A prototype sys-
tem, performance baseline and lessons learned. In
Proceeding of Twenty-Second National Conference
of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2007).

X. Carreras, I. Chao, L. Padró, and M. Padró. 2004.
An Open-Source Suite of Language Analyzers.
In 4th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’04), Lisbon, Portu-
gal.

Oren Etzioni, Michele Banko, and Michael J. Ca-
farella. 2006. Machine reading. In AAAI Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence.

Oren Etzioni, Anthony Fader, Janara Christensen,
Stephen Soderland, and Mausam. 2011. Open
information extraction: the second generation. In
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence.

Anthony Fader, Stephen Soderland, and Oren Etzioni.
2011. Identifying relations for open information ex-
traction. In Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing.

Pablo Gamallo and Isaac González. 2011. A gram-
matical formalism based on patterns of part-of-
speech tags. International Journal of Corpus Lin-
guistics, 16(1):45–71.

Eduard Hovy, Chin yew Lin, and Liang Zhou. 2005.
A BE-based Multi-document Summarizer with Sen-
tence Compression. In Proceedings of Multilin-
gual Summarization Evaluation (ACL workshop).
Ann Arbor, MI.

Dirk Hovy, Chunliang Zhang, Eduard Hovy, and
Anselmo Pe nas. 2011. Unsupervised discovery of
domain-specific knowledge from text. In Proceed-
ings of 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, Portland, Oregon, USA.

Thomas Lin, Mausman, and Oren Etzioni. 2010.
Identifying functional relations in web text. In Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing.

Stephen Soderland, Brendan Roof, Bo Qin, Shi Xu,
Mausam, and Oren Etzioni. 2010. Adapting open
information extraction to domain-specific relations.
AI Magazine, 31(3):93–102.

Fei Wu and Daniel S. Weld. 2010. Open information
extraction using wikipedia. In Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics.

18


