










































Semantic Relatedness for Biomedical Word Sense Disambiguation


Proceedings of the TextGraphs-7 Workshop at ACL, pages 25–29,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Semantic Relatedness for
Biomedical Word Sense Disambiguation

Kiem-Hieu Nguyen and Cheol-Young Ock
School of Electrical Engineering

University of Ulsan
93, Daehakro, Nam-gu, Ulsan 680-749, Korea
{hieunk,okcy}@mail.ulsan.ac.kr

Abstract

This paper presents a graph-based method
for all-word word sense disambiguation of
biomedical texts using semantic relatedness as
edge weight. Semantic relatedness is derived
from a term-topic co-occurrence matrix. The
sense inventory is generated by the MetaMap
program. Word sense disambiguation is per-
formed on a disambiguation graph via a ver-
tex centrality measure. The proposed method
achieves competitive performance on a bench-
mark dataset.

1 Introduction

Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) has been an
open problem in Computational Linguistics (Nav-
igli, 2009). It aims at identifying the correct mean-
ing of an ambiguous word in a given context, e.g.,
‘adjustment’ could refer to individual adjustment or
adjustment action in “marital adjustment” and “di-
etary adjustment”, respectively.

Supervised methods outperform unsupervised
and knowledge-based methods (McInnes, 2009;
Nguyen and Ock, 2010). However, they require ex-
pensive manual annotations and only the words of
which training data are available could be disam-
biguated. On the other hand, knowledge-based and
unsupervised methods overcome the two shortcom-
ings by using knowledge sources or untagged raw
texts (McInnes, 2008; Agirre et al., 2010; Ponzetto
and Navigli, 2010).

Among knowledge-based methods, the graph-
based method using semantic relatedness achieves
state-of-the-art performance (Sinha and Mihalcea,

Concept Semantic Type
Individual adjustment Individual Behavior
Adjustment action Functional Concept
Psychological adjustment Mental Process

Table 1: The UMLS concepts and appropriate Semantic
Types of the term ‘adjustment’.

2007; Nguyen and Ock, 2011). This work aims at
applying the method to the biomedical domain.

This paper proposes calculating semantic related-
ness between Semantic Types based on the Semantic
Type Indexing (Humphrey et al., 2006) algorithm.
WSD is then perform via a state-of-the-art graph-
based method (Sinha and Mihalcea, 2007). The pro-
posed method achieves competitive performance on
a benchmark dataset.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2
presents the graph-based WSD method; Section 3
describes the calculation of semantic relatedness;
Experimental results are showed in Section 4; The
paper ends with conclusions in Section 5.

2 The WSD Method

Sense inventory is essential for WSD. In the biomed-
ical domain, the MetaMap program (Aronson, 2001)
has been used to generate concept candidates in
the Unified Medical Language System (Bodenrei-
der, 2004) (UMLS) for ambiguous terms.

The concepts in the UMLS are assigned to pre-
defined topics called Semantic Types (ST) (Table 1).
Hence, STs could be efficiently used for disam-
biguation of biomedical terms (Humphrey et al.,
2006). For instance, if the term ‘adjustment’ is

25



mapped to the ST Mental Process then it is disam-
biguated as psychological adjustment.

The WSD method used in this work is derived
from Sinha and Mihalcea (2007) with an additional
postprocessing step (Humphrey et al., 2006). The
method consists of three steps:

• A disambiguation graph is generated for each
context. The vertices are STs. The edge
weight is semantic relatedness between STs
(Section 3).

• Each ambiguous term is mapped to the ST with
the highest rank based on vertex centrality.

• The term is disambiguated as the appropriate
concept of the selected ST.

On the one hand, i) the method achieves state-of-
the-art performance for WSD on general texts us-
ing WordNet (Miller, 1995) as sense inventory and
the source to calculate semantic relatedness (Sinha
and Mihalcea, 2007; Nguyen and Ock, 2011). By
far, semantic relatedness between biomedical con-
cepts has been studied on the UMLS meta-thesaurus
(Pedersen et al., 2007) but there has been no work
on applying semantic relatedness (particularly be-
tween STs) to biomedical WSD. On the other hand,
ii) the method is effective in terms of implementa-
tion, comprehension, and computational complexity.

2.1 Disambiguation Graph

The Algorithm 1 generates an undirected fully
connected disambiguation graph for a context C =
{w0, w1, · · · , wn}. The dictionary D maps from an
ambiguous termwi to its ST candidatesD(wi). D is
generated by MetaMap. Given a term wi, MetaMap
generates a list of its UMLS concept candidates. In
UMLS, each concept is, in turn, assigned to one
or several STs. From that, we can create a list of
ST candidates for wi. The resulted disambiguation
graphG contains vertices as STs and weight edge as
semantic relatedness between STs.

From line 1 to line 8, the algorithm generates the
vertices of G from the dictionary. From line 9 to
line 15, the algorithm calculates the edge weight as
semantic relatedness between STs (3).

Algorithm 1 Disambiguation graph creation
Input: Context {w0, w1, · · · , wn}.
Input: Dictionary D
Output: Disambiguation graph G = (V,E)

1: V ← φ # Initialize graph vertices.
2: for all wi ∈ w do
3: for all STi ∈ D (wi) do
4: if STi /∈ V then
5: V ← V ∪ {STi}
6: end if
7: end for
8: end for
9: E ← φ # Initialize the edges of the graph.

10: for all STi ∈ V do
11: for all STj ∈ V \

{
{STi} ∪D−1 (STi)

}
do

12: eSTi,STj ← sr (STi, STj)
13: E ← E ∩

{
eSTi,STj

}
14: end for
15: end for
16: return G = (V,E)

2.2 Disambiguation based on Vertex Centrality
Given the disambiguation graph G, the rank of a
vertex STi is defined as its weighted node-degree
(shortly as degree):

degree(STi) =
∑

STj∈V,eSTi,STj∈E
eSTi,STj , (1)

For each ambiguous termwi, the ST with the highest
rank is selected among its ST candidates:

argmax
STk∈D(wi)

degree(STk) (2)

While there are alternative vertex centrality mea-
sures such as betweenness, closeness, and eigen-
vector centrality, empirical evidences show that de-
gree achieves state-of-the-art performance on sev-
eral benchmark datasets (Sinha and Mihalcea, 2007;
Ponzetto and Navigli, 2010; Nguyen and Ock,
2011).

Given a sentence “Clinically, these four patients
had mild symptoms which improved with dietary ad-
justment”, the terms not existing in the sense inven-
tory are ignored, the rest are mapped to ST candi-
dates as (‘four’: Quantitative Concept, ‘patients’:
Patient or Disabled Group; ‘mild’: Qualitative Con-
cept; ‘symptoms’: Functional Concept, Sign or

26



Figure 1: The disambiguation graph for “Clinically, these
four patients had mild symptoms which improved with di-
etary adjustment”. The edges containing the ST candi-
dates of ‘adjustment’ are solid lines, the rest are dot lines.

Symptom; ‘improved’: Qualitative Concept, Intel-
lectual Product; ‘dietary’: Food; ‘adjustment’: Indi-
vidual Behavior, Functional Concept, Mental Pro-
cess). The disambiguation graph hence contains
eight STs (Fig. 1).

If we want to disambiguate, for instance, ‘adjust-
ment’, we could compare the degree of its ST can-
didates. As seen in Fig. 1, Functional Concept is
the highest rank ST. Consequently, ’adjustment’ is
disambiguated as adjustment action (not individual
adjustment or psychological adjustment).

3 Semantic Relatedness between STs

3.1 Motivations
Pedersen et al. (2007) show that there is no general-
purpose measure among the six state-of-the-art se-
mantic relatedness measures calculated based on the
UMLS ontology and medical corpora. For instance,
the corpus-based measure is close to physician judg-
ments while the path-based and information content
based measures are close to medical coders judg-
ments. This is one of the main obstacles that prevent
the use of semantic relatedness between concepts for
biomedical WSD.

In another direction, Humphrey et al. (2006) in-
duce a term-ST matrix from medical corpora. The
WSD method proposed in that work is similar to

the Lesk algorithm (Lesk, 1986) where each ST pro-
file is compared with the context using the term-ST
matrix to select the highest rank ST. Nguyen and
Ock (2011) show that using the same synset pro-
files in WordNet, the Lesk-based method achieves
higher precision but lower recall than the semantic
relatedness-based method.

3.2 The Proposed Measure
Semantic relatedness between STs is calculated
from a term-ST matrix Am,n proposed in the Se-
mantic Type Indexing algorithm (Humphrey et al.,
2006) where m is the number of STs and n is the
size of vocabulary. Ai,j is the normalized frequency
that the ith ST and the jth term co-occur. Hence,
each row of the matrix is an ST profile that can be
used to calculate context-sensitive semantic related-
ness between STs as follows:

• Given a set of terms {w0, w1, w2, ..., wn} in a
context C and the term-ST matrix A.

• The static vector of the ith ST is Ai, the ith row
of A. A(i) contains all the terms in the vocabu-
lary. Ai(C) is generated from Ai by assigning
zero to all the terms not in C .

• The context-sensitive semantic relatedness of
the ith and jth STs is defined as the dot product
of the two context-sensitive vectors:

sr(STi, STj) = Ai(C) ·Aj(C) (3)

4 Experiments

4.1 Test Dataset
The NLM-WSD dataset contains 5,000 contexts of
50 frequent ambiguous biomedical terms from the
paper abstracts of the 1998 MEDILINE database
(Weeber et al., 2001). Each ambiguous term has 100
contexts including the surrounding sentence, paper
title and abstract. The average number of senses per
term is 3.28.

4.2 Experimental Setups
The MetaMap program was used to generate ST can-
didates of ambiguous terms.

The most frequent sense (MFS) heuristic was used
as the baseline system: For each ambiguous term,

27



System A P R F
SR 93.2 74.8 69.7 72.2
Static-SR 95.0 66.2 62.9 64.5
STI 93.2 74.1 69.0 71.5
PPR 100.0 68.1 68.1 68.1
MFS 100.0 85.5 85.5 85.5

Table 2: Experimental results on the NLM-WSD dataset.

the most frequent concept calculated based on the
NLM-WSD dataset is simply selected.

The experimental results were compared using at-
tempted, precision, recall and F-measure (A, P, R,
and F, respectively).

4.3 Experimental Results

The proposed method, namely SR, was compared
with three knowledge-based systems:

• Static-SR: The system uses static ST vectors,
i.e., Ai, instead of context-sensitive ST vectors,
i.e., Ai(C) as described in Section 3.

• STI1 (Humphrey et al., 2006): For a context,
the rank of an ST candidate is the average ranks
across all words in the context, e.g., for the
context Clinically, these four patients had mild
symptoms which improved with dietary adjust-
ment, the rank of Functional Concept is [ .5314
(‘symptoms’) + .4714 (‘adjustment’) + .7149
(‘patients’) + .1804 (‘dietary’) + .7226 (‘mild’)
+ .7282 (‘improved’) + .7457 (‘four’) ] / 7 =
.5849.

• PPR2 (Agirre et al., 2010): The system uses the
UMLS metathesaurus as a lexical knowledge
graph and executes the Personalized PageRank,
a state-of-the-art graph-based method, on the
graph (Agirre and Soroa, 2009).

The performance of the MFS baseline is remark-
ably high, i.e., 85.5% of F-measure (Table 2). This
shows that the sense distribution in the biomedical
domain is highly skewed. Hence, this simple su-
pervised heuristic outperformed all the investigated
knowledge-based systems.

1Available as a component of the MetaMap program.
2http://ixa2.si.ehu.es/ukb

Because STI and SR performed WSD via the dis-
ambiguation of STs, the two systems failed when the
ST with the highest rank was assigned to at least
two concepts. For instance, given the term ‘cold’,
if Disease or Syndrome scores the highest rank, the
two systems cannot decide whether common cold
or chronic obstructive airway disease is the correct
concept. Hence, the attempted status of SR and STI
didn’t reach 100%.

SR was remarkably superior to Static-SR which
empirically supports the context-sensitive ST vec-
tors over static ones. Overall, SR and STI achieved
the best performance.

5 Conclusions

In our experiments, the ST profiles were induced
from the term-ST co-occurrence matrix. On the
other hand, semantic relations and textual definitions
in WordNet are useful for word sense disambigua-
tion (Ponzetto and Navigli, 2010; Nguyen and Ock,
2011). Hence, the semantic relations between STs
and the textual definitions of ST in the Unified Med-
ical Language System could be potential resources
for the disambiguation of biomedical texts.

The paper presents a graph-based method to
biomedical word sense disambiguation using se-
mantic relatedness between pre-defined biomedical
topics. The proposed method achieves competitive
performance on the NLM-WSD dataset. Because
the achieved performance is significantly inferior to
the performance of the most frequent sense heuris-
tic, there is still more ground for improvement.

Acknowledgments

This work is partially supported by a scholarship of
the Korean Ministry of Information and Communi-
cation. The first author receives a tuition fellow-
ship of PhD course from the University of Ulsan,
Korea. The authors would like to thank the United
States National Library of Medicine for providing
the NLM-WSD dataset and the MetaMap program,
and the anonymous reviewers for their suggestions.

References

E. Agirre and A. Soroa. 2009. Personalizing PageRank
for Word Sense Disambiguation. In Proceedings of the

28



12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL
(EACL 2009), pages 33–41, Athens, Greece, March.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

E. Agirre, A. Soroa, and M. Stevenson. 2010. Graph-
based word sense disambiguation of biomedical docu-
ments. Bioinformatics, 26:2889–2896, November.

AR Aronson. 2001. Effective mapping of biomedical
text to the UMLS metathesaurus: the MetaMap pro-
gram. Proceedings / AMIA ... Annual Symposium.
AMIA Symposium, pages 17–21.

O. Bodenreider. 2004. The unified medical language
system (UMLS): integrating biomedical terminology.
Nucleic Acids Research, 32(Database issue):D267–
D270, January. PMID: 14681409 PMCID: 308795.

S. M. Humphrey, W. J. Rogers, H. Kilicoglu, D. Demner-
Fushman, and T. C. Rindflesch. 2006. Word sense dis-
ambiguation by selecting the best semantic type based
on journal descriptor indexing: Preliminary experi-
ment. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., 57:96–113, Jan-
uary.

Michael Lesk. 1986. Automatic sense disambiguation
using machine readable dictionaries: how to tell a pine
cone from an ice cream cone. In Proceedings of the
5th annual international conference on Systems docu-
mentation, SIGDOC ’86, pages 24–26, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

B. T. McInnes. 2008. An unsupervised vector approach
to biomedical term disambiguation: integrating umls
and medline. In Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
on Human Language Technologies: Student Research
Workshop, HLT-SRWS ’08, pages 49–54, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

B. T. McInnes. 2009. Supervised and knowledge-based
methods for disambiguating terms in biomedical text
using the umls and metamap.

G. A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database for en-
glish. Commun. ACM, 38:39–41, November.

R. Navigli. 2009. Word sense disambiguation: A survey.
ACM Comput. Surv., 41:10:1–10:69, February.

K. H. Nguyen and Ch. Y. Ock. 2010. Margin perceptron
for word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the
2010 Symposium on Information and Communication
Technology, SoICT ’10, pages 64–70, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

K. H. Nguyen and Ch. Y. Ock. 2011. Word sense disam-
biguation as a traveling salesman problem. Artificial
Intelligence Review, December.

T. Pedersen, S. V. S. Pakhomov, S. Patwardhan, and
Ch. G. Chute. 2007. Measures of semantic similar-
ity and relatedness in the biomedical domain. J. of
Biomedical Informatics, 40:288–299, June.

S. P. Ponzetto and R. Navigli. 2010. Knowledge-rich
word sense disambiguation rivaling supervised sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL
’10, pages 1522–1531, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

R. Sinha and R. Mihalcea. 2007. Unsupervised Graph-
basedWord Sense Disambiguation Using Measures of
Word Semantic Similarity. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Semantic Computing, pages
363–369, Washington, DC, USA. IEEE Computer So-
ciety.

M. Weeber, J. G. Mork, and A. R. Aronson. 2001. De-
veloping a test collection for biomedical word sense
disambiguation. Proceedings / AMIA ... Annual Sym-
posium. AMIA Symposium, pages 746–750. PMID:
11825285.

29


