










































A Morphologically Annotated Hebrew CHILDES Corpus


Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Workshop on Computational Models of Language Acquisition and Loss, pages 20–22,
Avignon, France, April 24 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Morphologically Annotated Hebrew CHILDES Corpus

Aviad Albert
Linguistics

Tel Aviv Uni.
Israel

Brian MacWhinney
Psychology

Carnegie Mellon Uni.
USA

Bracha Nir
Communication Sciences

Uni. of Haifa
Israel

Shuly Wintner
Computer Science

Uni. of Haifa
Israel

Abstract We present a corpus of transcribed
spoken Hebrew that reflects spoken interactions
between children and adults. The corpus is an
integral part of the CHILDES database, which
distributes similar corpora for over 25 languages.
We introduce a dedicated transcription scheme for
the spoken Hebrew data that is sensitive to both
the phonology and the standard orthography of
the language. We also introduce a morphologi-
cal analyzer that was specifically developed for
this corpus. The analyzer adequately covers the
entire corpus, producing detailed correct analyses
for all tokens. Evaluation on a new corpus reveals
high coverage as well. Finally, we describe a mor-
phological disambiguation module that selects the
correct analysis of each token in context. The re-
sult is a high-quality morphologically-annotated
CHILDES corpus of Hebrew, along with a set of
tools that can be applied to new corpora.

CHILDES We present a corpus of transcribed
spoken Hebrew that forms an integral part of
a comprehensive data system that has been de-
veloped to suit the specific needs and inter-
ests of child language researchers: CHILDES
(MacWhinney, 2000). CHILDES is a system of
programs and codes designed to facilitate the pro-
cess of free speech analysis. It involves three
integrated components: 1. CHAT, a system for
discourse notation and coding, designed to ac-
commodate a large variety of analyses, while
still permitting a barebones form of transcription;
2. CLAN, a set of computer programs; and 3. A
large, internationally recognized database of lan-
guage transcripts formatted in CHAT. These in-
clude child-caretaker interactions from normally-
developing children, children with language dis-
orders, adults with aphasia, learners of second
languages, and bilinguals who have been exposed

to language in early childhood. Researchers can
directly test a vast range of empirical hypotheses
against data from nearly a hundred major research
projects. While about half of the CHILDES cor-
pus consists of English data, there is also a signif-
icant body of transcripts in 25 other languages.

Corpus We focus on the Hebrew section of
CHILDES, consisting of two corpora: the Ber-
man longitudinal corpus, with data from four chil-
dren between the ages of 1;06 and 3;05 (Berman
and Weissenborn, 1991), and the Ravid longitudi-
nal corpus, with data from two siblings between
the ages of 0;09 to around 6 years of age. The
corpora consist of 110,819 utterances comprising
of 417,938 word-tokens (13,828 word-types).

Transcription The Hebrew data are transcribed
with a Latin-based phonemic transcription (Nir
et al., 2010). We use a set of monoglyph Unicode
characters (mostly in line with standard IPA con-
ventions) that has already been applied for other
complex scripts. In contrast to previous tran-
scription methods, the current transcription re-
flects phonemic, orthographic and prosodic fea-
tures. The advantages of our approach in reducing
ambiguity are:
• Unlike the standard script, our phonemic

transcriptions includes the five vowels of Mod-
ern Hebrew, and prosodic information on primary
stress location, thereby yielding fewer ambigui-
ties that stem from homographs.
• At the same time, we retain valuable phone-

mic and phonetic distinctions that are standard in
the orthography but are no longer distinct in Mod-
ern Hebrew speech (e.g., t /t., k /q, P/Q).

• We separate and mark prefix particles, mak-
ing it easier to recognize them as separate mor-
phemes, which never participate in homographs.

20



Our transcription thus conforms to the three
major goals which the CHAT format is designed
to achieve (MacWhinney, 1996): systematicity
and clarity, human and computerized readability,
and ease of data entry.

Morphological Analysis CLAN includes a lan-
guage for expressing morphological grammars,
implemented as a system, MOR, for the construc-
tion of morphological analyzers. A MOR gram-
mar consists of three components: a set of lexi-
cons specifying lexical entries (base lexemes) and
lists of affixes; a set of rules that govern allomor-
phic changes in the stems of lexical entries (A-
rules); and a set of rules that govern linear affixa-
tion processes by concatenation (C-rules).

Different languages vary in their requirements
and their need to utilize these MOR devices.
The Hebrew MOR extensively uses all of them
in order to account for vocalic and consonantal
changes of the stem allomorphs (handled within
the A-Rules), and the proper affixation possibili-
ties (via the C-rules and affix lists).

The lexicon includes over 5,800 entries, in
16 part-of-speech (POS) categories. Lexically-
specified information includes root and pattern
(for verbs mainly), gender (for nouns), plural suf-
fix (for nouns), and other information that cannot
be deduced from the form of the word. Over 1,000
A-rules describe various allomorphs of morpho-
logical paradigms, listing their morphological and
morphosyntactic features, including number, gen-
der, person, nominal status, tense, etc. Lexical en-
tries then instantiate the paradigms described by
the rules, thereby generating specific allomorphs.
These, in turn, can combine with affixes via over
100 C-rules that govern the morphological alter-
nations involved in affixation.

Results and Evaluation The corpora include
over 400,000 word tokens (about 14,000 types).
More than 27,000 different morphological analy-
ses are produced for the tokens observed in the
corpus; however, we estimate that the application
of the morphological rules to our lexicon would
result in hundreds of thousands of forms, so that
the coverage of the MOR grammar is substan-
tially wider. The grammar fully covers our cur-
rent corpus. Figure 1 depicts a small fragment of
a morphologically-annotated corpus.

To evaluate the coverage of the grammar, we
applied it to a new corpus that is currently being

transcribed. Of the 10,070 tokens in this corpus,
176 (1.75%) do not obtain an analysis (77 of the
1431 types, 5.3%). While some analyses may be
wrong, we believe that most of them are valid, and
that the gaps can be attributed mostly to missing
lexical entries and inconsistent transcription.

As another evaluation method, we developed a
program that converts the transcription we use to
the standard Hebrew script. We then submit the
Hebrew forms to the MILA morphological ana-
lyzer (Itai and Wintner, 2008), and compare the
results. The mismatch rate is 11%. While few
mismatches indeed indicate errors in the MOR
grammar, many are attributable to problems with
the MILA analyzer or the conversion and compar-
ison script.

Morphological Disambiguation The MOR
grammar associates each surface form with all its
possible analyses, independently of the context.
This results in morphological ambiguity. The
level of ambiguity is much lower than that of the
standard Hebrew script, especially due to the vo-
calic information encoded in the transcription, but
several forms are still ambiguous. These include
frequent words that can function both as nouns,
adjectives or adverbs and as communicators (e.g.,
yōfi “beauty/great!”, t.ov “good/OK”); verbs
whose tense is ambiguous (e.g., baP “come” can
be either present or past); etc.

We manually disambiguated 18 of the 304 files
in the corpus, and used them to train a POS tag-
ger with tools that are embedded in CLAN (POS-
TRAIN and POST). We then automatically disam-
biguated the remaining files. Preliminary evalua-
tion shows 80% accuracy on ambiguous tokens.

Future Plans Our ultimate plan is to add syn-
tactic annotation to the transcripts. We have de-
vised a syntactic annotation scheme, akin to the
existing scheme used for the English section of
CHILDES (Sagae et al., 2010), but with special
consideration for Hebrew constructions that are
common in the corpora. We have recently begun
to annotate the corpora according to this scheme.

Acknowledgments This research was sup-
ported by Grant No. 2007241 from the United
States-Israel Binational Science Foundation
(BSF). We are grateful to Arnon Lazerson for
developing the conversion script, and to Shai
Gretz for helping with the manual annotation.

21



Figure 1: A fragment of the annotated corpus

References
Ruth A. Berman and Jürgen Weissenborn. Acquisi-

tion of word order: A crosslinguistic study. Final
Report. German-Israel Foundation for Research and
Development (GIF), 1991.

Alon Itai and Shuly Wintner. Language resources for
Hebrew. Language Resources and Evaluation, 42
(1):75–98, March 2008.

Brian MacWhinney. The CHILDES system. Ameri-
can Journal of Speech Language Pathology, 5:5–14,
1996.

Brian MacWhinney. The CHILDES Project: Tools
for Analyzing Talk. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Mahwah, NJ, third edition, 2000.

Bracha Nir, Brian MacWhinney, and Shuly Wintner.
A morphologically-analyzed CHILDES corpus of
Hebrew. In Proceedings of the Seventh conference
on International Language Resources and Evalua-
tion (LREC’10), pages 1487–1490, Valletta, Malta,
May 2010. European Language Resources Associ-
ation (ELRA). ISBN 2-9517408-6-7.

Kenji Sagae, Eric Davis, Alon Lavie, Brian MacWhin-
ney, and Shuly Wintner. Morphosyntactic
annotation of CHILDES transcripts. Jour-
nal of Child Language, 37(3):705–729, 2010.
doi: 10.1017/S0305000909990407. URL
http://journals.cambridge.org/
article_S0305000909990407.

22


