










































Expressive NLG for Next-Generation Learning Environments: Language, Affect, and Narrative


INLG 2012 Proceedings of the 7th International Natural Language Generation Conference, page 2,
Utica, May 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Invited Speaker

Dr. James Lester
North Carolina State University

Expressive NLG for Next-Generation Learning Environments: Language, Affect, and
 Narrative

Abstract

Recent years have seen the appearance of adaptive learning technologies that offer significant potential  
for bringing about fundamental improvements in education. A promising development in this arena is the 
emergence of  narrative-centered learning environments,  which integrate  the inferential  capabilities of  
intelligent  tutoring  systems  with  the  rich  gameplay  supported  by  commercial  game  engines.  While  
narrative-centered learning environments have demonstrated effectiveness in both student learning and  
engagement,  their  capabilities  will  increase  dramatically  with  expressive  NLG.  In  this  talk  we  will 
introduce the principles motivating the design of narrative-centered learning environments, discuss the  
role of NLG in narrative-centered learning, consider the interaction of NLG, affect, and learning, and 
explore how next-generation learning environments will push the envelope in expressive NLG.

Biography

Dr. James Lester is a professor Department of Computer Science North Carolina State University.  He  
received   the  B.A.  (Highest  Honors),  M.S.C.S.,  and  Ph.D.  Degrees  in  Computer  Science  from the 
University of Texas at Austin and the B.A in History from Baylor University.  A member of Phi Beta  
Kappa, he has served as Program Chair for the ACM conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (2001),  
Program Chair for the International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (2004),  Conference Co-
Chair for the International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents (2008), and on the editorial board of  
Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems  (1997-2007). His research focuses on intelligent tutoring 
systems, computational linguistics, and intelligent user interfaces.  It has been recognized by several Best  
Paper awards. His research interests include intelligent game-based learning environments, computational  
models of narrative, affective computing, creativity-enhancing technologies, and tutorial dialogue. He is 
Editor-In-Chief of the International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education.

2


