










































A Serious Game for Building a Portuguese Lexical-Semantic Network


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on the People’s Web Meets NLP, ACL 2012, pages 10–14,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Serious Game for Building a Portuguese Lexical-Semantic Network

Mathieu Mangeot♠ Carlos Ramisch♠♣
♠ GETALP — LIG, University of Grenoble (France)
♣ Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (Brazil)

FirstName.LastName@imag.fr

Abstract

This paper presents a game with a purpose
for the construction of a Portuguese lexical-
semantic network. The network creation is
implicit, as players collaboratively create links
between words while they have fun. We de-
scribe the principles and implementation of
the platform. As this is an ongoing project,
we discuss challenges and long-term goals.We
present the current network in terms a quanti-
tative and qualitative analysis, comparing it to
other resources. Finally, we describe our tar-
get applications.

1 Introduction

The creation of lexical resources like wordnets is
time consuming and very costly in terms of man-
power. Funding agencies and publishing houses are
very reluctant to launch new projects. Ironically, in
our globalized nowadays world, the need of such re-
sources for communication is growing. In this con-
text, there is hope for building resources via commu-
nities of voluntary contributors. But is it possible to
use the Wikipedia paradigm for building a rich and
broad-coverage lexical resource reusable by humans
and machines in NLP projects? Wordnets are very
interesting resources, but they suffer of several limi-
tations. First, even if the English wordnet (Miller et
al., 1990) is open source and freely available, this is
not the case of the EuroWordnets. Second, wordnets
and other manually built thesauri are based on lin-
guists’ intuition. Information about up-to-date en-
tities (Facebook, Costa Concordia, etc.) and real-
world facts are missing. Third, relations between the
synsets of wordnets are of limited semantic kinds.

We would like to build other relations at the syntac-
tic and lexical level (e.g. collocations).

Our first goal is to build a rich lexical network
for the Portuguese language. The relations between
nodes (words) is represented in a sophisticated way,
by using lexical-semantical functions à la Mel’čuk
(Mel’čuk, 1995) such as the Magn function repre-
senting the notion of intensifier: Magn(smoker) =
heavy, Magn(bachelor) = confirmed. The resulting
network represents the usage of the language, not the
norm. Thus, it may contain frequent spelling mis-
takes or neologisms. This resource is open-source
and freely available. It can be used in several appli-
cations: lexicography, printed dictionary, text gen-
eration, semantic information extraction, ontology
learning, etc. The construction of the resource is
done indirectly by contributors through a game.

In the next section, the concept of using serious
games for building NLP resources will be explained
(§ 2). The following section will detail the construc-
tion of the Portuguese version of the game (§ 3). Af-
terwards, we will discuss some preliminary results
(§ 4) and finally we present future work (§ 5).

2 Serious Games and NLP

The concept of human contribution, collaboration
and computation has been utilized in many applica-
tions and scenarios. The work of Luis von Ahn made
a breakthrough, especially in ESP game (von Ahn,
2006; von Ahn and Dabbish, 2008). Human com-
putation (crowdsourcing, volunteer contribution) is
now seriously considered to be able to solve large
computational problems (Speer, 2007). The idea
of collecting massive contributions from volunteers
through an online game took off recently. Nowa-

10



days, many serious games or GWAP “Game With
A Purpose” (von Ahn and Dabbish, 2008) projects
exist in different domains, like Open Mind Com-
mon Sense (Singh et al., 2002), ESP games, Learner
(Chklovski and Gil, 2005), or CYC project 1. Con-
cerning more specifically lexical networks, similar
projects exist like “small world of words”2 launched
in 2003 by KU Leuwen. For the moment, this
project is limited to building relations of only one
kind: associated ideas.

Looking at the Wikipedia project, the idea of
building lexical resources with the help voluntary
contributors comes to mind. Unfortunately, the
Wikipedia paradigm cannot be easily applied to
build a dictionary with rich lexical information. In
Wikipedia, articles do not need to follow the same
structure, while in a dictionary, the same structure
and linguistic theory must be applied to all the arti-
cles. Moreover, while it is easy to contribute to an
encyclopedia entry, not everyone has the linguistic
knowledge to contribute to a dictionary. On read-
ing Wiktionary entries, one realizes that the quality
cannot be compared to existing paper dictionaries.

When looking at people playing online games
through the Internet, one could think that it would
be interesting to use this time for playing a game that
would build lexical data in the background, specifi-
cally data that is difficult to find in existing dictionar-
ies. In this context, the idea of a serious lexical game
emerged. The first version was launched for French
in 2007 (Lafourcade and Joubert, 2008), which has
now around 250,000 nodes and 1,330,000 relations.

Our game aims at building a rich and evolving
lexical network comparable to the famous English
wordnet (Miller et al., 1990). The principle is as
follows: a player A initiates a game, an instruc-
tion is displayed concerning a type of competency
corresponding to a lexical relation (e.g. synonym,
antonym, domain, intensifier) and a word W is cho-
sen randomly in the database. Player A has then a
limited amount of time for giving propositions that
answer the instruction applied to the word W .

The same word W with the same instruction is
proposed to another player B and the process is the
same. The two half-games of player A and player

1http://game.cyc.com/
2http://www.smallworldofwords.com/

B are asynchronous. For each common answer in
A and B’s propositions, the two players earn a cer-
tain amount of points and credits. For the word W ,
the common answers of A and B players are entered
into the database. This process participates in the
construction of a lexical network linking terms with
typed and weighted relations, validated by pairs of
players. The relations are typed by the instructions
given to the players and weighted with the number
of pair players that proposed them. A more detailed
description of the game in French is provided by
Lafourcade and Zampa (2009).

3 Portuguese Version

The game interface was translated by a native Por-
tuguese speaker. A preliminary step was to interna-
tionalize the text messages by separating them from
the interface and storing them in an array, allowing
for easy translation in any other language. Simul-
taneously, we developed, and tested an easy step-
by-step installer which makes the deployment of the
game as easy as installing a content management
system software on a server.

A list of seed words must be provided from which
the game will chose the proposed terms at the be-
ginning. As the game evolves, people suggest new
words not necessarily in the initial dictionary, thus
helping the vocabulary to grow. Two resources
were used to compose this list of seed words. The
first is the DELAS–PB dictionary from NILC (Mu-
niz, 2004). All nouns, verbs, adjectives and ad-
verbs were extracted, resulting in 67,062 words. As
these include a large number of rare words, pilot
tests showed that the game became annoying when
the player ignored the meaning of most of the pro-
posed words. Therefore, the number of Google
hits for every word was obtained and only the 20%
most common ones were kept, resulting in a list of
13,413 words. To this, the entries of the Brazilian
Open Mind Common Sense network (Anacleto et
al., 2008) were added, in order to allow future com-
parison with this resource. Apertium’s lt-toolbox3

was used in order to obtain the most frequent POS
tag for each entry, resulting in 5,129 nouns, 3,672
verbs, 1,176 adjectives, and 201 adverbs. The union
with the preceding dictionary resulted in a final seed

3http://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/Lttoolbox

11



list of 20,854 words.
Once the game is deployed, one of the big chal-

lenges is to gather volunteer players. We gave pre-
sentations about the game in the academic context
and spread the word among Portuguese teachers, ar-
guing that the game could be used to enrich the vo-
cabulary of their students. We also created a Face-
book page and linked it in our website. One way to
motivate subscribed players to come back is to offer
gift words. Each player can offer a friend a game
with a specific word. For example, if I have a friend
fan of baseball, I will offer him/her this word.

Once the first challenge of gathering a commu-
nity of players is overcome, the main difficulty is
to keep the motivation going. For succeeding, the
project needs a person that will animate the com-
munity, motivate gamers and publicize the game for
recruiting new contributors. Games were launched
in other languages, but due to social factors (lack of
community animator), they are in a sleeping state.4

Internally, each word is represented as a node in
a graph. The directed edges are the lexico-syntactic
relations created by the game. Each edge has a type
(associated idea, hypernym, hyponym, typical ob-
ject, etc.) and a weight, corresponding to the num-
ber of times the two words co-occurred. Each node
has also a weight corresponding to its popularity
(proportional to its degree). Part of speech is en-
coded as edges going from a term to special POS
nodes. In addition to the standard attributes, each
edge also contains counters that represent the coun-
try of players who contributed to its creation. There-
fore, we would like to investigate dialectal varia-
tions of Portuguese in Portugal, Brasil and other lu-
sophone countries. This information can be impor-
tant for using the resource in semantic extraction,
according to the variation of the analyzed text.

4 Preliminary Evaluation

To date, 61 players participated in the game. In this
preliminary quantitative and qualitative evaluation,
we consider only the nodes for which some rela-
tion was created, thus excluding all the seed words
that were not connected to other words yet. Figure 1
shows a fragment of the network. Green edges rep-
resent associated words, red edges represent hypo-

4http://jeuxdemots.liglab.fr/

Figure 1: Overview of part of the network.

and hypernyms. Most relations created are standard,
like feijó, andré, amélia and jean are associated with
name. However, non-standard relations are also cre-
ated, like Cuba is the antonym of United States or
tatoo is associated to eternal. While purists may
consider these as noise, we regard it as relations rep-
resenting real-world semantics and language use.

The network contains 19,473 word nodes and
20,854 occurrences of POS relations (a word may
have several POS). Among those, 347 nodes do
not contain POS edges, meaning that they are new
words. A sample of the 20 most popular terms is
presented in Table 1. They include common hyper-
nym nodes like thing and person and animal but also
everyday language words like drink, car and sea.

From all the nodes in the network, only 1,408
(7.23%) have a degree greater than 1 (excluding
POS edges). For the remaining 18,065 nodes, no
relation was created. Figure 2 shows user activity
in number of games played per day. The number of
games is unsteady but it does not seem to increase
nor decrease. Analysis of the log files show that
players tend to participate a lot and the beginning
and then, after one or two weeks, they stop. Thus, it
is important not only to attract new players but also
to keep them active.

Word w Word w Word w

comida 110 hotel 80 pintura 74
*** 100 bebida 80 água 72
pessoa 96 mulher 78 porta 72
dinheiro 92 casa 78 mar 72
carne 82 carro 78 empresa 72
nome 80 animal 76 coisa 72

Table 1: Top-20 most connected words and weights (w).

12



25/12 02/01 10/01 18/01 26/01 03/02 11/02 19/02 27/02 06/03 14/03 22/03 30/03 07/04

Date

0

10

20

30

40

50

Nu
m

be
r o

f g
am

es

Figure 2: User activity from Dec 27, 2011 to Apr 4, 2012.

For the moment, the most common edge is of the
associated idea type. It corresponds to more than
80% of the edges. Some players bought compe-
tences in hypo- and hypernym, which together ac-
count for 15.39% of the edges. As these relations
are dual, it would be easy to infer new edges.The
total number of edges acquired is 1,344.

There is one large connected component in the
graph and a large number of small connected com-
ponents with two or three nodes. The total number
of connected components in the graph is 281 (ig-
noring disconnected nodes), yielding a high mod-
ularity of 0.898. The average degree of a node is
0.955, as more than 750 nodes have only one rela-
tion and around 200 have 2 relations, and the degree
decreases exponentially.

The trend is that, as more relations are added,
the current small components will be attached to
the larger ones, but also more smaller unconnected
graphs will be created. However, we expect that
once a large proportion of the nodes has been cov-
ered, the network will converge to a single large con-
nected component.

For the moment, the coverage of our resource is
limited. But a previous comparison done for the
French game versus the French Euro WordNet (F-
EWN) was very promising. The french game con-
tains 10 times more terms than F-EWN (240,000 vs

Relation type Count %

Associated 1,126 83.78
Hypernym 115 8.56
Hyponym 81 6.83
Domain 12 0.89
Antonym 10 0.74

Total 1,344 100

Table 2: Number of edges according to types.

23,000) and relations (1,359,000 vs 100,000). On a
sample of 100 terms frequently played in the game,
3% of them contain errors (spelling mistakes or con-
fusions). Data collected with the French game bring
a lot of originality but the precision rate is much
lower that data collected manually in F-EWN.

Our resource now only contains as much as 0.91%
of the nodes in English Wordnet. As precise num-
bers about the size of the Portuguese wordnet (Mar-
rafa et al., 2011) are not available, we also queried
the online service for the nodes in our network. We
found out that 35.87% of the nodes are covered by
the Portuguese wordnet. Thus, we believe that col-
laborative methods can considerably speed up the
creation of lexical resources, as in only three months
we already have some information complimentary to
a 13-years old project.

5 Future work

We presented the deployment and a preliminary
evaluation of JeuxDeMots–pt,5 a game that aims
at the construction of a Portuguese lexical-semantic
network. The coverage of the resource is still lim-
ited, but the network keeps growing.

For the moment, we have made available a simple
interface in which the user can query for a word and
retrieve all the words related to it. For instance, if
one searches for the word loja (store), the result is:

• store is a place
• cell phone store is a store
• store is associated to buy shirt
• store is associated to sell toys
• store is associated to manager
• store is associated to clothes

The creation of the network is much less onerous
and faster (and more entertaining) than traditional
thesauri construction, that can take years of the work
of many experts. Our long-term goal is the creation
of a large network comparable to existing resources
for English. This resource would be extremely use-
ful in many NLP tasks. Once we will have enough
data, our goal is to apply it to many other applica-
tions like information extraction, WSD, semantic in-
ference and textual entailment. This would help to
bridge the gap of missing lexical resources for NLP
applications dealing with Portuguese language.

5http://jeuxdemots.liglab.fr/por

13



Acknowledgements

This work was partly funded by the CAMELEON
project (CAPES–COFECUB 707-11).

References
Junia Coutinho Anacleto, Aparecido Fabiano P. de Car-

valho, Alexandre M. Ferreira, Eliane N. Pereira, and
Alessandro J. F. Carlos. 2008. Common sense based
applications to advance personalized learning. In
PROC of the IEEE International Conference on Sys-
tems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC 2008), pages 3244–
3249, Singapore.

Timothy Chklovski and Yolanda Gil. 2005. An anal-
ysis of knowledge collected from volunteer contribu-
tors. In Twentieth National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI-05), Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Mathieu Lafourcade and Alain Joubert. 2008. Jeuxde-
mots : un prototype ludique pour l’émergence de re-
lations entre termes. In JADT 2008 : 9es Journées
internationales d’Analyse statistique des Données
Textuelles, pages 657–666, Lyon, France, 12-14 mars.

Mathieu Lafourcade and Virginie Zampa. 2009. Jeuxde-
mots and pticlic: games for vocabulary assessment and
lexical acquisition. In Computer Games, Multimedia
& Allied technology 09 (CGAT’09), Singapore, 11th-
13th May.

Palmira Marrafa, Raquel Amaro, and Sara Mendes.
2011. Wordnet.pt global – extending wordnet.pt to
portuguese varieties. In Proc. of the First Workshop
on Algorithms and Resources for Modelling of Di-
alects and Language Varieties, pages 70–74, Edin-
burgh, Scotland, July. ACL.

Igor Mel’čuk. 1995. Lexical functions: A tool for
the description of lexical relations in the lexicon. In
Leo Wanner, editor, Lexical Functions in Lexicogra-
phy and Natural Language Processing, pages 37–102.
John Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.

George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane Fell-
baum, Derek Gross, and Katherine Miller. 1990. In-
troduction to wordnet: an on-line lexical database. In-
ternational Journal of Lexicography, 3(4):235–244.

Marcelo C. M. Muniz. 2004. A construção de recursos
linguistico-computacionais para o portugues do brasil:
o projeto de unitex-pb. Master’s thesis, Instituto de
Ciencias Matematicas de Sao Carlos, USP, São Carlos,
SP, Brazil.

Push Singh, Thomas Lin, et al. 2002. Open mind
common sense: Knowledge acquisition from the gen-
eral public. In Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Ontologies, Databases, and Applica-
tions of Semantics for Large Scale Information Sys-
tems, Irvine, CA, USA.

Robert Speer. 2007. Open mind commons: An inquis-
itive approach to learning common sense. In Work-
shop on Common Sense and Intelligent User Inter-
faces, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA., January 28-31.

Luis von Ahn and Laura Dabbish. 2008. General tech-
niques for designing games with a purpose. Commu-
nications of the ACM, pages 58–67.

Luis von Ahn. 2006. Games with a purpose. IEEE Com-
puter Magazine, pages 96–98.

14


