










































Building an Arabic Multiword Expressions Repository


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 24–29,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Building an Arabic Multiword Expressions Repository 

 
 

Abdelati Hawwari, Kfir Bar, Mona Diab 
Center for Computational Learning Systems 

Columbia University 
{ah3019,kfir,mdiab}@ccls.columbia.edu 

 

 
Abstract 

We introduce a list of Arabic multiword 
expressions (MWE) collected from various 
dictionaries. The MWEs are grouped based 
on their syntactic type. Every constituent 
word in the expressions is manually 
annotated with its full context-sensitive 
morphological analysis. Some of the 
expressions contain semantic variables as 
place holders for words that play the same 
semantic role. In addition, we have 
automatically annotated a large corpus of 
Arabic text using a pattern-matching 
algorithm that considers some morpho-
syntactic features as expressed by a highly 
inflected language, such as Arabic. A 
sample part of the corpus is manually 
evaluated and the results are reported in 
this paper. 

1 Introduction 
A multiword expression (MWE) refers to a 
multiword unit or a collocation of words that co-
occur together statistically more than chance. A 
MWE is a cover term for different types of 
collocations, which vary in their transparency and 
fixedness. MWEs are pervasive in natural 
language, especially in web based texts and speech 
genres. Identifying MWEs and understanding their 
meaning is essential to language understanding, 
hence they are of crucial importance for any 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications 
that aim at handling robust language meaning and 
use. In fact, the seminal paper (Sag et al., 2002) 
refers to this problem as a key issue for the 
development of high-quality NLP applications. 
MWEs are classified based on their syntactic 

constructions. Among the various classes, one can 
find the Verb Noun Constructions (VNC), Noun 
Noun Construction (NNC) and others. A MWE 
typically has an idiosyncratic meaning that is more 
or different from the meaning of its component 
words. In this paper we focus on MWEs in Arabic. 
Like many other Semitic languages, Arabic is 
highly inflected; words are derived from a root and 
a pattern (template), combined with prefixes, 
suffixes and circumfixes. As opposed to English 
equivalents, Arabic MWEs can be expressed in a 
large number of forms, expressing various 
inflections and derivations of the words while 
maintaining the exact same meaning, for example, 
>gmD [flAn] Eynyh En [Al>mr] 1 , “[one] 
disregarded/overlooked/ignored [the issue]”, 
literally, closed one’s eyes, vs. >gmDt [flAnp] 
EynyhA En [Al>mr], “[one_fem] 
disregarded/overlooked/ignored_fem [the issue]”, 
where the predicate takes on the feminine 
inflection. However, in many cases, there are 
morphological features that cannot be changed in 
different contexts, for example, mkrh >xAk lA bTl, 
“forced with no choice”, in this example, 
regardless of context, the words of the MWE do 
not agree in number and gender with the 
surrounding context. These are considered frozen 
expressions. One of the challenges in building 
MWE list for Arabic is to identify those features 
and document them in every MWE. Our resource 
is available for download.2  

We have manually collected a large number of 
MWEs from various Arabic dictionaries, which are 
based on MSA corpora, and then filtered by Arabic 
                                                
1 We use the Buckwalter transliteration for rendering Arabic 
script in Romanization through out the paper (Buckwalter, 
2002). 
2 To get a direct access, please send a request to one of the 
authors 

24



native linguists. We then classified them based on 
their syntactic constructions, considering the 
relevant syntactic phenomena expressed in Arabic. 
The MWEs were manually annotated with the 
context-sensitive SAMA (Maamouri, 2010) 
morphological analysis for each word to assist an 
automated identification of MWEs in a large 
corpus of text. Part of the Arabic Gigaword 4.0 
(Parker, 2009) is processed accordingly and the 
MWEs are annotated based on a deterministic 
algorithm considering different variants of every 
MWE in our list. There are diverse tasks that 
require a corpus with annotated MWEs, which 
have not been addressed in Arabic due to the lack 
of such a resource. However, a lot of attention is 
put on those tasks when implemented in English 
and other languages. Among those tasks, 
classifying MWEs in a running text is the most 
common one. Diab and Bhutada (2009) applied a 
supervised learning framework to the problem of 
classifying token level English MWEs in context. 
They used the annotated corpus provided by Cook 
(2008), a resource of almost 3000 English 
sentences annotated with VNC usage at the token 
level. Katz and Giesbrecht (2006) carried out a 
vector similarity comparison between the context 
of an English MWE and that of the constituent 
words using Latent Semantic Analysis to 
determine if the expression is idiomatic or not. In 
work by Hashimoto and Kawahara (2008), they 
addressed token classification into idiomatic versus 
literal for Japanese MWEs of all types. They 
annotated a corpus of 102K sentences, and used it 
to train a supervised classifier for MWEs. Using 
MWEs in machine translation is another 
application. Carpuat and Diab (2010) studied the 
effect of integrating English MWEs with a 
statistical translation system. They used the 
WordNet 3.0 lexical database (Fellbaum, 1998) as 
the main source for MWEs. Attia et al., in 2010, 
extracted Arabic MWEs from various resources. 
They focused only on nominal MWEs and used 
diverse techniques for automatic MWE extraction 
from cross-lingual parallel Wikipedia titles, 
machine-translated English MWEs taken from the 
English WordNet and the Arabic Gigaword 4.0 
corpus. They found a large number of MWEs, 
however only a few of them were evaluated.  

In this paper, we describe the process of 
manually creating a relatively comprehensive 
Arabic MWE list. We use the resulting list to tag 

MWE occurrences in context in a corpus.  
 
The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 

we describe the process of creating the Arabic 
MWE list. Section 3 discusses the algorithm for 
automatic deterministic tagging of MWEs in 
running text, based on pattern matching. Sections 4 
and 5 summarize the results of applying the 
pattern-matching algorithm on a corpus. Finally, 
we conclude in Section 6. 

2 Arabic MWE List 
Our Arabic MWE list is created based on a 
collection of about 5,000 expressions, which is 
manually extracted from various Arabic 
dictionaries (Abou Saad, 1987; Seeny et al., 1996; 
Dawod, 2003; Fayed, 2007). Each MWE is 
preprocessed by the following steps: 1) cleaning 
punctuations and unnecessary characters, 2) 
breaking alternative expressions into individual 
entries, and 3) running MADA (Habash and 
Rambow, 2005; Roth et al, 2008) on each MWE 
individually for finding the context-sensitive 
morphological analysis for every word. Some of 
the extracted MWEs are originally enriched with 
placeholder generic words that play the same 
semantic role in the context of the MWE. That set 
of generic words is manually normalized and 
reduced to a group of types, as shown in Table 2. 
 
Generic Type Semantic 

Role 
Example 

flAn  
“so-and-so” 

a person 

Agent/Patient qr flAn EynA  
“pleased 

someone“ 
k*A 

“something“ 
an object 

Goal ElY HsAb k*A  
“at the expense of 

that/this” 
<mr 

“something” 
an issue 

Source <mr Abn ywmh 
“something very 

new“ 
 

Table 1 – Generic Types 
 
Generic words are sometimes provided with or 
without additional clitics. For example, in the 
MWE lEbt [bflAn] AldnyA, literally, “the world 
played-passive with so-and-so:”, which could be 
translated as “life played havoc with so-and-so”,  
the word bflan “to so-and-so” has the preposition b 
“with” cliticized to it.  Every word that substitutes 
a generic word (an instantiation) has to comply 

25



with the morphological features of the context 
surrounding it.  

The automatic preprocessing steps we ran on the 
list are followed by a series of manual ones. We 
found that the short context we had for every 
MWE was not sufficient for MADA to return the 
correct analysis with reasonable precision.  
Therefore, we had to go over the results and 
manually select the correct analysis for each word 
in every MWE. Generic words are also assigned 
with their correct analysis in context.  

The class of each MWE is assigned manually. 
Arabic is highly inflected; therefore many MWE 
classes can be identified. However, in this paper, 
we focus only on the major ones. The following 
classes are used: Verb-Verb Construction (VVC) 
as in >xZ [flAn] w>ETY “give and take”; Verb-
Noun Construction (VNC), for example, md [flAn] 
Aljswr “[someone] built bridges” as in extending 
the arms of peace; Verb-Particle Construction 
(VPC) as in mDY [flAn] fy “[someone] continues 
working on”; Noun-Noun Construction (NNC) as 
in Enq {lzjAjp “bottleneck”; Adjective Noun 
Construction (ANC) as in [flAn] wAsE {l&fq 
“[someone] broad-minded”.  

The final list comprises 4,209 MWE types. 
Table 2 presents the total number of MWE types 
for each category.  
 

MWE Category Type Number 
VVC 41 
VNC 1974 
VPC 670 
NNC 1239 
ANC 285 

 

Table 2 – Arabic MWEs by category types 

3 Deterministic Identification of Arabic 
MWEs 

We developed a pattern-matching algorithm for 
discovering MWEs in Arabic running text. The 
main goal of this algorithm is to deterministically 
identify instances of MWEs from the list in a large 
Arabic corpus, considering some morphological as 
well as syntactic phenomena. We use the Arabic 
Gigaword 4.0 (AGW). 3  To capture the large 

                                                
3 
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/catalogEntry.jsp?catalogId
=LDC2009T30 

number of morpho-syntactic variations of the 
MWEs in context, the pattern-matching algorithm 
is designed to use some of the information 
available from the selected morphological analysis 
for every MWE word, as well as shallow-syntactic 
information that we automatically assigned for 
every word in the corpus.  

One of our immediate intentions is to use the list 
of MWEs for learning how to statistically classify 
new ones in running text. Therefore, we begin here 
with annotating a large part of the AGW corpus  
with all the occurrences a MWE given in the list. 
In order to make some shallow-syntactic features 
available for the pattern-matching algorithm, we 
pre-processed the AGW with AMIRAN, an 
updated version of the AMIRA tools (Diab et al., 
2004, 2007). AMIRAN is a tool for finding the 
context-sensitive morpho-syntactic information. 
AMIRAN combines AMIRA output with 
morphological analyses provided by SAMA. 
AMIRAN is also enriched with Named-Entity-
Recognition (NER) class tags provided by 
(Benajiba et al., 2008). For every word, AMIRAN 
is capable of identifying the clitics, diacritized 
lemma, stem, full part-of-speech tag excluding 
case and mood, base-phrase chunks and NER tags. 
Part of this information was used in previous work 
for processing English MWEs.  

When looking for Arabic MWEs in the pre-
processed corpus, there are two important issues 
that the pattern-matching algorithm is addressing: 
morphological variations and gaps. We now 
elaborate further on each one of them. 

 
Morphological variations: As mentioned 

above, Arabic is highly inflected; clitics may be 
attached to reflect definiteness, conjunction, 
possessive pronouns and prepositions. This fact 
forces the pattern-matching algorithm to match 
words on a more abstract level then their surface 
form. The algorithm considers different levels of 
representation for each of the words. Those levels 
are matched based on the information provided by 
AMIRAN on corpus words, on the one hand, and 
the morphological analyses that are selected 
manually for every MWE word on the other hand. 
In the experiment reported here, we match words 
on the lemma level. The lemma provided by 
AMIRAN and the one manually chosen by 
MADA/SAMA analyses are taken from the same 
pool, hence matching is enabled. It is worth noting 

26



that in Arabic, the lemma is a generic name for a 
group of words that can be derived from one of its 
underlying stems, sharing the same meaning. For 
instance, the noun bnt  “girl” and its plural form 
bnAt “girls” are reduced to the same lemma form 
bnt. Obviously, perfect and imperfect forms of a 
verb are also assigned to the same lemma. A 
lemma form does not include the clitics; for every 
corpus word, this information is recorded by 
AMIRAN. Since clitics are in many cases 
important for matching MWES, the pattern-
matching algorithm considers them. For example, 
in the MWE: <x* [flAn] bAlv<r, “[so-and-so] 
requited”, the proclitic b “with” expressed in the 
last word, is important for matching.  

 
Gaps: Sometimes a MWE can be found with 

additional words such as modifiers that are not part 
of the original MWE expression words. For 
instance, the MWE: wDEt AlHrb <wzArhA, “the 
war is over”, is found in the text: wDEt AlHrb 
AlEAlmyp AlvAnyp <wzArhA, “the second world 
war is over”. The nominal modifiers AlEAlmyp 
AlvAnyp (“second world…”) are not present in the 
original MWE taken from the list, and therefore 
considered as gap fillers.  To be able to identify 
gaps of MWEs in context, the pattern-matching 
algorithm uses the part-of-speech and base-phrase 
tags provided for every word by AMIRAN. In the 
reported experiment, we allowed an MWE to be 
matched over gaps of noun-phrases 
complementing MWE words. In other words, we 
allowed every MWE noun to be matched with a 
complete non-recursive noun-phrase that appears 
in the text. The matching is performed only on the 
first noun of the containing noun-phrase, 
restricting our approach using only noun-phrases 
expressing the head noun in the beginning of a 
phrase. For instance, in the previous example 
AlHrb AlEAlmyp AlvAnyp, “the Second World 
War”, is a noun-phrase with a first noun word 
AlHrb “the war”. This noun-phrase matches the 
word AlHrb “the war” from the list MWE wDEt 
AlHrb <wzArhA “the war is over”, hence allowing 
the entire MWE to be found. Obviously, allowing 
gaps of any types would have increased the recall 
but on the other hand a large number of false 
positive MWEs would have been identified. 
Currently, only noun-phrases are considered as 
potential gap fillers. Considering other phrase 
types is left for future work. We plan on 

identifying the types of potential gap fillers and 
correlating them with the various MWE types. 

One of the remaining problems with identifying 
MWEs deterministically in a running text is that 
the exact MWE words can be found in a text, 
however given the context, in some cases they are 
not idiomatic. This is the case for many VNCs for 
instance. Hence, they are not a unified concept – a 
word with gaps -- as in our definition of a MWE 
usage.  Accordingly a token MWE classifier is 
required to identify such cases, teasing idiomatic 
from literal MWEs apart.  

4 Building MWE Annotated Corpus 
We ran the pattern-matching algorithm on a large 
part of the AGW after we pre-processed the 
documents with AMIRAN. Overall, we had 250 
million tokens and found 481,131 MWE instances. 
Table 3 summarizes the exact number of MWEs 
that we found, grouped by their class type. 

The matching was performed on the lemma 
level constraining the search with clitic matching. 
Gaps are restricted only to noun-phrases at this 
time, as mentioned above. The output of this 
process follows the Inside Outside Beginning 
(IOB) annotation scheme. In fact, the output files 
are based on the same input AMIRAN files, 
enriched with O, B/I-MWE tags as found by the 
pattern-matching algorithm. Figure 1 shows how a 
complete sentence, containing a MWE, is 
annotated by the pattern-matching algorithm. 
 

MWE Category Type Number 
VVC 576 
VNC 64,504 
VPC 75,844 
NNC 316,393 
ANC 23,814 

 

Table 3 – Annotated MWEs by class 

5 Evaluation 
The annotations are manually evaluated by a native 
speaker of Arabic. We sub sampled the corpus and 
examined each MWE instance that is identified by 
the pattern-matching algorithm. Table 4 shows our 
findings. Each row represents one category type. 
The middle column shows the number of instances 
evaluated, followed by the number of unique 
MWE types. In the last column, the number of 
correct instances as it was examined in context, is 

27



reported. The correctness of an instance is 
determined by its context. Remember that MWEs 
are not only matched statically; generic words, 
gaps and inflections may cause the pattern-
matching algorithm to annotate expressions with 
an MWE type, incorrectly. 
 

Word Lemma POS NER MWE 
swlAnA suwlAnA NN I-OR O 

: : PUNC O O 
AlAtHAd <it~iHAd NN B-GP O 

AlAwrwby Auwrub~iy NN I-GP O 
w+ wa+ CC O O 

wA$nTn wA$inoTuwn NNP B-GP O 
ysEyAn saEaY-a VBPMD3 O O 

l+ li+ IN O O 
AyjAd AiyjAd NN O O 
Alyp |liy~ap NNFS O O 

l+ li+ IN O O 
wqf waqof NN O O 

ATlAq Talaq NN O B-MW 
Al+ Al+ DET O I-MW 
nAr nAr NN O I-MW 

 

Figure 1 – Annotated sentence example 
 
 

MWE 
Type 

Evaluated Instances Correct 
Instances 

VVC 111 (2 types) 2 
VNC 157 (34 types) 154 
VPC 161 (32 types) 125 
NNC 155 (26 types) 154 

 

Table 4 – Evaluation Results 
 
The evaluation set is relatively small. Nevertheless, 
one can see that in most cases the annotations are 
correct. For the VNC, the pattern matching 
algorithm achieves an accuracy of 98%, for VPC, 
we get an accuracy of 77.6%, and NNC we achieve 
an accuracy of 99%. It is worth noting that NNCs 
are the only category that employs the gapping. 
The VVC category contains only a few MWE 
types, in the sampled set we evaluated 111 
instances of merely two different types from 
which, one was constantly identified incorrectly by 
the algorithm and it constitutes the majority of the 
instances (109 instances). 

6 Conclusions 
In this paper we have introduced a list of MWEs in 
Arabic. The MWEs are enriched with 
morphological information that was carefully 

assigned to every word. A large part of the Arabic 
Gigaword 4.0 was deterministically annotated 
using a pattern-matching algorithm, considering 
morphological variations as expressed by Arabic 
and some potential gaps. A sample of the corpus 
was manually evaluated with encouraging results. 
Building both resources is a first step toward our 
research in the field of Arabic MWEs. Classifying 
the level of idiomaticity of the part of the MWE 
classes is one direction we are currently exploring. 

Acknowledgment 

This paper is based upon work supported by the 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA) under Contract No. HR0011-12-C-0014. 
Any opinions, findings and conclusions or 
recommendations expressed in this paper are those 
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the 
views of DARPA.  

References  
Attia, Mohammed, Antonio Toral, Lamia Tounsi, Pavel 

Pecina and Josef van Genabith. 2010. Automatic 
extraction of Arabic multiword expressions. In 
Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation, LREC-2010, Valletta, 
Malta. 

Abou Saad, Ahmed. 1987. A Dictionary of Arabic 
Idiomatic Expressions (mu’jm altrakib wala’barat 
alastlahiah ala’rbiah alkdim mnha walmould). Dar El 
Ilm Lilmalayin. 

Benajiba, Yassine, Mona Diab and Paolo Rosso. 2008. 
Arabic Named Entity Recognition: An SVM-based 
approach. In Proceedings of the Arab International 
Conference on Information Technology, ACIT-2008, 
Tunisia. 

Buckwalter, Tim. 2002. Buckwalter Arabic 
Morphological Analyzer Version 1.0. LDC catalog 
number LDC2002L49, ISBN 1-58563-257-0. 

Carpuat, Marine and Mona Diab. 2010. Task-based 
Evaluation of Multiword Expressions: a Pilot Study 
in Statistical Machine Translation. HLT-NAACL. 

Cook, Paul, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson. 
2008. The VNC-Tokens Dataset. In Proceedings of 
the LREC Workshop on Towards a Shared Task for 
Multiword Expressions (MWE 2008), Marrakech, 
Morocco. 

28



Dawood, Mohammed. 2003. A Dictionary of Arabic 
Contemporary Idioms (mu’jm alta’bir alastlahiat). 
Dar Ghareeb. 

Diab, Mona and Pravin Bhutada. 2009. Verb noun 
construction MWE token supervised classification. In 
Workshop on Multiword Expressions (ACL-IJCNLP), 
pp. 17–22. 

Diab, Mona. 2009. Second Generation Tools (AMIRA 
2.0): Fast and Robust Tokenization, POS tagging, 
and Base Phrase Chunking. MEDAR 2nd 
International Conference on Arabic Language 
Resources and Tools, Cairo, Egypt. 

Fayed, Wafaa Kamel. 2007. A Dictionary of Arabic 
Contemporary Idioms (mu’jm alta’bir alastlahiat). 
Abu Elhoul. 

Fellbaum, Christiane. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic 
Lexical Database. MIT Press. 

Habash, Nizar and Owen Rambow. 2005. Arabic 
Tokenization, Morphological Analysis, and Part-of-
Speech Tagging in One Fell Swoop. In Proceedings 
of the Conference of American Association for 
Computational Linguistics, Ann Arbor, MI, 578-580. 

Hashimoto, Chikara and Daisuke Kawahara. 2008. 
Construction of an idiom corpus and its application 
to idiom identification based on WSD incorporating 
idiom-specific features. In Proceedings of the 2008 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing, Honolulu, Hawaii, pages 992–
1001. 

Katz, Graham and Eugenie Giesbrecht. 2006. 
Automatic identification of non-compositional 
multiword expressions using latent semantic analysis. 
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword 
Expressions: Identifying and Exploiting Underlying 
Properties, Sydney, Australia, pages 12–19. 

Maamouri, Mohamed, et al. 2010. Standard Arabic 
Morphological Analyzer (SAMA) Version 3.1. 
Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia 

Parker, Robert, et al. 2009. Arabic Gigaword Fourth 
Edition LDC2009T30, ISBN 1-58563-532-4. 
Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC), Philadelphia 

Roth, R., Rambow, O., Habash, N., Diab, M. and Rudin, 
C. 2008. Arabic Morphological Tagging, 
Diacritization, and Lemmatization Using Lexeme 
Models and Feature Ranking. In Proceedings of 
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 
Columbus, Ohio. 

Sag, Ivan A. and Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann 
A. Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword 
expressions: A pain in the neck for nlp. In 

Proceedings of the Third International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text 
Processing, London, UK, pp. 1–15. 

Sieny, Mahmoud Esmail, Mokhtar A. Hussein and 
Sayyed A. Al-Doush. 1996. A contextual Dictionary 
of Idioms (almu’jm alsyaqi lelta’birat alastlahiah). 
Librairie du Liban Publishers. 

29


