










































Detecting Power Relations from Written Dialog


Proceedings of the 2012 Student Research Workshop, pages 7–12,

Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Detecting Power Relations from Written Dialog

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran
Department of Computer Science

Columbia University
New York, NY 10027, USA

vinod@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

In my thesis I propose a data-oriented study
on how social power relations between par-
ticipants manifest in the language and struc-
ture of online written dialogs. I propose that
there are different types of power relations
and they are different in the ways they are ex-
pressed and revealed in dialog and across dif-
ferent languages, genres and domains. So far,
I have defined four types of power and anno-
tated them in corporate email threads in En-
glish and found support that they in fact man-
ifest differently in the threads. Using dialog
and language features, I have built a system to
predict participants possessing these types of
power within email threads. I intend to extend
this system to other languages, genres and do-
mains and to improve it’s performance using
deeper linguistic analysis.

1 Introduction

Social relations like power and influence are difficult
concepts to define, but are easily recognizable when
expressed. Most classical definitions of power in
the sociology literature (e.g. (Bierstedt, 1950; Dahl,
1957)) include “an element indicating that power is
the capability of one social actor to overcome re-
sistance in achieving a desired objective or result”
(Pfeffer, 1981). Influence closely resembles power,
although some consider it as one of the means by
which power is used (Handy, 1985). The five bases
of power — Coercive, Reward, Legitimate (Posi-
tional), Referent, and Expert — proposed by French
and Raven (1959) and its extensions are widely used
in sociology to study power. I find these definitions

and typologies helpful as general background, but
not specific enough for a data-oriented study on how
they are expressed in online written dialogs.

One of the primary ways power is manifested is
the manner in which people participate in dialog.
Power relations sometimes constrain how one be-
haves when engaging in dialog; in some other cases,
they enable one to constrain someone else’s behav-
ior. And in some cases, the dialog behavior becomes
a tool to express and even pursue power. By dialog
behavior, I mean the choices one makes while en-
gaging in dialog. It includes choices with respect
to the message content, like lexical choices, degree
of politeness or instances of overt display of power
such as orders or commands. It also includes choices
participants make in terms of dialog structure, like
the choice of when to participate with how much and
what sort of contribution, how many questions to ask
and which of those questions to answer and the time
between those questions and their answers.

The primary goal of my thesis is to show that
different social power relations manifest themselves
in written dialog in different, but predictable ways,
and to investigate how these manifestations differ
across languages, genres and domains. To achieve
this goal, I aim to introduce a new typology of power
that is relevant in online written interactions and can
be validated using data-oriented approaches. Then, I
aim to study how these different types of power dif-
fer in their manifestations in dialog. Specifically, I
aim to capture and compare these manifestations in
two dimensions of the dialog: content and structure.
In addition to using existing components like dialog
act taggers and linkers to capture the dialog structure

7



and lexical analyzers to capture content features, I
plan to identify and extract more structural and lin-
guistic indicators of power relations. Using these
features, I will build a system that can automati-
cally extract power relations between participants of
written dialogs across different languages (English
vs. Arabic), genres (discussion forums vs. emails)
and domains (political vs. scientific). Currently, I
have partially achieved this goal within the context
of English corporate email threads, which represent
a specific language-genre-domain combination. The
four types of power I have defined are: situational
power, hierarchical power, control of communica-
tion and influence. My future research directions in-
clude 1) broadening this work onto other languages,
genres and domains and 2) using deeper analysis to
identify more indicators of power and capture power
relations at finer granularity

2 Literature survey

It has long been established that there is a correla-
tion between dialog behavior of a discourse partic-
ipant and how influential she is perceived to be by
the other discourse participants (Bales et al., 1951;
Scherer, 1979; Ng et al., 1995). Specifically, fac-
tors such as frequency of contribution, proportion of
turns, and number of successful interruptions have
been identified as being important indicators of in-
fluence. Locher (2004) recognizes “restriction of
an interactant’s action-environment” (Wartenberg,
1990) as a key element by which exercise of power
in interactions can be identified. I use a linguis-
tic indicator Overt Display of Power which cap-
tures action-restriction at an utterance level. Warten-
berg (1990) also makes the important distinction be-
tween two notions of power: power-over and power-
to. Power-over refers to hierarchical relationships
between interactants, while power-to refers to the
ability an interactant possesses (may be temporar-
ily) and can use within the interaction. My notions
of hierarchical power and situational power roughly
correspond to Wartenberg’s notions of power-over
and power-to, respectively. Both can be considered
special cases of French and Raven (1959)’s notion
of legitimate power. I consider influence as a type
of power which captures notions of expert power
and referent power described by French and Raven.

Finally, my notion of control of communication is
based on the concept of conversational control in-
troduced by Ng and Bradac (1993). It is a form of
power the participant has over the interaction; other
forms of power are modeled between participants.

In computational literature, several studies have
used Social Network Analysis (Diesner and Carley,
2005; Shetty and Adibi, 2005; Creamer et al., 2009)
to deduce social relations from online communica-
tion. These studies use only meta-data about mes-
sages: who sent a message to whom and when. For
example, Creamer et al. (2009) find that the response
time is an indicator of hierarchical relations; how-
ever, they calculate the response time based only on
the meta-data, and do not have access to information
such as thread structure or message content, which
would actually verify that the second email is in fact
a response to the first.

Using NLP to analyze the content of messages to
deduce power relations from written dialog is a rela-
tively new area which has been studied only recently
(Strzalkowski et al., 2010; Bramsen et al., 2011;
Peterson et al., 2011). Using knowledge of the or-
ganizational structure, Bramsen et al. (2011) create
two sets of messages: messages sent from a supe-
rior to a subordinate, and vice versa. Their task is
to determine the direction of power (since all their
data, by construction of the corpus, has a power re-
lationship). They approach the task as a text classi-
fication problem and build a classifier to determine
whether the set of all emails (regardless of thread)
between two participants is an instance of up-speak
or down-speak. In contrast, I plan to use a com-
plete communication thread as a data unit and cap-
ture instances where power is actually manifested. I
also plan to study power in a broader sense, look-
ing beyond power attributed by hierarchy to other
forms of power. Strzalkowski et al. (2010) are also
interested in power in written dialog. However, their
work concentrates on lower-level constructs called
Language Uses, which might indicate higher level
social constructs such as leadership and power. This
said, one of their language uses is agenda control,
which is very close to our notion of conversational
control. They model it using notions of topic switch-
ing, using mainly complex lexical features. Peter-
son et al. (2011) focuses on formality in Enron email
messages and relates it to social distance and power.

8



3 Work done so far: Power in Corporate
Emails

So far, I have worked on my primary goal – study-
ing manifestations of social power relations – within
the context of English corporate email threads. For
this purpose, I used a subset of email threads from a
version of the Enron email corpus (Yeh and Harnly,
2006) in which messages are organized as threaded
conversations. In the remainder of this section, I first
introduce the power typology and annotations and
then present the linguistic and structural features I
used. Then, I present the findings from a statistical
significance study conducted between these features
and different types of power. Finally, I present a sys-
tem built using these features to predict participants
with power within an email thread.

Power Typology and Annotations: After care-
ful analysis of a part of the email corpus, I defined a
power typology to capture different types of power
relevant in corporate emails. I propose four types of
power: situational power, hierarchical power, con-
trol of communication and influence.1 Person 1 is
said to have situational power (SP) over person 2
if person 1 has power or authority to direct and/or
approve person 2’s actions in the current situation
or while a particular task is being performed, as can
be deduced from the communication in the current
thread. Person 1 with situational power may or may
not be above person 2 in the organizational hierar-
chy (or there may be no organizational hierarchy at
all). Person 1 is said to have hierarchical power
(HP) over person 2 if person 1 appears to be above
person 2 in the organizational hierarchy, as can be
deduced from the communication in the given thread
(annotators did not have access to independent in-
formation about the organizational hierarchy). Pos-
sible clues to HP include (by way of example): 1)
characteristic of a part of a message as being an ap-
proval, or being a direct order; 2) a person’s behav-
ior such as asking for approval; 3) a person’s au-
thority to make the final decision. A person is said
to have control of the communication (CNTRL) if
she actively attempts to achieve the intended goals
of the communication. These are people who ask
questions, request others to take action, etc. and

1This typology is an extension of an initial typology formu-
lated through collaborative effort with another student.

not people who simply respond to questions or per-
form actions when directed to do so. A thread could
have multiple such participants. A person is said
to have influence (INFL) if she 1) has credibility
in the group, 2) persists in attempting to convince
others, even if some disagreement occurs, 3) intro-
duces topics/ideas that others pick up on or support,
and 4) is a group participant but not necessarily ac-
tive in the discussion(s) where others support/credit
her. In addition, the influencer’s ideas or language
may be adopted by others and others may explic-
itly recognize influencer’s authority.2 Prabhakaran
et al. (2012a) presents more details on annotations
of these power relations in the email corpus.

Manifestations in Content and Stucture: I used
six sets of features to explore manifestations of
power: dialog act percentages (DAP), dialog link
counts (DLC), positional (PST), verbosity (VRB),
lexical (LEX) and overt display of power (ODP).
The first four sets of features relate to the whole di-
alog and its structure while the last two relate to the
form and content of individual messages. The email
corpus I used has been previously annotated with di-
alog acts and links by other researchers (Hu et al.,
2009). I used these annotations to capture DAP and
DLC features. DAP captures percentages of each of
the dialog act labels (Request Action, Request In-
formation, Inform, Conventional, and Commit) ag-
gregated over all messages sent by the participant
within the thread. The dialog links include forward
links which denote utterances with requests for in-
formation or actions, backward links which denote
their responses and secondary forward links which
denote utterances without explicit requests that were
interpreted as requests and were linked back from
later utterances. DLC captures various features de-
rived from these links with respect to each partici-
pant such as counts of each type of link, counts of
forward links that are connected back and counts
and percentages of those which were not connected
back. PST includes features to indicate relative posi-
tions of first and last messages by a participant. VRB
includes features to denote how much and how often
a participant took part in the conversation. PST and

2I adopt this definition from the IARPA Socio-Cultural Con-
tent in Language (SCIL) program, where many researchers par-
ticipating in the SCIL program contributed to the scope and re-
finement of the definition of a person with influence.

9



VRB are readily derivable from the email threads. I
used simple word ngram features to capture LEX.

Overt display of power (ODP) is a linguistic indi-
cator of power I introduced. An utterer can choose
linguistic forms in her utterance to signal that she
is imposing constraints on the addressee’s choice
of how to respond, which go beyond those defined
by the standard set of dialog acts. For example, if
the boss’s email is “Please come to my office right
now”, and the addressee declines, he is clearly not
adhering to the constraints the boss has signaled,
though he is adhering to the general constraints of
cooperative dialog by responding to the request for
action. I am interested in these additional constraints
imposed on utterances through choices in linguistic
form. I define an utterance to have ODP if it is in-
terpreted as creating additional constraints on the re-
sponse beyond those imposed by the general dialog
act. An ODP can be an order, command, question
or even a declarative sentence. The presence of an
ODP does not presuppose that the utterer actually
possess social power: the utterer could be attempt-
ing to gain power. In (Prabhakaran et al., 2012b),
I present a system to identify utterances with ODP
using lexical features like word and part of speech
ngrams along with dialog acts of the utterance.

Statistical significance study: For each type of
power, I considered two populations of people who
participated in the dialog – Pp, those judged to have
that type of power and Pn, those not judged to have
that power. Then, for each feature, I performed a
two-sample, two-tailed t-test comparing means of
feature values of Pp and Pn. I found many fea-
tures which are statistically significant, which sug-
gests that power types are reflected in the email
threads. I also found that the significance of fea-
tures differ considerably from one type of power to
another, which suggests that these power types are
reflected differently in the threads, and that they are
thus indeed different types of power. For hierarchi-
cal power, the feature TokenRatio has a mean of 0.38
for Pp and 0.54 for Pn with a p-value of 0.07. This
suggests that bosses tend to talk less within a thread.
People with situational power or control request ac-
tions significantly more often than others and send
significantly more and longer messages than others.
People with influence never request actions and send
much longer messages than others. They also tend to

have more secondary forward links (with a p-value
of 0.07) which suggests that people often respond
to what people with influence say even if the influ-
encer’s contribution is not a request.

Predicting Persons with Power: I formally de-
fined the problem as: given a communication thread
T and an active participant X , predict whether X
has power of type P ∈ {SP, HP, INFL, CNTRL}
over some person Y in the thread. I built a binary
SVM classifier for each power type P predicting
whether or not X has power P based on features
with respect to X in the context of the given thread
T . I obtained good results for SP and CNTRL, but
HP and INFL were hard to predict since they oc-
curred rarely in my corpus. The combination of
DLC and OSP performed best for SP (F = 64.4) and
PST performed best for CNTRL (F = 90.0). For HP,
the combination of DLC and LEX performed best (F
= 34.8). For INFL, the best performer was DLC (F
= 22.6). All results except the ones for INFL were
statistically significant improvement over an always-
true baseline. I found dialog features to be signif-
icant in predicting power, though content features
also contribute to detecting some types of power.

4 Proposed Work

So far, I have defined four types of power and have
studied how they are expressed and revealed in En-
ron email threads. My future research directions in-
clude deepening this study by i) capturing more lin-
guistic indicators of social power in dialog, ii) build-
ing automatic taggers for all linguistic indicators, iii)
using deeper semantic analysis on the content and
iv) extending it to capture power relations at finer
granularity. I also intend to broaden this work into
different languages, genres and domains, adapting
work done in email threads when viable.

More power indicators : I will work on captur-
ing more linguistic indicators of power from dialog.
I currently have annotations at the utterance level
that capture attempts to exercise power and attempts
to influence. I will use these annotations to build
systems that can automatically detect them. In ad-
dition, I plan to capture linguistic expressions that
suggest lack of power such as asking for approvals,
permissions etc. or acting overly polite. For this,
I will have to add new annotations to the data. I

10



also plan to perform deeper analysis on the content
to capture subjectivity — whether someone states
more facts than opinions, commitment — whether
someone commits to what she says, and the pres-
ence of other modalities such as permissions, re-
quirements, desires etc. I plan to use existing work
in subjectivity analysis (Wilson, 2008) and commit-
ment analysis (Prabhakaran et al., 2010) for this pur-
pose. For modality analysis, I plan to use previous
unpublished work that I participated in.

Fully automated system: I plan to use automatic
taggers to extract dialog act and link features and
other linguistic indicators of power (like ODP), to
build a fully automated social power extraction sys-
tem. Hu et al. (2009) presented a dialog act tagger
and link predictor which could be used to extract
DAP and DLC. However, I found their dialog act
tagger performs poorly on minority classes such as
requests for actions, which are more critical to pre-
dict power. Their link predictor obtained an F mea-
sure of 35% which makes it unfit to be used in its
current form. For ODP, I will use the SVM clas-
sifier I built, which obtained a best cross validation
F measure of 65.8. I plan to improve the perfor-
mance of the dialog act tagger, the link predictor and
the ODP tagger using new features and techniques.
I plan to use a threshold adjustment algorithm pro-
posed by Lin et al. (2007) to handle the class imbal-
ance problem in dialog act tagger and link predictor
(ODP tagger already uses this). I will also build au-
tomatic taggers for all other linguistic indicators of
power discussed above.

Deeper Semantic Analysis I will explore new
features derived from deeper semantic analysis to
improve performance of the dialog act tagger, the
link predictor and the taggers for other indicators of
power like ODP. In particular, I plan to use seman-
tic information from VerbNet to provide useful ab-
straction of verbs into verb classes. This will reduce
data sparseness, thereby improving the performance
of the taggers. In an initial experiment, I found that
using VerbNet class name instead of verb lemma im-
proved the performance of ODP tagger by a small
margin. I did this only for those verbs that belong
to a single VerbNet class (hence needing no dis-
ambiguation). I will explore ways to disambiguate
verbs with multiple VerbNet class assignments and
employ this feature in other taggers as well.

Finer granularity of relations: I will enhance
the system to predict power relations between pairs
of participants. Aggregating features at the partic-
ipant level is prone to noise. For example, let X ,
Y , Z be active participants such that X has power
over Y , who has power over Z . When we aggregate
features with respect to Y , we are introducing noise
from the part of communication between X and Y .
Extending my work to the person pair level would
prevent this noise and provide us with a finer gran-
ularity of power relations. Formally, I want to pre-
dict if person X has power P over person Y , given
a communication thread T . My power annotations
already capture the recipient (person 2) of power re-
lations which I will use for this purpose.

Language, genre and domain adaptation: I will
extend my work in the English email threads to other
languages, genres and domains. Specifically, I plan
to work on existing data containing Wikipedia dis-
cussion threads and political forums in both English
and Arabic. Thus, my thesis would include the
analysis of power under 5 different language-genre-
domain settings. This step will need extensive an-
notation efforts. I expect that my proposed power
typology might need to be refined to capture types
of relations in the new genres. Also, I may have
to define new linguistic indicators relevant to the
new genres or refine the ones I identified for email
threads to adapt to the new genres. This would also
require me to adapt various subsystems/taggers to
capture features such as dialog acts, links, ODP etc.
to new genres or build new systems.

5 Conclusion

In my thesis, I propose to study how different power
relations are manifested in the structure and lan-
guage of online written dialogs and build a system
to automatically extract power relations from them.
I have already conducted this study in English email
threads and I plan to extend this to other languages,
genres and domains.

6 Acknowledgments

This work is supported, in part, by the Johns Hop-
kins Human Language Technology Center of Ex-
cellence. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this material are

11



those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the sponsor. I thank my advisors Dr. Owen
Rambow and Dr. Mona Diab for their valuable guid-
ance and support. I thank Daniel Bauer for useful
discussions and feedback on this proposal.

References
Robert F. Bales, Fred L. Strodtbeck, Theodore M. Mills,

and Mary E. Roseborough. 1951. Channels of com-
munication in small groups. American Sociological
Review, pages 16(4), 461–468.

Robert Bierstedt. 1950. An Analysis of Social Power.
American Sociological Review.

Philip Bramsen, Martha Escobar-Molano, Ami Patel, and
Rafael Alonso. 2011. Extracting social power rela-
tionships from natural language. In ACL, pages 773–
782. The Association for Computer Linguistics.

Germán Creamer, Ryan Rowe, Shlomo Hershkop, and
Salvatore J. Stolfo. 2009. Advances in web min-
ing and web usage analysis. chapter Segmentation
and Automated Social Hierarchy Detection through
Email Network Analysis, pages 40–58. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Robert A. Dahl. 1957. The concept of power. Syst. Res.,
2(3):201–215.

Jana Diesner and Kathleen M. Carley. 2005. Exploration
of communication networks from the enron email cor-
pus. In In Proc. of Workshop on Link Analysis, Coun-
terterrorism and Security, SIAM International Confer-
ence on Data Mining 2005, pages 21–23.

John R. French and Bertram Raven. 1959. The Bases of
Social Power. In Dorwin Cartwright, editor, Studies in
Social Power, pages 150–167+. University of Michi-
gan Press.

Charles B. Handy. 1985. Understanding Organisations.
Institute of Purchasing & Supply.

Jun Hu, Rebecca Passonneau, and Owen Rambow. 2009.
Contrasting the interaction structure of an email and a
telephone corpus: A machine learning approach to an-
notation of dialogue function units. In Proceedings of
the SIGDIAL 2009 Conference, London, UK, Septem-
ber. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Hsuan-Tien Lin, Chih-Jen Lin, and Ruby C. Weng. 2007.
A note on platt’s probabilistic outputs for support vec-
tor machines. Mach. Learn., 68:267–276, October.

Miriam A. Locher. 2004. Power and politeness in ac-
tion: disagreements in oral communication. Lan-
guage, power, and social process. M. de Gruyter.

Sik Hung. Ng and James J. Bradac. 1993. Power in lan-
guage : verbal communication and social influence /
Sik Hung Ng, James J. Bradac. Sage Publications,
Newbury Park :.

Sik Hung Ng, Mark Brooke, , and Michael Dunne.
1995. Interruption and influence in discussion groups.
Journal of Language and Social Psychology, pages
14(4),369–381.

Kelly Peterson, Matt Hohensee, and Fei Xia. 2011.
Email formality in the workplace: A case study on
the enron corpus. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Language in Social Media (LSM 2011), pages 86–
95, Portland, Oregon, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Jeffrey Pfeffer. 1981. Power in organizations. Pitman,
Marshfield, MA.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Owen Rambow, and Mona
Diab. 2010. Automatic committed belief tagging.
In Coling 2010: Posters, pages 1014–1022, Beijing,
China, August. Coling 2010 Organizing Committee.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Owen Rambow, and Mona
Diab. 2012a. Annotations for power relations on
email threads. In Proceedings of the Eighth confer-
ence on International Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’12), Istanbul, Turkey, May. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Owen Rambow, and Mona
Diab. 2012b. Predicting overt display of power in
written dialogs. In Human Language Technologies:
The 2012 Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Montreal, Canada, June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

K. R. Scherer. 1979. Voice and speech correlates of per-
ceived social influence in simulated juries. In H. Giles
and R. St Clair (Eds), Language and social psychol-
ogy, pages 88–120. Oxford: Blackwell.

Jitesh Shetty and Jafar Adibi. 2005. Discovering im-
portant nodes through graph entropy the case of en-
ron email database. In Proceedings of the 3rd inter-
national workshop on Link discovery, LinkKDD ’05,
pages 74–81, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Tomek Strzalkowski, George Aaron Broadwell, Jennifer
Stromer-Galley, Samira Shaikh, Sarah Taylor, and
Nick Webb. 2010. Modeling socio-cultural phenom-
ena in discourse. In Proceedings of the 23rd Interna-
tional Conference on COLING 2010, Beijing, China,
August. Coling 2010 Organizing Committee.

Thomas E. Wartenberg. 1990. The forms of power:
from domination to transformation. Temple Univer-
sity Press.

Theresa Wilson. 2008. Annotating subjective content in
meetings. In Proceedings of the Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference. LREC-2008, Springer.
AMIDA-85.

Jen-yuan Yeh and Aaron Harnly. 2006. Email thread
reassembly using similarity matching. In In Proc. of
CEAS.

12


