










































Natural Language Generation and Assistive Technologies


INLG 2012 Proceedings of the 7th International Natural Language Generation Conference, page 1,
Utica, May 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Invited Speaker

Dr. Kathleen F. McCoy
University of Delaware

Natural Language Generation and Assistive Technologies

Abstract

Some people with disabilities find it difficult to access some forms of language. Assistive Technology is a 
term used to describe a class of technologies/interventions designed to enable people with disabilities to  
do things that their disabilitie currently make difficult. A large amount of work on Assistive Technology 
has focused on enabling access to language and communication; this class of interventions could greatly 
benefit from Natural Language Generation technologies.

This  talk  will  briefly  survey  some  Assistive  Technology  applications  that  have  employed  Natural  
Language Generation technologies – highlighting some of the needs in this application area along with 
the opportunities that it provides for investigating hard problems in Natural Language Generation. It will  
then highlight a project, called the SIGHT System, intended to provide access to information graphics 
(e.g., bar charts, line graphs) found in popular media to people who have visual impairments. This system 
employs  Natural  Language Generation technologies to generate appropriate  textual  summaries  of the  
information  graphics.  As  such,  it  makes  contributions  to  several  areas  within  the  field  of  Natural  
Language Generation while  also enabling access to the information in these graphics to people  who  
cannot access  it with visual means.

Biography

Dr. Kathleen F. McCoy is a professor in the Department of Computer and Information Sciences at the 
University of  Delaware.  She  received  her  PhD from the University of  Pennsylvania  in  1985 with  a 
dissertation in the area of Natural Language Generation, and has been at the University of Delaware ever 
since then. Shortly after joining Delaware, she began working in applying Natural Language Processing 
to  Assistive  technologies  at  the  Center  for  Applied Science and Engineering in  Rehabilitation at  the 
University of Delaware and the DuPont Hospital for Children. She served as the Center’s director from 
2000-2009.  She received a University of Delaware Excellence in Teaching Award in 1997, a University 
of Delaware Excellence in Advising Award in 2001,  and a College of Arts and Science Outstanding 
Advisor  Award  in  2003.  From 1995-2008  she  served  on  the  ACL Executive  committee  in  various 
capacities including 10 years as Treasurer.  She is the founding President of the ACL Special Interest 
Group on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies (2011). She has been an organizer  
of several workshops on that area associated with various ACL conferences. She was program co-chair of  
the  User  Modeling  Conference  in  2007,  the  ACM  SIGACCESS  Conference  on  Computers  and 
Accessibility in 2009, and the General Chair of that same conference in 2011. She is a Senior Member of  
the ACM.

1


