










































A Classical Chinese Corpus with Nested Part-of-Speech Tags


Proceedings of the 6th EACL Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 75–84,
Avignon, France, 24 April 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Classical Chinese Corpus with Nested Part-of-Speech Tags 

 

 

John Lee 

The Halliday Centre for Intelligent Applications of Language Studies 

Department of Chinese, Translation and Linguistics 

City University of Hong Kong 

jsylee@cityu.edu.hk 

 

 
 

 

 

 

Abstract 

We introduce a corpus of classical 

Chinese poems that has been word 

segmented and tagged with parts-of-

speech (POS). Due to the ill-defined 

concept of a ‘word’ in Chinese, previous 

Chinese corpora suffer from a lack of 

standardization in word segmentation, 

resulting in inconsistencies in POS tags, 

therefore hindering interoperability 

among corpora. We address this problem 

with nested POS tags, which 

accommodates different theories of 

wordhood and facilitates research 

objectives requiring annotations of the 

‘word’ at different levels of granularity. 

1 Introduction 

There has been much effort in enriching text 

corpora with linguistic information, such as 

parts-of-speech (Francis and Kučera, 1982) and 

syntactic structures (Marcus et al., 1993).  The 

past decade has seen the development of Chinese 

corpora, mostly for Modern Chinese (McEnery 

& Xiao, 2004; Xue et al., 2005), but also a few 

for pre-modern, or “classical”, Chinese (Wei et 

al. 97; Huang et al. 2006; Hu & McLaughlin 

2007). 

One common design issue for any corpus of 

Chinese, whether modern or classical, is word 

segmentation. Yet, no segmentation standard has 

emerged in the computational linguistics research 

community.  Hence, two adjacent characters 

X1X2 may be considered a single word in one 

corpus, but treated as two distinct words X1 and 

X2 in another
1
; furthermore, the part-of-speech 

(POS) tag assigned to X1X2 in the first corpus 

may differ from the tag for X1 and the tag for X2 
in the second.  These inconsistencies have made 

it difficult to compare, combine or exploit 

Chinese corpora.  This paper addresses this 

problem by proposing a new method for word 

segmentation and POS tagging for Chinese and 

applying it on a corpus of classical Chinese 

poems. 

2 Research Objective 

A Chinese character may either function as a 

word by itself, or combine with its neighbor(s) to 

form a multi-character word.  Since the goal of 

part-of-speech (POS) tagging is to assign one tag 

to each word, a prerequisite step is word 

segmentation, i.e., drawing word boundaries 

within a string of Chinese characters.  The 

general test for ‘wordhood’ is whether “the 

meaning of the whole is compositional of its 

parts”; in other words, X1X2 forms one word 

when the meaning of the characters X1X2 does 

not equal to the meaning of X1 plus the meaning 

of X2 (Feng, 1998). Consider the string 沙門 sha 
men ‘Buddhist monk’.  As a transliteration from 

Sanskrit, it bears no semantic relation with its 

constituent characters 沙 sha ‘sand’ and 門 men 
‘door’.  The two characters therefore form one 

word. 

From the point of view of corpus 

development, word segmentation has two 

consequences.  First, it defines the smallest unit 

for POS analysis.  It would be meaningless to 

analyze the POS of the individual characters as, 

                                                           
1 This phenomenon can be compared with what is often 

known as multiword expressions (Sag et al., 2002) in other 

languages. 

75



say, 沙/NN and 門/NN (see Table 1 for the list of 
POS tags used in this paper).  Instead, the two 

characters sha and men together should be 

assigned one POS tag, 沙門/NN. 
Second, word segmentation sets boundaries 

for automatic word retrieval.  A simple string 

search for “sha men” on a non-segmented corpus 

might yield spurious matches, where sha is the 

last character of the preceding word, and men is 

the first character of the following one.  In a 

word study on 本 覺  ben jue ‘original 
enlightenment’ (Lancaster, 2010), based on a 

non-segmented corpus of the Chinese Buddhist 

Canon, the author needed to manually examine 

each of the 763 occurrences of the string ben jue 

in order to determine which of them are in fact 

the word in question, rather than accidental 

collocations of the two characters. Word 

boundaries resulting from word segmentation 

would have removed these ambiguities, 

expedited the search and enabled this kind of 

word studies to be performed on much larger 

scales. 

There is not yet a scholarly consensus on a 

precise definition of ‘wordhood’ in Classical 

Chinese (Feng, 1998).  Inevitably, then, 

treatment of word segmentation varies widely 

from corpus to corpus.  Some did not perform 

word segmentation (Huang et al. 2006); others 

adopted their own principles (Wei et al. 1997; Hu 

& McLaughlin 2007).  The lack of 

standardization not only hinders corpus 

interoperability, but also makes it difficult for 

any single corpus to cater to users with different 

assumptions about wordhood or different 

research objectives.  What is regarded as one 

word for a user may be two words in the eyes of 

another.  Consider two alternative analyses of the 

string 黃河  huang he ‘Yellow River’ in two 
research tasks.  For retrieval of geographical 

references in a text, it should ideally be tagged as 

one single proper noun, 黃河 /NR; to study 
parallelisms in poetry, however, it is better to be 

tagged as two separate words, 黃 /JJ huang 

‘yellow’ followed by 河/NN he ‘river’, in order 
not to obscure the crucial POS sequence 

‘adjective-noun’ that signals parallelism in a 

couplet.  To settle on any particular word 

segmentation criterion, then, is to risk omitting 

useful information. 

We are not qualified to lay down any 

definitive criterion for word segmentation; 

rather, we advocate a theory-neutral approach 

through nested POS tags: characters are analyzed 

individually whenever possible, but annotated 

with hierarchical tags to recognize possible word 

boundaries. 

3 Previous Work  

In this section, we summarize previous practices 

in Chinese word segmentation (section 3.1) and 

part-of-speech tagging (section 3.2), then 

describe existing frameworks of multi-level 

tagging (section 3.3). 

3.1 Word segmentation 

As mentioned in Section 2, a common test for 

word segmentation is “compositionality of 

meaning”.  While there are clear-cut cases like 

sha men, many cases fall in the grey area.  

Indeed, even native speakers can agree on word 

boundaries in modern Chinese only about 76% of 

the time (Sproat et al., 1996).  It is not surprising, 

then, that a myriad of guidelines for word 

segmentation have been proposed for various 

corpora of Modern Chinese (Liu et al., 1994; 

Chinese Knowledge Information Processing 

Group, 1996; Yu et al., 1998; Xia 2000; Sproat 

and Emerson, 2003).  In the rest of this section, 

we first review the approaches taken in three 

classical Chinese corpora, developed respectively 

at Jiaotong University (Huang et al., 2006), 

University of Sheffield (Hu et al., 2005) and the 

Academia Sinica (Wei et al., 1997). We then 

describe in more detail a modern Chinese corpus, 

the Penn Chinese Treebank (Xue et al., 2005). 

Corpus at Jiaotong University.  This treebank 

consists of 1000 sentences of pre-Tsin classical 

Chinese.  No word segmentation was performed.  

On the one hand, this decision may be supported 

by the fact that “in general the syllable, written 

with a single character, and the word correspond 

in Classical Chinese” (Pulleyblank, 1995).  On 

the other hand, there are nonetheless a non-

negligible number of strings for which it makes 

little sense to analyze their constituent characters.  

These include not only transliterations of foreign 

loanwords such as sha men, but also bound 

morphemes
2

 and reduplications
3

 (Pulleyblank, 

1995).  The lack of segmentation in this corpus 

also leads to the lack of word boundaries to 

support word retrieval. 

                                                           
2 E.g., 然 ran, a suffix forming expressive adverbs such as 

卒然 cu ran ‘abruptly’ 
3 E.g., 須 xu ‘wait’, which, via partial reduplication, derives 

須臾 xu yu ‘a moment’ 

76



Academia Sinica Ancient Chinese Corpus.  

With more than 500K characters, this is the 

largest word-segmented and POS-tagged corpus 

of classical Chinese.  In the annotation process, a 

character is presumed to be a word in its own 

right; it is combined with other characters to 

form a word if they fall into one of the following 

categories: parallel and subordinating 

compounds; bisyllabic words; reduplications; 

and proper nouns.  Two of these categories, 

namely, bisyllabic words and reduplications, are 

retained in our word segmentation criteria (see 

section 4.1).  Proper nouns, as well as parallel 

and subordinating compounds, however, are 

treated differently (see section 4.2). 

Sheffield Corpus of Chinese.  This corpus has 

more than 109K characters of archaic Chinese 

and 147K characters of medieval Chinese.  Word 

segmentation was performed by hand.  Their 

criteria for word segmentation, unfortunately, do 

not seem to be publicly available. 

The Penn Chinese Treebank.  This widely 

used treebank of modern Chinese boasts an 

extensively documented word segmentation 

procedure (Xia, 2000), which rests on six 

principles.  We follow their principle that 

complex internal structures should be segmented 

when possible (see section 4.2).  We also retain a 

second principle that a bound morpheme forms a 

word with its neighbor
4
, although morphemes in 

Classical Chinese are nearly always free forms 

(Feng, 1998). 

A third criterion is the number of syllables.  

Consider a noun phrase N1N2 where the first 

noun (N1) modifies the second (N2).  This noun 

phrase is considered one word if N2 consists of 

one character, but two words if N2 has two or 

more characters.  For example, the string 北京大

學  bei jing da xue ‘Peking University’ is 
segmented as two words bei jing ‘Peking’ and da 

xue ‘university’, since ‘university’ is made up of 

two characters; however, a similar string 北京市 
bei jing shi ‘Beijing City’ is one word, since 

‘city’ consists of just one character shi.  Given 

the dominance of monosyllabic words in 

classical Chinese, a direct application of this 

principle would have resulted in a large number 

of multi-character words in our corpus. 

Further, there are three linguistic tests.  The 

“semantic compositionality” test has already 

been outlined in section 2 and is not repeated 

here.  The “insertion test” asks whether another 

                                                           
4 E.g., the morpheme 本 ben is bound to the character 人 

ren ‘person’  in the word 本人 ben ren ‘oneself’ 

morpheme can be inserted between two 

characters X1 and X2; if so, then X1X2 is unlikely 

to be a word.  The “XP-substitution test” asks if a 

morpheme can be replaced by a phrase of the 

same type; if not, then it is likely to be part of a 

word.  Performing these tests requires intuition 

and familiarity with the language.  Since no 

human is a native speaker of classical Chinese, 

we found it difficult to objectively and reliably 

apply these tests.  Instead, we strive to 

accommodate different views of wordhood in our 

corpus. 

3.2 Part-of-Speech Tagging 

Following word segmentation, each word is 

assigned a part-of-speech (POS) tag.  Most POS 

tagsets cover the major word categories, such as 

nouns, verbs, and adjectives; they differ in the 

more fine-grained distinctions within these 

categories. For examples, verbs may be further 

subdivided into transitive and intransitive; nouns 

may be further distinguished as common, proper 

or temporal; and so on.  In general, a larger 

tagset provides more precise information, but 

may result in lower inter-annotator agreement, 

and hence reduced reliability. 

Classical Chinese does not have inflectional 

morphology; this makes POS tags even more 

informative, but also makes inter-annotator 

agreement more challenging.  As with other 

languages, the POS tagset is tailored to fit one’s 

research objective, as reflected in the wide-

ranging levels of granularity in different corpora, 

from 21 tags in (Huang et al., 2006), 26 in the 

Peking University corpus (Yu et al., 2002), 46 in 

the Academia Sinica Balanced Corpus (Chen et 

al., 1996), to 111 in the Sheffield Corpus of 

Chinese (Hu et al., 2005).  Our tagset is based on 

that of the Penn Chinese Treebank, which lies 

towards the lower end of this spectrum, with 33 

tags. 

3.3 Multi-level Tagging  

In principle, any text span may be annotated at 

an arbitrary number of levels using, for example, 

stand-off annotation.  In practice, most effort has 

concentrated on identifying named entities, such 

as (Doddington et al., 2004).  While our corpus 

does specify word boundaries of multi-character 

proper nouns, it tackles all other forms of 

compounds in general (section 4.2). 

Turning to the Chinese language in particular, 

we are by no means the first to point out 

inconsistencies in word segmentation and POS 

77



tags among different corpora.  Annotators of the 

Penn Chinese Treebank, among others, also 

recognized this issue (Xia, 2000).  As a remedy, 

a two-level annotation method is used on a 

number of grammatical constructions.  Suppose 

it is uncertain whether X1 and X2 should be 

considered two separate words or one word.  

Under this method, X1 and X2 are first tagged 

individually (say, as pos1 and pos2), then tagged 

as a whole (say, as pos), and finally grouped 

together with a pair of brackets, resulting in the 

final form (X1/pos1 X2/pos2)/pos.  For instance, 

rather than simply tagging the string 走上來 zou 

shang lai ‘walk up’ as one verb 走上來/VV, the 
three-character word is further segmented 

internally as 走 zou ‘walk’ and 上來 shang lai 

‘come up’, hence (走/VV 上來/VV)/VV.  This 
method makes the interpretation more flexible: 

those who consider zou shang lai to be one word 

can simply ignore the details inside the brackets; 

others who view zou and shang lai as stand-

alones can discard the brackets and retain their 

individual analyses. 

This device is used in the Penn Chinese 

Treebank on only a narrow range of 

constructions to ensure compatibility with the 

Chinese Knowledge Information Processing 

Group (1996) and with (Liu et al., 1994).  In 

contrast, it is generalized in our corpus as nested 

tags of arbitrary depth, and used systematically 

and extensively to mark alternate word 

boundaries. 

 

Tag Part-of-Speech 

AD Adverb 

CD Cardinal number 

DER Resultative de5 

DEV Manner de5 

FW Foreign word 

IJ Interjection 

JJ Other noun modifier 

LC Localizer 

NN Other noun 

NR Proper noun 

NT 

P 

PN 

SP 

VV 

Temporal noun 

Preposition 

Pronoun 

Sentence-final particle 

Other verb 

 

Table 1: Part-of-speech tags of the Penn Chinese 

Treebank that are referenced in this paper.  

Please see (Xia, 2000) for the full list. 
 

4 Corpus Design  

This section describes our corpus at two levels, 

first the ‘strings without internal structures’ 

(section 4.1), which may be combined to form 

‘strings with internal structures’ (section 4.2) and 

marked with nested brackets and tags. 

4.1 Strings without internal structures 

The lowest annotation layer marks the 

boundaries of what will be referred to as ‘strings 

without internal structures’. These are roughly 

equivalent to ‘words’ in existing Chinese 

corpora. 

Segmentation criteria.  Following the practice 

of the Academia Sinica Ancient Chinese Corpus, 

each character is initially presumed to be a 

monosyllabic word.  The annotator may then 

decide that it forms a multi-character word with 

its neighbor(s) under one of the categories listed 

in Table 2.  This set of categories represents a 

more stringent segmentation criterion than those 

in most existing corpora, such that the number of 

multi-character words is relatively small in our 

target text (see section 6).  

 

Category Example 

Foreign 

loanwords 
匈奴 xiong nu ‘the Xiongnu 
people’ 

e.g., 匈奴/NR圍酒泉 ‘The 
Xiongnus surrounded the city 

of Jiuquan’ 

Numbers 十五 shi wu ‘fifteen’, 十六 
shi liu ‘sixteen’ 

e.g., 少年十五/CD 十六/CD

時 ‘as a youth of 15 or 16 
years of age’ 

Reduplications 駸駸 qin qin ‘quickly’ 

e.g., 車馬去駸駸/AD ‘the 
chariots went quickly’ 

Bound 

morphemes 
油然 you ran ‘spontaneously’ 

e.g., 天油然/AD作雲 ‘the 
sky spontaneously makes 

clouds’ 

 

Table 2: Categories of multi-character words that 

are considered ‘strings without internal 

structures’ (see Section 4.1). Each category is 

illustrated with one example from our corpus. 
 

Part-of-speech tagging.  Similar to the 

principle adopted by the Penn Chinese Treebank, 

78



POS tags are assigned not according to the 

meaning of the word, but to syntactic distribution 

(Xia, 2000), i.e. the role the word plays in the 

sentence.  Compared to modern Chinese, it is a 

much more frequent phenomenon in the classical 

language for a word to function as different 

parts-of-speech in different contexts.  For 

example, it is not uncommon for nouns to be 

used as verbs or adverbs, and verbs as adverbs 

(Pulleyblank, 1995). Consider two nouns 鐘 

zhong ‘bell’ and 雲 yun ‘cloud’.  The former is 

used as a verb ‘to ring’ in the verse 深山何處鐘
/VV ‘where in the deep mountain [is it] ringing’; 

the latter serves as an adverb ‘in the manner of 

clouds’ in the verse 倏忽雲 /AD 散  ‘quickly 
disperses like clouds’. They are therefore tagged 

as a verb (VV) and an adverb (AD).  Likewise, 

when the verb 盡 jin ‘exhaust’ has an adverbial 

sense ‘completely’, such as in 送君盡/AD惆悵 
‘saying farewell to you, I am utterly sad’, it is 

tagged as such. 

We largely adopted the tagset of the Penn 

Chinese Treebank.  As the standard most familiar 

to the computational linguistics community, their 

tagset has been used in annotating a large volume 

of modern Chinese texts, offering us the 

possibility of leveraging existing modern 

Chinese annotations as training data as we seek 

automatic methods to expand our corpus.  For the 

most part, the Penn tagset can be adopted for 

classical Chinese in a straightforward manner.  

For example, the tag PN (pronoun) is used, 

instead of the modern Chinese pronouns 我 wo 

‘I’ and 你 ni ‘you’, for the classical equivalents 

吾 wu ‘I’ and 爾 er ‘you’.  Similarly, the tag SP 
(sentence-final particles) is applied, rather than to 

the modern Chinese particles 吧 ba or 呀 a, to 

their classical counterparts 耳 er and 也 ye.  In 
other cases, we have identified roughly 

equivalent word classes in classical Chinese.  To 

illustrate, although the classical language has no 

prepositions in the modern sense, the P 

(preposition) tag is retained for words known as 

coverbs (Pulleyblank, 1995).  A few tags specific 

to modern Chinese are discarded; these include 

DER, DEV, and FW (see Table 1).  

4.2 Strings with internal structures  

Since our criteria for ‘strings without internal 

structures’ are intentionally strict, they disqualify 

many multi-character strings that may fail the 

“semantic compositionality” test and are 

therefore commonly deemed words.  These 

include proper names with analyzable structures, 

as well as parallel or subordinating compounds, 

which are considered ‘strings with internal 

structures’ in our corpus, and are annotated with 

nested tags. 

 

Category Example 

Parallel compounds 

Similar 

meaning 
君王 jun wang ‘king’ 

= 君 jun ‘ruler’ + 王 wang ‘king’ 

(君/NN 王/NN)/NN 
Related 

meaning 
骨肉 gu rou ‘kin’ 

= 骨 gu ‘bone’ + 肉 rou ‘flesh’ 

(骨/NN 肉/NN)/NN 
Opposite 

meaning 
是非 shi fei ‘rumors’ 

= 是 shi ‘right’ + 非 fei ‘wrong’ 

(是/JJ 非/JJ)/NN 
Subordinating compounds 

Verb-object  識事 shi shi ‘experience’ 

= 識 shi ‘understand’ + 事 shi 
‘affairs’ 

(識/VV 事/NN)/NN 
Subject-

verb 
日落 ri luo ‘sunset’ 

= 日 ri ‘sun’ + 落 luo ‘descend’ 

(日/NN 落/VV)/NN 
Adjectival 

modifier 
少年 shao nian ‘youth’ 

= 少 shao ‘few’ + 年 nian ‘year 

(少/JJ 年/NN)/NN 
Noun 

modifier 
家食 jia shi ‘household food’ 

= 家 jia ‘house’ + 食 shi ‘food’ 

(家/NN 食/NN)/NN 
 

Table 3: Categories of multi-character words that 

are considered ‘strings with internal structures’ 

(see Section 4.2). Each category is illustrated 

with an example from our corpus. Both the 

individual characters and the compound they 

form receive a POS tag. 
 

Segmentation criteria.  All parallel and 

subordinating compounds are considered to be 

‘strings with internal structures’.  A parallel 

compound is a two-character noun, verb and 

adjective “in which neither member dominates 

the other” (Packard, 1998) and it refers to one 

meaning despite having two characters.  For 

example, the noun compound 骨肉  gu rou, 

formed from from 骨  gu ‘bone’ and 肉  rou 
‘flesh’, means simply ‘kin’ rather than ‘bone and 

flesh’.  In practice, in our corpus, two characters 

79



are considered to be a parallel compound when 

they are of the same POS, and have similar, 

related, or opposite meaning, as shown in Table 

3.  The individual characters are ‘strings without 

internal structure’ and receive their own POS 

tags, while the compound also receives its own 

tag. 

Subordinating compounds refer to those where 

“one member (the modifier) is subordinate to and 

modifies the other (the head)” (Packard, 1998). 

For example, the compound 少年 shao nian is 

made up of an adjective 少 shao ‘few’ modifying 

a noun 年  nian ‘year’, but together has the 
specialized meaning ‘youth’. In our corpus, two 

characters are considered to form a subordinating 

compound when they have the verb-object or 

subject-verb relationship, or a modifier-head 

relationship, including adjectival modifiers and 

noun modifiers. 

Proper names can also have internal structures, 

whenever the grammatical structure of their 

constituent characters may be discerned. The 

most common such proper names in our corpus 

are geographical names, such as 黃河 huang he 
‘Yellow River’, where the adjective huang 

‘yellow’ modifies the noun he ‘river’.  Another 

frequent type is personal names with titles, such 

as 始興公 shi xing gong ‘Duke Shixing’, where 
one noun modifies another. 

Our definition of ‘strings with internal 

structures’ is deliberately broad.  As a result, 

some of these strings would not be considered to 

be a word or compound by all or even most 

linguists. Many verb-object combinations, for 

example, may well fail the ‘semantic 

compositionality’ test.  This is intentional: rather 

than searching for the perfect segmentation 

policy that suits everyone
5

, the nested 

annotations allow the user to decide which level 

of tags is suitable for the research objective at 

hand. 

Part-of-speech tagging. The nested 

annotations of ‘strings with internal structures’ 

not only mark the possible word boundaries, but 

also assign a POS tag at every level, since that 

tag is not always predictable from the tags of the 

constituent characters.  Consider the verse in 

Table 4.  There are two possible segmentations 

for the string 晚來  wan lai. As two separate 
words, wan ‘evening’ and lai ‘come’ form a 

clause meaning ‘as the evening comes’; the 

                                                           
5 The verb-object combination, for example, is “among the 

hardest cases for the word definition” (Xia, 2000). 

whole verse may be translated ‘the weather turns 

chilly as the evening comes’.  Alternatively, they 

can be taken as a two-character word, i.e., simply 

a temporal noun 晚來/NT wan lai ‘evening’.  In 
this case, the proper translation would be ‘the 

weather turns chilly at evening’.  Notice that the 

tag NT (temporal noun) cannot be predicted from 

the tags at the lower level, NN (noun) and VV 

(verb). 

Further, these nested tags indicate alternatives 

for future syntactic analysis.  In dependency 

grammar, for instance, the adjectival verb qiu 

‘chilly’ would be the head of the verb lai, which 

is the verb in the subordinate clause; in the 

second interpretation, however, it would be the 

head of a temporal modifier, wan lai ‘evening’. 

 

天 氣 晚 來 秋 
tian qi wan lai qiu 

‘weather’ ‘night’ ‘come’ ‘chilly’ 

NN NN VV JJ 

NT 

 

Table 4: POS annotations of an example sentence 

with a string, wan lai ‘evening’, that has internal 

structure. See Section 4.2 for two possible 

translations, and Table 1 for the meaning of the 

POS tags. 
 

Verse 1 

獨 樹 臨 關 門 
du shu lin guan men 

‘only’ ‘tree’ ‘upon’ ‘pass’ ‘entrance’ 

JJ NN VV NN NN 

‘a lone tree watches the entrance of the pass’ 

Verse 2 

黃 河 向 天 外 
huang he Xiang tian wai 

‘yellow’ ‘river’ ‘face’ ‘sky’ ‘outside’ 

JJ NN VV NN LC 

NR 

‘The Yellow River faces the outer sky’ 

 

Table 5: POS annotations of a couplet, i.e., a pair 

of two verses, in a classical Chinese poem.  See 

Table 1 for the meaning of the POS tags. 

 

One significant benefit of nested annotation, 

especially in classical Chinese poetry, is the 

preservation of the underlying parallelism.  Two 

consecutive verses, called a couplet, always have 

the same number of characters.  Moreover, two 

characters at the same position in the two verses 

80



often have the same or related POS.  Consider 

the couplet in Table 5. The first two characters of 

each verse, 獨樹 du shu ‘lone tree’ and 黃河 
huang he ‘Yellow River’, respectively, are 

parallel; both are noun phrases formed by a noun 

modified by the preceding adjective. 

In most existing corpora, huang he would be 

simply considered one word and assigned one 

tag, namely, a proper noun 黃河 /NR.  This 
treatment would, first of all, result in one verse 

having four words and the other five, making it 

difficult to analyze character correspondences.  It 

also obscures the parallelism between the noun 

phrases du shu and huang he: both are JJ-NN, i.e. 

‘adjective-noun’.  In contrast, our corpus 

annotates huang he as a string with internal 

structures (黃/JJ 河/NN)/NR, as shown in Table 
5.  Its outer tag (NR) preserves the meaning and 

boundary of the whole proper noun huang he, 

facilitating word searches; the inner tags support 

automatic identification of parallel structures. 

In all examples above of ‘strings with internal 

structures’, the nested annotations have only a 

depth of one.  In theory, the depth can be 

arbitrary, although in practice, it rarely exceeds 

two.  An example is the string 細柳營 xi liu ying 
‘Little Willow military camp’.  At the coarsest 

level, the three characters may be considered to 

form one proper noun, referring to a camp at the 

ancient Chinese capital.  The string obviously 

has ‘internal structures’, composed of 營  ying 
‘military camp’ and its location, the place name 

細柳 xi liu ‘Xiliu’.  Furthermore, this place name 
has an evocative meaning, ‘little willow’, made 

up of the adjective xi ‘little’ and the noun liu 

‘willow’.  As shown in Table 6, this analysis 

results in a three-level, nested annotation ((細/JJ 

柳/NN)/NR 營/NN)/NR. 
Furthermore, these three characters are the last 

characters in the second verse of a couplet.  

Table 6 also shows the annotations for the 

corresponding characters in the first verse, 新豐

市 xin feng shi ‘Xinfeng city’. Taken together, 
the annotations reveal the perfect symmetry of 

both noun phrases at every level of analysis.  

5 Data  

Among the various literary genres, poetry enjoys 

perhaps the most elevated status in the classical 

Chinese tradition. The Tang Dynasty is 

considered the golden age of shi, one of the five 

subgenres of Chinese poetry.  The Complete Shi 

Poetry of the Tang (Peng, 1960), originally 

compiled in 1705, consists of nearly 50,000 

poems by more than two thousand poets. 

Our method of word segmentation and POS 

tagging has been applied to the complete works 

by two Chinese poets in the 8
th
 century CE, 

Wang Wei and Meng Haoran.  Wang is 

considered one of the three most prominent Tang 

poets; Meng is often associated with Wang due 

to the similarity of his poems in style and 

content.  Altogether, our corpus consists of about 

32,000 characters in 521 poems. 

 

Noun Phrase in Verse 2 

細 柳 營 
xi liu ying 

‘little’ ‘willow’ ‘camp’ 

‘Little Willow camp’ 

JJ NN NN 

NR 

NR 

Noun Phrase in Verse 1 

新 豐 市 

xin feng shi 

‘new’ ‘abundance’ ‘city’ 

‘City of New Abundance’ 

JJ NN NN 

NR 

NR 

 

Table 6: Part-of-speech annotations of the three-

character strings 細柳營 xi liu ying ‘Little 

Willow military camp’ and 新豐市 xin feng shi 
‘Xinfeng city’.  Both are ‘strings with internal 

structures’, with nested structures that perfectly 

match at all three levels.  They are the noun 

phrases that end both verses in the couplet 忽過

新豐市, 還歸細柳營. 

6 Evaluation  

Two research assistants, both of whom hold a 

Bachelor’s degree in Chinese, have completed 

the annotations.  To estimate inter-annotator 

agreement, the two annotators independently 

performed word segmentation and POS tagging 

on a 1,057-character portion of the poems of 

Wang.  We measured their agreement on word 

segmentation, POS tags for ‘strings without 

internal structures’, and those for ‘strings with 

internal structures’. 

Word segmentation.  This task refers to 

decisions on boundaries between ‘strings without 

internal structure’ (section 4.1). Given the rather 

stringent criteria, it is not surprising that only 

81



about 6.5% of the words in our texts contain 

more than one character.  Among these, 75% 

consists of two characters. 

Disagreement rate on the presence of word 

boundary between characters was only 1.7%.  No 

comparable figure has been reported for classical 

Chinese word segmentation, but this rate 

compares favorably with past attempts for 

modern Chinese, e.g., an average of 76% inter-

human agreement rate in (Sproat et al., 1996).  

This may be explained by the relatively small 

number of types of strings (see Table 2) that are 

considered to be multi-character words in our 

corpus. 

POS tagging on strings without internal 

structures.  We now consider the POS tags 

assigned at the lowest level, i.e. those assigned to 

strings without internal structures.  After 

discarding characters with disputed word 

segmentation boundaries, the disagreement rate 

on POS tags was 4.9%.  Three main areas of 

disagreement emerged. 

One category is the confusion between verbs 

and adverbs, when the annotators do not agree on 

whether a verb has an adverbial force and should 

therefore be tagged as AD rather than VV.  For 

example, the word 紆  yu ‘bow’ normally 
functions as a verb, but can also be used 

adverbially when referring to an attitude, 

‘respectfully’, which is implied by bowing. 

When used in collocation with the word 顧 gu 

‘visit’ in the verse 伏檻紆三顧 fu jian yu san gu, 
it can therefore mean ‘prostrated on the threshold 

and respectfully (AD) paid visits three times’ or 

‘prostrated on the threshold and bowed (VV) and 

paid visits three time’. 

A second category is the confusion between 

measure word and a noun.  The noun 簞 dan 

‘bowl’ can collocate with the noun 食 shi ‘food’.  
Taken together, dan shi can either mean ‘a bowl 

of food’ where dan is a measure word (M), or it 

can simply mean a specific kind of meal, in 

which case dan is a noun modifier (NN).  Both 

interpretations have been supported by 

commentators. 

The third is the confusion between adjective 

(JJ) and noun (NN), when the word in question 

modifies a noun that immediately follows.  For 

example, for the noun phrase 命服  ming fu 
‘uniform with rank devices’, it is clear that the 

first character 命 ming ‘profession’ modifies the 

second character 服 fu ‘clothes’.  The annotators 
did not agree, however, on whether ming is a 

noun modifier or an adjectival modifier.  In the 

Penn Chinese Treebank POS guidelines (Xia, 

2000), this question is resolved with the 

linguistic test: if the word is JJ, then it cannot be 

the head of a noun phrase.  In practice, this test is 

difficult to apply for non-native speakers of a 

language.  The annotator would have to decide 

whether he can compose a “good” classical 

Chinese that uses the word has an NP head. 

POS tagging on strings with internal 

structures.  Thirdly, we turn our attention to POS 

tags assigned at the higher levels of the nested 

structure.  Of the ‘strings with internal structures’, 

about 73% consist of two characters; those 

longer than two characters are mostly proper 

names. 

We measured inter-human agreement for the 

nested bracketing by taking each annotator in 

turn as ‘gold’, and calculated the precision and 

recall of the other.  The average precision was 

83.5%; the average recall also worked out to 

83.5%.  A significant source of error was 

disagreement over whether several characters 

form a proper name, and should therefore be 

bracketed and assigned the tag NR; these often 

involve knowledge of Chinese history and 

geography. In the remaining cases of 

discrepancies, the vast majority are direct 

consequences of differences in POS tagging.  

Lastly, among the strings with internal structures 

that have received identical bracketing, there was 

almost complete agreement between the 

annotators regarding their POS tags, except in a 

few isolated cases. 

7 Conclusion 

We have a described a novel method of word 

segmentation and POS tagging, tailored for the 

classical Chinese language, and designed to 

support interoperability between corpora.  This 

method has been applied on about 32,000 

characters, drawn from two well-known poets 

from the 8
th
 century CE. 

The corpus aspires to contribute to two areas 

of scholarly enquiry.  First, it is expected to 

facilitate classical Chinese word studies by 

automating word retrieval (e.g., (Lancaster, 

2010)), and will support investigations in other 

areas of classical Chinese philology, such as 

semantic and metaphorical coherence (Zhu & 

Cui, 2010), by supplying syntactic evidence.  

Second, it is intended to serve as training data for 

automatic POS taggers, to automate the analysis 

of the vast and growing digital collections of 

classical Chinese texts. 

82



Acknowledgments 

We thank Tin Ho Chan, Yin Hei Kong and 

Cheuk Ho Wan for their assistance in annotating 

this corpus.  This work was supported by a 

Strategic Research Grant (#7002549) from City 

University of Hong Kong. 

References  

Pi-Chuan Chang, Michel Galley, and Chris Manning, 

2008.  Optimizing Chinese Word Segmentation for 

Machine Translation Performance.  In Proc. ACL 

3
rd

 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. 

Keh-Jiann Chen, Chu-Ren Huang, Li-Ping Chang, 

and Hui-Li Hsu, 1996.  SINICA CORPUS: Design 

Methodology for Balanced Corpora.  In Proc. 

Language, Information and Computation 

(PACLIC). 

Chinese Knowledge Information Processing Group, 

1996.  Shouwen Jiezi --- A study of Chinese Word 

Boundaries and Segmentation Standard for 

Information Processing (in Chinese).  Technical 

Report, Academia Sinica, Taipei. 

George Doddington, Alexis Mitchell, Mark 

Przybocki, Lance Ramshaw, Stephanie Strassel, 

and Ralph Weischedel, 2004.  The Automatic 

Content Extraction (ACE) Program: Tasks, Data, 

and Evaluation.  In Proc. LREC. 

Shengli Feng, 1998.  Prosodic Structure and 

Compound Words in Classical Chinese.  In New 

Approaches to Chinese Word Formation, Jerome 

Packard (ed.), Mouton de Gruyter. 

W. Nelson Francis and Henry Kučera, 1982.  

Frequency Analysis of English Usage: Lexicon and 

Grammar.  Houghton Mifflin. 

Xiaolong Hu, N. Williamson and J. McLaughlin, 

2005.  Sheffield Corpus of Chinese for Diachronic 

Linguistic Study.  In Literary and Linguistic 

Computing 20(3):281---93. 

Xiaoling Hu and Jamie McLaughlin, 2007.  The 

Sheffield Corpus of Chinese.  Technical Report, 

University of Sheffield, UK. 

Liang Huang, Yinan Peng, Huan Wang and Zhengyu 

Wu, 2006.  Statistical Part-of-Speech Tagging for 

Classical Chinese.  In Lecture Notes in Computer 

Science 2448:296-311. 

Lewis Lancaster, 2010. Pattern Recognition and 

Analysis in the Chinese Buddhist Canon: A Study 

of “Original Enlightenment”. In Asia Pacific World 

3rd series 60. 

Yuan Liu, Qiang Tan, and Kun Xu Shen, 1994.  

Segmentation Standard for Modern Chinese 

Information Processing and Automatic 

Segmentation Methodology.  Qinghua University 

Press, Beijing, China. 

Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and 

Beatrice Santorini, 1993.  Building a Large 

Annotated Corpus of English: the Penn Treebank.  

In Computational Linguistics 19(2). 

Anthony McEnery and Zhonghua Xiao, 2004.  The 

Lancaster Corpus of Mandarin Chinese: a corpus 

for monolingual and contrastive language study.  In 

Proc. LREC. 

Jerome Lee Packard, 1998.  New Approaches to 

Chinese Word Formation: Morphology, Phonology 

and the Lexicon in Modern and Ancient Chinese.  

In Trends in Linguistics Studies and and 

Monographs, Mouton de Gruyter. 

Dingqiu Peng, 1960. Quan Tang Shi 全 唐 詩 . 
Zhonghua Shuju, Beijing. 

Edwin Pulleyblank, 1995.  Outline of Classical 

Chinese Grammar.  UBC Press, Vancouver, 

Canada. 

Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann 

Copestake, and Dan Flickinger, 2002.  Multiword 

Expressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP.  In 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science 

2276/2002:189—206. 

Richard Sproat, Chilin Shih, William Gale and Nancy 

Chang, 1996.  A Stochastic Finite-state Word-

Segmentation Algorithm for Chinese.  In 

Computational Linguistics 22(3). 

Richard Sproat and Thomas Emerson, 2003.  The 

First International Chinese Word Segmentation 

Bakeoff.  In Proc. 2nd SIGHAN Workshop on 

Chinese Language Processing. 

Pei-chuan Wei, P. M. Thompson, Cheng-hui Liu, 

Chu-Ren Huang, Chaofen Sun, 1997.  Historical 

Corpora for Synchronic and Diachronic Linguistics 

Studies.  In Computational Linguistics and Chinese 

Language Processing 2(1):131—145. 

Fei Xia, 2000.  The Segmentation Guidelines for the 

Penn Chinese Treebank (3.0).  University of 

Pennsylvania, PA. 

Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu-Dong Chiou, and Martha 

Palmer, 2005. The Penn Chinese Treebank: Phrase 

structure annotation of a large corpus.  In Natural 

Language Engineering 11:207-238. 

Shiwen Yu, Xuefeng Zhu, Hui Wang, and Yunyun 

Zhang, 1998.  The Grammatical Knowledgebase of 

Contemporary Chinese: A Complete Specification 

(in Chinese).   Tsinghua University Press, Beijing, 

China. 

Shiwen Yu, Huiming Duan, Xuefeng Zhu, and Bin 

Sun, 2002.  北京大學現代漢語語料庫基本加工

规範 Beijing daxue xiandai hanyu yuliaoku jiben 

83



jiagong guifan.  中文信息學報 Zhongwen Xinxi 
Xuebao 5:49--64. 

Chunshen Zhu and Ying Cui, 2010.  Imagery 

Focalization and the Evocation of a Poetic World.  

In Chinese Translators Journal. 

 

84


