










































Reformulating student contributions in tutorial dialogue


INLG 2012 Proceedings of the 7th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 95–99,
Utica, May 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Reformulating student contributions in tutorial dialogue∗

Pamela Jordan1
pjordan@pitt.edu

Sandra Katz1
katz@pitt.edu

Patricia Albacete1
palbacet@pitt.edu

Michael Ford2
mjford@pitt.edu

Christine Wilson1
clwilson@pitt.edu

University of Pittsburgh
Learning Research & Development Center1

School of Education2

Pittsburgh PA 15260, USA

Abstract

While some recent work in tutorial dialogue
has touched upon tutor reformulations of stu-
dent contributions, there has not yet been an
attempt to characterize the intentions of refor-
mulations in this educational context nor an
attempt to determine which types of reformu-
lation actually contribute to student learning.
In this paper we take an initial look at tutor
reformulations of student contributions in nat-
uralistic tutorial dialogue in order to charac-
terize the range of pedagogical intentions that
may be associated with these reformulations.
We further outline our plans for implementing
reformulation in our tutorial dialogue system,
Rimac, which engages high school physics
students in post problem solving reflective dis-
cussions. By implementing reformulations in
a tutorial dialogue system we can begin to test
their impact on student learning in a more con-
trolled way in addition to testing whether our
approximation of reformulation is adequate.

1 Introduction

In the current study of tutorial dialogue we describe
here, we seek to identify the most pedagogically
valuable ways in which a tutor incorporates a stu-
dent’s contribution into his turn so that we can im-
plement these in a tutorial dialogue system. In edu-
cational research, two teaching techniques that have

∗The research reported here was supported by the Institute
of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through
Grant R305A100163 to the University of Pittsburgh. The opin-
ions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent the
views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.

been shown to benefit students, Accountable Talk
(O’Connor and Michaels, 1993) and Questioning
the Author (Beck et al., 1996), both train teach-
ers to make use of a number of discussion moves
that react to student contributions. One such move
that is shared by both teaching techniques is revoic-
ing. Revoicing is characterized as a reformulation
of what the student said with the intention of ex-
pressing it in a way that most of the student’s fellow
classmates will be able to make sense of it and elab-
orate upon it. In the case of Accountable Talk it also
includes the intent that the teacher attempt to relin-
quish authority on the topic under discussion. This is
done by not evaluating the student contribution and
instead inviting the student to assess the teacher’s
reformulation. In tutorial dialogue, the pedagogical
intention of revoicing cannot be exactly the same.
However, a reformulation that invites the student to
assess it may retain some of the benefits of class-
room revoicing. This is something we intend to test
as part of our research. A step we are taking towards
such a test is to look at what reformulations appear
in tutorial dialogue and then attempt to character-
ize the tutor intentions that may be associated with
them.

In some applied contexts, such as second lan-
guage learning, reformulations are more narrowly
defined as using different words while keeping the
content semantically equivalent. However, research
in pragmatics takes a broader view of reformulation.
In a corpus study of lectures that examined reformu-
lation markers such as “in other words,” “that is” and
“i.e.” and also endeavored to consolidate the find-
ings from previous linguistics studies, the range of

95



intentions identified include, among others, defini-
tion, denomination, specification, explanation, cor-
rection and consequence (Murillo, 2008). In our pre-
liminary characterization of reformulations in nat-
uralistic tutorial dialogue, we will use this broader
definition and will test whether a tutor contribution
is a reformulation of what the student said by check-
ing the felicity of inserted reformulation markers
such as “in other words.”

Two recent studies of tutorial dialogue specifi-
cally recognize revoicing. The first study (Chi and
Roy, 2010) examines face to face naturalistic tutorial
dialogue in which a tutor is helping a student work
through a physics problem. They suggest that when
the tutor repeats part of what the student said, it is
often done with the intention of providing positive
feedback for correct answers and call this revoicing
as with the excerpt below which is repeated from
(Chi and Roy, 2010) .

S: First the gravity is pulling down
T: Pulling it down. [Tutor revoiced.]
S: Weight is..the mass times..acceleration due
to gravity and that’s force.
T: Right. Right.
S: Ok.
T: So weight is the force. [Tutor revoiced.]

Given the limited context of these transcribed ex-
cerpts it is difficult to argue that these are revoicings
in the sense of Accountable Talk (AT). There are
no implicit or explicit invitations, such as a question
mark, to assess the tutor’s contributions.

While it is possible in the first example that the
tutor understood the student to be making a generic
statement and was adding “it” to apply it to the par-
ticular problem under discussion, it is also possible
they have the shared goal of identifying and sum-
ming all the forces on a particular object and the tu-
tor is just acknowledging understanding.

The second example seems to draw attention to
what is most important in what the student just said.
In AT and Questioning the Author (QtA), this type
of move is called marking instead of revoicing. A
marking is a reformulation that emphasizes what is
most important in what the student said and attempts
to direct the student to focus his/her continued dis-
cussion on the reformulation.

Although neither of these examples are revoicings
in the sense of AT and the first seems more like a
repetition to acknowledge rather than reformulate,
both are still important to consider for tutorial dia-
logue. They may help lessen the student’s cognitive
load (Walker, 1996) by drawing attention to what is
most important in what the student said (Becker et
al., 2011).

The other recent study of tutorial dialogue that
considers revoicing collected a corpus using human
tutors who were trained to use QtA and who fill in
for a conversational virtual tutor in a science educa-
tion system (Becker et al., 2011). This corpus has
been annotated along multiple dimensions. Two dis-
cussion moves from QtA, revoicing and marking,
which are noted to be frequent in this corpus, are
included in the dialogue act dimension along with
other more general speech acts. However, there is no
stated goal to annotate other reformulations. So we
do not know what other intentions associated with
reformulations may appear in the corpus.

In addition, the authors’ description of revoicing
differs from that used in AT. Here, it is a reformula-
tion that is meant to help a student who is struggling
with a particular concept. As shown in the annotated
example of revoicing repeated below from (Becker
et al., 2011), authority is not relinquished and the
student is not invited to assess the reformulation.

S33: well when you scrub the the paperclip to
the magnet the paperclip is starting to be a mag-
net [Answer/Describe/Process]
T34: very good, so if the magnet gets
close to the paperclip it picks it up [Feed-
back/Positive/None, Revoice/None/None]

A range of reformulations are recognized in other
work on tutorial dialogue and have been incorpo-
rated into tutorial dialogue systems. In AutoTutor
(Person et al., 2003), elaboration and summary in-
volve reformulation. In Circsim-Tutor (Freedman,
2000), student answers that are close to correct ex-
cept for terminology trigger a reformulation. Fi-
nally, in Beetle II (Dzikovska et al., 2008), restate-
ments of correct and near correct answers involve
reformulations. In our work we wish to identify a
more comprehensive set of reformulation types and
intentions and determine which of these types are
most beneficial to emulate.

96



In this paper we examine a corpus of natural-
istic human tutorial dialogues for tutor reformula-
tions. We further outline our plans for implementing
revoicing and reformulation in our tutorial dialogue
system, Rimac (Katz et al., 2011), which engages
high school physics students in post problem solv-
ing reflective discussions. By implementing refor-
mulations and revoicings we can begin to test their
impact on student learning in a more controlled way
in addition to testing whether our approximations of
them are adequate.

First, we will describe the corpus of human tu-
torial dialogues we are analyzing and then we will
present examples of some of the reformulations we
have found in the corpus and speculate upon pos-
sible tutor intentions for these reformulations. We
will then outline our plans for implementing certain
types of reformulation by first describing the current
tutorial dialogue system and the planned modifica-
tions for implementing tutor reformulations.

2 The Corpus

The corpus of human tutorial dialogues we are an-
alyzing was collected during a study (Katz et al.,
2003) on the effectiveness of reflection questions af-
ter a physics problem-solving session with the An-
des physics tutoring system (VanLehn et al., 2005).
The tutors in this corpus were graduate teaching
assistants who had experience in tutoring physics.
The students were recruited from introductory un-
dergraduate physics courses.

The students first solved a problem using the
Andes system and afterwards they were presented
with a deep-reasoning reflection question which they
needed to answer. After typing their answer, they
then engaged in a typed dialogue with a human tutor
to follow up on their answer. This dialogue contin-
ued until the tutor was satisfied that the student un-
derstood the correct answer. Three to eight reflection
questions were asked per problem solved in Andes.
There were 12 Andes problems in all.

3 Characterizing Reformulations in
Reflective Tutorial Dialogue

As part of our analysis of the corpus described in
the previous section, we have been annotating cases
of repetition and reformulation across immediately

adjacent tutor-student and student-tutor turns (Katz
et al., 2011). While this effort is still ongoing and
we cannot yet fully characterize the reformulations
found, we can show examples of some of the re-
formulations we have identified and speculate upon
what the tutor’s intentions may have been. Our goal
in this section is to show the variety of intentions one
can attribute to these reformulations. Due to space
limitations we cannot include examples of the full
range of intentions we have found.

The first example, shown below, reformulates
what the student said (in italics) by using terminol-
ogy that is typical to mathematics/physics (in bold).
Arguably, “I would call that” may act as a reformu-
lation marker in this example. At the end of a re-
formulation, we list in square brackets the pragmat-
ics labels we believe best characterize the reformu-
lation.

T: what direction (in words) is the displace-
ment?
S: downwards/towards the negative y-axis
T: right: I would call that the -y direction [de-
nomination]

The next example, shown below, reformulates
what the student said in terms of a more fully spec-
ified definition. Inserting “in other words” after
“Right” seems felicitous.

T: What is speed?
S: it is velocity without direction
T: Right, The (instantaneous) speed is the
magnitude of the (instantaneous) velocity.
[specification/definition]

The next example, shown below, reformulates
some of what the student said so that it is correct.
Here we can insert the marker “you mean” in front
of “the mass and acceleration are related to forces”
and arguably “as you point out” could be serving as
an explicit reformulation marker. In this case the tu-
tor seems to be correcting an implied “equated to”
to “related to.”

S: the mass and the acceleration push the man
into the airbag
S: so aren’t they considered forces?
T: the mass and acceleration are related to

97



forces as you point out, but in Newtonian me-
chanics are not considered forces. [correction]

And finally, the example shown below is a refor-
mulation that is a revoicing. In this case the student
may be struggling to explain but seems to have a cor-
rect conceptual understanding. The tutor attempts to
summarize in a clearer way what he thinks the stu-
dent meant and invites a student assessment with “I
think I see what you mean” and the question mark.

S: no gravity is no effecting x directly, but if it
did not effect y, it would go on forever, and x
would countinue to grow as well, but since y
has a bound, so does the x
T: I think I see what you mean. That when
gravity pulls the ball back to the earth, that
the earth then affects the horizontal mo-
tion (by direct contact), which wouldn’t have
happened without gravity? [summary]
S: gravity is needed to bring y back to 0 so that
the d x comp is = d

4 The Rimac Tutorial Dialogue System

To understand how we propose to implement re-
formulations, we must begin with a high level de-
scription of the current Rimac system. To build Ri-
mac, we used the TuTalk (Jordan et al., 2007) nat-
ural language (NL) tutorial dialogue toolkit. This
toolkit enables system developers to focus on de-
veloping the content to be presented to students
and rapidly developing an end-to-end system for
conducting experiments that determine what con-
tent and presentation is most pedagogically effec-
tive. Tutorial dialogue system developers can grad-
ually transition towards a more principled dialogue
system as questions of pedagogical effectiveness are
answered, since core modules such as NL under-
standing and generation are designed to be replaced
or supplemented as needed.

The simplest dialogue one can write using this
toolkit can be represented as a finite state machine.
Each state represents a tutor turn. The arcs leaving
the state correspond to all classifications of a stu-
dent’s response turn. When creating a state, the au-
thor enters the NL text for a tutor’s turn and enters
the NL text that defines several classes of student re-
sponses as transition arcs, and indicates which state

each arc leads to. An arc can also push to another
finite state network.

In this toolkit, the NL text associated with a state
or an arc is represented by a concept definition. In
the simplest case, a concept is a set of NL phrases.
For instance, the set for a concept labelled NEG-
ACK might be “Not quite,” “Well, not exactly,”
“No.” When a student turn is received, the dialogue
manager sends a request to the understanding mod-
ule to determine what concepts it best represents and
determines transitions on the basis of the concept la-
bels returned. Likewise when a concept is to be ex-
pressed, the dialogue manager asks the generation
module to determine how to best express it in NL.

In the next section we outline an initial approach
for rapidly testing which reformulations matter to
student learning.

5 Implementing Reformulation in Rimac
and Future Work

In our preliminary approach for emulating some of
the types of reformulation we have found in the
corpus, if there is a more preferred phrasing for a
matched concept, regardless of whether the student’s
response is considered correct or incorrect, then a re-
formulation with the preferred phrasing is presented
to the student. How the reformulation is presented
depends on the quality or confidence of the concept
match. If the student turn is a poor match for a con-
cept, but it is the best available match then the sys-
tem will revoice the student response; e.g.:

S: the distance of the hailstone
T: Are you saying ’distance the hailstone
travels’?

In this example, we assume that “distance of the
hailstone” is a poor match for the expected cor-
rect concept and it does not match any other con-
cepts that represent an incorrect response. Further,
we assume that the author indicated “distance the
hailstone travels” as one of the most highly ranked
phrases for expressing the correct concept. So the
tutor’s response revoices using the preferred phras-
ing. In this example, the tutor’s question invites the
student to confirm the system’s reformulation of her
response or try again.

However, if the student’s response is a high qual-
ity match for a concept but the author ranked this

98



phrasing as a less preferred way of expressing the
concept, then the system will reformulate using the
most preferred phrasing for the concept; e.g.:

S: the height of the cloud and the starting place
for the hailstone
T: Good. You could have also said ’the mag-
nitude of the displacement of the hailstone’.

Note that we are not yet attempting to distinguish
the intentions behind reformulations. Instead we are
focusing on when to revoice vs. reformulate. Here,
revoicing is similar to the confirmation/clarification
questions used in spoken dialogue systems when
recognition of the user’s speech is uncertain.

We have also implemented a standalone prototype
of simple repetitions using the XSLT approach de-
scribed in (Wilcock, 2001). By this we mean that the
system will incorporate part of a student’s answer
into correctness feedback; e.g. for positive feedback
as found in (Chi and Roy, 2010; Dzikovska et al.,
2008):

T: in which direction is the acceleration?
S: it is [to the right|eastward]
T: Yes, it is [to the right|eastward]

and, in addition, for negative feedback similar to
splicing in (Person et al., 2003); e.g.:

T: in which direction is the acceleration?
S: it is [to the right|eastward]
T: No, if it were [to the right|eastward] then
the velocity would be increasing instead of de-
creasing.

We are currently in the process of completing our
analysis of reformulations and are just beginning to
implement the approach for revoicing and reformu-
lation we outlined for the Rimac system.

References
I. Beck, M. McKeown, C. Sandora, L. Kucan, and J. Wor-

thy. 1996. Questioning the author: A yearlong class-
room implementation to engage students with text.
The Elementary School Journal, 96(4):385–413.

L. Becker, W. Ward, S. Van Vuuren, and M. Palmer.
2011. Discuss: A dialogue move taxonomy layered
over semantic representations. In IWCS 2011: The
9th International Conference on Computational Se-
mantics, Oxford, England, January.

M. T. H. Chi and M. Roy. 2010. How adaptive is an
expert human tutor? In Intelligent Tutoring Systems
Conference, ITS 2010, pages 401–412.

M. Dzikovska, G. Campbell, C. Callaway, N. Stein-
hauser, E. Farrow, J. Moore, L. Butler, and C. Math-
eson. 2008. Diagnosing natural language answers to
support adaptive tutoring. In Proc. of International
FLAIRS Conference.

R. Freedman. 2000. Using a reactive planner as the basis
for a dialogue agent. In Proc. of International FLAIRS
Conference.

P. Jordan, B. Hall, M. Ringenberg, Y. Cui, and C.P. Rosé.
2007. Tools for authoring a dialogue agent that partic-
ipates in learning studies. In Proc. of AIED 2007.

S. Katz, D. Allbritton, and J. Connelly. 2003. Going
beyond the problem given: How human tutors use
post-solution discussions to support transfer. Interna-
tional Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Education,
13(1):79–116.

S. Katz, P. Albacete, P. Jordan, and D. Litman. 2011.
Dialogue analysis to inform the development of a
natural-language tutoring system. In Proc. of SemDial
2011 (Los Angelogue) Workshop on the Semantics and
Pragmatics of Dialogue.

S. Murillo. 2008. The role of reformulation markers in
academic lectures. In A.M. Hornero, M.J. Luzón, and
S. Murillo, editors, Corpus Linguistics: Applications
for the Study of English, pages 353–364. Peter Lang
AG.

M.C. O’Connor and S. Michaels. 1993. Aligning aca-
demic task and participation status through revoicing:
Analysis of a classroom discourse strategy. Anthropol-
ogy & Education Quarterly, 24(4):318–335.

N. Person, A. Graesser, R. Kreuz, and V. Pomeroy. 2003.
Simulating human tutor dialog moves in autotutor. In-
ternational Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Educa-
tion, 12(23-39).

K. VanLehn, C. Lynch, K. Schultz, J. A. Shapiro, R. H.
Shelby, and L. Taylor. 2005. The Andes physics tutor-
ing system: Lessons learned. International Journal of
Artificial Intelligence and Education, 3(15):147–204.

M. A. Walker. 1996. The effect of resource limits and
task complexity on collaborative planning in dialogue.
Artificial Intelligence Journal, 85(1-2):181–243.

G. Wilcock. 2001. Pipelines, templates and transforma-
tions: Xml for natural language generation. In 1st NLP
and XML Workshop, page 18.

99


