










































MedLingMap: A growing resource mapping the Bio-Medical NLP field


Proceedings of the 2012 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2012), pages 140–145,
Montréal, Canada, June 8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

MedLingMap:  A growing resource mapping the Bio-Medical NLP field 

Marie Meteer, Bensiin Borukhov, Michael Crivaro,  
Michael Shafir, Attapol Thamrongrattanarit  

{mmeteer, bborukhov, mcrivaro, mshafir, tet}@brandeis.edu 

Department of Computer Science  
Brandeis University  

Waltham, MA 02453, USA 
 

Abstract 

The application of natural language process-
ing (NLP) in the biology and medical domain 
crosses many fields from Healthcare Informa-
tion to Bioinformatics to NLP itself.  In order 
to make sense of how these fields relate and 
intersect, we have created “MedLingMap” 
(www.medlingmap.org) which is a compila-
tion of references with a multi-faceted index.  
The initial focus has been creating the infra-
structure and populating it with references an-
notated with facets such as topic, resources 
used (ontologies, tools, corpora), and organi-
zations.  Simultaneously we are applying NLP 
techniques to the text to find clusters, key 
terms and other relationships.  The goal for 
this paper is to introduce MedLingMap to the 
community and show how it can be a power-
ful tool for research and exploration in the 
field. 

1 Introduction 

In any field, understanding the scope of the field as 
well as finding materials relevant to a particular 
project paradoxically gets more difficult as the 
field gets larger.  This is even more difficult in a 
field such as Bio-Medical NLP, since it is at the 
crossroads of multiple disciplines. The drawbacks 
of keyword search, even using a specific engine 
such as Google Scholar, are well documented 
(Stoica et. al 2007) and recent trends in content 
aggregation and content curation have emerged to 
attempt to address the problem.  Uses of curation 
range from those in library science to ensure mate-
rial remain accessible as format and electronic 
readers change and to make that information more 
findable (e.g. Peer and Green 2012) to those in 
marketing to increase revenue by providing more 
relevant content (Beaulaurier 2012).   

However, these approaches still have chal-
lenges. Automatic aggregation over a large body of 
content still provides too many results without ad-
ditional filtering mechanism.  Content curation, 
which filters content by value and annotates it to 
ensure higher quality returns, is expensive since  
annotating large collections of content with the 
metadata needed to support faceted search and 
navigation is a huge challenge.   

The goal of the work described in this paper is 
to provide a framework for creating a useful re-
source tool bounded by the interests of a specific 
community which can take advantage of automated 
clustering and keyword extraction techniques and 
the use of community based annotation through 
crowd sourcing and social tatting to provide valu-
able curation. What is an impossible task for a sin-
gle team because doable when we successfully 
harness and empower the community. 

The MedLingMap site is available at 
www.medlingmap.org. Currently MedLingMap 
has over 300 references many of which are anno-
tated according to a set of “contextual” facets (de-
scribed below). We first provide some use cases 
for the system and then go into more detail on the 
content, infrastructure and origins of the system.   

We welcome members of the field to join 
MedLingMap as a curator to help extend the re-
source.  Just email info@medlingmap.org to get an 
account.  Please include your affiliation. 

2 Use Cases 

MedLingMap was started as a class project in a 
Brandeis graduate course on NLP in the Medical 
Domain to provide a means of finding and organiz-
ing the publications in the field and as a data 
source for exploring trends in topics and relation-

140



ships among researchers.  While there are many 
use cases for such a resource, three stand out. 

The first is simply the ability to find material 
that meets very specific criteria. for example, to 
find papers using “MetaMap” for named entity 
extraction over clinical data. MedLingMap’s grow-
ing collection of references and the necessary 
meta-data to make it useful is well suited to this 
task.  

The second is to support the exploration of an 
area.  If I’m interested in clinical coding, I can se-
lect that subject area and am presented with a 
number of papers.  I notice that Phil Resnik is on a 
number of papers and may want to follow up on 
his work.  I also see many of the papers are tagged 
with AHIMA, including an entire proceedings that 
is worth exploring.  I select a paper and see the 

abstract mentions a particular challenge that is also 
worth following up on.  We are in the process of 
developing a personal “workspace” that will let 
researchers record searches, annotate findings, and 
keep a queue of the “next directions” that might be 
worth following up. 

The third use case gets back to one of the origi-
nal premises of the work, which is that a “map” of 
a field goes beyond a collection of materials, it also 
provides context and can be used to see “hot spots” 
and trends.  In order to provide this information 
and visualization, we have developed a set of tools 
applying a variety of NLP techniques, such as clus-
tering, topic identification and tf-idf to the content 
of the papers.  This work is described in more de-
tail in (Thamrongrattanarit, et al, 2012).   

 

 
 

Figure 1:  MedLingMap site:  www.medlingmap.org 

3 Content and Context 

The core content in MedLingMap are the refer-
ences themselves.  The underlying representation 
is based on bibtex and references can be added by 
either pasting in a single bibtex item or uploading 

an entire file.  A reference can be added through a 
form interface as well.  

We have added BioNLP and related workshops 
dating back to 2002 as well as many other docu-
ments.  In addition to the references, there are en-
tries for a variety of organizations and resources 

141



with a short description and links for each.  These 
elements are entered by hand.  The assumption is 
that there are a limited number of them and edito-
rial control is more important than speed of entry. 

3.1 Examples of the interface 
The MedLingMap interface is shown in Figure 

1.  All references, resources and organizations are 
linked through a set of “taxonomies” (described 
below), which have been developed bottom up 
based on the material tagged to date.  Selecting any 
item from the taxonomies will select content anno-
tated by that tag.  So selecting a “Technical area” 
from the box on the right brings in all the papers 
annotated by that topic.  A similar box of “re-
sources” allows the user to select all papers that 
have been annotated as using a particular resource. 

For example, in Figure 1 the user has selected 
MedLEE from the “Resources” taxonomy and is 
shown the information on MedLee as well as refer-
ences that have been annotated as discussing 
MedLEE.  In addition to the basic bibliographic 
information, the user can export the reference in 
bibtex or xml or jump directly to it Google scholar, 
which can provide multiple ways of accessing the 
resource. Alternative views show all of the refer-
ences by year, author or title.  

 
Figure 2:  Information on a particular reference 

By selecting a reference in MedLingMap, addi-
tional information is available, as shown in Figure 

2. By selecting any of the key terms from the tax-
onomy at the top of the “view”, the user can go to 
more papers tagged with that term.  By selecting 
any of the authors, the user is shown other papers 
by that author.  Those with a “curator” account 
(described below) can select “edit” and make 
changes or provide additional tags. 

In addition, there is a standard search mecha-
nism, as shown in Figure 3.  We are in the process 
of implementing true faceted search, similar to 
“advanced search” for recipes, where you can se-
lect one or more item from each taxonomy to con-
strain the search. 

 
Figure 3:  Open search 

3.2 Faceted indexing 
Indexing content along multiple dimensions or 
“facets” is not new to search (Alan 1995) and sig-
nificant work has gone into creating effective inter-
faces for faceted search (Hearst 2006).  When 
searching for research materials, the context the 
work was done can be a significant contributor to 
being able to find related materials.  “Necessity is 
the mother of invention” implies that if you want 
to find similar solutions, look for similar needs.   

To try to capture this kind of information, 
MedLingMap has facets organized into taxono-
mies:  
• Technical area or topic of the work (shown in 

the screen shot above) 

• Resources used: 

142



• Data: Corpora such as Genia, CRAFT, i2B2, 
BioInfer 

• Lexical Resources, which are organized into 
dictionaries, and ontologies and  include 
UMLS, PubMEd, MedLine, MeSH, and 
Medical Wordnet 

• Tools, such as parsers, taggers, annotation 
toolkits and more complete systems, such as 
MedLee, GATE, and MIST 

• Shared tasks, such as the BioNLP 2009 and 
2011 shared tasks, BioCreative, and i2b2 

• Institution the work was done in or is associated 
with in some way (e.g. funding, providing re-
sources, etc) 

As the project continues, these facets will grow 
and new ones will be added.  Additional facets un-
der consideration include the program (e.g. across 
multiple institutions, generally associated with a 
single funding source), target data (e.g. medical 
literature or clinical records).   

4 Origins of MedLingMap 

As mentioned above, MedLingMap was started as 
a class project in a graduate course NLP in the 
Medical Domain and the creation of the taxono-
mies and population of the material was done as 
part of the class. However, the underlying architec-
ture itself is based on a system that has been under 
development for speech recognition for the past 
two years (www.stcspeechmap.org) by author 
Marie Meteer as part of the Speech Technology 
Consortium’s effort to improve prior art research 
in non-patent literature.  

The driving principle is that the “art” in any 
field (the papers, documentation, product descrip-
tions, etc) can only be understood in terms of the 
context in which they were produced, contexts 
which show relations between them that is usually 
not available in the individual documents.  For ex-
ample, much of the early work in speech recogni-
tion addressed the challenges of multimodal 
interfaces well before we had sophisticated mobile 
devices.  Solutions are being reinvented and pat-
ents applied for that would not considered novel if 
the original research were more readily available.  
Similar issues arise in multidisciplinary fields such 
as Bio-Medical NLP where different groups come 

together who do not have the same historical con-
text and may not know about previous research.  

5 Infrastructure 

 MedLingMap and SpeechMap are built on Dru-
pal1 an open architecture Content Management 
System (CMS), which underlies many web sites 
ranging from www.whitehouse.gov to BestBuy.   

Using Drupal ensures that MedLingMap can be 
a living, growing resource. Drupal provides the 
following functionality: 

• A database to store, retrieve, and maintain 
large documents sets and web pages, provid-
ing multiple views into the contents. 

• Specific content types for resources, organi-
zations, authors, and references, all linked 
though a set of taxonomies. 

• The capability to load in references in bibtex 
format either in a group or individually and 
annotate them with terms from the taxono-
mies. 

• Maintenance facilities, such as suggesting 
when multiple authors may be the same per-
son and merging them. 

• User profiles with different permission lev-
els to accommodate viewers, contributors, 
social tagging, and private workspaces with 
the appropriate levels of security. 

• The ability to integrate powerful search 
components, such as SOLR2, as well as spe-
cific modules, such as the Bibliography 
module which provides automatic links to 
Google Scholar to retrieve those documents. 

• Web-based to allow easy outside access and 
be more compatible with other systems.  

• Extensibility both for more content, more 
content types, and more functionality.  For 
example while there is a module that pro-
duces a warning if a possible duplicate ref-
erence, we are still looking for one that 
would search out potential duplicates and 
propose merges.  If none exists, such a mod-
ule can be written and easily integrated. 

                                                
1 http://drupal.org/ 
2 SOLR is an open-source search server based on the Lucene 
Java search library. http://lucene.apache.org/solr/ 

143



6 Value for Stakeholders 

The value of MedLingMap varies with the audi-
ence.  We first talk about the value to the current 
community and contrast MedLingMap to similar 
resources already available.  We then look at 
stakeholders outside or entering the community 
and the value MedLingMap brings to them. 

6.1 BioMedical NLP community 
For members of the community, a central reposi-
tory for papers in the field is a “nice to have”.  
There is information that is surfaced by seeing the 
organization of the information and links to re-
sources in one place, but if you have been attend-
ing conferences and workshops regularly, this is 
not new information.  You know the players and 
already follow the work you are interested in.   

In addition, similar information is available 
elsewhere, though in a more distributed form.  
ACL has made all of the proceedings to confer-
ences and workshops available3. Similarly ACM 
and IEEE Xplore provide access to all of the pa-
pers they control.  The significant difference is that 
in these collections even the advance search is re-
lying on standard bibliographic elements, such as 
author and title, and keyword search and there is 
no segmentation of the material by field, which 
introduces significant ambiguity as the same term 
can mean different things in different fields.  Simi-
larly PubMed and GoPubMed offer documents and 
advanced search on a huge body of literature, but 
focused on biology and medicine, not the applica-
tion of NLP techniques to those fields.  MedLing-
Map is designed to be focused on a smaller 
community with more like interests.  

It is also important to note that MedLingMap is 
providing links to papers, not the actual papers, 
which are controlled by the publishers.  While 
many papers are readily available using the links 
provided or can be found through the Google 
Scholar link for each reference, if you need a sub-
scription to see the entire paper such as for IEEE, 
you still need to go through your standard method 
to get those papers. 

LREC’s Resource Map is more similar in that it 
provides more in depth information that the aggre-
gations described above, however the focus is on 

                                                
3 http://aclweb.org/anthology-new/ 

mapping the resources themselves, not necessarily 
all of the publications that have taken advantage of 
those resources, though some of that information 
may be available by following the links.  LREC is 
also using a crowd sourcing method for growing 
the resource by asking those who submit papers 
also submit the information about the resources 
they used.  This is an interesting model in that it 
assures that those contributing have a stake in the 
result since they are members of the community by 
virtue of submitting a paper. 

Organizations such as BioNLP.org and Sig-
BioMed are also important resource aggregators 
for the community.  Neither are focused on publi-
cations and we hope that MedLingMap willl be-
come one more resource they would point to. 

6.2 From the outside 
For students or those who come to the field from a 
neighboring field, the aggregation of the material 
in MedLingMap can save considerable time and 
provide overview or “map” of the field.  Queries 
that are ambiguous in Google Scholar are more 
precise when the domain is limited.  <example> 

This increase in the ability of newcomers in the 
field to find what they are looking for actual turns 
into benefits for those in the field in two ways:  
First, one’s own papers become more findable, 
increasing citations and potential collaborations.  
Second, for those who teach, MedLingMap pro-
vides a great environment for the students to do 
targeted research.  Letting them loose in a con-
strained search environment increases the likeli-
hood they will find a rich body of material to learn 
from and build on without having to always hand 
select the papers. 

7 Growing the resource 

The real challenge for a community resource such 
as MedLingMap is how to grow it to be compre-
hensive and keep it up to date, specifically how to: 

• grow the number of references and resources 

• increase high quality annotations that go be-
yond what can be extracted automatically. 

• provide visualizations that bring to light the 
connections in the material. 

• maintain the quality of the data, for example 
by fining and merging duplicate entries and 

144



ensuring information about resources and 
organizations is up to data. 

The two choices for growing are automatic tech-
niques and human annotation.  We discuss the 
former in a related paper (Thamrongrattanarit 
2012).  Here we describe how manual annotation 
can be feasible. 

7.1 Distributed Power 
The key to high quality documents and tagging is 
community involvement.  There are two comple-
mentary approaches that are key to the MedLing-
Map project:  crowd sourcing and social tagging.  
Crowd sourcing involves the community in finding 
relevant resources, particularly those that are fairly 
obscure and predate the internet.  The second is 
social tagging which lets individuals check on their 
own materials or materials in areas related to their 
own work and adding or adjusting the tags to make 
the content more searchable. 

The key to making these tactics work is setting 
up the right support in the underlying system.  For-
tunately, the MedLingMap infrastructure allows 
for easy signup for those volunteering to contrib-
ute.  These technique have been used successfully 
in patent prior art search by Article One, Inc.4 
which puts out a call to researchers to find art on a 
particular patent.  If the client selects that art to 
support their case, the contributor is paid.  The pat-
ent office itself attempted something similar in the 
Peer to Patent program5, which depended on peo-
ple’s desire to improve the quality of patents by 
letting them contribute art.  It was moderately suc-
cessful, but without the kind of specific reward the 
Article One provides, they did not get nearly as 
much material as they would have liked. 

MedLingMap, SpeechMap and other efforts of 
its kind have the same problem:  no one has 
enough time.  So how do we address it?  How do 
we create a convincing value proposition?  Here 
are a couple suggestions: 

Teaching:  MedLingMap is a great teaching 
tool.  Not only can students use it to do research on 
the material that’s in it, we as educators can enlist 
them to both tag material and go out on the web to 
find additional material to tag and add.  In just one 
semester we have made considerable progress.  If 

                                                
4 http://www.articleonepartners.com/ 
5 http://peertopatent.org/ 

everyone teaching a similar course enlisted their 
students, the students would gain and the resource 
would grow. 

Research support:  With the implementation of 
the personal workspace described above, the sys-
tem will provide a unique service not available 
from other aggregators or content owners. 

Funded project: Being able to hire student an-
notators would accelerate the process.  For the 
SpeechMap project we have a proposal into the US 
Patent Office for funding.  We are open to sugges-
tions about funding sources for MedLingMap. 

Conclusion 

With MedLingMap’s infrastructure in place and 
enough content to provide an exemplar of how it 
can grow, the challenge now is engaging the com-
munity in what we see as an exiting experiment in 
harnessing the resources of the internet through 
crowd sourcing and social tagging to create a liv-
ing resource that will benefit both the current and 
future members of the field.  MedLingMap also 
provides a resource for exploring automated ways 
of annotating and organizing research materials.  
We also hope that this can be a map itself, to build 
similar “maps” in other subfields. 

References 
Allen, RB. 1995. Retrieval from Facet Spaces, Elec-

tronic Publishing Chichester, Vol. 8(2 & 3), 247–
257.  

Beaulaurier, Joe. 2012. Content Curating for Fun and 
Profit, http://whatcommarketing.com/content-
curating-for-fun-and-profit/.  

Hearst, Marti. 2006. Design Recommendations for Hi-
erarchical Faceted Search Interfaces. ACM SIGIR 
Workshop on Faceted Search, August, 2006  

Peer, L. Green, A. 2012. Building an Open Data Reposi-
tory for a Specialized Research Community: Process, 
Challenges and Lessons, International Journal of 
Digital Curation, Vol 7, No 1.  

E. Stoica, M.A. Hearst, and M. Richardson. 2007. Au- 
tomating Creation of Hierarchical Faceted Metadata 
Structures. In Human Language Technologies: The 
Annual Conference of the North American Chapter 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics 
(NAACL-HLT 2007), pages 244–251.  

Thamrongrattanarit, A., Shafir, M., Crivaro, M., Boruk-
hov, B. , Meteer, M. What can NLP tell us about Bio 
NLP? BioNLP Workshop, Montreal, CA, 2012  

145


