










































Multilingual Sentiment Analysis using Machine Translation?


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, pages 52–60,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Multilingual Sentiment Analysis using Machine Translation?

Alexandra Balahur and Marco Turchi
European Commission Joint Research Centre

Institute for the Protection and Security of the Citizen
Via E. Fermi 2749, Ispra, Italy

alexandra.balahur, marco.turchi@jrc.ec.europa.eu

Abstract

The past years have shown a steady growth
in interest in the Natural Language Process-
ing task of sentiment analysis. The research
community in this field has actively proposed
and improved methods to detect and classify
the opinions and sentiments expressed in dif-
ferent types of text - from traditional press ar-
ticles, to blogs, reviews, fora or tweets. A less
explored aspect has remained, however, the
issue of dealing with sentiment expressed in
texts in languages other than English. To this
aim, the present article deals with the prob-
lem of sentiment detection in three different
languages - French, German and Spanish - us-
ing three distinct Machine Translation (MT)
systems - Bing, Google and Moses. Our ex-
tensive evaluation scenarios show that SMT
systems are mature enough to be reliably em-
ployed to obtain training data for languages
other than English and that sentiment analysis
systems can obtain comparable performances
to the one obtained for English.

1 Introduction

Together with the increase in the access to tech-
nology and the Internet, the past years have shown
a steady growth of the volume of user-generated
contents on the Web. The diversity of topics cov-
ered by this data (mostly containing subjective and
opinionated content) in the new textual types such
as blogs, fora, microblogs, has been proven to be
of tremendous value to a whole range of applica-
tions, in Economics, Social Science, Political Sci-
ence, Marketing, to mention just a few. Notwith-

standing these proven advantages, the high quan-
tity of user-generated contents makes this informa-
tion hard to access and employ without the use of
automatic mechanisms. This issue motivated the
rapid and steady growth in interest from the Natural
Language Processing (NLP) community to develop
computational methods to analyze subjectivity and
sentiment in text. Different methods have been pro-
posed to deal with these phenomena for the distinct
types of text and domains, reaching satisfactory lev-
els of performance for English. Nevertheless, for
certain applications, such as news monitoring, the
information in languages other than English is also
highly relevant and cannot be disregarded. Addi-
tionally, systems dealing with sentiment analysis in
the context of monitoring must be reliable and per-
form at similar levels as the ones implemented for
English.

Although the most obvious solution to these is-
sues of multilingual sentiment analysis would be to
use machine translation systems, researchers in sen-
timent analysis have been reluctant to using such
technologies due to the low performance they used
to have. However, in the past years, the performance
of Machine Translation systems has steadily im-
proved. Open access solutions (e.g. Google Trans-
late1, Bing Translator2) offer more and more accu-
rate translations for frequently used languages.

Bearing these thoughts in mind, in this article
we study the manner in which sentiment analysis
can be done for languages other than English, using
Machine Translation. In particular, we will study

1http://translate.google.it/
2http://www.microsofttranslator.com/

52



this issue in three languages - French, German and
Spanish - using three different Machine Translation
systems - Google Translate, Bing Translator and
Moses (Koehn et al., 2007).

We employ these systems to obtain training and
test data for these three languages and subsequently
extract features that we employ to build machine
learning models using Support Vector Machines Se-
quential Minimal Optimization. We additionally
employ meta-classifiers to test the possibility to min-
imize the impact of noise (incorrect translations) in
the obtained data.

Our experiments show that machine translation
systems are mature enough to be employed for mul-
tilingual sentiment analysis and that for some lan-
guages (for which the translation quality is high
enough) the performance that can be attained is sim-
ilar to that of systems implemented for English.

2 Related Work

Most of the research in subjectivity and sentiment
analysis was done for English. However, there were
some authors who developed methods for the map-
ping of subjectivity lexicons to other languages. To
this aim, (Kim and Hovy, 2006) use a machine trans-
lation system and subsequently use a subjectivity
analysis system that was developed for English to
create subjectivity analysis resources in other lan-
guages. (Mihalcea et al., 2009) propose a method
to learn multilingual subjective language via cross-
language projections. They use the Opinion Finder
lexicon (Wilson et al., 2005) and use two bilin-
gual English-Romanian dictionaries to translate the
words in the lexicon. Since word ambiguity can ap-
pear (Opinion Finder does not mark word senses),
they filter as correct translations only the most fre-
quent words. The problem of translating multi-word
expressions is solved by translating word-by-word
and filtering those translations that occur at least
three times on the Web. Another approach in obtain-
ing subjectivity lexicons for other languages than
English was explored by Banea et al. (Banea et al.,
2008b). To this aim, the authors perform three dif-
ferent experiments, obtaining promising results. In
the first one, they automatically translate the anno-
tations of the MPQA corpus and thus obtain subjec-
tivity annotated sentences in Romanian. In the sec-

ond approach, they use the automatically translated
entries in the Opinion Finder lexicon to annotate a
set of sentences in Romanian. In the last experi-
ment, they reverse the direction of translation and
verify the assumption that subjective language can
be translated and thus new subjectivity lexicons can
be obtained for languages with no such resources.
Further on, another approach to building lexicons
for languages with scarce resources is presented by
Banea et al. (Banea et al., 2008a). In this research,
the authors apply bootstrapping to build a subjectiv-
ity lexicon for Romanian, starting with a set of seed
subjective entries, using electronic bilingual dictio-
naries and a training set of words. They start with
a set of 60 words pertaining to the categories of
noun, verb, adjective and adverb from the transla-
tions of words in the Opinion Finder lexicon. Trans-
lations are filtered using a measure of similarity to
the original words, based on Latent Semantic Anal-
ysis (LSA) (Deerwester et al., 1990) scores. Yet
another approach to mapping subjectivity lexica to
other languages is proposed by Wan (2009), who
uses co-training to classify un-annotated Chinese re-
views using a corpus of annotated English reviews.
He first translates the English reviews into Chinese
and subsequently back to English. He then performs
co-training using all generated corpora. (Kim et al.,
2010) create a number of systems consisting of dif-
ferent subsystems, each classifying the subjectivity
of texts in a different language. They translate a cor-
pus annotated for subjectivity analysis (MPQA), the
subjectivity clues (Opinion finder) lexicon and re-
train a Nave Bayes classifier that is implemented in
the Opinion Finder system using the newly gener-
ated resources for all the languages considered. Fi-
nally, (Banea et al., 2010) translate the MPQA cor-
pus into five other languages (some with a similar
ethimology, others with a very different structure).
Subsequently, they expand the feature space used in
a Nave Bayes classifier using the same data trans-
lated to 2 or 3 other languages. Their conclusion is
that by expanding the feature space with data from
other languages performs almost as well as training
a classifier for just one language on a large set of
training data.

Attempts of using machine translation in differ-
ent natural language processing tasks have not been
widely used due to poor quality of translated texts,

53



but recent advances in Machine Translation have
motivated such attempts. In Information Retrieval,
(Savoy and Dolamic, 2009) proposed a comparison
between Web searches using monolingual and trans-
lated queries. On average, the results show a drop
in performance when translated queries are used,
but it is quite limited, around 15%. For some lan-
guage pairs, the average result obtained is around
10% lower than that of a monolingual search while
for other pairs, the retrieval performance is clearly
lower. In cross-language document summarization,
(Wan et al., 2010; Boudin et al., 2010) combined
the MT quality score with the informativeness score
of each sentence in a set of documents to automat-
ically produce summary in a target language using
a source language texts. In (Wan et al., 2010), each
sentence of the source document is ranked accord-
ing both the scores, the summary is extracted and
then the selected sentences translated to the target
language. Differently, in (Boudin et al., 2010), sen-
tences are first translated, then ranked and selected.
Both approaches enhance the readability of the gen-
erated summaries without degrading their content.

3 Motivation and Contribution

The main motivation for the experiments we present
in this article is the known lack of resources and ap-
proaches for sentiment analysos in languages other
than English. Although, as we have seen in the
Related Work section, a few attempts were made
to build systems that deal with sentiment analysis
in other languages, they mostly employed bilingual
dictionaries and used unsupervised approaches. The
very few that employed supervised learning using
translated data have, in change, concentrated only
on the issue of sentiment classification and have dis-
regarded the impact of the translation quality and
the difference that the use of distinct translation sys-
tems can make in this settings. Moreover, such ap-
proaches have usually employed only simple ma-
chine learning algorithms. No attempt has been
made to study the use of meta-classifiers to enhance
the performance of the classification through the re-
moval of noise in the data.

Our main contribution in this article is the com-
parative study of multilingual sentiment analysis
performance using distinct machine translation sys-

tems, with varying levels of translation quality. In
this sense, we employ three different systems - Bing
Translator, Google Translate and Moses to translate
data from English to three languages - French, Ger-
man and Spanish. We subsequently study the perfor-
mance of classifying sentiment from the translated
data and different methods to minimize the effect of
noise in the data.

Our comparative results show, on the one hand,
that machine translation can be reliably used for
multilingual sentiment analysis and, on the other
hand, which are the main characteristics of the data
for such approaches to be successfully employed.

4 Dataset Presentation and Analysis

For our experiments, we employed the data provided
for English in the NTCIR 8 Multilingual Opinion
Analysis Task (MOAT)3. In this task, the organiz-
ers provided the participants with a set of 20 top-
ics (questions) and a set of documents in which sen-
tences relevant to these questions could be found,
taken from the New York Times Text (2002-2005)
corpus. The documents were given in two differ-
ent forms, which had to be used correspondingly,
depending on the task to which they participated.
The first variant contained the documents split into
sentences (6165 in total) and had to be used for
the task of opinionatedness, relevance and answer-
ness. In the second form, the sentences were also
split into opinion units (6223 in total) for the opin-
ion polarity and the opinion holder and target tasks.
For each of the sentences, the participants had to
provide judgments on the opinionatedness (whether
they contained opinions), relevance (whether they
are relevant to the topic). For the task of polar-
ity classification, the participants had to employ the
dataset containing the sentences that were also split
into opinion units (i.e. one sentences could contain
two/more opinions, on two/more different targets or
from two/more different opinion holders).

For our experiments, we employed the latter rep-
resentation. From this set, we randomly chose 600
opinion units, to serve as test set. The rest of opin-
ion units will be employed as training set. Subse-
quently, we employed the Google Translate, Bing

3http://research.nii.ac.jp/ntcir/ntcir-
ws8/permission/ntcir8xinhua-nyt-moat.html

54



Translator and Moses systems to translate, on the
one hand, the training set and on the other hand
the test set, to French, German and Spanish. Ad-
ditionally, we employed the Yahoo system to trans-
late only the test set into these three languages. Fur-
ther on, this translation of the test set by the Yahoo
service has been corrected by a person for all the
languages. This corrected data serves as Gold Stan-
dard4. Most of these sentences, however, contained
no opinion (were neutral). Due to the fact that the
neutral examples are majoritary and can produce a
large bias when classifying, we decided to eliminate
these examples and employ only the positive and
negative sentences in both the training, as well as
the test sets. After this elimination, the training set
contains 943 examples (333 positive and 610 nega-
tive) and the test set and Gold Standard contain 357
examples (107 positive and 250 negative).

5 Machine Translation

During the 1990’s the research community on Ma-
chine Translation proposed a new approach that
made use of statistical tools based on a noisy chan-
nel model originally developed for speech recogni-
tion (Brown et al., 1994). In the simplest form, Sta-
tistical Machine Translation (SMT) can be formu-
lated as follows. Given a source sentence written
in a foreign language f , the Bayes rule is applied
to reformulate the probability of translating f into a
sentence e written in a target language:

ebest = argmax
e
p(e|f) = argmax

e
p(f |e)pLM (e)

where p(f |e) is the probability of translating e to f
and pLM (e) is the probability of producing a fluent
sentence e. For a full description of the model see
(Koehn, 2010).

The noisy channel model was extended in differ-
ent directions. In this work, we analyse the most
popular class of SMT systems: PBSMT. It is an ex-
tension of the noisy channel model using phrases
rather than words. A source sentence f is segmented

4Please note that each sentence may contain more than one
opinion unit. In order to ensure a contextual translation, we
translated the whole sentences, not the opinion units separately.
In the end, we eliminate duplicates of sentences (due to the fact
that they contained multiple opinion units), resulting in around
400 sentences in the test and Gold Standard sets and 5700 sen-
tences in the training set

into a sequence of I phrases f I = {f1, f2, . . . fI}
and the same is done for the target sentence e, where
the notion of phrase is not related to any grammat-
ical assumption; a phrase is an n-gram. The best
translation ebest of f is obtained by:

ebest = argmax
e
p(e|f) = argmax

e
p(f |e)pLM (e)

= argmax
e

I∏
i=1

φ(fi|ei)λφd(ai − bi−1)λd

|e|∏
i=1

pLM (ei|e1 . . . ei−1)λLM

where φ(fi|ei) is the probability of translating a
phrase ei into a phrase fi. d(ai − bi−1) is the
distance-based reordering model that drives the sys-
tem to penalise significant reorderings of words dur-
ing translation, while allowing some flexibility. In
the reordering model, ai denotes the start position
of the source phrase that is translated into the ith
target phrase, and bi−1 denotes the end position of
the source phrase translated into the (i − 1)th target
phrase. pLM (ei|e1 . . . ei−1) is the language model
probability that is based on the Markov’s chain as-
sumption. It assigns a higher probability to flu-
ent/grammatical sentences. λφ, λLM and λd are
used to give a different weight to each element. For
more details see (Koehn et al., 2003).

Three different SMT systems were used to trans-
late the human annotated sentences: two existing
online services such as Google Translate and Bing
Translator5 and an instance of the open source
phrase-based statistical machine translation toolkit
Moses (Koehn et al., 2007).

To train our models based on Moses we used the
freely available corpora: Europarl (Koehn, 2005),
JRC-Acquis (Steinberger et al., 2006), Opus (Tiede-
mann, 2009), News Corpus (Callison-Burch et al.,
2009). This results in 2.7 million sentence pairs for
English-French, 3.8 for German and 4.1 for Span-
ish. All the modes are optimized running the MERT
algorithm (Och, 2003) on the development part of
the News Corpus. The translated sentences are re-
cased and detokonized (for more details on the sys-
tem, please see (Turchi et al., 2012).

5http://translate.google.com/ and http://
www.microsofttranslator.com/

55



Performances of a SMT system are automati-
cally evaluated comparing the output of the system
against human produced translations. Bleu score
(Papineni et al., 2001) is the most used metric and it
is based on averaging n-gram precisions, combined
with a length penalty which penalizes short transla-
tions containing only sure words. It ranges between
0 and 1, and larger value identifies better translation.

6 Sentiment Analysis

In the field of sentiment analysis, most work has
concentrated on creating and evaluating methods,
tools and resources to discover whether a specific
“target”or “object” (person, product, organization,
event, etc.) is “regarded” in a positive or negative
manner by a specific “holder” or “source” (i.e. a per-
son, an organization, a community, people in gen-
eral, etc.). This task has been given many names,
from opinion mining, to sentiment analysis, review
mining, attitude analysis, appraisal extraction and
many others.

The issue of extracting and classifying sentiment
in text has been approached using different methods,
depending on the type of text, the domain and the
language considered. Broadly speaking, the meth-
ods employed can be classified into unsupervised
(knowledge-based), supervised and semi-supervised
methods. The first usually employ lexica or dictio-
naries of words with associated polarities (and val-
ues - e.g. 1, -1) and a set of rules to compute the
final result. The second category of approaches em-
ploy statistical methods to learn classification mod-
els from training data, based on which the test data
is then classified. Finally, semi-supervised methods
employ knowledge-based approaches to classify an
initial set of examples, after which they use different
machine learning methods to bootstrap new training
examples, which they subsequently use with super-
vised methods.

The main issue with the first approach is that ob-
taining large-enough lexica to deal with the vari-
ability of language is very expensive (if it is done
manually) and generally not reliable (if it is done
automatically). Additionally, the main problem of
such approaches is that words outside contexts are
highly ambiguous. Semi-supervised approaches, on
the other hand, highly depend on the performance of

the initial set of examples that is classified. If we are
to employ machine translation, the errors in translat-
ing this small initial set would have a high negative
impact on the subsequently learned examples. The
challenge of using statistical methods is that they re-
quire training data (e.g. annotated corpora) and that
this data must be reliable (i.e. not contain mistakes
or “noise”). However, the larger this dataset is, the
less influence the translation errors have.

Since we want to study whether machine transla-
tion can be employed to perform sentiment analy-
sis for different languages, we employed statistical
methods in our experiments. More specifically, we
used Support Vector Machines Sequential Minimal
Optimization (SVM SMO) since the literature in the
field has confirmed it as the most appropriate ma-
chine learning algorithm for this task.

In the case of statistical methods, the most impor-
tant aspect to take into consideration is the manner
in which texts are represented - i.e. the features that
are extracted from it. For our experiments, we repre-
sented the sentences based on the unigrams and the
bigrams that were found in the training data. Al-
though there is an ongoing debate on whether bi-
grams are useful in the context of sentiment classi-
fication, we considered that the quality of the trans-
lation can also be best quantified in the process by
using these features (because they give us a measure
of the translation correctness, both regarding words,
as well as word order). Higher level n-grams, on the
other hand, would only produce more sparse feature
vectors, due to the high language variability and the
mistakes in the traslation.

7 Experiments

In order to test the performance of sentiment classi-
fication when using translated data, we performed a
series of experiments:

• In the first set of experiments, we trained an
SVM SMO classifier on the training data ob-
tained for each language, with each of the three
machine translations, separately (i.e. we gen-
erated a model for each of the languages con-
sidered, for each of the machine translation
systems employed). Subsequently, we tested
the models thus obtained on the correspond-
ing test set (e.g. training on the Spanish train-

56



ing set obtained using Google Translate and
testing on the Spanish test set obtained using
Google Translate) and on the Gold Standard for
the corresponding language (e.g. training on
the Spanish training set obtained using Google
Translate and testing on the Spanish Gold Stan-
dard). Additionally, in order to study the man-
ner in which the noise in the training data can
be removed, we employed two meta-classifiers
- AdaBoost and Bagging (with varying sizes of
the bag).

• In the second set of experiments, we combined
the translated data from all three machine trans-
lation systems for the same language and cre-
ated a model based on the unigram and bigram
features extracted from this data (e.g. we cre-
ated a Spanish training model using the uni-
grams and bigrams present in the training sets
generated by the translation of the training set
to Spanish by Google Translate, Bing Trans-
lator and Moses). We subsequently tested the
performance of the sentiment classification us-
ing the Gold Standard for the corresponding
language, represented using the features of this
model.

Table 1 presents the number of unigram and bi-
gram features employed in each of the cases.

In the following subsections, we present the re-
sults of these experiments.

7.1 Individual Training with Translated Data
In the first experiment, we translated the training
and test data from English to all the three other
languages considered, using each of the three ma-
chine translation systems. Subsequently, we rep-
resented, for each of the languages and translation
systems, the sentences as vectors, whose features
marked the presence/absence (1 or 0) of the uni-
grams and bigrams contained in the corresponding
trainig set (e.g. we obtained the unigrams and bi-
grams in all the sentences in the training set ob-
tained by translating the English training data to
Spanish using Google and subsequently represented
each sentence in this training set, as well as the test
set obtained by translating the test data in English to
Spanish using Google marking the presence of the
unigram and bigram features). In order to test the

approach on the Gold Standard (for each language),
we represented this set using the corresponding un-
igram and bigram features extracted from the cor-
responding training set (for the example given, we
represented each sentence in the Gold Standard by
marking the presence/absence of the unigrams and
bigrams from the training data for Spanish using
Google Translate).

The results of these experiments are presented in
Table 2, in terms of weighted F1 measure.

7.2 Joint Training with Translated Data
In the second set of experiments, we added together
all the translations of the training data obtained for
the same language, with the three different MT sys-
tems. Subsequently, we represented, for each lan-
guage in part, each of the sentences in the joint train-
ing corpus as vectors, whose features represented
the presence/absence of the unigrams and bigrams
contained in this corpus. In order to test the perfor-
mance of the sentiment classification, we employed
the Gold Standard for the corresponding language,
representing each sentence it contains according to
the presence or absence of the unigrams and bigrams
in the corresponding joint training corpus for that
language. Finally, we applied SVM SMO to classify
the sentences according to the polarity of the senti-
ment they contained. Additionally, we applied the
AdaBoost and Bagging meta-classifiers to test the
possibilities to minimize the impact of noise in the
data. The results are presented in Tables 3 and 4,
again, in terms of weighter F1 measure.

Language SMO AdaBoost M1 Bagging
To German 0.565∗ 0.563∗ 0.565∗

To Spanish 0.419 0.494 0.511
To French 0.25 0.255 0.23

Table 3: For each language, each classifier has been
trained merging the translated data coming form differ-
ent SMT systems, and tested using the Gold Standard.
∗Classifier is not able to discriminate between positive
and negative classes, and assigns most of the test points
to one class, and zero to the other.

8 Results and Discussion

Generally speaking, from our experiments using
SVM, we could see that incorrect translations imply

57



Bing Google T. Moses
To German 0.57∗ 0.572∗ 0.562∗

To Spanish 0.392 0.511 0.448
To French 0.612∗ 0.571∗ 0.575∗

Table 4: For each language, the SMO classifiers have
been trained merging the translated data coming form dif-
ferent SMT systems, and tested using independently the
translated test sets. ∗Classifier is not able to discriminate
between positive and negative classes, and assigns most
of the test points to one class, and zero to the other.

an increment of the features, sparseness and more
difficulties in identifying a hyperplane which sepa-
rates the positive and negative examples in the train-
ing phase. Therefore, a low quality of the translation
leads to a drop in performance, as the features ex-
tracted are not informative enough to allow for the
classifier to learn.

From Table 2, we can see that:
a) There is a small difference between performances
of the sentiment analysis system using the English
and translated data, respectively. In the worst case,
there is a maximum drop of 8 percentages.
b) Adaboost is sensitive to noisy data, and it is
evident in our experiments where in general it does
not modify the SMO performances or there is a
drop. Vice versa, Bagging, reducing the variance
in the estimated models, produces a positive effect
on the performances increasing the F-score. These
improvements are larger using the German data,
this is due to the poor quality of the translated data,
which increases the variance in the data.

Looking at the results in Tables 3 and 4, we can
see that:
a) Adding all the translated training data together
drastically increases the noise level in the training
data, creating harmful effects in terms of clas-
sification performance: each classifier loses its
discriminative capability.
b) At language level, clearly the results depend
on the translation performance. Only for Spanish
(for which we have the highest Bleu score), each
classifies is able to properly learn from the training
data and try to properly assign the test samples. For
the other languages, translated data are so noisy
that the classifier is not able to properly learn the

correct information for the positive and the negative
classes, this results in the assignment of most of
the test points to one class and zero to the other. In
Table 3, for the French language we have significant
drop in performance, but the classifier is still able
to learn something from the training and assign the
test points to both the classes.
c) The results for Spanish presented in Table 3
confirm the capability of Bagging to reduce the
model variance and increase the performance in
classification.
d) At system level in Table 4, there is no evidence
that better translated test set allows better classifica-
tion performance.

9 Conclusions and Future Work

In this work we propose an extensive evaluation of
the use of translated data in the context of sentiment
analysis. Our findings show that SMT systems are
mature enough to produce reliably training data for
languages other than English. The gap in classifi-
cation performance between systems trained on En-
glish and translated data is minimal, with a maxi-
mum of 8

Working with translated data implies an incre-
ment number of features, sparseness and noise in the
data points in the classification task. To limit these
problems, we test three different classification ap-
proaches showing that bagging has a positive impact
in the results.

In future work, we plan to investigate different
document representations, in particular we believe
that the projection of our documents in space where
the features belong to a sentiment lexical and in-
clude syntax information can reduce the impact of
the translation errors. As well we are interested to
evaluate different term weights such as tf-idf.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Ivano Azzini, from
the BriLeMa Artificial Intelligence Studies, for the
advice and support on using meta-classifiers. We
would also like to thank the reviewers for their use-
ful comments and suggestions on the paper.

58



References

Turchi, M. and Atkinson, M. and Wilcox, A. and Craw-
ley, B. and Bucci, S. and Steinberger, R. and Van der
Goot, E. 2012. ONTS: “Optima” News Translation
System.. Proceedings of EACL 2012.

Banea, C., Mihalcea, R., and Wiebe, J. 2008. A boot-
strapping method for building subjectivity lexicons for
languages with scarce resources.. Proceedings of the
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluations
(LREC 2008), Maraakesh, Marocco.

Banea, C., Mihalcea, R., Wiebe, J., and Hassan, S.
2008. Multilingual subjectivity analysis using ma-
chine translation. Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP 2008), 127-135, Honolulu, Hawaii.

Banea, C., Mihalcea, R. and Wiebe, J. 2010. Multilin-
gual subjectivity: are more languages better?. Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING 2010), p. 28-36, Beijing,
China.

Boudin, F. and Huet, S. and Torres-Moreno, J.M. and
Torres-Moreno, J.M. 2010. A Graph-based Ap-
proach to Cross-language Multi-document Summa-
rization. Research journal on Computer science
and computer engineering with applications (Polibits),
43:113–118.

P. F. Brown, S. Della Pietra, V. J. Della Pietra and R. L.
Mercer. 1994. The Mathematics of Statistical Ma-
chine Translation: Parameter Estimation, Computa-
tional Linguistics 19:263–311.

C. Callison-Burch, and P. Koehn and C. Monz and J.
Schroeder. 2009. Findings of the 2009 Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation. Proceedings of the
Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 1–28. Athens, Greece.

Deerwester, S., Dumais, S., Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T.
K., and Harshman, R. 1990. Indexing by latent se-
mantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science, 3(41).

Kim, S.-M. and Hovy, E. 2006. Automatic identification
of pro and con reasons in online reviews. Proceedings
of the COLING/ACL Main Conference Poster Ses-
sions, pages 483490.

Kim, J., Li, J.-J. and Lee, J.-H. 2006. Evaluating
Multilanguage-Comparability of Subjectivity Analysis
Systems. Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
595603, Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010.

P. Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. Proceedings of the
Machine Translation Summit X, pages 79-86. Phuket,
Thailand.

P. Koehn. 2010. Statistical Machine Translation. Cam-
bridge University Press.

P. Koehn and F. J. Och and D. Marcu. 2003. Statistical
Phrase-Based Translation, Proceedings of the North
America Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics, 48–54.

P. Koehn and H. Hoang and A. Birch and C. Callison-
Burch and M. Federico and N. Bertoldi and B. Cowan
and W. Shen and C. Moran and R. Zens and C. Dyer
and O. Bojar and A. Constantin and E. Herbst 2007.
Moses: Open source toolkit for statistical machine
translation. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, demon-
stration session, pages 177–180. Columbus, Oh, USA.

Mihalcea, R., Banea, C., and Wiebe, J. 2009. Learn-
ing multilingual subjective language via cross-lingual
projections. Proceedings of the Conference of the An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics 2007, pp.976-983, Prague, Czech Repub-
lic.

F. J. Och 2003. Minimum error rate training in statisti-
cal machine translation. Proceedings of the 41st An-
nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 160–167. Sapporo, Japan.

K. Papineni and S. Roukos and T. Ward and W. J. Zhu
2001. BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of
machine translation. Proceedings of the 40th Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 311–318. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

J. Savoy, and L. Dolamic. 2009. How effective is
Google’s translation service in search?. Communi-
cations of the ACM, 52(10):139–143.

R. Steinberger and B. Pouliquen and A. Widiger and C.
Ignat and T. Erjavec and D. Tufiş and D. Varga. 2006.
The JRC-Acquis: A multilingual aligned parallel cor-
pus with 20+ languages. Proceedings of the 5th Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation, pages 2142–2147. Genova, Italy.

J. Tiedemann. 2009. News from OPUS-A Collection of
Multilingual Parallel Corpora with Tools and Inter-
faces. Recent advances in natural language processing
V: selected papers from RANLP 2007, pages 309:237.

Wan, X. and Li, H. and Xiao, J. 2010. Cross-language
document summarization based on machine transla-
tion quality prediction. Proceedings of the 48th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 917–926.

Wilson, T., Wiebe, J., and Hoffmann, P. 2005. Recogniz-
ing contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment anal-
ysis. Proceedings of HLT-EMNLP 2005, pp.347-354,
Vancouver, Canada.

59



Language SMT system Nr. of unigrams Nr. of bigrams

French

Bing 7441 17870
Google 7540 18448
Moses 6938 18814

Bing+Google+Moses 9082 40977

German

Bing 7817 16216
Google 7900 16078
Moses 7429 16078

Bing+Google+Moses 9371 36556

Spanish

Bing 7388 17579
Google 7803 18895
Moses 7528 18354

Bing+Google+Moses 8993 39034

Table 1: Features employed.

Language SMT Test Set SMO AdaBoost M1 Bagging Bleu Score
English GS 0.685 0.685 0.686
To German

Bing
GS 0.641 0.631 0.648
Tr 0.658 0.636 0.662 0.227

To German
Google T.

GS 0.646 0.623 0.674
Tr 0.687 0.645 0.661 0.209

To German
Moses

GS 0.644 0.644 0.676
Tr 0.667 0.667 0.674 0.17

To Spanish
Bing

GS 0.656 0.658 0.646
Tr 0.633 0.633 0.633 0.316

To Spanish
Google T.

GS 0.653 0.653 0.665
Tr 0.636 0.667 0.636 0.341

To Spanish
Moses

GS 0.664 0.664 0.671
Tr 0.649 0.649 0.663 0.298

To French
Bing

GS 0.644 0.645 0.664
Tr 0.644 0.649 0.652 0.243

To French
Google T.

GS 0.64 0.64 0.659
Tr 0.652 0.652 0.678 0.274

To French
Moses

GS 0.633 0.633 0.645
Tr 0.666 0.666 0.674 0.227

Table 2: Results obtained using the individual training sets obtained by translating with each of the three considered
MT systems, to each of the three languages considered.

60


