










































ATLAS - Human Language Technologies integrated within a Multilingual Web Content Management System


Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 72–76,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

ATLAS - Human Language Technologies integrated within a 
Multilingual Web Content Management System

Svetla Koeva
Department of Computational Linguistics, Institute for Bulgarian

Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
svetla@dcl.bas.bg

Abstract

The main purpose of the project ATLAS 
(Applied Technology for Language-Aided 
CMS) is to facilitate multilingual web content 
development and management. Its main 
innovation is the integration of language 
technologies wi th in a web content 
management sys tem. The language 
processing framework, integrated with web 
content management,  provides automatic 
annotation of important words, phrases and 
named entities, suggestions for categorisation 
o f documen t s , au toma t i c summary 
generation, and machine translation of 
summaries of documents. A machine 
translation approach, as well as methods for 
obtaining and constructing training data for 
machine translation are under development. 

1 Introduction

The main purpose of the European project 
ATLAS (Applied Technology for Language-
Aided CMS)1  is to facilitate multilingual web 
content development and management. Its main 
innovation is the integration of language 
technologies within a web content management 
system. ATLAS combines a language processing 

framework with a content  management 
component  (i-Publisher)2  used for creating, 
running and managing dynamic content-driven 
websites. Examples of such sites are i-Librarian,3 
a free online library of digital documents that 
may be personalised according to the user’s 
needs and requirements; and EUDocLib,4  a free 
online library of European legal documents. The 
language processing framework of these 
websites provides automatic annotation of 
important  words, phrases and named entities, 
suggestions for categorisation of documents, 
automatic summary generation, and machine 
translation of a summary of a document 
(Karagyozov et al. 2012). Six European Union 
languages – Bulgarian, German, Greek, English, 
Polish, and Romanian are supported.

2. Brief overview of existing content 
management systems

The most frequently used open-source 
multilingual web content  management  systems 
(WordPress, Joomla, Joom!Fish, TYPO3, 
Drupal)5  offer a relatively low level of 
multilingual content management. None of the 
platforms supports multiple languages in their   

1 http://www.atlasproject.eu

2 http://i-publisher.atlasproject.eu/

3 http://www.i-librarian.eu/

4 http://eudoclib.atlasproject.eu/

5 http://wordpress.com/, http://www.joomla.org/, http://www.joomfish.net/, http://typo3.org/, http://drupal.org/

72



native states. Instead, they rely on plugins to 
handle this: WordPress uses the WordPress 
Multilingual Plugin, Drupal needs a module 
called Locale, and Joomla needs a module called 
Joomfish. There are modules, like those provided 
by ICanLocalize6, than can facilitate selection 
within Drupal and WordPress of the material to 
be translated, but  the actual translation is done by 
human translators. To the best  of our knowledge, 
none of the existing content  management 
systems exploits language technologies to 
provide more sophisticated text content 
management. This is proved by the data 
published at  the CMS Critic7  - an online media 
providing news, reviews, articles and interviews 
for about 60 content  management  systems. 
Taking into account that  the online data are in 
many cases multilingual and documents stored in 
a content management  system are usually related 
by means of sharing similar topics or domains it 
can be claimed that  the web content management 
systems need the power of modern language 
technologies. In comparison ATLAS offers the 
advantage of integration of natural language 
processing in the multi l ingual content 
management.

3 Selection of “core” words
ATLAS suggests “core” words (plus phrases and 
named entities), i.e., the most  essential words 
that capture the main topic of a given document. 
Currently the selection of core words is carried 
out in a two-stage process: identification of 
candidates and ranking. For the identification 
stage a language processing chain is applied that 
consists of the following tools: sentence splitter, 
tokenizer, PoS tagger, lemmatizer, word sense 
disambiguator (assigns a unique sense to a 
word), NP extractor (marks up noun phrases in 
the text) and NE extractor (marks up named 
entities in the text). After this stage, the target 
core words are ranked according to their 
importance scores, which are estimated by 
features such as frequency, linguistic correlation, 
phrase length, etc., combined by heuristics to 
obtain the final ranking strategy. The core words 
are displayed in several groups: named entities 
(locations, names, etc.) - both single words and 
phrases, and noun phrases - terms, multiword 
expressions or noun phrases with a hight 
frequency. For example among the “core” noun 
phrases extracted from Cocoa Fundamentals 

Guide8  are the following phrases: Object-
Oriented Programming, Objective-C language, 
Cocoa application, Cocoa program, etc. Even 
though the language processing chains that  are 
applied differ from language to language, this 
approach offers a common ground for language 
processing and its results can be comfortably 
used by advanced language components such as 
document c lass i f i ca t ion , c lause-based 
summarisation, and statistical machine 
translation. Content  navigation (such as lists of 
similar documents) based on interlinked text 
annotations is also provided.

4 Automatic categorisation
Automatic document  classification (assigning a 
document to one or more domains or categories 
from a set of labels) is of great importance to a 
modern multilingual web content management 
system. ATLAS provides automatic multi-label 
categorisation of documents into one or more 
predefined categories. This starts with a training 
phase, in which a statistical model is created 
based on a set of features from already labelled 
documents. There are currently four classifiers, 
two of which exploit  the Naïve Bayesian 
algorithm, the two others Relative entropy and 
Class-featured centroid, respectively. In the 
classifying phase, the model is used to assign one 
or more labels to unlabelled documents. The 
results from the different classifiers are 
combined and the final classification result  is 
determined by a majority voting system. The 
automatic text  categorisation is at  the present 
stage able to handle documents in Bulgarian and 
English. For example, the Cocoa Fundamentals 
Guide is automatically categorised under the 
domain Computer science, and unter the Topics 
Computer science, Graphics and Design, 
Database Management, and Programming.

5 Text summarization
Two different  strategies for obtaining summaries 
are used in ATLAS. The strategy for short  texts is 
based on identification of the discourse structure 
and produces a summary that  can be classified as 
a type of excerpt, thus it is possible to indicate 
the length of the summary as a percentage of the 
original text. Summarisation of short texts in 
ATLAS draws on the whole language processing 
chain and also adds a couple of other modules to 

6 http://www.icanlocalize.com/

7 http://www.cmscritic.com/

8 https://developer.apple.com/library/mac/documentation/Cocoa/Conceptual/CocoaFundamentals/CocoaFundamentals.pdf

73



the chain: clause splitting, anaphora resolution, 
discourse parsing and summarization. The 
method used for short texts (Cristea et al. 2005) 
exploits cohesion and coherence properties of the 
text to build intermediate structures. Currently, 
the short  text summarisation modules are 
implemented for English and Romanian.
The strategy for long texts assembles a template 
summary based on extraction of relevant 
information specific to different genres and is for 
the time being still under development.

6	
 Machine translation
For i-Publisher, machine translation serves as a 
translation aid for publishing multilingual 
content. The ability to display content in multiple 
languages is combined with a computer-aided 
localization of the templates. Text  for a 
localization is submitted to the translation engine 
and the output is subject to human post- 
processing.
For i-Librarian and EuDocLib, and for any 
website developed with i-Publisher, the machine 
translation engine provides a translation of the 
document summary provided earlier in the chain. 
This will give the user rough clues about 
documents in different languages, and a basis to 
decide whether they are to be stored.

6.1 Obtaining training corpora
The development  of a translation engine is 
particularly challenging, as the translation should 
be able to be used in different domains and 
within different text  genres. In addition, most of 
the language pairs in question belong to the less 
resourced group for which bilingual training and 
test material is available in limited amounts 
(Gavrila and Vertan 2011). For instance, parallel 
corpora incorporating Bulgarian are relatively 
small and usually domain-specific, with mostly 
literary or administrative texts. ATLAS’ 
administrative subcorpus contains texts from EU 
legislation created between the years 1958 and 
2011, available as an online repositories, i.e., the 
EuroParl Corpus (Koehn 2005); the JRC-Acquis 
(Steinberger 2006), and includes all the 
accessible texts in the target languages. The 
scientific / administrative subcorpus consists of 
administrative texts published by the European 
Medicines Evaluation Agency (EMEA) in the 
years between 1978 and 2009. It  is part of the 
OPUS collection (Tiedemann 2009). The mass 
media subcorpus contains news reports as well as 
some other journalistic texts published in nine 
Balkan languages and English from October 

2002 until the present day on the East  Europe 
information website9. The fiction subcorpus was 
compiled manually by harvesting freely available 
texts on the Internet, scanning, and from 
donations by authors. So far, it consists of texts 
in Bulgarian, English, and German. The 
subcorpus of informal texts consists of subtitles 
of films: feature films, documentaries, and 
animations, all part of the OPUS collection 
(Tiedemann 2009). Automatic collection of 
corpora is preferred to manual, and for that 
purpose a set  of simple crawlers was designed. 
They are modified for each source to ensure 
efficiency. Figure 1 presents some statistical data 
for the Bulgarian-English parallel corpus, the 
largest in the collection (the vertical axis shows 
the number of words, while the horizontal - the 
domain distribution).

Figure 1 Bulgarian-English parallel corpus

Two basic methods are used to enlarge the 
existing parallel corpora. In the first, the 
available training data for statistical machine 
translation are extended by means of generating 
paraphrases (e.g. compound nouns are 
paraphrased into (semi-) equivalent  phrases with 
a preposition, and vice versa). The paraphrases 
can be classified as morphological (where the 
difference is between the forms of the phrase 
constituents), lexical (based on semantic 
similarity between constituents) and phrasal 
(based on syntactic transformations). Paraphrase 
generation methods that operate both on a single 
monolingual corpus or on parallel corpus are 
discussed by Madnani and Dorr 2010. For 
instance, one of the methods for paraphrase 
generation from a monolingual corpus considers 
as paraphrases all words and phrases that are 
distributionally similar, that is, occurring with the 

0

10000000

20000000

30000000

40000000

Administrative Science Massmedia Fiction Informal

Bulgarian English

9 http://setimes.com/

74



same sets of anchors (Paşca and Dienes 2005). 
An approach using phrase-based alignment 
techniques shows how paraphrases in one 
language can be identified using a phrase in a 
second language as a pivot (Bannard and 
Callison-Burch 2005).
The second method performs automatic 
generation of parallel corpora (Xu and Sun 2011) 
by means of automatic translation. This method 
can be applied for language pairs for which 
parallel corpora are still limited in quantity. If, 
say, a Bulgarian-English parallel corpus exists, a 
Bulgarian Polish parallel corpus can be 
constructed by means of automatic translation 
from English to Polish. To control the quality of 
the automatically generated data, multiple 
translation systems can be used, and the 
compatibility of the translated outputs can be 
calculated. Thus, both methods can fill gaps in 
the available data, the first  method by extending 
existing parallel corpora and the second by 
automatic construction of parallel corpora.

6.2 Accepted approach
Given that the ATLAS platform deals with 
languages from different  language families and 
that the engine should support  several domains, 
an interlingua approach is not suitable. Building 
transfer systems for all language pairs is also 
time-consuming and does not make the platform 
easily portable to other languages. When all 
requirements and limitations are taken into 
account, corpus-based machine translation 
paradigms are the best option that can be 
considered (Karagyozov et al. 2012). For the 
ATLAS translation engine it  was decided to use a 
hybrid architecture combining example-based 
and statistical machine translation at  the word- 
based level (i.e., no syntactic trees will be used). 
The ATLAS translation engine interacts with 
other modules of the system. For example, the 
document categorisation module assigns one or 
more domains to each document, and if no 
specific trained translation model for the 
respective domain exists, the user gets a warning 
that the translation may be inadequate with 
respect to lexical coverage. Each input item to 
the translation engine is then processed by the 
example-based machine translation component.
If the input as a whole or important chunks of it 
are found in the translation database, the 
translation equivalents are used and, if necessary, 
combined (Gavrila 2011). In all other cases the 
input  is sent further to the Moses-based machine 
translation component which uses a part-of- 
speech and domain-factored model (Niehues and 
Waibel 2010).

Like the architecture of the categorization 
engine, the translation system in ATLAS is able 
to accommodate and use different  third-party 
translations engines, such as those of Google, 
Bing, and Yahoo.
The ATLAS machine translation module is still 
under development. Some experiments in 
translation between English, German, and 
Romanian have been performed in order to 
define: what  parameter settings are suitable for 
language pairs with a rich morphology, what 
tuning steps lead to significant  improvements, 
wheather the PoS-factored models improve 
significantly the quality of results (Karagyozov 
et al. 2012).

7! Conclusion
To conclude, ATLAS enables users to create, 
organise and publish various types of 
multilingual documents. ATLAS reduces the 
manual work by using automatic classification of 
documents and helps users to decide about a 
document by providing summaries of documents 
and their translations. Moreover, the user can 
easily find the most  relevant texts within large 
document collections and get  a brief overview of 
the i r content . A modern web content 
management systems should help users come to 
grips with the growing complexity of today’s 
multilingual websites. ATLAS answers to this 
task.

Acknowledgments
ATLAS (Applied Technology for Language-
Aided CMS) is a European project  funded under 
the CIP ICT  Policy Support  Programme, Grant 
Agreement 250467.

References 
Bannard and Callison-Burch 2005: Bannard, Colin 

and Chris Callison-Burch. Paraphrasing with 
bilingual parallel corpora. In Proceedings of 
ACL, pages 597–604, Ann Arbor, MI. 

Cristea et al. 2005: Cristea,  D.,  Postolache, O., Pistol, 
I. (2005). Summarisation through Discourse 
Structure. Computational Linguistics and 
Intelligent Text Processing, 6th International 
Conference CICLing 2005 (pp.  632-644). Mexico 
City, Mexico: Springer LNSC, vol. 3406.

Gavrila 2011: Gavrila, M. Constrained recombination 
in an example-based machine translation system. 
In M. L. Vincent Vondeghinste (Ed.), 15th 
Annual Conference of the European Association 
for Machine Translation, Leuven, Belgium, pp. 
193-200.

75



Gavrila and Vertan 2011: Gavrila Monica and 
Cristina Vertan. Training data in statistical 
machine translation – the more, the better? In 
Proceedings of the RANLP-2011 Conference, 
September 2011, Hissar, Bulgaria, pp. 551-556.

Karagyozov et al. 2012: Diman Karagiozov, Anelia 
Belogay, Dan Cristea, Svetla Koeva,  Maciej 
Ogrodniczuk, Polivios Raxis, Emil Stoyanov and 
Cristina Vertan. i-Librarian – Free online library 
for European citizens, In Infotheca, Belgrade, to 
appear.

Koehn 2005: Koehn, Ph.  Europarl: A Parallel Corpus 
for Statistical Machine Translation, Proceedings 
of MT Summit, pp. 79–86.

Madnani and Dorr 2010: Nitin Madnani and Bonnie 
Dorr. 2010. Generat- ing phrasal and sentential 
paraphrases: A survey of data-driven methods. 
Computational Linguistics, 36(3), pp. 341–388.

Niehues and Waibel 2010: Niehues Jan and Alex 
Waibel,  Domain Adaptation in Statistical 
Machine Translation using Factored Translation 
Models, Proceedings of EAMT 2010 Saint-
Raphael.

Paşca and Dienes 2005: Paşca, Marius and Péter 
Dienes. 2005. Aligning needles in a haystack: 
Paraphrase acquisition across the Web. In 
Proceedings of IJCNLP, Jeju Island, pp. 119-130.

Steinberger et al. 2006: Steinberger, R., Pouliquen, 
B., Widiger, A., Ignat,  C., Erjavec, T., Tufiş,  D., 
Varga, D. (2006). The JRC-Acquis: A 
multilingual aligned parallel corpus with 20+ 
languages. Proceedings of LREC 2006. Genoa, 
Italy.

Tiedemann 2009: Tiedemann, J. News from OPUS - 
A Collection of Multilingual Parallel Corpora 
with Tools and Interfaces. In: N. Nicolov, K. 
Bontcheva, G. Angelova, R. Mitkov (eds.) 
Recent Advances in Natural Language 
Processing (vol . V) , John Benjamins, 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia, pp. 237–248.

Xu and Sun 2011: Jia Xu and Weiwei Sun. 
Genera t ing v i r tua l para l le l corpus : A 
compatibility centric method. In Proceedings of 
the Machine Translation Summit XIII.

76


