



















































The Distribution of Floating Quantifiers: A Dependency Grammar Analysis


Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (DepLing 2013), pages 272–281,
Prague, August 27–30, 2013. c© 2013 Charles University in Prague, Matfyzpress, Prague, Czech Republic

 

The Distribution of Floating Quantifiers 

A Dependency Grammar Analysis 

Timothy Osborne 

615 6
th

 Street Apt. 110 

Kirkland, WA 98033 

USA 

tjo3ya@yahoo.com 

 

 

Abstract 

This contribution provides a dependency 

grammar analysis of the distribution of 

floating quantifiers in English and German. 

Floating quantifiers are deemed to be “base 

generated”, meaning that they are not 

moved into their surface position by a trans-

formation. Their distribution is similar to 

that of modal adverbs. The nominal (noun 

or pronoun) over which they quantify is an 

argument of the predicate to which they at-

tach. Variation in their placement across 

English and German is due to independent 

word order principles associated with each 

language.  

1 Introduction 

The quantifiers all (in English) and alle (in 

German) in the following sentences are “float-

ing”: 

 (1) a. They  have  all  understood.  

b. Sie   haben alle verstanden. 

The noteworthy trait of these quantifiers is that 

they are positioned at a distance from the defi-

nite nominal (noun or pronoun) over which 

they quantify. In the examples here, all and 

alle are separated from the pronouns they and 

sie by the finite verbs have and haben. This 

situation is contrary to expectation, since the 

modifiers of nominals generally appear adja-

cent to them. Data such as (1a-b) are, however, 

a frequent occurrence, and the term floating 

quantifier has long been established in order to 

denote the phenomenon. Typical quantifiers 

that float in English are all, both and each, and 

in German alle ‘all’ and beide ‘both’.
1
  

 For the most part, there are two possible and 

competing theoretical analyses of floating 

quantifiers. The one is associated with trans-

formational syntax, the assumption being that 

the quantifier and nominal form a constituent 

at some underlying level of representation or 

stage of a derivation (e.g. Sportiche 1988, Ca-

rillo 2009). The quantifier ends up “floating” 

because its host nominal is moved out of its 

base position up the structure, whereby the 

quantifier remains behind. This approach is 

called the movement approach here. The other 

approach assumes that there is no movement 

(e.g. Dowty and Brodie 1984, Bobaljik 2003, 

Hoeksema 2012), but rather floating quantifi-

ers are a type of adverbial, and their distribu-

tion is similar to that of, for instance, modal 

adverbs (e.g. certainly, probably, mainly). This 

approach is called the adverb approach here.  

 Of these two approaches, this contribution 

rejects the first in favor of the second. It rejects 

the movement approach for two reasons, the 

first being that movement is not consistent 

with the tradition of dependency grammar 

(DG), a majority of DGs rejecting the move-

ments and derivational processes associated 

with transformational syntax, favoring repre-

sentations instead. The second reason for re-

jecting the movement approach is empirical. 

There are a number of problems with the 

movement approach (see Bobaljik 2003 and 

Hoeksema 2012), not the least of which is the 

fact that floating quantifiers at times quantify 

                                                           
1 Partitive quantifiers can also float, e.g. They were all of 

them deceived. The distribution of partitive quantifiers is 

not examined in this contribution, although they behave 

similarly to their non-partitive counterparts.  

272



 

over material with which they cannot be con-

strued as forming a constituent at some under-

lying level or point in a derivation, e.g. 

(2) a.   Bob, Bill, and Tom have all called. 

  b. *All Bob, Bill, and Tom have called. 

Based on the unacceptability of (2b), it is diffi-

cult to see how the quantifier all in (2a) could 

be construed as forming a constituent with the 

subject Bob, Bill, and Tom at some underlying 

level or point in a derivation.     

 The adverb approach is more congruent with 

the DG tradition, since it sees the quantifier as 

“base generated” in its surface position. More 

importantly, it is supported by a number of 

empirical considerations, not the least of which 

is the simple observation that floating quantifi-

ers have a distribution that is similar to that of 

modal adverbs: 

(3) a. 
?
The kids likely will have been seen. 

  b.   The kids will likely have been seen. 

  c.   The kids will have likely been seen. 

  d. 
??

The kids will have been likely seen. 

(4) a. 
?
The kids all will have been seen. 

  b.   The kids will all have been seen. 

  c.   The kids will have all been seen. 

  d. 
??

The kids will have been all seen. 

The adverb approach is supported by the simi-

lar acceptability judgments across these two 

groups of sentences. The movement approach, 

in contrast, comes up short when confronted 

with these data, since it has no reason to put 

floating quantifiers on par with modal ad-

verbs.
2
  

 This contribution presents a DG analysis of 

the distribution of floating quantifiers in Eng-

lish and German, whereby the adverb approach 

is pursued. It will be demonstrated that the 

principle of distribution is consistent across the 

two languages. The differences that do exist 

across English and German are due to inde-

pendent principles of word order that have lit-

tle to do with floating quantifiers.   

                                                           
2 Note that by claiming that floating quantifiers distribute 

like modal adverbs, I am not claiming that floating quan-

tifiers are modal adverbs. A similar distribution does not 

necessitate that the two types of words belong to the 

same syntactic class.     

2 Floating? 

An analysis of floating quantifiers must first be 

in a position to distinguish between quantifiers 

that are and are not floating. In a DG, this task 

can be accomplished if one sees the quantifier 

as floating when its position in relation to the 

nominal it quantifies over would constitute a 

projectivity violation: 

Floating quantifier (initial version) 

A quantifier is floating if interpreting it 

as a dependent of a nominal that it quan-

tifies over would mean the presence of a 

projectivity violation in the dependency 

tree. 

Given this guideline, any time a quantifier is 

separated from the noun it quantifies over by 

one or more words that dominate the noun, that 

quantifier must necessarily be “floating”, e.g. 

(5)    have 

  They       been 

        all    helpful 

 a. They have  all  been  helpful. 

The crossing lines in this tree identify a projec-

tivity violation, which means the quantifier is 

floating.  

  The status of all as a floating quantifier in 

examples like (5) is beyond contention. There 

are other cases, however, where one might 

overlook the fact that the quantifier is floating, 

e.g. 

(6) The boys all left. 

Since the quantifier all is adjacent to the noun 

boys and it quantifies over boys, the guideline 

above does not necessitate that it be viewed as 

floating. Further considerations, however, de-

monstrate that all is not a dependent of boys in 

(6), which means it must be floating. When a 

quantifier attaches to the noun over which it 

quantifies, it attaches as a predependent, never 

as a postdependent, and when it appears as a 

dependent of a pronoun, it is always a postde-

pendent, never a predependent. These facts are 

visible in the following sentences:  

(7) a.   Fred liked all the candies. 

b. *Fred liked the candies all. 

273



 

  c. *Fred liked all them.  

  d.   Fred liked them all. 

These sentences show that when a quantifier 

attaches to the noun it quantifies, it must be a 

predependent, but when it attaches to a pro-

noun, it must be a postdependent. These traits 

of nouns, pronouns, and quantifiers are proba-

bly motivated by prosodic factors, the quantifi-

er preferring to attach as a postdependent to 

prosodically weak elements.  

 The V2 principle of German delivers sup-

port for the conclusion. The V2 principle re-

quires one and only one constituent to appear 

as the predependent of the finite verb in stand-

ard declarative matrix clauses and w-

constituent questions, e.g. 

(8) a. *Die  Leute  alle kennen  es. 

     The  people all  know   it 

b.   Wir  alle  kennen  es.  

    we  all know  es 

(9) a.  *Welche Leute alle  hast du gehört? 

      Which people all have you heard? 

  b.    Wen alles hast du gehört?  

      who all have you heard 

When the left-most constituent before the fi-

nite verb is an NP, the quantifier cannot imme-

diately follow it, but if that element is a pro-

noun, the quantifier CAN immediately follow 

it. The V2 principle predicts that the b-

sentences would be bad like the a-sentences if 

the quantifier were floating in the b-sentences, 

for two constituents, not just one, would be 

preceding the finite verb. 

 The same sort of acceptability contrast 

shows up in English: 

(10) a. *Which people all did you see? 

  b.   Who all did you see? 

This contrast is explained in part if we assume 

that in English as well, only one constituent 

can precede the finite verb in such wh-

questions.   

 The following contrast further supports the 

general insight: 

(11) a. 
?
The boys all had done their work. 

  b.  The boys had all done their work. 

(12) a.  They all had done their work. 

  b.  They had all done their work.  

Sentence (11a) is marginally acceptable, the 

word order in (11b) clearly being preferred. 

This contrast in acceptability disappears in 

(12), where both word orders are fine. The dif-

ference is explained in part if one assumes that 

the quantifier all is floating in (11a), but it is a 

postdependent of the pronoun they in (12a).  

This peculiar asymmetry between nouns and 

pronouns with respect to quantifiers is, again, 

probably explained by prosodic considerations; 

the quantifier prefers to immediately follow a 

prosodically weak element (such as a pronoun 

or an auxiliary verb). This asymmetry must be 

kept in mind when exploring the distribution of 

floating quantifiers. What it means is that the 

guideline above is not completely accurate. 

The relevant criterion for identifying floating 

quantifiers is not whether its position necessi-

tates a projectivity violation, but whether the 

quantifier can be construed as a dependent of 

the nominal that it quantifies over. If it cannot, 

then it is floating. Thus in the case of (6), 

which is repeated here as (13a) with the de-

pendency structure added, the quantifier all is 

floating because it is a dependent of the verb, 

not of the noun: 

(13)          left 

      boys  all 

   The 

  a. The  boys  all left. 

(The arrow dependency edge marks a constitu-

ent that is not selected or subcategorized for by 

its head – in other words, it marks an adjunct.) 

But if the subject is a pronoun, the quantifier is 

a postdependent of the pronoun: 

(13)       left 

They 

      all  

b. They all left. 

Note that the analysis shown in (13b) does not 

prohibit the quantifier from floating if need be, 

e.g. 

274



 

(13)           left 

   They probably all 

  c. They probably all left. 

These points motivate a reformulation of the 

guideline for identifying floating quantifiers: 

Floating quantifier (final version) 

A quantifier is floating if, for whatever 

reason, it cannot be construed as a de-

pendent of the nominal that it quantifies. 

3 Rising? 

A widespread means of addressing projectivity 

violations like the one shown in (5) is to as-

sume that the displaced constituent climbs up 

the structure and attaches to a word that domi-

nates its governor (e.g. Duchier and Debus-

mann 2001, Gerdes and Kahane 2001, Bröker 

2003:294). Groß and Osborne (2009) call this 

mechanism rising, and they indicate its pres-

ence in dependency trees using a dashed de-

pendency edge to mark the “risen” constituent 

and a g subscript to mark the governor of the 

risen constituent.
3
 On a rising analysis, the tree 

for sentence (5) might be as follows: 

(14)    have 

  Theyg    all  been  

             helpful 

  They have  all  been  helpful. 

This sort of analysis has been shown to be val-

id for the major types of discontinuities 

acknowledged in the literature (extraposition, 

scrambling, topicalization, wh-fronting) – see 

Groß and Osborne (2009) and Osborne et al. 

(2012). The analysis cannot, however, be valid 

for floating quantifiers. We know it cannot be 

valid for floating quantifiers because floating 

quantifiers can appear much lower down in the 

syntactic hierarchy, a fact that a rising analysis 

really cannot accommodate, since it would 

necessitate more than one instance of rising, 

e.g. 

                                                           
3 Groß and Osborne (2009) emphasize that the term ris-

ing should not be understood as indicating a transforma-

tional approach. They use the term as a convenient meta-

phor to denote a constellation in which the head of a giv-

en constituent is not its governor.  

(15)   will 

 Theyg    haveg all been 

              examined 

a. They will  have  all been examined. 

The rising analysis shown in this tree is im-

plausible because it sees both the quantifier all 

and the nonfinite VP been examined rising. 

There is no independent evidence that nonfi-

nite VPs headed by an auxiliary verb can rise 

in this manner. 

 A more plausible approach is to assume that 

the quantifier attaches as a postdependent to 

the infinitive auxiliary have: 

(15)   will 

  Theyg    haveg   

all been 

               examined 

b. They will  have  all been  examined. 

An alternative analysis here that attaches the 

quantifier all as a predependent to the partici-

ple been is implausible for reasons that will be 

made clear further below.  

The greater point to these examples is that 

many floating quantifiers appear too low in the 

syntactic hierarchy to allow an analysis in 

terms of rising. This insight leads immediately 

to the following question: then what is a float-

ing quantifier? As stated in the introduction, 

the current contribution follows an established 

tradition in assuming that floating quantifiers 

are essentially a type of adverb that has a dis-

tribution similar to that of modal adverbs.     

4 Why float? 

Floating quantifiers have similar quantifica-

tional powers to the corresponding non-

floating quantifiers. They are quantifying over 

a nominal, restricting or expanding the set of 

entities that can be denoted by the nominal. 

Thus the following two sentences translate to 

the same formula of predicate logic: 

(16) a. All the guests were hungry. 

  b. The guests were all hungry.  

   ∀x ((guest (x)) → (hungry (x))) 

275



 

Given this complete overlap in meaning, one 

can ask why floating quantifiers exist: what do 

they accomplish? The answer to this question 

is that they can disambiguate utterances. 

 Dowty and Brody (1984) demonstrate that 

the use of a floating quantifier can disambigu-

ate an utterance. Floating quantifiers do not, 

namely, allow the scope ambiguities associated 

with their non-floating counterparts. The fol-

lowing sentence is ambiguous depending on 

whether the quantifier scopes over the nega-

tion, or vice versa: 

(17) a. All the women didn’t protest.  

     ∀x ((woman (x)) → ¬ (protest (x)))  
   ¬ ∀x ((woman (x)) → (protest (x))) 

When the quantifier floats, in contrast, the am-

biguity disappears: 

(17) b. The women all didn’t protest.  

∀x ((woman (x)) → ¬ (protest (x)))  
* ¬ ∀x ((woman (x)) → (protest (x))) 

c. The women didn’t all protest.  

   * ∀x ((woman (x)) → ¬ (protest (x)))  
   ¬ ∀x ((woman (x)) → (protest (x))) 

When a quantifier floats, scope is determined 

strictly by linear order; the logical operator that 

appears first in the left-to-right sequence takes 

scope over an operator that follows. 

 The ability of floating quantifiers to disam-

biguate utterances justifies their existence. 

5 C-command? 

The fact, however, that a floating quantifier is 

often not adjacent to the nominal that it quanti-

fies over should motivate one to question how 

it picks out its argument. Why, for instance, is 

the quantifier incapable of quantifying over the 

italicized constituent in the following sen-

tence? 

(18) *His parents’ idea has both upset him. 

This sentence fails obviously because the 

quantifier both cannot pick out his parents’ as 

its argument, but why not? 

 Some constituency grammars might seek to 

answer this question by appealing to c-

command, the assumption being that the argu-

ment of a floating quantifier must c-command 

its antecedent (e.g. Radford 2004:239, Cirillo 

2009:2). Given a DP analysis of noun phrases, 

however, it is not obvious that an explanation 

in terms of c-command will work, since such 

an analysis might take his parents’ to be a de-

terminer that heads the phrase and thus 

c-commands out of it.   

 An approach to the distribution of floating 

quantifiers in terms of c-command will clearly 

not work for languages such as Dutch and 

German, as pointed out by Hoeksema 

(2012:3), because these languages allow the 

floating quantifier to precede its nominal, as 

the following examples from German, taken 

from Hoeksema, demonstrate: 

(19) a. Alle haben  sie  gelogen. 

   all have  they lied 

   ‘They have all lied.’ 

  b. Beide  waren  sie  dabei. 

   Both  were  they present 

   ‘They were both present.’ 

The pre-verb position is widely believed to be 

the most prominent syntactic position, the one 

position that c-commands everything to its 

right. Thus there is no way that the subject 

pronouns sie and sie in these sentences can be 

construed as c-commanding the quantifiers.
4
 

 The relevant insight concerning sentence 

(18) is that his parents’ is not an argument of 

the matrix predicate, but rather it is embedded 

in an argument of the matrix predicate. In or-

der to be an argument of the matrix predicate, 

it would have to be directly dependent on it. 

The rule of quantifier binding is therefore that 

a floating quantifier can quantify only over an 

argument of the predicate to which it attaches: 

Principle of floating quantification 

A floating quantifier can quantify only 

over an argument of the predicate to 

which the quantifier attaches. 

It is important to note that predicates in de-

pendency structures are often multi-word cate-

nae (Osborne et al. 2012), that is, they consist 

of a word or a combination of words that are 

chained together by dependencies. Thus what 

                                                           
4 Unlike German, English never allows a floating quanti-

fier to precede its nominal. The difference across the two 

languages probably has to do with differences in how 

topicalization occurs.     

276



 

this principle says is that a floating quantifier 

can quantify over a given nominal only as long 

as it attaches to any part of the predicate for 

which that nominal is an argument. 

 The catena concept as it bears on predicates 

is illustrated using the following structure: 

(20) may 

He    have 

        been 

           being 

              advised 

He may  have  been  being advised. 

The matrix predicate is in italics. Each of the 

auxiliary verbs, starting with the modal auxil-

iary, is part of the matrix predicate. We know 

that these verbs are part of the matrix predicate 

because they do not select any arguments and 

they thus do not each constitute a separate 

predicate. They certainly subcategorize for 

specific syntactic categories, but they do not 

semantically select any arguments; they con-

tribute only functional meaning to the core of 

the predicate represented by advised. Hence 

what the principle of floating quantification 

says is that by attaching to any one of the 

words of such a predicate catena, a floating 

quantifier is quantifying over one of the argu-

ments of that multi-word predicate catena. 

 The principle allows a floating quantifier to 

attach to a predicate that is embedded under a 

dominant control predicate, e.g. 

(21)    asked 

    They    us  to 

            all leave 

a.   They asked us  to  all leave. 

 b. *They asked  him  to  all  leave. 

Since the position of the quantifier between to 

and leave prevents it from attaching to the ma-

trix predicate asked, the quantifier is restricted 

to quantifying over the argument of the em-

bedded predicate to…leave, that argument be-

ing us/him.
5
 This explains the fact that all can-

                                                           
5 The quantifier in (21) is shown as a postdependent of 

the particle to. This analysis is plausible for a couple of 

reasons, the one being that English prefers right-

branching structures, and the other is that there is no evi-

not quantify over they, for they is an argument 

of asked, not of to…leave. Note that a basic 

trait of control predicates liked asked in (21) is 

that they assign one of their arguments to also 

be the subject argument of the infinitive predi-

cate that they embed. What this means is that a 

floating quantifier can attach to an embedded 

predicate yet still quantify over a dependent of 

the matrix predicate, as shown in (21).  

 The principle is also valid for German, e.g. 

(22)  haben 

 Sie      gebeten 

      uns       zu gehen 

            alle 

a. Sie haben uns gebeten, alle zu gehen.  

 they have  us  asked  all to leave 

b. *Sie haben ihn gebeten alle zu gehen. 

 they have  him asked  all to leave 

We again see that when the quantifier attaches 

to the embedded predicate, it is capable of 

quantifying over only the one argument of the 

embedded predicate, uns/ihn in this case. Note 

the status of all in (21) as a postdependent of 

to in contrast to alle in (22), which is a prede-

pendent of zu gehen. Zu-infinitives in German 

behave as single words in every respect, hence 

they are granted just a single node here.  

6 Pre- or postdependents? 

An aspect of floating quantifiers that has not 

been addressed so far in this contribution con-

cerns their status as either pre- or postdepend-

ents. Do they prefer to be pre- or postdepend-

ents of their heads? The answer to this ques-

tion is not obvious. In fact, an examination of 

the data suggests that floating quantifiers obey 

language specific constraints; they are at times 

predependents of their heads, and at other 

times postdependents, depending in part on the 

extent to which the language at hand prefers 

centrifugal (right branching) or centripetal (left 

branching) structures.   

The fact that quantifiers cannot attach to 

nouns as postdependents, as illustrated with 

                                                                                    
dence that floating quantifiers can attach as predepend-

ents to infinitives embedded under a finite verb. The 

issue is touched on below.  

277



 

examples (7a-b), impacts the analysis of float-

ing quantifiers in relation to auxiliary and full 

verbs. In particular, it helps motivate the in-

sight that floating quantifiers only reluctantly 

attach as a predependent to finite auxiliary 

verbs in English, but they readily attach as 

predependents to finite full verbs: 

(23) a. 
?
The workmen all will show up. 

  b.  The workmen will all show up. 

(24)   The workmen all showed up.  

Sentence (23a) is marginal, the order in (23b) 

clearly being preferred, whereas sentence (24), 

where the floating quantifier also immediately 

precedes the finite verb, is perfectly fine. The 

reason for this contrast between auxiliary verbs 

and full verbs is not entirely clear, although as 

stated above, it probably has to do with pro-

sodic differences between auxiliary verbs, 

which tend to be unstressed, and full verbs, 

which tend to be prosodically more prominent. 

Floating quantifiers prefer to attach as postde-

pendents to prosodically weak words in Eng-

lish. If such a word is not available, only then 

do they readily attach as a predependent to a 

prosodically more prominent word.   

 Despite the fact that sentence (23a) is not 

very good, examples like (24) demonstrate that 

floating quantifiers can easily attach to verbs 

as predependents. But this insight does not 

clarify whether a floating quantifier that ap-

pears between two verbs of a predicate catena 

is a pre- or postdependent. For instance, which 

of the following two analyses is correct? 

(25)       were 

      dogs     both  fed 

   The           

  a. The dogs  were  both  fed.  

        were 

     dogs        fed 

   The       both     

  b. The dogs  were  both  fed. 

Three considerations support the analysis 

shown in (25a) over the one in (25b). The first  

is that English VPs are by and large right 

branching. In this regard, the analysis in (25b) 

would necessitate viewing both fed as a left-

branching VP, which does not seem right for 

English.  

 The second consideration supporting (25a) 

over (25b) has to do with the category status of 

the floating quantifier. One can make a case 

that floating quantifiers can be nominals, since 

quantifiers can appear as argument dependents 

of verbs, e.g. All is good, We saw both (of 

them), etc.  Nominals do not generally attach 

to nonfinite verbs as predependents in English. 

The analysis in (25a) accommodates this fact, 

whereas the analysis in (25b) contradicts it.  

 The third consideration supporting (25a) 

over (25b) is evident when a measure adverb 

appears in addition to the floating quantifier, 

e.g. 

(26) a.    The dogs are all completely fed. 

  b. *The dogs are completely all fed. 

Measure adverbs attach directly to the predi-

cate word that they modify. They can be dis-

placed with their head, e.g. Completely fed, the 

dogs definitely were. If all were a predepend-

ent of fed in (26), we would expect both sen-

tences to be acceptable. Since only (26a) 

works, we can assume that all is not attaching 

to fed as a predependent, but rather it must be a 

postdependent of are.  

  The analysis can be extended to similar cas-

es such as (15) above, which is repeated here 

as (27): 

(27)   will 

  They    haveg   

all been 

               examined 

 They will  have  all been  examined. 

The floating quantifier is taken as a postde-

pendent of have as opposed to as a predepend-

ent of been. The three considerations enumer-

ated for examples (25) and (26) extend to this 

case, where the quantifier appears lower in the 

structure.  

 Applying the reasoning to further cases, the 

account here sees floating quantifiers as pre- 

and postdependents of finite verbs, but gener-

ally only as postdependents of nonfinite verbs 

in English (overlooking an exception discussed 

below). This analysis does not extend to Ger-

278



 

man, however, since there is clear evidence 

that floating quantifiers can be predependents 

of nonfinite verbs in German. Example (22) 

from above is repeated here as (28):   

(28)  haben 

 Sie      gebeten 

       uns       zu gehen 

            alle 

a. Sie haben uns gebeten, alle zu gehen.  

 they have  us  asked  all to leave 

The analysis shown here, where alle is a pre-

dependent of zu gehen, is the only plausible 

analysis for two reasons: because zu-infinitive 

phrases tend to behave as single constituents in 

German and because the only alternative 

would be to position the quantifier as a postde-

pendent of gebeten, which cannot be correct, 

since the nonverbal dependents of nonfinite 

verbs in German are by and large predepend-

ents, not postdependents.   

 The long and the short of these considera-

tions is that nonfinite verbs in English take 

floating quantifiers as postdependents in line 

with the tendency for nonfinite VPs in English 

to be right branching. In German in contrast, 

floating quantifiers attach to nonfinite verbs as 

predependents in line with the tendency for 

nonfinite VPs in German to be left branching.  

7 Predicate catenae 

The observations and reasoning employed 

above do not make the correct prediction for 

floating quantifiers in nonfinite clauses. When 

the floating quantifier appears in a clausal con-

stituent the head of which is a participle, for 

instance, the quantifier has the option to pre-

cede or follow the participle, e.g.  

(29) a. The beers all tasting the same, … 

  b. The beers tasting all the same,… 

(30) a. The boys both having been examined,..  

  b. The boys having both been examined,... 

The same optional position occurs in nonfinite 

clauses even when the predicate is not a verb 

form, e.g. 

(31) a. With the two girls both in love with it,.. 

  b. With the two girls in love with it both,.. 

These data suggest that the generalization ar-

rived at in the foregoing section cannot be cor-

rect. Nonfinite verb forms can in fact take 

floating quantifiers as predependents in Eng-

lish, as the a-sentences in (29-31) demonstrate.   

 To accommodate these additional data, the 

role of predicate catenae can be acknowledged. 

The relevant criterion for determining when a 

floating quantifier can be a predependent con-

cerns the root word of the predicate catena in-

volved. A floating quantifier can precede or 

follow the root word of a predicate catena, re-

gardless of whether this root word is a finite 

verb or not. Below this root word, however, a 

floating quantifier can attach to a nonfinite 

verb only as a postdependent:  

Distribution of floating quantifiers 

in English 

Floating quantifiers in English can at-

tach as a pre- or postdependent to the 

root word of a clause predicate, or as a 

postdependent to a nonfinite verb below 

the root.  

The principle is similar for German, the only 

difference being that the quantifiers attach as 

predependents to the nonfinite verbs below the 

root, not as postdependents: 

Distribution of floating quantifiers 

in German 

Floating quantifiers in German can at-

tach as a pre- or postdependent to the 

root word of a clause predicate, or as a 

predependent to a nonfinite verb below 

the root.  

Of course this rule cannot flout the V2 princi-

ple, meaning that floating quantifiers in Ger-

man cannot precede the finite verb of a matrix 

V2 (or V1) clause – see example (8a) above. 

They can easily precede a finite verb in VF 

clauses, though, e.g. 

(32) dass 

             essen 

       Hunde  alle 

     die 

  dass  die Hunde  alle essen 

  that  the dogs   all eat 

  ‘that the dogs are all eating’ 

279



 

In sum, the distribution of floating quantifiers 

in English and German is similar, the same 

basic principle of distribution determining 

where they can appear. The differences that do 

exist across the two languages are explained by 

overarching principles of word order, i.e. SV 

vs. V2 word order and left vs. right branching 

VPs.  

8 Enigmatic behavior 

The two principles just produced are necessary 

conditions on the distribution of floating quan-

tifiers, but they are not sufficient ones. There 

are a couple of outstanding issues that can now 

be addressed, however briefly. The first con-

cerns the special behavior of all. As noted a 

couple of times above, the distribution of all 

seems to be determined in part by prosodic 

factors; it prefers to attach as a postdependent, 

rather than a predependent, to a prosodically 

unstressed element. Other quantifiers are more 

flexible, e.g. 

(33) a.   They will all solve the problem.  

  b. *They will solve the problem all. 

  c.   They will solve the problem all  

  before noon.  

(34 ) a.   They will both solve the problem. 

  b.  
?
They will solve the problem both.  

  c.   They will solve the problem both 

     before noon. 

The contrast in acceptability across the 

b-sentences must be due to prosodic factors, 

the weak quantifier all, which lacks an onset, 

seems to be prosodically reliant on some other 

word in context; it cannot appear in the pro-

sodically prominent spot at the end of sen-

tence. The quantifier both, in contrast, which 

has an onset, can appear in sentence final posi-

tion, although its appearance there is also not 

so good. When something follows the quantifi-

er as in the c-sentences, acceptability improves 

markedly in both cases. Thus these data 

demonstrate that prosodic considerations are 

an additional factor influencing the distribution 

of floating quantifiers. 

 Perhaps the most enigmatic trait of floating 

quantifiers in English is their reluctance to ap-

pear as a postdependent of a nonfinite form of 

the auxiliary BE, e.g. 

(35) a.   The guests will each be fed. 

  b. 
??

The guests will be each fed. 

(36) a.   They will all be trying hard. 

  b. 
??

They will be all trying hard.  

(37) a.   The two will have both been sneaky. 

  b. 
??

The two will have been both sneaky.  

There is a significant decrease in acceptability 

moving from the a- to the b-sentences. The 

source of this decrease is unclear, though, 

since the quantifier can easily attach as a post-

dependent to a form of HAVE, which is also an 

auxiliary like BE, as example (37a) demon-

strates.
6
  

 While it is unclear at this point why a nonfi-

nite form of the auxiliary BE does not readily 

accept a floating quantifier as a postdependent, 

one should note that the problem is not re-

stricted to quantifiers. Modal adverbs are also 

reluctant to appear immediately after a nonfi-

nite form of BE, e.g. 

(37) a.   They will probably be helpful. 

  b. 
??

They will be probably helpful. 

(38) a.   She has certainly been doing the work. 

  b. 
 ?
She has been certainly doing the work. 

What these examples show is that the unwill-

ingness of floating quantifiers to attach to non-

finite forms of BE is not restricted to them, but 

rather it is an aspect of the distribution of cer-

tain adverbial elements in general. These ele-

ments dislike the position between nonfinite BE 

and a full verb or other part of the predicate.   

9 Conclusion 

To conclude, the four highlights of the DG 

account of floating quantifiers presented above 

are repeated here: 

                                                           
6 One possible explanation might have to with the fact 

that nonfinite have cliticizes to other words, whereas 

nonfinite be, been, and being never do, e.g. 

 (i)  We would’ve done it. 

 (ii) *We would’e happy. 

 (iii) *We would have’n happy.  

This observation suggests that nonfinite forms HAVE may 

in fact be prosodically weaker than nonfinite forms of BE. 

280



 

Floating quantifier 
A quantifier is floating if, for whatever rea-

son, it cannot be construed as a dependent 

of the nominal it quantifies over. 

Principle of floating quantification 
A floating quantifier can quantify only over 

an argument of the predicate to which it at-

taches. 

Distribution of floating quantifiers  

in English 
Floating quantifiers in English can attach as 

a pre- or postdependent to the root word of 

a clause predicate, or as a postdependent to 

a nonfinite verb below the root.  

Distribution of floating quantifiers 

in German 

Floating quantifiers in German can attach 

as a pre- or postdependent to the root word 

of a clause predicate, or as a predependent 

to a nonfinite verb below the root.  

And to restate these highlights in other words, 

a quantifier is floating if it cannot be construed 

as a dependent of the nominal over which it 

quantifies. Floating quantifiers attach to predi-

cates and quantify over an argument of these 

predicates. Their category status is that of a 

nominal, which means they distribute like 

nominals. In English, they tend to appear as 

postdependents of nonfinite verbs just like oth-

er nominals, and in German, they tend to ap-

pear as predependents of nonfinite verbs just 

like other nominals. When they attach to the 

root of a predicate catena, they can be a prede-

pendent or a postdependent, whereby prosodic 

factors can influence which is preferred.  

 A final comment considers the DG approach 

to floating quantifiers presented above in com-

parison to previous accounts, all of which are, 

to the best of my knowledge, constituency-

based. While notions such as catena, head, 

dependent, predicate, predependent, and post-

dependent can be defined over constituency-

based structures, doing so is more laborious, 

since the phrasal nodes complicate matters. In 

this respect, the DG approach presented here 

can claim superiority by virtue of its minimal-

ism.    

References  

Robert Cirillo. 2009. The syntax of floating 

quantifiers: Stranding revisited. Doctoral 
dissertation, University of Amsterdam. Utrecht: 

LOT.  

 David Dowty and Belinda Brodie. 1984. A seman-

tic analysis of floated quantifiers in transforma-

tional grammar. Proceedings of the West 

Coast Conference on formal linguistics 3. 
Stanford: Stanford Linguistics Association, Stan-

ford University.  

Denys Duchier and Ralph Debusmann. 2001. To-

pology dependency trees: A constraint based ac-

count of linear precedence. Proceedings from 

the 39th annual meeting of the Association 

Computational Linguistics (ACL) 2001, 
Toulouse, France, 180-187. 

Gerdes, K. and S. Kahane. 2001. Word order in 

German: A formal dependency grammar using a 

topology model. Proceedings from the 39th 

annual meeting of the Association Compu-

tational Linguistics (ACL) 2001, Toulouse, 
France, 220-227. 

Thomas Groß and Timothy Osborne. 2009. Toward 

a practical dependency grammar theory of dis-

continuities. SKY Journal of Linguistics 22: 
43-90. 

Jack Hoeksema. 2012. Floating quantifiers, parti-

tives and distributivity. Freely downloadable 

from ebooks (March 2013).    

Timothy Osborne, Michael Putnam, and Thomas 

Groß. 2012. Catenae: Introducing a novel unit 

  of syntactic analysis. Syntax 15(4): 354-396. 

Andrew Radford. 2004. English Syntax: An In-

troduction. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 

Dominique Sportiche. 1988. A theory of floating 

  quantifiers in transformational grammar. Lin-

guistic Inquiry 19: 425-449.  

Jonathan Bobaljik. 2003. Floating quantifiers: Han-

dle with care. In Lisa Cheng and Rint Sybesma 

(eds.),The Second GLOT International 

State-of-the-Art Book. Mouton de Gruyter. 
Freely downloadal from ebooks (March 2013) 

281


