



















































AIDA: Artificial Intelligent Dialogue Agent


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, pages 145–147,
Metz, France, 22-24 August 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

AIDA: Artificial Intelligent Dialogue Agent 

 
Rafael E. Banchs, Ridong Jiang, Seokhwan Kim, Arthur Niswar, Kheng Hui Yeo 

Natural Language Understanding Lab, Human Language Technology Department  
Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore 138632 

{rembanchs,rjiang,kims,aniswar,yeokh}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg 
 
 

Abstract 

This demo paper describes our Artificial Intel-
ligent Dialogue Agent (AIDA), a dialogue 
management and orchestration platform under 
development at the Institute for Infocomm Re-
search. Among other features, it integrates dif-
ferent human-computer interaction engines 
across multiple domains and communication 
styles such as command, question answering, 
task-oriented dialogue and chat-oriented dia-
logue. The platform accepts both speech and 
text as input modalities by either direct micro-
phone/keyboard connections or by means of 
mobile device wireless connection. The output 
interface, which is supported by a talking ava-
tar, integrates speech and text along with other 
visual aids. 

1 Introduction 

Some recent efforts towards the development of 
a more comprehensive framework for dialogue 
supported applications include research on multi-
domain or multi-task dialogue agents (Komatani 
et. al 2006, Lee et. al 2009, Nakano et. al 2011, 
Lee et. al 2012). With this direction in mind, our 
Artificial Intelligent Dialogue Agent (AIDA) has 
been created aiming the following two objec-
tives: (1) serving as a demonstrator platform for 
showcasing different dialogue systems and relat-
ed technologies, and (2) providing an experi-
mental framework for conducting research in the 
area of dialogue management and orchestration. 

The main objective of this paper is to present 
and describe the main characteristics of AIDA. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. 
First, in section 2, a description of APOLLO, the 
software integration platform supporting AIDA 
is presented. Then, in section 3, the main features 
of AIDA as a dialogue management and orches-
tration platform are described, and a real exam-
ple of human interaction with AIDA is reported. 
Finally, in section 4, our conclusions and future 
work plans are presented.  

2 The APOLLO Integration Platform 
APOLLO (Jiang et al. 2012) is a component 
pluggable dialogue framework, which allows for 
the interconnection and control of the different 
components required for the implementation of 
dialogue systems. This framework allows for the 
interoperability of four different classes of com-
ponents: dialogue (ASR, NLU, NLG, TTS, etc.), 
managers (vertical domain-dependent task man-
agers), input/output (speech, text, image and vid-
eo devices), and backend (databases, web crawl-
ers and indexes, rules and inference engines). 

 The different components can be connected to 
APOLLO either by means of specifically created 
plug-ins or by using TCP-IP based socket com-
munications. All component interactions are con-
trolled by using XML scripts. Figure 1 presents a 
general overview of the APOLLO framework. 

  

 
Figure 1: The APOLLO framework 

145



3 Main Features of AIDA  
AIDA (Artificial Intelligent Dialogue Agent) is a 
dialogue management and orchestration plat-
form, which is implemented over the APOLLO 
framework. In AIDA, different communication 
task styles (command, question answering, task-
oriented dialogue and chatting) are hierarchically 
organized according to their atomicity; i.e. more 
atomic (less interruptible) tasks are given prefer-
ence over less atomic (more interruptible) tasks.  

In the case of the chatting engine, as it is the 
least atomic task of all, it is located in the bottom 
of the hierarchy. This engine also behaves as a 
back-off system, which is responsible for taking 
care of all the user interactions that other engines 
fail to resolve properly.    

In AIDA, a dialogue orchestration mechanism 
is used to simultaneously address the problems 
of domain switching and task selection. One of 
the main components of this mechanism is the 
user intention inference module, which makes 
informed decisions for selecting and assigning 
turns across the different individual engines in 
the platform.  

Domain and task selection decisions are made 
based on three different sources of information: 
the current user utterance, which includes stand-
ard semantic and pragmatic features extracted 
from the user utterance; engine information 
states, which takes into account individual in-
formation states from all active engines in the 
platform; and system expectations, which is con-
structed based on the most recent history of user-
system interactions, the task hierarchy previously 
described and the archived profile of the current 
user interacting with the system. 

Our current implementation of AIDA inte-
grates six different dialogue engines: (BC) a basic 
command application, which is responsible for 
serving basic requests such as accessing calendar 
and clock applications, interfacing with search 
engines, displaying maps, etc.; (RA) a reception-
ist application, which consists of a question an-
swering system for providing information about 
the Fusionopolis Complex; (IR) I2R information 
system, which implements as question answering 
system about our institute; (FR) a flight reserva-
tion system, which consists of a frame-based dia-
logue engine that uses statistical natural language 
understanding; (RR) a restaurant recommenda-
tion system, which implements a three-stage 
frame-based dialogue system that uses rule-base 
natural language understanding, and (CH) our 
IRIS chatting agent (Banchs and Li, 2012). 

Regarding input/output modalities, speech and 
text can be used as input channels for user utter-
ances. Direct connections via microphone and 
keyboard are supported, as well as remote con-
nections via mobile devices.  

Additionally, audio and video inputs are used 
to provide AIDA with user identification and 
tracking capabilities. In the first case, speaker 
identification techniques are used to compare the 
voice profile of the current speaker with a set of 
users already known by the system. In the second 
case, face detection and tracking are used in 
combination with sound localization to deter-
mine what the current speaker’s location is when 
dealing with multi-party dialogue scenarios. 

The main output of AIDA is composed of a 
browser interface in which several frames, in-
cluding different visual elements, are presented 
along with a talking avatar. The different visual 
elements include a banner, a text display and a 
general purpose frame for displaying different 
html files, images or URL’s as required.  

For avatar and text-to-speech, AIDA relies on 
the SitePal API (SitePal 2013). This API allows 
for controlling both the avatar speech and gaze. 
Speech functionalities are used for generating a 
spoken form of the system’s output (which is 
also displayed as text in one of the frames of the 
interface) and gaze functionalities are used in 
combination with face tracking to direct the ava-
tar attention to the user who is speaking.    

Figure 2 illustrates the main output interface 
of AIDA. 

 

 
Figure 2: AIDA’s output interface. 

146



Finally, an actual example of a user interaction 
with the AIDA platform is presented in Table 1. 
In the table, the following information is provid-
ed for each of the turns composing the dialogue: 
the user utterance, the corresponding system re-
sponse, the engine that was responsible for gen-
erating the response, and the action taken by the 
system (if any action was taken).  
 
Turn Speaker Utterance/Action 

1 USER Good morning, how are you? AIDA-CH How can I help you? 

2 
USER Can you help me to book a flight? 

AIDA-FR Flight reservation, how can I help you? 
(action) Displays flight reservation main screen 

3 USER I want to fly from Singapore to Tokyo AIDA-FR What day do you want to leave? 

4 USER Next Monday in the evening AIDA-FR What day do you want to return? 

5 
USER The second of April in the morning 

AIDA-FR Here is your itinerary 
(action) Displays flight schedule on the screen 

6 

USER Is there any coffee shop nearby? 

AIDA-RA There are three coffee shops in this buil-ding: Jass Café, Starbucks and Ya Kun 
(action) Shows logos of retrieved coffee shops  

7 USER Do you drink coffee? AIDA-CH Coffee? 

8 USER Yes, coffee AIDA-CH No 

9 USER Why not? AIDA-CH Well, for one thing you can’t spell.  

10 

USER Please suggest a good Italian restaurant 

AIDA-RR What area of the city do you want me to search for? 
(action) Displays restaurant system main screen 

11 

USER Near Sentosa 

AIDA-RR 

Ok, I have found one restaurant for you: 
Alkaff Mansion Ristorante. Do you 
want more information or do you want 
to make a reservation? 

(action) Displays http://www.alkaff.com.sg/  

12 
USER Yes please 

AIDA-RR Ok, I will do a reservation for you! And, how many guests is this reservation for? 

13 
USER Only two persons 

AIDA-RR And, will you be interested in dinner or lunch?  

14 
USER Please make it for tonight 

AIDA-RR Your reservation has been made. 
(action) Displays reservation details 

15 USER Great, thank you AIDA-CH You are welcome 

Table 2: Example of a user interaction with AIDA 

4 Conclusions and Future Work 
In this demo paper we have presented AIDA (Ar-
tificial Intelligent Dialogue Agent), the dialogue 
management and orchestration platform currently 
under development at the Institute for Infocomm 
Research in Singapore.  

AIDA integrates different communication task 
styles (command, question answering, dialogue 
and chat) into a single conversational agent. It 
also combines speech recognition and synthesis, 
image processing and avatar technologies to im-
prove the user-system interaction experience. 

Our future plans include the incorporation of 
more vertical applications into the platform, as 
well as the integration of machine translation 
engines to develop multilingual capabilities. 

Demonstration Plan 

During the SIGDIAL demo presentation, the fol-
lowing functionalities will be demonstrated: text 
and speech input; dialogue orchestration among 
receptionist, flight reservation, I2R information 
system, restaurant booking and chatting agent; 
and avatar-supported speech and visual output 
interface. For the case of speech input and ava-
tar-supported output, the use of these technolo-
gies is subject to the availability of internet con-
nection at the location of the demo.  

References  
R. E. Banchs and H. Li. 2012. IRIS: a chat-oriented 

dialogue system based on the vector space model, 
in Demo Session of Association of Computational 
Linguistics, pp. 37–42. 

R. Jiang, Y. K. Tan, D. K. Limbu and H. Li. 2012. 
Component pluggable dialogue framework and its 
application to social robots. In Proc. Int’l Work-
shop on Spoken Language Dialog Systems. 

K. Komatani, N. Kanda, M. Nakano, K. Nakadai, H. 
Tsujino, T. Ogata and H. G. Okuno. 2006. Multi-
domain spoken dialogue system with extensibility 
and robustness against speech recognition errors. In 
Proc. SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dia-
logue, pp. 9–17.  

C. Lee, S. Jung, S. Kim and G. G. Lee. 2009. Exam-
ple-based dialog modeling for practical multi-
domain dialog system. Speech Communication, 51, 
pp. 466–484. 

I. Lee, S. Kim, K. Kim, D. Lee, J. Choi, S. Ryu and 
G. G. Lee. 2012. A two step approach for efficient 
domain selection in multi-domain dialog systems. 
In Proc. Int’l Workshop on Spoken Dialogue Sys-
tems.  

M. Nakano, S. Sato, K. Komatani, K. Matsutama, K. 
Funakoshi and H. G. Okuno. 2011. A two stage 
domain selection framework for extensible multi-
domain spoken dialogue systems. In Proc. SIGdial 
Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue. 

SitePal API & Programmer Information, accessed on 
June 27th, 2013 http://www.sitepal.com/support/  

147


