




































Neo-Davidsonian Semantics in Lexicalized Grammars

Petr Homola
Codesign, s.r.o.
Czech Republic

phomola@codesign.cz

Abstract

We present a method of semantic parsing
within lexicalized grammars that generates neo-
Davidsonian logical forms. We augment an ex-
isting LFG grammar with predicate logic formu-
lae in the lexicon and logical annotations in the
context-free rules to obtain logical forms of a se-
quence of sentences that can be used to construct
a model, i.e., formulae with resolved anaphoric
and indexical expressions, by skolemization and
discourse resolution based on salience.

1 Introduction

Semantic parsing is important for many
NLP applications. We present results of
experiments with semantic parsing within
the framework of Lexical-Functional Gram-
mar (LFG), a well-researched unification-
based formalism (Kaplan and Bresnan, 1982;
Dalrymple et al., 1995a; Butt et al., 1999;
Bresnan, 2001; Dalrymple, 2001;
Nordlinger and Bresnan, 2011) for which wide-
coverage grammars for a variety of typologically
different languages are available.

The method we have developed can be used with
any semantic formalism that can be expressed in
first-order logic with equality (FOL). The approach
of Parsons (1990) is usually called “neo-Davidsonian”
because it is a variation of the event-based formal
representation of Davidson (1967). The formalism
used in this paper is a combination of that of Par-
sons and Hobbs (1985; 2003) who extends David-
son’s approach to all predications. We show how sim-
ple and complex predicates are represented, how se-
mantic representations can be incrementally created in
LFG via codescription and how discourse and context

(anaphoric and indexical expressions) can be treated.
While we used LFG in the experiments, the method
is flexible enough to be used in any rule-based gram-
mar formalism based on context-free or categorial
grammars such as (Uszkoreit, 1986) or (Kay, 1979;
Kay, 1984).

In the next section we survey recent approaches to
semantics in LFG. In Section 3 the neo-Davidsonian
approach to semantics is presented. Section 4 ex-
pounds the way how neo-Davidsonian logical forms
can be incrementally built up using LFG machinery.
Section 5 focuses on how discourse models can be
constructed from logical forms by resolving anaphoric
and indexical expressions. Finally, we conclude in
Section 6.

2 Related Work

Virtually all approaches to formal semantics assume
the Principle of Compositionality, formally formu-
lated by Partee (1995) as follows: “The meaning of
a whole is a function of the meanings of the parts
and of the way they are syntactically combined.” This
means that semantic representation can be incremen-
tally built up when constituents are put together dur-
ing parsing. Since c(onstituent)-structure expresses
sentence topology rather than grammatical relations,
the rules that combine the meanings of subphrases
frequently refer to the underlying syntactic struc-
ture, that is, f(unctional)-structure in LFG. Indeed,
Halvorsen and Kaplan (1995) in their account of se-
mantics within LFG define the s(emantic)-structure
as a projection of the c-structure (through the corre-
spondence function σ) but they refer to grammatical
functions (GFs) by means of the compound function

134



σφ´1,1 as in the following example:

(1) John ran slowly.

The corresponding lexical entry for the verb is

(2)
pσM ˚ RELq “ ran
pσM ˚ARG1q “ σφ´1pÒ SUBJq
pσM ˚ARG2q “ σφ´1pÒ OBJq

and the resulting correspondence between the c-
structure and the s-structure is

(3)

S

NP

John

VP

V

ran

AdvP

slowly
»

—

—

–

PRED

«

REL ran
MOD slowly

ff

ARG1 John

fi

ffi

ffi

fl

Note that Halvorsen and Kaplan (1995) represent s-
structures as feature structures (since they use func-
tional annotations to construct them). (3) can be more
conventionally expressed as slowlypranqpJohnq.

Recent approaches to semantics in LFG
are based on the so-called “glue semantics”
(Dalrymple et al., 1993; Dalrymple et al., 1995b;
Dalrymple, 2001). Consider the sentence

(4) Bill obviously kissed Hillary

Its semantic form is, accord-
ing to Dalrymple et al. (1993),
obviouslypkisspBill,Hillaryqq. Glue seman-
tics uses linear logic; lexical entries are assigned
“meaning constructors” that consist of a logical
expression and instructions for how the meaning is
put together. For to kiss, for example, we have

(5)
@X,Y.pf SUBJqσ ; X b pf OBJqσ ; Y

⊸ fσ ; kisspX,Y q
In words, (5) means that if the meaning of pf SUBJqσ
is X and the meaning of pf OBJqσ is Y , then the

1φ is the correspondence function from c-structures to f-
structures.

meaning of fσ is kisspX,Y q. For brevity, mean-
ing constructors are sometimes written as JwordK.
For (4), then, we get

(6)
JBillKb JobviouslyK
bJkissedKb JHillaryK

$ fσ ; obviouslypkisspBill,Hillaryqq

The idea behind glue semantics is that the lexicon and
the rules for syntactic assembly provide meaning con-
structors that are interpreted as soon as all expressions
on the left-hand side of the linear implication (⊸) are
available.2

Note that both Halvorsen and Kaplan (1995) and
glue semantics use higher-order logic. In the next sec-
tion we go on to outline an account of semantics that,
while using codescription, relies on pure FOL for rep-
resentation and on conjunction as the means of mean-
ing assembly, as advocated on Minimalist grounds by
Pietroski (2005).

3 Neo-Davidsonian Logical Representation

The sentence John loves Mary can be logically ex-
pressed (disregarding tense for the sake of simplicity)
using a binary predicate for the verb and constants for
its arguments:

(7) lovepJohn,Maryq

Davidson (1967) has introduced “events” into the
description of logical forms of sentences to be able to
refer to “actions” by means of FOL (i.e., events are
treated as individuals). We use the notation and ter-
minology of Hobbs (1985; 2003) who introduced the
“nominalization operator” and the term “eventuality”
to refer to “possible events”. The predicate love in (7)
can be “nominalized” and we assume that the follow-
ing equivalence holds:

(8) lovepx, yq ” De.love1pe, x, yq ^Rexistpeq

The newly introduced variable e is the eventuality
of John’s loving Mary and Hobbs’ predicate Rexist

2More recent work on glue semantics uses a slightly different
notation. (5) would be written as

λX.λY.kisspX, Y q : pÒ SUBJqσ ⊸ rpÒ OBJqσ ⊸Òσs

135



expresses that the eventuality is realized (this predi-
cate is discussed in (Hobbs, 1985; Hobbs, 2003), we
do not use it in the remainder of the paper).

Parsons (1990), too, uses events but he proposes
unary predicates for actions and special predicates for
their arguments. In this spirit, we use the following
notation:

(9)
love1pe, x, yq ”
” love2peq ^ actorpe, xq ^ patientpe, yq

Rather than θ-roles, we use what is called
“protoroles” (Dowty, 1991), “tectogrammatical
roles” (Sgall et al., 1986) or “roles on the action
tier” (Jackendoff, 1990) in the literature on for-
mal semantic analysis of natural languages. Thus
actorpe, xq means that x has the role “actor” in the
eventuality e.

In the remainder of the paper, we refer to “neo-
Davidsonian” formulae (with actions denoted by
double-primed predicates) as logical forms (LF).3

4 Logical Forms in LFG

In LFG, parsing is driven by a context-free grammar
that conforms to the X1-theory (Jackendoff, 1977).
In this section we show how LFs can be incor-
porated formally within LFG. Notationally, we fol-
low Kaplan (1995).4

In the formal architecture of LFG, N is the set of
nodes, F is the set of f-structures, by Φ we denote
the set of formulae (LFs) and V denotes the set of
variables that may occur in LFs. In standard LFG, the
mapping M : N Ñ N maps nodes to their mother
node and φ : N Ñ F maps nodes to f-structures. We
introduce ξ : N Ñ Φ that maps nodes to formulae
and τ : N Ñ V that maps nodes to variables.

For terminal nodes, ξ and τ are defined in the lex-
icon. For example, the morpholexical entry for the

3We could go even further and reify the double-primed predi-
cates along the scheme

P peq ” actpp, eq

where p is an “action constant” that corresponds to the predicate
P . While such a notation would surely be useful in formulating
an axiomatic theory for reasoning, the difference between the no-
tations has no impact on the presently described compositional
mechanism.

4In the remainder of the paper we assume that we have a LFG
grammar that produces c- and f-structures and rules out ill-formed
sentences.

proper name John contains, besides the usual infor-
mation, i.e., its category (N) and f-structure [PRED

‘John’], a formula (ξpnq df“ x “ John) and a des-

ignated variable (τpnq df“ x where x is the variable

from ξpnq). For a noun, such as dog, we have ξpnq df“

dogpxq and τpnq df“ x. Likewise, the morpholexical
entry for the finite form of the verb to see contains
its category, its f-structure [PRED ‘seexpÒ SUBJq, pÒ

OBJqy’, . . . ], a formula (ξpnq df“ see2peq) and a desig-

nated variable (τpnq df“ e where e is the variable from
ξpnq).

The formula of a nonterminal node is composed
from the formulae of its daughter nodes. In LFG,
context-free rules are augmented with functional an-
notations. Likewise, we augment them with logi-
cal annotations. Since Hobbs’ (1985; 2003) “onto-
logically promiscuous” formulae are conjunctions of
atomic formulae, we combine the formulae of the
daughter nodes using the logical connective ^.

In (10), ni are the daughter nodes of n and εpniq
are the corresponding logical annotations. Note that
tn1, . . . , nku “M

´1pnq.

(10) n

εpn1q
n1

εpn2q
n2

. . . εpnk´1q
nk´1

εpnkq
nk

Obviously, M´1pnq ‰ H holds for n, for it is a
nonterminal node. We define ξpnq for nonterminal
nodes as follows:

(11) ξpnq “
ľ

mPM´1pnq

ξpmq ^ εpmq

We also introduce a new variable, τpnq. For ease
of exposition, we give all formulae in an equivalent
prenex normal form, i.e., Q1x1 . . .Qnxn.ϕ where Qi
are quantifiers over variables xi and ϕ is open (i.e., it
contains no quantifiers).

To refer to terms in the formulae associated with
nodes in the subtree induced by a rule, we use two
metavariables in the logical annotations defined in the
context of εpniq as follows:

(12)
△ “ τpMpniqq
▽ “ τpniq

136



S

NP

a boy

VP

V

built

NP

a boat

ψ “ De, x, y.boypxq^actorpe,xq^build2peq^Pastpeq^boatpyq^patientpe,yq

ϕ “ De1, e2, e3, x, y.boypxq^actorpe3,xq^build
2pe1q^Pastpe1q^boatpyq^patientpe2,yq^e1=e2^e2=e3

Figure 1: Logical form of A boy built a boat.

Thus △ and ▽ are to logical annotations what Ò and Ó
are to functional annotations.

Let us consider the sentence A boy built a boat
(slightly adapted from (Hobbs, 1985)). The logical
part of the lexicon, used to build up the LF of the sen-
tece, is given in (13).

(13)

word ξ τ
a J z
boy boypxq x
boat boatpyq y
built build2pe1q ^ Pastpe1q e1

Because of the definition (11) of ξ for nonterminal
nodes, every node must have a formula (i.e., ξ is de-
fined for all nodes), thus we use J as the formula of
the article a.

The context-free rules and the corresponding func-
tional and logical annotations are given in (14) (we
omit the rule ‘NP Ñ Det N’ as it is irrelevant for the
present discussion).

(14)

S Ñ NP VP
pÒ SUBJq “Ó Ò“Ó
actorp△,▽q △“ ▽

VP Ñ V NP
Ò“Ó pÒ OBJq “Ó
△“ ▽ patientp△,▽q

The c-structure and the corresponding formula in-
duced by the logical annotations (more precisely, its
existential closure) are given in Figure 1. The prenex
normal form we obtain is the formula ϕ but since e1 “

e2 and e2 “ e3, we can use ψ “ ϕre1{e, e2{e, e3{es
where e is a newly introduced variable that embraces
the eventualities e1, e2, e3.

4.1 Complex Predicates
Complex predicates have been subject to re-
search within LFG since the 1990s (Alsina, 1996;
Alsina, 1997; Alsina et al., 1997; Broadwell, 2003).
Consider the sentence John made Mary cry with a
syntactically formed causative. The sentence is repre-
sented by one f-structure (i.e., the f-structures of made
and cry are unified and the corresponding nodes are
coheads) with a complex (hierarchically organized)
PRED value:

(15) causex(ÒSUBJ),cryx(ÒOBJ)yy

The f-structure of John made Mary cry is syntactically
monoclausal:

(16)
»

—

–

PRED causex(ÒSUBJ),cryx(ÒOBJ)yy
SUBJ [“John”]
OBJ [“Mary”]

fi

ffi

fl

The LF of John made Mary cry is given in (17). Note
that two eventualities are introduced (e1, e2) as the
expression, although syntactically monoclausal, is se-
mantically complex.

(17)
De1, e2.cause

2pe1q ^ cry
2pe2q^

^actorpe1, Johnq ^ patientpe1, e2q^
^actorpe2,Maryq

Alsina (1997) proposes the creation of com-
plex PRED values using the so-called restric-
tion operator (Kaplan and Wedekind, 1991;

137



Kaplan and Wedekind, 1993;
Wedekind and Kaplan, 1993). Note that as for
LFs, no special machinery is needed, syntactically
formed complex predicates can by modelled by rules
using ordinary logical annotations.

4.2 Syntactic Pivots
The sentences

(18)
a. John sold a car to Paul.
b. Paul bought a car from John.

have the same content if interpreted according to a the-
ory that models the common relationship between to
sell and to buy. However

(19)
a. I made John sell a car to Paul.
b. I made Paul buy a car from John.

differ in their content although both entail (18a) and
(18b). To express the different perspectives of (18a)
and (18b) we use the predicate Pivot that distin-
guishes the individual around which a clause revolves
syntactically (Pivotpe, Johnq and Pivotpe, Paulq in
(18a) and (18b), respectively).5

Similarly, adverbial modifiers are pivot-sensitive.
Consider the following two sentences:

(20)
a. John painted Mary.
b. Mary was painted by John.

Using the approach sketched above, we arrive at the
following LF:

(21)
De.paint2peq ^ Pastpeq^
^actorpe, Johnq ^ patientpe,Maryq

While (21) represents the meaning of both (20a)
and (20b), note that the meanings of the two sentences
differ if we add the phrase with great pleasure because
the corresponding predicate with_great_pleasure
modifies not only the eventuality but also the entity
which is the syntactic pivot of the sentence. In En-
glish, the syntactic pivot is the subject, i.e., John
in (20a) and Mary in (20b). To express the differ-
ence between the two sentences, we add the conjunc-
tion Pivotpe, xq^x “ y to the formulae where x is a
newly introduced variable and y is the variable asso-
ciated with the subject.6

5For a description of pivots at the level of f-structure see
(Falk, 1998; Falk, 2000).

6Note that LFs need not be purely semantic (for this reason we

5 From Logical Forms to Models

To obtain a model from a sequence of LFs, we have
to resolve all anaphoric and indexical expressions and
replace all existentially quantified variables with con-
stants. In contrast to parsing, the conversion of LFs
into a model was implemented procedurally in our ex-
periments.

Anaphoric expressions refer to an entity in the
same sentence or in a preceding one. Anaphora
resolution uses morphological (agreement), syntac-
tic (switch-reference), semantic (logical acceptabil-
ity) or pragmatic (topic/focus articulation) informa-
tion provided by c-structures, f-structures and i-
structures (King, 1997).

According to Kaplan (1979; 1989), the character
(linguistic meaning) of an indexical expression is a
function from contexts that delivers the expression’s
content at each context. We assume that the informa-
tion about the current speaker, hearer, time, and place
is available to the system and this contextual informa-
tion is used to resolve expressions such as I, you, my,
here, now, Past, etc.

Consider the following two sentences that represent
a simple mini-discourse (a coherent sequence of utter-
ances):

(22)
a. I saw a dog.
b. The dog barked.

The corresponding LFs, without any intersentential
relations, are given in (23).

(23)

a. De1, x.see2pe1q ^ Pastpe1q^
^actorpe1, Iq ^ patientpe1, xq^
^dogpxq

b. De2, y.bark2pe2q ^ Pastpe2q^
^actorpe2, yq ^ dogpyq

To convert the LFs to a model, we instantiate the
existentially bound variables with constants that sat-
isfy the LFs using the information provided by f-
structures (morphological, syntactic, semantic, and
pragmatic). For e1 and e2, we introduce constants
ce1 and ce2 . The constant I represents the indexi-
cal pronoun I. We use contextual information to re-

called them logical rather then semantic). Pivots are a syntactic
notion but they affect semantic interpretation. This is consonant
with the approach of Hobbs (2003) who uses, for example, a syn-
tactic predicate (nn) to represent noun-noun compounds in LFs.

138



place it with a proper name, say Peter. The pred-
icate Past is indexical, too. We replace Pastpceiq
with Timepointpcei , tiq ^ Beforepti, nq where ti is
a newly introduced constant which represents a time
point, and n is the constant for “now” (taken from the
context). x is replaced with cx, a newly introduced
constant.

In the second sentence, y is recognized as referen-
tially anchored (we sketch the algorithm for anaphora
resolution in the following subsection) and replaced
by cx. The resolved formulae are given in (24) and the
situation described in (22) is their conjunction. Since
Hobbs (1985; 2003) does not use the connective  ,
the formulae are always satisfiable, i.e., a model al-
ways exists.

(24)

a. see2pce1q ^ Timepointpce1 , t1q^
Beforept1, nq ^ actorpce1 , Peterq^
^patientpce1 , cxq ^ dogpcxq

b. bark2pce2q ^ Timepointpce2 , t2q^
^Beforept2, nq ^ actorpce2 , cxq^
^dogpcxq

5.1 Anaphora Resolution

The parser operates on isolated sentences, disregard-
ing intersentential coreferences. To resolve intrasen-
tential and intersentential anaphora in coherent se-
quences of utterances, we formalize salience of en-
tities at the level of pragmatics.

For the purposes of this subsection we assume
that we have a discourse that consists of sentences
s1, . . . , sn and the corresponding feature structures
f1, . . . , fn. An entity is a feature structure that repre-
sents a person, an object or an event. Every entity has
a special attribute, INDEX, to represent coreferences.

The discourse context is formally a list of indices
(values of the INDEX attribute) C “ xi1, . . . , imy.
The sentences are processed one by one. We start with
C “ H. For every f-structure fi, we proceed as fol-
lows:

1. For every entity in fi, we try to find its referent in
C (using available morphological, syntactic, se-
mantic, and pragmatic information). If a referent
was found for an entity, its index in C is moved
to the front of the list. Otherwise, a new index is
assigned to the entity and prepended to the list.

2. The indices of entities that belong to the focus
are moved to the front of C because of their high
salience.7

6 Conclusions

The paper presents a method of integrating neo-
Davidsonian event semantics within the formal frame-
work of LFG. We showed how logical forms can be
obtained from LFG rules augmented with logical an-
notations. Further, we showed how anaphoric and in-
dexical expressions can be resolved so that we can
construct a (possibly partial) model of the processed
text.

Our approach differs from glue semantics in using
conjunction instead of linear logic for meaning assem-
bly. Moreover, unlike glue semantics we do not use
higher-order logic in semantic forms for practical rea-
sons (mainly in order to be able to use FOL-based the-
orem provers and model builders for reasoning over
LFs).

In further work we will extend our grammar to ac-
count for more phenomena and in the next step we
will focus on inferential entailment in models.

References

Alex Alsina, Joan Bresnan, and Peter Sells. 1997. Com-
plex Predicates: Structure and Theory. In Alex Alsina,
Joan Bresnan, and Peter Sells, editors, Complex Predi-
cates, pages 1–12.

Alex Alsina. 1996. The Role of Argument Structure in
Grammar: Evidence from Romance. CSLI Publications.

Alex Alsina. 1997. A Theory of Complex Predicates: Ev-
idence from Causatives in Bantu and Romance. In Alex
Alsina, Joan Bresnan, and Peter Sells, editors, Complex
Predicates, pages 203–246.

Joan Bresnan. 2001. Lexical-Functional Syntax. Black-
well Textbooks in Linguistics, New York.

George Aaron Broadwell. 2003. Complex predication and
parallel structures in optimality-theoretic syntax. Hand-
out from a talk given at the 7th Workshop on Optimality
Theory Syntax in Nijmegen, Netherlands.

Miriam Butt, Tracy Holloway King, María-Eugenia Niño,
and Frédérique Segond. 1999. A Grammar Writer’s
Cookbook. CSLI Publications.
7We assume that the parser provides information about

topic/focus articulation. We use i-structures (King, 1997).

139



Mary Dalrymple, John Lamping, and Vijat Saraswat. 1993.
LFG Semantics via Constraints. In Proceedings of Sixth
Meeting of the European ACL.

Mary Dalrymple, Ronald M. Kaplan, John T. Maxwell III,
and Annie Zaenen. 1995a. Formal Issues in Lexical-
Functional Grammar. CSLI Publications.

Mary Dalrymple, John Lamping, Fernando Pereira, and Vi-
jat Saraswat. 1995b. Linear logic for meaning assembly.
In Proceedings of Computational Logic for Natural Lan-
guage Processing.

Mary Dalrymple. 2001. Lexical Functional Grammar,
volume 34 of Syntax and Semantics. Academic Press.

Donald Davidson. 1967. The logical form of action sen-
tences. In The logic of decision and action, pages 81–95.
University of Pittsburg Press.

David Dowty. 1991. Thematic Proto-Roles and Argument
Selection. Language, 67:547–619.

Yehuda N. Falk. 1998. On Pivots and Subjects. MS,
Department of English, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem.

Yehuda N. Falk. 2000. Pivots and the Theory of Gram-
matical Functions. In Miriam Butt and Tracy Holloway
King, editors, Proceedings of the LFG Conference.

Per-Kristian Halvorsen and Ronald M. Kaplan. 1995. Pro-
jections and Semantic Description in Lexical-Functional
Grammar. In Mary Dalrymple, Ronald M. Kaplan,
John T. Maxwell, and Annie Zaenen, editors, Formal
Issues in Lexical-Functional Grammar, pages 279–292.
CSLI.

Jerry R. Hobbs. 1985. Ontological Promiscuity. In Pro-
ceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 61–69.

Jerry R. Hobbs. 2003. Discourse and Inference. MS, Infor-
mation Sciences Institute, University of Southern Cali-
fornia, Marina del Rey.

Ray Jackendoff. 1977. X-Bar Syntax: A Study of Phrase
Structure. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Ray Jackendoff. 1990. Semantic Structures. MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Ronald M. Kaplan and Joan Bresnan. 1982. Lexical-
Functional Grammar: A formal system for grammatical
representation. In Joan Bresnan, editor, Mental Repre-
sentation of Grammatical Relations. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge.

Ronald M. Kaplan and Jürgen Wedekind. 1991. Restric-
tion and Structure Misalignment. MS, Xerox Palo Alto
Research Center.

Ronald M. Kaplan and Jürgen Wedekind. 1993. Restric-
tion and Correspondence-based Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 6th EACL Conference, pages 193–202.

David Kaplan. 1979. On the Logic of Demonstratives.
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 8(1):81–98.

David Kaplan. 1989. Demonstratives: An Essay on the
Semantics, Logic, Metaphysics, and Epistemology of
Demonstratives and Other Indexicals. In Themes from
Kaplan, pages 481–563. Oxford University Press.

Ronald M. Kaplan. 1995. The Formal Architecture
of Lexical-Functional Grammar. In Formal Issues in
Lexical-Functional Grammar, pages 7–28. CSLI Pub-
lications.

Martin Kay. 1979. Functional Grammar. In Proceedings
of the 5th meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society.

Martin Kay. 1984. Functional Unification Grammar: a for-
malism for machine translation. In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics and 22nd annual meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Tracy Holloway King. 1997. Focus Domains and Infor-
mation Structure. In Miriam Butt and Tracy Holloway
King, editors, Proceedings of the LFG Conference.

Rachel Nordlinger and Joan Bresnan. 2011. Lexical-
Functional Grammar: Interactions Between Morphol-
ogy and Syntax. In Robert D. Borsley and Kersti Bör-
jars, editors, Non-Transformational Syntax: Formal and
Explicit Models of Grammar, pages 112–140. Wiley-
Blackwell Publishing.

Terence Parsons. 1990. Events in the Semantics of En-
glish: A Study in Subatomic Semantics. MIT Press.

Barbara H. Partee. 1995. Lexical Semantics and Com-
positionality. In Lila R. Gleitman and Mark Liberman,
editors, Invitation to Cognitive Science. Language, vol-
ume 1, pages 311–360. MIT Press.

Paul M. Pietroski. 2005. Events and Semantic Architec-
ture. Oxford University Press.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajičová, and Jarmila Panevová. 1986. The
Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and Pragmatic
Aspects. D. Reider Publishing Company.

Hans Uszkoreit. 1986. Categorial Unification Grammars.
In Proceedings of COLING.

Jürgen Wedekind and Ronald M. Kaplan. 1993. Type-
driven Semantic Interpretation of F-Structures. In Pro-
ceedings of the 6th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics.

140


