



















































Using NooJ for semantic annotation of Italian language corpora in the domain of motion: a cognitive-grounded approach


Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Finite State Methods and Natural Language Processing, pages 72–80,
St Andrews–Sctotland, July 15–17, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using NooJ for semantic annotation of Italian language corpora in the
domain of motion: a cognitive-grounded approach

Edoardo Salza
LiCoTT - Università del Piemonte Orientale

Vercelli,Italy
edoardo.salza@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper we propose a system to parse and
annotate motion constructions expressed in Italian
language. We used NooJ as a software tool to im-
plement finite-state transducers in order to recog-
nize linguistic elements constituting motion events.
In this paper we describe the model we adopted
for semantic description of events (grounded on
Talmy’s Cognitive Semantics theories) and then we
illustrate how the system works with a domain-
specific corpus, the structure of annotation that our
system will perform, some annotation structures of
example sentences expressing motion and then an
attempt to evaluate the system’s performance.

1 Introduction

The building of models of semantic knowledge to
be implemented in language recognition and anal-
ysis systems shares some features with the theory
of perception (Piotrowski and Palibina, 1973). In
a Cognitive Linguistics paradigm this task should
be viewed as the modelling of the human ability to
map concepts onto syntactic-semantic constructs.
The aim of this contribution is to describe an ap-
proach to the annotation of expressions of mo-
tion in Italian. The set of concepts (i.e. the se-
mantic model) is grounded on a cognitive seman-
tics theory where knowledge representation con-
stitute both the basis of the construction process of
meaning and also the goal of the proposed appli-
cation. From the computational point of view we
make use of recursive transition networks (RTNs)
used for recognition and subsequent annotation of
text with the domain’s concepts. To implement
RTNs we used NooJ development environment
(Silberztein, 2004). We used NooJ because in this
way we can easily write local grammars describ-
ing the elements to be recognized. From the tech-
nical point of view, at the dawn of NLP research on
pattern recognition, experimentation started using
the so-called rule-based paradigm. This entailed

the processing of a large amount of grammar rules
and the need of storage-consuming electronic dic-
tionaries. These drawbacks caused these methods
to be substantially impractical thus shifting rapidly
the mainstream to the now widespread statistical
corpus-based approach. In this paper we then pro-
pose a system that, using a cascade of transducers,
deterministically recognizes semantic patterns de-
scribing motion events (Abney, 1996). These pat-
terns show a large variety of diverse expressions
and lexical choices (in one word lexicalization pat-
terns) to describe motion. Such a variety is eas-
ily accounted for by a set of finite-state automata.
The formalism used here to extract semantic com-
ponents of the patterns is grounded on cognitive
semantics theories attempting to describe the lex-
icalization processes that underlie the production
of the syntactic and semantic structures express-
ing concepts related to motion and, consequently,
to space.

2 Theoretical Framework

Spatial notions form the kernel of linguistic
knowledge from which all other concepts are de-
rived from, giving to the spatial knowledge a pri-
mary role on the conceptualization of the real-
ity. This stance is called localism. Localism is
the “hypothesis that spatial expressions are more
basic, grammatically and semantically, than var-
ious kind of spatial expressions [. . . ] spatial or-
ganization is of central importance in human cog-
nition” (Lyons, 1977) and such approaches date
back to the early comparative studies on prepo-
sitions and cases (Wüllner, 1827), where their
meaning is viewed as grounded on spatial subjec-
tive intuition. Concepts related to space hold a
basic role in the conceptualization process of the
human’s mind (and in child’s development of con-

72



cepts) and they serve as a major source of lexi-
calization of more abstract ones. These views re-
gained importance with the rise of cognitive sci-
ence in the 1970’s, with the dominance of uni-
versalist studies on categorization. According to
these theories, abstract concepts are thought to be
derived from spatial primitives by using cogni-
tive tools like conceptual metaphor (Lakoff, 1980)
or derivation from universal representations like
image-schemata (Johnson, 1987). Space-related
constructs can thus refer also to a wider seman-
tic area than just concepts closely related to space
and motion: in this way a system extracting mo-
tion events will recognize also events other than
motion-related ones, if expressed metaphorically
with motion verbs. Sentences expressing motion
events are generally characterized by a set of the-
matic roles from the semantic domain of concepts
related to motion. Our purpose is to parse sim-
ple sentence constructs, more specifically we fo-
cus on compound nouns and predicate-argument
structures, which bear most of the meaning (Sur-
deanu et al., 2003). Our final goal is to recognize
the type of motion described and to semantically
annotate the text with the related concepts.

3 The proposed system

The system implements semantic role labeling
techniques (Gildea and Jurafsky, 2002) to parse
predicate-arguments structures. Lexical constructs
are connected to their corresponding roles selected
by the verb. These latter will be recognized and
annotated with their respective information ele-
ments related to the motion event. Predicate-
argument structures are constituted by a main
verb and a set of nouns or prepositional phrases
specifying the meaning of the verb, which works
as the head of the structure. Semantic model
maps lexical elements into their respective seman-
tic roles. In the following section we will describe
the model we used for structure detection and an-
notation, we then detail the mapping layers im-
plemented according to the annotation to be per-
formed and finally we will illustrate some of the
transducers used for the recognition of lexical ele-
ments and also we give some examples of possible
practical uses of our system.

3.1 Semantic model of the motion event

To choose a suitable representation of motion
events we need to consider different semantic roles

expressed by lexical elements in order to map the
predicate-argument structures onto elements of the
semantic model of the event (Exner and Nugues,
2011). The model is thus constituted by a set of
domain-specific semantic roles belonging to mo-
tion. To choose them we have considered the
notion of motion event as introduced by Talmy
(1985) where motion events are described as “sit-
uation containing movement or the maintenance
of a stationary location [. . . ]. The basic mo-
tion event consists of one object (the Figure) mov-
ing or located with respect to another object (the
reference-object or Ground)”. Talmy’s approach
is based on perception and on neuropsychologi-
cal theories: Figure and Ground are, for exam-
ple, concepts borrowed from the so-called Gestalt
Theory, a theory of mind opposed to structuralist
and behaviorist approaches aiming to describe the
mind/brain through holistic, analog and emergent
mechanisms. This has led to choose a semantic
model that is both cognitive-grounded and com-
prehensive of all necessary conceptual elements
(Mosca, 2010). In Table 1 are listed the elements
we choose to extract. As Italian is a pro-drop lan-
guage, subject is often omitted and then FIGURE
is seldom lexicalized.

Element Description
FIGURE The object that moves or is located with

respect to another object.
GROUND The reference object with respect to with

the motion takes place or another object is
located to.

SOURCE The place where the described motion
event starts.

GOAL The place where the described motion
event ends.

DIRECTION The relative direction taken with respect to
a ground or reference point (as left, right,
north, west, ...).

VECTOR The axis along which the motion take place
and/or the absolute direction of the moving
element.

PATH The type of path performed by the mov-
ing element involving a ground element
(inwards, outwards, crossing, passing
through).

SHAPE The shape of movement performed. (cir-
cular, straight, curvilinear)

PROXIMALITY The distinctive feature of motion with re-
spect to a ground or reference point (near,
along or throughout)

MANNER The manner of performed motion (walk-
ing, running, wandering,...)

Table 1: Elements of motion

73



3.2 Description of the system
The elements previously listed constitute the set of
semantic roles of our model. They can be beared
by the verb itself or explicitly lexicalized as syn-
tactic elements of the sentence as direct objects,
indirect objects or adverbial phrases (i.e. they
are satellites of the verb). We need to implement
a set of lexico-syntactic transducers to parse ev-
ery single semantic elements.According to Mosca
(2010), motion event sentences can be grouped in
eight syntactic patterns with increasing analyticity.
For our purposes we select the following ones:

1. Motion verbs that can stand alone with no adjoints.

2. Motion verbs accepting a noun phrase as direct object.

3. Motion verbs accepting a prepositional phrase as object.

4. Motion verbs expressed with a generic motion verb with prepositional
phrases(s) plus one or more satellites to specify motion event roles.

5. Motion events analytically expressed with support verbs1

Verbs of the first type bear a lot of informa-
tion and accept none or few satellites: according
to Talmy’s terminology they conflate semantic el-
ements. A verb like fiancheggiare “conflates”all
the information about the fact that a figure is mov-
ing in proximity to a reference ground. Confla-
tion is “any syntactic process [ . . . ] whereby a
more complex construction turns into a simpler
one.” (Talmy, 2000). More analytic verbs bear few
information and devolves their meaning to their
satellites2. Satellites are lexicalized with differ-
ent syntactic constructs. Our system recognizes
locative adverbial phrases representing position or
direction, deictic elements expressing proximal-
ity or distality (frequently referred to a reference
ground) and so on. The system also maps satellites
to the corresponding semantic roles and “deflates”
the meaning of the verbs making it explicit.

Motion verbs are grouped in semantic clusters
according to their meaning (Mosca, 2007). For
each cluster we need to implement a set of trans-
ducers. We have considered motion verbs with
the meaning of a generic motion from and/or to
a ground object, verbs indicating a continuing
motion along the same direction (called source-
destination verbs), verbs indicating motion along
a direction or towards something that specifies the

1Support verbs are constructions where the predicative
role is taken by the noun (object) and the verb lose its mean-
ing as fare una curva VS curvare

2They are “the grammatical category of any constituent
other than a noun-phrase or prepositional phrase comple-
ment that is in a sister relation to the verb root ”

followed path (direction verbs), verbs with the
meaning of passing beyond, crossing, exiting or
entering a ground, or with the meaning of moving
along a direction or near a ground (path verbs),
verbs indicating a proximal motion passing near
a ground (proximity verbs), verbs specifying the
shape of a path (curvilinear, circular, straight, etc.)
(called shape verbs) and verbs that specifies the
manner of motion (manner verbs).

Semantic patterns are represented with for-
malisms involving lexical, syntactic and seman-
tic elements (local grammars) implemented on
NooJ 3. Local grammars are formal descriptions
of morpho-syntactic and/or semantic regularities
represented with finite-state transducers (Harris,
1991; Gross, 1993).

3.2.1 Annotation layers
The annotation is performed using a cascade of
transducers. Parsing is done incrementally: an-
notations at one level make use of the ones per-
formed on previous levels. We have implemented
seven different layers, each defined by the type of
structure(s) recognized, as described below.

Simple compound nouns This layer recog-
nizes compound nouns with patterns like N+Adj
(e.g. lago blu), Adj+N (e.g. nuovo sentiero),
N+N (e.g. piazza Garibaldi, N+Prep+N (e.g.
casa di pietra). These listed above are the
most frequent patterns in Italian (Voghera,
2004). Below is reported the correspond-
ing local grammar reported in NooJ’s format4.

SC::= NA | AN | NPN | NPV | NN | NeN
AN::= <A> <N>
NA::= <N> <A>
NPN::= <N> P <N>
NPV::= <N> (a|da|per) <V+Inf>
NN::= <N> <N>
P::= (di|a|da|in|con|su|per|tra|fra) <DET>*

Complex compound nouns The second layer
refers to complex compound nouns: this layer
recognizes compound nouns corresponding to
forms as strada ripida sterrata, bivio segnalato
da bolli gialli, casa vicino all’incrocio di tre
strade, versante occidentale della catena mon-
tuosa. The head can be one of the cases listed

3NooJ standard dictionary with other resources for
Italian are developed and maintained by Simonetta
Vietri of Università di Salerno and are available at
http://www.nooj4nlp.net/pages/italian.html. (Elia and
Vietri, 2002).

4Angle brackets denote a POS element of standard dictio-
nary and asterisk refers to optional elements.

74



above and the modifier can be an adjectival or
a prepositional phrase. Corresponding trans-
ducers are shown in Figure 1 and below is
presented the related local grammar. As the
former, this layer recognizes structure type,
number, gender and head of the extracted nouns.

CCN::= (<N>|SC> (A_modifier | P_modifier | N_modifier))
A_modifier::= <AVV>* <A> ((e|ed) <A>)*
P_modifier::= P ( (<V+Inf>|<AVV>*)|(<N>|SC) )
N_modifier::= N

Figure 1: Transducer recognizing complex com-
pound nouns

Noun phrases This layer annotates noun
phrases and extracts their head. Transducer is
shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Transducer recognizing noun phrases

Prepositional phrases This layer annotates
prepositional phrases and extracts their preposi-
tional head and the dependent noun (or noun
phrase). Respective transducer is shown in Figure
3.

Figure 3: Transducer recognizing prepositional
phrases

Motion verbs This layer recognizes motion
verbs. The ones recognized by our system are ex-
tracted from a list compiled through a statistical
analysis of a corpus of spoken Italian. This corpus
was collected from experiments for which the goal
is to solve a spatial description task. Verbs form-
ing this list are a set of frequently used verbs while

describing motion events in Italian. We adopted
the classification and the set of lemmas proposed
in Mosca (2007). The local grammar that recog-
nizes motion verbs is reported in Figure 4. Trans-
ducers are shown in Figure 5.

Figure 4: Grammar recognizing of motion verbs

Figure 5: Transducers recognizing motion verbs

Verb phrases This layer recognizes different
syntactic realizations of motion verb phrases dis-
tinguishing between active and passive form. The
corresponding transducer is shown in Figure 6.

Figure 6: Transducer recognizing verb chunks

4 Motion Events’ elements recognition

The two upper layers (i.e. the last processed ones)
are used for recognizing the different elements

75



of motion event: the first is dedicated to the
recognition of satellites. They consist mainly
of prepositions expressing information about
motion (Mosca, 2012) such as Prepositional
Case-Markers (PCM) and satellites-prepositions.
Prepositional Case-Markers are prepositions with
a weak or no meaning that serve to introduce
a prepositional phrase as in salire su sul tetto.
Satellite-preposition Satpreps are intended as
prepositional particles fulfilling both the func-
tions described before. For our purposes we
have distinguished the following satellite types:

• DIRECTION: satellites expressing direction. They can be specified
using an absolute or an intrinsic frame or reference Levinson (2003)
(as in direzione est or a destra). The system also recognizes deictic
relative reference grounds to/from an origo5.

• POSITION: satellites expressing locations with an absolute or relative
reference as di fronte, a destra, sopra sotto, a est, qui, l.

• PROXIMITY: satellites expressing proximality, i.e. object located in
areas expressed with respect to a ground (lungo, accanto, di fianco, nei
pressi, vicino).

• STRAIGHT: satellites expressing motion events in which the taken
direction is straight (as dritto).

• CIRCULAR: satellites expressing motion events where the motion is
circular (as intorno,attorno).

• THROUGH: satellites expressing motion events whose GOAL is
reached via a path (as attraverso) or through a reference ground (as
in fondo, a fine).

These transducers recognize FIGURE and
GROUND elements, satellites and PCM (see Fig-
ure 7).

Figure 7: Transducers for recognizing satellites,
figure, ground, PCM and Satpreps elements

We have also distinguished five types of lexical-
ization structures according to the meaning of the
verb:

1. Structures expressing a generic motion with a source and/or a destina-
tion explicitly expressed.

5With respect to Levinson (2003) we use here a slightly
different terminology adopting the term relative for an intrin-
sic frame of reference in Levinson’s sense and the term de-
ictic for Levinson’s relative frame of reference to express a
direction with respect to a reference point or ground object

Figure 8: Annotations performed by our system

2. Structures describing a movement in a particular direction and/or along
a particular vector. The direction can be expressed by a conflation of
the directional element of meaning in the verb root (as in scendere,
salire, indietreggiare) or by a satellite.

3. Structures expressing a motion along a path where the moving element
can enter, exit, pass over or going through a the reference ground (verbs
as entrare, attraversare, percorrere, sbucare).

4. Structures expressing proximal motion. We distinguish a motion along
(costeggiare, seguire), near (sfiorare, toccare) or passing through a
GROUND (sorpassare, superare).

5. Structures expressing a straight or round shape of the motion path. A
round path can be a complete circular loop, a circle arc (circoscrivere,
aggirare) or a curved trajectory as in curvare, svoltare. Note that in
this latter case the motion will change vector so the system will note
this explicitly with a dedicated annotation (+VECTOR CHANGE).

Note that if the elements about motion are con-
flated in the verb root the information should be
extracted by putting an empty-string transducer
before the matching element with the desired an-
notation in output (see Figure 9).

Figure 9: Example of a transducer recognizing
motion elements lexicalized in verb root

Arguments of the verbs are extracted with the
transducer shown in Figure 10. Elements lexical-
ized by satellites are extracted using transducers
as the one shown in Figure 11. These latter have
been designed according to the structure of related
verb(s).

76



Figure 10: Example of a transducer recognizing
motion structures arguments

Figure 11: Transducer recognizing motion ele-
ments lexicalized in satellites

Transduction is performed when we need to
annotate text chunks: annotation is given in the
NooJ’s XML-like form, i.e. using a node-label
and a series of attribute-value pair specifying mo-
tion elements. Annotation and extraction are done
simultaneously for every stage of the transducers’
cascade. A comprehensive list of the annotations
performed by our system is shown in Figure 8
where, for every layer, the annotation tree is de-
tailed (annotations introduced by the standard dic-
tionary are not reported).

4.1 Source-destination

These automata describe basic motion events (an-
notated as +SD) starting from a SOURCE and end-
ing in a GOAL. These can be described by verbs
as andare, venire, spostarsi, tornare. SOURCE and
GOAL can be of different types: we have consid-
ered the following three cases:

1. The simplest case where the SOURCE and/or the GOAL are reference
grounds expressed with prepositional phrases as partire da casa or an-
dare a casa.

2. The case where the SOURCE and/or the GOAL are areas defined with
respect to a reference ground as in parti davanti la stazione. The GOAL
can be reached via a path or through a reference ground (spostarsi
in fondo al viale, andare alla fine della strada, partire da davanti la
stazione).

A generic motion should be expressed with a
verb whose meaning focuses alternatively on dif-
ferent phases of the event as the reaching of a
point or a place (+TO), the leaving from a point
or a place (+FROM) as in partire or the contin-
uing (+CONT) of the motion along a path as in
proseguire, continuare, andare avanti. The system
also distinguishes from terminative verbs +TERM
involving the reaching of a goal (raggiungere, ar-
rivare, giungere) or the reaching of a generic point
along a translation process (ritrovarsi, incontrare).
Examples of extracted structures are shown in Fig-
ure 12.

Figure 12: Samples of source-destination struc-
tures with related annotations

4.2 Path

The system distinguishes four types of paths
(+PATH), involving four different configurations
of the motion:

1. A motion event which PATH entails that the FIGURE moves THROUGH
a GROUND. The reference ground can be a road, a trail or a path (verbs
as passare, percorre, seguire).

2. A motion event in which the FIGURE goes ACROSS a GROUND ele-
ment (i.e. a river, a crossing, a wood). It can be described by verbs as
incrociare, tagliare, attraversare.

3. A motion event in which the FIGURE enters in a GROUND element
as a house, a road or a new path. It is described by verbs as entrare,
imboccare, immettersi (INTO).

4. A motion event in which the FIGURE exits from a GROUND element
(verbs as sbucare, uscire) (+OUT FROM).

Examples of annotated structures are shown in
Figure 13.

Figure 13: Samples of path structures with related
annotation

77



4.3 Proximality
The system extracts motion events’ structures
where the FIGURE moves near a GROUND ob-
ject (+PROXY). We call this feature proximality.
Transducers extracting these structures are shown
in Figure 9 and examples of annotated structures
are shown in Figure 14. Our system distinguishes
three cases:

1. The case in which the FIGURE passes NEAR a GROUND object (verbs
as rimanere, sfiorare, toccare).

2. The case where the FIGURE moves ALONG a reference GROUND (as a
border). (as verbs costeggiare, fiancheggiare).

3. The case where the FIGURE passes OVER a reference ground (over-
stepping an obstacle or moving beyond a landmark). This is expressed
with verbs as (oltrepassare, superare).

Figure 14: Samples of proximality structures with
related annotation

4.4 Direction
The system recognizes five different cases in re-
spect to the lexicalization of DIRECTION and
VECTOR features of motion:

1. The case where the FIGURE has to go back (+DIRECTION BACK) in re-
spect to the direction already taken (+VECTOR=BACKWARDS). Event
is described by verbs like tornare (indietro), indietreggiare.

2. The case (+DIRECTION DOWN) where the FIGURE moves downwards
(+VECTOR=DOWNWARDS) (verb scendere).

3. The case (+DIRECTION UP) where the FIGURE moves upwards (verb
salire).

4. The case (+DIRECTION DEV) where the FIGURE changes direction
(+CHANGE DIRECTION) (verbs as abbandonare, inclinarsi, rientrare,
alzarsi). This case can involve the change of direction and/or vector of
the FIGURE.

5. The case (+DIRECTION GEN) where the direction of the FIGURE is ex-
plicitly expressed by a generic verb (as punta, dirigiti, muoviti) using a
direction satellite with respect to a reference ground. The system rec-
ognizes the case where DIRECTION is taken toward a reference ground
(+DIRECTION=TO GROUND).

Examples of annotated structures are shown in
Figure 15.

4.5 Shape
There are also cases where the motion involves
a straight or a circular movement (+SHAPE).
The motion can take place with respect to a
GROUND following a circular trajectory (verbs ag-
girare, circondare, circoscrivere) or just a direc-
tion change, usually with a turn (verbs girare, cur-
vare, svoltare). Examples are shown in Figure 16.

Figure 15: Samples of direction structures

Figure 16: Samples of extracted shape structures

5 Evaluation of the system

In order to evaluate our system we have collected
a corpus of about 300 texts describing hiking
tours in Western Alps. Texts are extracted from
hiker’s fan websites (our main source was the site
http://www.inalto.org).

These descriptions, from the point of view of
language variation determined by the medium of
communication, share characteristics both of writ-
ten and spoken language. This is due to the
distinctive traits of Web-Mediated communica-
tion where the language, although written, shows
features of spoken language and also to the re-
duced perceived distance between addresser and
addressee. Route descriptions posted in a blog
brings similar characteristics: in this way we can
easily have a corpus positioned “half-way” along
the diamesic dimension (Mioni, 1983).

A hiking tour description, also, contains mo-
tion events where all three space dimensions are
involved while describing paths. These can run
up and down, going along grounds elements with
directions that can be expressed lexically through
both absolute or relative frames of references. All
these features make hiking descriptions a well
suitable test corpus for the system.

The dimension of our corpus is around
100kwords with a type/token ratio of 8%. In Table
2 we show the score of the system tested on the
evaluation corpus at the current stage of develop-
ment.

Precision Recall F1 score
70,5% 80,4% 75,1%

Table 2: System’s scores

78



Figure 17: Annotation structure of a sample sentence

The evaluation is conducted on recognized sen-
tences not taking into account the annotation struc-
ture. We show in Figure 17 a sample of the anno-
tation structure of a sample sentence.

The proposed system can be used to extract mo-
tion structures with complex combines of features.
Here we extract events involving a changing vec-
tor to left (see Figure 18):

<ME+CHANGE_VECTOR+DIRECTION=LEFT>

Figure 18: Samples of extracted motion structures

Our system can also make queries using lower
annotation layers as in:

<V+SD_CONT> <PCM+PREP=su> <GROUND>

where the system extracts all motion events in
which the FIGURE continues along a PATH ex-
pressed by a GROUND and introduced by the
preposition su (on) used here as a case-marker.
Results are shown in Figure 19.

6 Conclusions and future work

We have described here a system that recognizes
sentences expressing motion events and annotates
them extracting the information about the type of
performed motion. This information is gathered
from the meaning of the verb and explicitly lexi-
calized by verb’s satellites expressing motion fea-
tures such as position, direction or shape. Ele-
ments participating in motion process are anno-

tated according to concepts borrowed from psy-
chological theory of Gestalt as used in Talmy’s
theory of motion events. It would be possible to
expand the scope of our system making it able
to recognize more complex and longer patterns of
expressions. We could also make use of lexico-
syntactic constraints in order to filter out relevant
sentences and thus improve precision. Thanks to
the integration capability of NooJ our system is
designed to be also part of more complex applica-
tions in a NLP pipeline. As an example, it is pos-
sible to use the information extracted and reported
on annotation layers to populate an ontology in the
domain of space or motion (Salza, 2013). More-
over, the described system can be extended to rec-
ognize a large variety of lexical structures; among
these, the vocabulary related to manner of motion
lacks a deeper theoretical analysis and requires
further work.

Figure 19: Samples of extraction of lower annota-
tion layers

79



References
Steven Abney. 1996 Partial parsing via finite-state cas-

cades. Natural Language Engineering, 1996.

Annibale Elia and Simonetta Vietri. 2002 L’analisi au-
tomatica dei testi e i dizionari elettronici, in E. Bu-
rattini, R. Cordeschi, (eds.), Manuale di Intelligenza
Artificiale per le Scienze Umane. Carocci, Roma,
2002.

Peter Exner and Pierre Nugues 2011 Using semantic
role labeling to extract events from Wikipedia. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Detection, Repre-
sentation, and Exploitation of Events in the Seman-
tic Web (DeRiVE 2011). Workshop in conjunction
with the 10th International Semantic Web Confer-
ence 2011 (ISWC 2011) Bonn, October 23–24 2011

Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky 2002 Auto-
matic labeling of semantic roles. In Proceedings of
the 38th Annual Conference of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL-00), pages 512–
520, Hong Kong, October 2000.

Maurice Gross. 1993 Local grammars and their repre-
sentation by finite automata. In M. Hoey - Data, De-
scription, Discourse. Harper Collins, London, pages
26–38, 1993.

Zellig S. Harris. 1991 A theory of language and infor-
mation: a mathematical approach. Clarendon Press,
Oxford

Mark L. Johnson 1987. The Body in the Mind: The
Bodily Basis of Meaning, Imagination, and Reason.
University of Chicago Press, 1987.

George Lakoff and Mark L. Johnson 1980. Metaphors
we live by. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
1980.

Stephen C. Levinson 2003. Space in language and
cognition. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
1977.

John Lyons 1977. Semantics. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1977.

Monica Mosca 2007. Spatial language in spoken Ital-
ian dialogues. A cognitive linguistics perspective.
Ph.D. Thesis, Pisa, Università di Pisa

Monica Mosca 2010. Eventi di moto in italiano tra
sintassi e semantica. Uno studio cognitivo empirico.
Edizioni Plus - Pisa University Press

Monica Mosca 2012. Italian motion constructions -
Different functions of particles. In: Filipović, Luna
and Kasia M. Jaszczolt (eds.), Space and Time in
Languages and Cultures: Linguistic diversity . 2012.
xv, 492 pp. (pp. 373394) John Benjamins John Ben-
jamins

Marvin Minsky 1975. A Framework for Representing
Knowledge. In The Psychology of Computer Vision,
ed. P. H. Winston, 211 277. New York: McGraw-
Hill.

Alberto M. Mioni 1983 Italiano tendenziale: osser-
vazioni su alcuni aspetti della standardizzazione, in
Scritti liguistici in onore di Giovan Battista Pelle-
grini, Pacini, Pisa 495-517.

R. G. Piotrowski and I. V. Palibina 1973. Automatic
pattern recognition applied to semantic problems. In
Proceedings of the 5th conference on Computational
linguistics - Volume 2, COLING ’73, pages 104–106
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 1973. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Edoardo Salza 2013. Using NooJ as a system for (shal-
low) ontology population from Italian texts. Unpub-
lished conference proceedings, NooJ International
Conference. June 3–5 2013, Saarbrücken University.

Max Silberztein 2004. NooJ : an Object-Oriented
Approach. In INTEX pour la Linguistique et le
Traitement Automatique des Langues, C. Muller, J.
Royauté, M. Silberztein Eds, Cahiers de la MSH
Ledoux. Presses Universitaires de Franche-Comté,
pp. 359-369.

Mihai Surdeanu and Sanda Harabagiu and
John Williams and Paul Aarseth. 2003. Using
predicate-argument structures for information
extraction. In Proceedings of the 41st An-
nual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 8–15. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2003.

Henry S. Thompson and Anne Anderson and
Ellen Gurman Bard and Gwyneth Doherty-Sneddon
and Alison Newlands and Cathy Sotillo 1993. The
hcrc map task corpus: natural dialogue for speech
recognition. In Proceedings of the workshop on Hu-
man Language Technology, HLT ’93, pages 25–30,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 1993. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Mark B. Turner and Gilles Fauconnier 1995. Con-
ceptual Integration and Formal Expression (July
28, 1995). Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, Vol.
10, No. 3, pp. 183-203, 1995. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1650417

Leonard Talmy 1985. Lexicalization Pat-
terns:Semantic Structure in Lexical Forms, in
T.Shopen, Language Typology and Syntactc Dess-
cription. Vol. III Gramamtical Categories and Lex-
icon. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press:57-
149

Leonard Talmy 2000. Toward a Cognitive Seman-
tics: Vol.I Concept Structuring Systems. Cam-
bridge(MA), MIT Press

Miriam Voghera. 2004 Polirematiche. In Grossmann
M., Rainer F., (a cura di) La formazione delle parole
in italiano.Tbingen, Niemeyer, pages 56–69, 2004.

Franz Wüllner 1827. Die Bedeutung der sprachlichen
Casus und Modi. Münster, Theissigsche Buchhand-
lung

80


