










































Annotating Anaphoric Shell Nouns with their Antecedents


Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop & Interoperability with Discourse, pages 112–121,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotating Anaphoric Shell Nouns with their Antecedents

Varada Kolhatkar
Department of Computer Science

University of Toronto
varada@cs.toronto.edu

Heike Zinsmeister
Institut für Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung

Universität Stuttgart
zinsmeis@ims.stuttgart-uni.de

Graeme Hirst
Department of Computer Science

University of Toronto
gh@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

Anaphoric shell nouns such as this is-
sue and this fact conceptually encapsulate
complex pieces of information (Schmid,
2000). We examine the feasibility of anno-
tating such anaphoric nouns using crowd-
sourcing. In particular, we present our
methodology for reliably annotating an-
tecedents of such anaphoric nouns and the
challenges we faced in doing so. We also
evaluated the quality of crowd annotation
using experts. The results suggest that
most of the crowd annotations were good
enough to use as training data for resolv-
ing such anaphoric nouns.

1 Introduction

Anaphoric shell nouns (ASNs) such as this fact,
this possibility, and this issue are common in all
kinds of text. They are called shell nouns be-
cause they provide nominal conceptual shells for
complex chunks of information representing ab-
stract concepts such as fact, proposition, and event
(Schmid, 2000). An example is shown in (1).

(1) Despite decades of education and widespread course
offerings, the survival rate for out-of-hospital car-
diac arrest remains a dismal 6 percent or less
worldwide.

This fact prompted the American Heart Association
last November to simplify the steps of CPR to make
it easier for lay people to remember and to encour-
age even those who have not been formally trained
to try it when needed.

Here, the ASN this fact encapsulates the clause
marked in bold from the preceding paragraph.

ASNs play an important role in organizing a dis-
course. First, they are used metadiscursively to

talk about the current discourse. In (1), the au-
thor characterizes the information presented in the
context by referring to it as a fact — a thing that
is indisputably the case. Second, they are used as
cohesive devices in a discourse. In (1), for exam-
ple, this fact on the one hand refers to the propo-
sition marked in bold, and on the other, faces for-
ward and serves as the starting point of the follow-
ing paragraph. Finally, as Schmid (2000) points
out, like conjunctions so and however, ASNs
may function as topic boundary markers and topic
change markers.

Despite their importance, ASNs have not re-
ceived much attention in Computational Linguis-
tics. Although there has been some effort to anno-
tate certain anaphors with similar properties, i.e.,
demonstratives and the pronoun it (Byron, 2003;
Artstein and Poesio, 2006), in contrast to ordi-
nary nominal anaphora, there are not many anno-
tated corpora available that could be used to study
ASNs. Indeed, many questions of annotation of
ASNs must still be answered. For example, the
extent to which native speakers themselves agree
on the resolution of such anaphors, i.e., on the pre-
cise antecedents, remains unclear.

An essential first step in this field of research
is therefore to clearly establish the extent of inter-
annotator agreement on antecedents of ASNs as
a measure of feasibility of the task. In this pa-
per, we describe our methodology for annotating
ASNs using crowdsourcing, a cheap and fast way
of obtaining annotation. We also describe how we
evaluated the feasibility of the task and the quality
of the annotation, and the challenges we faced in
doing so, both with regard to the task itself and the
crowdsourcing platform we use. The results sug-
gest that most of the crowd-annotations were good
enough to use as training data for ASN resolution.

112



2 Related work

There exist only few annotated corpora of
anaphora with non-nominal antecedents (Dipper
and Zinsmeister, 2011). The largest one of these,
the ARRAU corpus (Poesio and Artstein, 2008),
contains 455 anaphors pointing to non-nominal
antecedents, but only a few instances are ASNs.
Kolhatkar and Hirst (2012) annotated antecedents
of the same type as we do, but restricted their ef-
forts to the ASN this issue.1 In addition, there are
corpora annotated with event anaphora in which
verbal instances are identified as proxies for non-
nominal antecedents (Pradhan et al., 2007; Chen
et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2012).

For the task of identifying non-nominal an-
tecedents as free spans of text, there is no standard
way of reporting inter-annotator agreement. Some
studies report only observed percentage agree-
ment with results in the range of about 0.40–
0.55 (Vieira et al., 2002; Dipper and Zinsmeis-
ter, 2011). The studies differed with respect to
number of annotators, types of anaphors, and lan-
guage of the corpora. Artstein and Poesio (2006)
discuss Krippendorff’s alpha for chance-corrected
agreement. They considered antecedent strings as
bags of words and computed the degree of differ-
ence between them by different distance measures
(e.g. Jaccard, Dice). The bag-of-words approach
is rather optimistic in the sense that even two non-
overlapping strings are very likely to share at least
a few words. Kolhatkar and Hirst (2012) followed
a different approach by using Krippendorff’s uni-
tizing alpha (uα) which considers the longest com-
mon subsequence of different antecedent options
(Krippendorff, 2013). They reported high chance-
corrected uα of 0.86 for two annotators but in a
very restricted domain.

There has been some prior effort to annotate
anaphora and coreference using Games with a
Purpose as a method of crowdsourcing (Chamber-
lain et al., 2009; Hladká et al., 2009). Another, less
time-consuming approach of crowdsourcing is us-
ing platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk2.
It has been shown that crowdsourced data can suc-
cessfully be used as training data for NLP tasks
(Hsueh et al., 2009).

1Another data set reported in the literature could have
been relevant for us: Botley’s (2006) corpus contained about
462 ASN instances signaled by shell nouns; but this data is
no longer available (S. Botley, p.c.).

2https://mturk.com/mturk/

Class Description Examples

factual states of affairs fact, reason
linguistic linguistic acts question, report
mental thoughts and ideas issue, decision
modal subjective judgements possibility, truth
eventive events act, reaction
circumstantial situations situation, way

Table 1: Schmids categorization of shell nouns.
The nouns in boldface are used in this research.

3 The Anaphoric Shell Noun Corpus

Our goal is to obtain annotated data for ASN an-
tecedents that could be used to train a supervised
machine learning system to resolve ASNs. For
that, we created the Anaphoric Shell Noun (ASN)
corpus.

Schmid (2000) provides a list of 670 English
nouns which are frequently used as shell nouns.
He divides them into six broad semantic classes:
factual, mental, linguistic, modal, circumstantial,
and eventive. Table 1 shows this classification,
along with example shell nouns for each category.

To begin with, we considered articles contain-
ing occurrences of these 670 shell nouns from the
New York Times (NYT) corpus (about 711,046
occurrences).3 To create a corpus of a manage-
able size for annotation, we considered first 10
highly frequent shell nouns distributed across each
of Schmid’s shell noun categories from Table 1
and extracted ASN instances by searching for the
pattern {this shell noun} in these articles.4

To examine the feasibility of the annotation, we
systematically annotated sample data ourselves,
which contained about 15 examples of each of
these 10 highly frequent shell nouns. The anno-
tation process revealed that not all ASN instances
are easy to resolve. The instances with shell nouns
from the circumstantial and eventive categories, in
particular, had very long and unclear antecedents.
So we excluded these categories in this research
and work with six shell nouns from the other four
categories: fact, reason, issue, decision, question,
and possibility. To create the ASN corpus, we
extracted about 500 instances for each of these
six shell nouns. After removing duplicates and
instances with a non-abstract sense (e.g., this is-

3http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/
catalogEntry.jsp?catalogId=LDC2008T19

4Schmid (2000) provides patterns for anaphoric shell
nouns, and this-NP is the most prominent pattern among
them.

113



sue with a publication-related sense), we were left
with 2,822 ASN instances.

4 ASN Annotation Challenges

ASN antecedent annotation is a complex task, as
it involves deeply understanding the discourse and
interpreting it. Here we point out two main chal-
lenges associated with the task.

What to annotate? The question of ‘what to an-
notate’ as mentioned by Fort et al. (2012) is not
straightforward for ASN antecedents, as the no-
tion of markables is complex compared to ordi-
nary nominal anaphora: the units on which the
annotation work should focus are heterogeneous.5

Moreover, due to this heterogeneous nature of an-
notation units, there is a huge number of mark-
ables (e.g., all syntactic constituents given by a
syntactic parse tree). So there are many options
to choose from, while only a few units are actu-
ally to be annotated. Moreover, there is no one-
to-one correspondence between the syntactic type
of an antecedent and the semantic type of its refer-
ent (Webber, 1991). For instance, a semantic type
such as fact can be expressed with different syn-
tactic shapes such as a clause, a verb phrase, or a
complex sentence. Conversely, a syntactic shape,
such as a clause, can function as several semantic
types, including fact, proposition, and event.

Lack of the notion of the right answer It is not
obvious how to define clear and detailed annota-
tion guidelines to create a gold-standard corpus
for ASN antecedent annotation due to our limited
understanding of the nature and interpretation of
such antecedents. The notion of the right answer
is not well-defined for ASN antecedents. Indeed
most people will be hard-pressed to say whether
or not to include the clause Despite decades of
education and widespread course offerings in the
antecedent of this fact in example (1). The main
challenge is to identify the conditions when two
different candidates for annotation should be con-
sidered as representing essentially the same con-
cept, which raises deep philosophical issues that
we do not propose to solve in this paper. For our
purposes, we believe, this challenge could only
be possibly tackled by the requirements of down-
stream applications of ASN resolution.

5Occasionally, ASN antecedents are non-contiguous
spans of text, but in this work, we ignore them for simplicity.

5 Annotation Methodology

Considering the difficulties of ASN annotation
discussed above, there were two main challenges
involved in the annotation process: first, to find an-
notators who can annotate data reliably with min-
imal guidelines, and second, to design simple an-
notation tasks that will elicit data useful for our
purposes. Now we discuss how we dealt with
these challenges.

Crowdsourcing We wanted to examine to what
extent non-expert native speakers of English with
minimal annotation guidelines would agree on
ASN antecedents. We explored the possibility of
using crowdsourcing, which is an effective way to
obtain annotations for natural language research
(Snow et al., 2008). In particular, we explored the
use of CrowdFlower6, a crowdsourcing platform
that in turn uses various worker channels such as
Amazon Mechanical Turk. CrowdFlower offers a
number of features.

First, it offers a number of integrated quality-
control mechanisms. For instance, it throws gold
questions randomly at the annotators, and anno-
tators who do not answer them correctly are not
allowed to continue. To further minimize spam-
mers, it also offers a training phase before the ac-
tual annotation. In this phase, every annotator is
presented with a few gold questions. Only those
annotators who get the gold questions right get ad-
mittance to do the actual annotation.

Second, CrowdFlower chooses a unique answer
for each annotation unit based on the majority vote
of the trusted annotators. For each annotator, it
assigns a trust level based on how she performs
on the gold examples. The unique answer is com-
puted by adding together the trust scores of an-
notators, and then picking the answer with the
highest sum of trusts (CrowdFlower team, p.c.).
It also assigns a confidence score (denoted as c
henceforth) for each answer, which is a normal-
ized score of the summation of the trusts. For ex-
ample, suppose annotators A, B, and C with trust
levels 0.75, 0.75, and 1.0 give answers no, yes, yes
respectively for a particular instance. Then the an-
swer yes will score 1.75 and answer no will score
0.75 and yes will be chosen as the crowd’s answer
with c = 0.7 (i.e., 1.75/(1.75 + 0.75)). We use
these confidence scores in our analysis of inter-
annotator agreement below.

6http://crowdflower.com/

114



Finally, CrowdFlower also provides detailed an-
notation results including demographic informa-
tion and trustworthiness of each annotator.

Design of the annotation tasks With the help of
well-designed gold examples, CrowdFlower can
get rid of spammers and ensures that only reliable
annotators perform the annotation task. But the
annotation task must be well-designed in the first
place to get a good quality annotation. Following
the claim in the literature that with crowdsourc-
ing platforms simple tasks do best (Madnani et al.,
2010; Wang et al., 2012), we split our annotation
task into two relatively simple sequential annota-
tion tasks. First, identifying the broad region of the
antecedent, i.e., not the precise antecedent but the
region where the antecedent lies, and second, iden-
tifying the precise antecedent, given the broad re-
gion of the antecedent. Now we will discuss each
of our annotation tasks in detail.

5.1 CrowdFlower experiment 1
The first annotation task was about identifying the
broad region of ASN antecedents without actu-
ally pinpointing the precise antecedents. We de-
fined the broad region as the sentence containing
the ASN antecedent, as the shell nouns we have
chosen tend to have antecedents that lie within
a single sentence. We designed a CrowdFlower
experiment where we presented to the annotators
ASNs from the ASN corpus with three preceding
paragraphs as context. Sentences in the vicinity
of ASNs were each labelled: four sentences pre-
ceding the anaphor, the sentence containing the
anaphor, and two sentences following the anaphor.
This choice was based on our pilot annotation:
the antecedents very rarely occur more than four
sentences away from the anaphor. The annota-
tion task was to pinpoint the sentence in the pre-
sented text that contained the antecedent for the
ASN and selecting the appropriate sentence label
as the correct answer. If no labelled sentence in the
presented text contained the antecedent, we sug-
gested to the annotators to select None. If the an-
tecedent spanned more than one sentence, then we
suggested to them to select Combination. We also
provided a link to the complete article from which
the text was drawn in case the annotators wanted
to have a look at it.

Settings We asked for 8 judgements per instance
and paid 8 cents per annotation unit. Our job
contained in total 2,822 annotation units with 168

gold units. As we were interested in the ver-
dict of native speakers of English, we limited the
allowed demographic region to English-speaking
countries.

5.2 CrowdFlower experiment 2

This annotation task was about pinpointing the
exact antecedent text of the ASN instances. We
designed a CrowdFlower experiment, where we
presented to the annotators ASN instances from
the ASN corpus with highlighted ASNs and the
sentences containing the antecedents, the output
of experiment 1. One way to pinpoint the ex-
act antecedent string is to ask the annotators to
mark free spans of text within the antecedent sen-
tence, similar to Byron (2003) and Artstein and
Poesio (2006). However, CrowdFlower quality-
control mechanisms require multiple-choice an-
notation labels. So we decided to display a set
of labelled candidates to the annotators and ask
them to choose the answer that best represents
the ASN antecedent. A practical requirement of
this approach is that the number of options to be
displayed be only a handful in order to make it
a feasible task for online annotation. But as we
noted in Section 4, the number of markables for
ASN antecedents is large. If, for example, we de-
fine markables as all syntactic constituents given
by the Stanford parser7, there are on average 49.5
such candidates per sentence in the ASN corpus. It
is not practical to display all these candidates and
to ask CrowdFlower annotators to choose one an-
swer from this many options. Also, some potential
candidates are clearly not appropriate candidates
for a particular shell noun. For instance, the NP
constituent the survival rate in example (1) is not
an appropriate candidate for the shell noun fact as
generally facts are propositions. So the question is
whether it is possible to restrict this set of candi-
dates by discarding unlikely ones.

To deal with this question, we used super-
vised machine learning methods trained on easy,
non-anaphoric unlabelled examples of shell nouns
(e.g., the fact that X). In this paper, we will focus
on the annotation and will treat these methods as a
black box. In brief, the methods reduce the large
search space of ASN antecedent candidates to a
size that is manageable for crowdsourcing anno-
tation, without eliminating the most likely candi-

7http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/
lex-parser.shtml

115



dates. We displayed the 10 most-likely candidates
given by these methods. In addition, we made sure
not to display two candidates with only a negli-
gible difference. For example, given two candi-
dates, X and that X, which differ only with respect
to the introductory that, we chose to display only
the longer candidate that X.

In a controlled annotation, with detailed guide-
lines, such difficulties of selecting between minor
variations could be avoided. However, such de-
tailed annotation guidelines still have to be devel-
oped.

Settings As in experiment 1, we asked for 8
judgements per instance and paid 6 cents per anno-
tation unit. But for this experiment we considered
only 2,323 annotation units with 151 gold units,
only high-confidence units (c ≥ 0.5) from experi-
ment 1. This task turned out to be a suitable task
for crowdsourcing as it offered a limited number
of options to choose from, instead of asking the
annotators to mark arbitrary spans of text.

6 Agreement

Our annotation tasks pose difficulties in measur-
ing inter-annotator agreement both in terms of the
task itself and the platform used for annotation. In
this section, we describe our attempt to compute
agreement for each of our annotation tasks and the
challenges we faced in doing so.

6.1 CrowdFlower experiment 1
Recall that in this experiment, annotators identify
the sentence containing the antecedent and select
the appropriate sentence label as their answer. We
know from our pilot annotation that the distribu-
tion of such labels is skewed: most of the ASN an-
tecedents lie in the sentence preceding the anaphor
sentence. We observed the same trend in the re-
sults of this experiment. In the ASN corpus, the
crowd chose the preceding sentence 64% of the
time, the same sentence 13% of the time, and long-
distance sentences 23% of the time.8 Consider-
ing the skewed distribution of labels, if we use tra-
ditional agreement coefficients, such as Cohen’s
κ (1960) or Krippendorff’s α (2013), expected
agreement is very high, which in turn results in a
low reliability coefficient (in our case α = 0.61)
that does not necessarily reflect the true reliability
of the annotation (Artstein and Poesio, 2008).

8This confirms Passonneau’s (1989) observation that non-
nominal antecedents tend to be close to the anaphors.

F R I D Q P all

c < .5 8 8 36 21 13 7 16
.5≤ c < .6 6 6 13 8 7 5 8
.6≤ c < .8 24 25 31 31 22 27 27
.8≤ c < 1. 22 23 11 14 19 25 18

c = 1. 40 38 9 26 39 36 31

Average c .83 .82 .61 .72 .80 .83 .76

Table 2: CrowdFlower confidence distribution for
CrowdFlower experiment 1. Each column shows
the distribution in percentages for confidence of
annotating antecedents of that shell noun. The fi-
nal row shows the average confidence of the dis-
tribution. Number of ASN instances = 2,822. F
= fact, R = reason, I = issue, D = decision, Q =
question, P = possibility.

One way to measure the reliability of the data,
without taking chance correction into account, is
to consider the distribution of the ASN instances
with different levels of CrowdFlower confidence.
Table 2 shows the percentages of instances in dif-
ferent confidence level bands for each shell noun
as well as for all instances. For example, for the
shell noun fact, 8% of the total number of this fact
instances were annotated with c < 0.5. As we
can see, most of the instances of the shell nouns
fact, reason, question, and possibility were anno-
tated with high confidence. In addition, most of
them occurred in the band 0.8 ≤ c ≤ 1. There
are relatively few instances with low confidence
for these nouns, suggesting the feasibility of re-
liable antecedent annotation for these nouns. By
contrast, the mental nouns issue and decision had
a large number of low-confidence (c < 0.5) in-
stances, bringing in the question of reliability of
antecedent annotation of these nouns.

Given these results with different confidence
levels, the primary question is what confidence
level should be considered acceptable? For our
task, we required that at least four trusted anno-
tators out of eight annotators should agree on an
answer for it to be acceptable.9 We will talk about
acceptability later in Section 7.

6.2 CrowdFlower experiment 2
Recall that this experiment was about identifying
the precise antecedent text segment given the sen-
tence containing the antecedent. It is not clear
what the best way to measure the amount of such

9We chose this threshold after systematically examining
instances with different confidence levels.

116



Jaccard Dice
Do De α Do De α

A&P .53 .95 .45 .43 .94 .55
Our results .47 .96 .51 .36 .92 .61

Table 3: Agreement using Krippendorff’s α for
CrowdFlower experiment 2. A&P = Artstein and
Poesio (2006).

agreement is. Agreement coefficients such as Co-
hen’s κ underestimate the degree of agreement for
such annotation, suggesting disagreement even be-
tween two very similar annotated units (e.g., two
text segments that differ in just a word or two).
We present the agreement results in three different
ways: Krippendorff’s α with distance metrics Jac-
card and Dice (Artstein and Poesio, 2006), Krip-
pendorff’s unitizing alpha (Krippendorff, 2013),
and CrowdFlower confidence values.

Krippendorff’s α using Jaccard and Dice To
compare our agreement results with previous ef-
forts to annotate such antecedents, following Art-
stein and Poesio (2006), we computed Krippen-
dorff’s α using distance metrics Jaccard and Dice.
The general form of coefficient α is:

α = 1− Do
De

(1)

where Do and De are observed and expected dis-
agreements respectively. α = 1 indicates perfect
reliability and uα = 0 indicates the absence of re-
liability. When uα < 0, either the sample size
is very small or the disagreement is systematic.
Table 3 shows the agreement results. Our agree-
ment results are comparable to Artstein and Poe-
sio’s agreement results. They had 20 annotators
annotating 16 anaphor instances with segment an-
tecedents, whereas we had 8 annotators annotat-
ing 2,323 ASN instances. As Artstein and Poesio
point out, expected disagreement in case of such
antecedent annotation is close to maximal, as there
is little overlap between segment antecedents of
different anaphors and therefore α pretty much re-
flects the observed agreement.

Krippendorff’s unitizing α (uα) Following
Kolhatkar and Hirst (2012), we use uα for measur-
ing reliability of the ASN antecedent annotation
task. This coefficient is appropriate when the an-
notators work on the same text, identify the units
in the text that are relevant to the given research

F R I D Q P all

c < .5 11 17 32 31 14 28 21
.5≤ c < .6 12 12 19 23 9 19 15
.6≤ c < .8 36 33 34 32 30 36 33
.8≤ c < 1. 24 22 10 10 21 13 18

c = 1. 17 16 5 3 26 4 13

Average c .74 .71 .60 .59 .77 .62 .68

Table 4: CrowdFlower confidence distribution for
CrowdFlower experiment 2. Each column shows
the distribution in percentages for confidence of
annotating antecedents of that shell noun. The fi-
nal row shows the average confidence of the dis-
tribution. Number of ASN instances = 2,323. F
= fact, R = reason, I = issue, D = decision, Q =
question, P = possibility.

question, and then label the identified units (Krip-
pendorff, p.c.). The general form of coefficient
uα is the same as in equation 1. In our context,
the annotators work on the same text, the ASN in-
stances. We define an elementary annotation unit
(the smallest separately judged unit) to be a word
token. The annotators identify and locate ASN
antecedents for the given anaphor in terms of se-
quences of elementary annotation units.

uα incorporates the notion of distance between
strings by using a distance function which is de-
fined as the square of the distance between the
non-overlapping tokens in our case. The distance
is 0 when the annotated units are exactly the same,
and is the summation of the squares of the un-
matched parts if they are different. We compute
observed and expected disagreement as explained
by Krippendorff (2013, Section 12.4). For our
data, uα was 0.54.10 uα was lower for the men-
tal nouns issue and decision and the modal noun
possibility compared to other shell nouns.

CrowdFlower confidence results We also ex-
amined different confidence levels for ASN an-
tecedent annotation. Table 4 gives confidence re-
sults for all instances and for each noun. In con-
trast with Table 2, the instances are more evenly
distributed here. As in experiment 1, the men-
tal nouns issue and decision had many low con-
fidence instances. For the modal noun possibility,
it was easy to identify the sentence containing the
antecedent, but pinpointing the precise antecedent

10Note that uα reported here is just an approximation of
the actual agreement as in our case the annotators chose an
option from a set of predefined options instead of marking
free spans of text.

117



turned out to be difficult.
Now we discuss the nature of disagreement in

ASN annotation.

Disagreement in experiment 1 There were two
primary sources of disagreement in experiment 1.
First, the annotators had problems agreeing on the
answer None. We instructed them to choose None
when the sentence containing the antecedent was
not labelled. Nonetheless, some annotators chose
sentences that did not precisely contain the actual
antecedent but just hinted at it. Second, sometimes
it was hard to identify the precise antecedent sen-
tence as the antecedent was either present in the
blend of all labelled sentences or there were multi-
ple possible answers, as shown in example (2).

(2) Any biography of Thomas More has to answer one
fundamental question. Why? Why, out of all the
many ambitious politicians of early Tudor England,
did only one refuse to acquiesce to a simple piece
of religious and political opportunism? What was it
about More that set him apart and doomed him to a
spectacularly avoidable execution?

The innovation of Peter Ackroyd’s new biography of
More is that he places the answer to this question
outside of More himself.

Here, the author formulates the question in a num-
ber of ways and any question mentioned in the
preceding text can serve as the antecedent of the
anaphor this question.

Hard instances Low agreement can indicate
different problems: unclear guidelines, poor-
quality annotators, or difficult instances (e.g., not
well understood linguistic phenomena) (Artstein
and Poesio, 2006). We can rule out the pos-
sibility of poor-quality annotators for two rea-
sons. First, we consider 8 diverse annotators
who work independently. Second, we use Crowd-
Flower’s quality-control mechanisms and hence
allow only trustworthy annotators to annotate our
texts. Regarding instructions, we take inter-
annotator agreement as a measure for feasibility of
the task, and hence we keep the annotation instruc-
tion as simple as possible. This could be a source
of low agreement. The third possibility is hard in-
stances. Our results show that the mental nouns
issue and decision had many low-confidence in-
stances, suggesting the difficulty associated with
the interpretation of these nouns (e.g., the very
idea of what counts as an issue is fuzzy). The shell
noun decision was harder because most of its in-
stances were court-decision related articles, which
were in general hard to understand.

Different strings representing similar concepts
As noted in Section 4, the main challenge with the
ASN annotation task is that different antecedent
candidates might represent the same concept and
it is not trivial to incorporate this idea in the anno-
tation process. When five trusted annotators iden-
tify the antecedent as but X and three trusted anno-
tators identify it as merely X, since CrowdFlower
will consider these two answers to be two com-
pletely different answers, it will give the answer
but X a confidence of only about 0.6. uα or α with
Jaccard and Dice will not consider this as a com-
plete disagreement; however, the coefficients will
register it as a difference. In other words, the dif-
ference functions used with these coefficients do
not respond to semantics, paraphrases, and other
similarities that humans might judge as inconse-
quential. One way to deal with this problem would
be clustering the options that reflect essentially the
same concepts before measuring the agreement.
Some of these problems could also be avoided by
formulating instructions for marking antecedents
so that these differences do not occur in the iden-
tified antecedents. However, crowdsourcing plat-
forms require annotation guidelines to be clear and
minimal, which makes it difficult to control the an-
notation variations.

7 Evaluation of Crowd Annotation

CrowdFlower experiment 2 resulted in 1,810 ASN
instances with c > 0.5. The question is how good
are these annotations from experts’ point of view.

To examine the quality of the crowd annotation
we asked two judges A and B to evaluate the ac-
ceptability of the crowd’s answers. The judges
were highly-qualified academic editors: A, a re-
searcher in Linguistics and B, a translator with a
Ph.D. in History and Philosophy of Science. From
the crowd-annotated ASN antecedent data, we
randomly selected 300 instances, 50 instances per
shell noun. We made sure to choose instances with
borderline confidence (0.5 ≤ c < 0.6), medium
confidence (0.6 ≤ c < 0.8), and high confidence
(0.8 ≤ c ≤ 1.0). We asked the judges to rate
the acceptability of the crowd-answers based on
the extent to which they provided interpretation of
the corresponding anaphor. We gave them four
options: perfectly (the crowd’s answer is perfect
and the judge would have chosen the same an-
tecedent), reasonably (the crowd’s answer is ac-
ceptable and is close to their answer),

118



Judge B
P R I N Total

Judge A

P 171 44 11 7 233
R 12 27 7 4 50
I 2 4 6 1 13

N 1 2 0 1 4

Total 186 77 24 13 300

Table 5: Evaluation of ASN antecedent annota-
tion. P = perfectly, R = reasonably, I = implicitly,
N = not at all

implicitly (the crowd’s answer only implicitly
contains the actual antecedent), and not at all (the
crowd’s answer is not in any way related to the
actual antecedent).11 Moreover, if they did not
mark perfectly, we asked them to provide their an-
tecedent string. The two judges worked on the task
independently and they were completely unaware
of how the annotation data was collected.

Table 5 shows the confusion matrix of the rat-
ings of the two judges. Judge B was stricter than
Judge A. Given the nature of the task, it was
encouraging that most of the crowd-antecedents
were rated as perfectly by both judges (72% by
A and 62% by B). Note that perfectly is rather a
strong evaluation for ASN antecedent annotation,
considering the nature of ASN antecedents them-
selves. If we weaken the acceptability criteria and
consider the antecedents rated as reasonably to be
also acceptable antecedents, 84.6% of the total in-
stances were acceptable according to both judges.

Regarding the instances marked implicitly, most
of the times the crowd’s answer was the closest
textual string of the judges’ answer. So we again
might consider instances marked implicitly as ac-
ceptable answers.

For a very few instances (only about 5%) either
of the judges marked not at all. This was a posi-
tive result and suggests success of different steps
of our annotation procedure: identifying broad re-
gion, identifying the set of most likely candidates,
and identifying precise antecedent. As we can see
in Table 5, there were 7 instances where the judge
A rated perfectly while the judge B rated not at all,
i.e., completely contradictory judgements. When
we looked at these examples, they were rather hard
and ambiguous cases. An example is shown in (3).
The whether clause marked in the preceding sen-

11Before starting the actual annotation, we carried out a
training phase with 30 instances, which gave an opportunity
to the judges to ask questions about the task.

tence is the crowd’s answer. One of our judges
rated this answer as perfectly, while the other rated
it as not at all. According to her the correct an-
tecedent is whether Catholics who vote for Mr.
Kerry would have to go to confession.

(3) Several Vatican officials said, however, that any such
talk has little meaning because the church does not
take sides in elections. But the statements by several
American bishops that Catholics who vote for Mr.
Kerry would have to go to confession have raised
the question in many corners about whether this is
an official church position.

The church has not addressed this question publicly
and, in fact, seems reluctant to be dragged into the
fight...”

There was no notable relation between the an-
notator’s rating and the confidence level: many in-
stances with borderline confidence were marked
perfectly or reasonably, suggesting that instances
with c ≥ 0.5 were reasonably annotated instances,
to be used as training data for ASN resolution.

8 Conclusion

In this paper, we addressed the fundamental ques-
tion about feasibility of ASN antecedent annota-
tion, which is a necessary step before developing
computational approaches to resolve ASNs. We
carried out crowdsourcing experiments to get na-
tive speaker judgements on ASN antecedents. Our
results show that among 8 diverse annotators who
worked independently with a minimal set of an-
notation instructions, usually at least 4 annotators
converged on a single ASN antecedent. The re-
sult is quite encouraging considering the nature of
such antecedents.

We asked two highly-qualified judges to in-
dependently examine the quality of a sample of
crowd-annotated ASN antecedents. According to
both judges, about 95% of the crowd-annotations
were acceptable. We plan to use this crowd-
annotated data (1,810 instances) as training data
for an ASN resolver. We also plan to distribute the
annotations at a later date.

Acknowledgements

We thank the CrowdFlower team for their respon-
siveness and Hans-Jörg Schmid for helpful dis-
cussions. This material is based upon work sup-
ported by the United States Air Force and the De-
fense Advanced Research Projects Agency under
Contract No. FA8650-09-C-0179, Ontario/Baden-
Württemberg Faculty Research Exchange, and the
University of Toronto.

119



References
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2006. Identify-

ing reference to abstract objects in dialogue. In
Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on the Semantics
and Pragmatics of Dialogue, pages 56–63, Potsdam,
Germany.

Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder
agreement for computational linguistics. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(4):555–596, December.

Simon Philip Botley. 2006. Indirect anaphora: Testing
the limits of corpus-based linguistics. International
Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 11(1):73–112.

Donna K. Byron. 2003. Annotation of pronouns and
their antecedents: A comparison of two domains.
Technical report, University of Rochester. Computer
Science Department.

Jon Chamberlain, Udo Kruschwitz, and Massimo Poe-
sio. 2009. Constructing an anaphorically anno-
tated corpus with non-experts: Assessing the quality
of collaborative annotations. In Proceedings of the
2009 Workshop on The People’s Web Meets NLP:
Collaboratively Constructed Semantic Resources,
pages 57–62, Suntec, Singapore, August. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Bin Chen, Jian Su, Sinno Jialin Pan, and Chew Lim
Tan. 2011. A unified event coreference resolu-
tion by integrating multiple resolvers. In Proceed-
ings of 5th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 102–110, Chiang
Mai, Thailand, November.

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement
for nominal scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 20(1):37.

Stefanie Dipper and Heike Zinsmeister. 2011. Anno-
tating abstract anaphora. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 69:1–16.

Karën Fort, Adeline Nazarenko, and Sophie Rosset.
2012. Modeling the complexity of manual anno-
tation tasks: a grid of analysis. In 24th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 895–910.

Barbora Hladká, Jiřı́ Mı́rovský, and Pavel Schlesinger.
2009. Play the language: Play coreference. In Pro-
ceedings of the Association of Computational Lin-
guistics and International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing 2009 Conference Short
Papers, pages 209–212, Suntec, Singapore, August.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Pei-Yun Hsueh, Prem Melville, and Vikas Sindhwani.
2009. Data quality from crowdsourcing: A study of
annotation selection criteria. In Proceedings of the
NAACL HLT 2009 Workshop on Active Learning for
Natural Language Processing, pages 27–35, Boul-
der, Colorado, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Varada Kolhatkar and Graeme Hirst. 2012. Resolving
“this-issue” anaphora. In Proceedings of the 2012
Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 1255–1265, Jeju Island,
Korea, July. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Klaus Krippendorff. 2013. Content Analysis: An
Introduction to Its Methodology. Sage, Thousand
Oaks, CA, third edition.

Heeyoung Lee, Marta Recasens, Angel Chang, Mihai
Surdeanu, and Dan Jurafsky. 2012. Joint entity and
event coreference resolution across documents. In
Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
489–500, Jeju Island, Korea, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Nitin Madnani, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Philip
Resnik. 2010. Measuring transitivity using un-
trained annotators. In Proceedings of the NAACL
HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Lan-
guage Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, pages
188–194, Los Angeles, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Rebecca J. Passonneau. 1989. Getting at discourse ref-
erents. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 51–59, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Massimo Poesio and Ron Artstein. 2008. Anaphoric
annotation in the ARRAU corpus. In Proeedings
of the Sixth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’08), Marrakech,
Morocco, May. European Language Resources As-
sociation (ELRA).

Sameer S. Pradhan, Lance A. Ramshaw, Ralph M.
Weischedel, Jessica MacBride, and Linnea Micci-
ulla. 2007. Unrestricted coreference: Identifying
entities and events in OntoNotes. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Semantic Comput-
ing, pages 446–453, September.

Hans-Jörg Schmid. 2000. English Abstract Nouns As
Conceptual Shells: From Corpus to Cognition. Top-
ics in English Linguistics 34. De Gruyter Mouton,
Berlin.

Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and
Andrew Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast – but is it
good? evaluating non-expert annotations for natu-
ral language tasks. In Proceedings of the 2008 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 254–263, Honolulu, Hawaii, Oc-
tober. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Renata Vieira, Susanne Salmon-Alt, Caroline
Gasperin, Emmanuel Schang, and Gabriel Othero.
2002. Coreference and anaphoric relations of

120



demonstrative noun phrases in multilingual corpus.
In Proceedings of the 4th Discourse Anaphora and
Anaphor Resolution Conference (DAARC 2002),
pages 385–427, Lisbon, Portugal, September.

Aobo Wang, Cong Duy Vu Hoang, and Min-Yen Kan.
2012. Perspectives on crowdsourcing annotations
for natural language processing. In Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, volume in press, pages 1–
23. Springer.

Bonnie Lynn Webber. 1991. Structure and ostension in
the interpretation of discourse deixis. In Language
and Cognitive Processes, pages 107–135.

121


