










































Multi-document multilingual summarization corpus preparation, Part 2: Czech, Hebrew and Spanish


Proceedings of the MultiLing 2013 Workshop on Multilingual Multi-document Summarization, pages 13–19,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Multi-document multilingual summarization corpus preparation, Part 2:
Czech, Hebrew and Spanish

Michael Elhadad
Ben-Gurion Univ.
in the Negev, Israel
elhadad@cs.bgu.ac.il

Sabino Miranda-Jiménez
Instituto Politécnico
Nacional, Mexico

sabino_m@hotmail.com

Josef Steinberger
Univ. of

West Bohemia,
Czech Republic
jstein@kiv.zcu.cz

George Giannakopoulos
NCSR Demokritos, Greece

SciFY NPC, Greece
ggianna@iit.demokritos.gr

Abstract

This document overviews the strategy, ef-
fort and aftermath of the MultiLing 2013
multilingual summarization data collec-
tion. We describe how the Data Contrib-
utors of MultiLing collected and gener-
ated a multilingual multi-document sum-
marization corpus on 10 different lan-
guages: Arabic, Chinese, Czech, English,
French, Greek, Hebrew, Hindi, Romanian
and Spanish. We discuss the rationale be-
hind the main decisions of the collection,
the methodology used to generate the mul-
tilingual corpus, as well as challenges and
problems faced per language. This paper
overviews the work on Czech, Hebrew and
Spanish languages.

1 Introduction

In this document we present the language-
specific problems and challenges faced by Con-
tributors during the corpus creation process. To
facilitate the reader we repeat some information
found in the first part of the overview (Li et al.,
2013): the MultiLing tasks and the main steps of
the corpus creation process.

2 The MultiLing tasks

There are two main tasks (and a single-
document multilingual summarization pilot de-
scribed in a separate paper) in MultiLing 2013:

Summarization Task This MultiLing task aims
to evaluate the application of (partially or
fully) language-independent summarization
algorithms on a variety of languages. Each
system participating in the task was called
to provide summaries for a range of differ-
ent languages, based on corresponding cor-
pora. In the MultiLing Pilot of 2011 the lan-
guages used were 7, while this year systems

were called to summarize texts in 10 differ-
ent languages: Arabic, Chinese, Czech, En-
glish, French, Greek, Hebrew, Hindi, Roma-
nian, Spanish. Participating systems were re-
quired to apply their methods to a minimum
of two languages.
The task was aiming at the real problem of
summarizing news topics, parts of which may
be described or may happen in different mo-
ments in time. We consider, similarly to Mul-
tiLing 2011(Giannakopoulos et al., 2011) that
news topics can be seen as event sequences:

Definition 1 An event sequence is a set of
atomic (self-sufficient) event descriptions, se-
quenced in time, that share main actors, lo-
cation of occurence or some other important
factor. Event sequences may refer to topics
such as a natural disaster, a crime investiga-
tion, a set of negotiations focused on a single
political issue, a sports event.

The summarization task requires to generate
a single, fluent, representative summary from
a set of documents describing an event se-
quence. The language of the document set
will be within the given range of 10 languages
and all documents in a set share the same lan-
guage. The output summary should be of the
same language as its source documents. The
output summary should be between 240 and
250 words.

Evaluation Task This task aims to examine how
well automated systems can evaluate sum-
maries from different languages. This task
takes as input the summaries generated from
automatic systems and humans in the Sum-
marization Task. The output should be a grad-
ing of the summaries. Ideally, we would want
the automatic evaluation to maximally corre-
late to human judgement.

13



The first task was aiming at the real problem of
summarizing news topics, parts of which may be
described or happen in different moments in time.
The implications of including multiple aspects of
the same event, as well as time relations at a vary-
ing level (from consequtive days to years), are still
difficult to tackle in a summarization context. Fur-
thermore, the requirement for multilingual appli-
cability of the methods, further accentuates the dif-
ficulty of the task.

The second task, summarization evaluation has
come to be a prominent research problem, based on
the difficulty of the summary evaluation process.
While commonly used methods build upon a few
human summaries to be able to judge automatic
summaries (e.g., (Lin, 2004; Hovy et al., 2005)),
there also exist works on fully automatic evalua-
tion of summaries, without human“model” sum-
maries (Louis and Nenkova, 2012; Saggion et al.,
2010). The Text Analysis Conference has a sepa-
rate track, named AESOP (Dang and Owczarzak,
2009) aiming to test and evaluate different auto-
matic evaluation methods of summarization sys-
tems.

Given the tasks, a corpus needed to be gener-
ated, that would be able to:

• provide input texts in different languages to
summarization systems.

• provide model summaries in different lan-
guages as gold standard summaries, to also
allow for automatic evaluation using model-
dependent methods.

• provide human grades to automatic and hu-
man summaries in different languages, to
support the testing of summary evaluation
systems.

In the following section we show how these re-
quirements were met in MultiLing 2013.

3 Corpus collection and generation

The overall process of creating the corpus of
MultiLing 2013 was, similarly to MultiLing 2011,
based on a community effort. The main processes
consisting the generation of the corpus are as fol-
lows:

• Selection of a source corpus in a single lan-
guage.

• Translation of the source corpus to different
languages.

• Human summarization of corpus topics per
language.

• Evaluation of human summaries, as well as of
submitted system runs.

4 Language specific notes

In the following paragraphs we provide
language-specific overviews related to the corpus
contribution effort. The aim of these overviews is
to provide a reusable pool of knowledge for future
similar efforts.

In this document we elaborate on Czech, He-
brew, and Spanish languages. A second document
(Elhadad et al., 2013) elaborates on the rest of the
languages.

4.1 Czech language
The first part of the Czech subcorpus (10 top-

ics) was created for the multilingual pilot task at
TAC 2011. Five new topics were added for Mul-
tiling 2013. In total, 14 annotators participated in
the Czech corpus creation.

The most time consuming part of the annota-
tion work was the translation of the articles. The
annotators were not professional translators and
many topics required domain knowledge for cor-
rect translation. To be able to translate a per-
son name, the translator needs to know its correct
spelling in Czech, which is usually different from
English. The gender also plays an important role
in the translation, because a suffix ‘ová’ must be
added to female surnames.

Translation of organisation names or person’s
functions within an organisation needs some do-
main knowledge as well. Complicated morphol-
ogy and word order in Czech (more free but some-
times very different fromEnglish) makes the trans-
lation even more difficult.

For the creation of model summaries the anno-
tator needed to analyse the topic well in order to
decide what is important and what is redundant.
Sometimes, it was very difficult, mainly in the
case of topics which covered a long period (even
5 years) and which contained articles sharing very
little information.

The main question of the evaluation part was
how to evaluate a summary which contains a read-
able, continuous text — mainly the case of the

14



Group SysID Avg Perf
a B 4.75
a A 4.63
ab C 4.61
b D 4.21
b E 4.10

Table 1: Czech: Tukey’s HSD test groups for hu-
man summarizers

baseline system with ID6) — however not impor-
tant information from the article cluster point of
view.

An overview of the Overall Responsiveness and
the corresponding average grades of the human
summarizers can be seen in Table 1. We note
that on average the human summaries are consid-
ered excellent (graded above 4 out of 5), but that
there exist statistically significant differences be-
tween summarizers, essentially forming two dis-
tinct groups.

4.2 Hebrew language

This section describes the process of preparing
the dataset for MultiLing 2013 in Hebrew: transla-
tion of source texts from English, and the summa-
rization for the translated texts, by the Ben Gurion
University Natural Language Processing team.

4.2.1 Translation Process
Four people participated in the translation and

the summarization of the dataset of the 50 news
articles: three graduate students, one a native En-
glish speaker with fluent Hebrew and the other two
with Hebrew as a mother tongue and very good
English skills. The process was supervised by a
professional translator with a doctoral degree with
experience in translation and scientific editing.

The average times to read an article was 2.5min-
utes (std. dev 1.2min), the average translation time
was 30 minutes (std. dev 15min), and the average
proofing time was 18.5min (std. dev 10.5min).

4.2.2 Translation Methodology
We tested two translation methodologies by dif-

ferent translators. In some of the cases, translation
was aided with Google Translate1, while in other
cases, translation was performed from scratch.

In the cases where texts were first translated
using Google Translate, the translator reviewed

1See http://translate.google.com/.

the text and edited changes according to her judg-
ment. Relying on the time that was reported for the
proofreading of each translation, we could tell that
texts that were translated using this method, re-
quired longer periods of proofreading (and some-
times more time was required to proofread than to
translate). This is most likely because once the au-
tomatic translation was available, the human trans-
lator was biased by the automatic outcome, re-
maining anchored’ to the given text with reduced
criticism and creativity.

Translating the text manually, aided with online
or offline dictionaries, Wikipedia and news site on
the subject that was translated, showed better qual-
ity as analysis of time shows, where the ratio be-
tween the time needed to proofread was less than
half.

In addition, we found, that inmost cases the time
that the translation took for the first texts of a given
subject (for each article cluster), tends to be signif-
icantly longer than the subsequent articles in the
same cluster. This reflects the ’learning phase’ ex-
perienced by the translators who approached each
cluster, getting to know the vocabulary of each
subject.

4.2.3 Topic Clusters
The text collection includes five clusters of ten

articles each. Some of the topics were very famil-
iar to the Hebrew-speaking readers, and some sub-
jects were less familiar or relevant. The Iranian
Nuclear issue is very common in the local news
and terminology is well known. Moreover, it was
possible to track the articles from the news as they
were published in Hebrew news websites at that
time; this was important for the usage of actual
and correct news-wise terminology. The hardest
batch to translate was on the Paralympics champi-
onship, which had no publicity in Hebrew, and the
terminology of winter sports is culturally foreign
to native Hebrew speakers.

4.2.4 Special Issues in Hebrew
A couple of issues have surfaced during the

translation and should be noted. Many words in
Hebrew have a foreign transliterated usage and an
original Hebrew word as well. For instance, the
Latin word Atomic is very common in Hebrew
and, therefore, it will be equally acceptable to use
it in the Hebrew form, אטומי / ‘atomi’but also
the Hebrew word גרעיני (‘gar’ ini’ / nuclear).
Traditional HebrewNews Agencies have for many

15



Summarizer Reading time Summarization
A 43 min 49 min
B 22 min 84 min
C 35 min 62 min

Table 2: Summarization process times (averaged)

years adopted an editorial line which strongly en-
courages using original Hebrew words whenever
possible. In recent years, however, this approach
is relaxed, and both registers are equally accepted.
We have tried to use a ’common notion’ in all texts
using the way terms are written inWikipedia as the
voice of majority. In most cases, this meant using
many transliterations.

Another issue in Hebrew concerns the orthog-
raphy variations of plene vs. deficient spelling.
Since Hebrew can be written with or without vo-
calization, words may be written with variations.
For instance, the vocalized version of the word
‘air’ is ֲאִויר (‘avir’ ) while the non-vocalized
version is אוויר (‘avvir’). The rules of spelling
related to these variations are complicated and are
not common knowledge. Even educated people
write words with high variability, and in many
cases, usage is skewed by the rules embedded in
the Microsoft Word editor. We did not make any
specific effort to enforce standard spelling in the
dataset.

4.2.5 Summarization Process
Each cluster of articles was summarized by three

persons, and each summary was proof-read by the
other summarizers. Most of the summarizers read
the texts before summarization, while translating
or proofreading them, and, therefore, the time that
was required to read all texts was reduced.

The time spent reading and summarizing was
extremely different for each of the three summa-
rizers, reflecting widely different summarization
strategies, as indicated in the Table 2 (average
times over the 5 new clusters of MultiLing 2013):

The trend indicates that investing more time up
front reading the clusters pays off later in summa-
rization time.

The instructions did not explicitly recommend
abstractive vs. extractive summarization. Two
summarizers applied abstractive methods, one
tended to use mostly extractive (C). The extractive
method did not take markedly less time than the
abstractive one. In the evaluation, the extractive

Group SysID Avg Perf
a A 4.80
ab B 4.40
b C 4.13

Table 3: Hebrew: Tukey’s HSD test groups for hu-
man summarizers

summary was found markedly less fluent.
As the best technique to summarize efficiently,

all summarizers found that ordering the texts by
date of publication was the best way to conduct the
summaries in the most fluent manner.

However, it was not completely a linear process,
since it was often found that general information,
which should be located at the beginning of the
summary as background information, appeared in
a later text. In such cases, summarizers changed
their usual strategy and consciously moved infor-
mation from a later text to the beginning of the
summary. This was felt as a distinct deviation –
as the dominant strategy was to keep track of the
story told across the chronology of the cluster, and
to only add new and important information to the
summary that was collected so far.

The most difficult subject to summarize was
the set on Paralympic winter sports championship
which was a collection of anecdotal descriptions
which were not necessarily a developing or a se-
quential story and had no natural coherence as a
cluster.

4.2.6 Human evaluation
The results of human evaluation over the human

summarizers are provided in Table 3. It is inter-
esting to note that even between humans there ex-
ist two groups with statistically significant differ-
ences in their grades. On the other hand, the hu-
man grades are high enough to show high quality
summaries (over 4 on a 5 point scale).

4.3 Spanish language
Thirty undergraduate students, from National

Institute Polytechnic and Autonomous University
of the State of Mexico, were involved in creating
of Spanish corpus for MultiLing 2013.

The Spanish corpus built upon the Text Analy-
sis Conference (TAC) MultiLing Corpus of 2011.
The source documents were news fromWikiNews
website, in English language. The source corpus
for translating consisted of 15 topics and 10 docu-
ments per topic. In the following paragraphs, we

16



show the measured times for each stage and prob-
lems that people had to face during the generation
of corpus that includes translation of documents,
multi-document summarization, and evaluation of
human (manual) summaries.

At the translation step, people had to translate
sentence by sentence or paraphrase a sentence up
to completing the whole document. When a docu-
ment was translated, it was sent to another person
to verify the quality of the translated document.
The effort was measured by three different time
measurements: reading time, translation time, and
verification time.

The reading average at document level was 7.6
minutes (with a standard deviation of 3.4 minutes),
the average translation of each document was 19.2
minutes (with a standard deviation of 7.8 min-
utes), and the average verification was 14.9 min-
utes (with a standard deviation of 7.7 minutes).
The translation stage took 104.5 man-hours.

At summarization step, people had to read the
whole set of translated documents (topic) and cre-
ate a summary per each set of documents. The
length of a summary is between 240 and 250
words. Three summaries were created for each
topic. Also, reading time of the topic and time of
writing the summary were measured.

The average reading of a set of documents was
31.6 minutes (with a standard deviation of 10.2
minutes), and the average time to generate a sum-
mary was 27.7 minutes (with a standard deviation
of 6.5 minutes). This stage took 44.5 man-hours.

At evaluation step, people had to read the whole
set of translated documents and assess its corre-
sponding summary. The summary quality was
evaluated. Three evaluations were done for each
summary. The human judges assessed the overall
responsiveness of the summary based on covering
all important aspects of the document set, fluent
and readable language. The human summary qual-
ity average was 3.8 (on a scale 1 to 5) (with a stan-
dard deviation of 0.81). The results are detailed in
Table 4. It is interesting to note that all humans
have no statistically significant differences in their
grades. On the other hand, the human grades are
not excellent on average (i.e. exceeding 4 out of 5)
which shows that the evaluators considered human
summaries non-optimal.

Group SysID Avg Perf
a C 3.867
a B 3.778
a A 3.667

Table 4: Spanish: Tukey’s HSD test groups for hu-
man summarizers

4.3.1 Problems during Generation of Spanish
Corpus

During the translation step, translators had to
face problems related to proper names, acronyms,
abbreviations, and specific themes. For instance,
the proper name“United States”can be depicted
with different Spanish words such as “EE. UU.”
2,“Estados Unidos”, and“EUA”—all of them
are valid words. Even though translators know
all the correct translations, they decided to use the
frequent terms in a context of news (the first two
terms are frequently used).

In relation to acronyms, well-known acronyms
were translated into equivalent well-known (or fre-
quent) Spanish translations such as UN (United
Nations) became into ONU (Organización de las
Naciones Unidas), or they were kept in the source
language, because they are frequently used in
Spanish, for example, UNICEF, BBC, AP (the
news agency, Associated Press), etc.

On the contrary, for not well-known acronyms
of agencies, monitoring centers, etc., translators
looked for the common translation of the proper
name on Spanish news websites in order to cre-
ate the acronym based on the name. Other trans-
lators chose to translate the proper name, but they
kept the acronym from the source document beside
the translated name. In cases where acronyms ap-
peared alone, they kept the acronym from source
language. It is a serious problem because a set of
translated documents has a mix of acronyms.

Abbreviations were mainly faced with ranks
such as lieutenant (Lt.), Colonel (Col.), etc. Trans-
lators used an equivalent rank in Spanish. For in-
stance, lieutenant (Lt.) is translated into“teniente
(Tte.)”; however, translators preferred to use the
complete word rather than the abbreviation.

In case of specific topics, translators used Span-
ish websites related to the topic in order to know
the particular vocabulary and to decide what (tech-

2The double E and double U indicate that the letter rep-
resents a plural: e.g. EE. may stand for Asuntos Exteriores
(Foreign Affairs).

17



nical) words should be translated and how they
should be expressed.

As regards at text summarization step, sum-
marizers dealt with how to organize the sum-
mary because there were ten documents per topic,
and all documents involved dates. Two strategies
were employed to solve the problem: generating
the summary according to representative dates, or
starting the summary based on a particular date.

In the first case, summarizers took the chain
of events and wrote the summary considering the
dates of events. They gathered important events
and put together under one date, typically, the lat-
est date according to a part of the chain of events.
They grouped all events in several dates; thus, the
summary is a sequence of dates that gather events.
However, the dates are chosen arbitrary according
to the summarizers.

In the second case, summarizers started the sum-
mary based on a specific date, and continued writ-
ing the sequence of important events. The se-
quence of events represents the temporality start-
ing from a specific point of time (usually, the
first date in the set of documents). Finally, in
most cases, evaluators think that human sum-
maries meet the requirements of covering all im-
portant aspects of the document set, fluent and
readable language.

5 Conclusions and lessons learnt

The findings from the languages presented in
this paper appear to second the claims found in the
rest of the languages (Li et al., 2013):

• Translation is a non-trivial process, often re-
quiring expert know-how to be performed.

• The distribution of time in summarization can
significantly vary among human summariz-
ers: it essentially sketches different strate-
gies of summarization. It would be interest-
ing to follow different strategies and record
their effectiveness in the multilingual setting,
similarly to previous works on human-style
summarization (Endres-Niggemeyer, 2000;
Endres-Niggemeyer and Wansorra, 2004).
Our find may be related to the (implied) ef-
fort of taking notes while reading, which can
be a difficult cognitive process (Piolat et al.,
2005).

• The time aspect is important when generat-
ing a summary. The exact use of time (a sim-

ple timeline? a grouping of events based on
time?) is apparently arbitrary.

We remind the reader that extended technical re-
ports recapitulating discussions and findings from
the MultiLingWorkshop will be available after the
workshop at the MultiLing Community website3,
as an addenum to the proceedings.

What can definitely be derived from all the ef-
fort and discussion related to the gathering of sum-
marization corpora is that it is a research challenge
in itself. If the future we plan to broaden the scope
of the MultiLing effort, integrating all the findings
in tools that will support the whole process and al-
low quantifying the apparent problems in the dif-
ferent stages of corpus creation. We have also been
considering to generate comparable corpora (e.g.,
see (Saggion and Szasz, 2012)) for future Multi-
Ling efforts. We examine this course of action
to avoid the significant overhead by the transla-
tion process required for parallel corpus genera-
tion. We should note here that so far we have been
using parallel corpora to:

• allow for secondary studies, related to the
human summarization effort in different lan-
guages. Having a parallel corpus is such cases
can prove critical, in that it provides a com-
mon working base.

• be able to study topic-related or domain-
related summarization difficulty across lan-
guages.

• highlight language-specific problems (such
as ambiguity in word meaning, named entity
representation across languages).

• fixes the setting in which methods can show
their cross-language applicability. Exam-
ining significantly varying results in differ-
ent languages over a parallel corpus offers
some background on how to improve exist-
ing methods and may highlight the need for
language-specific resources.

On the other hand, the significant organizational
and implementaion effort required for the transla-
tion may turn the balance towards comparable cor-
pora for future MultiLing endeavours.

3See http://multiling.iit.demokritos.gr/
pages/view/1256/proceedings-addenum)

18



Acknowledgments

MultiLing is a community effort and this com-
munity is what keeps it alive and interesting. We
would like to thank contributors for their organi-
zational effort, which made MultiLing possible in
so many languages and all volunteers, helpers and
researchers that helped realize individual steps of
the process. A more detailed reference of the con-
tributor teams can be found in the Appendix.

The MultiLing 2013 organization has been par-
tially supported by the NOMAD FP7 EU Project
(cf. http://www.nomad-project.eu).

References
[Dang and Owczarzak2009] Hoa Trang Dang and

K. Owczarzak. 2009. Overview of the tac 2009
summarization track, Nov.

[Elhadad et al.2013] Michael Elhadad, Sabino
Miranda-Jiménez, Josef Steinberger, and George
Giannakopoulos. 2013. Multi-document multi-
lingual summarization corpus preparation, part 2:
Czech, hebrew and spanish. In MultiLing 2013
Workshop in ACL 2013, Sofia, Bulgaria, August.

[Endres-Niggemeyer and Wansorra2004] Brigitte
Endres-Niggemeyer and Elisabeth Wansorra. 2004.
Making cognitive summarization agents work in
a real-world domain. In Proceedings of NLUCS
Workshop, pages 86–96. Citeseer.

[Endres-Niggemeyer2000] Brigitte Endres-
Niggemeyer. 2000. Human-style WWW sum-
marization. Technical report.

[Giannakopoulos et al.2011] G. Giannakopoulos,
M. El-Haj, B. Favre, M. Litvak, J. Steinberger,
and V. Varma. 2011. TAC 2011 MultiLing pilot
overview. In TAC 2011 Workshop, Maryland MD,
USA, November.

[Hovy et al.2005] E. Hovy, C. Y. Lin, L. Zhou, and
J. Fukumoto. 2005. Basic elements.

[Li et al.2013] Lei Li, Corina Forascu, Mahmoud El-
Haj, and George Giannakopoulos. 2013. Multi-
document multilingual summarization corpus prepa-
ration, part 1: Arabic, english, greek, chinese, ro-
manian. In MultiLing 2013 Workshop in ACL 2013,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August.

[Lin2004] C. Y. Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for
automatic evaluation of summaries. Proceedings of
the Workshop on Text Summarization Branches Out
(WAS 2004), pages 25–26.

[Louis and Nenkova2012] Annie Louis and Ani
Nenkova. 2012. Automatically assessing ma-
chine summary content without a gold standard.
Computational Linguistics, 39(2):267–300, Aug.

[Piolat et al.2005] Annie Piolat, Thierry Olive, and
Ronald T Kellogg. 2005. Cognitive effort dur-
ing note taking. Applied Cognitive Psychology,
19(3):291–312.

[Saggion and Szasz2012] Horacio Saggion and Sandra
Szasz. 2012. The concisus corpus of event sum-
maries. In LREC, pages 2031–2037.

[Saggion et al.2010] H. Saggion, J. M. Torres-Moreno,
I. Cunha, and E. SanJuan. 2010. Multilingual sum-
marization evaluation without human models. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics: Posters, page 1059–
1067.

Appendix: Contributor teams

Czech language team
Team members Brychcín Tomáš, Campr Michal,

Fiala Dalibor, Habernal Ivan, Habernalová
Anna, Ježek Karel, Konkol Michal, Konopík
Miloslav, Krčmář Lubomír, Nejezchlebová
Pavla, Pelechová Blanka, Ptáček Tomáš,
Steinberger Josef, Zíma Martin.

Team affiliation University of West Bohemia,
Czech Republic

Contact e-mail jstein@kiv.zcu.cz

Hebrew language team
Team members Tal Baumel, Raphael Cohen,

Michael Elhadad, Sagit Fried, Avi Hayoun,
Yael Netzer

Team affiliation Computer Science Dept. Ben-
Gurion University in the Negev, Israel

Contact e-mail elhadad@cs.bgu.ac.il

Spanish language team
Team members Sabino Miranda-Jiménez, Grig-

ori Sidorov, Alexander Gelbukh (Natural
Language and Text Processing Laboratory,
Center for Computing Research, National In-
stitute Polytechnic, Mexico City, Mexico)

Obdulia Pichardo-Lagunas (Interdisciplinary
Professional Unit on Engineering and Ad-
vanced Technologies (UPIITA), National In-
stitute Polytechnic, Mexico City, Mexico)

Contact e-mail sabino_m@hotmail.com

19


