










































Generating Natural-Language Video Descriptions Using Text-Mined Knowledge


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Vision and Language (WVL ’13), pages 10–19,
Atlanta, Georgia, 14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generating Natural-Language Video Descriptions
Using Text-Mined Knowledge

Niveda Krishnamoorthy ∗
UT Austin

niveda@cs.utexas.edu

Girish Malkarnenkar ∗
UT Austin

girish@cs.utexas.edu

Raymond Mooney
UT Austin

mooney@cs.utexas.edu

Kate Saenko
UMass Lowell

saenko@cs.uml.edu

Sergio Guadarrama
UC Berkeley

sguada@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract

We present a holistic data-driven technique
that generates natural-language descriptions
for videos. We combine the output of state-of-
the-art object and activity detectors with “real-
world” knowledge to select the most proba-
ble subject-verb-object triplet for describing a
video. We show that this knowledge, automat-
ically mined from web-scale text corpora, en-
hances the triplet selection algorithm by pro-
viding it contextual information and leads to
a four-fold increase in activity identification.
Unlike previous methods, our approach can
annotate arbitrary videos without requiring the
expensive collection and annotation of a sim-
ilar training video corpus. We evaluate our
technique against a baseline that does not use
text-mined knowledge and show that humans
prefer our descriptions 61% of the time.

1 Introduction

Combining natural-language processing (NLP) with
computer vision to to generate English descriptions
of visual data is an important area of active research
(Farhadi et al., 2010; Motwani and Mooney, 2012;
Yang et al., 2011). We present a novel approach to
generating a simple sentence for describing a short
video that:

1. Identifies the most likely subject, verb and
object (SVO) using a combination of visual
object and activity detectors and text-mined
knowledge to judge the likelihood of SVO
triplets. From a natural-language generation

∗Indicates equal contribution

(NLG) perspective, this is the content planning
stage.

2. Given the selected SVO triplet, it uses a simple
template-based approach to generate candidate
sentences which are then ranked using a statis-
tical language model trained on web-scale data
to obtain the best overall description. This is
the surface realization stage.

Figure 1 shows sample system output. Our ap-
proach can be viewed as a holistic data-driven three-
step process where we first detect objects and ac-
tivities using state-of-the-art visual recognition al-
gorithms. Next, we combine these often noisy de-
tections with an estimate of real-world likelihood,
which we obtain by mining SVO triplets from large-
scale web corpora. Finally, these triplets are used to
generate candidate sentences which are then ranked
for plausibility and grammaticality. The resulting
natural-language descriptions can be usefully em-
ployed in applications such as semantic video search
and summarization, and providing video interpreta-
tions for the visually impaired.

Using vision models alone to predict the best sub-
ject and object for a given activity is problematic,
especially while dealing with challenging real-world
YouTube videos as shown in Figures 4 and 5, as
it requires a large annotated video corpus of simi-
lar SVO triplets (Packer et al., 2012). We are in-
terested in annotating arbitrary short videos using
off-the-shelf visual detectors, without the engineer-
ing effort required to build domain-specific activity
models. Our main contribution is incorporating the
pragmatics of various entities’ likelihood of being

10



Figure 1: Content planning and surface realization

the subject/object of a given activity, learned from
web-scale text corpora. For example, animate ob-
jects like people and dogs are more likely to be sub-
jects compared to inanimate objects like balls or TV
monitors. Likewise, certain objects are more likely
to function as subjects/objects of certain activities,
e.g., “riding a horse” vs. “riding a house.”

Selecting the best verb may also require recog-
nizing activities for which no explicit training data
has been provided. For example, consider a video
with a man walking his dog. The object detectors
might identify the man and dog; however the action
detectors may only have the more general activity,
“move,” in their training data. In such cases, real-
world pragmatics is very helpful in suggesting that
“walk” is best used to describe a man “moving” with
his dog. We refer to this process as verb expansion.

After describing the details of our approach, we
present experiments evaluating it on a real-world
corpus of YouTube videos. Using a variety of meth-
ods for judging the output of the system, we demon-
strate that it frequently generates useful descriptions
of videos and outperforms a purely vision-based ap-
proach that does not utilize text-mined knowledge.

2 Background and Related Work

Although there has been a lot of interesting work
done in natural language generation (Bangalore and
Rambow, 2000; Langkilde and Knight, 1998), we
use a simple template for generating our sentences
as we found it to work well for our task.

Most prior work on natural-language descrip-
tion of visual data has focused on static images
(Felzenszwalb et al., 2008; Kulkarni et al., 2011;
Kuznetsova et al., 2012; Laptev et al., 2008; Li et al.,

2011; Yao et al., 2010). The small amount of exist-
ing work on videos (Ding et al., 2012; Khan and Go-
toh, 2012; Kojima et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2008; Yao
and Fei-Fei, 2010) uses hand-crafted templates or
rule-based systems, works in constrained domains,
and does not exploit text mining. Barbu et al. (2012)
produce sentential descriptions for short video clips
by using an interesting dynamic programming ap-
proach combined with Hidden Markov Models for
obtaining verb labels for each video. However, they
do not use any text mining to improve the quality of
their visual detections.

Our work differs in that we make extensive use of
text-mined knowledge to select the best SVO triple
and generate coherent sentences. We also evaluate
our approach on a generic, large and diverse set of
challenging YouTube videos that cover a wide range
of activities. Motwani and Mooney (2012) explore
how object detection and text mining can aid activity
recognition in videos; however, they do not deter-
mine a complete SVO triple for describing a video
nor generate a full sentential description.

With respect to static image description, Li et al.
(2011) generate sentences given visual detections of
objects, visual attributes and spatial relationships;
however, they do not consider actions. Farhadi et al.
(2010) propose a system that maps images and the
corresponding textual descriptions to a “meaning”
space which consists of an object, action and scene
triplet. However, they assume a single object per
image and do not use text-mining to determine the
likelihood of objects matching different verbs. Yang
et al. (2011) is the most similar to our approach in
that it uses text-mined knowledge to generate sen-
tential descriptions of static images after performing
object and scene detection. However, they do not
perform activity recognition nor use text-mining to
select the best verb.

3 Approach

Our overall approach is illustrated in Figure 2 and
consists of visual object and activity recognition fol-
lowed by content-planning to generate the best SVO
triple and surface realization to generate the final
sentence.

11



Figure 2: Summary of our approach

3.1 Dataset

We used the English portion of the YouTube data
collected by Chen et al. (2010), consisting of short
videos each with multiple natural-language descrip-
tions. This data was previously used by Motwani
and Mooney (2012), and like them, we ensured that
the test data only contained videos in which we can
potentially detect objects. We used the object de-
tector by Felzenszwalb et al. (2008) as it achieves
the state-of-the-art performance on the PASCAL Vi-
sual Object Classes (VOC) Challenge. As such, we
selected test videos whose subjects and objects be-
long to the 20 VOC object classes - aeroplane, car,
horse, sheep, bicycle, cat, sofa, bird, chair, motor-
bike, train, boat, cow, person, tv monitor, bottle,
dining table, bus, dog, potted plant. During this
filtering, we also allow synonyms of these object
names by including all words with a Lesk similar-
ity (as implemented by Pedersen et al. (2004)) of at
least 0.5.1 Using this approach, we chose 235 po-
tential test videos; the remaining 1,735 videos were
reserved for training.

All the published activity recognition methods
that work on datasets such as KTH (Schuldt et al.,
2004), Drinking and Smoking (Laptev and Perez,
2007) and UCF50 (Reddy and Shah, 2012) have
a very limited recognition vocabulary of activity
classes. Since we did not have explicit activity la-

1Empirically, this method worked better than using WordNet
synsets.

Figure 3: Activity clusters discovered by HAC

bels for our YouTube videos, we followed Motwani
and Mooney (2012)’s approach to automatically dis-
cover activity clusters. We first parsed the train-
ing descriptions using Stanford’s dependency parser
(De Marneffe et al., 2006) to obtain the set of verbs
describing each video. We then clustered these verbs
using Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering (HAC)
using the res metric from WordNet::Similarity by
Pedersen et al. (2004) to measure the distance be-
tween verbs. By manually cutting the resulting hi-
erarchy at a desired level (ensuring that each clus-
ter has at least 9 videos), we discovered the 58 ac-
tivity clusters shown in Figure 3. We then filtered
the training and test sets to ensure that all verbs be-
longed to these 58 activity clusters. The final data
contains 185 test and 1,596 training videos.

3.2 Object Detection
We used Felzenszwalb et al. (2008)’s
discriminatively-trained deformable parts mod-
els to detect the most likely objects in each video.
Since these object detectors were designed for
static images, each video was split into frames at
one-second intervals. For each frame, we ran the
object detectors and selected the maximum score
assigned to each object in any of the frames. We
converted the detection scores, f(x), to estimated
probabilities p(x) using a sigmoid p(x) = 1

1+e−f(x)
.

3.3 Activity Recognition
In order to get an initial probability distribution for
activities detected in the videos, we used the motion
descriptors developed by Laptev et al. (2008). Their
approach extracts spatio-temporal interest points
(STIPs) from which it computes HoG (Histograms

12



Corpora Size of text
British National Corpus (BNC) 1.5GB
WaCkypedia EN 2.6GB
ukWaC 5.5GB
Gigaword 26GB
GoogleNgrams 1012 words

Table 1: Corpora used to Mine SVO Triplets

of Oriented Gradients) and HoF (Histograms of Op-
tical Flow) features over a 3-dimensional space-time
volume. These descriptors are then randomly sam-
pled and clustered to obtain a “bag of visual words,”
and each video is then represented as a histogram
over these clusters. We experimented with different
classifiers such as LIBSVM (Chang and Lin, 2011)
to train a final activity detector using these features.
Since we achieved the best classification accuracy
(still only 8.65%) using an SVM with the intersec-
tion kernel, we used this approach to obtain a prob-
ability distribution over the 58 activity clusters for
each test video. We later experimented with Dense
Trajectories (Wang et al., 2011) for activity recogni-
tion but there was only a minor improvement.

3.4 Text Mining
We improve these initial probability distributions
over objects and activities by incorporating the like-
lihood of different activities occuring with particular
subjects and objects using two different approaches.
In the first approach, using the Stanford dependency
parser, we parsed 4 different text corpora covering a
wide variety of text: English Gigaword, British Na-
tional Corpus (BNC), ukWac and WaCkypedia EN.
In order to obtain useful estimates, it is essential to
collect text that approximates all of the written lan-
guage in scale and distribution. The sizes of these
corpora (after preprocessing) are shown in Table 1.

Using the dependency parses for these corpora,
we mined SVO triplets. Specifically, we looked for
subject-verb relationships using nsubj dependencies
and verb-object relationships using dobj and prep
dependencies. The prep dependency ensures that
we account for intransitive verbs with prepositional
objects. Synonyms of subjects and objects and con-
jugations of verbs were reduced to their base forms
(20 object classes, 58 activity clusters) while form-
ing triplets. If a subject, verb or object not belonging

to these base forms is encountered, it is ignored dur-
ing triplet construction.

These triplets are then used to train a backoff lan-
guage model with Kneser-Ney smoothing (Chen and
Goodman, 1999) for estimating the likelihood of an
SVO triple. In this model, if we have not seen train-
ing data for a particular SVO trigram, we “back-off”
to the Subject-Verb and Verb-Object bigrams to co-
herently estimate its probability. This results in a
sophisticated statistical model for estimating triplet
probabilities using the syntactic context in which
the words have previously occurred. This allows us
to effectively determine the real-world plausibility
of any SVO using knowledge automatically mined
from raw text. We call this the “SVO Language
Model” approach (SVO LM).

In a second approach to estimating SVO prob-
abilities, we used BerkeleyLM (Pauls and Klein,
2011) to train an n-gram language model on the
GoogleNgram corpus (Lin et al., 2012). This sim-
ple model does not consider synonyms, verb con-
jugations, or SVO dependencies but only looks at
word sequences. Given an SVO triplet as an in-
put sequence, it estimates its probability based on
n-grams. We refer to this as the “Language Model”
approach (LM).

3.5 Verb Expansion

As mentioned earlier, the top activity detections are
expanded with their most similar verbs in order to
generate a larger set of potential words for describ-
ing the action. We used the WUP metric from Word-
Net::Similarity to expand each activity cluster to in-
clude all verbs with a similarity of at least 0.5. For
example, we expand the verb “move” with go 1.0,
walk 0.8, pass 0.8, follow 0.8, fly 0.8, fall 0.8, come
0.8, ride 0.8, run 0.67, chase 0.67, approach 0.67,
where the number is the WUP similarity.

3.6 Content Planning

To combine the vision detection and NLP scores and
determine the best overall SVO, we use simple lin-
ear interpolation as shown in Equation 1. When
computing the overall vision score, we make a con-
ditional independence assumption and multiply the
probabilities of the subject, activity and object. To
account for expanded verbs, we additionally mul-
tiply by the WUP similarity between the original

13



(Vorig) and expanded (Vsim) verbs. The NLP score
is obtained from either the “SVO Language Model”
or the “Language Model” approach, as previously
described.

score = w1 ∗ vis score + w2 ∗ nlp score (1)

(2)vis score = P (S|vid) ∗ P (Vorig|vid)
∗ Sim(Vsim, Vorig) ∗ P (O|vid)

After determining the top n=5 object detections
and top k=10 verb detections for each video, we
generate all possible SVO triplets from these nouns
and verbs, including all potential verb expansions.
Each resulting SVO is then scored using Equation 1,
and the best is selected. We compare this approach
to a “pure vision” baseline where the subject is the
highest scored object detection (which empirically
is more likely to be the subject than the object), the
object is the second highest scored object detection,
and the verb is the activity cluster with the highest
detection probability.

3.7 Surface Realization
Finally, the subject, verb and object from the top-
scoring SVO are used to produce a set of candi-
date sentences, which are then ranked using a lan-
guage model. The text corpora in Table 1 are mined
again to get the top three prepositions for every verb-
object pair. We use a template-based approach in
which each sentence is of the form:

“Determiner (A,The) - Subject - Verb (Present,
Present Continuous) - Preposition (optional) - De-
terminer (A,The) - Object.”

Using this template, a set of candidate sentences are
generated and ranked using the BerkeleyLM lan-
guage model trained on the GoogleNgram corpus.
The top sentence is then used to describe the video.
This surface realization technique is used for both
the vision baseline triplet and our proposed triplet.

In addition to the one presented here, we tried al-
ternative “pure vision” baselines, but they are not
included since they performed worse. We tried a
non-parametric approach similar to Ordonez et al.
(2011), which computes global similarity of the
query to a large captioned dataset and returns the

nearest neighbor’s description. To compute the sim-
ilarity we used an RBF-Chi2 kernel over bag-of-
words STIP features. However, as noted by Ordonez
et al. (2011), who used 1 million Flickr images, our
dataset is likely not large enough to produce good
matches. In an attempt to combine information from
both object and activity recognition, we also tried
combining object detections from 20 PASCAL ob-
ject detectors (Felzenszwalb et al., 2008) and from
Object Bank (Li et al., 2010) using a multi-channel
approach as proposed in (Zhang et al., 2007), with a
RBF-Chi2 kernel for the STIP features and a RBF-
Correlation Distance kernel for object detections.

4 Experimental Results

4.1 Content Planning

We first evaluated the ability of the system to iden-
tify the best SVO content. From the ∼ 50 human
descriptions available for each video, we identified
the SVO for each description and then determined
the ground-truth SVO for each of the 185 test videos
using majority vote. These verbs were then mapped
back to their 58 activity clusters. For the results pre-
sented in Tables 2 and 3, we assigned the vision
score a weight of 0 (w1 = 0) and the NLP score
a weight of 1 (w2 = 1) since these weights gave us
the best performance for thresholds of 5 and 10 for
the objects and activity detections respectively. Note
that while the vision score is given a weight of zero,
the vision detections still play a vital role in the de-
termination of the final triplet since our model only
considers the objects and activities with the highest
vision detection scores.

To evaluate the accuracy of SVO identification,
we used two metrics. The first is a binary metric that
requires exactly matching the gold-standard subject,
verb and object. We also evaluate the overall triplet
accuracy. Note that the verb accuracy in the vision
baseline is not word-based and is measured on the
58 activity classes. Its results are shown in Table 2,
where VE and NVE stand for “verb expansion”
and “no verb expansion” respectively. However,
the binary evaluation can be unduly harsh. If we
incorrectly choose “bicycle” instead of a “motor-
bike” as the object, it should be considered better
than choosing “dog.” Similarly, predicting “chop”
instead of “slice” is better than choosing “go”.

14



Method Subject% Verb% Object% All%

Vision Baseline 71.35 8.65 29.19 1.62

LM(VE) 71.35 8.11 10.81 0.00

SVO LM(NVE) 85.95 16.22 24.32 11.35

SVO LM(VE) 85.95 36.76 33.51 23.78

Table 2: SVO Triplet accuracy: Binary metric

Method Subject% Verb% Object% All%

Vision Baseline 87.76 40.20 61.18 63.05

LM(VE) 85.77 53.32 61.54 66.88

SVO LM(NVE) 94.90 63.54 69.39 75.94

SVO LM(VE) 94.90 66.36 72.74 78.00

Table 3: SVO Triplet accuracy: WUP metric

In order to account for such similarities, we also
measure the WUP similarity between the predicted
and correct items. For the examples above, the rel-
evant scores are: wup(motorbike,bicycle)=0.7826,
wup(motorbike,dog)=0.1, wup(slice,chop)=0.8,
wup(slice,go)=0.2857. The results for the WUP
metric are shown in Table 3.

4.2 Surface Realization
Figures 4 and 5 show examples of good and bad sen-
tences generated by our method compared to the vi-
sion baseline.

4.2.1 Automatic Metrics
To automatically compare the sentences gener-

ated for the test videos to ground-truth human de-
scriptions, we employed the BLEU and METEOR
metrics used to evaluate machine-translation output.
METEOR was designed to fix some of the prob-
lems with the more popular BLEU metric. They
both measure the number of matching n-grams (for
various values of n) between the automatic and hu-
man generated sentences. METEOR takes stem-
ming and synonymy into consideration. We used
the SVO Language Model (with verb expansion) ap-
proach since it gave us the best results for triplets.
The results are given in Table 4.

4.2.2 Human Evaluation using Mechanical
Turk

Given the limitations of metrics like BLEU and
METEOR, we also asked human judges to evalu-
ate the quality of the sentences generated by our ap-

Figure 4: Examples where we outperform the baseline

Figure 5: Examples where we underperform the baseline

proach compared to those generated by the baseline
system. For each of the 185 test videos, we asked 9
unique workers (with >95% HIT approval rate and
who had worked on more than 1000 HITs) on Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk to pick which sentence better
described the video. We also gave them a “none
of the above two sentences” option in case neither
of the sentences were relevant to the video. Qual-
ity was controlled by also including in each HIT a
gold-standard example generated from the human
descriptions, and discarding judgements of workers
who incorrectly answered this gold-standard item.
Overall, when they expressed a preference, hu-
mans picked our descriptions to that of the baseline

Method BLEU score METEOR score
Vision Baseline 0.37±0.05 0.25±0.08
SVO LM(VE) 0.45±0.05 0.36±0.27

Table 4: Automatic evaluation of sentence quality

15



61.04% of the time. Out of the 84 videos where the
majority of judges had a clear preference, they chose
our descriptions 65.48% of the time.

5 Discussion

Overall, the results consistently show the advantage
of utilizing text-mined knowledge to improve the se-
lection of an SVO that best describes a video. Below
we discuss various specific aspects of the results.

Vision Baseline: For the vision baseline, the sub-
ject accuracy is quite high compared to the object
and activity accuracies. This is likely because the
person detector has higher recall and confidence
than the other object detectors. Since most test
videos have a person as the subject, this works in
favor of the vision baseline, as typically the top ob-
ject detection is “person”. Activity (verb) accuracy
is quite low (8.65% binary accuracy). This is be-
cause there are 58 activity clusters, some with very
little training data. Object accuracy is not as high
as subject accuracy because the true object, while
usually present in the top object detections, is not
always the second-highest object detection. By al-
lowing “partial credit”, the WUP metric increases
the verb and object accuracies to 40.2% and 61.18%,
respectively.

Language Model(VE): The Language Model ap-
proach performs even worse than the vision baseline
especially for object identification. This is because
we consider the language model score directly for
the SVO triplet without any verb conjugations and
presence of determiners between the verb and ob-
ject. For example, while the GoogleNgram corpus
is likely to contain many instances of a sentence like
“A person is walking with a dog”, it will probably
not contain many instances of “person walk dog”,
resulting in lower scores.

SVO Language Model(NVE): The SVO Lan-
guage Model (without verb expansion) improves
verb accuracy from 8.65% to 16.22%. For the WUP
metric, we see an improvement in accuracy in all
cases. This indicates that we are getting semanti-
cally closer to the right object compared to the ob-
ject predicted by the vision baseline.

SVO Language Model(VE): When used with
verb expansion, the SVO Language Model approach
results in a dramatic improvement in verb accu-

racy, causing it to jump to 36.76%. The WUP
score increase for verbs between SVO Language
Model(VE) and SVO Language Model(NVE) is mi-
nor, probably because even without verb expansion,
semantically similar verbs are selected but not the
one used in most human descriptions. So, the jump
in verb accuracy for the binary metric is much more
than the one for WUP.
Importance of verb expansion: Verb expansion
clearly improves activity accuracy. This idea could
be extended to a scenario where the test set contains
many activities for which we do not have any ex-
plicit training data. As such, we cannot train activ-
ity classifiers for these “missing” classes. However,
we can train a “coarse” activity classifier using the
training data that is available, get the top predictions
from this coarse classifier and then refine them by
using verb expansion. Thus, we can even detect and
describe activities that were unseen at training time
by using text-mined knowledge to determine the de-
scription of an activity that best fits the detected ob-
jects.

Effect of different training corpora: As men-
tioned earlier, we used a variety of textual cor-
pora. Since they cover newswire articles, web pages,
Wikipedia pages and neutral content, we compared
their individual effect on the accuracy of triplet se-
lection. The results of this ablation study are shown
in Tables 5 and 6 for the binary and WUP met-
ric respectively. We also show results for training
the SVO model on the descriptions of the training
videos. The WaCkypedia EN corpus gives us the
best overall results, probably because it covers a
wide variety of topics, unlike Gigaword which is re-
stricted to the news domain. Also, using our SVO
Language Model approach on the triplets from the
descriptions of the training videos is not sufficient.
This is because of the relatively small size and nar-
row domain of the training descriptions in compari-
son to the other textual corpora.

Effect of changing the weight of the NLP score
We experimented with different weights for the Vi-
sion and NLP scores (in Equation 1). These results
can be seen in Figure 6 for the binary-metric evalu-
ation. The WUP-metric evaluation graph is qualita-
tively similar. A general trend seems to be that the
subject and activity accuracies increase with increas-
ing weights of the NLP score. There is a significant

16



Method Subject% Verb% Object% All%

Vision Baseline 71.35 8.65 29.19 1.62

Train Desc. 85.95 16.22 16.22 8.65
Gigaword 85.95 32.43 20.00 14.05
BNC 85.95 17.30 29.73 14.59
ukWaC 85.95 34.05 32.97 22.16
WaCkypedia EN 85.95 35.14 40.00 28.11
All 85.95 36.76 33.51 23.78

Table 5: Effect of training corpus on SVO binary accu-
racy

Method Subject% Verb% Object% All%

Vision Baseline 87.76 40.20 61.18 63.05

Train Desc. 94.95 45.12 61.43 67.17
Gigaword 94.90 63.99 65.71 74.87

BNC 94.88 51.48 73.93 73.43

ukWaC 94.86 60.59 72.83 76.09

WaCkypedia EN 94.90 62.52 76.48 77.97
All 94.90 66.36 72.74 78.00

Table 6: Effect of training corpus on SVO WUP accuracy

improvement in verb accuracy as the NLP weight is
increased towards 1. However, for objects we notice
a slight increase in accuracy until the weight for the
NLP component is 0.9 after which there is a slight
dip. We hypothesize that this dip is caused by the
loss of vision-based information about the objects
which provide some guidance for the NLP system.

BLEU and METEOR results: From the results
in Table 4, it is clear that the sentences generated
by our approach outperform those generated by the
vision baseline, using both the BLEU and METEOR
evaluation metrics.

MTurk results: The Mechanical Turk results
show that human judges generally prefer our sys-
tem’s sentences to those of the vision baseline. As
previously seen, our method improves verbs far
more than it improves subjects or objects. We hy-
pothesize that the reason we do not achieve a simi-
larly large jump in performance in the MTurk evalu-
ation is because people seem to be more influenced
by the object than the verb when both options are
partially irrelevant. For example, in a video of a per-
son riding his bike onto the top of a car, our pro-
posed sentence was “A person is a riding a motor-
bike” while the vision sentence was “A person plays

Figure 6: Effect of increasing NLP weights (Binary met-
ric)

a car”, and most workers selected the vision sen-
tence.

Drawback of Using YouTube Videos: YouTube
videos often depict unusual and “interesting” events,
and these might not agree with the statistics on typ-
ical SVOs mined from text corpora. For instance,
the last video in Figure 5 shows a person dragging a
cat on the floor. Since sentences describing people
moving or dragging cats around are not common in
text corpora, our system actually down-weights the
correct interpretation.

6 Conclusion

This paper has introduced a holistic data-driven
approach for generating natural-language descrip-
tions of short videos by identifying the best subject-
verb-object triplet for describing realistic YouTube
videos. By exploiting knowledge mined from large
corpora to determine the likelihood of various SVO
combinations, we improve the ability to select the
best triplet for describing a video and generate de-
scriptive sentences that are prefered by both au-
tomatic and human evaluation. From our experi-
ments, we see that linguistic knowledge significantly
improves activity detection, especially when train-
ing and test distributions are very different, one of
the advantages of our approach. Generating more
complex sentences with adjectives, adverbs, and
multiple objects and multi-sentential descriptions of
longer videos with multiple activities are areas for
future research.

17



7 Acknowledgements

This work was funded by NSF grant IIS1016312
and DARPA Minds Eye grant W911NF-10-2-0059.
Some of our experiments were run on the Mastodon
Cluster (NSF Grant EIA-0303609).

References

Bangalore, S. and Rambow, O. (2000), Exploiting
a probabilistic hierarchical model for generation,
in ‘Proceedings of the 18th conference on Com-
putational linguistics-Volume 1’, Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 42–48.

Barbu, A., Bridge, A., Burchill, Z., Coroian, D.,
Dickinson, S., Fidler, S., Michaux, A., Mussman,
S., Narayanaswamy, S., Salvi, D. et al. (2012),
Video in sentences out, in ‘Proceedings of the
28th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial In-
telligence (UAI)’, pp. 102–12.

Chang, C. and Lin, C. (2011), ‘LIBSVM: a li-
brary for support vector machines’, ACM Trans-
actions on Intelligent Systems and Technology
(TIST) 2(3), 27.

Chen, D., Dolan, W., Raghavan, S., Huynh, T.,
Mooney, R., Blythe, J., Hobbs, J., Domingos, P.,
Kate, R., Garrette, D. et al. (2010), ‘Collecting
highly parallel data for paraphrase evaluation’,
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR)
37, 397–435.

Chen, S. and Goodman, J. (1999), ‘An empirical
study of smoothing techniques for language mod-
eling’, Computer Speech & Language 13(4), 359–
393.

De Marneffe, M., MacCartney, B. and Manning, C.
(2006), Generating typed dependency parses from
phrase structure parses, in ‘Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC)’, Vol. 6, pp. 449–454.

Ding, D., Metze, F., Rawat, S., Schulam, P., Burger,
S., Younessian, E., Bao, L., Christel, M. and
Hauptmann, A. (2012), Beyond audio and video
retrieval: towards multimedia summarization, in
‘Proceedings of the 2nd ACM International Con-
ference on Multimedia Retrieval’.

Farhadi, A., Hejrati, M., Sadeghi, M., Young, P.,
Rashtchian, C., Hockenmaier, J. and Forsyth, D.

(2010), ‘Every picture tells a story: Generating
sentences from images’, Computer Vision–
European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV) pp. 15–29.

Felzenszwalb, P., McAllester, D. and Ramanan,
D. (2008), A discriminatively trained, multi-
scale, deformable part model, in ‘IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR)’, pp. 1–8.

Khan, M. and Gotoh, Y. (2012), ‘Describing video
contents in natural language’, European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL) .

Kojima, A., Tamura, T. and Fukunaga, K. (2002),
‘Natural language description of human activities
from video images based on concept hierarchy of
actions’, International Journal of Computer Vi-
sion (IJCV) 50(2), 171–184.

Kulkarni, G., Premraj, V., Dhar, S., Li, S., Choi,
Y., Berg, A. and Berg, T. (2011), Baby talk:
Understanding and generating simple image de-
scriptions, in ‘IEEE Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)’, pp. 1601–
1608.

Kuznetsova, P., Ordonez, V., Berg, A. C., Berg,
T. L. and Choi, Y. (2012), Collective genera-
tion of natural image descriptions, in ‘Proceed-
ings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Long Papers-
Volume 1’, Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pp. 359–368.

Langkilde, I. and Knight, K. (1998), Generation that
exploits corpus-based statistical knowledge, in
‘Proceedings of the 17th international conference
on Computational linguistics-Volume 1’, Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 704–710.

Laptev, I., Marszalek, M., Schmid, C. and Rozen-
feld, B. (2008), Learning realistic human actions
from movies, in ‘IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)’, pp. 1–8.

Laptev, I. and Perez, P. (2007), Retrieving actions in
movies, in ‘Proceedings of the 11th IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)’,
pp. 1–8.

Lee, M., Hakeem, A., Haering, N. and Zhu, S.

18



(2008), Save: A framework for semantic anno-
tation of visual events, in ‘IEEE Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPR-W)’,
pp. 1–8.

Li, L., Su, H., Xing, E. and Fei-Fei, L. (2010), ‘Ob-
ject bank: A high-level image representation for
scene classification and semantic feature sparsifi-
cation’, Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems (NIPS) 24.

Li, S., Kulkarni, G., Berg, T., Berg, A. and Choi,
Y. (2011), Composing simple image descriptions
using web-scale n-grams, in ‘Proceedings of the
Fifteenth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL)’, Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 220–228.

Lin, Y., Michel, J., Aiden, E., Orwant, J., Brockman,
W. and Petrov, S. (2012), Syntactic annotations
for the google books ngram corpus, in ‘Proceed-
ings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL)’.

Motwani, T. and Mooney, R. (2012), Improving
video activity recognition using object recogni-
tion and text mining, in ‘European Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (ECAI)’.

Ordonez, V., Kulkarni, G. and Berg, T. (2011),
Im2text: Describing images using 1 million
captioned photographs, in ‘Proceedings of Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS)’.

Packer, B., Saenko, K. and Koller, D. (2012), A
combined pose, object, and feature model for ac-
tion understanding, in ‘IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)’,
pp. 1378–1385.

Pauls, A. and Klein, D. (2011), Faster and smaller
n-gram language models, in ‘Proceedings of the
49th annual meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies’, Vol. 1, pp. 258–267.

Pedersen, T., Patwardhan, S. and Michelizzi, J.
(2004), Wordnet:: Similarity: measuring the re-
latedness of concepts, in ‘Demonstration Papers
at Human Language Technologies-NAACL’, As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 38–
41.

Reddy, K. and Shah, M. (2012), ‘Recognizing 50
human action categories of web videos’, Machine
Vision and Applications pp. 1–11.

Schuldt, C., Laptev, I. and Caputo, B. (2004), Rec-
ognizing human actions: A local SVM approach,
in ‘Proceedings of the 17th International Con-
ference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR)’, Vol. 3,
pp. 32–36.

Wang, H., Klaser, A., Schmid, C. and Liu, C.-L.
(2011), Action recognition by dense trajectories,
in ‘IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR)’, pp. 3169–3176.

Yang, Y., Teo, C. L., Daumé, III, H. and Aloimonos,
Y. (2011), Corpus-guided sentence generation of
natural images, in ‘Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP)’, Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pp. 444–454.

Yao, B. and Fei-Fei, L. (2010), Modeling mutual
context of object and human pose in human-
object interaction activities, in ‘IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR)’.

Yao, B., Yang, X., Lin, L., Lee, M. and Zhu, S.
(2010), ‘I2t: Image parsing to text description’,
Proceedings of the IEEE 98(8), 1485–1508.

Zhang, J., Marszałek, M., Lazebnik, S. and Schmid,
C. (2007), ‘Local features and kernels for classi-
fication of texture and object categories: A com-
prehensive study’, International Journal of Com-
puter Vision (IJCV) 73(2), 213–238.

19


