










































MIME- NLG Support for Complex and Unstable Pre-hospital Emergencies


Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 198–199,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

MIME- NLG Support for Complex and Unstable Pre-hospital
Emergencies

Anne H. Schneider Alasdair Mort Chris Mellish Ehud Reiter Phil Wilson
University of Aberdeen

{a.schneider, a.mort, c.mellish, e.reiter, p.wilson}@abdn.ac.uk

Pierre-Luc Vaudry
Université de Montréal

vaudrypl@iro.umontreal.ca

Abstract

We present the first prototype of a han-
dover report generator developed for the
MIME (Managing Information in Medi-
cal Emergencies) project. NLG applica-
tions in the medical domain have been var-
ied but most are deployed in clinical situa-
tions. We develop a mobile device for pre-
hospital care which receives streamed sen-
sor data and user input, and converts these
into a handover report for paramedics.

1 Introduction

Natural Language Generation underlies many ap-
plications in the medical domain but most are em-
ployed under relatively predictable clinical situa-
tions. The MIME project employs a mobile de-
vice with novel lightweight sensors to improve
pre-hospital care service delivery. The term pre-
hospital care denotes the treatment delivered to
a patient before they arrive at hospital. Usu-
ally this entails paramedics and ambulance teams,
but it can also include a wide range of volun-
tary and professional care groups. Care for ru-
ral pre-hospital patients can sometimes be car-
ried out by volunteers from local communities:
Community First Responders (CFR). Their task is
to assess patients, perform potentially life-saving
first aid procedures and record medical observa-
tions whilst the ambulance clinicians are en-route.
These data are then handed over to the receiv-
ing ambulance team upon arrival. Because of
their time-critical nature, handover reports are of-
ten verbal and hence maybe incomplete or misun-
derstood.

MIME was inspired by the Babytalk BT-Nurse
system (Hunter et al., 2012), which generates shift
handover reports for nurses in a neonatal intensive
care unit. While BT-Nurse works with an exist-
ing clinical record system, which does not always

At 02:12, after RR remained fairly
constant around 30 bpm for 4 minutes,
high flow oxygen was applied, she took
her inhaler and RR decreased to 27
bpm. However, subsequently RR once
more remained fairly constant around
30 bpm for 8 minutes.

At 02:15 she was feeling faint.

At 02:15 the casualty was moved.

At 02:17 the casualty was once more
moved.

Figure 1: Part of the ”Treatment and Findings” for
an asthma scenario.

record all actions and observations which ideally
would be included in a report, in MIME the elec-
tronic record and user interface for acquiring ex-
actly the desired information are effectively de-
signed. This simplifies the NLG task, at the cost
of adding a new task (interface construction).

2 The MIME project

Pre-hospital care is especially challenging because
the environment in which it is delivered is inher-
ently unpredictable. The clinical condition of a
patient may have improved or deteriorated since
the original call for help. The unpredictability of
the environment at the scene of the call and the
minimal level of clinical training of the CFRs con-
tributes to the challenges presented to developers
of a mobile device for this situation. In particular,
the continuous capture of physiological data intro-
duces the problem that irrelevant material needs
to be suppressed in order not to overload the am-
bulance clinicians and hinder interpretation. The
generated reports must provide a quick overview
of the situation but at the same time be compre-
hensive. It is also vital that the format must en-
hance the readability, and the user-interface be
simple and intuitive in order to avoid what has

198



Figure 2: First hardware prototype of the MIME
project (GETAC Z710 tablet and Pulse Oxymeter
sensor).

been termed ‘creeping featurism’ (His and Potts,
2000), whereby option saturation hinders task per-
formance.

In a user centred development process we estab-
lished a structure for the handover reports. After
the demographic description of the casualty (i.e.
age and gender) and incident details that were re-
layed to the CFR by the ambulance control centre
two elements of generated text follow, the initial
assessment section and the treatment and findings
section. The initial assessment contains informa-
tion on the casualty that is gathered by the CFRs
before the sensors are applied including baseline
observation during the first minute after the ap-
plication of the sensors. The treatment and find-
ings section (Figure 1) is a report of the observa-
tions and actions of the CFRs while they attended
the casualty and waited for the ambulance to ar-
rive. This includes a paragraph that sums up the
condition of the patient at the time of handover.
There are three types of events included in the re-
port: discrete events (action and observation) and
continuous events (trends in sensor readings). Ac-
tions (e.g. applying oxygen) and observations (e.g.
the patient feels faint) have to be entered by the
CFR through an interface. Continuous events are
derived from the medical sensors: currently res-
piratory rate, blood oxygen saturation, and heart
rate are recorded. Since some events, especially
those that deviate from the norm are more impor-
tant than others (Hallett et al., 2006), in the docu-
ment planning stage we employ an algorithm that
decides which events are mentioned in the report

and in which order. This process is loosely based
on similar decision processes reported in (Hallett
et al., 2006) and (Portet et al., 2007).

3 Summary and Conclusion

We have developed a first prototype of the system
which uses simulated data to produce handover re-
ports. This runs on standard desktop PCs. For our
second prototype, which is currently being devel-
oped, we port the NLG algorithm onto a GETAC
Z710 tablet1 which has been chosen for it’s robust-
ness, capacitative touch screen, and long battery
life (Figure 2). Our research also includes the es-
tablishment of a connection between the tablet and
sensors, the recording of the incoming data stream
and the development of an interface for the tablet,
which can be used by the CFR to enter observa-
tions and actions taken or any other useful infor-
mation.

At the ENLG workshop we will present our first
hardware prototype alongside the desktop com-
puter version, highlighting the challenges that the
project faces in developing a handover report gen-
erator for pre-hospital care.

4 Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the RCUK dot.rural
Digital Economy Research Hub, University of Ab-
erdeen (Grant reference: EP/G066051/1)

References
C. Hallett, R. Power, and D. Scott. 2006. Summarisa-

tion and visualisation of e-Health data repositories.
In UK E-Science All-Hands Meeting, pages 18–21,
Nottingham, UK.

I. His and C. Potts. 2000. Studying the Evolution and
Enhancement of Software Features. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Software Mainte-
nance, ICSM ’00, pages 143–151, Washington, DC,
USA.

J. Hunter, Y. Freer, A. Gatt, E. Reiter, S. Sripada, and
C Sykes. 2012. Automatic generation of natural
language nursing shift summaries in neonatal in-
tensive care: BT-Nurse. Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine, 56:157–172.

F. Portet, E. Reiter, J. Hunter, and S. Sripada. 2007.
Automatic generation of textual summaries from
neonatal intensive care data. In Proccedings of
the 11th Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine (AIME 07). LNCS, pages 227–236.

1http://en.getac.com/products/Z710/
Z710_overview.html

199


