










































Tagging Opinion Phrases and their Targets in User Generated Textual Reviews


Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, pages 75–80,
Atlanta, Georgia, 14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Tagging Opinion Phrases and their Targets in User Generated Textual
Reviews

Narendra Gupta
AT&T Labs - Research, Inc.

Florham Park, NJ 07932 - USA
ngupta@research.att.com

Abstract

We discuss a tagging scheme to tag data for
training information extraction models which
can extract the features of a product/service
and opinions about them from textual reviews,
and which can be used across different do-
mains with minimal adaptation. A simple tag-
ging scheme results in a large number of do-
main dependent opinion phrases and impedes
the usefulness of the trained models across do-
mains. We show that by using minor mod-
ifications to this simple tagging scheme the
number of domain dependent opinion phrases
are reduced from 36% to 17%, which leads to
models more useful across domains.

1 Introduction

A large number of opinion-rich reviews about most
products and services are available on the web.
These reviews are often summarized by star rat-
ings to help consumers in making buying decisions.
While such a summarization is very useful, often
consumers like to know about specific features of the
product/service. For example in the case of restau-
rants consumers might want to know what people
think about their chicken dish. There are many re-
search papers on both supervised (Li et al., 2010)
and unsupervised(Liu et al., 2012),(Hu and Liu,
2004), (Popescu and Etzioni, 2005), (Baccianella
et al., 2009) methods for extracting reviewer’s opin-
ions and their targets (features of products/services)
from textual reviews. Unsupervised methods are
preferred as they can be used across domains, how-
ever their performance is limited by the assump-

tions they make about lexical and syntactic proper-
ties of opinion and target phrases. We would like
to use supervised methods to develop information
extraction models that can also be used across do-
mains with minimum adaptation. We hope to suc-
ceed in our goal because: a) even though there are
domain specific opinion phrases, we believe a large
proportion of opinion phrases can be used across
the domains with the same semantic interpretation;
b) target phrases mostly contain domain dependent
words, but have domain independent syntactic rela-
tionships with opinion phrases. Obviously for a do-
main containing large number of domain dependent
opinion phrases, our models will perform poorly and
additional domain adaptation will be necessary.

In this paper we discuss a tagging scheme to man-
ually tag the necessary training data. In section
2 we show that simply tagging opinion and target
phrases, forces a large number of opinion phrases to
contain domain dependent vocabulary. This makes
them domain dependent, even when domain inde-
pendent opinion words are used. In section 3 we
propose a modification to the simple tagging scheme
and show that this modification allows tagging of
opinion phrases without forcing them to contain do-
main dependent vocabulary. We also identify many
linguistic structures used to express opinions that
cannot be captured even with our modified tagging
scheme. In section 4 we experimentally show the
improvement in the coverage of tagged domain inde-
pendent opinion phrases due to our proposed modifi-
cation. In section 5 we discuss the relationship with
other work. We conclude this paper in section 6 by
summarizing the contribution of this work.

75



2 A Simple Tagging Scheme

Our goal is to only extract author’s current opinions
by using the smallest possible representation. Past
opinions or those of other agents are not of interest.

As shown in Table 1, in this simple tagging
scheme we tag opinions, their targets, and pronomi-
nal references in each sentence without considering
the review or the domain the sentence is part of1.
Opinion phrases are further categorized to represent
their polarity and their domain dependence2.

There are two relations in this scheme viz.
Target(Opinionphrase, Target|Referencephrase), and
Reference(Referencephrase, Targetphrase).

Finally, we tag only the contiguous non-
overlapping spans in the sentences.

Phrase Type Domain Dependent Tag Symbol

Opinion

Positive No PYes PD

Negative No NYes ND
Neutral Yes UD

Target Yes T
Pronomial Reference No R

Table 1: Different types of phrases to be tagged.

Figure 1: Examples tagged by the simple tagging scheme.

Figure 13 shows examples of tagged sentences
using the simple tagging scheme. It illustrates: a)
a sentence can have multiple “Target” relationships
b) pronominal references can be used as targets; c)
many opinion phrases can have the same target and

1Once context independent information is extracted from in-
dividual sentences, post processing (not discussed in this paper)
can aggregate information (e.g. resolve all identified pronomi-
nal references) within the context of the entire review.

2An opinion phrase is domain independent if its interpreta-
tion remains unchanged across domains

3Figures showing examples annotations are extracted from
Brat Annotation Tool (http://brat.nlplab.org/). In Brat tags are
displayed as square boxes and relations as directed arcs.

vice versa; d) opinion phrases are not always adjec-
tives and/or adverbs; e) in the sixth sentence “his”
opinion about chocolate is not tagged instead, au-
thor’s opinion about the opinion holder is tagged; f)
in the last sentence fragmented opinion phrase “not
recommend for a large group” is not tagged.

Figure 2: Examples where the simple tagging scheme is
not discriminating enough.

Figure 2 shows examples where our simple tag-
ging scheme is not discriminating enough. As a re-
sult majority of the opinion phrases are tagged as
domain dependent. Example 1, 2 show that the tag-
ging scheme cannot express attributes of a target.
Therefore, they are lumped with the opinion phrases,
making them domain dependent. In example 5 the
opinion about “wines they have” is embedded in the
tagged opinion phrase. In example 6 the fact that
“we do not love this place” is not captured. Example
7 shows that our scheme can only tag one of the two
targets of a comparative opinion expression. Exam-
ple 8 shows a complex opinion expression involv-
ing multiple agents, opinions, expectations, analo-
gies and modalities. To accurately represent opin-
ions expressed in the infinitely many compositions,
natural languages offer, a more complex representa-
tion is required. Instead of solving this knowledge
representation problem, we introduce two additional
tags and relations, and show that our modified tag-
ging scheme is able to capture opinions expressed
through some commonly used expressions.

3 A Modified Tagging Scheme

In our modified tagging scheme, we add 2 more
tags and relations. We add an “Embedded Target”

76



(symbol ET) tag to represent attributes of the
targets, embedded in the opinion phrases tagged
by the simple tagging scheme. These attributes
could have any relationship e.g. part-of, feature-of
and instance-of, with the target of the opinion.
More specifically in the modified tagging scheme
we break the opinion phrases as tagged in the
simple tagging scheme into opinion phrases and the
embedded target phrases.We also add a “Negation”
(symbol NO) tag to capture the negation of an
opinion which often is located far from the opinion
phrases (example 3 and 6 in Figure 2). The cor-
responding relations in our modified scheme are
Embeddedtarget(OpinionPhrase, EmbeddedTarget) and
Negation(NegationPhrase, OpinionPhrase).

Figure 3: Example sentences tagged with modified tag-
ging scheme.

Figure 3 shows the examples in Figure 2 tagged
with the modified tagging scheme. From this tag-
ging we can put together fragmented components of
opinion and target phrases (Table 2) using the rule:
Target(Op, Tp)&Emb Target(Op, ETp) → Target(Op, Tp :
ETp) i.e. if Tp is tagged as target phrase of the
opinion phrase Op and ETp is tagged as its em-
bedded target phrase then Tp : ETp4 is the target
of the opinion phrase Op. Similarly if a relation
Negation(Np,Op) exists, the complete specifica-
tion of the opinion is derived by adding the negation
phrase Np to the opinion phrase Op .

As can be seen in Table 2, the modified tag-
ging scheme is able to capture the opinions and
their targets more precisely than the simple tagging
scheme. In addition, opinion phrases become mostly
domain independent. Still, there is some informa-
tion loss. For example in sentence 4 “for” rela-

4The colon in this expression is intended to join specifica-
tions of the target.

Sentence Opinion phrase Target Phrase

1 good This place: foodgood This place: entertainment
2 does not realize how poor The server: service
3 not anymore: a great This: place to eat

4 great This: placeromantic This: evening

5 knowledgeable My server: winegreat they: wine
6 have given up: love this place

Table 2: Tagged information in Figure 3.

tionship between the two opinion phrases is ignored
(“place is great for romantic evening”), instead we
extract “This:place” is “great” and “This5:evening”
is “Romantic”. This although not exact, captures the
essence of the reviewer’s opinion without additional
complexity in the tagging scheme. In the rest of this
section, we describe other natural language struc-
tures used to express opinions and also show how
they are handled in our tagging scheme.

3.1 Ambiguous Targets

In many situations it is difficult to distinguish be-
tween the target and the embedded target. In Figure
4 two possible tags on a sentence are shown. In the

Figure 4: Examples sentences showing ambiguity in tag-
ging targets and embedded targets.

first version, the neutral opinion about the “discern-
ing diners” is tagged. In the second version, domain
dependent negative opinion about “this restaurant”
is tagged. If the context of tagging i.e. interest in
opinions about the restaurants, was known, this am-
biguity is resolved. In our context free tagging, we
resolve this ambiguity by preferring the subject of
the sentence as the main target of the opinions.

3.2 Conditional Opinions

Opinions are also expressed in conditional form and
sometimes, like in example 1 and 2 in Figure 5, it
is difficult to separate the opinion phrases from the
target/embedded target phrases and the only choice
is to tag entire sentence/segement as domain depen-
dent neutral. Even though in the first sentence opin-
ion about the loud music is expressed, and in the sec-

5Anphora resoultion will bind “This” to the reviewed restau-
rant.

77



ond sentence opinion about the food of the restau-
rant is expressed, they cannot be tagged as such even
with our modified scheme. Examples 3 and 4 as

Figure 5: Examples of conditional opinion phrases.

shown in Figure 5 however, can be segmented into
opinions and their targets/embedded targets. These
examples illustrate that when there are no negations
in the conditional opinions they typically can be seg-
mented into opinion and target phrases.

3.3 Opinion Referencing Other Opinion
Phrases

Figure 6 shows examples where opinions about
other opinions are expressed. In the first example,
the opinion “most impressive” reinforces other opin-
ions; such reinforcement cannot be represented in
our tagging scheme. In the second example, how-
ever, the pronoun “it” references the magazine’s
opinion, which is ignored in our tagging scheme.

Figure 6: Examples where opinion expressions reference
other opinion expressions.

3.4 Implicit Target Switch

In the first part of the sentence shown in Figure 7
an opinion about “this: steak” is expressed and in
the second part an opinion about “this: ambiance”
is expressed. Clearly if “this” refers to a steak, it
cannot have ambiance. It must be the ambiance of
the restaurant serving the steak. Our tagging scheme
does not capture this implicit target switching.

Figure 7: Example of implicit target switching.

4 Coverage experiment

Table 3 shows the counts of domain dependent opin-
ion phrases tagged on a small sample of data from 3
different domains, using both simple and modified
schemes. The number of domain dependent opinion
phrases in case of the modified tagging scheme is re-
duced by more than half. Even for the MP3 players
with a large domain dependent vocabulary, 73% of
opinion phrases are tagged as domain independent.
This will make models trained on different domains
useful even for MP3 players.

Domain Num. Sentences
Number of Tagged Opinion Phrases

Total Domain DependentSimple Modified
Restaurant 68 101 31(30%) 13(13%)
Hotels 147 111 39(35%) 15(14%)
MP3 Plyr. 350 287 103(36%) 48(17%)

Table 3: Comparison of simple and modified scheme.

5 Relationship to other work

Kessler et al. (2010)6 have tagged automobile data
(JDPA Corpus) with sentiment expressions (our
opinion phrases) and mentions (our target and em-
bedded target phrases). JDPA representation is more
extensive than ours. It explicitly represents many re-
lationships among mentions and a number of mod-
ifiers of sentiment expressions. The strength of our
scheme however, is in the way we choose the targets.
In JDAP, mentions are tagged as targets of their mod-
ifying sentiment expressions. In our scheme we tag
the main object as the target of opinions. For some
cases both JDPA and our schemes result in equiv-
alent representations, but for others we believe our
scheme results in a more accurate representation.

As can be verified for Example 1 in Figure 2
both schemes result in an equivalent representation.
For example in Figure 8, on the other hand our
scheme represents the opinion expressions more ac-
curately then JDPA. This example contains an opin-
ion about any good camera. Therefore, the target
of the opinion in our scheme is “good camera” and
not “camera” by itself, and the opinion is “must
have a great zoom”, “zoom” being embedded target
we can drive Target(must have a great, good cam-
era:zoom). In JDPA this will be represented as Tar-
get(good,camera), Target(must have a great,zoom),

6Author is thankful to the reviewers of the paper to point out
this reference.

78



part-of(camera, zoom). Notice that JDPA explicitly
represents that the “camera is good”, which is not
true, and is not represent in our scheme.

Figure 8: Example where our scheme captures the opin-
ions more accurately than JDPA.

The tagged data by Hu and Liu (2004)(H-L data)
is the another data that has opinions and their tar-
gets labeled. It has been used by many researchers
to benchmark their work. We randomly selected re-
views from the H-L data and tagged them with our
modified tagging scheme (Figure 9). Several obser-
vations can be made from Table 4, showing infor-
mation tagged by our scheme and by the labels in
the H-L data. First, not all opinion and targets are
tagged in the H-L data. Instead of tagging the opin-
ion phrases directly, the H-L data relies on labeler’s
assessments for polarity strengths of the opinion. In
the H-L data even the targets may or may not be
present in the sentence (example 2). Again the H-
L data relies on the labeler’s assessment of what the
target is. Clearly in the H-L data the labeling is per-
formed with a specific context in mind while our
scheme makes no such assumption. The main rea-
son for this difference is that Hu and Liu (2004) used
this data only to test their un-supervised technique,
while our motivation is to use the tagged data for su-
pervised training of models that could be used across
domains. With the contextual assumptions made in
the labeling, the models trained by using the H-L
data will perform very poorly when used across do-
mains.

Modified Tagging Scheme H-L Label
Opinion Pol. Target Pol. Target
incredibly overpriced neg apple i-pod
not(regret) pos the purchase 3 player
Not(any doubts) pos this player
easy pos software: to use 2 software
much cheaper pos player 2 price
good looking pos player
beautiful pos blue back-lit screen
good pos this→lack of a viewing hole for ..
not(damaged/scratched) pos the face
fast pos transfer rate
suck neg the stock ones→headphones -3 headphone
will out sell pos this player

Table 4: Side by side comparison of tagged information
with our modified tagging scheme and H-L data

Wiebe et al. (2005) describe the MPQA tagging

Figure 9: Tagging a review from Hu and Liu (2004) data
using the our modified tagging scheme.

scheme for identifying private states of agents, in-
cluding those of the author and any other agent re-
ferred in the text. The MPAQ tags direct subjective
expressions (DSE) e.g. “faithful” and “criticized”,
and expressive subjective elements (ESE) e.g. “high-
way robbery” and “illegitimate”, to identify the pri-
vate states. We only tag author’s opinions. For ex-
ample in ““The US fears a spill-over,” said Xirao-
Nima” the MPQA will identify the private states of
“US” and of “Xirao-Nima”. We, however, will not
tag this sentence since the author is not expressing
any opinion.

Opinions are part of an agent’s private state, but
not all private states are opinions. For example in the
sentence “I am happy” the author is describing his
private state and not an opinion. In the MPQA the
author’s private state will be identified by “happy”
but, in our tagging scheme this sentence will not be
tagged. However, in the sentence “I am happy with
their service” author is expressing an opinion about
“their service” and will be tagged in our scheme.

Another difference between MPQA and our
scheme is that MPQA tags only the private states of
agents, causing some inconsistencies as illustrated
by the following example. In the sentence “The U.S.
is full of absurdities”, “absurdities” is tagged as a
private state of the U.S. At the same time in sen-
tence “The report is full of absurdities”, “absurdi-
ties” is tagged as a private state of the author, and

79



“the report” is relegated to its target. In our tagging
scheme both “the US” and “the report” are consis-
tently tagged as targets of the opinion phrase “ab-
surdities”. Because of these differences we believe
that the MPQA data is less suitable for opinion min-
ing research.

6 Conclusion

We discussed a tagging scheme to tag data for train-
ing information extraction models to extract from
textual reviews the features of a product/service and
opinions about them, and which can be used across
domains with minimal adaptation. We demonstrated
that a) by using a simple tagging scheme a large pro-
portion of opinion phrases are tagged as domain de-
pendent, defeating our goal to train models usable
across domains; b) even when a domain indepen-
dent vocabulary is used, a more complex tagging
scheme is needed to fully disambiguate opinion and
target phrases. Instead of addressing this complex
representation problem, we show that by introducing
two additional tags the number of domain dependent
opinion phrases is reduced from 36% to 17%. This
will lead to information extraction models that per-
form better when used across domains.

7 Acknowledgments

Author is thankful to Amanda Stent and to the
anonymous reviewers for their comments and sug-
gestions, which significantly contributed to improv-
ing the quality of the publication.

References

Baccianella, Stefano, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Se-
bastiani. 2009. Multi-facet rating of product re-
views. In Proceedings of the 31th European Con-
ference on IR Research on Advances in Informa-
tion Retrieval (ECIR 09). pages 462–472.

Hu, Minqing and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and sum-
marizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining (KDD). pages 168–177.

Kessler, Jason S., Miriam Eckert, Lyndsay Clark,
and Nicolas Nicolov. 2010. The icwsm 2010 jdpa
sentiment corpus for the automotive domain. In

Proceedings of the 4th International AAAI Con-
ference on Weblogs and Social Media Data Chal-
lenge Workshop (ICWSM-DCW 2010).

Li, Fangtao, Chao Han, Minlie Huang, Xiaoyan
Zhu, Yingju Xia, Shu Zhang, and Hao Yu. 2010.
Structure-aware review mining and summariza-
tion. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COL-
ING 2010). pages 653–661.

Liu, Kang, Liheng Xu, and Jun Zhao. 2012. Opin-
ion target extraction using word-based translation
model. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning, EMNLP-CoNLL 2012. pages 1346–
1356.

Popescu, Ana-Maria and Oren Etzioni. 2005. Ex-
tracting product features and opinions from re-
views. In Proceedings of the Human Language
Technology Conference and the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (HLT/EMNLP).

Wiebe, Janyce, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie.
2005. Annotating expressions of opinions and
emotions in language. Language Resources and
Evaluation 39(2-3):165–210.

80


