










































Learning from OzCLO, the Australian Computational and Linguistics Olympiad


Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Teaching Natural Language Processing, pages 35–41,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Learning from OzCLO, the Australian Computational and Linguistics 
Olympiad 

 
Dominique Estival 

U. of Western Sydney 
d.estival@uws.edu.au 

John Henderson 
U. of Western Australia 

john.henderson@uwa.edu.au 

Mary Laughren 
U. of Queensland 

m.laughren@uq.edu.au 
 

Diego Mollá 
Macquarie U. 
diego.molla-

aliod@mq.edu.au 

Cathy Bow 
Charles Darwin U. 

cathy.bow@cdu.edu.au 

Rachel Nordlinger 
U. of Melbourne 

racheln@unimelb.edu.au 

Verna Rieschild 
Macquarie U. 

verna.rieschild@mq.edu.au 

Andrea C. Schalley 
Griffith U. 

a.schalley@griffith.edu.au 

 Alexander W. Stanley 
Macquarie U. 

alexander.stanley@students.mq.edu.au  

Colette Mrowa-Hopkins 
Flinders U.  

colette.mrowa-hopkins@flinders.edu.au 

 
 

Abstract 

The Australian Computational and Linguistics 
Olympiad (OzCLO) started in 2008 in only 
two locations and has since grown to a na-
tionwide competition with almost 1500 high 
school students participating in 2013. An Aus-
tralian team has participated in the Interna-
tional Linguistics Olympiad (ILO) every year 
since 2009. This paper describes how the 
competition is run (with a regional First 
Round and a final National Round) and the or-
ganisation of the competition (a National 
Steering Committee and Local Organising 
Committees for each region) and discusses the 
particular challenges faced by Australia (tim-
ing of the competition and distance between 
the major population centres). One major fac-
tor in the growth and success of OzCLO has 
been the introduction of the online competi-
tion, allowing participation of students from 
rural and remote country areas. The organisa-
tion relies on the good-will and volunteer 
work of university and school staff but the 
strong interest among students and teachers 
shows that OzCLO is responding to a demand 
for linguistic challenges. 

1 Introduction 

The Australian Computational and Linguistic 
Olympiad (OzCLO, www.ozclo.org.au) began as 
an idea in late 2007, largely prompted by a par-
ent in Ballarat, a small town in Victoria, who 
came across the North American competition 
(NACLO, Radev et al. 2008) on the internet and 
thought it was something that her daughter 
would be interested in doing.  Her emails to the 

organisers of NACLO, asking about the likeli-
hood of such an event being run in Australia, led 
to initiating contact with the Australasian Lan-
guage Technology Association (ALTA) with the 
suggestion that a computational linguistic olym-
piad be established in Australia. Dominique Es-
tival (then at Appen Pty Ltd, and a member of 
the ALTA Steering Committee) took on the pro-
ject and, jointly with Jane Simpson (then from 
the University of Sydney), Rachel Nordlinger 
and Jean Mulder (from the University of Mel-
bourne), ran the first ever Australian Computa-
tional and Linguistic Olympiad in 2008, with 
financial support from HCSNet (the Human 
Communication Science Network), and help 
from ALTA (the Australasian Language Tech-
nology Association), ALS (the Australian Lin-
guistic Society) and CSIRO (the Commonwealth 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation).  
The first competition was held in two locations – 
the University of Melbourne (Victoria) and the 
University of Sydney (New South Wales) – with 
a total of 119 students participating from 22 
schools.  Given the success of this first competi-
tion, 2009 saw the addition of four new locations 
around Australia (Adelaide, South Australia; 
Brisbane, Queensland; Canberra, ACT; Perth, 
Western Australia) and the sending of the na-
tional winning team to the International Linguis-
tic Olympiad in Wroclaw, Poland. Since then 
OzCLO has run every year, with the recent addi-
tion of two regions (NSW-North in 2010 and 
Northern Territory in 2013) and the participation 
of an Australian team in every ILO.  

35



2 Philosophy, Aims and Principles 
The immediate aim of OzCLO (Simpson and 
Henderson, 2010) is to introduce high school 
students to language puzzles from which they 
can learn about the richness, diversity and sys-
tematic nature of language, and develop their 
reasoning skills. The general value of this type of 
knowledge and skills in high school education 
has not been specifically articulated to potential 
participants or their teachers, schools or parents, 
as it has in the UK (UKLO, 2011; Hudson and 
Sheldon, 2013). However, informal feedback and 
the participation rate both indicate a widespread 
perception in the school sector that this type of 
activity has educational value, albeit with differ-
ent focuses in different schools. For many of the 
schools that participate, OzCLO provides a 
means to meet their institutional responsibility to 
provide extra-curricular activities that are intel-
lectually stimulating and broadening for aca-
demically high-achieving students (under rubrics 
such as ‘gifted and talented’). Some schools offer 
OzCLO to a wider range of students.  

The broader aim of OzCLO is to promote 
awareness of, and interest in linguistics and 
computational linguistics in high schools and in 
the wider community, and more specifically to 
increase enrolments in these disciplines at uni-
versity level. A further goal is that this will ulti-
mately attract people to careers in these areas. 
Linguistics has traditionally had little recognition 
at high school level in Australia, even within 
language education, although more recently there 
is linguistics content at upper high school level in 
the English Language course in Victoria and in 
the new national English curriculum. OzCLO has 
been running in most regions long enough to see 
participants reaching university, and although 
there has been no proper research on the impact 
of OzCLO on enrolments, there is anecdotal evi-
dence that some former participants have chosen 
to study at least some linguistics. 

Consistent with the key aim of promoting in-
terest, OzCLO operates on the principles that 
participation should be fun and should offer 
achievable if challenging tasks to a wide range of 
students across science and humanities interests, 
especially in the First Round. Schools are pro-
vided with a training package of problems which 
starts with a simple morphological analysis that 
is suitable to do as a whole-class exercise even if 
they do not proceed to the competition itself. In 
both rounds participation takes place in school-
based teams, rather than individual competition. 

This is partly to encourage students to learn to 
communicate their analytical ideas, to collabo-
rate effectively, and to provide mutual support 
and social interaction. It also offers some organ-
isational advantages in terms of registration and 
marking. Because team members may have dif-
ferent levels of ability, the competition process 
does not necessarily identify the highest achiev-
ing individuals, but this risk is out-weighed by 
the benefits of teams. The organisation of the 
First Round as separate competitions in each re-
gion provides each team with a smaller pool to 
compete in initially and a distinct level of local 
achievement. However, since there are consider-
able differences in the number of teams in each 
region, and the top teams from each region are 
invited into the National Round, the national 
competition does not necessarily consist of the 
highest achieving teams nationally and there is 
currently discussion of methods to minimise this 
effect. Finally, the results are structured to rec-
ognise participation as well as high achievement: 
in addition to recognising the top teams, all 
teams receive certificates in the categories Gold 
(top ≈25%), Silver (next ≈25%) and Bronze (re-
mainder). 

3 Organising the Annual Competition 

3.1 University level 
All Australian states and territories (with the ex-
ception of Tasmania) now participate in OzCLO 
and there is typically one Local Organising 
Committee (LOC) for each geographical region. 
There are currently eight LOCs (soon to be nine 
with the addition of a third New South Wales 
region).  Each LOC has the responsibility for 
student and school liaison, university space 
booking, recruiting volunteer academic and stu-
dent helpers, running the competitions, publicis-
ing the event locally, and finding cash or in-kind 
sponsorship (e.g. for rooms, venues, printing and 
prizes). 

The National Steering Committee (NSC) 
comprises the Chair of each LOC, the Problems 
Coordinator, the Treasurer, the OZCLO Web-
master and the Online Competition Coordinator.  
The NSC’s role is to coordinate between LOCs, 
make and implement OzCLO decisions, and co-
ordinate national sponsorships and publicity. A 
training package is developed by the NSC and 
provided online each year, on the OzCLO web-
site and within the online competition site. The 
NSC Chair has the responsibility of ensuring the 
coordination and execution of tasks for OzCLO, 

36



both nationally and internationally. The NSC 
Chair and the Problems Coordinator liaise with 
ELCLO (English Linguistics and Computational 
Linguistics Olympiads) with regard to develop-
ing annual problem sets, and with the Interna-
tional Linguistics Olympiad (ILO/IOL) with re-
gard to the international competition. NSC mem-
bers may have dual responsibilities. 
 Because of the distances between regional 
centres, the NSC meetings are all conducted via 
teleconferences, and committee members share 
documents and records using Airset, a cloud-
based collaboration site. 

3.2 School level 
OzCLO operates on a democratic basis, with the 
devolution of decision making passing from NSC 
to LOC to school teacher to students. Teacher 
and student feedback often contributes to NSC 
discussions. Information is disseminated to 
school teachers through the website as well as 
through emails from the region’s LOC. This in-
formation is also shared via Facebook and Twit-
ter accounts. Training sessions are provided 
online, at universities and, in some cases, within 
schools.  Teachers register teams of 4 members 
at the Junior (Years 9 and 10) or Senior level 
(Years 11-12) online. There is no limit to regis-
trations for the online competition, but registra-
tions for the offline competition (in which stu-
dents typically attend the organising University 
campus) may be constrained by University venue 
availability issues. Some schools have Linguis-
tics Clubs, and OzCLO is a strong focus for their 
activities.  In some regions, schools with over 80 
participating students request in-house training 
and invigilation for an offline First Round. 

3.3 The public face of OzCLO 
OzCLO has a website (www.ozclo.org.au) and a 
social media presence with Twitter and Facebook 
accounts for communications and promotion. 
Most LOCs have been successful in gaining pub-
licity for OzCLO through their University media 
departments. Many schools publish pictures and 
items about OzCLO achievements in their school 
newsletters. Some individual schools have fea-
tured in the local press after results of competi-
tions have been published. OzCLO has also fea-
tured in national radio segments. 

4 The OzCLO Competition  

4.1 Competitions Rounds  
The OzCLO competition consists of two rounds, 
a regional or state-wide First Round and a Na-
tional Round. In both, school-based teams of up 
to four students attempt to solve five or six lin-
guistic problems in two hours. The teams are 
divided into Senior and Junior sections, with the 
Senior teams drawn from the last two years of 
high school (Tears 11 and 12) while the Junior 
teams are drawn from the two preceding years 
(Years 9 and 10). The same problems sets and 
competition conditions hold for both Senior and 
Junior teams. The top three teams from each 
LOC are invited to go on to the National Round 
which is held under the same conditions. If the 
top Junior team is not in the overall top three 
teams, then it is also invited. The Senior team 
which wins the National Round is invited to rep-
resent Australia at the ILO. 

4.2 Problem sets 

In its first two years, OzCLO greatly benefited 
from NACLO, which allowed use of their prob-
lem sets. Some additional problems were com-
posed by linguists engaged in the running of the 
competition, or their colleagues. Since 2009, 
OzCLO has been part of ELCLO, the English 
Language Computational Linguistics Olympiad, 
in which participating countries (Australia, Ire-
land, North America and the United Kingdom) 
contribute to a shared set of problems. Because 
of the OzCLO rationale described above, an at-
tempt is made to try to have a mix of problems 
based on data from a wide range of languages, 
and also a wide range of data types. Different 
levels of difficulty are included so that students 
have the satisfaction of being able to solve most 
of the problems. The aim is to show students that 
analysing language phenomena can be fun as 
well as challenging, and also that linguistic skills 
can be applied to some very practical tasks. The 
problems include: deciphering non-Roman 
scripts; translation tasks involving typical mor-
phological and syntactic analysis; computational 
linguistic tasks; search for phonological rules, or 
linguistic reconstruction. 

4.3 Training for ILO 
Since 2009, an Australian team has participated 
in every ILO. While the main goal of OzCLO 
has always been the promotion of language stud-
ies, linguistic knowledge and analysis skills in 

37



Australian high schools, the appeal of potentially 
participating in an international competition has 
proved an additional incentive for many of the 
students and their teachers. However, because of 
the rationale for OzCLO discussed above, the 
problems used in the First Round and even the 
National Round are not nearly as difficult as the 
actual ILO problems. Therefore the Australian 
team needs to be given additional training before 
competing at the international level. This training 
was first provided by a coach accompanying the 
team at the ILO but we have found that this was 
insufficient and too late to be helpful. We now 
provide training sessions aimed at solving ILO-
level problems to the winning team prior to trav-
elling to the ILO. This has resulted in higher re-
sults, including an individual silver medal in 
2011 and honourable mentions in 2010 and 2012. 

5 Participation 2008-2013 
OzCLO has evolved from 22 schools and 119 
competing students in 2008 to 87 schools and 
1,451 competing students in 2013. Some schools 
have participated each year, and there has been a 
steady increase in new schools. Private and se-
lective government schools have so far been the 
majority in most regions, but the numbers of 
government schools participating are growing. 
All participating schools are highly enthusiastic 
about the OzCLO competitions. 

OzCLO naturally attracts schools keen on of-
fering a new kind of challenge to students in 
their GATS (gifted and talented students) pro-
grammes. However, teachers (not only language 
teachers, but also mathematics and computer sci-
ences teachers) also comment that OzCLO is a 
rare kind of competition because it provides fun, 
challenge, stimulation and team work for any 
student. 

A challenge for Australia compared with 
Europe or North America is the enormous dis-
tance between rural and metropolitan areas, mak-
ing it difficult for many schools in rural areas to 
participate in an offline University-based compe-
tition. The advent of the online option gives ur-
ban, rural and country remote students equity in 
access. Thanks to this plus a strong marketing 
drive in that state, numbers have increased dra-
matically in Queensland. In other regions, some 
schools prefer the university campus experience 
offered by the offline option. 

As Table 1 shows, numbers have increased 
steadily over the six years since inception. In 

2013, Australia’s population of 23 million has 
provided nearly as many Linguistics Olympiads 
competitors as has the United States and Canada 
combined, whose population figures are fifteen 
times more than Australia’s. The OzCLO par-
ticipation rate is 6.4 per 100,000 population. For 
UKLO it is 4.55, and for NACLO 0.49. 

6 Going on-line 
In the first four years of OzCLO’s existence, the 
competition was offered on campus by academic 
staff volunteers from a number of mainly metro-
politan Universities. Participating teams travelled 
from their schools to the respective Universities’ 
campuses to take part in the Training Session and 
the First Round, except for NSW, where several 
OzCLO representatives also travelled to schools 
with a large participation base, in order to run the 
competition at the school. Teachers often re-
ported that these visits to the University campus 
were a highlight for the participating students 
who very much enjoyed the experience. 

Nonetheless, a number of drawbacks to this 
approach became apparent quite early. These 
included: 
● The difficulty of organising suitable venues 

on campus for running the competition due to 
the timing of the First Round (usually coin-
ciding with Universities’ Orientation Week or 
their first weeks of teaching in the first semes-
ter). 

● The distance factor with the result that only 
schools within travel distance could partici-
pate in the competition (in the case of Queen-
sland, for instance, no school beyond a dis-
tance of about 100kms from campus partici-
pated in the offline competition). Given the 
size of Australia, most regional and rural 
schools were thus virtually excluded from 
competing. 

● Constraints on availability of venues and 
markers put a cap on the overall number of 
students who could compete in each region. 
Thus, the number of schools and the number 
of students per school had to be limited by the 
local committees from the outset (e.g. in 
Queensland, only two teams per school were 
able to compete, although some schools 
wished to enrol many more).  
 

 

38



LOC 
 

2008 
Schools/ 
students 

2009 
Schools/ 
Students 

2010 
Schools/ 
students 

2011 
Schools/ 
students 

2012 
Schools/ 
students 

2013 
Schools/ 
students 

Region  
population 

000s 

Participants 
per 100,000 
population 

NSW-S 10 
64 

14 
105 

[fn/a] 
92 

15 
279 

12 
289 

9 
312 

7,314 5.24 

NSW-N n/a  n/a  5 
40 

7 
58 

5 
60 

6 
71 

VIC 12 
55 

11 
90 

[fn/a] 
120 

9 
115 

16 
245 

18 
304 

5,649 5.38 

ACT n/a  7 
30 

5 
83 

5 
72 

9 
136 

9 
161 

377 42.76 

QLD n/a  11 
60 

15 
90 

15 
106 

20 
312 

25 
377 

4,585 8.22 

SA n/a  [fn/a]  
29 

5 
33 

3 
19 

4 
27 

3 
34 

1,658 2.05 

NT n/a  n/a  n/a  n/a  n/a  6 
80 

236 33.86 

WA n/a  10 
78 

11 
144 

16 
143 

14 
120 

12 
120 

2,451 4.90 

TAS n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 512 0 

Overall  119 
students 

392 
students 

602 
students 

792  
students 

1069  
students 

1459  
students 

22,786 6.40 

Table 1:  Participation schools/students 
(n/a = not applicable = LOC was not participating;  [fn/a] =figure not available 

 
In order to address these issues, it was de-

cided to offer an online option in 2012, using 
Griffith University’s Learning Management 
System. This lifted restrictions on numbers 
(both school and students per school), and 
schools were able to compete from anywhere 
in Australia if they so wished. As a result, 
schools located as far as 1,500 kms from the 
metropolitan areas have successfully partici-
pated in the competition, and some schools 
registered more than 20 teams in the latest 

competition. With the online option, the over-
all number of participants has increased dra-
matically (see Table 2). For instance, Victoria 
saw the number of their participants double 
from 2011 to 2012, while numbers in Queen-
sland nearly tripled. Even in those regions that 
shifted to exclusively offering the online op-
tion (such as Queensland in the last two years), 
most schools have remained in the competi-
tion. 

 
 

 2012 2013 
LOC Online students On campus students Online Students On-campus Students 
NSW-S 91 198 120 192 
NSW-N 60 [on/a] 8 63 
VIC 137 108 195 109 
ACT 64 72 115 46 
QLD 312 [on/a] 377 on/a 
SA 0 27 34 on/a 
WA 28 92 120 on/a 
NT n/a n/a 80 on/a 

Table 2: Participation numbers by mode (online/on-campus) 
 (n/a = not applicable (LOC was not participating);  [fn/a] =figure not available;  

[on/a] =option not available) 

39



In terms of students competing online vs. 
on-campus, except for the NSW-N region, 
there is a distinct shift towards participating 
online. Feedback from teachers has shown that 
in many cases it is easier for teams to stay 
within the school grounds for the competition 
rather than to travel to the University campus. 
For some schools, however, travelling to the 
University campus is still one of the major 
benefits they would not want to lose. For this 
reason most LOCs offer both on-campus and 
online options. Some regions choose to only 
offer the online option (with a training session 
at the University). 

Teams participating online have access to 
training materials and all the necessary infor-
mation, which is made available through the 
OzCLO website well before the competition 
day. This site also allows teams to familiarise 
themselves with the online testing system. On 
the day, all teams across Australia compete at 
the same time on the same day and within the 
same two hour period (to compensate for time 
zone differences, teams started at 12:00 in 
WA, 13:30 in the NT, 14:00 in QLD, 14:30pm 
in SA and 15:00 in the ACT, NSW and VIC in 
the 2013 competition). 

In terms of process and technical require-
ments, each participating team needs access to 
an Internet-enabled computer on the day of the 
competition. No special software is required on 
the school’s computers. The problem set is 
made available to teachers shortly before the 
competition commences, in order to allow 
them to print and copy the problems for the 
students. Students usually work on the paper 
copy, and then access the computer to enter 
their responses.  There is also a virtual class-
room set up for live communication during the 
competition, in order to allow students and 
teachers to ask questions but also to show stu-
dents that there are hundreds of competitors 
participating from around the country at the 
same time.  

Overall, the addition of the online alterna-
tive has been a very beneficial development for 
OzCLO. The strong growth in overall partici-
pant numbers over recent years is not simply 
due to the online option, but this has certainly 
played a major role. It remains to be seen if 
there is even more potential for growth – espe-
cially in areas outside of the major cities. 

7 Challenges 
One of the main challenges OzCLO faces is 
the timing of the competition in relation to the 
schedule of the international linguistics compe-
titions. The Australian school year begins in 
February and ends in December, and the uni-
versity year is roughly March to November, in 
contrast to the September-June academic cal-
endars of the northern hemisphere. In order for 
an Australian team to be selected with enough 
time to prepare for participation in the ILO, the 
National Round needs to be held before the 
Easter break (March/April). For Universities 
and schools, this creates a very rushed timeline 
at the busiest time of the school/academic year. 

As mentioned earlier, another challenge for 
Australia is the vast distances between metro-
politan areas, where most of the universities 
are located. In spite of the success of the online 
competition, so far OzCLO has had mostly a 
metropolitan base and has not yet fully en-
gaged in marketing to regional and rural areas 
across the whole country. Targeting appropri-
ate teachers within schools can also be a chal-
lenge, as experience has shown that often the 
information does not filter through to the rele-
vant teachers (these are usually the coordina-
tors of Languages, Gifted Education, Mathe-
matics, or Computing programmes). Contact-
ing the professional associations for the differ-
ent teaching specialties could ensure that in-
formation is disseminated more efficiently. 

Funding is not guaranteed, and fundraising 
efforts are not rewarded every year. All organ-
isational efforts at University and school level 
depend on good-will and volunteering as well 
as donations. Changes in Heads of Depart-
ments in Universities and principals in schools 
can impact negatively on funds and participa-
tion levels. This means that core issues need to 
be resolved again every year, for example, the 
ongoing maintenance of the OzCLO web-
site/online registration system, which is both a 
challenge and a solution to other issues. The 
OzCLO website hosting is provided by Mac-
quarie University and the site is maintained by 
a student volunteer.  It has served as the central 
hub of information, with other modes (email, 
Facebook and Twitter) leading back to it for 
detailed information.  In addition to ordinary 
information, it also enables self-service regis-
tration, and the automated generation of PDF 
certificates after the competition. These facili-
ties and the volunteer support of the webmaster 

40



have significantly lowered the administrative 
and financial overhead for the organisers.  

An additional problem for OzCLO is the 
division of Australia’s most populated state 
(NSW, with almost a third of Australia’s popu-
lation) into northern and southern regions, 
which leads to one state providing double the 
competitors of other states into the National 
Round. A model is needed whereby all com-
petitors, no matter whether they come from a 
small or a large region, have an equal opportu-
nity to compete in the National Round.  

Finally, while OzCLO has been able to con-
tribute a number of linguistic problems to the 
ELCLO pool, it has proved extremely difficult 
to obtain contributions from Computational 
Linguistics (Estival, 2011). 

8 Conclusions 
In conclusion, running the OzCLO competition 
has been an activity well worth the effort, and 
it is very rewarding that it has become a fixture 
in the academic calendar for many schools. 
Students, teachers and principals have been 
extremely positive about the experience, giv-
ing encouraging feedback and expressing 
strong support for the competition. The recent 
increases in participation rates have come from 
new regions (only one Australian state cur-
rently has no LOC, but possibilities are being 
explored in this area), new schools, and larger 
numbers from individual schools (up to 100 
participants from a single school). Some 
schools have started a linguistics club as after 
school activity, and others are promoting their 
experiences on social media.  

While there is no data currently available 
regarding any effect on enrolments in tertiary 
linguistics programs, increased interest in and 
awareness of linguistics is certainly a positive 
outcome for a discipline which faces chal-
lenges of funding and viability. The coopera-
tion of academics from universities across the 
country in all the LOCs and the NSC, plus the 
support of the Australian Linguistics Society 
(ALS) and of the Australasian Language 
Technology Association (ALTA), make the 
competition a truly national event. This means 
that the competition is not dependent on any 
one single person or institution (although com-
petition within particular regions is), and al-
lows for further growth. Ongoing funding and 
continued support from both universities and 
schools across the country should see contin-

ued growth in the popularity and spread of the 
competition. 

References  
Derzhanski, Ivan, and Thomas Payne. (2010). The 

linguistic olympiads: academic competitions in 
linguistics for secondary school students. Lin-
guistics at school: language awareness in pri-
mary and secondary education, ed. By Kristin 
Denham and Anne Lobeck, 213–26. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Estival, Dominique. (2011). “OzCLO: The Austra-
lian Computational Linguistic Olympiad”. Pro-
ceedings of the Australasian Language Technol-
ogy Association Workshop 2011. Canberra, Aus-
tralia.  

Hudson, Richard, and Sheldon, Neil. (2013). “Lin-
guistics at School: The UK Linguistics Olym-
piad.” Language and Linguistics 
pass, Volume 7, Issue 2. pp. 

Radev, Dragomir R., Lori S. Levin, and Thomas E. 
Payne. (2008). “The North American Computa-
tional Linguistics Olympiad (NACLO)”. In Pro-
ceedings of The Third Workshop on Issues in 
Teaching Computational Linguistics, Columbus, 
OH, USA. 

91–104,  

Simpson, Jane, and Henderson, John. (2010).  Aus-
tralian Computational and Linguistics Olympiad. 
Cross Section, Vol. 20, No. 3, July 2010: 10-14.  

United Kingdom Linguistics Olympiad Committee. 
(n.d.) The Linguistics Olympiads: Lots of fun, 
but are they educa-
tional? http://www.uklo.org/?page_id=35  .

41


