










































Comparison between historical population archives and decentralized databases


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 20–28,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Comparison between historical population archives
and decentralized databases

Marijn Schraagen and Dionysius Huijsmans
Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science (LIACS)

Leiden University, The Netherlands
{schraage,huijsman}@liacs.nl

Abstract

Differences between large-scale historical
population archives and small decentral-
ized databases can be used to improve data
quality and record connectedness in both
types of databases. A parser is developed
to account for differences in syntax and
data representation models. A matching
procedure is described to discover records
from different databases referring to the
same historical event. The problem of ver-
ification without reliable benchmark data
is addressed by matching on a subset of
record attributes and measuring support
for the match using a different subset of
attributes. An application of the matching
procedure for comparison of family trees
is discussed. A visualization tool is de-
scribed to present an interactive overview
of comparison results.

1 Introduction

In the historical demographics and genealogy do-
main, research data can be collected from cen-
tralized databases such as a historical census or
civil registry. Alternatively, decentralized data can
be collected from, e.g., personal archives or lo-
cal organizations. Complementary and conflicting
information between these sources can be valu-
able for research if the overlap, i.e., matching
records, is correctly identified. This paper de-
scribes a method to discover matching records in
centralized and decentralized data for the prob-
lem of family reconstruction. An overview of re-
lated work is presented in Section 2. Section 3
describes the two different data formats. Section 4
provides a mapping procedure between the differ-
ent data formats. In Section 5 the matching proce-
dure is explained at the conceptual and technical
level. Section 6 provides a verification procedure

and results for a test database. An application of
the matching in a family tree visualization tool is
provided in Section 7. A conclusion and directions
for future research are provided in Section 8.

The most important concepts used throughout
this paper are defined as follows:
Record. Unit of matching and linkage. A record
refers to a Genlias certificate (Section 3) or a
Gedcom certificate reconstruction (Sections 3 and
4), unless stated otherwise.
Record match. A pair of records that refer to the
same event (birth, marriage, or death).
Record link. A pair of records that refer to related
events (e.g., birth and death of the same person).
Field similarity measure. Similarity between
field values, e.g., number of days between dates.
Record similarity measure. Similarity require-
ments for selected fields and relations between the
requirements.
Edit distance. Minimum number of character
insertions, deletions and/or substitutions needed
to transform one string into another (Levenshtein
distance).
Name sequence. Concatenation of person names
from a record.
Person name. Single name, i.e., given name or
family name.

2 Related work

Automatic matching and linkage of historical
records has been researched for several decades.
An early example can be found in (Winchester,
1970), using Soundex as field similarity measure
to compare census data. An approach from the
French-speaking Canadian province of Quebec,
using a custom phonetic code, is described in
(Bouchard and Pouyez, 1980). In this approach
different types of data are merged together. The
researchers state that “the most fundamental rule
is that we never try to link individuals, but rather

20



pairs of individuals; that is: couples [. . . ] It can
be demonstrated easily that individual linkage is
liable to result in uncertain, false, or missed links,
whereas the result of the linkage of couples is very
reliable”. The approach is implemented as fol-
lows: “we accept as candidates for linkage those
pairs which have at least two exactly identical el-
ements”. Experience with the dataset used in the
current research has resulted in a similar approach
(see Section 5). Linkage on the Quebec dataset has
been developed by the same authors (Bouchard,
1992). The 1992 paper discusses the use of field
values: “the various fields can serve as identi-
fiers (linkage), controls (validation), or variables
(analysis).” The notion of internal validation is
discussed further in Section 6. Later approaches
to record linkage have focussed on scalability of
linkage methods for large amounts of data, see,
e.g., (Christen and Gayler, 2008).

A detailed overview of elements from genealo-
gical records and the application of each element
for linkage is provided in (Wilson, 2011). Besides
historical and/or genealogical data, various other
types of data have been used for development and
testing of algorithms, such as hospital records,
phone book records, customer records, etc. How-
ever, algorithms generally assume a certain level
of uniformity in data representation, both at a tech-
nical and at a conceptual level. This means that
generally pedigrees are linked to other pedigrees
but not to civil certificates, and vice versa. Events
and individuals (actors) have been modelled to-
gether using NLP techniques (Segers et al., 2011),
however these approaches are mostly not applica-
ble for genealogical data both because of the lack
of natural language resources to identify and link
instances of actors and events, as well as the differ-
ence in scope of the model (participants of histor-
ically significant events vs. every person that ex-
isted during a certain time period). Some attempts
have been made to facilitate data exchange and
accessability in the genealogical domain, either
by presenting a standardized format (the Gedcom
standard (GEDCOM Team, 1996) being the most
succesful example), by conversion into a standard-
ized format (Kay, 2006; Kay, 2004), by enforcing
a Semantic Web ontology (Zandhuis, 2005), or
by defining a framework that accepts custom data
models as metadata to be provided upon exchange
of the genealogical data itself (Woodfield, 2012).
Algorithmic solutions for merging of pedigrees

have been proposed (Wilson, 2001) that take into
account matches between individuals and match-
ing links between individuals. More elaborate
linkage of pedigree data is described in (Quass and
Starkey, 2003), using feature weights and thresh-
olds to increase linkage performance.

Using various definitions of record, such as a
single individual, multiple individuals, families
(i.e., multiple individuals in a family relation), or
events (i.e., multiple individuals in a certain rela-
tion at a specific point in time), most research in
record linkage is either directed towards matching
of records, i.e., asserting equal reference, or link-
age of related (but not equal) records using match-
ing of record elements (e.g., a birth record linked
to a marriage record based on a match between
the child and the bridegroom). In social networks
research a different type of linkage is common,
where records are linked but not matched (e.g.,
two people sharing common interests). Occasion-
ally this type of link is used in historical record
linkage as well (Smith and Giraud-Carrier, 2006).

Test corpora have been developed (Schone et
al., 2012), (Bouchard, 1992), however these are in-
trinsically domain- and language-specific. More-
over, these corpora are generally not readily avail-
able for research.

3 Data formats

The centralized data used in the experiments is ex-
tracted from the Dutch Genlias1 database. Genlias
contains civil certificates (around 15 million in to-
tal) from the Netherlands, for the events of birth,
marriage and death. Most documents originate
from the 19th and early 20th century. A record
(see Figure 1 for an example) consists of the type
of event, a serial number, date and place, and par-
ticipant details. The parents are also listed for the
main subject(s) of the document, i.e., the newborn
child, bride and groom, and deceased person for
birth, marriage and death certificates, respectively.
The documents do not contain identifiers for indi-
viduals. No links are provided between documents
or individuals.

The decentralized data is extracted from a fam-
ily tree database in the Gedcom (Genealogical
Data Communication) format. In this format ge-
nealogical data is stored based on individuals and
nuclear (immediate) families, instead of events as

1The Genlias data is currently maintained by WieWasWie,
see http://www.wiewaswie.nl (in Dutch)

21



Type: birth certificate
Serial number: 176
Date: 16 - 05 - 1883
Place: Wonseradeel
Child: Sierk Rolsma
Father: Sjoerd Rolsma
Mother: Agnes Weldring

Figure 1: Genlias birth certificate.

in Genlias. Every individual or family in Gedcom
is assigned a unique identifier. Records for indi-
viduals usually contain personal information like
names, birth and death date, etc. The families in
which the individual participates, either as child
or as parent, are also indicated. A family record
lists the individuals and their roles. Marriage in-
formation (date, place) can also be present in a
family record. Using the record identifiers, a link
network between individuals and families can be
constructed.

Gedcom is a text-based free entry format. The
standard (GEDCOM Team, 1996) states that “A
record is represented as a sequence of tagged,
variable-length lines, arranged in a hierarchy. A
line always contains a hierarchical level number, a
tag, and an optional value. A line may also con-
tain a cross-reference identifier or a pointer.” (see
Figure 2 for an example). The Gedcom standard
is used by a wide variety of genealogical appli-
cations, ranging from full-featured commercially
available software to small scripts. The imple-
mentation of the standard can differ between ap-
plications, as well as the content format entered by
users. The next section describes a parsing proce-
dure designed to process this kind of data.

4 Parsing

Prior to the actual record matching, a mapping be-
tween the data formats must be performed. This
requires either a reconstruction of events from
the Gedcom file, or vice versa a reconstruction
of individuals and nuclear families from Genlias.
The first option requires links between Gedcom
records, for example to construct a birth record
from the three individual records of the child
and parents using the intermediate family record.
The second option requires links between Gen-
lias certificates, for example to construct a family
record from the birth certificates of several chil-
dren. Record links are available in Gedcom only,
and therefore reconstruction of events from Ged-

0 @F294@ FAM
1 HUSB @I840@
1 WIFE @I787@
1 MARR
2 DATE 30 MAY 1874
2 PLAC Wonseradeel
1 CHIL @I847@
1 CHIL @I848@
1 CHIL @I849@
0 @I840@ INDI
1 NAME Sjoerd/Rolsma/
1 BIRT
2 DATE 13 FEB 1849
1 DEAT
2 DATE 17 JAN 1936
1 FAMS @F294@
0 @I787@ INDI
1 NAME Agnes/Welderink/
1 SEX F
1 BIRT
2 DATE ca 1850
1 FAMS @F294@
0 @I849@ INDI
1 NAME Sierk/Rolsma/
1 BIRT
2 DATE 16 MAY 1883
2 PLAC Wonseradeel
2 SOUR
3 REFN 176
1 FAMC @F294@

Figure 2: Gedcom database fragment, showing a
selection of fields from a FAM record (family)

and three INDI records (individual).

com is the preferred option.
There are various tools available to perform the

required data transformation. Many genealogy
programs can export Gedcom data to, e.g., XML
or SQL databases which can be queried to con-
struct events. Alternatively, dedicated Gedcom
parsers exist for a number of programming lan-
guages (such as Perl (Johnson, 2013), C (Verthez,
2004), Python (Ball, 2012), XSLT (Kay, 2004))
that provide data structures to manipulate the Ged-
com data from within code. However, the data
structures are still centered around individuals and
families and the performance of the tools is to a
greater or lesser degree sensitive to violations of
(some version of) the Gedcom standard. The rest
of this section describes a more general parsing
algorithm that can be applied to any kind of level-
numbered textual data.

The parser (see Figure 3) uses a Prolog DCG-
style grammar to specify the elements of target
records (see Figure 4 for an example). Tags found
in lines from the database file are pushed on a
stack one by one. Before a tag is pushed, all cur-

22



S ← ∅
while L← readline(database) do

if(L.level = 0) then
id← L.value

while(S.top.level ≥ L.level) do
S.pop()

S.push(L.tag)
foreach terminalList ∈ grammar do

if(S = terminalList) then
index(id,terminalList)← L.value

foreach id ∈ index do
foreach target ∈ grammar do

if(pointerList ∈ target) then
duplicate(target,id,pointerList)

foreach protoRecord ∈ ({target} ∪ duplicates) do
foreach terminalList ∈ protoRecord do

output ← index(id,terminalList)
output ← record separator

Figure 3: Parser algorithm.

birthcertificate −−> [@],[fam,chil(+)]:birthbasic,
[fam,husb]:personname, [fam,wife]:personname.

birthbasic −−> birthdate, birthplace, birthref, personname.
birthdate −−> [indi,birt,date].
birthplace −−> [indi,birt,plac].
birthref −−> [indi,birt,sour,refn].
personname −−> [@],[indi,name].
target −−> birthcertificate.

Figure 4: Grammar fragment. Special characters:
’@’ level 0-value (record id), ’+’ pointer list,

’:’ pointer dereference.

rent elements with an equal or higher level num-
ber are popped, which makes the stack correspond
to the current branch in the database hierarchy. If
the stack corresponds to a list of terminal symbols
in the grammar, then the current line is indexed
for later use by the value at level 0. All grammar
rules are expanded to terminal symbols and subse-
quently dereferenced for each of the index values
in the previous step. If an expanded rule contains a
pointer list (indicated by a + symbol) then the rule
is duplicated for each element of the pointer list
associated to the current index value before dere-
ferencing. As an example the algorithm in Fig-
ure 3 applied to the database in Figure 2 using the
grammar in Figure 4 on the index value @F294@
will produce three duplicate protorecords which
can be dereferenced to certificates. Figure 5 pro-
vides an example that matches the Genlias certifi-
cate in Figure 1. Note that the family name of the
mother differs between the databases.

The use of a domain-independent grammar pro-
vides a flexible parser for Gedcom or structurally

Protorecord
[@], [fam,chil(2)]:[indi,birt,date],
[fam,chil(2)]:[indi,birt,plac],
[fam,chil(2)]:[indi,birt,sour,refn], [fam,chil(2)]:[@],
[fam,chil(2)]:[indi,name], [fam,husb]:[@],
[fam,husb]:[indi,name], [fam,wife]:[@],
[fam,wife]:[indi,name]

Certificate
@F294@, 16 MAY 1883, Wonseradeel, 176,
@I849@, Sierk/Rolsma/, @I840@, Sjoerd/Rolsma/,
@I787@, Agnes/Welderink/

Figure 5: Parsing example for index value
@F294@ using the pointer [@F294@,CHIL(2)],

which is @I849@.

similar data formats. Additionally, only informa-
tion that corresponds to an element of a target
record is indexed, resulting in a light-weight pro-
cedure. The output of the parser can be directly
used for record matching, which is described in
the next section.

5 Matching

After parsing, both databases are represented in
the same data format. This enables a definition
of similarity between records based on the val-
ues of corresponding fields. In the current exper-
iments a partial similarity measure is used, mean-
ing that any sufficiently large subset of the corre-
sponding fields must be similar whereas the com-
plement set remains unchecked. This approach as-
sumes sparseness of high-dimensional data, which
implies that the set of field values of each record is
unique and moreover any large subset of field val-
ues is also unique. This property can easily be ver-
ified on a given database and if it holds, the simi-
larity measure can be simplified accordingly. For
the current experiments this allows for name vari-
ation in civil certificates which is hard to detect
automatically by similarity measures. A certifi-
cate, as discussed in Section 3, generally contains
at least three individuals, which amounts to six
names in total (given names and family names).
If one of the names is subject to large variation in
two matching records (for example Elizabeth vs.
Lisa), this match might be undetected when us-
ing all names in the record comparison. However,
by ignoring this field in a partial comparison the
match will be discovered.

A partial record similarity measure can be de-

23



fined by stating similarity requirements for each
of the fields used in the measure and relations be-
tween the requirements. As an example, consider
the matching between marriage certificates based
on the year of marriage and the names of the bride
and bridegroom (four names in total) which is used
in the current experiments, as stated in Figure 6.
Note that the first clause in this definition requires
an exact match on person names. This has the con-
ceptual advantage that exact matching is more re-
liable than similarity matching based on, e.g., edit
distance. Additionally, exact matching allows for
straightforward string indexing and efficient look-
up. Memory consumption is less efficient, the ex-
ample index of two names out of four requires(4
2

)
= 6 entries per record. Therefore it might be

necessary to adjust the similarity measure to meet
computational resources.

At least two out of four names are exactly
equal, and

the year of marriage is equal or different
by a small margin, or

the year of marriage is different by a
larger margin and the edit distance be-
tween name sequences is below a small
threshold, or

the year of marriage in a record is spec-
ified as a range and the year of marriage
in another record is within this range,
and the edit distance between name se-
quences is below a small threshold.

Figure 6: Record similarity measure
for marriage certificates.

6 Results and verification

The record similarity measure in Figure 6 is ap-
plied to the Genlias database and a sample Ged-
com database containing 1327 individuals and 423
families. As preprocessing, given names are re-
duced to the first token (for example: Quentin
Jerome Tarantino → Quentin Tarantino). Sepa-
rate family name prefixes, which are common in
Dutch, are stripped using a stop list (for example:
Vincent van Gogh → Vincent Gogh). The edit dis-
tance threshold and year margins required by the
similarity measure are set according to empirical

Edit distance threshold 5
Large year margin 10
Small year margin
marriage 2
birth, death 0
Marriage match 153

no match 23
Birth match 335

no match 276
Death match 100

no match 239

Table 1: Matching parameters and results.

knowledge of the domain. A subset of the Gedcom
records is used to match the timeframe of the Gen-
lias database (1796–1920). Settings and match-
ing results are displayed in Table 1. The match-
ing is performed for the three main types of civil
certificates: birth, marriage and death. For birth
and death certificates the marriage record similar-
ity measure (Figure 6) is used replacing the roles
of bride and bridegroom by mother and father of
the child or deceased person for birth and death
certificates respectively (i.e., the name of the child
or deceased person itself is not used). To avoid
confusion with other siblings, the small year mar-
gin for birth and death certificates is set to zero.
If multiple matching candidates are found using
the record similarity measure, the match with the
smallest edit distance between name sequences is
used. The large amount of missed matches for
birth and death certificates is expected, because
the Genlias database is still under active develop-
ment and a significant number of birth and death
certificates are not yet digitized. Moreover, Ged-
com databases generally contain many peripheral
individuals for which no parents are listed (usu-
ally inlaws of the family of interest), prohibiting
the reconstruction of birth and death certificates.

Verification of record matches should ideally be
performed using a test set of known matches (a
gold standard). However, for this particular com-
bination of databases such a test set is not avail-
able. The lack of test sets extends to the majority
of decentralized historical data, as well as Genlias
itself (which does not have any kind of internal
links or verification sets). This is a quite unde-
sirable situation given the large variation in data
quality and coverage between databases in the his-
torical domain. Because the characteristics of any

24



two databases regarding the contents can differ to
a large degree, the performance of a matching al-
gorithm obtained on one database is not indicative
for other databases. Put differently: every appli-
cation of a matching algorithm has to perform its
own verification, which is difficult in the absence
of test sets.

6.1 Internal verification

A possible solution for the verification problem
is to re-use the sparseness assumption to obtain
a measure of support for a match. The matches
returned by the similarity measure are based on a
subset of fields. If other field values are equal or
similar as well, they provide additional support for
the match independent of the similarity measure.
Note that this solution is only applicable if there
are fields available which are not used in the record
similarity measure. Moreover these fields should
have a certain discriminative power, which rules
out categorical variables like gender or religion.
For many linkage tasks extra fields are not avail-
able, for example linking a marriage certificate of
a person to the marriage certificate of this person’s
parents, in which case the only available informa-
tion about the parents are the person names. How-
ever, in the current experiments a certificate from
one database is being matched to the same certifi-
cate in another database, therefore the amount of
available information is much larger.

A candidate field for verification is the serial
number, which has been recorded since the start
of the civil registry in the Netherlands. The num-
bers are assigned per year by the municipality
issuing the certificate, meaning that the combi-
nation of municipality, year and serial number
uniquely references a certificate (also known as
a persistent identifier or PID). A shared PID be-
tween two records in a match therefore provides
strong support for this match. However, in a Ged-
com database serial numbers are not necessarily
included. The source of the data can be something
different than the civil registry, such as church
records, or the database author might just have
omitted the serial number. Moreover, if the source
of the Gedcom record is the civil registry, then the
match is not very indicative of the performance
of the similarity measure in combining different
data sources. Therefore, the serial number is of
limited use only for verification purposes. Other
candidate fields are dates and toponyms (location

names). The year is used in the similarity measure,
but the day and month can be used for support. For
the current experiments three levels of support are
defined: exact date match, a difference of 1 to 7
days, or a difference of more than 7 days.

In case of limited support from the verification
fields, edit distance (or any other string similarity
measure) can be used as an indication of the cor-
rectness of a match.

6.2 Toponym mapping
Toponyms cannot always be compared directly,
because of the difference in use between Genlias
and most Gedcom databases. In Genlias the to-
ponym that denotes the location of the event is al-
ways the municipality that has issued the certifi-
cate. In a Gedcom database often the actual lo-
cation of the event is used, which can be a town
that is part of a larger municipality. A comparison
between toponyms is therefore more informative
after mapping each toponym to the corresponding
municipality. In the current experiments a refer-
ence database of Dutch toponyms is used to per-
form the mapping. Because the municipal organi-
zation in the Netherlands changes over time, the
year of the event is required for a correct map-
ping. Ambiguity for toponyms (i.e., multiple lo-
cations with the same name) can generally be re-
solved using the province of the event. In case that
the province is not recorded the toponym can be
disambiguated by choosing the location with the
most inhabitants by default.

6.3 Interpretation of support figures
Table 2 shows the results of verification using se-
rial numbers, dates and mapped toponyms as sup-
port fields. The support figures should be inter-
preted with the distribution of data values in mind.
The first two rows of Table 2 represent matches
with equal serial numbers. Most of these matches
have equal PIDs (toponym and year equal as well).
Given that each PID is unique these matches are
correct. Differences in toponym are usually small
for matches with equal serial numbers, therefore
a PID match can be assumed (although support
is higher for true PID matches). The third row
represents matches with the same toponym and
date, and also two names equal (by definition of
the similarity measure). Note again that the match
was selected using the names and the year only,
and verified using the toponym and the full date.
These matches could be incorrect, because it is

25



possible that different couples with (partially) the
same name got married on the same day in the
same place, for example. In the Genlias database
this is the case for around 0.3% of all marriage
certificates. Therefore, the sparseness assump-
tion largely holds for this set of fields and these
matches can also be considered correct. Similarly,
other verification field values can be interpreted in
terms of confidence in a match (based on the va-
lidity of the sparseness assumption) or counterev-
idence against a match (in case of large differ-
ences in field values). For the current experiments,
the last row of matches should be considered in-
correct. The relatively large number of incorrect
matches for birth and death certificates can be at-
tributed to the lack of coverage in Genlias. The
best match is returned, however this assumes true
matches to be present in the data set. The record
similarity match can be adjusted using the verifi-
cation fields, however it is preferred to keep simi-
larity computation and verification separated.

7 Application

The previous sections have discussed matching
records from different databases that refer to the
same event. However, most research in histori-
cal record linkage is focussed on links between
events, such as a birth and the marriage of the
parents listed in the birth certificate. These links
can be added to a database by manual annota-
tion or using automatic linkage methods. Differ-
ent databases in the same population domain are
likely to contain complementary and conflicting
links, which can be used to increase the quality
and quantity of links in both databases. To com-
pare links between databases the records need to
be matched first, which can be achieved using the
record matching method from the current research.

field marriage birth death
s t d e
+ + + 69 170 9
+ - + 2 30 0
– + + 41 20 1
– + ∼ 0 33 6
– + – 2 1 0
– – + 10 2 7
– – ∼ 2 5 10
– – – ≤ 3 11 2 3
– – – > 3 16 72 64
total 153 335 100

Table 2: Verification results.
Columns: (s)erial number, (t)oponym, (d)ate,

(e)dit distance. Support level: + equal,
∼ 1–7 days difference,– not equal (s,t) or

> 7 days difference (d). Edit distance is only
used for the matches without support from the

verification fields (final two rows).

To demonstrate the application of the method, a
comparison is performed on links between mar-
riage certificates in Genlias and corresponding
links in the sample Gedcom database used in the
matching experiments. A marriage certificate con-
tains the marriage couple and the parents of both
bride and bridegroom. A link can be defined be-
tween a marriage and the marriage of one of the
parent couples (see Figure 7). For the Genlias
database links have been constructed by select-
ing all record pairs with a maximum Levenshtein
edit distance of 3 between name sequences. Ad-
ditional record links are computed by converting
each name to a base form and selecting record
pairs with matching base name sequences. The
details of the link computation are beyond the
scope of this paper, for the current experiments

Marriage couple
Ewout Kaptein
Geertrui Dekker

Parents groom
Jacob Kaptein
Dirksje van den Broek

Parents bride
Arij Dekker
Kniertje Verschoor

Marriage couple
Jacob Kaptein
Lijntje Smits

Parents groom
Ewoud Kaptein
Geertrui Dekker

Parents bride
Souverein Smits
Lijntje Delgens

Certificate 09914931

Municipality: Mijnsheerenland

Date: August 29, 1895

Municipality: Mijnsheerenland

Certificate 09915109

Date: September 18, 1868

Serial number: 9 Serial number: 13

Figure 7: Example of a link between two Genlias marriage certificates,
containing a small spelling variation: Ewout vs. Ewoud.

26



@F171@

13-05-1848

Sjoerd Riemerts Riemersma

Johanna Sikkes van der Zee

@F100@

01-05-1824

Sikke Sasses van der Zee
Aafke Klazes de Boer
Afke de Boer

@F15@

09-05-1857

Jan Johannes Altena

Klaaske Sikkes van der Zee

@F16@

02-07-1892

Johannes Altena

Elisabeth Vonk

@F17@

16-11-1889

Eke Foekema

Aaltje Altena

@F18@

09-01-1896

Sikke Altena
Cornelia Verkooyen
Cornelia Verkooijen

@F13@

13-06-1896

Ruurd Altena

Anna Jans Rolsma

@F19@

~1900

H Wesseling

Agatha Altena

9797998

08-05-1895

Hendrikus Wesseling

Agatha Altena

@F122@

~1920

Sikkes ?

IJbeltje Altena

@F123@

~1925

Bartolomeus Mathias van Oerle

Klaaske Altena

@F124@

18-05-1923

Sikke Altena

Trijntje Homminga

Figure 8: Visualization of link comparison.

only the resulting set of links between Genlias
marriage certificates is of interest. In the Ged-
com database links between marriages are already
present. The link comparison procedure is as fol-
lows: first, marriage certificates are matched us-
ing the method described in Section 5. For every
matched certificate the marriages of the children
are identified using the links from Genlias and the
Gedcom database (cf. Figure 7). These two sets of
marriages are aligned using a slightly more strict
version of the record similarity measure in Fig-
ure 6, to accomodate for the inherent similarity in
names and timeframe of sibling marriages. Us-
ing the alignment, the links can be divided into
three categories: present in both databases, present
in the Gedcom database only, or present in Gen-
lias only. A visualization tool is developed that
shows the results of the comparison in a link tree
(see Figure 8), which can be browsed by expand-
ing or collapsing record links. Colours indicate
differences between databases (red and blue for
the Gedcom database and Genlias, respectively).
Records @F19@ and 9797998 are an example of
a false negative. The lower row is found in the
Gedcom database only because these records are
outside of the Genlias timeframe. The tool enables
users to provide their own Gedcom database and
identify differences with the nation-wide Genlias
database. Due to data licensing issues the tool has
not yet been released, however it could be inte-
grated in the Genlias website in the future.

8 Conclusion and future work

In this paper a method is described to compare
a dataset based on events (Genlias) to a dataset
based on individuals (the Gedcom model). This
method is complementary to most current ap-
proaches in record linkage, in which only datasets
with the same conceptual structure are compared.
The parser (Section 4) facilitates the transforma-
tion of data formats. A combination of multi-
ple string indexing and field similarity measures
provides a computationally efficient and flexible
record matching method, as described in Sec-
tion 5. The problem of verification without gold
standard test data is addressed in Section 6. An
application of the method in a visualization tool is
presented in Section 7.

In future research, other Gedcom databases
can be presented to the matching procedure. A
crowdsourcing set-up can be envisioned to per-
form large-scale data collection and evaluation of
the approach. The matching procedure itself can
be refined by improving the record similarity mea-
sure or by incorporating a network approach in
which record links can contribute to matching. Fi-
nally, functionality can be added to the visualiza-
tion tool, preferably resulting in a public release.

Acknowledgment

This work is part of the research programme
LINKS, which is financed by the Netherlands Or-
ganisation for Scientific Research (NWO), grant
640.004.804. The authors would like to thank Tom
Altena for the use of his Gedcom database.

27



References
Madeleine Ball. 2012. python-gedcom: Python

module for parsing, analyzing, and manipulat-
ing GEDCOM files. https://github.com/
madprime/python-gedcom/.

Gérard Bouchard and Christian Pouyez. 1980. Name
variations and computerized record linkage. Histor-
ical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Inter-
disciplinary History, 13(2):119–125.

Gérard Bouchard. 1992. Current issues and new
prospects for computerized record linkage in the
province of Québec. Historical Methods: A Jour-
nal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History,
25(2):67–73.

Peter Christen and Ross Gayler. 2008. Towards scal-
able real-time entity resolution using a similarity-
aware inverted index approach. In Seventh Aus-
tralasian Data Mining Conference (AusDM 2008),
volume 87, pages 51–60. ACS.

GEDCOM Team. 1996. The GEDCOM standard
release 5.5. Technical report, Family and Church
History Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City.

Paul Johnson. 2013. Gedcom — a module to manip-
ulate Gedcom genealogy files. http://search.
cpan.org/˜pjcj/Gedcom-1.18/.

Michael Kay. 2004. Up-conversion using XSLT 2.0.
In Proceedings of XML: From Syntax to Solutions.
IDEAlliance.

Michael H. Kay. 2006. Positional grouping in XQuery.
In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on
XQuery Implementation, Experience and Perspec-
tives (XIME-P).

Dallan Quass and Paul Starkey. 2003. Record linkage
for genealogical databases. In KDD-2003 Workshop
on Data Cleaning, Record Linkage, and Object Con-
solidation, pages 40–42.

Patrick Schone, Chris Cummings, Stuart Davey,
Michael Jones, Barry Nay, and Mark Ward. 2012.
Comprehensive evaluation of name matching across
historic and linguistic boundaries. In Proceedings of
the 12th Annual Family History Technology Work-
shop. FamilySearch.

Roxane Segers, Marieke van Erp, and Lourens van der
Meij. 2011. Hacking history via event extraction.
In Proceedings of the sixth international conference
on Knowledge capture, K-CAP ’11, pages 161–162.
ACM.

Matthew Smith and Christophe Giraud-Carrier. 2006.
Genealogical implicit affinity network. In Proceed-
ings of the 6th Annual Family History Technology
Workshop. FamilySearch.

Peter Verthez. 2004. The Gedcom parser library.
http://gedcom-parse.sourceforge.
net/.

D. Randall Wilson. 2001. Graph-based remerging of
genealogical databases. In Proceedings of the 1st
Annual Family History Technology Workshop. Fam-
ilySearch.

D. Randall Wilson. 2011. Genealogical record link-
age: Features for automated person matching. In
Proceedings of RootsTech 2011, pages 331–340.
FamilySearch.

Ian Winchester. 1970. The linkage of historical
records by man and computer: Techniques and prob-
lems. The Journal of Interdisciplinary History,
1(1):107–124.

Scott Woodfield. 2012. Effective sharing of family
history information. In Proceedings of the 12th An-
nual Family History Technology Workshop. Family-
Search.

Ivo Zandhuis. 2005. Towards a genealogical ontol-
ogy for the semantic web. In Humanities, Comput-
ers and Cultural Heritage: Proceedings of the XVI
international conference of the Association for His-
tory and Computing, pages 296–300.

28


