










































Introducing PersPred, a Syntactic and Semantic Database for Persian Complex Predicates


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages 11–20,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Introducing PersPred, a Syntactic and Semantic Database for Persian
Complex Predicates

Pollet Samvelian and Pegah Faghiri
Université Sorbonne Nouvelle & CNRS

18, rue des Bernardins
75005, Paris, France

{pollet.samvelian, pegah.faghiri}@univ-paris3.fr

Abstract

This paper introduces PersPred, the first
manually elaborated syntactic and seman-
tic database for Persian Complex Predicates
(CPs). Beside their theoretical interest, Per-
sian CPs constitute an important challenge in
Persian lexicography and for NLP. The first
delivery, PersPred 11, contains 700 CPs, for
which 22 fields of lexical, syntactic and se-
mantic information are encoded. The seman-
tic classification PersPred provides allows to
account for the productivity of these combi-
nations in a way which does justice to their
compositionality without overlooking their id-
iomaticity.

1 Introduction

Persian has only around 250 simplex verbs, half
of which are currently used by the speech commu-
nity2. The morphological lexeme formation process
outputting verbs from nouns (e.g. xâb ‘sleep’ >
xâb-idan ‘to sleep’; raqs ‘dance’ > raqs-idan ‘to
dance’), though available, is not productive. The
verbal lexicon is mainly formed by syntactic com-
binations, including a verb and a non-verbal ele-
ment, which can be a noun, e.g. harf zadan ‘to talk’
(Lit. ‘talk hit’), an adjective, e.g. bâz kardan ‘to
open’ (Lit. ‘open do’), a particle, e.g. bar dâštan
‘to take’ (Lit. ‘PARTICLE have’), or a prepositional

1PersPred 1 is freely available under the LGPL-LR li-
cense, http://www.iran-inde.cnrs.fr/ (Language Resources for
Persian).

2Sadeghi (1993) gives the estimation of 252 verbs, 115 of
which are commonly used. Khanlari (1986) provides a list of
279 simplex verbs. The Bijankhan corpus contains 228 lemmas.

phrase, e.g. be kâr bordan ‘to use’ (Lit. ‘to work
take’). These combinations are generally referred to
as Complex Predicates (CPs), Compound Verbs or
Light Verb Constructions (LVCs).

New “verbal concepts” are regularly coined as
complex predicates (CPs) rather than simplex verbs,
for instance yonize kardan ‘to ionize’ (Lit. ‘ionized
do’) instead of yon-idan3.

Several studies have focused on the dual nature of
Persian CPs, which exhibit both lexical and phrasal
properties (Goldberg, 2003; Vahedi-Langrudi, 1996;
Karimi, 1997; Karimi-Doostan, 1997; Megerdoo-
mian, 2002, among others). Indeed, these combi-
nations display all properties of syntactic combina-
tions, including some degree of semantic compo-
sitionality, which makes it impossible to establish
a clearcut distinction between them and “ordinary”
verb-object combinations for instance (cf. 2.1). On
the other hand, these sequences also have word-like
properties, since CP formation has all the hallmarks
of a lexeme formation process, such as lexicaliza-
tion (cf. 2.2). Thus, in the same way as the ver-
bal lexicon of English includes all its simplex verbs,
the inventory of the verbal lexicon in Persian, and
consequently dictionaries, must include these com-

3In reality, there are verbs formed from nouns or adjectives,
but they are mainly created by the Academy of Persian Lan-
guage and Literature, who suggests and approves equivalents
for the foreign general or technical terms. The verb râyidan ‘to
compute’, for instance, is a recent creation by the Academy.
However, it should be noted that these creations, which are
far less numerous than spontaneous creations, are not easily
adopted by native speakers, who almost systematically prefer
using the CP counterpart, e.g. kampyut kardan (Lit. ‘computa-
tion do’) instead of râyidan.

11



binations. However, despite several attempts, this
task has not been carried out in a systematic way
and such a resource is cruelly missing. Although
dictionaries mention some of the lexicalized combi-
nations, either under the entry associated to the verb,
or to the non verbal element, the underlying criteria
in the choice of combinations is far from being clear
and the resulting list significantly varies from one
dictionary to another.

Computational studies have also mentioned the
lack of large-scale lexical resources for Persian and
have developed probabilistic measures to determine
the acceptability of the combination of a verb and a
noun as a CP (Taslimipoor et al., 2012).

PersPred is a syntactic and semantic database,
which aims to contribute to fill this gap by propos-
ing a framework for the storage and the description
of Persian CPs. Its first delivery, PersPred 1., con-
tains more than 700 combinations of the verb zadan
‘hit’ with a noun, presented in a spreadsheet.

PersPred is not only a lexicographic resource, it is
also the implementation of a theoretical view on Per-
sian CPs. Adopting a Construction-based approach
(cf. 4), PersPred sheds a new light on some crucial
and closely related issues in CP formation:

- The way the productivity of these combinations
can be accounted for despite their idiomatic-
ity and the link generally established between
compositionality and productivity (cf. 3).

- The relation between “lexical” and “light”
verbs and the validity of such a distinction for
a great number of Persian verbs.

The fact that Persian has only around 250 sim-
plex verbs has a very obvious consequence which
has generally been overlooked by theoretical stud-
ies: Almost all Persian verbs are light verbs, or,
more precisely, are simultaneously light and lexical
verbs. In other words, if one establishes a scale of
specificity in the verbal meaning (Ritter and Rosen,
1996) going from highly specific verbs (e.g. google,
milk) to lowly specific ones (e.g. do, make), most
Persian verbs are located somewhere in the middle
of the scale. Consequently, in many CPs, the verb
has a lexical semantic content and cannot be consid-
ered as a light verb sensu stricto. This also entails

that Persian CPs are not always as idiomatic as En-
glish LVCs, for instance, and that many aspects of
their formation can be accounted for via composi-
tionality. By providing a fine-grained semantic clas-
sification for Persian CPs, PersPred proposes a solu-
tion that does justice to the compositionality of these
combinations, thus allowing to account for their pro-
ductivity.

2 Persian CPs as Multiword Expressions

Several studies, including those in computational
linguistics, treat Persian CPs like LVCs in languages
such as English and French, and thus as MWEs (Fa-
zly et al., 2007, among others). However, the fact
that Persian CPs are generally formed by a “bare”
(non-determined, non-referential) noun and a verb,
in an adjacent position, makes them far more cohe-
sive than English LVCs for instance, and leads some
studies to treat these combination as words by de-
fault (Goldberg, 1996).

2.1 Phrasal Properties

It has been shown by several studies (Karimi-
Doostan, 1997; Megerdoomian, 2002; Samvelian,
2012) that the two elements in a CP are clearly sep-
arate syntactic units: a) All inflection is prefixed
or suffixed on the verb, as in (1), and never on the
noun. b) The two elements can be separated by the
pronominal clitics, (2), the future auxiliary, (3), or
even by clearly syntactic constituents, (4). c) Both
the noun and the verb can be coordinated, (5) and
(6) respectively. d) The noun can be extracted, (7).
e) CPs can be passivized, (8). In this case, the nomi-
nal element of the CP can become the subject of the
passive construction, as does the Direct Object of a
transitive construction. f) Finally, the noun can head
a complex NP, (9).

(1) Maryam
Maryam

bâ
with

Omid
Omid

harf
talk

ne-mi-zan-ad
NEG-IPFV-hit-3S

‘Maryam does not talk to Omid.’4

(2) Dust=aš
friend=3S

dâr-am
have-1S

‘I like her/him/it.’

4DDO = definite direct object marker; EZ = Ezafe particle;
IPFV = imperfective, NEG = negation, PP = past participle.

12



(3) Maryam
Maryam

Omid=râ
Omid=DDO

dust
friend

xâh-ad
AUX-3S

dâšt
had

‘Maryam will like Omid.’

(4) Dast
hand

be
to

begol-hâ
flower-PL

na-zan
NEG-hit

‘Don’t touch the flowers.’

(5) Mu-hâ=yaš=râ
hair-PL=3S=DDO

boros
brush

yâ
or

šâne
comb

zad
hit

‘(S)he brushed or combed her hair.’

(6) Omid
Omid

sili
slap

zad
hit

va
and

xord
strike

‘Omid gave and received slaps.’

(7) Dast
hand

goft-am
said-1S

be
to

gol-hâ
flower-PL

na-zan
NEG-hit

‘I told you not to touch the flowers.’

(8) a. Maryam
Maryam

be
to

Omid
Omid

tohmat
slander

zad
hit

‘Maryam slandered Omid.’

b. Be
to

Omid
Omid

tohmat
slander

zade
hit.PP

šod
become

‘Omid was slandered.’

(9) [In
this

xabar=e
news=EZ

mohem]=râ
important=DDO

be
to

mâ
us

dâd
gave

‘(S)he gave us this important news.’

These observations show that the syntactic prop-
erties of CPs are comparable to regular Object-Verb
combinations. While the noun in a CP is more cohe-
sive with the verb than a bare direct object (in terms
of word order, differential object marking, pronom-
inal affix placement), it is impossible to draw a cat-
egorical syntactic distinction between the two types
of combinations.

2.2 Lexical and Idiomatic Properties

While clearly being syntactic combinations, Persian
CPs display several lexeme like properties (Bonami
and Samvelian, 2010). From a semantic point of
view, their meaning can be unpredictable (i.e. con-
ventional). From a morphological point of view, the
whole sequence behaves like a word in the sense that
it feeds lexical formation rules. Finally, the associa-
tion of a given noun and a given verb is more or less
idiomatic.

CPs are lexicalized. In many cases, the meaning
of a CP is not fully predictable from the meaning
of its components. N-V combinations are subject to
various levels of lexicalization.

In some cases, the CP meaning is a specialization
of the predictable meaning of the combination. For
instance čâqu zadan ‘to stab’ (Lit. ‘knife hit’) is not
only to hit somebody with a knife; dast dâdan ‘to
shake hands’ (Lit. ‘hand give’) does not only im-
ply that you give your hand to somebody; âb dâdan,
‘to water’ (Lit. ‘water give’) is not just pouring
water on something; šir dâdan ‘to breastfeed’ (Lit.
‘milk give’) is not just the action of giving milk to
somebody. These particular specializations have to
be learned, in the same way as one has to learn the
meaning of the verbs such as water or towel in En-
glish.

In other examples semantic drift has taken place,
either by metaphor or by metonymy. The link be-
tween the compositional meaning and the lexical-
ized meaning is sometimes still recoverable syn-
chronically. For instance, the lexicalized meaning
of guš kardan ‘to listen’ (Lit. ‘ear do’) can be recov-
ered via metonymy. The CP designates the prototyp-
ical action done by ears. Likewise, in zanjir zadan
‘to flagellate’ (Lit. ‘chain hit’), the elliptical element
of the meaning, pošt ‘shoulder’, can also be recov-
ered. The CP comes in fact from bâ zanjir (be) pošt
zadan ‘to hit one’s shoulders with chains’.

However, in numerous other cases, the initial link
is no more perceivable by speakers. For instance, ru
gereftan ‘to become cheeky’ (Lit. ‘face take’) and
dast andâxtan ‘to mock’ (Lit. ‘hand throw’) consti-
tute opaque sequences in synchrony.

CPs feed lexeme formation rules. The fact that
N-V combinations serve as inputs to further lexeme
formation rules has been noted in several studies (cf.
Introduction) and has been considered by some of
them as an argument to support the “wordhood” of
these sequences. For instance, the suffix -i forms
abilitative adjectives from verbs, e.g. xordan ‘eat’ >
xordani ‘edible’ (and by further conversion > xor-
dani ‘food’). This suffix combines with CPs, inde-
pendently of whether they are compositional or not:
dust daštan ‘to love’ > dustdaštani ‘lovely’; xat xor-
dan ‘to be scratched’ > xatxordani ‘scratchable’; juš
xordan ‘to bind’ > jušxordani ‘linkable’.

13



(Non-)predictibility of the verb. Finally, the
combination of a particular verb with a particular
noun is idiosyncratic in the sense that there is some-
times no semantic justification for the choice of a
particular verb. Thus, two semantically close or even
synonymous nouns can be combined with two dif-
ferent verbs to give rise to almost synonymous CPs:
hesâdat kardan (Lit. ‘jealousy do’) vs. rašk bor-
dan (Lit. ‘jealousy take’) both mean ‘to envy’, ‘to
be jealous’; sohbat kardan (Lit. ‘talk do’) vs. harf
zadan (Lit. ‘talk hit’) both mean ‘to talk’, ‘to speak’.

3 Productivity of Persian CPs

Although Persian CPs are idiomatic, they are also
highly productive. Several theoretical studies have
suggested that compositionality is the key to this
productivity and put forward hypotheses on how the
contribution of the verb and the noun must be com-
bined to obtain the meaning of the predicate (Folli
et al., 2005; Megerdoomian, 2012). However, as
(Samvelian, 2012) extensively argues, these “radical
compositional” accounts are doomed, because they
wrongly assume that a given verb and a given noun
each have a consistent contribution through all their
combinations to form a CP. In this study, we assume
that:

1. Persian CPs do not constitute a homogenous
class, ranging from fully compositional com-
binations to fully idiomatic phrases.

2. Compositionality and productivity constitute
two distinct dimensions and thus productivity
does not necessarily follow from composition-
ality.

3. A part of Persian CPs can receive a composi-
tional account, provided compositonality is de-
fined a posteriori. For these cases, composi-
tionality does account for productivity.

4. For some other cases, analogical extension on
the basis of the properties of the whole CP is
responsible for productivity.

3.1 Compositionality-Based Productivity

With respect to their compositionality, Persian CPs
are comparable to Idiomatically Combining Expres-
sions (Nunberg et al., 1994), idioms whose parts

carry identifiable parts of their idiomatic meanings
(p. 496). In other words, the verb and the non-verbal
element of a CP can be assigned a meaning in the
context of their combination. Thus, the CP is com-
positional (or decompositional), in the sense that the
meaning of the CP can be distributed to its compo-
nents, and yet it is idiomatic, in the sense that the
contribution of each member cannot be determined
out of the context of its combination with the other
one. This is the line of argumentation used by (Nun-
berg et al., 1994) to support a compositional view of
expressions such as spill the beans.

Table 1 below illustrates this point. Each line con-
tains a set of CPs formed with kešidan ‘to pull’,
where the verb can be assigned a meaning compa-
rable to that of a lexical verb in English.

Examples of CPs with Kešidan
divâr – ‘to build a wall’,
jâdde – ‘to build a road’, pol –
‘to build a bridge’

> ‘build’

lule – ‘to set up pipes’, sim –
‘to install cables’, narde – ‘to
set up a fence’

> ‘set up’

sigâr – ‘to smoke a cigarette’,
pip – ‘to smoke a pipe’,
taryâk – ‘to smoke opium’

>‘smoke’

čâqu – ‘to brandish a knife’,
haftir – ‘to brandish a re-
volver’, šamšir – ‘to brandish a
sword’

>‘brandish’

ranj – ‘to suffer’, dard – ‘to
suffer from pain’, bixâbi – ‘to
suffer from insomnia’, setam –
‘to suffer from injustice’

>‘suffer from’

dâd – ‘to scream’, faryâd – ‘to
scream’, arbade – ‘to yell’

>‘emit’

harf – ‘to extort information’,
e’terâf – ‘to extort a confes-
sion’, eqrâr – ‘to extort a con-
fession’

>‘extort’

Table 1: Meanings of kešidan in the context of its CPs

Given that kešidan alone cannot convey any of
these meanings, these combinations can be consid-
ered as ICEs. On the basis of the meaning assigned
to kešidan and the meaning of the CP as a whole,

14



new combinations can be produced and interpreted.
For instance, the newly coined šabake kešidan ‘to
install a network’ can be interpreted given the CP
kâbl kešidan ‘to install cables’ in Table 1.

3.2 Analogical Productivity

CPs such as šâne kešidan ‘to comb’, kise kešidan
‘to rub with an exfoliating glove’, jâru kešidan ‘to
broom’ and bros kešidan ‘to brush’ constitute a
rather coherent paradigm. They all denote an ac-
tion carried out using an instrument in its conven-
tional way. However, it is impossible to assign a
lexical meaning to kešidan. Indeed, kešidan does
not mean ‘to use’, but to use in a specific manner,
which cannot be defined without resorting to the
noun kešidan combines with. Nevertheless, the fact
that these instrumental CPs exist enables speakers to
create CPs such as sešuâr kešidan ‘to do a brushing’
(Lit. ‘hairdryer pull’) on an analogical basis.

In the same way, CPs such as telefon zadan ‘to
phone’ (Lit. ‘phone hit’), telegrâf zadan ‘to send
a telegraph’ (Lit. ‘telegraph hit’), bisim zadan ‘to
walkie-talkie’, ‘to communicate by means of a
walkie-talkie’ (Lit. ‘walkie-talkie hit’) constitute a
rather coherent paradigm. However, it is impossible
to assign a meaning to zadan in these combinations.
Nevertheless recent combinations such as imeyl
zadan ‘to email’ or esemes zadan ‘to text, to sms’
have been created by analogical extension.

4 A Construction-Based Approach

Building on the conclusions presented in the
previous section, Samvelian (2012) proposes a
Construction-based approach of Persian CPs. A
Construction, in the sense of Goldberg (1995) and
Kay and Fillmore (1999), is a conventional associ-
ation between a form and a meaning. Given that
Persian CPs are MWEs, they each correspond to a
Construction. Constructions can be of various lev-
els of abstractness and can be organized hierarchi-
cally, going from the most specific ones (in our case
a given CP, jâru zadan ‘to broom’) to more abstract
ones (e.g. Instrumental CPs).

Samvelian (2012) applies this Contruction-based
perspective to the CPs formed with zadan ‘to hit’

and provides a set of abstract Constructions group-
ing these CPs on the basis of their semantic and syn-
tactic similarities.

Although zadan is not the most frequent verb5 in
the formation of CPs compared to kardan ‘to do’ or
šodan ‘to become’, it is nevertheless a productive
one, in the sense that it regularly forms new CPs:
imeyl zadan ‘to email’, lâyk zadan ‘to like (on Face-
book)’, tredmil zadan ‘to run on a treadmill’, epi-
leydi zadan ‘to use an epilator’. Besides, zadan has
a more consistent semantic content than kardan ‘to
do’ or šodan ‘to become’, which function more or
less like verbalizers with no real semantic contribu-
tion, similarly to conversion or derivation. Zadan,
on the contrary, can convey several lexical mean-
ings, such as ‘hit’, ‘beat’, ‘cut’, ‘put’, ‘apply’... Con-
sequently, CPs formed with zadan provide an inter-
esting case study to highlight the continuum going
from lexical verbs to light verbs (or from free syn-
tactic combinations to idiomatic combinations), as
well as the way new combinations are coined on the
basis of semantic groupings.

Each class is represented by a partially fixed Con-
struction. Here are two examples of Constructions:

(10) Instrumental-zadan Construction

N0
Agent

(be) N1
Patient

N
Instrument

zadan

‘N0 accomplishes the typical action for
which N is used (on N1)’

N zadan: bil – ‘to shovel’, boros – ‘to brush’, jâru –
‘to broom’, mesvâk – ‘to brush one’s teeth’, otu – ‘to
iron’, šâne – ‘to comb’, sohân – ‘to file’, suzan – ‘to
sew’, qeyči – ‘to cut with scissors’...

(11) Forming-zadan Construction

N0
Location/Theme

N
Theme

zadan

‘N is formed on N0’/ ‘N0 is changed into N’

N zadan: javâne – ‘to bud’, juš – ‘to sprout’, ka-
pak – ‘to go moldy’, šabnam – ‘to dew’, šokufe – ‘to
bloom’, tabxâl – ‘to develop coldsore’, tâval – ‘to

5To give a rough approximation, the most frequent verb in
the Bijankhan corpus (see section 5.1) is kardan with 30k oc-
currences, zadan stands in 21st place with 1k occurrences

15



blister’, yax – ‘to freeze’, zang – ‘to rust’, pine – ‘to
become calloused’, nam – ‘to dampen’...

Note that these semantic groupings do not exclu-
sively lie on the semantic relatedness of the nouns
occurring in the CPs, but involve the Construction
as a whole. While semantic relatedness of the nouns
is indeed a good cue for grouping CPs, it does not
always allow to account for the relatedness of other-
wise clearly related CPs. For instance, kapak zadan
‘go moldy’ (Lit. ‘mold hit’), javâne zadan ‘bud’
(Lit. ‘bud hit’), juš zadan ‘sprout’ (Lit. ‘spot hit’),
šabnam zadan ‘dew’ (Lit. ‘dew hit’), zang zadan
‘rust’ (Lit. ‘rust hit’) can be grouped together (see
11 above) on the basis of the fact that they all denote
a change of state generally resulting in the forma-
tion, development or outbreak of an entity (denoted
by the nominal element of the CP) on another en-
tity (denoted by the grammatical subject of the CP).
However mold, bud, spot, dew and rust, ice, damp-
ness and blister do not form a natural class.

Constructions can be structured in networks,
reflecting different relationships such as hy-
ponymy/hyperonymy (subtypes vs supertypes), syn-
onymy, valency alternations.

Semantic Subtypes and Supertypes. Some se-
mantic classes can be grouped together into a more
abstract class. In this case, the Construction that is
associated to them is the subtype of a less specific
Construction. For instance the CPs associated to the
Spreading-zadan Construction, e.g. rang zadan ‘to
paint’ (Lit. ‘paint hit’), can be considered as Lo-
catum (or Figure) CPs. Locatum verbs, e.g. paint,
salt (Clark and Clark, 1979), incorporate a Figure
(i.e. the noun to which the verb is morphologically
related) and have a Ground argument realized as an
NP or a PP: ‘to paint sth’ = ‘to put paint (= Figure)
on sth (= Ground). In the case of Persian Locatum
CPs, the Figure is the nominal element of the CP.

Apart from the Spreading-zadan Construction,
Locatum-zadan Construction has several other sub-
types: Incorporation-zadan Construction, e.g. na-
mak zadan ‘to salt’ (Lit. ‘salt hit’), Putting-zadan
Construction, e.g. dastband zadan ‘to put hand-
cuffs’ (Lit. ‘handcuff hit’) and Wearing-zadan Con-
struction, e.g. eynak zadan ‘to wear glasses’ (Lit.
‘glasses hit’).

Synonymous constructions. The same Construc-
tion can be realized by different verbs, e.g. kardan
‘to do’ and kešidan ‘to pull’ also form Instrumen-
tal predicates, e.g. jâru kardan and jâru kešidan ‘to
broom’. So, along with Instrumental-zadan Con-
struction, there is also an Instrumental-kešidan Con-
struction and an Instrumental-kardan Construction.
These three partially fixed Constructions are sub-
types of a more abstract Construction, with no lexi-
cally fixed element, namely Instrumental Construc-
tion. Synonymy rises when the same noun occurs in
the same Construction realized by different verbs.

Valency alternating Constructions. The same
Construction can display valency alternations. For
instance, in an Instrumental Construction, the Agent
argument can be mapped to the grammatical sub-
ject and the Patient to the grammatical object, in
which case we obtain an “Active” Instrumental Con-
struction, or the Patient can be mapped to the gram-
matical subject, which gives rise to a “Passive” In-
strumental Construction. This valency alternation is
often realized by a verb alternation in the CP: otu
zadan ‘to iron’ vs. otu xordan ‘to be ironed (Lit.
‘iron collide’); âtaš zadan ‘to set fire’ vs. âtaš geref-
tan ‘to take fire’ (Lit. ‘fire take’).

For a detailed description of Constructions and
their hierarchical organization see Samvelian (2012)
and Samvelian and Faghiri (to appear).

5 PersPred’s Database Conception

Building on Samvelian (2012), PersPred 1 invento-
ries the CPs formed with zadan and a nominal ele-
ment. Its first delivery includes around 700 combi-
nations grouped in 52 classes and 9 super classes. 22
fields are annotated for each combination.

5.1 Input Data

As Samvelian (2012) extensively argues, the deci-
sion whether a given Noun-Verb combination in Per-
sian must be considered as a CP (or LVC) or a free
Object-Verb is not straightforward and this opposi-
tion is better conceived of in terms of a continuum
with a great number of verbs functioning as semi-
lexical or semi-light verbs. Consequently, a combi-
nation such as namak zadan ‘to salt’ (Lit. ‘salt hit’)
can be viewed either as a CP or as the combination
of a lexical verb – zadan meaning ‘to put’, ‘to add’

16



or ‘to incorporate’ – and its object. Hence, the ex-
istence of felfel zadan ‘to pepper’, zarčube zadan
‘to add tumeric’ and many others, which constitute
an open class. So, our main concern in the elabora-
tion of PersPred is not to solve this insolvable prob-
lem. We rather intend to provide a sufficiently rich
description of the totally idiomatic combinations as
well as semi-productive and even totally productive
ones, allowing a precise characterization of the lexi-
cal semantics of the simplex verbs in Persian. We
thus aim to ultimately elaborate a comprehensive
verbal lexicon for Persian.

PersPred is built up, and continues to be enriched,
from different types of resources and through com-
plementary methods, in a permanent back-and-forth
movement.

1) A first list was established on the basis of
Samvelian (2012), which proposes a manually ex-
tracted list of CPs from various lexicographic re-
sources, literature, media and the Web, along with
their semantic classification.

2) This initial list was enriched in two ways, auto-
matic extraction from the Bijankhan corpus6 and by
manually adding semantically related combinations.

Automatic extraction. We used the Bijankhan
corpus (Bijankhan, 2004), a freely available corpus
of 2.6m tokens, from journalistic texts, annotated for
POS. We first lemmatized the verbs (228 types, 185k
tokens)7 and then extracted CP candidates accord-
ing to the following pattern : N-V or P-N-V, since,
as also mentioned by Tamsilipoor et al. (2012), the
N-V pattern can be considered to be the prototypical
pattern of the CP construction in Persian. Addition-
ally, in order to include prepositional CPs, e.g. dar
nazar gereftan ‘take into account’ (Lit. in view take)
or be zamin zadan ‘make fall’ (Lit. to ground hit),
we also took into account the noun’s preceding ele-
ment if it was a preposition. In total, we extracted a
set of 150k combinations (37k types) regardless of
the verbal lemma with, as expected, a large number
of hapaxes (25k). For zadan, we have 1056 com-
binations of 386 types with 267 hapaxes. It should

6http://ece.ut.ac.ir/dbrg/bijankhan/
7We took the verbal periphrasis into account in the way that

a complex conjugation of, for example, three tokens such as
xânde xâhad šod ‘will be read’ or two tokens such as zade ast
‘have hit’, are lemmatized and counted as one verb.

be noted that low frequency does not imply the ir-
relevance of the combination since the frequency
is corpus-dependent, for instance well established
CPs such as pelk zadan ‘blink’, neq zadan ‘nag’,
havâr zadan ‘scream’ or neyrang zadan ‘deceive’
have only one occurrence in the corpus. Hence, the
manual validation of all the extracted combination
types is necessary. To do so, we stored all the candi-
dates in a spreadsheet sorted by descending order of
type frequency and manually filtered out irrelevant
sequences.

Manual enrichment. Given the existing classes,
we considered a set of new candidates to expand
each class on the basis of semantic relatedness. We
used a simple heuristic – based on Google search
results for the exact expression formed by the noun
and the verb in its infinitive form – combined with
our native speaker intuition to decide whether a can-
didate should be retained or not. For instance, given
the existence of the class labeled Communicating
with members such as telefon zadan ‘to phone’ or
faks zadan ‘to fax’, we considered combinations
such as imeyl zadan ‘to email’ and esemes zadan ‘to
SMS’, ‘to text’.

Note that for totally productive classes (e.g. In-
coporating class with members such namak zadan
‘salt’ (see above), listing all potential combinations
was useless, since the verb selects the noun it com-
bines with in the same way as a lexical verb selects
its complements, i.e. via restricting its conceptual
class. So, the actual size of a class in PersPred 1
does not necessarily reflect its real extension.

5.2 Encoded Information

PersPred 1 contains 22 different fields which are
conceived to capture different types of lexical, syn-
tactic and semantic information. Tables 2, 3 and 4
below illustrate these fields via the example of the
CP âb zadan ‘wet’. Note that 2 extra fields provide
(at least) one attested example in Persian script and
its phonetic transcription.

Lemma information. 9 fields provide informa-
tion on the lemma of the CP and its combining
parts, including French and English translations of
the Noun, the Verb and the CP.
CP-Lemma indicates the lexical identity of the

CP. Consequently there are as many lemmas asso-

17



Field Example

Verb (V in Persian script)
Noun (N in Persian script)
N-transcription âb
V-transcription zadan
CP-lemma âb-zadan0
N-FR-translation eau
N-EN-translation water
CP-FR-translation mouiller
CP-EN-translation to wet

Table 2: Lemma fields for âb zadan ‘to wet’

ciated to the same combination as meanings. Thus
CP-Lemma allows to distinguish homonymous CPs
on the one hand and to group polysemous and syn-
tactically alternating CPs on the other hand. The
notation used is as follows: The CP-lemma is en-
coded by the concatenation of the nominal and the
verbal element, linked by a hyphen and followed
by a number, beginning from 0. Homonymous CPs
are formed with the same components but refer to
clearly different events or situations. For instance,
suzan zadan (Lit. needle hit) means either to sew
or to give an injection. A different lemma is associ-
ated to each meaning in this case, suzan-zadan0
and suzan-zadan1. We have adopted an approach
favoring grouping of polysemous CPs, by assigning
the same lemma to polysemous CPs. Polysemy is
hence accounted for by creating multiple lexical en-
tries.

Subcategorization and syntactic information. 8
fields represent the syntactic construction of the CP
and its English equivalent through an abstract syn-
tactic template inspired, as mentioned above, by
Gross (1975). Valency alternations and synonymy
are also represented through 3 fields, Intransitive,
Transitive and Synonymous Variants.

The subcatgorization frame is provided by
Synt-Construction combined with PRED-N,
Prep-Form-N1, Prep-Form-N2, where N stands
for a bare noun or a nominal projection (i.e. NP)
and the number following N indicates the oblique-
ness hierarchy among nominal elements: N0 is the
1st argument (subject); N1 the direct object; Prep
N1 the prepositional object and so on.

The nominal element of the CP, indicated by
PRED-N, is also assigned a number. Even though,
this element does not display the typical semantic
properties of an argument, from a syntactic point
of view it can undergo different operations, which
means that it has a syntactic function and must
thus be taken into account in the obliqueness hi-
erarchy. PRED-N specifies which constituent in
Synt-Construction is the nominal element of
the CP (i.e. forms a CP with the verb), and thus
takes as its value either N0, N1, N2 or N3 or Prep
Nx, in case the nominal of the CP is introduced by
a preposition. Prep-Form-N1 and Prep-Form-N2
indicate either the lemma of the preposition which
introduces N1 and N2, in case the preposition is lex-
ically fixed, or its semantic value:

Field Example

Synt-Construction N0 Prep N1 N2 V

PRED-N N2

Prep-N1 be

Prep-N2 NONE

Construction-trans-En N0 wets N2

Intrans-Var xordan

Trans-Var NONE

Syn-Var NONE

Table 3: Syntactic fields for âb zadan ‘to wet’

Alternations in the argument realization (i.e. di-
rect vs prepositional) give rise to several entries.
For instance, the second argument of âb zadan
‘to wet’, can either be realized as an NP or a
PP (i.e. Dative shift alternation). Consequently,
âb zadan has two entries which differ with re-
spect to their Synt-Construction feature value:
N0 Prep N1 N2 V vs N0 N1 N2 V. Note that these
two entries are considered to be two different real-
izations of the same lemma (i.e. they have the same
value for CP-Lemma).
Construction-EN-Trans simultaneously pro-

vides the English translation of the CP and the way
the arguments of the Persian CP (as encoded in
Synt-Construction) are mapped with the gram-
matical functions in the English translation.
Intrans-Variant, Trans-Variant and

Syn-Variant provide information about valency
alternations and synonymy. The value of these

18



features is either a verbal lemma or NONE, if there
is no attested variant. Intrans-Variant provides
the lemma of one or several verbs that can be used
to produce a CP where the Patient (N1 or N2) argu-
ment is assigned the subject function, i.e. becomes
N0. This alternation is somehow comparable to
the passive alternation. Trans-Variant gives the
lemma of the verb(s) used to add an extra argument
(or participant) to the CP. This external participant
generally has a Cause interpretation and is realized
as the subject of the “transitive/Causative” CP. The
first argument of the initial CP is mapped in this
case onto the Object function. Syn-Variant gives
the lemma of the set of verbs forming a synonymous
predicate with the same noun.

Semantic information. 5 fields are dedicated to
semantic information, e.g. the semantic subtype
and supertype and the type of meaning extension
(metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche), if applicable.

Field Example

Sem-Class Spreading

Sem-Super-Class Locatum

Constant-Sem Liquid

Subject-Sem Human

Meaning-Exension NONE

Table 4: Semantic fields for âb zadan ‘to wet’

Sem-Class and Sem-Super-Class give the se-
mantic classification of the CP, i.e. the semantic
class and the semantic superclass which the CP is a
member of (cf. Section 4 for a detailed explanation).
The value of Sem-Class corresponds to the most
specific partially fixed Construction of which the CP
is an instance. The value of Sem-Super-Class
is the less specific Construction of which the CP
is an instance. These feature allow for a hierarchi-
cal organization of CPs in classes and super-classes,
implementing the Construction networks mentioned
in Section 4. CPs which do not pertain to any of
the classes are nevertheless considered as the only
member of the class they represent. All these sin-
gleton classes are assigned the value “isolated” for
Sem-Super-Class.
Subject-Sem and Constant-Sem give the se-

mantic class of the subject and the nominal element

of the CP. Our classification is more fine-grained
than the one adopted in Wordnet, but it can easily
be converted into a Wordnet-type classification.
Meaning-Extension indicates if a CP has un-

dergone semantic drift, mainly metaphor, metonymy
or synecdoche. In the case of a metaphoric exten-
sion, the concerned CP is linked to the CP from
which it is metaphorically driven.

The integration of a given CP into a given class
has been decided on the basis of its most salient
semantic properties or some of its meaning compo-
nents. It should be noted that some meaning compo-
nents cut across the classes identified in PersPred 1
and consequently, the CPs that display these mean-
ing components can be cross-classified in different
classes8. At this stage, only one specific class (i.e.
Construction) is mentioned for each CP. One of the
future developments of PersPred will be to include
multiple class memberships.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we presented PersPred 1, which in-
augurates the elaboration of a large-scale syntac-
tic and semantic database for Persian CPs. Per-
sPred 1 is dedicated to CPs formed with zadan ‘to
hit’. We plan to extend its coverage by integrating
CPs formed with dâdan ‘to give’, gereftan ‘to take’
and xordan ‘to collide’ shortly. Bearing in mind
that integrating new verbs will have an impact on
the semantic classes and their networks, and given
the fact that our main difficulties so far have been
the semantic classification and the time-consuming
task of manual annotation, we are currently elabo-
rating semi-automatic annotating methods in order
to achieve a satisfactory pace in the future develop-
ment of PersPred.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the bilateral project Per-
Gram, funded by the ANR (France) and the DGfS
(Germany) [grant no. MU 2822/3-I] and is related to
the work package LR4.1 of the Labex EFL (funded
by the ANR/CGI). We would like to thank Gwen-
doline Fox and the anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments.

8See (Levin, 1993) for similar remarks on English verb
classes.

19



References

Mohammad Bijankhan. 2004. The role of the corpus
in writing a grammar : An introduction to a software.
Iranian Journal of Linguistics, 10(2).

Olivier Bonami and Pollet Samvelian. 2010. Persian
complex predicates: Lexeme formation by itself. Pa-
per presented at Septièmes Décembrettes Morphology
Conference, Toulouse, December 3.

Eve V. Clark and Herbert H. Clark. 1979. When nouns
surface as verbs. Language, 55(4):767–811.

Afsaneh Fazly, Suzanne Stevenson, and Ryan North.
2007. Automatically learning semantic knowledge
about multiword predicates. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 41:61–89.

Raffaella Folli, Heidi Harley, and Simin Karimi. 2005.
Determinants of event type in Persian complex predi-
cates. Lingua, 115:1365–1401.

Adele E. Goldberg. 1995. A Construction Grammar Ap-
proach to Argument Structure. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.

Adele E. Goldberg. 1996. Words by default: Optimiz-
ing constraints and the Persian complex predicate. In
Annual Proceedings of the Berkeley Linguistic Society
22, pages 132–146. Berkeley.

Adele E. Goldberg. 2003. Words by default: The Per-
sian complex predicate construction. In E. Francis
and L. Michaelis, editors, Mismatch: Form-Function
Incongruity and the Architecture of Grammar, pages
117–146. CSLI Publications, Stanford.

Maurice Gross. 1975. Méthodes en syntaxe : régime des
constructions complétives. Hermann, Paris.

Gholamhossein Karimi-Doostan. 1997. Light Verb Con-
structions in Persian. Ph.D. thesis, University of Es-
sex.

Simin Karimi. 1997. Persian complex verbs: Idiomatic
or compositional. Lexicology, 3:273–318.

Paul Kay and Charles J. Fillmore. 1999. Grammati-
cal constructions and linguistic generalizations: The
What’s X doing Y? construction. Language, 75(1–33).

Parviz Khanlari. 1986. Tarix-e zabân-e farsi (A History
of the Persian Language). Editions Nashr-e Now.

Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tions. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Karine Megerdoomian. 2002. Beyond Words and
Phrases: A Unified Theory of Predicate Composition.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Southern California.

Karine Megerdoomian. 2012. The status of the nominal
in persian complex predicates. Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory, 30(1):179–216.

Geoffrey Nunberg, Ivan A. Sag, and Thomas Wasow.
1994. Idioms. Language, 70:491–538.

Elizabeth Ritter and Sara Rosen. 1996. Strong and weak
predicates: Reducing the lexical burden. Linguistic
Analysis, 26:1–34.

Ali Ashraf Sadeghi. 1993. On denominative verbs in
Persian. In Farsi Language and the Language of Sci-
ence, pages 236–246. University Press, Tehran.

Pollet Samvelian and Pegah Faghiri. to appear. Re-
thinking compositionality in persian complex predi-
cats. In Proceedings of the 39th Berkeley Linguistics
Society. Linguistic Society of America, Berkeley.

Pollet Samvelian. 2012. Grammaire des prédicats com-
plexes. Les constructions nom-verbe. Lavoisier.

Shiva Taslimipoor, Afsaneh Fazly, and Ali Hamzeh.
2012. Using noun similarity to adapt an acceptability
measure for persian light verb constructions. In Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC
2012), Istanbul.

Mohammad-Mehdi Vahedi-Langrudi. 1996. The syntax,
Semantics and Argument Structure of Complex Pred-
icates in Modern Farsi. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Ottawa.

20


