










































Adaptation of a Rule-Based Translator to Rio de la Plata Spanish


Proceedings of the Adaptation of Language Resources and Tools for Closely Related Languages and Language Variants, pages 15–22,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 13 September 2013.

Adaptation of a Rule-Based Translator to Río de la Plata Spanish 

 
 

Ernesto López 
Instituto de Computación 

Universidad de la República 
Uruguay 

ernesto.nicolas.lopez 

@gmail.com 

Luis Chiruzzo 
Instituto de Computación 

Universidad de la República 
Uruguay 

luischir@fing.edu.uy 

Dina Wonsever 
Instituto de Computación 

Universidad de la República 
Uruguay 

wonsever@fing.edu.uy 

  
 

Abstract 

Pronominal and verbal voseo is a well-
established variant in spoken language, and al-
so very common in some written contexts - 
web sites, literary works, screenplays or subti-
tles - in Rio de la Plata Spanish.  An imple-
mentation of Río de la Plata  Spanish (includ-
ing voseo) was made in the open source col-
laborative system Apertium, whose design is 
suited for the development of new translation 
pairs. This work includes: development of a 
translation pair for Río de la Plata Spanish-
English (back and forth), based on the Span-
ish-English pairs previously included in Aper-
tium; creation of a bilingual corpus based on 
subtitles of movies; evaluation on this corpus 
of the developed Apertium variant by compar-
ing it to the original Apertium version and to a 
statistical translator in the state of the art. 

1 Introduction 

In this multilingual world, easily accessible 
through Internet, machine translation is becom-
ing increasingly important. While the problem as 
a whole remains yet to be solved, there are sev-
eral systems which provide an interesting ser-
vice, by automatically producing a translated 
version of a text.  In these days Google (Google, 
2013) provides translation services - at least from 
and into English - for 51 different languages.  
While, in general, translations provided by 
Google are not completely accurate, users will 
have a reasonable comprehension of the content 
of the source text. A language like Spanish, that 
is spoken by about 420 million people (Instituto 
Cervantes, 2012) and is the official language in 
21 countries, covering a vast geographical re-
gion, has different regional variations, some of 
which are firmly well-established.  Appropriate 
coverage and fluid texts, adjusted to the situation 

and the language registry of an utterance, are not 
possible unless machine translation systems con-
template the consolidated and accepted variants 
used. 

Pronominal and verbal voseo is a well-
established variant in spoken language, and also 
very common in some written contexts - web 
sites, literary works, screenplays or subtitles - in 
Rio de la Plata Spanish.1  To include this variant 
in a statistical machine translation system re-
quires the availability of a large corpus for the 
language pair involved.  An implementation of  
Río de la Plata  Spanish (including voseo) was 
made in the open source collaborative system 
Apertium (Forcada et al., 2011), whose design is 
suited for the development of new translation 
pairs. 

 
This work includes: development of a transla-

tion pair Río de la Plata Spanish-English (back 
and forth), based on the Spanish-English pairs 
previously included in Apertium; creation of a 
bilingual corpus based on subtitles of movies; 
evaluation on this corpus of the developed Aper-
tium variant by comparing it to the original 
Apertium version and to a statistical translator in 
the state of the art.  There is also an improvement 
of the translation system, through the addition of 
a repertoire of proper nouns of Uruguayan geo-
graphical regions. 

The following section briefly introduces ma-
chine translation systems and their current per-
formance. Section 3 describes the use of voseo in 
Río de la Plata while sections 4 and 5 describe 
the system development, the creation of the cor-
pus, the evaluation and its results.  Conclusions 
are in section 6. The developed translation pairs 
and the evaluation corpus are both available. 

                                                 
1 This region includes an important part of Argentina and 
almost the entire Uruguayan territory. 

15



 

2 Background 

Machine translation (MT) is a development 
area within Natural Language Processing, which 
relates to the use of automatic tools to translate 
texts from one natural language into another. The 
different approaches used to solve this problem 
are separated into two main groups: Rule-based 
Machine Translation (RBMT) and Statistical 
Machine Translation (SMT). 

2.1 Statistical Machine Translation 

The current state of the art in MT is provided 
by Statistical Machine Translation systems. The 
initial interest into these approaches was drawn 
by the work of Brown et al. (1993), which rec-
ommends developing a translation model be-
tween language pairs and a language model for 
the target language. The system finds the best 
sentence in the target language, maximizing both 
accuracy (translation model) and fluency (lan-
guage model). 

Today the best performances are provided by 
phrase-based systems (PBMT) (Koehn et al., 
2003). These systems consider the alignment of 
complete phrases in their translation model, and 
incorporate a phrase reordering model. 

SMT systems strongly depend on the exist-
ence of a large volume of linguistic resources.  
Particularly, they depend on a target language 
corpus and a parallel corpus in source and target 
languages. This information is not available in an 
important number of language pairs. 

2.2 Rule-Based Machine Translation 

The second group of MT methods are the 
Rule-Based Machine Translation methods.  The-
se methods apply manually crafted rules to trans-
late the source language text into the target lan-
guage. 

Usually, translations produced by these meth-
ods are more mechanic than and not as fluent as 
those produced by SMT. However, users who 
have a fairly good command of both languages 
do not require large parallel corpora to elaborate 
translation rules (Forcada et al., 2011). 

2.3 Hybrid Machine Translation 

In recent years, new approaches have attempt-
ed to combine the best qualities of the two tradi-
tional groups of translation systems (Thurmair, 
2009). Statistical Post-Edition (SPE) edits manu-
ally the output of a RBMT system to produce a 

higher-quality translation.  Then, a corpus is cre-
ated using the RBMT output and the edited trans-
lation, and a SMT is trained with this corpus 
[Simard 2007]. 

By using a parallel corpus, Molchanov (2012) 
extracts a bilingual dictionary and complements 
it with SPE between the RBMT output and the 
parallel corpus destiny. Dugast et al. (2008) 
trains a SMT with the correspondence of the 
source text and the RBMT translation, instead of 
using a parallel corpus or a manually corrected 
output. 

There is a different hybrid approach which us-
es phrases translated by the Apertium system 
(RBMT) to enrich the translation model tables of 
the Moses system (SMT) (Sanchez-Cartagena et 
al., 2011). 

2.4 Apertium 

Apertium is a RBMT system developed by the 
Transducens group from the Universitat 
d’Alacant. Originally, it was a translation system 
for related-language pairs (particularly for lan-
guages spoken in Spain) (Corbi-Bellot et al., 
2005), but later on modules were added to trans-
late more distant language pairs, such as English 
and Spanish (Forcada et al., 2011). 

It is an open-source machine translation plat-
form and it includes a set of tools to develop new 
language pairs. For this reason, an important 
number of collaborators have contributed with 
new linguistic resources and there are currently 
36 pairs (Apertium, 2013) of languages officially 
accepted to be translated by Apertium. 

Apertium has proved to be very useful to de-
velop translation systems between related lan-
guages (Wiechetek et al., 2010) and languages 
with few linguistic resources (Martinez et al., 
2012). In other development areas Apertium has 
been integrated to other finite-state tools such as 
the Helsinki Finite-State Toolkit (Washington et 
al., 2012). 

As mentioned above, besides being used as a 
standalone RBMT system, there have been some 
experiments regarding the use of Apertium joint-
ly with statistical systems (Sanchez-Cartagena  et 
al., 2011). 

3 Río de la Plata Spanish 

There are variants in all languages spoken in 
the world. These are differences in vocabulary, 
verb conjugation, pronunciation, and in some 
cases, even syntactic differences.  

16



Language variants are caused by historical, 
cultural and geographical factors.  There are 
many sociological studies which try to explain 
the reason for these variants. For example, Chil-
ean Spanish, which has a fairly unusual pronun-
ciation, is a combination of the language spoken 
by Mapuche natives and the Quechua language 
from the south.  This Spanish variant is found 
even in Argentinean provinces bordering with 
Chile. It has a lot in common with Rio de la Plata 
Spanish.  Even in Uruguay, with a small popula-
tion – just over 3 million people – there are mul-
tiple variants of Spanish.  In Uruguayan cities 
separated by street borders from Brazil, there is a 
particular combination of Spanish and Portu-
guese. There is another example in southern Bra-
zil, where Portuguese language uses the personal 
pronoun ‘tú’ (you singular). 

The Spanish spoken in Río de la Plata is no 
exception, with many differences with Spanish 
from Spain.  This variant occurs mainly in coast 
cities along Río de la Plata and Río Uruguay, 
upstream to the mouth of Río Negro. But it is 
also found in Uruguayan remote inland, albeit 
with variants, with a stronger Portuguese influ-
ence. Likewise, fusion of Spanish variants is 
seen in northern Argentina provinces and in 
southern Paraguay (Elizaincín, 2009).  

There are various differences between Río de 
la Plata Spanish and the other Spanish variants. 
Some of these differences are only phonetic, 
such as yeísmo 2, and others are related to verb 
conjugation and pronoun uses, such as voseo.  
Voseo - albeit not exclusively from Río de la Pla-
ta - is one of the most distinctive particularities 
of this Spanish variant, and it itself has some var-
iants. In the definition of RAE3 voseo is the use 
of the pronominal vos (You, singular) to address 
the interlocutor (RAE, 2011). There are two sep-
arate types of voseo: 

The reverential voseo, is the ceremonial us-
age of vos pronoun to address the second person, 
both plural and singular, and it is rarely used to-
day. It is found in old Spanish texts, ceremonial 
writings or those which recreate Spanish lan-
guage from the past.    

The subject of this work is the South Ameri-
can dialectal voseo.  It is the Spanish use of the 
plural second-person pronominal and (modified) 

                                                 
2 Yeísmo consists of a phonological variant, where conso-
nants /Ῐ/ and /y/ are merged into a single sound /y/. It is a 
phonological process which merges two phonemes original-
ly different (González, 2011). 
3 Royal Spanish Academy 

verbal forms, to address a single interlocutor.  It 
is common in different variants of Spanish in 
Latin America, and, unlike reverential voseo, it 
implies closeness and informality since it is not 
usually seen - at least in its pronominal form - in 
very formal situations, where ustedeo is com-
monly used (Kapovic, 2007). The conjugation 
pattern in this variant is also different to peninsu-
lar Spanish. 
Pronominal voseo 

Pronominal voseo is the use of vos as singular 
second-person pronoun, instead of tú or ti.  Vos 
is used as:  

• Subject: Puede que vos tengás razón 
(You might be right) 

• Vocative: ¿Por qué la tenés contra Alva-
ro Arzú, vos? (You, what is it that you 
have against Alvaro Arzú?)  

• Preposition term: Cada vez que sale 
con vos, se enferma (Every time he goes 
out with you, he feels unwell) 

• Comparison term: Es por lo menos tan 
actor como vos (He is so good an actor 
as you) 

According to RAE, for pronouns used with 
pronominal verbs and in objects with no preposi-
tion (atonic pronoun), and for possessive pro-
nouns, it is combined with tuteo form, e.g.: Vos 
te lavaste las manos (You washed your hands), 
No cerrés tus ojos (Don’t close your eyes). 
Verbal voseo 

Verbal voseo is more complex than pronomi-
nal voseo. RAE defines “verbal voseo is the use 
of the original verb suffixes of the plural second-
person, more or less modified, in the conjugating 
forms of the singular second-person: tú vivís, vos 
comés, vos comís (you live, you eat, you eat)”. 
Verbs vary differently in their form and tenses in 
each region. Complexity of verbal voseo lies on 
the fact that its use varies considerably in each 
region, some of which do not accept it as correct 
language.  The subject of this work is the Río de 
la Plata variant. In fact, voseo is acknowledged 
as correct language only in Argentina, Uruguay 
and Paraguay (Kapovic, 2007). The Argentine 
Academy of Letters did not accept voseo as cor-
rect language – and only in some of its modali-
ties - until 1982. 

Voseo, as mentioned above, implies closeness 
and informality, and this is strongly related with 
its origin. Originally, it was rejected by purists 
and considered vulgar and demeaning by gram-
marians of the time. The use of vos was firmly 
rejected, particularly by the upper-class society. 

 

17



Present tense verbal voseo 
It may be found in indicative present tense forms 
combined with the plural diphthongs (habláis 
(You talk)); in some cases the s at the end of the 
verb is silent, particularly in Andean regions. In 
Río de la Plata, diphthongs consist of a single 
open vowel (sabés (You know)), although there 
are documents in which the vowel is closed 
(sabís (You know)). For first conjugation verbs, 
where infinitive forms end in -ar, verbs do not 
end in –ís with vos in this present tense form 
(RAE, 2011). 
In present subjunctive structures voseo is seen in 
plural diphthongs as well (habléis (…you to 
talk), in some regions the s at the end of the verb 
is silent.  In Río de la Plata, diphthongs consist of 
a single open vowel (subás (…you to climb)), 
although there are documents in which the vowel 
is closed (hablís (…you to talk)). Here, the –ís 
suffix only appears in first conjugation verbs. 
Verbal voseo in imperative tenses 
Voseo in imperative tenses is the variation of the 
plural second-person with omission of the d at 
the end of the verb. For example: tomá (tomad 
(take)), poné (poned (put)). These forms do not 
follow irregularities of the singular second-
person characteristic of tuteo, therefore, di (tell), 
sal (leave), ven (come), ten (take) become decí, 
salí, vení, tené in verbal voseo. 
These verb forms have accent marks since they 
are words stressed on the last syllable with a 
vowel at the end.  When there is a pronoun at-
tached to the verb, as a suffix, these forms follow 
general accentuation rules. For example: “Com-
penetrate en Beethoven, imaginátelo. Imaginate 
su melena” (RAE, 2011). (“Think about Beetho-
ven, picture him. Picture his long hair” (RAE, 
2011). 
Pronominal and verbal voseo may be combined 
with tuteo. These are the modalities of voseo: 

• Verbal and pronominal use of vos: Very 
frequently used in Río de la Plata. The 
subject, vos, is combined with verbal vo-
seo forms, e.g.: “Vos no podés en-
tregarles los papeles antes de setenta y 
dos horas” (You cannot give him the 
documents for the next three days) 

• Exclusively verbal voseo: The subject of 
the verbal forms in this case is exclusive-
ly tú. It is commonly used in Uruguay, 
particularly in fairly informal situations. 

• Exclusively pronominal voseo: Vos is the 
subject of singular second-person verbs, 
e.g.: “Vos tienes la culpa para hacerte 
tratar mal” (You are the one to blame 

for his abusive behaviour). This is rare in 
Río de la Plata. 

4 Río de la Plata Apertium 

Apertium decomposes the translation process 
into modules, executed in sequence. Figure 1 
describes the pipeline of Apertium modules. It 
may be divided into the following steps: 
• De-formatter: Separates the text in the input 

file from the format information.  
• Morphological analyzer: In this module the 

text is segmented into lexical units. The units 
are supplied with morphological information. 
This step requires finite-state transducers 
(FST) technology. 

 

 
 

Figure 1 - Apertium modules 
 
• POS-Tagger: The part-of-speech tagger 

chooses one of these analyses for the lexical 
unit. 

• Lexical transfer: Establishes correspondence 
of the lexical units in the target language 
with the lexical units from the source text. 

• Structural transfer: There is shallow parsing 
or chunking of text and a set of rules are ap-
plied, established specifically for each lan-
guage pair, to transform the source language 
structure into the structure of the target lan-
guage. Therefore, Apertium is classified as a 
shallow transfer system. (Forcada et al., 2010) 

• Morphological generator: The morphological 
generator inflects target-language lexical 
units to produce the surface forms. 

 

 De-formatter 

 
Morphological 

Analyzer 

Pos-Tagger 

 
Structural 

Transfer 

 
Morphological 

Generator 

 Post-generator 

 Re-formatter 

 

 

 

 

 

 Lexical Transfer 

 

  

 Source 
language text 

 Target 
language text 

18



• Post-generator: Applies target-language or-
thographic rules. 

• Re-formatter: Restores format information 
encapsulated by the de-formatter, to produce 
a translated file format similar to the source 
file format.  

 
Voseo is a discourse phenomenon, occurring ba-
sically at morphological level.  In Apertium, this 
process is carried out by the morphological ana-
lyzer. There is a transducer generated from an 
XML file, including the necessary rules (Forcada 
et al., 2011). The input of the module is a set of 
lexical units which are separately processed, in-
flections are analysed, and based on inflections, 
the attributes of the unit, such as lexical category, 
number or gender (for verbs) are tagged. The 
XML file information consists simply of rules 
which assign a set of attributes to a particular 
morphology. 

In the particular case of verbs and verb tenses, 
verbs with similar morphological inflection – 
even if their lemma is different – belong to the 
same group.   For example, in Spanish the verbs 
cantar (to sing) and abandonar (to abandon) 
have similar morphological inflection.  There-
fore, inflection paradigms are independent from 
lemmas. 

 
 Cantaría Abandonaría 

Lemma Cant Abandon 

Inflection aría aría 

Attributes 
Verb, Cond., 
Indic., Sing., 
First Person 

Verb, Cond., 
Indic., Sing., 
First Person 

 
Table 1 - Verbal paradigms in Apertium 

 
It is clear that there are multiple analyses for 

each lexical unit. The selection of the corre-
sponding analysis occurs in the next module.  A 
new verb may be added by simply identifying its 
lemma and selecting an inflection paradigm.  
Therefore, since verbal voseo modifies verb in-
flections, this variation may be included by simp-
ly adding the new inflections to the paradigms 
already defined for traditional Spanish.  So all 
the verbal paradigms defined in the Apertium 
dictionary were extracted, and the inflections 
studied and their corresponding attributes for 
imperative tenses and indicative present tenses 
were added.  There were 170 inflection para-
digms modified.  

For pronominal voseo, the lexical unit vos was 
added to the dictionary. It was assigned with the 
attribute of tonic pronoun.   

To improve the identification of named enti-
ties, 120 locations of Uruguay were added to the 
Apertium dictionary. They were extracted from 
the Geonames database (Geonames, 2011). 

5 Evaluation and metrics 

It is extremely complex to evaluate a transla-
tion system, mainly because there is usually 
more than one correct translation. Translations 
may vary in the word order, and even use differ-
ent words. Yet translations will have many things 
in common and this is what metrics tries to 
measure to evaluate machine translation systems 
(Papineni et al., 2002). 

A reference translation is always used to eval-
uate the MT system and sentences are the basic 
evaluation units every time. One of the most 
acknowledged metrics is BLEU, which weighs 
adequacy and fluency of sentences. This requires 
considering not only the number of lexical units 
in common between the translation to be evalu-
ated and the reference translation, but also the 
length of common n-grams. BLEU also penalizes 
translation lengths which do not match the refer-
ence translation (Papineni et al., 2002).  

NIST metrics - also used to evaluate transla-
tion systems - was also taken into account in this 
work.  NIST is based on BLEU. The only differ-
ence is that NIST gives a higher score to less 
common n-grams, which actually provide more 
information to the content of the sentence.  

5.1 Evaluation corpus 

The corpus to evaluate the adaptation of Aper-
tium should have the following particularities: It 
should be a bilingual Spanish – English corpus, 
for Río de la Plata Spanish, contemplating that 
voseo is more frequent in dialogues and conver-
sations.  

There are some texts that contain dialogues 
and conversations, which naturally have transla-
tions: movie subtitles. There are many movies 
subtitled in several languages. These subtitles 
may be read as transcriptions of the same text, in 
different languages, so subtitles are bilingual 
texts. Although it fails to be a perfectly aligned 
corpus, a very valuable asset of subtitles is the 
time window where they must be shown on 
screen.  This provides more information, which 
is very useful to align two subtitles from the 
same movie. 

19



It is very simple to find subtitles in the web. 
However, the only subtitles of interest for this 
work were those which included texts in Río de 
la Plata Spanish. IMDb highest-ranked movies 
from Argentina and Uruguay were used based on 
the premise that it is more likely to find the cor-
responding subtitles in both languages. Whenev-
er possible, the original transcription extracted 
from the movies' official version was used. Oth-
erwise, the subtitles used were those created by 
Internet users, based on the same highest-ranked 
premise. A corpus with about 100000 words was 
elaborated by using subtitles from 26 movies 
(Table 2). 

 
Name Year 

The Pope’s Toilet 2007 

Son of the Bride 2001 

Valentín 2002 

Waiting for the Hearse 1985 

Merry Christmas 2000 

Official Story 1985 

Night of the pencils 1986 

The Die is Cast 2005 

Rain 2008 

Nine Queens 2000 

Chinese Take-Away 2011 

Avellaneda’s moon 2004 

A Matter of Principles 2009 

Made Up Memories 2008 

Martin (Hache) 1997 

Camila 1984 

Tierra del Fuego 2000 

Seawards Journey 2003 

Whisky 2004 

25 Watts 2001 

A place in the world 1992 

Burnt Money 2000 

Autumn sun 1996 

Chronicle of an Escape 2006 

Anita 2009 

On Probation 2005 

 
Table 2 - Movies used for the evaluation corpus 
 
Sentences were aligned in all subtitles based 

on (Tyers and Pienaar, 2008; Tiedemann, 2007; 
Gale and Church, 1991; Brown et al., 1991).  
Sentences from subtitle pairs were aligned with 

relative precision, using the start/end time of the 
lines in the screen. In general, the parallelization 
algorithm groups together those sentences that 
appear in the same time frame in the subtitle pair.   
Then sentences are aligned based on their length, 
given similar sentence lengths in both languages.  
Accuracy was about 80% for random samples. 

5.2 Evaluation and results 

NIST and BLEU metrics were used. Adapta-
tions made were compared with Apertium in its 
traditional version and with Google translator. 
Evaluation scripts (NIST, 2011) used were those 
developed in the 2008 edition of the NIST (Na-
tional Institute of Standards and Technology) 
Open Machine Translation Evaluation.   

In Spanish to English translations, all results 
provided by Apertium adapted to Río de la Plata 
Spanish were more correct translations than 
those obtained with Apertium’s traditional ver-
sion. As expected, Google translator provides 
significantly better results. Table 3 shows the 
average results for these metrics, in the Spanish 
into English direction. 

 
 BLEU NIST 
Traditional 
Apertium 

0.118183333 3.414683333 

Río de la Plata 
Apertium 

0.1246 3.553916667 

Google Translator 0.226116667 4.810316667 
 

Table 3 - Spanish into English translation results 
 

The amount of voseo occurrences contained in 
the source text is difficult to establish, yet there 
is a 5.4% increase in the performance of Aperti-
um in relation to the traditional version of the 
system. The modified system identifies the voseo 
verbs and its contractions, as well as all the uses 
of the vos pronoun. 

In terms of recognition, the analysis of the 
morphological analyser output showed 13% and 
14% improvement in the recognition of verbs 
and pronouns, respectively. Recognition im-
provement of named entities was 4.4%, reflect-
ing that 44% more locations were identified. 

While Google Translator provides better re-
sults, this is mainly due to the fact that generally 
translations are structurally and lexically more 
accurate.  Many lexical units are not included in 
Apertium’s dictionaries, which could explain its 
recognition problems, as shown in Table 4. In 
terms of voseo, Google Translator does not han-
dle the vos pronoun properly: Google translator 

20



translates ‘Vos pensás en él’ as ‘*Vos you think 
on it’. 

 
Translation for: Vos te lo merecés 
Apertium * Vos You it * merecés 
R.P. Apertium You deserve it 
 
Table 4 - Translation before and after adaptation 
 

In English to Spanish translations (Table 5), a 
fact to consider is that the Río de la Plata Aperti-
um translator may operate in two modes to pro-
duce Spanish text: in the traditional mode (exclu-
sively use of tú) or in the mode with exclusive 
use of vos. The traditional mode and the system 
without modifications provide identical results.  
Therefore, the work studied the operation of the 
system in the modality with exclusive use of vos. 

 
 BLEU NIST 
Traditional 
Apertium 

0.112733333 3.35635 

Río de la Plata 
Apertium 

0.111433333 3.374283333 

Google Transla-
tor 

0.21005 4.597533333 

 
Table 5 - English into Spanish translation results 

6 Conclusions 

Apertium machine translations were improved 
by generating Río de la Plata Spanish – English 
pairs in the system. This is a free tool, and will 
be useful to translate colloquial language texts, 
such as web sites, blogs, literary works, screen-
plays or subtitles. 

A Río de la Plata Spanish – English bilingual 
corpus was compilated from movie subtitles. 
This corpus was aligned and used for evaluation. 
There was clear improvement in relation to the 
previous version of Apertium. Apertium was 
compared with Google Translator at all times 
and in this context, Google Translator clearly 
surpasses Apertium. However, while Google 
Translator’s performance is always better, there 
were some examples in which it failed to deal 
with the voseo particularity. 

Translation was also improved by the addition 
of geographical entity names from the Geonames 
repository,  filtered by their importance. 

Overall, in translations from Río de la Plata 
Spanish into English, there is clear improvement, 
while not in the opposite direction, since voseo 
and traditional variants co-exist. So a more re-
fined mechanism is required, to capture the 

speech registry in each statement and to select 
the corresponding mode. In future works, com-
municative situations and participants should be 
contemplated, as well as the symmetric and 
asymmetric interpersonal relations involved. 

 

References 

Apertium. 2013. Wiki – Apertium, Main Page. 
http://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/Main_Page (7th July, 
2013) 

Peter F. Brown, Jennifer Lai and Robert Mercer. 
1991. Aligning sentences in parallel corpora. ACL. 

Peter F. Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent J. 
Della Pietra and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The 
Mathematics of Statistical Machine Translation. 
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center. Computational 
Linguistics - Special issue on using large corpora: II 
archive Volume 19 Issue 2, June 1993. Pages 263-
311. MIT Press Cambridge, MA, USA. 

Antonio M. Corbí-Bellot, Mikel L. Forcada, Sergio 
Ortiz-Rojas, Juan Antonio Pérez Ortiz, Gema 
Ramírez-Sánchez, Felipe Sánchez-Martínez, Iñaki 
Alegria, Aingeru Mayor and Kepa Sarasola. 2005. 
An Open-Source Shallow-Transfer Machine 
Translation Engine for the Romance Languages of 
Spain. Proceedings of the European Associtation for 
Machine Translation, 10th Annual Conference 
(Budapest, Hungary, 30-31.05.2005), p. 79-86. 

Loïc Dugast, Jean Senellart and Philipp Koehn. 2008. 
Can we relearn an RBMT system? Proceedings of 
the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine 
Translation, pages 175–178, Columbus, Ohio, USA, 
June 2008. 

Adolfo Elizaincín. 2009. Geolingüística, sustrato y 
contacto lingüístico: español, portugués e italiano 
en uruguay. ROSAE – Congresso em Homenagem a 
Rosa Virgínia Mattos e Silva. 

Mikel L. Forcada, Boyan Ivanov Bonev, Sergio Ortiz 
Rojas, Juan Antonio Perez Ortiz, Gema Ramirez 
Sanchez, Felipe Sanchez Martinez, Carme 
Armentano-Oller, Marco A. Montava and Francis 
M. Tyers. 2010. Documentation of the Open-Source 
Shallow-Transfer Machine Translation Platform 
Apertium. 

Mikel L. Forcada, Mireia Ginestí-Rosell, Jacob 
Nordfalk, Jim O’Regan, Sergio Ortiz-Rojas, Juan 
Antonio Pérez-Ortiz, Felipe Sánchez-Martínez, 
Gema Ramírez-Sánchez and Francis M. Tyers. 
2011. Apertium: a free/open-source platform for 

21



rule-based machine translation. Machine 
Translation: Volume 25, Issue 2 (2011), p. 127-144. 

William A. Gale and Kenneth W. Church. 1991. A 
program for aligning sentences in bilingual 
corpora. ACL ’91 Proceedings of the 29th annual 
meeting on Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 

Geonames Web Site. About Geonames. 
http://www.geonames.org/about.html (23rd 
September, 2011). 

Google Translate. 2013. http://translate.google.com/ 
(23rd July, 2013) 

Rosario González Galicia. 2011. Mi querida elle. 
http://www.babab.com/no09/elle.htm (2nd August, 
2011) 

Instituto Cervantes. 2012. Primer estudio conjunto del 
Instituto Cervantes y el British Council sobre el 
peso internacional del español y del inglés. Instituto 
Cervantes. 21st June, 2012. 
http://www.cervantes.es/sobre_instituto_cervantes/p
rensa/2012/noticias/nota-londres-palabra-por-
palabra.htm 

Marko Kapovic. 2007. Fórmulas de tratamiento en 
dialectos de español, fenómenos de voseo y ustedeo. 
HIERONYMUS I, 2007. 

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och and Daniel Marcu. 
2003. Statistical Phrase-Based Translation. 
HLT/NAACL 2003. 

Juan Pablo Martínez Cortes, Jim O’Regan and Francis 
M. Tyers. 2012. Free/Open Source Shallow-
Transfer Based Machine Translation for Spanish 
and Aragonese. LREC 2012. 

Alexander Molchanov. 2012. PROMT DeepHybrid 
system for WMT12 shared translation task. 
Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Statistical 
Machine Translation, pages 345–348, Montreal, 
Canada, June 7-8, 2012. 

NIST. 2008. Mt08 scoring scripts. 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/mig//tests/mt/2008/scorin
g.html, (23rd September, 2011) 

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and 
Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: A method for automatic 
evaluation of machine translation. 40th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL), Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 311-
318. 

Real Academia Española. 2011. Diccionario 
panhispánico de dudas, 1era edición 2da tirada. 

http://buscon.rae.es/dpdI/SrvltGUIBusDPD?lema=v
oseo, (5th October, 2011) 

Víctor M. Sanchez-Cartagena, Felipe Sánchez-
Martínez and Juan Antonio Perez-Ortiz. 2011. 
Integrating shallow-transfer rules into phrase-based 
statistical machine translation. Proceedings of the 
13th Machine Translation Summit : September 19-
23, 2011, Xiamen, China, pp. 562-569 

Michel Simard, Cyril Goutte and Pierre Isabelle. 
2007. Statistical Phrase-based Post-editing. 
Proceedings of NAACL. 

Jörg Tiedemann. 2007. Improved sentence alignment 
for movie subtitles. In Proceedings of RANLP 2007, 
Borovets, Bulgaria, pages 582–588, 2007. 

Gregor Thurmair. 2009. Comparing different 
architectures of hybrid MachineTranslation 
systems. MT Summit XII: proceedings of the twelfth 
Machine Translation Summit, August 26-30, 2009, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; pp.340-347. 

Francis M. Tyers and Jacques A. Pienaar. 2008. 
Extracting bilingual word pairs from wikipedia. 
Proceedings of the SALTMIL Workshop at 
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference., 
LREC08:19–22. 

Jonathan North Washington, Mirlan Ipasov and 
Francis M. Tyers. 2012. A finite-state 
morphological transducer for Kyrgyz. LREC 2012. 

Linda Wiechetek, Francis M. Tyers and Thomas 
Omma. 2010. Shooting at flies in the dark: Rule-
based lexical selection for a minority language pair. 
Proceeding IceTAL'10 Proceedings of the 7th 
international conference on Advances in natural 
language processing. Pages 418-429. 

22


