



















































PhraseFix: Statistical Post-Editing of TectoMT


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 141–147,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013 c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

PhraseFix: Statistical Post-Editing of TectoMT

Petra Galuščáková, Martin Popel, and Ondřej Bojar
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Malostranské náměstí 25, Prague, Czech Republic

{galuscakova,popel,bojar}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

We present two English-to-Czech systems
that took part in the WMT 2013 shared
task: TECTOMT and PHRASEFIX. The
former is a deep-syntactic transfer-based
system, the latter is a more-or-less stan-
dard statistical post-editing (SPE) applied
on top of TECTOMT. In a brief survey, we
put SPE in context with other system com-
bination techniques and evaluate SPE vs.
another simple system combination tech-
nique: using synthetic parallel data from
TECTOMT to train a statistical MT sys-
tem (SMT). We confirm that PHRASEFIX
(SPE) improves the output of TECTOMT,
and we use this to analyze errors in TEC-
TOMT. However, we also show that ex-
tending data for SMT is more effective.

1 Introduction

This paper describes two submissions to the
WMT 2013 shared task:1 TECTOMT – a deep-
syntactic tree-to-tree system and PHRASEFIX –
statistical post-editing of TECTOMT using Moses
(Koehn et al., 2007). We also report on exper-
iments with another hybrid method where TEC-
TOMT is used to produce additional (so-called
synthetic) parallel training data for Moses. This
method was used in CU-BOJAR and CU-DEPFIX
submissions, see Bojar et al. (2013).

2 Overview of Related Work

The number of approaches to system combination
is enormous. We very briefly survey those that
form the basis of our work reported in this paper.

2.1 Statistical Post-Editing
Statistical post-editing (SPE, see e.g. Simard et al.
(2007), Dugast et al. (2009)) is a popular method

1http://www.statmt.org/wmt13

for improving outputs of a rule-based MT sys-
tem. In principle, SPE could be applied to any
type of first-stage system including a statistical
one (Oflazer and El-Kahlout, 2007; Béchara et al.,
2011), but most benefit could be expected from
post-editing rule-based MT because of the com-
plementary nature of weaknesses and advantages
of rule-based and statistical approaches.

SPE is usually done with an off-the-shelf SMT
system (e.g. Moses) which is trained on output of
the first-stage system aligned with reference trans-
lations of the original source text. The goal of SPE
is to produce translations that are better than both
the first-stage system alone and the second-stage
SMT trained on the original training data.

Most SPE approaches use the reference trans-
lations from the original training parallel corpus
to train the second-stage system. In contrast,
Simard et al. (2007) use human-post-edited first-
stage system outputs instead. Intuitively, the lat-
ter approach achieves better results because the
human-post-edited translations are closer to the
first-stage output than the original reference trans-
lations. Therefore, SPE learns to perform the
changes which are needed the most. However, cre-
ating human-post-edited translations is laborious
and must be done again for each new (version of
the) first-stage system in order to preserve its full
advantage over using the original references.2

Rosa et al. (2013) have applied SPE on
English→Czech SMT outputs. They have used
the approach introduced by Béchara et al. (2011),
but no improvement was achieved. However, their
rule-based post-editing were found helpful.

Our SPE setting (called PHRASEFIX) uses
TECTOMT as the first-stage system and Moses as
the second-stage system. Ideally, TECTOMT pre-

2If more reference translations are available, it would be
beneficial to choose such references for training SPE which
are most similar to the first-stage outputs. However, in our
experiments only one reference is available.

141



serves well-formed syntactic sentence structures,
and the SPE (Moses) fixes low fluency wordings.

2.2 MT Output Combination
An SPE system is trained to improve the output
of a single first-stage system. Sometimes, more
(first-stage) systems are available, and we would
like to combine them. In MT output selection,
for each sentence one system’s translation is se-
lected as the final output. In MT output combi-
nation, the final translation of each sentence is a
combination of phrases from several systems. In
both approaches, the systems are treated as black
boxes, so only their outputs are needed. In the
simplest setting, all systems are supposed to be
equally good/reliable, and the final output is se-
lected by voting, based on the number of shared n-
grams or language model scores. The number and
the identity of the systems to be combined there-
fore do not need to be known in advance. More so-
phisticated methods learn parameters/weights spe-
cific for the individual systems. These methods
are based e.g. on confusion networks (Rosti et al.,
2007; Matusov et al., 2008) and joint optimization
of word alignment, word order and lexical choice
(He and Toutanova, 2009).

2.3 Synthetic Data Combination
Another way to combine several first-stage sys-
tems is to employ a standard SMT toolkit, e.g.
Moses. The core of the idea is to use the n first-
stage systems to prepare synthetic parallel data
and include them in the training data for the SMT.

Corpus Combination (CComb) The easiest
method is to use these n newly created paral-
lel corpora as additional training data, i.e. train
Moses on a concatenation of the original paral-
lel sentences (with human-translated references)
and the new parallel sentences (with machine-
translated pseudo-references).

Phrase Table Combination (PTComb) An-
other method is to extract n phrase tables in
addition to the original phrase table and ex-
ploit the Moses option of multiple phrase tables
(Koehn and Schroeder, 2007). This means that
given the usual five features (forward/backward
phrase/lexical log probability and phrase penalty),
we need to tune 5 · (n+1) features. Because such
MERT (Och, 2003) tuning may be unstable for
higher n, several methods were proposed where
the n+1 phrase tables are merged into a single one

(Eisele et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2009). Another is-
sue of phrase table combination is that the same
output can be achieved with phrases from several
phrase tables, leading to spurious ambiguity and
thus less diversity in n-best lists of a given size
(see Chen et al. (2009) for one possible solution).
CComb does not suffer from the spurious ambi-
guity issue, but it does not allow to tune special
features for the individual first-stage systems.

In our experiments, we use both CComb and
PTComb approaches. In PTComb, we use TEC-
TOMT as the only first-stage system and Moses as
the second-stage system. We use the two phrase
tables separately (the merging is not needed; 5 · 2
is still a reasonable number of features in MERT).
In CComb, we concatenate English↔Czech par-
allel corpus with English↔“synthetic Czech” cor-
pus translated from English using TECTOMT. A
single phrase table is created from the concate-
nated corpus.

3 TECTOMT

TECTOMT is a linguistically-motivated tree-to-
tree deep-syntactic translation system with trans-
fer based on Maximum Entropy context-sensitive
translation models (Mareček et al., 2010) and
Hidden Tree Markov Models (Žabokrtský and
Popel, 2009). It employs some rule-based compo-
nents, but the most important tasks in the analysis-
transfer-synthesis pipeline are based on statistics
and machine learning. There are three main rea-
sons why it is a suitable candidate for SPE and
other hybrid methods.
• TECTOMT has quite different distribution

and characteristics of errors compared to
standard SMT (Bojar et al., 2011).
• TECTOMT is not tuned for BLEU using

MERT (its development is rather driven by hu-
man inspection of the errors although different
setups are regularly evaluated with BLEU as an
additional guidance).
• TECTOMT uses deep-syntactic dependency

language models in the transfer phase, but it
does not use standard n-gram language mod-
els on the surface forms because the current syn-
thesis phase supports only 1-best output.
The version of TECTOMT submitted to WMT

2013 is almost identical to the WMT 2012 version.
Only a few rule-based components (e.g. detection
of surface tense of English verbs) were refined.

142



Corpus Sents
Tokens

Czech English
CzEng 15M 205M 236M
tmt(CzEng) 15M 197M 236M
Czech Web Corpus 37M 627M –
WMT News Crawl 25M 445M –

Table 1: Statistics of used data.

4 Common Experimental Setup

All our systems (including TECTOMT) were
trained on the CzEng (Bojar et al., 2012) par-
allel corpus (development and evaluation sub-
sets were omitted), see Table 1 for statistics.
We translated the English side of CzEng with
TECTOMT to obtain “synthetic Czech”. This
way we obtained a new parallel corpus, denoted
tmt(CzEng), with English↔ synthetic Czech sen-
tences. Analogically, we translated the WMT
2013 test set (newstest2013) with TECTOMT and
obtained tmt(newstest2013). Our baseline SMT
system (Moses) trained on CzEng corpus only was
then also used for WMT 2013 test set transla-
tion, and we obtained smt(newstest2013). For all
MERT tuning, newstest2011 was used.

4.1 Alignment

All our parallel data were aligned with GIZA++
(Och and Ney, 2003) and symmetrized with
the “grow-diag-final-and” heuristics. This ap-
plies also to the synthetic corpora tmt(CzEng),
tmt(newstest2013),3 and smt(newstest2013).

For the SPE experiments, we decided to base
alignment on (genuine and synthetic Czech) lem-
mas, which could be acquired directly from the
TECTOMT output. For the rest of the experiments,
we approximated lemmas with just the first four
lowercase characters of each (English and Czech)
token.

4.2 Language Models

In all our experiments, we used three language
models on truecased forms: News Crawl as pro-
vided by WMT organizers,4 the Czech side of
CzEng and the Articles section of the Czech Web

3Another possibility was to adapt TECTOMT to output
source-to-target word alignment, but GIZA++ was simpler to
use also due to different internal tokenization in TECTOMT
and our Moses pipeline.

4The deep-syntactic LM of TECTOMT was trained only
on this News Crawl data – http://www.statmt.org/
wmt13/translation-task.html (sets 2007–2012).

BLEU 1-TER
TECTOMT 14.71±0.53 35.61±0.60
PHRASEFIX 17.73±0.54 35.63±0.65
Filtering 14.68±0.50 35.47±0.57
Mark Reliable Phr. 17.87±0.55 35.57±0.66
Mark Identities 17.87±0.57 35.85±0.68

Table 2: Comparison of several strategies of SPE.
Best results are in bold.

Corpus (Spoustová and Spousta, 2012).
We used SRILM (Stolcke, 2002) with modified

Kneser-Ney smoothing. We trained 5-grams on
CzEng; on the other two corpora, we trained 7-
grams and pruned them if the (training set) per-
plexity increased by less than 10−14 relative. The
domain of the pruned corpora is similar to the test
set domain, therefore we trained 7-grams on these
corpora. Adding CzEng corpus can then increase
the results only very slightly – training 5-grams on
CzEng is therefore sufficient and more efficient.

Each of the three LMs got its weight as-
signed by MERT. Across the experiments, Czech
Web Corpus usually gained the largest portion of
weights (40±17% of the total weight assigned to
language models), WMT News Crawl was the sec-
ond (32±15%), and CzEng was the least useful
(15±7%), perhaps due to its wide domain mixture.

5 SPE Experiments

We trained a base SPE system as described in Sec-
tion 2.1 and dubbed it PHRASEFIX.

First two rows of Table 2 show that the first-
stage TECTOMT system (serving here as the base-
line) was significantly improved in terms of BLEU
(Papineni et al., 2002) by PHRASEFIX (p < 0.001
according to the paired bootstrap test (Koehn,
2004)), but the difference in TER (Snover et
al., 2006) is not significant.5 The preliminary
results of WMT 2013 manual evaluation show
only a minor improvement: TECTOMT=0.476
vs. PHRASEFIX=0.484 (higher means better, for
details on the ranking see Callison-Burch et al.
(2012)).

5The BLEU and TER results reported here slightly differ
from the results shown at http://matrix.statmt.
org/matrix/systems_list/1720 because of differ-
ent tokenization and normalization. It seems that statmt.org
disables the --international-tokenization
switch, so e.g. the correct Czech quotes („word“) are not
tokenized, hence the neighboring tokens are never counted
as matching the reference (which is tokenized as " word ").

143



Despite of the improvement, PHRASEFIX’s
phrase table (synthetic Czech ↔ genuine Czech)
still contains many wrong phrase pairs that worsen
the TECTOMT output instead of improving it.
They naturally arise in cases where the genuine
Czech is a too loose translation (or when the
English-Czech sentence pair is simply misaligned
in CzEng), and the word alignment between gen-
uine and synthetic Czech struggles.

Apart from removing such garbage phrase pairs,
it would also be beneficial to have some control
over the SPE. For instance, we would like to gen-
erally prefer the original output of TECTOMT ex-
cept for clear errors, so only reliable phrase pairs
should be used. We examine several strategies:

Phrase table filtering. We filter out all phrase
pairs with forward probability ≤ 0.7 and all sin-
gleton phrase pairs. These thresholds were set
based on our early experiments. Similar filtering
was used by Dugast et al. (2009).

Marking of reliable phrases. This strategy is
similar to the previous one, but the low-frequency
phrase pairs are not filtered-out. Instead, a special
feature marking these pairs is added. The subse-
quent MERT of the SPE system selects the best
weight for this indicator feature. The frequency
and probability thresholds for marking a phrase
pair are the same as in the previous case.

Marking of identities A special feature indicat-
ing the equality of the source and target phrase in
a phrase pair is added. In general, if the output
of TECTOMT matched the reference, then such
output was probably good and does not need any
post-editing. These phrase pairs should be perhaps
slightly preferred by the SPE.

As apparent from Table 2, marking either reli-
able phrases or identities is useful in our SPE set-
ting in terms of BLEU score. In terms of TER
measure, marking the identities slightly improves
PHRASEFIX. However, none of the improvements
is statistically significant.

6 Data Combination Experiments

We now describe experiments with phrase table
and corpus combination. In the training step, the
source-language monolingual corpus that serves
as the basis of the synthetic parallel data can
be:

• the source side of the original parallel training
corpus (resulting in tmt(CzEng)),
• a huge source-language monolingual corpus for

which no human translations are available (we
have not finished this experiment yet),
• the source side of the test set (resulting in

tmt(newstest2013) if translated by TECTOMT
or smt(newstest2013) if translated by baseline
configuration of Moses trained on CzEng), or
• a combination of the above.

There is a trade-off in the choice: the source
side of the test set is obviously most useful for
the given input, but it restricts the applicability (all
systems must be installed or available online in the
testing time) and speed (we must wait for the slow-
est system and the combination).

So far, in PTComb we tried adding the full
synthetic CzEng (“CzEng + tmt(CzEng)”), adding
the test set (“CzEng + tmt(newstest2013)” and
“CzEng + smt(newstest2013)”), and adding both
(“CzEng + tmt(CzEng) + tmt(newstest2013)”). In
CComb, we concatenated CzEng and full syn-
thetic CzEng (“CzEng + tmt(CzEng)”).

There are two flavors of PTComb: either the
two phrase tables are used both at once as alter-
native decoding paths (“Alternative”), where each
source span is equipped with translation options
from any of the tables, or the synthetic Czech
phrase table is used only as a back-off method if a
source phrase is not available in the primary table
(“Back-off”). The back-off model was applied to
source phrases of up to 5 tokens.

Table 3 summarizes our results with phrase ta-
ble and corpus combination. We see that adding
synthetic data unrelated to the test set does bring
only a small benefit in terms of BLEU in the case
of CComb, and we see a small improvement in
TER in two cases. Adding the (synthetic) transla-
tion of the test set helps. However, adding trans-
lated source side of the test set is helpful only if
it is translated by the TECTOMT system. If our
baseline system is used for this translation, the re-
sults even slightly drop.

Somewhat related experiments for pivot lan-
guages by Galuščáková and Bojar (2012) showed
a significant gain when the outputs of a rule-based
system were added to the training data of Moses.
In their case however, the genuine parallel corpus
was much smaller than the synthetic data. The
benefit of unrelated synthetic data seems to van-
ish with larger parallel data available.

144



Training Data for Moses Decoding Type BLEU 1-TER
baseline: CzEng — 18.52±0.57 36.41±0.66
tmt(CzEng) — 15.96±0.53 33.67±0.63
CzEng + tmt(CzEng) CComb 18.57±0.57 36.47±0.64
CzEng + tmt(CzEng) PTComb Alternative 18.42±0.58 36.47±0.65
CzEng + tmt(CzEng) PTComb Back-off 18.38±0.57 36.25±0.65
CzEng + tmt(newstest2013) PTComb Alternative 18.68±0.57 37.00±0.65
CzEng + smt(newstest2013) PTComb Alternative 18.46±0.54 36.59±0.65
CzEng + tmt(CzEng) + tmt(newstest2013) PTComb Alternative 18.85±0.58 37.03±0.66

Table 3: Comparison of several strategies used for Synthetic Data Combination (PTComb – phrase table
combination and CComb – corpus combination).

BLEU Judged better
SPE 17.73±0.54 123
PTComb 18.68±0.57 152

Table 4: Automatic (BLEU) and manual (number
of sentences judged better than the other system)
evaluation of SPE vs. PTComb.

7 Discussion

7.1 Comparison of SPE and PTComb

Assuming that our first-stage system, TECTOMT,
guarantees the grammaticality of the output (sadly
often not quite true), we see SPE and PTComb
as two complementary methods that bring in the
goods of SMT but risk breaking the grammati-
cality. Intuitively, SPE feels less risky, because
one would hope that the post-edits affect short se-
quences of words and not e.g. the clause structure.
With PTComb, one relies purely on the phrase-
based model and its well-known limitations with
respect to grammatical constraints.

Table 4 compares the two approaches empir-
ically. For SPE, we use the default PHRASE-
FIX; for PTComb, we use the option “CzEng +
tmt(newstest2013)”. The BLEU scores are re-
peated.

We ran a small manual evaluation where three
annotators judged which of the two outputs was
better. The identity of the systems was hidden,
but the annotators had access to both the source
and the reference translation. Overall, we col-
lected 333 judgments over 120 source sentences.
Of the 333 judgments, 17 marked the two systems
as equally correct, and 44 marked the systems as
incomparably wrong. Across the remaining 275
non-tying comparisons, PTComb won – 152 vs.
123.

We attribute the better performance of PTComb
to the fact that, unlike SPE, it has direct access to
the source text. Also, the risk of flawed sentence
structure in PTComb is probably not too bad, but
this can very much depend on the language pair.
English→Czech translation does not need much
reordering in general.

Based on the analysis of the better marked re-
sults of the PTComb system, the biggest problem
is the wrong selection of the word and word form,
especially for verbs. PTComb also outperforms
SPE in processing of frequent phrases and sub-
ordinate clauses. This problem could be solved
by enhancing fluency in SPE or by incorporat-
ing more training data. Another possibility would
be to modify TECTOMT system to produce more
than one-best translation as the correct word or
word form may be preserved in sequel transla-
tions.

7.2 Error Analysis of TECTOMT
While SPE seems to perform worse, it has a
unique advantage: it can be used as a feedback
for improving the first stage system. We can either
inspect the filtered SPE phrase table or differences
in translated sentences.

After submitting our WMT 2013 systems, this
comparison allowed us to spot a systematic error
in TECTOMT tagging of latin-origin words:

source pancreas
TECTOMT slinivek [plural]
PHRASEFIX slinivky [singular] břišní

The part-of-speech tagger used in TECTOMT in-
correctly detects pancreas as plural, and the wrong
morphological number is used in the synthesis.
PHRASEFIX correctly learns that the plural form
slinivek should be changed to singular slinivky,
which has also a higher language model score.
Moreover, PHRASEFIX also learns that the trans-

145



lation of pancreas should be two words (břišní
means abdominal). TECTOMT currently uses a
simplifying assumption of 1-to-1 correspondence
between content words, so it is not able to produce
the correct translation in this case.

Another example shows where PHRASEFIX
recovered from a lexical gap in TECTOMT:

source people who are strong-willed
TECTOMT lidé , kteří jsou silná willed
PHRASEFIX lidí , kteří mají silnou vůli

TECTOMT’s primary translation model considers
strong-willed an OOV word, so a back-off dictio-
nary specialized for hyphen compounds is used.
However, this dictionary is not able to translate
willed. PHRASEFIX corrects this and also the
verb jsou = are (the correct Czech translation is
mají silnou vůli = have a strong will).
Finally, PHRASEFIX can also break things:

source You won’t be happy here
TECTOMT Nebudete št’astní tady
PHRASEFIX Vy tady št’astní [you here happy]

Here, PHRASEFIX damaged the translation by
omitting the negative verb nebudete = you won’t.

8 Conclusion

Statistical post-editing (SPE) and phrase table
combination (PTComb) can be seen as two com-
plementary approaches to exploiting the mutual
benefits of our deep-transfer system TECTOMT
and SMT.

We have shown that SPE improves the results of
TECTOMT. Several variations of SPE have been
examined, and we have further improved SPE re-
sults by marking identical and reliable phrases us-
ing a special feature. However, SMT still out-
performs SPE according to BLEU and TER mea-
sures. Finally, employing PTComb, we have im-
proved the baseline SMT system by utilizing ad-
ditional data translated by the TECTOMT system.
A small manual evaluation suggests that PTComb
is on average better than SPE, though in about one
third of sentences SPE was judged better. In our
future experiments, we plan to improve SPE by
applying techniques suited for monolingual align-
ment, e.g. feature-based aligner considering word
similarity (Rosa et al., 2012) or extending the par-
allel data with vocabulary identities to promote
alignment of the same word form (Dugast et al.,
2009). Marking and filtering methods for SPE also
deserve a deeper study. As for PTComb, we plan
to combine several sources of synthetic data (in-

cluding a huge source-language monolingual cor-
pus).

Acknowledgements

This research is supported by the grants
GAUK 9209/2013, FP7-ICT-2011-7-288487
(MosesCore) of the European Union and SVV
project number 267 314. We thank the two
anonymous reviewers for their comments.

References
Hanna Béchara, Yanjun Ma, and Josef van Genabith.

2011. Statistical post-editing for a statistical MT
system. MT Summit XIII, pages 308–315.

Ondřej Bojar, Miloš Ercegovčević, Martin Popel, and
Omar Zaidan. 2011. A Grain of Salt for the WMT
Manual Evaluation. In Proc. of WMT, pages 1–11,
Edinburgh, Scotland. ACL.

Ondřej Bojar, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Ondřej Dušek, Pe-
tra Galuščáková, Martin Majliš, David Mareček, Jiří
Maršík, Michal Novák, Martin Popel, and Aleš Tam-
chyna. 2012. The Joy of Parallelism with CzEng
1.0. In Proc. of LREC, pages 3921–3928, Istanbul,
Turkey. ELRA.

Ondřej Bojar, Rudolf Rosa, and Aleš Tamchyna. 2013.
Chimera – Three Heads for English-to-Czech Trans-
lation. In Proc. of WMT.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
Matt Post, Radu Soricut, and Lucia Specia. 2012.
Findings of the 2012 Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. In Proc. of WMT, Montreal,
Canada. ACL.

Yu Chen, Michael Jellinghaus, Andreas Eisele,
Yi Zhang, Sabine Hunsicker, Silke Theison, Chris-
tian Federmann, and Hans Uszkoreit. 2009. Com-
bining Multi-Engine Translations with Moses. In
Proc. of WMT, pages 42–46, Athens, Greece. ACL.

Loïc Dugast, Jean Senellart, and Philipp Koehn.
2009. Statistical Post Editing and Dictionary Ex-
traction: Systran/Edinburgh Submissions for ACL-
WMT2009. In Proc. of WMT, pages 110–114,
Athens, Greece. ACL.

Andreas Eisele, Christian Federmann, Hervé Saint-
Amand, Michael Jellinghaus, Teresa Herrmann, and
Yu Chen. 2008. Using Moses to Integrate Multi-
ple Rule-Based Machine Translation Engines into a
Hybrid System. In Proc. of WMT, pages 179–182,
Columbus, Ohio. ACL.

Petra Galuščáková and Ondřej Bojar. 2012. Improving
SMT by Using Parallel Data of a Closely Related
Language. In Proc. of HLT, pages 58–65, Amster-
dam, Netherlands. IOS Press.

146



Xiaodong He and Kristina Toutanova. 2009. Joint Op-
timization for Machine Translation System Combi-
nation. In Proc. of EMNLP, pages 1202–1211, Sin-
gapore. ACL.

Philipp Koehn and Josh Schroeder. 2007. Experiments
in Domain Adaptation for Statistical Machine Trans-
lation. In Proc. of WMT, pages 224–227, Prague,
Czech Republic. ACL.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation.
In Proc. of ACL, pages 177–180, Prague, Czech Re-
public. ACL.

Philipp Koehn. 2004. Statistical Significance Tests
for Machine Translation Evaluation. In Proc. of
EMNLP, Barcelona, Spain.

David Mareček, Martin Popel, and Zdeněk Žabokrt-
ský. 2010. Maximum entropy translation model
in dependency-based MT framework. In Proc. of
MATR, pages 201–206. ACL.

Evgeny Matusov, Gregor Leusch, Rafael E. Banchs,
Nicola Bertoldi, Daniel Dechelotte, Marcello Fed-
erico, Muntsin Kolss, Young-Suk Lee, Jose B.
Marino, Matthias Paulik, Salim Roukos, Holger
Schwenk, and Hermann Ney. 2008. System Combi-
nation for Machine Translation of Spoken and Writ-
ten Language. IEEE, 16(7):1222–1237.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Comput. Linguist., 29(1):19–51.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum Error Rate Training
in Statistical Machine Translation. In Proc. of ACL,
Sapporo, Japan.

Kemal Oflazer and Ilknur Durgar El-Kahlout. 2007.
Exploring different representational units in
English-to-Turkish statistical machine translation.
In Proc. of WMT, pages 25–32. ACL.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proc. of ACL,
pages 311–318, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. ACL.

Rudolf Rosa, Ondřej Dušek, David Mareček, and Mar-
tin Popel. 2012. Using Parallel Features in Parsing
of Machine-Translated Sentences for Correction of
Grammatical Errors. In Proc. of SSST, pages 39–48,
Jeju, Republic of Korea. ACL.

Rudolf Rosa, David Mareček, and Aleš Tamchyna.
2013. Deepfix: Statistical Post-editing of Statistical
Machine Translation Using Deep Syntactic Analy-
sis. Sofia, Bulgaria. ACL.

Antti-Veikko Rosti, Necip Fazil Ayan, Bing Xiang,
Spyros Matsoukas, Richard Schwartz, and Bonnie
Dorr. 2007. Combining Outputs from Multiple
Machine Translation Systems. In Proc. of NAACL,
pages 228–235, Rochester, New York. ACL.

Michel Simard, Cyril Goutte, and Pierre Isabelle.
2007. Statistical Phrase-Based Post-Editing. In
Proc. of NAACL, pages 508–515, Rochester, New
York. ACL.

Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, Lin-
nea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A study of
translation edit rate with targeted human annotation.
In Proc. of Association for Machine Translation in
the Americas, pages 223–231.

Johanka Spoustová and Miroslav Spousta. 2012. A
High-Quality Web Corpus of Czech. In Proc. of
LREC, Istanbul, Turkey. ELRA.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM – an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proc. of ICSLP, pages
257–286.

Zdeněk Žabokrtský and Martin Popel. 2009. Hidden
Markov Tree Model in Dependency-based Machine
Translation. In Proc. of IJCNLP, pages 145–148,
Suntec, Singapore.

147


