










































Overview of the First Content Selection Challenge from Open Semantic Web Data


Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 98–102,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Overview of the First Content Selection Challenge from Open Semantic
Web Data

Nadjet Bouayad-Agha1
Gerard Casamayor1

Leo Wanner1,2
1DTIC, University Pompeu Fabra

2Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats
Barcelona, Spain

firstname.lastname@upf.edu

Chris Mellish
Computing Science

University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen AB24 3UE, UK

c.mellish@abdn.ac.uk

Abstract

In this overview paper we present the out-
come of the first content selection chal-
lenge from open semantic web data, fo-
cusing mainly on the preparatory stages
for defining the task and annotating the
data. The task to perform was described
in the challenge’s call as follows: given a
set of RDF triples containing facts about
a celebrity, select those triples that are re-
flected in the target text (i.e., a short bi-
ography about that celebrity). From the
initial nine expressions of interest, finally
two participants submitted their systems
for evaluation.

1 Introduction

In (Bouayad-Agha et al., 2012), we presented the
NLG challenge of content selection from seman-
tic web data. The task to perform was described
as follows: given a set of RDF triples contain-
ing facts about a celebrity, select those triples that
are reflected in the target text (i.e., a short biogra-
phy about that celebrity). The task first required
a data preparation stage that involved the follow-
ing two subtasks: 1) data gathering and prepara-
tion, that is, deciding which data and texts to use,
then downloading and pairing them, and 2) work-
ing dataset selection and annotation, that is, defin-
ing the criteria/guidelines for determining when a
triple is marked as selected in the target text, and
producing a corpus of triples annotated for selec-
tion.

There were initially nine interested participants
(including the two organizing parties). Five of
which participated in the (voluntary) triple anno-
tation rounds.1 In the end, only two participants
submitted their systems:

1We would like to thank Angelos Georgaras and Stasinos
Konstantopoulos from NCSR (Greece) for their participation
in the annotation rounds.

UA: Roman Kutlak, Chris Mellish and Kees van
Deemter. Department of Computing Science
, University of Aberdeen, Scotland (UK).

UIC: Hareen Venigalla and Barbara Di iEugenio.
Department of Computer Science, University
of Illinois at Chicago (USA).

Before the presentation of the baseline evalua-
tion of the submitted systems and the discussion
of the results (Section 4), we outline the two data
preparation subtasks (Sections 2 and 3). In Sec-
tion 5, we then sketch some conclusions with re-
gard to the achievements and future of the con-
tent selection task challenge. More details about
the data, annotation and resources described in this
overview, as well as links for downloading the data
and other materials (e.g., evaluation results, code,
etc.) are available on the challenge’s website.2

2 Data gathering and preparation

We chose Freebase as our triple datastore.3,4 We
obtained the triple set for each person in the Turtle
format (ttl) by grepping the official Freebase RDF
dump released on the 30th of December 2012 for
all triples whose subject is the person’s URI; cer-
tain meta-data and irrelevant triples (i.e., triples
with specific namespaces such as “base” or “com-
mon”) have been filtered out.

Each triple set is paired with the person’s sum-
mary biography typically available in Wikipedia,
which consists of the first paragraph(s) preceding
the page’s table of contents5

Our final corpus consists of 60000+ pairs, all of
which follow two restrictions that are supposed to

2http://www.taln.upf.edu/cschallenge2013/
3http://www.freebase.com
4For a comparison between Freebase and DBPedia, see

http://wiki.freebase.com/wiki/DBPedia.
5For example, the first four paragraphs in the follow-

ing page constitute the summary biography of that person:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George Clooney.

98



maximize the chances of having interesting pairs
with sufficient original and selected input triples
for the challenge. Firstly, the number of unique
predicates in the input ttl must be greater than
10. The number 10 is estimated based on the
fact that a person’s nationality, date and place of
birth, profession, type and gender are almost al-
ways available and selected, such that we need a
somewhat large set to select content from in or-
der to make the task minimally challenging. Sec-
ondly, the Wikipedia-extracted summary biogra-
phy must contain more than 5 anchors and at least
20% of the available anchors, where an anchor is
a URI in the text (i.e., external href attribute value
in the html) pointing to another Wikipedia article
which is directly related to that person. Given that
most Freebase topics have a corresponding DBPe-
dia entity with a Wikipedia article, anchors found
in the introductory text are an indicator of potential
relevant facts available in Freebase and are com-
municated in the text. In other words, the anchor
threshold restriction is useful to discard pairs with
very few triples to annotate. We found this crite-
rion more reliable than the absolute length of the
text which is not necessarily proportional with the
number of triples available for that person.

3 Working Dataset selection and
annotation

The manual annotation task consisted in emulat-
ing the content selection task of a Natural Lan-
guage Generation system, by marking in the triple
dataset associated with a person the triples predi-
cated in the summary biography of that person ac-
cording to a set of guidelines. We performed two
rounds of annotations. In the first round, partic-
ipants were asked to select content for the same
three celebrities. The objectives of this annota-
tion, in which five individuals belonging to four
distinct institutions participated, were 1) for par-
ticipants to get acquainted with the content selec-
tion task envisaged, the domain and guidelines,
2) to validate the guidelines, and 3) to formally
evaluate the complexity of the task by calculat-
ing inter-annotator agreement. For the latter we
used free-marginal multi-rater Kappa, as it seemed
suited for the annotation task (i.e. independent rat-
ings, discrete categories, multiple raters, annota-
tors are not restricted in how they distribute cat-
egories across cases) (Justus, 2005). We obtained
an average Kappa of 0.92 across the three pairs for

the 5 annotators and 2 categories (selected, not se-
lected), which indicates a high level of agreement
and therefore validates our annotation guidelines.

Our objective for the second round of annota-
tions was to obtain a dataset for participants to
work with. In the end, we gathered 344 pairs from
5 individuals of 5 distinct institutions. It should be
noted that although both rounds of annotations fol-
low the anchor restriction presented in Section 2,
the idea to set a minimum number of predicates
for the larger corpus of 60000+ pairs came forth
after analysing the results of the second round and
noting the data sparsity in some pairs. In what fol-
lows, we detail how the triples were presented to
human annotators and what were the annotation
criteria set forth in the guidelines.

3.1 Data presentation

A machine-readable triple consists of a subject
which is a Freebase machine id (mid), a predicate
and an object which can either be a Freebase mid
or a literal, as shown in the following two triples:

ns:m.0dvld
ns:people.person.spouse_s

ns:m.02kknf3 .

ns:m.0dvld
ns:people.person.date_of_birth

"1975-10-05"ˆˆxsd:datetime .

Triples were transformed into a human-readable
form. In particular, each mid in object position
(e.g., 02kknf3) was automatically mapped onto
an abbreviated description of the Freebase topic
it refers to. Thus, the triples above have been
mapped onto a tabular form consisting of (1) pred-
icate, (2) object description, (3) object id, and (4)
object types (for literals):

(1) /people/person/spouse_s
(2) "1998-11-22 - Jim Threapleton -

2001-12-13 - Marriage -
Freebase Data Team - Marriage"

(3) /m/02kknf3

(1) /people/person/date_of_birth
(2) value
(3) "1975-10-05"
(4) "datetime"

For each triple thus presented, annotators were
asked to mark 1) whether it was selected, 2) in
which sentence(s) of the text did it appear, and
3) which triples, if any, are its coreferents. Two
triples are coreferent if their overlap in meaning is
such that either of them can be selected to repre-
sent the content communicated by the same text

99



fragment and as such should not count as two sep-
arate triples in the evaluation. Thus, the same text
might say He is probably best known for his stint
with heavy metal band Godsmack and He has also
toured and recorded with a number of other bands
including Detroit based metal band Halloween
’The Heavy Metal Horror Show’ . . . , thus refer-
ring in two different sentences to near-equivalent
triples /music/artist/genre ‘‘Heavy
metal" and /music/artist/genre
‘‘Hard rock".

3.2 Annotation criteria

Annotators were asked to first read the text care-
fully, trying to identify propositional units (i.e.,
potential triples) and then to associate each iden-
tified propositional unit with zero, one or more
(coreferent) triples according to the following
rules:

Rule 1. One cannot annotate facts that are not
predicated and cannot be inferred from predicates
in the text. In other words, all facts must be
grounded in the text. For example, in the sentence
He starred in Annie Hall, the following is pred-
icated: W.H.has profession actor and
W.H. acted in film Annie Hall. The
former fact can be inferred from the latter. How-
ever, the following is not predicated: (1) Person
has name W.H., (2) W.H. is Male, and (3)
W.H. is Person.

Rule 2. In general, one can annotate more
generic facts if they can be inferred from more
specific propositions in the text, but one cannot
annotate specific facts just because a more gen-
eral proposition is found in the text. In the exam-
ple He was a navigator, we can mark the triples
Person has profession Sailor as well
as Person has profession Navigator
(we would also mark them as coreferent). How-
ever, given the sentence He was a sailor, we can-
not mark the triple Person has profession
Navigator, unless we can infer it from the text
or world knowledge.

Rule 3. One can annotate specific facts from a
text where the predicate is too vague or general if
the facts can be inferred from the textual context,
from the available data, or using world knowledge.
This rule subsumes four sub-cases:

Rule 3.1. The predicate in the proposition is too
vague or general and can be associated with mul-
tiple, more specific triples. In this case, do not

select any triple. In the example Film A was a
great commercial success, we have several triples
associating the celebrity with Film A, as direc-
tor, actor, writer, producer and composer and none
of them with a predicate resembling “commercial
success”. In this case there are no triples that can
be associated with the text.

Rule 3.2. The predicate in the proposition is
too vague or general, but according to the data
there is just one specific triple it can be associated
with. In this case, select that triple. In the ex-
ample Paris released Confessions of an Heiress,
the term released could be associated with au-
thored, wrote or published. However, there is only
one triple associating that subject with that object,
which matches one of the interpretations (i.e., au-
thoring) of the predicate. Therefore that triple can
be selected.

Rule 3.3. The predicate in the proposition is
too vague or general, but one or more specific
triples can be inferred using world knowl-
edge. In this case, select all. The sentence
He is also a jazz clarinetist who performs
regularly at small venues in Manhattan, can
be associated with the available triples W.H.
profession Clarinetist and W.H.
music/group member/instruments played

Clarinet, even though for this latter triple
the person being in a group is not mentioned
explicitly. However, this can be inferred from
basic world knowledge.

Rule 3.4. The predicate in the proposition is
too vague or general, but one or more specific
triples can be inferred using the textual context.
In this case, select all. In the example By the
mid-1960s Allen was writing and directing films
. . . Allen often stars in his own films . . . Some of
the best-known of his over 40 films are Annie Hall
(1977) . . . , the relations of the person with the
film Annie Hall are that of writer, director and
actor, as supported by the previous text. There-
fore we would annotate facts stating that the per-
son wrote, directed and starred in Annie Hall.
However, we wouldn’t annotate composer or pro-
ducer triples if they existed.

Rule 4. A proposition can be associated
with multiple facts with identical or over-
lapping meanings. In the example, Woody
Allen is a musician, we have the triples
W.H occupation musician and W.H
profession musician, which have near

100



identical meanings. Therefore, we mark both
triples and indicate that they co-refer. The
sentence Woody Allen won prize as best director
for film Manhattan, on the other hand, can be
associated with non-coreferring triples W.H won
prize and W.H. directed Manhattan.

Rule 5. If the text makes reference to a set of
facts but it does not enumerate them explicitly, and
there is no reason to believe it makes reference to
any of them in particular, then do not annotate in-
dividual facts. Thus, sentence Clint Eastwood has
seven children does not warrant marking each of
the seven children triples as selected, given that
they are not enumerated explicitly.

Rule 6. If the text makes a clear and unam-
biguous reference to a fact, do not annotate any
other facts, even though they can be inferred from
it. In other words, as explained in Rule 1, all an-
notated triples must be grounded in the text. In
the sentence For his work in the films Unforgiven
(1992) and Million Dollar Baby (2004), Eastwood
won Academy Awards for Best Director and Pro-
ducer of the Best Picture, we can infer from world
knowledge that the celebrity was nominated prior
to winning the award in those categories. How-
ever, the text makes a clear reference only to the
fact that he won the award and there is no reason
to believe that it is also predicating the fact that the
celebrity was nominated.

4 Baseline evaluation

Briefly speaking, the UA system uses a general
heuristic based on the cognitive notion of com-
munal common ground regarding each celebrity,
which is approximated by scoring each lexicalized
triple (or property) associated with a celebrity ac-
cording to the number of hits of the Google search
API. Only the top-ranked triples are selected (Kut-
lak et al, 2013). The UIC system uses a small
set of rules for the conditional inclusion of pred-
icates that was derived offline from the statistical
analysis of the co-occurrence between predicates
that are about the same topic or that share some
shared arguments; only the best performing rules
tested against a subset of the development set are
included (Venigalla and Di Eugenio, 2013).

For the baseline evaluation, we used the devel-
opment set obtained in the second round annota-
tion (see Section 3). However, we only consider
pairs obtained during the second round annotation
that 1) follow both restrictions presented in Sec-

Baseline UIC UA
Precision 49 64 47
Recall 67 50 39
F1 51 51 42

Table 1: Baseline evaluation results (%)

tion 2, and 2) have no coreferring triples. This
last restriction was added to minimize errors be-
cause we observed that annotators were not al-
ways consistent in their annotation of triple coref-
erence.6 We therefore considered 188 annotations
from the 344 annotations of the development set.
Of these, we used 40 randomly selected annota-
tions for evaluating the systems and 144 for es-
timating a baseline that only considers the top 5
predicates (i.e., the predicates most often selected)
and the type-predicate.7.

The evaluation results of the three systems
(baseline, UIC and UA) are presented in Table 1.
The figures in the table were obtained by compar-
ing the triples selected and rejected by each system
against the manual annotation. The performance
of the baseline is quite high. The UA system based
on a general heuristic scores lower than the base-
line, whilst the UIC system has a better precision
than the baseline, albeit a lower recall. This might
be due, as the UA authors observe in their sum-
mary (Venigalla and Di Eugenio, 2013), to “the
large number of predicates that are present only
in a few files . . . [which] makes it harder to de-
cide whether we have to include these predicates
or not.”

5 Conclusions

We have given an overview of the first content se-
lection challenge from open semantic web data,
focusing on the rather extensive and challenging
technological and methodological work involved
in defining the task and preparing the data. Unfor-
tunately, despite agile participation in these early

6Type-predicate triples were filtered out of the annotated
files in the development set whilst they were included in the
large corpus made available to the candidates. Therefore,
we added type-predicate triples in the development set a
posteriori for this evaluation. These type-predicate triples
might be coreferring with other triples, say ns:m.08rd51
ns:type.object.type ns:film.actor and
ns:m.08rd5 people/person/profession
"Actor" /m/02hrh1q . Nonetheless, this was not
taken into account in the evaluation.

7The top 5 predicates were (in descending order of fre-
quency): music track, film actor, profession, date of birth and
nationality

101



preparatory stages, the number of submitted sys-
tems was limited. Both of the presented systems
were data-intensive in that they usedeither a pool
of textual knowledge or the corpus of triple data
provided by the challenge in order to select the
most relevant data.

Unlike several previous challenges that involve
more traditional NLG tasks (e.g., surface realiza-
tion, referring expression generation), content se-
lection from large input semantic data is a rela-
tively new research endeavour in the NLG com-
munity that coincides with the rising interest in
statistical approaches to NLG and dates back, to
the best of our knowledge, to (Duboue and McK-
eown, 2003). Furthermore, although we had ini-
tially planned to produce a training set for the
task, the cost of manual annotation turned out
to be prohibitive and the resulting corpus was
only fit for development and baseline evaluation.
Despite these setbacks, we believe that open se-
mantic web data is a promising test-bed and ap-
plication field for NLG-oriented content selec-
tion (Bouayad-Agha et al., 2013) and trust that
this first challenge has prepared the ground for
follow up challenges with a larger participation.
We would also like to encourage researchers from
NLG and Semantic Web research fields to exploit
the framework and materials developed during the
course of this challenge to advance research in
content selection.

References

Nadjet Bouayad-Agha, Gerard Casamayor, and Leo
Wanner. 2013. Natural Language Generation in the
Context of the Semantic Web. Submitted to the Se-
mantic Web Journal.

Nadjet Bouayad-Agha, Gerard Casamayor, Chris Mel-
lish, and Leo Wanner. 2012. Content Selection from
Semantic Web Data. INLG ’12 Proceedings of the
Seventh International Natural Language Generation
Conference. Pages 146-149.

Pablo A. Duboue and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2003.
Statistical Acquisition of Content Selection Rules
for Natural Language Generation Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods for Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP). Pages 121–128.

Randolph, Justus J. 2005. Free-marginal multirater
kappa (multirater Kfree): An alternative to fleiss
fixed-marginal multirater kappa. Presented as the
Joensuu University Learning and Instruction Sym-
posium.

Roman Kutlak, Chris Mellish and Kees van Deemter
2013. Content Selection Challenge University of
Aberdeen entry Proceedings of the 14th European
Natural Language Generation (ENLG) Workshop.

Hareen Venigalla and Barbara Di Eugenio. 2013. UIC-
CSC: The Content Selection Challenge Entry from
the University of Illinois at Chicago Proceedings
of the 14th European Natural Language Generation
(ENLG) Workshop.

102


