










































Automated Essay Scoring for Swedish


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 42–47,
Atlanta, Georgia, June 13 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automated Essay Scoring for Swedish
Robert Östling

Department of Linguistics
Stockholm University
SE-106 91 Stockholm

robert@ling.su.se

Andre Smolentzov
Department of Linguistics

Stockholm University
SE-106 91 Stockholm

asmolentzov@gmail.com

Björn Tyrefors Hinnerich
Department of Economics

Stockholm University
SE-106 91 Stockholm

bjorn.hinnerich@ne.su.se

Erik Höglin
National Institute of Economic Research

Kungsgatan 12-14
103 62 Stockholm

erik.hoglin@konj.se

Abstract

We present the first system developed for auto-
mated grading of high school essays written in
Swedish. The system uses standard text qual-
ity indicators and is able to compare vocabu-
lary and grammar to large reference corpora of
blog posts and newspaper articles. The system
is evaluated on a corpus of 1 702 essays, each
graded independently by the student’s own
teacher and also in a blind re-grading process
by another teacher. We show that our system’s
performance is fair, given the low agreement
between the two human graders, and further-
more show how it could improve efficiency in
a practical setting where one seeks to identify
incorrectly graded essays.

1 Introduction

Automated Essay Scoring (AES) is the field of auto-
matically assigning grades to student essays (Sher-
mis and Burstein, 2003; Dikli, 2006).

Previous work on AES has primarily focused on
English texts, and to the best of our knowledge no
AES system for Swedish essays has been published.
We exploit some peculiarities of the Swedish lan-
guage, such as its compounding nature, to design
new features for classification. We also use con-
structions in the shape of hybrid n-grams (Tsao and
Wible, 2009) extracted from large corpora in the
classification.

Earlier results from this work have been presented
in the B.A. thesis of Smolentzov (2013), where fur-
ther details can be found. Source code, a trained
model as well as an on-line version of our tool are

available from the website of the Department of Lin-
guistics.1 Due to legal restrictions, we are currently
unable to publish the corpus of essays used for train-
ing the model and in our evaluation. While this is
very regrettable, there are so far no suitable training
corpora available for Swedish that are publicly avail-
able. We hope in the future to be able to produce an
anonymized version of the corpus, to be shared with
other researchers.

2 Data

We use a corpus of essays from the essay writing
part of the Swedish high school national exams in
Swedish.2 These were collected using random sam-
pling by Hinnerich et al. (2011), who had them dig-
itized, anonymized, and re-graded by high school
teachers experienced with grading the national ex-
ams. The essays were originally graded by the stu-
dent’s own teacher. In total, 1 702 essays have all the
information we require: digitized text and the two
grades. The size of the corpus is 1 116 819 tokens,
or an average of 656 per essay. The essays have
been automatically annotated with lemma and part
of speech (PoS) information using Stagger (Östling,
2012).

There are four grades: IG (fail), G (pass), VG
(pass with distinction) and MVG (excellent). Hin-
nerich et al. (2011) found that the agreement be-
tween the two human graders is rather low, and in
the set of essays used in this study only 780 (45.8%)
of the 1 702 essays received the same grade by both

1http://www.ling.su.se/aes
2Course Svenska B, fall 2005/spring 2006.

42



Teacher
IG G VG MVG Sum

B
lin

d
gr

ad
er IG 74 147 50 5 276

G 68 437 293 55 853
VG 12 136 223 75 446
MVG 1 25 55 46 127
Sum 155 745 621 181 1 702

Table 1: Confusion matrix for the grades assigned by the
students’ own teachers, and during the blind re-grading
process. In total, 780 essays (45.8%) are assigned the
same grade. Linear weighted κ = 0.276

graders. In 148 cases (8.7%), the grade difference
was more than one step.

In Table 1, we can clearly see that the blind
graders’ grades are generally lower. The disagree-
ment is also more severe for the grades at the ex-
tremes of the scale.

It is important to note that the grading guide-
lines for the national exams do not focus exclu-
sively on the quality of the language used, but rather
on the ability of the student to produce a coher-
ent and convincing argument, understanding and re-
lating to other texts, or describing personal experi-
ences. Some work has been carried out using high-
level features in automated essay scoring. Milt-
sakaki and Kukich (2004) use some manual anno-
tation to explore the role of coherence, and Attali
and Burstein (2005) automatically analyze the over-
all structure of essays. Others take the contents of
essays into account (Landauer et al., 2003), which
is suitable for essay questions in non-language sub-
jects.

We will, however, focus on form rather than con-
tent. One important reason for this is that our cor-
pus of essays is spread out over 19 different topics
(in several cases with as few as 20–30 essays each),
where the type of text expected can vary consider-
ably between topics.

3 Methods

We use a supervised machine learning approach,
based on a Linear Discriminant Analysis classifier in
the implementation of Pedregosa et al. (2011). Each
essay is represented by a feature vector, whose con-
tents we will describe in some detail in the following
sections.

It is important to note that we are using corre-
lations between grade and different features of the
text, but the relationship between these features and
the qualities of the essay on which the grade should
be based may be complex. As a cautionary tale, we
could mention that vocabulary related to cell phones
was found to correlate strongly with essay grade. It
turned out that poor students showed a strong pref-
erence for one of the given essay topics, which hap-
pened to center around cell phones. In the field of
AES, it is particularly important to keep in mind that
correlation does not imply causation.

3.1 Simple features

We use a number of features that may be directly
measured from the text. These are presented be-
low, roughly in decreasing order of correlation with
essay grade. Most of the features have been dis-
cussed in previous literature on AES (Attali and
Burstein, 2005), and specifically in the context of
Swedish high school essays by Hultman and West-
man (1977). Some further features that did not con-
tribute much to grading accuracy were tried, but will
be omitted from this discussion.

Text length Since the essays are composed in a
classroom setting with a fixed amount of time allot-
ted (five hours), a student’s fluency in writing is di-
rectly mirrored in the length of an essay, which be-
comes the feature that most strongly correlates with
grade. While one might want to exclude the length
from consideration in the grading process, it is im-
portant to keep this correlation in mind since other
measures may correlate with length, and therefore
indirectly correlate with essay grade without con-
tributing any new information.

Average word length The average number of let-
ters per word also correlates with grade but only
weakly with the length (in words). It does however
correlate strongly with the distribution of parts of
speech, primarily pronouns (which tend to be short)
and nouns (which tend to be long, particularly since
Swedish is a compounding language).

OVIX lexical diversity measure OVIX (Hult-
man, 1994) was in fact developed for the very
purpose of analyzing lexical diversity in Swedish
high school essays, and has been found to correlate

43



strongly with grade in this setting. At the same time,
the measure is mostly independent of text length.

OVIX = log ntokens/
(

2−
log ntypes
log ntokens

)
Part of speech distribution The relative frequen-
cies of different parts of speech also correlate with
essay grade, although more weakly so than the re-
lated measure of average word length.

3.2 Corpus-induced features

While the size our corpus of graded student essays
is in the order of one million words, much larger
amounts of Swedish text are available from differ-
ent sources, such as opinion pieces, news articles,
and blog posts. Due to the large amounts of text
available, from tens of millions to several billions of
words depending on the source, we can extract re-
liable statistics even about relatively rare language
phenomena.

By comparing student essays to statistics gathered
from different text types, we obtain new variables
that often correlate strongly with essay grades.

PoS tag cross-entropy The average cross-entropy
per token from a PoS trigram model (with simple
additive smoothing) is used to model the similarity
on a syntactic level. This includes both elements of
style (e.g. frequent use of passive constructions) and
mechanics (e.g. agreement errors). We use a corpus
of news texts3 to train the model.

Vocabulary cross-entropy With word frequency
statistics from two different text sources, we com-
pute the average cross-entropy per token given a un-
igram model, and use the difference between these
values for the two models to indicate which type of
text the present essay is most similar to. In our ex-
periments, the two text sources are of equal size and
consist of the news texts mentioned above, and a cor-
pus of blog posts.

Hybrid n-gram cross-entropy We can general-
ize the vocabulary cross-entropy measure described
above by using hybrid n-grams (Tsao and Wible,
2009) rather than single words. This allows for some

3The corpus consists of ca 200 million words, crawled from
the WWW editions of Dagens Nyheter and Svenska Dagbladet.

patterns that are neither entirely grammatical nor en-
tirely lexical to be used, complementing the two pre-
vious approaches. The same news and blog corpora
as above are used.

3.3 Language error features

Spelling errors We implemented a simple spell
checker, using the SALDO lexicon (Borin and Fors-
berg, 2009) and statistics from a corpus of news text.
On average, a misspelling was detected in 0.63% of
all word tokens, or about four misspellings per essay.
Manual inspection showed that the spell checker
made some errors, so it is reasonable to assume that
results could be improved somewhat using a more
accurate tool.

Split compound errors Swedish is a compound-
ing language, with noun compounding particularly
frequent. It is a fairly common error among inexpe-
rienced writers to separate the segments of a com-
pound word. We use word uni- and bigram statistics
from a corpus of news texts to find instances of these
errors in the essays. Only 0.10% of word tokens
are found to be incorrectly split, or less than one
instance per essay on average. As expected, there
is a (weak) negative correlation between split com-
pound frequency and grade, which seems to be due
to a small number of poor essays with many such
errors.

3.4 Evaluation measures

The simplest measure of overlap between two
graders (either among humans, or between human(s)
and machine) is the percentage of essays on which
they agree about the grade. However, in our set-
ting this is not so informative because there is a
high chance of graders assigning the same grade by
chance, and this probability varies between different
pairs of graders.

This makes comparisons difficult, so we instead
use Cohen’s kappa value (Cohen, 1968), linearly
weighted according to the numeric values of grades
used by the Swedish school system: IG corresponds
to 0 points, G to 10, VG to 15, and MVG to 20.
A kappa value of 1 would indicate perfect agree-
ment, while 0 would mean random agreement. The

44



Feature Correlation
ntokens

0.25 0.535
ntokens 0.502
hybrid n-gram cross-entropy 0.363
vocabulary cross-entropy 0.361
average word length 0.307
OVIX 0.304
nlong/ntokens 0.284
spelling errors -0.257
PoS cross-entropy 0.216
split compound errors -0.208

Table 2: Correlation between grade (average of two
graders) and features. Interactions between features are
not taken into account. Only features with Pearson coef-
ficient ρ > 0.2 are included, all are highly significant.

weighted kappa value is computed as:

κ = 1−
∑

i,j wijOij∑
i,j wijEij

where Oij is the number of times annotator 1 as-
signed grade i and annotator 2 assigned grade j,
while Eij is the expected number of times for the
same event, given that both annotators randomly as-
sign grades according to a multinomial distribution.
wij is the difference in score between grades i and
j, according to the above.

4 Results

4.1 Feature-grade correlations
First, we look at the correlations between the
human-assigned grades and individual features.
Since a linear machine learning algorithm is used,
we use the Pearson coefficient to measure linear de-
pendence. Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient
gives similar results.

From Table 2 we can see that only ten of the
features show a correlation above 0.2. There were
statistically significant (but weak) correlations be-
low this threshold, e.g. the ratios of different parts
of speech, where the strongest correlations were
ρ = −0.192 (pronouns) and ρ = 0.177 (preposi-
tions).

4.2 Automated grading
Table 3 shows the performance of our system, using
the leave-one-out evaluation method on all 1 702 es-

Computer
IG G VG MVG Sum

H
um

an
av

g. IG 107 176 6 0 289
G 61 752 110 11 934
VG 2 225 189 17 433
MVG 0 9 27 10 46
Sum 170 1 162 332 38 1 702

Table 3: Confusion matrix for the grades assigned by the
system, and the average (rounded down) of the two hu-
man graders. In total, 1 058 essays (62.2%) are assigned
the same grade, κ = 0.399.

says, i.e. evaluating each essay using a model trained
on all the other 1 701 essays. We see that the com-
puter’s grades are biased towards the most com-
mon grade (G, pass), but that overall accuracy is
quite high (62.2%, κ = 0.399) compared to 58.4%
(κ = 0.249) when using only the strongest feature
(4th root of essay length), 54.9% when assigning
the most common grade to all essays, or the 45.8%
(κ = 0.276) agreement between the two human
graders.

It is also encouraging to see that only 28 essays
(1.6%) receive a grade by the computer that differs
more than one step from the human-assigned grade.
The corresponding figure is 148 essays (8.7%) be-
tween the two humans.

When training and evaluating using only the
grades of the blind grader, the agreement between
computer and human was 57.6% (κ = 0.369), and
only 53.6% (κ = 0.345) using the grades of the
student’s teacher. Both these figures are below the
62.2% (κ = 0.399) obtained when using the aver-
age grade, and the explanation closest at hand is that
the features we model (partially) represent or corre-
late with the actual grading criteria of the exam.

Since the teachers are affected by various sources
of bias (Hinnerich et al., 2011), a weaker correla-
tion (mirrored by a lower κ) to any kind of “objec-
tive” measure would be expected. Similarly, using
the average of two graders should decrease the large
individual variance due to the difficult and partially
subjective nature of the task, leading to a stronger
correlation with relevant features of the text.

45



4.3 Re-grading

In 148 cases (8.7%) of our 1 702 essays, the grade
assigned in the blind re-grading process differs by
more than one step from the original grade, and we
performed an experiment to see how efficiently these
highly deviant grades could be identified. This sce-
nario could arise within an organization responsi-
ble for evaluating the consistency in grading a na-
tional exam, where resources are insufficient for re-
grading all essays manually. Given a training corpus
of graded essays, our system could then be used to
select candidates among the larger set of essays for
further manual re-grading.

In other to evaluate the usefulness of this method,
we let the system re-grade all essays based on the
blind grades of all other essays (leave-one-out). In
the cases where the system’s grade differs by more
than one step from the teacher’s grade, we check
whether the difference between the system’s grade
and that of the blind grader is less than between the
two human graders. It turns out that we can correctly
identify 43 (29.1%) of the 148 cases in this way, with
only 91 essays (5.3% of the total) considered.

In a scenario where we have a large amount of
essays but only the resources to manually re-grade
a fraction of them, we can thus increase the ratio of
highly deviant grades found from 8.7% (148/1702,
by randomly choosing essays to re-grade) to 47%
(43/91, by only re-grading those identified by our
system).

5 Conclusions and future work

We have presented a system for automatic grading
of Swedish high school essays. While its accu-
racy is not high enough to be used in grading high-
stakes exams, we have demonstrated its usefulness
in a practical setting of finding instances of incorrect
grading (as identified by humans). Novel aspects in-
clude features based on constructions induced using
unsupervised methods, and on (language-specific)
compounding errors.

It would be interesting to apply some of our meth-
ods to other languages and other data sets, for in-
stance of second language learners. Since our sys-
tem is quite general, all that would be needed to
adapt it to another domain is a training corpus of
graded essays. Adapting to another language would

in addition require a PoS tagger and suitable unla-
beled text corpora.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for
their useful comments.

References
Yigal Attali and Jill Burstein. 2005. Automated essay

scoring with e-rater R© v.2.0. Technical report, Educa-
tional Testing Services.

Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2009. All in the fam-
ily: A comparison of SALDO and WordNet. In Pro-
ceedings of the Nodalida 2009 Workshop on WordNets
and other Lexical Semantic Resources – between Lexi-
cal Semantics, Lexicography, Terminology and Formal
Ontologies, Odense.

Jacob Cohen. 1968. Weighted kappa: Nominal scale
agreement provision for scaled disagreement or partial
credit. Psychological Bulletin, 70:213–220.

Semire Dikli. 2006. An overview of automated scoring
of essays. Journal of Technology, Learning, and As-
sessment, 5.

Björn Tyrefors Hinnerich, Erik Höglin, and Magnus Jo-
hannesson. 2011. Are boys discriminated in swedish
high schools? Economics of Education Review,
30:682–690.

Tor G. Hultman and Margareta Westman. 1977. Gymna-
sistsvenska. LiberLäromedel.

Tor G. Hultman. 1994. Hur gick det med ovix? In
Språkbruk, grammatik och språkförändring. En fest-
skrift till Ulf Teleman, pages 55–64. Lund University.

Thomas K. Landauer, Darrell Laham, and Peter Foltz.
2003. Automatic essay assessment. Assessment in Ed-
ucation, 10:295–308.

E. Miltsakaki and K. Kukich. 2004. Evaluation of text
coherence for electronic essay scoring systems. Natu-
ral Language Engineering, 10:25–55.

Robert Östling. 2012. Stagger: A modern POS tagger
for Swedish. In Proceedings of the Swedish Language
Technology Conference (SLTC).

F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel,
B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer,
R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos,
D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duches-
nay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–
2830.

M.D. Shermis and J. Burstein, editors. 2003. Automated
Essay Scoring: A Cross Disciplinary Perspective. L.
Erlbaum Associates.

46



André Smolentzov. 2013. Automated Essay Scoring:
Scoring Essays in Swedish. Bachelor’s thesis, Depart-
ment of Linguistics, Stockholm University.

Nai-Lung Tsao and David Wible. 2009. A method for
unsupervised broad-coverage lexical error detection
and correction. In Proceedings of the Fourth Work-
shop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educa-
tional Applications, EdAppsNLP ’09, pages 51–54,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

47


