










































BahaBa: A Route Generator System for Mobile Devices


Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Processing and Crisis Information 2013, pages 51–56,
Nagoya, Japan, 14 October 2013. c©2013 Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing

BahaBa: A Route Generator System for Mobile Devices 

  

Ralph Vincent J. Regalado,  Michael Benedict Y. Haw,  Matthew Alexis P. Martinez,  

Lowie O. Santiaguel, Patrick Lawrence S. Tamayo 

Center for Language Technologies 

De La Salle University 

Manila, Philippines 

ralph.regalado@delasalle.ph, {michael_haw, matthew_martinez, 

lowie_santiaguel, patrick_lawrence_tamayo}@dlsu.ph, 

  

 

Abstract 

The Philippines is considered to be one of the 

world’s most disaster prone countries. Since 

the use of mobile devices continues to grow, 

many generated applications for mobile devic-

es that will aid during disaster. While most of 

the people residing in the urban areas are 

mostly smartphone users, people who are liv-

ing in the rural areas are still using low-cost 

phones.  In order to equally provide infor-

mation that will be needed on or during disas-

ter, we created BahaBa a SMS-based route 

generation system targeted for mobile devices. 

The system accepts a SMS and generates a 

template-based response to the sender, con-

taining instructions on the shortest path to the 

nearest safe place in a community.  

1 Introduction 

According to the Asia Pacific Disaster Report 

2012, the average number of people in Asia-

Pacific who are at risk from yearly flooding dou-

bled from 29.5 million to 63.8 million  (United 

Nations Economic and Social Commission for 

Asia and the Pacific and United Nations Office 

for Disaster Risk Reduction, 2012). Philippine is 

one of the region's hardest hit countries in the 

past decade which recorded 182 disasters that 

killed almost 11,000 people (United Nations 

Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, 2012). 

Since the use of mobile devices continues to 

grow, several local applications for mobile de-

vices have been developed, such as iTyphoon 

(Nueva Caceres Technology Solutions, Inc., 

2013) and Project NOAH (Department of 

Science and Technology, 2013) , to aid during 

disasters. Most of these applications require the 

use of smartphones and mobile internet to con-

tribute and retrieve content. 

According to a World Bank (2012) report, 

Philippines have a high access and usage statis-

tics in mobile communication when compared to 

other countries. It is highlighted that mobile in-

ternet usage in the Philippines is low, 23.1% of 

Filipino mobile users have mobile broadband 

connection and only 9.8% use mobile internet. 

The data also showed that 97% of the users use 

Short Message Service (SMS). In order to pro-

vide information that will be needed on or during 

disaster we created BahaBa, route generation 

system targeted for mobile devices. It uses SMS 

to accept user request and generates a template-

based response to the sender containing instruc-

tions on the shortest path to the nearest safe place 

in a community. 

The remainder of this paper is organized as 

follow. Section 2 reviews existing works related 

to our approaches. Section 3 introduces the main 

processes of our approach.   Section 4 describes 

our testing results.  In Section 5, we conclude our 

efforts and discuss some future works. 

2 Related Literature 

The work of Dale, et al. (2003) was one of the 

early works who used Natural Language Genera-

tion (NLG) to provide navigational assistance. 

Their work, Coral, generate descriptions for 

routes from an area to another area. Routes gen-

erated consider the mode of navigation, means of 

communication and type of environment. The 

system represented the world as nodes, arcs and 

polygons. The nodes represent junctions or deci-

sion points, arcs represent travelable paths and 

polygons represent areas like parks, stations and 

the like. The system also has several options 

which allows user to customize their route, 

whether he wants the shortest or fastest path, 

avoid an area, or traverse a one way road. The 

NLG task in Coral involves text planning, micro 

51



planning and linguistic realization. Text planning 

is about taking a path-based route plan that de-

rives messages that are sent to the user. Micro 

planning makes a list of sentences and identifies 

what information to be used for the route to be 

undertaken. Linguistic realization maps the sen-

tences. Same as Coral, our work focuses on using 

NLG to generate route to safe places. Our NLG 

task is focus on Text Planning, Discourse Plan-

ning and Linguistic Realization. 

  Fajardo & Oppus (2010) discussed MyDisas-

terDroid, an application that determines the op-

timum route to find different ge-graphical loca-

tions that the rescuers will take in order to serve 

effectively during a disaster. In determining the 

most optimum route along different geographical 

locations, it was solved as a travelling salesman 

problem wherein the objective is to go to a loca-

tion and proceed to another in the shortest way 

possible in terms of length or cost. Since our 

work provides a path to a nearest safe place, we 

used A* search algorithm. This algorithm en-

sures that a path can be found, and, if it exists, 

takes distance into consideration as the cost in 

order achieve the optimal route.  

  

3 The Bahaba System 

The BahaBa system is consists of 3 main mod-

ules: SMS Processing, Route Generation and 

Text Generation. Figure 1 shows the system ar-

chitecture. 

3.1 SMS Processing Module 

This module is responsible for sending and re-

ceiving SMS to and from the user. Once an SMS 

is received this module validates first the format. 

The format is: 

 

BHB [Type] [Hazard] [User Location] 

 

BHB is the system key variable. The [type]   is 

the keyword for safe places being searched by 

the user. [Hazard] is the keyword if the user 

wants to consider the surrounding flood hazards. 

While the [User Location], contains the user’s 

current location. Table 1 and 2 shows the key-

words used for [type] and [hazard]. 

 

 

Keyword Description 

EC Evacuation Center 

P Police Station 

H Hospital 

O Any nearest safe place 

Table 1. Keywords for Safe Place 

 

 

Keyword Description 

H With hazards 

NH Without hazards 

Table 2. Keywords for Hazard 

 

 

 
 

Figure 1. BahaBa System Architecture 

52



Once the format is validated, it will perform 

location validation. The [User Location] will be 

compared to all the list of locations stored in the 

database. Once validated, it will transfer the 

SMS data, and the longitude and latitude of the 

[User Location] to the next module; else it will 

respond back to the user notifying that the SMS 

is invalid. 

3.2 Route Generation Module 

This module handles the actual generation of the 

route in the form of a list of nodes. It first creates 

a start node for the start location based on the 

[User Location]. It then searches the database for 

a list of safe places specified in the [Type] and 

creates goal nodes for them.  

The task of this module is to look for the nearest 

safe place from the start location. We treated this 

route generation as a search problem where, from 

the initial node, or the start location, the search 

algorithm finds the fastest and lowest cost path to 

the goal node, or the target location. We used A* 

search algorithm since it ensures that a solution 

or path can be found, and, if it exists, takes dis-

tance into consideration as the cost in order 

achieve the optimal route.  

For the evaluation function f(n) used in A* 

search algorithm, the cost function g(n) will be 

the collective cost or distance from the start node 

to the node n, while the heuristic function h(n) 

will be the cost or straight line distance from the 

node n to the goal node. Distances are calculated 

with the Euclidean distance formula using lati-

tude and longitude as the ordered pair for the 

nodes as seen in Figure 2.  

 

  √
(        (  )          (  ))

 

  (         (  )           (  ))
 

 

 

 

Figure 2. Euclidian Distance Formula 

 

Since our system consider flood hazards, they 

are treated as expensive nodes depending on the 

hazard level. To be more specific, a hazard node 

can still be a viable node to pass through in a 

route. To emulate the added cost of a hazard 

node’s flood level, the node’s heuristic value can 

be increased by a value corresponding to the in-

tensity of the flood level. A hazard node that cur-

rently has minimal flood levels would have its 

heuristic increased by a trivial amount, like an 

additional 10m, which would keep its overall 

cost lower, while a hazard node that currently 

has dangerous flood levels would have its heuris-

tic increased by a major amount, like an addi-

tional 500m, which would make the node ex-

tremely costly to traverse, effectively ruling it 

out as a possible node in the route. After the 

shortest path to the goal node is found the mod-

ule then generates a Text Plan. 

The Text Plan is constructed by traversing the 

route’s nodes. Using the location’s longitude and 

latitude found in each node, it identifies if it is 

traversing a single street and detects when the 

path turns to a new street or encounters a loca-

tion landmark. Figure 3 shows an example of a 

generated Text Plan. 

 
De La Salle University { 
    nextNode: Dagonoy; 
    safePlace: 0; 
    hazard: 0; 
    landmark: none; 
    turn: right; 
} 

↓ 
Dagonoy { 
    nextNode: Leon Guinto; 
    safePlace: 0; 
    hazard: 0; 
    landmark: none; 
    turn: left; 
} 

↓ 
Leon Guinto{ 
    nextNode: Quirino Avenue; 
    safePlace: 0; 
    hazard: 0; 
    landmark: none; 
    turn: left; 
} 

↓ 
Quirino Avenue { 
    nextNode: Ospital ng Maynila; 
    safePlace: 0; 
    hazard: 0; 
    landmark: none; 
    turn: right; 
} 

↓ 
Ospital ng Maynila { 
    nextNode: none; 
    safePlace: 1; 
    hazard: 0; 
    landmark: none; 
    turn: none; 
} 

 

Figure 3. Sample Text Plan 

 

If there is a route generated the Text Plan will 

be passed to the Text generation module; else it 

53



will pass it to the SMS processing module to in-

form the sender that there are no routes available.  

3.3 Text Generation Module 

This module converts the route generated by the 

previous module into text form through the use 

of template-based NLG. This module has two 

sub-modules: Discourse Planning and Linguistic 

Realization. Figure 3 shows the process of the 

Text Generation Module 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Figure 4. Text Generation Module 

 

Discourse Planning 

Each element in the Text Plan is analyzed and 

categorized according to the templates. Table 3 

shows the list of template tag. 

 

Template Tag Description 

<start no landmark> First element in the 

Text Plan. No land-

mark near the area. 

<start with landmark> First element in the 

Text Plan. There is 

landmark near the area. 

<body no landmark> Elements between the 

first and the last ele-

ment. No landmark 

near the area. 

<body with landmark> Elements between the 

first and the last ele-

ment. There is land-

mark near the area. 

<end no landmark> Last element in the 

Text Plan. No land-

mark near the area. 

<end with landmark> First element in the 

Text Plan. There is 

landmark near the area. 

 

Table 3. List of Template Tag 

 

Once all the elements are analyzed, it will pass 

the Text Plan and the assigned templates to the 

next sub-module. Using the Text Plan in the pre-

vious module it will output the following: 

 

<start no landmark><body no landmark> 

<body no landmark> <end no landmark> 

 

Linguistic Realization 

The template tags from the output of the dis-

course planning are the basis on what template 

number will be retrieved from the database. The 

database used in this sub-module contains all the 

templates with their corresponding tag. For every 

template randomly chosen, the values from the 

Text Plan are used to complete the template. Us-

ing the Text plan and the template tags it will 

output the following text: 

 Simula sa De La Salle University, 
dumiretso pagkatapos kumanan sa Da-

gonoy. 

Translation: ‘Starting from De La Salle 

University, you walk straight ahead and 

then turn right to Dagonoy’ 

 Pagkatapos lumiko, dumiretso lamang at 
kumaliwa sa Leon Guinto. 

Translation: ‘After you turn, you walk 

straight and then turn left to Leon Guinto.’ 

 Ang susunod na gagawin ay hanapin ang 
Quirino at kumaliwa dito. 

Translation: ‘The next step is to look for 

Quirino and turn left.’ 

 Dumiretso lamang at matatagpuan ang 
Ospital ng Maynila.  

Translation: ‘You walk straight ahead and 

you will see the Hospital on Manila.’ 

 

Once the text form is generated it will then 

pass it to the SMS Processing Module to send 

back the message containing the route to the 

sender. 

 

4 Evaluation 

The quality of the routes generated was evalu-

ated based on standards discussed by Lovelace, 

et al. (1999). According to Lovelace, et al. 

(1999), the quality of a route direction can be 

measured by the information present in the text. 

Examples of this information are the landmarks, 

turns and descriptive route information. To con-

firm the quality of the routed generated by our 

system two experiments were conducted.  

 

Templates 

Text Plan 

Discourse Planning 

Linguistic Realization 

Generated Route 

54



Experiment 1: Unfamiliar route and Map 

The goal of the experiment is to determine if a 

SMS response generated from the system is clear 

enough to direct a user to a safe place. 

The task performed was to ask evaluators to 

answer a survey which contains an unfamiliar 

map and a route generated by the system. Fol-

lowing the route found in the survey, the evalua-

tors need to draw lines on the roads of the map 

starting from a specified starting location going 

to the destination. 

The survey was answered by 30 respondents, 

14 of which are male while the rest are female. 

Below is a summary of the evaluation:  

 Errors made by some respondents were 
through following the route per sentence. 

They go through the whole street that 

was mentioned in the first instruction be-

fore they head to the next street indicated 

in the next instruction. This result to mis-

takes in turning and the respondents had 

to go back since they missed a corner.  

 Errors were caused due to unfamiliarity 
of the area, based from their drawing 

there are some lines that went over the 

corners and passed through them. These 

errors were due to the problem with the 

generation of the route. Roads that are 

going to a curve are sometimes per-

ceived as a turn in direction. 

Based from the results of this survey, some 

roads are hard to simulate by only looking at the 

map and the given route. It is recommended that 

an actual simulation is needed to test the reliabil-

ity of the generated instruction.  

 

Experiment 2: Validate Generated Route 

The second experiment conducted is to evalu-

ate the route generated whether it is effective in 

giving out directions. 

Same as the previous experiment we ask eval-

uators to answer a survey. The survey was an-

swered by 30 respondents, 14 of which are male 

while the rest are female. The survey contains an 

example route to be evaluated and a list of crite-

ria made by Lovelace, et al. (1999). Evaluators 

were asked to check a criteria if it is present in 

the route generated by the system. Table 4 shows 

the result of the experiment. 

 

 

Criteria Votes % * 

A - Prepares the traveler for up-

coming turning points to change 

location 

21 70% 

B - Mentions landmarks at turn-

ing points 

21 70% 

C - Gives ’you’ve gone too far 

if’ statements in case a turning 

point is missed 

18 60% 

D - Gives landmarks rather than 

street names 

14 47% 

E - Provides a limited amount of 

redundant information 

14 47% 

F - Tells the traveler which way 

to proceed at a turning point to 

change location 

23 77% 

G - Provides information to al-

low recovery from errors 

10 33% 

H - Provides clearly linear in-

formation 

20 67% 

I - Gives distances between turn-

ing points 

6 20% 

* no. of votes / no. of evaluators 

 

Table 4. Results of Experiment 2 

 

The results show that the generated route was 

able to direct a user when there is a turning point 

to change direction. It is also observed that the 

route was able to use landmarks, but this is de-

pendent on the data stored in the database. Crite-

ria G and I are expected to be low because the 

templates used for the routes does not cover giv-

ing directions to allow recovery of errors and 

does not give distances between turning points. 

 

5 Conclusion 

The BahaBa System was able receive a SMS re-

quest, process the request, generate a route and 

its corresponding route message, and send the 

SMS back to the user.  

Currently, the routes generated by the system 

are in the Filipino Language. But since we are 

using template-based NLG, it can easily be 

adapted to other languages by simply translating 

the templates that are stored in the database. 

While experiment 1 results shows confusion 

among evaluators when navigating on the paper 

map, experiment 2 showed that the generated 

routes are effective. Possible future work in-

cludes, doing experiment 1 again but instead of 

navigating on paper map, an actual navigation 

should be done. Another possible work is on re-

solving the criteria G and I by reviewing and ex-

panding the templates and adding more infor-

mation relevant to route generation. 

55



References  

Dale, R., Geldof, S., & Prost, J.-P. (2003). CORAL: 

Using Natural Language Generation for Naviga-

tional Assistance. 26th Australasian Computer 

Science Conference - Volume 16 (pp. 35-44). 
Australian Computer Society, Inc. 

Department of Science and Technology. (2013). Pro-

ject NOAH. Retrieved January 2013, from Google 
Play: 

https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=ph.g

ov.dost.noah.android 

Fajardo, J., & Oppus, C. (2012). A mobile disaster 

management system using the android technology. 

WSEAS Transaction on Communications, 9(6), 
343-353. 

Lovelace, K. L., Hegarty, M., & Montello, D. R. 

(1999). Elements of good route directions in famil-

iar and unfamiliar environments. Spatial infor-

mation theory. Cognitive and computational 

foundations of geographic information science 
(pp. 65-82). Berlin: Springer. 

Nueva Caceres Technology Solutions, Inc. (2013). 

iTyphoon. Retrieved January 2013, from Google 
Play: 

https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.

magnoconag.ITyphoon 

The World Bank. (2012). 2012 Information and 

Communications and Development : Maximiz-

ing Mobile. Washington DC: International Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development / The World 

Bank. 

United Nations Economic and Social Commission for 

Asia and the Pacific and United Nations Office for 

Disaster Risk Reduction. (2012). Asia Pacific 

Disaster Report 2012. Bangkok, Thailand: Unit-
ed Nations Economic and Social Commission for 

Asia and the Pacific and United Nations Interna-

tional Strategy for Disaster Reduction. 

United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. 

(2012). Floods deaths down but economic loss-

es significant. Retrieved January 2013, from 
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction: 

http://www.unisdr.org/archive/30026 

 

56


