










































Towards NLG for Physiological Data Monitoring with Body Area Networks


Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 193–197,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards NLG for Physiological Data Monitoring
with Body Area Networks

Hadi Banaee, Mobyen Uddin Ahmed and Amy Loutfi
Center for Applied Autonomous Sensor Systems

Örebro University, Sweden
{hadi.banaee,mobyen.ahmed,amy.loutfi}@oru.se

Abstract

This position paper presents an on-going
work on a natural language generation
framework that is particularly tailored for
summary text generation from body area
networks. We present an overview of
the main challenges when considering this
type of sensor devices used for at home
monitoring of health parameters. This pa-
per describes the first steps towards the im-
plementation of a system which collects
information from heart rate and respira-
tion rate using a wearable sensor. The pa-
per further outlines the direction for future
work and in particular the challenges for
NLG in this application domain.

1 Introduction

Monitoring of physiological data using body area
networks (BAN) is becoming increasingly popular
as advances in sensor and wireless technology en-
able lightweight and low costs devices to be easily
deployed. This gives rise to applications in home
health monitoring and may be useful to promote
greater awareness of health and prevention for par-
ticular end user groups such as the elderly (Ahmed
et al., 2013). A challenge however, is the large vol-
umes of data which is produced as a result of wear-
able sensors. Furthermore, the data has a num-
ber of characteristics which currently make auto-
matic methods of data analysis particularly diffi-
cult. Such characteristics include the multivariate
nature of the data where several dependent vari-
ables are captured as well as the frequency of mea-
surements for which we still lack a general under-
standing of how particular physiological parame-
ters vary when measured continuously.

Recently many systems of health monitoring
sensors have been introduced which are designed
to perform massive and profound analysis in the

area of smart health monitoring systems (Baig
and Gholamhosseini, 2013). Also several research
have been done to show the applications and ef-
ficiency of data mining approaches in healthcare
fields (Yoo et al., 2012). Such progress in the
field would be suitable to combine with state of
the art in the NLG community. Examples of suit-
able NLG systems include the system proposed by
Reiter and Dale (2000) which suggested an archi-
tecture to detect and summarise happenings in the
input data, recognise the significance of informa-
tion and its compatibility to the user, and gener-
ate a text which shows this knowledge in an un-
derstandable way. A specific instantiation of this
system on clinical data is BabyTalk project, which
is generated summaries of the patient records in
various time scales for different end users (Portet
et al., 2009; Hunter et al., 2012). While these
works have made significant progress in the field,
this paper will outline some remaining challenges
that have yet to be addressed for physiological data
monitoring which are discussed in this work. The
paper will also present a first version of an NLG
system that has been used to produce summaries
of data collected with a body area network.

2 Challenges in Physiological Data
Monitoring with BAN

2.1 From Data Analysis to NLG

One of the main challenges in healthcare area is
how to analyse physiological data such that valu-
able information can help the end user. To have a
meaningful analysis of input signals, preprocess-
ing the data is clearly an important step. This
is especially true for wearable sensors where the
signals can be noisy and contain artifacts in the
recorded data. Another key challenge in physio-
logical data monitoring is mapping from the many
data analysis approaches to NLG. For example
finding hidden layers of information with unsuper-

193



vised mining methods will be enable the system to
make a representation of data which is not pro-
ducible by human analysis alone. However, do-
main rules and expert knowledge are important in
order to consider a priori information in the data
analysis. Further external variables (such as med-
ication, food, stress) may also be considered in a
supervised analysis of the data. Therefore, there is
a challenge to balance between data driven tech-
niques that are able to find intrinsic patterns in the
data and knowledge driven techniques which take
into account contextual information.

2.2 End User / Content
A basic issue in any design of a NLG system is un-
derstanding the audience of the generated text. For
health monitoring used e.g. at home this issue is
highly relevant as a variety of people with diverse
backgrounds may use a system. For example, a
physician should have an interpretation using spe-
cial terms, in contrast for a lay user where infor-
mation should be presented in a simple way. For
instance, for a decreasing trend in heart rate lower
than defined values, the constructed message for
the doctor could be: “There is a Bradycardia at
. . . ”. But for the patient itself it could be just:
“Your heart rate was low at . . . ”. It is also im-
portant to note that the generated text for the same
user in various situations should also differ. For
instance a high heart rate at night presents a dif-
ferent situation than having a high heart rate dur-
ing the high levels of activity. Consequently, all
the modules in NLG systems (data analysis, docu-
ment planning, etc.) need to consider these aspects
related to the end user.

2.3 Personalisation / Subject Profiling
Personalisation differs from context awareness
and is effective to generate messages adapted to
the personalised profile of each subject. One pro-
file for each subject is a collection of information
that would be categorised to: metadata of the per-
son (such as age, weight, sex, etc.), the history of
his/her signals treatments and the extracted fea-
tures such as statistical information, trends, pat-
terns etc. This profiling enables the system to per-
sonalise the generated messages. Without profil-
ing, the represented information will be shallow.
For instance, two healthy subjects may have dif-
ferent baseline values. Deviations from the base-
line may be more important to detect than thresh-
old detection. So, one normal pattern for one in-

Document Planning

Data Analysis

Single / Batch 
Measurement

Uni / Multi parameter 
Analysis

Event-based 
Message Handler

Personal 
Profiles

-metadata
-events
-patterns
- ...

Text

Summary-based 
Message Handler

Ontology

Microplanning and Realisation

Data Preprocessing
Expert 

Knowledge

Global info. 
Message Handler

Ranking Functions

Figure 1: System architecture of text generation from phys-
iological data.

dividual could be an outlier for another individual
considering his/her profile.

3 System Architecture

In this section we outline a proposed system ar-
chitecture, which is presented in Figure 1. So far
the handling of the single and batch measurements
and the data analysis have been implemented as
well as first version of the document planning. For
microplanning and realisation modules, we em-
ployed the same ideas in NLG system proposed
by Reiter and Dale (2000).

3.1 Data Collection
By using wearable sensor, the system is able to
record continuous values of health parameters si-
multaneously. To test the architecture, more than
300 hours data for two successive weeks have been
collected using a wearable sensor called Zephyr
(2013), which records several vital signs such as
heart rate, respiration, temperature, posture, activ-
ity, and ECG data. In this work we have primar-
ily considered two parameters, heart rate (HR) and
respiration rate (RR) in the generated examples.

3.2 Input Measurements
To cover both short-term and long-term healthcare
monitoring, this system is designed to support two
different channels of input data. The first channel
is called single measurement channel which is a
continuous recorded data record. Figure 2 shows
an example of a single measurement. In the fig-
ure, the data has been recorded for nine continuous
hours of heart rate and respiration data which cap-
ture health parameters during the sequential activi-

194



20:30 21:45 23:00 00:15 01:30 02:45 04:00 05:15 06:30 07:45

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

220

HH:MM

b
p

m

 

 

HR

RR

Watching TVExercising Walking

Walking Sleeping

Figure 2: An example of single measurement, 13 hours of
heart rate (HR) and respiration rate (RR).

40

80
Mar 13

 

 

40

80
Mar 14

40

80
Mar 15

40

80
Mar 16

40

80
Mar 18

0 h 1 h 2 h 3 h 4 h 5 h 6

40

80

Hours

bp
m

Mar 19

Figure 3: An example of batch measurement included heart
rate for 6 nights.

ties such as exercising, walking, watching TV, and
sleeping. To have a long view of health parame-
ters, the system is also designed to analyse a batch
of measurements. Batch measurements are sets of
single measurements. Figure 3 presents an exam-
ple of a batch of measurements that contain all the
readings during the night for a one week period.
This kind of input data allows the system to make a
relation between longitudinal parameters and can
represent a summary of whole the dataset.

3.3 Data Analysis

To generate a robust text from the health param-
eters, the data analysis module extracts the infor-
mative knowledge from the numeric raw data. The
aim of data analysis module is to detect and repre-
sent happenings of the input signals. The primary
step to analyse the measurements is denoising and
removing artifacts from the raw data. In this work,
by using expert knowledge for each health param-
eter, the artifact values are removed. Meanwhile,
to reduce the noise in the recorded data, a series of
smoothing functions (wavelet transforms and lin-
ear regression (Loader, 2012)) have been applied.

In this framework an event based trend detec-
tion algorithm based on piecewise linear segmen-
tation methods (Keogh et al., 2003) for the time
series has been used. In addition, general statistics
are extracted from the data such as mean, mode,
frequency of occurrence etc. that are fed into the
summary based message handler. As an ongoing
work, the system will be able to recognise mean-
ingful patterns, motifs, discords, and also deter-
mine fluctuation portions among the data. Also for
multi-parameter records, the input signals would
be analysed simultaneously to detect patterns and
events in the data. Therefore the particular novelty
of the approach beyond other physiological data
analysis is the use of trend detection.

3.4 Document Planning

Document planning is responsible to determine
which messages should appear, how they should
be combined and finally, how they should be ar-
ranged as paragraphs in the text. The messages
in this system are not necessarily limited to de-
scribing events. Rather, the extracted information
from the data analysis can be categorised into one
of three types of messages: global information,
event based, and summary based messages. For
each type of message category there is a separate
ranking function for assessing the significance of
messages for communicating in the text. The or-
der of messages in the final text is a function based
on (1) how much each message is important (value
of the ranking function for each message) (2) the
extracted relations and dependencies between the
detected events. The output of document plan-
ning module is a set of messages which are organ-
ised for microplanning and realisation. Document
planning contains both event based and summary
based messages as described below.

Event based Message Handler: Most of the
information from the data analysis module are cat-
egorised as events. Event in this system is an ex-
tracted information which happens in a specific
time period and can be described by its attributes.
Detected trends, patterns, and outliers and also
identified relations in all kinds of data analysis
(single/batch measurement or uni/multi parame-
ter) are able to be represented as events in the text.
The main tasks of the event based message handler
are to determine the content of events, construct
and combine corresponding messages and their re-
lations, and order them based on a risk function.

195



The risk function is subordinate to the features of
the event and also expert knowledge to determine
how much this event is important.

Summary based Message Handler: Linguis-
tic summarisation of the extracted knowledge data
is a significant purpose of summary based message
handler. With inspiration from the works done
by Zadeh (2002) and Kacprzyk et. al (2008), we
represent the summary based information consid-
ering the possible combination of conditions for
the summary of data. The proposed system uses
fuzzy membership function to map the numeric
data into the symbolic vocabularies. For instance
to summarise the treatments of heart rate during
all nights of one week in linguistic form, we de-
fine a fuzzy function to identify the proper range
of low/medium/high heart rate level or specify a
proper prototype for representing the changes such
as steadily/sharply or fluctuated/constant. Here,
the expert knowledge helps to determine this task.

The validity of these messages is measured by a
defined formula in linguistic fuzzy systems called
truth function which shows the probability of pre-
cision for each message. The system uses this
indicator as a ranking function to choose most
important messages for text. The main tasks of
summary based message handler are: determining
the content of the summaries, constructing corre-
sponding messages, and ordering them based on
the truth function to be appeared in the final text.
The summary based message handler is not con-
sidered in previous work in this domain.

3.5 Sample Output

The implemented interface is shown in Figure 4
which is able to adapt the generated text with fea-
tures such as health parameters, end user, mes-
sage handler etc.. Currently our NLG system pro-
vides the following output for recorded signals
which covers global information and trend detec-
tion messages. Some instances of generated text
are shown, below. The first portion of messages in
each text is global information which includes ba-
sic statistical features related to the input signals.
An example of these messages for an input data is:
“This measurement is 19 hours and 28 minutes which started

at 23:12:18 on February 13th and finished at 18:41:08 on the

next day.”

“The average of heart rate was 61 bpm. However most of the

time it was between 44 and 59 bpm. The average of respira-

tion rate was 19 bpm, and it was between 15 and 25 bpm.”

Figure 4: A screenshot of the implemented interface.

Regarding to the event based messages, an ex-
ample of the output text extracted from the trend
detection algorithm is:
“Between 6:43 and 7:32, the heart rate suddenly increased

from 50 to 108 and it steadily decreased from 90 to 55 be-

tween 11:58 and 17:21.”

4 Future Work

So far we have described the challenges and the
basic system architecture that has been imple-
mented. In this section we outline a number of
sample outputs intended for future work which
captures e.g. multivariate data and batch of mea-
surement. We foresee that there is a non-trivial in-
teraction between the event message handler and
the summary message handler. This will be fur-
ther investigated in future work.

Samples for single measurement:
“Since 9:00 for half an hour, when respiration rate became

very fluctuated, heart rate steadily increased to 98.”

“Among all high levels of heart rate, much more than half are

very fluctuated.”

Samples for batch of measurements:
“During most of the exercises in the last weeks, respiration

rate had a medium level.”

“During most of the nights, when your heart rate was low,

your respiration rate was a little bit fluctuated.”

Other messages could consider the comparison
between the history of the subject and his/her cur-
rent measurement to report personalised unusual
events e.g.:
“Last night, during the first few hours of sleep, your heart

rate was normal, but it fluctuated much more compared to

the similar times in previous nights.”

In this work we have briefly presented a pro-
posed NLG system that is suitable for summaris-
ing data from physiological sensors using natural
language representation rate. The first steps to-
wards an integrated system have been made and
an outline of the proposed system has been given.

196



References
Mobyen U. Ahmed, Hadi Banaee, and Amy Loutfi.

2013. Health monitoring for elderly: an applica-
tion using case-based reasoning and cluster analysis.
Journal of ISRN Artificial Intelligence, vol. 2013, 11
pages.

Mirza M. Baig and Hamid Gholamhosseini. 2013.
Smart health monitoring systems: an overview of
design and modeling. Journal of Medical Systems,
37(2):1–14.

James Hunter, Yvonne Freer, Albert Gatt, Ehud Re-
iter, Somayajulu Sripada, and Cindy Sykes. 2012.
Automatic generation of natural language nurs-
ing shift summaries in neonatal intensive care:
BT-Nurse. Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine, 56(3):157–172.

Janusz Kacprzyk, Anna Wilbik, and Slawomir
Zadrożny. 2008. Linguistic summarization of time
series using a fuzzy quantifier driven aggregation.
Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 159(12):1485–1499.

Eamonn J. Keogh, Selina Chu, David Hart, and
Michael Pazzani. 2003. Segmenting time series:
a survey and novel approach. Data Mining In Time
Series Databases, 57:1–22.

Catherine Loader. 2012. Smoothing: local regression
techniques. Springer Handbooks of Computational
Statistics, 571-596.

Franois Portet, Ehud Reiter, Albert Gatt, Jim Hunter,
Somayajulu Sripada, Yvonne Freer, and Cindy
Sykes. 2009. Automatic generation of textual sum-
maries from neonatal intensive care data. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence, 173:789–816.

Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building natural
language generation systems. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, UK.

Illhoi Yoo, Patricia Alafaireet, Miroslav Marinov, Keila
Pena-Hernandez, Rajitha Gopidi, Jia-Fu Chang, and
Lei Hua. 2012. Data mining in healthcare and
biomedicine: a survey of the literature. Journal of
Medical Systems, 36(4):2431–2448.

Lotfi A. Zadeh. 2002. A prototype centered approach
to adding deduction capabilities to search engines.
Annual Meeting of the North American Fuzzy In-
formation Processing Society, (NAFIPS 2002) 523–
525.

Zephyr. http://www.zephyr-technology.com, Accessed
April 10, 2013.

197


