


































Lemon-aid: using Lemon to aid quantitative historical linguistic analysis

Steven Moran
University of Zurich

University of Marburg
steven.moran@uzh.ch

Martin Brümmer
University of Leipzig

AKSW
bruemmer@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

Abstract
In this short paper, we describe how we
converted dictionary and wordlist data
made available by the QuantHistLing
project into the Lexicon Model for On-
tologies. By doing so, we leverage
Linked Data to combine disparate lexi-
cal resources – more than fifty lexicons
and dictionaries – by converting the lexical
data into an RDF model that is specified by
Lemon. The resulting new Linked Data re-
source, what we call the QHL dataset, pro-
vides researchers with a translation graph,
which allows users to query across the un-
derlying lexicons and dictionaries to ex-
tract semantically-aligned wordlists.

1 Introduction

There is an increasing amount of research that
applies quantitative approaches to historical-
comparative linguistic processes, including di-
verse areas such as: statistical tests for genealog-
ical relatedness (Kessler, 2001), methods for phy-
logenetic reconstruction (Holman et al., 2011;
Bouckaert et al., 2012), phonetic alignment algo-
rithms (Kondrak, 2000; Prokić et al., 2009), and
automatic detection of cognates (Turchin et al.,
2010; Steiner et al., 2011), borrowings (Nelson-
Sathi et al., 2011), and proto-forms (Bouchard-
Côté et al., 2013). However, before any of these
steps within the pipeline of computational his-
torical linguistics can be undertaken, lexical data
from secondary resources such as dictionaries and
wordlists, or from tertiary resources like online
lexical databases, must be collected, digitized and
collated. The promise of the automatization of
time-consuming tasks, such as lexical comparison,
phonetic alignments and similarity judgements, is
providing a resurgence of historical-comparative
analysis, the goal of which is to identify the ge-
nealogical relatedness of languages and ultimately

inform the prehistory of native peoples and their
migrations. By linking data on these low-resource
languages to the Linguistic Linked Open Data
cloud (LLOD), and thus to the Linked Open Data
cloud (LOD), we are also following in the prac-
tice and vision of the Semantic Web – open data
sharing.

In the following sections we describe the QHL
project’s lexicon and wordlist format and how
we converted the data into our ontological model
specified in Lemon (McCrae et al., 2010; McCrae
et al., 2011). The resulting resource allows users
to query across what are originally disparate paper
lexicons and dictionaries to extract semantically-
aligned wordlists for historical-comparative anal-
ysis. We provide some examples in SPARQL.

2 Data

2.1 Source
The Quantitative Historical Linguistics (Quan-
tHistLing) research unit aims to uncover and
clarify phylogenetic relationships between na-
tive South American languages using quantita-
tive methods.1 There are two main objectives of
the project: digitalization of lexical resources on
South American languages and the development
of computer-assisted methods and algorithms to
quantitatively analyze the digitized data. The
project aims to digitize around 500 works, most
of which are currently only available in print and
many of which are the only resources available for
the languages that they describe. The list of the
languages, language families and the data that has
so far been digitized is available online.2

The QuantHistLing project has a simple
data output format that contains metadata (pre-
fixed with “@”) and tab-delimited lexical out-

1http://quanthistling.info/
2http://quanthistling.info/index.php?

id=resources

28



put. An example is given in Figure 1. The
first row following the metadata contains the
data header with the fields: QLCID, HEAD,
HEAD DOCULECT, TRANSLATION, TRANS-
LATION DOCULECT, which correspond respec-
tively to the internal QLC unique identifier, the
headword in the dictionary, the doculect of the
headword (or in other words the language in which
this particular document describes), the translation
for the given headword, and the doculect that the
translation is given in. For each resource a data
dump with the same format is provided by the
project.

2.2 Conversion
We convert the QLC data into Linked Data that
conforms to the Lemon model with a simple
Python script. Lemon is an ontological model for
modeling lexicons and machine-readable dictio-
naries for linking to the Semantic Web and the
Linked Data cloud.3 It is based on the Lexical
Markup Framework (LMF) (Francopoulo et al.,
2006) and uses the idea of data categories (Ro-
mary, 2010), like ISOCat (Kemps-Snijders et al.,
2008), which include uniquely identified concepts
that are useful for computational tasks (McCrae et
al., 2011).

The benefits of modeling lexical data in Lemon
are multi-fold. Internal to the Lemon mission are
the benefits from overcoming the challenges that
the model was designed to meet:4

• RDF-native form to enable leverage of ex-
isting Semantic Web technologies (SPARQL,
OWL, RIF etc.).

• Linguistically sound structure based on LMF
to enable conversion to existing offline for-
mats.

• Separation of the lexicon and ontology lay-
ers, to ensure compatability with existing
OWL models.

• Linking to data categories, in order to al-
low for arbitrarily complex linguistic descrip-
tion. In particular the LexInfo vocabulary is
aligned to Lemon and ISOcat.

3The Lemon developers are also active in the W3C
Ontology-Lexica Community Group, whose goal is to “de-
velop models for the representation of lexica (and machine
readable dictionaries) relative to ontologies”. See: http:
//www.w3.org/community/ontolex/.

4http://lemon-model.net/

• A small model using the principle of least
power - the less expressive the language, the
more reusable the data.

We chose to model lexicons in Lemon instead of
the Graph Annotation Format (GrAF) (Ide and Su-
derman, 2007) and the Lexicon Interchange For-
maT (LIFT)5 because of Lemon’s tight integration
with Semantic Web technologies, which allows us
to add lexical data to the Linked Open Data cloud
(LOD) and the Linguistic Linked Open Data cloud
(LLOD). From the perspective of linguistics re-
searchers, mapping dictionary and wordlists data
to the LLOD has many advantages:

• Data that is linked is available on the Web
in a standard format and accessible via the
(L)LOD.

• Data are queryable through a SPARQL end-
point.

• The use of an ontology and Linked Data
addresses the problem of merging disparate
dictionary entries using senses and meaning
mappings, including leveraging other sources
such as Wordnet and domain-specific ontolo-
gies.

2.3 Ontology
Figure 2 illustrates our model implementation of
the Lemon model with the QHL data.6 Subjects,
predicates and objects are clearly labeled. Cur-
rently the dataset contains 3,828,420 triples and
we have made links to Lexvo,7 a pivot for linguis-
tic resources in the LLOD, via ISO 639-3 language
name identifiers (de Melo, Submittied). There are
currently 216 language links to Lexvo and thus nu-
merous entries to other language resources.

3 Application

A major goal in historical-comparative linguistics
is the identification of cognates, i.e. sets of words
in genealogically related languages that have been
derived from a common word or root (e.g. English
‘is’, German ‘ist’, Latin ‘est’, from Indo-European
‘esti’). Modeling dictionaries and lexicons in a
pivot ontology using overlaps in translations is

5https://code.google.com/p/
lift-standard/

6Our version of the Linked Data is available here: http:
//linked-data.org/datasets/qhl.ttl.zip.

7http://www.lexvo.org/

29



Figure 1: QLC data format
@date: 2012-11-23
@url: http://www.quanthistling.info/data/source/aguiar1994/dictionary-329-369.html
@source_title: Analise descritiva e teorica do Katukino-Pano
@source_author: de Aguiar, Maria Sueli
@source_year: 1994
@doculect: Katukina, n/a, Katukina, Panoan
@doculect: Portugues, por, Portugues, Panoan
QLCID HEAD HEAD_DOCULECT TRANSLATION TRANSLATION_DOCULECT
aguiar1994/329/1 ai Katukina presente Portugues
aguiar1994/329/2 aima Katukina solteiro Portugues
aguiar1994/329/3 ain Katukina esposa Portugues
aguiar1994/329/4 ainnan Katukina cipo para cesta Portugues
aguiar1994/329/5 ainnan Katukina casado Portugues
aguiar1994/329/6 aka Katukina soco Portugues
aguiar1994/329/7 akaai Katukina tomar Portugues

Figure 2: Implementation of QHL data in Lemon

30



one way to merge several resources into one RDF
graph for querying and extracting semantically-
aligned wordlists, which can then be used as input
into computational historical linguistics tools such
as LingPy (List and Moran, 2013).8

As a first step, we have converted the QHL
data into Linked Data and it is available online
through a SPARQL endpoint.9 Querying the com-
bined dictionaries and lexicons is straightforward,
as shown in example 1, which returns us all triples.

(1) select * where
{GRAPH
<http://quanthistling.info/lod/>
{?s ?p ?o}
}

Next we limit the query in example 2 to the set
of languages in our translation graph that contain
written forms for the lexical sense “casa”. The
query returns pairs of words, but one can program-
matically expand it by using the wordForm2 and
inserting it in the filter clause.

(2) PREFIX lemon:
<http://www.monnet-project.eu/lemon#>
PREFIX lexinfo:
<http://lexinfo.net/ontology/2.0/
lexinfo#>
select ?wordForm1 ?language1
?wordForm2 ?language2 where
{GRAPH
<http://quanthistling.info/lod/>
{
?word1 a lemon:LexicalForm;
lemon:writtenRep ?wordForm1.
?entry1 lemon:form ?word1;
lemon:sense ?sense1.
?language1 lemon:entry ?entry1.
?sense1 lexinfo:translation ?sense2.
?word2 a lemon:LexicalForm;
lemon:writtenRep ?wordForm2.
?entry2 lemon:form ?word2;
lemon:sense ?sense2.
?language2 lemon:entry ?entry2.
FILTER(str(?wordForm1)="casa")
}
}

Regarding our use of sense, the Lemon documen-
tation states: “The sense object represents a map-
ping between a lexical entry and an ontology en-
tity.” The “ontology entity” that the Lemon au-
thors use as an example is a link to the correspond-
ing DBpedia or Wiktionary entry, where a descrip-
tion of the meaning can be found. While the prin-
ciple is sound, this information is not contained in
our data. Hence that is why there is no more in-
formation in our #sense resources. If a reference

8http://lingpy.org/
9http://qhanthistling.info/lod/

to an ontology entry is to be added later, it can be
easily done so by adding it as a property of the
#sense resource (for example as owl:sameAs, dc-
terms:references, etc.). However, if we have only
strings in languages that are very rare, how are we
to add an ontology entry? For most of the entries,
there will be no corresponding entry. In fact, sup-
pose we find the translation of an entry in a poorly
documented language into a richer-resourced lan-
guage (e.g. Katukina to Portuguese), we would
not know if the Portuguese sense is a proper de-
scription of the sense of the work in Katukina.
Moreover, the links would be sparse and some,
if not many, would be wrong due to missing in-
formation. Therefore, our modelling follows the
Lemon cookbook (examples 29, page 18) for good
reason: the translation of a word is neither a trans-
lation of its wordform or representation nor is it
a translation of its lexical entry. It is thus lin-
guistically sound to say the “sense” of a word like
“casa” is translated into another language, but its
word form or entry is not.

Building on the former query, one can also add
a node, as illustrated in example 3:10

(3) PREFIX lemon:
<http://www.monnet-project.eu/lemon#>
PREFIX lexinfo:
<http://lexinfo.net/ontology/2.0/
lexinfo#>
select ?wordForm1 ?language1
?wordForm2 ?language2 ?wordForm3
?language3
WHERE
{GRAPH
<http://quanthistling.info/lod/>
{?word1 a lemon:LexicalForm;
lemon:writtenRep ?wordForm1.
?entry1 lemon:form ?word1;
lemon:sense ?sense1.
?language1 lemon:entry ?entry1.
?sense1 lexinfo:translation ?sense2.
?word2 a lemon:LexicalForm;
lemon:writtenRep ?wordForm2.
?entry2 lemon:form ?word2;
lemon:sense ?sense2.
?language2 lemon:entry ?entry2.
?sense2 lexinfo:translation ?sense3.
?word3 a lemon:LexicalForm;
lemon:writtenRep ?wordForm3.
?entry3 lemon:form ?word3;
lemon:sense ?sense3.
?language3 lemon:entry ?entry3.
FILTER (str(?wordForm1)="casa")
}
}

Of course this query can be easily extended to in-
10Note that the filter in this query is computationally ex-

pensive and at the moment certain queries may time out as
we try and increase server capacity.

31



corporate entire wordlists, such as the Swadesh list
(Swadesh, 1952) or Leipzig-Jakarta list (Tadmor
et al., 2010).

Again we emphasize that the combination of
disparate data from many dictionaries and lexi-
cons is a first step in a computational historical
linguistics pipeline: the results are given in the
source documents’ orthographic representations
and therefore they must be normalized into an in-
terlingual pivot, such as the International Phonetic
Alphabet, if phonetic or phonemic analysis is to
be applied to the data. This would be the next step
before producing phonetic alignments and cognate
judgements based on metrics and algorithms for
calculating lexical similarity.

4 Conclusion

From data being digitized and extracted from print
resources, we are creating machine-readable lexi-
cons that are both interoperable with each other
(we link semantic senses using the Lemon ontol-
ogy model) and with other linguistics sources (we
use standard language code URIs used by other
Linked Data resources in the LLOD).

Future work may proceed in a number of direc-
tions, such as:

• building algorithms that identify seman-
tically similar translation-pairs from terse
translations, e.g. identify that doculect trans-
lations like “coarsely grind”, “grind up, crush
well”, “grind lightly (chili pepper, millet
for a quick snack)”, “grind lightly (ground-
nuts) with stones” for different languages can
be mapped to a simpler form such as “to
crush/grind” for initial comparative analysis

• using NLP Interchange Format (Hellmann et
al., 2012) to keep track of where information
in the dictionaries comes from – or in other
words, use NIF combined with Lemon to an-
notate the QHL data sources for provenance

• linking to other resources that contain other
linguistic and non-linguistic information (e.g.
typological data and geographic variables
that provide useful information for determin-
ing the genealogical and geographical relat-
edness of languages)

References
Alexandre Bouchard-Côté, David Hall, Thomas L.

Griffiths, and Dan Klein. 2013. Automated re-
construction of ancient languages using probabilis-
tic models of sound change. PNAS, 110(11):4224–
4229.

R. Bouckaert, P. Lemey, M. Dunn, S. J. Greenhill,
A. V. Alekseyenko, A. J. Drummond, R. D. Gray,
M. A. Suchard, and Q. D. Atkinson. 2012. Mapping
the origins and expansion of the Indo-European lan-
guage family. Science, 337(6097):957–960, Aug.

Gerard de Melo. Submittied. Lexvo.org: Language-
related information for the linguistic linked data
cloud. Semantic Web Journal.

Gil Francopoulo, Monte George, Nicoletta Calzolari,
Monica Monachini, Nuria Bel, Mandy Pet, Claudia
Soria, et al. 2006. Lexical markup framework (lmf).
In In Proceedings of the Fifth International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2006).

Sebastian Hellmann, Jens Lehmann, and Sören Auer.
2012. Linked-data aware uri schemes for referenc-
ing text fragments. In Knowledge Engineering and
Knowledge Management, pages 175–184. Springer.

Eric. W. Holman, Cecil H. Brown, Søren Wich-
mann, André Müller, Viveka Velupillai, Harald
Hammarström, Sebastian Sauppe, Hagen Jung, Dik
Bakker, Pamela Brown, Oleg Belyaev, Matthias Ur-
ban, Robert Mailhammer, Johann-Mattis List, and
Dimitry Egorov. 2011. Automated dating of the
world’s language families based on lexical similar-
ity. Current Anthropology, 52(6):841–875.

Nancy Ide and Keith Suderman. 2007. Graf: A graph-
based format for linguistic annotations. In Proceed-
ings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages
1–8. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Marc Kemps-Snijders, Menzo Windhouwer, Peter Wit-
tenburg, and Sue Ellen Wright. 2008. Isocat: Cor-
ralling data categories in the wild. In LREC.

Brett Kessler. 2001. The significance of word lists.
CSLI Publications, Stanford.

Grzegorz Kondrak. 2000. A new algorithm for the
alignment of phonetic sequences. In Proceedings of
the 1st North American chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics conference, NAACL
2000, pages 288–295, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Johann-Mattis List and Steven Moran. 2013. An open
source toolkit for quantitative historical linguistics.
In Proceedings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.

John McCrae, Guadalupe Aguado-de Cea, Paul
Buitelaar, Philipp Cimiano, Thierry Declerck,
Asunción Gómez Pérez, Jorge Gracia, Laura

32



Hollink, Elena Montiel-Ponsoda, Dennis Spohr, and
Tobias Wunner. 2010. The lemon cookbook. Tech-
nical report, CITEC, Universität Bielefeld.

John McCrae, Dennis Spohr, and Philipp Cimiano.
2011. Linking lexical resources and ontologies on
the semantic web with lemon. In The Semantic
Web: Research and Applications, pages 245–259.
Springer.

Shijulal Nelson-Sathi, Johann-Mattis List, Hans
Geisler, Heiner Fangerau, Russell D. Gray, William
Martin, and Tal Dagan. 2011. Networks un-
cover hidden lexical borrowing in Indo-European
language evolution. Proceedings of the Royal So-
ciety B, 278(1713):1794–1803.

Jelena Prokić, Martijn Wieling, and John Nerbonne.
2009. Multiple sequence alignments in linguis-
tics. In Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop
on Language Technology and Resources for Cultural
Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities, and Educa-
tion, pages 18–25, Stroudsburg, PA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Laurent Romary. 2010. Standardization of the formal
representation of lexical information for nlp. Dictio-
naries. An International Encyclopedia of Lexicogra-
phy. Supplementary volume: Recent developments
with special focus on computational lexicography.

Lydia Steiner, Peter F. Stadler, and Michael Cysouw.
2011. A pipeline for computational historical lin-
guistics. Language Dynamics and Change, 1(1):89–
127.

Morris Swadesh. 1952. Lexico-statistic dating of pre-
historic ethnic contacts. Proceedings of the Ameri-
can Philosophical Society, 96(4):452–463.

Uri Tadmor, Martin Haspelmath, and Bradley Taylor.
2010. Borrowability and the notion of basic vocab-
ulary. Diachronica, 27(2):226–246.

Peter Turchin, Ilja Peiros, and Murray Gell-Mann.
2010. Analyzing genetic connections between lan-
guages by matching consonant classes. Journal of
Language Relationship, 3:117–126.

33


