










































Linguistically analyzed labels of knowledge objects: How can they support OBIE? Lessons learned from the Monnet and TrendMiner projects


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on NLP&LOD and SWAIE, page 49,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 12 September 2013.

Linguistically analyzed labels of knowledge objects: How can 

they support OBIE? Lessons learned from the Monnet and Trend-

Miner projects  

 

 

Thierry Declerck 

DFKI GmbH  

thierry.declerck@dfki.de  

 

 

  

 

1 Abstract 

We are investigating the use of natural language 

expressions included in Knowledge Organization 

Systems (KOS) for supporting Ontology-Based 

Information Extraction (OBIE), in a multi- and 

cross-lingual context. 

Very often, Knowledge Organization Systems 

include so-called annotation properties, in the 

form of labels, comments, definitions, etc, which 

have the purpose of introducing human readable 

information in the formal description of the do-

main modelled in the KOS. 

An approach developed in the Monnet project, 

and continued in the TrendMiner project, con-

sists in transforming the content of annotation 

properties into linguistically analysed data. Natu-

ral language processing of such language expres-

sions, also called sometimes lexicalisation of 

Knowledge Organisation Systems, are thus trans-

forming the unstructured content of annotation 

properties into linguistically structured data, 

which can be used in comparing language data 

included in a KOS with linguistically annotated 

texts. If some match of linguistic features be-

tween those two types of documents can be es-

tablished, corresponding segments of the textual 

documents can be semantically annotated with 

the elements of the KOS the content of the anno-

tation property is associated with. Evidently, this 

semantic annotation procedure can be of great 

help for OBIE, relating text segment to relevant 

parts of thesauri, taxonomy or ontologies. 

But looking in more details at the language 

data contained in annotation properties, we can 

see that this data very often has to be modified in 

order to be better used in the context of OBIE. 

Also there is a need for a formal representation 

of such linguistically annotated language data in 

order to ensure interoperability with semantic 

data available in the Linked Data Framework. 

The talk will expand on those issues. 

 

2 Short Bio 

Thierry Declerck is senior consultant at DFKI's 

LT lab and he was leading the DFKI contribution 

to the European Project MONNET
1
. Before this 

he was in charge of the DFKI contribution to the 

Integrated Project MUSING
2
, which finished in 

April 2010, and till March 2009 he was involved 

as well in the European Network of Excellence 

"K-Space" (Knowledge Space of semantic infe-

rence for automatic annotation and retrieval of 

multimedia content). In the field of standardiza-

tion of language resources, Thierry Declerck was 

involved in the eContent "Lirics" (Linguistic In-

frastructure for Interoperable Resources and Sys-

tems) project (see http://lirics.loria.fr/) and was 

leading the MUMIS project on the Indexing and 

Search of Multimedia data. He was also in 

charge of the ACL Natural Language Software 

Registry, which is now integrated in lt-world. 

Since Mai 2004, he was conducting the DFKI 

contribution of the eTen WINS project. Thierry 

Declerck is also actively involved in ISO 

TC37/SC4/ (on language resources manage-

ment). 

 

                                                 
1 http://www.monnet-project.eu/ 
2 http://www.musing.eu/ 

49


