










































Event-Centered Information Retrieval Using Kernels on Event Graphs


Proceedings of the TextGraphs-8 Workshop, pages 1–5,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Event-Centered Information Retrieval Using Kernels on Event Graphs

Goran Glavaš and Jan Šnajder
University of Zagreb

Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing
Unska 3, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia

{goran.glavas,jan.snajder}@fer.hr

Abstract

Traditional information retrieval models as-
sume keyword-based queries and use unstruc-
tured document representations. There is
an abundance of event-centered texts (e.g.,
breaking news) and event-oriented informa-
tion needs that often involve structure that
cannot be expressed using keywords. We
present a novel retrieval model that uses a struc-
tured event-based representation. We struc-
ture queries and documents as graphs of event
mentions and employ graph kernels to measure
the query-document similarity. Experimental
results on two event-oriented test collections
show significant improvements over state-of-
the-art keyword-based models.

1 Introduction

The purpose of an information retrieval (IR) system is
to retrieve the documents relevant to user’s informa-
tion need expressed in the form of a query. Many in-
formation needs are event-oriented, while at the same
time there exists an abundance of event-centered texts
(e.g., breaking news, police reports) that could satisfy
these needs. Furthermore, event-oriented information
needs often involve structure that cannot easily be
expressed with keyword-based queries (e.g., “What
are the countries that President Bush has visited and
in which has his visit triggered protests?”). Tradi-
tional IR models (Salton et al., 1975; Robertson and
Jones, 1976; Ponte and Croft, 1998) rely on shal-
low unstructured representations of documents and
queries, making no use of syntactic, semantic, or
discourse level information. On the other hand, mod-
els utilizing structured event-based representations
have not yet proven useful in IR. However, signifi-
cant advances in event extraction have been achieved

in the last decade as the result of standardization ef-
forts (Pustejovsky et al., 2003) and shared evaluation
tasks (Verhagen et al., 2010), renewing the interest
in structured event-based text representations.

In this paper we present a novel retrieval model
that relies on structured event-based representation
of text and addresses event-centered queries. We
define an event-oriented query as a query referring
to one or more real-world events, possibly includ-
ing their participants, the circumstances under which
the events occurred, and the temporal relations be-
tween the events. We account for such queries by
structuring both documents and queries into event
graphs (Glavaš and Šnajder, 2013b). The event
graphs are built from individual event mentions ex-
tracted from text, capturing their protagonists, times,
locations, and temporal relations. To measure the
query-document similarity, we compare the corre-
sponding event graphs using graph kernels (Borg-
wardt, 2007). Experimental results on two news story
collections show significant improvements over state-
of-the-art keyword-based models. We also show that
our models are especially suitable for retrieval from
collections containing topically similar documents.

2 Related Work

Most IR systems are a variant of the vector space
model (Salton et al., 1975), probabilistic model
(Robertson and Jones, 1976), or language model
(Ponte and Croft, 1998), which do not account for
associations between query terms. Recent models in-
troduce co-occurrence-based (Park et al., 2011) and
syntactic (Shinzato et al., 2012) dependencies. How-
ever, these dependencies alone in most cases cannot
capture in sufficient detail the semantics of events.

A more comprehensive set of dependencies can be
modeled with graph-based representations. Graph-

1



based IR approaches come in two flavors: (1) the
entire document collection is represented as a sin-
gle graph in which queries are inserted as additional
vertices (Mihalcea and Tarau, 2004); (2) each query
and each document are represented as graphs of con-
cepts, and the relevance of a document for a query is
determined by comparing the corresponding graphs
(Montes-y Gómez et al., 2000). Our approach fits
into the latter group but we represent documents as
graphs of events rather than graphs of concepts. In
NLP, graph kernels have been used for question type
classification (Suzuki, 2005), cross-lingual retrieval
(Noh et al., 2009), and recognizing news stories on
the same event (Glavaš and Šnajder, 2013b).

Event-based IR is addressed explicitly by Lin et
al. (2007), who compare predicate-argument struc-
tures extracted from queries to those extracted from
documents. However, queries have to be manually
decomposed into semantic roles and can contain only
a single predicate. Kawahara et al. (2013) propose a
similar approach and demonstrate that ranking based
on semantic roles outperforms ranking based on syn-
tactic dependencies. Both these approaches target the
problem of syntactic alternation but do not consider
the queries made of multiple predicates, such as those
expressing temporal relations between events.

3 Kernels on Event Graphs

Our approach consists of two steps. First, we con-
struct event graphs from both the document and the
query. We then use a graph kernel to measure the
query-document similarity and rank the documents.

3.1 Event Graphs

An event graph is a mixed graph in which vertices rep-
resent the individual event mentions and edges repre-
sent temporal relations between them. More formally,
an event graph is a tuple G = (V,E,A,m, r), where
V is the set of vertices, E is the set of undirected
edges, A is the set of directed edges, m : V → M
maps the vertices to event mentions, and r : E → R
assigns temporal relations to edges.

We use a generic representation of a factual event
mention, which consists of an event anchor and event
arguments of four coarse types (agent, target, time,
and location) (Glavaš and Šnajder, 2013a; Glavaš
and Šnajder, 2013b). We adopt the set of temporal

relations used in TempEval-2 (Verhagen et al., 2010)
(before, after, and overlap), with additional temporal
equivalence relation (equal).

To build an event graph, we first extract the event
mentions and then extract the temporal relations be-
tween them. To extract the event anchors, we use
a supervised model based on a rich feature set pro-
posed by Glavaš and Šnajder (2013b), performing
at 80% F1-score. We then use a robust rule-based
approach from Glavaš and Šnajder (2013a) to extract
event arguments. Finally, we extract the temporal
relations using a supervised model with a rich fea-
ture set proposed by Glavaš and Šnajder (2013b).
Relation classification performs at 60% F1-score.

To compute the product graph kernels, we must
identify event mentions from the query that corefer
with mentions from the document. To this end, we
employ the model from Glavaš and Šnajder (2013a),
which compares the anchors and four types of argu-
ments between a pair of event mentions. The model
performs at 67% F-score on the EventCorefBank
dataset (Bejan and Harabagiu, 2008).

3.2 Product Graph Kernels
Graph kernels provide an expressive measure of sim-
ilarity between graphs (Borgwardt, 2007). In this
work, we use product graph kernel (PGK), a type of
random walk graph kernel that counts the common
walks between two graphs (Gärtner et al., 2003).

Product graph. The graph product of two labeled
graphs, G and G

′
, denoted GP = G×G′, is a graph

with the vertex set

VP =
{
(v, v′) | v ∈ VG, v′ ∈ VG′ , δ(v, v′)

}
where predicate δ(v, v′) holds iff vertices v and v′ are
identically labeled (Hammack et al., 2011). Vertices
of event graphs have the same label if the event men-
tions they denote corefer. The edge set of the product
is conditioned on the type of the graph product. In the
tensor product, an edge exists in the product iff the
corresponding edges exist in both input graphs and
have the same label, i.e., denote the same temporal
relation. In the conormal product, an edge is intro-
duced iff the corresponding edge exists in at least one
input graph. A conormal product may compensate
for omitted temporal relations in the input graphs but
may introduce spurious edges that do not represent

2



(a) Query graph (b) Document graph (c) Tensor product (d) Conormal product

Figure 1: Examples of event graphs and their products

true overlap between queries and documents. Fig. 1
shows an example of input graphs and their products.

PGK computation. The PGK for input graphs G
and G′ is computed as

kPG(G,G
′) =

|VP |∑
i,j=1

[(I − λAP )−1]ij

provided λ < 1/d , where d is the maximum vertex
degree in the product graph GP with the adjacency
matrix AP . In experiments, we set λ to 1/(d+ 1) .
PGK suffers from tottering (Mahé et al., 2005), a phe-
nomenon due to the repetition of edges in a random
walk. A walk that totters between neighboring ver-
tices produces an unrealistically high similarity score.
To prevent tottering between neighboring vertices,
Mahé et al. (2005) transform the input graphs before
computing the kernel score on their product: each
edge (vi, vj) is converted into a vertex ve; the edge it-
self gets replaced with edges (ve, vi) and (ve, vj). We
experiment with Mahé extension for PGK, account-
ing for the increased probability of one-edge-cycle
tottering due the small size of query graphs.

4 Experiments

Test Collections and Queries. To the best of our
knowledge, there is no standard test collection avail-
able for event-centered IR that we could use to evalu-
ate our models. Thus, we decided to build two such
test collections, with 50 queries each: (1) a general
collection of topically diverse news stories and (2) a
topic-specific collection of news on Syria crisis. The
first collection contains 25,948 news stories obtained
from EMM News Brief, an online news clustering
service.1 For the topic-specific collection, we se-
lected from the general collection 1387 documents
that contain the word “Syria” or its derivations.

1http://emm.newsbrief.eu

General collection (news stories)

q1: An ICT giant purchased the phone maker after the
government approved the acquisition

q2: The warship tried to detain Chinese fishermen but
was obstructed by the Chinese vessels

Topic-specific collection (Syria crisis)

q3: Syrian forces killed civilians, torched houses, and
ransacked stores, overrunning a farmer village

q4: Rebels murdered many Syrian soldiers and the gov-
ernment troops blasted the town in central Syria

Table 1: Example queries from the test collection

For each collection we asked an annotator to com-
pile 50 queries. She was instructed to select at ran-
dom a document from the collection, read the docu-
ment carefully, and compile at least one query con-
sisting of at least two event mentions, in such a way
that the selected document is relevant for the query.
Example queries are shown in Table 1. For instance,
query q1 (whose corresponding event graph is shown
in Fig. 1a) was created based on the following docu-
ment (whose event graph is shown in Fig. 1b):

Google Inc. won approval from Chinese regula-
tors for its $12.5 billion purchase of Motorola
Mobility Holdings Inc., clearing a final hurdle
for a deal that boosts its patents portfolio. . .

Relevance judgments. To create relevance judg-
ments, we use the standard IR pooling method with
two baseline retrieval models – a TF-IDF weighted
vector space model (VSM) and a language model.
Our graph-based model was not used for pooling be-
cause of time limitations (note that this favors the
baseline models because pool-based evaluation is
biased against models not contributing to the pool
(Büttcher et al., 2007)). Given that EMM News Brief
builds clusters of related news and that most EMM

3



Collection

Model General Specific

Baselines TF-IDF VSM 0.335 0.199
Hiemstra LM 0.300 0.175
In expC2 0.341 0.188
DFR BM25 0.332 0.192

Graph-based Tensor 0.502 0.407
Conormal 0.434 0.359
Mahé Tensor 0.497 0.412
Mahé Conormal 0.428 0.362

Table 2: Retrieval performance (MAP)

clusters contain less than 50 news stories, we esti-
mate that there are at most 50 relevant documents per
query. To get an even better estimate of recall, for
each query we pooled the union of top 75 documents
retrieved by each of the two baseline models.

One annotator made the relevance judgments for
all queries. We asked another annotator to provide
judgments for two randomly chosen queries and ob-
tained perfect agreement, which confirmed our intu-
ition that determining relevance for complex event-
centered queries is not difficult. The average number
of relevant documents per query in the general and
topic-specific collection is 12 and 8, respectively.2

Results. Table 2 shows the mean average preci-
sion (MAP) on both test collections for four graph
kernel-based models (tensor/conormal product and
with/without Mahé extension). We compare our
models to baselines from the three traditional IR
paradigms: a TF-IDF-weighted cosine VSM, the
language model of Hiemstra (2001), and the best-
performing models from the probabilistic Divergence
from Randomness (DFR) framework (In expC2 and
DFR BM25) (Amati, 2003; Ounis et al., 2006). We
evaluate these models using the Terrier IR platform.3

Overall, all models perform worse on the topic-
specific collection, in which all documents are topi-
cally related. Our graph kernel models outperform
all baseline models (p<0.01 for tensor models and
p<0.05 for conormal models; paired student’s t-test)
on both collections, with a wider margin on topic-
specific than on the general collection. This result

2Available at http://takelab.fer.hr/data
3http://terrier.org

[−1;−0.1](−0.1; 0] (0; 0.1] (0.1; 0.3] (0.3; 1]
0

5

10

15

Figure 2: Histogram of AP differences

suggests that the graph-based models are especially
suitable for retrieval over topic-specific collections.
There is no significant difference between the ten-
sor product and conormal product models, indicating
that the conormal product introduces spurious edges
more often than it remedies for incorrect extraction
of temporal relations. The performance differences
due to Mahé extension are not significant, providing
no conclusive evidence on the effect of tottering.

To gain more insights into the performance of our
event graph-based model, we analyzed per query
differences in average precision between our best-
performing model (Tensor) and the best-performing
baseline (In expC2) on queries from the general col-
lection. Fig. 2 shows the histogram of differences.
Our graph kernel-based model outperforms the base-
line on 42 out of 50 queries. A closer inspection
of the eight queries on which our model performs
worse than the baseline reveals that this is due to (1)
an important event mention not being extracted from
the query (2 cases) or a (2) failure in coreference
resolution between an event mention from the query
and a mention from the document (6 cases).

5 Conclusion and Perspectives

We presented a graph-based model for event-centered
information retrieval. The model represents queries
and documents as event graphs and ranks the docu-
ments based on graph kernel similarity. The experi-
ments demonstrate that for event-based queries our
graph-based model significantly outperforms state-of-
the-art keyword-based retrieval models. Our models
are especially suitable for topic-specific collections,
on which traditional IR models perform poorly.

An interesting topic for further research is the ex-
tension of the model with other types of dependen-
cies between events, such as entailment, causality,

4



and structural relations. Another direction concerns
the effective integration of event graph-based and
keyword-based models. We will also consider ap-
plications of event graphs on other natural language
processing tasks such as text summarization.

Acknowledgments. This work has been supported
by the Ministry of Science, Education and Sports,
Republic of Croatia under the Grant 036-1300646-
1986. We thank the reviewers for their comments.

References

Giambattista Amati. 2003. Probability models for infor-
mation retrieval based on divergence from randomness.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Glasgow.

Cosmin Adrian Bejan and Sanda Harabagiu. 2008. A
linguistic resource for discovering event structures and
resolving event coreference. In Proc. of the LREC
2008.

Karsten Michael Borgwardt. 2007. Graph Kernels. Ph.D.
thesis, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München.

Stefan Büttcher, Charles LA Clarke, Peter CK Yeung, and
Ian Soboroff. 2007. Reliable information retrieval
evaluation with incomplete and biased judgements. In
Proc. of the ACM SIGIR, pages 63–70. ACM.

Thomas Gärtner, Peter Flach, and Stefan Wrobel. 2003.
On graph kernels: Hardness results and efficient alterna-
tives. In Learning Theory and Kernel Machines, pages
129–143. Springer.

Goran Glavaš and Jan Šnajder. 2013a. Exploring coref-
erence uncertainty of generically extracted event men-
tions. In Proc. of the CICLing 2013, pages 408–422.
Springer.

Goran Glavaš and Jan Šnajder. 2013b. Recognizing iden-
tical events with graph kernels. In Proc. of the ACL
2013, pages 797–803.

Richard Hammack, Wilfried Imrich, and Sandi Klavžar.
2011. Handbook of Product Graphs. Discrete Mathe-
matics and Its Applications. CRC Press.

Djoerd Hiemstra. 2001. Using language models for infor-
mation retrieval. Taaluitgeverij Neslia Paniculata.

Daisuke Kawahara, Keiji Shinzato, Tomohide Shibata, and
Sadao Kurohashi. 2013. Precise information retrieval
exploiting predicate-argument structures. In Proc. of
the IJCNLP 2013. In press.

Chia-Hung Lin, Chia-Wei Yen, Jen-Shin Hong, Samuel
Cruz-Lara, et al. 2007. Event-based textual document
retrieval by using semantic role labeling and corefer-
ence resolution. In IADIS International Conference
WWW/Internet 2007.

Pierre Mahé, Nobuhisa Ueda, Tatsuya Akutsu, Jean-Luc
Perret, and Jean-Philippe Vert. 2005. Graph kernels
for molecular structure-activity relationship analysis
with support vector machines. Journal of Chemical
Information and Modeling, 45(4):939–951.

Rada Mihalcea and Paul Tarau. 2004. TextRank: Bring-
ing order into texts. In Proc. of the EMNLP 2004,
volume 4. Barcelona, Spain.

Manuel Montes-y Gómez, Aurelio López-López, and
Alexander Gelbukh. 2000. Information retrieval with
conceptual graph matching. In Database and Expert
Systems Applications, pages 312–321. Springer.

Tae-Gil Noh, Seong-Bae Park, Hee-Geun Yoon, Sang-Jo
Lee, and Se-Young Park. 2009. An automatic transla-
tion of tags for multimedia contents using folksonomy
networks. In Proc. of the ACM SIGIR 2009, pages
492–499. ACM.

Iadh Ounis, Gianni Amati, Vassilis Plachouras, Ben He,
Craig Macdonald, and Christina Lioma. 2006. Terrier:
A high performance and scalable information retrieval
platform. In Proceedings of the OSIR Workshop, pages
18–25.

Jae Hyun Park, W Bruce Croft, and David A Smith. 2011.
A quasi-synchronous dependence model for informa-
tion retrieval. In Proc. of the 20th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Manage-
ment, pages 17–26. ACM.

Jay Ponte and Bruce Croft. 1998. A language modeling
approach to information retrieval. In Proc. of the ACM
SIGIR, pages 275–281. ACM.

James Pustejovsky, José Castano, Robert Ingria, Roser
Sauri, Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, Graham Katz,
and Dragomir Radev. 2003. TimeML: Robust specifi-
cation of event and temporal expressions in text. New
Directions in Question Answering, 3:28–34.

Stephen E Robertson and K Sparck Jones. 1976. Rele-
vance weighting of search terms. Journal of the Ameri-
can Society for Information science, 27(3):129–146.

Gerard Salton, Anita Wong, and Chung-Shu Yang. 1975.
A vector space model for automatic indexing. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 18(11):613–620.

Keiji Shinzato, Tomohide Shibata, Daisuke Kawahara,
and Sadao Kurohashi. 2012. Tsubaki: An open search
engine infrastructure for developing information ac-
cess methodology. Journal of Information Processing,
20(1):216–227.

Jun Suzuki. 2005. Kernels for structured data in natural
language processing. Doctor Thesis, Nara Institute of
Science and Technology.

Marc Verhagen, Roser Sauri, Tommaso Caselli, and
James Pustejovsky. 2010. SemEval-2010 Task 13:
TempEval-2. In Proc. of the SemEval 2010, pages
57–62.

5


