










































IITB System for CoNLL 2013 Shared Task: A Hybrid Approach to Grammatical Error Correction


Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning: Shared Task, pages 82–87,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

IITB System for CoNLL 2013 Shared Task: A Hybrid Approach to
Grammatical Error Correction

Anoop Kunchukuttan Ritesh Shah Pushpak Bhattacharyya
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Bombay

{anoopk,ritesh,pb}@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract
We describe our grammar correction sys-
tem for the CoNLL-2013 shared task.
Our system corrects three of the five er-
ror types specified for the shared task -
noun-number, determiner and subject-verb
agreement errors. For noun-number and
determiner correction, we apply a classi-
fication approach using rich lexical and
syntactic features. For subject-verb agree-
ment correction, we propose a new rule-
based system which utilizes dependency
parse information and a set of conditional
rules to ensure agreement of the verb
group with its subject. Our system ob-
tained an F-score of 11.03 on the official
test set using the M2 evaluation method
(the official evaluation method).

1 Introduction

Grammatical Error Correction (GEC) is an inter-
esting and challenging problem and the existing
methods that attempt to solve this problem take
recourse to deep linguistic and statistical analy-
sis. In general, GEC may partly assist in solv-
ing natural language processing (NLP) tasks like
Machine Translation, Natural Language Genera-
tion etc. However, a more evident application of
GEC is in building automated grammar checkers
thereby benefiting non-native speakers of a lan-
guage. The CoNLL-2013 shared task (Ng et al.,
2013) looks at improving the current approaches
for GEC and for inviting novel perspectives to-
wards solving the same. The shared task makes
the NUCLE corpus (Dahlmeier et al., 2013) avail-
able in the public domain and participants have
been asked to correct grammatical errors belong-
ing to the following categories: noun-number,
determiner, subject-verb agreement (SVA), verb
form and preposition. The key challenges are han-
dling interaction between different error groups

and handling potential mistakes made by off-the-
shelf NLP components run on erroneous text.

For the shared task, we have addressed the fol-
lowing problems: noun-number, determiner and
subject-verb agreement correction. For noun-
number and determiner correction, we use a clas-
sification based approach to predict corrections
- which is a widely used approach (Knight and
Chander, 1994; Rozovskaya and Roth, 2010). For
subject-verb agreement correction, we propose a
new rule-based approach which applies a set of
conditional rules to correct the verb group to en-
sure its agreement with its subject. Our system
obtained a score of 11.03 on the official test set
using the M2 method. Our SVA correction sys-
tem performs very well with a F-score of 28.45 on
the official test set.

Section 2 outlines our approach to solving the
grammar correction problem. Sections 3, 4 and
5 describe the details of the noun-number, deter-
miner and SVA correction components of our sys-
tem. Section 6 explains our experimental setup.
Section 7 discusses the results of the experiments
and Section 8 concludes the report.

2 Problem Formulation

In this work, we focus on correction of three
error categories related to nouns: noun-number,
determiner and subject-verb agreement. The
number of the noun, the choice of determiner and
verb’s agreement in number with the subject are
clearly inter-related. Therefore, a coordinated
approach is necessary to correct these errors. If
these problems are solved independently of each
other, wrong corrections may be generated. The
following are some examples:
Erroneous sentence
A good workmen does not blame his tools
Good corrections
A good workman does not blame his tools
Good workmen do not blame his tools

82



noun-number

subject-verb agreement determiner

Figure 1: Dependencies between the noun-
number, determiner and subject-verb agreement
errors

Bad corrections
A good workman do not blame his tools
Good workman does not blame his tools

The choice of noun-number is determined by
the discourse and meaning of the text. The choice
of determiner is partly determined by the noun-
number, whereas the verb’s agreement depends
completely on the number of its subject. Fig-
ure 1 shows the proposed dependencies between
the number of a noun, its determiner and num-
ber agreement with the verb for which the noun
is the subject. Assuming these dependencies, we
first correct the noun-number. The corrections to
the determiner and the verb’s agreement with the
subject are done taking into consideration the cor-
rected noun. The noun-number and determiner are
corrected using a classification based approach,
whereas the SVA errors are corrected using a rule-
based system; these are described in the following
sections.

3 Noun Number Correction

The major factors which determine the number
of the noun are: (i) the intended meaning of the
text, (ii) reference to the noun earlier in the dis-
course, and (iii) stylistic considerations. Gram-
matical knowledge is insufficient for determining
the noun-number, which requires a higher level of
natural language processing. For instance, con-
sider the following examples:
(1) I bought all the recommended books. These
books are costly.
(2) Books are the best friends of man.

In Example (1), the choice of plural noun in the
second sentence is determined by a reference to
the entity in the previous sentence. Example (2) is
a general statement about a class of entities, where
the noun is generally a plural. Such phenomena
make noun-number correction a difficult task. As
information at semantic and discourse levels is dif-
ficult to encode, we explored lexical and syntactic

Tokens, POS and chunk tags in
±2 word-window around the noun

Is the noun capitalized ?
Is the noun an acronym ?
Is the noun a named entity?
Is the noun a mass noun, pluralia tantum?
Does the noun group have an article/

demonstrative/quantifier?
What article/demonstrative/quantifier does

the noun phrase have ?
Are there words indicating plurality in

the context of the noun?
The first two words of the sentence

and their POS tags
The number of the verb for which this noun

is the subject
Grammatical Number of majority of nouns

in noun phrase conjunction

Table 1: Feature set for noun-number correction

information to obtain cues about the number of the
noun. The following is a summary of the cues we
have investigated:
Noun properties: Is the noun a mass noun, a plu-
ralia tantum, a named entity or an acronym?
Lexical context: The presence of a plurality indi-
cating word in the context of the noun (e.g. the
ancient scriptures such as the Vedas, Upanishads,
etc.)
Syntactic constraints:

• Nouns linked by a conjunction agree with
each other (e.g. The pens, pencils and books).

• Presence/value of the determiner in the noun
group. However, this is only a secondary cue,
since it is not possible to determine if it is the
determiner or the noun-number that is incor-
rect (e.g. A books).

• Agreement with the verb of which the noun is
the subject. This is also a secondary feature.

Given that we are dealing with erroneous text,
these cues could themselves be wrong. The prob-
lem of noun-number correction is one of mak-
ing a prediction based on multiple cues in the
face of such uncertainty. We model the prob-
lem as a binary classification problem, the task
being to predict if the observed noun-number
of every noun in the text needs correction (la-
bels: requires correction/no correction). Alterna-

83



tively, we could formulate the problem as a sin-
gular/plural number prediction problem, which
would not require annotated learner corpora text.
However, we prefer the former approach since we
can learn corrections from learner corpora text (as
opposed to native speaker text) and use knowledge
of the observed number for prediction. Use of ob-
served values has been shown to be beneficial for
grammar correction (Rozovskaya and Roth, 2010;
Dahlmeier and Ng, 2011).

If the model predicts requires correction, then
the observed number is toggled to obtain the cor-
rected noun-number. In order to bias the system
towards improved precision, we apply the correc-
tion only if classifier’s confidence score for the re-
quires correction prediction exceeds its score for
the no correction prediction by at least a threshold
value. This threshold value is determined empiri-
cally. The feature set designed for the classifier is
shown in Table 1.

4 Determiner Correction

Determiners in English consist of articles, demon-
stratives and quantifiers. The choice of deter-
miners, especially articles, depends on many fac-
tors including lexical, syntactic, semantic and dis-
course phenomena (Han et al., 2006). Therefore,
the correct usage of determiners is difficult to mas-
ter for second language learners, who may (i) in-
sert a determiner where it is not required, (ii) omit
a required determiner, or (iii) use the wrong de-
terminer. We pose the determiner correction prob-
lem as a classification problem, which is a well
explored method (Han et al., 2006; Dahlmeier and
Ng, 2011). Every noun group is a training in-
stance, with the determiner as the class label. Ab-
sence of a determiner is indicated by a special
class label NO DET. However, since the number
of determiners is large, a single multi-class classi-
fier will result in ambiguity. This ambiguity can
be reduced by utilizing of the fact that a partic-
ular observed determiner is replaced by one of a
small subset of all possible determiners (which we
call its confusion set). For instance, the confu-
sion set for a is {a, an, the, NO DET}. It is un-
likely that a is replaced by any other determiner
like this, that, etc. Rozovskaya and Roth (2010)
have used this method for training preposition cor-
rection systems, which we adopt for training a de-
terminer correction system. For each observed de-
terminer, we build a classifier whose prediction is

Description Path

1 Direct subject

verb

noun

nsubj

verb

noun

nsubjpass

2 Path through Wh-determiner

noun

wh-determiner

ref verb

rcmod

nsubj

3 Clausal subject

verb

noun

csubj

verb

noun

csubjpass

4 External subject

verb_1

noun

nsubj

verb_2

xsubj

to

aux

5 Path through copula

verb

subj_complement

cop

noun

nsubj

6 Subject in a different clause

verb_1

verb_3

conj

conjunction

cc

noun

nsubj

verb_2

conj

7 Multiple subjects

noun_1

noun_2

conj

noun_3

conj

conjunction

cc

verb

nsubj

Table 2: Some rules from the singular-
ize verb group rule-set

limited to the confusion set of the observed deter-
miner. The confusion sets were obtained from the
training corpus. The feature set is almost the same
as the one for noun-number correction. The only
difference is that context window features (token,
POS and chunk tags) are taken around the deter-
miner instead of the noun.

5 Subject-Verb Agreement

The task in subject-verb agreement correction is to
correct the verb group components so that it agrees
with its subject. The correction could be made
either to the verb inflection (He run → He runs)
or to the auxiliary verbs in the verb group (He
are running → He is running). We assume that
noun-number and verb form errors (tense, aspect,
modality) do not exist or have already been cor-
rected. We built a rule-based system for perform-
ing SVA correction, whose major components are
(i) a system for detecting the subject of a verb, and

84



(ii) a set of conditional rules to correct the verb
group.

We use a POS tagger, constituency parser and
dependency parser for obtaining linguistic infor-
mation (noun-number, noun/verb groups, depen-
dency paths) required for SVA correction. Our as-
sumption is that these NLP tools are reasonably
robust and do a good analysis when presented with
erroneous text. We have used the Stanford suite of
tools for the shared task and found that it makes
few mistakes on the NUCLE corpus text.

The following is our proposed algorithm for
SVA correction:

1. Identify noun groups in a sentence and the in-
formation associated with each noun group:
(i) number of the head noun of the noun
group, (ii) associated noun groups, if the
noun group is part of a noun phrase conjunc-
tion, and (iii) head and modifier in each noun
group pair related by the if relation.

2. Identify the verb groups in a sentence.

3. For every verb group, identify its subject as
described in Section 5.1.

4. If the verb group does not agree in number
with its subject, correct each verb group by
applying the conditional rules described in
Section 5.2.

5.1 Identifying the subject of the verb
We utilize dependency relations (uncollapsed) ob-
tained from the Stanford dependency parser to
identify the subject of a verb. From analysis of de-
pendency graphs of sentences in the NUCLE cor-
pus, we identified different types of dependency
paths between a verb and its subject, which are
shown in Table 2. Given these possible depen-
dency path types, we identify the subject of a verb
using the following procedure:

• First, check if the subject can be reached us-
ing a direct dependency path (paths (1), (2),
(3) and (4))

• If a direct relation is not found, then look for
a subject via path (5)

• If the subject has not been found in the previ-
ous step, then look for a subject via path (6)

A verb can have multiple subjects, which can be
identified via dependency path (7).

Rule Condition Action
1 ∃w ∈ vg, pos tag(w) = MD Do nothing
2 ∃w ∈ vg, pos tag(w) = TO Do nothing
3 subject(vg) 6= I Replace are by is
4 subject(vg) = I Replace are by am
5 do, does /∈ vg ∧ subject(vg) 6= I Replace have by has
6 do, does /∈ vg ∧ subject(vg) = I Replace has by have

Table 3: Some rules from the singular-
ize verb group rule-set
w is a word, vg is a verb group, POS tags are from the Penn
tagset

5.2 Correcting the verb group

For correcting the verb group, we have two sets of
conditional rules (singularize verb group and plu-
ralize verb group). The singularize verb group
rule-set is applied if the subject is singular,
whereas the pluralize verb group rule-set is ap-
plied if the subject is plural or if there are multi-
ple subjects (path (7) in Table 2). For verbs which
have subjects related via dependency paths (3) and
(4) no correction is done.

The conditional rules utilize POS tags and lem-
mas in the verb group to check if the verb group
needs to be corrected and appropriate rules are ap-
plied for each condition. Some rules in the sin-
gularize verb group rule-set are shown in Table 3.
The rules for the pluralize verb group rule-set are
analogous.

6 Experimental Setup

Our training data came from the NUCLE corpus
provided for the shared task. The corpus was
split into three parts: training set (55151 sen-
tences), threshold tuning set (1000 sentences) and
development test set (1000 sentences). In addi-
tion, evaluation was done on the official test set
(1381 sentences). Maximum Entropy classifiers
were trained for noun-number and determiner cor-
rection systems. In the training set, the number
of instances with no corrections far exceeds the
number of instances with corrections. Therefore,
a balanced training set was created by including
all the instances with corrections and sampling
α instances with no corrections from the training
set. By trial and error, α was determined to be
10000 for the noun-number and determiner cor-
rection systems. The confidence score threshold
which maximizes the F-score was calibrated on
the tuning set. We determined threshold = 0

85



Task Development test set Official test setP R F-1 P R F-1
Noun Number 31.43 40 35.2 28.47 9.84 14.66

Determiner 35.59 17.5 23.46 21.43 1.3 2.46
SVA 16.67 23.42 19.78 29.57 27.42 28.45

Integrated 29.59 17.24 21.79 28.18 4.99 11.03

Table 4: M2 scores for IIT Bombay correction system: component-wise and integrated

for the noun-number and the determiner correction
systems.

The following tools were used in the devel-
opment of the system for the shared task: (i)
NLTK (MaxEntClassifier, Wordnet lemmatizer),
(ii) Stanford tools - POS Tagger, Parser and NER
and Python interface to the Stanford NER, (iii)
Lingua::EN::Inflect module for noun and verb plu-
ralization, and (iv) Wiktionary list of mass nouns,
pluralia tantum.

7 Results and Discussion

Table 4 shows the results on the test set (de-
velopment and official) for each component of
the correction system and the integrated system.
The evaluation was done using the M2 method
(Dahlmeier and Ng, 2012). This involves comput-
ing F1 measure between a set of proposed system
edits and a set of human-annotated gold-standard
edits. However, evaluation is complicated by the
fact that there may be multiple edits which gen-
erate the same correction. The following example
illustrates this behaviour:

Source: I ate mango
Hypothesis: I ate a mango

The system edit is �→ a, whereas the gold stan-
dard edit is mango→a mango. Though both the
edits result in the same corrected sentence, they do
not match. The M2 algorithm resolves this prob-
lem by providing an efficient method to detect the
sequence of phrase-level edits between a source
sentence and a system hypothesis that achieves the
highest overlap with the gold-standard annotation.

It is clear that the low recall of the noun-number
and determiner correction components have re-
sulted in a low overall score for the system. This
underscores the difficulty of the two problems.
The feature sets seem to have been unable to cap-
ture the patterns determining the noun-number and
determiner. Consider a few examples, where the
evidence for correction look strong:

1. products such as RFID tracking system have
become real

2. With the installing of the surveillances for
every corner of Singapore

A cursory inspection of the corpus indicates that
in the absence of a determiner (example (1)), the
noun tends to be plural. This pattern has not been
captured by the correction system. The coverage
of the Wiktionary mass noun and pluralia tantum
dictionaries is low, hence this feature has not had
the desired impact (example(2)).

The SVA correction component has a reason-
ably good precision and recall - performing best
amongst all the correction components. Since
most errors affecting agreement (noun-number,
verb form, etc.) were not corrected, the SVA
agreement component could not correct the agree-
ment errors. If these errors had been corrected, the
accuracy of the standalone SVA correction com-
ponent would have been higher than that indicated
by the official score. To verify this, we manually
analyzed the output from the SVA correction com-
ponent and found that 58% of the missed correc-
tions and 43% of the erroneous corrections would
not have occurred if some of the other related er-
rors had been fixed. If it is assumed that all these
errors are corrected, the effective accuracy of SVA
correction increases substantially as shown in Ta-
ble 5. A few errors in the gold standard for SVA
agreement were also considered for computing the
effective scores. The standalone SVA correction
module therefore has a good accuracy.

A major reason for SVA errors (∼18%) is
wrong output from NLP modules like the POS tag-
ger, chunker and parser. The following are a few
examples:

• The verb group is incorrectly identified if
there is an adverb between the main and aux-
iliary verbs.

It [do not only restrict] their freedom in all

86



SVA Score Development test set Official test setP R F-1 P R F-1
Official 16.67 23.42 19.78 29.57 27.42 28.45

Effective 51.02 55.55 53.18 65.32 66.94 66.12

Table 5: M2 scores (original and modified) for SVA correction

aspects , but also causes leakage of personal
information .

• Two adjacent verb groups are not distin-
guished as separate chunks by the chunker
when the second verb group is non-finite in-
volving an infinitive.

The police arrested all of them before they
[starts to harm] the poor victim.

• The dependency parser makes errors in iden-
tifying the subject of a verb. The noun prob-
lems is not identified as the subject of is by
the dependency parser.

Although rising of life expectancies is an
challenge to the entire human nation , the
detailed problems each country that will en-
counter is different.

Some phenomena have not been handled by our
rules. Our system does not handle the case where
the subject is a gerund phrase. Consider the exam-
ple,

Collecting coupons from individuals are the first
step.

The verb-number should be singular when a
gerund phrase is the subject. In the absence of
rules to handle this case, coupons is identified as
the subject of are by the dependency parser and
consequently, no correction is done.

Our rules do not handle interrogative sentences
and interrogative pronouns. Hence the following
sentence is not corrected,

People do not know who are tracking them.
Table 6 provides an analysis of the error type

distribution for SVA errors on the official test set.

8 Conclusion

In this paper, we presented a hybrid grammati-
cal correction system which incorporates both ma-
chine learning and rule-based components. We
proposed a new rule-based method for subject-
verb agreement correction. As future work, we
plan to explore richer features for noun-number
and determiner errors.

Error types % distribution
Noun-number errors 58.02 %
Wrong tagging, chunking, parsing 18.52 %
Wrong gold annotations 7.40%
Rules not designed 6.1%
Others 9.88 %

Table 6: Causes for missed SVA corrections and
their distribution in the official test set

References
Daniel Dahlmeier and Hwee Tou Ng. 2011. Grammat-

ical error correction with alternating structure opti-
mization. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies-Volume 1.

Daniel Dahlmeier and Hwee Tou Ng. 2012. Better
evaluation for grammatical error correction. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Daniel Dahlmeier, Hwee Tou Ng, and Siew Mei Wu.
2013. Building a large annotated corpus of learner
english: The NUS Corpus of Learner English. In To
appear in Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Inno-
vative Use of NLP for Building Educational Appli-
cations.

Na-Rae Han, Martin Chodorow, and Claudia Leacock.
2006. Detecting errors in english article usage by
non-native speakers. Natural Language Engineer-
ing.

Kevin Knight and Ishwar Chander. 1994. Automated
postediting of documents. In AAAI.

Hwee Tou Ng, Siew Mei Wu, Yuanbin Wu, Christian
Hadiwinoto, and Joel Tetreault. 2013. The CoNLL-
2013 Shared Task on Grammatical Error Correction.
In To appear in Proceedings of the Seventeenth Con-
ference on Computational Natural Language Learn-
ing.

Alla Rozovskaya and Dan Roth. 2010. Generating
confusion sets for context-sensitive error correction.
In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing.

87


