



















































Factored Machine Translation Systems for Russian-English


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 154–157,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013 c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Factored Machine Translation Systems for Russian-English

Stéphane Huet, Elena Manishina and Fabrice Lefèvre
Université d’Avignon, LIA/CERI, France

FirstName.LastName@univ-avignon.fr

Abstract

We describe the LIA machine transla-
tion systems for the Russian-English and
English-Russian translation tasks. Various
factored translation systems were built us-
ing MOSES to take into account the mor-
phological complexity of Russian and we
experimented with the romanization of un-
translated Russian words.

1 Introduction

This paper presents the factored phrase-based
Machine Translation (MT) systems (Koehn and
Hoang, 2007) developed at LIA, for the Russian-
English and English-Russian translation tasks at
WMT’13. These systems use only data provided
for the evaluation campaign along with the LDC
English Gigaword corpus.

We summarize in Section 2 the resources used
and the main characteristics of the systems based
on the MOSES toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007). Sec-
tion 3 reports experiments on the use of fac-
tored translation models. Section 4 describes the
transliteration process used to improve the Russian
to English task. Finally, we conclude in Section 5.

2 System Architecture

2.1 Pre-processing

The corpora available for the workshop were pre-
processed using an in-house script that normal-
izes quotes, dashes, spaces and ligatures. Long
sentences or sentences with many numeric or
non-alphanumeric characters were also discarded.
Since the Yandex corpus is provided as lower-
cased, we decided to lowercase all the other cor-
pora. The same pipeline was applied to the LDC
Gigaword; also only the documents classified as
“story” were retained. Table 1 summarizes the
used data and introduces designations that we fol-

low in the remainder of this paper to refer to these
corpora.

Russian is a morphologically rich language with
nouns, adjectives and verbs inflected for case,
number and gender. This property requires in-
troducing morphological information inside the
MT system to handle the lack of many inflec-
tional forms inside training corpora. For this
purpose, each corpus was previously tagged with
Part-of-Speech (PoS) tags. The tagger TREE-
TAGGER (Schmid, 1995) was selected for its
good performance on several comparable tasks.
The Russian tagger associates each word (e.g.
ÿùèêà (boxes)) with a complex PoS including
morphological information (e.g. “Ncmpnn” for
“Noun Type=common Gender=masculine Num-
ber=plural Case=nominative Animate=no”) and
its lemma (e.g. ÿùèê (box)). A description of
the Russian tagset can be found in (Sharoff et al.,
2008). The English tagger provides also a lemma-
tization and outputs PoS from the Penn Treebank
tagset (Marcus et al., 1993) (e.g. “NNS” for
“Noun plural”).

In order to simplify the comparison of differ-
ent setups, we used the tokenizer included in the
TREETAGGER tool to process all the corpora.

2.2 Language Models

Kneser-Ney discounted LMs were built
from monolingual corpora using the SRILM
toolkit (Stolcke, 2002). 5-gram LMs were trained
for words, 7-gram LMs for lemmas and PoS. A
LM was built separately on each monolingual cor-
pus: mono-news-c and news-s. Since ldc was too
large to be processed as one file, it was split into
three parts according to the original publication
year of the document. These LMs were combined
through linear interpolation. Weights were fixed
by optimizing the perplexity on a corpus made of
the WMT test sets from 2008 to 2011 for English
and on the WMT 2012 test set for Russian (the

154



CORPORA DESIGNATION SIZE (SENTENCES)

English-Russian Bilingual training
News Commentary v8 news-c 146 k
Common Crawl crawl 755 k
Yandex yandex 978 k

English Monolingual training
News Commentary v8 mono-news-c 247 k
Shuffled News Crawl corpus (from 2007 to 2012) news-s 68 M
LDC Gigaword ldc 190 M

Russian Monolingual training
News Commentary v8 mono-news-c 182 k
Shuffled News Crawl corpus (from 2008 to 2012) news-s 20 M

Development
newstest2012 test12 3,003

Table 1: Used bilingual and monolingual corpora

only available at that time).

2.3 Alignment and Translation Models

All parallel corpora were aligned using
MGIZA++ (Gao and Vogel, 2008). Our transla-
tion models are phrase-based models (PBMs) built
with MOSES using default settings. Weights of
LM, phrase table and lexicalized reordering model
scores were optimized on test12, thanks to the
MERT algorithm (Gao and Vogel, 2008). Since
only one development corpus was made available
for Russian, we used a 3-fold cross-validation
so that MERT is repeated three times for each
translation model on a 2,000-sentence subsample
of test12.

To recase the corpora, translation models were
trained using a word-to-word translation model
trained on the parallel corpora aligning lowercased
and cased sentences of the monolingual corpora
mono-news-c and news-s.

3 Experiments with Factored
Translation Models

The evaluation was performed using case-
insensitive BLEU and was computed with the
mteval-v13a.pl script provided by NIST.
The BLEU scores shown in the tables below are
all averaged on the test parts obtained from the 3-
fold cross validation process.

In the remainder of the paper, we employ the
notation proposed by Bojar et al. (2012) to refer
to factored translation models. For example, tW-

W:tL-L+tP-P+gLaP-W, where “t” and “g” stand
for “translation” and “generation”, denotes a trans-
lation system with two decoding paths:

• a first one directly translates words to words
(tW-W),

• a second one is divided into three steps:
1. translation from lemmas to lemmas (tL-

L),
2. translation from PoS to PoS (tP-P) and
3. generation of target words from target

lemmas and PoS (gLaP-W).

3.1 Baseline Phrase-Based Systems
Table 2 is populated with the results of PBMs
which use words as their sole factor. When LMs
are built on mono-news-c and news-s, an improve-
ment of BLEU is observed each time a training
parallel corpus is used, both for both translation di-
rections (columns 1 and 3). We can also notice an
absolute increase of 0.4 BLEU score when the En-
glish LM is additionally trained on ldc (column 2).

3.2 Decomposition of factors
Koehn and Hoang (2007) suggested from their ex-
periments for English-Czech systems that “it is
beneficial to carefully consider which morpholog-
ical information to be used.” We therefore tested
various decompositions of the complex Russian
PoS tagset (P) output by TREETAGGER. We con-
sidered the grammatical category alone (C), mor-
phological information restrained to case, number

155



EN→ RU RU→ EN
+LDC

news-c 26.52 26.82 19.89
+crawl 29.49 29.82 21.06
+yandex 31.08 31.49 22.16

Table 2: BLEU scores measured with standard
PBMs.

Tagset #tags Examples

C 17 Af, Vm, P, C
M1 95 fsg, -s-, fsa, —
M2 380 fsg, -s-, fsa, ÷òî (that)
M3 580 fsg, -s-1ife, fsa3, ÷òî (that)
P 604 Afpfsg, Vmif1s-a-e, P-3fsa, C

Table 3: Statistics on Russian tagsets.

and gender (M1), the fields included in M1 along
with additional information (lemmas) for conjunc-
tions, particles and adpositions (M2), and finally
the information included in M2 enriched with per-
son for pronouns and person, tense and aspect for
verbs (M3). Table 3 provides the number of tags
and shows examples for each used tagset.

To speed up the training of translation models,
we experimented with various setups for factor de-
composition from news-c. The results displayed
on Table 4 show that factors with morphologi-
cal information lead to better results than a PBM
trained on word forms (line 1) but that finally the
best system is achieved when the complex PoS tag
output by TREETAGGER is used without any de-
composition (last line).

tW-W 19.89
tW-WaC 19.81
tW-WaM1 20.04
tW-WaCaM1 19.95
tW-WaM2 19.92
tW-WaCaM2 19.91
tW-WaM3 19.98
tW-WaCaM3 19.89
tW-WaP 20.30

Table 4: BLEU scores for EN→RU using news-c
as training parallel corpus.

tL-W 29.23
tW-W 31.49
tWaP-WaP 31.62
tW-W:tL-W 31.69
tW-WaP 31.80
tW-WaP:tL-WaP 31.89

Table 5: BLEU scores for RU→EN using the three
available parallel corpora.

3.3 Experimental Results for Factored
Models

The many inflections for Russian induce a hight
out-of-vocabulary rate for the PBMs, which gener-
ates many untranslated Russian words for Russian
to English. We experimented with the training of
a PMB on lemmatized Russian corpora (Table 5,
line 1) but observed a decrease in BLEU score
w.r.t. a PBM trained on words (line 2). With two
decoding paths — one from words, one from lem-
mas (line 4) — using the MOSES ability to manage
multiple decoding paths for factored translation
models, an absolute improvement of 0.2 BLEU
score was observed.

Another interest of factored models is disam-
biguating translated words according to their PoS.
Translating a (word, PoS) pair results in an ab-
solute increase of 0.3 BLEU (line 5), and of 0.4
BLEU when considering two decoding paths (last
line). Disambiguating source words with PoS did
not seem to help the translation process (line 3).

The Russian inflections are far more problem-
atic in the other translation direction since mor-
phological information, including case, gender
and number, has to be induced from the English
words and PoS, which are restrained for that lan-
guage to the grammatical category and knowledge
about number (singular/plural for nouns, 3rd per-
son singular or not for verbs). Disambiguating
translated Russian words with their PoS resulted
in a dramatic increase of BLEU by 1.6 points (Ta-
ble 6, last line vs line 3). The model that trans-
lates independently PoS and lemmas, before gen-
erating words, albeit appealing for its potential to
deal with data sparsity, turned out to be very dis-
appointing (first line). We additionally led ex-
periments training generation models gLaP-W on
monolingual corpora instead of the less volumi-
nous parallel corpora, but we did not observed a
gain in terms of BLEU.

156



tL-L+tP-P+gLaP-W 17.06
tW-W 22.16
tWaP-WaP 23.34
tWaP-LaP+gLaP-W 23.48
tW-LaP+gLaP-W 23.58
tW-WaP 23.72

Table 6: BLEU scores for EN→RU using the three
available parallel corpora.

BEFORE AFTER

tW-WaP 31.80 32.15
tW-WaP:tL-WaP 31.89 32.21

Table 7: BLEU scores for RU → EN before and
after transliteration.

4 Transliteration

Words written in Cyrillic inside the English trans-
lation output were transliterated into Latin letters.
We decided to restrain the use of transliteration for
the English to Russian direction since we found
that many words, especially proper names, are in-
tentionally used in Latin letters in the Russian ref-
erence.

Transliteration was performed in two steps.
Firstly, untranslated words in Cyrillic are looked
up in the guessed-names.ru-en file provided for the
workshop and built from Wikipedia. Secondly, the
remaining words are romanized with rules of the
BGN/PCGN romanization method for Russian (on
Geographic Names, 1994). Transliterating words
in Cyrillic resulted in an absolute improvement of
0.3 BLEU for our two best factor-based system
(Table 7, last column).

The factored model with the tW-WaP:tL-
WaP translation path and a transliteration post-
processing step is the final submission for the
Russian-English workshop translation task, while
the tW-WaP is the final submission for the other
translation direction.

5 Conclusion

This paper presented experiments carried out with
factored phrase-based translation models for the
two-way Russian-English translation tasks. A mi-
nor gain was observed after romanizing Russian
words (+0.3 BLEU points for RU → EN) and
higher improvements using word forms, PoS inte-
grating morphological information and lemma as

factors (+0.4 BLEU points for RU→ EN and +1.6
for EN → RU w.r.t. to a phrase-based restrained
to word forms). However, these improvements
were observed with setups which disambiguate
words according to their grammatical category or
morphology, while results integrating a generation
step and dealing with data sparsity were disap-
pointing. It seems that further work should be
done to fully exploit the potential of this option
inside MOSES.

References
Ondřej Bojar, Bushra Jawaid, and Amir Kamran. 2012.

Probes in a taxonomy of factored phrase-based mod-
els. In 7th NAACL Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation (WMT), pages 253–260.

Qin Gao and Stephan Vogel. 2008. Parallel implemen-
tations of word alignment tool. In Proceedings of
the ACL Workshop: Software Engineering, Testing,
and Quality Assurance for Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 49–57.

Philipp Koehn and Hieu Hoang. 2007. Factored trans-
lation models. In Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-
CoNLL), pages 868—-876.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexan-
dra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses:
Open source toolkit for statistical machine transla-
tion. In 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), Companion Vol-
ume, pages 177–180.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2:313–330.

U.S. Board on Geographic Names. 1994. Romaniza-
tion systems and roman-script spelling conventions.
Technical report, Defense Mapping Agency.

Helmut Schmid. 1995. Improvements in part-of-
speech tagging with an application to german. In
ACL SIGDAT Workshop, pages 47–50.

Serge Sharoff, Mikhail Kopotev, Tomaž Erjavec, Anna
Feldman, and Dagmar Divjak. 2008. Designing
and evaluating a russian tagset. In 6th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), pages 279–285.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM — an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In 7th International Con-
ference on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP).

157


