


































Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD)
Introduction and Overview

Christian Chiarcos1, Philipp Cimiano2, Thierry Declerck3 & John P. McCrae2

1 Goethe-Universität Frankfurt am Main, Germany
chiarcos@uni-frankfurt.de

2 Universität Bielefeld, Germany
{cimiano|jmccrae}@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de

3 Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Künstliche Intelligenz, Germany
declerck@dfki.de

Abstract

The explosion of information technology has led to a substantial growth in
quantity, diversity and complexity of linguistic data accessible over the internet.
The lack of interoperability between linguistic and language resources represents
a major challenge that needs to be addressed, in particular, if information from
different sources is to be combined, like, say, machine-readable lexicons, corpus
data and terminology repositories. For these types of resources, domain- specific
standards have been proposed, yet, issues of interoperability between different
types of resources persist, commonly accepted strategies to distribute, access
and integrate their information have yet to be established, and technologies and
infrastructures to address both aspects are still under development.
The goal of the 2nd Workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics (LDL-2013) has
been to bring together researchers from various fields of linguistics, natural lan-
guage processing, and information technology to present and discuss principles,
case studies, and best practices for representing, publishing and linking linguis-
tic data collections, including corpora, dictionaries, lexical networks, transla-
tion memories, thesauri, etc., infrastructures developed on that basis, their use
of existing standards, and the publication and distribution policies that were
adopted.

Background: Integrating Information from Differ-
ent Sources

In recent years, the limited interoperability between linguistic resources has
been recognized as a major obstacle for data use and re-use within and across
discipline boundaries. After half a century of computational linguistics [8], quan-
titative typology [12], empirical, corpus-based study of language [10], and com-
putational lexicography [16], researchers in computational linguistics, natural
language processing (NLP) or information technology, as well as in Digital Hu-
manities, are confronted with an immense wealth of linguistic resources, that
are not only growing in number, but also in their heterogeneity.

Interoperability involves two aspects [14]:

Structural (‘syntactic’) interoperability: Resources use comparable formalisms
to represent and to access data (formats, protocols, query languages, etc.),

i



so that they can be accessed in a uniform way and that their information
can be integrated with each other.

Conceptual (‘semantic’) interoperability: Resources share a common vo-
cabulary, so that linguistic information from one resource can be resolved
against information from another resource, e.g., grammatical descriptions
can be linked to a terminology repository.

With the rise of the Semantic Web, new representation formalisms and novel
technologies have become available, and different communities are becoming
increasingly aware of the potential of these developments with respect to the
challenges posited by the heterogeneity and multitude of linguistic resources
available today. Many of these approaches follow the Linked (Open) Data
paradigm [1] that postulates four rules for the publication and representation
of Web resources: (1) Referred entities should be designated by using URIs,
(2) these URIs should be resolvable over HTTP, (3) data should be represented
by means of W3C standards (such as RDF), (4) and a resource should include
links to other resources. These rules facilitate information integration, and
thus, interoperability, in that they require that entities can be addressed in a
globally unambiguous way (1), that they can be accessed (2) and interpreted
(3), and that entities that are associated on a conceptual level are also physically
associated with each other (4).

In the definition of Linked Data, the Resource Description Framework
(RDF) receives special attention. RDF was designed to provide metadata about
resources that are available either offline (e.g., books in a library) or online (e.g.,
eBooks in a store). RDF provides a generic data model based on labeled directed
graphs, which can be serialized in different formats. Information is expressed
in terms of triples - consisting of a property (relation, i.e., a labeled edge) that
connects a subject (a resource, i.e., a labeled node) with its object (another
resource, or a literal, e.g., a string). RDF resources (nodes)1 are represented by
Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs). They are thus globally unambiguous in
the web of data. This allows resources hosted at different locations to refer to
each other, and thereby to create a network of data collections whose elements
are densely interwoven.

Several data base implementations for RDF data are available, and these can
be accessed using SPARQL [17], a standardized query language for RDF data.
SPARQL uses a triple notation similar to RDF, only that properties and RDF
resources can be replaced by variables. SPARQL is inspired by SQL, variables
can be introduced in a separate SELECT block, and constraints on these variables
are expressed in a WHERE block in a triple notation. SPARQL does not only
support running queries against individual RDF data bases that are accessible
over HTTP (so-called ‘SPARQL end points’), but also, it allows us to combine
information from multiple repositories (federation). RDF can thus not only be
used to establish a network, or cloud, of data collections, but also, to query this
network directly.

1The term ‘resource’ is ambiguous: Linguistic resources are structured collections of data
which can be represented, for example, in RDF. In RDF, however, ‘resource’ is the conventional
name of a node in the graph, because, historically, these nodes were meant to represent objects
that are described by metadata. We use the terms ‘node’ or ‘concept’ whenever RDF resources
are meant in ambiguous cases.

ii



RDF has been applied for various purposes beyond its original field of ap-
plication. In particular, it evolved into a generic format for knowledge repre-
sentation. RDF was originally conceived as the building block of the Semantic
Web and was then readily adopted by disciplines as different as biomedicine
and bibliography. Due to its application across discipline boundaries, RDF is
maintained by a large and active community of users and developers, and it
comes with a rich infrastructure of APIs, tools, databases, query languages, and
multiple sub-languages that have been developed to define data structures that
are more specialized than the graphs represented by RDF. These sub-languages
can be used to create reserved vocabularies and structural constraints for RDF
data. For example, the Web Ontology Language (OWL) defines the datatypes
necessary for the representation of ontologies as an extension of RDF, i.e., classes
(concepts), instances (individuals) and properties (relations).

The concept of Linked Data is closely coupled with the idea of openness
(otherwise, the linking is only partially reproducible), and in 2010, the original
definition of Linked Open Data has been extended with a 5 star rating system for
data on the Web.2 The first star is achieved by publishing data on the Web (in
any format) under an open license, and the second, third and fourth star require
machine-readable data, a non-proprietary format, and using standards like RDF,
respectively. The fifth star is achieved by linking the data to other people’s data
to provide context. If (linguistic) resources are published in accordance with
these rules, it is possible to follow links between existing resources to find other,
related data and exploit network effects.

Linked Data: Benefits

Publishing Linked Data allows resources to be globally and uniquely iden-
tified such that they can be retrieved through standard Web protocols. More-
over, resources can be easily linked to one another in a uniform fashion and thus
become structurally interoperable. Linking to central terminology repositories
facilitates conceptual interoperability. Beyond this, Chiarcos et al. [7] identified
the following main benefits of Linked Linguistic Data: (a) linking through URIs,
(b) federation, (c) dynamic linking between resources, and (d) the availability
of a rich ecosystem of formats and technologies.

Linking through URIs
Linked Data requires that every resource is identified by a Uniform Resource
Identifier (URI) that figures both as a global identifier and as a Web address –
i.e., a description of the resource is available if you request it from its URI on the
Web. However, RDF allows for a standard description of such resources on the
Web and hence for automatic processing of these resources. It is not necessarily
the case that the data must be solely available as RDF, as the HTTP proto-
col supports content negotiation: as one example, the RDF data under http:
//de.dbpedia.org/data/Linked_Open_Data.rdf can be rendered in human-
readable HTML, see http://de.dbpedia.org/page/Linked_Open_Data.

2http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html, paragraph ‘Is your Linked Open
Data 5 Star?’

iii



Information Integration at Query Runtime (Federation)

As resources can be uniquely identified and easily referenced from any other
resource on the Web through URIs, the connections between these resources
can be navigated even during query runtime. In effect, this allows the creation
of a linked web of data similar to the effect of hyperlinks in the HTML Web.
Moreover, it is possible to use existing Semantic Web methods such as Semantic
PingBack [18] to be informed of new incoming links to your resource. Along
with HTTP-accessible repositories and resolvable URIs, it is possible to combine
information from physically separated repositories in a single query at runtime.
Information from different resources in the cloud can then be integrated freely.

Dynamic Import

If cross-references between linguistic resources are represented by resolvable
URIs instead of system-defined ID references or static copies of parts from an-
other resource, it is not only possible to resolve them at runtime, but also to
have access to the most recent version of a resource. For community-maintained
terminology repositories like the ISO TC37/SC4 Data Category Registry [20, 19,
ISOcat], for example, new categories, definitions or examples can be introduced
occasionally, and this information is available immediately to anyone whose re-
sources refer to ISOcat URIs.

Ecosystem

RDF as a data exchange framework is maintained by an interdisciplinary,
large and active community, and it comes with a developed infrastructure that
provides APIs, database implementations, technical support and validators for
various RDF-based languages, e.g., reasoners for OWL. For developers of linguis-
tic resources, this ecosystem can provide technological support or off-the-shelf
implementations for common problems, e.g., the development of a database that
is capable of supporting flexible, graph-based data structures as necessary for
multi-layer corpora [15].

Beyond this, another advantage warrants a mention: The distributed ap-
proach of the Linked Data paradigm facilitates the distributed development of
a web of resources and collaboration between researchers that provide and use
this data and that employ a shared set of technologies. One consequence is
the emergence of interdisciplinary efforts to create large and interconnected sets
of resources in linguistics and beyond. LDL-2013 aims to provide a forum to
discuss and to facilitate such on-going developments.

LLOD: Building the Cloud

Recent years have seen not only a number of approaches to provide linguistic
data as Linked Data, but also the emergence of larger initiatives that aim at in-
terconnecting these resources, culminating in the creation of a Linguistic Linked
Open Data (LLOD) cloud, i.e., a Linked Open Data (sub-)cloud of linguistic
resources.

iv



LDL-2013 is organized in the context of two recent community efforts, the
Open Linguistics Working Group (OWLG), and the W3C Ontology-Lexica
Community Group (OntoLex). The Open Linguistics Working Group has spear-
headed the creation of new data and the republishing of existing linguistic re-
sources as part of the emerging Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD) cloud.
Similarly, the W3C Ontology-Lexica Community Group is seeking to develop
standard models for representing and publishing (ontology-) lexica and other
lexical resources as RDF.

The LLOD Cloud

Aside from benefits arising from the actual linking of linguistic resources,
various linguistic resources from various fields have been provided in RDF and
related standards in the last decade.

In particular, this is the case for lexical resources (Fig. 1, lexicon), e.g.,
WordNet [11], which represent a cornerstone of the Semantic Web and which
are firmly integrated in the Linked Open Data (LOD) cloud. Other types of
linguistic resources with less relevance for AI and Knowledge Representation,
however, have been absent from the LOD cloud.

The Linked Data paradigm also facilitates the management of information
about language (Fig. 1, language_description), i.e., linguistic terminology
and linguistic databases. Terminology repositories serve an important role
to establish conceptual interoperability between language resources. If resource-
specific annotations or abbreviations are expanded into references to reposito-
ries of linguistic terminology and/or metadata categories, linguistic annotations,
grammatical features and metadata specifications become more easily compara-
ble. Important repositories developed by different communities include GOLD
[9] and ISOcat [20, 19], yet, only recently these terminology repositories were
put in relation with each other using Linked Data principles and with linguistic
resources, e.g., within the OLiA architecture [5]. Linguistic databases are
a particularly heterogeneous group of linguistic resources; they contain com-
plex and manifold types of information, e.g., feature structures that represent
typologically relevant phenomena, along with examples for their illustration
and annotations (glosses) and translations applied to these examples (struc-
turally comparable to corpus data), or word lists (structurally comparable to
lexical-semantic resources). RDF as a generic representation formalism is thus
particularly appealing for this class of resources.

Finally, for linguistic corpora (Fig. 1, corpora), the potential of the
Linked Data paradigm for modeling, processing and querying of corpora is im-
mense, and RDF conversions of semantically annotated corpora have been pro-
posed early [3]. RDF provides a graph-based data model as required for the
interoperable representation of arbitrary kinds of annotation [2, 15], and this
flexibility makes it a promising candidate for a general means of representation
for corpora with complex and heterogeneous annotations. RDF does not only
establish interoperability between annotations within a corpus, but also between
corpora and other linguistic resources [4]. In comparison to other types of lin-
guistic resources, corpora are currently underrepresented in the LLOD cloud,
but the development of schemes for corpora and/or NLP annotations represents
an active line of research [6, 13] also addressed in the workshop.

v



Figure 1: Linguistic Linked Open Data cloud as of September 2013.

Only recently, the efforts to apply RDF to linguistic resources of different
types have begun to converge towards an actual Linked Open Data (sub-) cloud
of linguistic resources, the Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD) cloud.

Community Efforts

The LLOD cloud is a result of a coordinated effort of the Open Linguistics
Working Group (OWLG),3 a network open to anyone interested in linguistic
resources and/or the publication of these under an open license. The OWLG is
a working group of the Open Knowledge Foundation (OKFN),4 a community-
based non-profit organization promoting open knowledge (i.e., data and content
that is free to use, re-use and to be distributed without restriction).

Since its formation in 2010, the Open Linguistics Working Group has grown
steadily. One of our primary goals is to attain openness in linguistics through:

1. Promoting the idea of open linguistic resources,

2. Developing the means for the representation of open data, and

3. Encouraging the exchange of ideas across different disciplines.
3http://linguistics.okfn.org
4http://okfn.org/

vi



The OWLG represents an open forum for interested individuals to address these
and related issues. At the time of writing, the group consists of about 100 people
from 20 different countries. Our group is relatively small, but continuously
growing and sufficiently heterogeneous. It includes people from library science,
typology, historical linguistics, cognitive science, computational linguistics, and
information technology; the ground for fruitful interdisciplinary discussions has
been laid out. One concrete result emerging out of collaborations between a
large number of OWLG members is the LLOD cloud as already sketched above.

The emergence of the LLOD cloud out of a set of isolated resources was
accompanied and facilitated by a series of workshops and publications
organized under the umbrella of the OWLG, including the Open Linguistics
track at the Open Knowledge Conference (OKCon-2010, July 2010, Berlin, Ger-
many), the First Workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics (LDL-2012, March
2012, Frankfurt am Main, Germany), the Workshop on Multilingual Linked
Open Data for Enterprises (MLODE-2012, September 2012, Leipzig, Germany),
the Linked Data for Linguistic Typology track at ALT-2012 (September 2013,
Leipzig, Germany). Plans to create a LLOD cloud were first publicly announced
at LDL-2012, and subsequently, a first instance of the LLOD materialized as
a result of the MLODE-2012 workshop, its accompanying hackathon and the
data postproceedings that will appear as a special issue of the Semantic Web
Journal (SWJ). The Second Workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics (LDL-
2013) continues this series of workshops. In order to further contribute to the
integration of the field, it is organized as a joint event of the OWLG and the
W3C Ontology-Lexica Community Group.

The Ontology-Lexica Community (OntoLex) Group5 was founded in
September 2011 as a W3C Community and Business Group. It aims to produce
specifications for a lexicon-ontology model that can be used to provide rich
linguistic grounding for domain ontologies. Rich linguistic grounding includes
the representation of morphological, syntactic properties of lexical entries as well
as the syntax-semantics interface, i.e., the meaning of these lexical entries with
respect to the ontology in question. An important issue herein will be to clarify
how extant lexical and language resources can be leveraged and reused for this
purpose. As a byproduct of this work on specifying a lexicon-ontology model, it
is hoped that such a model can become the basis for a web of lexical linked data:
a network of lexical and terminological resources that are linked according to the
Linked Data Principles forming a large network of lexico-syntactic knowledge.

The OntoLex W3C Community Group has been working for more than a
year on realizing a proposal for a standard ontology lexicon model, currently
discussed under the the designation lemon. As the core specification of the
model is almost complete, the group started to develop of additional modules
for specific tasks and use cases, and some of these are presented at LDL-2013.

LDL-2013: The 2nd Workshop on Linked Data in
Linguistics

The goal of the 2nd Workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics (LDL-2013)
has been to bring together researchers from various fields of linguistics, NLP,

5http://www.w3.org/community/ontolex

vii



and information technology to present and discuss principles, case studies, and
best practices for representing, publishing and linking linguistic data collections,
including corpora, dictionaries, lexical networks, translation memories, thesauri,
etc., infrastructures developed on that basis, their use of existing standards, and
the publication and distribution policies that were adopted.

For the 2nd edition of the workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics, we invited
contributions discussing the application of the Linked Open Data paradigm to
linguistic data as it might provide an important step towards making linguis-
tic data: i) easily and uniformly queryable, ii) interoperable and iii) sharable
over the Web using open standards such as the HTTP protocol and the RDF
data model. Recent research in this direction has lead to the emergence of a
Linked Open Data cloud of linguistic resources, the Linguistic Linked Open
Data (LLOD) cloud, where Linked Data principles have been applied to lan-
guage resources, allowing them to be published and linked in a principled way.
Although not restricted to lexical resources, these play a particularly prominent
role in this context. The topics of interest mentioned in the call for papers were
the following ones:

1. Use cases for creation, maintenance and publication of linguistic data col-
lections that are linked with other resources

2. Modelling linguistic data and metadata with OWL and/or RDF

3. Ontologies for linguistic data and metadata collections

4. Applications of such data, other ontologies or linked data from any sub-
discipline of linguistics

5. Descriptions of data sets, ideally following Linked Data principles

6. Legal and social aspects of Linguistic Linked Open Data

In response to our call for papers we received 17 submissions which were all
reviewed by at least two members of our program committee. On the basis
of these reviews, we decided to accept 8 papers as full papers and 2 as short
papers, giving an overall acceptance rate of around 50%.

LDL-2013 was collocated with the 6th International Conference on Gener-
ative Approaches to the Lexicon (GL2013): Generative Lexicon and Distribu-
tional Semantics, and hence, lexical-semantic resources represent a particu-
larly important group of resources at the current edition of the workshop.

The contributions by Koide and Takeda and Bartolini et al. describe the
conversion of the Japanese and Italian WordNet and related resources as well
as their linking to (L)LOD resources such as the DBpedia.

Buitelaar et al. describe the specification and use of a model for the interop-
erable representation of language resources for sentiment analysis. The model
is based directly on lemon, and in the EuroSentiment project it will be used to
represent language resources for sentiment analysis such as WordNet Affect in
a interoperable way.

Similarly, Moran and Brümmer employ lemon for the modeling of dictio-
nary and wordlist data made available by a project on quantitative historical
linguistics. Using Linked Data principles, more than fifty disparate lexicons and
dictionaries were combined into a single dataset, which then provides researchers

viii



with a translation graph allowing users to query across the underlying lexicons
and dictionaries to extract semantically-aligned wordlists.

An extension of lemon is developed by Fiorelli et al. who present LIME (Lin-
guistic Metadata), a new vocabulary aiming at completing lemon with specifi-
cations for linguistic metadata. In many usage scenarios currently developed as
extensions of lemon (e.g. ontology alignment, localization etc...), the discovery
and exploitation of linguistically grounded datasets may benefit from reassum-
ing information about their linguistic expressivity. While the VoID vocabulary
covers the need for general metadata about linked datasets, specifically linguistic
information demands a dedicated extension.

Finally, Bonial et al. describe SemLink, a comprehensive resource for NLP
that maps and unifies several high quality lexical resources: PropBank, Verb-
Net, FrameNet, and OntoNotes sense groupings. Each of these resources was
created for different purposes, and therefore each carries unique strengths and
limitations. SemLink allows users to leverage the strengths of each resource and
provides the groundwork for incorporating these lexical resources effectively.
Although SemLink is not immediately based on the application of the Linked
Data paradigma, it represents an important contribution to the LLOD cloud,
as it provides links between classical resources for word-level semantics (e.g.,
WordNet) long established in the (L)LOD cloud, and frame-semantic resources.
In this function, an earlier instantiation of SemLink represents a fundamental
component of the lemonUby data set shown in Fig. 1.

An approach to model of language description data as Linked Data is
presented by Littauer et al. who feed spreadsheet data about a group of endan-
gered languages and where they are spoken in West Africa into an RDF triple
store. They use RDF tools to organize and visualize these data on a world
map, accessible through a web browser. The functionality they develop allows
researchers to see where these languages are spoken and to query the language
data, thereby providing a powerful tool for linguists studying the genealogical
relatedness of the Dogon languages.

A different type of information about language is addressed by Hayashi who
describes the modeling of psycholinguistic semantic feature norms. Semantic
feature norms, originally utilized in the field of psycholinguistics as a tool for
studying human semantic representation and computation, have recently at-
tracted some NLP/IR researchers who wish to improve their task performances.
Currently available semantic feature norms are, however, rarely well structured,
making them difficult to integrate with existing resources of various types. This
paper provides a case study, it extracts a tentative set of semantic feature norms
that are psycholinguistically considerable, and draws a technical map to formal-
ize them by observing the Linked Data paradigm.

LDL-2013 features three contributions addressing corpora that we identified
above as being underrepresented in the LLOD cloud: Menke et al. describe a
framework for releasing multimodal corpora as Linked Data, and experiences in
releasing a multimodal corpus based on an online chat game on that basis. Heuss
presents an experiment in translating excerpts of a natural language story into a
formal RDF structure, so that it is accessible by machines on a word or concept
level. Finally, Pareja-Lora et al. describe the first steps taken to transform a set
of linguistic resources from the Data Transcription and Analysis Tool’s (DTA)
metadata and data into an open and interoperable language resource.

ix



Acknowledgements

We would like to express our gratitude to the organizers of the GL2013 for
hosting our workshop and support with respect to local organization. Further,
we thank the OWLG and its members for active contributions to the LLOD
cloud, to the workshop and beyond. In particular, we have to thank the con-
tributors and the program committee for their invaluable work and engagement.

Bibliography

[1] T. Berners-Lee. Design issues: Linked data. URL http://www.w3.org/
DesignIssues/LinkedData.html (July 31, 2012), 2006.

[2] S. Bird and M. Liberman. A formal framework for linguistic annotation.
Speech Communication, 33(1-2):23–60, 2001.

[3] A. Burchardt, S. Padó, D. Spohr, A. Frank, and U. Heid. Formalising
multi-layer corpora in OWL/DL – lexicon modelling, querying and con-
sistency control. In 3rd International Joint Conference on NLP (IJCNLP
2008), Hyderabad, India, 2008.

[4] C. Chiarcos. Interoperability of corpora and annotations. In C. Chiarcos,
S. Nordhoff, and S. Hellmann, editors, Linked Data in Linguistics, pages
161–179. Springer, Heidelberg, 2012.

[5] C. Chiarcos. Ontologies of linguistic annotation: Survey and perspectives.
In 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2012), pages 303–310, Istanbul, Turkey, May 2012.

[6] C. Chiarcos. POWLA: Modeling linguistic corpora in OWL/DL. In
9th Extended Semantic Web Conference (ESWC-2012), pages 225–239,
Heraklion, Crete, May 2012.

[7] C. Chiarcos, J. McCrae, P. Cimiano, and C. Fellbaum. Towards open data
for linguistics: Linguistic linked data. In A. Oltramari, Lu-Qin, P. Vossen,
and E. Hovy, editors, New Trends of Research in Ontologies and Lexical
Resources. Springer, Heidelberg, to appear.

[8] L. Dostert. The Georgetown-IBM experiment. In W. Locke and A. Booth,
editors, Machine Translation of Languages, pages 124–135. John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 1955.

[9] S. Farrar and T. Langendoen. Markup and the GOLD ontology. In
EMELD Workshop on Digitizing and Annotating Text and Field Record-
ings. Michigan State University, July 2003.

[10] W. N. Francis and H. Kucera. Brown Corpus manual. Technical report,
Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, 1964. revised edition 1979.

x



[11] A. Gangemi, R. Navigli, and P. Velardi. The OntoWordNet project:
Extension and axiomatization of conceptual relations in WordNet. In
R. Meersman and Z. Tari, editors, Proceedings of On the Move to Meaning-
ful Internet Systems (OTM2003), pages 820–838, Catania, Italy, Novem-
ber 2003.

[12] J. Greenberg. A quantitative approach to the morphological typology of
languages. International Journal of American Linguistics, 26:178–194,
1960.

[13] S. Hellmann, J. Lehmann, and S. Auer. Linked-data aware URI schemes
for referencing text fragments. In 18th International Conference on
Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management (EKAW-2012), Gal-
way, Ireland, 2012.

[14] N. Ide and J. Pustejovsky. What does interoperability mean, anyway?
Toward an operational definition of interoperability. In Second Inter-
national Conference on Global Interoperability for Language Resources
(ICGL 2010), Hong Kong, China, 2010.

[15] N. Ide and K. Suderman. GrAF: A graph-based format for linguistic
annotations. In 1st Linguistic Annotation Workshop (LAW 2007), pages
1–8, Prague, Czech Republic, 2007.

[16] W. Morris, editor. The American Heritage Dictionary of the English
Language. Houghton Mifflin, New York, 1969.

[17] E. Prud’Hommeaux and A. Seaborne. SPARQL query language for RDF.
W3C working draft, 4(January), 2008.

[18] S. Tramp, P. Frischmuth, N. Arndt, T. Ermilov, and S. Auer. Weaving a
distributed, semantic social network for mobile users. In 8th Extended Se-
mantic Web Conference (ESWC-2011), pages 200–214, Heraklion, Crete,
2011.

[19] M. Windhouwer and S.E. Wright. Linking to linguistic data categories
in ISOcat. In C. Chiarcos, S. Nordhoff, and S. Hellmann, editors, Linked
Data in Linguistics, pages 99–107. Springer, Heidelberg, 2012.

[20] S.E. Wright. A global data category registry for interoperable language
resources. In Proceedings of the Fourth Language Resources and Eva-
luation Conference (LREC 2004), pages 123–126, Lisboa, Portugal, May
2004.

xi



xii



Organizing Committee
Christian Chiarcos Johan Wolfgang Goethe Universität Frankfurt
Philipp Cimiano Universität Bielefeld
Thierry Declerck Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Künstliche Intelli-

genz
John Philip McCrae Universität Bielefeld

Program Committee
Guadalupe Aguado Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
Maria Blume Cornell University, USA
Peter Bouda Interdisciplinary Centre for Social and Language

Documentation, Portugal
Steve Cassidy Macquarie University, Australia
Damir Cavar Eastern Michigan University, USA
Michael Cysouw Ludwig-Maximilian-Universität München, Germany
Ernesto William De Luca University of Applied Sciences Potsdam, Germany
Gerard de Melo University of California at Berkeley, USA
Dongpo Deng Institute of Information Sciences, Academia Sinica,

Taiwan
Alexis Dimitriadis Universiteit Utrecht, The Netherlands
Judith Eckle-Kohler Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany
Jeff Good University at Buffalo, USA
Jorge Gracia Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
Harald Hammarström Radboud Universiteit Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Yoshihiko Hayashi Osaka University, Japan
Sebastian Hellmann Universität Leipzig, Germany
Dominic Jones Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
Lutz Maicher Universität Leipzig, Germany
Pablo Mendes Open Knowledge Foundation Deutschland, German
Elena Monsiel-Ponsoda Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
Steven Moran Universität Zürich, Switzerland/Ludwig Maximilian

University, Germany
Sebastian Nordhoff Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropol-

ogy, Leipzig, Germany
Antonio Pareja-Lora Universidad Complutense Madrid, Spain
Felix Sasaki Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Künstliche Intelli-

genz, Germany
Andrea Schalley Griffith University, Australia
Marieke van Erp VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Menzo Windhouwer Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Ni-

jmegen, The Netherlands
Alena Witzlack-Makarevich Universität Zürich, Switzerland

xiii


