










































A Statistical Approach to Prediction of Empty Categories in Hindi Dependency Treebank


Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Parsing of Morphologically Rich Languages, pages 91–96,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Statistical Approach to Prediction of Empty Categories in Hindi
Dependency Treebank

Puneeth Kukkadapu, Prashanth Mannem
Language Technologies Research Center

IIIT Hyderabad, India
{puneeth.kukkadapu,prashanth}@research.iiit.ac.in

Abstract

In this paper we use statistical dependency
parsing techniques to detect NULL or Empty
categories in the Hindi sentences. We have
currently worked on Hindi dependency tree-
bank which is released as part of COLING-
MTPIL 2012 Workshop. Earlier Rule based
approaches are employed to detect Empty
heads for Hindi language but statistical learn-
ing for automatic prediction is not explored.
In this approach we used a technique of in-
troducing complex labels into the data to pre-
dict Empty categories in sentences. We have
also discussed about shortcomings and diffi-
culties in this approach and evaluated the per-
formance of this approach on different Empty
categories.

1 Introduction

Hindi is a morphologically rich and a relatively
free word order language (MoR-FWO). Parsing is
a challenging task for such MoR-FWO languages
like Turkish, Basque, Czech, Arabic, etc. be-
cause of their non-configurable nature. Previous re-
search showed that the dependency based annota-
tion scheme performs better than phrase based an-
notation scheme for such languages (Hudson, 1984;
Bharati et al., 1995). Dependency annotation for
Hindi is based on Paninian framework for building
the treebank (Begum et al., 2008). In recent years
data driven parsing on Hindi has shown good re-
sults, the availability of annotated corpora is a defi-
nite factor for this improvement (Nivre et al., 2006;
McDonald et al., 2005; Martins et al., 2009; Man-
nem and Dara, 2011). Other approaches such as

rule-based and hybrid of rule-based and data-driven
(Bharati et al., 2009a) for Hindi language have also
been tried out. In the shared task for Hindi Pars-
ing organized with COLING workshop Singla et al.
(2012) achieved best results for Gold-Standard data
with 90.99% (Labeled Attachment Score or LAS)
and 95.87% (Unlabeled Attachment Score or UAS).

Empty category is a nominal element which does
not have any phonological content and is therefore
unpronounced. Empty categories are annotated in
sentences to ensure a linguistically plausible struc-
ture. Empty categories play a crucial role in the an-
notation framework of the Hindi dependency tree-
bank (Begum et al., 2008; Bharati et al., 2009b). If
dependency structure of a sentence do not form a
fully connected tree then Empty category (denoted
by NULL in Hindi Treebank) is inserted in the sen-
tence. In the Hindi treebank, an Empty category has
at least one child. Traditional parsing algorithms do
not insert Empty categories and require the Empty
categories to be part of the input. These Empty
categories are manually annotated in the treebank.
In real time scenarios, like translation between lan-
guages, it is not possible to add the Empty cate-
gories into the sentences manually. So we require an
approach which can identify the presence of these
Empty categories and insert into appropriate posi-
tions in the sentence.

Figure 1 shows an Example of a Hindi sentence
annotated with a NULL category. The English trans-
lation for this sentence is, “Its not fixed what his big
bank will do”. The aim of this paper is to investigate
the problem of automatically predicting the Empty
categories in the sentences using the statistical de-

91



Figure 1: An Example of a Hindi sentence annotated with a NULL category.

pendency parsing technique and to shed some light
on the challenges of this problem. As the data-driven
parsing on Hindi language has achieved good results
(Singla et al., 2012), we try to use this approach to
predict Empty categories in the sentence. In this
approach the information about NULL categories is
encoded into the label set of the structure. In these
experiments we have used only Projective sentences
from the treebank. Non-projectivity makes it diffi-
cult to identify the exact position of NULLs during
introduction of NULLs in the sentence.

The rest of the paper is divided into the follow-
ing sections: Section 2 discusses about the related
work. Section 3 gives an overview of the Hindi data
we have used for our experiments. Section 4 con-
tains the details of our approach and section 5 dis-
cusses about experiments, parser, results and discus-
sion. We conclude the paper in section 6 with a sum-
mary and the future work.

2 Related Work

Previous work related to Empty categories predic-
tion on Hindi data is done by Gsk et al. (2011) which
is a rule based approach for detection of Empty cate-
gories and also presented detailed analysis of differ-
ent types of Empty categories present in the Hindi
treebank. They used hand-crafted rules in order
to identify each type of Empty category. As this
is a rule based approach it becomes language spe-
cific. There are many approaches for the recov-
ery of empty categories in the treebanks like Penn
treebank, both ML based (Collins, 1997; Johnson,

2002; Seeker et al., 2012), and rule based (Camp-
bell, 2004). Some approaches such as Yang and
Xue (2010) follow a post processing step of recov-
ering empty categories after parsing the text. Gsk
et al. (2011) have discussed about different types
of Empty categories in Hindi Treebank in detailed
manner. The main types of Empty categories are:

• Empty Subject where a clause is dependent on
missing subject (NP) of the verb, denoted as
NULL NP or NULL PRP.

• Backward Gapping where the verb (VM) is
absent in the clause that occurs before a co-
ordinating conjunct, denoted as NULL VM

• Forward Gapping where the verb (VM) is
absent in the clause that occurs after a co-
ordinating conjunct, denoted as NULL VM.

• Conjunction Ellipses where the Conjunction
(CC) is absent in the sentence, denoted as
NULL CC.

3 Data

We have used COLING-MTPIL workshop 2012
data for our experiments. This was released by the
organizers as part of the shared task in two differ-
ent settings. One being the manually annotated data
with POS tags, chunks and other information such as
gender, number, person etc. whereas the other one
contains only automatic POS tags without any other
information. We have used Gold standard data with

92



Type of NULL No. of Instances
NULL VM 247
NULL CC 184
NULL NP 71

NULL PRP 25

Table 1: Empty categories in Training + Development
Dataset of Hindi treebank.

Type of NULL No. of instances
NULL VM 26
NULL CC 36
NULL NP 9

NULL PRP 4

Table 2: Empty categories in Testing Dataset of Hindi
treebank.

all features provided for our experiments. Train-
ing set contains 12,041 sentences, development data
set consists of 1233 sentences and testing data set
consists of 1828 sentences. In our experiments we
have worked with only projective sentences. We
have combined the training and development data
sets into one data set and used as training in the final
experiments.

Training and Development data together consists
of 544 NULL instances (in 436 sentences) of 10,690
sentences. The major types of Empty categories
present in the training data are of type NULL CC,
NULL VM, NULL NN and NULL PRP categories.
Table 1 and Table 2 show the number of instances of
each category. Testing data consists of 80 instances
(72 sentences) of 1455 sentences.

4 Approach

There are 3 main steps involved in this process.

4.1 Pre-Processing
In the first step, we encode information about pres-
ence of Empty categories in a sentence into the
dependency relation label set of the sentence. If
NULLs are present in a sentence, we remove the
NULLs from the respective sentence in the treebank.
In a sentence the dependents or children of a NULL
category are attached to the parent of the NULL cat-
egory and their respective labels are combined with
dependency label of NULL category which indicates

the presence of NULL and also says that such words
or tokens are children of NULL category. Instead of
just combining the labels we also add a sense of di-
rection to the complex label which indicates whether
the position of NULL is to the right or left of this
token in the sentence and subsequently NULLs are
also detached from its parent node. Therefore a
complex label in a sentence indicates the presence
of a NULL category in the sentence.

Example: Null-label r dep-label is a generic
type of a complex label. In this format ’r’ indicates
that a NULL instance is to the right of this token.
Null-label is the dependency relation label joining
the Null instance and its parent and dep-label is the
dependency relation label joining the current token
or word to its parent which is a NULL instance.
Figure 2 illustrates this step.

4.2 Data-driven parsing

In the second step a Data-driven parser is trained
using the training data (with complex dependency
relation labels) and when this parser model is used
on the test data it predicts the complex labels in the
output. In this approach we have tried out different
data-driven parsers such as Malt (Nivre et al., 2006),
Turbo (Martins et al., 2010) and MST (McDonald
et al., 2005) for this experiment which were shown
earlier to be performing better for Hindi Parsing by
Kukkadapu et al. (2012) and found that Malt parser
performs better than the rest on this data with com-
plex labels.

4.3 Post-processing

In the final step, Post-processing is applied on the
output predicted by the parser in the above step. In
this step presence of NULLs are identified using the
complex labels and their position in the sentence
is identified using sense of direction in these labels
(i.e., whether NULL instance is to the left ’l’ or right
’r’ of this token). During the insertion of NULLs
into the sentence Projectivity of the sentence must
be preserved. Keeping this constraint intact and us-
ing the direction information from the dependency
relation labels, NULLs are introduced into the sen-
tence. Figure 2 illustrates this step.

The advantage in using statistical approach rather
than a rule based approach to predict NULLs is, it

93



Figure 2: Process

can be easily used to predict NULLs in other MoR-
FWO languages. The problem with this approach
is, it can’t handle Empty categories occurring as
Leaf nodes (or Terminal nodes in the dependency
tree) and as Root nodes. As we have mentioned
earlier, the dependency annotation scheme of Hindi
language does not allow for Empty categories to oc-
cur as Leaf nodes (or Terminal nodes). But if these
Empty categories occur as Root nodes in the depen-
dency tree then such cases are not disturbed in our
approach.

5 Experiments and Results

5.1 Parser settings
As mentioned earlier we had used Malt parser for
our experiments. Malt Parser implements the tran-
sition based approach to dependency parsing which
has two components:
1) A transition system for mapping sentences into
dependency trees.
2) A classifier for predicting the next transition for
every possible system configuration.

Malt parser provides two learning algorithms
LIBSVM and LIBLINEAR. It also provides various
options for parsing algorithms and we have exper-
imented on nivre-eager, nivre-standard and stack-
proj parsing algorithms. Nivre-eager has shown
good results in our experiments.

5.2 Features and Template
Feature model is the template, which governs the
learning from the given training data. We observed
feature model used by Kosaraju et al. (2010) per-
forms best.

In order to get best results in the second step
(Data-driven parsing) we have experimented with

Type of NULL Category Recall
NULL VM 50
NULL CC 69.45
NULL NN 88.89
NULL PRP 50

Table 3: Empty categories Predicted by this approach on
test data.

various features provided in the data. Kosaraju et al.
(2010) and Husain et al. (2010) showed the best fea-
tures that can be used in FEATS column in CoNLL-
X format. These features are vibhakti (post posi-
tional marker), TAM (tense, aspect and modality),
chunk features like chunk head, chunk distance and
chunk boundary information have proved to be ef-
fective in parsing of Hindi language and our results
on overall accuracy of data is consistent with their
results.

5.3 Results and Discussion

The Results obtained on the test dataset are shown
below and Recall on each Empty category are given
in Table 3:

The Results obtained by using this approach on
the test set including all the Empty category types is
as follows:

Precision = 84.9
Recall = 69.23
F-measure = 76.26
In computation of the above results the exact po-

sition of NULLs in the sentence are not considered.
These values indicate the efficiency of the system
in identifying the presence of the Empty categories
in the system. However, this approach inserted the

94



NULLs in exact positions with a Precision of more
than 85%, i.e., of all the NULL instances it has in-
serted correctly, it has inserted 85% of them in exact
positions in the sentences.

The approach was able to insert NULL NP to-
kens with good accuracy but it had a tough time pre-
dicting NULL VM tokens. This was also consistent
with Gsk et al. (2011) conclusions about Empty cat-
egories in Hindi treebank.

In case of NULL VM categories we have ob-
served some inconsistency in the annotation of these
sentences. In these sentences which have multiple
clauses with main verb (VM) token missing, certain
sentences are annotated with NULL VM for each
clause where main verb (VM) token is missing and
certain sentences are annotated with one NULL VM
for all the clauses with main verb (VM) missing.
This may be a reason for accuracy drop in predict-
ing NULL VM tokens. The main reason for low ac-
curacy as we have observed is that the output pre-
dicted by the parser is low for these complex labels.
The test data consists of 202 complex labels whereas
the parser has been able to predict only 102 of them,
which is a huge drop in accuracy for complex labels.
The overall accuracy of parser on the test data (only
projective sentences) has been high 91.11%(LAS),
95.86%(UAS) and 92.65%(LS). The low accuracy
of the parser on complex labels may be due to less
number of these instances compared to size of the
corpus. Another reason may be due to the introduc-
tion of complex labels the size of label set has in-
creased significantly and it may be difficult for the
parser to learn the rare labels.

6 Conclusion and Future work

In this paper, we presented a statistical approach to
Empty category prediction using Data-driven pars-
ing. We have used state-of-the-art parser for Hindi
language with an accuracy above 90% and have
achieved a decent F-score of 76.26 in predicting
Empty categories. We look to try out this approach
for other MoR-FWO languages and compare the
performances on different languages. We need to
identify Features which would help in identifying
NULL CC category and also should try this ap-
proach on a big data set with a significant number
of instances of NULLs and also look to extend this

approach to Non-Projective sentences.

References
Rafiya Begum, Samar Husain, Arun Dhwaj, Dipti Misra

Sharma, Lakshmi Bai, and Rajeev Sangal. 2008. De-
pendency annotation scheme for indian languages. In
Proceedings of IJCNLP.

A. Bharati, V. Chaitanya, R. Sangal, and KV Ramakrish-
namacharyulu. 1995. Natural language processing: A
Paninian perspective. Prentice-Hall of India.

Akshar Bharati, Samar Husain, Dipti Misra, and Rajeev
Sangal. 2009a. Two stage constraint based hybrid ap-
proach to free word order language dependency pars-
ing. In Proceedings of the 11th International Confer-
ence on Parsing Technologies, pages 77–80. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Akshara Bharati, Dipti Misra Sharma, Samar Husain,
Lakshmi Bai, Rafiya Begam, and Rajeev Sangal.
2009b. Anncorra: Treebanks for indian languages,
guidelines for annotating hindi treebank.

Richard Campbell. 2004. Using linguistic principles to
recover empty categories. In Proceedings of the 42nd
annual meeting on association for computational lin-
guistics, page 645. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Michael Collins. 1997. Three generative, lexicalised
models for statistical parsing. In Proceedings of the
eighth conference on European chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 16–23. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Chaitanya Gsk, Samar Husain, and Prashanth Mannem.
2011. Empty categories in hindi dependency treebank:
Analysis and recovery. In Proceedings of the 5th Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop, pages 134–142. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

R.A. Hudson. 1984. Word grammar. Blackwell Oxford.
Samar Husain, Prashanth Mannem, Bharat Ram Ambati,

and Phani Gadde. 2010. The icon-2010 tools contest
on indian language dependency parsing. Proceedings
of ICON-2010 Tools Contest on Indian Language De-
pendency Parsing, ICON, 10:1–8.

Mark Johnson. 2002. A simple pattern-matching al-
gorithm for recovering empty nodes and their an-
tecedents. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting
on Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
136–143. Association for Computational Linguistics.

P. Kosaraju, S.R. Kesidi, V.B.R. Ainavolu, and
P. Kukkadapu. 2010. Experiments on indian language
dependency parsing. Proceedings of the ICON10 NLP
Tools Contest: Indian Language Dependency Parsing.

Puneeth Kukkadapu, Deepak Kumar Malladi, and
Aswarth Dara. 2012. Ensembling various dependency

95



parsers: Adopting turbo parser for indian languages.
In 24th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, page 179.

P. Mannem and A. Dara. 2011. Partial parsing from bi-
text projections. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 1597–
1606.

A.F.T. Martins, N.A. Smith, and E.P. Xing. 2009. Con-
cise integer linear programming formulations for de-
pendency parsing. In Proceedings of the Joint Confer-
ence of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 1-Volume 1, pages
342–350.

A.F.T. Martins, N.A. Smith, E.P. Xing, P.M.Q. Aguiar,
and M.A.T. Figueiredo. 2010. Turbo parsers: Depen-
dency parsing by approximate variational inference.
In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 34–
44.

R. McDonald, F. Pereira, K. Ribarov, and J. Hajič. 2005.
Non-projective dependency parsing using spanning
tree algorithms. In Proceedings of the conference on
Human Language Technology and Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
523–530.

J. Nivre, J. Hall, and J. Nilsson. 2006. Maltparser: A
data-driven parser-generator for dependency parsing.
In Proceedings of LREC, volume 6, pages 2216–2219.

Wolfgang Seeker, Richárd Farkas, Bernd Bohnet, Hel-
mut Schmid, and Jonas Kuhn. 2012. Data-driven de-
pendency parsing with empty heads. In Proceedings
of COLING 2012: Posters, pages 1081–1090, Mum-
bai, India, December. The COLING 2012 Organizing
Committee.

Karan Singla, Aniruddha Tammewar, Naman Jain, and
Sambhav Jain. 2012. Two-stage approach for
hindi dependency parsing using maltparser. Training,
12041(268,093):22–27.

Yaqin Yang and Nianwen Xue. 2010. Chasing the ghost:
recovering empty categories in the chinese treebank.
In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics: Posters, pages 1382–
1390. Association for Computational Linguistics.

96


