



















































Open-ended, Extensible System Utterances Are Preferred, Even If They Require Filled Pauses


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, pages 280–283,
Metz, France, 22-24 August 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Open-ended, Extensible System Utterances Are Preferred,
Even If They Require Filled Pauses

Timo Baumann
Universität Hamburg

Department of Informatics
Germany

baumann@informatik.uni-hamburg.de

David Schlangen
University of Bielefeld

Faculty of Linguistics and Literary Studies
Germany

david.schlangen@uni-bielefeld.de

Abstract

In many environments (e. g. sports com-
mentary), situations incrementally unfold
over time and often the future appearance
of a relevant event can be predicted, but not
in all its details or precise timing. We have
built a simulation framework that uses our
incremental speech synthesis component
to assemble in a timely manner complex
commentary utterances. In our evaluation,
the resulting output is preferred over that
from a baseline system that uses a simpler
commenting strategy. Even in cases where
the incremental system overcommits tem-
porally and requires a filled pause to wait
for the upcoming event, the system is pre-
ferred over the baseline.

1 Introduction

In spontaneous speech, speakers often commit tem-
porally, e. g. by starting utterances that they do not
yet know how to complete (Clark, 1996), putting
time pressure on them for the generation of a com-
pletion. While this may be for planning and effi-
ciency reasons, it also enables them to start com-
menting on events for which the outcome is not yet
known. For example when a ball is flying towards
the goal, but it is uncertain yet whether it will hit,
in sports commentary.

To accommodate this incremental behaviour, hu-
man speakers plan their utterances just somewhat
ahead, typically in chunks of major phrases (Levelt,
1989), and remain flexible to change or abandon
the original plan, or to hesitate, e. g. to adapt their
timing. This flexibility is in contrast to speech
output in spoken dialogue systems (SDSs) which
typically generate, synthesize and deliver speech
in units of full utterances that cannot be changed
while ongoing, apart from being aborted or inter-
rupted (Edlund, 2008).

Recently, incremental speech synthesis (iSS) has
been presented (Dutoit et al., 2011; Baumann and
Schlangen, 2012b) which allows to start partial ut-
terances that are then smoothly extended during
verbalization. Incremental spoken output for di-
alogue systems has been shown to improve natu-
ralness (Buschmeier et al., 2012) and Skantze and
Hjalmarsson (2010) have used filled pauses to hold
a turn. Dethlefs et al. (2012) present an incremental
NLG strategy to reduce the need for filled pauses
in interactions.

We investigate the impact of incremental spoken
output in a highly dynamic environment, that is,
where the rate of external events is high enough
to allow only few utterances to finish as planned.
As an example, we choose an otherwise simple
commentary domain, where incremental output en-
ables the system to combine multiple events into
one complex commenting utterance that takes into
account predictions about upcoming events. If the
system overcommits to the timing of future events,
it autonomously uses a filled pause until more ma-
terial becomes available.

2 Related Work

A paradigmatic example of a domain that uses
open-ended utterances is sports commentary,
which has received some attention in the NLG
community. For example, Chen and Mooney
(2008) present a system that learns from hand-
annotated data what to comment on. However,
attention seems to have been placed more on
truthfulness of the content, as, judging from videos
provided on their website,1 the formulations
that are produced are rather monotonic (“pink7
dribbles towards the goal. pink7 shoots for the

goal. pink7 passes to...”). More importantly,
the delivery of a produced utterance does not seem
to be temporally tied to the occurrence of the event.

1
http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/ml/clamp/sportscasting

280



Figure 1: The map shown in the CarChase domain,
including the car on one of its itineraries (red; an-
other in blue). At the depicted moment we can
assume that the car will take a turn, but do not
know whether left or right.

Repeatedly, utterances are synthesized long after
the fact that they describe which sometimes has
become obsolete at that point (for example, a goal
is scored while the system still talks about a pass).

Lohmann et al. (2011) describe another domain
that can be called highly dynamic: a system that
adds spoken assistance to tactile maps for the vi-
sually impaired. In their settings, users can move
around on a computer representation of a map with
a hand-held haptic force-feedback device. Users
are given spoken advice about the currently tra-
versed streets’ names, the relation of streets to each
other, and to other map objects in the user’s vicin-
ity. Such exploratory moves by users can become
rather quick, which in the system they describe
can lead to output that comes late, referring to a
position that has long been left.

3 A Highly Dynamic Commenting Domain

Our example domain combines properties of the
sports commentary and map exploration domains
mentioned above: the CarChase domain depicted
in Figure 1. In the domain, a car drives around
streets on the map and a commentator (supposed to
be observing the scene from above) comments on
where it is driving and what turns it is taking.

The car’s itinerary in our domain simulator is
scripted from a configuration file which assigns
target positions for the car at different points in time
and from which the motion and rotation of the car
is animated. The speed of the car is set so that the
event density is high enough that the setting cannot
be described by simply producing one utterance
per event – in other words: the domain is highly
dynamic.

time event description ongoing utterance (already realized part in bold,
newly appended continuation in italic)

t1 car on Main Street The car drives along Main Street.
t2 car will likely turn . . . drives along Main Street and then turns ‹hes›
t3 car turns right . . . drives along Main Street and then turns right.

Figure 2: Example of incremental utterance pro-
duction as a car drives along a street and turns. The
ongoing utterance is extended as events unfold.

4 A Strategy for Incremental
Commentary

We distinguish three types of events in the do-
main: identification (ID) events trigger the system
to name the street the car is on, turn events fire
when the car is taking a turn. Finally, turn-prep
events fire when it is obvious that the car will turn
but the direction of the turn remains open. These
three event types are shown in Figure 2 at time t1
(ID), t2 (turn-prep), and t3 (turn).

As can be seen in the example in Figure 2, the
turn-prep event enables a system that is able to
incrementally update its ongoing utterance to con-
tinue speaking about the anticipated future (“and
then turns”) without knowing the direction of the
turn. This allows an incremental system to output
efficient utterances that fluently combine multiple
events and avoid repetition. Furthermore, turn-prep
events enable the system to output the direction
of the turn (the most important information) very
shortly after the fact.

A non-incremental system, in contrast, must out-
put individual utterances for every event and utter-
ances can only start after the fact. Furthermore,
a non-incremental system cannot extend ongoing
utterances, rendering turn-prep events useless.

5 Implemented System

The system used for the experiment reported be-
low uses an early version of incremental speech
synthesis as implemented in INPROTK (Baumann
and Schlangen, 2012c), a toolkit for incremental
spoken dialogue processing based on the IU model
(Schlangen and Skantze, 2009). The system al-
lows to extend ongoing utterances, enabling the

281



incremental commenting strategy outlined above.
In addition, we implemented a capability to syn-

thesize a hesitation if no more content is specified,
and to continue as soon as content becomes avail-
able. (Thus, in contrast to (Skantze and Hjalmars-
son, 2010), hesitations do not consume additional
time.) By using hesitations, the system gracefully
accommodates temporal over-commitment (i. e. the
obligation to produce a continuation that is not ful-
filled in time) which may occur, e. g. when the car
drives slower than anticipated and a turn’s direction
is not yet known when the system needs it.

In the preliminary version of iSS used for the ex-
periments, no prosodic integration of continuations
takes place, resulting in prosodic discontinuities;
see (Baumann and Schlangen, 2012a) for a detailed
assessment of prosodic integration in iSS.

As we focus on the merit of iSS in this work, we
did not implement a scene analysis/event detection
nor a NLG component for the task.2 Instead, the
commentary is scripted from the same configura-
tion file that controls the car’s motion on the board.
iSS events lag behind slightly, ensuring that visual
analysis would be possible, and event/text corre-
spondence is close, matching NLG capabilities.

6 Experiment

To evaluate the incremental system, we compared
it to a non-incremental baseline system which is
unable to alter speech incrementally and hence can-
not smoothly extend ongoing partial utterances. In-
stead, the baseline system always produces full
utterances, one per event. To ensure the tempo-
ral proximity of delivery with the causing event
in the baseline system, utterances can be marked
as optional (in which case they are skipped if the
system is still outputting a previous utterance), or
non-optional (in which case an ongoing utterance
is aborted in favour of the new utterance). All ‘turn’
events in the domain were marked as optional, all
street ID events as non-optional.

We devised 4 different configurations (including
the itineraries shown in Figure 1), and the timing of
events was varied (by having the car go at different
speeds, or by delaying some events), resulting in 9
scenarios; in 3 of these, the incremental system gen-
erated one or more hesitations. Both systems’ out-
put for the 9 scenarios was recorded with a screen-
recorder, resulting in 18 videos that were played in

2However, Lohmann et al. (2012) present an incremental
NLG strategy for a similar task.

random order to 9 participants (university students
not involved in the research). Participants were
told that various versions of commentary-generat-
ing systems generated the commentary based on
the running picture in the videos and were then
asked to rate each video on a five-point Likert scale
with regards to how natural (similar to a human)
the spoken commentary was (a) formulated, and
(b) pronounced. In total, this resulted in 81 paired
samples for each question.3

The assumption (and rationale for the second
question) was that the incremental system’s formu-
lations would result in higher formulation ratings,
while we hoped the acoustic and prosodic artefacts
resulting from the coarsely implemented incremen-
tal synthesis would not significantly hurt pronun-
ciation ratings. In order to not draw the subjects’
attention towards incremental aspects, no question
regarding the timeliness of the commentary was
asked for explicitly.

7 Results

The mean ratings for both formulation quality and
pronunciation quality for the incremental and base-
line systems is shown in Figure 3. The median
differences in the ratings of the two conditions is
2 points on the Likert scale for question (a) and
0 points for question (b) (means of 1.66 and 0.51,
respectively), favouring the incremental system.
The sign test shows that the advantage of the incre-
mental system is clearly significant for questions
(a) (68+/9=/4-; p < .0001) and (b) (38+/30=/13-;
p < .0007)4.

Thus, it is safe to say that the production strate-
gies enabled by incremental speech synthesis (i. e.
starting to speak before all evidence is known and
extending the utterance as information becomes
available) allows for formulations in the spoken
commentary that are favoured by human listeners.

Incremental behaviour in the 3 scenarios that
required hesitations was rated significantly worse
than in those scenarios without hesitations for both
questions (t-tests, p < .001 (a) and p < .01 (b)). This

3The experiment was conducted in one language (German)
only, but we believe our results to carry over to other lan-
guages. Specifically, we assume that most or all languages
cater for commenting, and believe that human commenters
universally use their ability to integrate events late in the utter-
ance. However, practices of commenting may work differently
(and differently well) among languages.

4We also conducted a non-paired t-test for question (b), as
the different formulations of the systems might have effects on
pronunciation quality; this test was also significant (p < .0012).

282



very

little

a little

neutral

a bit

very

much

a) formulation b) pronunciation

no hes

no hes 

incremental strategy

baseline strategy

hes

hes

Figure 3: Mean ratings of formulation and pronun-
ciation for the incremental and baseline systems;
the formulation rating differs for utterances with
and without hesitations in the incremental system.

is a clear indication that a system should try to
avoid over-commitment, as users do not accept hes-
itations as inevitable (given that there was simply
no evidence yet where the car would turn, for exam-
ple). However, even in those scenarios that require
filled pauses, the incremental commentary’s for-
mulation is rated as significantly better than the
baseline system’s (sign test, 18+/5=/4-; p < .005)
while there is no effect on pronunciation in these
cases.

8 Discussion & Outlook

The results indicate a clear user preference for open-
ended, extensible utterances that grow as events un-
fold. Furthermore, this preference is stronger than
the negative impact of filled pauses that are needed
to cover temporal over-commitment, and despite
the poor quality of filled pauses in the current sys-
tem, which we plan to improve in the future.

Similarly to spoken commentary in dynamic do-
mains, conversational speech requires revisions and
reactions to events such as listener feedback, or the
absence thereof (Clark, 1996). Thus, we believe
that our results, as well as iSS in general, also apply
to a broad range of conversational SDS tasks.

Finally, synthesis quality appears to be less im-
portant than interaction adequacy: we found no
difference in rating of perceptual quality (‘pronun-
ciation’) between the variants, even though in isola-
tion iSS sounded noticeably worse in the prototype.
This result calls for interactive adequacy as an op-
timization target over (isolated) perception ratings
for speech synthesis, and also challenges the use of
canned speech in conversational SDSs, which does
not adapt to the interaction.

Acknowledgements The first author would like
to thank Wolfgang Menzel for fruitful discussions
on the topic, and permanent encouragement.

References
Timo Baumann and David Schlangen. 2012a. Eval-

uating prosodic processing for incremental speech
synthesis. In Procs. of Interspeech, Portland, USA.

Timo Baumann and David Schlangen. 2012b. IN-
PRO_iSS: A component for just-in-time incremen-
tal speech synthesis. In Proceedings of ACL System
Demonstrations, Jeju, Korea.

Timo Baumann and David Schlangen. 2012c. The
INPROTK 2012 release. In Proceedings of SDCTD,
Montréal, Canada.

Hendrik Buschmeier, Timo Baumann, Benjamin
Dorsch, Stefan Kopp, and David Schlangen. 2012.
Combining incremental language generation and in-
cremental speech synthesis for adaptive information
presentation. In Procs. of SigDial, pages 295–303,
Seoul, Korea.

David L. Chen and Raymond J. Mooney. 2008. Learn-
ing to sportscast: A test of grounded language ac-
quisition. In Proceedings of 25th Int. Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), Helsinki, Finland.

Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Using Language. Cambridge
University Press.

Nina Dethlefs, Helen Hastie, Verena Rieser, and Oliver
Lemon. 2012. Optimising incremental generation
for spoken dialogue systems: Reducing the need for
fillers. In Procs. of the Seventh Int. Natural Lan-
guage Generation Conf., pages 49–58, Utica, USA.

Thierry Dutoit, Maria Astrinaki, Onur Babacan, Nico-
las d’Alessandro, and Benjamin Picart. 2011. pHTS
for Max/MSP: A Streaming Architecture for Statis-
tical Parametric Speech Synthesis. Technical Re-
port 1, numediart Research Program on Digital Art
Technologies.

Jens Edlund. 2008. Incremental speech synthesis. In
Second Swedish Language Technology Conference,
pages 53–54, Stockholm, Sweden. System Demo.

William J.M. Levelt. 1989. Speaking: From Intention
to Articulation. MIT Press.

Kris Lohmann, Carola Eschenbach, and Christopher
Habel. 2011. Linking spatial haptic perception to
linguistic representations: assisting utterances for
tactile-map explorations. In Spatial information the-
ory, pages 328–349, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer.

Kris Lohmann, Ole Eichhorn, and Timo Baumann.
2012. Generating situated assisting utterances to fa-
cilitate tactile-map understanding: A prototype sys-
tem. In Procs. of SLPAT 2012, Montréal, Canada.

David Schlangen and Gabriel Skantze. 2009. A Gen-
eral, Abstract Model of Incremental Dialogue Pro-
cessing. In Procs. of the EACL, Athens, Greece.

Gabriel Skantze and Anna Hjalmarsson. 2010. To-
wards incremental speech generation in dialogue sys-
tems. In Procs. of SigDial, pages 1–8, Tokyo, Japan.

283


