










































Language diversity and implications for Language technology in the Multilingual Europe


Proceedings of the Adaptation of Language Resources and Tools for Closely Related Languages and Language Variants, pages 2–6,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 13 September 2013.

Language diversity and implications for Language technology in the 
Multilingual Europe 

Cristina Vertan 
University of Hamburg 

cristina.vertan@uni-
hamburg.de 

Walther v. Hahn 
University of Hamburg 

vhahn@informatik.uni-
hamburg.de 

 
 

 
Europe has a particular and unique setting. On 
one had it has a great language diversity, there 
are twenty four official languages and a dozen of 
minority languages largely used. On the other 
hand most of these languages belong to one of 
the indo-European language families (Roman, 
Germanic Slavic) and within these language 
families similarities at lexical and syntactic level 
can be observed. Whilst an increased attention 
have been given to the development of language 
technology tools for the official EU –Languages, 
processing tools for minority languages have a 
chance to progress only by exploiting similarities 
within their language families. 

 
In order to have an overview about the 

European linguistic diversity and the 
implications on the language technology research 
we republish here a part of the article 

“Translation Difficulties and Information 
Processing Problems with Eastern 
European Languages” 

Cristina Vertan and Walther v.Hahn 
Published din the volume “Multilingual 
Processing in Eastern and Southern EU 
Languages”, Cambridge Scholar Press, 2012 
 
It is still popular today to blame machine 
translation (MT) for poor translations of literary 
texts. However, even inelegant translations are 
an industrial factor in producing MT software, in 
selling multilingual retrieval for relevance 
scanning or in opening markets by issuing simple 
foreign-language descriptions. Information 
retrieval (IR) technologies are effective even if 
their degree of linguistic correctness is low. 
The success story of Machine Translation is 
partly owed to some simplifications, which made 
its start-up easier (leaving aside the political 
presetting of English-Russian translations). 
Simplifying reality  was a promising approach, 

because the reduction of parameters from syntax, 
morphology, and domain coverage formed the 
basis for the demonstration of MT’s feasibility. 
Moreover, the statistical approach in MT 
nourished the hope that reasonable results for 
English can be seen as evidence for the fact that 
MT can be done with similar quality for any 
other language.  
In subsequent decades experiments were 
performed with numerous other language pairs 
around the world including languages even, for 
which detailed linguistic knowledge was 
unavailable . The goal of these scientific and 
industrial research efforts was mainly to estimate 
the quality and costs of acceptable MT products 
for the commercially meaningful language pairs. 
The same holds true for multilingual information 
retrieval and multilingual information processing 
on other fields. 
With the ever growing number of language pairs 
for which customers require cost-efficient 
processing, four aspects became clear:  
1. There are domains and language pairs for 
which not even human translation/IR is 
available, e.g., financial law texts from Finish to, 
say, Hausa. The question remains how to obtain 
these at all. 
2. There is no representative bilingual data 
collection (a "corpus") for these language pairs at 
all. Statistical approaches hence will not be 
feasible within the next 5-10 years. How to 
obtain inexpensive translations in the mid-term 
for these "low resourced" languages? 
3. Many languages (e.g., Hausa) have more 
than one writing system or changing orthography 
(compare the post-reform rules for German 
orthogography that are in force since 2006). This 
poses the challenge of how to obtain 
homogeneous corpora. 
4. Multinational or global companies need 
language processing for promotion, local 
instruction, or contracts, that affords legally 
binding results.  

2



The optimism of the pioneering years has yielded 
to scepticism regarding general recipes for 
multilingual processing such as translation,  even 
for the traditional Western languages. In Europe, 
the expansion of the EU additionally 
demonstrated that democratic co-operation 
requires a huge work load of translation and 
bilingual information processing among today’s 
23 official languages. The sheer number of 
languages, their diverse linguistic structure and 
their different public use are reasons enough to 
give up some of the starting assumptions and 
simplifications of the first decades.  
We discusses the rather different situations in 
Europe with regards to cross-lingual processing 
tasks in an English and American context along 
the following dimensions:  

1 Languages 

There are 230 spoken languages in Europe. Most 
of them have a long common history in the Indo-
European paradigm. Even among the 23 official 
languages of the EU there are the Finno-Ugric 
official languages Finnish, Estonian and 
Hungarian. The Turkic and Mongolic families 
also have several European members, while the 
north Caucasian and Kartvelian families are 
important in the south-eastern border of 
geographical Europe. The Basque language of 
the Western Pyrenees is an isolated language, 
unrelated to any other language group in Europe. 
Much less known even to Central European 
citizens is the existence of a European Semitic 
language, the Maltese, written in Latin letters.  
In the current volume we decided to refer only to 
the official EU languages, as representatives of 
most of the families enumerated above. 
Additionally, due to European integration there 
is an increased need in translation and cross-
lingual management of documents in these 
languages. We hope that the some solutions 
presented here can be applicable also for non-
official and minority languages of the EU. 
Even the simple enumeration of the language 
families encountered in Europe already reveals 
the existence of major graphemic, phonetic and 
structural differences amongst them. The aim of 
this volume is not to investigate these differences 
from a linguistic point of view, but rather to 
insist on those discrepancies that trigger 
challenges for any translation system or cross-
lingual/multilingual application. In this sense the 
following aspects are of relevance: 

1.1 Writing differences 
Although Europe has no unusual iconographic or 
syllabic writing systems but only phonographic 
paradigms, there are nevertheless problems with 
gathering homogenous bilingual language 
resources, i.e., training material for statistical 
approaches. 
 
Cyrillic transliterations for named entities (NEs) 
follow four different (target language 
independent) transliteration schemata and 
numerous (target language dependent) 
transcriptions. As an example, consider the 
(operating system dependent) specific encodings 
for Bulgarian Cyrillics in contrast to Russian 
encoding. A similar situation exists for Arabic 
NEs in Maltese. The transliteration is not always 
standardised, which often leads to data 
sparseness. One word transliterated in three 
different ways will be identified in fact as three 
different words. Moreover, there is a problem 
with older electronic resources that were 
developed before the introduction of the Unicode 
character set: Many languages adopted 
transliteration simplifications that induce 
undesired ambiguities. For example the 
Romanian word for “goose” contains two 
diacritics “gâscă”. A corpus collected before the 
introduction of the Unicode system would 
simplify this word to “gasca”, which may be read 
also as “gașcă” denoting a group of young 
people.  

1.2 Variety of Linguistic Structure  
European languages differ centrally in their use 
of pronouns and articles. So called "pro-drop" 
languages like Italian do not express the 1st 
person sg. pronouns explicitly, but mark them 
morphologically, whereas non-pro-drop 
languages like German have to add the pronoun 
explicitly in examples like "Ich gehe zu ihm" (I 
am going to him). Even more difficult in this 
sense is Hungarian, where lots of particles are 
only attached as morphemes 
(összerakhatatlanságukért = "for their quality of 
not being easy to put together")1. 
Grammatical gender is present or not (English, 
Basque), is expressed in noun endings (Italian, 
mostly), or not (German, mostly), affects other 
words by agreement (Spanish, French) affects 
the demonstratives (Italian), or not (Greek), is 
additionally marked by articles (German, but not 
                                                             
1 This example is owed to Merényi Csaba from 
MorphoLogic 

3



unambiguously), or not (Bulgarian, the Baltic 
languages). Articles are in use for the three-
gender system (German), or two genders 
(Maltese), or the middle (Romanian, common 
singular for masc. and ntr.) attached to the end of 
a word (Romanian), or separated in front of the 
noun (French). Moreover, grammatical and 
natural gender have an unclear relation in most 
languages. 
All these are major challenges especially in 
machine translation (MT) whenever the target 
language is more productive in pronouns or 
articles than the source. Rule based MT needs a 
deep linguistic analysis module and often the 
involvement of large knowledge bases in order to 
infer the correct target pronoun, while corpus-
based MT cannot cope with this problem at all. 
In most cases the translation lacks not only the 
correct pronoun but also all derived information 
such as the correct inflection of the dependent 
nouns, adjectives and verbs. 
To express definiteness, some languages use 
articles, while others express it by word order, 
which normally gets lost in surface-form 
statistical MT systems.  
The word order of adjective and noun is 
semantically relevant in Spanish, restricted in 
German and fixed in English. Also the position 
of a verb in the sentence varies among language 
families. This is a real challenge not only for 
translation systems but also for multilingual tools 
that try to apply the same analysis technique to 
several structurally different languages. Rule-
based tools lack a substantial number of common 
rules. Statistical methods, on the ther hand, 
require the availabilty of huge non-sparse data 
covering all these phenomena.  
Word composition plays a major role in many 
EU languages and the order of components is 
significant. Sometimes logical particles must be 
inserted for correct translation. Distant verb 
particles in German are very difficult to 
differentiate from prepositions when only 
statistical methods are being applied. Again, such 
particularities constitute challenges not only in 
translation but for any preprocessing step in 
cross-linguistic processing.  

1.3 Contact  
All these languages have been in extensive 
contact with each other over time with the result, 
that additional irregularities were introduced. In 
Romanian, for example, one third of the 
vocabulary stems from Russian, Hungarian and 
German and has only been assimilated 

superficially. This means that the graphemic 
rules for Romanian are not homogenous. The 
contact,  however, differs from language to 
language. Compare Romanian-Italian and 
Slovene-Italian contacts, e.g. whichdiffer with 
respect to the historical time, when the contact 
was established. Italy influenced Slovenia much 
more through Venetian than through modern 
Italian.  
Borrowings were often done only partially so not 
all semantics is preserved. A special situation is 
encountered on the Balkan Peninsula where 
vocabulary related to food, e.g., old weapons or 
customs are usually shared by neighbouring 
communities but not necessarily by whole 
countries. For example, a lot of regional words in 
the North-Western part of Romania 
(Transylvania) are in common with Hungarian 
and German, but unknown in the Southern part 
of the country, which otherwise uses more words 
shared with Turkish and Bulgarian.  
This constitutes a real challenge for modern 
retrieval systems which make use of ontologies. 
Building a language-independent ontology is an 
extremely difficult task, and even word-based 
semantic networks are highly problematic. A 
series of papers published over the last years 
report the difficulties in adapting the English 
Word-Net to each of the Balkan languages, and 
the challenge of homogenisation amongst these 
Word-Nets. 
These considerations, however, touch upon 
cultural differences, that are addressed in the 
following paragraphs of this paper. We 
demonstrate with a few observations that behind 
the language differences in the EU there are 
many more cultural differences than between two 
regions of one country. 

2 Text Structures, Forms and Formats 

Two textual peculiarities of European 
publications are very confusing in corpora:  
European texts often quote passages in a foreign 
language such as English or other European 
languages, because of a close contact with that 
language. Translated quotations from web pages, 
hence, are not always in the correct language, as 
an MT tool has been used. 
A typical text form for an application, for an 
objection, for an expertise etc. differs not only 
lexically but also in style and form between 
European countries.  

4



3 Cultures of Textuality 
In Europe the influence of English varies from 
country to country. A comparison of German and 
French shows that an official inhibitive language 
policy influenced the borrowings to a high 
degree in France. Looking to Hungarian one can 
observe that the French policy more or less 
succeeded in most technical fields, whereas in 
Hungary two different medical nomenclatures 
exist that in practice and international 
information exchange conflict severely.  
Irrespectively of a country’s official language 
policy, the language policy of companies is also 
changing dramatically. A recent study observed 
that in Germany slightly more than 50%  of all 
companies use German as the only business 
language, another 20% use German and English 
or only English, respectively. Less than 4% use 
other languages. 
In general, technical fields in countries have a 
different degree of textualisation dependent on 
technologies, which have a higher or lower 
distance to text production and use, e.g. carpet 
weaving, vs. violin making vs. ecological food 
supplier vs. photo-copying or services.  
Correspondingly, the reference to computerised 
texts, e.g. interactive web forms or download 
resources of public service differs very much 
between European countries, say, between 
Finland and Poland. While web forms must be 
explained even for language minorities, paper 
forms are issued by offices, where 
misunderstandings may be resolved in direct 
contact. 

4 Commercial Market Value 

The possible market value of multilingual or 
cross-lingual technologies clearly depends on the 
mere number of publications accessible and 
resulting from trade and industry. If you compare 
a Slavonic language minority like the Sorbs in 
Germany to Polish speakers in Poland, it 
becomes clear that the industrial expansion in 
Poland and exports abroad result in a 
disproportionately more extensive language and 
information contact than that for Sorbian 
speakers. Translating a handbook of nano 
technology into Polish makes more sense than 
translating it into Sorbian or publishing 
Shakespeare’s works in Frisian, another German 
minority language. 

5 Background and Perspectives 
To come back to the main issue: Language 
technology in Europe is not an extension of 
known technologies to new languages, but a 
multidimensional challenge for science, 
technology and politics of quite another order of 
magnitude. It will bind research groups, 
translators, software companies and politicians 
for the next 50 years at least. 
There is a widespread conception that  
• the rapid development of the Internet,  
• with new web services, 
• the globalisation of the markets and  
• the increase of online transactions  
are the main factors driving international 
research in language technology.  
This argument is, at least in a European context, 
only partially valid. In the era when Internet was 
in its infancy, and most part of the online 
information was exclusively distributed in 
English, the Directorate General of EU 
“Linguistic Applications” was already concerned 
with the additional languages from the countries 
willing to join the European Union.  
“With the expected enlargement of the EU 
following the accession of up to ten Central and 
Eastern European countries (referred to as 
CEECs, which is the usual EU abbreviation), the 
translation complexity takes a quantum leap. The 
current EU languages (n.R. situation in 1998) 
(Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, 
German, Greek, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish and 
Swedish) can be translated in 110 language 
combinations, as each of the 11 languages can be 
translated into 10 other languages. With the 
addition of 10 new languages (Estonian, Latvian, 
Lithuanian, Polish, Czech, Slovak, Hungarian, 
Slovenian, Romanian and Bulgarian) the 
complexity goes up to 21 x 20 = 420 language 
combinations, but there is no obvious political or 
linguistic justification for changing the European 
Union's official policy of supporting 
multilingualism, which finds its expression in the 
MLIS programme, among others.”  
(Poul Andersen, DG XIII EU Representative, in 
an article “Translation Tools for the CEEC 
Candidates for EU Membership - an Overview”, 
Terminologie et Traduction 1.1998, pp.140-166). 
One can only speculate about the development in 
Europe in multilingual language technology 
without the political changes of 1989. The rule-
based machine translation system Systran was 
functional, with reasonable performance for the 
EU-languages and for the requirements of that 

5



time, namely translation of easy official 
documents. 
We assume that the dramatic development of 
multilingual language technology in Europe was 
in fact driven by two forces: The new political 
context and the social impact of the Internet, 
rather than the economy. 
We are also convinced that the European 
approach to multilingual language technology 
gave an impulse all around the globe to develop 
applications for various language communities: 
Recently systems for several Ethiopian 
languages appeared, a machine translation 
system for Quechua was presented (to quote only 
a few examples). 
. 
 

6


