



















































Discourse Relations, Discourse Structure, Discourse Semantics


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, page 1,
Metz, France, 22-24 August 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Discourse Relations, Discourse Structure,
Discourse Semantics

Bonnie Webber
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, Scotland, UK

bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk

It is generally accepted that a discourse connective expresses a semantic
and/or pragmatic relation between its matrix sentence or clause and some-
thing in the previous discourse. Usually the sense of this relation is expressed
as a label, often within a hierarchy of sense labels. But the meaning of these
labels may vary from system to system, and the same connective may be as-
signed different labels in different systems. Given this, we might learn more
and make better predictions if (i) sense labels were associated with (some
of) their entailments and (ii) connectives were characterized in terms of both
their formal properties and their use conditions. I’ll give examples of both.

The above-mentioned predictions tie in with an interesting property of
Penn Discourse TreeBank annotation. Annotators were allowed to assign
multiple sense labels to a single connective, to imply that all the senses held
simultaneously. For those cases where adjacent sentences lacked an inter-
vening connective, annotators were instructed to try to insert one or more
connectives that (together) expressed the relation(s) between the sentences.
Here too, in many cases, annotators inserted a single connective to which
they assigned multiple meanings, Other times they inserted multiple connec-
tives to convey the relation(s) they took as being expressed. Some of this
will be shown to make more sense in terms of the entailments and formal
properties of the connectives than in terms of any sense labels.

I’ll close by trying to distinguish discourse connectives that are associated
with coordinating or subordinating relations between sentences or clauses,
which is an feature of discourse structure, from those connectives that simply
convey additional relevant semantic or pragmatic content.

1


