



















































Tunable Distortion Limits and Corpus Cleaning for SMT


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 225–231,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013 c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Tunable Distortion Limits and Corpus Cleaning for SMT

Sara Stymne Christian Hardmeier Jörg Tiedemann Joakim Nivre
Uppsala University

Department of Linguistics and Philology
firstname.lastname@lingfil.uu.se

Abstract

We describe the Uppsala University sys-
tem for WMT13, for English-to-German
translation. We use the Docent decoder,
a local search decoder that translates at
the document level. We add tunable dis-
tortion limits, that is, soft constraints on
the maximum distortion allowed, to Do-
cent. We also investigate cleaning of the
noisy Common Crawl corpus. We show
that we can use alignment-based filtering
for cleaning with good results. Finally we
investigate effects of corpus selection for
recasing.

1 Introduction

In this paper we present the Uppsala University
submission to WMT 2013. We have submitted one
system, for translation from English to German.
In our submission we use the document-level de-
coder Docent (Hardmeier et al., 2012; Hardmeier
et al., 2013). In the current setup, we take advan-
tage of Docent in that we introduce tunable dis-
tortion limits, that is, modeling distortion limits as
soft constraints instead of as hard constraints. In
addition we perform experiments on corpus clean-
ing. We investigate how the noisy Common Crawl
corpus can be cleaned, and suggest an alignment-
based cleaning method, which works well. We
also investigate corpus selection for recasing.

In Section 2 we introduce our decoder, Docent,
followed by a general system description in Sec-
tion 3. In Section 4 we describe our experiments
with corpus cleaning, and in Section 5 we describe
experiments with tunable distortion limits. In Sec-
tion 6 we investigate corpus selection for recasing.
In Section 7 we compare our results with Docent
to results using Moses (Koehn et al., 2007). We
conclude in Section 8.

2 The Docent Decoder

Docent (Hardmeier et al., 2013) is a decoder for
phrase-based SMT (Koehn et al., 2003). It differs
from other publicly available decoders by its use
of a different search algorithm that imposes fewer
restrictions on the feature models that can be im-
plemented.

The most popular decoding algorithm for
phrase-based SMT is the one described by Koehn
et al. (2003), which has become known as stack
decoding. It constructs output sentences bit by
bit by appending phrase translations to an initially
empty hypothesis. Complexity is kept in check,
on the one hand, by a beam search approach that
only expands the most promising hypotheses. On
the other hand, a dynamic programming technique
called hypothesis recombination exploits the lo-
cality of the standard feature models, in particu-
lar the n-gram language model, to achieve a loss-
free reduction of the search space. While this de-
coding approach delivers excellent search perfor-
mance at a very reasonable speed, it limits the
information available to the feature models to an
n-gram window similar to a language model his-
tory. In stack decoding, it is difficult to implement
models with sentence-internal long-range depen-
dencies and cross-sentence dependencies, where
the model score of a given sentence depends on
the translations generated for another sentence.

In contrast to this very popular stack decod-
ing approach, our decoder Docent implements a
search procedure based on local search (Hard-
meier et al., 2012). At any stage of the search pro-
cess, its search state consists of a complete docu-
ment translation, making it easy for feature mod-
els to access the complete document with its cur-
rent translation at any point in time. The search
algorithm is a stochastic variant of standard hill
climbing. At each step, it generates a successor
of the current search state by randomly applying

225



one of a set of state changing operations to a ran-
dom location in the document. If the new state
has a better score than the previous one, it is ac-
cepted, else search continues from the previous
state. The operations are designed in such a way
that every state in the search space can be reached
from every other state through a sequence of state
operations. In the standard setup we use three op-
erations: change-phrase-translation replaces the
translation of a single phrase with another option
from the phrase table, resegment alters the phrase
segmentation of a sequence of phrases, and swap-
phrases alters the output word order by exchang-
ing two phrases.

In contrast to stack decoding, the search algo-
rithm in Docent leaves model developers much
greater freedom in the design of their feature func-
tions because it gives them access to the transla-
tion of the complete document. On the downside,
there is an increased risk of search errors because
the document-level hill-climbing decoder cannot
make as strong assumptions about the problem
structure as the stack decoder does. In prac-
tice, this drawback can be mitigated by initializing
the hill-climber with the output of a stack decod-
ing pass using the baseline set of models without
document-level features (Hardmeier et al., 2012).
Since its inception, Docent has been used to ex-
periment with document-level semantic language
models (Hardmeier et al., 2012) and models to
enhance text readability (Stymne et al., 2013b).
Work on other discourse phenomena is ongoing.
In the present paper, we focus on sentence-internal
reordering by exploiting the fact that Docent im-
plements distortion limits as soft constraints rather
than strictly enforced limitations. We do not in-
clude any of our document-level feature functions.

3 System Setup

In this section we will describe our basic system
setup. We used all corpora made available for
English–German by the WMT13 workshop. We
always concatenated the two bilingual corpora Eu-
roparl and News Commentary, which we will call
EP-NC. We pre-processed all corpora by using
the tools provided for tokenization and we also
lower-cased all corpora. For the bilingual corpora
we also filtered sentence pairs with a length ra-
tio larger than three, or where either sentence was
longer than 60 tokens. Recasing was performed as
a post-processing step, trained using the resources

in the Moses toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007).

For the language model we trained two sepa-
rate models, one on the German side of EP-NC,
and one on the monolingual News corpus. In
both cases we trained 5-gram models. For the
large News corpus we used entropy-based prun-
ing, with 10−8 as a threshold (Stolcke, 1998). The
language models were trained using the SRILM
toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) and during decoding we
used the KenLM toolkit (Heafield, 2011).

For the translation model we also trained two
models, one with EP-NC, and one with Common
Crawl. These two models were interpolated and
used as a single model at decoding time, based on
perplexity minimization interpolation (Sennrich,
2012), see details in Section 4. The transla-
tion models were trained using the Moses toolkit
(Koehn et al., 2007), with standard settings with
5 features, phrase probabilities and lexical weight-
ing in both directions and a phrase penalty. We ap-
plied significance-based filtering (Johnson et al.,
2007) to the resulting phrase tables. For decod-
ing we used the Docent decoder with random ini-
tialization and standard parameter settings (Hard-
meier et al., 2012; Hardmeier et al., 2013), which
beside translation and language model features in-
clude a word penalty and a distortion penalty.

Parameter optimization was performed using
MERT (Och, 2003) at the document-level (Stymne
et al., 2013a). In this setup we calculate both
model and metric scores on the document-level
instead of on the sentence-level. We produce k-
best lists by sampling from the decoder. In each
optimization run we run 40,000 hill-climbing it-
erations of the decoder, and sample translations
with interval 100, from iteration 10,000. This
procedure has been shown to give competitive re-
sults to standard tuning with Moses (Koehn et
al., 2007) with relatively stable results (Stymne
et al., 2013a). For tuning data we concate-
nated the tuning sets news-test 2008–2010 and
newssyscomb2009, to get a higher number of doc-
uments. In this set there are 319 documents and
7434 sentences.

To evaluate our system we use newstest2012,
which has 99 documents and 3003 sentences. In
this article we give lower-case Bleu scores (Pap-
ineni et al., 2002), except in Section 6 where we
investigate the effect of different recasing models.

226



Cleaning Sentences Reduction
None 2,399,123
Basic 2,271,912 5.3%
Langid 2,072,294 8.8%
Alignment-based 1,512,401 27.0%

Table 1: Size of Common Crawl after the different
cleaning steps and reduction in size compared to
the previous step

4 Cleaning of Common Crawl

The Common Crawl (CC) corpus was collected
from web sources, and was made available for the
WMT13 workshop. It is noisy, with many sen-
tences with the wrong language and also many
non-corresponding sentence pairs. To make better
use of this resource we investigated two methods
for cleaning it, by making use of language identi-
fication and alignment-based filtering. Before any
other cleaning we performed basic filtering where
we only kept pairs where both sentences had at
most 60 words, and with a length ratio of maxi-
mum 3. This led to a 5.3% reduction of sentences,
as shown in Table 1.

Language Identification For language identifi-
cation we used the off-the-shelf tool langid.py (Lui
and Baldwin, 2012). It is a python library, cover-
ing 97 languages, including English and German,
trained on data drawn from five different domains.
It uses a naive Bayes classifier with a multino-
mial event model, over a mixture of byte n-grams.
As for many language identification packages it
works best for longer texts, but Lui and Bald-
win (2012) also showed that it has good perfor-
mance for short microblog texts, with an accuracy
of 0.89–0.94.

We applied langid.py for each sentence in the
CC corpus, and kept only those sentence pairs
where the correct language was identified for both
sentences with a confidence of at least 0.999. The
total number of sentences was reduced by a further
8.8% based on the langid filtering.

We performed an analysis on a set of 1000 sen-
tence pairs. Among the 907 sentences that were
kept in this set we did not find any cases with
the wrong language. Table 2 shows an analysis
of the 93 sentences that were removed from this
test set. The overall accuracy of langid.py is much
higher than indicated in the table, however, since
it does not include the correctly identified English
and German sentences. We grouped the removed

sentences into four categories, cases where both
languages were correctly identified, but under the
confidence threshold of 0.999, cases where both
languages were incorrectly identified, and cases
where one language was incorrectly identified.
Overall the language identification was accurate
on 54 of the 93 removed sentences. In 18 of the
cases where it was wrong, the sentences were not
translation correspondents, which means that we
only wrongly removed 21 out of 1000 sentences.
It was also often the case when the language was
wrongly identified, that large parts of the sentence
consisted of place names, such as “Forums about
Conil de la Frontera - Cádiz.” – “Foren über Conil
de la Frontera - Cádiz.”, which were identified as
es/ht instead of en/de. Even though such sentence
pairs do correspond, they do not contain much use-
ful translation material.

Alignment-Based Cleaning For the alignment-
based cleaning, we aligned the data from the pre-
vious step using GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003)
in both directions, and used the intersection of
the alignments. The intersection of alignments is
more sparse than the standard SMT symmetriza-
tion heuristics, like grow-diag-final-and (Koehn et
al., 2005). Our hypothesis was that sentence pairs
with very few alignment points in the intersection
would likely not be corresponding sentences.

We used two types of filtering thresholds based
on alignment points. The first threshold is for the
ratio of the number of alignment points and the
maximum sentence length. The second threshold
is the absolute number of alignment points in a
sentence pair. In addition we used a third thresh-
old based on the length ratio of the sentences.

To find good values for the filtering thresholds,
we created a small gold standard where we man-
ually annotated 100 sentence pairs as being cor-
responding or not. In this set the sentence pairs
did not match in 33 cases. Table 3 show results for
some different values for the threshold parameters.
Overall we are able to get a very high precision
on the task of removing non-corresponding sen-
tences, which means that most sentences that are
removed based on this cleaning are actually non-
corresponding sentences. The recall is a bit lower,
indicating that there are still non-corresponding
sentences left in our data. In our translation sys-
tem we used the bold values in Table 3, since it
gave high precision with reasonable recall for the
removal of non-corresponding sentences, meaning

227



Identification Total Wrong lang. Non-corr Corr Languages identified
English and German < 0.999 15 0 7 8
Both English and German wrong 6 2 2 2 2:na/es, 2:et/et, 1: es/an, 1:es/ht
English wrong 13 1 6 6 5: es 4: fr 1: br, it, de, eo
German wrong 59 51 3 5 51: en 3: es 2:nl 1: af, la, lb
Total 93 54 18 21

Table 2: Reasons and correctness for removing sentences based on language ID for 93 sentences out of
a 1000 sentence subset, divided into wrong lang(uage), non-corr(esponding) pairs, and corr(esponding)
pairs.

Ratio align Min align Ratio length Prec. Recall F Kept
0.1 4 2 0.70 0.77 0.73 70%
0.28 4 2 0.94 0.72 0.82 57%
0.42 4 2 1.00 0.56 0.72 41%
0.28 2 2 0.91 0.73 0.81 59%
0.28 6 2 0.94 0.63 0.76 51%
0.28 4 1.5 0.94 0.65 0.77 52%
0.28 4 3 0.91 0.75 0.82 60%

Table 3: Results of alignment-based cleaning for different values of the filtering parameters, with pre-
cision, recall and F-score for the identification of erroneous sentence pairs and the percentage of kept
sentence pairs

that we kept most correctly aligned sentence pairs.
This cleaning method is more aggressive than

the other cleaning methods we described. For the
gold standard only 57% of sentences were kept,
but in the full training set it was a bit higher, 73%,
as shown in Table 1.

Phrase Table Interpolation To use the CC cor-
pus in our system we first trained a separate phrase
table which we then interpolated with the phrase
table trained on EP-NC. In this way we could al-
ways run the system with a single phrase table. For
interpolation, we used the perplexity minimization
for weighted counts method by Sennrich (2012).
Each of the four weights in the phrase table, back-
ward and forward phrase translation probabilities
and lexical weights, are optimized separately. This
method minimizes the cross-entropy based on a
held-out corpus, for which we used the concate-
nation of all available News development sets.

The cross-entropy and the contribution of CC
relative to EP-NC, are shown for phrase transla-
tion probabilities in both directions in Table 4. The
numbers for lexical weights show similar trends.
For each cleaning step the cross-entropy is re-
duced and the contribution of CC is increased. The
difference between the basic cleaning and langid is
very small, however. The alignment-based clean-
ing shows a much larger effect. After that cleaning
step the CC corpus has a similar contribution to
EP-NC. This is an indicator that the final cleaned
CC corpus fits the development set well.

p(S|T ) p(T |S)
Cleaning CE IP CE IP
Basic 3.18 0.12 3.31 0.06
Langid 3.17 0.13 3.29 0.07
Alignment-based 3.02 0.47 3.17 0.61

Table 4: Cross-entropy (CE) and relative interpo-
lation weights (IP) compared to EP-NC for the
Common Crawl corpus, with different cleaning

Results In Table 5 we show the translation re-
sults with the different types of cleaning of CC,
and without it. We show results of different corpus
combinations both during tuning and testing. We
see that we get the overall best result by both tun-
ing and testing with the alignment-based cleaning
of CC, but it is not as useful to do the extra clean-
ing if we do not tune with it as well. Overall we
get the best results when tuning is performed in-
cluding a cleaned version of CC. This setup gives
a large improvement compared to not using CC at
all, or to use it with only basic cleaning. There is
little difference in Bleu scores when testing with
either basic cleaning, or cleaning based on lan-
guage ID, with a given tuning, which is not sur-
prising given their small and similar interpolation
weights. Tuning was, however, not successful
when using CC with basic cleaning.

Overall we think that alignment-based corpus
cleaning worked well. It reduced the size of the
corpus by over 25%, improved the cross-entropy
for interpolation with the EP-NC phrase-table, and

228



Testing
Tuning not used basic langid alignment
not used 14.0 13.9 13.9 14.0
basic 14.2 14.5 14.3 14.3
langid 15.2 15.3 15.3 15.3
alignment 12.7 15.3 15.3 15.7

Table 5: Bleu scores with different types of clean-
ing and without Common Crawl

gave an improvement on the translation task. We
still think that there is potential for further improv-
ing this filtering and to annotate larger test sets to
investigate the effects in more detail.

5 Tunable Distortion Limits

The Docent decoder uses a hill-climbing search
and can perform operations anywhere in the sen-
tence. Thus, it does not need to enforce a strict
distortion limit. In the Docent implementation, the
distortion limit is actually implemented as a fea-
ture, which is normally given a very large weight,
which effectively means that it works as a hard
constraint. This could easily be relaxed, however,
and in this work we investigate the effects of using
soft distortion limits, which can be optimized dur-
ing tuning, like other features. In this way long-
distance movements can be allowed when they are
useful, instead of prohibiting them completely. A
drawback of using no or soft distortion limits is
that it increases the search space.

In this work we mostly experiment with variants
of one or two standard distortion limits, but with a
tunable weight. We also tried to use separate soft
distortion limits for left- and right-movement. Ta-
ble 6 show the results with different types of dis-
tortion limits. The system with a standard fixed
distortion limits of 6 has a somewhat lower score
than most of the systems with no or soft distortion
limits. In most cases the scores are similar, and
we see no clear affects of allowing tunable lim-
its over allowing unlimited distortion. The system
that uses two mono-directional limits of 6 and 10
has slightly higher scores than the other systems,
and is used in our final submission.

One possible reason for the lack of effect of al-
lowing more distortion could be that it rarely hap-
pens that an operator is chosen that performs such
distortion, when we use the standard Docent set-
tings. To investigate this, we varied the settings of
the parameters that guide the swap-phrases opera-
tor, and used the move-phrases operator instead of
swap-phrases. None of these changes led to any

DL type Limit Bleu
No DL – 15.5
Hard DL 6 15.0
One soft DL 6 15.5

8 14.2
10 15.5

Two soft DLs 4,8 15.5
6,10 15.7

Bidirectional soft DLs 6,10 15.5

Table 6: Bleu scores for different distortion limit
(DL) settings

improvements, however.
While we saw no clear effects when using tun-

able distortion limits, we plan to extend this work
in the future to model movement differently based
on parts of speech. For the English–German lan-
guage pair, for instance, it would be reasonable to
allow long distance moves of verb groups with no
or little cost, but use a hard limit or a high cost for
other parts of speech.

6 Corpus Selection for Recasing

In this section we investigate the effect of using
different corpus combinations for recasing. We
lower-cased our training corpus, which means that
we need a full recasing step as post-processing.
This is performed by training a SMT system on
lower-cased and true-cased target language. We
used the Moses toolkit to train the recasing system
and to decode during recasing. We investigate the
effect of using different combinations of the avail-
able training corpora to train the recasing model.

Table 7 show case sensitive Bleu scores, which
can be compared to the previous case-insensitive
scores of 15.7. We see that there is a larger effect
of including more data in the language model than
in the translation model. There is a performance
jump both when adding CC data and when adding
News data to the language model. The results
are best when we include the News data, which
is not included in the English–German translation
model, but which is much larger than the other cor-
pora. There is no further gain by using News in
combination with other corpora compared to using
only News. When adding more data to the trans-
lation model there is only a minor effect, with the
difference between only using EP-NC and using
all available corpora is at most 0.2 Bleu points.
In our submitted system we use the monolingual
News corpus both in the LM and the TM.

There are other options for how to treat recas-

229



Language model
TM EP-NC EP-NC-CC News EP-NC-News EP-NC-CC-News
EP-NC 13.8 14.4 14.8 14.8 14.8
EP-NC-CC 13.9 14.5 14.9 14.8 14.8
News 13.9 14.5 14.9 14.9 14.9
EP-NC-News 13.9 14.5 14.9 14.9 14.9
EP-NC-CC-News 13.9 14.5 14.9 14.9 15.0

Table 7: Case-sensitive Bleu scores with different corpus combinations for the language model and
translation model (TM) for recasing

ing. It is common to train the system on true-
cased data instead of lower-cased data, which has
been shown to lead to small gains for the English–
German language pair (Koehn et al., 2008). In this
framework there is still a need to find the correct
case for the first word of each sentence, for which
a similar corpus study might be useful.

7 Comparison to Moses

So far we have only shown results using the Do-
cent decoder on its own, with a random initializa-
tion, since we wanted to submit a Docent-only sys-
tem for the shared task. In this section we also
show contrastive results with Moses, and for Do-
cent initialized with stack decoding, using Moses,
and for different type of tuning.

Previous research have shown mixed results for
the effect of initializing Docent with and with-
out stack decoding, when using the same feature
sets. In Hardmeier et al. (2012) there was a drop
of about 1 Bleu point for English–French trans-
lation based on WMT11 data when random ini-
tialization was used. In Stymne et al. (2013a),
on the other hand, Docent gave very similar re-
sults with both types of initialization for German–
English WMT13 data. The latter setup is similar
to ours, except that no Common Crawl data was
used.

The results with our setup are shown in Ta-
ble 8. In this case we lose around a Bleu point
when using Docent on its own, without Moses ini-
tialization. We also see that the results are lower
when using Moses with the Docent tuning method,
or when combining Moses and Docent with Do-
cent tuning. This indicates that the document-
level tuning has not given satisfactory results in
this scenario, contrary to the results in Stymne et
al. (2013a), which we plan to explore further in
future work. Overall we think it is important to
develop stronger context-sensitive models for Do-
cent, which can take advantage of the document
context.

Test system Tuning system Bleu
Docent (random) Docent 15.7
Docent (stack) Docent 15.9
Moses Docent 15.9
Docent (random) Moses 15.9
Docent (stack) Moses 16.8
Moses Moses 16.8

Table 8: Bleu scores for Docent initialized ran-
domly or with stack decoding compared to Moses.
Tuning is performed with either Moses or Docent.
For the top line we used tunable distortion lim-
its 6,10 with Docent, in the other cases a standard
hard distortion limit of 6, since Moses does not al-
low soft distortion limits.

8 Conclusion

We have presented the Uppsala University system
for WMT 2013. Our submitted system uses Do-
cent with random initialization and two tunable
distortion limits of 6 and 10. It is trained with the
Common Crawl corpus, cleaned using language
identification and alignment-based filtering. For
recasing we used the monolingual News corpora.

For corpus-cleaning, we present a novel method
for cleaning noisy corpora based on the number
and ratio of word alignment links for sentence
pairs, which leads to a large reduction of corpus
size, and to small improvements on the transla-
tion task. We also experiment with tunable dis-
tortion limits, which do not lead to any consistent
improvements at this stage.

In the current setup the search algorithm of
Docent is not strong enough to compete with
the effective search in standard decoders like
Moses. We are, however, working on developing
discourse-aware models that can take advantage of
the document-level context, which is available in
Docent. We also need to further investigate tuning
methods for Docent.

230



References
Christian Hardmeier, Joakim Nivre, and Jörg Tiede-

mann. 2012. Document-wide decoding for phrase-
based statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
1179–1190, Jeju Island, Korea.

Christian Hardmeier, Sara Stymne, Jörg Tiedemann,
and Joakim Nivre. 2013. Docent: A document-level
decoder for phrase-based statistical machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of
the ACL, Demonstration session, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Kenneth Heafield. 2011. KenLM: Faster and smaller
language model queries. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
187–197, Edinburgh, Scotland.

Howard Johnson, Joel Martin, George Foster, and
Roland Kuhn. 2007. Improving translation qual-
ity by discarding most of the phrasetable. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, pages 967–
975, Prague, Czech Republic.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Human Language Technology
Conference of the NAACL, pages 48–54, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada.

Philipp Koehn, Amittai Axelrod, Alexandra Birch
Mayne, Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and
David Talbot. 2005. Edinburgh system descrip-
tion for the 2005 IWSLT speech translation evalu-
ation. In Proceedings of the International Workshop
on Spoken Language Translation, Pittsburgh, Penn-
sylvania, USA.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL,
Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 177–180, Prague,
Czech Republic.

Philipp Koehn, Abhishek Arun, and Hieu Hoang.
2008. Towards better machine translation quality for
the German-English language pairs. In Proceedings
of the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation, pages 139–142, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Marco Lui and Timothy Baldwin. 2012. langid.py: An
off-the-shelf language identification tool. In Pro-
ceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the ACL,
System Demonstrations, pages 25–30, Jeju Island,
Korea.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training
in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 42nd Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 160–
167, Sapporo, Japan.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: A method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 40th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 311–
318, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Rico Sennrich. 2012. Perplexity minimization for
translation model domain adaptation in statistical
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 16th
Annual Conference of the European Association
for Machine Translation, pages 539–549, Avignon,
France.

Andreas Stolcke. 1998. Entropy-based pruning of
backoff language models. In Proceedings of the
DARPA Broadcast News Transcription and Under-
standing Workshop, pages 270–274, Landsdowne,
Virginia, USA.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM – an extensible
language modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the
Seventh International Conference on Spoken Lan-
guage Processing, pages 901–904, Denver, Col-
orado, USA.

Sara Stymne, Christian Hardmeier, Jörg Tiedemann,
and Joakim Nivre. 2013a. Feature weight opti-
mization for discourse-level SMT. In Proceedings
of the ACL 2013 Workshop on Discourse in Machine
Translation (DiscoMT 2013), Sofia, Bulgaria.

Sara Stymne, Jörg Tiedemann, Christian Hardmeier,
and Joakim Nivre. 2013b. Statistical machine trans-
lation with readability constraints. In Proceedings
of the 19th Nordic Conference on Computational
Linguistics (NODALIDA’13), pages 375–386, Oslo,
Norway.

231


