










































Interpreting Consumer Health Questions: The Role of Anaphora and Ellipsis


Proceedings of the 2013 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2013), pages 54–62,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Interpreting Consumer Health Questions: The Role of Anaphora and 
Ellipsis 

 
 

Halil Kilicoglu, Marcelo Fiszman, Dina Demner-Fushman 
Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications  

National Library of Medicine  
Bethesda, MD, USA 

{kilicogluh, fiszmanm, ddemner}@mail.nih.gov 

 
  

 

Abstract 

While interest in biomedical question answer-
ing has been growing, research in consumer 
health question answering remains relatively 
sparse. In this paper, we focus on the task of 
consumer health question understanding. We 
present a rule-based methodology that relies 
on lexical and syntactic information as well as 
anaphora/ellipsis resolution to construct struc-
tured representations of questions (frames). 
Our results indicate the viability of our ap-
proach and demonstrate the important role 
played by anaphora and ellipsis in interpreting 
consumer health questions. 

1 Introduction 

Question understanding is a major challenge in 
automatic question answering. An array of ap-
proaches has been developed for this task in the 
course of TREC Question Answering evaluations 
(see Prager (2006) for an overview). These col-
lectively developed approaches to question un-
derstanding were successfully applied and ex-
panded upon in IBM’s Watson system (Lally et 
al., 2012). Currently, Watson is being retargeted 
towards biomedical question answering, joining 
the ongoing research in domain-specific question 
answering (for a review, see Simpson and 
Demner-Fushman, 2012). 

Much research in automatic question answer-
ing has focused on answering well-formed fac-
toid questions. However, real-life questions that 
need to be handled by such systems are often 
posed by lay people and are not necessarily well-
formed or explicit. This is particularly evident in 
questions involving health issues. Zhang (2010), 
focusing on health-related questions submitted to 
Yahoo Answers, found that these questions pri-

marily described diseases and symptoms (ac-
companied by some demographic information), 
were fairly long, dense (incorporating more than 
one question), and contained many abbreviations 
and misspellings. For example, consider the fol-
lowing question posed by a consumer: 

(1) my question is this: I was born w/a esopha-
gus atresia w/dextrocardia. While the heart 
hasn't caused problems,the other has. I get 
food caught all the time. My question is...is 
there anything that can fix it cause I can't eat 
anything lately without getting it caught. I 
need help or will starve! 

It is clear that the person asking this question 
is mainly interested in learning about treatment 
options for his/her disease, in particular with re-
spect to his/her esophagus. Most of the textual 
content is not particularly relevant in understand-
ing the question (I need help or will starve! or I 
get food caught all the time). In addition, note 
the presence of anaphora (it referring to esopha-
gus atresia) and ellipsis (the other has [caused prob-
lems]), which should be resolved in order to auto-
matically interpret the question. Finally, note the 
informal fix instead of the more formal treat, and 
cause instead of because.  

The National Library of Medicine® (NLM®) 
receives questions from consumers on a variety 
of health-related topics. These questions are cur-
rently manually answered by customer support 
services. The overall goal of our work is to assist 
the customer support services by automatically 
interpreting these questions, using information 
retrieval techniques to find relevant documents 
and passages, and presenting the information in 
concise form for their assessment. 

In this paper, we specifically focus on ques-
tion understanding, rather than information re-

54



trieval aspects of our ongoing work. Our goal in 
question understanding is to capture the core as-
pects of the question in a structured representa-
tion (question frame), which can then be used to 
form a query for the search engine. In the current 
work, we primarily investigate and evaluate the 
role of anaphora and ellipsis resolution in under-
standing the questions. Our results confirm the 
viability of rule-based question understanding 
based on exploiting lexico-syntactic patterns and 
clearly demonstrate that anaphora and ellipsis 
resolution are beneficial for this task.  

2 Background 
Despite the growing interest to biomedical ques-
tion answering (Cairns et al., 2012; Ni et al., 
2012; Bauer and Berleant, 2012), consumer 
health question answering remains a fairly un-
derstudied area of research. The initial research 
has focused on the analysis of consumer lan-
guage (McCray et al., 1999) and the types of 
questions they asked. Spink et al. (2004) found 
that health-related queries submitted to three web 
search engines in 2001 were often advice seeking 
and personalized, and fell into five major catego-
ries: general health, weight issues, reproductive 
health and puberty, pregnancy/obstetrics, and 
human relationships. Observing that health que-
ries constituted no more than 9.5% of all queries 
and declined over time, they concluded that the 
users turn more to the specialized resources for 
the answers to health-related questions. Similar 
to the findings of Zhang (2010), Beloborodov et 
al. (2013) found that diseases and symptoms 
were the most popular topics in a resource simi-
lar to Yahoo Answers, Otvety@Mail.Ru. They 
analyzed Otvety@Mail.Ru questions by mapping 
questions to body parts and organs, applying La-
tent Dirichlet Allocation method with Gibbs 
sampling to discover topics, and using a 
knowledge-based method to classify questions as 
evidence-directed or hypothesis-directed. 

First efforts in automated consumer health 
question processing were to classify the ques-
tions using machine learning techniques. In one 
study, frequently asked questions about diabetes 
were classified according to two somewhat or-
thogonal taxonomies: according to the “medical 
type of the question” (Causes, Diagnostic, Pre-
vention, Symptoms, Treatment, etc.) and accord-
ing to the “expected answer type” (Boolean, 
Causal, Definition, Factoid, Person, Place, etc.) 
(Cruchet et al., 2008). Support Vector Machine 
(SVM) classification achieved an F-score in low 

80s in classifying English questions to the ex-
pected answer type. The results for French and 
medical type classification in both languages 
were much lower. Liu et al. (2011) found that 
SVM trained to distinguish questions asked by 
consumers from those posed by healthcare pro-
fessionals achieve F-scores in the high 80s - low 
90s. One of distinguishing characteristics of the 
consumer questions in Liu et al.’s study was the 
significantly higher use of personal pronouns 
(compared to professional questions). This fea-
ture was found to be useful for machine learning; 
however, the abundance of pronouns in the long 
dense questions is also a potential source of fail-
ure in understanding the question.  

Vicedo and Ferrández (2000) have shown that 
pronominal anaphora resolution improves several 
aspects of the QA systems’ performance. This 
observation was supported by Harabagiu et al. 
(2005) who have manually resolved coreference 
and ellipsis for 14 of the 25 scenarios in the 
TREC 2005 evaluation. Hickl et al. (2006) have 
incorporated into their question answering sys-
tem a heuristic based question coreference mod-
ule that resolved referring expressions in the 
question series to antecedents mentioned in pre-
vious questions or in the target description. To 
our knowledge, coreference and ellipsis resolu-
tion has not been previously attempted in con-
sumer health question understanding. 

Another essential aspect in processing con-
sumer questions is defining a formal representa-
tion capable of capturing all important points 
needed for further processing in automatic query 
generation (in the systems that use document 
passage retrieval to find a set of potential an-
swers) and answer extraction and unification. 
Ontologies provide effective representation 
mechanisms for concepts, whereas relations are 
better captured in frame-like or event-related 
structures (Hunter and Cohen, 2006). Frame-
based representation of extracted knowledge has 
a long-standing tradition in the biomedical do-
main, for example, in MedLEE (Friedman et al., 
1994). Demner-Fushman et al. (2011) showed 
that frame-based representation of clinical ques-
tions improve identification of patients eligible 
for cohort inclusion. Demner-Fushman and Ab-
hyankar (2012) extracted frames in four steps: 1) 
identification of domain concepts, 2) extraction 
of patient demographics (e.g., age, gender) and 
social history, 3) establishing dependencies be-
tween the concepts using the Stanford dependen-
cy parser (de Marneffe et al., 2006), and 4) add-
ing concepts not involved in the relations to the 

55



frame as a list of keywords.  Event-based repre-
sentations have also seen increasing use in recent 
years in biomedical text mining, with the availa-
bility of biological event corpora, including 
GENIA event (Kim et al., 2008) and GREC 
(Thompson et al., 2009), and shared task chal-
lenges (Kim et al., 2012). Most state-of-the-art 
systems address the event extraction task by 
adopting machine learning techniques, such as 
dual composition-based models (Riedel and 
McCallum, 2011), stacking-based model integra-
tion (McClosky et al., 2012), and domain adapta-
tion (Miwa et al., 2012). Good performance has 
also been reported with some rule-based systems 
(Kilicoglu and Bergler, 2012). Syntactic depend-
ency parsing has been a key component in all 
state-of-the-art event extraction systems, as well. 
The role of coreference resolution in event ex-
traction has recently been acknowledged (Kim et 
al., 2012), even though efforts in integrating co-
reference resolution into event extraction pipe-
lines have generally resulted in only modest im-
provements (Yoshikawa et al., 2011; Miwa et 
al., 2012; Kilicoglu and Bergler, 2012). 

Coreference resolution has also been tackled 
in open domain natural language processing. 
State-of-the-art systems often employ a combina-
tion of lexical, syntactic, shallow semantic and 
discourse information (e.g., speaker identifica-
tion) with deterministic rules (Lee et al., 2011). 
Interestingly, coreference resolution is one re-
search area, in which deterministic frameworks 
generally outperform machine learning models 
(Haghighi and Klein, 2009; Lee et al., 2011).  

In contrast to coreference resolution, ellipsis 
resolution remains an understudied NLP prob-
lem. One type of ellipsis that received some at-
tention is null instantiation (Fillmore and Baker, 
2001), whereby the goal is to recover the refer-
ents for an uninstantiated semantic role of a tar-
get predicate from the wider discourse context. A 
semantic evaluation challenge that focused on 
null instantiation was proposed, although partici-
pation was limited (Ruppenhofer et al., 2010). 
Gerber and Chai (2012) focused on implicit ar-
gumentation (i.e., null instantiation) for nominal 
predicates. They annotated a corpus of implicit 
arguments for a small number of nominal predi-
cates and trained a discriminative model based 
on syntactic, semantic and discourse features 
collected from various linguistic resources. Fo-
cusing on a different type of ellipsis, Bos and 
Spenader (2011) annotated a corpus of verb 
phrase ellipsis; however, so far there have been 
little work in verb phrase ellipsis resolution. We 

are also not aware of any work in ellipsis resolu-
tion in biomedical NLP.  

3 Methods   
We use a pipeline model for question analysis, 
which results in frame annotations that capture 
the content of the question. Our rule-based meth-
od begins with identifying terms (named enti-
ties/triggers) in question text. Next, we recognize 
anaphoric mentions and, if any, perform anapho-
ra resolution. The next step is to link frame trig-
gers with their theme and question cue by ex-
ploiting syntactic dependency relations. Finally, 
if frames with implicit arguments exist (that is, 
frames in which theme or question cue was not 
instantiated), we attempt to recover these argu-
ments by ellipsis resolution. In this section, we 
first describe our data selection. Then, we ex-
plain the steps in our pipeline, with particular 
emphasis on anaphora and ellipsis. The pipeline 
diagram is illustrated in Figure 1.  

 

 
Figure 1. The system pipeline diagram 

3.1 Data Selection and Annotation 
In this study, we focused on questions about ge-
netic diseases, due to their increasing prevalence. 
Since the majority of the consumers’ questions 
submitted to NLM are about treatment and prog-
nosis, we selected mainly these types of ques-
tions for our training set. Note that while these 
questions mostly focused on treatment and prog-
nosis, some of them also include other types of 
questions, asking for general information or 
about diagnosis, etiology, and susceptibility 
(thus, confirming the finding of Zhang (2010)). 
The majority of selected questions were asked by 
real consumers in 2012. Due to our interest in 
genetics questions, we augmented this set with 

56



some frequently asked questions from the Genet-
ic and Rare Disease Information Center 
(GARD) 1 . Our selection yielded 32 treatment 
and 22 prognosis questions. An example treat-
ment question was provided earlier (1). The fol-
lowing is a training question on prognosis: 

(2) They have diagnosed my niece with Salla 
disease. I understand that this is a very rare 
disease and that its main origin is Finland. 
Can you please let me know what to expect? 
My niece is 7 years old. It has taken them 6 
years to finally come up with this diagnosis. 

We used training questions to gain linguistic 
insights into the problem, to develop and refine 
our methodology, and as the basis of a trig-
ger/question cue dictionary. 

After the system was developed, we selected 
29 previously unseen treatment-focused ques-
tions posed to GARD for testing. We annotated 
them with target frames (41 instances) using brat 
annotation tool (Stenetorp et al., 2012) and eval-
uated our system results against these frames. 29 
of the target frames were treatment frames. Addi-
tionally, there were 1 etiology, 6 general infor-
mation, 2 diagnosis, and 3 prognosis frames. 

3.2 Syntactic Dependency Parsing 
Our question analysis module uses typed de-
pendency relations as the basis of syntactic in-
formation. We extract syntactic dependencies 
using Stanford Parser (de Marneffe et al., 2006) 
and use its collapsed dependency format. We 
rely on Stanford Parser for tokenization, lemma-
tization, and part-of-speech tagging, as well. 

3.3 Named Entity/Trigger Detection 
We use simple dictionary lookup to map entity 
mentions in text to UMLS Metathesaurus con-
cepts (Lindberg, 1993). So far, we have focused 
on recognizing three mention categories: prob-
lems, interventions, and patients. Based on 
UMLS 2007AC release, we constructed a dic-
tionary of string/concept pairs. We limited the 
dictionary to concepts with predefined semantic 
types. For example, all problems in the diction-
ary have a semantic type that belongs to the Dis-
orders semantic group (McCray et al., 2001), 
such as Neoplastic Process and Congenital Ab-
normality. Currently our dictionary contains ap-
proximately 260K string/concept pairs. 

Dictionary lookup is also used to detect trig-
gers and question cues. We constructed a trigger 
                                                 
1 https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/GARD/ 

and question cue dictionary based on training 
data and limited expansion. The dictionary cur-
rently contains 117 triggers and 14 question cues.  

3.4 Recognizing Anaphoric Mentions 
We focus on identifying two types of anaphoric 
phenomena: pronominal anaphora (including 
anaphora of personal and demonstrative pro-
nouns) and sortal anaphora. The following ex-
amples from the training questions illustrate 
these types. Anaphoric mentions are underlined 
and their antecedents are in bold. 
• Personal pronominal anaphora: My daughter 

has just been diagnosed with Meier-Gorlin 
syndrome. I would like to learn more about 
it … 

• Demonstrative pronominal anaphora: We just 
found out that our grandson has 48,XXYY 
syndrome. …  I was wondering if you could 
give us some information on what to expect 
and the prognosis for this and ..  

• Sortal anaphora: I have a 24-month-old niece 
who has the following symptoms of Cohen 
syndrome: … I would like seek your help in 
learning more about this condition. 

To recognize mentions of personal pronominal 
and sortal anaphora, we mainly adapted the rule-
based techniques outlined in Kilicoglu and Ber-
gler (2012), itself based on the deterministic co-
reference resolution approach described in 
Haghighi and Klein (2009). While Kilicoglu and 
Bergler (2012) focused on anaphora involving 
gene/protein terms, our adaptation focuses on 
those involving problems and patients. In addi-
tion, we expanded their work by developing rules 
to recognize demonstrative pronominal anapho-
ra.  

3.4.1 Personal Pronouns 
Kilicoglu and Bergler (2012) focused on only 
resolving it and they, since, in scientific article 
genre, resolving other third person pronouns (he, 
she) was less relevant. We currently recognize 
these two pronouns, as well. For personal pro-
nouns, we merely tag the word as a pronominal 
anaphor if it is tagged as a pronoun and is in 
third person (i.e., she, he, it, they).  

3.4.2 Demonstrative Pronouns 
We rely on typed syntactic dependencies as well 
as part-of-speech tags to recognize demonstrative 
pronominal anaphora. A word is tagged as 
demonstrative pronominal anaphor if it is one of 
this, that, those, or these and if it is not the de-

57



pendent in a det (determiner) dependency (in 
other words, it is not a pronominal modifier). 
Furthermore, we ensure that the pronoun that 
does not act as a complementizer, requiring that 
it not be the dependent in a complm (complemen-
tizer) dependency. 

3.4.3 Sortal Anaphora 
In the current work, we limited sortal anaphora 
to problem terms. As in Kilicoglu and Bergler 
(2012), we require that the anaphoric noun 
phrases not include any named entity terms. 
Thus, we allow the syndrome as an anaphoric 
mention, while blocking the Stickler syndrome.  

To recognize sortal anaphora, we look for the 
presence of det dependency, where the depend-
ent is one of this, that, these, those, or the.  

Once the named entities, question cues, trig-
gers, and anaphoric mentions are identified in a 
sentence, we collapse the syntactic dependencies 
from the sentence to simplify further processing. 
This is illustrated in Table 1 for the sentence in 
(3). 

(3) My partner is a carrier for Simpson-Golabi-
Behmel syndrome and her son was diag-
nosed with this rare condition.  

 
Dependencies before Dependencies after 
amod (syndrome, simpson-golabi-behmel) prep_for(carrier, simpson-golabi-behmel syndrome) prep_for(carrier,syndrome) 
det(condition,this) 

prep_with (diagnosed, this rare condition) amod(condition, rare) 
prep_with(diagnosed, condition) 

Table 1: Syntactic dependency transformations 

3.5 Anaphora  Resolution 
Anaphora resolution is the task of finding the 
antecedent for an anaphoric mention in prior dis-
course. Our anaphora resolution method is again 
based on the work of Kilicoglu and Bergler 
(2012). However, we made simplifying assump-
tions based on our examination of the training 
questions. First observation is that each question 
is mainly about one salient topic (problem) and 
anaphoric mentions are highly likely to refer to 
this topic. Secondly, the salient topic often ap-
pears as the first named entity in the question.  
Based on these observations, we did not attempt 
to use the relatively complex, semantic graph-
based resolution strategies (e.g., graph distance) 
outlined in that work. Furthermore, we have not 
attempted to address set-instance anaphora or 
event anaphora in this work, since we did not see 
examples of these in the training data. 

Anaphora resolution begins with identifying 
the candidate antecedents (problems, patients) in 
prior discourse, which are then evaluated for syn-
tactic and semantic compatibility. For pronomi-
nal anaphora, compatibility involves person and 
number agreement between the anaphoric men-
tion and the antecedent. For sortal anaphora, 
number agreement as well as satisfying one of 
the following constraints is required: 
• Head word constraint: The head of the ana-

phoric NP and the antecedent NP match. 
This constraint allows Wolf-Hirschhorn Syn-

drome as an antecedent for this syndrome, 
matching on the word syndrome. 

• Hypernymy constraint: The head of the ana-
phoric NP is a problem hypernym and the 
antecedent is a problem term. Similar to 
gene/protein hypernym list in Kilicoglu and 
Bergler (2012), we used a small list of prob-
lem hypernym words, including disease, dis-
order, illness, syndrome, condition, and 
problem. This constraint allows Simpson-
Golabi-Behmel syndrome as an antecedent 
for this rare condition in example (3). 

We expanded number agreement test to in-
clude singular mass nouns, so that plural anapho-
ra (e.g., they) can refer to mass nouns such as 
family, group, population. In addition, we de-
fined lists of gendered nouns (e.g., son, father, 
nephew, etc. for male and wife, daughter, niece, 
etc. for female) and required gender agreement 
for pronominal anaphora. 

After the candidate antecedents are identified, 
we assign them salience scores based on the or-
der in which they appear in the question and their 
frequency in the question. The terms that appear 
earlier in the question and occur more frequently 
receive higher scores. The most salient anteced-
ent is then taken to be the coreferent. 

3.6 Frame Construction 
We adapted the frame extraction process based 
on lexico-syntactic information outlined in 
Demner-Fushman et al. (2012) and somewhat 

58



modified the frames to accommodate consumer 
health questions. For each question posed, we 
aim to construct a frame which consists of the 
following elements: type, theme, and question 
cue: theme refers to the topic of the question 
(problem name, etc.), while type refers to the 
aspect of the theme that the question is about 
(treatment, prognosis, etc.) and question cue to 
the question words (what, how, are there, etc.). 
Theme element is semantically typed and is re-
stricted to the UMLS semantic group Disorders. 
From the question in (1), the following frame 
should be extracted: 

 
Treatment fix 
      Theme Esophageal atresia  

(Disease or Syndrome) 
      QCue Is there 

Table 2: Frame example 
 
We rely on syntactic dependencies to link frame 
indicators to their themes and question cues. We 
currently search for the following types of syn-
tactic dependencies between the indicator men-
tion and the argument mentions: dobj (direct ob-
ject), nsubjpass (passive nominal subject), nn 
(noun compound modifier), rcmod (relative 
clause modifier), xcomp (open clausal comple-
ment), acomp (adjectival complement), prep_of, 
prep_to, prep_for, prep_on, prep_from, 
prep_with, prep_regarding, prep_about (prepo-
sitional modifier cued by of, to, for, on, from, 
with, regarding, about, respectively). Two spe-
cial rules address the following cases: 
• If the dependency exists between a trigger of 

type T and another of type General Infor-
mation, the General Information trigger be-
comes a question cue for the frame type T. 
This handles cases such as ‘Is there infor-
mation regarding prognosis..’ where there is 
a prep_regarding dependency between the 
General Information trigger ‘information’ 
and the Prognosis trigger ‘prognosis’. This 
results in ‘information’ becoming the ques-
tion cue for the Prognosis frame. 

• If a dependency exists between a trigger T 
and a patient term P and another between the 
patient term P and a potential theme argu-
ment A, the potential theme argument A is 
assigned as the theme of the frame indicated 
by T. This handles cases such as ‘What is the 
life expectancy for a child with Dravet syn-
drome?’ whereby Dravet syndrome is as-
signed the Theme role for the Prognosis 
frame indicated by life expectancy. 

3.6.1 Ellipsis Resolution 
The frame construction step may result in frames 
with uninstantiated themes or question cues. If a 
constructed frame includes a question cue but no 
theme, we attempt to recover the theme argument 
from prior discourse by ellipsis processing. Con-
sider the question in (4) and the frame in Table 3 
extracted from it in previous steps: 

(4) They have diagnosed my niece with Salla 
disease. …Can you please let me know what 
to expect? … 

Prognosis expect 
      Theme - 
      QCue what 

Table 3: Frame with uninstantiated Theme role 
 

In the context of consumer health questions, 
the main difficulty with resolving such cases is 
recognizing whether it is indeed a legitimate case 
of ellipsis. We use the following dependency-
based heuristics to determine the presence of el-
lipsis: 
• Check for the presence of a syntactic de-

pendency of one of the types listed in Sec-
tion 3.5, in which the frame trigger appears 
as an element. If such a dependency does not 
exist, consider it a case of ellipsis.  

• Otherwise, consider the other element of the 
dependency: 

o If the other element does not corre-
spond to a term, we cannot make a 
decision regarding ellipsis, since we 
do not know the semantics of this 
other element. 

o If it corresponds to an element that 
has already been used in creating the 
frame, the dependency is accounted 
for.  

• If all the dependencies involving the frame 
trigger are accounted for, consider it a case 
of ellipsis. 

In example (4), the trigger expect is found to 
be in an xcomp dependency with the question cue 
know, which has already been used in the frame. 
Therefore this dependency is accounted for, and 
we consider this a case of ellipsis.  On the other 
hand, consider the example:  

(5) My child has been diagnosed with pachgyria. 
What can I expect for my child’s future? 

As in the previous example, the Theme role of 
the Prognosis frame indicated by expect is unin-
stantiated. However, it is not considered an ellip-

59



tical case, since there is a prep_for dependency 
between expect and future, a word that is seman-
tically unresolved. 

Once the presence of ellipsis is ensured, we 
fill the Theme role of the frame with the most 
salient term in the question text, as in anaphora 
resolution. 

In rare cases, the frame may include a theme 
but not a question cue.  This may be due to a lack 
of explicit question expression (such as in the 
question ‘treatment for Von Hippel-Lindau syn-
drome.’) or due to shortcomings in dependency-
based linking of frame triggers to question cues. 
If no fully instantiated frame was extracted from 
the question, as a last resort, we construct a 
frame without the question cue in an effort to 
increase recall.  

4 Results and Discussion 
We extracted frames from the test questions and 
compared the results with the annotated target 
frames. As evaluation metrics, we calculated 
precision, recall, and F-score. To assess the ef-
fect of various components of the system, we 
evaluated several scenarios: 
• Frame extraction without anaphora/ellipsis 

resolution (indicated as A in Table 4 below) 
• Frame extraction with anaphora/ellipsis reso-

lution (B) 
• Frame extraction without anaphora/ellipsis 

resolution but with gold triggers/named enti-
ties (C) 

• Frame extraction with anaphora/ellipsis reso-
lution and gold triggers/named entities (D) 

The evaluation results are provided in Table 4. In 
the second column, the numbers in parentheses 
correspond to the numbers of correctly identified 
frames. 
 
 # of frames Recall Precision F-score 
A 14 (13) 0.32 0.93 0.48 
B 26 (22) 0.54 0.85 0.66 
C 17 (16) 0.39 0.84 0.55 
D 35 (33) 0.80 0.94 0.86 

Table 4: Evaluation results 
 

The evaluation results show that the depend-
ency-based frame extraction method with dic-
tionary lookup is generally effective; it is precise 
in identifying frames, even though it misses 
many relevant frames, typical of most rule-based 
systems. On the other hand, anaphora/ellipsis 
resolution helps a great deal in recovering the 
relevant frames and only has a minor negative 

effect on precision of the frames, the overall ef-
fect being significantly positive. Note also that 
the increase in recall without gold triggers/named 
entities is about 40%, while that with gold trig-
gers/named entities is more than double, indicat-
ing that accurate term recognition contributes to 
better anaphora/ellipsis resolution and, in turn, to 
better question understanding. 

The dictionary-based named entity/trigger/ 
question cue detection is relatively simple, and 
while it yields good precision, the lack of terms 
in the corresponding dictionary causes recall er-
rors. An example is given in (6). The named enti-
ty Reed syndrome was not recognized due to its 
absence in the dictionary, causing two false 
negative errors. 

(6) A friend of mine was just told she has Reed 
syndrome… I was wondering if you could let 
me know where I can find more information 
on this topic. I am wondering what treat-
ments there are for this, … 

Similarly, dependency-based frame construc-
tion is straightforward in that it mostly requires 
direct dependency relations between the trigger 
and the arguments.  While the two additional 
rules we implemented redress the shortcomings 
of this straightforward approach, there are cases 
in which dependency-based mechanism is still 
lacking. An example is given in (7). The lack of 
a direct dependency between treatments and this 
condition causes a recall error. A more sophisti-
cated mechanism based on dependency chains 
could recover such frames; however, such chains 
would also increase the likelihood of precision 
errors.  

(7) Are people with Lebers hereditary optic neu-
ropathy partially blind for a long period of 
time …. ?Are there any surgical treatments 
available to alter this condition or is it per-
manent for life? 

Anaphora/ellipsis processing clearly benefited 
our question understanding system. However, we 
noted several errors due to shortcomings in this 
processing. For example, from the sentence in 
(8), the system constructed a General Infor-
mation frame with the trigger wonder and the 
Theme argument central core disease, which 
caused a false positive error.  

(8) After 34 years of living with central core dis-
ease, …. My lower back doesn't seem to 
work, and I wonder if I will ever be able to 
walk up stairs or run.  

60



The system recognized that the trigger wonder 
had an uninstantiated theme argument, which it 
attempted to recover by ellipsis processing. 
However, this processing misidentified the case 
as legitimate ellipsis due to the dependency rela-
tions wonder is involved in. A more sophisticat-
ed approach would take into account specific 
selectional restrictions of predicates like wonder; 
however, the overall utility of such linguistic 
knowledge in the context of consumer health 
questions, which are often ungrammatical and 
not particularly well-written, remains uncertain. 

Our anaphora resolution method was unable to 
resolve some cases of anaphora. For example, 
consider the question in (6). The anaphoric men-
tion this topic corefers with Reed syndrome. 
However, we miss this anaphora since we did not 
consider topic as a problem hypernym in scenar-
io D, in which gold named entities are used. 

5 Conclusions and Future Work 
We presented a rule-based approach to consumer 
health question understanding which relies on 
lexico-syntactic information and anapho-
ra/ellipsis resolution. We showed that lexico-
syntactic information provides a good baseline in 
understanding such questions and that resolving 
anaphora and ellipsis has a significant impact on 
this task. 

With regard to question understanding, future 
work includes generalization of the system to 
questions on topics other than genetic disorders 
(e.g., drugs) and aspects (such as complications, 
prevention, ingredients, location information, 
etc.) and broader evaluation. We also plan to au-
tomate dictionary development to some extent 
and address misspellings and acronyms in ques-
tions. We have been extending our frames to in-
clude ancillary keywords (named entities ex-
tracted from the question) that are expected to 
assist the search engine in pinpointing the rele-
vant answer passages, similar to Demner-
Fushman and Abhyankar (2012). We will also 
continue to develop our anaphora/ellipsis pro-
cessing module, addressing the issues revealed 
by our evaluation as well as other anaphoric phe-
nomena, such as recognition of pleonastic it. 

Acknowledgments 

This research was supported by the Intramural 
Research Program of the NIH, National Library 
of Medicine. 

References  

Michael A. Bauer and Daniel Berleant. 2012. Usabil-
ity survey of biomedical question answering sys-
tems. Human Genomics, 6(1):17. 

Alexander Beloborodov, Artem Kuznetsov, Pavel 
Braslavski. 2013. Characterizing Health-Related 
Community Question Answering. In Advances in 
Information Retrieval, 680-683. 

Brian L. Cairns, Rodney D. Nielsen, James J. Masanz, 
James H. Martin, Martha S. Palmer, Wayne H. 
Ward, Guergana K. Savova. 2011. The MiPACQ 
clinical question answering system. In AMIA An-
nual Symposium Proceedings, pages 171-180. 

Sarah Cruchet, Arnaud Gaudinat, Célia Boyer. 2008. 
Supervised approach to recognize question type in 
a QA system for health. Studies in Health Technol-
ogy and Informatics, 136:407-412. 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, 
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed 
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In 
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 449-
454. 

Dina Demner-Fushman, Swapna Abhyankar, Antonio 
Jimeno-Yepes, Russell F. Loane, Bastien Rance, 
François-Michel Lang, Nicholas C. Ide, Emilia 
Apostolova, Alan R. Aronson. 2011. A 
Knowledge-Based Approach to Medical Records 
Retrieval. In Proceedings of Text Retrieval Confer-
ence 2011.  

Dina Demner-Fushman and Swapna Abhyankar. 
2012. Syntactic-Semantic Frames for Clinical Co-
hort Identification Queries. Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, 7348:100-112. 

Charles J. Fillmore and Collin F. Baker. 2001. Frame 
semantics for text understanding. In Proceedings of 
the NAACL’01 Workshop on WordNet and Other 
Lexical Resources. 

Carol Friedman, Philip O. Alderson, John HM Austin, 
James J. Cimino, and Stephen B. Johnson. 1994. A 
general natural-language text processor for clinical 
radiology. Journal of the American Medical Infor-
matics Association, 1(2): 161-174. 

Matthew S. Gerber and Joyce Y. Chai. 2012. Seman-
tic Role Labeling of Implicit Arguments for Nomi-
nal Predicates. Computational Linguistics, 38(4): 
755-798. 

Aria Haghighi and Dan Klein. 2009. Simple corefer-
ence resolution with rich syntactic and semantic 
features. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2009, pages 
1152-1161. 

Sanda Harabagiu, Dan Moldovan, Christine Clark, 
Mitchell Bowden, Andrew Hickl, Patrick Wang. 
2005. Employing two question answering systems 
in TREC-2005. In Proceedings of Text Retrieval 
Conference  2005. 

61



Andrew Hickl, John Williams, Jeremy Bensley, Kirk 
Roberts, Ying Shi, Bryan Rink. 2006. Question 
Answering with LCC’s CHAUCER at TREC 2006. 
In Proceedings of Text Retrieval Conference  2006. 

Lawrence Hunter and Kevin B. Cohen. 2006. Bio-
medical language processing: what's beyond Pub-
Med? Molecular Cell. 21(5):589-94. 

Halil Kilicoglu and Sabine Bergler 2012. Biological 
Event Composition. BMC Bioinformatics, 13 
(Supplement 11):S7.  

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 
2008. Corpus annotation for mining biomedical 
events from literature. BMC Bioinformatics, 9:10. 

Jin-Dong Kim, Ngan Nguyen, Yue Wang, Jun’ichi 
Tsujii, Toshihisa Takagi, Akinori Yonezawa. 2012. 
The Genia Event and Protein Coreference tasks of 
the BioNLP Shared Task 2011.  BMC Bioinformat-
ics, 13(Supplement 11):S1.  

Adam Lally, John M. Prager, Michael C. McCord, 
Branimir Boguraev, Siddharth Patwardhan, James 
Fan, Paul Fodor, Jennifer Chu-Carroll. 2012. Ques-
tion analysis: How Watson reads a clue. IBM Jour-
nal of Research and Development, 56(3):2. 

Heeyoung Lee, Yves Peirsman, Angel Chang, Na-
thanael Chambers, Mihai Surdeanu, Dan Jurafsky. 
2011. Stanford's Multi-Pass Sieve Coreference 
Resolution System at the CoNLL-2011 Shared 
Task. In Proceedings of the CoNLL-2011 Shared 
Task, pages 28-34. 

Donald A.B. Lindberg, Betsy L. Humphreys, Alexa T. 
McCray. 1993. The Unified Medical Language 
System. Methods of information in medicine, 
32(4): 281-291. 

Feifan Liu, Lamont D. Antieau, Hong Yu. 2011. To-
ward automated consumer question answering: au-
tomatically separating consumer questions from 
professional questions in the healthcare domain. 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 44(6): 1032-
1038. 

David McClosky, Sebastian Riedel, Mihai Surdeanu, 
Andrew McCallum, Christopher Manning. 2012. 
Combining joint models for biomedical event ex-
traction. BMC Bioinformatics, 13 (Supplement 11): 
S9. 

Alexa McCray, Russell Loane, Allen Browne, Anan-
tha Bangalore. 1999. Terminology issues in user 
access to Web-based medical information. In 
AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, pages 107–
111. 

Alexa McCray, Anita Burgun, Olivier Bodenreider. 
2001. Aggregating UMLS semantic types for re-
ducing conceptual complexity. In Proceedings of 
Medinfo, 10(Pt1): 216-220. 

Makoto Miwa, Paul Thompson, Sophia Ananiadou. 
2012. Boosting automatic event extraction from the 
literature using domain adaptation and coreference 
resolution. Bioinformatics, 28(13):1759-1765. 

Yuan Ni, Huijia Zhu, Peng Cai, Lei Zhang, Zhaoming 
Qui, Feng Cao. 2012. CliniQA: highly reliable 
clinical question answering system. Studies in 
Health Technology and Information, 180:215-219. 

John M. Prager. 2006. Open-domain question answer-
ing. Foundations and Trends in Information Re-
trieval, 1(2):91-231. 

Sebastian Riedel and Andrew McCallum. 2011. Fast 
and robust joint models for biomedical event ex-
traction. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2011, pages 1-
12. 

Josef Ruppenhofer, Caroline Sporleder, Roser Mo-
rante, Collin Baker, Martha Palmer. 2010. 
SemEval-2010 Task 10: Linking Events and Their 
Participants in Discourse. In Proceedings of the 5th 
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, 
pages 45-50. 

Matthew S. Simpson and Dina Demner-Fushman. 
2012. Biomedical Text Mining: a Survey of Recent 
Progress. Mining Text Data 2012:465-517. 

Amanda Spink, Yin Yang, Jim Jansen, Pirrko 
Nykanen, Daniel P. Lorence, Seda Ozmutlu, H. 
Cenk Ozmutlu. 2004. A study of medical and 
health queries to web search engines. Health In-
formation & Libraries Journal. 21(1):44-51. 

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topić, 
Tomoko Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, Jun’ichi Tsujii. 
2012. Brat: a Web-based Tool for NLP-Assisted 
Text Annotation. In Proceedings of the Demon-
strations Sessions at EACL 2012, pages 102-107. 

Paul Thompson, Syed A. Iqbal, John McNaught, So-
phia Ananiadou. 2009. Construction of an annotat-
ed corpus to support biomedical information ex-
traction. BMC Bioinformatics, 10:349. 

José L. Vicedo and Antonio Ferrández. 2000. Im-
portance of pronominal anaphora resolution in 
question answering systems. In Proceedings of the 
38th Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 555-562. 

Katsumasa Yoshikawa, Sebastian Riedel, Tsutomu 
Hirao, Masayuki Asahara, Yuji Matsumoto. 2011. 
Coreference Based Event-Argument Relation Ex-
traction on Biomedical Text. Journal of Biomedi-
cal Semantics, 2 (Supplement 5):S6. 

Yan Zhang. 2010. Contextualizing Consumer Health 
Information Searching: an Analysis of Questions in 
a Social Q&A Community. In Proceedings of the 
1st ACM International Health Informatics Sympo-
sium (IHI’10), pages 210-219. 

62


