








































Sentiment Composition Using a Parabolic Model

Baptiste Chardon12 Farah Benamara1 Yannick Mathieu3

Vladimir Popescu1 Nicholas Asher1

1 IRIT-CNRS, Toulouse University,
2 Synapse Développement, Toulouse,

3 LLF-CNRS, Paris 7 University
{chardon, benamara, popescu, asher}@irit.fr

yannick.mathieu@linguist.jussieu.fr

Abstract

In this paper, we propose a computational model that accounts for the effects of negation and
modality on opinion expressions. Based on linguistic experiments informed by native speakers, we
distil these effects according to the type of modality and negation. The model relies on a parabolic
representation where an opinion expression is represented as a point on a parabola. Negation is
modelled as functions over this parabola whereas modality through a family of parabolas of different
slopes; each slope corresponds to a different certainty degree. The model is evaluated using two
experiments, one involving direct strength judgements on a 7-point scale and the other relying on a
sentiment annotated corpus. The empirical evaluation of our model shows that it matches the way
humans handle negation and modality in opinionated sentences.

1 Introduction

Sentiment composition is the process of computing the sentiment orientation of an expression or a sen-
tence (in terms of polarity and / or strength) on the basis of the sentiment orientation of its constituents.
This process, similar to the principle of compositionality (Dowty et al., 1989), aims to capture how
opinion expressions interact with each other and with specific linguistic operators such as intensifiers,
negations or modalities. For instance, the sentiment expressed in the sentence This restaurant is good
but expensive is a combination of the prior sentiment orientation of the words restaurant, good, but and
expensive. Similarly, in My wife confirms that this restaurant is not good enough, sentiment composition
has to deal with the verb confirm, the adjective good and the adverbs not and enough.

Several computational models were proposed to account for sentiment composition. (Moilanen and
Pulman, 2007) use a syntactic tree representation where nodes are associated to a set of specific hand-
made composition rules that treat both negation and intensifier via three models: sentiment propagation,
polarity conflict resolution and polarity reversal. (Shaikh et al., 2007) use verb frames representation for
sentence-level classification and show that their compositional model outperfoms a non-compositional
rule-based system. (Yessenalina and Cardie, 2011) represent each word as a matrix and combine words
using iterated matrix multiplication, which allows for modelling both additive (for negations) and multi-
plicative (for intensifiers) semantic effects. This matrix-space model is learned in order to assign ordinal
sentiment scores to sentiment-bearing phrases. (Socher et al., 2011) model sentences in a vectorial rep-
resentation and propose an approach based on semi-supervised recursive autoencoders in order to predict
sentence-level sentiment distributions. (Wu et al., 2011) propose a graph-based method for computing
a sentence-level sentiment representation. The vertices of the graph are the opinion targets, opinion
expressions and modifiers of opinion and the edges represent relations among them (mainly, opinion
restriction and opinion expansion). Finally (Socher et al., 2012) propose a matrix-vector representations
with a recursive neural network. The model is build on a parse tree where the nodes are associated to



a vector. The matrix captures how each constituent modifies its neighbour. The model was applied to
predict fine-grained sentiment distributions of adverb-adjective pairs.

Based on linguistic experiments informed by native speakers (Benamara et al., 2012), we propose a
sentiment composition model based on a parabolic representation where an opinion expression is rep-
resented as a point on a parabola. Our model is designed to handle the interactions between opinion
expressions and specific linguistic operators at the sub-sentential level. This paper focus particularly on
modality and negation but our model can be used to treat intensifier as well. Within the model, negation
are modelled as functions over this parabola whereas modality through a family of parabolas of different
slopes; each slope corresponds to a different certainty degree. The model is applied for French but it can
be easily instantiated for other languages like English. Its empirical evaluation shows that it has good
agreement with the way humans handle negation and modality in opinionated sentences. Our approach
is novel:

• it takes into account both negation and modality in a uniform framework. In our knowledge, our
approach is the first study dealing with the semantic of modality for sentiment analysis,

• it distills the effect of these linguistic phenomena on opinion expressions depending on different
types of negation and modality. We distinguish between three types of negation (Godard, 2013):
negative operators, such as “not”, “without”, negative quantifiers, such as “ever”, “nobody” and
lexical negations, such as “absence” and between three types of modality (Larreya, 2004) (Portner,
2009): bouletic, such as “hope”, “wish”, epistemic such as “definitely”, “probably” and deontic,
such as “must”. (Benamara et al., 2012) empirically show that each type of negation and modality
has a specific effect on the opinion expression in its scope: both on the polarity and the strength
for negation and on the strength and/or the certainty degree for modality. These empirical results
provide a basis for our computational model.

• it provides a lexicon independent representation of extra-propositional aspects of meaning.

The paper is organized as follow. We first give an overview of how existing sentiment analysis
systems deal with negation and modality. We then give in section 3 the linguistic motivations behind our
approach. The parabolic model and its evaluation are respectively described in section 4 and section 5.

2 Related Works

The computational treatment of negation and modality has recently become an emerging research area.
These complex linguistic phenomena have been shown to be relevant in several NLP applications such
as sentiment analysis (Wiegand et al., 2010), information retrieval (Jia and Meng, 2009), recognizing
contrasts and contradictions (de Marneffe and Manning, 2008) and biomedical text processing (Szarvas,
2008). Due to the emergence of this field, several workshops and conferences have been organized
such as the Negation and Speculation in Natural Language Processing (NeSp-NLP 2010) workshop,
the Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational Linguistics (ExPRom 2012) workshop,
and the publication of a special issue of the journal Computational Linguistics. A number of resources
annotated with factuality information are also available. Among them, we can cite the BioScope corpus
(Vincze et al., 2008) and FactBank (Saurı́ and Pustejovsky, 2009).

In sentiment analysis, the presence of modalities is generally used as a feature in a supervised learning
setting for sentence-level opinion classification (Kobayakawa et al., 2009). However, to our knowledge,
no work has investigated how modality impacts on opinions. There are two ways of treating negation
when computing the contextual polarity an opinion expression at the sentense-level: (a) polarity reversal
(Polanyi and Zaenen, 2006; Moilanen and Pulman, 2007; Choi and Cardie, 2008) that flips the prior
polarity of the expression to its opposite value. For instance, if the score of the adjective “excellent” is
+3, then the opinion in “this student is not excellent” is -3 ; (b) polarity shift (Taboada et al., 2011) that
assumes that negation affects both the polarity and the strength. For instance, the opinion in “this student
is not excellent” cannot be -3 ; it rather means that the student is not good enough. Two main types of



negation were taken into account in these models: negators such as “not” and / or content word negators
(Choi and Cardie, 2008) that can be positive polarity shifters (like abate) or negative polarity shifters
(like lack). Few studies take into account other types of negation. (Taboada et al., 2011) treat negative
polarity items (NPIs) (as well as modalities) as “irrealis blockers” by ignoring the semantic orientation
of the word under their scope. For example, the opinion word “good” will just be ignored in “any good
movie in this theater”. We think that ignoring NPIs is not suitable and a more accurate analysis is needed.
In addition, no work has investigated the effect of multiple negatives on opinions.

All the previous studies have focused on English. In French, as far as we know, main existing research
in sentiment analysis treat negation as polarity reversal and do not take into account modality (Vernier
et al., 2007). Thus, there is little existing work for us to compare ourselves to.

3 Linguistic motivations

Our analysis of negation is based on the lexical-syntactic classification of (Godard, 2013) as part of the
“Grande Grammaire du Français” project (Abeillé and Godard, 2010). We distinguish between four
types of negation in French1.

• Negative operators, denoted by NEG: they are the adverbs “pas” (“not”), “plus” (“no more”),
“non” (“no one”), the preposition “sans” (“without”) and the conjunction “ni” (“neither”). These
operators always appear alone in the sentence and they cannot be combined with each other. The
semantic of negative operators are similar to the negation used in logic since they can be para-
phrased by ”it is not true”.

• Negative quantifiers, denoted by NEG quant, express both a negation and a quantification. They
are, for example, the nouns and pronouns “aucun” (“none”), “nul” (“no”), “personne” (“no-
body”), “rien” (“nothing”), or the adverbs “jamais” (“never”) and “aucunement”/“nullement” (“in
no way”)2. Neg quant have three main properties: (i) they can occur in positive sentences (that
is not negated), particularly in interrogatives, when they are employed as indefinite (as in Jean
travaille toute la semaine mais jamais le dimanche (Jean works all the week but never on Sun-
day) or when they appear after the relative pronoun “que” (“that”) (as in Il a réussi sans qu’il ait
jamais fait d’efforts (He was successful without doing any efforts), (ii) in negative contexts, they
are always associated to the adverb “ne” (“not”) and (iii) they can be combined with each other as
well as with negative operators. Here are some examples of this type of negation extracted form
our corpus of French movie reviews: “on ne s’ennuie jamais” (“you will never be bored”), “je ne
recommande cette série à personne” (“I do recommend this movie to nobody”)

• Lexical negations denoted by NEG lex which are implicit negative words, such as “manque de”
(“lack of”), “absence de”(“absence of”), “carence” (“deficiency”), “manquer de” (“to lack”), “
dénué de” (“deprived of”). NEG lex can be combined with each other as well as with the two
previous types of negation.

• Multiple negatives. In some languages, double negatives cancel the effect of negation, while in
negative-concord languages like French, double negations usually intensify the effect of nega-
tion3. In French, multiple negatives that preserve negation concern two cases: the combinations
composed of negative quantifiers and the combination of a negative quantifier and a negative oper-
ator. Note that the combination of a lexical negation with a lexical quantifier or a lexical negation
with a negative operator cancel the effect of NEG lex. Here is an example of a positive opinion

1This classification does not cover words such as few or only, since we consider them as weak intensifiers (strength dimin-
ishers) rather than negations.

2In this paper, all examples are in French along with their direct translation in English. Note however that there are substan-
tial semantic differences between the two languages.

3In French, there are at most three negative words in a multiple negative. However, this case is relatively rare in opinion text
and we only deal with two negatives



extracted from our corpus of French movie reviews: Cette série télé n’a jamais manqué de me
surprendre (This TV series never fails to amaze me) where we have two negatives: the negative
quantifier jamais (never) and the lexical negation manqué (fail).

Drawing partly on (Portner, 2009) and on (Larreya, 2004) for French, we have chosen to split modal-
ity in three categories:

• Bouletic, denoted by Mod B. It indicates the speaker’s desires/wishes. This type of modality is
expressed via a closed set of verbs denoting hope e.g. “I wish he were kind”.

• Epistemic, denoted by Mod E. It indicates the speaker’s belief in the propositional content he
asserts. They are expressed via adverbs expressing doubt, possibility or necessity such as “per-
haps”, “definitely”, “certainly”, etc., and via the French verbs “devoir” (“have to”), “falloir” (“need
to/must”) and “pouvoir” (“may/can”), e.g. “The movie might be good”,

• Deontic, denoted by Mod D. It indicates a possibility or an obligation (with their contrapositives,
impossibility and permission, respectively). They are only expressed via the same modal verbs as
for epistemic modality, but with a deontic reading, e.g., “You must go see the movie”.

(Benamara et al., 2012) consider that effect of each modal category on opinion expression is on their
strength – for instance, the strength of the recommendation “You must go see the movie, it’s a blast”
is greater than for “Go see the movie, it’s a blast”, and certainty degree – for instance, “This movie
is definitely good” has a greater certainty than “This movie is good”. The certainty degree has three
possible values, in line with standard literature (Saurı́ and Pustejovsky, 2009): possible, probable and
certain. However, as in (Benamara et al., 2012), we consider that, in an opinion analysis context, the
frontier between the first two values is rather vague, hence we conflate them into a value that we denote
by uncertain. We thus obtain two certainty degrees, from which we build a three-level scale, by inserting
between these values a “default” certainty degree for all expressions which are not modalities or in the
scope of a modality.

(Benamara et al., 2012) structure the effects of each negation type as a set of hypotheses PolNeg,
StrNeg, QuantNeg, LexNeg and MultiNeg that have been empirically validated by volunteer native French
speakers through two protocols: one for PolNeg and StrNeg, with 81 subjects and one for the three other
hypotheses with 96 subjects. Similarly, the effects of modality are structured as a set of six hypotheses
that have been empirically validated via a set of three evaluation protocols. Respectively 78, 111 and
78 subjects participated in these studies. The table 1 gives an overview of our set of hypotheses, as
well as the results (as the average agreement and disagreement between the subjects’ answers and the
hypotheses). Regarding these results, only valid hypotheses (i.e that obtain more that 50% agreement)
are plugged in our parabolic model. We leave lexical negations for future work since their effect is
closely related to the semantic of the word used to express negation.

4 Parabolic Model

Let T be an explicitly subjective phrase that contains one opinion expression exp about one topic. exp
can be an adjective, a noun or a verb, and can be modified by a set of linguistic operators (e.g., intensifier,
negation, modality) that we denote by OPi for i = 1 . . . n. Their cumulative effect on exp is represented
by the nesting OP1(OP2...(OPn((exp))), where the order of operators reflects their scope over exp.
Here are some examples of T , along with their corresponding semantic representations, operators are in
bold font:

(1) Cet étudiant est brillant (this student is brilliant), T = brilliant

(2) Cet étudiant n’est pas brillant (this student is not brilliant), T = NEG(brilliant)

(3) Personne n’est brillant (nobody is brilliant), T = NEG quant(brilliant)



Hypothesis Description Results
PolNeg The negation always reverses the polarity of an opinion expression. Exp. exceptionnel (exceptional) and

pas exceptionnel (not exceptional).
90.7 %

StrNeg The strength of an opinion expression in the scope of a negation is not stronger than of the opinion expres-
sion alone.

100 %

QuantNeg The strength of an expression when in the scope of a NEG quant is greater than when in the scope of a
NEG. Exp. jamais exceptionnel (never exceptional) is stronger than pas exceptionnel (not exceptional).

67 %

LexNeg NEG lex has the same effect as NEG. Exp. lack of taste and no taste 43 %
MultiNeg The strength of an expression when in the scope of multiple negatives is greater than when in the scope of

each negation alone. Exp. plus jamais bon (no longer ever good) is stronger than plus bon (no longer good)
64 %

BoulMod Mod B alters the certainty degree of opinion expressions in their scope and is weaker than the certainty
degree of the opinion expression itself. Exp. I hope this movie is funny there is less certainty than in This
movie is funny

86.5 %

EpisMod1 Mod E alters the certainty degree of opinion expressions in their scope. For adverbial Mod E, this degree is
altered according to the certainty of the respective adverb: if the latter is uncertain, then the certainty of the
opinion in the scope of the adverb is reduced; otherwise, the certainty is augmented

72 %

EpisMod2 The certainty of opinion expressions in the scope of a verbal Mod E is always lower than when not in the
scope of such a modality and varies according to the certainty of the respective verb, from pouvoir – lowest
certainty, as in “the film might be good”, to devoir and falloir – greater certainty, as in “the film must be
good”.

79 %

EpisMod3 The certainty degrees of opinion expressions in the scope of epistemic devoir and falloir are the same. 57 %
DeonMod1 Mod D alters the strength of opinion expressions in their scope. Hence, strength varies according to the

verb: pouvoir reduces the strength of the opinion, whereas devoir and falloir boost it.
54 %

DeonMod2 The strengths of opinion expressions in the scope of deontic devoir and falloir are the same. 60 %

Table 1: An overview of our set of hypotheses and their associated results

(4) Cet étudiant n’apportera jamais rien de bon (This student will never bring anything good), T =
NEG quant(NEG quant(bon))

(5) Cet étudiant n’est definitivement pas brillant (this student is definitely not brilliant), T =
Mod E(NEG(brilliant))

We assume that exp is characterized by a prior score s = pol · str encoded in a lexicon, where
pol ∈ {−1, + 1} is the polarity of exp and str ∈ (0, MAX] is its strength. For example, if we have a
three-value scale to encode opinion strength, we can put s(brilliant) = +3. The key question is: how
can we compute the contextual score of exp ? i.e what is the value of s(T ) ? Knowing contextual score
of opinion expressions at the sub-sentential level is a necessary step in a sentiment analysis system since
the s(T ) scores have to be aggregated in order to determine the overall polarity orientation and/or the
overall rating at the document level.

To compute the contextual polarity of exp, we propose a parabolic model where an opinion expres-
sion exp is represented by a point E of the parabola of focus F and summit O, such that E 6= O4. This
parabola belongs to a family of three parabolas of the same focus and different slopes. The slopes cor-
respond to certainty degrees. By convention, we set a reference value p0 for “default” certainty degrees,
p1 > p0 for “certain” and p2 < p0 for “uncertain”. The certainty degree of exp being “default”, we place
it on the parabola of slope p0. The polarity and strength of exp on this parabola are then characterized
by the angle θ between the lines EF and OF (see Figure 1).

Our model is parametrises by pol, str and MAX . Hence, θ is obtained as a mapping φ : {pol} ×
{str} → (0;π), such that: φ = ϕ2 ◦ ϕ1 where ϕ1 : {str} → (0; 1) and ϕ2 : {pol} × (0; 1) → (0;π).
To compute ϕ1, we rely on a “pivot” word exp0, such that when in the scope of a negative operator
(see Section 3), its polarity is reversed, while its strength, denoted by str0, is preserved. This generally
corresponds to words with relatively weak strengths like “good” or “bad” in English. We set ϕ1(str0) to
1
2 . This parameter is set to this value in order to be consistent with our elementary operation for negation
operators Σneg (cf. description below). Then, for any expression exp, its new strength is computed as
follows:

4E cannot be on the summit of the parabola, since this would correspond to a non-opinionated expression, and our model
does not apply to such expressions.



Figure 1: Parabolic model, with negation and modality.

ϕ1(str) =

{ str
str0
· 12 , if str ≤ str0

1
2 + (

str−str0
MAX+1−str0 ·

1
2 ) , else

Then, we determine the angle corresponding to exp from its polarity and new strength as follows:

θ ≡ ϕ2(pol;ϕ1(str)) = pol · ϕ1(str) · π

The table 2 below shows normalized values in case of a three-points discrete strength such that the “pivot”
word good is associated to the score +1:

Opinion score s Normalized angular score θ Example
+1 π/2 good
+2 2π/3 brilliant
+3 5π/6 excellent
−1 −π/2 bad
−2 −2π/3 disgusting
−3 −5π/6 outrageous

Table 2: Normalization on a 3-points scale

The next step is to compute the score of T , given that T contains one single phrase of the type
OP1(OP2...(OPn((exp))). Negations and modalities are modeled as functions Σ over the angle θ and
the slope p of the parabola where the expressions are placed: Σ : (θin; pin) 7→ (θout; pout). Σ is
customized with respect to the operator type: we have both “primitive” and “composition” functions.
We have four “primitive” functions:

• Σneg for negative operators NEG. It consists in adding/subtracting π to/from θ, which ensures that
negating of a high-strength opinion expression yields a low-strength one, which is in line with
observed behaviour in Hypotheses PolNeg and StrNeg (cf. table 1):

θout =

{
θout = θin + π , if θin < 0
θout = θin − π , if θin > 0

; pout = pin

Table 3 shows how this formula can be applied in case of a three-points strength scale for positive
values. As expected, “not good” has a stronger score than “not excellent”.

• Σint for intensity modifiers, i.e. deontic modalities (MOD D) or intensity adverbs. This operation
consists in an angle adjustment: it can either increase or decrease the value of θ. We denote these
effects by the two sub-functions Σint+ and Σint−, respectively:

Σint+(θ) =

{
2 · |θ|θ · |θ| , if |θ| ≤

π
3

|θ|
θ ·
(
π
2 +

|θ|
2

)
, else;



θin Σneg(θin) Example
π/2 −π/2 good / not good
2π/3 −π/3 brilliant / not brilliant
5π/6 −π/6 excellent / not excellent

Table 3: Negation primitive function on a 3-points scale

Σint−(θ) = π − Σneg(π − θ)

Table 4 shows an example of these functions in case of a three-points strength scale for positive
values.

θin Σint+(θin) Example Σint−(θin) Example
π/2 3π/4 definitely good π/4 possibly good
2π/3 5π/6 definitely brilliant π/3 possibly brilliant

Table 4: Modality primitive functions on a 3-points scale

• Σcert for modalities that alter the certainty degree of the expressions in their scope (epistemic
MOD E), according to Hypotheses BoulMod, EpisMod1 to EpisMod3. It consists in altering the
slope of the parabola, according to the certainty degree c of the modality:

θout = θin; pout =
{

2 , if c = “certain”
0.5 , if c = “uncertain”,

• Σcert0 for buletic modalities. This operation consists in cancelling the opinion by setting the
parameter p to 0.

We have two “composition” functions, Σneg quant and Σneg m, that account for negative quantifiers
and multiple negations, respectively. These functions adjust the output angle yielded by Σneg and φ ac-
cording to Hypotheses QuantNeg, DeonMod1, DeonMod2 and MultiNeg. These “composition” functions
are defined as follows.

Σneg quant : θout = Σint+(Σneg(θin; pin)), pout = pin.

Σneg m : θout = Σint+(Σint+(Σneg(θin; pin))); pout = pin.

Table 5 illustrates these functions.

θin Σneg quant(θin) Example Σneg m(θin) Example
π/2 −3π/4 good / never good −7π/8 good / no longer ever good
2π/3 −2π/3 brilliant / never brilliant −5π/6 brilliant / no longer ever brilliant

Table 5: Composition functions on a 3-points scale

5 Empirical validation

In order to validate empirically our model, we conducted two complementary evaluations. The first one
relies on a set of linguistic protocols that aims at evaluating at what extent our model matches the way
humans handle negation and modality in opinionated sentences. The second one relies on manually
annotated review product corpus and aims at comparing the score that annotators give to elementary dis-
course segments to the score computed by our model. In both evaluation settings, we compare our model
with some baselines and with the (Taboada et al., 2011)’s system which is the state-of-the art model that
is the most closer to our. Indeed, (Taboada et al., 2011)’s model shifts the score of an expression to the



opposite polarity by a fixed amount. Thus a +2 adjective is negated to a −2, but the negation of a −3
adjective (for instance, sleazy) is only slightly positive.

5.1 Assessing the parabolic model via linguistic protocols

We designed three protocols: P NegOp1 and P NegOp2 to assess our model with respect to negative
operators and one protocol, namely P NegQuantMulti, to evaluate our model with respect to negative
quantifiers and to multiple negatives. Since the function Σcert simply alters the slop of the parabola
following the already validated hypothesis BoulMod and EpisMod1 to EpisMod3 (cf. Table 1), we do
not give its evaluation here (see (Benamara et al., 2012) for more details).

In our framework, the strength of the opinion is discretized on a three-level scale, going from 1
(minimal strength) to 3 (maximal strength). Several types of scales have been used in sentiment anal-
ysis research, going from continuous scales to discrete ones. Since our negation hypotheses have to be
evaluated against human subjects, the chosen length of the scale has to ensure a trade-off between a fine-
grained categorisation of subjective words and the reliability of this categorisation with respect to human
jugments. We thus use in our framework a discrete 7-point scale, going from −3 (which corresponds
to “extremely negative” opinions) to +3 (for “extremely positive” ones) to quantify the strenght of an
opinion expression. Note that 0 corresponds to cases where in the absence of any context, the opinion
expression can be neither positive nor negative.

5.1.1 The experimental setup

The first protocol P NegOp1 was already used for evaluating Hypothesis PolNeg. It is needed to check
whether the scores yielded by the parabolic model match those elicited from human subjects. A set of six
questions are shown to subjects. In each question, an opinionated sentence is presented, along with its
negation using negative operators, as in “This student is brilliant” and “This student is not brilliant”. The
strengths of the opinions vary from one question to another on a discrete scale. A set of 81 native French
speakers were asked to indicate the strength of each sentence in a question on the same 7-point scale.
In the second protocol P NegOp2, the same subjects are given 6 couples of sentences with negative
operators, where we vary the strength of the opinion expression in the scope of the negation, while
keeping their polarity, e.g. “This student is not brilliant” and “This student is not exceptional”. We ask
them to compare, within each couple, the strengths of its members. A set of 96 native French speakers
participated in this study. P NegOp2 is needed in order to discriminate between our model and different,
baseline or state-of-the-art ones (see below), in case of equal performance according to the first protocol.
In the third and last protocol, named P NegQuantMulti, we give subjects a set of sentences where each
contains an opinion expression of a distinct strength. Each sentence is presented with three forms: one
with a negative operator, one with a negative quantifier and one with multiple negation. We then ask
subjects to rank each sentence on our 7-point scale. 96 volunteers participate in this protocol.

Given that negation alters only the polarity and strength of an expression (and hence its angle in
the model), we first perform a mapping between the angle obtained by applying Σneg, Σneg quant and
Σneg m, and the 7-point scale, used by human subjects. This mapping is based on the fact that, ϕ1 and
ϕ2 being bijections, their composition φ = ϕ2 ◦ ϕ1 is a bijection as well. Hence, the inverse mapping
φ−1 = ϕ−11 ◦ ϕ

−1
2 is also a bijective function. Thus, for any angle θ, we get a real-numbered score σθ in

[−3, 3], which is further discretized via the nearest integer function, yielding the integer bσθe on the 7-
point scale. The evaluation is performed in two steps: (i) verifying, via P NegOp1, and P NegQuantMulti
that, for a given expression, its bσθe corresponds to the score given by the subjects; (ii) verifying, via
P NegOp2, that, for a set of expressions, the ordering of their bσθes is identical to the ordering of the
scores given by subjects. The assessments are quantified as subjects-model agreements.

P NegOp1 and P NegOp2 aim, in addition, to assess our model, along with three other negation
models: (i) a “switch” model, which only changes the polarity of the prior score of an expression, while
keeping the strength unchanged; (ii) a “flat” model, where the strengths of expressions in the scope
of negations are either +1 for negative expressions or −1 for positive ones; (iii) “Tab et al.” model,



standing for (Taboada et al., 2011)’s model. In this model negation boils down to a±4 shift of the scores
of the opinion expressions on a scale of {−5,−4, . . . , 4, 5}; hence, polarity is not preserved (Hypothesis
PolNeg not validated). The assessment according to P NegOp1 allows us to indirectly compare these
three models to our model. To this end, we first need to perform a scale adjustment for prior scores in
(Taboada et al., 2011)’s model: first, our prior scores are linearly mapped to Taboada et al.’s scale, then
their model is applied and finally the results are re-mapped to our scale.

5.1.2 Results

In Table 6 we evaluate the subjects-model agreement measure of the four models. We thus assess their
ability to provide scores that reflect subjects’ intuition (protocol P NegOp1). In case of equal perfor-
mance according to this measure, the models are further assessed with respect to their ability to provide
the same score orderings as the subjects (protocol P NegOp2). Concerning the correspondence between
subject and model scores (P NegOp1), we observe that the “flat” and parabolic models perform best. The
“switch” and “Tab et al.” models reflect to a lesser extent subjects’ assessments. The “Tab et al.” model
exhibits lower performance figures because, unlike the “flat” and parabolic models, it does not systemati-
cally reverse polarity, whereas subjects do so. The parabolic and flat models show the same performance
because in both models negation boils down to assigning±1 strengths to negated expressions and, in fact,
discretizing the output of the parabolic model on the {−3, . . . 3} scale boils down to applying the same
formula as for the “flat” model. Hence, in order to further distinguish between the “flat” and parabolic
models, we performed the second evaluation, with respect to score orderings (P NegOp2). In this set-
ting, we remark that (Taboada et al., 2011)’s and our parabolic model perform best, which shows that the
“switch” and “flat” models fail to provide a score ranking in agreement with subjects’ intuitions. Our
model has the same performance as (Taboada et al., 2011)’s model because both are order-preserving
shifting models and hence yield the same score ordering for the negated expressions, starting from the
same prior score ordering for the expressions.

Model P NegOp1 P NegOp2
Switch 27.03 % 5.80 %
Flat 61.43 % 21.16 %
Tab et al. 47.77 % 73.04 %
Parabolic 61.43 % 73.04 %

Table 6: Empirical validation of the parabolic model

Finally, using P NegQuantMulti, the agreement between the parabolic model and subjects that are in
concordance with Hypothesis PolNeg is 85.96% for negative quantifiers and 78 % for multiple negatives.
Our results show that the adjustment function Σint+ perfoms well.

5.2 Assessing the parabolic model on manually annoted data

In order to validate our model as a whole, we conducted an experiment on manually annotated data.
The data consists in a set of 133 reviews on various subjects: films, TV series, books, and video games.
The annotation includes opinion information both at the expression level, with polarity and strength on
a three-point scale for opinion words, and with the operators associated to them, and at the discourse
segment level, with polarity and strength after application of the operators. While annotating, annotators
are not asked to determine the semantic category of negation and modality. For our evaluation, we first
automatically determine the type of each operator (i.e negative operator, negative quantifier, multiple
negative, epistemic modality, boulic modality as well as intensifiers where we distinguish between ad-
verbs that increase (vs. decrease) the opinion strength) using a dedicated lexicon. Then, we compare the
score of discourse segments with those given by annotators. The corpus used for the evaluation contains
393 segments. Table 7 shows the results obtained in terms of accuracy.

We observe that the three models obtain good results, especially in case of intensifiers. Indeed, this
kind of operation is usually well supported by each model. Concerning negation, switch model loses an



Model Accuracy
Switch 59.5 %
Tab et al. 64.7 %
Parabolic 68.8 %

Table 7: Empirical validation of the parabolic model

important part of discourse segments when dealing with high strength opinions; Tab et al. model per-
forms better on most negation, but loses some segments especially when high intensity opinion expres-
sion are concerned: Tab et al model doesn’t forecast a polarity switch, and we showed with hypothesis
PolNeg that this is not the best behaviour for French. On the contrary our model deals correctly with in
these cases. In addition, our model performs well on multiple negative and negative quantifiers, which
are not taken into account neither in the switch nor in the Tab et al. model. Finally, we also observe
that our results for modality are very good, with a F-measure of 88%. However, these results need to be
assessed on a larger corpus (we had few instances of epistemic and deontic modalities in our corpus).

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we propose a way to compute the opinion orientation at the sub-sentencial level using a
parabolic model. Our approach takes into account both negation and modality in a uniform framework
and distils the effect of these linguistic phenomena on opinion expressions depending on different types
of negation and modality. The empirical evaluation of our model shows that it has good agreement with
the way humans handle negation and modality in opinionated sentences. In further work, we plan to
study the effect of cumulative modalities, as in “you definitely must see this movie” and of co-occurring
negation and modality, as in you should not go see this movie, on opinion expressions. At the moment,
our model is based on the assumption that a subjective text span contains a single opinion expression.
This assumption is far from being verified. Hence, we plan to extend our parabolic model so that it can
compute the overall opinion of a text containing several opinion expressions. The focus of the family of
three parabolas can correspond to a couple (topic, holder), hence we have as many families of parabolas
as opinions expressed towards different topics and/or by different holders. Sentiment composition can
then be parametrized by the topic or the holder of the opinion. Finally, we plan to instantiate our model
in other languages in order to compare its prediction on standard datasets available in the literature.

Acknowledgement

This work was supported by a DGA-RAPID project under grant number 0102906143.

References

Abeillé, A. and D. Godard (2010). The grande grammaire du français project. In Proceedings of the 7th
LREC.

Benamara, F., B. Chardon, Y. Mathieu, V. Popescu, and N. Asher (2012). How do negation and modality
impact on opinions? In Proceedings of the Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in
Computational Linguistics, pp. 10–18. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Choi, Y. and C. Cardie (2008). Learning with compositional semantics as structural inference for sub-
sentential sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pp. 793–801.

de Marneffe, Marie-Catherine, A. N. R. and C. D. Manning (2008). Finding contradictions in text. In In
Proceedings of ACL 2008, pp. 10391047.



Dowty, D. R., R. E. Wall, and S. Peters (1989). Introduction to Montague Semantics, Volume 11. D.
Reidel.

Godard, D. (2013). Les négateurs. In La Grande Grammaire du français. Godard Danièle, Anne Abeillé
and Annie Delaveau. Actes Sud.

Jia, L. Yu, C. T. and W. Meng (2009). The effect of negation on sentiment analysis and retrieval effec-
tiveness. In CIKM, pp. 1827–1830.

Kobayakawa, T., T. Kumano, H. Tanaka, N. Okazaki, J. Kim, and J. Tsujii (2009). Opinion classification
with tree kernel svm using linguistic modality analysis. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference
on Information and knowledge management, pp. 1791–1794.

Larreya, P. (2004). L’expression de la modalité en français et en anglais (domaine verbal). Revue belge
de philologie et d’histoire 82(3), 733–762.

Moilanen, K. and S. Pulman (2007, September 27-29). Sentiment composition. In Proceedings of
RANLP, pp. 378–382.

Polanyi, L. and A. Zaenen (2006). Contextual valence shifters. In Computing Attitude and Affect in Text:
Theory and Applications, Volume 20 of The Information Retrieval Series, pp. 1–10.

Portner, P. (2009). Modality, Volume 1. Oxford University Press, USA.

Saurı́, R. and J. Pustejovsky (2009). FactBank: a corpus annotated with event factuality. Language
Resources and Evaluation 43(3), 227–268.

Shaikh, M. A. M., H. Prendinger, and M. Ishizuka (2007). Assessing sentiment of text by semantic de-
pendency and contextual valence analysis. In Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, Second
International Conference, ACII 2007, Lisbon, Portugal, September 12-14, 2007, Proceedings, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pp. 191–202. Springer.

Socher, R., B. Huval, C. D. Manning, and A. Y. Ng (2012). Semantic Compositionality Through Recur-
sive Matrix-Vector Spaces. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Socher, R., J. Pennington, E. H. Huang, A. Y. Ng, and C. D. Manning (2011, July). Semi-supervised
recursive autoencoders for predicting sentiment distributions. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pp. 151–161.

Szarvas, G. (2008). Hedge classification in biomedical texts with a weakly supervised selection of
keywords. In In Proceedings of ACL 2008, pp. 281289.

Taboada, M., J. Brooke, M. Tofiloski, K. Voll, and M. Stede (2011). Lexicon-based methods for senti-
ment analysis. Computational Linguistics 37, 267–307.

Vernier, M., Y. Mathet, F. Rioult, T. Charnois, S. Ferrari, and D. Legallois (2007). Classification de textes
d’opinions: une approche mixte n-grammes et sémantique. DEFT’07.

Vincze, V., G. Szarvas, R. Farkas, G. Móra, and J. Csirik (2008). The bioscope corpus: biomedical texts
annotated for uncertainty, negation and their scopes. BMC bioinformatics 9(Suppl 11), S9.

Wiegand, M., A. Balahur, B. Roth, D. Klakow, and A. Montoyo (2010). A survey on the role of nega-
tion in sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Speculation in Natural
Language Processing, NeSp-NLP ’10, pp. 60–68.

Wu, Y., Q. Zhang, X. Huang, and L. Wu (2011). Structural opinion mining for graph-based sentiment
representation. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pp. 1332–1341.

Yessenalina, A. and C. Cardie (2011). Compositional matrix-space models for sentiment analysis. In
Proceedings of EMNLP, pp. 172–182.


