










































Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation: Overview and Developments


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation, pages 1–6,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation:
Overview and Developments

Marta R. Costa-jussà, Rafael E. Banchs
Institute for Infocomm Research1

Patrik Lambert
Barcelona Media3

Kurt Eberle
Lingenio GmbH4

Reinhard Rapp
Aix-Marseille Université, LIF2

Bogdan Babych
University of Leeds5

1{vismrc,rembanchs}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, 2reinhardrapp@gmx.de,
3patrik.lambert@barcelonamedia.org, 4k.eberle@lingenio.de,

5b.babych@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract
A current increasing trend in machine
translation is to combine data-driven and
rule-based techniques. Such combinations
typically involve the hybridization of dif-
ferent paradigms such as, for instance,
the introduction of linguistic knowledge
into statistical paradigms, the incorpora-
tion of data-driven components into rule-
based paradigms, or the pre- and post-
processing of either sort of translation sys-
tem outputs. Aiming at bringing together
researchers and practitioners from the dif-
ferent multidisciplinary areas working in
these directions, as well as at creating a
brainstorming and discussion venue for
Hybrid Translation approaches, the Hy-
Tra initiative was born. This paper gives
an overview of the Second Workshop on
Hybrid Approaches to Translation (HyTra
2013) concerning its motivation, contents
and outcomes.

1 Introduction

Machine translation (MT) has continuously been
evolving from different perspectives. Early sys-
tems were basically dictionary-based. These ap-
proaches were further developed to more complex
systems based on analysis, transfer and genera-
tion. The objective was to climb up (and down)
in the well-known Vauquois pyramid (see Figure
1) to facilitate the transfer phase or to even mini-
mize the transfer by using an interlingua system.
But then, corpus-based approaches irrupted, gen-
erating a turning point in the field by putting aside
the analysis, generation and transfer phases.

Although there had been such a tendency right
from the beginning (Wilks, 1994), in the last

Figure 1: Vauquois pyramid (image from
Wikipedia).

years, the corpus-based approaches have reached
a point where many researchers assume that rely-
ing exclusively on data might have serious limi-
tations. Therefore, research has focused either on
syntactical/hierarchical-based methods or on try-
ing to augment the popular phrase-based systems
by incorporating linguistic knowledge. In addi-
tion, and given the fact that research on rule-based
has never stopped, there have been several propos-
als of hybrid architectures combining both rule-
based and data-driven approaches.

In summary, there is currently a clear trend to-
wards hybridization, with researchers adding mor-
phological, syntactic and semantic knowledge to
statistical systems, as well as combining data-
driven methods with existing rule-based systems.

In this paper we provide a general overview
of current approaches to hybrid MT within the
context of the Second Workshop on Hybrid Ap-
proaches to Translation (HyTra 2013). In our
overview, we classify hybrid MT approaches ac-
cording to the linguistic levels that they address.
We then briefly summarize the contributions pre-
sented and collected in this volume.

1



The paper is organized as follows. First, we mo-
tivate and summarize the main aspects of the Hy-
Tra initiative. Then, we present a general overview
of the accepted papers and discuss them within
the context of other state-of-the-art research in the
area. Finally, we present our conclusions and dis-
cuss our proposed view of future directions for
Hybrid MT research.

2 Overview of the HyTra Initiative

The HyTra initiative started in response to the in-
creasing interest in hybrid approaches to machine
translation, which is reflected on the substantial
amount of work conducted on this topic. An-
other important motivation was the observation
that, up to now, no single paradigm has been able
to successfully solve to a satisfactory extent all of
the many challenges that the problem of machine
translation poses.

The first HyTra workshop took part in conjunc-
tion with the EACL 2012 conference (Costa-jussà
et al., 2012). The Second HyTra Workshop, which
was co-organized by the authors of this paper, has
been co-located with the ACL 2013 conference
(Costa-jussà et al., 2013). The workshop has been
supported by an extensive programme committee
comprising members from over 30 organizations
and representing more than 20 countries. As the
outcome of a comprehensive peer reviewing pro-
cess, and based on the recommendations of the
programme committee, 15 papers were finally se-
lected for either oral or poster presentation at the
workshop.

The workshop also had the privilege to be hon-
ored by two exceptional keynote speeches:

• Controlled Ascent: Imbuing Statistical MT
with Linguistic Knowledge by Will Lewis and
Chris Quirk (2013), Microsoft research. The
intersection of rule-based and statistical ap-
proaches in MT is explored, with a particular
focus on past and current work done at Mi-
crosoft Research. One of their motivations
for a hybrid approach is the observation that
the times are over when huge improvements
in translation quality were possible by sim-
ply adding more data to statistical systems.
The reason is that most of the readily avail-
able parallel data has already been found.

• How much hybridity do we have? by Her-
mann Ney, RWTH Aachen. It is pointed

out that after about 25 years the statistical
approach to MT has been widely accepted
as an alternative to the classical approach
with manually designed rules. But in prac-
tice most statistical MT systems make use
of manually designed rules at least for pre-
processing in order to improve MT quality.
This is exemplified by looking at the RWTH
MT systems.

3 Hybrid Approaches Organized by
Linguistic Levels

’Hybridization’ of MT can be understood as com-
bination of several MT systems (possibly of very
different architecture) where the single systems
translate in parallel and compete for the best re-
sult (which is chosen by the integrating meta sys-
tem). The workshop and the papers do not fo-
cus on this ’coarse-grained’ hybridization (Eisele
et al., 2008), but on a more ’fine grained’ one
where the systems mix information from differ-
ent levels of linguistic representations (see Fig-
ure 2). In the past and mostly in the framework
of rule-based machine translation (RBMT) it has
been experimented with information from nearly
every level including phonetics and phonology
for speech recognition and synthesis in speech-
to-speech systems (Wahlster, 2000) and includ-
ing pragmatics for dialog translation (Batliner et
al., 2000a; Batliner et al., 2000b) and text coher-
ence phenomena (Le Nagard and Koehn, 2010).
With respect to work with emphasis on statisti-
cal machine translation (SMT) and derivations of
it mainly those information levels have been used
that address text in the sense of sets of sentences.

As most of the workshop papers relate to this
perspective - i.e. on hybridization which is de-
fined using SMT as backbone, in this introduc-
tion we can do with distinguishing between ap-
proaches focused on morphology, syntax, and se-
mantics. There are of course approaches which
deal with more than one of these levels in an in-
tegrated manner, which are commonly refered to
as multilevel approaches. As the case of treat-
ing syntax and morphology concurrently is espe-
cially common, we also consider morpho-syntax
as a separate multilevel approach.

3.1 Morphological approaches
The main approaches of statistical MT that ex-
ploit morphology can be classified into segmen-
tation, generation, and enriching approaches. The

2



Figure 2: Major linguistic levels (image from
Wikipedia).

first one attempts to minimize the vocabulary of
highly inflected languages in order to symmetrize
the (lexical granularity of the) source and the tar-
get language. The second one assumes that, due
to data sparseness, not all morphological forms
can be learned from parallel corpora and, there-
fore, proposes techniques to learn new morpho-
logical forms. The last one tries to enrich poorly
inflected languages to compensate for their lack of
morphology. In HyTra 2013, approaches treating
morphology were addressed by the following con-
tributions:

• Toral (2013) explores the selection of data to
train domain-specific language models (LM)
from non-domain specific corpora by means
of simplified morphology forms (such as
lemmas). The benefit of this technique is
tested using automatic metrics in the English-
to-Spanish task. Results show an improve-
ment of up to 8.17% of perplexity reduction
over the baseline system.

• Rios Gonzalez and Goehring (2013) propose
machine learning techniques to decide on the
correct form of a verb depending on the con-
text. Basically they use tree-banks to train the
classifiers. Results show that they are able
to disambiguate up to 89% of the Quechua
verbs.

3.2 Syntactic approaches
Syntax had been addressed originally in SMT in
the form of so called phrase-based SMT with-
out any reference to linguistic structures; during

the last decade (or more) the approach evolved
to or, respectively, was complemented by - work
on syntax-based models in the linguistic sense of
the word. Most such approaches can be classi-
fied into three different types of architecture that
are defined by the type of syntactic analysis used
for the source language and the type of generation
aimed at for the target language: tree-to-tree, tree-
to-string and string-to-tree. Additionally, there
are also the so called hierarchical systems, which
combine the phrase-based and syntax-based ap-
proaches by using phrases as translation-units and
automatically generated context free grammars as
rules. Approaches dealing with the syntactic ap-
proach in HyTra 2013 include the following pa-
pers:

• Green and Zabokrtský (2013) study three dif-
ferent ways to ensemble parsing techniques
and provide results in MT. They compute cor-
relations between parsing quality and transla-
tion quality, showing that NIST is more cor-
related than BLEU.

• Han et al. (2013) provide a framework for
pre-reordering to make Chinese word order
more similar to Japanese. To this purpose,
they use unlabelled dependency structures of
sentences and POS tags to identify verbal
blocks and move them from after-the-object
positions (SVO) to before-the-object posi-
tions (SOV).

• Nath Patel et al. (2013) also propose a pre-
reordering technique, which uses a limited
set of rules based on parse-tree modification
rules and manual revision. The set of rules is
specifically listed in detail.

• Saers et al. (2013) report an unsupervised
learning model that induces phrasal ITGs by
breaking rules into smaller ones using mini-
mum description length. The resulting trans-
lation model provides a basis for generaliza-
tion to more abstract transduction grammars
with informative non-terminals.

3.3 Morphosyntactical approaches

In linguistic theories, morphology and syntax are
often considered and represented simultaneously
(not only in unification-based approaches) and the
same is true for MT systems.

3



• Laki et al. (2013) combine pre-reordering
rules with morphological and factored mod-
els for English-to-Turkish.

• Li et al. (2013) propose pre-reordering rules
to be used for alignment-based reordering,
and corresponding POS-based restructuring
of the input. Basically, they focus on tak-
ing advantage of the fact that Korean has
compound words, which - for the purpose of
alignment - are split and reordered similarly
to Chinese.

• Turki Khemakhem et al. (2013) present
work about an English-Arabic SMT sys-
tem that uses morphological decomposition
and morpho-syntactic annotation of the target
language and incorporates the correspond-
ing information in a statistical feature model.
Essentially, the statistical feature language
model replaces words by feature arrays.

3.4 Semantic approaches
The introduction of semantics in statistical MT has
been approached to solve word sense disambigua-
tion challenges covering the area of lexical seman-
tics and, more recently, there have been different
techniques using semantic roles covering shallow
semantics, as well as the use of distributional se-
mantics for improving translation unit selection.
Approaches treating the incorporation of seman-
tics into MT in HyTra 2013 include the following
research work:

• Rudnick et al. (2013) present a combina-
tion of Maximum Entropy Markov Models
and HMM to perform lexical selection in
the sense of cross-lingual word sense disam-
biguation (i.e. by choice from the set of trans-
lation alternatives). The system is meant to
be integrated into a RBMT system.

• Boujelbane (2013) proposes to build a bilin-
gual lexicon for the Tunisian dialect us-
ing modern standard Arabic (MSA). The
methodology is based on leveraging the large
available annotated MSA resources by ex-
ploiting MSA-dialect similarities and ad-
dressing the known differences. The author
studies morphological, syntactic and lexical
differences by exploiting Penn Arabic Tree-
bank, and uses the differences to develop
rules and to build dialectal concepts.

• Bouillon et al. (2013) presents two method-
ologies to correct homophone confusions.
The first one is based on hand-coded rules
and the second one is based on weighted
graphs derived from a pronunciation re-
source.

3.5 Other multilevel approaches
In a number of linguistic theories information
from the morphological, syntactic and semantic
level is considered conjointly and merged in cor-
responding representations (a RBMT example is
LFG (Lexical Functional Grammars) analysis and
the corresponding XLE translation architecture).
In HyTra 2013 there are three approaches dealing
with multilevel information:

• Pal et al. (2013) propose a combination of
aligners: GIZA++, Berkeley and rule-based
for English-Bengali.

• Hsieh et al. (2013) use comparable corpora
extracted from Wikipedia to extract parallel
fragments for the purpose of extending an
English-Bengali training corpus.

• Tambouratzis et al. (2013) describe a hybrid
MT architecture that uses very few bilingual
corpus and a large monolingual one. The
linguistic information is extracted using
pattern recognition techniques.

Table 1 summarizes the papers that have been
presented in the Second HyTra Workshop. The
papers are arranged into the table according to the
linguistic level they address.

4 Conclusions and further work

The success of the Second HyTra Workshop con-
firms that research in hybrid approaches to MT
systems is a very active and promising area. The
MT community seems to agree that pure data-
driven or rule-based paradigms have strong lim-
itations and that hybrid systems are a promising
direction to overcome most of these limitations.
Considerable progress has been made in this area
recently, as demonstrated by consistent improve-
ments for different language pairs and translation
tasks.

The research community is working hard, with
strong collaborations and with more resources at
hand than ever before. However, it is not clear

4



Morphological (Toral, 2013) Hybrid Selection of LM Training Data Using Linguistic Information and Perplexity
(Gonzales and Goehring, 2013) Machine Learning disambiguation of Quechua verb morphology

Syntax (Green and Zabokrtský, 2013) Improvements to SBMT using Ensemble Dependency Parser
(Han et al., 2013) Using unlabeled dependency parsing for pre-reordering for Chinese-to-Japanese SMT
(Patel et al., 2013) Reordering rules for English-Hindi SMT
(Saers et al., 2013) Unsupervised transduction grammar induction via MDL

Morpho-syntactic (Laki et al., 2013) English to Hungarian morpheme-based SMT system with reordering rules
(Li et al., 2013) Experiments with POS-based restructuring and alignment based reordering for SMT
(Khemakhem et al., 2013) Integrating morpho-syntactic feature for English Arabic SMT

Semantic (Rudnick and Gasser, 2013) Lexical Selection for Hybrid MT with Sequence Labeling
(Boujelbane et al., 2013) Building bilingual lexicon to create dialect Tunisian corpora and adapt LM
(Bouillon et al., 2013) Two approaches to correcting homophone confusions in a hybrid SMT based system

Multilevels (Pal et al., 2013) A hybrid Word alignment model for PBSMT
(Hsieh et al., 2013) Uses of monolingual in-domain corpora for cross-domain adaptation with hybrid MT approaches
(Tambouratzis et al., 2013) Overview of a language-independent hybrid MT methodology

Table 1: HyTra 2013 paper overview.

whether technological breakthroughs as in the past
are still possible are still possible, or if MT will be
turning into a research field with only incremen-
tal advances. The question is: have we reached
the point at which only refinements to existing ap-
proaches are needed? Or, on the contrary, do we
need a new turning point?

Our guess is that, similar to the inflection point
giving rise to the statistical MT approach during
the last decade of the twentieth century, once again
there might occur a new discovery which will rev-
olutionize further the research on MT. We cannot
know whether hybrid approaches will be involved;
but, in any case, this seems to be a good and smart
direction as it is open to the full spectrum of ideas
and, thus, it should help to push the field forward.

Acknowledgments

This workshop has been supported by the Sev-
enth Framework Program of the European Com-
mission through the Marie Curie actions HyghTra,
IMTraP, AutoWordNet and CrossLingMind and
the Spanish “Ministerio de Economı́a y Competi-
tividad” and the European Regional Development
Fund through SpeechTech4all. We would like to
thank the funding institution and all people who
contributed towards making the workshop a suc-
cess. For a more comprehensive list of acknowl-
edgments refer to the preface of this volume.

References
Anton Batliner, J. Buckow, Heinrich Niemann, Elmar

Nöth, and Volker Warnke, 2000a. The Prosody
Module, pages 106–121. New York, Berlin.

Anton Batliner, Richard Huber, Heinrich Niemann, El-
mar Nöth, Jörg Spilker, and K. Fischer, 2000b. The
Recognition of Emotion, pages 122–130. New York,
Berlin.

Pierrette Bouillon, Johanna Gerlach, Ulrich Germann,
Barry Haddow, and Manny Rayner. 2013. Two ap-
proaches to correcting homophone confusions in a
hybrid machine translation system. In ACL Work-
shop on Hybrid Machine Approaches to Translation,
Sofia.

Rahma Boujelbane, Mariem Ellouze khemekhem, Si-
war BenAyed, and Lamia HadrichBelguith. 2013.
Building bilingual lexicon to create dialect tunisian
corpora and adapt language model. In ACL Work-
shop on Hybrid Machine Approaches to Translation,
Sofia.

Marta R. Costa-jussà, Patrik Lambert, Rafael E.
Banchs, Reinhard Rapp, and Bogdan Babych, edi-
tors. 2012. Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on
Exploiting Synergies between Information Retrieval
and Machine Translation (ESIRMT) and Hybrid Ap-
proaches to Machine Translation (HyTra). As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Avignon,
France, April.

Marta R. Costa-jussà, Patrik Lambert, Rafael E.
Banchs, Reinhard Rapp, Bogdan Babych, and Kurl
Eberle, editors. 2013. Proceedings of the Sec-
ond Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation
(HyTra). Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Sofia, Bulgaria, August.

Andreas Eisele, Christian Federmann, Hans Uszkoreit,
Hervé Saint-Amand, Martin Kay, Michael Jelling-
haus, Sabine Hunsicker, Teresa Herrmann, and
Yu Chen. 2008. Hybrid machine translation archi-
tectures within and beyond the euromatrix project.
In John Hutchins and Walther v.Hahn, editors, 12th
annual conference of the European Association for
Machine Translation (EAMT), pages 27–34, Ham-
burg, Germany.

Annette Rios Gonzales and Anne Goehring. 2013.
Machine learning disambiguation of quechua verb
morphology. In ACL Workshop on Hybrid Machine
Approaches to Translation, Sofia.

Nathan Green and Zdenek Zabokrtský. 2013. Im-
provements to syntax-based machine translation us-
ing ensemble dependency parsers. In ACL Work-
shop on Hybrid Machine Approaches to Translation,
Sofia.

5



Dan Han, Pascual Martinez-Gomez, Yusuke Miyao,
Katsuhito Sudoh, and Masaaki NAGATA. 2013.
Using unlabeled dependency parsing for pre-
reordering for chinese-to-japanese statistical ma-
chine translation. In ACL Workshop on Hybrid Ma-
chine Approaches to Translation, Sofia.

An-Chang Hsieh, Hen-Hsen Huang, and Hsin-Hsi
Chen. 2013. Uses of monolingual in-domain cor-
pora for cross-domain adaptation with hybrid mt ap-
proaches. In ACL Workshop on Hybrid Machine Ap-
proaches to Translation, Sofia.

Ines Turki Khemakhem, Salma Jamoussi, and Abdel-
majid Ben Hamadou. 2013. Integrating morpho-
syntactic feature in english-arabic statistical ma-
chine translation. In ACL Workshop on Hybrid Ma-
chine Approaches to Translation, Sofia.

László Laki, Attila Novak, and Borbála Siklósi. 2013.
English to hungarian morpheme-based statistical
machine translation system with reordering rules. In
ACL Workshop on Hybrid Machine Approaches to
Translation, Sofia.

Ronan Le Nagard and Philipp Koehn. 2010. Aiding
pronoun translation with co-reference resolution. In
Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation and MetricsMATR, pages
252–261, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Will Lewis and Chris Quirk. 2013. Controlled ascent:
Imbuing statistical mt with linguistic knowledge. In
ACL Workshop on Hybrid Machine Approaches to
Translation, Sofia.

Shuo Li, Derek F. Wong, and Lidia S. Chao.
2013. Experiments with pos-based restructuring and
alignment-based reordering for statistical machine
translation. In ACL Workshop on Hybrid Machine
Approaches to Translation, Sofia.

Santanu Pal, Sudip Naskar, and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay.
2013. A hybrid word alignment model for phrase-
based statistical machine translation. In ACL Work-
shop on Hybrid Machine Approaches to Translation,
Sofia.

Raj Nath Patel, Rohit Gupta, Prakash B. Pimpale, and
Sasikumar M. 2013. Reordering rules for english-
hindi smt. In ACL Workshop on Hybrid Machine
Approaches to Translation, Sofia.

Alex Rudnick and Michael Gasser. 2013. Lexical se-
lection for hybrid mt with sequence labeling. In ACL
Workshop on Hybrid Machine Approaches to Trans-
lation, Sofia.

Markus Saers, Karteek Addanki, and Dekai Wu. 2013.
Unsupervised transduction grammar induction via
minimum description length. In ACL Workshop on
Hybrid Machine Approaches to Translation, Sofia.

George Tambouratzis, Sokratis Sofianopoulos, and
Marina Vassiliou. 2013. Language-independent hy-
brid mt with presemt. In ACL Workshop on Hybrid
Machine Approaches to Translation, Sofia.

Antonio Toral. 2013. Hybrid selection of language
model training data using linguistic information and
perplexity. In ACL Workshop on Hybrid Machine
Approaches to Translation, Sofia.

Wolfgang Wahlster, editor. 2000. Verbmobil: Foun-
dations of Speech-to-Speech Translation. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York.

Yorick Wilks. 1994. Stone soup and the french
room: The empiricist-rationalist debate about ma-
chine translation. Current Issues in Computational
Linguistics: in honor of Don Walker, pages 585–
594. Pisa, Italy: Giardini / Dordrecht, The Nether-
lands: Kluwer Academic.

6


