










































Managing Multiword Expressions in a Lexicon-Based Sentiment Analysis System for Spanish


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages 1–10,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Managing Multiword Expressions in a Lexicon-Based 
Sentiment Analysis System for Spanish 

  

Antonio Moreno-Ortiz and Chantal Pérez-Hernández and M. Ángeles Del-Olmo 
Facultad de Letras 

Universidad de Málaga 
29071 Málaga. Spain 

{amo, mph, mariadelolmo@uma.es}

 

Abstract 

This paper describes our approach to 
managing multiword expressions in 
Sentitext, a linguistically-motivated, 
lexicon-based Sentiment Analysis (SA) 
system for Spanish whose performance 
is largely determined by its coverage of 
MWEs. We defend the view that multi-
word constructions play a fundamental 
role in lexical Sentiment Analysis, in at 
least three ways. First, a significant pro-
portion conveys semantic orientation; 
second, being units of meaning, their 
relative weight to the calculated overall 
sentiment rating of texts needs to be ac-
counted for as such, rather than the 
number of component lexical units; and, 
third, many MWEs contain individual 
words that carry a given polarity, which 
may or may not be that of the phrase as 
a whole. As a result, successful lexicon-
based SA calls for appropriate manage-
ment of MWEs.1 

1 Introduction 

In recent years, sentiment analysis or opinion min-
ing has become an increasingly relevant sub-field 
within natural language processing that deals with 

                                                             
1 This work is funded by the Spanish Ministry of Science and 
Innovation (Lingmotif Project  FFI2011-25893). 

the computational treatment of opinion and subjec-
tivity in texts. The fact that emotions and opinions 
condition how humans communicate and motivate 
their actions explains why the study of evaluative 
language has attracted a great deal of attention 
from a wide range of disciplines (Pang and Lee, 
2008).  

With the advent of the Web 2.0 and the wide-
spread use of social networks, it is easier than ever 
before to gain access to vast amounts of sentiment-
laden texts. User reviews are particularly interest-
ing for companies as a tool for product improve-
ment. Different opinions and trends in political or 
social issues can be identified, to the extent that 
many companies have decided to add sentiment 
analysis tools to their social media measurement 
and monitoring tools with a view to improving 
their business. 

With regard to MWEs, their relevance to Natu-
ral Language Processing in general, and to Senti-
ment Analysis in particular, can hardly be 
overstated since they constitute a significant pro-
portion of the lexicon of any natural language. It is 
estimated that the number of MWEs in the lexicon 
of a native speaker has the same order of magni-
tude as the number of single words (Jackendoff, 
1997) and even these ratios are probably underes-
timated when considering domain-specific lan-
guage, in which the specialized vocabulary and 
terminology are composed mostly by MWEs. As 
Erman and Warren (2000: 29) point out, the fact 
that half of spoken and written language comes in 
preconstructed multiword combinations makes it 
impossible to consider them as marginal phenome-
na. Further, a large number of such expressions 

1



express emotions and opinions on the part of the 
speaker, so it follows that any lexicon-based ap-
proach to sentiment analysis somehow needs to 
account for multiword constructions.  

2 Sentiment Analysis in perspective 

Sentiment Analysis approaches mainly fall into 
one of two categories, which are usually referred to 
as the lexicon-based approach and the machine-
learning approach. The latter is undoubtedly more 
popular for many reasons, an important one being 
a faster bootstrapping process, but also reasonably 
good performance (Pang and Lee, 2005; Aue and 
Gamon, 2005). In fact, machine learning tech-
niques, in any of their flavors, have proven ex-
tremely useful, not only in the field of sentiment 
analysis, but in text mining and information re-
trieval applications in general, as well as a wide 
range of data-intensive computational tasks. How-
ever, their obvious disadvantage in terms of func-
tionality is their limited applicability to subject 
domains other than the one they were designed for. 
Although interesting research has been done aimed 
at extending domain applicability (Aue and Gam-
on, 2005), such efforts have shown limited success. 
An important variable for these approaches is the 
amount of labeled text available for training the 
classifier, although they perform well in terms of 
recall even with relatively small training sets (An-
dreevskaia and Bergler, 2007). 

In contrast, lexicon-based approaches rely on 
dictionaries where lexical items have been as-
signed either polarity or valence, which has been 
extracted either automatically from other dictionar-
ies, or, more uncommonly, manually. Although the 
terms polarity and valence are sometimes used 
interchangeably in the literature, especially by 
those authors developing binary text classifiers, we 
restrict the usage of the former to non-graded, bi-
nary assignment, i.e., positive / negative, whereas 
the latter is used to refer to a rating on an n-point 
semantic orientation scale. The works by Hatzi-
vassiloglou and Wiebe (2000), and Turney (2002) 
are perhaps classical examples of such an ap-
proach. The most salient work in this category is 
Taboada et al. (2011), whose dictionaries were 
created manually and use an adaptation of Polanyi 
and Zaenen’s (2006) concept of Contextual Va-
lence Shifters to produce a system for measuring 
the semantic orientation of texts, which they call 

SO-CAL(culator). This is exactly the approach we 
used in our Sentitext system for Spanish (Moreno-
Ortiz et al., 2010). 

Hybrid, i.e., semi-supervised, approaches have 
also been employed, as in Goldberg and Zhu 
(2006), where both labeled and unlabeled data are 
used. Extraction of lexical cues for semantic orien-
tation (i.e., polarity) is usually performed semi-
automatically, for example by Mutual Information 
scores obtained from adjectives or adverbs, which 
are the most obvious word classes to convey sub-
jective meaning. To a lesser extent, nouns (e.g. 
Riloff et al., 2003) and verbs (e.g. Riloff and 
Wiebe, 2003) have also been used to identify se-
mantic orientation. It is worth noting at this point 
that no mention has been made thus far of MWE’s. 
The reason is simply that they have by and large 
been ignored, probably due to the increased com-
plexity that dealing with them involves. 

Sentiment Analysis approaches can also be 
classified according to output granularity. Most 
systems fall in the Thumbs up or Thumbs Down 
approach, i.e., producing a simple positive or nega-
tive rating. Turney's (2002) work, from which the 
designation derives, is no doubt the most repre-
sentative. A further attempt can be made to pro-
duce not just a binary classification of documents, 
but a numerical rating on a scale. The rating infer-
ence problem was first posed by Pang and Lee 
(2005), and the approach is usually referred to as 
Seeing Stars in reference to that work, where they 
compared different variants of the original SVM 
binary classification scheme aimed at supporting n-
ary classification. Gupta et al. (2010) further elabo-
rated on the multi-scale issue by tackling multi-
aspect, i.e., pinpointing the evaluation of multiple 
aspects of the object being reviewed, a feature we 
regard as essential for high-quality, fine-grained 
sentiment analysis, but one that requires very pre-
cise topic identification capabilities. 

2.1 Sentiment Analysis for Spanish 
Nor surprisingly, work within the field of Senti-
ment Analysis for Spanish is, by far, scarcer than 
for English. Besides, most studies focus on specific 
domains, typically movie reviews. 

Cruz et al. (2008) developed a document classi-
fication system for Spanish similar to Turney’s 
(2002), i.e. unsupervised, though they also tested a 
supervised classifier that yielded better results. In 

2



both cases, they used a corpus of movie reviews 
taken from the Spanish Muchocine website. Bol-
drini et al. (2009) carried out a preliminary study in 
which they used machine learning techniques to 
mine opinions in blogs. They created a corpus for 
Spanish using their Emotiblog system, and dis-
cussed the difficulties they encountered while an-
notating it. Balahur et al. (2009) also presented a 
method of emotion classification for Spanish, this 
time using a database of culturally dependent emo-
tion triggers. Finally, Brooke et al. (2009) adapted 
a lexicon-based sentiment analysis system for Eng-
lish (Taboada et al., 2011) to Spanish by automati-
cally translating the core lexicons and adapting 
other resources in various ways. They also provide 
an interesting evaluation that compares the perfor-
mance of both the original (English) and translated 
(Spanish) systems using both machine learning 
methods (specifically, SVM) and their own lexi-
con-based semantic orientation calculation algo-
rithm, SO-CAL, mentioned above. They found that 
their own weighting algorithm, which is based on 
the same premises as our system, achieved better 
accuracy for both languages, but the accuracy for 
Spanish was well below that for English. 

Our system, Sentitext (Moreno-Ortiz et al., 
2010; 2011), is very similar to Brooke et al.’s 
(2009) in design: it is also lexicon-based and it 
makes use of a similar calculation method for se-
mantic orientation. It differs in that the lexical 
knowledge has been acquired semi-automatically 
and then manually revised from the ground up over 
a long period of time, with a strong commitment to 
both coverage and quality. It makes no use of user-
provided, explicit ratings that supervised systems 
typically rely on for the training process, and it 
produces an index of semantic orientation based on 
weighing positive against negative text segments, 
which is then transformed into a ten-point scale 
and a five-star rating system. 

Yet another way in which our system differs 
from most other systems, including Taboada et 
al.’s (2011), is in the relevance given to multiword 
expressions vis-à-vis individual words. 

3 Sentitext: a SA system for Spanish 

Sentitext is a web-based, client-server application 
written in C++ (main code) and Python (server). 
The only third-party component in the system is 
Freeling (Atserias et al., 2006; Padró, 2011), a 

powerful, multi-language NLP suite of tools, 
which we use for basic morphosyntactic analysis. 
Currently, only one client application is available, 
developed in Adobe Flex,2 which takes an input 
text and returns the results of the analysis in sever-
al numerical and graphical ways, including visual 
representations of the text segments that were iden-
tified as sentiment-laden.  For storage, we rely on a 
relational database (MySQL), where lexical infor-
mation is stored. 

Given that it is a linguistically-motivated sen-
timent analysis system, special attention is paid to 
the representation and management of the lexical 
resources that Sentitext uses for its analysis. The 
underlying design principle is to isolate lexical 
knowledge from processing as much as possible, 
so that the processors can use the data directly 
from the database. The idea behind this design is 
that all lexical sources can be edited at any time by 
any member of the team, which is facilitated by a 
PHP interface specifically developed to this end. 
We believe this approach is optimal for lexicon-
based systems, since it allows improvements to be 
easily incorporated simply by updating the data-
base by means of a user-friendly interface. 

3.1 Data sources 
Sentitext relies on three major sources: the indi-
vidual word dictionary (words), the multiword 
expressions dictionary (mwords), and the context 
rules set (crules), which is our implementation of 
Contextual Valence Shifters (Polanyi and Zaenen, 
2006).  

The individual word dictionary currently con-
tains over 9,400 items, all of which are labeled for 
valence. The acquisition process for this dictionary 
was inspired by the bootstrapping method recur-
rently found in the literature (e.g., Riloff and 
Wiebe, 2003, Aue and Gamon, 2005). We adapted 
this methodology in the following way: first, we 
established a set of 22 antonymic pairs of words to 
be used as seed words, which we fed to the Span-
ish version of the OpenOffice thesaurus in order to 
track its contents for sentiment-carrying words. 
However, rather than doing this automatically, we 
built an interactive tool that presented a user with 
consecutive rounds of candidate words to be added 
to the dictionary, thus providing the means to 
                                                             
2 This application can be accessed and tested online at 
http://tecnolengua.uma.es/sentitext 

3



block wrong polarity assignments, caused mainly 
by polysemy, that would propagate to subsequent 
sets of synonymous words. The resulting diction-
ary was thoroughly revised manually and actual 
valences were added by lexicographers using the 
GDB tool. In Section 4, we elaborate on this pro-
cess of manual valence assignment in relation to 
the MWEs dictionary, which does not differ from 
the one used in the word dictionary. Lexical items 
in both dictionaries in our database were assigned 
one of the following valences: -2, -1, 0, 1, 2. How-
ever, since the word dictionary contains only sen-
timent-carrying items, no 0-valence word is 
present.   

The SA system most similar to ours (Taboada 
et al., 2011) uses a scale from -5 to +5, which 
makes sense for a number of graded sets of near 
synonyms such as those given as examples by the 
authors (p. 273). In our opinion, however, as more 
values are allowed, it becomes increasingly diffi-
cult to decide on a specific one while maintaining a 
reasonable degree of objectivity and agreement 
among different (human) acquirers, especially 
when there is no obvious graded set of related 
words, which is very often the case. In fact, our 
initial intention was to use a -5 to 5 scale, but this 
idea was abandoned, as the difficulty for assigning 
such fine-grained valences became apparent in 
actual practice on a large scale dictionary.  

This does not imply that valence values for ac-
tual words and MWEs in context are limited to 
these. In a lexicon-based SA system that computes 
a sentiment rating based on weighing positive 
against negative text segments there should be a 
way to distinguish not only between, for example, 
the adjectives “good” and “bad”, but also deal with 
the semantics of qualifiers, as in “very good”, and 
“extremely good”. This is where context rules 
come into play. 

3.2 Context rules 
It is important to understand the way our context 
rules work in order to appreciate how closely they 
interact with the other lexical data sources, espe-
cially the multiword dictionary. Simply accounting 
for negative and positive words and phrases found 
in a text would not be enough. There are two ways 
in which their valence can be modified by the im-
mediately surrounding context: the valence can 
change in degree (intensification or downtoning), 

or it may be inverted altogether. Negation is the 
simplest case of valence inversion. 

The idea of Contextual Valence Shifters (CVS) 
was first introduced by Polanyi and Zaenen (2006), 
and implemented for English by Andreevskaia and 
Bergler (2007) in their CLaC System, and by 
Taboada et al. (2011) in their Semantic Orientation 
CALculator (SO-CAL). To our knowledge, apart 
from Brooke et al.’s (2009) adaptation of the SO-
CAL system, Sentitext is the only sentiment analy-
sis system to implement CVS for Spanish natively. 

Our CVS system is implemented in what we 
call Context Rules, which are expressed as the 
following data structure: 

1. Unit Form: Freeling-compliant morpho-
syntactic definition of the item being modi-
fied (e.g.: "AQ" for qualifying adjectives). 

2. Unit Sign: polarity of the item being modi-
fied (e.g. "+"). 

3. CVS Definition: modifier definition (e.g.: 
very,“very”). 

4. CVS Position: position of the modifier (e.g. 
"L" for left). 

5. CVS Span: maximum number of words 
where the modifier can be found in the mod-
ified item. 

6. Result: valence result of the modification. 
This result can be expressed as either an op-
erator or a set valence. An operators is one 
of the following 
• INV (valence/polarity INVersion) 
• INTn (valence INTensification of n) 
• DOWn (valence DOWntoning of n). 

The n argument in the last two operators is the 
degree by which the operator is to be applied. The 
result can also be a set valence, in which case it 
looks like any valence expressed in the dictionar-
ies. 

This system allows us to describe fairly elabo-
rate context rules; for instance, having multiword 
modifiers such as those in (1) and (2) below. A 
context rule for type (1) constructions would cause 
the polarity of the negative adjective to be invert-
ed, whereas a rule for type (2) constructions would 
intensify the valence of the negative adjective. 
(1)  no tener nada de (be not at all) + negative 

adjective: 
 “Ese no tiene nada de tonto/estúpido/...” 

(“He’s not at all dumb/stupid/…”) 

4



(2)  (ser) un completo (be a complete) + negative 
adjective: 

  “Es un completo idiota” (“He’s a complete 
idiot”) 

The implementation of this kind of context 
rules gives us greater flexibility than simply having 
a repository of MWEs. Without context rules, it 
would be very difficult to represent (and success-
fully process for SA) these types of MWEs, where 
part of them is defined by the existence of a given 
semantic prosody that triggers a certain polarity 
(e.g., adjectives denoting a negative quality).  

3.3 Computing Sentiment 
Sentitext returns a number of metrics in the form 
of an XML file which is then used to generate the 
reports and graphical representations of the data. 
The crucial information is a Global Sentiment Val-
ue (GSV), which is a numerical score (on a 0-10 
scale) for the sentiment of the input text. Other 
data include the total number of words, total num-
ber of lexical words (i.e., content, non-grammatical 
words), number of neutral words, etc. 

To arrive at the global value, a number of 
scores are computed. The most important is what 
we call Affect Intensity, which modulates the GSV 
to reflect the percentage of sentiment-conveying 
words that the text contains. Before we explain 
how this score is obtained, it is worth stressing the 
fact that we do not count words (whether positive, 
negative, or neutral): we count identified text seg-
ments that correspond to lexical units (i.e., mean-
ing units from a lexical perspective). A segment is 
one of the following: 

1. A single word or MWE as found in the text 
(or rather, its lemmatized form), either neu-
tral or otherwise. MWEs are not marked in 
any special way in Sentitext’s output, except 
for the fact that the individual words it is 
composed of appear in the lemmatized form 
in which they are stored in the database. 

2. A single word or MWE identified as a sen-
timent-conveying lexical item, whose va-
lence has been modified by a context rule, 
either by inversion or by intensification.   

As we mentioned before, items in our dictionar-
ies are marked for valence with values in the range 
-2 to 2. Intensification context rules can add up to 
three marks, for maximum score of 5 (negative or 
positive) for any given segment. 

The simplest way of computing a global value 
for sentiment would be to add negative values on 
the one hand and positive values on the other, and 
then establish it by simple subtraction. However, 
as others have noted (e.g., Taboada et al., 2011), 
things are rather more complicated than that. Our 
Affect Intensity measure is an attempt to capture 
the effect that different proportions of sentiment-
carrying segments have in a text. We define the 
Affect Intensity simply as the percentage of senti-
ment-carrying segments. Affect Intensity is not 
used directly in computing the global value for the 
text, however: we first adjust the upper and lower 
limits (initially -5 and 5). The adjusted limit or 
Upper Bound equals the initial limit unless the 
Affect Intensity is greater than 25 (i.e., over 25% 
of the text’s lexical items are sentiment-carrying). 
Obviously, this figure is arbitrary, and has been 
arrived at simply by trial and error. The Upper 
Bound is obtained by dividing the Affect Intensity 
by 5 (since there are 5 possible negative and posi-
tive valence values). 

A further variable needs some explaining. Our 
approach to computing the GSV is similar to Po-
lanyi and Zaenen’s (2006) original method, in 
which equal weight is given to positive and nega-
tive segments, but it differs in that we place more 
weight on extreme values. This is motivated by the 
fact that it is relatively uncommon to come across 
such values (e.g. “extremely wonderful”), so when 
they do appear, it is a clear marker of positive sen-
timent. Other implementations of Contextual Va-
lence Shifters (Taboada et al., 2011) have put more 
weight only on negative segments when modified 
by valence shifters (up to 50% more weight), oper-
ating under the so-called “positive bias” assump-
tion (Kennedy and Inkpen, 2006), i.e., negative 
words and expressions appear more rarely than 
positive ones, and therefore have a stronger cogni-
tive impact, which should be reflected in the final 
sentiment score. 

In our implementation, equal weight is placed 
on positive and negative values. However, we do 
not simply assign more weight to both extremes of 
the scale (-5 and 5), we place more weight increas-
ingly to each value by multiplying them by differ-
ent factors, from -12.5 to 12.5 in 2.5 increments3. 
                                                             
3 Our rating scale is based on a 0-10 scale, i.e., a 11-point 
scale, which is the most familiar for Spanish users, commonly 
used for grading. Sentitext outputs its rating using such a 
scale, and then this is converted to 5-star rating system.  

5



What we aim to achieve with these increments 
is to give more weight to extreme values. For ex-
ample, a text segment that has been assigned a 
valence of +4, which warrants a 10 factor, would 
end up having twice as much weight as two +2 
segments (5 factor): 10x4x1=40; 5x2x2=20. The 
reason for this is that such extreme values are rare-
ly found and, when they are, they invariably signal 
strong opinion.  

The resulting method for obtaining the Global 
Sentiment Value for a text is expressed by Equa-
tion 1 below,  

𝐺𝑆𝑉 =
( 2.5𝑖 ∙ 𝑖 ∙ 𝑁! +!!!! 2.5𝑖 ∙ 𝑖 ∙ 𝑃!) ∙ 𝑈𝐵!!!!

5 ∙ (𝐿𝑆 − 𝑁𝑆)
	  

 (1) 

where Ni is the number of each of the negative 
valences found, and Pi is the equivalent for posi-
tive values. The sum of both sets is then multiplied 
by the Upper Bound (UB). LS is the number of 
lexical segments and NS is the number of neutral 
ones. Although not expressed in the equation, the 
number of possible scale points (5) needs to be 
added to the resulting score, which, as mentioned 
before, is on a 0-10 scale. 

This formula was arrived at by trial and error 
and heuristics, starting from the simple addition 
and weighing of positive and negative valences. 
We found that accounting for the proportion of 
neutral-to-polarity segments was clearly necessary, 
because otherwise a fully neutral text with a few 
polarity segments would be analyzed as highly 
positive or negative, which is usually not the case. 
Similarly, opinion texts commonly show a number 
of mild opinion expressions, but if extreme values 
are found, they largely determines the overall opin-
ion of the text. 

Although we think that the positive bias path is 
worth exploring, we have not to date made com-
parisons with our current method. In the following 
section we describe previous performance tests of 
our system and mention some other ways in which 
it could be improved. 

3.4 Performance 
Sentitext was designed, from the beginning, 

with domain independence in mind. However, our 
first formal evaluation of the system (Moreno-
Ortiz et al., 2010) was performed using a set of 
user reviews from the Spanish Tripadvisor website. 
The results of our experiment showed that good 

performance on a domain-specific corpus implied 
even better performance on general language texts. 

Table 1 below shows a tendency toward low re-
call of negative segments, which we think may be 
caused by the “positive bias” effect mentioned in 
the previous section. In any event, these figures are 
more than reasonable for a sentiment analysis sys-
tem. 

Dataset Precision Recall 
Global segments 0,848 0,616 
Positive segments 0,838 0,669 
Negative segments 0,864 0,525 

Table 1: Precision and recall results in global, positive 
and negative segment valences. 

A second evaluation (Moreno-Ortiz et al., 
2011) was carried out using a greater variety of 
types of user reviews: movies, books and music, 
consumer goods, and electronics. We also intro-
duced new features, such as a slightly modified 
system for calculating the GSV (modified Affect 
Intensity threshold) and conversion of the 0-10 
score to a 5-point star-rating system. Introducing 
the star-rating system posed interesting questions, 
such as defining what is a miss and what is a hit, 
when comparing Sentitext’s results to human rat-
ings. Performance results were consistent with the 
previous evaluation, and confirmed a tendency to 
obtain better results for reviews of non-content 
objects (i.e. not books and movies), such as elec-
tronics. 

A recent evaluation (Moreno-Ortiz and Pérez-
Hernández, 2013) has been carried out using a 
large set of Twitter messages. This work was de-
veloped for the TASS workshop (Villena-Roman 
et al., 2013), where a double challenge was pro-
posed by the organizers that consisted of classify-
ing over 60,000 tweets according to their polarity 
in 3 levels + none and 5 levels + none, respective-
ly. This time performance was significantly poorer, 
which we attribute to both the nature of the texts, 
and the imposed distinction between neutral and no 
polarity, which we find irrelevant4. It has served, 

                                                             
4 In this scheme, no polarity means that no lexical segments 
carrying polarity were found, whereas neutral means that 
positive and negative text segments cancel each other out. Our 
Affect Intensity measure could easily be used for this, but such 
a distinction is not really useful for most applications, and 
usually not taken into account in the literature. 

6



however, as proof that our GSV calculation needs 
to be modified in order to account for extremely 
short texts. 

4 MWEs in Sentitext 

Our criteria for the lexical representation of MWEs 
were largely determined by our choice of tools for 
basic morphosyntactic analysis, i.e., tokenization, 
part-of-speech tagging, and lemmatization. 
Freeling has the advantage of offering a very flexi-
ble MWE recognition engine. 
An important advantage of using Freeling is that, 
being open source, the lexical resources it uses for 
its analysis are installed in the system in the form 
of text files, which allows for relatively easy edit-
ing. This is particularly useful for the acquisition 
of MWEs, since, although Freeling includes only a 
reduced set of common phrases, it is fairly straight-
forward to update the text file that contains them. 

As for the criteria we have employed for the in-
clusion of an item in our database, we follow 
Baldwin and Kim’s (2010) loose definition of 
MWEhood and typology of idiomaticity. They 
distinguish between lexical, semantic, pragmatic, 
and statistic idiomaticity, where MWEs may dis-
play one or more of those types. Some of them are 
idiomatic at more than one level, whereas others at 
one (statistical idiomaticity, in the case of colloca-
tions, for example).  

4.1 Annotation schema 
As of February 2013, the Sentitext MWE lexicon 
contains over 19,000 entries, most of which are, as 
expected, noun phrases. The full distribution ac-
cording to syntactic category is shown in Table 2 
below. 

MWE Category Number Proportion 
Noun Phrases 10,421 55% 
Verb Phrases 4,768 25% 
Adverbial Phrases 2,255 12% 
Interjections5 781 4% 
Adjectival Phrases 436 2% 
Prepositional phrases 237 1% 
Conjunctions 122 1% 

Table 2: Distribution of MWE categories in the 
Sentitext lexicon. 

                                                             
5 Interjections include idioms and other set phrases that have 
the form of a full sentence. 

Freeling uses the EAGLES tagset recommenda-
tions for morphosyntactic annotation of corpora 
(EAGLES, 1996), which have consistently proved 
their viability in the past. The EAGLES recom-
mendations do not impose a particular representa-
tion scheme for MWEs, and Freeling takes a 
simple compositional approach in which MWEs 
are sequences of categorized individual words.  

Each morphological tag is composed of differ-
ent data fields, depending on which morphosyntac-
tic category it belongs to; some categories, like 
interjections, have just one field, while others have 
up to seven fields (e.g., verb phrases), some of 
which may be instantiated at runtime. For example, 
the morphologically invariable MWE gafas de sol 
(“sunglasses”) is represented as  

(3) gafas_de_sol,gafas_de_sol,NCMS000 
where the tag “NCMS000” specifies that it is: N = 
noun, C = common, M = masculine, S = singular. 
Whereas in (4) below (oso polar, “polar bear”), the 
MWE is defined as a noun phrase composed of 
two lemmas that can be instantiated to any valid 
words form at runtime. 

 (4) <oso>_<polar>,oso_polar,$1:NC 

4.2 Acquisition and valence assignment 
Our mwords dictionary was obtained mainly from 
dictionaries and corpora, and the initial collection 
was subsequently enhanced during the extensive 
application testing process. We regard our acquisi-
tion of lexical items as an ongoing effort. 

Prior to tagging our initial set of MWEs for 
Freeling, a review process was carried out to en-
sure that they adhered to certain varietal and statis-
tical criteria. Castilian Spanish was taken as the 
standard, and very rarely are other varieties ac-
counted for.  

The most time-consuming task was obviously 
identifying and marking up the components of the 
MWEs that can be inflected. This was a lengthy 
process, and the results had to be checked exhaust-
ively, since a mistake could result in an MWE not 
being identified in any of its forms. This was per-
formed manually, but aided by an interface that 
provided a set of templates with the most common-
ly used morphological structures, also reducing the 
possibility of typing mistakes. Next we added the 
morphological tags, a semiautomatic process that 
employed RE pattern matching and then a manual 
check. 

7



Valence assignment was a manual process in 
which lists of MWEs were rotated among team 
members, all native speakers of Spanish with train-
ing in Linguistics, to keep personal bias to a mini-
mum, and hard cases were checked against corpora 
and decisions made on actual usage.6 Agreement 
was usually high, since ambiguity and polysemy in 
MWEs is lower than that of individual words, es-
pecially in terms of polarity. 

As mentioned in section 3.1 above, the valences 
assigned to the items in our database can range 
from -2 to 2. However, the results obtained from 
Sentitext’s analyses can exceed these limits after 
the application of context rules. For example, the 
MWE loco de atar (“mad as a hatter”) has a va-
lence of -2. If we analyze the phrase completamen-
te loco de atar with Sentitext, the analyzer will 
recognize the adjective phrase loco de atar, as well 
as the premodifying adverb completamente, which 
intensifies its valence by 2; this will result in a 
score of -4 for the entire phrase.  

It is worth mentioning that MWEs do not re-
quire specific context rules –since their tags are the 
same as those used for individual words (AQ in 
this example), the rule that states that the adverb 
completamente to the right of an adjective intensi-
fies its valence by 2 applies to both adjectives and 
MWEs tagged as such. This, which is a conse-
quence of Freeling’s annotation scheme, simplifies 
the acquisition and maintenance of context rules. 

4.3 The role of MWEs in GSV calculation 
As Table 3 shows, more than half of the MWEs in 
our lexicon are neutral, but this does not mean that 
they have no effect on the overall emotional con-
tent of texts. Neutral MWEs can be modified by 
words or other MWEs through the application of 
context rules in such a way that their polarity 
and/or valence is altered.  

MWE Polarity Number Proportion 
Neutral 10,823 56% 
Negative 5,578 30% 
Positive 2,586 14% 

                                                             
6 The corpora used were the COE (Corpus de Opinión del 
Español), a collection of product reviews and opinion texts, 
compiled by our research team, and the Corpus del Español, a 
100 million words reference corpus compiled by Mark Davies 
freely available for research purposes at 
http://www.corpusdelespanol.org.  

Table 3: Distribution of MWEs polarity in the Sentitext 
lexicon 

For comparison’s sake, our single words lexi-
con contains 9,404 words, all of them polarity-
carrying, of which 6,907 (73%) are negative and 
2,497 (27%) are positive. This is very similar to 
the distribution of sentiment-laden MWEs, with 
negative items being much more frequent than 
positive ones. 

It is also important to note that, even when 
MWEs are neutral, their identification is necessary 
to produce the right number of lexical segments, 
which is taken into account in obtaining the GSV 
for the text. 

There is yet another crucial way in which fail-
ing to identify a MWE will interfere with calcula-
tion of our GSV: if a sentiment-carrying word is 
part of a MWE, and that MWE is not accounted for 
by the mwords dictionary, the individual word 
(whose valence may or may not be correct or rele-
vant) will be incorrectly tagged for valence. 

This is particularly true of non-compositional 
MWEs, where the valence of the MWE cannot be 
deduced or calculated from the valences of the 
individual words that it comprises. By maintaining 
the MWE in the database, we eliminate the prob-
lem of having Sentitext identify parts of a MWE as 
individual words.  

For example, the word “honor” tends to have a 
positive polarity, but it is also a word that frequent-
ly appears in neutral, negative and positive MWEs: 

• Positive: palabra de honor (word of honor) 
• Neutral: dama de honor  (bridesmaid). 
• Negative: delito contra el honor (offense 

against honor). 
Examples of neutral individual words that ap-

pear in polarity-carrying MWEs are the following:7 
• darse a la bebida (take to drink) [-2] 
• números rojos (in the red) [-2] 
• alzamiento de bienes (concealment of assets) 

[-2] 
• apaga y vámonos (it can’t be helped) [-2] 
• quedarse a cuadros (be astonished) [-2] 
• haber química (get on well) [2] 
• ir como la seda (go smoothly) [2] 

                                                             
7 The number in square brackets marks the valence that the 
MWE has in our lexicon. 

8



In all these cases no individual word that is part 
of the MWEs shows any polarity whatsoever, 
while the MWEs themselves clearly do. 

It is also common to find cases in which polari-
ty-carrying individual words are part of MWEs 
that have the opposite polarity: 

• amor egoísta (selfish love) [-2]: amor has 
valence [2] as an individual word. 

• ¡a buenas horas, mangas verdes! (about ti-
me, too!) [-1]: bueno has valence [1]. 

• (querer) con locura (madly in love) [2]: lo-
cura” has valence [-2]. 

• libre de obstáculos (free of obstacles) [2]: 
obstáculo has valence [-1]. 

• morir de gusto (die of pleasure) [2]: morir 
has valence [-2]. 

In all these cases, not being able to account for 
the MWEs, would have even a stronger negative 
effect on the overall result. 

5 Conclusion 

We have shown several significant ways in which 
MWEs contribute to the semantic orientation of the 
text as a whole.  

First, MWEs show a much higher proportion of 
polarity items (44% in our lexicon) than single 
lexical items do. The distribution of polarity 
MWEs is also very relevant. Negative MWEs 
make up for more than double of positive ones 
(30% vs. 14%), which means that the higher the 
proportion of MWEs there are in a text, the more 
likely it is for it to be negative overall. 

Second, the number of lexical units they con-
tain would alter the global calculation of semantic 
orientation. And, finally, the polarity of those lexi-
cal items, if computed individually, often interferes 
with that of the MWE as a unit. Of particular im-
portance is the case of non-compositional MWEs, 
where the valence of the MWE cannot be deduced 
or calculated from the valences of the individual 
words that it comprises. This is not only a question 
of neutral words acquiring a certain polarity when 
they appear in a MWE: as we have shown, some 
words may also reverse their polarity from positive 
to negative or the other way around.  

As a result, we believe that proper management 
and extensive coverage of MWEs in lexicon-based 
Sentiment Analysis systems is critical to success-
fully analyzing input texts. 

References 
Andreevskaia, A. and S. Bergler. 2007. CLaC and 

CLaC-NB: knowledge-based and corpus-based ap-
proaches to sentiment tagging. Proceedings of the 4th 
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (pp. 
117–120). ACL, Prague, Czech Republic. 

Atserias, J., B. Casas, E. Cornelles, M. González, L. 
Padró, and M. Padró. 2006. FreeLing 1.3: Syntactic 
and semantic services in an open-source NLP library. 
Proceedings of the 5th ELREC International Confer-
ence. ELRA, Genoa.  

Aue, A. and M. Gamon. 2005. Customizing sentiment 
classifiers to new domains: A case study. Proceedings 
of RANLP 2005. Borovets, Bulgaria. 

Balahur, A., Z. Kozareva, and A. Montoyo. 2009. De-
termining the polarity and source of opinions ex-
pressed in political debates. Proceedings of the 10th 
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics and Intelligent Text Processing (pp. 468–480). 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg. 

Baldwin, T. and S. Kim. 2010. Multiword expressions. 
Handbook of Natural Language Processing, 2nd edi-
tion. N. Indurkhya and F. J. Damerau (eds.) (pp. 267– 
292). CRC Press, Boca Raton.  

Boldrini, E., A. Balahur, P. Martínez-Barco, and A. 
Montoyo. 2009. EmotiBlog: an annotation scheme for 
emotion detection and analysis in non-traditional tex-
tual genres. Proceedings of the 2009 International 
Conference on Data Mining (pp. 491–497). CSREA 
Press, Las Vegas, USA. 

Brooke, J., M. Tofiloski, and M. Taboada. 2009. Cross-
Linguistic Sentiment Analysis: From English to Span-
ish. Proceedings of RANLP 2009, (pp. 50–54). Bo-
rovets, Bulgaria. 

Cruz, F., J.A. Troyano, F. Enriquez, and J. Ortega. 
(2008). Clasificación de documentos basada en la opi-
nión: experimentos con un corpus de críticas de cine 
en español. Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, 41: 
73–80. 

EAGLES. 1996. Recommendations for the Morphosyn-
tactic Annotation of Corpora (EAG--TCWG--
MAC/R).  

Erman, B. and B. Warren. 2000. The Idiom Principle 
and the Open Choice Principle. Text, 20(1): 29–62. 

Goldberg, A. B. and X. Zhu. (2006). Seeing stars when 
there aren’t many stars: graph-based semi-supervised 
learning for sentiment categorization. Proceedings of 
the 1st Workshop on Graph Based Methods for NLP 
(pp. 45–52). ACL, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. 

Gupta, N., G. Di Fabbrizio, and P. Haffner. 2010. Cap-
turing the stars: predicting ratings for service and 
product reviews. Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 
2010 Workshop on Semantic Search (pp. 36–43). 
ACL, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. 

Hatzivassiloglou, V. and J. Wiebe. 2000. Effects of 
adjective orientation and gradability on sentence sub-

9



jectivity. 18th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (pp. 299–305). ACL. 

Jackendoff, R. 1997. The Architecture of the Language 
Faculty. MIT, Massachusetts. 

Kennedy, A. and D. Inkpen. 2006. Sentiment classifica-
tion of movie reviews using contextual valence shift-
ers. Computational Intelligence, 22(2): 110–125.  

Moreno-Ortiz, A., F. Pineda, and R. Hidalgo. 2010. 
Análisis de valoraciones de usuario de hoteles con 
Sentitext: un sistema de análisis de sentimiento inde-
pendiente del dominio. Procesamiento de Lenguaje 
Natural, 45: 31–39. 

Moreno-Ortiz, A., C. Pérez, and R. Hidalgo. 2011. Do-
main-neutral, linguistically-motivated Sentiment 
Analysis: a performance evaluation. Actas del XXVII 
Congreso de la SEPLN (pp. 847–856). Huelva, Spain. 

Moreno-Ortiz, A. and C. Pérez-Hernández. (2013). 
Lexicon-based Sentiment Analysis of Twitter messag-
es in Spanish. Procesamiento de Lenguaje Natural, 
50: 93–100. 

Padró, L. 2011. Analizadores multilingües en FreeLing. 
Linguamatica, 3(2): 13–20. 

Pang, B., L. Lee, and S. Vaithyanathan. 2002. Thumbs 
up?: sentiment classification using machine learning 
techniques. Proceedings of the ACL-02 Conference on 
Empirical Methods in NLP - Volume 10 (pp. 79–86).  

Pang, B. and L. Lee. 2005. Seeing stars: Exploiting 
class relationships for sentiment categorization with 
respect to rating scales. Proceedings of ACL 2005 (pp. 
115–124). ACL.  

Pang, B. and L. Lee. 2008. Opinion Mining and Senti-
ment Analysis. Foundations and Trends in Infor-
mation Retreival, 2(1-2): 1–135. 

Polanyi, L. A. and Zaenen. 2006. Contextual valence 
shifters. Computing Attitude and Affect in Text: Theo-
ry and Applications (pp. 1–10). Springer, Dordrecht.  

Riloff, E. J. and J. Wiebe. 2003. Learning extraction 
patterns for subjective expressions. Proceedings of the 
2003 Conference on Empirical Methods in NLP (pp. 
105–112). ACL, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.  

Riloff, E., J. Wiebe, and T. Wilson. 2003. Learning 
subjective nouns using extraction pattern bootstrap-
ping. Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Natural 
Language Learning at HLT-NAACL 2003 - Volume 4 
(pp. 25–32). ACL, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. 

Taboada, M., J. Brooks, M. Tofiloski, K. Voll, and M. 
Stede. 2011. Lexicon-based methods for Sentiment 
Analysis. Computational Linguistics, 37(2): 267–307. 

Turney, P. D. 2002. Thumbs up or Thumbs down? Se-
mantic orientation applied to unsupervised classification 
of reviews. Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of 
the ACL (pp. 417–424). ACL, Philadelphia, USA.  
Villena-Román, J., J. García, C. Moreno, L. Ferrer, S. 

Lana, J. González, and A. Westerski. (2013). TASS-
Workshop on sentiment analysis at SEPLN. 
Procesamiento de Lenguaje Natural, 50: 37-44. 

10


