










































Keynote Speech: Lexical Semantics of Chinese Language


Proceedings of the Seventh SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing (SIGHAN-7), page 1,
Nagoya, Japan, 14 October 2013.

Keynote Speech: Lexical Semantics of Chinese Language 

 
 

Dr. Keh-Jiann Chen 
Institute of Information Science, Academic Sinica, Taiwan 

kchen@iis.sinica.edu.tw 
 

  
 

Abstract 

In this talk, we are going to give a systematic view of lexical semantics of Chinese language. 
From macro perspective point of view, lexical conceptual meanings are classified into hierar-
chical semantic types and each type plays some particular semantic functions of Host, Attrib-
ute, and Value to form a semantic compositional system. Lexical senses and their composi-
tional functions will be exemplified by the semantic expressions of E-HowNet. Entities and 
relations are two major semantic types of the compositional system. Lexical senses and 
phrasal senses are compositions of these two types. From micro perspective point of view, 
each lexical word has individual idiosyncratic semantic contents, focuses and features. Hence 
words of same semantic type may have various different syntactic properties which make au-
tomatic language processing very difficult. On the other hand lexical syntactic properties are 
strongly influenced by lexical semantic structures. Morpho-semantic structures may systemat-
ically lead the way to derive lexical senses and syntactic behaviors of lexemes. It was ob-
served that allowable alternations of sentence-patterns for verbs are mainly determined by 
their lexical semantic structures. It follows that senses and syntactic properties of out-of-
vocabulary words become predictable and lexical compositional properties do shed light on 
automatic Chinese language understanding. Supporting evidences and logical interpretations 
of semantic and syntactic interactions will be presented in this talk. 
 

Vita 

Keh-Jiann Chen obtained a B.S. in mathematics from National Cheng Kung University in 
1972. He received a Ph.D. in computer science from the State University of New York at Buf-
falo in 1981. Since then he joined the Institute of Information Science as an associate research 
fellow and became a research fellow in 1989. He was the deputy director of the institute from 
August 1991 to July 1994. His research interests include Chinese language processing, lexical 
semantics, lexical knowledge representation, and corpus linguistics. He had been and contin-
ued in developing the research environments for Chinese natural language processing includ-
ing Chinese lexical databases, corpora, Treebank, lexical analyzer and parsers. Dr. Chen is 
one of the founding members of the Association of Computational Linguistic and Chinese 
Language Processing Society (also known as ROCLING). He had served as 2nd term presi-
dent of the society from 1991 to 1993. Currently he is the board member of the Chinese Lan-
guage Computer Society, the advisory board member of the International Journal of Compu-
tational Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing, the editor of journal of Computer Pro-
cessing of Oriental Language. 
 

1


