










































Cliticization and Endoclitics Generation of Pashto Language


The 4th Workshop on South and Southeast Asian NLP (WSSANLP), International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 77–82,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

Cliticization and Endoclitics Generation of 

Pashto Language  
 

Azizud Din 
aziz621@gmail.com   

 Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Al Jouf University, KSA 
 Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, University Malaysia Sarawak, Malaysia 

 

Abstract---Pashto is one of the national languages of 

"Afghanistan", and the home language of Pushtuns living in the 

"Khyber Pakhtoonkhwa Province" of "Pakistan" and many 

Pushtuns living in Baluchistan. Pashto language allows 

pronominal clitics to be inserted into morphological words. The 

clitics with this property are called endoclitics. This paper 

describes an account of Pashto Endoclitics generation which is 

an early stage of generation, Cliticization rules and the unique 

challenge posed by these clitics to the traditional syntactic 

theory. Pashto endoclitics are interesting, because they cannot 

be completely accounted for by syntax or prosody alone, but 

transcend different levels of grammar framework. In a natural 

generation task, the problem of clitic generation has to deal 

with syntax, prosody, and discourse constraints. 

 

Index Terms---Clitics, Cliticization, Endoclitic, Prosody , 

Syntax. 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Pashto is spoken by about 13 million people in the south, 

east and a few northern provinces of Afghanistan and over 

28 million in the province of Khyber Pakhtoonkhwa, 

Federally Administered Tribal Areas, and Baluchistan. 

Smaller, modern "transplant" communities are also found in 

Sindh (Karachi, Hyderabad). In the linguistics literature 

clitics are described as morphemes that are neither 

independent words nor morphological affixes. Syntactically 

and phonologically clitics follow the host word to which they 

are attached. Clitics are grouped into four types: proclitics, 

enclitics, meesoclitics, and endoclitics. Proclitics are 

prefixed to host word; enclitics are suffixed to host word; 

and mesoclitics appear between the stem of the host word 

and other affixes. Endoclitics are inserted inside the host root 

stem by splitting the root stem into semantically deficient 

parts. Pashto allows all of these types of clitics to occur in 

sentences.  Pashto has been written in a variant of the Persian 

script (which in turn is a variant of Arabic script) since the 

late sixteenth century [1]. 

 

Pashto clitics normally occurs in the second position (2P) of 

a clause or sentence [2], however they may occur in various 

other positions in sentences as well, but never occurs at the 

beginning of a sentence as the following examples show.  

دې             ورور          ېد          وقاص  

  de       wroor      dee          waqas 

 aux        brother    CLT(yours)Waqas 

          Waqas is your brother. 

 

ودې                لو ست                کتاب  

lwasto               dee             kitaab 

were reading   CLT    book 

      (You) were reading a book. 

The following table gives a complete list of clitics used in 

Pashto language [3]. However, endoclitics generation in 

Pashto language occurs only with pronominal clitics mee, 

dee and yee, am. 

Table I 

 Pashto clitics 

 

Pashto 

Clitics 
Gloss Type 

 mee Pronominal مي

 dee Pronominal دې

 yee Pronominal ې       

 am Pronominal ام

 mo Pronominal مو

 ba Modal بو

 de Modal دي

 kho Adverbial خو

 no Adverbial نو

 Ra Oblique Pronominal را

 der Oblique Pronominal د ر

 wer Oblique Pronominal ور

 

Pashto clitics display properties commonly attributed to post-

lexical clitics as they are prosodically dependent on an 

adjacent prosodic element and co-occur with hosts from a 

limited set of syntactic categories. Tagey [4] derives the 

generalization that 2P Clitics appear after the “First stress 

bearing” phrasal constituent in the Pashto clause. The 

phrasal host must be stress-bearing and must contain at least 

one primary accent. 2P Clitics normally are not hosted by 

unaccented constituents. In general, it has been demonstrated 

in work done so far by other authors, that clitic placement in 

a phrase or a sentence is driven by syntactic, morphological 

and prosodic rules. The following example shows clitic 

occurring after a phrasal constituent. The unstressed material 

infront of the verb makes the clitic appear at the very right 

edge of the phrase. 

 [اغو         د         شلو      کالو      دنګو      او      خائستو        پيغلو]     

NP [Peeghla khaaysta aw  danga   kaloo  shaloo  da   aagha] 

[Girl    pretty  and tall years twenty postp that]NP 

 

 

77



  دي        نن       بيا        وليده   

Wa‟lida    Bya   nen       dee 

Saw        again  today  CLT-you 

      

You saw that twenty years old tall and pretty girl again today. 

 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section II, 

we describe the related works about Pashto endoclitics 

generation with examples. Section III reviews Syntactic and 

Phonological Features of Clitics. In section IV, we presented 

clitics placement rules. Conclusions are presented in section 

V.   

II. PASHTO ENDOCLITICS 

Pashto allows clitics to be inserted into morphological words. 

The clitics with this property are called endoclitics. By 

definition endoclitics are inserted inside a word (verb in 

Pashto is split by endoclitic) by splitting the word into 

separate nonadjacent and semantically vacuous pieces. 

Endoclitics may not be regarded as morphological inflections 

as their semantics are unrelated to the host word in most of 

the cases. Morphologically endoclitics violate principle of 

Lexical Integrity (which states that syntactic operations may 

not interfere with morphology of words) [5]. The following 

example from [4] shows the occurrence of an endoclitic in a 

Pashto sentence with imperfective verb form. 

 

 ما  اخستل

Akhist-el  maa 

buy3sg  1sg 

I was buying them.(Tagey 1977:89) 

 

Pashto is strictly a verb final language (word order in Pashto 

is SOV). The verb [akhist-el] appears non-finally and clitic 

[mee] occurs after it, because the clitic needs a host element 

if the strong pronoun maa is deleted. Sentences can thereby 

consist of simply a verb and a clitic. 

   

 اخستل  مې

mee  akhist-el 

1SG  buy3sg 

I was buying them. 

 

Tagey observes that a-initial verbs can be split apart by 

clitics. Specifically, in the presence of a clitic the initial [a] 

of these verbs can split off from the rest of the verb root 

rendering the above sentence as show below. It is important 

to note that the part of verb appearing before the verb cannot 

be classified as either affix or an independent word.  

 

 ا مې خستل

Khist-el mee a 

buy3sg CLT(I) ?? 

I was buying them. 

 

Similarly, in the perfective form of the verb, the verb 

[akhistal] is prefixed with [wa] perfective marker resulting 

the following sentential form.   

 

 ما وا   اخستل

Akhist-el   wa maa 

buy3sg PERF 1SG 

I bought them. 

 

In the above sentence, deleting the strong pronoun [maa] 

introduces the clitic [mee]. This is shown by the sentence 

below. 

 

 وا ا مې خستل

Khist-el mee a wa 

buy3sg CLT ?? PERF 

I bought them. 

 

For explanatory purpose another example in which a clitic 

introduces as endoclitic is demonstrated by the following 

sentences.  

 

 ىغو            مې              وا         ا         نو       خستل

Khist-el   na      a         wa            mee       agha 

buy3sg not  ??      PERF       CLT(1sg)    3SG 

I did not buy it. 

 

و                 واه              ه              ېىغو                

ah           waha            wa            yee          agha 

AUX3SG   beat            PERF     CLT(3sg)    3SG 

 He beats him. 

 

Clitics always maintain second position. For example, if the 

strong pronoun [agha] is deleted from the second sentence 

above, the endoclitic would still be in second position after 

the perfective marker [wa], resulting in a sentence in which 

perfective marker [wa] (suffix) is no longer attached to the 

verb.  

 

واه              ه              ېو                  

 a           Waha         yee               wa 

Aux3SG best           CLT(3sg)     PERF 

He beats him. (the pronoun agha deleted) 

 

If the perfective marker [wa] is removed, the endoclitic is 

again placed in the second position, and moves to the last 

position in the sentence. 

 

  ېواه                 ه             

yee            a                waha 

CLT         Aux3SG       beat 

He was beating him. 

78



There is another example which illustrates the insertion of 

clitic between perfective marker and verb. 

 

لولوو   تو              ې             

walwala     yee              ta 

read           it(CLT)      you 

You read it.  

 

When the strong pronoun [ta] is deleted, a new sentence is 

generated with endoclitic as shown below. 

 

لولوې                            و   

lwaala       yee              wa 

read           it(CLT)      PERF 

You read it.  

 

Pashto verb has been identified to play important role in 

clitic placement. Kopris describes following five different 

classes of verb that have different behaviors in the presence 

of endoclitics [5]. 

 

1. Imperfective and Perfective verb 

2. a-initial verb 

3. Simple verb 

4. Derivative verb 

5. Doubly irregular verb 

In Bogel‟s analysis, endoclitics are subject to prosodic as 

well as syntactic constraints [6]. Prosodically, a clitic is 

placed after the first item bearing lexical stress in a sentence. 

Pashto is classified as an argument-dropping language, 

which is made possible by the syntactic agreement system on 

verbs and nouns. The endoclitics appear after aspect-caused 

stressed constituents. With regard to stress, Pashto verbs fall 

roughly into three classes, depending on their word-internal 

structure [6]. Bogel defines three classes of verbs with 

respect to clitics and endoclitics. 

 

Class 1 Verbs: Monomorphemic imperfective verbs bear 

stress on the last syllable; the clitic is placed after the verb. 

The perfective monomorphemic verbs take on a perfective 

prefix [wa] that bears the main stress and the clitic occurs 

after the prefix.  .  The following shows an example.  

 

 تښنولو               مې

me texnawala 

CLT     tickle 

I was tickling (her).  (Tagey 1977: 86) 

 

In the perfective aspect the [wa] marker attaches to the verb 

as a prefix and clitic occurs after it. In this case [wa] prefix is 

stressed. 

ې              تښنولوو        م  

texnawala      me       wa 

 tickle            CLT    PERF 

I tickled (her). (Tagey 1977:92) 

 

Class 2 Verbs: (compound prefix + root): These verbs form 

the perfective by means of a stress on the first syllable of the 

verb. A class-2 verb is bi-morphemic and is formed by a 

derivational prefix and a root. Syntactically these verbs are 

viewed as one unit. 

 

Class 3 Verbs: (compound lexical item + auxiliary verb): 

They are similar to class-2 verbs, but are complex predicates 

(light verb + adjective/adverb/noun). These verbs are also 

split by clitics as shown by the next two example sentences. 

 

مې           وستو پوري    

mee         pore wasta 

 1SG     carry across(3sg,FEM,PAST)  

I carried her across. 

 

 پوري             مې                    وستو

Wasta                mee              pore 

PERF                1SG         Carry across      

I carried her across.  

 

It has been suggested by Tagey [4], that there is a separate 

group of a-initial verbs, which has nine verbs that start with 

vowel [a]. These verbs show a very distinct behavior with 

regard to optional stress in the imperfective aspect. These 

verbs are: [akhistal] „to buy‟, [aleyal] „to singe‟, [acawal] „to 

throw‟, [agustal] „to put on‟, [alwtal] „to fly‟, [astawal] „to 

send‟, [arawal] „to turn over‟, [azmeyal] „to test‟, and [awral] 

„to hear‟.  

Some researchers have concluded that [a] was originally a 

prefix clitic [7], though [a] is no longer a recognizable prefix 

in Pashto. The class-2 and class-3 verbs can be thought of 

allowing clitic to be inserted post-lexically (at phonological 

level) into verb, without violating the principle of Lexical 

Integrity.  

In the perfective tense, a-initial verbs take the perfective 

prefix [we] like all other class-1 verbs. Perfective a-initial 

verbs display vowel coalescence, a process that is assumed to 

take place in the lexicon. The a-initial verbs in class-1 

undergo vowel coalescence when they are preceded by a 

particle ending in a vowel i.e. [we] [na] and [ma].The Pashto 

rule of vowel coalescence (VC) and its interaction with clitic 

placement was studied by Tegey [4]. The following example 

illustrates the vowel coalescence.  

 

 تو            ې            واخلو

waxla        yee             ta   *ta yee waaxla 

buyPERF     it        you 

You buy it. 

اخلوو تو        ې        م  

maxla       yee       ta   *ta yee maaxla 

79



not-buy    it        you 

Don‟t buy it. 

 

اخلي وتو         ې             ن  

naxla          yee            ta 

no-buy          it           you   *ta yee naaxla 

Don‟t buy it. 

 

The interaction of clitic and vowel coalescence is shown by 

the sentence below, as the clitic is inserted between vowel 

coalesced parts [wa] and [staw-el ]. 

 

ستول           وامې                               نن  

staw-el       wa               mee              none  

sent             PERF         CLT         today 

I sent  them today. 

 

ستولمې                 وا        

staw -el       mee          wa 

sent             CLT   PERF     

I sent them. 

 

Tegey supposed that a syntactic rule for clitic placement 

applied after phonological rule (vowel coalescence). 

According to Kassie the phonological motivation of VC is 

the elimination of haitus (phonological gapping) [8]. She 

suggests the following process for VC.  

[ə]particle + [a, ɑ]verb→[ɑ] 

 

Kassie concludes that VC is a type of lexically restricted 

phonological process and only a- for a-initial verbs undergo 

VC [8]. Therefore a- is considered as a morphological prefix, 

thereby claiming that no verb stem begins with a vowel. The 

a-initial verbs are described as midway between class-1 and 

class-2, as they take the perfective particle, but contain a 

stressable prefix. Clitics never move in the syntax, but may 

only move in the phonology to find a host to their left by the 

process of prosodic inversion. Bogel concludes that clitics 

are inserted into the morphological word post lexically, and 

are subjected to prosodic constraints and stress [6]. Moreover 

she assumes that prosody inserts clitics post lexically after an 

accent-bearing element, thereby asserting that attachment to 

a host is a strong prosodic constraint.  

 

III. SYNTACTIC AND PHONOLOGICAL FEATURES OF CLITICS 

The first detailed study of Pashto clitics was carried out by 

Tagey [4] in his Phd dissertation. Tagey proposed that the 

clitic placement was syntactic, without elaborating on the 

exact syntactic mechanisms that determine clitic placement. 

Kassiere affirmed that the Pashto clitics can be dealt with 

only syntax and morphology. In Tagey‟s analysis “clitics are 

placed after the first major surface constituent that bears at 

least one main stress”. Apparently the suggestion posits that 

phonology interacts with syntax inorder to place clitics in 

correct position in sentences. In a later publication 

Muhammad and Babrakzai proposed that clitic placement 

can be treated as syntactic agreement [2]. According to Dost 

clitics placement within sentences and clauses is governed by 

constraints on syntax, prosody, lexical and sublexical levels, 

thereby blurring the distinction and interaction between these 

different levels [9]. 

In the analysis of Roberts, clitics are divided into two groups: 

one appearing in the second position of the clause, and 

another that appearing nearer to the verb [10]. In Robert‟s 

analysis Pashto 2P clitics identify oblique-case NPs (in 

ergative, accusative and genitive cases) and license null 

oblique-case arguments. Clitics do not intervene among 

conjuncts, and among the parts of any clause-initial 

constituent. 

خو           اخستل و         مې                     [ کاپۍ          او           کتاب ] 

Kho     wakhist-el    mee      ConjP[ copy         aw       kitaab] 

Adv.CLT   bought     CLT-I      notebook   and      book 

I bought a notebook and a book but …..‟ 

 

 But the native speakers cannot speak it as below:  

 

واخستل                    کاپۍ          او           مې          کتاب  

wakhist-el      copy       aw          mee         kitab 

Bought              notebook     and    CLT-1sg    book 

   Or 

واخستل              کاپۍ             مې           او         کتاب   

wakhist-el     copy            mee        aw       kitaab 

bought            notebook     CLT-1sg  and    book   

 

 The ordering of pronominal clitics within a cluster (a series 

of adjacent clitics) is determined by person feature 

syntactically instead of a morphological template. Clitics 

bear person and number features which are not unique. 

Possessive clitics are dislocated from overt nominal with 

which they are semantically associated. There is a strong 

relationship between strong pronouns and pronominal clitics 

as stated by Roberts [10]. Strong pronouns occur at the same 

positions as the full NPs, but discourse neutral (topic) 

pronouns tend to appear in the form of second position 

Clitics. Pashto clitics have been studied from pure 

phonological aspect as well [10]. Roberts attempted to 

incorporate Pashto clitics into Chomsky‟s Minimalist 

Program. He states that 2P pronominal clitics are agreement 

morphemes based on the observation (also made in [2]) that 

pronominal 2P Clitics are in complementary distribution 

with verbal agreement morphology. This leads to the 

prediction that only ergative and accusative arguments may 

be criticized, whereas nominative or absolutive arguments 

cannot be criticized. Each clitic heads an agreement 

projection, whose specifier licenses a null pronominal 

argument.  As an example the constituent tree for the 

80



sentence [waqas me wanalide] „I didn‟t not see Waqas (a 

person).‟ is shown below from [9].  

   TP 

 

     NP             CliticP 

   

 

 

    waqasi       prok Clitic' 

 

       Clitic   AspP 

 

        mee 1SG  NegP  Asp 

 

            Neg  vP wa-PERF 

 

            ne           NP           VP  

  

            tk          ti lide 'see(MASC3SG)' 
 

 

The NP leaves a trace and overtly moves to the subject 

position in the sentence thereby positioning itself with 

respect to clitic. 

Dost [9] objects to the proposal brought forward by Roberts 

and identifies three problems with the syntax only analysis.  

1. 2P clitics should be double overt pronominal 

arguments based on the agreement hypothesis 

(“clitics as agreement hypothesis”), but that do not.  

2. The second problem is with endoclitics (that clitic 

in-fixation). Tagey in his analysis, identifies three 

classes of main verbs in Pashto, that sometimes 

require 2P Clitics to appear after the first accented 

syllable of the verb, rather than after the verb 

itself.When stress occurs on the first syllable of the 

verb (in perfective aspect), 2P Clitics obligatorily 

occur after the stressed syllable. According to Dost, 

Robert‟s analysis does not consider clitics to be 

another natural word class, but rather considers 

them agreement morphemes and wrongly predicts 

the behavior of endoclitics.  

3. The third problem identified by Dost is that 2P 

Clitics are prosodically required to have hosts. This 

property is lost by the syntactic treatment and EPP 

(Extended Projection Principle: the requirement that 

clauses have subjects), which is a syntactic 

requirement and not a prosodic one. 

According to Dost the hypothesis, that 2p clitics are 

agreement morphemes is wrong. The suggestion made by 

earlier studies that clitics should co-occur with full nominal 

arguments, is not supported by the actual linguistic data [6]. 

As an alternate Dost describes a Domain Based Approach to 

clitic placement in Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar 

(HPSG).  

IV. CLITIC PLACEMENT 

Pashto 2P clitics are unaccented, monosyllabic words that 

need single stressed phonological structure to their 

immediate left. According to existing clitic theories, Pashto 

clitics occur after first syntactic/prosodic structure in a 

sentence, which may be a word, phrase or prosodic unit. The 

first structure has to bear primary stress. Therefore, when 

placing clitics, syntax as well as prosodic constraints on 

phrases, words and units smaller than words have to be 

considered. Below Fig.1shows the sentence with strong 

pronoun on the top down parsing tree on the left side and 

with clitic on the right.  

 

 
 

Figure 1. Cliticization 

 

Clitics occur with wide range of syntactic hosts, and show 

low degree of selection with respect to hosts. 

Table II specifies the rules for replacing strong pronouns 

with 2P (second position) clitics based on syntactic 

constraints only. This process is called cliticization. The 

abbreviations used in Table II are defined in Table III.  

 

Table II 

 Rules for 2P Clitics 

 

Rule Strong  

Pronoun 

Syntactic 

Constraint 
Replacement 

Clitic 

 زه خپلو 1
verb(sng, p1, 

present) مې 

2 
 زه خپل

dob(mas), 

verb(sng, p1, 
present) 

 مې

 مې (verb(past ما 3

 مې (verb(sng, p3, past زما 4

 تاسو خپل 5
verb(past),  

mod(qst) ام 

6 
 تو خپل

dob(mas), 

verb(sng, p2, 
present) 

 دې

7 
 تو خپلو

dob(fem), 

verb(sng, p2, 
present) 

 دې

 دې (verb(past تا 8

 دې (verb(past ستا 9

 َد ىغو 10
verb(sng, p1, 

present) ې 

 َد ىغوئ 11
verb(sng, p1, 

present) ې 

 َد ىغي 12
verb(sng, p1, 

present) ې 

 

The rules specified in Table II use only syntactic knowledge 

of clitic placement to introduce a clitic at second position (2P) 

81



into a sentence by replacing an already existing strong 

pronoun within the sentence. These rules do not include 

Pashto endoclitics. Pure syntactic rules such as given in 

Table II cannot be formulated for the generation of 

endoclitics in a sentence, because of afore mentioned 

problems. To meet up with the challenge of endoclitic 

generation it is necessary to allow interaction between most 

notable linguistic levels; syntax and prosody during the 

generation of Pashto language text from any knowledge 

represented in computational form. 

 

TABLE III 

Abbreviations used in Table II 

 
Abbreviations Definition 

Dob Direct object in the current clause 

Fem Feminine 

Mas Masculine 

Sng Singular 

Pl Plural 

p1 First person 

p2 Second person 

p3 Third person 

Present Present tense 

Past Past tense 

qst Question 

 

V. CONCLUSION 

In this paper, I have presented few examples of Pashto 

endoclitics generation and some rules for cliticization 

process. The generation mechanism can be situated into any 

existing of linguistic theories such as Lexical Functional 

Grammar (LFG), Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar 

(HPSG) and Combinatory Categorial grammars (CCG). The 

Combinatory Categorial Grammar formalism will be chosen 

because of clear syntax-semantics interface particularly 

suited to natural language generation systems. As no 

theoretical and computational work has been done so far in 

NLG for Pashto language, therefore theoretical work has 

been shown in this paper for cliticization and endoclitics 

generation of Pashto sentences. Later on OpenCCG toolkit 

which is an open source natural language processing library 

will be used for Pashto clitics generation. 

 

REFERENCES 

[1] Wikipedia: “The History of Pashto Language”,  (30 November, 2007). 

Retreived From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, 

 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pashto_language. 

[2] Babrakzai, F. (1999).  “Topics in Pashto Syntax” , Ph.D Thesis, 

Linguistics Department, University of Hawaii. 

[3] Din, Khan (2007), “ Syntax Based  De- Cliticization of Pashto text for 

Better Machine Translation” in the proceedings of Conference on 

Language and Technology (CLT07) at Bara Gali campus, University 

of Peshawar (August 7- 11, 2007) Page no.1. 

[4] Tagey, Habibullah. (1977) “The Grammar of Clitics: Evidence from 

Pashto and Other Languages” PhD Dissertation University of Illinois. 

[5] Kopris, A Craig &  Davis Anthony R. (2005)  “Endoclitics in Pashto: 

Implications for Lexical Integrity” Presented at the Fifth 

Mediterranean Morphology Meeting, Sept. 15-18, 2005, Fréjus, France. 

[6] Bogel, T. (2010) “Pashto Endoclitics in Parallel Architecture” in the 

Proceedings of LFG10 Stanford: CSLI Publications 

[7] Anderson, S. (2005) “Aspects of the Theory of Clitics” Oxford 

University Press. 

[8] Kaisee, Ellen. (1981) “Separating Phonology from Syntax: A 

Reanalysis of Pashto‟ Journel of Linguistics, Col. 17, No. 2 (Sep., 

1981), pp. 197-208 Cambridge University Press. Dost, A. (2005) “A 

Domain-Based Approach to 2P Clitics in Pashto” in the Proceedings of 

the Texas Linguistics Society IX Conference 

[9] Dost, A. (2005) “A Domain-Based Approach to 2P Clitics in Pashto” 

in the Proceedings of the Texas Linguistics Society IX Conference 

[10] Roberts, T. (2000) “Clitics and Agreement” PhD Dissertation 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

 

82


