










































Invited Talk: Ontologies and Linked Open Data for Acquisition and Exploitation of Language Resources


Proceedings of the 4th Biennial International Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, page 1,
Sofia, Bulgaria, 8-9 August 2013. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Invited Talk: Ontologies and Linked Open Data for Acquisition and
Exploitation of Language Resources

Kiril Simov
Linguistic Modelling Deparment, IICT-BAS
Acad. G. Bonchev 25A, 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria

kivs@bultreebank.org

Recent developments in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) are heading towards knowledge
rich resources and technology. Integration of
linguistically sound grammars, sophisticated ma-
chine learning settings and world knowledge back-
ground is possible given the availability of the ap-
propriate resources: deep multilingual treebanks,
representing detailed syntactic and semantic in-
formation; and vast quantities of world knowl-
edge information encoded within ontologies and
Linked Open Data datasets (LOD). Thus, the addi-
tion of world knowledge facts provides a substan-
tial extension of the traditional semantic resources
like WordNet, FrameNet and others. This exten-
sion comprises numerous types of Named Entities
(Persons, Locations, Events, etc.), their properties
(Person has a birthDate; birthPlace, etc.), relations
between them (Person works for an Organization),
events in which they participated (Person partic-
ipated in war, etc.), and many other facts. This
huge amount of structured knowledge can be con-
sidered the missing ingredient of the knowledge-
based NLP of 80’s and the beginning of 90’s.

The integration of world knowledge within lan-
guage technology is defined as an ontology-to-text
relation comprising different language and world
knowledge in a common model. We assume that
the lexicon is based on the ontology, i.e. the word
senses are represented by concepts, relations or in-
stances. The problem of lexical gaps is solved by
allowing the storage of not only lexica, but also
free phrases. The gaps in the ontology (a miss-
ing concept for a word sense) are solved by appro-
priate extensions of the ontology. The mapping
is partial in the sense that both elements (the lex-
icon and the ontology) are artefacts and thus —
they are never complete. The integration of the in-

terlinked ontology and lexicon with the grammar
theory, on the other hand, requires some additional
and non-trivial reasoning over the world knowl-
edge. We will discuss phenomena like selectional
constraints, metonymy, regular polysemy, bridg-
ing relations, which live in the intersective ar-
eas between world facts and their language reflec-
tion. Thus, the actual text annotation on the basis
of ontology-to-text relation requires the explica-
tion of additional knowledge like co-occurrence of
conceptual information, discourse structure, etc.

Such knowledge is mainly present in deeply
processed language resources like HPSG-based
(LFG-based) treebanks (RedWoods treebank,
DeepBank, and others). The inherent character-
istics of these language resources is their dynamic
nature. They are constructed simultaneously with
the development of a deep grammar in the corre-
sponding linguistic formalism. The grammar is
used to produce all potential analyses of the sen-
tences within the treebank. The correct analy-
ses are selected manually on the base of linguis-
tic discriminators which would determine the cor-
rect linguistic production. The annotation process
of the sentences provides feedback for the gram-
mar writer to update the grammar. The life cycle
of a dynamic language resource can be naturally
supported by the semantic technology behind the
ontology and LOD - modeling the grammatical
knowledge as well as the annotation knowledge;
supporting the annotation process; reclassification
after changes within the grammar; querying the
available resources; exploitation in real applica-
tions. The addition of a LOD component to the
system would facilitate the exchange of language
resources created in this way and would support
the access to the existing resources on the web.

1


