




















Building gold-standard treebanks for Norwegian

Per Erik Solberg
National Library of Norway, P.O.Box 2674 Solli, NO-0203 Oslo, Norway

per.solberg@nb.no

ABSTRACT
Språkbanken at the National Library of Norway is currently building up gold-standard
Dependency Grammar treebanks for Norwegian Bokmål and Nynorsk. The treebanks
are manually annotated for morphological features, syntactic functions and dependency
relations. This paper explains the choice of texts and format of the treebanks, some key
aspects of the morphological and syntactic annotation, and it is illustrated how the treebanks
can be used.

KEYWORDS: Treebanking, Dependency Grammar, Morphology, Syntax, Norwegian.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 459 of 474]



1 Introduction
Data-driven NLP tools such as part-of-speech taggers and syntactic parsers require sufficiently
large manually annotated corpora for training and testing, so-called gold-standard corpora
(Brants (2000), Nivre et al. (2006a)). Språkbanken has decided to provide gold-standard
Dependency Grammar treebanks for the two written standards of Norwegian - Bokmål
and Nynorsk. The treebanks are manually annotated for morphological features, syntactic
functions and dependency relations.

The project was initiated in October 2011, and beta versions of the tree-
banks are released at irregular intervals at Språkbanken’s web page (see
http://www.nb.no/English/Collection-and-Services/Spraakbanken/
Available-resources/Text-Resources). Stable versions will be released in Oc-
tober 2013.

This paper and the system demonstration at NoDaLiDa 2013 present some important features
of the treebanks: Section 2 describes the format, size and choice of texts, and section 3 lays
out traits of the morphological analysis. Section 4 explains some key aspects of the syntactic
annotation, and section 5 exemplifies how the treebanks can be used.

2 Choice of texts and format
At the time of writing (April 2013), the Bokmål treebank consists of approximately 204 000
tokens and the Nynorsk treebank of around 156 000 tokens. These numbers will increase
significantly during the the last months before the final release. The size of the two treebanks
will also be leveled out.

Comparable treebanks for other languages, such as the TIGER treebank and Prague Depen-
dency Treebank, contain, to a large extent, newspaper text (Brants et al. (2004), Böhmová
et al. (2003)). The Norwegian treebanks also contain a significant amount of text of this
genre, taken from Norsk aviskorpus, a corpus of Norwegian newspaper articles from the last
15 years (http://avis.uib.no/om-aviskorpuset/english). Other types of factual
prose, such as government reports and transcripts of parliament debates, are also included.
In order to include texts in a more colloquial style, we have received permission from
individual bloggers to use selected posts from their blogs.

The distribution of texts in the treebanks is currently as follows:

Newspaper text 79%
Government reports 9%
Parliament debates 6%
Blogs 6%

Table 1: Distribution of texts in the treebanks

The texts are morphologically tagged, using the Oslo-Bergen Tagger (OBT), (Johannessen
et al. (2011)) and subsequently checked and corrected. For the syntactic preprocessing, we
use the MaltParser, trained on an earlier version of the treebanks ((Nivre et al. (2006a)).
The output of the syntactic parsing is checked and corrected using the annotation software
TrEd (http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/tred/). Most texts are syntactically annotated by
one annotator, but the two annotators working in the project regularly perform double
annotations to check that their annotations are consistent.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 460 of 474]



The treebanks are released in the CONLL format (Nivre et al. (2007)). The CONLL format is
a 10 column tab-separated table, where each new line represents a token. The columns,
from right to left, are token index, word form, lemma, coarse-grained part-of-speech (POS)
tag, fine-grained POS tag, morphological features, index of head, dependency relation,
and two columns which are left blank in our treebanks. We do not distinguish between
coarse-grained POS tags and fine-grained POS tags in our annotations, and these columns
therefore always contain the same information. In the final release, the treebanks will
also be available in Prague Markup Language, the XML-based format used in the Prague
Dependency Treebank.

3 Morphological annotation
The lemmatization and the morphological tagset are mostly the same for OBT and
Språbanken’s treebanks, although we have added a few additional morphological tags
(cf. Kinn et al. (2013, 7-16)), the most important being the tag unorm, explained be-
low. The lemmas are taken from Norsk ordbank, a lexicographic database for Norwegian
(http://www.edd.uio.no/prosjekt/ordbanken). In addition to this, OBT generates
lemmas for compounds and for adjectives formed on the basis of participial forms of verbs.
The morphological tagset of OBT is rather rich: In addition to features pertaining to the
inflection of words, it also contains information on whether the token belongs to a particular
sub-class of a POS: Pronouns are marked as demonstrative, personal, reflexive, reciprocal,
question-forming etc., determiners as demonstrative, quantifying, possessive and so on. For
users of the treebanks who need a distinction between coarse- and fine-grained POS tags, it
should be relatively easy to make a conversion scheme based on these tags.

A phenomenon which OBT cannot handle, is spelling variants and inflectional forms which
do not comply with the official norm for Bokmål and Nynorsk, and non-compounds which
do not have an entry in Norsk ordbank. In such cases, the annotators manually add a lemma
and the correct morphological tags, and mark the token as not complying with the norm,
using the morphological tag unorm, (i.e. unormert, ’non-standard’).

4 Syntactic annotation
While the morphological analyses are based on OBT, the syntactic annotation guidelines for
the treebanks have been developed specifically for this project (see Kinn et al. (2013)). The
formalism for the syntactic annotation is Dependency Grammar. The sentence in example
(1) and its analysis in FIGURE 1 illustrates some key features of the syntactic annotation.

(1) Den
the

kinesiske
Chinese

ledelsen
administration

har
has

tydeligvis
evidently

innsett
realized

alvoret.
seriousness+the

’The Chinese administration has evidently realized the seriousness.’

One token serves as head for the whole sentence. In (1), the finite auxiliary verb har heads
the sentence and carries the root-function for finite sentences FINV. Each of the other tokens
are annotated for syntactic functions and unique dependency relations to another token
in the sentence. The subject is dependent on the finite verb, as subjects usually only occur
in finite constructions. Other arguments and modifiers, such as the object alvoret and the
adverb tydeligvis in example (1), are, however, dependents on the lexical verb. While there
might be cases where it would be adequate to make e.g. an adverbial dependent on the

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 461 of 474]



Figure 1: Analysis of (1) Figure 2: Analysis of (2)

auxiliary, we have chosen this analysis to ensure annotations which are as consistent and
uniform as possible.

Finite subordinate clauses are always headed by the finite verb in our treebanks. Example
(2) and its analysis in FIGURE 2 illustrates this.

(2) De
the

kritiske
critical

røstene
voices

hevdet
claimed

at
that

foreldrene
parents+the

overstimulerte
overstimulated

barna.
children+the

’The critical voices claimed that the parents overstimulated the children.’

The complement clause in (2) is headed by the verb overstimulerte, which receives the
function DOBJ (direct object). An alternative analysis would be to make the subjunction
head. In Norwegian, the subjunction can quite often be dropped in both relative and
complement clauses. If all finite subordinate clauses are headed by the finite verb, it is quite
simple to make queries for all subordinate clauses of a specific type, regardless of whether
a subjunction is present. In the alternative analysis where the subjunction serves as head,
a different analysis would have to be found for clauses lacking a subjunction, and some
queries would be much more difficult to perform.

5 Use

The treebanks are mainly intended as testing and training material for data-driven NLP
tools, both morphological and syntactic. Such resources have been lacking for Norwegian1.
For example, there have been no suitable treebank for testing and training data-driven
dependency parsers. To illustrate how the gold-standard treebanks can be used for this
purposes, I parsed a 15 000 token text in Bokmål both with the MaltParser, and compared the
results to a manually annotated version of the text, using the CONLL-X shared task evaluation
script (http://ilk.uvt.nl/conll/software.html). The MaltParser was trained on
the current version of the Bokmål treebank. I used the Covington’s non-projective parsing
algorithm and the Liblinear learning algorithm, but didn’t try to optimize the parser any
further (Nivre et al. (2006a), Covington (2001), Fan et al. (2008)). the MaltParser gave a

1But see also the INESS project at the University of Bergen: http://iness.uib.no/

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 462 of 474]



labeled attachment score (LAS; the percentage of tokens for which both the dependency
relation and the syntactic function is correct) of 85.77 %. In comparison, Nivre et al. (2006b)
obtained a LAS of 84.58 % for Swedish and 84.77 % for Danish using the MaltParser, the best
results for those languages in the 2006 CoNLL-X shared task on Multilingual Dependency
Parsing (Buchholz and Marsi (2006)).

While the treebanks are primarily developed for NLP research and development, they can also
be interesting tools for researchers within other linguistic disciplines, such as morphology,
lexicography and syntax. A treebank can be used to query very specific constructions, which
cannot be found in corpora with a less detailed annotation. For example, Julien (2009),
who studied main clause word order in subordinate clauses in Mainland Scandinavian,
wasn’t able to search for fronted non-subjects in subordinate clauses in the corpora she used
(Julien (2009, 5)). This could have been retrieved easily from the gold-standard treebanks,
using e.g. PML Tree Query (Pajas and Štěpánek (2009)). A query in the treebanks can also
immediately give all lemmas occurring e.g. as indirect object, while this kind of information
is much harder to retrieve in corpora without syntactic annotation. A downside to manually
annotated treebanks when used for such purposes, is that they are usually much smaller
than corpora with a more shallow annotation, and it might therefore be difficult to find
infrequent constructions.

6 Conclusion

This paper has presented Språkbanken’s gold-standard treebanks for Norwegian Bokmål
and Nynorsk, two Dependency Grammar treebanks which are manually annotated for
morphological features, syntactic functions and dependency relations. The treebanks have
primarily been developed with the testing and training of data-driven NLP tools in mind.
Norwegian treebanks containing detailed syntactic annotation can, however, be useful and
interesting resources for other purposes too, such as syntactic and lexicographic research.

Acknowledgments

Språkbanken’s gold-standard treebanks are built up in close collaboration with the Text
Laboratory at the University of Oslo. I would also like to thank Lilja Øverlid and Arne
Skjærholt at the Department of Informatics at the University of Oslo for their valuable advice
and for helping us set up a more effective syntactic preprocessing. Inquiries regarding the
treebanks can be sent to sprakbanken@nb.no.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 463 of 474]



References

Böhmová, A., Hajič, J., Hajičová, E., and Hladká, B. (2003). The Prague Dependency
Treebank. In Treebanks, pages 103–127. Springer, Netherlands.

Brants, S., Dipper, S., Eisenberg, P., Hansen-Schirra, S., König, E., Lezius, W., Rohrer, C.,
Smith, G., and Uszkoreit, H. (2004). Tiger: Linguistic interpretation of a german corpus.
Research on Language and Computation, 2(4):597–620.

Brants, T. (2000). Tnt: a statistical part-of-speech tagger. In Proceedings of the sixth
conference on Applied natural language processing, pages 224–231, Seattle, WA.

Buchholz, S. and Marsi, E. (2006). Conll-x shared task on multilingual dependency parsing.
In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
149–164, New York, NY.

Covington, M. A. (2001). A fundamental algorithm for dependency parsing. In Proceedings
of the 39th annual ACM southeast conference, pages 95–102, Athens, GA.

Fan, R.-E., Chang, K.-W., Hsieh, C.-J., Wang, X.-R., and Lin, C.-J. (2008). Liblinear: A library
for large linear classification. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9:1871–1874.

Johannessen, J. B., Hagen, K., Nøklestad, A., and Lynum, A. (2011). Obt+ stat: Evaluation
of a combined cg and statistical tagger. Constraint Grammar Applications, pages 26–34.

Julien, M. (2009). Embedded clauses with main clause word order in mainland scandina-
vian. Published on LingBuzz:(http://ling. auf. net/lingBuzz/000475).

Kinn, K., Solberg, P. E., and Eriksen, P. K. (2013). Retningslinjer for morfologisk
og syntaktisk annotasjon i Språkbankens gullkorpus. Manuscript. Språkbanken, Na-
tional Library of Norway. URL: http://www.nb.no/Tilbud/Forske/Spraakbanken/
Tilgjengelege-ressursar/Tekstressursar. [last visited on 05/04/2013].

Nivre, J., Hall, J., Kübler, S., McDonald, R., Nilsson, J., Riedel, S., and Yuret, D. (2007).
The conll 2007 shared task on dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the CoNLL Shared
Task Session of EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 915–932, Toulouse, France.

Nivre, J., Hall, J., and Nilsson, J. (2006a). Maltparser: A data-driven parser-generator for
dependency parsing. In Proceedings of LREC, volume 6, pages 2216–2219.

Nivre, J., Hall, J., Nilsson, J., Eryiit, G., and Marinov, S. (2006b). Labeled pseudo-projective
dependency parsing with support vector machines. In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference
on Computational Natural Language Learning, pages 221–225, New York, NY.

Pajas, P. and Štěpánek, J. (2009). System for querying syntactically annotated corpora.
In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Software Demonstrations, pages 33–36, Suntec,
Singapore.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 464 of 474]


