



















































Verb Cluster, Non-Projectivity, and Syntax-Topology Interface in Korean


Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (DepLing 2013), pages 51–59,
Prague, August 27–30, 2013. c© 2013 Charles University in Prague, Matfyzpress, Prague, Czech Republic

Verb Cluster, Non-Projectivity, 

and Syntax-Topology Interface in Korean 

 

Jihye Chun 

MoDyCo – UMR7114 

University of Paris Ouest Nanterre La Défense 

France 

chunjihye@gmail.com 

 

Abstract 

This article proposes a simple modeling of 

Korean word order within the framework of 

the topological dependency grammar – the 

first topological modeling for this language 

– a system of formal rules accounting for 

the correspondence between the dependency 

tree of a sentence and an ordered constituent 

structure. We show that a fairly small num-

ber of linearization rules can account for the 

word order facts of Korean, considered to be 

a language with a relatively free order. 

These rules will be described, especially the 

non-projectivity phenomenon based of the 

notion of “verb cluster”, a cohesive topolog-

ical constituent, which appears in a syntax-

topology interface.  

1 Introduction  

First of all, let us consider the following exam-

ples. The difference between these declarative 

sentences is the placement of the two verbs, ta-

ko ‘take’ and ka-ss-da ‘go’, marked in bold:  

 

(1) a. 영이가       엄마     차를     타고  

Yeongi-ka   eomma   cha-leul    ta-ko  

Yeongi-NOM mother   car-ACC  take-VM 

시골에           갔다 

sigol-e          ka-ss-da 

country-LOC    go-P-DEC1 

 ‘Yeongi went to the countryside taking her mother’s 

 car’ 

 

b. 영이가        시골에    엄마     차를  

Yeongi-ka      sigol-e    eomma   cha-leul  

Yeongi-NOM country-LOC  mother   car-ACC 

 

                                                           
1
 ACC: accusative, ADV: adverb, C: copula, DAT: da-

tive, DEC: declarative, HON: honorification, LOC: loca-

tive, NEG: negation, NM: nominalization, NOM: nomi-

native, P: past, PRES: present, REL: relative, TOP: topic, 

VM: verbal morpheme with which verb dependents are 

combined (note that Korean is an agglutinative language). 

타고        갔다 

ta-ko      ka-ss-da 

take-VM   go-P-DEC 

‘Yeongi went to the countryside taking her mother’s  

car’ 

 

These two sentences are acceptable and natural. 

On the other hand, when the nominal depend-

ent of ta-ko ‘take’ is extracted, we remark that 

there are restrictions on the placement of verbs. 

Let us observe the following examples in 

which the nominal dependent of ta-ko ‘take’ is 

extracted:  
 

(2) a. 영이가      시골에     타고      간  

Yeongi-ka     sigol-e     ta-ko     ka-n  

Yeongi-NOM country-LOC take-VM  go-REL 

엄마     차는       검은색이다  

eomm  cha-neun   keomeunsaek-i-da 

mother  car-TOP     black-C-DEC 

‘the mother’s car that Yeongi took  

for going to the countryside is black’ 

 

b. ?* 영이가     타고    시골에        간  

Yeongi-ka     ta-ko    sigol-e       ka-n  

Yeongi-NOM take-VM  country-LOC  go-REL 

엄마      차는      검은색이다  
eomm   cha-neun   keomeunsaek-i-da 

mother   car-TOP    black-C-DEC 

 

As illustrated above, when the dependent verb 

is separated from its governor (example 2b), it 

is not possible that the nominal dependent of 

this dependent verb is extracted. On the other 

hand, when the dependent verb is placed next 

to its governor (example 2a), it is possible that 

the nominal dependent is extracted. This fact 

leads us to think about the correlation between 

extraction and constraints on the placement of 

verbs.  

In this paper, we are interested in this re-

striction of the linear position of verbs in the 

case of extraction, and we’d like to propose a 

simple modeling for this linguistic fact. To do 

this, we think that it is necessary to present a 

51



general description of Korean word order. 

Then, we will discuss the selection of suitable 

framework for word order variation of this 

language (section 2). We will propose to be 

placed in a topological approach based on 

Gerdes & Kahane (2001). In section 3, we will 

define a topological structure for Korean, 

based on its word order property. We will also 

develop a topological dependency grammar. In 

section 4, we will show that our grammar is 

fully capable of establishing the correct linear 

order, with non-projectivity phenomena illus-

trated in the examples above. We will show the 

utility of the notion of the “verb cluster”, a co-

hesive topological constituent which controls 

non-projectivity phenomena.  

2 Word Order Variation of Korean   

Korean is known as a language in which word 

order is relatively free (Chung 1998, Choi 

1999, Kim & Lee 2001 etc). First of all, let us 

consider the following examples in which the 

verb ju- ‘give’ has three nominal dependents: 

Yeongi-ka ‘Yeongi’, Cheolsu-eke ‘to Cheolsu’, 

and chaek-eul ‘a book’. The order variation of 

these constituents permits six possible orders:   

 

(3) a. 영이가    철수에게   책을     주었다  

Yeongi-ka   Cheolsu-eke  chaek-eul ju-eoss-da 

Yeongi-NOM Cheolsu-DAT book-ACC give-P-DEC 

‘Yeongi gave a book to Cheolsu’ 
 

b. 영이가     책을     철수에게    주었다  

Yeongi-ka  chaek-eul  Cheolsu-eke  ju-eoss-da 

Yeongi-NOM book-ACC Cheolsu-DAT give-P-DEC 

‘Yeongi gave a book to Cheolsu’ 
 

c. 철수에게    영이가     책을     주었다  

Cheolsu-eke  Yeongi-ka  chaek-eul  ju-eoss-da 

Cheolsu-DAT Yeongi-NOM book-ACC give-P-DEC 

‘Yeongi gave a book to Cheolsu’ 
 

d. 철수에게   책을     영이가    주었다  

Cheolsu-eke chaek-eul  Yeongi-ka  ju-eoss-da 

Cheolsu-DAT book-ACC Yeongi-NOM give-P-DEC 

‘Yeongi gave a book to Cheolsu’ 
 

e. 책을    영이가     철수에게     주었다  

chaek-eul  Yeongi-ka   Cheolsu-eke  ju-eoss-da 

book-ACC  Yeongi-NOM Cheolsu-DAT give-P-DEC 

‘Yeongi gave a book to Cheolsu’ 
 

f. 책을    철수에게    영이가     주었다  

chaek-eul  Cheolsu-eke  Yeongi-ka   ju-eoss-da 

book-ACC Cheolsu-DAT Yeongi-NOM give-P-DEC 

‘Yeongi gave a book to Cheolsu’ 

 

As illustrated in these examples, the verb oc-

curs at the end of these sentences (i.e. Korean 

is a verb final language), while the nominal 

elements of the main verb are freely placed.  

This linear behavior of nominal elements in the 

examples above brings about two questions: 

First, is the idea of standard word order SOV 

pertinent in the case of Korean? Second, how 

could we represent word order variation in a 

simple and elegant way?  

Greenberg (1963) proposed classifying word 

order types of languages from a typological 

point of view in terms of their basic order such 

as SVO, SOV, VSO, VOS, OSV or OVS. This 

proposition implies a fixed or at least clearly 

dominant order, which does not apply to Kore-

an word order variation as illustrated above.
2
 

Moreover, following Ross (1967), Korean 

word order variation has been discussed in 

terms of “scrambling” (Han 1998, Chung 1998, 

Choi 1999 etc.), which demands the concept of 

movement. We believe that this operation 

could make such a representation very compli-

cated for Korean where the communicative 

structure plays an important role, unlike Eng-

lish or French where word order largely de-

pends on the syntactic function.  

According to Choi (1999) and Kim & Lee 

(2001), there are several factors intervening in 

Korean word order variation: grammatical 

morphemes, communicative structure, syntac-

tic functions etc. From this point of view, in 

our study, we do not suppose a standard word 

order contrary to X-bar syntax in which syn-

tactic function and constituency are represent-

ed in a same structure. We believe that it is 

more convincing to separate different levels of 

information, for representing word order varia-

tion in a simple way. We thus propose to use 

the framework of Dependency Grammar where 

syntactic function and constituency are sepa-

rately represented (Tesnière 1959, Mel’čuk 

1988). More precisely, we base ourselves on 

Gerdes & Kahane (2001), broadly inspired by 

the classical topological model first introduced 

in the description of German. They integrated 

this model into the framework of dependency 

grammar, elaborating a syntax-topology inter-

face. Note that topology is an intermediate lev-

el between a dependency-based syntactic struc-

ture and a prosodic structure.
3
 That is to say, 

                                                           
2
 Note that Korean also has an unmarked order which is 

communicatively neutral.   
3 We are based on the Meaning-Text model (Mel’čuk 

1988) which posits multiple strata of representations 

52



word groupings in topology are strongly relat-

ed to prosodic units.  

In this paper, keeping the issue raised in the 

introduction in mind, we describe the corre-

spondence between unordered syntactic struc-

tures and ordered constituent structures on the 

basis of the Korean topological dependency 

grammar we propose. We will remark that lin-

earization rules are simpler than we thought for 

a language considered as a relatively free order 

language. This will be described precisely in 

the section 4 with the case of non-projectivity 

phenomena. This description will be a solution 

of the question raised in the introduction.  

3 Syntax-Topology Interface in Kore-
an  

In this section, we propose a topological model 

for Korean, based on its word order property. 

We also define the Korean topological de-

pendency grammar, which accounts for all 

possible word order variations. This grammar 

will allow for describing the correspondence 

between a given dependency tree and an or-

dered topological structure.  

3.1 Topological Structure for Korean  

The basic idea of the topological model is to 

“consider that a sentence is a template-like 

sequence of different fields each being able to 

host different types of constituents” (Gerdes & 

Kahane 2007). These different types of con-

stituents correspond to “domains”. The internal 

structure of domains is a sequence of “fields”.  

Choi (1999) and Gerdes (2002) insist on the 

fact that constraints on word order in Korean 

resemble those of German. However, we do 

not follow the architecture of the topological 

structure of German, in which the superior 

domain directly contains five fields (Vorfeld, 

left bracket, Mittelfeld, right bracket, Na-

chfeld). Korean is often considered as a dis-

course-oriented language (Kim 2003), or a top-

ic-prominent language (Li & Thompson 1976). 

In other words, the communicative structure 

plays an important role in the organization of 

sentences in Korean. Furthermore, all the ele-

ments are not obligatorily present. That is to 

say, it is not necessary to produce the elements 

that speakers understand in a given context (i.e. 

frequency of zero anaphora, cf. Kim 2003). 

This could make interpretation of the structure 

                                                                                    
related by explicit interfaces. We are interested especially 

in an interface where linearization takes place.  

of sentences complicated, and we could have 

at least two interpretations: 1) elements in a 

sentence are under subcategorization of the 

main verb, and 2) they are simply repetition of 

elements of the antecedent sentences in a con-

text.  

Moreover, the topological behaviors of the 

neun-phrase are very interesting in that it can 

appear in different linear order depending on 

the communicative structure (cf. Chun 2013). 

Consider the following examples in which the 

two neun-phrases appear:   

 

(4) a. 그    이야기는   저는      들었어요 

keu   iyaki-neun  jeo-neun  deul-eoss-eo-yo 

this   story-TOP  me-TOP  hear-P-DEC-HON 

‘for that story, it’s me who heard that’ 

 

b. 저는     그    이야기는    들었어요  

jeo-neun  keu   iyaki-neun  deul-eoss-eo-yo 

me-TOP  this   story-TOP  hear-P-DEC-HON 

‘for me, it’s that story that I heard’ 

 

As illustrated in the gloss of the examples 

above, their interpretation differs from the lin-

ear position of the neun-phrase: in (4a), keu 

iyaki-neun ‘that story’ is interpreted as a topic, 

while in (4b), this is interpreted as a focus con-

trastive. This means that there is a particular 

linear position of elements of a sentence. Fur-

thermore, the first constituent containing the 

neun marker in each sentence tends to be sepa-

rated from the following element with a high 

prominence in prosody (Seong & Song 1997, 

Hwang 2002).  

These points we mentioned above lead us to 

introduce two syntactic modules: the macro-

syntax and the micro-syntax following 

Blanche-Benveniste (1990). The latter is for 

elements in “proper” syntactic level, while the 

former contains detached elements which don’t 

fall under subcategorization. We believe that 

the introduction of two syntactic modules 

(macro- and micro-syntax) allows us to better 

understand the overall organization of sentenc-

es on different levels: syntactic level, commu-

nicative level and prosodic level etc.  

Let us now present our architecture of the Ko-

rean topological structure (cf. Figure 1). The 

two modules, the macro- and micro-syntax are 

integrated into our model as a macro-domain 

and a micro-domain respectively. Note that for 

a sequence of fields in the macro-domain, we 

introduce the term “kernel”
4
 interpreted as 

                                                           
4
 We borrow this term from Gerdes et al. (2005).  

53



“noyau” in French following Blanche-

Benveniste (1990). The macro-domain is com-

posed of three fields: the pre-kernel field, the 

kernel field, and the post-kernel field. The ker-

nel field “receives the other verbal dependents, 

especially all the elements that saturate the 

verbal valency” (Gerdes et al. 2005). The pre-

kernel field and post-kernel field contain de-

tached elements such as toplicalized or dislo-

cated elements. In the example (5), there is one 

more element apart from the elements under 

subcategorization of the main verb, namely, 

na-neun ‘me’ interpreted as a topic. This 

means that this element is placed in another 

topological position than in the kernel field: 

 

(5) 나는      내가     많이     발전했지  

na-neun   nae-ka   manhi   baljeonha-eoss-ji  

me-TOP  me-NOM  much   progress-P-DEC 

 ‘for me, I have much progressed’ 

 

We thus propose the pre-kernel field before the 

kernel field. 

Note that Korean nominal dependents can ap-

pear after the main verb. In the example (6), 

the subject is placed after the main verb ha-

neunde marked in bold: 

 

(6) 다시   생각을     해야   하는데     너는  

dasi  saengkak-eul  ha-eoya ha-neunde  neo-neun 

again thought-ACC  do-VM do-although you-TOP  

‘you have to think again’ 

 

Therefore, we need one more field behind the 

kernel field, i.e. the post-kernel field.  

The micro-domain has two fields: the principal 

field and the head field. This domain hosts the 

elements governed by the principal verb. This 

principal verb is placed in the head field, and 

its dependents occupy the principal field. 

In our architecture of the topological structure, 

there is a particular verbal grouping of words, 

namely, a verb cluster, in that this is not a sim-

ple verbal constituent, but a constituent which 

intervenes in the case of extraction. This is our 

main problem in this paper, and we will dis-

cuss that in detail in the section 4. The verb 

cluster is composed of four fields: the depend-

ent verb (dep-V) field, the adverb (ADV) field, 

the negation (NEG) field and the verb (V) 

field.
5
 The verb cluster forms a very rigid ver-

bal constituent with great cohesion, which 

                                                           
5 Note that the verb cluster is not a domain such as mac-

ro- and micro-syntax. 

tends to form one prosodic unit.
6
 The order of 

these four fields is fixed:  

 

(7)  요즘       영이     공부  잘   안   해  

yoseum   Yeongi    kongbu  jal  an   ha-eo 

these days Yeongi-TOP study  well NEG do-DEC 

‘these days, Yeongi doesn’t study well’ 

  

Note that certain constructions do not permit 

insertion of adverb or negation
7
 between two 

verbs, contrary to the example (7):  

 

(8) a.영이가     철수를    도와       주었다  

Yeongi-ka  Cheolsu-leul  dou-a      ju-eoss-da 

Yeongi-NOM Cheolsu-ACC help-VM do a favor-P-DEC 

‘Yeongi hepled Cheolsu with favor’ 

 

b. * 영이가          철수를  

Yeongi-ka      Cheolsu-leul   

Yeongi-NOM   Cheolsu-ACC  

도와       안      주었다 

dou-a      an      ju-eoss-da 

help-VM   NEG   do a favor-P-DEC 

‘Yeongi didn’t help Cheolsu with favor’ 

 

We now propose the Korean topological struc-

ture with three embedded levels:  

 
pre-kernel kernel post-kernel 

 
macro- domain  
 

pre- 

kernel 

kernel 

 

post- 

kernel 

 
macro-domain                     micro-domain 
 

pre- 

kernel 

kernel 

 

post- 

kernel 

 
 

macro-domaine                    micro-domain 

verb cluster  
 

Figure1. Three embedded levels of the topological 

structure in Korean
8
 

                                                           
6
 There is also a nominal cohesive constituent corre-

sponding to the verb cluster, i.e. a noun cluster. The noun 

cluster is a topological unit with a strong cohesion among 

nouns. 
7
 Korean has two negations: short negation such as an 

appearing in front of verbs, and long negation such as an 

auxiliary verb anh-.  
8
 There is no such field proposed for the complementizer. 

This is related to the fact that Korean is an agglutinative 

language in which it is the morphemes that play a role of 

complementizer.  

principal field          head field 

principal   head field  

field                    
dep-V ADV  NEG  V 

54



3.2 Topological Dependency Grammar  

In this section, we develop a topological de-

pendency grammar for Korean, based on 

Gerdes & Kahane (2001) in which the parame-

ters of topological dependency grammar are 

defined as follows: 

 

▶ Six components of a grammar  
- the vocabulary V 
- the set of (lexical) categories C 
- the set of syntactic relations R 
- the set of box names B 
- the set of field names F 
- the field of initialization i 

 

▶ Order of permeability of the boxes (which is 
a partial ordering on B used for emancipation

9
) 

 

▶ Four sets of rules 
- box description rules 
- field description rules 
- correspondence rules 
- box creation rules  

 

Note that in a topological approach, non-

projectivity phenomena are related to the no-

tion of “emancipation”, which means that “the 

dependents of a verb do not have to be placed 

in their governor’s domain” (Gerdes & Kahane 

2007). We will give the order rules for linear 

placement of nominal dependents in terms of 

emancipation.  

We now present the six components of the Ko-

rean grammar, and two of the four sets of rules, 

i.e. the box description rules and the field de-

scription rules, in a formalized manner. For 

clarity, the correspondence rules and the box 

creation rules are going to be described in nat-

ural language, and at the same time we will 

show the steps of the derivation of a declara-

tive sentence.   

▶ Six components of the Korean grammar  

V = the Korean words  

C = {V, V-eo, V-ji, V-ko, V-myeonseo, neun-

phrase…Y} 

R = {subj, obj, obji, attr, mod, cv
10

} 

B = {macro-domain, micro-domain, verb clus-

ter} 

                                                           
9
 The definition of the notion of emancipation is going to 

be followed after this presentation of parameters. 
10

 This means “verbal complement”, for verbal depend-
ents such as infinitive, completive.  

F = {pre-kernel field, kernel field, post-kernel 

 field, principal field, head field, dep-V 

field, lexical field} 

i is the field of initialization 

▶ Permeability order 

micro-domain  >  verb cluster 

 

This formula means that it is easier for the 

nominal dependent to be emancipated from the 

micro-domain than from the verb cluster. 

▶ Box description rules 

This rule indicates that such a box is composed 

of the list of fields. 

 

macro-domain → pre-kernel field, kernel 

field, post-kernel field 

micro-domain → principal field, head field 

verb cluster → dep-V field, ADV field, NEG 

field, V field 

▶ Field description rules  

Still following Gerdes & Kahane (2001), we 

present the field description in the form of pair 

(f,ε) in which f is a field and ε is a symbol 

among {!,?,+,*}. The pair means that the field 

f has to contain exactly one element (!), at 

most one element (?), at least one element (+) 

or any number of elements (*):  

 

(i, !), (lexical field, !), (pre-kernel field, *), 

(post-kernel field, *), (kernel field, !), (head 

field, !), (principal field, *), (dep-V field, ?) 

▶ Correspondence rules and box creation 

rules  

We have established the following correspond-

ence rules and box creation rules for the linear-

ization of verbs and their dependents.  

 

1) The root of the dependency tree opens 
a macro-domain containing three fields, i.e. 

the pre-kernel field, the kernel field, and the 

post-kernel field. Then, the principal verb 

opens a micro-domain in the kernel field hav-

ing two fields, the principal field and the head 

field. It finally opens a verb cluster in the 

head field: 

 

55



pré- 

kernel 

kernel 

 

post- 

kernel 

 
macro-domain 

micro-domain 

verb cluster 
 

Figure2. Illustration of the topological structure of 

Korean 

 

2) The principal verb opens a field for its 
dependent verb, after being placed in the verb 

cluster. The latter can occupy this dep-V field 

in the verb cluster, where it opens an embed-

ded verb cluster: 

 
pré- 

kernel 

kernel 

 

post- 

kernel 

 
macro 

micro 

verb cluster 

verb cluster  
 

Figure3. Dependent verb in the verb cluster 

 

If the dependent verb of the root has its de-

pendent verb, the latter proposes anew a place 

for its possible dependent. This process is re-

cursive. 

  

3) The dependent verb is not obliged to 
stay with its governor in the verb cluster: 

 
pré- 

kernel 

kernel 

 

post- 

kernel 

 
macro 

micro                         micro 
verb cluster       verb cluster  

 

Figure4. Micro-domain of the dependent verb in the 

principal field 

 

The place of the dependent verb largely de-

pends on the type of verbal morphemes with 

which it is combined, and on the communica-

tive structure: 

- The V-eo/ji obligatorily goes into the 
verb cluster; 

- The V-ko has two possibilities: to stay in 
the verb cluster or to create a micro-

domain in terms of the communicative 

structure; 

- The V-myeonseo11 is obliged to create a 
micro-domain in one of the three major 

fields (the pre-kernel field, the principal 

field and the post-kernel field). 

 

4) Other non-verbal predicative depend-
ents such as the predicative noun can join the 

dep-V field in the verb cluster. In this case, it 

is preferable that the predicative noun does 

not bear any markers (cf. example 7) 

 

5) All dependents of a verb can create a 
subdomain that should be placed in one of the 

three major fields in terms of the communica-

tive constraints:  

- Any dependent can go into the princi-
pal field without emancipation; 

- Any dependent can go into the pre-
kernel field with possibly emancipa-

tion from a verb cluster; 

- Any dependent can go into the post-
kernel field with possibly emancipa-

tion from a micro-domain.   

 

6) The neun-phrase interpreted as a topic 
has to be emancipated from the micro-

domain ; the neun-phrase interpreted as a 

contrastive focus should remain in the princi-

pal field without emancipation ; 

 

7) In the case of extraction, the verbs be-
longing to the verbal nucleus (cf. section 4 

for its definition) governing the extracted el-

ement must form a verb cluster.  
 

We now try to solve our problem presented in 

the examples (1) and (2). In the following sec-

tion, we will show how the correspondence 

rules and box creation rules are applied from a 

given dependency tree. In particular, we will 

see that the dependent verb should go into the 

verb cluster, created by its governor, in the 

case of extraction of its nominal dependent. 

4 Non-projectivity and Verb Cluster  

In this section, based on our topological de-

pendency grammar, we will insist on the utility 

of the verb cluster in the syntax-topology inter-

face for solving constraint on the relation be-

tween extraction and the placement of verbs in 

sentences with relatives. We will also show 

that in our analysis, unlike Ross (1967), it is 

                                                           
11

 This is considered as a morpheme which marks an 
adverbial clause. 

principal    head field 

field          
dep-V    V 

principal    head field 

field          
    V 

dep-V 

principal field              head 

                    field 

 V dep-V 

56



not necessary to consider the concept of 

movement or “island constraint” phenomena. 

Throughout this section, we refer to the rule 7 

which allows for describing non-projectivity 

phenomena in a simple way. 

We have shown the relation between extrac-

tion and restriction on the placement of verbs 

contrary to the case of declarative sentences 

(The examples (2a) and (2b) are reproduced 

here as (9) for convenience of the reader):  

 

(9) a. 영이가      시골에     타고      간  

Yeongi-ka     sigol-e     ta-ko     ka-n  

Yeongi-NOM country-LOC take-VM  go-REL 

엄마     차는       검은색이다  

eomm  cha-neun   keomeunsaek-i-da 

mother  car-TOP     black-C-DEC 

‘the mother’s car that Yeongi took  

for going to the countryside is black’ 

 

b. ?* 영이가     타고    시골에        간  

Yeongi-ka     ta-ko    sigol-e       ka-n  

Yeongi-NOM take-VM  country-LOC  go-REL 

엄마      차는      검은색이다  
eomm   cha-neun   keomeunsaek-i-da 

mother   car-TOP    black-C-DEC 

 

The problem is whether two verbs form a con-

stituent or not. How can we account for this 

phenomenon? We postulate the notion of “ver-

bal nucleus”, a syntactic position of a single 

verb, which can also receive a sequence of 

verbs, a notion introduced by Kahane (1997), 

for modeling of non-projectivity phenomena. 

This means that in the dependency tree, we 

postulate that the syntactic position of verbs or 

complex units containing a sequence of verbs 

corresponds to one verb. For example, verbal 

nuclei in English are auxiliary-participles (be 

eating, have eaten), verb-infinitives (want to 

eat), verb-conjunction-verbs (think that…eat), 

and verb-prepositions (look for) (cf. Kahane 

1997). Our hypothesis is that in the case of 

extraction, the verbal nucleus tends to form a 
topological constituent, i.e. the verb cluster.  

The following figure shows a dependency tree 

with a relative, and a topological constituent 

containing the two verbs is superimposed on 

this tree. The dotted oval represents the verbal 

nucleus: 

 

        
Figure5. Dependency tree of the examples (9a) 

 

Let us show how the correspondence is estab-

lished from this dependency tree of the exam-

ple (9a), referring to our grammar. Recall our 

correspondence rules and box creation rules. 
 

1) The root of this tree opens a verb cluster 
after creating a macro-domain and a mi-

cro-domain. And then it is placed in the 

head field: 

 

 kernel 

 

 

 
 

marcro-domain                           micro 
verb cluster 

 

2) The nominal head of the relative opens a 
micro-domain in the principal field as a 

nominal dependent of the root. It is 

placed in the field proposed for nouns in 

the noun cluster. Its dependent eomma 

‘mother’ rejoins the noun cluster: 

 

 kernel 

 

 

 

 

 
micro-domain                   verb cluster 

 
noun cluster 

 

3) ka-n ‘go’ opens a verb cluster in the 
head field:  

 

 kernel 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
verb cluster 

 

keomeunsaek-i-da 
'is black' 

subj 

cha-neun 'car' 

mod 

eomma 'mother' 

rel 

ka-n 'go' 

subj 

Yeongi-ka 

cv 

ta-ko 'take' 

loc 

sigol-e 
'country' 

PF                 HF 

  keomeunsaek-i-da 

PF                        HF 

keomeun 

saek-i-da 
PF       HF 

N     N 
emma cha-

neun 

PF                        HF 

keomeun

saek-i-da 

PF               HF 

emma  
cha- 

neun 

PF   HF 

Dep   V 
-V   

ka-n 

57



4) ta-ko ‘take’ has to be placed in the dep-
V field of the verb cluster opened by its 

governor ka-n ‘go’, instead of creating 

an independent constituent: 
 

 kernel 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
verb cluster 

 

5) Finally, the nominal dependents of ka-n 
‘go’ and those of ta-ko ‘take’ rejoin the 

principal field:  

 

 kernel 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

Figure6. Topological structure of the example (9a) 
 

Let us consider other possible linearization if 

the two verbs in a verbal nucleus do not form a 

topological constituent, i.e. a verb cluster.  

 

        
Figure7. Dependency tree of the examples (9b) 

 

In this case, we could not have the example 

(9a). One of the word orders from the Figure 7 

corresponds to example (9b), which is not nat-

ural, rather ungrammatical. This point enhanc-

es our hypothesis above. In corpora, we can 

find data where the relation between extraction 

and the placement of verbs is attested: 

 

(10) a. 평소에      그거    입고     다니는  

pyeongso-e  keukeo   ip-ko    dani-neun 

usually-LOC  this   wear-VM   go-REL 

아저씨   많이   봤어  

ajeossi  manhi  bo-ass-eo 

man    much  see-P-DEC 

‘I saw a man who was walking wearing this’ 

 

b. 사회자가          이끌어    가는  

sahoija-ka        ikkeul-eo   ka-neun  

announcer-NOM   lead-VM   go-REL 

대화가            큰         비중을  

daewha-ka        keu-n      bijung-eul  

conversation-NOM be big-REL importance-ACC  

차지한다  

chajiha-nda 

occupy-PRES.DEC 

‘the conversation that the announcer lead has a 

 great importance’ 

 

We thereby believe that the notion of verb 

cluster is useful to describe non-projectivity 

phenomena.  

5 Conclusion  

We have discussed and proposed a simple so-

lution of the description of extraction in terms 

of the verb cluster, in the framework of the 

topological dependency grammar, a simple 

modeling of Korean word order.  

On the level of modeling word order variation, 

we have shown that our model allows us to 

determine the order of nominal and verbal de-

pendents, with a small number of correspond-

ence rules or box creation rules. Moreover, we 

have shown that we can describe the word or-

der variation, postulating only three types of 

boxes: the macro-domain, the micro-domain, 

and the verb cluster. The internal structure of 

these boxes is much simpler than those of 

German, considered as a language with similar 

word order properties as Korean (Choi 1999, 

Gerdes 2002). For example, we have shown 

that in Korean, it is sufficient for the micro-

domain to have only two fields (principal field 

and head field) for the relative, the completive 

and the nominal groups. 

This paper is the early stage in a study of the 

topology for Korean. We should investigate 

further in various directions. Especially, we are 

aware of the importance to understand the 

communicative (or information) structure of 

sentences, which plays a crucial role in lineari-

zation. The word order rules should be further 

developed to include constraints on the com-

municative structure. 

keomeunsaek-i-da 
'is black' 

subj 

cha-neun 'car' 

mod 

eomma 'mother' 

rel 

ka-n 'go' 

subj 

Yeongi-ka 

cv 

ta-ko 'take' 

loc 

sigol-e 
'country' 

PF                          HF 

keomeu

nsaek-i-

da 

PF               HF 

emma  

cha- 

neun 

PF   HF 

Dep   V 
-V   

ta-ko ka-n 

PF                          HF 

keome
unsae

k-i-da 

PF               HF 

emma  
cha- 

neun 

PF   HF 

Dep   V 

-V   

ta-ko ka-n 

Yeongi-ka  sigol-e 

58



We have simply mentioned the topological 

behaviors of the neun marker, referring to 

Chun (2013). Korean is an agglutinative lan-

guage. This means that in addition to this mor-

pheme neun, further work will have to be done 

to study the topological behaviors of other 

morphemes such as eul, traditionally consid-

ered as an accusative marker, but more recent-

ly as a marker of communicative values (Han 

1999) which, of course, is related to its linear 

position. In other words, understanding its syn-

tactic behaviors and communicative values 

could allow for characterizing its topological 

position as being in the macro- or micro- do-

main.   

References  

Claire Blanche-Benveniste. 1990. Le français 

parlé: etudes grammaticales, CNRS Editions, 

Paris.  

Hye-Won Choi. 1999. Optimizing Structure in Con-

text: Scrambling and Information Structure, 

CSLI Publications, Stanford.  

Jihye Chun. 2013. Interface syntaxe-topologie et 

amas verbal en coréen et en français, Ph.D. 

Dissertation, University of Paris Ouest Nanterre 

La Défense, Paris.  

Chan Chung. 1998. Argument Composition and 

Long-distance Scrambling in Korean, in Erhard 

Hinrichs(ed.), Complex predicates in Nonderiva-

tional Syntax : Syntax and Semantics, 30:158-

220, Academic Press, New York.  

Kim Gerdes. 2002. Topologie et grammaires 

formelles de l’allemand, Ph.D.Dissertation, 

University of Denis Diderot, Paris.  

Kim Gerdes and Sylvain Kahane. 2001. Word order 

in German: a Formal Dependency Grammar Us-

ing a Topological Hierarchy, Proceedings Asso-

ciation for Computational Linguistic, Toulouse.  

Kim Gerdes and Sylvain Kahane. 2007. Phrasing it 

differently, in Leo Wanner (ed). Selected lexical 

and grammatical issues in the Meaning-Text 

Theory, 297-335.  

Kim Gerdes, Sylvain Kahane and Hiyon Yoo. 2005. 

On the descriptive adequacy of topology, Pro-

ceedings of MTT’05, Moscou.   

Joseph Greenberg. 1963. Universals of Language 

(2
nd

 edition), MIT Press, Cambridge. 

Chung-Hye Han. 1998. Asymmetry in the Interpre-

tation of -(n)un in Korean, Japanese and Korean 

Linguistics, 7:1-15. 

Jeonghan Han. 1999. Morphosyntactic Coding of 

Information Structure in Korean, Ph.D. Disser-
tation, State University of New York at Buffalo.  

Son-Moon Hwang. 2002. Hankukeo hwaje kumun-

eui unyul-jeok kochal (Study on Prosody of the 

Korean topic construction), Eumseong Kwahak, 

9(2):59-68. 

Sylvain Kahane. 1997. Bubble trees and syntactic 

representations, in Tilman Becker and Hans-

Ulrich Krieger(eds), Proceedings of 5
th

 Meeting 

the Mathematics of Language (MOL5), Saar-

brücken. 

Jong-Bok Kim and Minghaeng Lee. 2001. Realiza-

tions of Information Structure and Its Projection 

in Korean, Harvard Studies in Korean Linguis-

tics, IX:463-494, Hanshin Publishing Company, 

Seoul.  

Mi-Young Kim. 2003. An Optimality Approach to 

the Referential Interpretation of Zero Anaphora 

in Korean, Ph.D. Dissertation, Seoul National 

University, Seoul.  

Charles Li and Sandra Thompson. 1976. Subject 

and Topics: A New Typology, in Charles Li (ed), 

Subject and Topic, Academic Press, New York.  

Igor Mel’čuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory 

and Practice. The SUNY Press, Albany, N.Y. 

John Ross. 1967. Constraints on Variables in Syn-

tax, Ph.D. Dissertation, MIT. 

Cheol-Jae Seong and YoonKyoung Song. 1997. 

Jueojali josa-eui unyoulpaeteon-e kwanhan si-

heomeumseonghak-jeok yeonku (Experimental 

study on particles in the subject position), 

Malsoli, 33/34:23-42.  

Lucien Tesnière. 1959. Éléments de syntaxe 

structurale. Klincksieck, Paris. 

 

59


