










































Modelling the Internal Variability of MWEs


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), page 51,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Modelling the internal variability of MWEs

Malvina Nissim
Department of Linguistics and Oriental Studies

University of Bologna
Via Zamboni 33, 40126 Bologna, Italy
malvina.nissim@unibo.it

Abstract

The issue of flexibility of multiword expressions
(MWEs) is crucial towards their identification and
extraction in running text, as well as their better
understanding from a linguistic perspective. If we
project a large MWE lexicon onto a corpus, project-
ing fixed forms suffers from low recall, while an un-
constrained flexible search for lemmas yields a loss
in precision. In this talk, I will describe a method
aimed at maximising precision in the identification
of MWEs in flexible mode, building on the idea that
internal variability can be modelled via so-called
variation patterns. I will discuss the advantages and
limitations of using variation patterns, compare their
performance to that of association measures, and ex-
plore their usability in MWE extraction, too.

About the Speaker

Malvina Nissim is a tenured researcher in computa-
tional linguistics at the University of Bologna. Her
research focuses on the computational handling of
several lexical semantics and discourse phenomena,
such as the choice of referring expressions, semantic
relations within compounds and in argument struc-
ture, multiword expressions, and, more recently, on
the annotation and automatic detection of modality.
She is also a co-founder and promoter of the Senso
Comune project, devoted to the creation of a com-
mon knowledge base for Italian via crowdsourcing.
She graduated in Linguistics from the University of
Pisa, and obtained her PhD in Linguistics from the
University of Pavia. Before joining the University
of Bologna she was a post-doc at the University of

Edinburgh and at the Institute for Cognitive Science
and Technology in Rome.

51


