




















Nordic and Baltic wordnets aligned and compared through 
“WordTies”  

Bolette S. Pedersen
1
, Lars Borin

2
, Markus Forsberg

2
, Neeme Kahusk 

3 

Krister Lindén
4
, Jyrki Niemi

4
 Niklas Nisbeth

1
, Lars Nygaard

5 

Heili Orav
3
, Eirikur Rögnvaldsson

6
, Mitchel Seaton

1,
 Kadri Vider

3
, Kaarlo Voionmaa

2 

 

(1) University of Copenhagen, Njalsgade 140 2300 Copenhagen S 
(2) University of Gothenburg, Box 200, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden (3)  

University of Tartu, Ülikooli 18, 50090 Tartu, ESTONIA (4) University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 33 
(Yliopistonkatu 4) (5) Kaldera Language Technology, Oslo, Norway 

bspedersen@hum.ku.dk,lars.borin@svenska.gu.se,markus.forsberg@gu.se, 

neeme.kahusk@ut.ee,krister.linden@helsinki.fi, Jyrki.Niemi@helsinki.fi, 

niklas@nisbeth.dk,  larsnyga@gmail.com, heili.orav@ut.ee, eirikur@hi.is, 

seaton@hum.ku.dk, kadri.vider@ut.ee 

 

ABSTRACT 

During the last few years, extensive wordnets have been built locally for the Nordic and Baltic 

languages applying very different compilation strategies. The aim of the present investigation is 

to consolidate and examine these wordnets through an alignment via Princeton Core WordNet 

and thereby compare them along the measures of taxonomical structure, synonym structure, and 

assigned relations to approximate to a best practice. A common web interface and visualizer 

“WordTies” is developed to facilitate this purpose. Four bilingual wordnets are automatically 

processed and evaluated exposing interesting differences between the wordnets. Even if the 

alignments are judged to be of a good quality, the precision of the translations vary due to 

considerable differences in hyponymy depth and interpretation of the synset. All seven 

monolingual and four bilingual wordnets as well as WordTies have been made available via 

META-SHARE through the META-NORD project.  

 

KEYWORDS: wordnets, multilingual links, wordnet web interface, Nordic and Baltic languages, 

META-NORD. 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 147 of 474]



1 Wordnets as a multilingual action in the Nordic and Baltic countries  

Wordnets (cf. Fellbaum 1998, Vossen 1998) have emerged as one of the basic standard 
lexical resources in the language technology (LT) field. They encode fundamental 
semantic relations among words, relations that further in many cases have counterparts 
in relations among concepts in formal ontologies. According to the BLARK (Basic 
Language Resource Kit) scheme, wordnets along with treebanks, are central resources 
when building language enabled applications. The semantic proximity metrics among 
words and concepts defined by a wordnet are considered useful in applications such as 
information access systems and authoring tools because in addition to identical words, 
the occurrence of words with similar (more general or more specific) meanings 
contribute to measuring of the similarity of content or context or recognizing the 
meaning. Based on this impact, there is a crucial need for continuously comparing and 
improving such lexical semantic resources in order to approximate to a best practice. 
This is particularly relevant if we foresee an integration of them in cross-lingual LT.  

For the Nordic and Baltic languages, an extensive development of wordnets has taken 
place during the last five years, excluding here the Estonian wordnet, which has existed 
for more than a decade as part of the EuroWordNet project. During the META-NORD 
project (2011–2013) these wordnets have been further consolidated via extensions, 
validations and documentation. Thus, the relevance of cross-lingual alignment and 
comparison of wordnets in this region has emerged only recently. Wordnets or wordnet-
like resources of a considerable size exist now for the Finnish, Danish, Estonian, 
Swedish, Icelandic and the Norwegian languages. They have not, like several previous 
wordnet projects such as EuroWordNet, BalkaNet, Asian Wordnet, and IndoWordNet 
(cf. Section 2) been built as part of collaborative projects, but have rather emerged 
locally through national projects and initiatives. The META-NORD project thus poses a 
unique opportunity for actually coordinating a Nordic-Baltic action on wordnets and 
investigating the results of the very different compilation strategies that have been 
applied. 

The aim of this investigation can be expressed as threefold:  

 To facilitate browsing, alignment and comparison of the Nordic and Baltic 
wordnets through the development of an intuitive and easy-to-extend web 

interface. 

 To estimate the perspective of alignment via Princeton Core WordNet by 
generating four bilingual wordnets and evaluating them.  

 Via this alignment to perform a comparison of the involved wordnets along the 
measures of taxonomical structure, synset structure, and relational structure.  

The web interface, WordTies, is documented in Section 4. Four pilot bilingual wordnets 
have been produced semi-automatically via established links to Princeton Core 
Wordnet: Danish-Swedish, Danish-Finnish, Estonian-Finnish, Finnish-Swedish. An 
evaluation of these linked resources is included in Section 5 and a further comparison of 
a selected set of the wordnets is given in Section 6. All seven monolingual and four 
bilingual wordnets as well as WordTies have been made available via META-SHARE: 
www.meta-share.org under a variety of open source licenses.  

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 148 of 474]



2 Related work 

Broadly speaking, wordnets can be compiled applying two different approaches: the 
merge vs. the expand method (cf. Rigau & Agirre 2002). By an  expand method is meant 
that translations are made from Princeton WordNet and further customised to the target 
language, by a merge approach is meant that the wordnet is built monlingually and then 
(eventually) merged with Princeton WordNet.  

The EuroWordNet project, which was concerned with the compilation of wordnets for a 
series of European languages (Vossen 1998), launched the idea of compiling and 
expanding wordnets via a so-called Inter Lingual Index (ILI) constituted by Princeton 
WordNet 1.5, cf. Peters et al. 1998. A successor of EuroWordNet was the BalkaNet 
project, where several wordnets were built in the Balkan area and aligned 
simultaneously.  These projects all provide valuable reference points for a best practice 
within the expand approach, for example, BalkaNet uses a validation system based on 
word sense disambiguation for pinpointing wrong interlingual alignments, incomplete or 
missing synsets in one or another of the wordnets (Tufis, Ion & Ide 2004). Other works 
included mapping algorithms for aligning, tuning and validating wordnets as presented 
in Daudé, Padró & Rigau 1999, & Daudé, Padró & Rigau 2003 and several others. More 
recent collaborative wordnet projects include MultiWordNet (http://multiwordnet.itc.it) 
which relates Italian and Princeton wordnets, Asian WordNet which also applies the 
expand method for several Asian languages through a common management interface 
(Robkop et al. 2010), and IndoWordNet which include a series of Indian languages 
(Bhattacharyya 2010). Last but not least should be mentioned a recent initiative, Open 
Multilingual WordNet http://casta-net.jp/~kuribayashi/multi/ which aligns wordnets 
available through the Global WordNet Association’s WordNet Grid 
(http://www.globalwordnet.org/gwa/gwa_grid.html). 

In contrast, several recent European wordnets that have typically been compiled on a 
more local basis apply the merge technique (cf. Derwojedowa 2008, Borin & Forsberg 
2010, Pedersen et al. 2009) applying monolingual language resources such as existing 
dictionaries and corpora as the initial source.  

There are obvious risks related to both approaches. An expand approach based on 
Princeton WordNet runs the high risk of being biased towards the conceptual structure 
of the English language. However, with thorough customizations to the target language 
these risks can be reduced. A merge approach may reflect the target language better 
since it is based on more linguistic grounds (corpora and existing lexica) for that 
particular language. On the other hand, such wordnets typically differ so much from 
Princeton WordNet in structure that a merge becomes indeed very hard and extremely 
complex. These differences originate partly from different language cultures, partly from 
different levels of specialization depending on the source material used. For instance, a 
typical feature of wordnets based on monolingual lexica is that they adopt a  perspective 
which is more geared towards the layman and therefore typically not so deep in 
taxonomical structure (cf. Pedersen et al. 2010). 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 149 of 474]



3 Status of wordnets in the Nordic and Baltic countries 

3.1 About META-NORD 

During the last decade, linguistic resources have grown rapidly for all EU languages, 

including lesser-resourced languages such as the Nordic and Baltic ones. However they 

have typically been located in different places, have developed in different standards and 

in many cases were not well documented. The META-NORD project has aimed to 

establish an open linguistic infrastructure in the Baltic and Nordic countries to serve the 

needs of the industry and research communities. The project, which was completed in 

January 2013, has focused on 8 European languages – Danish, Estonian, Finnish, 
Icelandic, Latvian, Lithuanian, Norwegian and Swedish – each with less than 10 million 
speakers. The project has provided descriptions of the national landscapes in these 

countries via the META-NET White Paper Series “Europe’s Languages in the Digital 

Age” and has  assembled, linked across languages, and made widely available close to 

500 language resources and tools of different types via the common network META-

SHARE http://www.meta-share.org/. META-SHARE is a network of repositories of 

language data, tools and related web services documented with metadata, aggregated in 

central inventories allowing for uniform search and access to resources. The horizontal 

action on wordnets constitutes one of several cross-language initiatives in the project. In 

the following a brief status of each of the involved wordnets is given. 

3.2 Estonian wordnet 

The Estonian wordnet was built as part of the EuroWordNet project and thus used the 

expand method as a starting point. Base concepts from English were translated into 

Estonian as a first basis for a monolingual extension. The extensions have been 

compiled manually from Estonian monolingual dictionaries and other monolingual 

resources. In this sense, EstWN applies a hybrid method including both expand and 

monolingual techniques. EstWN includes nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs; as well 

as a set of  multiword units, cf Kahusk et al. 2012. The database currently (Jan 2013) 

contains approx. 59 000 concepts are interlinked by175,000 relations and work is still in 

progress. The database is available under a CC-NY-NC license. The database can be 

accessed partly via WordTies, partly at http://www.cl.ut.ee/teksaurus and 

www.keeleveeb.ee. 

3.3 Finnish wordnet 

FinnWordNet is compiled using the expand method and supplemented with 

monolingual localisations (see  http://www.ling.helsinki.fi/cgi-bin/fiwn/search). 

FinnWordNet contains nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs grouped by meaning into 

synonym sets representing concepts. Version 1.0 of FinnWordNet was created by 

translating the word senses in the Princeton WordNet 3.0 (Lindén & Carlson 2010). To 

ensure quality, the word senses were translated by professional translators. This 

approach allowed a very rapid and cost-efficient creation of an extensive Finnish 

wordnet directly aligned with the Princeton WordNet providing a translation relation 

between English and Finnish. 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 150 of 474]



 

It is often claimed that translating a wordnet from English is somehow problematic, 

so to dispel such doubts several rounds of evaluations were performed, only to discover 

very few translation or concept problems (cf. Lindén et al. 2012). During the evaluation 

some missing common Finnish words and concepts were added to FinnWordNet from a 

large corpus of Finnish as well as from Wiktionary and Wikipedia. The resulting 

FinnWordNet 2.0 has 120,449 concepts containing 208,645 word senses and linked to 

each other with 265,690 relations. It thus surpasses Princeton WordNet in the number of 

concepts and word senses. FinnWordNet is licensed under the Creative Commons 

Attribution (CC-BY) 3.0 licence. As a derivative of the Princeton WordNet, 

FinnWordNet is also subject to the Princeton WordNet licence. 

3.4 Danish Wordnet 

DanNet has been constructed using the merge approach where the wordnet is built on 

monolingual grounds and thereafter merged with Princeton WordNet. It currently 

contains 66,308 concepts which are interlinked by 326,564 relations (see also Pedersen 

et al. 2009). The wordnet has been compiled as a collaboration between the University 

of Copenhagen and the Danish Society for Language and Literature and is based on Den 

Danske Ordbog (Hjorth & Kristensen 2003). Furthermore, the Danish version of the 

SIMPLE lexicons (cf. Lenci et al. 2001) has influenced the construction of DanNet in 

the sense that it includes also qualia information such as the telic and the agentive role 

(purpose and origin). Qualia roles are encoded in DanNet in terms of relations such as 

used_for and made_by as well as by means of features such as SEX and 

CONNOTATION. DanNet is licensed under the Princeton WordNet licence. 

3.5 Swedish wordnet (Swesaurus) 

Swesaurus (Borin & Forsberg 2010, Borin & Forsberg 2011) is a Swedish wordnet 

developed at Språkbanken, University of Gothenburg. It is being built by reusing 

lexical-semantic relations collected from a number of pre-existing, freely available 

lexical resources: SALDO (Borin & Forsberg 2009), SDB (Järborg 2001), Synlex (Kann 

& Rosell 2006), and Swedish Wiktionary. A novel feature of Swesaurus is its fuzzy 

synsets derived from the graded synonymy relations of Synlex. Swesaurus and several 

other lexical resources are available for download and inspection at 

http://spraakbanken.gu.se/karp. Swesaurus is an integral part of a large and diverse 

lexical macroresource compiled in the Swedish FrameNet++ project (Borin et al. 2010). 

It includes 13,724 senses and is licensed under a CC-BY license. Due to its slightly 

different structure, Swesaurus is currently only partly visible through WordTies. 

 

3.6 Norwegian Wordnet 

A Norwegian Wordnet (NWN) has been developed as a part of The Norwegian Language 
Bank (Språkbanken). It consists of around 50,000 synsets, for both Norwegian Nynorsk 
and Norwegian Bokmål and covers more than 90 per cent of the senses of open word 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 151 of 474]



classes in running newspaper text. Both wordnets are available via META-SHARE 
(http://www.nb.no/clarin/repository/search/?q=ordnett) under the Princeton WordNet 
License. The compilation is based on the Danish wordnet (DanNet), and thus NWN 
contains the same lexical relations and much of the same semantic analysis as DanNet. 
The data format and licence are also identical. 

Semantically, Danish and Norwegian are very closely related, and word senses are 
mostly equivalent (though the frequency with which the senses are used often varies). 
Some synsets are dropped: some are only relevant for Danish society, and do not have 
natural equivalent in Norwegian. These synsets are almost exclusively infrequent and 
“peripheral” in the DanNet (i.e. they are leaf nodes in the synset graph). A partial 
semantic annotation of a Norwegian corpus has been developed to ensure that the most 
frequent senses for Norwegian text are covered. Using this method, it has been possible 
to create a very extensive wordnet for a fraction of the cost for development from 
scratch, and without the quality problems associated with translation from for example 
English.  

3.7 Icelandic wordnet (MerkOr) 

The semantic database MerkOr, which constitutes the Icelandic wordnet, has been 

developed using a monolingual approach with automatic methods for the extraction of 

semantic information from texts. Both pattern-based and statistical methods are used, as 

well as a hybrid methodology.  

The structure of the database is not based on hierarchies, like the Princeton WordNet, 

but rather on clusters of strongly related words and semantic relations often describing 

common sense knowledge and associations. The database contains about 110,000 words, 

primarily nouns, but also a number of verbs and adjectives. About 2.93 million relations 

between these words are listed in the database which also contains 305 semantic clusters 

– lists of words that belong to the same semantic field. The database is distributed under 

the GNU Lesser General Public License and can be queried online at 

http://merkor.skerpa.com. This wordnet is not yet made available via WordTies. 

 

4 WordTies: A common web interface for viewing aligned wordnets 

WordTies (wordties.cst.dk) is a web interface developed to visualize monolingual 

wordnets as well as their alignments with the other wordnets, cf. Figure 1. In this 

browser the user can chose either of the (currently four) relevant wordnets as a source 

language and see how a concept is linked to its sister wordnets.  

 

 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 152 of 474]



 
 

Figure 1: Introductory screen of WordTies 

 

WordTies builds on a monolingual browser, AndreOrd, which was built to browse 

DanNet, cf. Johannsen & Pedersen (2011). In this browser, the semantic relations are 

made available in a more graphical fashion compared to what is found in most other 

wordnet browsers which tend to focus primarily on visualizing the hyponymy structure 

of the wordnet. The particular choice of graph very compactly encodes large numbers of 

relations – each represented by its own colour – and thus gives a good overview of the 

general structure of the wordnet. In order to make room for all relations in the graph – 

also the inherited ones –, only one representative sense is visualized per synset. 

However, all senses are presented below the graph. By clicking on a related synset in the 

graph the user can dynamically move around in the wordnet. For illustration, see Figure 

2 where Danish has been chosen as the source and the Danish concept håb (‘hope’) has 

been looked up and aligned with Estonian, Swedish and Finnish wordnets. 

 

A click on either of these links will bring the users into these particular wordnets and 

enable them to browse the wordnet and view the established relations as well as its 

taxonomical structure, as seen in Figure 3 where we see that the Finnish wordnet has a 

much deeper taxonomical structure (expert perspective) than the Danish (layman 

perspective) of the concept tree. In this way, the web interface eases comparison and 

evaluation of the wordnets.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 153 of 474]



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2: A Danish synset look-up (håb (hope)) with multilingual alignments to English, 
Finnish, Estonian and Swedish wordnets. 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3: Graphical views of the taxonomical differences of the concept tree in the 
Danish and Finnish wordnets, respectively. DanNet includes three major (layman) 
subtypes of trees: deciduous trees, coniferous trees, and fruit trees, whereas the Finnish 
wordnet includes further subtypes based on a specialist, botanical structuring.  

Major changes to the AndreOrd source-code were model changes including the addition 

of instance, source model classes and modification to alignment and its relations. These 

three model classes handle the relational structure and data used to enable the 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 154 of 474]



multilingual relations (connections), facilitating a link between application instances via 

a wordnet’s imported Princeton Core WordNet relations.  

 

 

Figure 4: Overview and scripts used in WordTies. 

WordTies can be dynamically extended to include more wordnets. There are two  

compulsory steps for import, firstly to calculate and update the hyponym count 

for each synset record, and secondly to import alignments to Princeton Core 

WordNet. Optionally, the import alignments script can be used to import 

multilingual alignments, alignments to other wordnet synsets via Princeton Core 

WordNet. 

The application is able to have a customised locale, and language files. 

Currently, Danish and English are supported languages with the application. An 

index page is customisable based on the locale, and new language support can be 

easily added with valid translation of labels. Currently multi-locale support is not 

included with the application, a single locale is set for the application instance to 

operate in. Other customisations available, include filter values and path names 

(routes), and custom colour mappings for the relations graph.  

 

5 Alignment and evaluation of bilingual wordnets 

Four bilingual wordnets have been automatically processed on the basis of each 

wordnet’s links to Princeton WordNet. In other words, English has functioned as an 

interlingua in a triangulation method, and a central aim has been to examine to which 

extent this strategy influenced the quality of the bilingual translations.  

However, since the Nordic and Baltic wordnets were built locally using both the 

expand and merge techniques as we have seen, they differ in the extent to which they 

were bilingually linked before the META-NORD project was initiated. Therefore, a first 

task was to ensure a common linked coverage of all the involved wordnets. To this end, 

all wordnets were manually linked to Princeton Core WordNet containing 5,000 core 

synsets.
1
 Princeton Core WordNet is a recent, semi-automatically compiled list of 5,000 

                                                           
1 http://wordnetcode.princeton.edu/standoff-files/core-wordnet.txt 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 155 of 474]



“core” word senses in WordNet corresponding approximately to the 5,000 most 

frequently used word senses, followed by some manual filtering and adjustment. This 

set of basic concepts is considered to be deduced on better statistical grounds than the 

previously applied “base concepts” used in the EuroWordNet and SIMPLE projects. 

Further, Princeton Core WordNet is characterized by being relatively coarse-grained 

compared to the full Princeton WordNet and thus much better suited for alignment tasks. 

For the evaluation, a top 1000 set of this 5,000 synset intersection with a POS ratio of 

6:2:2 for  nouns, verbs, and adjectives, respectively was generated. The extract was also 

based on provided frequency data from Swedish and Finnish. Even if one-to-one synset 

alignments are by far the most frequent ones, one-to-many and many-to-one synset 

alignments occur as well. Valid relations to Princeton Core WordNet include 

eq_synonym, which are by the most frequent one, eq_has_hyponym, as well as 

eq_has_hyperonym, allowing thus in some cases for alignments to more or less specific 

synsets. All in all, four linked wordnets were processed and evaluated. Table 1 sums up 

the evaluation results. 

 
 Slight 

mismatches 

 

Linking   

errors 

Danish-Swedish    2.3  2.4 

Finnish-Swedish    2.6 1.1 

Finnish-Danish    0.7  0 

Estonian-Finnish 22.6 5.3 

 

Table 1: Percentage of errors and mismatches in bilingual wordnets 

 

As can be read, the semi-automatic alignments are judged to be of a relatively good 

quality even if translations are in several cases not 100% precise. An average of 2.2% 

errors and 7.0% slight mismatches is reported on. However, there are some clear 

divergences to be commented on in Table 1: the evaluation of Estonian-Finnish reports 

on 53 errors and 226 slight mismatches whereas no errors and only 7 mismatches are 

reported on for Finnish-Danish. Since the evaluations are made by different partners 

with the necessary bilingual language skills, part of this divergence is due to somewhat 

different interpretations of the concepts ‘slight mismatches’. Furthermore, the different 

nature of the wordnets seems to have influenced the evaluations to a certain extent. 

Thus, some evaluators have focused on a good definition-to-definition match between 

two synsets, whereas others have applied a somewhat stricter criterion by evaluating the 

exact sense-to-sense correspondence.   

 

 

 

 

 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 156 of 474]



 

 
WN synset ET  FI 

 

WN gloss  Comment  

album%1:06:

00:: 

Album_2 albumi; 

valokuva-

albumi 

a book of blank pages 

with pockets or 

envelopes; for 

organizing 

photographs or stamp 

collections etc 

 FinnWN synset member 

'valokuva-albumi' is 

more specific 

(eq_has_hyponym) 

       

apparatus%1:

06:00:: 

aparaat_1, 

seadis_1 

aparaatti; 

koneisto; 

laite; 

laitteisto; 

väline 

equipment designed to 

serve a specific 

function 

 EstWN synset members 

are in singular, as one 

particular piece of 

equipment 

 

 

gun%1:06:00

::  

tulirelv_1  kivääri; 

pistooli; 

pyssy; tykki  

a weapon that 

discharges a missile at 

high velocity 

(especially from a 

metal tube or barrel)  

 FinnWN synset have 

more specific members  

 

Table 2: Estonian-Finnish translations that are considered to be slight mismatches. 
 

For instance, the Estonian-Finnish evaluator has registered differences in synonyms 

or differences in specificity as slight mismatches, influenced by the fact that not all 

senses in two aligned synset represent fully precise translations of each other. See Table 

2 for comments on particular alignments between Estonian and Finnish. 

 

An additional explanation to the divergences is that since the Finnish and Estonian 
languages are very close, the Estonian evaluator expected to see exact matches sense-to-
sense in the translations between Finnish and Estonian, irrespective of the fact that the 
wordnets were built from more or less different starting points. The phenomenon with 
very close words (and mismatching translations) could presumably also have been 
observed between other close language pairs such as Swedish and Danish, but since 
these two wordnet are characterized by having less senses per synset, synonym 
mismatch is not observed to the same extent. The evaluator of the two “extremes” with 
respect to senses per synset, Danish and Finnish wordnets, reports on few mismatches, 
influenced by the fact that focus has here been more directed towards the definition-to-
definition alignment. 

Not surprisingly, wordnets that have been compiled via translations from Princeton 

WordNet have many senses per synsets (just as Princeton WordNet), whereas wordnets 

that are monolingually compiled and rather based on synonymy registrations in 

conventional dictionaries, have much less; (see also Section 5).  As can be seen, it has 

proven difficult to ‘neutralize’ such differences initial to the evaluations. 

With regards to alignment errors, there does not appear to be a systematic bias, some 

are due to false friends, others however, seem to be just random errors introduced during 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 157 of 474]



the linking to Princeton Core WordNet, as in the following, where the English synset 

has been linked to a too specific sense of ‘waste’ in DanNet than what was actually 

indicated by the English gloss, cf. Table 3. 

 

 
WN 

synset 

DA  SV 

 

WN gloss  Comment  

waste%1:27:0

0:: 

{spildprodukt

_0} 

avfall..1 any materials 

unused and rejected 

as worthless or 

unwanted  

 DArrefers to byproducts of 

production; should be the more 

general 'affald'. 

 

Table 3: Example of Danish-Swedish link which is considered an error  

 

6 Further comparison of selected wordnets 

Via the evaluations presented in Section 5 and by browsing the wordnets in WordTies, 

further insights have been achieved wrt. the very diverse characteristics of the selected 

wordnets in terms of taxonomical differences, different understandings of the synset, 

and differences in compiling semantic relations. 

First of all, we can observe some differences in average hyponym depth, number of 

senses per synset and average number of relations connected to a synset as shown in 

Table 4.    

 

 

DanNet FinnWordNet  EstWN  

Hyponym 

depth/SynSet 4.38  7.49 5.93  

Word Senses/SynSet 1.09  1.74  1.65  

Relations/SynSet 4.97  2.21  2.91  

 

Table 4: Hypnonym  depth, word sense per synset and relations per synset for Danish, 

Finnish and Estonian wordnets 

 

FinnWordNet has the highest average of hyponymy depth, relating well to our 

intuition of this wordnet being more expert oriented at least in the fields of botany and 

zoology (see also Figure 3).  In contrast, EstWN and DanNet which rely more on 

monolingual dictionaries and the genus proximums given in the definitions of these, 

have less depth. This fact can also be illustrated by extracting the path to the top from a 

botanical concept like tree in Danish and Finnish, respectively: 

 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 158 of 474]



træ (tree) has 4 super-concepts (plante → organisme →fysisk genstand→entitet) (plant → organism  → 
physical entity→entity) 

puu (tree) has 9 super-concepts (puumainen kasvi → putkilokasvi → kasvi → eliö → elävä olio → 

kokonaisuus → esine → fyysinen entiteetti → entiteetti) (woody plant → vascular plant → plant → 

organism → animate thing →whole → object → physical entity → entity) 

 

 

 

Figure 5: Differences in number of relations in Finnish and Danish, respectively, 
attached to the concept candle (kynttilä, stearinlys). For example, Danish includes 
relations such as used_for=light and is_made_of=stearin whereas the Finnish wordnet 
includes only hyponyms, parts and hyperonym. 

The number and selection of relations in the wordnets also differ; some have included 

only Princeton relations, others include EuroWordNet relations (i.e. Estonian, Danish, 

Norwegian) and others again have adapted qualia-inspired (Pustejovsky 1995) relations 

also from the SIMPLE project (Lenci et al. 2001), such as the used_for and made_by 

relations in the Danish and Norwegian wordnets. This extension of the relation set to 

include also purpose and origin is again influenced by sense definitions in conventional 

dictionaries where it is typically expressed for which purpose a given artifact is made 

and eventually how it is made (i.e. baked, grown, cooked, produced), see Figure 5 for 

such differences in number of relations between Danish and Finnish wordnets. 

 

7 Conclusion and further steps 

Apart from consolidating, extending and providing richer documentation for the Nordic 

and Baltic wordnets, the META-NORD multilingual wordnet initiative has ensured an 

alignment and comparison of the most mature of these wordnets and have made them all 

easily accessible through META-SHARE. Central aims have been to understand better 

the different nature of the lexical-semantic resources in order to approximate to a best 

practice, to test the perspective of linking them and to make them visible in an intuitive 

way in a common web interface. Four core bilingual wordnets have been compiled, 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 159 of 474]



made visible and evaluated with diverging, but still promising, results. The evaluations 

and comparisons have exposed a considerable variety of the wordnets wrt. taxonomical 

structure, structure of the synset (many or few senses per synset) and number of 

relations attached to each synset, a variety which proves to originate from the different 

compilation strategies used for the different Nordic and Baltic languages. As we have 

shown, the two compilation strategies (expand versus merge) have considerable impact 

on how the lexical-semantic information is represented and on the depth of the lexical 

hierarchies. In spite of these differences, an alignment through Princeton Core WordNet 

has proven feasible. 

Three wordnets were not fully mature when the META-NORD project started and have 

therefore not yet been aligned or made visible in WordTies, namely the Icelandic and 

Norwegian wordnets; the plan is to include them during 2013. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 160 of 474]



References  

Rigau, G. and Agirre, E. (2002). Semi-automatic Methods for WordNet Construction. Tutorial at 

2002 International WordNet Conference, Mysore, India. 

Bhattacharyya, P. (2010) IndoWordNet. Proceedings of LREC 2010. Valletta: ELRA. 

Borin, L., Danélls, D., Forsberg, M., Kokkinakis, D. and Gronostaj, M.T. (2010). The past meets 

the present in Swedish FrameNet++. In Proceedings of the 14th EURALEX International 

Congress, pp. 269–281. Leeuwarden: EURALEX. 

Borin, L. and Forsberg, M. (2009). All in the family: A comparison of SALDO and WordNet. In 

Proceedings of the Nodalida 2009 Workshop on WordNets and other Lexical Semantic 

Resources – between Lexical Semantics, Lexicography, Terminology and Formal Ontologies, 

pp. 7–12. Odense: NEALT. 

Borin, L. and Forsberg, M. (2010). Beyond the synset: Swesaurus – a fuzzy Swedish wordnet. In 

Workshop on Re-thinking synonymy: Semantic sameness and similarity in languages and their 

description. Helsinki. 

Borin, L. and Forsberg, M. (2011). Swesaurus – ett svenskt ordnät med fria tyglar. 

LexicoNordica vol. 18, pp. 17–39. 

Borin, L., Forsberg, M. and Lönngren, L. (2008). The hunting of the BLARK – SALDO, a freely 

available lexical database for Swedish language technology. Joakim Nivre, Mats Dahllöf and 

Beáta Megyesi (eds.), Resourceful language technology. Festschrift in honor of Anna Sågvall 

Hein, pp. 21–32. Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis: Studia Linguistica Upsaliensia 7. Uppsala: 

Uppsala University. 

Derwojedowa, M., Piasecki, M., Szpakowicz, S., Zawislawska, M. and Broda, B. (2008). Words, 

concepts and relations in the construction of the polish WordNet. In Global WordNet 

Conference 2008, pp. 162–177. Szeged, Hungary. 

Daudé J., Padró L. and Rigau G. (2003). Validation and Tuning of Wordnet Mapping 

Techniques. Proceedings of the International Conference on Recent Advances on Natural 

Language Processing (RANLP'03). Borovets, Bulgaria. 

Daudé J., Padró L. and Rigau G. (1999). Mapping Multilingual Hierarchies Using Relaxation 

Labeling. Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing 

and Very Large Corpora (EMNLP/VLC'99). Maryland, US. 

Fellbaum, C. (ed) (1998). WordNet – An Electronic Lexical Database. Cambridge, 

Massachusetts: The MIT Press. 

Hjorth, E. and Kristensen, K. (2003). Den Danske Ordbog. Gyldendal, Denmark. 

Järborg, J. (2001). Roller i Semantisk databas. Research Reports from the Department of 

Swedish, No. GU-ISS-01-3. University of Gothenburg: Dept. of Swedish. 

Johannsen, A. and Pedersen, B.S. (2011). “Andre ord” – a wordnet browser for the Danish 

wordnet, DanNet. In Proceedings from 18th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics, 

NODALIDA 2011, Riga, Latvia. Nothern Association for Language Technology, Vol. 11 pp. 

295–298, University of Tartu. 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 161 of 474]



Kann, V. and Rosell, M. (2006). Free construction of a free Swedish dictionary of synonyms In 

Proceedings of the 15th NODALIDA conference, pp. 105–110. Joensuu: University of Eastern 

Finland. 

Martola, N. (2011). FinnWordNet och det finska samhället. In: Symposium om onomasiologiske 

ordbøker i Norden. Schæffergården, Copenhagen. 

Kahusk, N., Orav, H. and Vare, K. (2012). Cross-linking Experience of Estonian WordNet. In: 

Human Language Technologies – The Baltic Perspective: The Fifth International Conference 

on Human Language Technologies – The Baltic perspective. Tartu, Estonia, October 4-5, 

2012. (Ed. Arvi, Tavast; Kadri Muischnek; Mare, Koit). IOS Press, pp. 96–102. Online access: 

doi:10.3233/978-1-61499-133-5-96 

Lenci, A., Bel, N., Busa, F., Calzolari, N., Gola, E., Monachini, M., Ogonowski, A., Peters, I., 

Peters, W., Ruimy, N., Villegas, M. and Zampolli, A. (2000).  SIMPLE: A general framework 

for the development of multilingual lexicons. International Journal of Lexicography, vol. 13, 

pp. 249–263 

Lindén, K. and Carlson, L. (2010). FinnWordNet – WordNet på finska via översättning. 

LexicoNordica – Nordic Journal of Lexicography, vol. 17, pp. 119–140 

Lindén, K., Niemi, J. and Hyvärinen, M. (2012) Extending and Updating the Finnish Wordnet. In 

Diana Santos, Krister Lindén and Wanjiku Ng’ang’a (eds.), Shall We Play the Festschrift 

Game? Essays on the Occasion of Lauri Carlson's 60th Birthday, pp. 67–98. Springer: Berlin, 

Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-30773-7. 

Pedersen, B.S, Nimb, S., Asmussen, J., Sørensen, N., Trap-Jensen, L. and Lorentzen, H. (2009). 

DanNet – the challenge of compiling a WordNet for Danish by reusing a monolingual 

dictionary. Language Resources and Evaluation, Computational Linguistics Series, pp. 269–

299. 

Pedersen, B.S., Nimb, S. and Braasch, A. (2010). Merging specialist taxonomies and folk 

taxonomies in wordnets. - a case study of plants, animals and foods in the Danish wordnet In: 

Proceedings from the Seventh International Conference on Language Resources and 

Evaluation, pp. 3181–3186. Malta. 

Peters, W., Vossen, P., Díes-Orzas, P. and Adriaens, G. (1998). Cross-lingual Alignment of 

Wordnets with an Inter-Lingual-Index. In: EuroWordNet – A Multilingual Database with 

Lexical Semantic Networks, pp. 149–179. Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

Pustejovsky, J. (1995). The Generative Lexicon. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 

Robkop, K., Thoongsup, S., Charoenpron, T., Sornlertlamvanich, V. and Isahara, H.. (2010). 

WNMS: Connecting Distributed Wordnet in the Case of Asian WordNet. In: Proceedings of 

the 5th International Conference of the Global WordNet Association (GWC 2010), Mumbai, 

India. 

Tufiş, D., Ion, R. and Ide, N. (2004). Word Sense Disambiguation as a Wordnets Validation 

Method in BalkaNet. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Language 

Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2004), pp. 1071–1074. Lisbon: ELRA  

Vossen, P. (ed.) (1998). EuroWordNet: A Multilingual Database with Lexical Semantic 

Networks. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 162 of 474]


