










































A Graph-Based Approach to Skill Extraction from Text


Proceedings of the TextGraphs-8 Workshop, pages 79–87,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18 October 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Graph-Based Approach to Skill Extraction from Text∗

Ilkka Kivimäki1, Alexander Panchenko4,2, Adrien Dessy1,2, Dries Verdegem3,
Pascal Francq1, Cédrick Fairon2, Hugues Bersini3 and Marco Saerens1

1ICTEAM, 2CENTAL, Université catholique de Louvain, Belgium
3IRIDIA, Université libre de Bruxelles, Belgium

4 Digital Society Laboratory LLC, Russia

Abstract

This paper presents a system that performs
skill extraction from text documents. It out-
puts a list of professional skills that are rele-
vant to a given input text. We argue that the
system can be practical for hiring and man-
agement of personnel in an organization. We
make use of the texts and the hyperlink graph
of Wikipedia, as well as a list of professional
skills obtained from the LinkedIn social net-
work. The system is based on first computing
similarities between an input document and
the texts of Wikipedia pages and then using a
biased, hub-avoiding version of the Spreading
Activation algorithm on the Wikipedia graph
in order to associate the input document with
skills.

1 Introduction

One of the most difficult tasks of an employer can
be the recruitment of a new employee out of a long
list of applicants. Another challenge of the employer
is to keep track of the skills and know-how of their
employees in order to direct the right people to work
on things they know. In the scientific community,
editors of journals and committees of conferences
always face the task of assigning suitable reviewers
for a tall pile of submitted papers. The tasks de-
scribed above are example problems of expertise re-
trieval (Balog et al., 2012). It is a subfield of in-
formation retrieval that focuses on inferring asso-
ciations between people, expertise and information
content, such as text documents.

∗Part of this work has been funded by projects with the
“Région wallonne”. We thank this institution for giving us the
opportunity to conduct both fundamental and applied research.
In addition, we thank Laurent Genard and Stéphane Dessy for
their contributions for the work.

In this paper, we propose a method that makes a
step towards a solution of these problems. We de-
scribe an approach for the extraction of professional
skills associated with a text or its author. The goal of
our system is to automatically extract a set of skills
from an input text, such as a set of articles written
by a person. Such technology can be potentially
useful in various contexts, such as the ones men-
tioned above, along with expertise management in a
company, analysis of professional blogs, automatic
meta-data extraction, etc.

For succeeding in our goal, we exploit Wikipedia,
a list of skills obtained from the LinkedIn social net-
work and the mapping between them. Our method
consists of two phases. First, we analyze a query
document with a vector space model or a topic
model in order to associate it with Wikipedia arti-
cles. Then, using these initial pages, we use the
Spreading Activation algorithm on the hyperlink
graph of Wikipedia in order to find articles that cor-
respond to LinkedIn skills and are related or central
to the initial pages.

One difficulty with this approach is that it of-
ten results in some skills, which can be identified
as hubs of the Wikipedia graph, constantly being
retrieved, regardless of what the input is. In or-
der to avoid this pitfall, we bias the activation to
avoid spreading to general, or popular nodes. We
try different measures of node popularity to redirect
the spreading and perform evaluative experiments
which show that this biasing in fact improves re-
trieval results.

We have built a web service that enables anyone
to test our skill extraction system. The name of the
system is Elisit, an abbreviation from “Expertise
Localization from Informal Sources and Information

79



Technologies” and conveying the idea of trying to
elicit, i.e. draw forth latent information about exper-
tise in a target text. According to the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to propose such a system
and describe openly the method behind it.

2 Related work

The recent review of Balog et al. (2012) gives a
thorough presentation of the problems of expertise
retrieval and of the methodology used for solving
them. They classify these problems in subcategories
of expert retrieval and expert profiling. The former
means the task of providing a name of a person who
is an expert in a field that is presented as a query,
while the latter means assigning expertise to a per-
son, or some other entity based on information that
is available of that entity. Recent expertise retrieval
research has focused on the TREC enterprise track,
which uses the TREC W3C and CERC corpora (Ba-
log et al., 2008). These datasets contain annotated
crawls of websites. The task in the TREC enterprise
challenge is to build a model that performs expert
retrieval and document retrieval based on a set of
query topics, which correspond to expertise areas.

Our approach is quite different from the one used
in the TREC challenge, as we focus on a fixed
list of skills gathered from the LinkedIn website.
Thus, we were not able to directly compare our sys-
tem to the systems participating in the TREC enter-
prise track. Our problem shares some resemblance
with the INEX entity-ranking track (Demartini et al.,
2010), where the goal was to rank Wikipedia pages
related to queries about a given topic. Our skill re-
trieval task can also be seen as an entity ranking task,
where the entities are Wikipedia pages that corre-
spond to skills.

LinkedIn has developed methods for defining
skills and for finding relations between them (Sko-
moroch et al., 2012). These techniques are used in
their service, for example, for recommending job
opportunities to the users. The key difference of
our technology is that it allows a user to search
for skills by submitting an arbitrary text, instead of
only searching for skills related to a certain skill.
Although expertise retrieval has been an active re-
search topic for some time, there have not been
many methods for explicitly assigning particular

skills to text content or people producing text con-
tent.

Our method consists of two steps. First, we ap-
ply a text similarity method to detect the relevant
Wikipedia pages. Second, we enrich the results
with graph mining techniques using the hyperlink
graph of Wikipedia. We have not found a simi-
lar combination being applied for skill extraction
before, although both parts have been well studied
in similar contexts before. For instance, Steyvers
et al. (2004) proposed the Author-Topic Model, a
graphical model based on LDA (Blei et al., 2003),
that associates authors of texts with topics detected
from those texts.

Wikipedia has been already used in NLP research
both as a corpus and as a semantic network. Its hy-
perlink graph is a collaboratively constructed net-
work, as opposed to manually crafted networks
such as WordNet (Miller, 1995). Gabrilovich and
Markovitch (2007) introduced Explicit Semantic
Analysis (ESA), where the words of a document are
represented as mixtures of concepts, i.e. Wikipedia
pages, according to their occurence in the body texts
of the pages. The experimental results show that this
strategy works very well and outranks, for exam-
ple, LSA (Landauer and Dumais, 1997) in the task
of measuring document similarity. ESA was later
extended by taking into account the graph structure
provided by the links in Wikipedia (Yeh et al., 2009).
The authors of this work used a PageRank-based al-
gorithm on the graph for measuring word and doc-
ument similarity. This approach was coined Wiki-
Walk.

Associating the elements of a text document un-
der analysis with Wikipedia pages involves itself al-
ready many problems often encountered in NLP. The
process where certain words and multiword expres-
sions are associated with a certain Wikipedia page
has been called Wikification (Mihalcea and Csomai,
2007). In our work, we take a more general ap-
proach, and try to associate the full input text to a
set of Wikipedia pages according to different vec-
tor space models. The models and the details of this
strategy are explained in section 3.3.

The Elisit system uses the Spreading Activa-
tion algorithm on the Wikipedia graph to establish
associations between texts and skills. We chose
to use Spreading Activation, as it tries to simulate

80



a cognitive associative memory (Anderson, 1983),
and the Wikipedia hyperlink network can be under-
stood as an associative network. The simulation
works by finding associations in a network of con-
cepts by spreading pulses of activation from con-
cepts into their neighbours. In the context of NLP,
the Spreading Activation algorithm has been tradi-
tionally used for word sense disambiguation (Hirst,
1988) and information retrieval (Crestani, 1997).
Gouws et al. (2010) have shown that this algorithm,
applied to the Wikipedia graph, can also be used to
measure conceptual and document similarity.

3 Methodology

In this section, we will explain how the Elisit
skill extraction system works. We will first ex-
plain how the system uses data from Wikipedia and
LinkedIn. Then, we will describe the two main
components of the system, the text2wiki mod-
ule, which associates a query document with related
Wikipedia pages, and the wiki2skill module,
which aims to associate the Wikipedia pages found
by the text2wiki module with Wikipedia pages
that correspond to skills.

3.1 Wikipedia texts and links

Each page in Wikipedia contains a text that may in-
clude hyperlinks to other pages. We make the as-
sumption that there is a meaningful semantic rela-
tionship between the pages that are linked with each
other and that the Wikipedia hyperlink graph can be
exploited as an associative network. The properties
of the hyperlink structure of Wikipedia and the na-
ture of the information contained in the links have
been investigated by Koolen (2011).

In addition to the encyclopedia pages, Wikipedia
also contains, among others, category, discussion
and help pages. In our system, we are only interested
in the encyclopedia pages and the hyperlinks be-
tween them. We are using data downloaded1 on May
2nd 2012. This dump encompasses 3,983,338 pages
with 247,560,469 links, after removal of the redi-
rect pages. The Wikipedia graph consists of a giant
Strongly Connected Component (SCC) of 3,744,419
nodes, 4130 SCC’s of sizes from 61 to 2 nodes and
228,881 nodes that form their own SCC’s.

1http://dumps.wikimedia.org/

3.2 LinkedIn skills

We gathered a list of skills from the LinkedIn social
network2. The list includes skills which the users
can assign to their profiles. This enables the site
to recommend new contacts or open job opportu-
nities to each user. The skills in the list have been
generated by an automated process developed by
LinkedIn (Skomoroch et al., 2012). The process de-
cides, whether a word or a phrase or a skill suggested
by a user is actually a skill through an analysis of the
text contained in the user profile pages.

Each LinkedIn skill has its own webpage that con-
tains information about the skill. One piece of infor-
mation contained in most of these pages is a link
to a Wikipedia article. According to Skomoroch et
al. (2012), LinkedIn automatically builds this map-
ping. However, some links are manually verified
through crowdsourcing. Not all skill pages contain
a link to Wikipedia, but these skills are often ei-
ther very specific or ambiguous. Thus, we decided
to remove these skills from our final list. The list
of skills used in the system was extracted from the
LinkedIn site in September 2012. After removal of
the skills without a link to Wikipedia, the list con-
tained 27,153 skills.

3.3 text2wiki module

The goal of the text2wiki module is to retrieve
Wikipedia articles that are relevant to an input text.

The output of the module is a vector of sim-
ilarities between the input document and all arti-
cles of the English Wikipedia that contain at least
300 characters. There are approximately 3.3 mil-
lion such pages. We only retrieve the 200 Wikipedia
pages that are most similar to the input document.
Thus, each input text is represented as a sparse vec-
tor a(0), which has 200 non-zero elements out of
3,983,338 dimensions corresponding to the full list
of Wikipedia pages. Each non-zero value ai(0) of
this vector is a semantic similarity of the query with
the i-th Wikipedia article. This approach stems from
ESA, mentioned above. The vector a(0) is given as
input to the second module wiki2skill.

The text2wiki module relies on the Gensim
library (Řehůřek and Sojka, 2010)3. In particular,

2http://www.linkedin.com/skills
3http://radimrehurek.com/gensim

81



we have used four different text similarity func-
tions, based respectively on the classical Vector
Space Models (VSM’s) (Berry et al., 1994), LSA
and LDA:

(a) TF-IDF (300,000 dimensions)
(b) LogEntropy (300,000 dimensions)
(c) LogEntropy + LSA (200 dimensions)
(d) LogEntropy + LDA (200 topics)

First, each text is represented as a vector x in
a space of the 300,000 most frequent terms in the
corpus, each appearing at least in 10% of the docu-
ments (excluding stopwords). We limited the num-
ber of dimensions to 300,000 to reduce computa-
tional complexity. The models (a) and (b) directly
use this representation, while for (c) and (d) this ini-
tial representation is transformed to a vector x′ in a
reduced space of 200 dimensions/topics. For LSA
and LDA, the number of dimensions is often empir-
ically selected from the range [100 − 500] (Foltz,
1996; Bast and Majumdar, 2005). We followed this
practice. From the vector representations (x or x′),
the similarity between the input document and each
Wikipedia article is computed using the cosine sim-
ilarity.

Pairwise comparison of a vector of 300,000 di-
mensions against 3.3 million vectors of the same
size has a prohibitive computational cost. To make
our application practical, we use an inverted index of
Gensim to efficiently retrieve articles semantically
related to an input document.

3.4 wiki2skill module
The wiki2skill module performs the Spread-
ing Activation algorithm using the initial activations
provided by the text2wiki module and returns a
vector of final activations of all the nodes of the net-
work and a vector containing the activations of only
the nodes corresponding to skills.

The basic idea of Spreading Activation is to ini-
tially activate a set of nodes in a network and then
iteratively spread the activation into the neighbour-
ing nodes. This can actually be interpreted in many
ways opening up a wide space of algorithms that can
lead to different results. One attempt for an exact
definition of the Spreading Activation algorithm can
be found in the work of Shrager et al. (1987). Their
formulation states that if a(0) is a vector containing

the initial activations of each node of the network,
then after each iteration, or time step, or pulse t, the
vector of activations is

a(t) = γa(t− 1) + λWTa(t− 1) + c(t), (1)

where γ ∈ [0, 1] is a decay factor which controls the
conservation of activation during time, λ ∈ [0, 1] is
a friction factor, which controls the amount of acti-
vation that nodes can spread to their neighbors, c(t)
is an activation source vector and W is a weighted
adjacency matrix, where the weights control the
amount of activation that flows through each link in
the network. In some cases, iterating eq. (1) leads
to a converged activation state, but often, especially
when dealing with large networks, it is more prac-
tical to set the number of pulses, T , to some fixed,
low number.

As already stated, this formulation of Spread-
ing Activation spans a wide space of different al-
gorithms. In particular, this space contains many
random walk based algorithms. By considering the
case where γ = 0, λ = 1, c(t) = 0 and where
the matrix W is row-stochastic, the Spreading Ac-
tivation model boils down to a random walk model
with a transition probability matrix W, where a(t)
contains the proportion of random walkers at each
node when the initial proportions are given by a(0).
When the situation is changed by choosing c(t) =
(1 − λ)a(0), we obtain a bounded Random Walk
with Restart model (Pan et al., 2004; Mantrach et
al., 2011).

Early experiments with the first versions of the al-
gorithm revealed an activation bias towards nodes
that correspond to very general Wikipedia pages
(e.g. the page “ISBN”, which is often linked to in
the References section of Wikipedia pages). These
nodes have a high input degree, but are often not rel-
evant for the given query. This problem is often en-
countered when analysing large graphs with random
walk based measures. It is known that they can be
dominated by the stationary distribution of the cor-
responding Markov Chain (Brand, 2005).

To tackle this problem, we assign link weights
according to preferential transition probabilities,
which define biased random walks that try to avoid
hub nodes. They have been studied e.g. in the con-
text of stochastic routing of packages in scale-free

82



networks (Fronczak and Fronczak, 2009). These
weights are given by

w∗ij =
παj∑

k:(i,k)∈E
παk
, (2)

where πj is a popularity index and α is a biasing
parameter, which controls the amount of activation
that flows from node i to node j based on the pop-
ularity of node j. For the popularity index, we con-
sidered three options. First, we tried simply the in-
put degree of a node. As a second option, we used
the PageRank score of the node (Page et al., 1999)
which corresponds to the node’s weight in the sta-
tionary distribution of a random surfer that surfs
Wikipedia by clicking on hyperlinks randomly. As a
third popularity index, we used a score based on the
HITS algorithm (Kleinberg, 1999), which is simi-
lar to PageRank, but instead assigns two scores, an
authority score and a hub score. In short, a page
has a high authority score, if it is linked to by many
hub pages, and vice versa. In the case of HITS, the
popularity index was defined as the product of the
authority and hub scores of the node. When α = 0,
wij is equal for all links leaving from node i, but
when α < 0, activation will flow more to less popu-
lar nodes and less to popular nodes. We included the
selection of a suitable value for α as a parameter to
be tuned along with the rest of the spreading strat-
egy in quantitative experiments that are presented in
section 5.2. These experiments show that biasing
the activation to avoid spreading to popular nodes
indeed improves retrieval results.

We also decided to investigate whether giving
more weight to links that exist in both directions
would improve results. The Wikipedia hyperlink
graph is directed, but in some cases two pages may
contain a link to each other. We thus adjust the link
weights wij so that wij = δw∗ij if (j, i) ∈ E and
wij = w

∗
ij otherwise, where δ ≥ 1 is a bidirectional

link weight. With large values of δ, more activation
will flow through bidirectional links than links that
exist only in one direction. After this weighting,
the final link weight matrix W is obtained by nor-
malizing each element with its corresponding row
sum to make the matrix row-stochastic. This makes
the model easier to interpret by considering random
walks. However, in a traditional Spreading Activa-

tion model the matrix W is not required to be row-
stochastic. We plan to investigate in the future, how
much the normalization affects the results.

The large size of the Wikipedia graph challenges
the use of Spreading Activation. In order to pro-
vide a usable web service, we would need the system
to provide results fast, preferably within fractions of
seconds. So far, we have dealt with this issue within
the wiki2skill module by respresenting the link
weight matrix W of the whole Wikipedia graph us-
ing the sparse matrix library SciPy4. Each itera-
tion of the Spreading Activation is then achieved by
simple matrix arithmetic according to eq. (1). As
a result, the matrix W must be precomputed from
the adjacency matrix for a given value of the bias-
ing parameter α and the bidirectional link weight δ
when the system is launched. Thus, they cannot be
selected separately for each query from the system.
Currently, the system can perform one iteration of
spreading activation within less than one second, de-
pending on the sparsity of the activation vector. Our
experiments indicate that the results are quite stable
after five spreading iterations, meaning that we nor-
mally get results with the wiki2skill module in
about one to three seconds.

4 The Elisit skill extraction system

The Elisit system integrates the text2wiki
and the wiki2skill modules. We have built a
web application5 which lets everyone try our method
and use it from third-party applications. Due to this
web service, the Elisit technology can be eas-
ily integrated into systems performing skill search,
email or document analysis, HR automatization,
analysis of professional blogs, automatic meta-data
extraction, etc. The web interface presents the user
the result of the skill extraction (a list of skills) as
well as the result of the text2wiki module (a list
of Wikipedia pages). Each retrieved skill also con-
tains a link to the corresponding Wikipedia page.

Figure 1 presents an example of results provided
by the Elisit system. It lists skills extracted
from the abstract of the chapter Support vector ma-
chines and machine learning on documents from

4http://www.scipy.org/
5GUI: http://elisit.cental.be/; RESTful web

service: http://elisit.cental.be:8080/.

83



Figure 1: Skills extracted from a text about text document
categorization.

Introduction to Information Retrieval by Manning
et al. (2008). As one can observe, the Wikipedia
pages found by the text2wiki module represent
many low-level topics, such as “Desicion bound-
ary”, “Ranking SVM” or “Least square SVM”. On
the other hand, the skills retrieved after using the
wiki2skillmodule provide high-level topics rel-
evant to the input text, such as “SVM”, “Machine
Learning” or “Classification”. These general topics
are more useful, since a user, such as an HR man-
ager, may be confused by too low-level skills.

5 Experiments & results

5.1 Evaluation of the text2wiki module

In order to compare the four text similarity func-
tions, we collected p = 200, 000 pairs of semanti-
cally related documents from the “See also” sections
of Wikipedia articles. A good model is supposed
to assign a high similarity to these pairs. However,
since the distribution of similarity scores depends
on the model, one cannot simply compare the mean
similarity s̄ over the set of pairs. Thus, we used a

Model z-score

TF-IDF 8459
LogEntropy 4370
LogEntropy + LDA 2317
LogEntropy + LSA 2143

Table 1: Comparison of different text similarity functions
on the Wikipedia “See also” dataset.

z-score as evaluation metric. The z-scores are com-
puted as

z =
s̄− µ̂√
σ̂2/p

(3)

where µ̂ and σ̂ are sample estimates of mean and
standard deviation of similarity scores for a given
model. These sample estimates have been calculated
from a set of 1,000,000 randomly selected pairs of
articles. Table 1 presents the results of this experi-
ment. It appears that more complex models (LSA,
LDA) are outperformed on this task by the simpler
vector space models (TF-IDF, LogEntropy). This
can be just a special case with this experimental
setting and perhaps another choice of the number
of topics could give better results. Thus, further
meta-parameter optimization of LSA and LDA is
one approach for improving the performance of the
text2wiki module.

5.2 Evaluation of the wiki2skill module

In order to find the optimal strategy of applying
Spreading Activation, we designed an evaluation
protocol relying on related skills listed on each
LinkedIn skill page. These are automatically se-
lected by computing similarities between skills from
user profiles (Skomoroch et al., 2012). Each skill
page contains at most 20 related skills.

For the evaluation procedure, we choose an initial
node i, corresponding to a LinkedIn skill, and acti-
vate it by setting a(0) = ei, that is a vector contain-
ing 1 in its i-th element and zeros elsewhere. Then,
we compute a(T ) with some spreading strategy and
for some number of steps T , filter out the skill nodes
and rank them according to their final activations. To
measure how well the related skills are represented
in this ranked list of skills, we use Precision at 1, 5
and 10, and R-Precision to evaluate the accuracy of
the first ranked results and Recall at 100 to see how
well the algorithm manages to activate all of the re-

84



lated skills.
There are many LinkedIn skills that are not well

represented in the Wikipedia graph, because of am-
biguity issues, for instance. To prevent these anoma-
lies from causing misguiding results, we selected a
fixed set of 16 representative skills for the evalua-
tion. These skills were “Statistics”, “Hidden Markov
Models”, “Telecommunications”, “MeeGo”, “Digi-
tal Printing”, “OCR”, “Linguistics”, “Speech Syn-
thesis”, “Classical”, “Impressionist”, “Education”,
“Secondary Education”, “Cinematography”, “Exec-
utive producer”, “Social Sciences”, “Political Soci-
ology”.

Developing a completely automatic optimisation
scheme for this model selection task would be diffi-
cult because of the number of different parameters,
the size of the Wikipedia graph and the heuristic na-
ture of the whole methodology. Thus, we decided to
rely on a manual evaluation of the results.

Exploring the whole space of algorithms spanned
by eq. (1) would be too demanding as well. That is
why we have so far tested only a few models. In the
preliminary experiments that we conducted with the
system, we observed that using a friction factor λ
smaller than one had little effect on the results, and
thus we decided to always use λ = 1. Otherwise,
we experimented with three models, which we will
simply refer to as models 1, 2 and 3 and which we
define as follows

• model 1: γ = 0 and c(t) = 0;
• model 2: γ = 1 and c(t) = 0;
• model 3: γ = 0 and c(t) = a(0).

In model 1, activation is not conserved in a node
but only depends on the activation it has received
from its neighbors after each pulse. In contrast, the
activation that a node receives is completely con-
served in model 2. Model 3 corresponds to the Ran-
dom Walk with Restart model, where the initial ac-
tivation is fed to the system at each pulse. Models
1 and 2 eventually converge to a stationary distribu-
tion that is independent of the initial activation vec-
tor. This can be beneficial in situations where some
of the initially activated nodes are noisy, or irrele-
vant, because it allows the initial activation to die
out, or at least become lower than the activation of
other, possibly more relevant nodes. With Model 3,

the initially activated nodes remain always among
the most activated nodes, which is not necessarily a
robust choice.

The outcomes of the experiments demonstrated
that model 2 and model 3 perform equally well. In-
deed, these models are very similar, and apparently
their small differences do not affect the results much.
However, model 1 provided constantly worse results
than the two other models. Thus, we decided to use
model 3, corresponding to the Random Walk with
Restart model, in the system and in selecting the rest
of the spreading strategy.

We also evaluated different settings for the link
weighting scheme. Here, we faced a startling result,
namely that increasing the bidirectional link weight
δ all the way up to the value δ = 15 kept improving
the results according to almost all evaluation mea-
sures. This would indicate that links that exist in
only one direction do not convey a lot of semantic
relatedness. However, we assume that this is a phe-
nomenon caused by the nature of the experiment and
the small subset of skills used in it, and not necessar-
ily a general phenomenon for the whole Wikipedia
graph. In our experiments, the improvement was
more drastic in the range δ ∈ [1, 5] after which a
damping effect can be observed. For this reason,
we decided to set the bidirectional link weight in the
Elisit system to δ = 5.

We observed a similar phenomenon for the num-
ber of pulses T . Increasing its value up to T = 8 im-
proved constantly the results. However, again, there
was no substantial change in the results in the range
T ∈ [5, 8]. In the web service, the number of pulses
of the spreading activation can be determined by the
user.

In addition to the parameters discussed above, the
link weighting involves the popularity index πj and
the biasing parameter α. An overview of the ef-
fect of these two choices can be seen in Table 2,
which presents the results with the different eval-
uation measures. These results were obtained by
setting parameters as described earlier in this sec-
tion. First, we can see from this table that using
negative values for α in the weighting improves re-
sults compared to the natural random walk, i.e. the
case α = 0. This indicates that our strategy of bi-
asing the spreading of activation to avoid popular
nodes indeed improves the results. We can also see

85



Pre@1 Pre@5 Pre@10 R-Pre Rec@100
α din PR HITS din PR HITS din PR HITS din PR HITS din PR HITS
0 0 0 0 0.119 0.119 0.119 0.156 0.156 0.156 0.154 0.154 0.154 0.439 0.439 0.439

-0.2 0 0 0 0.206 0.238 0.206 0.222 0.216 0.213 0.172 0.193 0.185 0.469 0.469 0.494
-0.4 0 0 0 0.225 0.263 0.169 0.203 0.200 0.150 0.185 0.204 0.148 0.503 0.498 0.476
-0.6 0 0 0.063 0.238 0.225 0.119 0.200 0.197 0.141 0.186 0.193 0.119 0.511 0.517 0.418
-0.8 0 0 0 0.213 0.181 0.075 0.191 0.197 0.113 0.171 0.185 0.109 0.515 0.524 0.384
-1 0 0 0 0.169 0.156 0.063 0.178 0.197 0.091 0.154 0.172 0.097 0.493 0.518 0.336

Table 2: The effect of the biasing parameter α and the choice of popularity index on the results in the evaluation of the
wiki2skill module.

that using Pagerank as the popularity index provided
overall better results than using the input degree,
which again yielded better results than using HITS.
Thus, biasing according to the input connections of
nodes seems more preferable than biasing accord-
ing to co-citation or co-reference connections. The
low scores with Precision@1 are understandable,
because of the low number of positives (at most 20
related skills) in comparison to the total number of
skills (over 27,000). In the Elisit system, we use
the Pagerank score as the popularity index and set
the value of the biasing parameter to α = −0.4.

5.3 Evaluation of the whole Elisit system

We adapted the evaluation procedure used for the
wiki2skill module, described in the previous
section, in order to test the whole Elisit sys-
tem. This time, instead of activating the node of
a given skill, we activated the nodes found by the
text2wiki module when fed with the Wikipedia
article corresponding to the skill. We run the Spread-
ing Activation algorithm with the setup presented in
the previous section. To make the evaluation more
realistic, the initial activation of the target skill node
is set to zero (instead of 1, i.e. the cosine of a vector
with itself).

The system allows its user to set the number of
initially activated nodes. We investigated the ef-
fect of this choice by measuring Precision and Re-
call according to the related skills, and by looking
at the average rank of the target skill on the list of
final activations. However, there was no clear trend
in the results when testing with 1-200 initially ac-
tivated nodes. Nevertheless, we have noticed that
using more than 20 initially activated nodes rarely
improves the results. We must also emphasize that
the choice of the number of initially activated nodes
depends on the query, especially its length.

We also wanted to compare the different VSM’s

VSM Pre@1 Pre@5 Pre@10 R-Pre Rec@100

TF-IDF 0.042 0.231 0.214 0.190 0.516
LogEntropy 0.068 0.216 0.212 0.193 0.525

LogEnt + LSA 0.042 0.180 0.181 0.163 0.491
LogEnt + LDA 0.089 0.193 0.174 0.159 0.470

Table 3: Comparison of the different models of the
text2wiki module in the performance of the whole
Elisit system.

of the text2wiki module when using the whole
Elisit system. We did this by comparing Pre-
cision and Recall at different ranks w.r.t. the re-
lated skills of the target skill found on LinkedIn.
Thus, this experiment combines the experiments in-
troduced in sections 5.1, where the evaluation was
based on the “See also” pages, and 5.2, where we
used a set of 16 target skills and their related skills.
Table 3 reports the Precision and Recall values ob-
tained with the different VSM’s. These values result
from an average over 12 different numbers of ini-
tially activated nodes. They confirm the conclusion
drawn from the experiment in section 5.1, namely
that the LogEntropy and TF-IDF models outperform
LSA and LDA models for this task.

6 Conclusion and future work

We have presented a method for skill extraction
based on Wikipedia articles, their hyperlink graph,
and a set of skills built by LinkedIn. We have also
presented the Elisit system as a reference imple-
mentation of this method. This kind of a system
has many potential applications, such as knowledge
management in a company or recommender systems
of websites. We have demonstrated with examples
and with quantitative evaluations that the system in-
deed extracts relevant skills from text. The evalu-
ation experiments have also allowed us to compare
and finetune different strategies and parameters of
the system. For example, we have shown that using
a bias to avoid the spreading of activation to popular

86



nodes of the graph improves retrieval results.
This work is still in progress, and we have many

goals for improvement. One plan is to compute link
weights based on the contents of linked pages using
their vector space representation in the text2wiki
module. The method and system proposed in the
paper could also be extended to other languages. Fi-
nally, our methodology can potentially be used to
different problems than skill extraction by substitut-
ing the LinkedIn skills with a list of Wikipedia pages
from another domain.

References
John R Anderson. 1983. A spreading activation theory of

memory. Journal Of Verbal Learning And Verbal Behavior,
22(3):261–295.

Krisztian Balog, Paul Thomas, Nick Craswell, Ian Soboroff, Pe-
ter Bailey, and Arjen P De Vries. 2008. Overview of the trec
2008 enterprise track. Technical report, DTIC Document.

Krisztian Balog, Yi Fang, Maarten de Rijke, Pavel Serdyukov,
and Luo Si. 2012. Expertise retrieval. Foundations and
Trends in Information Retrieval, 6(2-3):127–256.

Holger Bast and Debapriyo Majumdar. 2005. Why spectral
retrieval works. In Proceedings of the 28th annual interna-
tional ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development
in information retrieval, pages 11–18. ACM.

Michael W. Berry, Susan T. Dumais, and Gavin W. O’Brien.
1994. Using linear algebra for intelligent information re-
trieval. Technical Report UT-CS-94-270.

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. 2003.
Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 3:993–1022, March.

Matthew Brand. 2005. A random walks perspective on max-
imizing satisfaction and profit. Proceedings of the 2005
SIAM International Conference on Data Mining.

Fabio Crestani. 1997. Application of spreading activation tech-
niques in information retrieval. Artificial Intelligence Re-
view, 11(6):453–482.

Gianluca Demartini, Tereza Iofciu, and Arjen P De Vries. 2010.
Overview of the inex 2009 entity ranking track. In Focused
Retrieval and Evaluation, pages 254–264. Springer.

Peter W Foltz. 1996. Latent semantic analysis for text-based
research. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Com-
puters, 28(2):197–202.

Agata Fronczak and Piotr Fronczak. 2009. Biased random
walks in complex networks: The role of local navigation
rules. Physical Review E, 80(1):016107.

Evgeniy Gabrilovich and Shaul Markovitch. 2007. Comput-
ing semantic relatedness using wikipedia-based explicit se-
mantic analysis. In IJCAI’07: Proceedings of the 20th in-
ternational joint conference on Artifical intelligence, pages
1606–1611, San Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc.

Stephan Gouws, G-J van Rooyen, and Herman A. Engelbrecht.
2010. Measuring conceptual similarity by spreading acti-
vation over wikipedia’s hyperlink structure. In Proceedings

of the 2nd Workshop on The People’s Web Meets NLP: Col-
laboratively Constructed Semantic Resources, pages 46–54,
Beijing, China, August. Coling 2010 Organizing Committee.

Graeme Hirst. 1988. Semantic interpretation and ambiguity.
Artificial Intelligence, 34(2):131–177.

Jon M. Kleinberg. 1999. Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked
environment. Journal of the ACM, 46(5):604–632.

Marijn Koolen. 2011. The Meaning Of Structure: the Value
of Link Evidence for Information Retrieval. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Thomas K. Landauer and Susan T. Dumais. 1997. A solu-
tion to plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory
of acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psych. review, 104(2):211.

Christopher D Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich
Schütze. 2008. Introduction to information retrieval, vol-
ume 1. Cambridge University Press Cambridge.

Amin Mantrach, Nicolas van Zeebroeck, Pascal Francq,
Masashi Shimbo, Hugues Bersini, and Marco Saerens.
2011. Semi-supervised classification and betweenness com-
putation on large, sparse, directed graphs. Pattern Recogni-
tion, 44(6):1212–1224.

Rada Mihalcea and Andras Csomai. 2007. Wikify!: link-
ing documents to encyclopedic knowledge. In Mário J.
Silva, Alberto H. F. Laender, Ricardo A. Baeza-Yates, Debo-
rah L. McGuinness, Bjørn Olstad, Øystein Haug Olsen, and
André O. Falcão, editors, CIKM, pages 233–242. ACM.

George A Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database for english.
Communications of the ACM, 38(11):39–41.

Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, and Terry Wino-
grad. 1999. The pagerank citation ranking: Bringing order
to the web. Technical Report 1999-0120, Computer Science
Department, Stanford University.

Jia-Yu Pan, Hyung-Jeong Yang, Christos Faloutsos, and Pinar
Duygulu. 2004. Automatic multimedia cross-modal corre-
lation discovery. In Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge discovery and data
mining, pages 653–658. ACM.

Radim Řehůřek and Petr Sojka. 2010. Software Framework
for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. In Proceedings
of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP
Frameworks, pages 45–50, Valletta, Malta, May. ELRA.

Jeff Shrager, Tad Hogg, and Bernardo A Huberman. 1987.
Observation of phase transitions in spreading activation net-
works. Science, 236(4805):1092–1094.

Peter N Skomoroch, Matthew T Hayes, Abhishek Gupta, and
Dhanurjay AS Patil. 2012. Skill customization system, Jan-
uary 24. US Patent App. 13/357,360.

Mark Steyvers, Padhraic Smyth, Michal Rosen-Zvi, and
Thomas Griffiths. 2004. Probabilistic author-topic models
for information discovery. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining. ACM Press.

Eric Yeh, Daniel Ramage, Christopher D. Manning, Eneko
Agirre, and Aitor Soroa. 2009. Wikiwalk: Random walks
on wikipedia for semantic relatedness. In Graph-based
Methods for Natural Language Processing, pages 41–49.
The Association for Computer Linguistics.

87


