



















































The Syntax of Hungarian Auxiliaries: A Dependency Grammar Account


Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (DepLing 2013), pages 118–127,
Prague, August 27–30, 2013. c© 2013 Charles University in Prague, Matfyzpress, Prague, Czech Republic

The syntax of Hungarian auxiliaries:  

a dependency grammar account 

András Imrényi 

Jagiellonian University, Cracow 
Chair of Hungarian Philology 

Poland 
imrenyi.andras@gmail.com 

  

 

Abstract 

This paper addresses a hot topic of Hunga-
rian syntactic research, viz. the treatment of 
“discontinuous” constructions involving 
auxiliaries. The case is made for a projective 
dependency grammar (DG) account built on 
the notions of rising and catenae (Groß and 
Osborne, 2009). Additionally, the semantic 
basis of the dependency created by rising is 
described with a view to analogy and con-
structional meaning. 

1 Introduction 

The topic of this paper is the word order pat-
tern illustrated below. 

(1)  János  el      fog        utazni  Párizsba. 
  John   away  will.3SG travel  Paris.to 

   ‘John will travel to Paris.’ 

(2)  Részt     akar   venni a    kiállításon. 
       part.ACC wants take   the exhibition.on 
   ‘He/she wants to take part in the exhibition’ 

Both examples include a discontinuity, with 
the auxiliaries fog ‘will.3SG’ and akar ‘wants’ 
intervening between two parts of the complex 
verbs elutazni ‘to travel away’ and részt venni 
‘to take part’, respectively. Under the standard 
assumption that the finite auxiliaries are the 
roots here, taking lexical verbs as their infini-
tival complements, the simplest DG analysis 
incurs a projectivity violation: 

(3)                   fog 

 János       utazni  

   el           Párizsba 

  János el  fog  utazni  Párizsba 

The goals of the paper are twofold.  
Firstly, I will compare possible analyses of 

the construction, and argue for a projective DG 
account along the lines of Groß and Osborne 

(2009). In particular, it will be proposed that 
while utazni acts as the governor of el (licens-
ing its appearance), the latter element takes the 
auxiliary as its head (a case of rising). Formal 
evidence in favour of the account will come 
from ellipsis, coordination, prosodic structure, 
and the placement of adverbs. 

Secondly, with the above syntactic analysis 
in mind, I will turn to the issue whether the 
dependency created by rising has any asso-
ciated meaning or function. It will be argued 
that it does, but in a way which crucially in-
volves aspects of (clausal) constructional se-
mantics. 

The paper is concerned with a syntactic con-
struction rather than the word class of auxilia-
ries. It has to be mentioned, though, that both 
traditional (Lengyel 2000) and generative ap-
proaches (Kenesei 2008) to Hungarian tend to 
narrow down the group to a few elements (in-
cluding fog ‘will’ but excluding akar ‘want’, 
for example). I side with Kálmán C. et al. 
(1989), however, who identify Hungarian aux-
iliaries on the basis of syntactic and prosodic 
behaviour; roughly, appearance in the kind of 
construction illustrated in (1) and (2) above. I 
regard verbs which participate in this construc-
tion (in other words, which are collexemes of it 
in terms of Stefanowitsch and Gries, 2003) as 
auxiliaries, when and to the extent that they do 
so. However, this does not prevent them from 
being verbs, i.e. “auxiliary” is not viewed here 
as a distinct (let alone closed) word class of 
Hungarian. 

In section 2, I will present the relevant data, 
and make three observations against which the 
analyses will be matched. Section 3 compares 
four syntactic accounts, two each from the tra-
ditions of phrase structure grammar and de-
pendency grammar. Section 4 addresses the 
relationship between rising and constructional 
meaning. Finally, summary and conclusions 
follow in section 5. 

118



2 Data and observations 

In this section, I make three observations about 
the construction, which will serve as a basis for 
evaluating analyses in section 3. These obser-
vations are highlighted below for convenience. 

1. There is a syntactic relationship between 
the verb modifier (VM, e.g. el, részt) ap-
pearing to the left of the root auxiliary 
and the infinitive (e.g. utazni, venni, 
with the -ni infinitive suffix) on its right. 

2. There is also a syntactic relationship be-
tween the VM (e.g. el, részt) and the root 
auxiliary (e.g. fog, akar). 

3. The three elements (i.e. the VM, the root 
auxiliary and the infinitive) form a 
grammatical unit, which, however, is 
subject to word order variation. 

2.1 The link between VM and infinitive 

The first, rather trivial observation is that in 
patterns like el fog utazni ‘he/she will travel 
away’ and részt akar venni ‘he/she wants to 
take part’, there is a syntactic relationship be-
tween the first and the third element. This rela-
tionship is one of licensing: the so-called verb 
modifiers (el ‘away’, részt ‘part.ACC’) could 
not occur in these structures were it not for the 
lexical verbs appearing in an infinitive form. 

The two elements form a semantic unit with 
a higher or lower level of compositionality (cf. 
the oft-cited example berúg ‘get drunk’, where 
the VM be literally means ‘in’, and rúg literally 
means ‘kick’). In addition, it is noteworthy that 
there is often a morphological dependency be-
tween the two elements: for example, the -t 
accusative suffix of részt ‘part.ACC’ is as-
signed by venni ‘to take.’ While morphological 
dependencies are considered separable in prin-
ciple from syntactic ones (cf. Mel’čuk 1988), 
there is a clear tendency for such dependencies 
to hold between elements which are also syn-
tactically related. 

In Hungarian linguistics, the term “verb 
modifier”1 (also known as “preverb”) denotes 
a category of elements with the following 
properties: “(i) they occupy the position im-
mediately preceding the verb,2 and (ii) in the 
typical case they form semantically a complex 
                                                           
1 As a reviewer points out, the term may be misleading as 
VMs are not in fact modifiers (in the sense of being ad-
juncts). However, I still adopt it, following standard prac-
tice in Hungarian grammar (cf. É. Kiss, 2002: 67). 
2 At least in so-called neutral clauses, cf. section 2.3. 

verb with the base verb” (Kiefer 2003: 17). 
Thirdly, it can be added that the VM + verb 
sequence tends to behave as a single phonolog-
ical word, with the word-initial stress of Hun-
garian falling on the first syllable of the unit. 

 VMs come in two subgroups, illustrated by 
the expressions in (4) and (5). 

(4) a. moziba     megy 
     cinema.to goes 
     ‘[he/she] goes to cinema’  
 b. újságot     olvas 
     newspaper.ACC  reads 

‘[he/she] reads newspaper’ / ‘[he/she] 
is engaged in newspaper-reading’ 

(5) a. ki-megy 
     out-goes 

‘[he/she] goes out’  

 b. el-olvas 
       away-reads 
       ‘[he/she] reads [to the end]’ 

Whereas the VMs of the complex verbs listed 
in (4) satisfy an argument of the base verb, so-
called verbal particles such as el ‘away’, be 
‘in’ and ki ‘out’ fail to do so (cf. Kiefer ibid.). 
Nevertheless, there is considerable agreement 
in the literature that the two types of VMs are 
amenable to essentially the same syntactic 
analysis, cf. the analogous examples in (6). 

(6) a. moziba fog menni 
      ‘[he/she] will go to cinema’ 

 b. újságot akar olvasni 
     ‘[he/she] wants to read newspaper’ 

 c. ki fog menni 
     ‘[he/she] will go out’ 

 d. el       akarja               olvasni 
     away wants.DEF.OBJ  read 
     ‘[he/she] wants to read it’ 

In conclusion, it would be hard to deny that 
there is a relationship between VMs and infini-
tives in the construction under study. The link 
is evident at several levels of analysis includ-
ing the lexicon, morphology, syntax and se-
mantics. From a syntactic perspective, the rela-
tionship can be defined as licensing, a point 
that will be taken up later in section 3. 

2.2 The link between VM and auxiliary 

Less immediately apparent is the fact that there 
is also a syntactic relationship between the VM 
and the root auxiliary. Although the two ele-

119



ments are adjacent, adjacency alone is clearly 
insufficient to establish the link as syntactical-
ly significant. For instance, in this obviously 
contrived example, this and obviously have 
little to do with one another. 

However, the following data strongly sug-
gest that the VM and the root auxiliary are 
more intimately related. 

(7) A: János  el     fog    utazni Párizsba? 
    John away will.3SG travel  Paris.to  

      ‘Will John travel to Paris?’ 

 B: Igen, el       fog. 
      yes    away will.3SG 
      ‘Yes, he will.’   

In speaker B’s utterance, the VM and the root 
auxiliary together form a well-formed clause. 
This would hardly be possible in the absence 
of a direct syntactic relationship (more specifi-
cally, a dependency) between them.3 In partic-
ular, the analysis in (3) is rendered unlikely, 
since it implies the possibility of eliding an 
intermediate element (utazni ‘travel’) while 
preserving the phonological content of ele-
ments both above and below it in the tree. We 
will see in section 3 that this goes against what 
seems to be a valid generalization about the 
relevant cases of ellipsis. 

A second argument for a direct syntactic 
link between the VM and the root auxiliary 
comes from prosodic structure. As noted 
above, VMs immediately preceding their base 
verbs form a single phonological word with 
them; for example, 'elutazik ‘[he/she] travels 
away’ has a single stress assigned to the first 
syllable. Importantly, a similar situation holds 
when the VM is followed by an auxiliary. For 
example, in 'el fog 'utazni ‘[he/she] will travel 
away’, el and the first syllable of utazni are 
stressed, while fog is unstressed, presumably 
because el and fog belong to the same phono-
logical word. Under the reasonable assumption 
that elements forming phonological words tend 
to be syntactically closely related, this suggests 
that there is a direct link between el and fog in 
the syntactic hierarchy. 

Thirdly, the distribution of certain adverbs 
also supports the conclusion that the VM and 
                                                           
3 As a reviewer observes, disjointed elements may appear 
in answer fragments, cf. German [Wem gefällt das? ‘Who 
likes that?] Mir gefällt das nicht ‘Not me.’ However, 
speaker B’s utterance in (7) crucially includes the root 
auxiliary, whereas in the German example, the root verb 
is elided. It seems plausible to suppose that remnants 
which do include the root must be continuous. 

the root auxiliary form a tightly integrated unit. 
For example, the epistemic adverb talán ‘per-
haps’ cannot occur between the VM and the 
auxiliary (8a), only between the auxiliary and 
the infinitive (8b) or externally to the VM + 
auxiliary + infinitive pattern (8c, 8d). 

(8) a. *János el talán fog utazni Párizsba. 

  b.   János el fog talán utazni Párizsba. 

     c.   János talán el fog utazni Párizsba. 

    d.   János el fog utazni talán Párizsba. 
             ‘John will perhaps travel to Paris.’ 

Finally, the following coordination pattern also 
suggests the existence of a direct link between 
the VM and the auxiliary. Coordinating el akar 
and el is fog (where is means ‘also’) would 
hardly be possible if VM + auxiliary sequences 
were not grammatical units. 

(9) J. el        akar    és   el      is      fog  utazni Párizsba. 
      J. away wants and away also will travel  Paris.to 
      ‘John wants to, and also will, travel to Paris.’ 

All in all, ellipsis and coordination facts, pros-
ody, and the distribution of adverbs such as 
talán ‘perhaps’ provide converging evidence 
that the adjacency between the VM and the root 
auxiliary is syntactically significant. Precisely 
how this can be incorporated in a DG analysis 
is an issue to be addressed in section 3. 

2.3 Evidence that the three elements form 

a grammatical unit 

Finally, a third observation about the construc-
tion is that the VM, the auxiliary and the infini-
tive form some kind of grammatical unit. In 
this regard, note first that strings such as el 
akar utazni and el fog utazni can be substituted 
by one-word predicates with a similar dis-
course function (10, 11).  

(10) a. János el akar utazni Párizsba. 
       ‘John wants to travel to Paris.’  
    b.  János elutazna                    Párizsba. 
        John   away.travel.COND.3G Paris.to 

          ‘John would [gladly] travel to Paris.’ 

(11)  a. János el fog utazni Párizsba. 
       ‘John will travel to Paris.’ 
    b. János elutazik             Párizsba. 
        John  away.travel.3SG Paris.to 

         ‘John is [soon] travelling to Paris.’ 

Secondly, the strings mentioned can be coordi-
nated (12) or elided by gapping (13). In the 
latter example, pedig is a marker of topic shift. 

120



(12) János el akar utazni és el is fog utazni P.-ba. 
     ‘J. wants to, and also will, travel to Paris.’ 

(13) J. el fog utazni Párizsba, Mari pedig Rómába. 
    ‘J. will travel to Paris, and Mary to Rome.’ 

Such facts are easiest to explain if the VM + 
auxiliary + infinitive pattern is treated as a 
grammatical unit. However, it is important to 
observe that the unit in question is highly flex-
ible. In particular, the word order of its ele-
ments is subject to variation, as demonstrated 
by the examples below. 

(14) János el fog Párizsba utazni. 
     ‘John will travel to Paris.’  

(15) JÁNOS fog elutazni Párizsba. 
     ‘It is John who will travel to Paris.’ 

As (14) shows (compared with (1)), the rela-
tive position of the infinitive and its dependent 
is not fixed by the construction: Párizsba ‘to 
Paris’ may precede as well as follow its head 
utazni ‘travel.’ And as (15) illustrates, certain 
sentence types may also rearrange the order of 
the VM and the auxiliary. When an identifica-
tional focus (cf. É. Kiss 1998a) such as JÁNOS 
is present in the structure, it attracts the finite 
auxiliary to its right, and the VM is attached to 
the infinitive. More precisely, it is attached to 
the infinitive which licenses it, a qualification 
made necessary by examples such as (17). 

(16)  János el      fog  tudni   utazni  Párizsba. 
    John  away  will  be.able travel  Paris.to 

‘John will be able to travel to Paris.’ 

(17)  JÁNOS fog tudni elutazni Párizsba. 
‘It is John who will be able to travel to P.’ 

In Hungarian linguistics, examples such as 
(14) and (16) are often called neutral clauses, 
whereas patterns like (15) and (17) are known 
as non-neutral ones. Roughly, whereas a neu-
tral declarative clause answers the question 
What happened? or What is the situation?, a 
non-neutral one is felicitous under more spe-
cial communicative circumstances. The gene-
ralization that VMs immediately precede the 
finite verb or auxiliary is construction-specific. 
Clauses with identificational foci, a negative 
particle, an interrogative pronoun, etc. display 
a different word order (see also section 4). 

To conclude this section, the facts are fairly 
complex but substitution, coordination and 
ellipsis tests do suggest that the VM + auxiliary 
+ infinitive pattern forms some kind of gram-
matical unit. However, this unit is hardly a uni-

tary block that always appears in exactly the 
same form. Rather, it is subject to significant 
variation regarding the word order of its ele-
ments. In section 3, I will argue that this unit 
status combined with a high degree of flexibili-
ty can be best captured with the notion of cate-
nae as proposed by Osborne et al. (2012). 

3 Competing analyses 

We are now in a position to assess competing 
syntactic analyses of the construction. The 
main criterion for evaluation will be the extent 
to which they comply with the observations 
made in the previous section. Of the four ac-
counts to be considered, the first two come 
from the tradition of phrase structure grammar. 
These will be presented in 3.1, followed by a 
comparison of two DG-based solutions in 3.2. 

3.1 Phrase structure grammar 

In the last decades of the 20th century, phrase 
structure grammar enjoyed a virtual monopoly 
in analyses of Hungarian word order, so much 
so that even those not committed to Choms-
kyan generative grammar chose to adopt it for 
descriptive purposes. Thus in their classic pa-
per on the system of Hungarian auxiliaries, 
Kálmán C. et al. (1989: 52) assigned the tree 
diagram in (19) to the sentence below. 

(18) A MIGÉRT részt akart venni a kiállításon. 
        ‘MIGÉRT [name of Hungarian company] 

wanted to take part in the exhibition.’ 

(19)            Sentence 
 
  Subject       Predicate Phrase 

 
            Verb Phrase        Complement 
 
       Carrier  Verb 
 
           Carrier Ni-stem 
 
A MIGÉRT   részt       akart  venni   a k.-on 

Dated as it undoubtedly is, the account is not 
without merits. Firstly, it captures the intuition 
that the three elements form a grammatical unit 
(2.3): specifically, részt akart venni ‘wanted to 
take part’ is analysed as a VP within the predi-
cate phrase. Secondly, the relationship between 
the VM részt ‘part.ACC’ and the infinitive venni 
‘take’ is signalled (cf. 2.1), with the two form-
ing a constituent called “carrier” in the VP. 

On the other hand, the link betweeen the VM 
részt ‘part.ACC’ and the auxiliary verb akart 

121



‘wanted.3SG’ is not directly indicated, despite 
evidence from prosodic structure ('részt akart 
'venni), coordination (részt akar és részt is fog 
venni ‘wants to, and will, take part’) and the 
placement of adverbs.4 

(20)  a. *részt mindenképpen akart venni 

       b.  részt akart mindenképpen venni 

c.  mindenképpen részt akart venni 

d.  részt akart venni mindenképpen 
     ‘wanted to take part by all means’ 

As shown in (20), the adverb mindenképpen 
‘by all means’ has the same distribution vis-à-
vis részt akart venni ‘wanted to take part’ as 
talán ‘perhaps’ did with respect to el fog utazni 
‘will travel away’ in (8). This suggests that 
részt and akart form a tightly integrated unit. 

The biggest problem with (19) though is that 
it violates the No Crossing Branches principle 
widely adopted in the tradition of phrase struc-
ture grammar. Kálmán C. et al.’s flexible ap-
proach to what passes as a well-formed tree is 
problematic because it grossly overgenerates 
the set of possible sentences. In the absence of 
clearly defined restrictions on the emergence 
of discontinuities, any word order is predicted 
to be possible, and the analysis is lacking ex-
planatory power. 

The second phrase structural analysis consi-
dered here is couched in transformational ge-
nerative grammar. Rather than presenting a 
specific account found in the literature, I will 
attempt to come as close as possible to com-
plying with the observations made in section 2 
as well as the basic assumptions of the theory. 
Also, the analysis will only make use of ideas 
that are present in one or another version of the 
standard generative model of Hungarian (see 
in particular É. Kiss, 1998b, 2002). 

Transformational generative grammar al-
lows one to recognize the link between the VM 
and the infinitive at an underlying level of re-
presentation, and to let movement rules pro-
duce the surface word order. Thus, under the 
account in (21), the VM and the (non-finite) 
verb form a constituent at “deep structure” be-
fore the VM is moved out of the VP into a 
phrase called PredP, cf. É. Kiss (2008).  

  

                                                           
4 The kind of ellipsis shown in (7) works perfectly with 
verbal particles (such as el ’away’, ki ’out’, etc.) but it is 
rather marginal with VMs like részt. 

(21)             S 
 

 TopicP             PredP 
 
           Pred        VP1 
 
            V1     VP2 
 
              V2               CaseP 
 
          VM     V2  
 
János  eli     fog  t i   utazni    Párizsba    

This analysis has the advantage of being more 
restrictive, and therefore theoretically more 
appealing, than the proposal of Kálmán C. et 
al. (1989).5 The price paid for this is the intro-
duction of underlying representations and 
transformations, which rival theories such as 
LFG and HPSG reject on account of their per-
ceived lack of psycholinguistic plausibility and 
practical (computational linguistic) utility. 

More importantly for the present discussion, 
while (21) is consistent with the observation 
that there is a syntactic link between the VM 
and the infinitive, and also goes some way to-
ward recognizing the relationship between the 
VM and the auxiliary,6 it fails to reflect the unit 
status of the VM + auxiliary + infinitive pat-
tern. To the extent that the argumentation in 
section 2.3 was sound, this puts the account at 
a disadvantage. 

3.2 Dependency grammar 

As noted in the introduction, the simplest DG 
representation of the construction involves a 
projectivity violation.7 The analysis is repeated 
in (22) below. 

(22)                   fog 

 János       utazni  

   el           Párizsba 

  János el  fog  utazni  Párizsba 

                                                           
5 The tree in (21) is simplified in ways that do not 
crucially affect the argumentation. Technically, the VM is 
in Spec,PredP, and Pred0 may be the landing site of the 
finite verb (cf. É. Kiss 2008: 131). Thus, the VM and the 
finite verb may enter a Spec-Head configuration. 
6 This is so if the VM and the auxiliary are in a Spec-Head 
relationship, cf. footnote 5. 
7 In Nivre’s formulation, “A dependency graph satisfies 
the constraint of projectivity with respect to a particular 
linear order of the nodes if, for every arc h [head]→ d 
[dependent] and node w, w occurs between h and d in the 
linear order only if w is dominated by h” (2005: 10). 

122



The diagram signals the syntactic relationship 
between the VM and the infinitive, with utazni 
‘travel’ identified as the head of el ‘away.’ Se-
condly, the root auxiliary, the infinitive and the 
VM form a dependency chain (cf. Hudson 
1990: 99), hence a unit of DG. However, the 
tree in (22) implies that the adjacency of el and 
fog is merely a fact of word order; there is no 
direct dependency between them. 

As is well known, versions of DG can be 
built either with or without the assumption of 
projectivity (cf. Nivre 2005: 10). Here, what 
needs to be established is whether there are 
any empirical reasons for rejecting (22). As 
suggested in 2.2, the main counter-argument 
comes from the following type of ellipsis: 

(23)  A:  János  el      fog utazni Párizsba? 
         John   away  will travel Paris.to 

‘Will John travel to Paris?’ 

   B:  Igen, el       fog. 
          yes    away will.3SG 

 ‘Yes, he will.’   

Ellipsis is a hugely complex phenomenon, and 
a fully predictive account of when it is or is not 
possible may be an elusive research objective.8 
However, it seems fairly clear that given the 
structure in (22), one does not expect utazni to 
be elided while both its head fog ‘will.3SG’ and 
its dependent el ‘away’ are unaffected. 

According to Rosta (2006: 176), “[e]llipsis 
involves the deletion of the phonological con-
tent of some syntactic structure, and it seems to 
operate rather as if (the phonology of) a branch 
of the syntactic tree were snipped off. Thus if 
the phonological content of one node is de-
leted, then so must be the phonological content 
of all nodes subordinate to it.” Although this 
formulation is almost certainly too restrictive, 
as Rosta himself concedes (note especially 
gapping phenomena, cf. (13) and Osborne, 
2005: 275–280), it does seem to be a valid ge-
neralization for the case at hand. When a sen-
tence is reduced to a combination of elements 
including the root (let us call it its “core”), the 

                                                           
8 This is especially true for cross-linguistic predictions. 
As a reviewer remarks, similar word order configurations 
to the ones discussed in this paper exist in French, cf. 
Jean l’a vu ‘John has seen it’/’John saw it’, where the 
object clitic l’ ‘it’ is licensed by the past participle vu 
‘seen’ but it precedes and arguably depends on the aux-
iliary a ‘has.’ Still, the past participle cannot be elided 
(*Jean l’a vu). I assume that this is motivated by inde-
pendent properties of French; parallel structures in differ-
ent languages need not permit the same kinds of ellipsis. 

core ought to be a “network within the net-
work”, with its internal structure describable 
by a continuous set of dependencies. 

For this reason, and the further points made 
in 2.2, I propose the following representation 
of the syntactic structure of (1), following 
Groß and Osborne (2009).9 

(24)                   fog 

 János el      utaznig  

              Párizsba 

  János el  fog  utazni  Párizsba 

Groß and Osborne (2009: 53) crucially sepa-
rate the notions of governor and head. A 
word’s governor is the word licensing its ap-
pearance. By contrast, its head is the word that 
immediately dominates it. Although by default, 
the governor and the head are the same word, 
the two functions may also be associated with 
different nodes of the structure. In such cases, 
however, the head must be higher up in the 
tree than the governor; in other words, only 
“rising” can occur, not “lowering.”10 

The analysis in (24) expresses that the gov-
ernor of el is utazni; this is marked by the g 
subscript of the latter. The dependency pro-
duced by rising is distinguished by a dashed  
dependency edge. Importantly, rising is un-
derstood only metaphorically here, since Groß 
and Osborne’s approach is strictly non-
derivational (cf. Groß and Osborne, 2009: 54). 
Hence, there is no such claim that the head of 
el should have been utazni at an underlying 
level of representation. For arguments support-
ing rising-based analyses of linguistic pheno-
mena, see Groß and Osborne (2009: 56–64). 

By separating governor and head, the analy-
sis conforms to the observation that the VM is 
syntactically related to both the infinitive and 
the root auxiliary. Especially significant is the 
fact that the kind of ellipsis seen in (23) fol-
lows naturally from the proposal, which was 
not the case with (22). What is yet to be seen, 
though, is whether the grammatical unit status 
of the VM + auxiliary + infinitive pattern is 
accounted for under these assumptions. 
                                                           
9 For a parsing-oriented approach along similar lines, see 
Barta et al., 2004. 
10 Groß and Osborne’s concept of rising has many prece-
dents in the literature including Duchier and Debusmann, 
2001, Gerdes and Kahane, 2001, and Hudson, 2000 (cf. 
Groß and Osborne, 2009: 51). I adopt their approach 
because of its descriptive appeal; other frameworks may 
be seen as better developed from a model theoretic or 
computational linguistic perspective. 

123



Broadly speaking, the issue is what kinds of 
units larger than the word a syntactic DG anal-
ysis can recognize. One traditional unit type is 
the DG equivalent of a phrase or constituent. 
In contrast with phrase structure grammar, DG 
treats constituents as units implied by a net-
work of word-to-word relations (Hudson, 
2007: 121) rather than as unique nodes of the 
tree. A theory-neutral definition of constitu-
ents, also applicable to DG, is as follows: 

(25) Any node plus all the nodes that that node 
dominates. (Osborne, 2005: 254) 

In (24), there are only two multi-word consti-
tuents: utazni Párizsba, and János el fog utazni 
Párizsba. By contrast, el fog utazni does not 
count as a constituent, since it does not include 
all the nodes that its root (fog) dominates. 

Another established unit type recognized by 
DG is the dependency chain, i.e. a continuous 
non-branching line of h → d relations. Accord-
ing to Hudson (1990), “a word’s phrase con-
sists of the union of all its down-chains.” In 
(24), the following complete down-chains of 
fog ‘will.3SG’ can be identified: fog → János; 
fog → el; and fog → utazni → Párizsba. 
Again, el fog utazni as analysed in (24) is not 
captured by the concept. 

Recent years, however, have seen the recog-
nition of a new, more inclusive unit type im-
plied by the dependency network. Building on 
previous work (notably O’Grady, 1998, and 
Osborne, 2005), Osborne et al. (2012: 359) 
introduce a unit type called catena (Latin for 
‘chain’), defined over a D-tree as follows: 

(26) A word, or a combination of words which 
is continuous with respect to dominance. 

The catena concept is more inclusive than that 
of constituents/phrases because it does not re-
quire the unit to include all the nodes dominat-
ed by a given element. Also, it is more inclu-
sive than traditional dependency chains since it 
also captures combinations of words consisting 
of a head and multiple dependents (schemati-
cally: d1 ← h → d2). Finally, single words also 
count as catenae, which is again an extension 
on the previous concept of chains. 

In this paper, it is not my goal to defend the 
catena concept (for this, see e.g. Osborne and 
Groß, 2012, and Osborne et al., 2012). Suffice 
it to say that there is considerable evidence 
(especially from ellipsis, analytic predicates, 
and idioms) suggesting that the concept is 
highly operational. For the present discussion, 

what is important is that el fog utazni is a cate-
na (marked by italics in (24)). Hence, the anal-
ysis conforms not only to the observations 
made in 2.1 and 2.2 but also to the point that 
the three elements form a grammatical unit 
(2.3). Moreover, since the concept is defined in 
terms of dominance relations only, it is suffi-
ciently flexible to accommodate word order 
variation. Thus, the examples in (14) and (15) 
can receive the following analyses, in which 
the three elements still form catenae.11 

(27)                   fog 

 János el            utaznig 

           Párizsba 

  János el  fog  Párizsba   utazni 

(28)                   fog 

 JÁNOS         utazni 

          el      Párizsba 

  JÁNOS  fog   el  utazni Párizsba 

The proposal results from a happy marriage of 
empirical and theoretical considerations. On 
the one hand, there is strong empirical evi-
dence for a direct link between the VM and the 
root auxiliary (cf. 2.2), as signalled in (24) and 
(27). On the other, the independently moti-
vated theory of rising and catenae provides a 
simple way of accounting for this as well as 
other relevant observations. 

Also noteworthy is the fact that DG fares 
much better than phrase structure grammar in 
expressing the unit status of the VM + auxiliary 
+ infinitive pattern. Constituency-based ap-
proaches either struggle to reflect this intuition 
but fail to produce a satisfactory account, cf. 
Kálmán C. et al. (1989), or ignore the issue 
altogether, cf. the analysis couched in trans-
formational generative grammar. By contrast, 
the proposed DG account is flexible and re-
strictive enough to be faithful to the facts while 
also having strong theoretical appeal. 

At the same time, a possible objection to the 
rising analysis still remains. In particular, un-
der the assumption that dependencies ought to 
have an associated meaning or function, it is 

                                                           
11 Two reviewers make the point that VMs may be analys-
able as clitics. If this is indeed the case, then the vertical 
projection lines of VMs have to be removed under the 
conventions of Groß (2011: 60). Since the dependency 
edges would still be the same, the basic validity of the 
analyses is not at stake. Whether a clitic analysis is ne-
cessary is an issue left for future research to resolve. 

124



yet to be seen if the dependency created by 
rising also conforms to this requirement. In 
what follows, I argue that rising has a key role 
in coding aspects of constructional meaning. 

4 Rising and constructional meaning 

Since the inception of modern DG, the idea 
that dependencies have an associated meaning 
or function seems to be shared by most depen-
dency grammarians. Tesnière already claimed 
that “there is never a structural connection 
without a semantic one” (1959: 44, my transla-
tion). And while Hudson rejects the view that 
dependencies are primarily a matter of mean-
ing, he does contend that meaning is one of the 
properties that they “bring together”, “along 
with word order, agreement, case choice, and 
so on” (2007: 130). Witness also the conver-
gence between DG and construction gram-
mar/CxG (Osborne and Groß, 2012, and refer-
ences therein), which hinges on the notion that 
dependencies have a semantic side to them. 
After all, the basic tenet of CxG is that lexicon 
and syntax form a continuum, with syntactic 
constructions as well as morphemes, lexemes, 
etc. described as pairings of meaning and form. 

Exceptions, however, have also been al-
lowed by some theorists. Thus, Hudson argues 
that the “subject or object of a verb need not 
have any semantic relation to that verb at all” 
(2007: 130), It seems to be raining being an 
example. Even more importantly for the 
present discussion, he posits an “extractee” 
dependency between what and can in the sen-
tence below (2007: 131). 

(29) 

 

 

 

English non-subject wh-questions involve ris-
ing according to Osborne and Groß (2009: 52). 
In What can you see?, can is the head of what 
just as Hudson’s surface analysis (above the 
string of words) has it. Therefore, it is signifi-
cant that for Hudson, “such dependencies [as 
extractee] are concerned with very little but 
word order, and have little claim to semantic 
justification” (2007: 131). This suggests that 
the dependency created by rising perhaps does 
not, and need not, have an associated meaning. 

Clearly, though, the word order of English 
wh-elements can at least receive semantic mo-

tivation (if not justification). Since they contri-
bute a key aspect of constructional meaning 
(making a wh-question what it is), their promi-
nent and distinctive linear position is natural. 
And while in non-projective versions of DG, 
the attested word order would not entail a de-
pendency between the wh-word and the root 
auxiliary, there are independent reasons for 
subscribing to that account (e.g. the ellipsis in 
What can you see and what can’t you?). In the 
final analysis, the dependency created by ex-
traction or rising can be seen as “bringing to-
gether” both a semantic property (the special 
function of wh-questions as endowed to the 
construction by the wh-element) and formal 
ones (distinctive word order and prosody). 

Generalizing from this, one may hypothes-
ize that (certain) dependencies created by ris-
ing play a part in coding “global” aspects of 
constructional meaning, independently of any 
“local” (lexically motivated) semantic relation-
ship between the two elements. More specifi-
cally, there may be a significant correlation 
between rising and sentence types (grounded 
in illocutionary force distinctions).12 

As we return to Hungarian, it seems plausi-
ble to develop a similar account of the seman-
tic background to the word order of VMs. To 
begin, note that whereas VMs immediately pre-
cede their base verbs in neutral positive declar-
ative clauses lacking auxiliaries (30a), they 
follow them in sentence types which depart 
from this function in terms of illocutionary 
force or polarity: 

(30) a. János  el-utazott      Párizsba. 
   John  away-travelled.3SG  Paris.to 
   ‘John travelled to Paris.’ 
  b. Hova  utazott    el    János? 
   where travelled.3SG  away John? 
   ‘Where did John travel?’ 
  c. PÁRIZSBA utazott el. 
   ‘It is to Paris that he/she travelled.’ 
  d. Nem  utazott    el    Párizsba. 
   not  travelled.3SG  away Paris.to 

‘He/she did not travel to Paris.’ 

                                                           
12 A similar reasoning may apply to other “meaningless” 
dependencies such as the subjects of English and German 
weather verbs (it rains, es regnet). As Jespersen remarks, 
“the need for this pronoun [English it, German es, etc.] 
was especially felt when it became the custom to express 
the difference between affirmation and question by 
means of word order (er kommt, kommt er?), for now it 
would be possible in the same way to mark the difference 
between es regnet and regnet es?” (Jespersen, 1924: 25). 

125



The function of a neutral positive declarative 
clause such as (30a) is to profile the occur-
rence of an event relative to a mental space (in 
the sense of Fauconnier 1985). Here, the lis-
tener learns about the occurrence of a travel-
ling event in the past (a mental space distinct 
from the present), involving John as the mover 
and Paris as the goal. At the core of the con-
struct is the predicate elutazott, which has the 
function of a schematic clause. It may also 
stand by itself meaning ‘He/she travelled 
away.’ With respect to this clausal core, János 
‘John’ and Párizsba ‘to Paris’ simply elaborate 
the mover and the goal, respectively.  

By contrast, (30b,c,d) depart from the func-
tion of (30a) in one or another way. (30b) is 
used to inquire about John’s destination; (30c) 
identifies Paris as the goal to the exclusion of 
other possibilities; and finally, (30d)’s speaker 
denies the occurrence of the travelling event. 
Although not all deviations from the neutral 
positive declarative clause type are signalled in 
this way, it is reasonable to suggest that the 
inversion of VM and finite verb plays a promi-
nent role in coding clause type distinctions.13 

From this perspective, the word order (and 
by implication, the rising) of the VM in the 
Hungarian auxiliary construction can be moti-
vated by two interrelated facts. Firstly, the aux-
iliaries in question set up mental spaces in 
which an event unfolds. For example, fog 
‘will’ sets up a space for talking about future 
events, akar ‘want’ a space for discussing 
somebody’s intentions, etc. Since mental spac-
es are also implicit in the semantic structures 
of one-word predicates, it is natural to roll 
space-building verbs and verbs denoting events 
in those spaces into complex predicates. As 
noted in 2.3, VM + auxiliary + infinitive pat-
terns have a function analogous to that of VM + 
V sequences. The word order of the VM in the 
former can be seen as a reflex of complex pre-
dicate formation motivated by such analogies. 

Secondly, the resulting word order has the 
advantage of allowing for a salient and regular 
way of expressing clause type distinctions. 
Consider the following parallels: 

                                                           
13 Compare also Goldberg’s (2006: 166–182) account of 
English subject-auxiliary inversion (SAI). According to 
Goldberg, SAI as a “sytematic difference in form” signals 
a “systematic difference in function” (178) vis-à-vis pro-
totypical sentences (which are positive and declarative). 
However, “it is certainly not the only possible device” 
(181) in this capacity. For a more detailed account of 
English and Hungarian inversion, see Imrényi (2012). 

 positive negative 
past elutazott 

‘he/she travelled 
away’ 

nem utazott el 
‘he/she did not 
travel away’ 

present elutazik 
‘he/she is travel-

ling away’ 

nem utazik el 
‘he/she is not 

travelling away’ 
future el fog utazni 

‘he/she will tra-
vel away’ 

nem fog elutazni 
‘he/she will not 

travel away’ 

Table 1. Polarity and word order in Hungarian 

In all three tenses, VM + finite verb/auxiliary 
order is associated with positive polarity, and a 
different linearization with its opposite. If the 
VM did not precede the root auxiliary in the 
future tense, fog elutazni and nem fog elutazni 
would stand in opposition, and the semantic 
contrast would be coded less saliently as well 
as less regularly across the paradigm. 

To conclude, I have argued in this section 
that the word order (and assuming projectivity, 
the rising) of VMs codes important global as-
pects of constructional meaning. Firstly, it es-
tablishes a formal parallel between catenae 
with analogous functions (cf. the left-hand col-
umn in Table 1). Secondly, the VM + auxiliary 
pattern of neutral declarative clauses allows for 
a salient and regular way of coding sentence 
type distinctions (cf. the three rows in the ta-
ble). It seems likely that other “meaningless” 
dependencies such as Hudson’s “extractee” 
and the subject of English weather verbs (cf. 
footnote 12) may receive a similar motivation. 

5 Conclusions 

In this paper, I made the case for a projective 
DG analysis of the Hungarian auxiliary con-
struction. In 2, evidence was presented that in 
VM + auxiliary + infinitive patterns, there were 
syntactic links both between the VM and the 
infinitive and between the VM and the aux-
iliary. In addition, it was argued that the three 
elements formed a grammatical unit. In 3, four 
analyses were compared, with the result that 
only the DG account based on rising and cate-
nae conformed to all of the above observa-
tions. Finally, section 4 highlighted aspects of 
constructional meaning and analogy as moti-
vating factors for the form of the construction. 

Acknowledgments 

The research reported here was supported by 
the Hungarian Scientific Research Fund 

126



(project no. K100717). I also thank Timothy 
Osborne and three anonymous reviewers for 
many insightful comments and suggestions. 
All remaining errors are my own. 

References 

Barta, Csongor, Ricarda Dormeyer and Ingrid 
Fischer .2004. Word order and discontinuities in 
a DG for Hungarian. Proceedings of the 2nd 
Conference on Hungarian Computational 
Linguistics. Juhász Nyomda, Szeged. 19–27. 

Duchier, Denys and Ralph Debusmann. 2001. To-
pology dependency trees: A constraint based ac-
count of linear precedence. Proceedings from the 
39th annual meeting of the ACL. 180–187. 

É. Kiss, Katalin. 1998a. Identificational focus ver-
sus information focus. Language 74: 245–273. 

É. Kiss, Katalin. 1998b. Mondattan. In: É. Kiss 
Katalin, Kiefer Ferenc and Siptár Péter, Új ma-
gyar nyelvtan. Budapest: Osiris. 1–184. 

É. Kiss, Katalin. 2002. The syntax of Hungarian. 
CUP, Cambridge. 

É. Kiss, Katalin. 2008. Tagadás vagy egyeztetés? 
Magyar Nyelv 104: 129–143. 

Fauconnier, Gilles. 1985. Mental spaces: Aspects 
of meaning construction in natural lan-
guage. MIT Press, Cambridge MA. 

Gerdes, Kim and Sylvain Kahane. 2001. Word or-
der in German: A formal dependency grammar 
using a topology model. Proceedings from the 
39th annual meeting of the ACL. 220–227. 

Goldberg, Adele. 2006. Constructions at work: 
the nature of generalization in language. 
OUP, Oxford. 

Groß, Thomas. 2001. Clitics in Dependency Mor-
phology. Depling 2011 Proceedings: 58–68. 

Groß, Thomas and Timothy Osborne. 2009. To-
ward a practical dependency grammar theory of 
discontinuities. SKY J. of Ling. 22: 43–90. 

Heine, Bernd. 1993. Auxiliaries: cognitive forces 
and grammaticalization. OUP, Oxford. 

Hudson, Richard. 1990. English Word Grammar. 
Blackwell, Oxford. 

Hudson, Richard. 2000. Discontinuities. In: Ka-
hane, Sylvaine (ed.), Les grammaires de 
dépendance. Traitement automatique des 
langues 41. Hermes, Paris. 7–56. 

Hudson, Richard. 2007. Language networks. The 
new Word Grammar. OUP, Oxford. 

Imrényi, András. 2012. Inversion in English and 
Hungarian: comparison from a cognitive pers-
pective. In: Hart, Christopher (ed.), Selected 
Papers from UK-CLA Meetings, 1. 209–228. 

Jespersen, Otto. 1924. The philosophy of gram-
mar. George Allen & Unwin Ltd, London. 

Kálmán C., György, Kálmán László, Nádasdy 
Ádám and Prószéky Gábor. 1989. A magyar 
segédigék rendszere. Általános Nyelvészeti 
Tanulmányok XVII: 49–103. 

Kenesei, István. 2008. A segédigék. In: Kiefer 
Ferenc ed. Strukturális Magyar Nyelvtan 4. A 
szótár szerkezete. Akadémiai Kiadó, Budapest. 
615–620. 

Kiefer, Ferenc. 2003. A kétféle igemódosítóról. 
Nyelvtudományi Közlemények 100: 177–186. 

Lengyel, Klára. 2000. A segédigék és származéka-
ik. In: Keszler, Borbála (ed.), Magyar gram-
matika. Nemzeti Tankönyvkiadó, Budapest. 
252–258. 

Mel’čuk, Igor. 1988. Dependency Syntax: 
Theory and Practice. The SUNY Press, Alba-
ny, N.Y. 

Nivre, Joakim. 2005. Dependency grammar and 
dependency parsing. Vaxjo University. 

O’Grady, William. 1998. The syntax of idioms. 
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 16: 
279–312. 

Osborne, Timothy. 2005. Beyond the constituent: A 
dependency grammar analysis of chains. Folia 
Linguistica 39: 251–297. 

Osborne, Timothy and Thomas Groß. 2012.  Con-
structions are catenae. Construction Grammar 
meets Dependency Grammar. Cognitive Lin-
guistics 23 (1): 163–214. 

Osborne, Timothy, Michael Putnam and Thomas 
Groß. 2012. Catenae: Introducing a novel unit of 
syntactic analysis. Syntax 15 (4): 354–396. 

Rosta, Andrew. 2006. Structural and distributional 
heads. In: Kensei Sugayama and Richard Hud-
son (eds.), Word Grammar. New perspectives 
on a theory of language structure. Conti-
nuum, London. 171–203. 

Stefanowitsch, Anatol and Stefan Th. Gries. 2003. 
Collostructions: Investigating the inter-action be-
tween words and constructions. International 
Journal of Corpus Linguistics 8 (2): 209–43. 

Tesnière, Lucien. 1959. Éléments de syntaxe 
structurale. Klincksieck, Paris. 

127


