



















































A Look at Tesniere's E19 Elements through the Lens of Modern Syntactic Theory


Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (DepLing 2013), pages 262–271,
Prague, August 27–30, 2013. c© 2013 Charles University in Prague, Matfyzpress, Prague, Czech Republic

  

 

  A Look at Tesnière’s Éléments through the Lens of  

Modern Syntactic Theory 

Timothy Osborne 

615 6
th

 Street Apt. 110 

Kirkland, WA 98033 

USA 

tjo3ya@yahoo.com

Abstract 

A recent project to produce a much belated 

English translation of Lucien Tesnière’s 

Éléments de syntaxe structurale has provided 

the opportunity for an in depth look at 

Tesnière’s theory of syntax. This contribu-

tion examines a few aspects of Tesnière’s 

work through the lens of modern syntactic 

theory. Tesnière’s understandings of constit-

uents and phrases, auxiliary verbs, preposi-

tions, gapping, right node raising, proposi-

tional infinitives, and exocentric structures 

are all briefly considered. Concerning some 

of these areas, we see that Tesnière was vi-

sionary with his analysis, whereas in other 

areas, modern syntactic theory now rejects 

his account. Of particular interest is the fact 

that Tesnière’s theory was not entirely de-

pendency-based. His account of transfer (Fr. 

translation) acknowledged exocentric struc-

tures, which means his system was also em-

ploying constituency. In this regard, one can, 

surprisingly, classify Tesnière’s theory as a 

hybrid dependency-constituency grammar.  

1 Introduction 

Lucien Tesnière (1893-1954) is widely consid-

ered to be the father of modern dependency 

grammars (DGs). While the dependency concept 

certainly existed in varying forms in the works 

of numerous grammarians that preceded him, 

Tesnière (1959) was the first to fully utilize the 

concept of direct word-word dependencies in a 

comprehensive manner and to illustrate these 

dependencies using tree representations (stem-

mas) that left no doubt about the analysis of syn-

tactic structure being proposed. In particular, 

Tesnière appears to have been the first promi-

nent theoretician to have rejected the binary di-

vision of the clause into a subject and predicate 

and to have replaced this division with verb cen-

trality. The placement of the verb as the root of 

all syntactic structure was the all-important nov-

elty (and the main act of genius) in his theory. 

Given verb centrality, the theory of syntax that 

Tesnière was proposing could not help but be 

construed as a DG. 

Despite the fact that Tesnière is widely 

acknowledged as the father of an entire stream 

of syntactic theory, most syntacticians and 

grammarians lack exposure to his work. Few 

grammarians have actually read Tesnière’s Élé-

ments de syntaxe structurale, largely because an 

English translation of the Éléments is absent 

from the world of linguistics. Spanish, Italian, 

and German translations of the Éléments exist, 

but surprisingly, no English translation is yet 

available. With this lacuna in mind, a recent pro-

ject to translate the Éléments into English has 

been initiated and is continuing at present. This 

project is providing an in depth look at 

Tesnière’s theory and has motivated the current 

contribution. 

 Tesnière’s Éléments is large in size, 670 pages 

with hundreds of tables and tree diagrams 

(stemmas). Tesnière addresses many aspects and 

phenomena of syntax, whereby he employs ex-

amples from approximately two dozen lan-

guages, many of which he actually spoke – 

Tesnière was a true polyglot. In this respect, the 

intent of the current contribution is to briefly 

consider only a few important areas of the Élé-

ments, these areas being the ones that stuck out 

during the translation work. Certain aspects of 

Tesnière’s understanding of constituents and 

262



  

 

phrases, auxiliary verbs, prepositions, gapping, 

right node raising, propositional infinitives, and 

exocentric structures are considered below.  

 Two highlights can be mentioned here up 

front. First, Tesnière rejected much of the termi-

nology of syntax that preceded him, declaring 

that morphologists had imposed their nomencla-

ture on the study of syntax and thus confused 

our understanding of syntax (ch. 15). In this re-

gard, Tesnière had a penchant for introducing 

new terms, many of which have not become es-

tablished. One can therefore speculate about the 

reduced impact of his work due to his unfortu-

nate use of terminology. Second, Tesnière never 

actually employed the term dependency gram-

mar (Fr. grammaire de la dépandence). In fact it 

seems likely that he was not aware of the differ-

ence between dependency and constituency, 

since that distinction would be established later 

during the reception of his work.
1
 In this respect, 

he did not shy away from employing constituen-

cy in his theory of transfer (Fr. translation), a 

fact that may have been overlooked until now.   

 To conclude this introduction, a note concern-

ing the citation practice employed below for 

Tesnière’s book is necessary. The Éléments is 

split into 278 chapters, whereby each paragraph 

in a chapter is numbered. When citing specific 

passages, the chapter (ch.) and paragraph (§) are 

given (e.g. ch. 3, §3) instead of the page number. 

This practice avoids confusion that might arise if 

page numbers were cited due to the various edi-

tions of the Éléments in various languages 

(French, German, Spanish, Italian, and soon 

English as well).   

2 Constituents and phrases 

The constituent is the basic unit of syntactic 

analysis assumed by most constituency gram-

mars. A constituent is typically defined as a 

node plus all the nodes that that node dominates 

(for similar definitions, see Napoli 1993:167; 

Jacobson 1996:55; Haegeman and Guéron 

1999:51; Carnie 2008:37). Given such a defini-

tion, the number of constituents in a given tree 

structure matches the number of nodes. In the 

past, many DGs seem to have overlooked the 

                                                           
1
 According to Jurafsky and Martin (2000:489), Da-

vid Hays (1964) may have been the first to employ 

the term dependency grammar. 

fact that the definition is applicable to depend-

ency structures as well and that it identifies sub-

trees as constituents. A subtree that consists of a 

single node is simply a word, whereas a subtree 

consisting of more than one word is a phrase. In 

other words, DGs can and do acknowledge con-

stituents and phrases just like constituency 

grammars do, the only difference being that DGs 

acknowledge many fewer of both.  

Tesnière certainly saw the need to 

acknowledge the status of subtrees as particular 

units of syntax, but his use of terminology in the 

area was not consistent and this inconsistency 

has probably contributed to the confusion about 

whether dependency grammars acknowledge 

constituents and phrases. 

Tesnière defined the node (Fr. nœud) as fol-

lows: 

“We will define the node as a group con-

sisting of a governor and all the subordi-

nates that are to some degree either direct-

ly or indirectly dependent on that gover-

nor. The governor joins these nodes into a 

single cluster.”  (ch. 3, §3) 

It should be apparent from this definition that 

Tesnière saw any subtree of a tree as a node, 

which in turn means that he was acknowledging 

constituents and phrases, although the terminol-

ogy he was using to denote these units (nœud) 

was different from modern usage (constituent, 

phrase).    

In fact Tesnière’s use of terminology was, as 

stated, inconsistent in this area.
2
 While his origi-

nal definition suggested that his node was to be 

understood as a subtree, his later (and preferred) 

use of the term points to the meaning ‘vertex’. In 

other words, Tesnière usually meant just ‘vertex’ 

when he wrote nœud despite the fact that he had 

defined the node to be a subtree, i.e. a constitu-

ent. The contradiction in his use of terminology 

is seen most vividly in the passage where he is 

comparing the node to the nucleus: 

“The node is nothing more than a geomet-

ric point, whereas the nucleus is a collec-

tion of multiple points,…” (ch. 22, §12) 

                                                           
2
 This statement may be unfair. The Éléments was 

published posthumously. The inconsistency in the use 

of the term nœud may have arisen as the manuscript 

was being prepared for publication by others.  

263



  

 

Comparing this passage with the previous one 

where Tesnière initially defines the node, the 

contradiction should be apparent.  

 The pertinent question now concerns the ex-

tent to which Tesnière’s inconsistent use of ter-

minology has contributed to the fallacious per-

ception that DGs do not acknowledge constitu-

ents and phrases. They of course can and do 

acknowledge such units, although they have not 

been clear about their use of the associated ter-

minology.   

3  Auxiliary verbs 

Most modern DGs assume that auxiliary verbs 

dominate main verbs, and in this respect, they 

are consistent with most constituency grammars. 

In the Government and Binding framework 

(Chomsky 1981), for instance, a finite verb re-

sides in I, which projects up to IP, the root node 

of the clause, and in the Head-Driven Phrase 

Structure Grammar framework (Pollard and Sag 

1994), a finite auxiliary verb is the head daugh-

ter in the clause, which means it passes its fea-

tures up to the root node of the clause, the clause 

being a greater VP in a sense.  

 Tesnière, in contrast, did not explicitly state 

that given a two-word string such as has gone, 

the auxiliary verb has governs the main verb 

gone. He instead positioned the two in one and 

the same split nucleus (nucleus dissocié, ch. 23). 

The auxiliary verb has guarantees the syntactic 

contribution of the split nucleus and the full verb 

gone guarantees its semantic contribution. 

Tesnière drew a bubble around the two words in 

order to indicate that the two belong to one and 

the same nucleus. He illustrated this state of af-

fairs with the diagram of the sentence Alfred a 

oublié son chapeau hier ‘Alfred forgot his hat 

yesterday’ (ch. 31, stemma 39): 

(1)     a oublié 

  Alfred  chapeau  hier 

          son 

Given this analysis, Tesnière, if he were alive 

today, might object to the widespread assump-

tion that sees the auxiliary verb governing the 

main verb.  

 On the other hand, he might actually approve 

of the modern practice, since he drew another 

distinction that can be interpreted as accommo-

dating the modern analysis. He distinguished 

between constitutive and subsidiary words inside 

nuclei (ch. 29). A constitutive word guarantees 

the syntactic integrity of the nucleus, whereas 

the subsidiary word is a satellite of the constitu-

tive word. He also states (ch. 38, §13) that in a 

split nucleus consisting of an auxiliary verb and 

a full verb, the auxiliary verb is constitutive. 

Further, he explains that from an etymological 

point of view, the constitutive word once gov-

erned the subsidiary word (ch. 29, §18) and that 

this fact can be shown inside a nucleus by posi-

tioning the constitutive word above the subsidi-

ary word. This practice would result in tree rep-

resentations like the following one (my rendi-

tion, not Tesnière’s): 

(2)    has 

      gone 

  She      home 

The step from this tree to the modern analysis is 

not so great. By positioning the subject as a di-

rect dependent of the finite verb and the adverb 

as a direct dependent of the participle, one ac-

commodates directly in the tree both subject-

verb agreement and the lack of object-verb 

agreement: 

(3)   has 

  She   gone 

         home 

 These considerations suggest that the modern 

practice in both constituency and dependency 

grammars of positioning the auxiliary verb as 

head over the full verb is not necessarily contra-

ry to Tesnière’s theory. In fact Tesnière’s analy-

sis can be construed as presaging the modern 

analysis of auxiliary verbs, which did not take 

full hold until the 1980s – in Transformational 

Grammar, the auxiliary verb was originally con-

strued as a daughter of S (but not as the head 

daughter).  

4 Prepositions 

While Tesnière’s account of auxiliary verbs 

presaged the modern analysis, his account of 

prepositions was entirely contrary to modern 

264



  

 

assumptions. He classified many prepositions as 

semantically empty (Fr. mot vide) (ch. 28, §18) 

and syntactically subsidiary (Fr. mot subsidiaire) 

(ch. 29, §4). For Tesnière, prepositions were 

translatives (ch. 40, §4), which meant they 

served to transfer a word of one class into a 

word of another class, e.g. a noun to an adjec-

tive. The fact that these words were subsidiary 

means that for Tesnière, they could be analyzed 

as etymologically dependent on a constitutive 

word within a nucleus (ch. 29, §18). What this 

means is that from an etymological point of 

view, Tesnière took the preposition to be a de-

pendent of the noun inside a split nucleus, e.g.  

(4)  livre 

  le 

       Alfred 

      d’ 

  le livre  d’ Alfred    

‘Alfred’s book’ 

This tree has been adapted from stemma 32 

(ch.29) to show the etymological dependencies 

inside the nuclei. The important point is that the 

status of the preposition d’ in Tesnière’s system 

as a subsidiary word requires one to view it in an 

etymological sense as a dependent of the prepo-

sitional object. This analysis is, however, quite 

contrary to modern accounts, which almost 

unanimously take the preposition to be head 

over its object.   

 To be fair, Tesnière’s analysis of prepositions 

was not entirely unlike the syntactic analysis of 

prepositions of his day. For instance, Bloom-

field’s original analysis of prepositional phrases 

(1933) took them to be exocentric constructions, 

meaning that neither the preposition nor its ob-

ject noun could be construed as the head of the 

phrase. Section 8 below has more to say about 

the distinction between endo- and exocentric 

constituents.   

5  Gapping and right node raising 

The part of Tesnière’s theory that was perhaps 

most ahead of its time regards coordination 

(Jonction, Part II of the Éléments). In particular, 

Tesnière identified and produced an analysis of 

two aspects of coordinate structures, gapping 

and right node raising, that would not be 

acknowledged and explored until much later in 

the works of Ross (1970), Jackendoff (1971), 

and Postal (1974). Tesnière recognized key traits 

of gapping and right node raising and his analy-

sis of these phenomena remains largely con-

sistent with more modern DG accounts (e.g. 

Hudson 1988, 1989, Osborne 2008), although 

there are certainly differences in the details.   

 Tesnière called gapping double bifurcation 

(bifidité double, ch. 146). He interpreted it to be 

a combination of both catadidymic and ana-

didymic coordination (Fr. jonction catadidymes 

et anadidymes, ch. 145, §13). Catadidymic co-

ordination obtains when one or more shared de-

pendents appear to the immediate right of the 

coordinate structure, whereas anadidymic coor-

dination obtains when one or more shared de-

pendents appears to the immediate left of the 

coordinate structure, e.g. 

Catadidymic 

(5) [R. picks] and [B. cracks] the chestnuts. 

Anadidymic 

(6) A. [loves cake] and [detests punishment]. 

The expressions catadidymic and anadidymic 

are obscure terms that Tesnière borrowed from 

biology. He describes their meaning with a met-

aphor as follows: 

“…, catadidymic sentences are compara-

ble to the dragon with multiple heads in 

the fable (cf. La Fontaine, Fables, I, 12), 

and anadidymic sentences to the dragon 

with multiple tails.” (ch. 145, §14) 

While Tesnière’s analysis of these examples was 

insightful, his choice of obscure terminology has 

probably hindered the spread of his theory of 

coordination (and otherwise) more than any-

thing. The modern English designation for in-

stances of coordination like the one in (5) is 

right node raising, a term that is due to Postal 

(1974). While this modern term is also not ideal 

(because Postal’s original analysis of the phe-

nomenon is no longer defended), it at least con-

tains “right”, this adjective pointing to the fact 

that the shared material appears to the right of 

the coordinate structure. 

  Tesnière took instances of gapping to be a 

combination of both catadidymic and ana-

265



  

 

didymic coordination. He therefore coined the 

term anacatadidymic to denote the phenomenon, 

e.g. 

Anacatadidymic 

(7) The one carries his armor, the other his shield. 

He characterized anacatadidymic coordination 

with the following metaphor: 

“This sentence behaves like a dragon that 

has both multiple heads and multiple tails, 

but just one trunk. Or even like Siamese 

twins who are conjoined together back to 

back.” (ch. 146, §4) 

We again sense that Tesnière’s choice of termi-

nology was poor, since the term anacatadidymic 

does not evoke any associations. The modern 

term for such instances of coordination, i.e. gap-

ping, is much more appropriate, since one clear-

ly senses the presence of a “gap”; the verb is 

gapped from the non-initial conjuncts. 

 Tesnière’s primary insight in cases of gapping 

was that the verb is shared in a sense, a point 

that nobody would dispute. He rendered such 

cases of gapping with the French version of the 

following stemma: 

(8)            carries  (Cf. stemma 273) 

 

 

  The one  the other   armor  shield 

                    his     his 

This stemma indicates important aspects of in-

terpretation and meaning; it shows that the first 

subject and object share the verb in the same 

manner as the second subject and object. Fur-

thermore, it shows that the verb has two subject 

actants and two object actants. Tesnière also cor-

rectly observed (ch. 146, §12) that the remnants 

in the gapped conjunct can be adjuncts (circon-

stants) as well as arguments (actants). 

 While Tesnière’s analysis of gapping was 

brief (ch. 146 only), it correctly identified key 

aspects of the gapping mechanism. The reason 

Tesnière is not credited with his insightful anal-

ysis may in part be his unfortunate choice of 

terminology. His penchant for obscure grammat-

ical terms certainly did not promote the accessi-

bility of his account.  

6  More on right node raising 

As mentioned in the previous section, Tesnière 

also identified the mechanism of right node rais-

ing. His analysis was, again, characterized in 

terms of bifurcation, whereby the particular type 

of bifurcation he assumed in cases of right node 

raising was catadidymic, i.e. the shared depend-

ents appeared to the right of the coordinate 

structure (a dragon with two heads but just one 

tail). 

  Tesnière produced the following dependency 

analysis of the sentence Raton picks and Ber-

trand cracks the chestnuts: 

(9)    picks   and   cracks  (Cf. stemma 267) 

   

  

  Raton  Bertrand    the chestnuts 

This stemma correctly reflects some of the key 

traits of right node raising. It shows the manner 

in which the object the chestnuts is shared by the 

verbs at the same time that the verbs do not 

share a subject. It also correctly indicates that 

coordination occurs at the highest level, i.e. with 

the verbs.  

 Another important aspect of the analysis in (9) 

is that it does not rely on some notion of deletion 

or ellipsis, and in this respect, it is congruent 

with certain data where we can see that an ellip-

sis or deletion analysis contradicts observation, 

e.g. 

(10) a.    [I sang] and [you hummed] the same 

      tune. 

   b.  *[I sang the same tune] and [you hum- 

       med the same tune].  

The deletion analysis indicated in (10b) cannot 

be correct, since the non-elided version of the 

sentence would mean something different from 

(10a). In other words, I sang the same tune and 

you hummed the same tune does not correctly 

reflect the intended meaning of (10a), since it 

necessitates that the tune referenced appear in 

the preceding context, whereas sentence (10a) is 

not referencing a tune in the previous context.   

 While Tesnière’s analysis of right node raising 

and other phenomena of coordination did not 

posit deletion or ellipsis, he did make clear that 

at a semantic level, coordination involves the 

‘addition’ of numerous underlying sentences. 

266



  

 

His comment in this regard was that coordina-

tion is a very powerful device that allows for 

great economy of expression, a statement that no 

one who has studied coordination would dispute. 

7  Propositional infinitives 

In modern syntactic theory, the analysis of cer-

tain to-infinitives is a matter of controversy. 

(11) a. I believe her to be a genius.  

  b. You assumed me to know the answer. 

There are essentially two competing analyses of 

the underlined strings: either the object nominal 

and the to-infinitive phrase form a constituent or 

they do not. If they do not, both are construed as 

dependents of the matrix verb. The two compet-

ing analyses are illustrated as follows: 

(12)   believe 

   I       to 

        her  be 

              genius 

             a 

  a. I believe  her to be  a genius. 

    believe 

   I     her to 

            be 

              genius 

             a 

  b. I believe  her to be  a genius. 

The main distinction here is whether the object 

nominal (here her) is construed as a dependent 

of the matrix verb or of the embedded verb (here 

of the particle to). Modern transformation-

al/derivational accounts of such data are asso-

cated with small clauses, and they prefer an 

analysis like the one in (12a) (e.g. Chomsky 

1986:20, Ouhalla 1994:109ff., Haegeman and 

Guéron 1999:108ff.), whereas representational 

grammars, which tend to be accepting of flatter 

structures, prefer the analysis in (12b) (e.g. Cu-

licover and Jackendoff 2005:131ff.). 

Surprisingly, Tesnière’s account of such data 

is more supportive of the analysis shown in 

(12a) than of the one in (12b). This is surprising 

because the very nature of dependency-based 

analyses of syntactic structure is that they must 

in many cases assume relatively flat structures. 

Tesnière called the small-clause-like construc-

tions illustrated with (11-12) propositional infin-

itives (ch. 182). Based primarily on data from 

Latin and Greek, he construed the propositional 

infinitive as the root of a clause-like substruc-

ture.  

The particular analysis he assumed is illus-

trated with the Latin sentence Credo Deum esse 

sanctum ‘I believe God to be holy’.  

(13)   credo    (stemma 307) 

        esse 

     Deum    sanctum 

The thing to note about this example is the fact 

that Tesnière construed Deum ‘God’ as a de-

pendent of esse ‘be’. His analysis was therefore 

similar to the analysis in (12a), both trees show-

ing the (to-)infinitive as the root of an infinitival 

clause. The main piece of evidence that he pro-

duces in favor of the analysis in (13) is that the 

entire propositional infinitive phrase can func-

tion as subject, whereby the logical subject of 

the infinitive, Deum in (13), remains in the accu-

sative case. Tesnière illustrated this fact with a 

different Latin sentence: 

(14)  erit 

Utile              adesse 

      fratrem 

            tuum 

Utile erit  fratrem   tuum  adesse. 

Useful will.be brother-ACC your-ACC  present 

‘Your brother’s presence will be useful.’ 

The fact that fratrem tuum remains in the accu-

sative case suggests strongly that fratrem tuum 

is indeed a dependent of adesse as shown in 

(14), for if fratrem tuum were a dependent of 

erit, we would expect to find the nominative 

case, frater tuus. In other words, the nominative 

frater tuus instead of the accusative fratrem tu-

um would be necessary if fratrem tuum were a 

dependent of the finite verb erit. It would be 

functioning syntactically like a normal subject 

and would therefore have to appear in the nomi-

native.  

267



  

 

 Tesnière also notes that propositional infini-

tives occur in English (and French). The English 

example he produces is I suppose my friend to 

be very rich (ch. 182, §14). While he did not 

produce a tree to illustrate his structural analysis 

of this sentence, we can assume that he would 

have extended his analysis of the Latin examples 

to English, whereby the noun phrase my friend 

would be construed as a dependent of the split 

nucleus to be. 

While Tesnière’s analysis of propositional in-

finitives seems correct for the Latin and Greek 

data that he discussed, it is debatable whether 

the analysis shown in (13) can be extended to 

English examples. In fact there is strong evi-

dence suggesting that his analysis of the Latin 

and Greek examples does not extend to English. 

In other words, Tesnière’s analysis of small 

clause-like constructions was probably incorrect 

for English. A number of facts demonstrate this 

to be the case. For instance, the propositional 

infinitive cannot function as the subject in Eng-

lish, e.g. 

(15) a. *My friend to be very rich is supposed.  

But the object nominal can become the subject 

in the passive-like counterpart: 

(15) b.  My friend is supposed to be very rich.  

Furthermore, the object nominal can be a reflex-

ive pronoun that is co-referential with the sub-

ject: 

(15) c.  My friend supposes himself to be very 

     rich. 

And finally, constituency tests suggest that my 

friend to be very rich is not a constituent, e.g. 

(16) a. *My friend to be very rich I suppose. 

          - Topicalization 

d. *It is my friend to be very rich that I 

    suppose.   - Clefting.  

  e. 
??

What I suppose is my friend to be  

      very rich.   - Pseudoclefting 

  f.   What do I suppose? 
??

– My friend to  

  be very rich.   - Answer fragment  

If the object nominal were a dependent of the 

propositional infinitive, we would expect these 

constituency tests to identify the infinitival 

clause as a constituent. These data therefore 

point to the validity of the analysis in (12b), 

where the pronoun her and the infinitival phrase 

to be a genius do not form a constituent.    

 The conclusion to be drawn from this dicuss-

sion is that Tesnière’s analysis of propositional 

infinitives was perhaps correct for Latin and 

Greek, but it cannot be extended to English (and 

not to French). His analysis was therefore not 

nuanced enough. A syntactic construction that 

was productive in Latin and ancient Greek has 

become largely lexicalized in modern English, 

meaning that only a relatively small number of 

predicates in English (e.g. assume, believe, sup-

pose, take) subcategorize for such a proposition-

al infinitive.   

8  Exocentric structures 

As stated in the introduction, Tesnière never 

employed the term dependency grammar (Fr. 

grammaire de dépandence). In fact Tesnière 

rarely used the term dependent in the sense that 

it is understood today in modern DGs; he pre-

ferred the term subordinate instead. What this 

means is that at the point in time when Tesnière 

was developing his theory, the distinction be-

tween dependency- and constituency-based 

grammars did not yet exist. Or, to be more exact, 

the world of linguistics was not yet aware of the 

distinction. In this respect, one cannot assume 

that Tesnière was explicitly against the modern 

understanding of constituency as it is employed 

in phrase structure grammars today. While he 

was very explicit about his rejection of the bina-

ry division of the clause into a subject and a 

predicate (ch. 49) – this division being at the 

core of most constituency grammars – this fact 

did not prevent him for employing constituency 

elsewhere in his theory. 

 The modern understanding of dependency and 

constituency sees all dependency-based struc-

tures as endocentric (Osborne et al. 2011:325). 

In this regard, the adoption of X-bar Theory in 

the 1970s can be interpreted as a step in the di-

rection of DG, since X-bar Theory does not al-

low for exocentric structures. The distinction 

between endo- and exocentric structures is illus-

trated with the following representations: 

(17)   XP        YP   - Endocentric 

 a. X   Y  b. X   Y 

268



  

 

    ZP         - Exocentric 

 c. X   Y 

An exocentric structure bears a category label 

that is unlike either of its constituent parts. Thus 

the structure in (17c) is exocentric because ZP is 

not XP or YP. Dependency by its very nature 

cannot acknowledge exocentric structures like 

the one in (17c); only endocentric structures are 

possible: 

(18)   X          Y  - Endocentric 

  a.   Y   b.  X  

Dependency’s rejection of the phonologically 

null nodes of constituency structures prevents 

dependency-based structures from acknowledg-

ing exocentric constituents. In other words, a 

given constituent in DG always bears the catego-

ry label of its root node.  

 The fact that Tesnière was (probably at least 

somewhat) unaware of these distinctions (de-

pendency vs. constituency, endocentric vs. exo-

centric) means that nothing prevented him from 

positing the existence of exocentric structures, 

for he was not attempting to produce a purely 

dependency-based theory of syntax. In fact, his 

theory of transfer (Fr. translation), which occu-

pies the second half of his book (300 pages), 

frequently employs constituency in order to in-

dicate transfer which, upon close examination, is 

revealed as an exocentric construction. This fact, 

i.e. that Tesnière utilized constituency to ac-

commodate the exocentric structures that he was 

positing, seems to have been overlooked in the 

reception of Tesnière’s work. In the more than 

50 years since the Éléments was first published, 

the fact that Tesnière was actually proposing a 

hybrid dependency-constituency model of syn-

tax is not acknowledged.   

  The theory of transfer starts with Tesnière’s 

claim that in European languages, there are only 

four basic categories of content words (ch. 33): 

nouns (O), adjectives (A), verbs (I), and adverbs 

(E). The abbreviations O, A, I, and E are a 

mnemonic device; they correspond to last letter 

of the Esperanto equivalents (ch. 33, §3). 

Tesnière took other word categories that most 

modern theories of grammar acknowledge 

(adpositions, determiners, conjunctions, pro-

nouns, etc.) to be indices, junctors (j), or trans-

latives (t) (ch. 38). Indices serve simply to indi-

cate reference; they are typically clitic pronouns; 

junctors indicate the presence of coordination 

(Fr. jonction); and translatives serve to transfer 

the category of a given word to another catego-

ry.  

 According to Tesnière, translatives are empty 

words and as such, they appear intra-nuclear, i.e. 

inside a split nucleus with a full word (ch. 40). 

They transfer the syntactic category of the full 

word in their nucleus to another category. For 

instance, the French preposition de ‘of’ often 

transfers the syntactic category of its object, 

which is a noun, to an adjective. The French 

subordinate conjunction que ‘that’ often trans-

fers the syntactic category of its complement, 

which is a verb, to a noun.  

 Tesnière employed special devices in his 

stemmas to indicate the presence of transfer. He 

positioned the base word and its translative equi-

level as sisters. He drew a vertical line separat-

ing the two, whereby the line was slanted at its 

base toward the translative. He drew a horizontal 

line above the two and placed the category re-

sulting from the transfer medially on top of the 

line (ch. 155). For example: 

(19)      A           A 

  a.  de  Pierre   b.   t  O 

Example (19a) is a concrete stemma, whereas 

(19b) is “virtual” (ch. 33), since it shows just the 

categories involved in the instance of transfer. 

Tesnière employs these graphic devices fre-

quently. For instance, he fills 16 pages at the end 

of his book with large tree diagrams (stemmas 

354-366), most of which contain multiple in-

stances of transfer.  

 The diagrams (19a) and (19b) show that 

Pierre is a noun (O), de is a translative (t), and 

that the two together function as an adjective 

(A). It should be apparent that these graphic rep-

resentations are manifestations of constituency, 

not of dependency. Constituency is evident inso-

far as de (t) and Pierre (O) are positioned as 

equi-level sisters that are dominated by the cate-

gory that they become together. Constituency is 

also evident in the fact that there are three cate-

gory labels (A, t, O) but only two words (de and 

Pierre). Furthermore, the entire unit is an adjec-

tive, a category distinct from either of the parts, 

269



  

 

which means that an exocentric constituent ob-

tains.  

If one renders example (19a) using modern 

conventions for constructing trees, this is what 

one gets: 

(20)      A 

 a.  de   Pierre  

This tree is entirely constituency-based, a fact 

that is evident in that there are three nodes but 

only two words and in that the whole is an ad-

jective, a category distinct from either of its 

parts (t and O). The only clear difference that 

distinguishes this tree from modern constituen-

cy-based trees is the lack of “P”, which would 

indicate that the whole has the status of a phrase.   

Since Tesnière made massive use of transfer 

in his stemmas – a fact that is illustrated with the 

reproduction of stemma 357 below – means that 

one cannot argue that he sparingly augmented 

his dependency-based stemmas with constituen-

cy in order to accommodate some rare phenom-

ena. Instead, one is forced to acknowledge that 

his theory of sentence structure is a true hybrid 

that frequently combines dependency and con-

stituency.   

 

 

(21)                 deducebatur       (stemma 257) 

 

 

 ergo   iuvenis     a  patre  vel    a    propinquis   ad oratorem  apud  maiores  

 

  ille imbutus refertus    A             eum   A     nostros 

             qu- parabatur            qu- obtinebat  

  

 disciplina  iam  studiis    -i   foro  et   eloquentiæ        -i  locum 

 

    domestica   honestia                       principem 

                                  

                                   E 

                                  in  civitate 

 

Ergo apud majores nostros iuvenis ille, qui foro et eloquentiae parabatur, imbutus iam domes-

tica disciplina, refertus honestis studiis deducebatur a patre vel a propinquis ad eum oratorem, 

qui principem in civitate locum obtinebat. (Tacitus, Dialogue of Orators, 34) 

 

9  Conclusion 

This contribution has considered a few interest-

ing and noteworthy aspects of Tesnière’s theory 

of syntax. The motivation for the exploration has 

been a recent translation project, whereby 

Tesnière’s central work, Éléments de syntaxe 

structurale, is finally being translated into Eng-

lish. This project has provided the current author 

with the opportunity to take a detailed look at 

Tesnière’s ideas. As a result, the strengths and 

weaknesses of Tesnière’s theory are now be-

coming more apparent.  

 Arguably, Tesnière’s most brilliant insight 

was two-fold: he rejected the binary division of 

the clause into a subject and predicate, and in 

place of this division, he chose to position the 

verb as the root of all clause structure. This 

move allowed Tesnière to produce a truly novel 

theory of syntax. To the best of my knowledge, 

no one before Tesnière had thought to do this as 

clearly and as consistently as he did. The bril-

liance of Tesnière’s theory is also evident in the 

fact that his analysis of certain phenomena was 

visionary. His hierarchical analysis of auxiliary 

verbs, for instance, is basically accepted by most 

work in modern syntax. He also correctly identi-

fied the gapping and right node raising mecha-

nisms, an accomplishment for which he rarely 

receives credit.  

 On the other hand, certain weaknesses in 

Tesnière’s system have also come to light. 

Tesnière employed the term node (nœud) incon-

270



  

 

sistently, which may have contributed to the 

misconception that dependency-based structures 

do not acknowledge constituents and phrases, 

and he had an unfortunate penchant for introduc-

ing obscure terminology. This practice may also 

have had a negative impact on the reception and 

spread of his ideas. Furthermore, Tesnière’s 

analysis of certain structures has not survived 

into modern theories of syntax, for instance he 

failed to see that prepositions are the heads of 

prepositional phrases and that a flat analysis of 

small-clause-like constructions in languages like 

English is more defensible than the more layered 

analysis he proposed.  

 Finally, the most noteworthy insight gained so 

far during the translation project occurred in the 

second half of the Éléments, where Tesnière pre-

sents his theory of transfer in great detail. He 

employed a graphic representation that is con-

stituency-based. In other words, he employed 

constituency to accommodate his exocentric 

analysis of certain phrase types. What this 

means is that Tesnière was actually not propos-

ing a purely dependency-based model of syntax, 

but rather he was proposing a hybrid dependen-

cy-constituency system.  

References  

Bloomfield, Leonard. 1933. Language. Henry Holt, 
New York.  

Andrew Carnie. 2008. Constituent Structure. Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford. 

Chomsky, Noam 1981. Lectures on Government 

and Binding: The Pisa Lectures. Mouton de 
Gruyter. 

Noam Chomsky. 1986. Barriers. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA. 

Peter Culicover and Ray Jackendoff. 2005. Simpler 

Syntax. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. 

Daniel Jurafsky and James Martin. 2000. Speech 

and Language Processing: An introduction to 

Natural Language Processing, Computation-

al Linguistics, and Speech Recognition. Pear-
son Education, New Delhi, India. 

David Hays. 1964. Dependency theory: A formalism 

and some observations. Language 40, 511-525. 

Liliane Haegeman, L., Guéron, J., 1999. English 

Grammar: A Generative Perspective. Basil 
Blackwell, Oxford. 

Ray Jackendoff. 1971. Gapping and Related Rules. 

Linguistic Inquiry 2, 21-35 

Pauline Jacobson. 1996. Constituent Structure. In: A 

Concise Encyclopedia of Syntactic Theory. 
Pergamon, Cambridge. 

Donna Napoli. 1993. Syntax: Theory and Prob-

lems. Oxford University Press, New York. 

Richard Hudson 1988. Coordination and grammatical 

relations. Journal of Linguistics 24, 303-342. 

Richard Hudson 1989. Gapping and grammatical 

relations. Journal of Linguistics 25, 57-94. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory 

and Practice. The SUNY Press, Albany, N.Y. 

Timothy Osborne. 2008. Major constituents: And two 

Dependency Grammar constraints on sharing in 

coordination. Linguistics 46, 6, 1109-1165. 

Timothy Osborne, Michael Putnam and Thomas 

Groß. 2011. Bare phrase structure, label-less 

structures, and specifier-less syntax: Is Minimal-

ism becoming a dependency grammar? The Lin-

guistic Review 28, 315-364. 

Jamal Ouhalla. 1994. Transformational Grammar: 

From Rules to Principles and Parameters. 
Edward Arnold, London. 

Carl Pollard and Ivan Sag. 1994. Head-Driven 

Phrase Structure Grammar. University of Chi-
cago Press, Chicago. 

Paul Postal. 1974. On Raising. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA. 

John Ross. 1970. Gapping and the order of constitu-

ents. In M. Bierwisch and K. Heidolph (eds.), 

Progress in Linguistics: A Collection of Pa-

pers, pp. 249–259. Mouton, The Hague. 

Lucien Tesnière. 1959. Éléments de syntaxe struc-

turale. Klincksieck, Paris. 

Lucien Tesnière. 1959. Elements of structural syn-

tax. [Translated by Timothy Osborne and Sylvain 
Kahane, Benjamins, to appear].   

271


