





































More Than Only Noun-Noun Compounds: Towards an Annotation Scheme
for the Semantic Modelling of Other Noun Compound Types

Ben Verhoeven
CLiPS - Computational Linguistics Group

University of Antwerp
Antwerp, Belgium

ben.verhoeven@ua.ac.be

Gerhard B. van Huyssteen
Centre for Text Technology (CTexT)

North-West University
Potchefstroom, South Africa

gerhard.vanhuyssteen@nwu.ac.za

Abstract

The computational processing of compound
semantics poses several interesting chal-
lenges. Up to now, the processing of nomi-
nal compounds with non-noun left-hand con-
stituents (henceforth XN compounds) has not
received any attention, despite the fact that
these also seem to be rather productive in Ger-
manic languages. In our research project, we
aim to fill this hiatus by investigating various
kinds of compounds in Afrikaans and Dutch,
develop annotation protocols and data sets,
and model the semantics of such compounds.
In this publication we present the alpha ver-
sion of an annotation protocol that was de-
signed for both descriptive linguistic and com-
putational linguistic purposes. We describe
the protocol development and discuss the cur-
rent version.

1 Introduction

Within the field of natural language understanding,
the semantic processing of compounds poses sev-
eral interesting challenges, including issues related
to compositionality, ambiguity, and contextual inter-
pretation (see Girju et al. (2005) for a more elab-
orate discussion). The majority of research up to
now has focused on English, but surprisingly, vir-
tually no research has been done for other (Ger-
manic) languages (cf. Verhoeven, 2012; Verhoeven,
Daelemans & van Huyssteen, 2012). Also, given
that noun-noun (NN) compounds are by far the most
productive form of compounding in English (Plag,
2003: 145), it is to be expected that research on
the semantic analysis of English compounds (both

in descriptive linguistics and computational linguis-
tics) has thus far focused almost exclusively on NN
compounds (see Ó Séaghdha (2008) for a compre-
hensive overview, as well as Adams (2001: 83ff) for
a synopsis). A computational understanding of com-
pound semantics is of importance for commercial
applications such as machine translation systems,
where one often has to paraphrase compounds (i.e.
make the compound semantics explicit at surface
level) to be able to translate them into languages that
are not as productive in compounding, or that has
different compound constructions (Nakov, 2008).

Second to NN compounds, nominal compounds
with non-noun left-hand constituents (henceforth
XN compounds; i.e. other nominal compound
types) seems to be the most productive in English
(see Lieber, 2009), and probably in other Germanic
languages as well. However, as far as we could es-
tablish, no research has been done on the computa-
tional modelling of the semantics of XN compounds
in any language; hence, no annotation guidelines,
data sets or prior experiments are available. In our
research project, we aim to fill this hiatus by investi-
gating various kinds of compounds in Afrikaans and
Dutch, develop annotation protocols and data sets,
and model the semantics of such compounds.

In this contribution, we present a first version
of an annotation protocol for XN nouns, specifi-
cally for Afrikaans and Dutch (but also referring
to English in passing). The next section presents a
brief linguistic description of XN compounding in
Afrikaans and Dutch. In section 3 we discuss some
general principles for compound annotation, before
presenting the detailed protocol. In section 4 we

59



Afrikaans (Afr.) Dutch (Du.) English (Eng.)
NN tafelblad ‘table top’ pannenkoek ‘pancake’ car key
VN1 faksmasjien ‘fax machine’ leesbril ‘reading glasses’ skateboard
AN2 geelwortel ‘carrot’ geelzucht ‘yellow fever; jaundice’ lightweight
PN3 onderrok ‘under skirt; petticoat’ achterlicht ‘back light’ undertone
QN4 agthoek ‘octagon’ eenoog ‘cyclops twoface

Table 1: Examples of NN and XN compounds in Afrikaans, Dutch and English.

conclude with a view on future research.

2 XN Compounding in Germanic
Languages

Compounding is a highly productive word-
formation process in most languages (Plag, 2003),
and as such has received much attention in research
literature (e.g. Lieber and Štekauer, 2009). With
regard to typologies of compounding, Scalise and
Bisetto (2009) provide a comprehensive overview,
and also present the most recent morphological
compound classification scheme that is based on the
compound’s internal syntactic function. With regard
to the syntactic form of compounds, Plag (2003)
indicates that nominal compounds occur widely in
English (with NN compounds the most common
type); Don (2009: 370-371) maintains the same for
Dutch: “Nominal compounds are by far the most
productive type, although other types (adjectival and
verbal) exist and can also be formed productively”.
Since the same holds true for German (Neef, 2009:
388) and Danish (Bauer, 2009: 404), we may
safely assume that it also applies to Afrikaans, a
West Germanic language, closely related to Dutch.
Compare Table 1 for examples of NN and XN
compounds in Afrikaans, Dutch and English.

The most important challenge with regard to inter-
preting VN compounds is whether the V should be
interpreted as a V or an N in languages where a dis-
tinction between these forms are not marked overtly,
or where the (lack of) morphology could lead to am-
biguous interpretations. For example, in swimming
pool, the question is whether swimming should be
interpreted as a V (‘pool where one swims’) or as

1VN = Verb-Noun Compound
2AN = Adjective/Adverb-Noun Compound
3PN = Preposition-Noun Compound
4QN = Quantifier/Numeral-Noun Compound

a N (‘pool for the act of swimming’) (see Lieber,
2009: 361). When using the continuous participle
form of English verbs (the -ing forms) as a noun, it
“does not describe a single episode of the process,
but instead rather refers to it in a generalised, even
generic fashion” (Langacker, 1987: 208). It is there-
fore natural to assign an N interpretation to swim-
ming, and consequently regard swimming pool (and
the likes) as an NN compound.

In contrast, in the Dutch zwembad swim+bath
‘swimming pool’, a V interpretation is assigned to
the first constituent (a verbal stem), i.e. ‘bath where
one swims’. Most of the time, a verbal interpreta-
tion is the only option, since the infinitive form of
the verb (e.g. zwemmen) is usually used as the nom-
inalised form (as in Ik hou van zwemmen I like of
swim-INF ‘I like swimming’). Hence, in Dutch we
often find VN compounds.

Since Afrikaans does not have an overtly marked
infinitive form of the verb, it might seem to be more
ambiguous to distinguish whether swem in swembad
swim+bath ‘swimming pool’ is a verb or a noun
(i.e. the part-of-speech category of swem remains
ambiguous). However, because of the close rela-
tionship between Dutch and Afrikaans, we will treat
their compounds equally and thus consider these
stems as verbs; see Section 3.1. below.

With regard to AN compounds, we should note
that none of the three Germanic languages under
discussion allow for productive AN compounding,
since an A and N usually forms a noun phrase (NP),
e.g. white cloud is considered an NP, and not an
AN compound. However, all three languages do al-
low for compounding when there are signs of ex-
tension of meaning. For example, a blackboard is
more than just ‘a board with the colour black’ - it
is more specifically ‘a dark-coloured surface where
one could write on with chalk’. In all three lan-

60



guages, such cases are most often written as one
word, and thus more easily distinguishable from
NPs. (Of course, the orthography is a result of the
compounding process, rather than a cause.) Note
that it seems as if this phenomenon is found more
frequently in Afrikaans orthography than in English
or Dutch, e.g. Afr. witwyn, Du. witte wijn, Eng.
white wine; or Afr. swartmark, Du. zwarte markt,
Eng. black market ‘underground economy for trad-
ing illegal goods’; further comparative linguistic re-
search is needed to confirm this observation. All
cases of AN compounds should therefore be con-
sidered lexicalised, although certain patterns in the
semantics of such compounds might become appar-
ent (see Section 3.2 below).

Similarly, all QN compounds in these three lan-
guages are lexicalised - see Afr. agthoek, Du.
eenoog, Eng. twoface in Table 1 above. However,
a special case of phrasal compound could be dis-
tinguished: [[Q N]NP N]N, as in Afr. derdejaarstu-
dent, Du. tweepersoonsbed, Eng. three-phase elec-
tricity. Booij (2002: 150-151) presents an argu-
ment that one could consider such constructions also
as NN compounds (i.e. [[QN]N N]N), but we are
of contention that it makes more sense in the con-
text of compound semantics to consider it phrasal
compounds, i.e. a derdejaarstudent is ‘a student in
his/her third year’, a tweepersoonsbed is ‘a bed for
two people’, and three-phase electricity is ‘electric-
ity with three phases’. Currently, such compounds
are excluded from our focus, since this protocol only
deals with two-part compounds, as will be indicated
in the next section.

3 Protocol Design

The design of our XN compound semantics protocol
is based on the work by Ó Séaghdha (2008) on NN
compounds. We adopted his approach of semantic
categorisation and used his categories as basis for
the construction of a protocol for XN compounds
in Dutch and Afrikaans. The protocol deals mainly
with two-part compounds, and hence phrasal com-
pounds and recursive compounds are excluded from
the scope of our current research.

Also note that the version of the protocol pre-
sented here is still an alpha version, and has not yet
been verified (i.e. tested and extended) on a rep-

resentative dataset of compounds. A complete ver-
sion of this protocol, as well as subsequent updated
versions of the protocol are available on the Source-
forge page of the AuCoPro project5.

In concordance with the approach of Verho-
even (2012) and Verhoeven, Daelemans and Van
Huyssteen (2012) on the computational understand-
ing of compounds, all compounds that are listed in a
standard explanatory dictionary are considered lex-
icalised when using the protocol for computational
experiments. These lexicalised words do not need
a computational interpretation, because their mean-
ings are already present in the dictionary glosses.
For purposes of descriptive linguistics, using dictio-
nary compounds in non-lexicalised categories is al-
lowed when their meanings are the product of a clear
relation between the two constituents. This distinc-
tion between lexicalised and non-lexicalised leaves
room for interpretation in descriptive linguistics, but
it is a practical measure for computational purposes.

Exocentric compounds, such as Afr. banggat
afraid+bottom ‘person that is easily frightened’;
Du. kaalkop bald+head ‘person with a bald head’,
Eng. uphill (i.e. [PN]Adv) are always lexicalised and
thus also tagged as lexicalised, following the LEX
category of Ó Séaghdha (2008). Endocentric com-
pounds can be either lexicalised or non-lexicalised
(and thus productive). Endocentric compounds with
lexicalised meanings do not explicate the relation
between the constituents in a predictable manner, i.e.
they are fully non-compositional. There is thus one
more differentiation within the lexicalised category:
such compounds can be classified as either endocen-
tric or exocentric.

The main distinction between compound types in
our protocol is between the parts-of-speech of the
first constituent. We consider the following main
categories: verb, adjective (or adverb), quantifier (or
numeral), or preposition.

3.1 Verb-Noun Compounds (VN)

This category contains two-part compounds that
take a verb as a first constituent and a noun as a
second constituent. The first constituent will only
be considered a verb if it cannot be interpreted as a
noun. That is, in zwembad swim+pool ‘swimming

5https://sourceforge.net/projects/aucopro/

61



pool’, the constituent zwem can only be interpreted
as a verb, and is hence assigned a V interpretation
(unlike the case in English; see discussion above).

3.1.1. Event
This category is based on the INST and ACTOR cat-
egories in Ó Séaghdha’s protocol (2008). In our
protocol, the verb describes an action in which the
noun is some sort of participant. There are three
subcategories to this rule: the nominal element can
be the subject, object or instrument of the action de-
scribed by the verb. Although it might be interesting
to consider using semantic roles (e.g. from Frame
Semantics) as subcategories, this might also lead to
an abundance of fine-grained semantic classes, re-
sulting in more problems than gains for automatic
classification. We opine that such a classification
task (i.e. using fine-grained semantic roles) would
be a particularly hard task even for human annota-
tors, while the semantic role information could be
deduced broadly from the combination of the verb
semantics with the syntactic role of the noun.

• Subject
(‘N that Vs; the goal of N is to V’)
Afr. snydokter cut+doctor ‘doctor that cuts;
surgeon’
Du. gloeilamp glow+lamp ‘lamp that glows;
lightbulb’

• Object
(‘N that is (being) V-ed; VN is the result of V-
INF; the goal of N is to be V-ed’)
Afr. snyblomme cut+flowers ‘the goal of the
flowers is to be cut’
Du. werpbal throw+ball ‘ball that is thrown’

• Instrument
(‘N is used to V-INF’)
Afr. kapbyl chop+axe ‘axe used to chop down
trees’
Du. leesbril read+glasses ‘glasses that are used
to read; reading glasses’

3.1.2. Location
This category practically equals Ó Séaghdha’s IN
category (2008). It contains those VN compounds
in which the noun is a spatial or temporal location
(two subcategories) of the action described by the
verb.

• Space
(‘V in (neighbourhood of) N; N where one Vs’)
Afr. herstelsentrum recover+centre ‘centre
where people recover from injuries or opera-
tions’
Du. slaapkamer sleep+room ‘room where one
sleeps; bed room’

• Time
(‘N during which one Vs’)
Afr. bakleifase quarrel+fase ‘fase during
which one quarrels’
Du. regeerperiode rule+period ‘period during
which someone rules’

3.1.3 Composed of
This category can best be compared with the part-
whole and group interpretation of the HAVE cate-
gory in Ó Séaghdha (2008). The noun is some sort
of collection of the action described by the verb. The
compound can best be paraphrased as ‘N consists of
V’, e.g.:

Afr. skokterapie shock+therapy ‘therapy that
consists of shocking the patient’
Du. niesbui sneeze+shower ‘rapid succession
of sneezes’

3.1.4. Lexicalised
As indicated above, lexicalised compounds can be
either endocentric or exocentric; both subcategories
are excluded from computational experiments.

• Endocentric
Afr. snyhou cut+stroke ‘kind of tennis stroke’
Du. draaibal turn+ball ‘ball that is kicked with
a turning effect’

• Exocentric
Afr. speeltuin play+garden ‘playground’
Du. verzamelwoede collect+anger ‘urge or
mania to collect things’

3.2 Adjective-Noun Compounds (AN)
In our research thus far, we found all AN com-
pounds to be lexicalised, since the normal pattern
in Germanic languages is to consider A + N as
a syntactic phrase (see Section 2 above). We
will therefore not consider this category for
computational experiments, but for descriptive

62



completeness, we do posit some subcategories for
concatenated AN compounds.

3.2.1. Lexicalised

• Endocentric
Most examples under this category can be matched
to certain aspects of Ó Séaghdhas (2008) ABOUT
category, where the first constituent (A) describes a
characteristic of the concept defined by the second
constituent (N). Note that the A provides a more pre-
cise, fuller specification of the concept in the domain
of instantiation (Langacker, 2008: 134-136), invok-
ing a variety of cognitive domains (Langacker, 1987:
117). From our initial data analyses, we posit “Dura-
tion” and “Colour” as prototypical domains (specif-
ically for Afrikaans), but we also posit an “Other”
category, leaving the door open that more subcate-
gories could be defined in further linguistic research
and data analysis.

- Duration
(‘kind of N that is A’)
Afr. langverlof long+leave ‘kind of leave that
is longer than what is normally taken’
Du. no examples found

- Colour
(‘kind of N that is A’)
Afr. geelrys yellow+rice ‘kind of rice that is
yellow’
Du. rodekool red+cabbage ‘kind of cabbage
that is red’

- Other qualities
(‘kind of N that has the quality expressed by
A’)
Afr. sterkstroom strong+current ‘high volt-
age; the power current is strong’
Du. hogeschool high+school ‘school for higher
education’

• Exocentric
This category of lexicalised AN compounds con-
tains those compounds of which the semantic head
is not present in the compound. Often, they are pos-
sessive compounds where the compound is an en-
tity that has the characteristic described by the noun
modified by the adjective.

- Attributive (Scalise and Bisetto, 2009: 36);
also known as possessive or bahuvrihi com-
pounds (Bauer, 2004: 21)
Afr. luigat lazy+bottom ‘person that is lazy’
Du. kaalkop bald+head ‘person that has a bald
head’

- Other
Afr. groenskrif green+script ‘first draft of leg-
islation; green paper’
Du. blijspel happy+game ‘theatre play that is
supposed to amuse people’

3.3 Quantifier-Noun Compounds (QN)
In this category, we consider quantifiers and numer-
als as first constituent of a two-part compound that
has a noun as a second constituent.

3.3.1. Quantity-Object
The quantifier that specifies the quantity of N within
a larger phrasal compound (i.e. [ [Q+N]NP N]N)
is the only productive form of QN compounding
(e.g. Afr. sewejaardroogte seven+year+drought
‘seven-year drought’) (see Section 2 above). Since
these are not two-part compounds, they fall outside
the scope of our current research project.

3.3.2. Lexicalised
Many of the lexicalised QN compounds are exocen-
tric compounds, with a notable number of them be-
ing plant and animal names.

• Endocentric
No examples in Afrikaans or Dutch have been
found yet.

• Exocentric - Attributive
(compound is ‘entity that has Q number of N’)
Afr. vierkleur four+colour ‘flag of the old
Transvaal Republic’
Du. duizendpoot thousand+leg ‘centipede’.

3.4 Preposition-Noun Compounds (PN)
All compounds that have a preposition as a first
constituent and a noun as the second constituent
belong in this class, even when the prepositions
have adopted a more abstract or metaphorical
meaning.

63



3.4.1. Location
This category also relates to Ó Séaghdha’s IN cat-
egory (2008). The concept described by N is at a
position P of an undefined other concept. In three
different subclasses, the preposition describes a spa-
tial, temporal, or more abstract/metaphorical posi-
tion. The paraphrases of these categories contain an
undefined concept ‘G’ that is used as reference point
(i.e. grounding point).

• Space
(‘N is spatially at position P relative to G’)
Afr. onderrok under+skirt ‘skirt worn under
other skirt’
Du. achterlicht behind+light ‘light at behind
of car or bike; rear light’

• Time
(‘N is temporally at position P relative to G’)
Afr. voormiddag before+noon ‘forenoon’
Du. nagesprek after+talk ‘conversation after
previous event’

• Abstract/Metaphorical
(‘N is at abstract position P relative to G’)
Afr. byverdienste by+income ‘additional in-
come to normal income’
Du. overgewicht over+weight ‘the weight that
is over the normal’

3.4.2. Process-based
We assume this kind of PN compound to be related
to some kind of process. The noun goes in the direc-
tion described by the preposition (‘N goes in direc-
tion P’), e.g.:

Afr. opmars up+march ‘march’
Du. overstap over+step ‘transfer on public
transport’

3.4.3. Lexicalised

• Endocentric
Afr. optog up+trip ‘procession’
Du. uitgroeisel out+growth ‘excrescence’

• Exocentric
Afr. insig in+sight ‘insight’
Du. nageboorte after+birth ‘afterbirth’

4 Conclusion and Future Work

We have presented the alpha version of an an-
notation protocol for the semantics of Dutch and
Afrikaans noun compounds which have a non-noun
as a first constituent. Although this protocol is pri-
marily designed for computational linguistic pur-
poses, we have also indicated some categories rel-
evant to (comparative) descriptive linguistics. Basic
points of departure (based on work by Ó Séaghdha
(2008)) have also been described.

During the development of the protocol, we came
across some interesting findings that should be veri-
fied in further research. For example, it seems as if
all two-part AN and QN compounds are lexicalised,
probably because the more regular A + N and Q +
N constructions in Germanic languages are syntac-
tic phrases. In some categories we could not find
examples yet, these should be investigated in further
corpus-based/-driven research.

Also, the way we constructed the event-based
category for VN compounds (see Section 3.1.1.
above) is open for closer scrutiny. Having sepa-
rate subcategories for subject, object, instrument and
goal/result relations seems an interesting adaptation
of the INST and ACTOR categories in Ó Séaghdha
(2008). We believe it is worth considering the ad-
justment of Ó Séaghdha’s INST and ACTOR cate-
gories to be more like our categories in combining
the several participants of the event on which the
compound is based. This would, in our opinion,
make the annotation process easier because it does
away with the ‘direction’ of the annotation rules that
Ó Séaghdha uses.

As part of the continuous development of our cur-
rent protocol, we are currently in the process of
annotating Dutch and Afrikaans compounds, using
this protocol. The annotation process will proceed
as described by Verhoeven (2012). We are using
the compound database CKarma (CTexT, 2005) for
Afrikaans and a compound list extracted from the e-
Lex corpus for Dutch6. Eventually, this annotated
data will be used in computational experiments to
predict the semantics of a variety of compounds in
these two languages. The results of these experi-
ments will be published later.

6This list was extracted from the e-Lex corpus and annotated
by Lieve Macken from LT3 at Ghent University College.

64



Future work on the semantics of compounds
includes, but is not limited to: the investiga-
tion of affixoid-noun compounds where an adverb-
like affixoid combines with a noun, such as Afr.
laatherfs late+autumn ‘late autumn’; Du. tege-
naanval against+attack ‘counter-attack’; and Eng.
co-inhabitant; investigation of the semantics of
compounds with different parts-of-speech such as
XA (e.g. Afr. bloedrooi blood+red ‘very red’) and
XV (e.g. Afr. stofsuig dust+suck ‘vacuum/hoover’)
compounds; research into regularities that could be
found in the construction and meaning of phrasal
compounds.

Acknowledgments

Automatic Compound Processing (AuCoPro7) is
a collaborative project by research groups of
the North-West University (Potchefstroom, South
Africa), the University of Antwerp (Belgium) and
Tilburg University (The Netherlands), and is funded
through a research grant from the Nederlandse
Taalunie (Dutch Language Union) and the South
African Department of Arts and Culture (DAC), as
well as a grant of the South African National Re-
search Foundation (NRF) (grant number 81794).

We would like to acknowledge the work of Joanie
Liversage (North-West University), who attempted
a first analysis of XN compounds in her third-year
mini-dissertation, as well as the inputs of Walter
Daelemans (University of Antwerp).

References
Valerie Adams. 2001. Complex Words in English. Long-

man, Harlow, UK.
Laurie Bauer. 2004. A Glossary of Morphology. Edin-

burgh University Press, Edinburgh, UK.
Laurie Bauer. 2009. IE, Germanic: Danish. In Rochelle

Lieber and Pavol Štekauer, editors, The Oxford Hand-
book of Compounding, pages 400–416. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford, UK.

Geert Booij. 2002. The Morphology of Dutch. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK.

CTexT. 2005. CKarma (C5 KompositumAnaliseerder
vir Robuuste Morfologiese Analise). [C5 Compound
Analyser for Robust Morphological Analysis]. Centre
for Text Technology (CTexT), North-West University,
Potchefstroom, South Africa.
7http://tinyurl.com/aucopro

Jan Don. 2009. IE, Germanic: Dutch. In Rochelle
Lieber and Pavol Štekauer, editors, The Oxford Hand-
book of Compounding, pages 370–385. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford, UK.

Roxana Girju, Dan Moldovan, Marta Tatu, and Daniel
Antohe. 2005. On the semantics of noun compounds.
Computer Speech and Language, 19:479–496.

Ronald Langacker. 1987. Foundations of Cognitive
Grammar: Volume 1 - Theoretical Prerequisites. Stan-
ford University Press, Stanford.

Rochelle Lieber and Pavol Štekauer. 2009. Introduction:
status and definition of compounding. In Rochelle
Lieber and Pavol Štekauer, editors, The Oxford Hand-
book of Compounding, pages 3–18. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, UK.

Rochelle Lieber. 2009. IE, Germanic: English. In
Rochelle Lieber and Pavol Štekauer, editors, The Ox-
ford Handbook of Compounding, pages 357–369. Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford, UK.

Preslav Nakov. 2008. Noun compound interpretation
using paraphrasing verbs: Feasibility study. In Pro-
ceedings of the 13th International Conference on Ar-
tificial Intelligence: Methodology, Systems, Applica-
tions (AIMSA08).

Martin Neef. 2009. IE, Germanic: German. In Rochelle
Lieber and Pavol Štekauer, editors, The Oxford Hand-
book of Compounding, pages 386–399. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford, UK.

Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha. 2008. Learning compound noun
semantics. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

Ingo Plag. 2003. Word-Formation in English. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Sergio Scalise and Antonietta Bisetto. 2009. The classi-
fication of compounds. In Rochelle Lieber and Pavol
Štekauer, editors, The Oxford Handbook of Com-
pounding, pages 34–53. Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford, UK.

Ben Verhoeven, Walter Daelemans, and Gerhard B. van
Huyssteen. 2012. Classification of noun-noun com-
pound semantics in Dutch and Afrikaans. In Proceed-
ings of the Twenty-Third Annual Symposium of the Pat-
tern Recognition Association of South Africa (PRASA
2012), pages 121–125, Pretoria, South Africa.

Ben Verhoeven. 2012. A computational semantic anal-
ysis of noun compounds in Dutch. Master’s thesis,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

65



66


