










































Lexical Representation and Classification of Eventive Verbs - Polarity and Interaction between Process and State


Proceedings of the Seventh SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing (SIGHAN-7), pages 20–28,
Nagoya, Japan, 14 October 2013.

Lexical Representation and Classification of Eventive Verbs 

－ Polarity and Interaction between Process and State 

 
Shu-Ling Huang1         Yu-Ming Hsieh1, 2          Su-Chu Lin1           Keh-Jiann Chen1 

1 Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan 
2 Department of Computer Science, National Tsing-Hua University, Taiwan 

{josieh,morris,jess,kchen}@iis.sinica.edu.tw 
 

 
 

Abstract 

 

Event classification is one of the most crucial 
tasks in lexical semantic representation. Tradi-
tionally, researchers regarded process and state 
as two top level events and discriminated them 
by semantic and syntactic characteristics. In 
this paper, we add cause-result relativity as an 
auxiliary criterion to discriminate between 
process and state by structuring about 40,000 
Chinese verbs to the two correspondent event 
hierarchies in E-HowNet. All verbs are classi-
fied according to their semantic similarity with 
the corresponding conceptual types of the on-
tology. As a consequence, we discover defi-
ciencies of the dichotomy approach and point 
out that any discrete event classification sys-
tem is insufficient to make a clear cut classifi-
cation for synonyms with slightly different 
semantic focuses. We then propose a solution 
to remedy the deficiencies of the dichotomy 
approach. For the process or state type mis-
matched verbs, their inherited semantic prop-
erties will be adjusted according to their POS 
and semantic expressions to preserve their true 
semantic and syntactic information. Further-
more, cause-result relations will be linked be-
tween corresponding processes and states to 
bridge the gaps of the dichotomy approach. 

1 Introduction 
Clarifying the nature of verb classes is a crucial 
issue in lexical semantic research, being of great 
interest to both theoretical and computational 
linguistics. Many classification and representa-
tion theories have already been presented includ-
ing the widely cited theories proposed by 
Vendler (1967), Dowty (1979), Bach (1986), 
Parsons (1990), Levin (1993), Pustejovsky (1995) 
and Rosen (2003). Additionally, several online 

verb classification systems, such as WordNet 
(Fellbaum 1998), VerbNet (Kipper-Schuler 
2006), FrameNet (Fillmore et al. 2003) and Lev-
in’s verb classification are also available. Each 
approach views events from a different perspec-
tive, and each approach clarifies a different part 
of the overall problem of understanding the lin-
guistic representation of events. Overall, they can 
be divided into two main schools, one is seman-
tic classification, such as Vendler’s approach; 
and the other is syntactic classification, such as 
Levin’s approach. 

Since different event classifications pinpoint 
the basic features of events that need to be repre-
sented, we need to clarify the goal we want to 
achieve before adopting or proposing an event 
classification. In this paper, we aim to achieve a 
better lexical semantic representation framework 
for E-HowNet (Chen et al. 2003), and we adopt 
the typologies of process and state as the two top 
level event types. However, since verbs may ex-
press different aspects or viewpoints of concep-
tual events, is difficult in some cases to make a 
clear-cut difference between process and state 
verbs. Verb-result compounds, such as 購妥 gou-
tuo ‘to complete procurement’, are obvious ex-
amples which are either pure process or state. 
Furthermore their semantic interactions also need 
to be clarified. Consider, for example, the syno-
nym words (strictly speaking near synonyms and 
hyponyms) of 記得 ji-de ‘remember’ in Manda-
rin Chinese: (a) 想起 xiang-qi ‘call to mind’, 記
取 ji-qu ‘keep in mind’, 背起來 bei-qi-lai ‘mem-
orize’, (b) 念念不忘 nian-nian-bu-wang ‘memo-
rable’, 刻骨銘心 ke-gu-ming-xin ‘be remem-
bered with deep gratitude’; although these words 
are near synonyms, their senses shift slightly ac-
cording to different semantic focuses and often 
resulting in different grammatical behavior. If we 
classify group (a) as a process type, and group (b) 

20



as a state type by their fine-grained semantic fo-
cuses, we may lose the important information of 
they are actually near synonyms and denote the 
same event type. Therefore, in order to design a 
better semantic and syntactic representational 
framework for verbs, we try to clarify the polari-
ty and interaction between process and state. 

The remainder of this article is organized as 
follows. In the next section, we begin with a re-
view of past research. Section 3 clarifies the po-
larity between process and state, and then diffi-
culties of the dichotomy approach will be ad-
dressed. In Section 4 we describe the interaction 
between process and state, and propose solutions 
to overcome the difficulties mentioned in the 
previous section. Finally, we conclude our find-
ings and possible future research in Section 5. 

2 Backgrounds 
Over 2300 years ago, Aristotle (1984) proposed 
the first event-based classification of verbs. His 
main insight was the distinction between states 
and events (called ‘processes’ in this paper). 
From the late 1960’s, a large number of event 
classifications, variously based on temporal crite-
ria (such as tense, aspect, time point, time inter-
val), syntactic behavior (such as transitivity, ob-
ject case, event structure), or event arguments 
(such as thematic role mapping, agent type, verb 
valence) have been suggested and have aroused 
many heated discussions. These representations 
can be roughly divided into the two main schools 
of semantic classification and syntactic classifi-
cation. In the following discussion, we take 
Vendler and Levin as representatives for the two 
respective schools, and we will find that both 
schools treat process and state as two obviously 
different event types. 

2.1 Vendler’s Classification 
Vendler’s classification (1967) is the most influ-
ential and representative system in terms of the 
semantic classification approach. He classified 
verbs into four categories “to describe the most 
common time schemata implied by the use of 
English verbs” (pp. 98-99). The four categories 
are given in (1): 

(1) a. States: non-actions that hold for some peri-
od of time but lack continuous tenses. 
b. Activities: events that go on for a time, but do 
not necessarily terminate at any given point. 
c. Accomplishments: events that proceed toward 
a logically necessary terminus. 

d. Achievements: events that occur at a single 
moment, and therefore lack continuous tenses 
(e.g., the progressive). 

Distinctly, states denote a non-action condi-
tion and are irrelevant to temporal properties, 
while the other three denote an event process or a 
time point in an event process. Vendler’s succes-
sors, such as Verkuyl (1993), Carlson (1981), 
Moens (1987), Hoeksema (1983), extended this 
discussion without changing Vendler’s basic 
framework. According to Rosen (2003), the suc-
cessors all pointed out that state and process are 
two major event types. Ter Meulen (1983, 1995) 
thus suggested a redefinition of the Vendler clas-
ses. She defined states have no internal structure 
or change, while events, i.e., the processes dealt 
with in our paper and consisting in Vendler’s 
other three event types, are defined on the basis 
of their parts. 

2.2 Levin’s Classification 
Levin (1993) believes that identifying verbs with 
similar syntactic behavior provides an effective 
means of distinguishing semantically coherent 
verb classes. She proposed a coarse-grained clas-
sification for verbs based on two observations: 
the first is many result verbs lexicalize results 
that are conventionally associated with particular 
manners, and vice versa, many manner verbs 
lexicalize manners that are conventionally asso-
ciated with particular results. The examples she 
gave are listed in (2): 

(2) The pervasiveness of the dichotomy (Levin 
2011) 
 Manner 

verbs 
vs. Result 

verbs 
Verbs of damaging: hit vs. break 
Verbs of putting—2-dim smear vs. cover 
Verbs of putting—3-dim pour vs. fill 
Verbs of removal shovel vs. empty 
Verbs of combining shake vs. combine 
Verbs of killing stab vs. kill 
 

Levin argued the origins of the dichotomy 
arises from a lexicalization constraint that re-
stricts manner and result meaning components to 
fit in a complementary distribution: a verb lexi-
calizes only one type; and those components of a 
verb’s meaning are specified and entailed in all 
uses of the verb, regardless of context. Further, 
not only do manner and result verbs differ sys-
tematically in meaning, but they differ in their 
argument realization options (Rappaport and 
Levin 1998, 2005). For example, result verbs 
show a causative alternation, but manner verbs 

21



do not, as shown in example (3); and, manner 
verbs show considerably more and different ar-
gument realization options than result verbs 
(Rappaport and Levin 1998), such as those de-
scribed in (4). 

(3) a. Kim broke the window./The window broke. 
b. Kim wiped the window./*The window wiped. 

(4) a. Terry wiped. (activity) 
b. Terry wiped the table. (activity) 
c. Terry wiped the crumbs off the table. (remov-
ing) 
d. Terry wiped the crumbs into the sink. (putting) 
e. Terry wiped the slate clean. (change of state) 
f. Terry wiped the crumbs into a pile. (creation) 

Levin’s manner verb and result verb dichot-
omy characterizes semantic and syntactic inter-
actions between verbs. Specifically, this syntac-
tic dichotomy is caused by the semantic charac-
teristics of the language. We consider a similar 
semantic relation of cause-result between process 
verbs and state verbs to show the dichotomy and 
interactions between them. In fact, Levin’s result 
verbs are verb-result compounds in Chinese and 
our result verbs refer to pure states. The above 
cited verbs pairs, such as stab and kill in (2), are 
both process verbs. By our notion of process and 
state dichotomy wounded and die are result states 
of stab and kill, respectively.  

2.3 E-HowNet’s Classification 
E-HowNet (Chen et al. 2005) is a frame-based 
entity-relation model that constructs events, ob-
jects and relations in a hierarchically-structured 
ontology. By following the conventional event 
classification theories, verbs are partitioned into 
process and state first, which is a higher priority 
dichotomous classification criterion than the syn-
tactic classification in E-HowNet, since E-
HowNet is a primarily semantic classification 
system. Furthermore, semantic classification is 
more intuitive, and more in line with the general 

view of the real world. Based on this criterion, 
the top-level E-HowNet ontology is established 
as depicted in Figure 1. 

3 The Polarity and Interaction between 
Process and State  

Process and state have long been treated as two 
top classes of events. Semantically, their distinc-
tions are evident and intuitive, such as the obvi-
ous difference between the process verb 取悅 qu-
yue ‘please’ and the state verb 喜悅 xi-yue ‘joy-
ful’. With respect to syntax, process and state 
verbs also have their own individual characteris-
tics; for example, 取悅 qu-yue ‘please’ must 
have a patient object but 喜悅 xi-yue ‘joyful’ 
does not. Differentiating them is considered ob-
vious in theoretic and practical linguistic re-
search areas. However, from the perspective of a 
fine-grained lexical analysis, researchers have 
also found that it is difficult to make clear cut 
differences between process and state. Take the 
following as examples. The state verb 生氣 
sheng-qi ‘angry’ may accept an object goal in 
Mandarin and can be hardly differentiated from 
the process verb 發脾氣 fa-pi-qi ‘get angry’ in 
semantics. In this paper, we do not aim to strictly 
partition 生氣 sheng-qi ‘angry’ and 發脾氣 fa-pi-
qi ‘get angry’ into state and process type. Instead, 
our objective is to discriminate processes from 
states with an emphasis on why we encounter 
difficulties of discriminating them, and what are 
better representations that may preserve as much 
semantic and syntactic information as possible. 
For example, the verb 遇害 yu-hai ‘be murdered’ 
can be either classified as a process of kill or a 
state of die, with neither classification being ab-
solute. A better solution might be that even if the 
verb is misclassified into either type, we can still 
recognize that the experiencer of 遇害 yu-hai ‘be 
murdered’ is killed and dead. In this section, we 
emphasize the general distinction between pro-

TopNode

entity|事物 relation|關聯

event|事件

state|狀態 (result)process|行動 (cause)

object|物體 …… ……

AlterRelation|變關係 AlterState|變狀態

AlterPossession|變領屬 AlterIsa|變是非 ……

corelation|關連 ChangeState|改變狀態 ……

take|取 give|給 ……

OwnOrOwnNot|領屬 ……

own|有 BelongTo|屬於 ……

be|是

E-HowNet Ontology

Figure 1. The Architecture of E-HowNet 

22



cess and state, and then in the next section, we 
introduce several approaches we adopted while 
encountering difficulties of process-state dichot-
omy. 

The differentiating characteristics between 
process and state verbs, other than semantic dif-
ferences, are not obvious. Summarizing the pre-
viously mentioned theories in Section 2, the po-
larities between process and state can be general-
ized as below: 

(5)  The polarities and interactions between pro-
cess and state 
Processes: cause of states, dynamism (i.e., rele-
vant to temporal properties), object domination 
States: result of processes, stasis (i.e., irrelevant 
to temporal properties), object modification 

The polarity of dynamism and stasis is a se-
mantic-based distinction, whereas the domina-
tion of objects or their modification is a syntax-
based distinction. They are both common but 
coarse-grained event classification criteria and 
most verbs can be distinguished by these coarse-
grained classification criteria. However some 
verbs like 發脾氣 fa-pi-qi ‘get angry’ and 遇害 
yu-hai ‘be murdered’ are not easily classified. In 
our study, we propose an interaction between 
cause and result as an auxiliary criterion, which 
asserts that processes are the cause of states and 
they denote an event process or a time point on 
an event process. On the other hand, states are 
the result of processes and they denote a non-
action condition and are thus irrelevant to tem-
poral properties, i.e., they have no internal struc-
ture or change. Although it would appear that 
cause-result is a natural differentiation criterion 
between processes and states, it may not be a 
one-to-one relation and some of verb types may 
not have obvious cause-result counterparts. For 
instance, the concept of causative process {earn|
賺} may achieve several resultant states such as 
{obtain|得到} and {rich|富}, though the process 
of {swim|游} does not have an obvious result 
state. Nonetheless if we can use the characteris-
tics of (5) to differentiate all verbs into process 
and state types, which may help us achieve the 
first step towards a lexical semantic classification 
for verbs. We then use semantic expressions, 
part-of-speech (POS) features, and relational 
links such as cause-result relationship between 
process types and state types to make a better 
lexical semantic representation. Regarding the 
verb type classification, the following questions 
may be raised. Is the process-state dichotomy 

approach feasible? How are the verbs denoting 
complex event structures, such as verb-result 
compounds, classified? Is it true that all states 
have causing processes and all processes have 
result states? The following observations will 
provide the answers to these questions. 

3.1 Observations and Difficulties of the 
Process-State Dichotomy in E-HowNet 

In order to develop the lexical semantic represen-
tation system E-HowNet, we classified all Chi-
nese verbs into a process and state type-hierarchy, 
as illustrated in Figure 1. We use the characteris-
tics (5) of dynamism and stasis as a semantic-
based distinction; the domination and modifica-
tion of objects as a syntax-based supporting cri-
terion; as well as the cause-result relation as a 
complementary criterion to distinguish process 
from state. It is interesting that with the excep-
tion of general acts, almost all top-level Chinese 
verb types; whether of process or state types, 
necessarily have their cause-result counterpart. 
However for the fine-grained lower level types 
or lexical level verbs, there are three different 
cases of lexical realizations of cause-result di-
chotomy, which are listed in the following. 

Case 1: Process types have result states and vice 
versa. An example of cause-result mapping be-
tween process and state is given in (6).  

(6) Causative process type {brighten|使亮}: e.g., 
磨光 mo-guang ‘burnish’, 擦亮 ca-liang ‘polish’ 
etc.   
Resultant state type {bright|明}: e.g., 水亮 shui-
liang ‘bright as water’, 光燦 guang-can ‘shining’ 
etc.  

For this case, the process and state are two dif-
ferent types and can be differentiated by the fun-
damental differences between dynamic and static 
types or by the cause-result relation. However, 
lexemes may shift their senses due to different 
compounding, resulting in a classification di-
lemma of semantic similarity first or dichotomy 
of process and state first. As was mentioned in 
the above example, the causative process type 
{kill|殺害}, e.g., 弔死 diao-si ‘hang by the neck’, 
has a resultant state type {die|死}, e.g., 往生 
wang-sheng ‘pass away’. Then, how about the 
result-state verb 遇害 yu-hai ‘be murdered’? 
Should we classify 遇害 yu-hai ‘be murdered’ as 
a process type {kill|殺害}? Or, as a state type 
{die|死}? The verb 遇害 yu-hai ‘be murdered’ 
seems to be the resultant state {die|死} in terms 

23



of stativity, but from the perspective of a seman-
tic focus, it is more akin to a causative process 
{kill|殺害}. This classification difficulty always 
occurs when we analyze verbs denoting different 
aspect situations, such as passive or achieved 
situations. As a result, near synonyms of same 
event type could be separated apart for denoting 
different aspectual situations. 

In terms of the E-HowNet ontology, the 
cause-result matching between processes and 
states almost reaches 100% respecting 
hypernymy concepts as shown in Figure 2. How-
ever, at the hyponym or lexical level, we found 
that the correspondent rate was not as high as in 
top-level concepts. This results in Case 2 below. 

Case 2: Process types neither have nodes of re-
sult states nor do state types have nodes of caus-
ing processes in the E-HowNet ontology, which 
means the result states or causal processes are 
either vague or they are not lexicalized common 
concepts. (7), (8) are typical examples. 

(7) The causative process type {punish|處罰}, 
such as 行刑 xing-xing ‘execute’ or 處決 chu-jue 

‘put to death’, have the corresponding aspectual 
resultant states, such as 受刑 shou-xing ‘be put 
to torture’ and 伏法 fu-fa ‘be executed’, but no 
lexicalized concept in common to denote being 
punished or being tortured in Chinese. Therefore, 
there is no proper node of state type to which the 
above two stative verbs belong in E-HowNet. 

(8) There is no lexicalized concept in common to 
denote causative processes, such as 板起 (臉 ) 
ban-qu-(lian) ‘put on a stern expression’ and 正
色 zheng-se ‘with a stern countenance’ in Chi-
nese, and which are the cause of the resultant 
state type {austere|冷峻}, e.g., 凝重 ning-zhong 
‘serious’, 不苟言笑 bu-gou-yan-xiao ‘serious in 
speech and manner’. That is, there is no proper 
node of the process type to which the above two 
process verbs 板起臉 ban-qu-lian ‘put on a stern 
expression’ and 正色  zheng-se ‘with a stern 
countenance’ belong.  

For lexemes of Case 2, the characteristics of 
process and state of (5) can still differentiate the 
lexemes on the process and state types, but there 
are no actual corresponding conceptual nodes in 

PhysicalAct

MentalAct

MakeAct

GeneralAct

AlterRelation

AlterState

AlterAttribute

AlterObject

corelation

ChangeState

PhysicalState

feeling

ShowAttitude

ShowFeeling

ShowVolition

ShowPerception recognition

PROCESS STATE

AlterPossession

AlterIsa

AlterComparison

AlterFitness

AlterInclusion

AlterConnection

AlterCauseResult

AlterLocation

AlterTimePosition

AlterQuantity

OwnOrOwnNot

be

comparison

suit

inclusive

connective

CauseResult

TimeOrSpace

arithmetic

AlterProperty

AlterAppearance

AlterMeasurement

MakeHigher

MakeLower

change

AppearanceChange

QuantityChange

grow

CauseToExist

AlterStateNormal

AlterStateGood

AlterStateBad

CauseToBeHidden

ExistAppear

disappear

BeNormal

BeRecovered

BeGood

BeBad

end

WeatherState

MakeOwnKnowledge

MakeOtherKnowledge

MakeNoKnowledge

MakeMisunderstand

HaveKnowledge

NoKnowledge
misunderstand

BeUnable

cherish

excited

FeelingByGood

FeelingByBad

CauseToGrow

CauseToLive

resume
benefit
MakeBetter

cause result

Figure 2. The Matching between Processes and Result States in E-HowNet 

24



the ontology. This means that some stative verbs 
must be attached to the process type node and 
some of process verbs should be attached to 
stative type node in the ontology for the sake of 
keeping reasonable semantic consistency. 

Case 3: Some processes and respective states co-
exist concurrently and are not in the cause-result 
temporal sequence. We call such concurrent pro-
cess and state a dual process-state. There are 26 
dual process-state type primitives in the E-
HowNet ontology, with example (9) describing 
one of them. 

(9) the dual process-state {living|生活} includes: 
(a) 求生 qiu-sheng ‘seek to survive’, 度日 du-ri 
‘subsist’, and (b) 生存 sheng-cun ‘exist’, 在世 
zai-shi ‘be living’, 一息尚存 yi-xi-shang-cun ‘be 
still alive’. The semantic focus of group (a) indi-
cates a process of making a living or to live, 
while group (b) indicates the state of being alive 
or be living. The two types of process and state 
coexist and they are not cause-result relation. 

For the dual process-state type, we encounter 
the similar dilemma of the previous two cases. If 
we choose the bipartite process and state ap-
proach, near synonyms will belong to two nodes 
far apart in the ontology. If we adopt the ap-
proach of a unified conceptual node for each dual 
process-state type, the result will be the same 
problem as in Case 2, i.e., stative verbs and pro-
cess verbs are of the same type.   

Furthermore, in Mandarin Chinese we have 
many verb-result compounds (VR), such as 累病 
lei-bing ‘sick from overwork’, 驚退  jing-tui 
‘frighten off’ and 購妥  gou-tuo ‘to complete 
procurement’. Since causative process and re-
sultant state are contained in the same verb, how 
should we classify them? 

4 Knowledge Representation for Pro-
cess and State Verbs  

The difficulties of the dichotomous approach are 
caused by the semantic interaction between state 
and process. We thus propose the classification 
criterion (5) and a representational scheme ac-
cording to the above observations, and try to 
solve the corresponding difficulties without 
changing the framework of the dichotomy struc-
ture. The idea is that all verbs are classified ac-
cording to their semantic similarity with the con-
ceptual types of the ontology. The process or 
state type mismatched verbs will have their types 

adjusted by their POS or semantic expressions. 
Such an approach is functional insofar as, for 
example, using the feature of ‘don’t fly’ to adjust 
the flying property for penguins as bird type and 
still maintaining the inherent properties. Fur-
thermore, cause-result relations will be linked 
between corresponding processes and states to 
bridge the gaps of the dichotomy approach. This 
proposal is put forward to interpret the semantic 
and syntactic consistency and differences of 
verbs with respect to lexical representation. 

4.1 Lexical Semantic Representation for 
Verbs that are Attached to Process or 
State Primitives 

For the Case 1 verbs, every process has the cor-
responding result state, and every state has the 
corresponding causal processes. For synonym 
verbs with a process and state dichotomy, each 
verb is placed under its corresponding conceptual 
nodes. In addition, cause-result relation links will 
be established between corresponding process 
types and state types, as exemplified in the Fig-
ures 2 and 4. In real implementation, there are 
310 corresponding cause-result pairs established.  
However from a practical point of view, all se-
mantic representation systems are discrete sys-
tems. Given that they use a limited number of 
primitive concepts to express complex concepts, 
the result is that some words are forced to be 
classified to the most similar concept node but 
with a mismatched major type, such as 遇害 yu-
hai ‘be murdered’ possibly being classified as the 
process type {kill|殺害} instead of the state type 
{die|死}. We will resolve such kind of problem 
by the following method for Case 2. 

As shown in the observation of Case 2, some 
of the cause-result corresponding concepts are 
vague and some are not lexicalized, neither of 
which occur as conceptual type nodes in the on-
tology. As a result, for verbs whose potential 
hypernyms are missing, we will classify these 
verbs to their cause-result counterpart conceptual 
nodes instead. After this, we use the part-of-
speech to distinguish the state or process, as il-
lustrated in (10). 

(10) causative process: {FondOf| 喜 歡 } 
there is no corresponding resultant state 
lexicons: 看中 kan-zhong ‘take fancy to’, 喜愛
xi-ai ‘love’, 酷愛 ku-ai ‘ardently love’, 熱衷 re-
zhong ‘be addicted to’. Since these verbs in E-
HowNet are tagged with active POS, they are 
classified to {FondOf|喜歡}. 

25



The verbs of 癡情 chi-qing ‘be infatuated’, 興致
盎然  xing-zhi-ang-ran ‘full of interest’ in E-
HowNet are tagged with stative POS, but there is 
no lexicalized state primitive to place these verbs, 
and as such, they are classified to the corre-
sponding existing hypernym process node, i.e., 
{FondOf|喜歡}. 

With part-of-speech tags, we have no prob-
lem discriminating state verbs that are attached 
to a process primitive. In fact, we can define 
state verbs in {result(process)} format; or pro-
cess verbs in {cause(state)} format in order to 
make both semantic distinctions and link rela-
tions. Example (11) lists the expressions of verbs 
in (10). 

(11) 看中 kan-zhong ‘take fancy to’, 喜愛 xi-ai 
‘love’, 酷愛 ku-ai ‘ardently love’, 熱衷 re-zhong 
‘be addicted to’ are defined as {FondOf|喜歡}; 
癡情 chi-qing ‘be infatuated’, 興致盎然 xing-
zhi-ang-ran ‘full of interest’ are defined as {re-
sult({FondOf|喜歡})}. 

Moreover, fine-grained part-of-speech tags 
also provide syntactic constraint information for 
each verb; this solves the difficulty in Case 2 and 
effectively makes a semantic and syntactic dis-
tinction for synonyms. 

4.2 Lexical Representation for Verbs that 
are Attached to Dual Process-State 
Primitives 

For Case 3 dual process-state verbs, the bipartite 
nodes for state and process are not needed for 
two reasons. Firstly, it is hard to make distinction 
between process and state for the dual types, and 
secondly, state and process are just two different 
viewpoints of same events. A single dual pro-
cess-state conceptual type may contain both pro-
cess and stative verbs of same event type of dif-
ferent viewpoints. We use part-of-speech tags to 
tell the difference between semantic focus and 
the syntactic behavior of each verb. In addition, 

the dual process-state type also indicates that the 
process and state coexist at the same time.  

4.3 Lexical Semantic Representation for 
Verb-Result Compounds 

In addition to the verbs belonging to Cases 1-3, 
we also wanted to address the solution for classi-
fication difficulty of VR compounds. Take as 
examples the verbs with VR structure in example 
(12); no matter which event type we classified 
them to, no difference was caused with respect to 
lexical representation. 

(12) 累病 lei-bing ‘sick from overwork’ def:{ill|
病態: cause={tired|疲乏}}  
驚退  jing-tui ‘frighten off’ def:{frighten|嚇唬: 
patient={x}, result={leave|離開:theme={x}}} 
購 妥  gou-tuo ‘to complete procurement’ 
def:{buy|買: aspect={Vachieve|達成}} 

The semantic expressions provide infor-
mation to clarify the accurate word meaning and 
relation between V1 and V2, as well as to con-
strain the syntactic behaviors in the Verb-Result 
structure. Although it is controversial to recog-
nize the semantic focus of these verbs, i.e., to 
determine whether they are more state-like or 
more process-like, it is not an important issue in 
making a semantic and syntactic distinction in 
lexical representation. We built explicit links of 
cause-result relations between sub-events in the 
LESRE framework of E-HowNet (Chen et al. 
2013), such as {ill|病態} and {tired|疲乏} of the 
verb 累病  lei-bing ‘sick from overwork’. We 
also encoded the co-indexed arguments for all 
related event pairs, e.g., the patient of {frighten|
嚇唬} is the agent of {leave|離開} in (12). 

5 Discussion and Conclusion 
Levin (2010) had pointed out that different stud-
ies support positing verb classes of varying 
grain-sizes, including (a) coarse-grained classifi-
cation discriminating manner verb, result verb; 

Generic event
(Primitive)

foreground information

background information

viewpoint 

Syntactic: ICG and constraint rules

temporal-based lexical event structures

 core participant roles (i.e. arguments) and their semantic restrictions 

relations between sub-events and their co-index arguments

aspect

modality

Speaker’s attitude

perspective

focus

adjuncts

Figure 3. The Content and Formation of LESRE 

26



(b) medium-grained classification discriminating 
motion verbs, speaking verbs etc., with Fill-
more’s verb classification being regarded as a 
representative of medium-grained classification; 
and (c) fine-grained classification discriminating 
run, which lexicalizes a manner of motion that 
causes directed displacement towards a goal. 
Nevertheless, while these classifications are dif-
ferent in grain-size, they are not contradictory for 
the classification criteria.  

In E-HowNet, we carry this viewpoint 
through the whole construction by firstly classi-
fying events into causative processes and their 
corresponding resultant states, i.e., the top two 
levels of events we mainly discussed in this pa-
per; we then further subdivided more than 1200 
generic events (i.e., primitives) into a semantic 
hierarchy framework as a medium-grained event 
classification. Finally, the near synonyms were 
attached to each primitive and discriminated by 
fine-grained features that were integrated in the 
lexical event structure representation of E-
HowNet (abbreviated as LESRE; see Chen et al. 
2013). The content and formation of LESRE is 
shown in Figure 3. 

We believe the varying grain-sizes classifica-
tions provide different semantic and syntactic 
realization options, such as the coarse-grained 
classification in which process verbs show con-
siderably more and different argument options 
than state verbs; further, the idiosyncrasy of each 
grain-size classification, as well as their interac-
tion, will provide us with advanced knowledge in 
lexical representation. We will, therefore, con-
tinue to complete the LESRE theory in the near 
future, with the ultimate objective being to estab-
lish a completed event classification system 
which can be applied to both theoretical and 
computational linguistics. The sketch of different 

grain-sized event classification in the E-HowNet 
construction is detailed in Figure 4. 

Event classification is one of the most crucial 
tasks in lexical semantic representation. Tradi-
tionally, researchers have regarded process and 
state as two top level events and defined them by 
counter temporal features and syntactic rules. In 
this paper, we added cause-result relativity as an 
auxiliary criterion to discriminate between pro-
cess and state, and structured about 40,000 Chi-
nese verbs to the two correspondent event classes. 
All verbs were classified according to their se-
mantic similarity with the conceptual types of the 
ontology. The process or state type mismatched 
verbs would have their types be adjusted by their 
POS or semantic expressions. Furthermore 
cause-result relations would be linked between 
corresponding processes and states to bridge the 
gaps of the dichotomy approach.  

We not only aimed to claim the deficiency of 
dichotomy approach, but also to point out that 
any discrete event classification system is insuf-
ficient to make a clear cut classification for all 
verbs, such as synonyms with slightly different 
semantic focuses. Although misclassification 
maybe unavoidable, under our framework of 
event classification, we proposed the remedy of 
using fine-grained feature expressions to recover 
erroneous information inherited from the mis-
matched classification and differentiated the fi-
ne-grained semantic differences for near syno-
nyms. The E-HowNet feature expression system 
is an incremental system, i.e., fine-grain features 
can be added gradually without side effects. Cur-
rently we have resolved the medium-grained 
classification among 1200 generic event types 
for about 40,000 Chinese verbs. In the future, we 
will improve their fine-grained feature expres-
sions to achieve better lexical semantic and syn-
tactic representations. 

(cause) act|行動 

AlterRelation|變關係

AlterPossession|變領屬

take|取

earn|賺
Active verbs

  掙錢 to gain money, 
  撈本 to recover one's capital (in a risky adventure),
  賺到 have earned,
Stative verbs

  大發 make big money,
  穩賺 earn without doubt, 
  ……

(result) state|狀態

corelation|關連

OwnOrOwnNot|領屬

own|有

obtain|得到
Stative verbs

  受惠 receive benefit,
  中彩 win prize,
  不勞而獲 reap without sowing,
Active verbs

  贏得 to gain, 
  趨利 approach to profit,
  ……

coarse-grained classification

medium-grained classification

fine-grained classification(LESRE)

Figure 4. Three Grain-sizes of Event Classification in E-HowNet Construction 

27



References  
Aristotle, 1984, Metaphysics. In Jonathan Barnes 

(eds.), The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Re-
vised Oxford Translation, Volume 2. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 

Chen Keh-Jiann, et al., 2003, E-HowNet, CKIP Group, 
Academia Sinica, http://ehownet.iis.sinica.edu.tw 
/ehownet.php. 

Chen, Keh-Jiann, Shu-Ling Huang, Yueh-Yin Shih, 
Yi-Jun Chen, 2005, Extended-HowNet- A Repre-
sentational Framework for Concepts, OntoLex 
2005 - Ontologies and Lexical Resources IJCNLP-
05 Workshop, Jeju Island, South Korea. 

Chen Keh-Jiann, Shu-Ling Huang and Suchu Lin, 
2013, The Lexical Event Structure Representation 
of E-HowNet, technical report, CKIP Group, Aca-
demia Sinica. (In preparation). 

Levin, B., 1993, English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tions: A Preliminary Investigation. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press. http://www-
personal.umich.edu/~jlawler/levin.verbs. 

Levin, B., 2010, What is the best grain-size for defin-
ing verb classes? Conference on Word Classes: 
Nature, Typology, Computational Representations, 
Second TRIPLE International Conference, 
Università Roma Tre, Rome, pp.24-26. 

Levin, B., 2011, Verb Classes Within and Across 
Languages, Valency Classes Conference, Max 
Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, 
Leipzig, pp.14-17. 

Meulen Alice G.B. ter, 1983, The Representation of 
Time in Natural Language. In A.G.B. ter Meulen 
(ed.), Studies in Modaltheoretic Semantics. Dor-
drecht: Foris. 

Meulen Alice G.B. ter, 1995, Representing Time in 
Natural Language: The Dynamic Interpretation of 
Tense and Aspect. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Rappaport Hovav, M. and B. Levin, 1998, Building 
Verb Meanings, in M. Butt and W. Geuder, eds., 
The Projection of Arguments, CSLI Publications, 
Stanford, CA, pp.97-134. 

Rappaport Hovav, M. and B. Levin, 2005, Change of 
State Verbs: Implications for Theories of Argu-
ment Projection, in N. Erteschik-Shir and T. 
Rapoport, eds., The Syntax of Aspect, Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press, pp.274-286. 

Rosen, S. T., 2003, The Syntactic Representation of 
Linguistic Events, In L. Cheng & R. Sybesma 
(eds.), The 2nd State of the Article Book. Mouton 
de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 323-365. Reprinted from 
Glot International, 4, 3-10. 

Vendler, Z., 1967, Linguistics in Philosophy, Ithaca, 
New York: Cornell University Press, pp.97-121. 

28


