




















Negation Scope Delimitation in Clinical Text Using Three
Approaches: NegEx, PyConTextNLP and SynNeg

Hideyuki Tanushi1, Hercules Dalianis1, Martin Duneld1, Maria Kvist1,2,
Maria Skeppstedt1, Sumithra Velupillai1

(1) Dept. of Computer and Systems Sciences (DSV), Stockholm University
Forum 100, 164 40 Kista, Sweden

(2) Dept. of clinical immunology and transfusion medicine, Karolinska University Hospital
171 76 Stockholm, Sweden

hide-tan@dsv.su.se, hercules@dsv.su.se, xmartin@dsv.su.se,
maria.kvist@karolinska.se, mariask@dsv.su.se, sumithra@dsv.su.se

ABSTRACT
Negation detection is a key component in clinical information extraction systems, as health
record text contains reasonings in which the physician excludes different diagnoses by negating
them. Many systems for negation detection rely on negation cues (e.g. not), but only few
studies have investigated if the syntactic structure of the sentences can be used for determining
the scope of these cues. We have in this paper compared three different systems for negation
detection in Swedish clinical text (NegEx, PyConTextNLP and SynNeg), which have different
approaches for determining the scope of negation cues. NegEx uses the distance between the
cue and the disease, PyConTextNLP relies on a list of conjunctions limiting the scope of a cue,
and in SynNeg the boundaries of the sentence units, provided by a syntactic parser, limit the
scope of the cues. The three systems produced similar results, detecting negation with an
F-score of around 80%, but using a parser had advantages when handling longer, complex
sentences or short sentences with contradictory statements.

KEYWORDS: clinical text, negation detection, syntactic analysis.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 387 of 474]



1 Introduction

Clinical text is written by physicians and nurses in patient records. Most of these notes are
noisy, written in telegraphic style, containing e.g. incomplete sentences with missing subjects.
Moreover clinical text contains much more spelling errors than ordinary text. All this together
makes it difficult for ordinary text processing tools to work properly.

In a clinical setting, it is important to record the symptoms and signs of diseases that the patient
reports as a base for the following reasoning and speculation of possible diagnoses. Possible
diseases that can be ruled out, as well as symptoms that the patient does not experience,
are therefore frequently mentioned in the health record narrative. In one study, some of
the most frequently used clinical observations were found to be negated the majority of the
time (Chapman et al., 2001a). Negation detection in a clinical setting is essential for, e.g.,
text summarisation of clinical text, or for information retrieval of symptoms and diagnoses.
Such systems would be very valuable for clinical decision support, knowledge extraction and
supporting clinicians in their daily work.

The aim of this study is to determine if syntactic information is useful for negation scope
detection in clinical text, compared to fixed or flexible rule-based scope detection.

Some of the problems with negation detection and determining the scope of what is negated,
particularly in clinical texts, are linked with the characteristics mentioned above: the texts are
often telegraphic and may contain information dense sentences where negated and affirmed
diagnostic expressions are in close proximity, long enumerations, and complex sentences, where
current negation detection approaches produce errors. Such problems may be better handled if
syntactic information is used.

We therefore compared three different approaches for determining negation delimitation scope
of diagnostic expressions:

1. Using the heuristic that the scope of a negation cue is six tokens, that is, if a diagnostic
expression is mentioned in the proximity of six tokens from a negation cue it is considered as
negated. This heuristic has previously been used for Swedish (Skeppstedt 2011).

2. Using the sentence as the scope for the negation cues, but limiting the scope if a conjunction
is present in the sentence. This approach has previously been used for Swedish (Velupillai et al.,
2013)

3. Using morphological and syntactic labels provided by a syntactic parser for determining the
scope of a negation trigger.

2 Related Research

There are several studies on negation detection in English clinical text, both rule-based methods
(e.g. Chapman et al., 2001b, Mutalik et al., 2001) and machine learning based methods (e.g.
Rokach et al., 2010). The rule-based studies use a cue phrase that indicates negation, e.g. not,
no, rule out. The most simple approaches use a heuristically determined scope, negating all
symptoms and diseases that occur in close proximity to a cue phrase (Chapman et al., 2001b),
whereas there are also approaches using other cue words, such as conjunctions, for limiting
the scope of a negation cue phrase (Elkin et al., 2005, Chapman et al., 2011). Morante and
Daelemans (2009) have studied the span of the scope to the left and to the right of the negated
term in the BioScope Clinical Corpus and found that over 97 percent of the scopes are to the

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 388 of 474]



right of the negation and are on average 6.33 tokens long, while the ones to the left are only
4.84 tokens long. Aronow et al. (1999) describe a negation detection system, NegExpander,
where they checked the scope of conjunctions to decide scope of negations, i.e. a sort of
basic syntactic analysis. In Goryachev et al. (2006) this approach was compared with other
approaches such as NegEx (see below) and machine learning based approaches (SVM and Naïve
Bayes).

There are also studies in which parsers have been used for detecting the scope of negation cues.
The *SEM shared task (Morante and Blanco, 2012) provided a phrase structure parsed literary
corpus, annotated for negation cues and their scope, and had as one of the tasks to detect this
scope. Most participating groups based the scope detection on machine learning, and the two
most successful both used conditional random fields, one with features from the syntactic tree
and the other also using lexical features.

In the clinical domain, Huang and Lowe (2007) categorized negation cues, based on their
syntactic category and on typical phrase patterns they occur in, and constructed a grammar
for how negation is expressed for each category, using phrase structures given by the Stanford
syntactic parser. This resulted in a precision of 98.6% and a recall of 92.6% for detecting
negated noun phrases in radiology reports.

Another rule-based system, using the dependency parser Minipar, was constructed by Ballesteros
et al. (2012). This system determines scope by traversing the dependency graph towards the
terminals, starting from the negation cue, if the cue is a verb, and otherwise with the verb that
is affected by the negation cue. This system detected negation cues and their scope with a
precision of 95.8% and a recall of 90.6% on the clinical part of the BioScope corpus.

Zhu et al. (2010) also used the BioScope corpus and employed techniques developed for shallow
semantic parsing for detecting scope. The negation cue was regarded as a predicate and its
constituents, i.e. words included in its scope, were found by a machine learning system among
candidates given by a phrase structure parser. This approach resulted in a precision of 82.2%
and a recall of 80.6% for determining negation scope in the clinical part of BioScope, when
using automatic cue and parse tree detection.

Velldal et al. (2012) combined the output of one rule-based and one machine-learning system
for detecting scope of negation in the BioScope corpus. For the rule-based system, rules were
constructed for determining the scope of the cue, given the output of the dependency parser
MaltParser, trained on the Penn Tree-bank. Separate rules were constructed for each cue
part-of-speech category, with a special rule for the word none. For the machine learning system,
a phrase structure grammar was adapted to identify phrase structure constituents identical to
those in the annotated scopes. For the scientific texts in the BioScope corpus, this method gave
substantially improved results compared to a baseline of using the entire sentence as the scope.
For the clinical texts in the corpus, however, the baseline scope detection gave slightly better
results with an F-score of 91.4, compared to 90.7 (using gold standard cues). It was found that
40% of the scope errors in the clinical domain were due to parse errors.

3 Method

We here compare three approaches – fixed size context window, lexical cues and syntactic tags
– to determine the scope of a negated diagnostic expression in a Swedish clinical corpus. All
approaches rely on predefined trigger lists of negation cues. In order to study the effect of scope
delimitation in negation detection we have used the same trigger lists for all systems.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 389 of 474]



3.1 NegEx

NegEx (Chapman et al., 2001b) is a widely used system for negation detection in clinical
text that is built on three different lists of cue phrases that trigger negation; pre-negations,
post-negations and pseudo-negations. The pre-negation list consists of cue phrases indicating
that a clinical condition, i.e. a disease or a symptom, following the cue is negated, whereas
the post-negation list consists of cue phrases indicating that a clinical condition preceding
them is negated. Pseudo-negation phrases, on the other hand, are phrases that should not
trigger a negation of a clinical condition, even though they contain a negation cue, e.g. not
only. The first version of NegEx uses a heuristically determined number of tokens for the scope
of a negation cue. A clinical condition is thus here negated if it is in the range of one to six
tokens from a post- or pre-negation trigger. This version of NegEx has been adapted to Swedish,
through a translation of English negation cues into Swedish1, and through retaining the six
token heuristics for determining the scope of the triggers used in the English study (Skeppstedt,
2011). Later versions of NegEx for English use a list of termination terms, e.g. conjunctions, to
limit the scope of what clinical conditions a negation cue negates.

3.2 PyConTextNLP

PyConTextNLP (Chapman et al. 2011) is an extension of the NegEx algorithm that includes
modifications of the scoping rules, how lexical triggers are matched, and more functionalities
for defining user- and task-specific rules. It works on a sentence level and takes as input a
database containing the texts or sentences to be analyzed, user-defined targets (here: diagnostic
expressions) and user-defined lexical triggers. These triggers are represented as four-tuples: a
literal (the lexical cue/trigger), a category (what the trigger represents), a regular expression
(to capture variants of the trigger) and a rule that defines the direction a trigger modifies
a target (forward, backward or bidirectional). For handling scopes, instead of a six-token
window, the algorithm operates on the whole sentence, unless it finds user-defined conjunctions.
PyConTextNLP has been ported to Swedish (Velupillai et al., 2013).

3.3 SynNeg

SynNeg is a negation scoping tool that uses morphological and syntactic information provided
by the MaltParser (Nivre et al., 2007). The MaltParser is a language-independent and data-
driven dependency parsing system which relies on inductive learning from treebank data for
the analysis of new sentences. In Hassel et al. (2011) it was shown that the MaltParser trained
on general Swedish text worked sufficiently on Swedish clinical text (92.4% accuracy for
part-of-speech tagging and a labeled attachment score of 76.6% for the syntactic dependency
parsing). Therefore, it is likely that the information provided by a parser trained on general
Swedish text can be useful also for negation detection in clinical text.

The basic idea of SynNeg is that a negation scope does not cross the boundary of a sentence
unit (i.e. subject + verb phrase). It uses a list of negation triggers in order to identify negative
expressions in a sentence and tries to delimit a sentence unit to which a negation cue belongs,
through finding another sentence unit in the sentence. The MaltParser assigns the ES (= logical
subject), FS (= dummy subject) or SS (=other subject) DEPREL (Dependency Relation) tag
to a subject of a sentence unit. When a negation cue is found, SynNeg checks the DEPREL

1This trigger list is used for all three systems. It contains a total of 42 negation cues: five post-negations, nine
pseudo-negations and the remaining are pre-negations.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 390 of 474]



tags of either the following token (pre-negation) or the preceding token (post-negation) from
the negation cue to find a subject DEPREL tag. It also checks the part-of-speech (POS) tag
for coordinating conjunction (KN), minor delimiter, e.g. comma (MID), and subordinating
conjunction (SN) in order to set the negation span boundary position. Every time one of these
POS tags is found, the position of the token is stored as a boundary candidate. Once a subject
DEPREL tag is found, the nearest boundary candidate from the subject DEPREL tag is set as the
negation span boundary.

3.4 Data

A Swedish clinical corpus2 annotated for uncertainty and negation on a diagnostic expression
level was used in these experiments. The corpus consists of assessment entries from a medical
emergency ward in a Swedish hospital (Velupillai et al., 2011) and was annotated by a physician.
The annotations, originally for six levels of uncertainty and negation, were collapsed into two
annotation classes: negated and non-negated. The data set consists of 8874 sentences (average
sentence length 9.56 tokens), of which 2189 sentences contain diagnostic expressions (one
sentence contains the same diagnostic expression mentioned twice). 421 of these diagnostic
expressions were tagged as negated during the annotation of this data set, while 1769 were
tagged as non-negated. The distribution of negation cues in the data set is shown in table 1.

Pre-negation
Negation cue n Percentage
ingen (no, common gender) 363 21.25%
ej (not) 344 20.14%
inga (no, plural) 240 14.05%
inte (not) 209 12.24%
utan (without) 120 7.03%
utesluta (rule out) 87 5.09%
inga tecken (no signs of) 76 4.45%
inget (no, neuter gender) 69 4.04%
uteslutas (be ruled out) 27 1.58%
inte har
(not have, reversed word order)

20 1.17%

kan inte (cannot) 17 1.00%
aldrig (never) 13 0.76%
har inte (not have) 13 0.76%
icke (non-, not) 13 0.76%
inte kan (cannot, reversed word order) 13 0.76%
inget som (nothing that) 12 0.70%
utan tecken (without sign of) 10 0.59%
förnekar (denies) 7 0.41%
inte visar (not demonstrate) 6 0.35%
avsaknad av (absence of) 4 0.23%
kunde inte (cannot, past tense) 1 0.06%
utan några (with no) 1 0.06%

Post-negation
Negation cue n Percentage
negativt (negative for) 13 0.76%
osannolikt (unlikely) 9 0.53%
inget avvikande
(no abnormal)

6 0.35%

saknas (absence of) 1 0.06%
Pseudo-negation

Negation cue n Percentage
kan inte uteslutas
(cannot be ruled out)

7 0.41%

inte utesluta
(not rule out)

3 0.18%

ingen förändring
(no change)

2 0.12%

vet inte (do not know) 2 0.12%

Table 1: Frequency and percentage of negation cues in the data set. n is the number of instances of each
cue. The total number of cues in the data was 1708.

2This research has been approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board in Stockholm (Etikprövningsnämnden i
Stockholm), permission number 2012/1838-31/3.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 391 of 474]



The MaltParser was used to parse the texts and used directly as input for the SynNeg algorithm.
This parsed data was also used to construct data in the input formats used by NegEx and
PyConTextNLP, respectively. As the MaltParser requires POS tagged data as input, we first
tagged the clinical text with the Granska tagger (Knutsson et al., 2003).

4 Results

Table 2 summarizes the result of negation detection for the three systems. As the data was
annotated on a diagnostic expression level, the figures show precision and recall for detecting
whether these diagnostic expressions are negated or not. Overall results are very similar for
NegEx, PyConTextNLP and SynNeg. NegEx produces slightly higher precision results for negated
(79.6), while SynNeg results in slightly higher recall (82.9) and F-Score (79.9).

NegEx PyConTextNLP SynNeg
Precision 79.6 78.1 77.0
Recall 79.6 81.2 82.9
F-Score 79.6 79.6 79.9

Table 2: Results of negation detection for NegEx, PyConTextNLP and SynNeg.

Some examples of how diagnostic expressions are classified by the three systems are presented
in figures 1 and 2 and table 3. Figure 1 shows an example where a non-negated instance is
within 6 tokens from a negation cue and a conjunction is missing. A sentence with a negated
instance beyond a 6-token window is presented in figure 2. Table 3 demonstrates a long
sentence containing an adversative expression and a subordinate conjunction.

Figure 1: Sentence with non-negated instance within 6 tokens and lack of conjunction. Negated instances
and non-negated instances are illustrated with red-colored italic and green-colored bold, respectively.
DEPREL (Dependency Relation) and POS-tag as given by MaltParser and Granska, respectively.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 392 of 474]



Figure 2: Sentence with negated instance beyond a 6-token window. Negated instances and non-negated
instances are illustrated with red-colored italic and green-colored bold, respectively. DEPREL (Dependency
Relation) and POS-tag as given by MaltParser and Granska, respectively.

Vid ankomst opåv, ingen astma, inga hållpunkter för lunginflammation, dock UVI och

anamnestisk klåda utan att man kan se urticharia eller annan dermatit.
(At arrival unaff, no asthma, no signs of pneumonia, but UTI and anamnestical itching
without any visible urticharia or other dermatitis.)

Swedish English Annotation NegEx PyConTextNLP SynNeg
astma asthma negated negated negated negated

lunginflammation pneumonia negated negated negated negated
UVI UTI non-neg negated non-neg negated

urticharia urticharia negated negated negated non-neg
dermatit dermatitis negated non-neg negated non-neg

Table 3: Sentence with an adversative expression and a subordinate conjunction. Negation cue, negated
instance and non-negated instance are illustrated with underlined, red-colored italic and green-colored
bold, respectively.

5 Discussion

Given the relatively small sample size, the differences in results between the three systems
are difficult to draw conclusions from. Employing a simple, rule-based approach with a small
amount of negation triggers and a fixed context window for determining scope is very efficient
and useful, if results around 80% F-score are sufficient for a given purpose.

However, to better handle sentences such as the examples in figures 1 and 2 and table 3, other
approaches are necessary. In the example in figure 1, (Has no heart attack, his angina has
increased.), the lack of a conjunction makes it difficult to specify a cue phrase for delimiting
the scope in PyConTextNLP, while this can be captured through the syntactic rules employed
in SynNeg. On the other hand, table 3, (At arrival unaff, no asthma, no signs of pneumonia,
but UTI and anamnestical itching without any visible urticharia or other dermatitis.), shows an

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 393 of 474]



example where PyConTextNLP correctly classifies all instances, while the other two systems
produce errors. The scoping window of six tokens in NegEx is problematic (UTI incorrectly
classified as negated and dermatitis incorrectly classified as non-negated), and SynNeg produces
an error due to the subordinating conjunction att following utan (without) (UTI, urthicaria and
dermatitis).

Both PyConTextNLP and SynNeg can correctly classify more complex cases, such as sentences
with enumerations beyond the 6-token window (see figure 2) and short sentences with con-
junctions that contradict instances. For improving the results of PyConTextNLP, it is essential to
define lexical cue phrases, such as conjunctions, that delimit the scope of the negation trigger.
For SynNeg, on the other hand, no lexical information is needed, only correct Part-of-Speech
tags and syntactic labels. The advantage of the latter approach is that it generalizes over lexical
terms.

The current version of SynNeg does not utilize the dependency tree produced by the parser, i.e.
no traversal is done as in e.g. Ballesteros et al. (2012). This could be useful and will be studied
further in the development of SynNeg.

The results for all three systems are in line with previous studies on negation detection for
Swedish, e.g. Skeppstedt (2011). The results for most English studies are higher, e.g. Huang and
Lowe (2007), but it is difficult to directly compare the findings, for instance given differences in
used data.

One limitation in this study is that no evaluation on the performance of the MaltParser on this
data has been conducted. A previous study shows that applying the MaltParser on Swedish
clinical text yields promising results (Hassel et al., 2011), but that the parser produces errors
in sentences with complicated conjunctional, conditional and prepositional constructions. As
these are important factors for the correct identification of negation scope, this needs to be
studied further.

The fixed context window approach (NegEx) is efficient and simple, but limited in its approach
and will not be able to handle longer, complex sentences or short sentences with contradictory
statements. With the more flexible approach employed in PyConTextNLP, it is possible to
improve results if lexical phrases that define boundaries for the negation scope are defined.
However, this approach will be problematic for cases that are ambiguous. Moreover, finding
these lexical phrases may be time-consuming, and there is a risk of overfitting. Using syntactic
information (SynNeg) instead may prove fruitful, as it is more generalizable. Also, with such an
approach, it will be easier to port the system to another domain or language. However, it is
crucial that the syntactic parser produces correct labels, and, of course, that a syntactic parser
is available for that domain and language.

We plan to further develop SynNeg and evaluate it on larger datasets. In particular, we intend to
incorporate information from traversing the dependency tree, in order to handle cases where the
current heuristics are limited (double negation is, for example, currently not handled by any of
the systems). Ongoing studies on automatically generating trigger terms both for negation and
conjunctions for improving PyConTextNLP for Swedish clinical texts will also be of importance,
and we will continue to compare the two approaches in order to further understand how well
these types of systems can perform, along with comparisons of current state-of-the-art machine
learning based approaches. We hypothesize that a combination of lexical- and syntactic-based
systems may be very powerful, as they may complement each other.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 394 of 474]



6 Concluding Remarks

In this study we compare three different approaches for determining negation delimitation
scope in Swedish clinical text. The approaches are rule-based, one of them relying on a fixed
context window (NegEx) and one relying on full sentences or predefined lexical cue phrases for
delimitation (PyConTextNLP). The third approach utilizes Part-of-Speech and syntactic labels
(SynNeg). All three systems depend on the same trigger list of negation cues. Results show that
although we are at the initial stages of developing SynNeg we achieve similar results compared
to established lexical rule-based negation detection approaches: around 80% F-score. Using
syntactic information may also prove more generalizable, facilitating porting to other domains
or languages.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 395 of 474]



References

Aronow, D. B., Fangfang, F., and Croft, W. B. (1999). Ad Hoc Classification of Radiology
Reports. J Am Med Inform Assoc, 5(6):393–411.

Ballesteros, M., Francisco, V., Díaz, A., Herrera, J., and Gervás, P. (2012). Inferring the scope
of negation in biomedical documents. In 13th International Conference on Intelligent Text
Processing and Computational Linguistics (CICLING 2012), New Delhi. Springer, Springer.

Chapman, B., Lee, S., Kang, H., and Chapman, W. (2011). Document-level classification of CT
pulmonary angiography reports based on an extension of the ConText algorithm. J Biomed
Inform, 44(5):728–737.

Chapman, W., Bridewell, W., Hanbury, P., Cooper, G., and Buchanan, B. (2001a). Evaluation of
negation phrases in narrative clinical reports. In Proceedings AMIA, pages 105–109.

Chapman, W. W., Bridewell, W., Hanbury, P., Cooper, G. F., and Buchanan, B. G. (2001b). A
simple algorithm for identifying negated findings and diseases in discharge summaries. J
Biomed Inform, pages 34–301.

Elkin, P. L., Brown, S. H., Bauer, B. A., Husser, C. S., Carruth, W., Bergstrom, L. R., , and
Wahner-Roedler, D. L. (2005). A controlled trial of automated classification of negation from
clinical notes. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak, 13(5).

Goryachev, A., Sordo, M., Ngo, L., and Zeng, Q. (2006). Implementation and evaluation of
four different methods of negation detection. Technical report, DSG.

Harkema, H., Dowling, J. N., Thornblade, T., and Chapman, W. W. (2009). Context: An
algorithm for determining negation, experiencer, and temporal status from clinical reports. J.
of Biomedical Informatics, 42(5):839–851.

Hassel, M., Henriksson, A., and Velupillai, S. (2011). Something Old, Something New –
Applying a Pre-trained Parsing Model to Clinical Swedish. In Proc. 18th Nordic Conf. on Comp.
Ling. - NODALIDA ’11.

Huang, Y. and Lowe, H. J. (2007). A Novel Hybrid Approach to Automated Negation Detection
in Clinical Radiology Reports. JAMIA, 3(14):304–311.

Knutsson, O., Bigert, J., and Kann, V. (2003). A robust shallow parser for Swedish. In Proc.
14th Nordic Conf. on Comp. Ling. – NODALIDA ’03.

Morante, R. and Blanco, E. (2012). *sem 2012 shared task: resolving the scope and focus of
negation. In Proceedings of the First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics -
Volume 1: Proceedings of the main conference and the shared task, and Volume 2: Proceedings
of the Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval ’12, pages 265–274,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Morante, R. and Daelemans, W. (2009). Learning the scope of hedge cues in biomedical texts.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP, pages 28–36.

Mutalik, P., Deshpande, A., and Nadkarni, P. (2001). Use of general-purpose negation detection
to augment concept indexing of medical documents a quantitative study using the umls. JAMIA,
8(6):598–609.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 396 of 474]



Nivre, J., Hall, J., Nilsson, J., Chanev, A., Eryigit, G., Kübler, S., Marinov, S., and Marsi, E.
(2007). MaltParser: A language-independent system for data-driven dependency parsing.
Natural Language Engineering, 13(2):95–135.

Rokach, L., Romano, R., and Maimon, O. (2010). Negation recognition in medical narrative
reports. Information Retrieval, 11(6):499–538.

Skeppstedt, M. (2011). Negation detection in Swedish clinical text: An adaption of NegEx to
Swedish. Journal of Biomedical Semantics, 2(Suppl 3):S3.

Velldal, E., Øvrelid, L., Read, J., and Oepen, S. (2012). Speculation and negation: Rules,
rankers, and the role of syntax. Comput. Linguist., 38(2):369–410.

Velupillai, S., Dalianis, H., and Kvist, M. (2011). Factuality Levels of Diagnoses in Swedish
Clinical Text. In Moen, A., Andersen, S. K., Aarts, J., and Hurlen, P., editors, Proc. XXIII
International Conference of the European Federation for Medical Informatics – User Centred
Networked Health Care, pages 559 – 563, Oslo. IOS Press.

Velupillai, S., Skeppstedt, M., Kvist, M., Mowery, D., Chapman, B., Dalianis, H., and Chapman,
W. (2013). Porting a rule-based assertion classifier for clinical text from English to Swedish. In
Proc. 4th Louhi 2013, Sydney, Australia.

Zhu, Q., Li, J., Wang, H., and Zhou, G. (2010). A unified framework for scope learning
via simplified shallow semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’10, pages 714–724, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 397 of 474]


