










































Sentiment Analysis of Political Tweets: Towards an Accurate Classifier


Proceedings of the Workshop on Language in Social Media (LASM 2013), pages 49–58,
Atlanta, Georgia, June 13 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Sentiment Analysis of Political Tweets: Towards an Accurate Classifier
Akshat Bakliwal1, Jennifer Foster2, Jennifer van der Puil3∗,

Ron O’Brien4, Lamia Tounsi2 and Mark Hughes5
1Search and Information Extraction Lab, IIIT-Hyderabad, India

2NCLT/CNGL, School of Computing, Dublin City University, Ireland
3Department of Computer Science and Statistics, Trinity College, Ireland

4Quiddity, Dublin, Ireland
5CLARITY, School of Computing, Dublin City University, Ireland

1akshat.bakliwal@research.iiit.ac.in
2,5{jfoster,ltounsi,mhughes}@computing.dcu.ie

3jvanderp@tcd.ie
4ron@quiddity.ie

Abstract

We perform a series of 3-class sentiment clas-
sification experiments on a set of 2,624 tweets
produced during the run-up to the Irish Gen-
eral Elections in February 2011. Even though
tweets that have been labelled as sarcastic
have been omitted from this set, it still rep-
resents a difficult test set and the highest
accuracy we achieve is 61.6% using super-
vised learning and a feature set consisting
of subjectivity-lexicon-based scores, Twitter-
specific features and the top 1,000 most dis-
criminative words. This is superior to various
naive unsupervised approaches which use sub-
jectivity lexicons to compute an overall senti-
ment score for a <tweet,political party> pair.

1 Introduction

Supervised machine learning using minimal feature
engineering has been shown to work well in binary
positive/negative sentiment classification tasks on
well-behaved datasets such as movie reviews (Pang
et al., 2002). In this paper we describe sentiment
analysis experiments in a more complicated setup:
the task is three-class positive/negative/neutral clas-
sification, the sentiment being classified is not at the
general document level but rather directed towards a
topic, the documents are tweets, and the topic is poli-
tics, specifically the Irish General Election of Febru-
ary 2011.

∗Akshat Bakliwal and Jennifer van der Puil carried out their
part of this work while employed as summer interns at the Cen-
tre for Next Generation Localisation(CNGL) in the School of
Computing, DCU.

The dataset used in the experiments contains
tweets which were collected in the run up to the elec-
tion and which were subsequently doubly annotated
as positive, negative or neutral towards a particular
political party or party leader. The annotators also
marked a tweet as sarcastic if its literal sentiment
was different to its actual sentiment. Before explor-
ing the thorny issue of sentiment classification in the
face of sarcasm, we simplify the problem by first try-
ing to establish some sentiment analysis baselines
for those tweets which were not deemed to be sar-
castic.

We first explore a naive approach in which a sub-
jectivity lexicon is used as the primary source of in-
formation in determining whether sentiment towards
a political party or party leader is positive, negative
or neutral. The best version of this method achieves
an accuracy of 58.9, an absolute improvement of 4.9
points over the majority baseline (54%) in which all
tweets are classified as neutral. When these lexi-
con scores are combined with bag-of-word features
and some Twitter-specific features in a supervised
machine learning setup, this accuracy increases to
61.6%.

The paper is organised as follows: related work
is described in Section 2, followed by a brief dis-
cussion of the 2011 Irish General Election in Sec-
tion 3, a description of the dataset in Section 4
and a description of the natural language processing
tools and resources employed in Section 5. In Sec-
tion 6, the unsupervised lexicon-based approach is
presented and its limitations discussed. Section 7 de-
scribes the machine-learning-based experiments and
Section 8 concludes and provides hints towards fu-

49



ture work with this new dataset.

2 Previous Work

The related work can be divided into two groups,
general sentiment analysis research and research
which is devoted specifically to the political domain.

2.1 General Sentiment Analysis

Research in the area of sentiment mining started
with product (Turney, 2002) and movie (Pang et al.,
2002) reviews. Turney (2002) used Pointwise Mu-
tual Information (PMI) to estimate the sentiment ori-
entation of phrases. Pang et al. (2002) employed
supervised learning with various set of n-gram fea-
tures, achieving an accuracy of almost 83% with un-
igram presence features on the task of document-
level binary sentiment classification. Research on
other domains and genres including blogs (Chesley,
2006) and news (Godbole et al., 2007) followed.

Early sentiment analysis research focused on
longer documents such as movie reviews and blogs.
Microtext on the other hand restricts the writer to a
more concise expression of opinion. Smeaton and
Bermingham (2010) tested the hypothesis that it is
easier to classify sentiment in microtext as compared
to longer documents. They experimented with mi-
crotext from Twitter, microreviews from blippr, blog
posts and movie reviews and concluded that it is eas-
ier to identify sentiment from microtext. However,
as they move from contextually sparse unigrams to
higher n-grams, it becomes more difficult to improve
the performance of microtext sentiment classifica-
tion, whereas higher-order information makes it eas-
ier to perform classification of longer documents.

There has been some research on the use of pos-
itive and negative emoticons and hashtags in tweets
as a proxy for sentiment labels (Go et al., 2009; Pak
and Paroubek, 2010; Davidov et al., 2010; Bora,
2012). Bakliwal et al. (2012) emphasized the im-
portance of preprocessing and proposed a set of
features to extract maximum sentiment information
from tweets. They used unigram and bigram fea-
tures along with features which are more associated
with tweets such as emoticons, hashtags, URLs, etc.
and showed that combining linguistic and Twitter-
specific features can boost the classification accu-
racy.

2.2 Political Sentiment Analysis

In recent years, there has been growing interest in
mining online political sentiment in order to pre-
dict the outcome of elections. One of the most in-
fluential papers is that of Tumasjan et al. (2010)
who focused on the 2009 German federal election
and investigated whether Twitter can be used to pre-
dict election outcomes. Over one hundred thousand
tweets dating from August 13 to September 19, 2009
containing the names of the six parties represented
in the German parliament were collected. LIWC
2007 (Pennebaker et al., 2007) was then used to ex-
tract sentiment from the tweets. LIWC is a text anal-
ysis software developed to assess emotional, cog-
nitive and structural components of text samples
using a psychometrically validated internal dictio-
nary. Tumasjan et al. concluded that the number of
tweets/mentions of a party is directly proportional to
the probability of winning the elections.

O’Connor et al. (2010) investigated the extent to
which public opinion polls were correlated with po-
litical sentiment expressed in tweets. Using the Sub-
jectivity Lexicon (Wilson et al., 2005), they estimate
the daily sentiment scores for each entity. A tweet is
defined as positive if it contains a positive word and
vice versa. A sentiment score for that day is calcu-
lated as the ratio of the positive count over the neg-
ative count. They find that their sentiment scores
were correlated with opinion polls on presidential
job approval but less strongly with polls on electoral
outcome.

Choy et al. (2011) discuss the application of on-
line sentiment detection to predict the vote percent-
age for each of the candidates in the Singapore pres-
idential election of 2011. They devise a formula to
calculate the percentage vote each candidate will re-
ceive using census information on variables such as
age group, sex, location, etc. They combine this
with a sentiment-lexicon-based sentiment analysis
engine which calculates the sentiment in each tweet
and aggregates the positive and negative sentiment
for each candidate. Their model was able to predict
the narrow margin between the top two candidates
but failed to predict the correct winner.

Wang et al. (2012) proposed a real-time sentiment
analysis system for political tweets which was based
on the U.S. presidential election of 2012. They col-

50



lected over 36 million tweets and collected the sen-
timent annotations using Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Using a Naive Bayes model with unigram features,
their system achieved 59% accuracy on the four-
category classification.

Bermingham and Smeaton (2011) are also con-
cerned with predicting electoral outcome, in partic-
ular, the outcome of the Irish General Election of
2011 (the same election that we focused on). They
analyse political sentiment in tweets by means of su-
pervised classification with unigram features and an
annotated dataset different to and larger than the one
we present, achieving 65% accuracy on the task of
positive/negative/neutral classification. They con-
clude that volume is a stronger indicator of election
outcome than sentiment, but that sentiment still has
a role to play.

Gayo-Avello (2012) calls into question the use of
Twitter for election outcome prediction. Previous
works which report positive results on this task using
data from Twitter are surveyed and shortcomings in
their methodology and/or assumptions noted. In this
paper, our focus is not the (non-) predictive nature of
political tweets but rather the accurate identification
of any sentiment expressed in the tweets. If the ac-
curacy of sentiment analysis of political tweets can
be improved (or its limitations at least better under-
stood) then this will likely have a positive effect on
its usefulness as an alternative or complement to tra-
ditional opinion polling.

3 #ge11: The Irish General Election 2011

The Irish general elections were held on February
25, 2011. 165 representatives were elected across 43
constituencies for the Dáil, the main house of parlia-
ment. Eight parties nominated their candidates for
election and a coalition (Fine Gael and Labour) gov-
ernment was formed. The parties in the outgoing
coalition government, Fianna Fáil and the Greens,
suffered disastrous defeats, the worst defeat of a sit-
ting government since the foundatation of the State
in 1922.

Gallagher and Marsh (2011, chapter 5) discuss the
use of social media by parties, candidates and vot-
ers in the 2011 election and conclude that it had a
much more important role to play in this election
than in the previous one in 2007. On the role of Twit-

ter in particular, they report that “Twitter was less
widespread among candidates [than Facebook], but
it offered the most diverse source of citizen coverage
during the election, and it has been integrated into
several mainstream media”. They estimated that 7%
of the Irish population had a Twitter account at the
time of the election.

4 Dataset

We compiled a corpus of tweets using the Twitter
search API between 20th and the 25th of January
2011 (one month before the election). We selected
the main political entities (the five biggest politi-
cal parties – Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael, Labour, Sinn
Féin and the Greens – and their leaders) and per-
form query-based search to collect the tweets relat-
ing to these entities. The resulting dataset contains
7,916 tweets of which 4,710 are retweets or dupli-
cates, leaving a total of 3,206 tweets.

The tweets were annotated by two Irish annota-
tors with a knowledge of the Irish political land-
scape. Disagreements between the two annotators
were studied and resolved by a third annotator. The
annotators were asked to identify the sentiment as-
sociated with the topic (or entity) of the tweet. An-
notation was performed using the following 6 labels:

• pos: Tweets which carry positive sentiment to-
wards the topic

• neg: Tweets which carry negative sentiment to-
wards the topic

• mix: Tweets which carry both positive and neg-
ative sentiment towards the topic

• neu: Tweets which do not carry any sentiment
towards the topic

• nen: Tweets which were written in languages
other than English.

• non: Tweets which do not have any mention
or relation to the topic. These represent search
errors.

In addition to the above six classes, annotators were
asked to flag whether a tweet was sarcastic.

The dataset which we use for the experiments
described in this paper contains only those tweets

51



Positive Tweets 256 9.75%
Negative Tweets 950 36.22%
Neutral Tweets 1418 54.03%

Total Tweets 2624

Table 1: Class Distribution

that have been labelled as either positive, negative
or neutral, i.e. non-relevant, mixed-sentiment and
non-English tweets are discarded. We also simplify
our task by omitting those tweets which have been
flagged as sarcastic by one or both of the annotators,
leaving a set of 2,624 tweets with a class distribution
as shown in Table 1.

5 Tools and Resources

In the course of our experiments, we use two differ-
ent subjectivity lexicons, one part-of-speech tagger
and one parser. For part-of-speech tagging we use
a tagger (Gimpel et al., 2011) designed specifically
for tweets. For parsing, we use the Stanford parser
(Klein and Manning, 2003). To identify the senti-
ment polarity of a word we use:

1. Subjectivity Lexicon (SL) (Wilson et al.,
2005): This lexicon contains 8,221 words
(6,878 unique forms) of which 3,249 are adjec-
tives, 330 are adverbs, 1,325 are verbs, 2,170
are nouns and remaining (1,147) words are
marked as anypos. There are many words
which occur with two or more different part-of-
speech tags. We extend SL with 341 domain-
specific words to produce an extended SL.

2. SentiWordNet 3.0 (SWN) (Baccianella et al.,
2010): With over 100+ thousand words, SWN
is far larger than SL but is likely to be noisier
since it has been built semi-automatically. Each
word in the lexicon is associated with both a
positive and negative score, and an objective
score given by (1), i.e. the positive, negative
and objective score sum to 1.

ObjScore = 1−PosScore−NegScore (1)

6 Naive Lexicon-based Classification

In this section we describe a naive approach to sen-
timent classification which does not make use of la-
belled training data but rather uses the information

in a sentiment lexicon to deduce the sentiment ori-
entation towards a political party in a tweet (see
Liu (2010) for an overview of this unsupervised
lexicon-based approach). In Section 6.1, we present
the basic method along with some variants which
improve on the basic method by making use of infor-
mation about part-of-speech, negation and distance
from the topic. In Section 6.2, we examine some
of the cases which remain misclassified by our best
lexicon-based method. In Section 6.3, we discuss
briefly those tweets that have been labelled as sar-
castic.

6.1 Method and Results

Our baseline lexicon-based approach is as follows:
we look up each word in our sentiment lexicon and
sum up the scores to corresponding scalars. The re-
sults are shown in Table 2. Note that the most likely
estimated class prediction is neutral with a probabil-
ity of .5403 (1418/2624).

6.1.1 Which Subjectivity Lexicon?
The first column shows the results that we obtain

when the lexicon we use is our extended version of
the SL lexicon. The results in the second column
are those that result from using SWN. In the third
column, we combine the two lexicons. We define
a combination pattern of Extended-SL and SWN in
which we prioritize Extended-SL because it is man-
ually checked and some domain-specific words are
added. For the words which were missing from
Extended-SL (SWN), we assign them the polarity of
SWN (Extended-SL). Table 3 explains exactly how
the scores from the two lexicons are combined. Al-
though SWN slightly outperforms Extended-SL for
the baseline lexicon-based approach (first row of Ta-
ble 2), it is outperformed by Extended-SL and the
combinaton of the two lexicons for all the variants.
We can conclude from the full set of results in Ta-
ble 2 that SWN is less useful than Extended-SL or
the combination of SWN and Extended-SL.

6.1.2 Filtering by Part-of-Speech
The results in the first row of Table 2 represent

our baseline experiment in which each word in the
tweet is looked up in the sentiment lexicon and
its sentiment score added to a running total. We
achieve a classification accuracy of 52.44% with the

52



Method Extended-SL SWN Combined
3-Class Classification (Pos vs

Neg vs Neu)
Correct Accuracy Correct Accuracy Correct Accuracy

Baseline 1376 52.44% 1379 52.55% 1288 49.09%
Baseline + Adj 1457 55.53% 1449 55.22% 1445 55.07%

Baseline + Adj + S 1480 56.40% 1459 55.60% 1481 56.44%
Baseline + Adj + S + Neg 1495 56.97% 1462 55.72% 1496 57.01%

Baseline + Adj + S + Neg +
Phrases

1511 57.58% 1479 56.36% 1509 57.51%

Baseline + Adj + S + Neg +
Phrases + Than

1533 58.42% 1502 57.24% 1533 58.42%

Distance Based Scoring:
Baseline + Adj + S + Neg +

Phrases + Than
1545 58.88% 1506 57.39% 1547 58.96%

Sarcastic Tweets 87/344 25.29% 81/344 23.55% 87/344 25.29%

Table 2: 3-class classification using the naive lexicon-based approach. The majority baseline is 54.03%.

Extended-
SL

polarity

SWN
Polarity

Combination
Polarity

-1 -1 -2
-1 0 -1
-1 1 -1
0 -1 -0.5
0 0 0
0 1 0.5
1 -1 1
1 0 1
1 1 2

Table 3: Combination Scheme of extended-SL and SWN.
Here 0 represents either a neutral word or a word missing
from the lexicon.

Extended-SL lexicon. We speculate that this low
accuracy is occurring because too many words that
appear in the sentiment lexicon are included in the
overall sentiment score without actually contribut-
ing to the sentiment towards the topic. To refine our
approach one step further, we use part-of-speech in-
formation and consider only adjectives for the clas-
sification of tweets since adjectives are strong in-
dicators of sentiment (Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe,
2000). We achieve an accuracy improvement of ap-
proximately three absolute points, and this improve-
ment holds true for both sentiment lexicons. This
supports our hypothesis that we are using irrelevant
information for classification in the baseline system.

Our next improvement (third row of Table 2)
comes from mapping all inflected forms to their
stems (using the Porter stemmer). Examples of in-
flected forms that are reduced to their stems are de-
lighted or delightful. Using stemming with adjec-
tives over the baseline, we achieve an accuracy of
56.40% with Extended-SL.

6.1.3 Negation

“Negation is a very common linguistic construc-
tion that affects polarity and, therefore, needs to
be taken into consideration in sentiment analysis”
(Councill et al., 2010). We perform negation han-
dling in tweets using two different approaches. In
the first approach, we first identify negation words

53



and reverse the polarity of sentiment-bearing words
within a window of three words. In the second ap-
proach, we try to resolve the scope of the negation
using syntactic parsing. The Stanford dependency
scheme (de Marneffe and Manning, 2008) has a spe-
cial relation (neg) to indicate negation. We reverse
the sentiment polarity of a word marked via the neg
relation as being in the scope of a negation. Using
the first approach, we see an improvement of 0.6%
in the classification accuracy with the Extended-SL
lexicon. Using the second approach, we see an
improvement of 0.5%. Since there appears to be
very little difference between the two approaches to
negation-handling and in order to reduce the compu-
tational burden of running the Stanford parser each
time to obtain the dependencies, we continue further
experiments with the first method only. Using base-
line + stemming + adjectives + neg we achieve an
accuracy of 56.97% with the Extended-SL lexicon.

6.1.4 Domain-specific idioms
In the context of political tweets we see many

sentiment-bearing idioms and fixed expressions, e.g.
god save us, X for Taoiseach1, wolf in sheep’s cloth-
ing, etc. In our study, we had a total of 89 phrases.
When we directly account for these phrases, we
achieve an accuracy of 57.58% (an absolute im-
provement of 0.6 points over the last step).

6.1.5 Comparative Expressions
Another form of expressing an opinion towards

an entity is by comparing the entity with some other
entity. For example consider the tweet:

Fast Food sounds like a better vote than Fianna Fail.
(2)

In this tweet, an indirect negative sentiment is ex-
pressed towards the political party Fianna Fáil. In
order to take into account such constructions, the
following procedure is applied: we divide the tweet
into two parts, left and right. The left part contains
the text which comes before the than and the right
part contains the text which comes after than, e.g.
Tweet: ‘X is better than Y’
Left: ‘X is better’
Right: ‘Y’.

1The term Taoiseach refers to the Irish Prime Minister.

We then use the following strategy to calculate the
polarity of the tweet oriented towards the entity:

S left = sentiment score of Left.

S right = sentiment score of Right.

Ent pos left = if entity is left of

‘than′, then 1, otherwise − 1.
Ent pos right = if entity is right of

‘than′, then 1, otherwise − 1.
S(tweet) = Ent pos left ∗ S left +

Ent pos right ∗ S right. (3)

So in (2) above the entity, Fianna Fáil, is to the
right of than meaning that its Ent pos right value
is 1 and its Ent pos left value is -1. This has the
effect of flipping the polarity of the positive word
better. By including the “than” comparison, we see
an improvement of absolute 0.8% (third last row of
Table 2).

6.1.6 Distance Scoring
To emphasize the topic-oriented nature of our sen-

timent classification, we also define a distance-based
scoring function where we define the overall score
of the tweet as given in (4). Here dis(word) is de-
fined as number of words between the topic (i.e. the
political entity) and the sentiment word.

S(tweet) =
n∑

i=1

S(wordi)/dis(wordi). (4)

The addition of the distance information further en-
hanced our system accuracy by 0.45%, taking it to
58.88% (second last row of Table 2). Our highest
overall accuracy (58.96) is achieved in this setting
using the combined lexicon.

It should be noted that this lexicon-based ap-
proach is overfitting to our dataset since the list of
domain-specific phrases and the form of the com-
parative constructions have been obtained from the
dataset itself. This means that we are making a
strong assumption about the representativeness of
this dataset and accuracy on a held-out test set is
likely to be lower.

6.2 Error Analysis
In this section we discuss pitfalls of the naive

lexicon-based approach with the help of some exam-
ples (see Table 4). Consider the first example from

54



the table, @username and u believe people in fianna
fail . What are you a numbskull or a journalist ?
In this tweet, we see that negative sentiment is im-
parted by the question part of the tweet, but actually
there are no sentiment adjectives. The word numb-
skull is contributing to the sentiment but is tagged as
a noun and not as an adjective. This tweet is tagged
as negative by our annotators and as neutral by our
lexicon-based classifier.

Consider the second example from Table 4,
@username LOL . A guy called to our house tonight
selling GAA tickets . His first words were : I’m
not from Fianna Fail . This is misclassified because
there are no sentiment bearing words according to
the sentiment lexicon. The last tweet in the table rep-
resents another example of the same problem. Note
however that the emoticon :/ in the last tweet and the
web acronym LOL in the second tweet are providing
hints which our system is not making use of.

In the third example from Table 4, @username
Such scary words .’ Sinn Fein could top the poll ’
in certain constituencies . I feel sick at the thought
of it . ’ In this example, we have three sentiment
bearing words: scary, top and sick. Two of the three
words are negative and one word is positive. The
word scary is stemmed incorrectly as scari which
means that it is out of the scope of our lexicons.
If we just count the number of sentiment words re-
maining, then this tweet is labelled as neutral but ac-
tually is negative with respect to the party Sinn Féin.
We proposed the use of distance as a measure of re-
latedness to the topic and we observed a minor im-
provement in classification accuracy. However, for
this example, the distance-based approach does not
work. The word top is just two words away from the
topic and thus contributes the maximum, resulting in
the whole tweet being misclassified as positive.

6.3 Sarcastic Tweets
“Political discouse is plagued with humor, double
entendres, and sarcasm; this makes determining po-
litical preference of users hard and inferring voting
intention even harder.”(Gayo-Avello, 2012)
As part of the annotation process, annotators were
asked to indicate whether they thought a tweet ex-
hibited sarcasm. Some examples of tweets that were
annotated as sarcastic are shown in Table 5.

We made the decision to omit these tweets from

the main sentiment classification experiments under
the assumption that they constituted a special case
which would be better handled by a different clas-
sifier. This decision is vindicated by the results in
the last row of Table 2 which show what happens
when we apply our best classifier (Distance-based
Scoring: Baseline+Adj+S+Neg+Phrases+Than) to
the sarcastic tweets – only a quarter of them are cor-
rectly classified. Even with a very large and highly
domain-tuned lexicon, the lexicon-based approach
on its own will struggle to be of use for cases such
as these, but the situation might be improved were
the lexicon to be used in conjunction with possible
sarcasm indicators such as exclamation marks.

7 Supervised Machine Learning

Although our dataset is small, we investigate
whether we can improve over the lexicon-based ap-
proach by using supervised machine learning. As
our learning algorithm, we employ support vector
machines in a 5-fold cross validation setup. The tool
we use is SVMLight (Joachims, 1999).

We explore two sets of features. The first are the
tried-and-tested unigram presence features which
have been used extensively not only in sentiment
analysis but in other text classification tasks. As we
have only 2,624 training samples, we performed fea-
ture selection by ranking the features using the Chi-
squared metric.

The second feature set consists of 25 features
which are inspired by the work on lexicon-based
classification described in the previous section.
These are the counts of positive, negative, objec-
tive words according to each of the three lexicons
and the corresponding sentiment scores for the over-
all tweets. In total there are 19 such features. We
also employ six Twitter-related presence features:
positive emoticons, negative emoticons, URLs, pos-
itive hashtags, negative hashtags and neutral hash-
tags. For further reference we call this second set of
features our “hand-crafted” features.

The results are shown in Table 6. We can see
that using the hand-crafted features alone barely im-
proves over the majority baseline of 54.03 but it does
improve over our baseline lexicon-based approach
(see first row of Table 2). Encouragingly, we see
some benefit from using these features in conjunc-

55



Tweet Topic
Manual
Polar-

ity

Calculated
Polarity

Reason for
misclassifica-

tion
@username and u believe people in fianna fail .

What are you a numbskull or a journalist ?
Fianna

Fáil
neg neu

Focus only on
adjectives

@username LOL . A guy called to our house
tonight selling GAA tickets . His first words were :

I’m not from Fianna Fail .

Fianna
Fáil

neg neu
No sentiment

words

@username Such scary words .’ Sinn Fein could
top the poll ’ in certain constituencies . I feel sick

at the thought of it .

Sinn
Féin

neg pos
Stemming
and word

distance order
@username more RTE censorship . Why are they

so afraid to let Sinn Fein put their position across .
Certainly couldn’t be worse than ff

Sinn
Féin

pos neg
contribution

of afraid

Based on this programme the winners will be Sinn
Fein & Gilmore for not being there #rtefl

Sinn
Féin

pos neu
Focus only on

adjectives

#thefrontline pearce Doherty is a spoofer ! Vote
sinn fein and we loose more jobs

Sinn
Féin

neg pos

Focus only on
adjectives &
contribution

of phrase Vote
X

@username Tread carefully Conor . BNP
endorsing Sinn Fin etc . etc .

Sinn
Féin

neg neu
No sentiment

words
@username ah dude . You made me go to the fine

gael web site ! :/
Fine
Gael

neg neu
No sentiment

words

Table 4: Misclassification Examples

Feature Set # Features Accuracy
# samples = 2624 SVM Light

Hand-crafted 25 54.76

Unigram
7418 55.22

Top 1000 58.92
Top 100 56.86

Unigram + Hand-crafted
7444 54.73

Top 1000 61.62
Top 100 59.53

Table 6: Results of 3-Class Classification using Super-
vised Machine Learning

tion with the unigram features. Our best overall re-
sult of 61.62% is achieved by using the Top 1000 un-
igram features together with these hand-crafted fea-
tures. This result seems to suggest that, even with
only a few thousand training instances, employing
supervised machine learning is still worthwhile.

8 Conclusion

We have introduced a new dataset of political tweets
which will be made available for use by other re-
searchers. Each tweet in this set has been annotated
for sentiment towards a political entity, as well as
for the presence of sarcasm. Omitting the sarcastic
tweets from our experiments, we show that we can
classify a tweet as being positive, negative or neutral
towards a particular political party or party leader
with an accuracy of almost 59% using a simple ap-
proach based on lexicon lookup. This improves over
the majority baseline by almost 5 absolute percent-
age points but as the classifier uses information from
the test set itself, the result is likely to be lower on
a held-out test set. The accuracy increases slightly
when the lexicon-based information is encoded as
features and employed together with bag-of-word
features in a supervised machine learning setup.

Future work involves carrying out further exper-

56



Sarcastic Tweets
Ah bless Brian Cowen’s little cotton socks! He’s staying on as leader of FF because its better for the
country. How selfless!
So now Brian Cowen is now Minister for foreign affairs and Taoiseach? Thats exactly what he needs
more responsibilities http://bbc.in/hJI0hb
Mary Harney is going. Surprise surprise! Brian Cowen is going to be extremely busy with all these
portfolios to administer. Super hero!
Now in its darkest hour Fianna Fail needs. . . Ivor!
Labour and Fine Gael have brought the election forward by 16 days Crisis over Ireland is SAVED!! #vinb
@username Maybe one of those nice Sinn Fein issue boiler suits? #rtefl
I WILL vote for Fine Gael if they pledge to dress James O’Reilly as a leprechaun and send him
to the White House for Paddy’s Day.

Table 5: Examples of tweets which have been flagged as sarcastic

iments on those tweets that have been annotated as
sarcastic, exploring the use of syntactic dependency
paths in the computation of distance between a word
and the topic, examining the role of training set class
bias on the supervised machine learning results and
exploring the use of distant supervision to obtain
more training data for this domain.

Acknowledgements

Thanks to Emmet O Briain, Lesley Ni Bhriain and
the anonymous reviewers for their helpful com-
ments. This research has been supported by En-
terprise Ireland (CFTD/2007/229) and by Science
Foundation Ireland (Grant 07/CE/ I1142) as part of
the CNGL (www.cngl.ie) at the School of Comput-
ing, DCU.

References

Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-
tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In
Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10).

Akshat Bakliwal, Piyush Arora, Senthil Madhappan,
Nikhil Kapre, Mukesh Singh, and Vasudeva Varma.
2012. Mining sentiments from tweets. In Proceedings
of the WASSA’12 in conjunction with ACL’12.

Adam Bermingham and Alan F. Smeaton. 2010. Clas-
sifying sentiment in microblogs: is brevity an advan-
tage? In Proceedings of the 19th ACM international
conference on Information and Knowledge Manage-
ment.

Adam Bermingham and Alan Smeaton. 2011. On using
Twitter to monitor political sentiment and predict elec-
tion results. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Sen-
timent Analysis where AI meets Psychology (SAAIP
2011).

Nibir Nayan Bora. 2012. Summarizing public opinions
in tweets. In Journal Proceedings of CICLing 2012.

Paula Chesley. 2006. Using verbs and adjectives to au-
tomatically classify blog sentiment. In Proceedings
of AAAI-CAAW-06, the Spring Symposia on Computa-
tional Approaches.

Murphy Choy, Michelle L. F. Cheong, Ma Nang Laik,
and Koo Ping Shung. 2011. A sentiment analysis
of Singapore Presidential Election 2011 using Twitter
data with census correction. CoRR, abs/1108.5520.

Isaac G. Councill, Ryan McDonald, and Leonid Ve-
likovich. 2010. What’s great and what’s not: learn-
ing to classify the scope of negation for improved sen-
timent analysis. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Negation and Speculation in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, NeSp-NLP ’10.

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Enhanced sentiment learning using Twitter hashtags
and smileys. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics: Posters.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2008. The stanford typed dependencies repre-
sentation. In Proceedings of the COLING Workshop
on Cross-Framework and Cross-Domain Parser Eval-
uation.

Michael Gallagher and Michael Marsh. 2011. How Ire-
land Voted 2011: The Full Story of Ireland’s Earth-
quake Election. Palgrave Macmillan.

Daniel Gayo-Avello. 2012. “I wanted to predict elec-
tions with Twitter and all I got was this lousy paper”.

57



A balanced survey on election prediction using Twitter
data. CoRR, abs/1204.6441.

Kevin Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, Brendan O’Connor,
Dipanjan Das, Daniel Mills, Jacob Eisenstein, Michael
Heilman, Dani Yogatama, Jeffrey Flanigan, and
Noah A. Smith. 2011. Part-of-speech tagging for
Twitter: annotation, features, and experiments. In Pro-
ceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies: short papers - Volume 2.

Alec Go, Richa Bhayani, and Lei Huang. 2009. Twitter
sentiment classification using distant supervision. In
CS224N Project Report, Stanford University.

Namrata Godbole, Manjunath Srinivasaiah, and Steven
Skiena. 2007. Large-scale sentiment analysis for
news and blogs. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM).

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Janyce M. Wiebe. 2000.
Effects of adjective orientation and gradability on sen-
tence subjectivity. In Proceedings of COLING.

Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Advances in kernel meth-
ods. chapter Making large-scale support vector ma-
chine learning practical, pages 169–184. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, USA.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accurate
unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the 41st An-
nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics - Volume 1.

Bing Liu. 2010. Handbook of natural language pro-
cessing. chapter Sentiment Analysis and Subjectivity.
Chapman and Hall.

Brendan O’Connor, Ramnath Balasubramanyan,
Bryan R. Routledge, and Noah A. Smith. 2010. From
tweets to polls: Linking text sentiment to public opin-
ion time series. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM).

Alexander Pak and Patrick Paroubek. 2010. Twitter as a
corpus for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In
Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10).

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up?: sentiment classification using ma-
chine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing - Volume 10.

James W. Pennebaker, Cindy K. Chung, Molly Ireland,
Amy Gonzales, and Roger J. Booth. 2007. The de-
velopment and psychometric properties of liwc2007.
Technical report, Austin,Texas.

Andranik Tumasjan, Timm Oliver Sprenger, Philipp G.
Sandner, and Isabell M. Welpe. 2010. Predicting elec-
tions with Twitter: What 140 characters reveal about
political sentiment. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.

Peter D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?:
semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classifi-
cation of reviews. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Hao Wang, Dogan Can, Abe Kazemzadeh, François Bar,
and Shrikanth Narayanan. 2012. A system for real-
time Twitter sentiment analysis of 2012 U.S. presiden-
tial election cycle. In ACL (System Demonstrations).

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the conference
on Human Language Technology and Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing.

58


