








































From Glosses to Qualia: Qualia Extraction from Senso Comune

Tommaso Caselli
Trento Rise / Via Sommarive 18

IT-38122 Povo
t.caselli@trentorise.eu

Irene Russo
ILC-CNR / Via G. Moruzzi, 1

IT-56124 Pisa
irene.russo@ilc.cnr.it

Abstract

This paper describes a case study on meth-
ods for automatically extracting qualia re-
lations from dictionary glosses in Ital-
ian, namely the Senso Comune De Mauro
Dictionary (SCDM). The qualia extrac-
tion has been addressed by means of a
pattern-based approach and lexical match
with an Italian generative lexicon based
language resource, PAROLE-SIMPLE-
CLIPS (PSC). The evaluation of the ex-
traction approaches has been performed
with respect to a manually built Gold Stan-
dard containig 174 different qualia. The
results obtained are encouraging (P = 0.84,
R = 0.08 for the pattern extraction ap-
proach and P=0.73 and R=0.16 for the
merging of pattern extraction and lexical
match) and suggest that the information
contained in the SCDM glosses is comple-
mentary with that in PSC.

1 Introduction

This paper describes a case study on methods for
automatically extracting qualia relations (Puste-
jovsky, 1995) information from lexicographic dic-
tionary glosses in Italian, namely the Senso Co-
mune De Mauro (SCDM henceforth) Dictionary1

for a specific semantic class, i.e. the ARTIFACT
class in the Senso Comune ontology.
Qualia structure is a distinctive feature of the Gen-
erative Lexicon (GL) theory (Pustejovsky, 1995).
It is a simple and powerful structure which con-
tribute to the representation of the meaning of the
nouns. The Qualia Structure consists of four roles:

• Formal role: the conceptual super category
from which the object inherits its properties;

1www.sensocomune.it

• Agentive role: the origin of the object, its
coming into being into the world;

• Telic role: the purpose, or typical function of
an object;

• Constitutive role: the internal constituents
(parts, material, weight etc.) of an object.

The actual realization of each role is also de-
pendent on the associated semantic type (or onto-
logical class(es)) of the entity analyzed. For in-
stance, an entity denoting a Natural Object (e.g.
tree, flower, fruit, etc.) will never have informa-
tion for the Agentive role. On the contrary, this
information is relevant for Artifacts (wheel, pen,
table, etc.).
The qualia extraction task has been mainly
addressed in NLP by means of pattern-based
approaches on corpora and from dictionaries.
Pattern-based approaches for extracting semantic
relations are well known in literature (Calzolari
(1991); Montemagni and Vanderwende (1992);
Hearst (1992); Bouillon et al. (2002); Cimiano
and Wenderoth (2005); Pantel and Pennacchiotti
(2006), among others) and have proved highly re-
liable, namely in terms of precision, for extract-
ing the different types of qualia. One the advan-
tages of our work is that the extracted qualia are
associated with both a word sense and an ontolog-
ical class (see Section 3 for details on the SCDM
Dictionary). Furthermore, the SCDM dictionary
glosses are richer and more descriptive than the
WordNet glosses. The data collected can be ex-
ploited in different ways, namely:

• to reduce the complexity of the lexico-
graphic entries, thus facilitating dictionary
entry merging and sense alignment with other
lexica like, for instance, WordNet (even in
languages other than Italian);



• to enrich already existing lexica such
as PAROLE-SIMPLE-CLIPS (PSC hence-
forth) (Ruimy et al., 2003);

• to improve the performance of Natural Lan-
guage Processing tools for complex tasks
involving encyclopedic knowledge such as
Question Answering and Textual Entailment,
among others.

The remainder of this paper is structured as fol-
lows: Section 2 will briefly describe related works
on the automatic extraction of qualia information.
In Section 3 we will highlight the characteristics
of the two lexica, namely the SCDM Dictionary
and the PSC lexicon. A detailed description of the
methodology used to identify the linguistic pat-
terns coding the qualia information and their eval-
uation with respect to a manually built gold stan-
dard is reported in Section 4. In addition to this,
we have also carried out experiments i.) to exploit
the qualia information in the PSC lexicon to iden-
tify additional qualia which were not extracted by
means of the patterns; and ii.) to evaluate the cov-
erage of the extracted qualia with respect to the
entries in the PSC lexicon in order to enrich it. Fi-
nally, Section 5 reports on conclusions and high-
lights on-going and future research directions.

2 Related Works

In recent years there has been a continuous in-
terest in the NLP community on discovering
novel instances of semantic relations. Most of
this earlier work was based on surface pattern
matching (Hearst (1998); Cimiano and Wenderoth
(2005); Yamada and Baldwin (2004) among oth-
ers). Other works start from matches extracted
with this method and then use supervised training
data to learn semantic constraints to improve pre-
cision (Girju et al. (2003); Katrenko and Adriaans
(2010)). Much of previous works concentrated on
extracting hypernyms (Snow et al. (2005); Sang
and Hofmann (2009). Other works have applied
pattern classification approaches to extract larger
set of relations. The results obtained proved that
extracting a pattern distribution between occur-
rences and performing supervised classification
based on this distribution is a viable and promising
solution for extending the range of semantic rela-
tions beyond hyperonymy (Ó Séaghdha and Cop-
stake (2007); Herdağdelen and Baroni (2009)).
With respect to previous research and similarly

to what was done in the ACQUILEX Project,
we tackle the task of extracting qualia relation
from dictionary glosses. However, the SCDM
glosses are augmented with ontological informa-
tion whereby each sense is associated with a top
level ontology class. This allows us to have at
disposal qualia associated with specific senses and
ontological classes.

3 The Senso Comune Lexicon and
PAROLE-SIMPLE-CLIPS

The SCDM lexicon is part of a larger research ini-
tiative, Senso Comune (Vetere et al. (2011) Oltra-
mari et al. (2013)). Senso Comune aims at build-
ing an open knowledge base for the Italian lan-
guage, designed as a crowd-sourced initiative that
stands on the solid ground of an ontological for-
malization and well-established lexical resources.
The lexicon entries have been obtained from the
De Mauro GRADIT (DMG) dictionary and con-
sists in the 2,071 most frequent Italian words. In
SCDM, word senses are encoded following lexico-
graphic principles and are associated with lexico-
graphic examples of usage. Senso Comune com-
prises three modules: i.) a top level module for
basic ontological concepts; ii.) a lexical mod-
ule for linguistic and lexicographic structures; and
iii.) a frame module for modeling the predica-
tive structure of verbs and nouns. The top level
ontology is inspired by DOLCE (Descriptive On-
tology for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering)
(Masolo et al., 2002), which has been developed
in order to address core cognitive and linguistic
features of common sense knowledge. 4,586 word
senses from De Mauro Dictionary, corresponding
to 1,111 fundamental noun lemmas and covering
about 80% of the occurrences in texts (Oltramari et
al., 2013), have been manually classified accord-
ing to the ontological concepts.
PSC (Ruimy et al., 2003) is an Italian syntactic-
semantic lexicon based on the GL theory. Lex-
ical units are structured in terms of a seman-
tic type system and are characterized by means
of a rich set of semantic features and relations.
The type system consists of 157 language- and
domain-independent semantic types designed for
the multilingual lexical encoding of concrete and
abstract entities, events and properties. The type
system of the resource reflects the GL assump-
tion that lexical items are multidimensional enti-
ties. Multidimensionality is encoded by means of



the Extended Qualia Structure, a revisited version
of the GL representational tool which extended
each of the qualia roles with subtypes (e.g “Con-
cerns” is a subtype of the Constitutive qualia). The
PSC lexicon has been connected with ItalWord-
Net (Ruimy et al., 2008), an Italian version of
WordNet based on the EuroWordNet principles,
and contains 31619 nominal lemmas, for a total
of 38092 senses, 38153 associated semantic type
(ontological category) and 65539 qualia.
Although the structure of the two lexica is differ-
ent, there are some common aspects (e.g. the onto-
logical classes associated with word senses) which
suggest both the possibility of merging them and
respectively enriching their entries with the en-
coded information. Finally, the GL theory is based
on the inclusion of basic encyclopedic information
about nouns to model compositionality, and lexi-
cographic glosses offer this kind of knowledge.

4 Experiments

In order to identify reliable patterns expressing
qualia relations on the basis of the glosses in the
SCDM lexicon, we developed a specific dataset.
We first restricted the exploration of the SCDM
entry to nouns which have been assigned the on-
tological class ARTIFACT in the Senso Comune
ontology. We then extracted 35 lemmas with a to-
tal of 97 different senses as a development set. We
manually explored both glosses and lexicographic
examples and identified a set of 48 different syn-
tagmatic patterns expressing the four qualia roles
in a unique way. In particular, we identified 23
patterns for the telic role, 13 for the constitutive
role, 5 for the formal role and 7 for the agentive
role. In Table 1 we report some pattern examples
and their associated qualia. In the templates N, V
and ADJ refer to the target noun, verb and adjec-
tive expressing the qualia, respectively and “det”
refers to the presence of articles (partitive, defi-
nite and indefinite ones). The item expressing the
qualia is in bold in the pattern template and in the
example.
The possibility of restricting the qualia extraction
to word senses with explicit ontological classifica-
tion is an advantage of using the SCDM lexicon,
as this allows to disambiguate inherently ambigu-
ous patterns. For instance, the pattern “prodotto
da (det) N” [produced by (det) N] can express both
the Constitutive quale, if it applies to the class of
Natural Object such as fruit names, or the Agen-

tive quale, if it applies to the class of Artifact such
as man-made objects.
In order to evaluate the quality of the qualia ex-
tracted by the identified set of patterns in terms
of coverage and to identify limitations of this
methodology, such as the presence of qualia which
cannot be collected by means of pattern templates
and additional missing patterns, we developed a
manually annotated gold standard. We selected
46 nominal entries in the SCDM lexicon with at
least one sense associated with the ontological
type ARTIFACT. This has provided us with a set
of 50 different senses and a total of 173 different
qualia, namely 79 for the constitutive role; 3 for
the agentive role; 46 for the telic role; and 45 for
the formal role. None of the entries in the Gold
Standard is part of the development set described
above. We automatically analyzed part-of-speech
and lemmas in the glosses by means of the TextPro
tool suite (Pianta et al., 2008), applied the pattern
extraction script and then evaluated with respect to
the Gold Standard. The results are reported in Ta-
ble 2; all measures have been computed in terms of
Precision (P), Recall (R) and F-measure (F1). We
evaluated the reliability of the patterns both glob-
ally (Overall Evaluation) and for each qualia.

Evaluation Type P R F1
Overall Evaluation 0.84 0.08 0.14
Agentive 1 0.5 0.66
Formal 1 0.01 0.02
Telic 0.92 0.16 0.27
Constitutive 0.73 0.07 0.12

Table 2: Evaluation of the patterns with respect to
the Gold Standard.

The results obtained are quite satisfactory. Pre-
cision is extremely high but this has a cost in
terms of recall, both for the overall evaluation
and for each single qualia. A detailed error anal-
ysis (namely false positives and false negatives)
has shown: i.) that some (additional) patterns
were missing, thus preventing the extraction of
qualia fillers which have been manually identified,
namely for the constitutive qualia. This also ex-
plains the very low level of recall for the con-
stitutive quale; and ii.) that some qualia are ex-
pressed in the glosses by using general expressions
or as arguments of specific verbs which cannot be
codified into general pattern structures at the mo-
ment. The recall (and f-measure) for the formal



Template Pattern Example Qualia
usare per (fare—mettere) V [used to
(make—put) V]

usato per cacciare [used for hunting] telic

costituito da (det adj—det) N [made of
N]

costituito da metallo [made of metal] constitutive

di colore ADJ [of ADJ color] di colore grigio [of grey colour] constitutive
prodotto da [det] N [produced by N] prodotto dalla lavorazione agentive
un tipo di N [a kind of N] un tipo di strumento [a kind of instrument] formal

Table 1: Qualia and patterns extracted from the development noun set.

qualia is the lowest. This is due to the fact that
the SCDM dictionary very rarely uses explicit def-
initional patterns for indicating the supertype (e.g.
“è un N” [(it) is a N]) but tends to directly use
the hypernym item (e.g. as the first noun in the
gloss). However, not all glosses exploit hyper-
nyms for the sense descriptions, they sometimes
contain synonyms. We thus reduced the identifi-
cation of formal qualia only to instances expressed
in well formed patterns during the pattern template
development phase. Although the quantity of cor-
rect qualia is not large (we extracted 32 qualia re-
lations from our data), their reliability and quality
is extremely high. In the following section, we
will describe i.) the methodology we adopted in
order to extend the extraction of the qualia from
the SCDM glosses by exploiting the information
encoded in the PSC lexicon; and ii.) an evaluation
of the coverage of the extracted qualia with respect
to those in the PSC lexicon to enrich it with them.

4.1 Extending Qualia Matches with PSC

In order to extend the qualia extracted from the
SCDM lexicon, we decided to exploit the informa-
tion encoded in the PSC lexicon. Although the two
lexica have different structures, they have common
aspects, as described in Section 3. The ontologi-
cal models, which inform the semantic typing of
the word senses and contribute to keep distinct the
linguistic and the conceptual levels of represen-
tation, can be exploited in order to start merging
the two resources. The working hypothesis is that
the ontologies of the two lexica can be merged to-
gether by means of equivalence relations and sub-
sumption. This will allow us to have sets of onto-
logically compatible entries which can be further
aligned for word senses (word sense alignment;
WSA) by means of different methods, such as lex-
ical match on the glosses (Niemann and Gurevych
(2011); Meyer and Gurevych (2011)), exploita-

tion of qualia information and graph-based ap-
proaches (Matuschek and Gurevych (2013); Nav-
igli and Ponzetto (2012)).
At this stage of development, we partially tack-
led the task of aligning the ontological models
of the two lexica by restricting our analysis of
the PSC semantic types to those which are com-
patible with or equivalent to the SCDM semantic
type ARTIFACT, namely Instrument and Artifact.
Notice that we excluded the PSC types Artifac-
tual food and Artifactual drink which in SCDM
are assigned to the type SUBSTANCE.
We then extracted all qualia information for the 46
lemmas in the Gold Standard which have a corre-
sponding lemma entry and ontological class Arti-
fact or Instrument in the PSC lexicon. In this way
we obtained 333 couples lemma - qualia. We then
applied a baseline method for extracting additional
qualia from the glosses based on token match.
For each matched lemma in the PSC lexicon we
grouped all its associated qualia and looked for
an exact match in the gloss tokens of the corre-
sponding lemmas in the SCDM lexicon. To avoid
repetitions and to get also a preliminary evalua-
tion both of the coverage of the PSC qualia and
of the richness of the SCDM glosses in terms of
qualia, we excluded from the SCDM glosses all
qualia which had been extracted by means of the
patterns. We then merged together the data ob-
tained from the PSC lexicon with those obtained
from the pattern extraction and evaluated this new
data set against the manually built Gold Standard
(DirectMatch Extracted). Additionally, we also
evaluated the data obtained from the direct match
only against the Gold (DirectMatch only) so to get
a preliminary estimate of the coverage of the PSC
qualia. The figures obtained are reported in Ta-
ble 3.

By comparing the results of the Direct-
Match Extracted with those obtained from the pat-



Evaluation Type P R F1
DirectMatch Extracted 0.73 0.16 0.26
DirectMatch only 0.60 0.06 0.12

Table 3: Evaluation of extraction by direct match
of the PSC qualia in the SCDM glosses.

tern extraction method only (see Table 2), we
can notice that the decrease in precision (0.84 vs.
0.73) is balanced by an increase in recall (0.08 vs.
0.16). Furthermore, by observing the figures of
the results of DirectMatch only, the lower level
of precision (i.e. high number of false positives;
0.60 vs.0.84) suggest that the qualia information
in PSC, for the great part, contains information
which is additional and complementary with re-
spect to the qualia which can be extracted from
and are actually contained in the SCDM glosses,
namely for the constitutive and formal roles.
To identify further support to this observation, we
conducted three further evaluation assessments.
We computed precision and recall between: i.) the
manual gold standard and the PSC qualia (Gold-
PSC), with the PSC data as the key and the man-
ual gold standard as the response; ii.) the re-
sults of the pattern extraction and the PSC data
(Extracted-PSC), with the PSC data as the key
and the pattern extracted data as the response; iii.)
the false positives items from the Extracted-PSC
evaluation and the manual gold standard (FP PSC-
Extracted), with the manual gold as the key and
the false positives as the response. We report in
Table 4 the results obtained.

Evaluation Type P R
Gold-PSC 0.16 0.04
Extracted-PSC 0.12 0.006
FP PSC-Extracted 0.85 0.07

Table 4: PSC qualia, manual Gold qualia and ex-
tracted qualia coverage.

It is interesting to notice that both for the Gold-
PSC and the Extracted-PSC data the recall and
precision values are extremely low. On the other
hand, the results for the PF PSC-Extracted are in
line, both for precision and recall, with those ob-
tained for the pattern extraction against the Gold.
On the basis of these figures we claim that: i.) the
pattern-based extraction method has some issues
in coverage but it provides highly reliable data;

ii.) the data in PSC are complementary to those
which can be extracted from the SCDM glosses
and that, in the perspective of merging the two
resources, we can obtain a richer lexicon with
a better coverage of qualia information. How-
ever, the process of integration of the SCDM ex-
tracted qualia into the PSC is not straightforward
as qualia in PSC are assigned with a semantic
type and a specific semantic unit (i.e. a sense).
So far, we have provided a partial enrichment of
the PSC entries with ontological type Instrument
and Artifact for the type of relation (telic, agen-
tive, formal or constitutive) and lemma(s) of the
relation filler(s). For instance, the PSC entry for
“arco” [bow], type Instrument, has the follow-
ing qualia information: formal “strumento” [in-
strument]; agentive “fabbricare” [to make]; telic
tirare” [to throw]. We have integrated the entry
with the following additional qualia obtained from
the gloss: telic “caccia” [hunt]; constitutive “asta”
[rod], “flessibile” [flexible]. With respect to these
latter aspects, we are currently experimenting with
similarity measures between words and planning
a crowd-sourcing task for word sense disambigua-
tion (WSD) through the Senso Comune platform.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper has reported an on-going research on
the extraction of semantic information from dic-
tionary glosses and merging of lexica at the se-
mantic level. We have experimented a pattern-
based method for qualia extraction from ontologi-
cally annotated dictionary entries (SCDM glosses)
which has allowed us, on the one hand, to add
high quality semantic information to the Senso
Comune repository and, on the other hand, has
provided a set of data for the automatic enrichment
of an existing lexicon containing qualia informa-
tion, namely PSC. At the current stage of devel-
opment we are facing an issue related to the recall,
i.e. a quantity issue rather than a quality issue. The
solution can be only in part addressed by adding
missing patterns, as most qualia concerning the
constitutive and the formal roles are not always ex-
pressed in the SCDM glosses by means of colloca-
tion patterns. As a way to boost the extraction of
additional qualia we have explored the possibility
of using the information in the PSC lexicon. As a
preliminary strategy we have adopted the “direct
match” solution, i.e. lexical match of the token in
the SCDM gloss. The results obtained are quite



surprising as most of the qualia manually identi-
fied in the process of creation of the gold standard
are not contained in the PSC entries. This signals
that the two lexica contains complementary infor-
mation and both of them could benefit from their
merging. In order to accomplish this, as a prelimi-
nary task the two ontological models representing
the conceptual backbone of the two lexica must
be manually aligned. To improve the recall we are
planning: i.) to run a new pattern extraction exper-
iment by exploiting full parsing of the glosses and
dependency relations, though parsing errors may
not contribute to improve recall (Sang and Hof-
mann, 2009) and ii.) to exploit similarity measures
between the qualia data obtained by the patterns
and the lexical items in the the gloss which have
not been extracted.
The availability of qualia information associated
with word senses can be further exploited for
achieving word sense alignment (WSA) among
different lexica. As a matter of fact, words shar-
ing the same sense, or meaning, must have a com-
mon subset of qualia roles. To prove the valid-
ity of our hypothesis, we are currently trying to
achieve WSA between MutiWordNet synsets (Pi-
anta et al., 2002) and Senso Comune entries by
exploiting qualia extraction from the glosses, hy-
pernyms relations and meronyms.
Finally, an analysis of the manually annotated data
has highlighted that, at least for the SCDM lexi-
con, the constitutive and the telic roles have a pri-
mary function in describing the meaning of a nom-
inal instance of type ARTIFACT, more than the
formal and the agentive roles. This suggests an
interesting working hypothesis for the identifica-
tion of what could be called “core qualia” in order
to express and identify the core lexical semantics
characteristics of the entities belonging to differ-
ent ontological classes. On the basis of the results
we have obtained from the manual exploration, it
seems that as far as the ARTIFACT type is con-
cerned the core qualia are the constitutive and the
telic roles.

References

P. Bouillon, V. Claveau, C. Fabre C, and P. Sébillot.
2002. Acquisition of qualia elements from corpora
- evaluation of a symbolic learning method. In Pro-
ceedings of the Third International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2002),
Las Palmas, Spain.

N. Calzolari. 1991. Acquiring and representing se-
mantic information in a lexical knowledge base.
In J. Pustejovsky and S. Bergler, editors, Lexi-
cal Semantics and Knowledge Representation. First
SIGLEX ACL Workshop. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 235–244. Springer Verlag.

P. Cimiano and J. Wenderoth. 2005. Automatically
learning qualia structures from the web. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL-SIGLEX Workshop on Deep Lexi-
cal Acquisition, pages 28–37, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

R. Girju, A. Badulescu, and D. Moldovan. 2003.
Learning semantic constraints for the automatic dis-
covery of part-whole relations. In Proceedings of
the 2003 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics on
Human Language Technology - Volume 1, NAACL
’03, pages 1–8, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

R. Girju, D. Moldovan, M. Tatu, and D. Antohe. 2005.
On the semantics of noun compounds. Comput.
Speech Lang., 19(4):479–496, October.

M. A. Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In Proceedings of
the 14th conference on Computational linguistics -
Volume 2, COLING ’92, pages 539–545, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

M. Hearst. 1998. Automated discovery of wordnet
relations. In Christiane Fellbaum, editor, WordNet:
An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, Ams-
terdam.

A. Herdağdelen and M. Baroni. 2009. BagPack: A
general framework to represent semantic relations.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Geometrical
Models of Natural Language Semantics, pages 33–
40, Athens, Greece, March. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

S. Katrenko and P. Adriaans. 2008. Semantic types
of some generic relation arguments: Detection and
evaluation. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, Short
Papers, pages 185–188, Columbus, Ohio, June. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

S. Katrenko and P. Adriaans. 2010. Finding constraints
for semantic relations via clustering. In Proceedings
of CLIN-2010.

C. Masolo, A. Gangemi, N. Guarino, A. Oltramari, and
L. Schneider. 2002. Wonderweb deliverable D17:
the wonderweb library of foundational ontologies.
Technical report.

M Matuschek and I. Gurevych. 2013. Dijkstra-wsa:
A graph-based approach to word sense alignment.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (TACL), 2:to appear.



C. Meyer and I. Gurevych. 2011. What psycholin-
guists know about chemistry: Aligning wiktionary
and wordnet for increased domain coverage. In Pro-
ceedings of 5th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing, pages 883–892, Chi-
ang Mai, Thailand, November. Asian Federation of
Natural Language Processing.

S. Montemagni and L. Vanderwende. 1992. Struc-
tural patterns vs. string patterns for extracting se-
mantic information from dictionaries. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics - COLING-92, pages 546–552,
Nantes, France.

R Navigli and S. Ponzetto. 2012. BabelNet: The au-
tomatic construction, evaluation and application of a
wide-coverage multilingual semantic network. Arti-
ficial Intelligence, 193:217–250.

E. Niemann and I. Gurevych. 2011. The peoples web
meets linguistic knowledge: Automatic sense align-
ment of wikipedia and wordnet. In Proceedings of
the 9th International Conference on Computational
Semantics, pages 205–214, Singapore, January.

D. Ó Séaghdha and A. Copstake. 2007. Cooccur-
rence contetxs for noun compound interpretation. In
ACL Workshop on A Broader Perspective on Mul-
tiword Expressions. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

D. Ó Séaghdha. 2007. Annotating and learning com-
pound noun semantics. In Proceedings of the 48th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

A. Oltramari, G. Vetere, I. Chiari, E. Jezek, F.M. Zan-
zotto, M.Nissim, and A. Gangemi. 2013. Senso Co-
mune: A collaborative knowledge resource for ital-
ian. In I. Gurevych and J. Kim, editors, The Peoples
Web Meets NLP, Theory and Applications of Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 45–67. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.

P. Pantel and M. Pennacchiotti. 2006. Espresso:
Leveraging generic patterns for automatically har-
vesting semantic relations. In Proceedings of 21st
International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics. The Association for
Computer Linguistics, July.

E. Pianta, L. Bentivogli, and C. Girardi. 2002.
Multiwordnet: developing an aligned multilingual
database. In First International Conference on
Global WordNet, Mysore, India.

E Pianta, C. Girardi, and R. Zonoli. 2008. Textpro
tool suite. In Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC-08), volume CD-ROM, Marrakech,
Morocco. European Language Resources Associa-
tion (ELRA).

J. Pustejovsky. 1995. The Generative Lexicon. MIT
Press.

A. Roventini, N. Ruimy, R. Marinelli, U. Marisa, and
M. Michele. 2007. Mapping concrete entities
from parole-simple-clips to italwordnet: Methodol-
ogy and results. In Proceedings of the 45th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics Companion Volume Proceedings of the
Demo and Poster Sessions, Prague, Czech Republic,
June.

N. Ruimy, M. Monachini, E. Gola, N. Calzolari,
M.C. Del Fiorentino, M. Ulivieri, and S. Rossi.
2003. A computational semantic lexicon of italian:
SIMPLE. Linguistica Computazionale XVIII-XIX,
Pisa, pages 821–64.

N. Ruimy, A. Roventini, R. Marinelli, and M. Ulivieri.
2008. Linking and integrating two electronic lexi-
con. In Proceedings of the First International Con-
ference on Global Interoperability for Language Re-
sources - ICGL 2008, pages 197 – 204, Hong Kong,
January.

E. T. K. Sang and K. Hofmann. 2009. Lexical patterns
or dependency patterns: which is better for hyper-
nym extraction? In Proceedings of the Thirteenth
Conference on Computational Natural Language
Learning, CoNLL ’09, pages 174–182, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

R. Snow, D. Jurafsky, and A. Y. Ng. 2005. Learn-
ing syntactic patterns for automatic hypernym dis-
covery. In NIPS 17.

G. Vetere, A. Oltramari, I. Chiari, E. Jezek, L. Vieu,
and F.M. Zanzotto. 2011. Senso Comune, an open
knowledge base for italian. JTraitement Automa-
tique des Langues, 53(3):217–243.

I. Yamada and T. Baldwin. 2004. Automatic discov-
ery of telic and agentive roles from corpus data. In
Proceedings of the 18th Pacific Asia Conference on
Language, pages 115–141, Tokyo, Japan.


