










































Parallels between Linguistics and Biology


Proceedings of the 2013 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2013), pages 120–123,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Parallels between Linguistics and Biology

Ashish Vijay Tendulkar
IIT Madras

Chennai-600 036. India.
ashishvt@gmail.com

Sutanu Chakraborti
IIT Madras

Chennai-600 036. India.
sutanu@cse.iitm.ac.in

Abstract

In this paper we take a fresh look at par-
allels between linguistics and biology. We
expect that this new line of thinking will
propel cross fertilization of two disciplines
and open up new research avenues.

1 Introduction

Protein structure prediction problem is a long
standing open problem in Biology. The compu-
tational methods for structure prediction can be
broadly classified into the following two types:
(i) Ab-initio or de-novo methods seek to model
physics and chemistry of protein folding from first
principles. (ii) Knowledge based methods make
use of existing protein structure and sequence in-
formation to predict the structure of the new pro-
tein. While protein folding takes place at a scale
of millisecond in nature, the computer programs
for the task take a large amount of time. Ab-initio
methods take several hours to days and knowledge
based methods takes several minutes to hours de-
pending upon the complexity. We feel that the
protein structure prediction methods struggle due
to lack of understanding of the folding code from
protein sequence. In larger context, we are in-
terested in the following question: Can we treat
biological sequences as strings generated from a
specific but unknown language and find the rules
of these languages? This is a deep question and
hence we start with baby-steps by drawing par-
allels between Natural Language and Biological
systems. David Searls has done interesting work
in this direction and have written a number of
articles about role of language in understanding
Biological sequences(Searls, 2002). We intend
to build on top of that work and explore further
analogies between the two fields.

This is intended to be an idea paper that ex-
plores parallels between linguistics and biology

that have the potential to cross fertilization two
disciplines and open up new research avenues.
The paper is intentionally made speculative at
places to inspire out-of-the-box deliberations from
researchers in both areas.

2 Analogies

In this section, we explore some pivotal ideas in
linguistics (with a specific focus on Computational
Linguistics) and systematically uncover analogous
ideas in Biology.

2.1 Letters
The alphabet in a natural language is well speci-
fied. English language has 26 letters. The genes
are made up of 4 basic elements called as nu-
cleotide: adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine (C)
and guanine (G). During protein synthesis, genes
are transcribed into messenger RNA (mRNA),
which is made up of 4 basic elements: adenine
(A), uracil (U), cytosine (C) and guanine (G).
mRNA is translated to proteins that are made up
of 20 amino acids denotes by the following letters:
{A, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, M, N, P, Q, R, S, T,
V, W, Y}.

2.2 Words
A word is an atomic unit of meaning in a language.
When it comes to biological sequences, a funda-
mental problem is to identify words. Like English,
the biological language seems to have a fixed al-
phabet when it comes to letters. However, unless
we have a mechanism to identify atomic “func-
tional” units, we cannot construct a vocabulary of
biological words.

The first property of a word in NL is that it has
a meaning; a word is a surrogate for something
in the material or the abstract world. One cen-
tral question is: how do we make machines un-
derstand meanings of words? Humans use dictio-
naries which explain meanings of complex words

120



in terms of simple ones. For machines to use dic-
tionaries, we have two problems. The first is, how
do we communicate the meaning of simple words
(like “red” or “sad”)? The second is, to under-
stand meanings of complex words out of simple
ones, we would need the machine to understand
English in the first place. The first problem has
no easy solution; there are words whose meanings
are expressed better in the form of images or when
contrasted with other words (“orange” versus “yel-
low”). The second problem of defining words in
terms of others can be addressed using a knowl-
edge representation formalism like a semantic net-
work. Some biological words have functions that
cannot be easily expressed in terms of functions
of other words. For the other words, we can define
the function (semantics) of a biological word in
terms of other biological words, leading to a dic-
tionary or ontology of such words.

The second property of a word is its Part of
Speech which dictates the suitability of words to
tie up with each other to give rise to grammatical
sentences. An analogy can be drawn to valency
of atoms, which is primarily responsible in dictat-
ing which molecules are possible and which are
not. Biological words may have Parts of speech
that dictate their ability to group together to form
higher level units like sentences, using the compo-
sition of functions which has its analog in compo-
sitional semantics. The third property of a word
is its morphology, which is its structure or form.
This refers to the sequence of letters in the words.
There are systematic ways in which the form of a
root word (like sing) can be changed to give birth
to new words (like singing). Two primary pro-
cesses are inflection and derivation. This can be
related to mutations in Biology, where we obtain a
new sequence or structure by mutating the existing
sequences/structures.

3 Concepts

Effective Dimensionality: The Vector Space
Model (VSM) is used frequently as a formalism
in Information Retrieval. When used over a large
collection of documents as in the web, VSM pic-
tures the webpages as vectors in a high dimen-
sional vector space, where each dimension corre-
sponds to a word. Interestingly, thanks to strong
clustering properties exhibited by documents, this
high dimensional space is only sparsely populated
by real world documents. As an example to il-

lustrate this, we would not expect a webpage to si-
multaneously talk about Margaret Thatcher, Diego
Maradona and Machine Learning. Thus, more of-
ten than not, the space defined by intersection of
two or more words is empty. The webspace is like
the night sky: mostly dark and few clusters sprin-
kled in between. In IR parlance, we say that the
effective dimensionality of the space is much less
than the true dimensionality, and this fact can be
exploited cleverly to overcome “curse of dimen-
sionality” and to speed up retrieval. It is worth
noting that the world of biological sequences is
not very different. Of all the sequences that can
be potentially generated, only a few correspond to
stable configurations.

Ramachandran plot is used to understand con-
straints in protein conformations (Ramachandran,
1963). It plots possible φ − ψ angle pairs in pro-
tein structures based on the van der Waal radii of
amino acids. It demonstrates that the protein con-
formational space is sparse and is concentrated in
clusters of a few φ− ψ regions.

3.1 Machine Translation
Genes and mRNAs can be viewed as strings gen-
erated from four letters (A,T,C,G for genes and
A,U,C,G for mRNAs). Proteins can be viewed
as strings generated from twenty amino acids. In
addition proteins and mRNAs have correspond-
ing structures for which we do not even know
the alphabets. The genes are storing a blue-print
for synthesizing proteins. Whenever the cell re-
quires a specific protein, the protein synthesis
takes place, in which first the genes encoding that
protein are read and are transcribed into mRNA
which are then translated to make proteins with
relevant amino acids. This is similar to writing the
same document in multiple languages so that it can
be consumed by the people familiar to different
languages. Here the protein sequence is encoded
in genes and is communicated in form of mRNA
during the synthesis process. Another example is
sequence and structure representations of protein:
Both of them carry the same information specified
in different forms.

3.2 Evolution of Languages
Language evolves over time to cater to evolution
in our communication goals. New concepts orig-
inate which warrant revisions to our vocabulary.
The language of mathematics has evolved to make
communication more precise. Sentence structures

121



evolve, often to address the bottlenecks faced by
native speakers and second language learners. En-
glish, for example, has gone out of fashion. Thus
there is a survival goal very closely coupled to the
environment in which a language thrives that dic-
tates its evolution. The situation is not very differ-
ent in biology.

Scientific community believes that the life on
the Earth started with prokaryotes1 and evolved
into eukaryotes. Prokaryotes inhibited earth from
approximately 3-4 Billion years ago. About 500
million years ago, plant and fungi colonized the
Earth. The modern human came into existence
since 250,000 years. At a genetic level, new
genes were formed by means of insertion, dele-
tion and mutation of certain nucleotide with other
nucleotides.

3.3 Garden Path Sentences

English is replete with examples where a small
change in a sentence leads to a significant change
in its meaning. A case in point is the sen-
tence “He eats shoots and leaves”, whose meaning
changes drastically when a comma is inserted be-
tween “eats” and “shoots”. This leads to situations
where the meaning of a sentence cannot be com-
posed by a linear composition of the meanings of
words. The situation is not very different in biol-
ogy, where the function of a sequence can change
when any one element in the sequence changed.

3.4 Text and background knowledge needed
to understand it

Interaction between the “book” and the reader is
essential to comprehension; so language under-
standing is not just sophisticated modeling of in-
teraction between words, sentences and discourse.
Similarly the book of life (the gene sequence) does
not have everything that is needed to determine
function; it needs to be read by the reader (played
by the CD player). This phenomenon is similar
to protein/ gene interaction. Proteins/genes pos-
sess binding sites, that is used to bind other pro-
teins/genes to form a complex, which carry out the
desired function in the biological process.

3.5 Complexity of Dataset

Several measures have been proposed in the con-
text of Information Retrieval and Text Classifica-
tion which aim at capturing the complexity of a

1http://www.wikipedia.org

dataset. In unsupervised domains, a high clus-
tering tendency indicates a low complexity and
a low clustering tendency corresponds to a situ-
ation where the objects are spread out more or
less uniformly in space. The latter situation cor-
responds to high complexity. In supervised do-
mains, a dataset is said to be complex if objects
that are similar to each other have same category
labels. Interestingly, these ideas may apply in ar-
riving at estimates of structure complexity. In par-
ticular, weak structure function correspondences
would correspond to high complexity.

3.6 Stop words (function words) and their
role in syntax

Function words such as articles, prepositions play
an important role in understanding natural lan-
guages. On the same note, function words exist
in Biology and they play various important roles
depending on the context. For example, Protein
structures are made up of secondary structures.
Around 70% of these structures are α-helix and
β-strands which repeat in functionally unrelated
proteins. Based on this criterion, α-helix and β-
strands can be categorized as functional words.
These secondary structures are important in form-
ing protein structural frame on which functional
sites can be mounted. At genomic level, as much
as 97% of human genome does not code for pro-
teins and hence termed as junk DNA. This is an-
other instance of function word in Biology. Scien-
tists are realizing off late some important functions
of these junk DNA such as their role in alternative
splicing.

3.7 Natural Language Generation
Natural Language Generation (NLG) is com-
plementary to Natural Language Understanding
(NLU), in that it aims at constructing natural lan-
guage text from a variety of non-textual repre-
sentations like maps, graphs, tables and tempo-
ral data. NLG can be used to automate routine
tasks like generation of memos, letters or simula-
tion reports. At the creative end of the spectrum,
an ambitious goal of NLG would be to compose
jokes, advertisements, stories and poetry. NLG
is carried out in four steps: (i) macroplanning;
(ii)microplanning; (iii) surface realization and (iv)
presentation. Macroplanning step uses Rhetorical
Structure Theory (RST), which defines relations
between units of text. For example, the relation
cause connects the two sentences: “The hotel was

122



costly.” and “We started looking for a cheaper op-
tion”. Other such relations are purpose, motivation
and enablement. The text is organized into two
segments; the first is called nucleus, which car-
ries the most important information, and the sec-
ond satellites, which provide a flesh around the nu-
cleus. It seems interesting to look for a parallel of
RST in the biological context.

Analogously protein design or artificial life de-
sign is a form of NLG in Biology. Such artifi-
cial organisms and genes/proteins can carry out
specific tasks such as fuel production, making
medicines and combating global warming. For ex-
ample, Craig Venter and colleagues created syn-
thetic genome in the lab and has filed a patent for
the first life form created by humanity. These tasks
are very similar to NLG in terms of scale and com-
plexity.

3.8 Hyperlinks
Hyperlinks connect two or more documents
through links. There is an analogy in Biology
for hyperlinks. Proteins contain sites to bind with
other molecules such as proteins, DNA, metals
or any other chemical compound. The binding
sites are similar to hyperlinks and enable protein-
protein interaction and protein-DNA interaction.

3.9 Ambiguity and Context
An NLP system must be able to effectively handle
ambiguities. The news headline “Stolen Painting
Found by Tree” has two possible interpretations,
though an average reader has no trouble favoring
one over the other. In many situations, the con-
text is useful in disambiguation. For example, pro-
tein function can be specified unambiguously with
the help of biological process and cellular loca-
tion. In other words, protein functions in the con-
text of biological process and within a particular
cellular location. In the context of protein struc-
ture, highly similar subsequences take different
substructures such as α-helix or β-strand depend-
ing on their spatial neighborhood. Moonlighting
proteins carry out multiple functions and their ex-
act function can be determined only based on the
context.

Let us consider the following example: “Mary
ordered a pizza. She left a tip before leaving the
restaurant.” To understand the above sentences,
the reader must have knowledge of what people
typically do when they visit restaurants. Statisti-
cally mined associations and linguistic knowledge

are both inadequate in capturing meaning when
the background knowledge is absent. Background
knowledge about function and interacting partners
about a protein help in determining its structures.

4 Conclusion

In this paper, we presented a number of parallels
between Linguistics and Biology. We believe that
this line of thought process will lead to previously
unexplored research directions and bring in new
insights in our understanding of biological sys-
tems. Linguistics on other hand can also benefit
from a deeper understanding of analogies with bi-
ological systems.

Acknowledgments

AVT is supported by Innovative Young Biotech-
nologist Award (IYBA) by Department of
Biotechnology, Government of India.

References
David B. Searls. 2002. The language of genes Nature,

420:211–217.

G. N. Ramachandran, C. Ramakrishnan, and
V. Sasisekharan. 1963. Stereochemistry of
polypeptide chain configurations Journal of
Molecular Biology, 7:95–99.

123


