










































Statistical MT Systems Revisited: How much Hybridity do they have?


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation, page 7,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Statistical MT Systems Revisited:
How much Hybridity do they have?

Hermann Ney
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen and DIGITEO Chair, LIMSI-CNRS, Paris

Lehrstuhl für Informatik 6
RWTH Aachen

Ahornstr. 55
52056 Aachen

ney@informatik.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract

The statistical approach to MT started about
twenty-five years ago and has now been widely ac-
cepted as an alternative to the classical approach
with manually designed rules. Among the attrac-
tive properties of the statistical approach is its ca-
pability to learn the translation models automati-
cally from a (sufficiently) large amount of source-
target sentence pairs. Thus the need for the manual
design of suitable rules and for human interaction
can be reduced dramatically when developing an
MT system for a new application or language pair.

The idea of hybrid MT is to combine the ad-
vantages of both the rule-based and statistical ap-
proaches. In practice, most statistical MT sys-
tems make use of manually designed rules in or-
der to improve the MT accuracy. We revisit the
RWTH systems in order to study the effect of typ-
ical preprocessing steps based on manually de-
signed rules. The RWTH systems cover various
tasks (e.g. news, patents, lectures) and various lan-
guages (e.g. Arabic, Chinese, English, Japanese).
The preprocessing steps may include a categoriza-
tion of numbers, date and time expressions, a word
decomposition based on morphological analysis
and explicit word re-ordering based on a syntactic
analysis. In general, the preprocessing steps may
depend heavily on the language pair under consid-
eration.

We will also address concepts that aim at a
tighter integration of the conventional rule-based
and the statistical approaches. We will consider
the implications of such a tight integration for the
architecture of an MT system.

7


