










































Integration of the Thesaurus for the Social Sciences (TheSoz) in an Information Extraction System


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 90–95,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Integration of the Thesaurus for the Social Sciences (TheSoz)              
in an Information Extraction System  

 
 

Thierry Declerck 
DFKI GmbH, LT-Lab 
Stuhsatzenhausweg, 3 

D-66123 Saarbrücken, Germany 
declerck@dfki.de 

 
 

Abstract 

We present current work dealing with the in-
tegration of a multilingual thesaurus for so-
cial sciences in a NLP framework for sup-
porting Knowledge-Driven Information Ex-
traction in the field of social sciences.  We 
describe the various steps that lead to a run-
ning IE system: lexicalization of the labels of 
the thesaurus and semi-automatic generation 
of domain specific IE grammars, with their 
subsequent implementation in a finite state 
engine. Finally, we outline the actual field of 
application of the IE system: analysis of so-
cial media for recognition of relevant topics 
in the context of elections.   

1 Introduction 

Within a running research project dealing with 
the automatic linguistic and semantic processing 
of social media1, we are working on a use case 
concerned with the analysis of tweets exchanged 
in the context of approaching election events. 
Besides the detection of Named Entities (name 
of politicians, political parties, locations, etc.) 
and associated opinions, we are also interested in 
identifying and classifying the topics people are 
addressing in their messages. 

There are for sure topics that are very particu-
lar to a specific election, but there are also more 
generic and recurrent topics, some of them being 
of special interest to social scientists. In order to 
be able to detect such topics in various types of 
text, we have been searching for knowledge 
sources in the field of social and political sci-
ences that can be used for the corresponding 
(both manual and automatic) semantic annotation 
                                                 
1 The TrendMiner project, www.trendminer-project.eu,  
co-funded by the European Commission with Grant No. 
287863.  
 

of text. Our best candidate is for the time being 
the Thesaurus for the Social Sciences (TheSoz), 
developed by the GESIS institute at the Leibniz 
Institute for the Social Sciences2. This resource is 
available in the SKOS format 3 , and therefore 
adapted to the Linked Data framework4. In this 
short paper we present first in some details the 
thesaurus, before describing the steps that allow 
us to integrate the (multilingual) language data it 
includes into a NLP tools suite, for the goal of 
supporting Knowledge-Driven analysis of texts 
in the field of social sciences, with a focus on 
micro-blogs. 

2 The Thesaurus for the Social Sciences 
(TheSoz) 

The thesaurus for social sciences is a knowledge 
source under continuous development (we are 
currently using version 0.92). The list of key-
words used in TheSoz contains about 12,000 en-
tries, of which more than 8,000 are descriptors 
(or “authorized keywords”). 

It is encoded in RDF and SKOS. While the 
main conceptual elements of the thesaurus are 
encoded in the core syntax of SKOS, the re-
source makes also use of the SKOS-XL proper-
ties5 for including labels containing natural lan-
guage expressions (authorized keywords, which 
act as domain terms) that are attached to the con-
ceptual elements., using the “prefLabel” and 
“altLabel” annotation properties, allowing thus to 
describe main terms and their variants. The natu-
ral language expressions corresponding to the 
labels are encoding using the SKOS-XL annota-
tion property “literalForm”.  
                                                 
2 http://www.gesis.org/en/services/research/thesauri-und-
klassifikationen/social-science-thesaurus/ 
3 See http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-primer/ for a concise 
introduction to SKOS. 
4 http://linkeddata.org/ 
5 See http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/skos-xl.html 

90



In order to give a (human readable) idea of the 
content of the thesaurus6 , we extracted with a 
Perl script the main elements from the SKOS 
code and present those in a tabular fashion, an 
example of which is given below, displaying also 
the terms in the languages covered by TheSoz 
(English, French and German): 
 
concept id "10034303" 
   term “10034303" 

• prefLabel id "10034303" 
• lang=de "Abbrecher" 
• lang=en "drop-out" 
• lang=fr "drop-out" 
• altLabel id "10034307"  
• lang=de "Studienabbrecher" 
• lang=en "university drop-out" 
• lang=fr "étudiant qui abandonne ses études"     

   notation „3.2.00"  
• lang=de „Schule und Beruf (berufliche Qualifika-

tionselemente im Bereich der schulischen Ausbil-
dung)“ 

• lang=en “School and Occupation (Elements of 
Occupational Qualification in School Education)” 

• lang=fr « École et profession (éléments de quali-
fication professionnelle dans le domaine de 
l’enseignement scolaire) » 

   broader notation „3.2“     
• lang=de „Beruf und Qualifikation“ 
• lang=en „Occupation and Qualification“ 
• lang=fr « profession et qualification » 

   broader notation „3“  
• lang=de „Interdiszipinäre Anwendungsbereiche 

der Sozialwissenschaften“ 
• lang=en “Interdisciplinary Application Areas of 

Social Sciences” 
• lang=fr « domaines interdisciplinaires d'applica-

tion des sciences sociales »  
   
In the example above the reader can see how the 
English preferred label “drop-out” is associated 
with the concept “School and Occupation”, 
which is itself a subclass of the concept “Occu-
pation and Qualification”, classified itself as a 
field of the broader concept “Interdisciplinary 
Application Areas of Social Sciences“. All the 
language material contained in the labels or used 
for naming the “notations” can be re-used for 
detecting and semantically annotating the related 
topics in running texts. 

3 TheSoz as Linked Data 

The encoding of TheSoz in SKOS is an impor-
tant asset, since it allows linking the data to other 

                                                 
6 Online visualizations and access are available at 
http://lod.gesis.org/thesoz/ 

knowledge sources, like for example DBpedia7 in 
the Linked Data framework, and so to comple-
ment information contained in TheSoz, which 
remains at the terminological level, and is thus 
not giving detailed information about the in-
cluded multilingual terms for the described con-
cepts and the relations between those.  

So for example TheSoz mentions the main po-
litical parties in Germany, Austria and other 
countries, but not their actual leader, their actual 
role (in the government or in the opposition) or 
weight in the current legislation period. TheSoz 
also lists the names of important persons, like 
“Merkel, A.” or “Brandt, W.”, but no biographi-
cal indication or relation to political parties or 
institutions are given. As such TheSoz is provid-
ing for a light-weight ontological basis, with 
multilingual labels, which allows detecting in 
text mentions of topics or entities relevant to the 
social scientists.   

The linking of concepts and associated terms 
to more elaborated knowledge sources, like 
DBpedia, is thus necessary in order to implement 
a full Knowledge Driven Information Extraction 
(KDIE) system in the field of social sciences. So 
for example the TheSoz sub-term “university” in 
“university drop-out” can be completed by in-
formation in the DBpedia entry for “university”, 
stating among others that “university” is rdfs 
domain of “numberOfPostgraduateStudents” and 
that it is a subClassOf “EducationalInstitution. 
“http://schema.org/EducationalOrganization” is 
given as an equivalenceClass of the DBpedia 
entry for “EducationalInstitution”. From the 
schema.org entry we can make use of additional 
relations associated to “EducationalInstitution”, 
like for example a relation to more specific 
types, such as “CollegeOrUniversity”, “Elemen-
tarySchool”, “HighSchool”, “MiddleSchool”, 
“Preschool”,  “School”. We can this way expand 
the terminological base of TheSoz by accessing 
the labels of the classes and concepts of other 
knowledge sources referred to by explicit seman-
tic relations like owl:equivalentClass, 
owl:sameAs or skos:exactMatch.  
   As the reader can see from the name of the 
mentioned ontology classes above, natural lan-
guage expressions associated to elements of 
knowledge sources can have different surface 
forms as the one we saw in the examples of “lit-
eralForms” of TheSoz. Beyond the utilization of 
the annotation properties, such as rdfs:label, 

                                                 
7 See http://dbpedia.org/About. And in fact, 5024 TheSoz 
concepts are linked to DBpedia via SKOS “exact matches”. 

91



skosxl:prefLabel” or skosxl:literalForm, dedi-
cated to ease the understanding by human users, 
several other syntax elements of knowledge rep-
resentation systems, such as the RDF URI refer-
ences, like rdf:ID, rdf:about, or rdf:resource, may 
contain instead of numerical codes natural lan-
guage expressions, often using the CamelCase 
notation. Fu et al. (2012) describes NLP tasks 
and applications using natural language expres-
sions contained in such RDF URI references. In 
our work, we  focus on natural language expres-
sions contained in the annotation properties 
rdfs:label, sxkos:label (skosxl:prefLabel and oth-
ers) and skosxl:literalForm, which typically in-
clude textual material to be consumed by human 
readers, and which can be normally directly pro-
cessed by NLP tools, without requiring prior 
transformation processes of the textual material. 

4 Integration of TheSoz  in a NLP 
Framework 

Before applying the (possibly extended) termino-
logical material of TheSoz for supporting the 
semantic annotation of running texts, it has to be 
submitted to pre-processing steps, in order to 
ensure as a minimum a possible matching to 
morpho-syntactic variations of (elements of) the 
terms that are to be expected in external text. For 
this, we need to lexicalize the labels of the the-
saurus, transforming the terms to linguistic data 
that can be used for matching linguistically proc-
essed text. A first sketch of this approach has 
been described in (Declerck & Lendvai, 2010) 
and a more elaborated methodology, encoding 
the linguistic data in RDF is presented in 
(McCrae et al, 2012).  

And for ensuring a linking of linguistic data in 
text to the conceptual elements of the thesaurus 
(or other knowledge sources), the development 
of an information extraction grammar is needed. 
We present in section 3.2 below an automatized 
approach for this.   

For both steps we are using the NooJ plat-
form8 , whose finite states engine supports the 
flexible implementation of lexicons, morpho-
logical, syntactic and semantic grammars. 

4.1 Lexicalization 

The lexicalization step consists in submitting all 
the language material included in the knowledge 
source to a lexical and a syntactic analyzer, 

                                                 
8 http://www.nooj4nlp.net/pages/nooj.html 

which in our case are lexicons and grammars 
implemented in NooJ.   

The results of such a processing can be en-
coded in the lexicon-ontology model lemon 
(McCrae et al, 2012), which declaratively repre-
sents textual and linguistic information of on-
tologies as additional RDF resource linked to the 
original concepts associated to the labels. The 
lemon model decomposes multi-word expres-
sions to individual words and represents the re-
sults in a phrase structure, which can be shared 
by multiple lexical entries. Furthermore, depend-
ency relations between decomposed phrase con-
stituents can be modeled. A simplified example 
of the lemon representation of the NooJ parsed 
term “university drop-out” is shown below: 
 
:university_drop-out [lemon:writtenRep "univer-
sity drop-out"@en] 
lemon:sense [lemon:reference ontol-
ogy:TheSoz10034307]; 
lemon:decomposition ( :university_comp 
:drop-out_comp ) ; 
lemon:phraseRoot [ lemon:constituent :NP ; 
lemon:edge [lemon:constituent :NP ; 
lemon:edge [lemon:constituent :NN ; 
lemon:leaf university_comp ] ; 
lemon:edge [lemon:constituent :NN ; 
lemon:leaf drop-out_comp ] ];  
]. 
 
For the sake of simplicity we do not display the 
lemon representation of additional analysis pro-
vided by NooJ (for example the one, which is 
decomposing “drop-out” in two lemmas). It is 
enough to mention that lemon also supports the 
representation of preferred and alternative labels. 
This is important if one wants to consider all 
possible (linguistically annotated) term variants 
for improving the matching of TheSoz terms to 
terminological variants in text, going thus be-
yond the matching of terms to purely morpho-
syntactic variations. So for example, in TheSoz 
“drop-out” is the prefLabel, while “university 
drop-out” is marked as altLabel of the same con-
cept. Such term variants can also be “imported” 
in our lexicalization step from other source. Or 
one can import additional lexical material, so for 
example the corresponding WordNet synonyms 
or glosses. In the next future we also plan to 
“tap” the BabelNet9 resource, which is providing 
links to WordNet, Wikipedia and DBpedia (and 
more is planed), for extending the terminological 

                                                 
9 See http://lcl.uniroma1.it/babelnet/ or (Navigli & 
Ponzetto, 2012). 

92



base of the (lexicalized) TheSoz labels, also with 
terms in languages not covered by TheSoz for 
now.  

4.2 Automatic Generation of Domain spe-
cific IE grammars 

On the basis of the lexicalization step described 
in section 3.1, we wrote a Perl program that gen-
erates IE grammars in the NooJ finite state en-
gine. This procedure is done in 5 steps.  
 

1) Using the Term ID of TheSoz as names 
for NooJ recognition rules. 
term10034307 = 

2) Using the corresponding lexicalised la-
bels as the expressions to be recognized 
by the NooJ rule (abstract representa-
tion): 
term10034307 = [lemma=„university“ 
cat=„N“] [lemma=„drop-out“ 
cat=„N“] ; 

3) Adding possible term variants to the 
rule) 10: 
term10034307 = ([lemma=„university“ 
cat=„N“] [lemma=„drop-out“ 
cat=„N“] | :var10034307) ;  
 
var10034307 = [lemma=„university“ 
cat=„N“] [lemma=„drop“ cat=„V“] 
[lemma=„out“ cat=„P“] ; 

4) Linking the linguistically annotated pre-
fLabel and the altLabel(s) to the corre-
sponding Concept ID, as the basis of the 
semantic organization of the lexical ma-
terial in NooJ: 
concept10034303 = (term10034303 | 
term10034307) ; 

5) Defining the annotation generation pro-
cedure of the NooJ rules: Successful ap-
plication of  the rule  concept10034303 
can generate the following annotation: 
CLASS= TheSoz_ID=“10034303”  
altLabel_ID=“10034307“ 
altLabel =“universtiy drop-out@en“  
SuperClass=TheSoz_ID_3.2  

                                                 
10 In this simplified example we do just include as a 
term variant the decomposition of the noun “drop-
out” in two lemmas, extending thus the lexical cover-
age of the original label. The final rule (not displayed 
here for the sake of simplicity) is also stating that the 
sub-term “university” doesn’t have to immediately 
precede the sub-term “drop”, accounting thus also for 
alternative word order. 

SuperClassLabel = „Occupation and 
Qualification“ 
altLabel_Translation  = „Studienabbre-
cher@de“ 
etc.11  ) 
 

This procedure has been fully implemented, us-
ing Perl scripts. The addition of term variants (in 
red color in the example above, point 3) can be 
done manually or automatically. We are also cur-
rently adding information about the context of 
such terms to be expected in running texts, like 
for example the agent of the event “drop-out”, 
and further modifications, like date, location and 
reasons. 

At the moment we are able to semantically 
disambiguate in text for example the two senses 
of the TheSoz term “drop-out”: one in the sense 
of “university drop-out” and the one in the sense 
of “resignation from occupation”. The generated 
NooJ grammars are currently being tested for a 
use case dealing with the elections in Austria. 

5 Use Case 

Our actual focus is the elections in Austria. Our 
aim is to detect which topics are of have been 
discussed in the social media, and how this re-
lates to election results obtained by candidates 
and parties.  

As such we cannot report yet on evaluation re-
sults, both at the technological and usability lev-
el, since an evaluation study is still to be per-
formed. We will be using collection of polls for 
measuring the accuracy of the detection of topics 
and the related popularity of parties/politicians 
detected in social media.  

The use case partner involved in the project 
has been designing an annotation schema and is 
performing a semi-automatic annotation of se-
lected tweets and blogs, which we will use as 
gold standard. 

A fully operational system is expected to work 
for the national elections in Austria to be held on 
the 28th September of 2013. 

6 Future Work 

Besides the evaluation work sketched in the for-
mer section, the next steps in our work will con-
sist in aggregating information from other 

                                                 
11 An example text is: “Mar 29, 2012 – Record num-
bers of students quit university courses last year as the 
higher education drop-out rate soared above 30000 
for the first time…” 

93



knowledge source, not only from DBpedia but 
also from a recently developed political ontol-
ogy, which has been designed in the context of 
our project.   

We have also already conducted experiments 
in relating the linguistically annotated terms of 
TheSoz with terms available in other thesauri, 
like for example GEMET12. As GEMET is con-
taining labels in 33 languages, this linking will 
allow us to find more multilingual equivalents of 
terms in TheSoz, at least for the concepts of 
TheSoz that can be associated with concepts in 
GEMET.  

Another line of investigation will consist in 
adapting the work on correcting and comple-
menting the labels used in TheSoz, following the 
reports described in (Declerck & Gromann, 
2012), where correcting and completive patterns 
have been applied to the labels of multilingual 
taxonomies dealing with the description of indus-
try activity fields of companies listed in various 
stock exchanges. Improving the terminological 
quality of labels seems to be a good strategy for 
improving knowledge-driven information extrac-
tion.  
   Following the approaches to cross-lingual har-
monization of taxonomy labels described in (De-
clerck & Gromann, 2012; Gromann & Declerck, 
2013), we notice that in many multilingual 
knowledge sources (Thesauri, Taxonomies or 
Ontologies), the content of multilingual labels is 
not parallelized. In one of our example within the 
TheSoz, displayed in Section 2, we had the fol-
lowing concept with the labels in three lan-
guages: 

 
term "10034303" 
    concept  id "10034303" 

  … 
       altLabel id "10034307"  
       altLabel de "Studienabbrecher" 
       altLabel en "university drop-out" 

  altLabel fr "étudiant qui abandonne ses études" 
  …. 

 
As the reader can see, only the French label is 
containing explicitly the fact the entity “perform-
ing” the drop-out is a student. Although the su-
per-classes make clear that “university drop-out” 
is in the field of “School and Occupation”, none 
of the metadata or labels, other as the French 
“altLabel” is mentioning that a student is in-

                                                 
12 GEMET stands for “GEneral Multilingual Envi-
ronmental Thesaurus”. See also 
http://www.eionet.europa.eu/gemet/ 

volved in this field. The German label can lead to 
the reading that a person is involved, if adequate 
lexical semantics resources are used. The English 
label does not mention at all that an agent is in-
volved: it just names the event. The French and 
German labels are about abandoning “studies” 
while the English label is about abandoning 
“university”.  

As suggested by Gromann & Declerck (2013), 
we can add (either manually or by automated 
process) to the English alternative labels the 
translations of the French label (in this particular 
case, the one with the richest contextual informa-
tion), like “a student, who is dropping out his 
studies”. This is important since it improves the 
matching of the concepts of TheSoz to running 
texts. 

7 Conclusion 

We have described actual work in integrating 
multilingual knowledge sources in the field of 
social sciences into a NLP task, consisting in 
identifying relevant topics of discussion in social 
media. As it is still too early to report on results 
(due to the internal calendar of the project), we 
could only present for the time being the current 
state of implementation, which consisted in first 
lexicalizing the labels of the knowledge source 
“TheSoz”, freely available – in the SKOS for-
mat. On the basis of the lexicalized labels, and 
their relation to conceptual element of the 
knowledge source, we implemented an automatic 
generation of knowledge-driven IE grammars, 
which have been realized as finite state transduc-
ers in the NooJ platform. Those resulting IE 
grammars are to be deployed in the context of a 
use case dealing with the detection of topics ad-
dressed in social media on approaching elections.  
 
Acknowledgments 
 
The work presented in this paper has been sup-
ported by the TrendMiner project, co-funded by 
the European Commission with Grant No. 
287863. 
The author is thanking the reviewers for their 
very helpful comments, which led to substantial 
changes brought to the final version of the paper. 
The author is also thanking Dagmar Gromann 
(Vienna University of Economics and Business).  
Intensive discussions with her on related topics 
have been heavily inspiring the work described 
in this paper. 

 

94



References  

Declerck, T., Lendvai, P. 2010. Towards a standard-
ized linguistic annotation of the textual content of 
labels in Knowledge Representation Systems. In: 
Proceedings of the seventh international confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation, Va-
letta, Malta, ELRA. 

Fu, B., Brennan, R., O'Sullivan, D.: A Con_gurable 
Translation-Based Cross-Lingual Ontology Map-
ping System to Adjust Mapping Outcomes. Journal 
of Web Semantics, Vol. 15, pp.15_36 (2012) 

Declerck, T., Gromann, D. 2012. Towards the Gen-
eration of Semantically Enriched Multilingual 
Components of Ontology Labels. In: Proceedings 
of the 3rd Multilingual Semantic Web Workshop. 

Ell, B., Vrandecic, D., Simperl, E. 2011. Labels in the 
Web of Data. In Aroyo, L., Welty, C., Alani, H., 
Taylor, J., Bernstein, A. (eds.): Proceedings of the 
10th international conference on the semantic web 
- Volume Part I (ISWC'11), Vol. Part I. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp.162_176. 

Fu, B., Brennan, R., O'Sullivan, D.: A Configurable 
Translation-Based Cross-Lingual Ontology Map-
ping System to Adjust Mapping Outcomes. Journal 
of Web Semantics, Vol. 15, pp.15_36 (2012) 

Garcia, J., Montiel-Ponsoda, E., Cimiano, P., Gómez-
Pérez, A., Buitelaar, P., Mc- Crae, J. 2012. Chal-
lenges for the Multilingual Web of Data. Web Se-
mantics: Science, Services and Agents on the 
World Wide Web, Vol. 11, pp.63-71. 

Gromann, D., Declerck, T. 2013. Cross-Lingual Cor-
recting and Completive Patterns for Multilingual 
Ontology Labels. In Buitelaar, P. and Cimiano, P. 
(eds) Multilingual Semantic Web, Springer-Verlag 
(to appear) 

McCrae, J., Aguado-de-Cea, G., Buitelaar, P., Cimi-
ano, P., Declerck, T., Gómez-Pérez, A., Gracia, J., 
Hollink, L., Montiel-Ponsoda, E., Spohr, D., Wun-
ner, T. 2012. Interchanging lexical resources on 
the SemanticWeb. Journal of Language Resources 
and Evaluation, pp.1_19. 

Navigli, N., Ponzetto, S.P.. 2012. BabelNet: The Au-
tomatic Construction, Evaluation and Application 
of a Wide-Coverage Multilingual Semantic Net-
work. Artificial Intelligence, 193, Elsevier, pp. 
217-250. 

Silberztein, Max. 2003. NooJ manual. Available at 
the WEB site http://www.nooj4nlp.net (200 pages) 

Wimalasuriya, D. C., Dou, D. 2012. Ontology-based 
information extraction: an introduction and a sur-
vey of current approaches. Journal of Information 
Science, Vol. 36, No. 3, pp.306-_323. 

Zapilko, B., Johann Schaible, Philipp Mayr, Brigitte 
Mathiak. 2012. TheSoz. A SKOS Representation of 

the Thesaurus for the Social Sciences. Semantic-
Web Journal. 

 
 

95


