


































Towards the establishment of a linguistic linked data network for Italian

Roberto Bartolini
ILC - CNR

Via Moruzzi 1 - Pisa, Italy

Riccardo Del Gratta
ILC - CNR

Via Moruzzi 1 - Pisa, Italy
name.surname@ilc.cnr.it

Francesca Frontini
ILC - CNR

Via Moruzzi 1 - Pisa, Italy

Abstract

This paper describes the conversion of
ItalwordNet and of a domain WordNet
into RDF and their linking to the (L)LOD
cloud and to other existing resources. A
brief presentation of the resources is given,
and the conversion and resulting datasets
are described.

1 Introduction

Lexical Resources, both manually and automati-
cally created, are an indispensable component to
many NLP applications. In order to make lexical
resources more accessible, the importance of ad-
hering to common models has always been under-
lined, and in the course of time standards and best
practices for the representation of such resources
have emerged.

With the rise of the Semantic Web, efforts that
aimed to provide common annotation and shar-
ing formats to make resources more interoperable
have found a new ally in the linked data paradigm
(Berners-Lee, 2006), which generally pairs with
the adoption of the RDF formalism (Lassila and
Swick, 1999).

Indeed a new trend in the publication of linguis-
tic resources as linked open data seems to be estab-
lishing itself: a survey on the formats and frame-
works used in the last 20 years to exchange lin-
guistic resources, (Lezcano et al., 2013) found “an
increase in recent years in approaches adopting the
Linked Data initiative”.

Although still quantitatively a minority within
the linked data cloud, (Linguistic) Linked Open
Data ((L)LOD)1, (Chiarcos et al., 2011; Chiar-
cos, 2012), is growing and becoming a central
modality for linguistic data and especially for lex-
ical data publication. Lexicographic data may not
always be big in number of triples, but they are

1http://linguistics.okfn.org/resources/llod/.

significant in specific weight - especially the re-
sources manually developed/checked, as they con-
tain complex semantic information that has been
encoded by humans.

Following the path of this movement, the publi-
cation of lexical resources in the Italian language
has also started.

In this paper a description of the conversion of
ItalwordNet and of a WordNet in the geographic
domain is given.

2 Resource used for establishing a
linguistic linked data network for
Italian

2.1 PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS

PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS is a multi-layered Ital-
ian language lexicon that was the outcome of three
major lexical resource projects: PAROLE (Ruimy
et al., 1998) and SIMPLE (Lenci et al., 2000),
two consecutive European projects, and CLIPS ,
an Italian national project which enlarged and re-
fined the Italian PAROLE-SIMPLE lexicon.

The lexical information in PAROLE SIMPLE
CLIPS is encoded at different descriptive levels;
these are the phonetic, morphological, syntactic
and semantic layers. The semantic layer of PA-
ROLE SIMPLE CLIPS (PSC), SIMPLE, is largely
based on Pustejovsky’s Generative Lexicon (GL)
theory (Pustejovsky, 1991; Bel et al., 2000). This
level contains a language independent ontology of
153 semantic types as well as ∼ 60k so called “se-
mantic units”, or Usems, representing the mean-
ings of lexical entries in the lexicon: more specif-
ically, these encode the extended qualia structure
(Ruimy et al., 2002) and provide useful informa-
tion on the semantic type of a concept (formal
quale), its constituent parts (constitutive quale), on
how it came into being (agentive quale) and on
its purpose (telic quale). SIMPLE lexicons exist
for several languages and Usems are consistently

76



linked to a common Simple Interlingual Ontology
(SIO) of generic concepts labeled in English.

Recently a partial publication of the Italian PSC
lexicon as RDF linked data has been carried out
(del Gratta et al., 2013) and provided to the com-
munity. Other SIMPLE lexicons such as the Span-
ish one (Villegas and Bel, 2013) are currently also
publicly available in RDF. The Simple Interlin-
gual Ontology has been formalized into OWL by
(Toral and Monachini, 2007) and it is also publicly
available.

2.2 ItalwordNet

ItalwordNet (IWN) (Roventini et al., 2003) is a
semantical lexical database developed along the
lines of Princeton WordNet, (Fellbaum, 2010).
IWN started within the EuroWordNet2 project as
the “Italian WordNet” and then subsequently re-
fined in different Italian projects such as SI-TAL.

The ItalwordNet resource increased thanks to
manually-developed mapping, known as Inter-
Lingual Index (ILI), between its synsets and
synsets in different WordNets (WNs). As the
name suggests, the ILI is a connection among
concepts in different languages. In ItalwordNet
the ILI between Italian and English synsets in
WordNet 1.5, (WN1.5), has been used to connect
Italian to English concepts; successively, exploit-
ing the WN1.5 to WN3.0 mapping3, IWN and
WN3.0 have been semi-automatically linked. The
formalization of IWN into RDF is finalized with a
partial mapping to PSC, see figure 1.

Figure 1: ILI and WordNet1.5-WN3.0 mapping
expand the IWN; the mapping to PSC adds more
dimensions.

2http://www.illc.uva.nl/EuroWordNet/.
3The static mapping between WordNets 1.5 and 3.0 have

been downloaded from http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/tools/download-
map.php.

3 ItalwordNet schema and dataset
description

The conversion of ItalwordNet into RDF was
carried out following the strategy used to con-
vert WN into RDF, whose rules and philosophy
are reported in http://www.w3.org/TR/wordnet-
rdf. This schema4 is still the reference schema for
any other WN5 and contains all objects we need to
perform the conversion.

As a consequence, the proposed schema for
ItalwordNet complements the one adopted for
WN2.0: the main classes (Synset, WordSense and
Word) and subclasses6 of WordNet have been ex-
tended to address specificities of ItalwordNet. For
example, the proposed schema contains additional
subclasses for both Synset and WordSense to ad-
dress the ProperNoun (NP) part of speech which
is present in the ItalwordNet only, see figure 2.

Figure 2: IWN schema is an extension of WN2.0

Similarly the set of relations in ItalwordNet is
different from the one of WordNet.

Due to the specificity of the Italian language,
IWN contains relations that are not defined in
WN. Relations among synsets such as “in-
volved location” and “be in state” do not exist
in WN2.0 but are strongly used in IWN: as a
consequence, they have been defined in the IWN
schema, enforcing the concept of IWN schema as
a complementing schema.

Finally, the ItalwordNet schema defines rela-
tions for managing interlingual “pointers” to WNs
and links to PSC. Such relations can be both
objectProperty, used to manage the pointer(s)
between IWN and the corresponding WN3.0
synset(s) and dataProperty, used to managed the
pointer(s) between IWN and the static value of the
corresponding synset(s) in WN1.5, since this re-
source in not available in RDF.

4The complete schema for WN2.0 is available at
http://www.w3.org/2006/03/wn/wn20/schemas/wnfull.rdfs.

5Cf. http://purl.org/vocabularies/princeton/wn30/, for ex-
ample.

6Subclasses of Synset and WordSense are related to parts
of speech: Noun (N) part of speech generates NounSynset and
NounWordSense subclasses.

77



The PSC mapping is managed by as objectProp-
erty as well, see figure 3.

Figure 3: Object and Data properties

3.1 ItalwordNet Naming Convention

The unique identifiers for instances of Synset,
WordSense and Word follow the syntactic pattern
defined for WN2.0:

synset|wordsense-lexicalentry-pos-sense

word-lexicalentry

For example, synset-casa-noun-1 identifies
the synset whose list of members contains the
sense 1 of the word casa (home).7 There-
fore, the Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs)
for such instances are generated by combin-
ing the basic namespace (hereafter, base):
www.languagelibrary.eu/owl/italWordNet15

with the keyword instances and the correspond-
ing class identifiers. For example:

base/instances/synset-casa-noun-1

is the URI where the synset (identified by
synset-casa-noun-1 ) is accessible. To re-
fine the ItalwordNet resource we have defined
a second namespace for its official schema8,
iwn15schema = base/schema, and a set of files
which group the synsets according to a given rela-
tion.9

7The synset identified above contains 6 senses, including
the one related to “casa”, (home), that to “abitazione”, (habi-
tation) etc.. We selected “casa” (and its sense) to be the part
of the human readable synset identifier.

8The schema is available at base/schema/iwn.
9For example, the file “has hyponym” contains all cou-

ples of synsets which are connected by the “hyponym” rela-
tion.

3.2 ItalwordNet in RDF: triples

Table 1 gives the number of effective subject-
predicate-object triples, table 2 reports some ex-
ample data in terms of obtained triples for some
relations and table 3 sums all triples obtained from
the relations among IWN and WN synsets as well
as the one from the mapping to PSC:

Table 1: Files, units and triples
File Original Units Triples
synset 46, 769 148, 050

wordsenseandwords
68, 548 (wordsenses)

46, 769 (words)
367, 766

Table 2: A sample of files and obtained triples
Namespace File Triples
iwn15schema has hyponym 44, 603

iwn15schema has meronym 323

iwn15schema eq synonym 35, 653

Table 3: Internal and external relations
(iwn15schema namespace)

Source
resource

Triples Target
Resource

IWN

132, 212 IWN

56, 074 WN1.5

54, 717 WN3.0

19, 896 PSC

IWN → IWN Triples as objectProperty encod-
ing all internal synset-synset relations in
ItalwordNet;

IWN → WN1.5 Triples as dataProperty encod-
ing ILI relations;

IWN → WN3.0 Triples as objectProperty encod-
ing ILI relations. The domain of the relation
is a IWN synset, the range is a valid WN3.0
URI;10

IWN → PSC Triples as objectProperty encoding
the IWN PSC mapping. The domain of the
relation is a IWN synse, the range is a valid
PSC URI.11

10Such as http://purl.org/vocabularies/princeton/
wn30/synset-chair-noun-1.

11such as http://www.languagelibrary.eu/owl/simple/inds/
2/299/USem1450limone.

78



4 Geodomain resources

The Geodomain WNs were created within the
framework of the GLOSS project (Frontini et al.,
2012) in order to initialize a parallel terminology
for the semantic annotation and mining of docu-
ments in the public security domain. The English
resource was created by using the Geonames on-
tology12, transforming each English label into a
lexical entry, and then manually linking them to
corresponding synsets.

Subsequently the English labels and glosses
have been translated into Italian to produce an
equivalent Italian resource.

4.1 Building a Domain WordNet

In this section we describe the strategy used to
create a Domain WordNet from an human made
list of domain lexical entries. The strategy fol-
lows the following steps: (i) a sense number is
added to a lexical entry: in principle, we have to
take care of the fact that the same lexical entry can
belong to different concepts, such as for example
for the lexical entry “hill” which can be both an
underwater hill and a small mountain; (ii) then a
referent (identifier) of the synset must be created;
(iii) WordNet2.0 relations among synset are estab-
lished; finally (iv) the synset previously created is
connected to the concept into the Geonames ontol-
ogy through the owl:sameAs property.

4.2 GeoDomainWN schema and dataset
description

The conversion of GeoDomainWN into RDF was
carried out following the steps described in section
3 but, at the moment, there is no need to create a
dedicated schema, so that the provided resource
will use the standard WN2.0 schema.

4.3 GeoDomainWN Naming Convention

The unique identifiers for instances of Synset,
WordSense and Word follow the syntactic pattern
defined for IWN, see section 3.1, but we have pre-
fixed each identifier with geo to avoid confusion:

geosynset-lexicalentry-pos-sense

geowordsenselexicalentry-pos-sense

geoword-lexicalentry

For example, geosynset-lago-n-1 identifies the
synset whose list of members contains the sense

12http://www.geonames.org/ontology/.

1 of the word lago (lake). Therefore, the Uni-
form Resource Identifiers of the resources corre-
sponding to the main classes are obtained by com-
bining the basic namespace (hereafter, base):13

www.languagelibrary.eu/owl/geodomainWN/

with the keyword instances and the corre-
sponding class identifiers. For example:

base/instances/geosynset-lago-n-1

is the URI where the geosynset (identified by
geosynset-lago-n-1) is accessible.

4.4 GeoDomainWN dataset description

Table 4 gives the number of effective subject-
predicate-object triples.

Table 4: Files, units and triples
File Original Units Triples
synset 657 1, 971

wordsenseandwords
657 (wordsenses)

632 (words)
4, 781

Since the GeodomainWN synsets are 1 : 1
mapped onto the geonames ontology, the final re-
source also contains 657 relations which connect
the concepts using the owl:sameAs property.

4.5 GeodomainWN in lemon

lemon (LExicon Model for ONtologies)14 (Mc-
Crae et al., 2011) is a descriptive model that sup-
ports the linking up of a computational lexical re-
source with the semantic information stored in one
or more ontologies, as well as enabling the pub-
lishing of such lexical resources on the web ac-
cording to the (L)LOD paradigm.

Following the work performed in the Monnet
project15 for creating a WordNet in lemon16 we de-
cided to transform the GeodomainWN into lemon.
The resulting resource is a collection of lemon lex-
ical entries. lemon lexical entries are formally
equivalent to the word in WordNet but contain
more details such as the part of speech and the ex-
plicit “narrower/broader” relations among lemon
senses. In view of 632 units, the resulting resource
contains 6, 373 triples.

13Actually there are two different namespaces, one for Ital-
ian: base/ita, and one for English base/eng.

14http://www.lemon-model.net/.
15www.monnet-project.eu/.
16http://monnetproject.deri.ie/lemonsource/wordnet.

79



5 Data Distribution

The lexical resources described in this paper are
freely available from the datahub portal17 which
is synchronized with the languagelibrary initiative
website.18

More specifically, interested people can directly
access/download the resources from the following
endpoints:

ItalwordNet from
http://datahub.io/dataset/iwn

PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS from
http://datahub.io/dataset/simple

GeodomainWN from
http://datahub.io/dataset/geodomainwn

6 General picture

The figure 4 sums up the connections between the
datasets described in this paper and the rest of the
(L)LOD cloud.

Figure 4: The linguistic linked data network for
Italian

The mapping between the PAROLE SIMPLE
CLIPS Usems and ItalwordNet synsets enriches
the synset with semantic information coming from
the Usems. The depth of information provided
by the qualia structure surpasses the one available
through (Ital)WordNet, and can be accessed both
from Italian and from English, thanks to the IWN
- WNx.y mapping.

Although a direct linking between SIMPLE
Usems in different languages is not currently avail-
able, it is imaginable that it might be automatically

17http://www.datahub.io/
18http://www.languagelibrary.eu

attempted by combining an automatic translation
of the corresponding lexical form and the disam-
biguation that is provided by the common ontolog-
ical concepts.

Finally the linking to Geonames connects the
presented resources to the non linguistic linked
data cloud, for example the word “lago” (lake)
is connected to the geonames ontology concept
“H.LKS”.

7 Conclusion and future work

In this paper we have presented three different
types of Resource Description Framework (RDF)
rendering.

The first one is the conversion of ItalwordNet
in RDF according to the rules of the W3C consor-
tium. The second conversion is twofold: a list of
domain specific terms has been transformed into a
WordNet equivalent resource and then rendered as
RDF. This resource has been published also using
the lemon model (which is the third type of ren-
dering). This exercise will help us to serialize in
lemon also the complete ItalwordNet resource.

Having mapped the ItalwordNet synsets into the
Simple Interlingual Ontology via PSC is funda-
mental because it provides landscapes for inter-
esting future works and it maps WordNet synsets
onto an interesting ontological resource.

Finally the linking to Geonames offers possible
applications for Named Entity Recognition and
data mining: for example to solve the (Italian) (un-
ambiguous) query such as: “Trova tutti i laghi in
Toscana” (Select all lakes in Tuscany), the system
uses the “lago” (lake) - H.LKS mapping to per-
form a query in the Geonames dataset retrieving
all instances of that feature concept, namely all
lakes, that are located within a specific geographic
area, Toscana.

References

Núria Bel, Federica Busa, Nicoletta Calzolari, Elisa-
betta Gola, Alessandro Lenci, Monica Monachini,
Antoine Ogonowski, Ivonne Peters, Wim Peters,
Nilda Ruimy, Marta Villegas, and Antonio Zam-
polli. 2000. Simple: A general framework for the
development of multilingual lexicons. In Proceed-
ings of LREC 2000, Athens, Greece.

Tim Berners-Lee. 2006. Linked data. W3C Design
Issues.

Christian Chiarcos, Sebastian Hellmann, and Sebastian
Nordhoff. 2011. Towards a linguistic linked open

80



data cloud: The open linguistics working group.
TAL, 52(3):245–275.

Christian Chiarcos. 2012. Linked Data in Linguistics.
Springer.

Riccardo del Gratta, Francesca Frontini, Fahad Khan,
and Monica Monachini. 2013. Converting the pa-
role simple clips lexicon into rdf with lemon. Se-
mantic Web Journal (Submitted).

Christiane Fellbaum. 2010. Wordnet. In Roberto Poli,
Michael Healy, and Achilles Kameas, editors, The-
ory and Applications of Ontology: Computer Appli-
cations, pages 231–243. Springer Netherlands.

Francesca Frontini, Carlo Aliprandi, Clara Bacciu,
Roberto Bartolini, Andrea Marchetti, Enrico Par-
enti, Fulvio Piccinonno, and Tiziana Soru. 2012.
Gloss, an infrastructure for the semantic annotation
and mining of documents in the public security do-
main. In EEOP2012: Exploring and Exploiting Of-
ficial Publications Workshop Programme, page 21.

Ora Lassila and Ralph R. Swick. 1999. Resource de-
scription framework (RDF). model and syntax spec-
ification. Technical report, W3C, 2.

Alessandro Lenci, Nuria Bel, Federica Busa, Nico-
letta Calzolari, Elisabetta Gola, Monica Monachini,
Antoine Ogonowski, Ivonne Peters, Wim Peters,
Nilda Ruimy, Marta Villegas, and Antonio Zam-
polli. 2000. Simple: A general framework for the
development of multilingual lexicons. International
Journal of Lexicography, 13(4):249–263.

Leonardo Lezcano, Salvador Sanchez, and Antonio J
Roa-Valverde. 2013. A survey on the exchange
of linguistic resources: Publishing linguistic linked
open data on the web. Program: electronic library
and information systems, 47(3):3–3.

John McCrae, Dennis Spohr, and Philipp Cimiano.
2011. Linking lexical resources and ontologies on
the semantic web with lemon. In Proceedings of
the 8th extended semantic web conference on The
semantic web: research and applications - Volume
Part I, ESWC’11, pages 245–259, Berlin, Heidel-
berg. Springer-Verlag.

James Pustejovsky. 1991. The generative lexicon.
Comput. Linguist., 17(4):409–441, dec.

Adriana Roventini, Antonietta Alonge, Francesca
Bertagna, Nicoletta Calzolari, Christian Girardi,
Bernardo Magnini, Rita Marinelli, and Antonio
Zampolli. 2003. Italwordnet: building a large se-
mantic database for the automatic treatment of ital-
ian. Computational Linguistics in Pisa, Special Is-
sue, XVIII-XIX, Pisa-Roma, IEPI, 2:745–791.

N. Ruimy, O. Corazzari, E. Gola, A. Spanu, N. Calzo-
lari, and A. Zampolli. 1998. The european le-parole
project: The italian syntactic lexicon. In Proceed-
ings of the First International Conference on Lan-
guage resources and Evaluation, pages 241–248.

Nilda Ruimy, Monica Monachini, Raffaella Dis-
tante, Elisabetta Guazzini, Stefano Molino, Marisa
Ulivieri, Nicoletta Calzolari, and Antonio Zampolli.
2002. Clips, a multi-level italian computational lex-
icon: a glimpse to data. In Proceedings of LREC
2002, Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain.

Antonio Toral and Monica Monachini. 2007. Simple-
owl: a generative lexicon ontology for nlp and
the semantic web. In Workshop of Cooperative
Construction of Linguistic Knowledge Bases, 10th
Congress of Italian Association for Artificial Intelli-
gence.

Marta Villegas and Nuria Bel. 2013. Parole/simple
lexinfo ontology and lexicons. Semantic Web Jour-
nal (Submitted).

81


