










































Generating Paths through Cultural Heritage Collections


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 1–10,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generating Paths through Cultural Heritage Collections
Samuel Fernando1, Paula Goodale2, Paul Clough2,

Mark Stevenson1, Mark Hall2, Eneko Agirre3
1Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield

2Information School, University of Sheffield
3Computer Science Department, University of the Basque Country

{s.fernando, p.goodale, p.d.clough,
r.m.stevenson, m.mhall}@sheffield.ac.uk

e.agirre@ehu.es

Abstract

Cultural heritage collections usually or-
ganise sets of items into exhibitions or
guided tours. These items are often
accompanied by text that describes the
theme and topic of the exhibition and pro-
vides background context and details of
connections with other items. The PATHS
project brings the idea of guided tours
to digital library collections where a tool
to create virtual paths are used to assist
with navigation and provide guides on par-
ticular subjects and topics. In this pa-
per we characterise and analyse paths of
items created by users of our online sys-
tem. The analysis highlights that most
users spend time selecting items relevant
to their chosen topic, but few users took
time to add background information to the
paths. In order to address this, we con-
ducted preliminary investigations to test
whether Wikipedia can be used to au-
tomatically add background text for se-
quences of items. In the future we would
like to explore the automatic creation of
full paths.

1 Introduction

Paths (or trails) have been studied as a means of
assisting users with the navigation of digital col-
lections as an alternative to standard keyword-
based search (Furuta et al., 1997; Reich et al.,
1999; Shipman et al., 2000; White and Huang,
2010). Paths can be particularly useful to users
who are unfamilar with the content of digital col-
lections (e.g. historical documents) and may find
it difficult to formulate appropriate queries (Wil-
son et al., 2010). Paths can be used to assist users
with the navigation of collections through the pro-
vision of narratives and subject guides. From an

educational perspective paths can provide tangible
learning objects, created by teachers and followed
by students. Alternatively from a cultural her-
itage perspective paths can be used to create activ-
ity trails and guided tours support exploration by
visitors through collections of cultural artefacts.
This echoes the organised galleries and guided
tours found in physical museums. The existance
of tools, such as Walden’s paths1, Trailmeme2 and
Storify3, provide functionalities for users to record
and share paths through web resources and digital
libraries. From this perspective everyone can take
on role of curator and provide access to their own
personal collections.

We have developed an online system called
PATHS that allows curators and end-users to cre-
ate and view paths to navigate through the Eu-
ropeana4 cultural heriage collection. As part of
evaluations of the prototype PATHS system par-
ticipants have created paths on various topics. In
this paper we describe a number of these paths and
their characteristics. Analysing paths that are cre-
ated manually and characterising them can be seen
as a first step towards developing methods to sup-
port the creation of paths automatically and semi-
automatically. Within the context of the PATHS
project this is being considered to deal with the
following limitations of manual creation of paths.
Firstly, the effort required in generating them often
means that a sufficient number of paths on a vari-
ety of topics are not available. Secondly, the man-
ual creation of paths is a very time-consuming pro-
cess that would benefit from computational sup-
port in whatever form this might take. This pa-
per presents initial work in automatically creat-
ing paths and provides the following novel con-

1http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/walden/
2http://open.xerox.com/Services/

xerox-trails
3http://storify.com/
4http://www.europeana.eu/

1



tributions: (1) we present results of user stud-
ies describing what people want from paths and
how they use them to navigate digital collections;
(2) we analyse a set of manually-created paths
to identify their properties and be able to charac-
terise them; and (3) we present work on automati-
cally generating background text for sequences of
items, thus providing an efficient way to enrich
paths with additional information with little man-
ual input required.

The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 de-
scribes related work on the use of narratives in cul-
tural heritage and previous approaches to automat-
ically generate paths; Section 3 defines the prob-
lem of generating paths and describes the datasets
used in the experiments; Section 4 presents analy-
sis of manually-created paths; Section 5 shows re-
sults of using automatic methods to generate back-
ground text; and finally Section 6 concludes the
paper and provides avenues for further work.

2 Related Work

2.1 Narratives and Cultural Heritage

The potential of narrative in digital CH to sup-
port learning, creativity and exploration is clear,
providing opportunities for supporting a more ac-
tive user interaction, including deeper engagement
with context, representation of the collecting pro-
cess, and facilitation of a more entertaining expe-
rience of learning (Mulholland and Collins, 2002).
Walker et al. (2013) also propose narrative as a
major element of interaction and informal learn-
ing, suggesting that meaning is made when the
links between people and artefacts, and interpreta-
tion and ideas are surfaced, especially within so-
cial groups. Their experiments involve the use
of mobile and handheld technologies in a physi-
cal museum environment, capturing audio annota-
tions, but have much in common with experimen-
tal systems designed for path creation online. In a
similar vein the StoryBank project utilises collec-
tions of photographs and audio narratives to create
and share stories as information in the developing
world (Frohlich and Rachovides, 2008).

Whilst technologies have aided the creation and
sharing of narratives in physical cultural encoun-
ters, Manovich (1999) critiques the lack of narra-
tive in digital cultural environments, offering that
online collections and many CH web sites are
databases with constantly changing content that
inevitably lack a cohesive and persistent story.

However, since “narrative is constructed by link-
ing elements of this database in a particular or-
der” (Manovich, 1999), it is possible to offer users
any number of explicit ‘trajectories’ (narratives)
through a digital information space, and by merg-
ing database and narrative in this way, creating
a more dynamic, discovery-led experience. This
view might be interpreted at its simplest level as
a virtual representation of the guided tours rou-
tinely offered in physical CH spaces, and indeed
there is a small strand of research into the creation
of systems for generating and exploring online ex-
hibitions and tours from items held within digital
collections. A scenario of users creating and edit-
ing trails in a CH context is described by Walker
(2006), including functionality for collecting, or-
dering and annotating museum objects.

2.2 Automatically Creating Paths

Generation of implicit trails through physical and
virtual museum spaces has been related to the
learning process (Peterson and Levene, 2003). In
this example, trails are automatically created by
users as they navigate their way through an infor-
mation space, and may be used for individual or
collaborative purposes. Research on the applica-
tion of curated pathways in web environments has
often focused on providing trails pre-prepared by
experts (e.g. curators, educationalists) as a means
of assisting novice users to navigate information
online (Shipman et al., 2000). Indeed, it has been
found that domain knowledge or expertise can
considerably enhance the quality of trails created
(Yuan and White, 2012). Automatic extraction
and generation of trails in information spaces has
been explored as a means of harnessing the wis-
dom of crowds, using the mass actions of earlier
user behaviour to establish relevance, and recom-
mend content or navigation routes to later users.
Such trails can be readily mined from search en-
gine transaction logs and have been shown to pro-
vide added value (White and Huang, 2010; Has-
san and White, 2012; Liao et al., 2012). West and
Leskovec (2012) take this notion a stage further
and attempt to identify wayfinding strategies em-
ployed by browsers in Wikipedia, with the goal of
assisting future users in their navigation by surfac-
ing potentially useful hyperlinks.

Guided tours or pathways are essentially more
structured, purposeful forms of trails, taking the
user through a specific sequence of information

2



nodes and may also be automatically generated,
rather than manually curated as in the examples
above. Wheeldon and Levene (2003) offer an al-
gorithm for generating trails from site-search, en-
abling elements of structure and context to be in-
corporated into the trails created in this way, but
noting potential scalability issues for web scale
search tasks. In the CH domain, a small num-
ber of projects have attempted to automatically
generate digital content in the form of exhibi-
tions, tours and trails. Mäkelä et al. (2007) de-
scribe a system which utilises semantically an-
notated content to generate personalised ‘exhi-
bitions’ from a structured narrative-based search
query. Similarly, Zdrahal et al. (2008) demonstrate
how pathways can be generated through a collec-
tion of semantically related documents to provide
a means of exploration, using non-NLP cluster-
ing and path creation techniques. Sophisticated
approaches such as linear programming and evo-
lutionary algorithms have also been proposed for
generating summaries and stories (McIntyre and
Lapata, 2010; Woodsend and Lapata, 2010). In
contrast, Wang et al. (2007) use a recommender
system approach to generate museum tours on
the basis of ratings stored within a dynamic user
model, and Pechenizkiy and Calders (2007) pro-
pose the additional use of data mining techniques
on log data to improve this type of tour personali-
sation.

In summary, online tours and trails are made
possible either through manually curated content
generated through the efforts of experts or other
end users, or have been automatically generated
from the mining of large scale search logs, or from
collections benefitting from semantically-linked
content and/or detailed user models.

3 Methodology

This study brings together work from several ar-
eas of the PATHS project. An analysis of what
paths might be used for and what form they are ex-
pected to take, has had implications for the system
design and functionality and evaluation measures.
A user study focused upon evaluation of the first
prototype has provided manually-created paths as
a basis for analysing path content and attributes,
which in turn informs the desired characteristics
of automated paths and the algorithm designed for
generating paths automatically.

3.1 Utilisation of Paths

Initial user requirements interviews with 22 ex-
pert users in the heritage, education and profes-
sional domains found a strong affinity with the
path metaphor, revealing a range of different in-
terpretations of what it means in the CH context
and how they could be employed in an online en-
vironment to engage with key audiences. Eight
interpretations of the path metaphor emerged:

1. Path as search history
2. Path as information seeking journey
3. Path as linked metadata
4. Path as a starting point or way in
5. Path as a route through
6. Path as augmented reality
7. Path as information literacy journey / learn-

ing process
8. Path as transaction process
The first three of these are closest to the idea

of hypertext trails, with trails defined by user in-
teraction in 1 and 2, and trails defined automati-
cally, by the system in 3. Variations 4-6 are more
creative interpretations, all suggesting opportuni-
ties for guiding the user into and through collec-
tions, encouraging exploration and/or offering an
immersive experience, conducive with our initial
vision for the PATHS system.

In addition to expert-defined routes, 5 also in-
corporates the idea of users being able to see and
follow “well-trodden path” defined by the cumula-
tive interactions of other users, thus extending the
opportunities for utilizing search histories. Con-
versely, 7 and 8 are both process oriented, al-
though 7 is experiential, user-defined, learning-
oriented, typified by trial and error and unique to
the individual, whilst 8 is a rigid process designed
to escort all users consistently through a standard
process of pre-defined steps.

A strong emphasis was placed on path content
being carefully selected or ‘curated’ by the path-
creator, with the addition of context and interpre-
tation so that the objects within the path convey
a narrative or meaning. Content may be derived
from one collection, but there were seen to be sig-
nificant benefits from including objects from di-
verse collections, along with other materials from
external web sites.

Paths facilitate topic-based information re-
trieval typified by the berry-picking mode of in-
teraction (Bates, 1989), rather than known item
searching. Furthermore, paths may be a useful tool

3



for personal information management in both for-
mal and informal research scenarios, enabling the
user to record, reuse and share their research activ-
ity, or helping them to organize their ideas. Cre-
ativity is also encouraged, as user-generated paths
provide the means to repurpose CH objects into
users’ own narratives for private or public con-
sumption.

A summary of specific user scenarios high-
lighted by participants is given below:
• Teachers/lecturers presentations and class-

room activities
• Museum personnel curating collections, giv-

ing an overview, or covering a topic in depth
• Leisure users browsing, collecting interest-

ing and/or visually appealing content
• Researchers to aid image-based research,

sharing and discussing findings with fellow
researchers and supervisors
• Non-academic specialists (e.g. local histori-

ans) collecting and sharing items of interest
with other enthusiasts

3.2 Defining the Problem

To create a path or narrative that guides a user
through a set of items from a collection, whether
as a manual process or automatically, there are
three main activities: (1) the selection of items to
include in the path; (2) the arrangement of items
to form a path or narrative and (3) the annota-
tion of the path to with descriptive text and back-
ground information. We envision techniques to
automate the entire process; however, a first step is
to analyse existing manually-created paths to iden-
tify their characteristics and inform the automatic
creation of similar structures.

3.3 User Study

The manually generated paths used for this study
were created as part of a more detailed user study
to evaluate the first prototype, conducted using
a protocol informed by the Interactive IR eval-
uation framework (Borlund, 2003). Twenty-two
users, including subject experts, students and gen-
eral users (subject novices), each completed a 2-
hour session, during which they participated in the
following activities:
• Profile questionnaire and cognitive style test
• Familiarisation with the system
• 4x short information seeking tasks (5 minutes

each)

• 1x long simulated work task - path creation
(30 minutes)
• Task feedback questionnaire
• Session/system feedback questionnaire
• Think-after interview based upon the com-

plex task
Of most interest here is the simulated work task,

with associated observations, feedback and reflec-
tions. This task focused on the creation of a path,
using a scenario adapted to the type of user. Free-
dom was given in choosing a subject for the path,
and limited instructions were provided in what
might be needed to complete the task, for exam-
ple:

“Imagine you are a student who has been asked
to create a path as part of a university assignment.
You have been asked to use primary source ma-
terials to create a mini online exhibition suitable
for a target group within the general public and/or
school visitor categories. Your goal is to introduce
a historical or art-focussed topic in a popular, ac-
cessible way, and to encourage further use and ex-
ploration of cultural heritage resources.”

Data on the tasks was captured via log files, as
well as screen recording and observations using
the Morae usability software. Detailed analysis
was undertaken of user behaviour in the process of
completing the task, and of the paths created, from
both quantitative and qualitative perspectives.

4 Analysing Manually-created Paths

In this section we describe the results of analysing
the 22 paths created manually in the PATHS pro-
totype system.

4.1 User behaviour

On average users spend 25.3 mins on creating a
path (min=11.7; max=33.6) with an average of
201 mouse clicks (min=53; max=380). From the
observations, it was noted that some participants
spent quite a lot of time thinking about the task
and pondering their next move, whilst others en-
gaged in more rapid fire activity in the face of
uncertainty. Analysis of the screen recordings
showed a variety of primary interaction styles for
this task, with a fairly even split between serial
searching (33%) and serial browsing (39%), as the
two most popular strategies. Serial searching in-
volves repetitive search and reformulation, with
only a page or two of search results viewed before
searching again, and serial browsing involves very

4



few searches, with large numbers of search re-
sults pages viewed (over 50 pages in some cases).
These are then in effect, polar opposites of interac-
tion. Only 6% engaged primarily in exploring be-
haviour (using the explore and similar items con-
tent), and 22% of participants occupied the middle
ground, utilising a mix of search, browse and ex-
plore, with no strong preference for any one style.

4.2 Properties of paths
The mean number of items in a path was 10.7 (std
dev=6.7 items) with a minimum of 5 items and
maximum of 29 items. Most popular bin is 6-
10 items in a path (59%). We found 85% of the
items included in the paths included an image with
the metadata. The paths created were manually
categorised by theme to ascertain whether there
are any distinct preferences for the subject mat-
ter of content included. The most popular cate-
gories were paths about places (23%), art subjects
(23%) and history subjects (32%). These themes
are likely to have been influenced at least partly
by what content is currently available in our col-
lection, although the amount of art-related content
is much less than for history, and also appear to
have been influenced by the topics covered in ex-
isting paths in the system (e.g. places, topics re-
lated to the world wars). There were, however a
significant number of expert users who attempted
to build paths related to their own research inter-
ests, with varying degrees of success.

4.3 Descriptions and ordering
Once items have been selected and they have been
transferred in the path creation workspace, users
have the opportunity to modify and enhance their
path with a number of tools for adding content and
metadata, and for re-ordering the content. On cre-
ating the path, most users immediately went to the
metadata fields and added information for the path
description and duration fields, as well as a num-
ber of tags (or keywords). A short 1-2 line de-
scription of the path appears to be the norm and
was added in 91% of cases. Tags were added by
82% of users and a duration by only 46% of users.
It is clear from further investigation that the tags
were added incorrectly (without commas between
them) by a significant number of users and a tip
for successful use is required.

The items within a path can be annotated with
the user’s own contextual information, and can be
re-ordered into a more meaningful sequence, such

as a chronological or narrative sequence. These
more advanced features were used by significantly
fewer users, which could indicate a learning issue,
a lack of need, or a time constraint. On reviewing
the paths created by our evaluation participants it
is found that in 41% of cases, contextual informa-
tion was not added to any items in the path. There
are however 32% in which annotations were added
to all items (generally these were shorter paths
with fewer items), and a further 27% where anno-
tations were added to some or most of the items.

In 72% of cases the items in the paths created
were re-ordered to some degree, with 17% spend-
ing a considerable amount of time on this activity.
This finding is encouraging, as the default is for
items to be included in the path in the order they
were saved to the workspace, and re-ordering in-
dicates that users are thinking about their path as a
whole and trying to make sense of the information
it is intended to convey. Typical types of ordering
included chronology (32%), narrative (23%), ge-
ography (for example, a walking tour - 9%), theme
(9%) and ‘interestingness’ (5%).

5 Enriching paths with background
information

This section describes preliminary work on the
task of semi-automated path creation. In par-
ticular we describe efforts to enrich paths with
background contextual information using relevant
Wikipedia articles. The related work described
in Section 2.2 shows that there have been previ-
ous efforts to automatically select cultural heritage
items to form paths, trails and exhibitions. How-
ever to our knowledge no significant effort has
been made to automatically annotate such paths
with descriptive or contextual information. The
interviews described in Section 3.1 highlighted
the importance CH experts placed on having ad-
ditional information to give context for the items
in the path. It was also noted during the manual
path-creation exercise (Section 4.3) that a signif-
icant number of the users did not add any such
information to the path. The reasons for this are
unclear, but nevertheless there seems to be suffi-
cient motivation to devise automatic methods for
this task. Although the methods have previously
been well established in other tasks5 , we believe

5INEX Tweet Contextualization Track (https:
//inex.mmci.uni-saarland.de/tracks/qa/)
and Link-the-wiki Track (http://www.inex.otago.
ac.nz/tracks/wiki-link/wiki-link.asp)

5



this is the first time they have been applied for the
task of annotating sequences of items in this way.

5.1 Method

Manually generated paths contain sequences of
items selected from Europeana on some topic or
theme. Creators provide their own title, subject
keywords and description for the path. To aid
creation of paths we explore whether background
information could be generated automatically for
such paths. An approach is presented here which
shows promise as a potential way to achieve this
task. The input for this approach is a sequence of
items and a key Wikipedia article which describes
the overall topic of the path. The output comprises
sentences taken from a relevant Wikipedia article.
The aim is for this output to provide useful and
interesting additional background information re-
lated to the items and theme of the path. In this
paper experiments are focussed on how to select
good quality text to present as additional informa-
tion for the path. For this reason the key Wikipedia
article is manually chosen, and the task is to find a
good approach for selecting the most relevant sen-
tences from this key article for the text.

Two methods are tested in this paper. The first
method simply takes the first n sentences of the
article and outputs this. Since Wikipedia articles
are always structured to have a summary of the
article in the first paragraph we can expect this text
to perform well as a summary of the path topic.

The second method is more advanced and at-
tempts to find text in the article that is relevant to
the actual items that have been chosen for the path.
This approach uses the Wikipedia Miner software
(Milne and Witten, 2008) to add inline links to
the text in the items for this approach. This soft-
ware disambiguates terms in the text and then de-
tects links using various features such as the com-
monness of the term, the overall relatedness of the
terms in the text and so on. The result is text en-
riched with inline links to relevant Wikipedia arti-
cles. Each link also has an associated confidence
value which indicates how sure the software is that
the link is correctly disambiguated and relevant to
the text.

The approach works as follows for a sequence
of items S and a key article K. First Wikipedia
Miner is run over the items in S. The text input to
Wikipedia Miner comprises the title, subject and
description fields of each item. The output is a set

of article titles W comprising the titles of all the
linked articles which were found in the text fields
of S. For each title in W we also have the associ-
ated confidence value for the link as calculated by
Wikipedia Miner. The next step is to select from
K the most relevant sentences to output as the gen-
erated text. For each sentence in K a score is as-
signed if any of the words in the sentence match
one of the titles in W . The score is then simply the
sum of the confidence values associated with these
titles. The top scoring sentences are then output as
the background text. This method can be consid-
ered to be a kind of query based summarisation
(Jurafsky and Martin, 2008).

5.2 Results

The automatic approaches for generating back-
ground text were run over the items in the 22 man-
ually created paths described in the previous sec-
tion. To ensure a fair test the user-added text was
was discarded and only the original Europeana
metadata for the items was used as source for the
methods.

For each path a single key Wikipedia article was
manually found which best captured the overall
theme or topic of the path. For all paths at least
one reasonably good article was found, although
for some paths the articles were better matches for
the path topic than for others. Some examples are
shown in Table 1.

With the input ready, the approaches described
were run over the items and key articles to gener-
ate the additional text. This was limited to 3 sen-
tences to provide a short but useful piece of text
for viewers of the paths. For example one path
was entitled “Bronze Age metallurgy”. The user
provided description was as follows:

Bronze Age metalsmiths produce a variety of
objects, however, we learn as much from the tools,
leftover debris and the way in which objects were
deposited as we do from the finished objects them-
selves.

The key article chosen for the path was “Bronze
Age”. The items in the path included various ar-
tifacts and working debris from the Bronze Age.
For the first approach the output is the first 3 sen-
tences from this article:

The Bronze Age is a period characterized by
the use of copper and its alloy bronze as the chief
hard materials in the manufacture of some imple-
ments and weapons. Chronologically, it stands be-

6



Path title Key Wikipedia article
Canals in England Canals of the United Kingdom
A brief history of Sheffield History of Sheffield
Art and Criticism of John Ruskin John Ruskin
Early medieval features in English
Parish Churches

Architecture of the medieval cathedrals
of England

Brooches through the ages Brooch

Table 1: Key articles for paths

tween the Stone Age and Iron Age. The term Stone
Age implies the inability to smelt any ore, the term
Bronze Age implies the inability to smelt iron ore
and the term Iron Age implies the ability to man-
ufacture artifacts in any of the three types of hard
material.

For the second approach the top 3 highest scor-
ing sentences were output:

A region could be in the Bronze Age either by
smelting its own copper and alloying with tin or
by trading for bronze from production areas else-
where. The Bronze Age in Ireland commenced
around 2000 BC, when copper was alloyed with
tin and used to manufacture Ballybeg type flat axes
and associated metalwork. The Bronze Age is a
period characterized by the use of copper and its
alloy bronze as the chief hard materials in the
manufacture of some implements and weapons.

These sentences scored most highly since they
contained the most high-confidence terms from
the items, for example terms such as ‘copper’, ‘al-
loy’ and ‘Bronze Age’.

5.3 Evaluation

To evaluate the two approaches, 5 annotators were
presented with the paths and the text and asked to
rate each path on 3 dimensions:
• The relevance of the text to the theme and

items of the path. Text which relates strongly
to the path is scored highly while off-topic or
irrelevant text is given a low score.
• The coherence or quality of the text itself.

Text which appears well-written and well-
structured is scored highly, while poorly writ-
ten or incoherent text is given a low score.
• The contextualisation of the text in relation

to the path. To achieve a high score the
text should offer useful or interesting addi-
tional information which is not found else-
where within the content, i.e. the text helps
to provide a context for items in the path.

Annotators were asked to grade from A (very
good) to E (very poor) on each dimension. The
results are shown in Figure 1. The results for
the first 3 sentences are shown as First3 and for
the weighted approach as Weighted. For each di-
mension, the distribution of judgements across the
paths is shown. The First3 approach was found
to be superior in every dimension. For relevance
scores 90% of the scores were either A or B com-
pared to 63% for the Weighted approach. Sim-
ilarly for the coherence judgements 97% were A
or B compared to 62% for the weighted approach.
The reason for this superior performance seems to
be that the first few sentences of Wikipedia arti-
cles are deliberately created to give a short sum-
mary introduction of the topic of the article. This
explains the high scores for relevance and coher-
ence.

Both approaches scored lower on the contex-
tualisation dimension, with First3 getting 67%
A or B grades and the Weighted approach get-
ting 43%. There may be several reasons for this.
Firstly one problem is that the auto-generated text
sometimes repeats information that is already in
the path and item descriptions; thus the text fails
to meet the requirement of ‘useful additional in-
formation’. Secondly the text is sometimes quite
general and vague, rather than focussing on spe-
cific details which might be most relevant to the
items chosen for the path.

To measure the agreement among the annotators
the following approach was used. First the scores
were converted to numeric values; A to 1, B to 2
and so on. Then the scores for each annotator were
compared to the average of the scores of all the
other annotators. The correlation was computing
using Spearman’s correlation coefficient. These
scores were then averaged amongst all annotators
to give a final agreement value. The results are
shown in Table 2.

7



Figure 1: Comparing the results of the two methods.

First3 Weighted
Relevance 0.57 0.57
Coherence 0.28 0.56

Contextualisation 0.56 0.78

Table 2: Agreement amongst annotators.

For both approaches there was good agreement
on the Relevance dimension. For the Coherence
dimension the First3 approach got quite a low
score. This may be because one annotator gave
lower scores for all paths, while the others all gave
consistently high scores, which seems to have
skewed the correlation co-efficient. For the con-
textualisation dimension the correlation scores for
high for both approaches, and the Weighted ap-
proach in particular achieved a very high agree-
ment value.

6 Conclusions

This paper presented results of interviews about
creating paths through cultural heritage collec-
tions. These results inform us on how people
want to navigate through cultural heritage collec-
tions using the path metaphor, how they wish to
make use of paths for their work and education,
and what information and qualities they consider
it important for a path to contain. The paper also
presents results from studies using the PATHS pro-
totype software where users were able to search
and explore a large digital library collection and
create their own paths of items from the collection
on topics of their interest.

From the interviews it was clear that the experts
considered it important that the paths contain ad-
ditional information to convey contextual informa-

tion to understand the meaning of the items in the
path. The results from the user studies showed that
this need was not being met in a significant num-
ber of cases; users were putting items together on
a topic but adding little or no descriptive text about
the topic and the items in the path. Therefore we
identified this as a key task which might benefit
from automatic methods. The simpler approach
which output the first n sentences from the key
Wikipedia article was found to generate the best
results. The resulting generated text was found to
be relevant and coherent. In most cases the text
was also found to add useful context about the
topic.

Future work will further refine the text genera-
tion approach. The approach depends on success-
fully identifying a good key article for each path.
In these experiments the key article was manually
chosen, however we are devising methods to se-
lect this article automatically. To correct the prob-
lem with repeated information a filtering approach
could eliminate information that is already con-
tained within the paths.

Acknowledgments

The research leading to these results was car-
ried out as part of the PATHS project (http:
//paths-project.eu) funded by the Eu-
ropean Community’s Seventh Framework Pro-
gramme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement
no. 270082.

References
Marcia J Bates. 1989. The design of browsing and

berrypicking techniques for the online search inter-

8



face. Online Information Review.

Pia Borlund. 2003. The IIR evaluation model: a
framework for evaluation of interactive information
retrieval systems. Information research, 8(3).

David M Frohlich and Dorothy Rachovides. 2008. Us-
ing digital stories for local and global information
sharing. In Community and International Develop-
ment, CHI 2008 Workshop.

R. Furuta, F.. Shipman, C. Marshall, D. Brenner, and
H. Hsieh. 1997. Hypertext paths and the World-
Wide Web: experiences with Walden’s Paths. In
Proceedings of the eighth ACM conference on Hy-
pertext, pages 167–176, New York, NY.

Ahmed Hassan and Ryen W White. 2012. Task tours:
helping users tackle complex search tasks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st ACM international conference
on Information and knowledge management, pages
1885–1889. ACM.

Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2008. Speech
and Language Processing (2nd Edition) (Prentice
Hall Series in Artificial Intelligence). Prentice Hall.

Zhen Liao, Yang Song, Li-wei He, and Yalou Huang.
2012. Evaluating the effectiveness of search task
trails. In Proceedings of the 21st international con-
ference on World Wide Web, pages 489–498. ACM.

Eetu Mäkelä, Osma Suominen, and Eero Hyvönen.
2007. Automatic exhibition generation based on
semantic cultural content. In Proc. of the Cultural
Heritage on the Semantic Web Workshop at ISWC+
ASWC, volume 2007.

Lev Manovich. 1999. Database as symbolic form.
Convergence: The International Journal of Re-
search into New Media Technologies, 5(2):80–99.

Neil McIntyre and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Plot induc-
tion and evolutionary search for story generation. In
Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 1562–
1572. Association for Computational Linguistics.

D. Milne and I.H. Witten. 2008. Learning to link with
wikipedia. In Proceeding of the 17th ACM confer-
ence on Information and knowledge management,
pages 509–518. ACM.

Paul Mulholland and Trevor Collins. 2002. Using dig-
ital narratives to support the collaborative learning
and exploration of cultural heritage. In Database
and Expert Systems Applications, 2002. Proceed-
ings. 13th International Workshop on, pages 527–
531. IEEE.

Mykola Pechenizkiy and Toon Calders. 2007. A
framework for guiding the museum tours person-
alization. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Per-
sonalised Access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH07),
pages 11–28.

Don Peterson and Mark Levene. 2003. Trail records
and navigational learning. London review of Educa-
tion, 1(3):207–216.

S. Reich, L. Carr, D. De Roure, and W. Hall. 1999.
Where have you been from here? Trails in hypertext
systems. ACM Computing Surveys, 31.

Frank M Shipman, Richard Furuta, Donald Brenner,
Chung-Chi Chung, and Hao-wei Hsieh. 2000.
Guided paths through web-based collections: De-
sign, experiences, and adaptations. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science,
51(3):260–272.

K. Walker, A. Main, and Fass. J. 2013. User-
Generated Trails in Third Places. In HCI-3P Work-
shop on Human Computer Interaction for Third
Places at Computer Human Interaction 2013.

Kevin Walker. 2006. Story structures. building nar-
rative trails in museums. In Technology-Mediated
Narrative Environments for Learning, pages 103–
114. Sense Publishers.

Yiwen Wang, Lora M Aroyo, Natalia Stash, and Lloyd
Rutledge. 2007. Interactive user modeling for per-
sonalized access to museum collections: The ri-
jksmuseum case study. In User Modeling 2007,
pages 385–389. Springer.

Robert West and Jure Leskovec. 2012. Human
wayfinding in information networks. In Proceed-
ings of the 21st international conference on World
Wide Web, pages 619–628. ACM.

Richard Wheeldon and Mark Levene. 2003. The best
trail algorithm for assisted navigation of web sites.
In Web Congress, 2003. Proceedings. First Latin
American, pages 166–178. IEEE.

Ryen W White and Jeff Huang. 2010. Assessing the
scenic route: measuring the value of search trails in
web logs. In Proceedings of the 33rd international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop-
ment in information retrieval, pages 587–594. ACM.

M. Wilson, Kulesm B., M. Schraefel, and B. Schnei-
derman. 2010. From keyword search to explo-
ration: Designing future search interfaces for the
web. Foundations and Trends in Web Science,
2(1):1–97.

Kristian Woodsend and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Auto-
matic generation of story highlights. In Proceedings
of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 565–574. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Xiaojun Yuan and Ryen White. 2012. Building the
trail best traveled: effects of domain knowledge on
web search trailblazing. In Proceedings of the 2012
ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, pages 1795–1804. ACM.

9



Zdenek Zdrahal, Paul Mulholland, and Trevor Collins.
2008. Exploring pathways across stories. In Proc.
of International Conference on Distributed Human-
Machine Systems.

10


