







































An analysis of disagreement-provoking factors in the analysis of 
epistemic modality and evidentiality: the case of English adverbials 

 
 

Marta Carretero Juan Rafael Zamorano-Mansilla 
Departamento de Filología Inglesa I Departamento de Filología Inglesa I 

Facultad de Filología Facultad de Filología 
Universidad Complutense de Madrid Universidad Complutense de Madrid 
mcarrete@filol.ucm.es juanrafaelzm@filol.ucm.es 

 
 
 

Abstract 

This paper reports on a series of annotation 
experiments carried out on a number of 
English adverbials. The experiments, based 
on occurrences obtained from the British 
National Corpus, focused on the distinction 
of epistemic and evidential meanings from 
other kinds of meanings. The results led to 
the conclusion that many of the cases of 
inter-annotator disagreement were due to 
certain syntactic and semantic factors. 
Some of these factors will be described in 
detail, together with the decisions made in 
each case for prospective annotation.  

1 Introduction 
The annotation experiments described in this paper 
are part of the CONTRANOT project, aimed at the 
creation and validation of English-Spanish 
contrastive functional descriptions of a number of 
linguistic categories for corpus analysis and 
annotation 1  . As part of the corpus annotation 
activities developed in this project, in this paper we 
present some findings obtained during the process 
of annotating epistemic modality and evidentiality. 
More specifically, the paper describes work carried 
                                                           
1 Data of the project: “Creation and validation of contrastive 
decriptions (English-Spanish) through corpus analysis and 
annotation: linguistic, methodological and computational 
issues”. Ref. FFI2008-03384 (Ministry of Science and 
Innovation). Director: Prof. Julia Lavid, Universidad 
Complutense de Madrid. 
 

out on the initial stages of the coding system for 
the annotation of English epistemic and evidential 
adverbials: it includes an account of the initial 
coding system, together with an analysis of the 
most important factors that have given way to 
disagreement in the annotation of different 
adverbials. The analysis is mainly qualitative, due 
to the small number of examples analyzed, but the 
most relevant quantitative data have been 
specified. 
   The term ‘adverbial’, as it is used in this paper, 
encompasses adverbs such as certainly, evidently 
or probably, as well as expressions of other 
syntactic categories that are similar to them in 
meaning and function, such as the Noun Phrase no 
doubt or the Prepositional Phrases in all 
probability, in all likelihood or for sure. 
   The initial experiments that served to test the 
reliability of the coding scheme consisted in the 
annotation of 20 examples for each adverbial 
selected at random from the Brigham Young 
University version of the British National Corpus, 
available online at http://corpus.byu.edu/bnc/. 

2 The coding system: the concept and 
scope of epistemic modality and 
evidentiality 

The concept of epistemic modality adopted in this 
paper is in line with work based on modal logic, in 
which the different modal categories are treated in 
terms of possibility and necessity.2  Accordingly, 
                                                           
2  This approach is, perhaps, the most widely used for 
describing modal expressions in English. Some references are 
Hermerén (1978), Palmer (1990), Perkins (1983), Nuyts 
(2001), Wärnsby (2006) or Collins (2009). 



epistemic modality is defined as the estimation of 
the probability for a proposition to have been, be or 
become true (cf. Nuyts 2001: 21). This concept of 
epistemic modality excludes certain expressions 
included in broader approches to epistemic 
modality, 3  which qualify the speaker/writer 
(sp/wr)’s commitment to the reliability of the 
information in different ways from probability in 
the strict sense: examples of these expressions are 
hedges of approximation (sort of, or something...) 
or stance adverbials of degree (basically, 
essentially, totally). These categories could well be 
the basis of parallel annotation systems in future.  

As for evidentiality, it will be defined as the 
linguistic expression of the kind, source and/or 
evaluation of the evidence for or against the truth 
of the proposition that the sp/wr has at his/her 
disposal. We will consider it as a semantic 
category, in a similar way to Chafe (1986), not as a 
grammatical phenomenon as in Mithun (1986) or 
Anderson (1986), nor will we include cases in 
which evidentiality is pragmatically inferred 
(Ifantidou 2001). 

The adverbials selected for this research meet 
the requirements of the scope of epistemic 
modality and evidentiality described above The 
list, which is not exhaustive in the present stage of 
this research, includes the following items:  

 Epistemic adverbials of probability and 
possibility: maybe, perhaps, probably, in 
all likelihood, in all probability, 
improbably, possibly, conceivably, 
plausibly and predictably. 4 

 Epistemic adverbials of certainty: 
assuredly, certainly, definitely, positively, 
surely, undeniably, unquestionably.  

 Evidential adverbials: apparently, clearly, 
evidently, obviously, plainly. 

We believe that the evidential adverbials listed 
here, except for apparently, could be considered as 
epistemic and evidential at the same time, or 
‘epistentials’, since they have an epistemic 
meaning of high degree of certainty (which is 
similar to that of the epistemic adverbials of 
certainty listed above) as well as an evidential 
meaning of sound evidence. However, we believe 

                                                           
3 Examples of these approaches are Biber et al. (1999) and 
Kärkkäinen (2003).  
4  Originally, impossibly was also listed, but later it was 
excluded due to the almost total lack of epistemic meaning.   

that, in spite of this overlap in the linguistic 
expression of epistemic modality and evidentiality, 
both categories should be kept separate in the 
annotation, in the sense that the consideration of 
the overlap would complicate matters. 
Consequently, all the adverbials with a semantic 
component of evidence will be considered as 
evidential, independently of whether they also 
have an epistemic semantic feature or not.  

3 The experiments 
The adverbials listed above were submitted to a 
first annotation experiment by two linguists 
knowledgeable about epistemic modality and 
evidentiality (concretely, the two authors of this 
paper), in which the epistemic and evidential 
meanings were to be distinguished from other 
meanings. That is to say, the tagging was restricted 
to a basic level, where the options were 
‘Epistemic/Non-epistemic’ for the epistemic 
adverbials, and ‘Evidential/Non-evidential for the 
evidential adverbials. This labelling is not as trivial 
as it may seem at first sight: the difficulties 
involved in distinguishing epistemic modality from 
other categories are widely attested in the literature 
(Simon-Vandenbergen and Aijmer 2007, Nuyts 
2005, Collins 2009, Boye and Harder 2009, 
Cornillie 2009).  

In accordance with the definitions of epistemic 
modality and evidentiality described above, the 
criteria for their delimitation in this research have 
to be semantic. For this reason, a preliminary study 
of the adverbials was carried out, based on the 
references mentioned above and others (Byloo, 
Kastein and Nuyts 2007, Maíz and Arús 2008, 
Tucker 2001, Hoye 1997, Swan 1988). These 
references attest the importance of pragmatic and 
discourse factors in global accounts of the 
adverbials; however, in order to maintain the status 
of epistemic modality and evidentiality as semantic 
categories, the decision was made to ignore these 
factors at this stage of the work. A more detailed 
account of these pragmatic factors is provided in 
Carretero and Zamorano-Mansilla (to appear). For 
the purposes of this paper, suffice it to say that a 
common feature of these factors is the bleaching of 
the epistemic or evidential meaning into a more 
general meaning of modifying assertiveness. On 
the one hand, epistemic adverbs of probability and 
possibility, together with the evidential adverbial 



apparently, are often used as downtoners, with the 
main purpose of expressing a high degree of 
tentativeness rather than assessing probability. For 
example, maybe in (1) is used to downtone the 
strength of a suggestion rather than to express an 
assessment of weak probability:  
(1) Every day, I always used to stick my head 

around the office door and say, ‘Anything for 
me today?’ — and one day they said, ‘Well, 
we're looking for dancers for the BBC's 
production of Pistol Shot (which was a play by 
Chekhov) — maybe you'd like to do it and 
choreograph it and use some of your students?’ 
(BNC AB5) 

On the other hand, epistemic and evidential 
adverbials of certainty are frequently used with the 
main purpose of enhancing assertiveness rather 
than making an assessment of certainty. For 
example, the main function of certainly in (2) is to 
lay emphasis on the speaker’s commitment to 
comply with the request:  
(2) Lord Hulton turned to me. “You'll let us have 

some more Propopamide, won't you, Herriot?” 
“Certainly,” I replied. “I think I have some in 
the car.” (BNC G3S) 

   It is also well-known that epistemic and 
evidential adverbials often perform certain 
discourse functions. The most remarkable of all is, 
perhaps, the signalling of concessive relationships 
between the clause in which they occur and 
another clause. We believe that this discourse 
function is compatible with the epistemic or 
evidential meaning: for example, the concessive 
relationships signalled by maybe in (3) and by 
certainly in (4) do not interfere with their 
respective meanings of possibility and certainty. 
For this reason, the adverbials were considered as 
epistemic or evidential in this kind of contexts.   
(3) Maybe the farmer or his tenant will ask for a 

percentage of the kill within the agreement, but 
it makes jolly good sense to ensure that anyone 
who likes to eat a rabbit and who can influence 
your sport is well looked after (BNC BNY). 

(4) Orcs are bigger than Goblins, more dangerous, 
and more brutally ambitious.Grom was to 
prove the exception, a Goblin who was not 
only as dangerous and ambitious as the best 
Orc, but vastly bigger as well! It was not that 
Grom was especially tall, certainly not as tall 
as an Orc, but he was enormously and 
infamously fat (BNC CMC). 

Once the pragmatic factors of modification of 
assertiveness and concession were identified as 
distractors, the authors started the annotation task, 
with the 20 examples of each of the adverbs 
selected above. The results of the annotation 
confirmed that a number of semantic factors 
clearly provoked disagreement. Some of these 
factors are explained in Section 4.  

4 An account of the disagreement-
provoking factors 

4.1 Generic statements 
The adverbials of possibility conceivably, maybe, 
perhaps, possibly and improbably often occurred 
in statements such as (5), which are characterized 
by the following two features: a) the modalized 
sentence refers to a class of entities and can 
therefore be considered as generic, and b) the 
modal adverbial is paraphraseable by adverbials of 
frequency such as sometimes: 
(5) ‘Many companies are placing their main focus 

on the opportunities for intro-European trading 
after 1992 and rightly so. However, at British 
Airways Cargo it is the global implications of 
the Single Market which are receiving most 
attention,’ says Peter White. He continues: 
Currently, major manufacturers from the 
United States and Asia tend to have two or 
maybe three plants in Europe.’(BNC AMH) 

In these cases, the epistemic adverb may be 
argued to maintain its epistemic meaning, since 
there is some probability for the state of affairs to 
occur in each individual case (that is, whenever 
there is a major manufacturer from the United 
States and Asia, there is a possibility that s/he has 
three plants in Europe). However, the modal 
adverb could also be considered to express 
dynamic modality. This modality consists of the 
set of meanings that belong to the possibility-
necessity axis and are determined by natural 
circumstances, which may or may not be inherent 
to a person or another entity. The main meanings 
included in dynamic modality are inevitability, 
tendency, ability and (lack of) potentiality due to 
internal properties of an entity or else to 
circumstantial properties (Zamorano-Mansilla and 
Carretero to appear). Maybe in statements such as 
(5) is close to dynamic modality, since it describes 
a tendency of the manufacturers described above. 



This semantic complexity accounted for the 
majority of the cases of disagreement of possibly 
and conceivably (these cases are, altogether, 5 for 
possibly and 6 for conceivably).5 Consequently, the 
decision was made to annotate these occurrences 
taking into account the overall meanings of the 
adverbs concerned. The cases of perhaps and 
maybe in generic statements were annotated as 
epistemic, since these adverbs do not display other 
cases of dynamic modality apart from these; in this 
way, the adverbs perhaps and maybe y contrast, 
possibly and conceivably have a more established 
dynamic meaning (Zamorano-Mansilla and 
Carretero, to appear): in certain cases, as in (6), 
they are not paraphraseable with perhaps or 
maybe. For this reason, the decision was made to 
annotate their occurrences with generic statements, 
as in (7), as cases of merger between epistemic and 
dynamic modality.  
(6) In 1939, as in the 1920s, any imports that 

could conceivably be replaced by nationally 
produced goods had to be reduced to a 
minimum or stopped. (BNC HPV) 

(7) When the radio is switched on, this voltage, 
stored on C1, is temporarily let loose on the 
circuitry, where it could conceivably do some 
damage.  After a moment, of course, the 
voltage subsides to its on-load value, which is 
smaller. (BNC C92) 

Generic statements also occurred with 
improbably, concretely with the collocation 
however improbably. The decision was also made 
to annotate them as cases of merger between 
epistemic and dynamic modality: 
(8)  Suppose that, however improbably, a 

balanced slate could nevertheless be agreed on 
in one party. It is a safe bet that the other 
parties in contention would not make the same 
mistake. (BNC EW4) 

4.2 Impossibility  
Another factor that gave rise to disagreement in the 
annotation of possibly and conceivably, and of 
plausibly to a lesser extent, was negative polarity, 
more specifically the combinations of these 
adverbials with cannot or could not. It may well be 

                                                           
5  For conceivably, this result corresponds to a second 
experiment, which had to take place because the annotators 
realized that both had overused the label ‘epistemic’ in the 
first experiment.  

considered that dynamic impossibility entails 
epistemic impossibility: a statement that nature 
does not allow the occurrence of a state of affairs 
entails that the probabilities for it to occur are 
none, as in (9), about which the sp/wr has no 
doubts: 
(9)  Now you can’t possibly test a medicine on ten 

thousand people before you start to sell it, so 
that sort of risk, as rare a risk as that, will only 
be picked up when the medicine has actually 
been in use and on the market and been 
properly prescribed for some years. (BNC 
KRE) 

However, in other cases impossibility may be 
indirectly inferred from evidence, and the sp/wr 
may be interpreted to have a slight doubt (10). 
Since these cases often led to inter-annotator 
disagreement, the decision was made to consider 
them as dynamic, together with the others.  
(10) His car was found with bloodstains on the 

steering-wheel. “He couldn’t possibly do a 
thing like that,” his best friend said. (BNC 
H7A) 

Other cases of disagreement occurred with the 
collocation of only with can / could and possibly / 
conceivably. Only has a similar effect to negative 
polarity (“not… but”), so that the modal meaning 
of the expressions shifts from weak to strong. 
These occurrences are annotated as dynamic, in a 
similar way to the treatment of impossibility 
described above:   
(11) However, Przeworski (1980 and 1985) 

explores two possible consequences of liberal 
democracy for the proletariat. First, workers as 
the majority group in the electorate might 
rationally choose to maintain capitalism, not 
because they are duped by the dominant 
ideology but because their individual interests 
are better met under redistributive capitalism 
than through a painful transition to socialism, 
which could only conceivably deliver net 
benefits in the very long run. (BNC CS3) 

4.3 Interrogative structures 
The occurrences of the modal adverbials of 
possibility in interrogative structures were also an 
area of disagreement. The peculiarities of the use 
of epistemic expressions in interrogative structures, 
widely reported in the literature (see, for example, 
Palmer (1990) and Coates (1983), among others) is 
due to the fact that questions often implicate the 



sp/wr’s lack of total certainty, which coincides 
with the meaning of epistemic expressions. In fact, 
these adverbials tend to occur in speculative 
questions for which the sp/wr does not really 
expect to get an answer. For instance, (12) could 
be interpreted as a question about naturally 
possible reasons (dynamic), or else as epistemic, in 
the sense that the sp/wr is thinking (in vain) about 
the correct answer. There is perhaps very little 
difference between asking about naturally possible 
reasons and about possibly real reasons. In order to 
favour inter-annotator agreement, these cases were 
considered as dynamic.  
(12) ‘No. Dad gives us money.’ Ashamed, she 

hung her head and scraped a pattern on the dry 
ground with her toe. ‘Then what do you want 
to get it published for?’ ‘I don't know.’ She 
looked at him through her lashes, almost 
sullenly. What other reason could there 
possibly be? ‘I just thought people did get 
books published’, she said lamely (BNC HH9) 

4.4 Epistemic qualifications whose scope is 
not exactly that of the clause in which 
they occur 

Some occurrences of the adverb plausibly are 
clearly epistemic (13) and others are clearly non-
epistemic, such as (14), in which this adverb refers 
to the adequacy of a word or expression as a 
descriptor of an entity or situation: 
(13) The larger troops, plausibly, were developed 

as protection from diurnal predators. (BNC 
AMG) 

(14) The novel can plausibly be labelled science 
fiction by virtue of the fact that it takes place 
in the future and involves’ alien’ life forms. 
(BNC G1N) 

However, this adverbial displayed a large 
number of cases of disagreement (9 out of 20), 
most of which concern the reasonability of a 
statement made by someone else. The verb often 
expresses a process of saying (argue, propose, say, 
suggest, etc.). In these cases, the use of plausibly 
means epistemic modality on the part of the sp/wr, 
but this modality does not affect the proposition in 
which plausibly occurs, but the following 
proposition (i.e. the proposition expressed by the 
subordinate clause introduced by the verb of 
saying). For example, plausibly in (15) does not 
qualify the statement that the suggestion had been 

made, but the fact that the ‘negative’ idea was 
inspired by the custom mentioned there:   
(15)  The figures are left in the orange colour of 

the clay, the background painted in round them 
in the shiny black: a purely decorative 
variation; and it has been plausibly suggested 
that the strange ‘negative’ idea was inspired by 
the custom of washing the background of 
marble reliefs with a blue or red against which 
the mainly white figures were left standing out. 
(BNC FPW) 

The decision was made to consider these cases 
as epistemic, since the modalized proposition is 
expressed in the same sentence in which plausibly 
occurs. 

4.5 Neighbouring epistemic lexical verbs  
The occurrence of a modal lexical verb in the 
clause in which the adverbials occur can bring 
about additional complexity to the annotation of 
adverbials of possibility. For example, in (16), 
could conceivably occurs with negative polarity 
and is therefore to be classified as dynamic; 
however, the presence of the verb believe turned 
out to be a distractor: 
(16) Looking at the matter generally, I can not 

believe [sic] that that could conceivably have 
been the intention of Parliament when passing 
the Children Act 1989 (BNC FC0) 

Similarly, the occurrence of believe seems to 
have distracted one of the annotators in (17), a case 
of plausibly about the reasonability of a statement 
made by someone else (see 4.4.) in which the verb 
expresses a process of thinking and not of saying. 
(17) Concurrent with the building of the earliest, a 

timber grave chamber was constructed beneath 
its floor to receive the decomposed remains of 
a middle-aged man. This is plausibly believed 
to be Gorm, Harald’s father, originally interred 
in pagan fashion (BNC HXX) 

   As a consequence of this distracting effect of 
verbs such as believe, the design of the annotation 
system could well include specific instructions 
about the coexistence of the adverbials with 
believe and similar verbs such as think or suppose, 
with authentic examples and their correct 
annotation.  



4.6 Gradable adjectives or adverbs 
Gradability is a complicating factor that affects the 
annotation of adverbials of certainty, most of 
which often occurred with gradable Adjectival 
Groups or Adverbial Groups under their scope, as 
in (18-19). In these cases, the adverbials can be 
roughly paraphrased with intensifiers such as very, 
so that the meanings of certainty and of degree 
may well be considered to merge. However, a 
number of dictionaries6 did not register a meaning 
of degree in some of the adverbs, such as 
decidedly, definitely and positively. Consequently, 
examples of this kind were annotated as epistemic.  
(18) Unfortunately, faced with price increases of 

up to 25 per cent, many of us decided we could 
live without champagne. Frankly, it wasn't 
much of a sacrifice. The sparkling alternatives 
were getting better and better, thanks largely to 
the overseas investment of champagne houses, 
and the basic quality of champagne was 
decidedly dodgy. 1991 levels, but consumers 
continue to vote with their wallets. (BNC FBL) 

(19) They are making a mistake because the Costa 
Brava has everything anyone could ever want -
in large quantities. It is rapidly becoming the 
playground for some of Europe's most 
sophisticated and cosmopolitan young people. 
The French, Italians, Scandinavians, Dutch and 
Swiss come to play at prices that make some 
new hot spots look positively expensive. (BNC 
AM0) 

4.7 Coexistence of the meanings of certainty 
and firm decision 

The adverbial definitely displays clear epistemic 
cases, roughly paraphraseable with certainly, as 
well as a few non-epistemic cases, which are 
characterized by the following features: a) 
paraphraseability of definitely by finally, while  
replacement with certainly would provoke a 
semantic change; b) emphasis on the firmness of 

                                                           
6 The dictionaries consulted were: 

 Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary: 
http://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/british/ 

 Merriam-Webster Dictionary: 
 http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/ 
 Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced 

Learners (2002). 
 
 

voluntary decisions; and c) occurrence with 
processes of saying (approve, say, state, decide). 
An example is (20): 
(20) Very few projects are definitely approved, 

with the Space Telescope the major exception. 
(BNC B7N) 

However, other cases of definitely are not so 
clear: they report a firm decision, but at the same 
time the adverbial may be replaced by certainly 
with little change of meaning (21). In order to 
achieve a greater degree of agreement, 
paraphraseability with certainly was considered as 
the key criterion, so that many doubtful cases were 
subsequently annotated as epistemic.  
(21) So you weren't going out with him? “Oh – no. 

Definitely not. It's never a good idea to get too 
involved with a colleague. (BNC C8D) 

4.8 Evidentiality and epistemicity: the case of 
apparently 

In the annotation of apparently, all the occurrences 
were unanimously tagged as evidential except for 
two, one of which is (22). The reason for the 
disagreement turned out to be that in all the cases 
except these there was an epistemic implicature 
that the sp/wr did not know the truth of the 
proposition. The difference may be seen if we 
compare (22) with (23): in (22), the Geordies, 
against appearances, turned out not to be 
invincible; in (23), the sp/wr implicates that s/he is 
not absolutely sure that the king repeatedly 
climbed the town wall.   
(22) Keegan, who ten days ago was boss of an 

apparently invincible Geordie side, said: ‘I 
know what people are thinking, but the only 
difference between our defeat at Leicester on 
Saturday and our early season results was that 
we gave away a silly goal.’ (BNC CEP) 

(23) The king was the guest of Richard Wolph, a 
prosperous gentleman farmer, until the evening 
of May 4th, when he left by the same gate for 
Southwell. Apparently he repeatedly climbed 
the town wall during his stay to watch for his 
pursuers. (BNC CBB) 

The disagreement was due to the error made by 
one of the annotators of considering the epistemic 
status of apparently for its annotation. However, it 
was previously agreed that this adverbial is to be 
annotated in terms of evidentiality and not of 
epistemic modality. Consequently, it is to be 
always annotated as evidential: even in cases such 



as (22), in which it qualifies a proposition that is 
not true, it still provides evidence in favour of the 
hypothetical truth of that proposition. That is to 
say, its evidential value is constant, while its 
epistemicity is generated by default, thus having 
the status of a Generalized Conversational 
Implicature (Levinson 2000; Carretero 2004); that 
is to say, apparently implicates that the sp/wr does 
not know the truth or the falsehood of the 
proposition except when there is contrary evidence 
to this lack of knowledge. 

4.9 Coexistence and pragmatic neutralization 
of the meanings of evidentiality and 
manner 

The evidential adverbials clearly and plainly 
display evidential cases as well as non-evidential 
cases, which indicate ease of perception (as in ‘He 
spoke clearly’). Only the first kind of cases are 
paraphraseable by the construction ‘it + BE + 
clear/plain + that’. However, a few occurrences 
were not readily classifiable, and could even be 
considered as cases of pragmatic neutralization 
between the evidential meaning and the meaning 
of manner. These occurrences did not provoke 
much disagreement in the annotation (one case of 
each of clearly and plainly); however, they did 
provoke doubtfulness during the annotation 
process. One of these cases is (24), for which the 
interpretations “must be set in a clear way…” 
(manner) and “it is clear that the actualized 
instances must be set…” (evidential) are both 
possible: from the pragmatic point of view, there is 
not much difference between them, since the 
sp/wr’s aims to communicate, above all, that it is 
necessary to set actualized instances of linguistic 
signs in correspondence with their conventional 
meanings: 
(24) The conventional meaning of linguistic signs, 

and their combinations in sentences, 
constitutes types of conceptualization codified 
as linguistic knowledge and the tokens of 
particular and actualized instances must 
clearly be set in correspondence with them. 
(BNC CBR) 

Similarly, in (25), the interpretations “the terms 
state in a clear way…” (manner) and “it is clear 
that the terms state…” (evidential) are both 
possible, and their difference is pragmatically of 
little importance, the main point being that the 

terms leave no doubt that the carrier has 
contractual remedies against a subcontractor.  
(25) Therefore, the terms of any subcontract 

should be very carefully drafted. The terms 
plainly state that the carrier has contractual 
remedies against a subcontractor (BNC CDP) 

In order to annotate examples such as (24) and 
(25), we have considered that the utterances with 
clearly and plainly are roughly paraphraseable by 
‘it is clear that…’ and ‘it is plain that…’, 
respectively, although the paraphrase lays 
emphasis on the evidential meaning and bleaches 
the meaning of manner. Nevertheless, the 
possibility of this paraphrase has motivated our 
decision to annotate these cases as evidential. 

5 Conclusions 
This paper has described a number of factors that 
have provoked inter-annotator disagreement in the 
initial annotation experiments carried out with a 
number of epistemic and evidential English 
adverbials. The nature of these factors is diverse: 
two of them, interrogative structures and clausal 
scope, could be classified as syntactic, although 
they need to be explained in terms of the meanings 
of the structures involved. Other factors concern 
the meaning of the adverbials themselves in certain 
contexts, concretely the meanings of impossibility, 
manner and firm decision, as well as the 
relationship between evidential and epistemic 
meanings. Finally, other factors are related to the 
meaning of the clause in which the adverbials 
occur (generic statements) or the meanings of other 
expressions in the surrounding linguistic contexts, 
such as epistemic lexical verbs or gradable 
adjectives or adverbs.  

In all the cases described here, solutions have 
been provided for prospective annotation. The 
application of these solutions (and others to be 
provided) should result in a high degree of inter-
annotator agreement by experts in the second 
experiment contemplated in the project. The 
confirmation of this agreement is to be followed by 
annotation by non-experts. Before embarking on 
the annotation tasks, these annotators are to receive 
instructions, which will include these problematic 
cases and the respective solutions. This procedure 
should lead to robust annotation systems of 
epistemic modality and evidentiality that guarantee 



a high degree of inter-annotator agreement not 
only among experts, but also among non-experts.  

References  
Lloyd B. Anderson. 1986. Evidentials, paths of change, 

and mental maps: Typologically regular 
asymmetries. In: Wallace Chafe and Johanna Nichols 
(eds.), Evidentiality: The Linguistic Coding of 
Epistemology. Ablex, Norwood. 

Douglas Biber, Stig Johansson, Geoffrey Leech, Susan 
Conrad and Edvard Finegan. 1999. Longman grammar 
of spoken and written English. Longman, London. 

Kasper Boye and Peter Harder. 2009. Evidentiality: 
linguistic categories and grammaticalization. 
Functions of Language, 16.1: 9-43.  

Pieter Byloo, Richard Kastein and Jan Nuyts. 2007. On 
certainly and zeker. In: Mike Hannay and Gerard J. 
Steen (eds.), Structural-functional Studies in English 
Grammar. John Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia. 

Marta Carretero and Juan Rafael Zamorano-Mansilla. 
Forthcoming. Disentangling epistemic modality, 
neighbouring categories and pragmatic uses: The 
case of English epistemic adverbs. Collection 
linguistique Épilogos. 

Marta Carretero. 2004. Levinson’s Presumptive 
meanings: a neo-Gricean approach to pragmatics. In: 
Marta Carretero, Honesto Herrera-Soler, Gitte 
Kristiansen and Julia Lavid, (eds.) Estudios de 
lingüística aplicada a la comunicación. Universidad 
Complutense, Madrid. 

Wallace Chafe. 1986. Evidentiality in English 
conversation and academic writing. In: Wallace Chafe 
and Johanna Nichols (eds.), Evidentiality: The 
Linguistic Coding of Epistemology. Ablex, Norwood.  

Jennifer Coates. 1983. The Semantics of the Modal 
Auxiliaries. Croom Helm, London.  

Peter Collins. 2009. Modals and Quasi-modals in 
English. Rodopi, Amsterdam. 

Bert Cornillie. 2009. Evidentiality and epistemic 
modality: On the close relationship between two 
different categories. Functions of Language, 16.1: 
44-62. 

Lars Hermerén. 1978. On Modality in English: the Study 
of the Semantics of the Modals. Gleerup, Lund.  

Leo Francis Hoye. 1997. Modals and Adverbs in 
English. Longman, London and New York. 

Elly Ifantidou. 2001. Evidentials and Relevance. John 
Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.  

Elise Kärkkäinen. 2004. Epistemic Stance in English 
Conversation. John Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia. 

Julia Lavid, Jorge Arús, Juan Rafael Zamorano-
Mansilla. 2010. Designing and exploiting a small 
online English-Spanish parallel corpus for language 
teaching purposes. In: Mari Carmen Campoy-
Cubillo, Begoña Bellés-Fortuño and María Lluïsa 

Gea-Valor, (eds.) Corpus-based approaches to 
English Language Teaching. Continuum, London. 

Julia Lavid. 2008. CONTRASTES: An Online English-
Spanish Textual Database for Contrastive and 
Translation Learning. In Barbara Lewandowska-
Tomaszczyk, (ed.) Corpus Linguistics, Computer 
Tools, and Applications – State of the Art. Peter 
Lang, Frankfurt. 

Julia Lavid. 2012 . Corpus Annotation in 
CONTRANOT: Linguistic and Methodological 
Challenges. In: Isabel Moskowitz and Begoña 
Crespo, (eds.) Encoding the Past: Decoding the 
Future: Corpora in the 21st Century. Cambridge 
Scholars Publishing, Newcastle upon Tyne. 

Stephen C. Levinson. 2000 Presumptive meanings. The 
theory of Generalized Conversational Implicature. 
MIT Press, London, UK and Cambridge, USA. 

Carmen Maíz and Jorge Arús. 2008. Towards a 
diachronic study of modal adverbs: a case study of 
certainly. Philologia, 2008, 27-36.  

Marianne Mithun. 1986. Evidential diachrony in 
Northern Iroquoian. In: Wallace Chafe and Johanna 
Nichols (eds.), Evidentiality: The Linguistic Coding 
of Epistemology. Ablex, Norwood.  

Jan Nuyts. 2001. Epistemic Modality, Language and 
Conceptualization: A Cognitive-Pragmatic Perspective. 
John Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.  

Jan Nuyts. 2005. The modal confusion: On terminology 
and the concepts behind it. In: Alex Klinge and 
Henrik Høeg Müller (eds.), Modality: Studies in 
Form and Function. Equinox, London. 

Frank R. Palmer. 1990 [1979]. Modality and the English 
Modals. Longman, London and New York. 

Michael R. Perkins. 1983. Modal Expressions in 
English. Frances Pinter, London.  

Anne-Marie Simon-Vandenbergen and Karin Aijmer. 
2007. The Semantic Field of Modal Certainty. A 
Corpus-based Study of English Adverbs. Mouton de 
Gruyter, Berlin and New York. 

Toril Swan. 1988. Sentence Adverbials in English: a 
Synchronic and Diachronic Investigation. Novus 
Forlag, Oslo.  

Gordon Tucker. 2001. Possibly alternative modality. 
Functions of Language, 8.2, 183-216. 

Anna Wärnsby. 2006. (De)coding Modality. The Case 
of Must, May, Måste and Kan. Lund Studies in 
English 113. Lund University, Lund. 

Juan Rafael Zamorano-Mansilla and Carretero, Marta. 
(in press). An annotation scheme for dynamic 
modality in English and Spanish. In: Maite Taboada, 
Susana Doval Suárez and Elsa González Álvarez 
(eds.) Contrastive discourse analysis: Functional and 
corpus perspectives. Equinox, London. 


