



















































The Representation of Czech Light Verb Constructions in a Valency Lexicon


Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (DepLing 2013), pages 147–156,
Prague, August 27–30, 2013. c© 2013 Charles University in Prague, Matfyzpress, Prague, Czech Republic

The Representation of Czech Light Verb Constructions
in a Valency Lexicon

Václava Kettnerová and Markéta Lopatková
Charles University in Prague

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics

Czech Republic
{kettnerova,lopatkova}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

Light verb constructions (LVCs) pose a se-
rious challenge for both theoretical and ap-
plied linguistics as their syntactic struc-
tures are not solely determined by verbs
alone but also by predicative nouns. In this
contribution, we introduce an initial step to
a new formal lexicographic representation
of LVCs for the valency lexicon of Czech
verbs, VALLEX.

The main idea underlying our representa-
tion is to decompose the information on an
LVC between (i) the verbal valency frame
and (ii) the nominal valency frame. Both
deep and surface syntactic structures of
LVCs can be easily derived from the in-
formation given in the verbal and nomi-
nal frames by application of formal rules
as they are introduced in this contribution.

1 Introduction

Light verb constructions (LVCs) represent a type
of complex predicate where two syntactic ele-
ments serve as a single predicate – for exam-
ple, in Czech, light verbs combine with predica-
tive nouns, ex. (1), adjectives, ex. (2), or adverbs,
ex. (3) (LVCs are typed in bold). These combi-
nations are characterized by ambivalent relations:
from a syntactic point of view, a light verb is the
governing component of the collocation; however,
from a semantic point of view, it is the predicative
noun that represents the governing component.

(1) Petr zı́skal souhlas od svého nadřı́zeného
ke změně právnı́ho zástupce firmy.
Eng. Peter won approval from his boss to
change the legal representative of the com-
pany.

(2) Jan je podobný svému otci.
Eng. John is like his father.

(3) Výpověd’ klı́čového svědka by mohla vnést
do přı́padu jasno.
Eng. Key witness testimony could shed
light on the case.

Considering the wide range of issues, this study
is limited to Czech LVCs based on the collocations
of a light verb and a predicative noun, see ex. (1).

Despite being subject to many analyses, see esp.
(Butt, 2010), a clear-cut definition of LVCs is still
missing. In this paper, we follow both semantic
and syntactic criteria for distinguishing LVCs. (i)
The semantic operational criterion is based on the
observation that a predicative noun (a predicative
adjective or a predicative adverb) – as a semantic
governing element – stands for the entire colloca-
tion of the predicative noun and a light verb; i.e, a
predicative noun shows the same semantic distri-
bution as the entire collocation. (ii) According to
the syntactic criterion, some valency complemen-
tations of a light verb and a predicative noun have
to be referentially identical, see esp. (Radimský,
2010) and (Kolářová, 2010).

Like other types of multiword expressions,
LVCs pose a serious challenge for both theoreti-
cal and applied linguistics (Sag et al., 2002). As
they require special treatment in NLP tasks, esp.
in machine translation, their automatic recognition
would bring a substantial benefit. Developing au-
tomatic recognition tools can be greatly assisted
by lexical resources providing formal description
of LVCs, see e.g. PropBank (Hwang et al., 2010),
and WordNet (Vincze et al., 2012).

In this paper, we propose a formal represen-
tation of LVCs in the valency lexicon of Czech
verbs, VALLEX.1 The VALLEX lexicon is a col-
lection of rich linguistically annotated data result-
ing from an attempt at a formal description of
the valency behavior of Czech verbs. It provides
the information on the valency structure of Czech

1http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/vallex

147



verbs in the form of valency frames, each valency
frame corresponding to a single verbal lexical unit.
For the description of valency, the valency theory
formulated within the Functional Generative De-
scription (FGD) – a dependency based framework
– has been adopted (Sgall et al., 1986). Valency
in FGD is related to the tectogrammatical layer
– to a layer of linguistically structured meaning
(roughly speaking, to a deep-syntactic layer). Five
types of verbal actants – labeled by functors AC-
Tor (ACT), PATient (PAT), ADDRessee (ADDR),
ORIGin (ORIG), and EFFect (EFF) – have been
determined. The first two – ACT and PAT – are
distinguished on the syntactic basis. In assigning
the remaining three actants – ADDR, ORIG and
EFF – semantic criteria are taken into account as
well, see esp. (Panevová, 1994).

The issue of LVCs (as well as other types of
complex predicates) has remained underdeveloped
in VALLLEX so far. The main motivation of
this paper is to propose an adequate representa-
tion of this phenomenon in order to fill such se-
rious gap in the description of valency behav-
ior of Czech verbs. When designing an LVCs
representation for VALLEX, we draw inspiration
esp. from the Explanatory Combinatorial Dictio-
nary of the Contemporary Russian Language elab-
orated within the Meaning-Text Theory, in which
a strong emphasis is put on the systematic descrip-
tion of combinatorial potentials of lexical units,
see (Mel’čuk and Žolkovskij, 1984). For the de-
scription of LVCs, several lexical functions – al-
lowing to identify verbonominal collocations – are
used, see (Mel’čuk, 1996).

We have carried out a detailed analysis of se-
mantic and deep syntactic aspects (Section 2) as
well as surface syntactic aspects (Section 3) of
the given constructions. The analysis of the LVCs
based on the combination of light verbs with pred-
icative nouns can be conducted either (i) from
the perspective of a light verb (Gross, 1981), or
(ii) from the perspective of a predicative noun
(Mel’čuk, 1996). Each of these analyses poses
different challenging problems. Moreover, they
can lead to more or less different interpretations
of forming complex syntactic structure of LVCs.

The representation of LVC proposed in this arti-
cle combines these two perspectives: (i) From the
semantic point of view, it is a predicative noun that
provides the LVC with its semantic participants;
thus semantic aspects of LVCs are described from

the perspective of a predicative noun here. (ii) On
the other hand, deep syntactic aspects are de-
scribed from the perspective of a (light) verb as it
is a verb that provides its valency potential for se-
mantic participants (evoked by the noun) and thus
determines a core syntactic structure of a sentence.

The results of this analysis have been re-
flected in the representation of Czech LVCs in the
VALLEX lexicon (Section 4). The proposed rep-
resentation decomposes the information on LVCs
between verbal and nominal lexicon entries, which
are interlinked by a special attribute -lvc. More-
over, a special attribute -map attached to the ver-
bal frame provides the information on the link-
ing between verbal and nominal valency comple-
mentations referring to the same entities in LVCs.
Based on this linking, deep and surface syntactic
structure of LVCs can be derived by application of
formal rules, which capture ‘patterns’ common to
individual types of LVCs.

2 Semantic and (Deep) Syntactic Aspects

In this section, semantic and (deep) syntactic as-
pects of Czech LVCs are described in detail. When
describing LVCs, it shows fruitful to distinguish:

(i) semantic participants involved in the situa-
tion expressed by a given LVC (related to
semantic content),2 roughly corresponding
to semantic actants in MTT, see (Mel’čuk,
2004a; Mel’čuk, 2004b),

(ii) valency complementations (related to the
deep syntactic layer), and

(iii) surface syntactic positions (related to the sur-
face syntactic layer).

Here the relation between semantic participants
(Subsection 2.1) and valency complementations in
LVCs is discussed (Subsection 2.2).

2.1 Semantic Participants
Verbonominal collocations forming LVCs repre-
sent a type of complex predicates where two syn-
tactic elements – a light verb and a predicative
noun – serve as a single predicate. In contrast to
a single predicating verb, in LVCs, semantic fea-
tures are decomposed between a light verb and a
predicative noun.

2Generally, whereas the inventory of units of syntactic
layers have been well elaborated, the inventory of seman-
tic participants has not been satisfactorily compiled so far in
FGD. Here we have adopted semantic roles used in FrameNet
for the description of semantic participants.

148



As to the distribution of semantic properties, a
light verb appears to be a semantically incomplete
element expressing only general semantic prop-
erties (esp. aspectual nuances). To be semanti-
cally complete, it enters into the combination with
a predicative noun which contributes individual
lexical-semantic properties into the resulting com-
plex predicate (Macháčková, 1979).

The following examples make evident that it
is the noun (not the light verb) that determines
the number of semantic participants (indicated by
their semantic labels) expressed in LVCs, ex. (4)–
(5), and their semantic features, ex. (6)–(7).

(4) PolicistaSpeaker podal hlášenı́ o akciInform
svému veliteliRecip .
‘The officerSpeaker – handed – a re-
port – on the actionInfo – to his
commanderRecip .’
Eng. The officer reported on the action to
his commander.

(5) SportovecAgent podal v závodu velký
výkon.
‘The sportsmanAgent – handed – in the
race – a great performance.’
Eng. The sportsman gave a great perfor-
mance in the race.

(6) Tento počı́tač / člověkin/animate dělá
hodně práce.
Eng. This computer/manin/animate does
much work.

(7) Tento *počı́tač / člověkin/animate dělá
velkou kariéru.
Eng. This *computer / manin/animate
makes a great career. (Radimský, 2010)

For instance, the light verb obdržet ‘to receive’
is depleted of individual semantic properties – in-
cluding semantic participants, see ex. (9) – fore-
grounding only the abstract semantic facets (i.e.,
‘transferring’) of its full verb counterpart; the lat-
ter expresses ‘transferring a physical object from
an agent to a recipient’ characterized by three
semantic participants, namely ‘Recipient’ (abbr.
‘Recip’), ‘Agent’, and ‘Theme’, see ex. (8).

(8) VýherceRecip od násAgent obdržı́ drobný
dárekTheme .
Eng. ‘The winnerRecip will receive a small
giftTheme from usAgent .’

(9) VelitelRecip obdržel hlášenı́ od
policistySpeaker o akciInform .

Eng. The commanderRecip received
the report on the actionInform from the
officerSpeaker .

To be semantically complete, the light verb
combines with the predicative noun hlášenı́ ‘re-
port’ that denotes the situation of ‘conveying
a piece of information to a recipient by a
speaker’. This situation involves three participants
– ‘Speaker’, ‘Recip’, and ‘Information’ (abbr. ‘In-
form’). As a result, the situation expressed by
the collocation obdržet hlášenı́ ‘to receive report’
is the situation of reporting, characterized by the
semantic participants provided by the predicative
noun, see ex. (9).

2.2 Valency Complementations
From a (deep) syntactic point of view, both a pred-
icative noun and a light verb in an LVC preserve
their own valency potentials (represented in a form
of valency frames), i.e., they are characterized
each by own sets of valency complementations.
In case of predicative nouns, valency frames rep-
resent the usage of nouns in nominal structures.
In case of light verbs, we observe that in Czech
valency frames are prototypically identical with
the frames of their full verb counterparts. Thus
we assume that the valency frames of light verbs
are inherited from the valency frames of the re-
spective full verbs, see Subsection 2.3.2. As light
verbs – entering into combination with predica-
tive nouns – form multiword lexical units, their va-
lency frames describe some kind of ‘proto lexical
units’ (in contrast to valency frames of full verbs,
where valency frames correspond to lexical units).

For instance, both the verb obdržet ‘to receive’
and the noun hlášenı́ ‘report’ forming the LVC
obdržet hlášenı́ ‘to receive report’ are character-
ized by their own valency frames: (i) The valency
frame of the verb is inherited from the valency
frame of the full verb (10), see ex. (11). (ii) The
valency frame of the noun (12) represents the us-
age of the noun in a nominal structure, see ex. (13).

(10) obdržet ‘to receive’ . . . ACT PAT ORIG
The valency complementations of the full
verb are mapped onto the semantic partic-
ipants ‘Recip’, ‘Theme’, and ‘Agent’, re-
spectively; see ex. (11).

(11) VýherceACT :Recip od násORIG:Agent
obdržı́ drobný dárekPAT :Theme .
Eng. ‘The winnerACT :Recip will receive a
small giftPAT :Theme from usORIG:Agent .’

149



(12) hlášenı́ ‘report’ . . . ACT ADDR PAT
The nominal valency complementations
are mapped onto the semantic participants
‘Speaker’, ‘Recip’, and ‘Inform’ respec-
tively, see ex. (13).

(13) PolicistovoACT :Speaker hlášenı́
veliteliADDR:Recip o akciPAT :Inform
bylo stručné.
Eng. The officer’sACT :Speaker re-
port on the actionPAT :Inform to his
commanderADDR:Recip was brief.

The correspondence between valency comple-
mentations of a verb and those of a noun in LVCs
is discussed in the following subsections.

2.3 Linking of Verbal and Nominal Valency
Complementations

A predicative noun (as was shown above) con-
tributes its semantic participants (linked with nom-
inal valency complementations) to the LVC. On
the other hand, the verbal complementations are
not semantically saturated, see Subsection 2.1. To
acquire semantic capacity, the verbal complemen-
tations are interlinked with nominal ones (satu-
rated by nominal semantic participants).

The linking of verbal complementations with
the nominal ones is reflected in the notions of fu-
sion or merger posited in connection with LVCs
by authors from different theoretical backgrounds,
see esp. (Alsina, 1997) and (Mohanan, 1997). In
FGD, this fact is tentatively referred to as shar-
ing valency complementations between a verbal
and a nominal valency frame which is indicated
by a specific type of grammatical coreference –
quasi-control, see esp. (Mikulová et al., 2006),
(Kolářová, 2010), and (Cinková, 2009).

For instance, when the verb obdržet ‘to receive’
combines with the predicative noun hlášenı́ ‘re-
port’ into the LVC, the nominal valency comple-
mentations are still linked with nominal semantic
participants (namely ‘Speaker’, ‘Recip’, and ‘In-
form’, see (12) in Subsection 2.2). On the other
hand, the verbal complementations do not corre-
spond to any semantic participants. To acquire the
semantic content, the verbal complementations are
linked with the nominal complementations (and
via them to the above given nominal semantic par-
ticipants), see Fig. 1.

As to the mechanism of the linking: when the
light verb obdržet ‘to receive’ combines with the

Figure 1: The linking of verbal valency com-
plementations with nominal complementations
(black arrows) and their saturation with the nom-
inal semantic participants in the LVC obdržet
hlášenı́ ‘to receive report’.

predicative noun hlášenı́ ‘report’, the noun oc-
cupies the verbal valency ‘PATient’. In accor-
dance with FGD, we re-assign this valency com-
plementation with the functor ‘CPHR’ (‘Com-
poundPHRaseme’) referring to a predicative com-
ponent in complex predicates, see (Mikulová et
al., 2006). The remaining valency complementa-
tions, ‘ORIGin’ and ‘ACTor’ in the verbal frame
(10), are linked with the nominal complementa-
tions ‘ACTor’ and ‘ADDRessee’ in (12), respec-
tively. As argued above, the linking allows the
given verbal complementations to acquire seman-
tic capacity from the nominal complementations.

2.3.1 Direction of Linking
With respect to the fact that a change of a light
verb may trigger the changes in the linking of ver-
bal and nominal valency complementations, we
assume that it is the light verb that determines the
linking of its complementation(s).

For instance, according to our suggestion, the
arrangement of the links is evoked by the verb
obdržet ‘to receive’ (not by the noun hlášenı́ ‘re-
port’) in the LVC obdržet hlášenı́ ‘to receive re-
port’, see Fig. 1. This hypothesis is supported by
the following observation: when the noun hlášenı́
‘report’ enters into combination with another light
verb, e.g., with the verb podat ‘to hand’ (result-
ing in the LVC podat hlášenı́ ‘to make report’), it
leads to the rearrangement of the linking – in this
case, the nominal ‘ACTor’ and ‘ADDRessee’ are
linked with the ‘ACTor’ and ‘ADDRessee’ of the
verb podat ‘to hand’, respectively, see ex. (14) and
Fig. 2.

(14) PolicistaACT :Speaker podal hlášenı́ o
akciPAT :Info svému veliteliADDR:Recip .
Eng. The officerACT :Speaker re-
ported on the actionPAT :Info to his

150



commanderADDR:Recip .

Figure 2: The linking of verbal valency com-
plementations with nominal complementations
(black arrows) and their saturation with the nomi-
nal semantic participants in the LVC podat hlášenı́
‘to make report’.

2.3.2 Verbal Valency Frame of a Light Verb
Let us repeat that from our point of view, valency
frames of light verbs are inherited from the va-
lency frames of their full counterparts, i.e., the va-
lency frames of light verbs are prototypically iden-
tical with the frames of the respective full verbs
(with the only difference that the complementa-
tion referring to a predicative noun is marked with
‘CPHR’ functor), as was stated in Subsections 2.2
and 2.3.

There is only one additional exception. In com-
parison with the valency frames of full verbs,
the number of valency complementations in the
frames of light verbs can be reduced. According
to our proposal, only those verbal valency com-
plementations from the valency frame that acquire
semantic content from nominal ones are retained
in the valency frame. Thus in case of light verbs,
only those valency complementations (in addition
to ‘CPHR’) that acquire semantic capacity via the
linking with nominal complementations are em-
ployed in the valency frame. Those verbal com-
plementations that are depleted in any semantic
content (i.e., those that remain unlinked with any
nominal complementation) are removed from the
valency frame.

These cases occur when the number of nom-
inal complementations is lower than the number
of verbal ones left in the verbal valency frame af-
ter a predicative noun occupies some verbal com-
plementation. Let us exemplify this case on the
verb podat ‘to hand’ when it enters into combi-
nation with the predicative noun výkon ‘perfor-
mance’ (resulting in the LVC podat výkon ‘to give
performance’), see ex. (5). This predicative noun

is characterized by a single valency complementa-
tion – ‘ACTor’ corresponding to the semantic par-
ticipant ‘Agent’. When this noun combines with
the verb podat ‘to hand’, it fills the verbal ‘PA-
Tient’ (assigned with ‘CPHR’). Then two verbal
complementations – ‘ACTor’ and ‘ADDRessee’ –
remain left in the verbal frame. The verbal ‘AC-
Tor’ is linked with the nominal ‘ACTor’; however,
the verbal ‘ADDRessee’ remains unlinked. As a
result, the ‘ADDRessee’ is deleted from the re-
spective verbal valency frame, see Fig. 3.

Figure 3: The linking of verbal valency com-
plementations with nominal complementations
(black arrows) and their saturation with the nomi-
nal semantic participants in the LVC podat výkon
‘to give performance’; see esp. the unlinked (and
thus deleted) verbal ‘ADDRessee’ (in gray).

3 Syntactic Expressions and Morphemic
Forms of Valency Complementations

We have argued that both a light verb and a pred-
icative noun retain their own valency potentials,
i.e., they correspond to separate valency frames,
see Subsection 2.2. These valency structures enter
into interaction which results in a complex surface
syntactic structure of a LVC.

In general, the number of valency complemen-
tations that can be expressed on the surface is de-
termined by the number of semantic participants
involved in the situation expressed by an LVC,
plus one verbal complementation (‘CPHR’) that is
reserved for a predicative noun.

Czech, as an inflectional language encoding sur-
face syntactic relations via morphological cases,
gives us an excellent opportunity to study the role
of valency complementations of a light verb and a
predicative noun in the complex surface structure
formation. According to morphemic forms of va-
lency complementations expressed on the surface
in LVCs, we can infer that the surface syntactic
structure of an LVC is typically partly formed by a
verbal valency frame and partly by a nominal va-
lency frame.

151



We formulate the following hypothesis: It is
a verb that, in general, determines the syntactic
structure of a sentence. Thus in case that a par-
ticular semantic participant is linked with both a
nominal valency complementation (directly) and
a verbal valency complementation (via the link
to a nominal valency complementation), it is a
verb (not a noun) that retains the complementa-
tion in the resulted surface structure (and thus pre-
scribe the morphemic form of the complementa-
tion). As each semantic participant is prototypi-
cally expressed only once, we consider the respec-
tive nominal complementation as elliptic (i.e., as
having zero morphemic realization).

Based on this hypothesis, the following rules
can be formulated:

– From the verbal valency frame, those verbal
valency complementations that are semanti-
cally saturated via linking with some nominal
valency complementations can be expressed
on the surface.

– From the nominal frame, those nominal com-
plementations that remain unlinked with any
verbal ones are expressed on the surface. On
the contrary, the nominal complementation
affected by linking with verbal complemen-
tation remains unexpressed on the surface.3

Let us exemplify the proposed rules on the ex-
ample of the LVC obdržet hlášenı́ ‘to receive re-
port’, which expresses the situation of reporting
characterized by three situational participants –
‘Speaker’, ‘Recip’, and ‘Inform’ (as discussed
in Section 2). Thus three valency complementa-
tions can be surface syntactically structured in the
LVC (in addition to the valency complementation
occupied by the predicative noun), see ex. (19).

As to the valency behavior, the light verb
obdržet ‘to receive’ is characterized by the va-
lency frame (16) inherited from the frame of its
full counterpart (15). The valency frame of the
predicative noun hlášenı́ ‘report’ (17) describes
the usage of the noun in a nominal structure, as
in ex. (18).

3In some cases, ‘ACTor’ can be expressed twice on the
surface, i.e., as both a nominal and a verbal complementa-
tion, despite being interlinked, e.g., Nemocnice svůj boj proti
rušenı́ akutnı́ch lůžek nevzdávajı́. ‘The hospitals do not give
up their fight against eliminating acute beds.’ However, the
possibility of expressing the ‘ACTor’ twice in a surface struc-
ture is subject to strong stylistic constraints in Czech.

(15) obdržet: ACTnom PATacc ORIGod+gen

(16) obdržet: ACTnom CPHRacc ORIGod+gen

(17) hlášenı́: ACTpos,gen ADDRdat PATo+loc

(18) PolicistovoACT :pos hlášenı́
veliteliADDR :dat o akciPAT :o+loc bylo
stručné.
Eng. The officer’sACT report on the
action to his commanderADDR was brief.

(19) VelitelACT :nom obdržel hlášenı́CPHR:acc o
akciPAT :o+loc od policistyORIG:od+gen .
Eng. The commanderACT received re-
portCPHR on the actionPAT from the
officerORIG .

1. When used in the LVC, one valency com-
plementation of the verb obdržet ‘to receive’ –
‘PATient’ expressed in accusative case – is filled
with the predicative noun hlášenı́ ‘report’; instead
of ‘PATient’, this complementation is marked by
the ‘CPHR’ functor distinguishing the light verb
from the full verb, see above.
2. Five valency complementations – two from the
verbal frame (‘ACTor’ and ‘ORIGin’) and three
from the nominal one (‘ACTor’, ‘ADDRessee’,
and ‘PATient’) – remain left in total for the expres-
sion of three semantic participants – ‘Speaker’,
‘Recip’, and ‘Inform’. Two verbal valency com-
plementations ‘ACTor’ and ‘ORIGin’ acquire se-
mantic capacity from the nominal ‘ADDRessee’
and ‘ACTor’, respectively, see Subsection 2.2 and
Fig. 1. Namely, the verbal ‘ACTor’ is linked with
‘Recip’ (via nominal ‘ADDRessee’) and the verbal
‘ORIGin’ is linked with ‘Speaker’ (via nominal
‘ACTor’). According to our hypothesis, the verb
retains these two complementations in the surface
structure and it determines their morphemic forms,
nominative and prepositional group od+genitive,
respectively; see valency frame (15).

As a result, nominal ‘ADDRessee’ and
‘ACTor’, remain unexpressed on the surface, see
Fig. 4 displaying the (simplified) dependency tree
representing ex. (19) – the linked valency com-
plementations are related by coreferential arrows
going from the complementations unexpressed on
the surface to the expressed ones.
3. The nominal ‘PATient’ – not being linked
with any verbal complementation, see Fig. 1 – is
expressed by the prepositional group o+locative
modifying the noun as when the noun is used out-
side the LVC, see ex. (18) and (19).

152



Figure 4: The (simplified) dependency tree for the
LVC obdržet hlášenı́ ‘to receive report’ in ex. (19).

The proposed hypotheses on the surface syntac-
tic formation of LVCs deserve further examination
on the corpus data.

3.1 Basic Typology of Syntactic Structures
with Light Verb Constructions

We have identified three types of complex surface
syntactic structures of LVCs in Czech (according
to the linking criteria). They are briefly exempli-
fied in the following paragraphs.

Type 1. All verbal complementations (exclud-
ing ‘CPHR’) are interlinked with the nominal
ones and no nominal complementation remains
unlinked. In this case, all the verbal complemen-
tations are expressed on the surface whereas all
nominal complementations remain unexpressed.
Compare with ex. (20) where the verbal ‘ACTor’
and ‘ADDRessee’ (linked with the nominal ‘AC-
Tor’ and ‘ADDResse’, respectively) are realized in
the resulting surface structure, whereas the respec-
tive nominal ones remain unexpressed (Fig. 5).

(20) JanoviADDR poskytovala podporuCPHR
rodinaACT .
Eng. John’s familyACT provided sup-
portCPHR to himADDR.

Type 2. All verbal valency complementations
(excluding ‘CPHR’) are linked with the nomi-
nal ones; however, some nominal complementa-
tions remain unlinked. In this case, the linked
verbal complementations are expressed whereas
the corresponding nominal complementations are
unexpressed in the resulted surface structure (as
in Type 1). Further, the unlinked nominal com-
plementations remain expressed as nominal ones.
Compare with ex. (21) where the verbal ‘ACTor’
(linked with the nominal ‘ACTor’) is expressed in
the resulted surface structure, whereas the nomi-
nal ‘ADDRessee’ (being unlinked with any verbal

Figure 5: The (simplified) dependency tree for the
LVC poskytovat podporu ‘to provide support’ in
ex. (20).

complementation) is realized as a nominal com-
plementation (expressed by the morphemic form
determined by the given noun, Fig. 6).

(21) Dceřin přı́telACT na násADDR udělal
dojemCPHR.
Eng. The daughter’s boyfriendACT made
an impressionCPHR on usADDR.

Figure 6: The (simplified) dependency tree for
the LVC udělat dojem ‘to make impression’ in
ex. (21).

Type 3. Not all verbal valency complementations
(besides ‘CPHR’) are linked with the nominal
ones, see Fig. 3. The linked ones are expressed on
the surface whereas the unlinked ones are deleted
from the verbal valency frame, see ex. (22) where
the verbal ‘ADDRessee’ is not structured (Fig. 7),
see also Subsection 2.3.2, Fig. 3.

(22) SportovecACT podal výkonCPHR.
Eng. The sportsmanACT gave a great per-
formanceCPHR.

4 Light Verb Constructions in VALLEX

In this section, the lexicographic representation of
LVCs is proposed for the valency lexicon of Czech

153



Figure 7: The (simplified) dependency tree for
for the LVC podat výkon ‘to give performance’ in
ex. (22).

verbs, VALLEX. As every light verb and predica-
tive noun creating an LVC are characterized by
their own valency potentials, we represent them by
separate valency frames: (i) for light verbs (Sub-
section 4.1) and (ii) for predicative nouns (Subsec-
tion 4.2). These frames are interlinked by refer-
ences so that the whole collocations can be easily
obtained. A special attention is paid to the repre-
sentation of the mapping between valency comple-
mentations of predicative nouns and light verbs.

In the current version VALLEX 2.5, there are
roughly 2,730 verb lexeme entries containing to-
gether around 6,460 verb lexical units; under the
term lexical unit, we understand a form-meaning
complex with (relatively) stable and discrete se-
mantic properties. A lexeme then represents an
abstract two-fold unit associating lexical form(s)
with lexical unit(s). The verbs were selected ac-
cording to their frequency in (the part of) the
Czech National Corpus4 SYN2000 – the corpus
coverage is approximately 98%. In building the
lexicon, the main emphasis was laid on both hu-
man and machine readability – this is reflected in
three formats of the lexicon: XML, HTML, and
PDF formats.

The lexical entries of verbs in the VALLEX
lexicon were exhaustively described in, e.g.,
(Žabokrtský and Lopatková, 2007). Let us shortly
recapitulate here the basic information relevant for
our explanation. Each lexical unit – represented
by a lemma (or set of lemmas) – is character-
ized by obligatory attributes: gloss(es), a valency
frame, and example(s). The valency frame, which
provides the core information in the lexicon, is
modeled as a sequence of valency slots. Each

4http://ucnk.ff.cuni.cz

slot stands for one valency complementation; it is
characterized by a functor (indicating the type of
the semantic relation of a valency complementa-
tion to a verb), by obligatoriness (in superscript),
and by a list of possible morphemic form(s) (in
subscript). In addition, optional attributes may
follow (providing the information on syntactico-
semantic class, the information of applicable al-
ternations, etc.).

4.1 Representation of Light Verbs
In this subsection, we describe the necessary mod-
ification of verb lexical entries for the purpose of
the representation of light verbs. Let us stress that
light verbs in the VALLEX lexicon will be rep-
resented by ‘proto lexical units’ (proto-LUs) (as
light verbs form multiword lexical units only in
combination with predicative nouns, see Subsec-
tion 2.2). These proto-LUs are characterized by
valency frames inherited from the frames of their
full verb counterparts. Proto-LUs have to provide
the following types of information:
I. In the inherited frame, the verbal valency com-
plementation that is filled with a predicative noun
is specified – its functor is changed to ‘CPHR’.
In case that more verbal valency complementa-
tions can be filled by (different) predicative nouns,
more inherited valency frames are determined,
with different valency slots identified as ‘CPHR’.
This functor covers the similar information which
is captured by lexical functions (namely Operi ,
Funci , and Labori , j, (k)) in the Meaning-Text
Theory, see esp. (Mel’čuk, 1996).
II. For each inherited valency frame, a list of pos-
sible linking(s) between the valency complemen-
tations of a light verb and those of a predicative
noun is given in a special attribute -map, see
Fig. 8.5 The following information can be drawn
from the linkings:
– which of the given valency complementation(s)
is/are expressed in a surface structure as verbal
modification(s) (those complementations that are
linked (via nominal complementations) with se-
mantic participants, see Section 3, Type 1, 2 and
3), and
– which verbal valency complementation(s) is/are
deleted from the verbal frame (those that are not
linked) and thus cannot be expressed on the sur-
face (Section 3, Type 3).

5As it is a light verb that forms the syntactic structure of a
sentence, this information is listed within verbal frames, see
Subsection 2.3.

154



III. Moreover, each inherited valency frame of a
light verb contains the references to possible pred-
icative nouns that form LVCs with the given light
verb. As the mapping may differ for different
predicative nouns, these references are attached to
individual types of linkings.

For instance, the verb podávatimpf , podatpf ‘to
hand’ as a full verb is characterized by the lexi-
cal unit displayed on the top of Fig. 8. The va-
lency frame representing the full verb is inherited
by the proto-LU of the light verb; this proto-LU is
characterized by the valency frame displayed be-
low. In this valency frame, the ‘PATient’ is filled
by predicative nouns (and thus replaced by the
‘CPHR’ functor). Moreover, two possible types of
linking between verbal and nominal complemen-
tations are specified. Both linkings are attributed
with the list of predicative nouns forming respec-
tive collocations.

Figure 8: The lexical unit of the full verb and the
proto lexical unit of the light verb podat, podávat
‘to hand’ in VALLEX.

4.2 Representation of Predicative Nouns

The current version of the VALLEX lexicon covers
only verbs, it does not comprise nouns. Thus for
the purpose of the description of LVCs, it is neces-
sary to enrich the lexicon with predicative nouns.
The logical structure of VALLEX is designed in a
way allowing for its further enriching with another
part-of-speech.

As in case of verbs, each lexical unit of a noun
is provided with a set of obligatory attributes pro-
viding the key information on the lexical unit –
including a valency frame, gloss(es), and exam-
ple(s). Again, the valency frame contains the core
information on valency behavior of nouns. In case

of predicative nouns, each noun is assigned the
valency frame corresponding to the usage of the
noun outside LVC(s), see, e.g., the valency frame
of the noun hlášenı́ ‘report’ given in (17), Sec-
tion 3 describing the usage of the noun in ex. (18).

In addition, a list of optional attributes that are
applicable only to relevant lexical units may fol-
low. Each predicative noun entering into combina-
tion with a light verb is attached with the optional
attribute -lvc containing references to possible
light verbs forming LVCs with the given predica-
tive noun;6 see, e.g., the proposed VALLEX lexical
unit for the noun hlášenı́ ‘report’ in Fig. 9.

Figure 9: The proposed lexical unit in VALLEX
describing the noun podat ‘to hand’.

5 Conclusion

We have provided a detailed analysis of the seman-
tic and deep syntactic aspects of light verb con-
structions – we have explained the role of semantic
participants with nominal and verbal valency com-
plementations and their interlinking. We have also
addressed the issue of surface syntactic expres-
sions of LVCs by giving an explanation of changes
in morphemic forms of the valency complementa-
tions affected in these constructions.

Our hypotheses have been projected to the pro-
posal of the representation of Czech LVCs in the
VALLEX lexicon. We have proposed to decom-
pose the information on LVCs between (i) ver-
bal valency frames (corresponding to light verbs)
and (ii) nominal valency frames (corresponding to
predicative nouns). Both frames are interlinked by
special attribute -lvc.

The proposed representation reflects the close
interplay between two components of LVCs – a

6The list of relevant light verbs are obtained automatically
from the verbal part of the VALLEX lexicon – we suppose
that for human readers, it is highly relevant to provide this
information (also) within the nominal frame; the automatic
extraction of such lists reduces duplicity (and thus decreases
possible inconsistencies in the lexicon).

155



light verb and a predicative noun. The information
provided by the -lvc attribute assigned to proto-
lexical units representing light verbs together with
valency frames (inherited from full verbs) make
it easy to derive both deep syntactic structure as
well as surface syntactic structure and morphemic
expressions of verbal and nominal valency com-
plementations of LVCs.

As the future work, the proposed hypotheses
on surface syntactic formation of LVCs will be
further examined on the corpus data. Moreover,
esp. three issues should be addressed in connec-
tion with LVCs: As for light verbs, a comprehen-
sive inventory of their aspectual nuances should
be compiled and included in their representation.
As for predicative nouns, the restrictions imposed
on the morphological category of number (e.g.,
upadnout do rozpaků ‘to fall into embarrassment’
where the Czech predicative noun can be used
only in plural) deserve further theoretical research
whose results should be covered in the lexicon as
well. Further, the possibility of expressing some
of valency complementations twice in the surface
structure deserves further investigation.

Acknowledgments

This work has been using language resources
stored and/or distributed by the LINDAT-Clarin
project of MŠMT (project LM2010013). The re-
search reported in this paper has been supported
by GA ČR, grant No. GA P406/12/0557.

References
Alex Alsina. 1997. Causatives in bantu and romance.

In Alex Alsina, Joan Bresnan, and Peter Sells, ed-
itors, Complex Predicates, pages 203–246. CSLI
Publications, Stanford, California.

Miriam Butt. 2010. The Light Verb Jungle: Still
Hacking Away. In Brett Baker Mengistu Amber-
ber and Mark Harvey, editors, Complex Predicates
in Cross-Linguistic Perspective, pages 48–78. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge.

Silvie Cinková. 2009. Words that Matter: Towards
a Swedish-Czech Colligational Dictionary of Basic
Verbs, volume 2 of Studies in Computational and
Theoretical Linguistics. UFAL, Prague.

Maurice Gross. 1981. Les bases empiriques de la no-
tion de prédicat sématique. Languages, 63:7–53.

Jena D. Hwang et al. 2010. Propbank annotation
of multilingual light verb constructions. In Pro-
ceedings of LAW 4, pages 82–90, Uppsala, Sweden.
ACL.

Veronika Kolářová. 2010. Valence deverbativnı́ch
substantiv v češtině (na materiálu substantiv s da-
tivnı́ valencı́). Univerzita Karlova, Nakladateltsvı́
Karolinum, Praha.

Eva Macháčková. 1979. Analytická spojenı́ typu
sloveso + abstraktnı́ substantivum (analytické vy-
jadřovánı́ predikátů). Ústav pro jazyk český ČSAV,
Praha.

Igor A. Mel’čuk. 1996. Lexical Functions: A Tool
for the description of lexical relations in a lexicon.
In Leo Wanner, editor, Lexical Functions in Lexi-
cography and Natural Language Processing, pages
37–105. John Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.

Igor A. Mel’čuk. 2004a. Actants in semantics and syn-
tax I: actants in semantics. Linguistics, 42(1):1–66.

Igor A. Mel’čuk. 2004b. Actants in semantics and syn-
tax II: actants in syntax. Linguistics, 42(2):247–291.

Igor A. Mel’čuk and Alexander Žolkovskij. 1984.
Tolkovo-kombinatornyj slovar’ sovremennovo
russkovo jazyka. Wiener Slawistischer Almanach,
Sonderband 14, Wien.

Marie Mikulová et al. 2006. Annotation on the tec-
togrammatical level in the Prague Dependency Tree-
bank. Annotation manual. Technical Report TR-
2006-30, ÚFAL MFF UK, Prague.

Tara Mohanan. 1997. Multidimensionality of Repre-
sentation: NV Complex Predicates in Hindi. In Alex
Alsina et al., editor, Complex Predicates, pages 431–
471, Stanford, California. CSLI Publications.

Jarmila Panevová. 1994. Valency Frames and the
Meaning of the Sentence. In Philip A. Luelsdorff,
editor, The Prague School of Structural and Func-
tional Linguistics, pages 223–243. John Benjamins
Publishing Company, Amsterdam, Philadelphia.

Jan Radimský. 2010. Verbo-nominálnı́ predikát s kat-
egoriálnı́m slovesem. Editio Universitatis Bohemiae
Meridionalis, České Budějovice.

Ivan A. Sag et al. 2002. Multiword Expressions: A
Pain in the Neck for NLP. In Proceedings of CI-
CLING 2002, pages 1–15, Mexico City, Mexico.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajičová, and Jarmila Panevová. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and
Pragmatic Aspects. Reidel, Dordrecht.

Veronika Vincze, Attila Almási, and János Csirik.
2012. Multiword verbs in wordnets. In Ch. Fell-
baum and P. Vossen, editors, Proceedings of the 6th
International Global WordNet Conference, pages
377–381, Brno. Tribun.

Zdeněk Žabokrtský and Markéta Lopatková. 2007.
Valency information in VALLEX 2.0: Logical struc-
ture of the lexicon. The Prague Bulletin of Mathe-
matical Linguistics, (87):41–60.

156


