



















































How Dependency Trees and Tectogrammatics Help Annotating Coreference and Bridging Relations in Prague Dependency Treebank


Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (DepLing 2013), pages 244–251,
Prague, August 27–30, 2013. c© 2013 Charles University in Prague, Matfyzpress, Prague, Czech Republic

How Dependency Trees and Tectogrammatics Help Annotating
Coreference and Bridging Relations in Prague Dependency Treebank

Anna Nedoluzhko
Charles University in Prague

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics

Czech Republic
nedoluzko@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Jiří Mírovský
Charles University in Prague

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics

Czech Republic
mirovsky@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

In  this  paper,  we  explore  the  benefits  of
dependency  trees  and  tectogrammatical
structure  used  in  the  Prague  Dependency
Treebank for annotating language phenomena
that  cross  the  sentence  boundary,  namely
coreference and bridging relations. We present
the benefits  of dependency trees  such as  the
detailed  processing  of  ellipses,  syntactic
decisions  for  coordination  and  apposition
structures  that  make  possible  coding
coreference relations in cases that  are not so
easy  when  annotating  on  the  raw  texts.  We
introduce  the  coreference  decision  for  non-
referring  constructions  and  present  some
tectogrammatical  features  that  are  useful  for
annotation of coreference.

1 Introduction

The  dependency  syntax  is  one  of  the  most
influential  linguistic  theories.  However,  its
benefits  are  mainly  explored  for  research  of
linguistic  phenomena  that  do  not  cross  the
sentence boundary and may be illustrated within
a single dependency tree. In this paper, we will
explore  how  dependency  trees  and
tectogrammatical structure  can  help  in  the
annotation of coreference and bridging relations
in the Prague Dependency Treebank.

The Prague Dependency Treebank (henceforth
PDT, Hajič et al. 2006) is a large collection of
linguistically annotated data and documentation.
In PDT 2.0, Czech newspaper texts are annotated
on  three  layers:  morphological,  syntactic  and
complex  semantic  (tectogrammatical).  In
addition  to  syntax,  the  tectogrammatical  layer
includes  the  annotation  of  topic-focus
articulation,  discourse  relations1,  coreference
1 The annotation of discourse and bridging relations

is a later addition to the data of PDT, see 
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/discourse/

links  and  bridging  relations.  Benefits  of
tectogrammatics  in  the  annotation  of  discourse
structure  were  examined  in  Mírovský  et  al.
(2012),  we  will  focus  on  coreference  and
bridging relations.

When we say that we take certain advantages
from  the  tectogrammatical  layer,  we  should
realize  that  the  advantages  of  two  kinds  are
possible:  we  can  take  advantage  from  the
dependency structure itself, independently of the
PDT conception, and we can use the information
included  in  the  tectogrammatical  layer  as  a
specific  contribution of  the Prague Dependency
Treebank.  In  this  paper,  when  we  describe
benefits that can be obtained for coreference and
bridging  annotation  using  the  dependency
structure,  our  examples  are  syntactically
analyzed  using  the  PDT  tectogrammatical
annotation strategy and are seriously influenced
by this approach. However, we suppose that in
principle any dependency analyzer would be able
to solve these problems in a similar way.

2 The  Coreference  and  Bridging
Relations in PDT

There are  three  types  of  relations  annotated in
PDT: (a)  grammatical  coreference  (coreference
of relative and reflexive pronouns, arguments  of
verbs of control, arguments in constructions with
reciprocity  and  verbal  complements),  (b)
pronominal  and  nominal  textual  coreference
(including  zero  anaphora),  which  is  further
specified  into  coreference  of  specific  (type
SPEC)  and  generic  (type  GEN)  noun  phrases,
and  (c)  bridging  relations,  which  mark  some
associative  semantic  relations  between  non-
coreferential  entities.  The  following  types  of
bridging  relations  are  distinguished:  PART-OF
(e.g.  room - ceiling),  SUBSET  (students - some
students)  and  FUNCT  (state - president)

244



traditional relations, CONTRAST for coherence
relevant  discourse  opposites  (this  year - last
year),  ANAF  for  explicitly  anaphoric  relations
without  coreference  (rainbow - that  word)  and
the further underspecified group REST2.

Coreference relations are marked between the
whole  subtrees  of  the  antecedent/anaphoric
expressions that are the subject to annotation. 

3 The Annotation Tool

The primary format of PDT 2.0 is called PML. It
is  an  abstract  XML-based  format  designed  for
annotation  of  treebanks.  For  editing  and
processing  data  in  PML  format,  a  fully
customizable  tree  editor  TrEd  has  been
implemented (Pajas and Štěpánek 2008). For the
coreference  and  bridging  annotation,  a special
extension was used, included into the system as a
module.

Technically, the coreference extension module
of TrEd allows annotation both on raw texts and
on  dependency  trees.  However,  annotation  on
dependency trees is more comfortable as it gives
more visual information about the function of the

2 For a detailed classification of coreference and 
bridging relations used in PDT, see e.g. 
Nedoluzhko et al. (2011).

annotated noun phrases in the sentence structure,
about  being  in  the  governing  or  dependent
position  in  the  coreferring  expression,  about
being a part of an appositional or a coordinative
construction and so on. 

4 Benefits  of  Dependency  Trees  and
Tectogrammatics

One  of  the  technical  advantages  of  gold
dependency trees is the automatic extraction of
elements  to  be  annotated  for  coreference,
including  so  called  minimal  markables (MIN-
IDs) that are always the governing expression of
full  span  markable  expressions.  Of  course,  it
does  not  solve  the  problem  for  coreference
resolution  systems,  but  it  makes  the  manual
annotation easier, reducing it to a single step of
coding  coreferential  links  between  already
identified markables. 

4.1 Syntactic zeros

In so-called ‘pro-drop’ languages such as  most
Romance  languages,  Japanese,  Greek,  most
Slavonic languages, etc., a phonetic realization is
not required for anaphoric references in contexts
where  they  are  syntactically  or  pragmatically
inferable. The problem of syntactic zeros is the

Figure 1: If you'd like {#Cor.ACT} to see the first time Michelle Pfeiffer sang on screen, and you have a 
lot of patience, #PersPron take a look at Grease 2.

245



subject  of  research in  many different  linguistic
theories  (see  e.g.  the  elaboration  of  different
aspects  in  generative  grammar  (Roberts  1997),
Prague  dependency  grammar  (Panevová  1986,
Růžička  1999),  Moscow  structuralismus
(Meľčuk  1974),  etc.).  There  is  not  much
theoretical  disagreement  concerning  such
elements  (at  least  in  case  of  zero  anaphoric
pronouns  and  control  constructions),  but  they
raise a lot of problems with annotation of their
relations  to  coreferential expressions  and
automatic  resolution  of  these  relations.  Thus,
only  a  few  coreference  annotation  projects
reconstruct the ellided expressions and annotate
them for coreference  (see e.g.  Xue et al.  2005,
Pradhan et al. 2007). However, for example, with
tools such as MMAX (Müller and Strube 2001),
the only option is to have ‘verbal markables’ as
done e.g.,  in VENEX (Poesio et  al.  2004)  and
LiveMemories (Rodriguez 2010) annotation (i.e.,
annotate  a  relation  between  the  immediately
following verbal element and the antecedent). In
AnCora  (Recasens  and Martí  2010),  zero
subjects were added as extra ‘empty’ tokens, and
these were used for annotating coreference. 

Consequent  annotation  of  such  arguments  is
better possible with annotation tools that use as a
base  layer  a  full  syntactic  annotation  or  an
argument structure. As TrEd is one of such tools,
its  benefits  are  used  for  reconstructing  ellided

expressions,  their  coreference  relations  being
further  consistently  annotated.  Zero  arguments
are  reconstructed  using  the  PDT  Valency
Lexicon VALLEX (Hajič et al. 2003), which for
each  autosemantic,  valency-capable  word
provides its valency information. 

According  to  the  detailed  classification  of
ellipses  introduced  in  Mikulová  (2011),  PDT
uses  a  rich  variety of  newly  established  nodes
occupying  positions  of  all  kinds  of
modifications. The classification of these nodes
corresponds to  the  ability of  different  types of
newly  established  nodes  to take  part  in
coreference  relations.  Newly  established  nodes
that are subjects to coreference annotation are the
following:

•  #PersPron. This lemma is assigned to nodes 
representing personal or possessive pronouns.
It applies both to newly established nodes and
to those present at the surface level. In most 
cases, nodes with #PersPron lemma, 
especially those representing personal 
pronouns in the third person, are connected 
with their antecedents by coreference 
relations (the rare exceptions are mostly 
generic uses of pronouns used once in the text
without further reference). Cf. Fig. 1.

•  #Cor. This lemma is assigned to newly 
established nodes representing the (usually 
inexpressible) controllee in control 
constructions. These nodes are always 
connected by a grammatical coreference link 
with its controller, cf. coreference of 
unexpressed actor of the verb in Fig. 1.

•  #QCor. This lemma is assigned to newly 
established nodes representing a (usually 
inexpressible) valency modification in 
constructions with so-called quasi-control. 
This case can be found with multi-word 
predicates the dependent part of which is a 
noun with valency requirements, cf. He 
offered Jan {#QCor} protection. The valency 
of the verb offer as well as the modification of
the noun protection has the same referent Jan.
This shared modification can only be present 
once at the surface level (it is impossible to 
say: *He offered Jan protection of Jan). These
nodes are always connected by a grammatical
coreference link with its controller.

•  #Rcp. This lemma is assigned to newly 
established nodes representing participants 
that are left out as a result of reciprocation. 
There is always a grammatical coreference 

Figure 2: Klienti pojišťoven, které ukončí svou 
činnost, se automaticky vrátí k Všeobecné.  (=lit. 
Clients of insurance companies which shut down will 
automatically return to the General {one}.)

246



relationship indicated in the tectogrammatical
tree, going from the node with the #Rcp t-
lemma to the node with which it is in the 
reciprocal relation: The lovers kissed 
{#Rcp.PAT}. 

•  If it is clear (and possible to find in the text) 
which noun has been omitted in the surface 
structure of the sentence (the case of textual 
ellipsis), a copy of the node representing the 
same lexical unit as the omitted element is 
inserted into the appropriate position. Cf. 
Fig. 2.

Other newly established nodes are not supposed
to be linked by coreference. These are e.g. #Gen
for  a  general  participant  (Houses  are  built
{#Gen.ACT}  from bricks.),  #Unsp for  valency
modifications with vague (non-specific) semantic
content  (U  Nováků  {#Unsp.ACT}  dobře  vaří.
(=They cook well at Nováks’.)),  #EmpNoun for
non-expressed  nouns  governing  syntactic
adjectives,  which  are  not  the  case  of  textual
ellipsis  (Přišli  jen  {#EmpNoun.ACT}  mladší.
(=lit.  Came  only  {#EmpNoun}  younger.)),
#Oblfm for obligatory adjuncts that are absent at
the surface level (Ta vypadá.  {#Oblfm.MANN}
(=lit.  That.fem  looks;  meaning:  She  looks
awful/so  strange...))  and  some  other  newly

established  nodes  used  in  comparative
constructions. 

Such  a  detailed  linguistically  elaborated
method  provides very consistent information of
the analyzed language and thus  a  reliable  base
for  a  theoretical linguistic research, but  corpora
annotated in this way are problematic for many
automatic resolving systems,  as the state of the
art  at  extracting  full  syntactic  structure  /
argument  structure  from  text  is  still  not  good
enough.  However,  the  results  for  #PersPron
resolution in PDT are not so bad.  A rule-based
system employed  in  Nguy  and Žabokrtský
(2007)  to  resolution  of  pronominal  textual
coreference  got  the  success  rate  of  74 %  (F1-
measure).  Applying  machine  learning  methods,
particularly  perceptron  ranking  in  Nguy  et  al.
(2009) on the same task outperformed the rule-
based method with F1-measure over 79 %.

4.2 Processing non-referring expressions

Non-referring  expressions  such  as  appositions,
verbal  complements  and  noun  phrases  in
predicative  positions  are  a  special  problematic
issue  in  coreference  annotation  projects  that
mark  coreference  on  raw  texts.  Coding
coreference on dependency trees may solve the
problem.  In  PDT,  appositions,  verbal
complements  and  noun  phrases  in  predicative

Figure 3: A master of pork-barrel politics, he had crafted the $2.85 billion package in vintage style 
and used the full force of his chairmanship to keep the proposal intact and dismiss any alternative.

247



positions are resolved on the syntactic level and
they do not need to be additionally annotated for
coreference.  This  information  can  be  easily
extracted from the tectogrammatical layer. Thus,
for appositions, the whole construction serves as
a markable for coreference annotation, its parts
beeing  connected  with  a  node  with  a  special
tectogrammatical functor APPS. The predicative
relation is obvious. For verbal complements, the
functor  COMPL is  used,  the  dependency on  a
noun being additionally represented by means of
a special attribute compl.rf, in TrEd visualized by
a (non-coreference) arrow (see Fig. 3).

4.3 Coordinative constructions

Coordination  structures  and  their  connection
with plural  reference are another difficult  issue
for  processing  coreference  relations.  E.g.  the
semantics  of  plural  reference to  a  coordination
like John and Mary met. They had not seen each
other  for  a  long  time is  fairly  uncontroversial
from a semantic point of view and can be solved
satisfactorily  by  any  annotation  system  (the
coordination construction as a whole and its parts
separately  may  be  lined  by  coreference
relations).  On  the  contrary,  the  problem  of
multiple  antecedents for  they in  John  visited
Ellen, and they went to the seaside will present a
problem for all,  no matter  if  dependency-based
or  raw-text  annotations.  Still,  there  are
coordinative  constructions  that  are  complicated
for annotation on texts (a special split-antecedent
mechanism  is  needed)  and  have  an  elegant
solution on dependency trees.

Annotating coreference link for  the Queen in
Fig. 43 on the raw text is problematic because of
its modifier  of Hearts is common for both NPs,
The  King and  the  Queen.  In  PDT
tectogrammatics,  this  is  resolved  by  a
dependency structure, as shown in Fig. 4.

The  reconstruction  of  a  complex  syntactic
construction  makes  it  possible  to  refer  to  a
coordination Latitude or Longitude in Fig. 5. 

4.4 Contribution of tectogrammatics

There are  some additional  helpful  features  that
do  not  necessarily  depend  on  the  dependency
structure  of  the  text  representation  but  are
present  in  the  tectogrammatical  level  of  the
Prague  Dependency  Treebank  and  are  very
useful  for  the  consistent  annotation  of
coreference and bridging relations and its further
analysis.  According  to  its  semantic  part  of
speech,  each  node  contains  grammatical
information about gender, number, resp. person,
tense, mood, etc. Direct speech and parenthesis
are marked  in  a special  attribute.  Discourse
annotation supplies the information about which
expressions are parts of titles or subtitles.  Very
important for the analysis of text cohesion is the
topic-focus  articulation  that  is  annotated
manually for the whole PDT.

Furthermore, PDT uses a special approach to
the syntactic annotation of quantifiers,  measure
NPs  and  constructions  with  similar  semantic
meaning. In PDT annotation guidelines, they are
called nouns with a ‘container’ meaning.  Their
3 For examples Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, the sentences from

the discussion on the workshop RAIS are used 
(http://wiki.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/RAIS/Stuttgart-
Workshop).

Figure 4: The King and Queen of Hearts were sitting on their throne when Alice 
appeared. The Queen said severely “Who is she?”

248



arguments have typical semantic label MAT and
can be easily recognized in the dependency tree.
This  fact  was widely exploited for  coreference
annotation. The ‘container’ words were basically
considered  to  be  markables  for  coreference
relations,  their  dependent  elements  were
annotated for coreference only in  some special
(rare) cases where annotation to ‘containers’ was
not possible for technical or semantical reasons
(Nedoluzhko 2011).

Also information  about  the  tectogrammatical
functors  of  potentially  coreferring  nodes  is
widely  explored  for  annotation  of  coreference
and bridging relations. In PDT, functors mainly
represent  the  semantic  values  of  syntactic
dependency relations, they express the functions
of  individual  modifications  in  the  sentence.  As
mentioned  above,  functors  for  appositive,
predicative  and  coordinative  constructions,  as
well  as  the  special  functor  for  verbal
complements,  are  of  great  use  for  consequent
coreference  annotation.  Moreover,  when
annotating  coreference  and  bridging  relations,
there should be considered such functors as ID,
ACMP, AUTH etc. 

4.4.1 The ID functor

The functor ID (identity) is used as a functor for
an identifying  expression,  which is  represented
as an identification structure. The ID functor is
assigned  to  adnominal  adjuncts  representing
meta-language  expressions,  proper  nouns  and
names  of  animals,  objects  and  events,  e.g.  v
případu  Kott - Kutílek (=  in  the  case  of
Kott - Kutílek);  agentura  Reuters (=Reuters
agency);  pojem čas (=notion  of  time).  In  such
cases, noun phrases do not refer to objects but to
themselves.  For  this  reason,  all  constructions
containing expressions  with the  ID functor  are
annotated  for  coreference  as  one  unit.  The
coreference  arrow links  the  governing  node  to
the node with the ID functor (i.e. agency in case
of  Reuters agency,  notion  in case of  notion of
time and so on). 

4.4.2 The ACMP functor

The ACMP functor (accompaniment) is a functor
for such an adjunct which expresses manner by
specifying  a  circumstance  (an  object,  person,
event) that accompanies (or fails to accompany)

Figure 5.  Alice had no idea what Latitude was, or Longitude either, but thought they were nice 
grand words to say.

249



the event or entity modified by the adjunct. The
meaning  of  the  ACMP functor  may  appear in
conflict  with  some  bridging  relations  (mainly
SUBSET). In this case, the bridging relations are
not  annotated.  Cf.  válečná  plavidla  včetně
bojových  letadel.ACMP  a  bitevních
vrtulníků.ACMP  (=warships  including  air
force ...).

5 Problematic Issues

Of  course,  dependency  trees  and
tectogrammatics  do  not  solve  all  coreference
annotation  problems.  One  of  the  problematic
issues  that  remains  daunting  for  coreference
annotation is the identity of prepositional phrases
and included noun phrases. In PDT, prepositions
are hidden in sub-functors and can be taken into
account if annotating on tectogrammatical  trees
only by looking at  these subfunctors.  Although
the  semantic  distinction  between  prepositional
phrases  with  the  same  head  and  different
preposition is very important, we ignore it in the
annotation.  So,  if  two  noun  phrases  are
coreferential,  we  mark  coreferential  relation
between them also in case when they are parts of
prepositional phrases which are not coreferential.
Although  contraintuitive,  the  following
expressions  will  be  marked  as  coreferential:
Prague – near Prague, before the war – during
the war – after the war. The distinction between
PPs and NPs beeing in Prague tectogrammatics
complicated  (though  technically  possible),  the
question about the ability of PPs to corefer still
remains  open,  so  our  decision  to  mark
coreference for  NPs  ignoring PPs still  remains
quite consequent.

6 Conclusion

In  this  paper,  we  demonstrated  how  manual
annotation of coreference relations may benefit
from  the  use  of  dependency  trees  and  the
tectogrammatical  structure  of  the  Prague
Dependency Treebank. We considered separately
the  contribution  of  dependency  trees  and  the
tectogrammatics. Although dependency syntactic
annotation is quite costly and time-consuming, it
gives  good  structural  solutions  for  processing
coreference  in  predicative,  appositive  and
coordinative  structures,  constructions  with
ellipses  of  different  kinds  and  so  on.  The
connection to the syntactico-semantic analysis of
the  tectogrammatical  layer  in  the  Prague
Dependency  Treebank  appears  as  a  rather
convenient  tool.  In  addition  to  issues  already

mentioned,  it  makes  it  possible  to  work  with
already  established  and  coherent  solutions  of
typical  syntactic  constructions  and
tectogrammatic  functors.  Along  with  other
similar tasks  being performed on the same PDT
level  (topic-focus  articulation,  discourse
annotation),  it  creates  a  reliable  basis  for  a
deeper linguistic research in the field of language
phenomena that cross the sentence boundary.

Acknowledgements 

We  gratefully  acknowledge  support  from  the
Grant  Agency  of  the  Czech  Republic  (grants
P406/12/0658 and P406/2010/0875).

Bibliography

J.  Hajič  et  al.  2006.  Prague  Dependency  Treebank
2.0.CD-ROM,  Linguistic  Data  Consortium,  LDC
Catalog No.: LDC2006T01, Philadelphia.

J. Hajič, J. Panevová, Z. Urešová, A. Bémová and V.
Kolářová.  2003.  PDT-Vallex:   Creating  a  Large-
coverage  Valency  Lexicon  for  Treebank
Annotation.  In  Proceedings  of  The  Second
Workshop on Treebanks  and Linguistic  Theories,
57-68. Vaxjo University Press. 

I.  Meľčuk.  1974.  O  sintaksicheskom  nule.  In
Cholodovich  A.A.  (ed.)  Tipologija  passivnych
konstrukcij. Diatezy i zalogi. Leningrad. 

M.  Mikulová. 2011.  Významová reprezentace elipsy.
ÚFAL, Prague, 230 pp.

M.  Mikulová,  A.  Bémová,  J.  Hajič,  E.  Hajičová,  J.
Havelka,  V.  Kolářová,  M.  Lopatková,  P.  Pajas,  J.
Panevová,  M.  Razímová,  P. Sgall,  J.  Štěpánek,  Z.
Urešová,  K.  Veselá,  Z.  Žabokrtský,  L.  Kučová.
2005.  Anotace  na  tektogramatické  rovině
Pražského  závislostního  korpusu.  Anotátorská
příručka (t-layer annotation guidelines). Technical
Report TR-2005-28, ÚFAL MFF UK, Prague.

J.  Mírovský,  P.  Jínová,  L.  Poláková.  2012.  Does
Tectogrammatics  help  the  Annotation  of
Discourse? In Procedings of the 24th International
Conference  on  Computational  Linguistics
(COLING 2012), Mumbai, India.

L.  Mladová,  Š.  Zikánová,  E.  Hajičová.  2008.  From
Sentence  to  Discourse:  Building  an  Annotation
Scheme  for  Discourse  Based  on  Prague
Dependency Treebank. In  Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2008), Marakéš, Maroko.

Ch.  Müller,  M.  Strube.  2001. Annotating  anaphoric
and  bridging  relations  with  MMAX.  In
Proceedings  of  the  2nd  SIGdial  Workshop  on
Discourse  and  Dialogue.  Aalborg,  Denmark,  pp.
90–95.

250



A.  Nedoluzhko. 2011.  Rozšířená textová koreference
a  asociační  anafora.  Koncepce  anotace  českých
dat  v  Pražském  závislostním  korpusu. ÚFAL,
Prague.

G.  L.  Nguy,  Z.  Žabokrtský.  2007.  Rule-based
Approach  to  Pronominal  Anaphora  Resolution
Applied on the Prague Dependency Treebank 2.0
Data.  In  Proceedings  of  the  6th  Discourse
Anaphroa  and  Anaphor  Resolution  Colloquium,
Lagos, 2007.

G.  L.  Nguy,  V.  Novák,  Z.  Žabokrtský.  2009.
Comparison  of  Classification  and  Ranking
Approaches to Pronominal Anaphora Resolution in
Czech.  In  Proceedings  of  the  SIGDIAL  2009
Conference, London.

P.  Pajas,  J.  Štěpánek.  2008.  Recent  advances  in  a
feature-rich framework for treebank annotation. In
The  22nd  Interntional  Conference  on
Computational  Linguistics  –  Proceedings  of  the
Conference. Manchester, pp. 673-680.

J.  Panevová.  1986.  The  Czech  infinitive  in  the
function of objective and the rules of reference. In
Mey  J.  (ed)  Language  and  discourse:  Text  and
protest. Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

M.  Poesio,  R.  Delmonte,  A.  Bristot,  L.  Chiran,
S.Tonelli. 2004.  The VENEX corpus of anaphoric
information  in  spoken  and  written  Italian.
Manuscript.

M.  Poesio.  2004.  The  MATE/GNOME  Scheme  for
Anaphoric  Annotation,  Revisited.  In  Proc.of
SIGDIAL, Boston.

M. Poesio, R. Artstein. 2008. Anaphoric annotation in
the  ARRAU  corpus  In  Proceedings  of  the  Sixth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC). Marrakech, Morocco.

S.  Pradhan,  L.  A.  Ramshaw, R.  M.  Weischedel,  J.
MacBride,  L.  Micciulla.  2007. Unrestricted
Coreference:  Identifying  Entities  and  Events  in
OntoNotes.  In  Proceedings  of  the  International
Conference  on  Semantic  Computing  (ICSC  '07).
446-453.

M.  Recasens,  A.  Martí.  2010. AnCora-CO:
Coreferentially annotated corpora for Spanish and
Catalan. In Language Resources and Evaluation.

I.  Roberts.  1997.  Comparative  syntax. London:
Arnold.

K. J. Rodriguez, F. Delogu, Y. Versley, E. Stemle and
M.  Poesio.  2010.  Anaphoric  Annotation  of
Wikipedia and Blogs in the Live Memories Corpus.
In  Proceedings  of  the  Seventh  International
Conference  on  Language  Resources  and
Evaluation (LREC), Valletta, Malta, May 2010.

R.  Růžička.  1999.  Control  in  grammar  and
pragmatics:  a  cross-linguistic  study.  John
Benjamins Publishing.

Nianwen  Xue,  Fei  Xia,  Fu-Dong  Chiou,  and  M.
Palmer. 2005. The Penn Chinese TreeBank: Phrase
structure  annotation  of  a  large  corpus.  Natural
Language Engineering, 11(2):207–238.

251


