










































Adapting the PULS event extraction framework to analyze Russian text


Proceedings of the 4th Biennial International Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 100–109,
Sofia, Bulgaria, 8-9 August 2013. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Adapting the PULS Event Extraction Framework
to Analyze Russian Text

Lidia Pivovarova,1,2 Mian Du,1 Roman Yangarber1
1 Department of Computer Science

University of Helsinki, Finland
2St. Petersburg State University, Russia

Abstract

This paper describes a plug-in component
to extend the PULS information extraction
framework to analyze Russian-language
text. PULS is a comprehensive framework
for information extraction (IE) that is used
for analysis of news in several scenarios
from English-language text and is primar-
ily monolingual. Although monolingual-
ity is recognized as a serious limitation,
building an IE system for a new language
from the bottom up is very labor-intensive.
Thus, the objective of the present work is
to explore whether the base framework can
be extended to cover additional languages
with limited effort, and to leverage the pre-
existing PULS modules as far as possible,
in order to accelerate the development pro-
cess. The component for Russian analysis
is described and its performance is evalu-
ated on two news-analysis scenarios: epi-
demic surveillance and cross-border secu-
rity. The approach described in the paper
can be generalized to a range of heavily-
inflected languages.

1 Introduction

1.1 Problem Statement

PULS1 is a framework for information extraction
from text (IE), designed for decision support in
various domains and scenarios. To date, work
on PULS has mostly concentrated on English-
language text, though some effort has gone into
adapting PULS to other languages, (Du et al.,
2011). This paper describes a component that is
used to extend PULS to analyze Russian-language
text, and demonstrates its performance on two IE
scenarios: infectious epidemics and cross-border

1http://puls.cs.helsinki.fi

security. The epidemics scenario is built to pro-
vide an early warning system for professionals
and organizations responsible for tracking epi-
demic threats around the world. Because infor-
mation related to outbreaks of infectious disease
often appears in news earlier than it does in offi-
cial sources, text mining from the Web for medi-
cal surveillance is a popular research topic, as dis-
cussed in, e.g., (Collier et al., 2008; Huttunen
et al., 2002; Rortais et al., 2010; Zamite et al.,
2010). Similarly, in the security scenario, the sys-
tem tracks cross-border crime, including illegal
migration, smuggling, human trafficking, as well
as general criminal activity and crisis events; text
mining for this scenario has been previously re-
ported by (Ameyugo et al., 2012; Atkinson et al.,
2011). The new component monitors open-source
media in Russian, searching for incidents related
to the given scenarios. It extracts information
from plain, natural-language text into structured
database records, which are used by domain spe-
cialists for daily event monitoring. The structure
of the database records (called templates) depends
on the scenario. For the epidemics scenario the
system extracts the fields: disease name, location
of the incident, date, number of victims, etc. In the
security domain, the template contains the type of
event, date and location, the perpetrator, number
of victims (if any), goods smuggled, etc.

Monolinguality is a serious limitation for IE,
since end-users are under growing pressure to
cover news from multiple languages, (Piskorski
et al., 2011). The Russian-language component
that we describe here is an experiment in extend-
ing PULS to multi-lingual coverage. Our aim is to
explore whether a such an extension can be built
with limited effort and resources.

1.2 Prior work on IE from Russian

IE in Russian has been the topic of several recent
studies. For example, (Piskorski et al., 2011) uses

100



Russian among other languages to study infor-
mation fusion across languages. Extraction tech-
niques are used for ontology learning in (Bocharov
et al., 2010) and (Schumann, 2012). The Uni-
versity of Sheffield’s GATE system, (Bontcheva
et al., 2003), which supports multi-lingual IE, has
been adapted to Russian as part of the MUSE-3
project, (though little is published on functional-
ity available in Russian). HP Labs have recently
started adaptation of their information extraction
solutions to Russian, (Solovyev et al., 2012).

Much literature devoted to Russian-language
information extraction is published only in Rus-
sian; a brief review can be found in (Khoro-
shevsky, 2010). The majority of existing appli-
cations for Russian IE, and Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) in general, are commercially based,
and are either published in Russian only, or not
at all. One major player in Russian text min-
ing is Yandex, the leading Russian search engine.
Yandex uses IE to support its main search ser-
vice, e.g., to underline addresses and persons in
search results, and in a service called “Press Por-
traits,”2 which builds profiles for various personal-
ities found in the news. A profile may include the
profession, biographical facts, news that s/he is in-
volved in, and related people—using information
automatically extracted from on-line Russian me-
dia. Yandex also recently unveiled an open-source
toolkit Tomita, for developing IE systems based on
context-free grammars.

Dictum, a company that builds applications for
NLP and sentiment analysis in Russian, provides
a toolkit for Russian morphological, syntactic and
semantic analysis. Their Fact Extraction compo-
nent3 finds persons, organizations, locations, etc.,
and creates simple facts about persons: corporate
posts, date of birth, etc.

RCO, a company focused on research and de-
velopment of text analysis solutions, provides the
RCO Fact Extractor tool4, which performs fact ex-
traction from unstructured text. One common us-
age scenario is setting up a list of target objects
(persons, companies) and extracting all events
where these objects are mentioned as participants.
The tool also includes a module that allows the
user to adjust search patterns.

With the exception of Tomita and AOT (see Sec-

2http://news.yandex.ru/people
3http://dictum.ru/en/object-extraction/blog
4http://www.rco.ru/eng/product.asp

tion 3), few resources are available in open-source.

2 The Baseline English System

The PULS news-tracking pipeline consists of three
main components: a Web-crawler that tries to
identify potentially relevant articles using a broad
keyword-based Web search; a rule-based Informa-
tion Extraction system that uses patterns acquired
through semi-supervised learning, that determines
exactly what happened in the article, creating a
structured record that is stored in the database;
and a relevance classifier that determines the rele-
vance of the selected articles—and events that they
describe—to the particular use-case scenario and
the users’ needs. This paper will mostly focus on
the IE component, as other two components are
language-independent.

The IE system contains modules for lower-
level—morphological and syntactic—analysis, as
well as higher-level—semantic—analysis, and
produces filled templates on output, extracted
from an input document, (Du et al., 2011).

PULS follows a classic IE processing pipeline:

• Pre-processing,

• Lexical markup,

• Shallow syntactic analysis/chunking,

• Semantic pattern matching

• Reference resolution and logical inference

Pre-processing includes tokenization, part-of-
speech tagging, processing of punctuation, nu-
meric expressions, etc.

Lexical markup is tagging of lexical units found
in text with semantic information found in a dictio-
nary and/or ontology. PULS uses several domain-
independent and domain-specific lexicons and on-
tologies. The ontology is a network of con-
cepts organized in a hierarchy by several rela-
tions, among which the “is-a” relation is the most
common. One key factor that enables the addi-
tion of new languages efficiently is that the on-
tology is language-independent. The system uses
the lexicons to map words into concepts. A lex-
icon consists of word-forms and some common
multi-word expressions (MWEs), which appear in
text and represent some ontology concept. We
assume that within a given domain each word or

101



MWE in the lexicon represents exactly one con-
cept, (Yarowsky, 1995). A concept may be rep-
resented by more than one word or MWE.5 Each
scenario has its own scenario-specific ontology
and lexicons; the Epidemics ontology consists of
more than 4000 concepts (which includes some
disease names). Diseases are organized in a hi-
erarchy, e.g., “hepatitis” is a parent term for “hep-
atitis A”. The Security ontology consists of 1190
concepts.

The domain-specific lexicon is a collection of
terms that are significant for a particular scenario,
mapped to their semantic types/concepts. The Se-
curity and Epidemics scenarios use a common lo-
cation lexicon, that contains approximately 2500
names of countries, cities and provinces. Loca-
tions are organized according the “part-of” rela-
tion: cities are part-of provinces, which are part-of
states, etc.

Syntactic analysis is implemented as a cascade
of lower-level patterns. PULS uses shallow anal-
ysis (chunking), which does not try to build com-
plete syntactic tree for a sentence but recognizes
local grammatical structures—in particular, the
noun and verb groups. This phase also identi-
fies other common constructions needed for IE,
(names, dates, etc.). As a result of the syntactic
analysis, each sentence is represented as a set of
fragments.

The pattern base is the main component of the
IE system, responsible for finding factual informa-
tion in text. A pattern is a set of semantic, syntactic
and morphological constraints designed to match
pieces of natural-language text. When a pattern
fires it triggers an action, which creates an abstract
logical entity based on the text matched by the pat-
tern. The entity is added to an internal pool of
entities found in the document so far. Facts pro-
duced by the system are based on the entities in
this pool. The patterns are arranged in a cascade
such that the results produced by one pattern are
used by subsequent patterns to form more com-
plex entities.

Patterns operate on a sentence-by-sentence ba-
sis. To link information in the surrounding sen-
tences PULS uses concept-based reference reso-
lution and logical inference rules. The reference
resolution component is a set of rules for merging

5By default, words that appear only in the general-purpose
dictionary, and do not appear in any domain-specific lexicon,
are automatically identified with a concept having an identi-
cal name.

mentions of the same object and events.
Inference rules work on a logical level (rather

than text), operating on entities found at the pre-
ceding stages of analysis. These entities can be
used to fill slots in an event description, for exam-
ple, to find event time and location, or to perform
logical inference. For example, if the event type is
human-trafficking and a concept related to organ-
transplantation is mentioned in the sentence, an
inference rule may specialize the event type to
human-trafficking-organs.

3 Russian Morphology and Syntax

To speed development, we use pre-existing tools
for tokenization, morphological and syntactic
analysis in Russian. The range of freely-available,
open-source tools for Russian is quite narrow, es-
pecially for syntactic analysis. Significant efforts
for overcoming this situation have been the focus
of the recent “Dialogue” series of conferences6,
which organized workshops on Russian morphol-
ogy, (Astaf’eva et al., 2010), and syntax, (Toldova
et al., 2012). Workshops take the form of compe-
titions, where the participants tackle shared tasks.
Eight teams participated in the latest workshop,
devoted to syntax. However, only one—AOT7—
offers their toolkit under the GNU LGPL license.

The AOT toolkit, (Sokirko, 2001) is a collec-
tion of modules for NLP, including libraries for
morphological, syntactic, and semantic analysis,
language generation, tools for working with dic-
tionaries, and GUIs for visualization of the anal-
ysis. Due to its open availability and high qual-
ity of linguistic analysis, AOT is currently a de-
facto standard for open-source Russian-language
processing.

The AOT morphological analyzer, called
“Lemm”, analyzes text word by word; its output
for each word contains: an index, the surface form,
the base lemma, part of speech, and morphologi-
cal tags. Lemm works on the morphological level
only, and leaves all morphological ambiguity in-
tact, to be resolved by later phases.

Lemm uses a general-purpose Russian mor-
phological dictionary, which can be edited and
extended (e.g., with neologisms, domain-specific
terms, etc.). To add a new lemma into the
dictionary, one needs to specify its inflectional

6Dialogue—International Conference of Computational
Linguistics (http://www.dialog-21.ru/en/)

7The AOT project (“Automatic Processing of Text” in
Russian)—www.aot.ru

102



paradigm. For Russian IE, we had to add to
the dictionary certain words and terms that des-
ignate scenario-specific concepts, for example
“мигрант” (migrant) and “гастарбайтер” (gas-
tarbaiter), which have become common usage in
recent Russian-language media.

The syntactic analyzer in AOT, “Synan”, uses
a hybrid formalism, a mix of dependency trees
and constituent grammars. The output for a sen-
tence contains two types of syntactic units: binary
parent-child relations, and “groups”, which are to-
ken sequences not analyzed further but treated as
an atomic expression. This approach is theoret-
ically natural, since certain syntactic units may
not have a clear root, for example, complex name
expressions (“Aleksey Sokirko”) or numeric ex-
pressions (“forty five”). To make it compatible
with the overall PULS structure, we transform all
Synan output into dependency-tree form; groups
simply become linked chains. Synan attempts to
produce a complete, connected parse structure for
the entire sentence; in practice, it produces a set of
fragments, consisting of relations and groups. In
the process, it resolves morphological ambiguity,
when possible.

To unify the results of Lemm and Synan, we
built a special “wrapper,” (Du et al., 2011). The
wrapper takes every binary (syntactic) relation in
the Synan output, finds the items corresponding
to the relation’s parent and child in Lemm’s out-
put, and resolves their morphological ambiguity
(if any) by removing all other morphological read-
ings. If the lemma for parent or child is null—as,
e.g., when the corresponding element is a group—
we infer information from Lemm output for the
element that is missed in Synan. If a word does
not participate in any relation identified by Synan,
its analysis is based only on Lemm output, pre-
serving all unresolved morphological ambiguity—
to be potentially resolved at a later stage, typically
by scenario-specific patterns. Finally, the wrapper
assembles the resulting analysis for all words into
a set of tree fragments.

4 Russian Information Extraction

4.1 Ontology and Dictionaries

The ontology, a network of semantic classes, is
language-independent, and in Russian IE, we used
the pre-existing domain ontologies for the epi-
demics and security domains, with minor mod-
ifications. Most of the changes centered on re-

moving vestiges of English language-specific in-
formation, e.g., by making explicit the distinctions
among certain concepts that may be confounded
in English due to ambiguity of English lexical
units. For example, in English, the word “convict”
means both the verb and the convicted person (pa-
tient nominalization), so it may be tempting to rep-
resent them by the same concept. In Russian, as in
many other languages, these are different concepts
as well as distinct lexemes.

A Russian domain-specific lexicon was added
to the system. Russian IE uses a shared lex-
icon for epidemics and security. The lexicon
contains not only translations of the correspond-
ing English words, but also includes MWEs that
appear in Russian media and correspond to the
domain-specific concepts. The current Russian
domain-specific lexicon contains approximately
1000 words and MWEs. Constructing the multi-
word lexicon for Russian is more complicated than
for English because Russian has a rich morphol-
ogy and complex grammatical agreement. For
example, to find a simple Adjective+Noun col-
location in text, the system needs to check that
the adjective agrees with the noun in gender,
case, and number. To resolve this problem, we
built a special set of low-level patterns, which
match MWEs. These patterns are subdivided
into several classes, according to their syntactic
form: Adjective+Noun, Noun+Noun, Verb+Noun,
Verb+Preposition+Noun, etc. The grammatical
constraints are coded only once for each class
of pattern, and apply to all patterns in the class.
For example, in the Noun+Noun class, the second
noun must be in genitive case (a genitive modifier
of the head noun), e.g., “цироз печени” (cirrho-
sis of the liver), or in the instrumental case, e.g.,
“торговля людьми” (human trafficking). This
simplifies adding new MWEs into the dictionary.

We use the multilingual GeoNames
database, (www.geonames.org) as the source
of geographic information in Russian. The
disease dictionary is mapped into Russian using
the International Classification of Diseases.8 The
system also identifies common animal diseases:
anthrax, African swine fever, rabies, etc.

4.2 Pattern Bases

The pattern base is the main component of the IE
system for extracting higher-level logical objects.

8ICD10: http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/

103



Syntactic variant Example Syntactic variant Example
I Verb + Object арестовали мигранта II Object + Verb мигранта арестовали

(active clause) [someone] arrested a migrant (reverse word order) (same meaning)
III Participle + Object арестован мигрант IV Object + Participle мигрант арестован

(passive clause) migrant is arrested [by someone] (reverse word order) (same meaning)
V Noun + Object арест мигранта VI (reverse word order is —

(nominalization) arrest of a migrant rare, unlikely in news)

Table 1: Examples of syntactic variants for a single pattern Russian

Patterns are language-dependent and domain-
dependent, which means that patterns must cap-
ture the lexical, syntactic and stylistic features of
the analyzed text. It was not possible to directly
translate or map the English pattern base into Rus-
sian for at least two reasons.

The first reason is technical. PULS’s English
pattern base has over 150 patterns for the epi-
demics domain, and over 300 patterns for secu-
rity.9 These patterns were added to the system
through an elaborate pattern-acquisition process,
where semi-supervised pattern acquisition for En-
glish text was used, (Greenwood and Stevenson,
2006; Yangarber et al., 2000), to bootstrap many
pattern candidates from raw text based on a small
set of seed patterns; the candidates were sub-
sequently checked manually and included in the
system. Many of these patterns are typically in
“base-form”, i.e., simple active clauses; the En-
glish system takes each active-clause, “subject-
verb-object” pattern, and generalizes it to multi-
ple syntactic variants, including passive clauses,
relative clauses, etc. Thus we created the Rus-
sian domain-specific patterns directly in PULS’s
pattern-specification language. A pattern consists
of a regular expression trigger and action code.

The second reason is theoretical. Unlike En-
glish, Russian is a heavily inflected, free word-
order language. In English, the active “subject-
word-object” clause has only one form, whereas
in Russian all six permutations of the three el-
ements are possible, depending on the informa-
tion structure and pragmatic focus. This means
that we would need 6 pattern variants to match
a single active clause, and many more to process
other clausal types. The free word-order makes
it difficult to generate syntactic clausal variants;
it also complicates the bootstrapping of patterns
from seeds.

Therefore, for Russian we used a different strat-
9The difference is partly due to the fact that the security

scenario has several event types—illegal migration, human-
trafficking, smuggling, general crisis—and sub-types, while
epidemics deals with one event type.

egy, close to that used by (Tanev et al., 2009) for
Romance languages. In this approach, the patterns
first create “shallow”, incomplete events where
only 1–2 slots are filled. Then, the inference rule
mechanism attempts to fill the remaining slots and
complete the events. The majority of Russian pat-
terns currently consist of two elements (such as
verb and object, or verb and subject), so that only
two word-order variants are possible. Currently,
the Russian patterns match five syntactic construc-
tions. These are listed in Table 1, along with ex-
amples from the security scenario. All example
phrases have the same meaning (“migrant was ar-
rested”) but different syntactic form. The active
clause and the passive clause in Russian may have
either V–O word order—types I and III—or O–
V,—types II and IV. The difference between the
active and the passive variants is in the grammati-
cal features only, which are marked by flexions.

Types I, III, and V in the table can be captured
by one simple pattern:

class(ARREST) noungroup(MIGRANT)

This pattern matches when a content phrase—
belonging to any part of speech (noun, verb,
or participle)—whose semantic head is the con-
cept “ARREST” governs (i.e., in this case, pre-
cedes) a noun group headed by the concept “MI-
GRANT”. The pattern primitives—class, noun-
group and others—build on top of the POS, syn-
tactic, and morphological tags that are returned by
the AOT wrapper. Types II and IV show variants
of the pattern in reverse order. Note that the pat-
terns use general ontology classes—shared with
English—rather than literal words.10

When a pattern fires, the system checks the con-
straints on grammatical features (e.g., case and
number agreement) on the matched phrases or
words. We introduce three types of constraints:
accusative object-case agreement for type I and

10NB: in practice, the patterns are more complex because
they allow various sentence modifiers to appear between verb
and object, which is a standard extension to this basic form
of the pattern.

104



Concept Event type
organ-transplant Human-Trafficking-Organs
border-guard Migration-Illegal-Entry
customs-officer Smuggling

Table 2: Examples of concepts found in context
that trigger rules to specialize the event type

II, for nominative subject-case agreement for type
III and IV, and and genitive-case nominalization
agreement for type V. If the constraints are satis-
fied, the event is created—that is, the same event
structure for any of the five pattern types.

For the security scenario the system currently
has 23 such “basic” patterns. Most of them ini-
tially produce an event of a general class CRI-
SIS and fire when the text mentions that some-
one was arrested, sentenced, jailed, etc. If addi-
tional security-related concepts are found in text
nearby, inference rules will fill additional slots in
the event template, and specialize the type of the
event. The Russian security scenario uses exactly
the same set of inference rules as does the English
Security Scenario. Example rules are shown in Ta-
ble 2. For example, when an inference rule finds
in the context of an event a semantic concept that
is a sub-type of the type given in the left column,
the Type of the event is specialized to the corre-
sponding value in the right column, Table 2.

For the epidemics scenario, the system currently
uses only 7 patterns. Two produce an under-
specified event, when the text mentions that some-
one has become sick. The actual disease name is
again found by inference rules from nearby con-
text; if no disease is mentioned, the event is dis-
carded. Two additional patterns work “in reverse”:
they match in cases when the text mentions an out-
break or case of a disease. Then the inference
rules try to find who is suffering from disease and
the number of victims. The inference rules are
again fully shared between English and Russian.
Some of the patterns are “negative”—they match
such statements as “there is no threat of epidemic”,
which appear often in official reports.

In addition, the Russian pattern base contains
41 lower-level patterns, common for the security
and epidemics domains. These include, for exam-
ple, patterns to match date expressions, to analyze
collective-partitive noun groups (“a group of mi-
grants”, “a team of doctors”, and so on), which
have general applicability.

Slot English system Russian system
rec pre F rec pre F

Event Type 67 72 69.41 70 57 62.83
Suspect 46 52 48.81 52 44 47.67
Total 27 71 46.47 44 37 40.20
Countries 56 55 55.49 48 40 43.63
Time 29 29 29.00 29 22 25.02
All 53 58 53.31 55 45 49.09

Table 3: Border Security scenario evaluation

English Russian
Event type test suite test suite
CRISIS 19 28
HUMAN-TRAFFICKING 4 4
ILLEGAL-MIGRATION 34 34
SMUGGLE 10 2
Total 67 68

Table 4: Distribution of event types in the test
suites for the Security scenario

5 Evaluation

5.1 Security

For evaluation, we used a test corpus of 64
Russian-language documents. Several assessors
annotated 65 events, and approximately one third
of the documents contained events. We compared
the Russian-language IE system with the English-
language system. The English test suite consists
of 50 documents with 70 events.

Evaluation results for the security domain are
presented in table 3, with scores given for the
main slots: Event Type (one of Migration, Human
Trafficking, Smuggling, and Crisis), Suspect, Total
(number of suspects), Countries (a list of one or
more countries involved in event), and Time (event
date). The table shows that currently the Rus-
sian system achieves a lower overall score than the
English system—the F-measure for all slots is 4–
5% lower, with precision being consistently lower
than recall for the Russian system.

Note that the development of a correct and
well-balanced test suite is in itself a challenging
task, and hence the evaluation numbers may be
biased. In the test suites used for these experi-
ments, shown in table 4, the English security sce-
nario includes more events of type SMUGGLE
than the Russian validation suite, and both vali-
dation suites contain few events of type HUMAN-
TRAFFICKING.

5.2 Epidemic Surveillance

For evaluation, we used a test corpus of 75 Rus-
sian documents. We asked several assessors to

105



Slot name English system Russian system
r p F r p F

Disease 74 74 74.00 93 81 86.58
Country 65 67 65.98 91 86 88.42
Total 68 79 73.09 30 78 43.33
Time 56 58 56.98 38 52 43.91
Status 77 75 75.99 93 81 86.58
All Slots 68 69 68.83 70 71 70.44

Table 5: Epidemics scenario evaluation.

correct events found by the system and add miss-
ing events in case they were not found by sys-
tem. Assessors annotated 120 events. We compare
the Russian-language IE system with the English-
language system. The PULS English validation
suite for Epidemics currently consists of 60 docu-
ments with 172 events.

Evaluation results are shown in table 5, where
the scores are given for the main slots: Dis-
ease, Country, Total (number of victims), Status
(“dead” or “sick”) and Time. Results for the Rus-
sian system are somewhat better than for English.
This is due in part to the bias in the process which
we used to select documents for the test suite: the
assessors marked documents in which the system
found events, rather than searching and annotating
documents from scratch. (This aspect of the evalu-
ation will be corrected in future work.) The events
that the system found could be relevant, spurious,
or erroneous; in case the system missed an event,
the assessor’s job was to add it to the gold-standard
answers. Note that in general the amount of irrele-
vant documents processed by PULS is much larger
than the amount of relevant documents (only about
1% of all documents that contain keywords rele-
vant to epidemics contain useful events). Thus it
is impractical to ask assessors to read raw docu-
ments. As a consequence, the scores for the main
slots, such as Disease or Country, may be over-
stated: the majority of documents mention only
one disease, and since an event was found by the
system in most documents selected for the test
suite, the Disease slot is usually filled correctly.
The results for the auxiliary slots, e.g., Time, To-
tal, are closer to our expectation.

5.3 Comparison of Languages and Scenarios

In general, the epidemics scenario performs much
better than security, both in Russian and English.
This is due to fact that the task definition for epi-
demics is simpler, better formalized, and deals
with one type of event only. As noted in (Hut-

Event Type English Russian
Epidemic Surveillance

DISEASE 31 5
HARM 825 412
Total 856 417

Border Security
CRISIS 694 476
HUMAN-TRAFFICKING 10 12
ILLEGAL-MIGRATION 32 31
SMUGGLE 7 19
Total 743 538

Table 6: Number of events found by IE systems in
parallel English-Russian news corpus.

tunen et al., 2002), event representation in text
may have different structure depending on the sce-
nario: the “classic” IE scenarios, such as the MUC
Management Succession or Terror Attacks, de-
scribe events that occur at a specific point in time,
whereas other scenarios, such as Natural Disasters
or Disease Outbreaks describe a process that is
spread out in time and space. Consequently, events
in the latter (“nature”) scenarios are more com-
plex, may have hierarchical structure, and may
even overlap in text. From the theoretical point of
view it would be interesting to compare how the
events representation, (Pivovarova et al., 2013),
differs in different languages. Moreover, such dif-
ferences can be important in cross-language infor-
mation summarization, (Ji et al., 2013).

We use a freely-available comparable news cor-
pus, (Klementiev and Roth, 2006), to investigate
the difference of event representation in English
and Russian. The corpus contains 2327 BBC mes-
sages from the time period from 1 January 2001 to
10 May 2005, and their approximate translations
from the Lenta.ru website; the translations may be
quite different from their English sources and are
stylistically similar to standard Russian news. We
processed the corpora with the security and epi-
demics IE systems, using the respective language;
the results are presented in the Table 6.

The table shows that for both scenarios the En-
glish system finds more events than the Russian,
which probably means that coverage of the Rus-
sian IE is lower. We have yet to conduct a thor-
ough evaluation of the events found. It is also clear
from the table that specific events are much more
rare than general events; for the security scenario,
the majority of events have type CRISIS, which is
a general type that indicates some incident related
to crime; in the epidemics scenario, the majority
of events have type HARM, i.e., which is a gen-

106



Figure 3: Monthly frequency of events for the four
top-reported diseases in Russia

eral type indicating that there are victims (e.g., hu-
mans) suffering from some cause, not only harm
caused by infections. The distributions of event
types are similar in English and Russian corpora,
which may hint that a lack of specific events may
be a property of the scenarios, irrespective of the
language. This agrees with the expectation that the
majority of retrieved documents are not relevant.

6 Discussion

The Russian-language processing pipeline pre-
sented above is compatible with the working, pre-
existing PULS IE system. It is worth noting again,
that the output of the Russian-language analysis
has the same form as that of the English-language
PULS event extraction, that is, all fills for the tem-
plate slots are output in English (except in the case
of person names). This is made possible by the
shared, language-independent ontology. An im-
portant benefit of this sharing is that the end-user
is not required to understand Russian in order to
determine whether the extracted facts and docu-
ments are relevant to her/his need. Thus, the slot
fills may be presented in English, as shown in Fig-
ure 1. The document text, however, may be pre-
sented in Russian; users who can read Russian can
see the original article text where event elements
are indicated (by highlighting or underlining).

Figure 2 shows a summary-style list of events
found from the news stream. The user can see
events extracted from documents in a mix of lan-
guages (identified by the language tag in the left-
most column). The database representation for
events is shared and independent of the language;
this permits the user get a grasp of current situa-
tion in the domain of interest, in more than one
language.

We checked the impact of the Russian compo-
nent on the system’s coverage over the geographic
area of the former USSR, which includes regions
(outside Russia) where Russian may be used as
a lingua franca, and may be common in press.

Figure 3 shows the total number of events found
in Russia, using both the Russian- and English-
language IE systems for the four most frequently
reported diseases. The check was conducted on
news streams over 2011–2012. The number of
events increases dramatically after deploying the
Russian component, at the end of 2011 (near the
middle of the timeline).

6.1 Conclusion

We have presented a “plug-in” extension to PULS,
an English-language IE system, to cover Russian-
language text. We currently handle two scenarios:
Security and Epidemic Surveillance. The amount
of effort needed to develop the Russian component
was modest compared to the time and labour spent
on the English-language IE system. The Russian
system demonstrates a comparable level of per-
formance to the baseline English IE: F-measure
is about 4% lower for the Security scenario and
2% higher for the Epidemic Surveillance. We be-
lieve that this success is due to two main factors:
first, the re-use of as many existing modules and
knowledge bases as possible from the pre-existing
English-language system; second, the use of shal-
low, permissive patterns in Russian in combination
with logical inference rules.

In future research, we plan to further expand the
pattern sets and lexicons, to analyze more kinds of
syntactic and lexical phenomena in Russian. We
plan to compare structural differences between the
Security and Epidemics scenarios and their repre-
sentation in Russian and English, to find language-
dependent and language-independent features of
the event representations. We plan to use cross-
lingual analysis to obtain advances in two direc-
tions: first, pre-IE automatic pattern and para-
phrase acquisition for free-word-order languages;
second, post-IE aggregation of extracted informa-
tion to improve overall quality by use of cross-
document context, (Chen and Ji, 2009; Yangarber
and Jokipii, 2005; Yangarber, 2006).

Acknowledgements

We thank Peter von Etter and Mikhail Novikov for
help with the implementation; students of the De-
partment of Information Systems, St. Petersburg
State University, for annotating evaluation data.
Work was funded in part by Frontex, Project on
Automated Event Extraction, and the ALGODAN
Center of Excellence of the Academy of Finland.

107



Figure 1: Document view and template view: a Smuggling event from the Security domain

Figure 2: Summary view: a list of events in the Security domain. The tool-tip under the mouse shows a
snippet of the original text, from which the event was extracted.

References
Ameyugo, G., Art, M., Esteves, A. S., and Piskorski,

J. (2012). Creation of an EU-level information ex-
change network in the domain of border security.
In European Intelligence and Security Informatics
Conference (EISIC). IEEE.

Astaf’eva, I., Bonch-Osmolovskaya, A., Garejshina,
A., Grishina, J., D’jachkov, V., Ionov, M., Korol-
eva, A., Kudrinsky, M., Lityagina, A., Luchina,
E., Sidorova, E., Toldova, S., Lyashevskaya, O.,
Savchuk, S., and Koval’, S. (2010). NLP evaluation:
Russian morphological parsers. In Proceedings of
Dialog Conference, Moscow, Russia.

Atkinson, M., Piskorski, J., van der Goot, E., and Yan-
garber, R. (2011). Multilingual real-time event ex-
traction for border security intelligence gathering.
In Wiil, U. K., editor, Counterterrorism and Open
Source Intelligence, pages 355–390. Springer Lec-
ture Notes in Social Networks, Vol. 2.

Bocharov, V., Pivovarova, L., Rubashkin, V., and
Chuprin, B. (2010). Ontological parsing of encyclo-

pedia information. Computational Linguistics and
Intelligent Text Processing.

Bontcheva, K., Maynard, D., Tablan, V., and Cunning-
ham, H. (2003). GATE: A Unicode-based infras-
tructure supporting multilingual information extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of Workshop on Information
Extraction for Slavonic and other Central and East-
ern European Languages, Borovets, Bulgaria.

Chen, Z. and Ji, H. (2009). Can one language boot-
strap the other: a case study on event extraction. In
Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT Workshop on Semi-
Supervised Learning for Natural Language Process-
ing.

Collier, N., Doan, S., Kawazoe, A., Goodwin, R. M.,
Conway, M., Tateno, Y., Ngo, Q.-H., Dien, D.,
Kawtrakul, A., Takeuchi, K., Shigematsu, M., and
Taniguchi, K. (2008). BioCaster: detecting public
health rumors with a Web-based text mining system.
Bioinformatics, 24(24).

Du, M., von Etter, P., Kopotev, M., Novikov, M., Tar-
beeva, N., and Yangarber, R. (2011). Building sup-

108



port tools for Russian-language information extrac-
tion. In Habernal, I. and Matoušek, V., editors, Text,
Speech and Dialogue, volume 6836 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.

Greenwood, M. and Stevenson, M. (2006). Improv-
ing semi-supervised acquisition of relation extrac-
tion patterns. In Proceedings of Workshop on Infor-
mation Extraction Beyond The Document, COLING-
ACL, volume 3808, pages 29–35. Springer, Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Sydney, Australia.

Huttunen, S., Yangarber, R., and Grishman, R. (2002).
Diversity of scenarios in information extraction.
In Proceedings of the Third International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2002), Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.

Ji, H., Favre, B., Lin, W.-P., Gillick, D., Hakkani-
Tur, D., and Grishman, R. (2013). Open-domain
multi-document summarization via information ex-
traction: Challenges and prospects. In Multi-source,
Multilingual Information Extraction and Summa-
rization. Springer.

Khoroshevsky, V. F. (2010). Ontology driven multilin-
gual information extraction and intelligent analytics.
In Web Intelligence and Security: Advances in Data
and Text Mining Techniques for Detecting and Pre-
venting Terrorist Activities on the Web. IOS Press.

Klementiev, A. and Roth, D. (2006). Weakly su-
pervised named entity transliteration and discovery
from multilingual comparable corpora. In Proceed-
ings of the 21st International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, Syd-
ney, Australia.

Piskorski, J., Belyaeva, J., and Atkinson, M. (2011).
Exploring the usefulness of cross-lingual informa-
tion fusion for refining real-time news event ex-
traction: A preliminary study. In Proceedings of
RANLP: 8th Conference on Recent Advances in Nat-
ural Language Processing, Hissar, Bulgaria.

Pivovarova, L., Huttunen, S., and Yangarber, R. (2013).
Event representation across genre. In Proceedins of
the 1st Workshop on Events: Definition, Detection,
Coreference, and Representation, NAACL HLT, At-
lanta, Georgia.

Rortais, A., Belyaeva, J., Gemo, M., van der Goot, E.,
and Linge, J. P. (2010). Medisys: An early-warning
system for the detection of (re-)emerging food- and
feed-borne hazards. Food Research International,
43(5):1553–1556.

Schumann, A.-K. (2012). Towards the automated en-
richment of multilingual terminology databases with
knowledge-rich contexts–experiments with russian
eurotermbank data. In CHAT 2012: The Second
Workshop on Creation, Harmonization and Applica-
tion of Terminology Resources, Madrid, Spain.

Sokirko, A. (2001). Semantic dictionaries in automatic
text analysis, based on DIALING system materials.
PhD thesis, Russian State University for the Human-
ities, Moscow.

Solovyev, V., Ivanov, V., Gareev, R., Serebryakov,
S., and Vassilieva, N. (2012). Methodology for
building extraction templates for Russian language
in knowledge-based IE systems. Technical Report
HPL-2012-211, HP Laboratories.

Tanev, H., Zavarella, V., Linge, J., Kabadjov, M.,
Piskorski, J., Atkinson, M., and Steinberger, R.
(2009). Exploiting machine learning techniques to
build an event extraction system for Portuguese and
Spanish. Linguamatica, 2.

Toldova, S. J., Sokolova, E. G., Astaf’eva, I.,
Gareyshina, A., Koroleva, A., Privoznov, D.,
Sidorova, E., Tupikina, L., and Lyashevskaya, O. N.
(2012). NLP evaluation 2011–2012: Russian syn-
tactic parsers. In Proceedings of Dialog Conference,
Moscow, Russia.

Yangarber, R. (2006). Verification of facts across doc-
ument boundaries. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Workshop on Intelligent Information Access
(IIIA-2006), Helsinki, Finland.

Yangarber, R., Grishman, R., Tapanainen, P., and Hut-
tunen, S. (2000). Automatic acquisition of do-
main knowledge for information extraction. In
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2000),
Saarbrücken, Germany.

Yangarber, R. and Jokipii, L. (2005). Redundancy-
based correction of automatically extracted facts. In
Proceedings of HLT-EMNLP: Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Van-
couver, Canada.

Yarowsky, D. (1995). Unsupervised word sense dis-
ambiguation rivaling supervised methods. In Pro-
ceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, Cambridge,
MA. ACM Press.

Zamite, J., Silva, F., Couto, F., and Silva, M. (2010).
MEDCollector: Multisource epidemic data collec-
tor. In Khuri, S., Lhotská, L., and Pisanti, N., ed-
itors, Information Technology in Bio- and Medical
Informatics, ITBAM 2010. Springer Berlin.

109


