










































The (Un)faithful Machine Translator


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 96–101,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

The (Un)faithful Machine Translator

Ruth Jones
Dept. of French and Francophone Studies

University of California Los Angeles

Ann Irvine
Center for Language and Speech Processing

Johns Hopkins University

Abstract

Applying machine translation (MT) to lit-
erary texts involves the same domain shift
challenges that arise for any sublanguage
(e.g. medical or scientific). However, it
also introduces additional challenges. One
focus in the discussion of translation the-
ory in the humanities has been on the hu-
man translator’s role in staying faithful to
an original text versus adapting it to make
it more familiar to readers. In contrast
to other domains, one objective in literary
translation is to preserve the experience of
reading a text when moving to the target
language. We use existing MT systems to
translate samples of French literature into
English. We then use qualitative analy-
sis grounded in translation theory and real
example outputs in order to address what
makes literary translation particularly hard
and the potential role of the machine in it.

1 Introduction

The question of how to translate, especially when
the source text is valued for its perceived literary
merit, has been the focus of a discussion that is
nearly as old as written text itself. A key debate is
whether the translator should (1) adapt the source
language text as it is translated into the target lan-
guage to make it familiar and understandable to
the reader, or (2) stay as faithful as possible to the
original. Schleiermacher (2012) calls the former
a free translation and the latter faithful. The for-
mer has also been referred to as domesticating the
text, or bringing the text to the reader, in contrast
to foreignizing the text, or bringing the reader to
the text (Venuti, 2008; Berman, 1992).

Consider the French phrase enculer les
mouches. Staying as faithful to the original
French as possible, the first word, enculer trans-
lates as the infinitive for the French word for anal

penetration, while the second is the more banal
flies. Google translate gives to fuck flies. However,
idiomatically, it is, despite the strongly sexual first
term, a not uncommon way to say to nitpick. This
translation makes the text more understandable, at
the cost of staying faithful to the meanings of the
individual words of the original text. Stylistic el-
ements such as metaphor, alliteration, metonymy,
and rhyme likewise require the translator to make
interpretive choices beyond the literal meaning
of the original, bringing the original text to the
reader of the translation even at the expense of
losing some of the literal meaning of the source.

Often multiple equally faithful translations of
a word or phrase exist, and the translator must
choose one based on context, either local or more
broad. For example, the French il neige can be
translated as it snows or it is snowing.1 In English,
it is snowing suggests the narrative present, while
it snows suggests a habitual occurrence.

Like human translators, a statistical machine
translation (SMT) system may produce transla-
tions that are relatively free or faithful and must
constantly make translation choices in decoding.
For SMT, choices are dependent on what is ob-
served in training and language modeling data and
their frequencies. When systems are trained on
datasets that are similar to a test text, they are more
likely to make reasonable translation choices. Ad-
ditionally, if a model, either a priori or automat-
ically, knows something about what the output
should look like (e.g. poetry should rhyme or
have rhythm), features could encourage free trans-
lations to take a certain form.

How much a translation sounds like an origi-
nal text in its target language and how much it
preserves elements of its source language, which
make it sound foreign, is in part an ethical choice
made by the human translator. Still, even experi-
enced human translators have difficulty recogniz-

1There is no present progressive tense in French.

96



ing when they are being faithful and when their
cultural experiences have influenced a translation.
Current SMT models have no awareness of this
and no ability to make specific choices to bal-
ance the two tendencies in the same output. Our
work shines a light on SMT from the perspective
of translation theory based on a qualitative analy-
sis of two translated samples of French literature,
one prose and one poetry. We compare SMT and
human translations to address the following:

• What types of translation choices does the
machine make, compared with humans?
• Is there evidence for the need to encourage a

machine to translate more freely?
• Can SMT translate non-ethnocentrically?

2 Background

2.1 Translation Theory
Schleiermacher (2012) raises the issue of a trans-
lation’s approximation of its source language vs.
its fluency or resemblance to an original work in
its target language, referring to translations “that
are faithful or free.” Berman (1992), alternatively,
outlined the need for an ethics and an analytics of
translation. For Berman, the translator has an im-
perative to avoid “freedom” where it brings with
it a tendency to alter the foreign text by making it
resemble a work of literature created in the target
language through adjustments to the original on
the levels of style, idiom, and content (both lexi-
cal and explicative). His is an argument for what
Venuti (2008) calls “foreignization” in translation,
preserving the distance between the language of
the original text and the language of the translation
by creating a translation that is perceptibly differ-
ent from an original work in the target language.
He opposes this to domestication, which instead
privileges fluency and readability.

Venuti (2008) uses a similar critique to address
the relative visibility or invisibility of the transla-
tor. For Venuti, part of the domestication of the
translated text comes in the form of the invisi-
bility of its translator in the finished (marketed)
product. Compare, for instance, Venuti’s exam-
ple of the translator’s invisibility in the 2002 Pen-
guin translation of the Anna Karenina, advertised
with praise for the “transparency” of its translation
without naming the translators, to Seamus Heany’s
2000 translation of Beowulf, which includes both
original and translated texts side-by-side and fea-
tures the poet/translator’s name prominently on

the cover. In the first case, the reader is asked to
forget that she is not, in fact, reading Tolstoy in
his own words, while, in the second, Heany’s text
is open to constant comparison with its original.

2.2 MT of Non-Standard Language
Prior work applying SMT to non-standard lan-
guage focuses primarily on domain adaptation. In
that task, an MT system trained on, for example,
newswire, is used to translate text in a different
domain, such as science. Much of this work has
focused on up-weighting subsets of the training or
language modeling data that are most similar to
the new domain (Matsoukas et al., 2009; Foster et
al., 2010; Ananthakrishnan et al., 2011; Niehues
and Waibel, 2010; Foster and Kuhn, 2007; Tiede-
mann, 2010; Lavergne et al., 2011).

Other work has focused on literary texts (Reddy
and Knight, 2011; Kao and Jurafsky, 2012; Roque,
2012). Most relevant is Greene et al. (2010),
which presents a model for translating Italian po-
etry into English. That work focuses on preserv-
ing meaning as well as rhythm and is an interest-
ing first attempt at integrating models of poetry
(“how to say”) and storyline (“what to say”) gen-
eration. In many cases, it is hard to do both well
at once; simultaneously maintaining the meaning
and rhythm of a poem is challenging.

3 Experiments

3.1 Data and Setup
We analyze translations of two samples of French
literature, one prose and one poem (Figures 1-
2). The prose selection is a sample of the twen-
tieth century novel L’Étranger by Albert Camus
(Camus, 1955). We use the Camus and Ward
(1989) English translation as a reference. The po-
etry selection is a sample of the twentieth cen-
tury poem “Jardin” by Yves Bonnefoy (Bonnefoy,
1968), from the collection Début et fin de la neige,
translated in Bonnefoy et al. (2012). We selected
the passages because they use fairly simple lan-
guage and have modern and well-known authors.

We translate the two literary selections using
two SMT systems. First, we train a phrase-based
MT model using the Hansard data.2 The corpus
contains over 8 million parallel lines of text and
is one of the largest freely available parallel cor-
pora for any language pair. It contains proceed-
ings of the Canadian parliament. Recent work has

2http://www.parl.gc.ca

97



shown that newswire corpora, the other common
bitext domain, is not very different from the par-
liamentary domain. Thus, a model trained on the
Hansard data reflects the status of a typical mod-
ern SMT system trained on freely available data.
We use the Moses SMT framework (Koehn et al.,
2007), GIZA++ automatic word alignments (Och
and Ney, 2003), and the batch version of MIRA
for tuning (Cherry and Foster, 2012). For compar-
ison, we also present and analyze translations by
Google translate.3

In addition to our detailed manual analysis,
we automatically evaluated outputs using case-
insensitive BLEU and a single reference. The
Moses system achieve a slightly higher BLEU
score than Google (16.62 vs. 11.25) on the Bon-
nefoy selection and the opposite is true for the Ca-
mus selection (26.03 vs. 30.05). However, be-
cause the selections are small, we don’t interpret
these results as particularly meaningful.

3.2 Analysis

Figures 1 and 2 show the outputs. Focusing on
the differences between the machine and human
translations with respect to the originals reveals
places where the human translators’ choices di-
verged from the translations considered probable
by the two SMT models. Close reading of the
source text and human translation suggests pos-
sible reasons for the translator’s choices. The
probabilities that the SMT model assigns to the
human translations relative to those assigned to
the observed MT output highlights the need for
probabilistic translation models that are specific to
the domain of the particular texts or for literary
translation more generally. While differences oc-
curred based on a variety of factors, for the sake of
brevity, we only consider lexical variation and the
question of time as an aspect of translation. We
take examples from Camus’ prose and Bonnefoy’s
poem while keeping in mind the possibility of a
definable difference in domain between the two.

Ward’s translation puts the plain language of
Camus’ text into a clear and conversational En-
glish, a stylistic choice for fluency and domes-
tication of the French. The focus in this pas-
sage is on the speaker, actively calming himself
after the departure of the warden, and the “re”
of “retrouvé” appears as “again.” The machine
translations, looking at the words in the absence

3translate.google.com

lui parti, j' ai retrouvé le calme.
j' étais épuisé et je me suis jeté sur ma couchette. 
je crois que j' ai dormi parce que je me suis réveillé avec des 
étoiles sur le visage.
des bruits de campagne montaient jusqu' à moi.
des odeurs de nuit , de terre et de sel rafraîchissaient mes 
tempes.
la merveilleuse paix de cet été endormi entrait en moi comme 
une marée.
a ce moment, et à la limite de la nuit, des sirènes ont hurlé.
elles annonçaient des départs pour un monde qui maintenant 
m' était à jamais indifférent.
pour la première fois depuis bien longtemps j' ai pensé à 
maman.

L’étranger - Albert Camus

his party, i found the calm. 
i was exhausted and i had on my sleeper. 
i think i slept because i woke up with stars on your face. 
the campaign noise up to me. 
the smell of night of land and salt rafraîchissaient my tempes. 
the great peace of this summer asleep came into me as a tide. 
has this time, and the limit of the night of sirens screamed and 
yelled. 
they announced departures for a world that now was never 
indifferent. 
for the first time in a long time i thought about mom. 

Hansard SMT

he was gone, i found calm.
i was exhausted and i threw myself on my bunk.
i think i slept because i woke up with stars on her face.
noises campaign amounted to me.
the smell of night, earth and salt refreshed my temples.
heavenly peace this summer sleeping entered me like a tide.
at that time, and the limit of the night, sirens screamed .
they announced departures for a world that now was never 
indifferent to me.
for the first time in ages i thought mom.

Google SMT

with him gone , i was able to calm down again.
i was exhausted and threw myself on my bunk.
i must have fallen asleep, because i woke up with the stars in 
my face.
sounds of the countryside were drifting in.
smells of night, earth, and salt air were cooling my temples.
the wondrous peace of that sleeping summer flowed through 
me like a tide. 
then, in the dark hour before dawn, sirens blasted.
they were announcing departures for a world that now and 
forever meant nothing to me.
for the first time in a long time i thought about maman.

The Stranger, translation by Matthew Ward

Figure 1: The Stranger by Albert Camus
of Camus’ protagonist, give “found,” eliminating
the “re.” Ward translates “se calmer” exactly, “to
calm (down).” In contrast, the machine versions
give “found (the) calm.” It is not the passive as-
pect of Camus’ phrase that is problematic (“find-
ing calm” as opposed to “calming down”); rather,
it is the return implied by the “re” that gives pause.
Ward’s translation gives a plainer, more informal
style than the translations offered by the SMT sys-
tems, choosing to preserve the repetition of “re”
(in “retrouvé”) with “again” rather than the core
meaning of “found” in “trouvé.”

Later in the passage (line 3), the phrase “je

98



il neige.
sous les flocons la porte
ouvre enfin au jardin
de plus que le monde.
j' avance. mais se prend
mon écharpe à du fer
rouillé, et se déchire
en moi l' étoffe du songe.
il neige.
sous les flocons la porte ouvre enfin au jardin de plus que le 
monde.
j' avance.
mais se prend mon écharpe à du fer rouillé, et se déchire en 
moi l' étoffe du songe.

Début et fin de la neige, Yves Bonnefoy, « Le jardin »

it snows. 
under the snowflakes the door 
opens finally au jardin 
more than the world. 
but is my point. 
my scarf to iron 
rusty tears, 
i think in character. 
it snows. 
under the cornflakes and opens the door au jardin de more 
than the world. 
my point. 
but does my scarf to iron rusty, that tears character in me 
thinking.

Hansard SMT

it snows.
flakes under the door
finally opens to the garden
over the world.
i advance. but takes
my scarf with iron
rusty, and tears
in me the stuff of dreams.
it snows.
finally, in the snow the door opens to the garden over the world.
i advance.
but take my scarf of rusty iron, and tears in me the stuff of 
dreams.

Google SMT

it’s snowing.
beneath the snowflakes the gate
opens at last on the garden
of more than the world.
i enter. but my scarf
catches on rusty iron,
and it tears apart in me
the fabric of the dream.
it’s snowing.
beneath the snowflakes the gate opens at last on the garden of 
more than the world.
i enter.
but my scarf catches on rusty iron, and it tears apart in me the 
fabric of the dream.

Beginning and End of the Snow, Emily Grolsholz, “The Garden”

Figure 2: The Garden by Yves Bonnefoy

me suis réveillé avec des étoiles sur le visage”
is translated as “I woke up with the stars in my
face” in Ward’s translation, whereas the Hansard
and Google translations drop the indefinite arti-
cle and assume a second person in the scene, giv-
ing “i woke up with stars on {your, her} face.”
Later, the phrase “des bruits de campagne” (line
4) also provides a source of linguistic confusion.

It is “sounds of the countryside” in Ward, but
“the campaign noise” and “noises campaign” in
Hansard and Google, respectively. Ward’s trans-
lations make two distinct choices for the indefi-
nite article “des,” converting it to a definite article
(the) in the first instance while dropping it in the
second. Both examples again show Ward working
the text into plain-spoken English prose by choos-
ing the specific “the stars” over the general “stars”
for “des étoiles” and the more conventional con-
struction sounds of the coutryside over country-
side sounds, which would preserve the unfamiliar
(as shown by the difficulty of both MT systems in
translating this phrase) construction of “des bruits
de campagne.” The discrepancies between the hu-
man and MT versions of Camus’ text suggest that
the MT systems might, at the least, be able to iden-
tify the difficulties of translating certain stylistic
elements of the French.

The translations of Bonnefoy’s poem reveal
slightly different concerns. The translations of
“étoffe” exemplify a lexical choice problem. Grol-
sholz’s choice of “fabric” has a lower transla-
tion probability in the SMT models than “stuff”
(Google translation). Both meanings are possi-
ble, but while “stuff” is more common, the source
text suggests an association between “écharpe”
(scarf) and “étoffe” (stuff/fabric) that comes to the
fore in Grolsholz’s translation. Taken with simi-
lar choices (“gate” for “door”, also “snowflakes”
for “flocons,” earlier in the poem), Grolsholz’s
translation reveals a preference for specificity over
probability that goes beyond rhythmic consistency
to effect the translated poem’s recreation of the im-
ages present in the original.

Temporality also appears as a difference be-
tween Grolsholz’s and the machine translations.
Specifically, Grolscholz translates “il neige” (line
1) as “it is snowing.” Neither SMT model se-
lected the present progressive. Their translation,
“it snows” has a distinctly high probability in the
Hansard model, as the parliamentary proceedings
deal most often with general conditions when dis-
cussing weather (i.e. “it snows in the prairies”).
While this is an adequate translation of the French
phrase, Grolsholz’s choice of the progressive an-
chors the poem in a narrative present that is absent
in the general expression “it snows.” This moment
is key to understanding the poem in the context of
the larger collection, as it gives the poet a defined
position in time that anchors the poem’s imagery.

99



The fact that neither MT system made this choice
suggests a difference between literary and nonlit-
erary texts in terms of how each treats time and the
experience of duration. Temporality functions in
subtly different ways in French and English. It is
important to narrative and literary text and is par-
ticularly difficult for the MT system.

4 Discussion

Defining the type and degree of domestication
that a literary translation should take is difficult
to express, even to a human. We can say that
Ward’s translation, with its conversational style
and choice of sense and style over language play,
is more domestic than Grolsholz’s, which tries to
reflect the syntax of the original. Indeed, if we
look back to Venuti’s complaint about the transla-
tion of Anna Karenina, Grolsholz is certainly the
more visible of the two translators, each of her
translations being accompanied by its original on
the facing page. From a technical standpoint, we
may want a translation to take into consideration
the narrative of a text in order to describe events in
the narrative present (e.g. choosing “it is snowing”
over “it snows”). However, defining the scope of
the relevant narrative context is difficult and may
vary substantially from text to text.

From the ethical perspective of the for-
eign/domestic debate, deciding how much the nar-
rative context needs to be explicated or altered
to be understandable in the translation is depen-
dent on variables including the translator’s stance
on this issue, the author’s wishes (if the author
is living) and the publisher’s requirements. Even
once they have been determined, specifying such
preferences precisely enough for a computational
model to follow is even harder. For example,
we could model a general preference for specific
translations of nouns over more probable transla-
tions (e.g. ‘snowflakes’ instead of ’flakes’), but
translation rules are typically very noisy and an
SMT system would likely be tempted by garbage
translation rules (e.g. in the Hansard system, ‘flo-
cons’ translates as ’cornflakes’ with higher prob-
ability than ‘snow’, ‘flakes’, or ‘snowflakes’). In
short, part of the human translator’s job is know-
ing when to make exceptions to convention for the
sake of the reader’s experience of the translated
text, and the question of the exception is difficult
for the machine to account for.

Even if the type and degree to which a text

should be domesticated could be accurately mod-
eled, some types of free/fluent/flexible translations
will be easier for a machine to produce than oth-
ers. For example, idioms may be easy to inte-
grate; if they are observed in training data, then
a machine can easily produce them. This, how-
ever, requires in-domain training data, and domain
is somewhat of a moving target in literature due
to extremely high variability. In contrast to the
ease of memorizing static idioms, computationally
choosing correct, relevant, and appropriately spe-
cific translations of individual nouns (e.g. ‘porte’
as ‘gate’ instead of ‘door’) is difficult.

We end our discussion on a note about visi-
bility. Introducing an SMT system into debates
surrounding literary translation by human transla-
tors would seem to cause the translator to disap-
pear entirely. Indeed, according to Cronin (2012),
“machine translation services would appear to ren-
der invisible the labour of translation...” How-
ever, for Venuti, visibility is crucial to the ethics
of balancing domestication and foreignization to
create non-ethnocentric translations in that it re-
minds the reader to be attentive to the translation
and to the translator as creative labourer. As a level
of domestication is to be expected in fluent trans-
lations, Venuti’s argument for visibility is also an
argument for a disruption to the reader’s experi-
ence that reinserts the distance of the foreignizing
translation in a different way, suggesting that flu-
ency, which hides the act of translation, might be
ethical under conditions of visibility. Difficulties
encountered by an SMT system can constitute a
kind of visibility, because they expose problems
in the translation, which often come in the form of
disfluencies. However, these systems cannot con-
sider translation in terms of domestication and for-
eignization; the SMT objective is to use patterns
observed in training data example translations to
produce something that has the same meaning as
the source text and looks like the target language.
There is a constant tradeoff between fluency and
faithfulness. Although SMT can deal with fluency,
it cannot handle ideas of domestic and foreign.
Therefore, if we accept that domesticating and for-
eignization is key to distinguishing visibility, then
the relationship between visibility and invisibility
for the human translator and the machine transla-
tor must be different. And this divergence, in turn,
means that current approaches to SMT could not
ensure non-ethnocentric translations.

100



References
Sankaranarayanan Ananthakrishnan, Rohit Prasad, and

Prem Natarajan. 2011. On-line language model bi-
asing for statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL).

Antoine Berman. 1992. The Experience of the For-
eign: Culture and Translation in Romantic Ger-
many. State University of New York Press, New
York. Trans. by S. Heyvaert.

Y. Bonnefoy, E. Grosholz, and F. Ostovani. 2012. Be-
ginning and End of the Snow / Debut Et Fin de la
Neige: Followed by Where the Arrow Falls / Suivi
de La Ou Retombe la Fleche. Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers, Incorporated.

Yves Bonnefoy. 1968. Selected poems. Cape editions.
Cape.

A. Camus and M. Ward. 1989. The Stranger. Every-
man’s library. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

A. Camus. 1955. L’étranger. Appleton-Century-
Crofts.

Colin Cherry and George Foster. 2012. Batch tuning
strategies for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (NAACL).

Michael Cronin. 2012. The Translation Age: Transla-
tion, Technology, and the new Instrumentalism. The
Translation Studies Reader, Third Editions. Rout-
ledge, New York.

George Foster and Roland Kuhn. 2007. Mixture-
model adaptation for smt. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(WMT).

George Foster, Cyril Goutte, and Roland Kuhn. 2010.
Discriminative instance weighting for domain adap-
tation in statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP).

Erica Greene, Tugba Bodrumlu, and Kevin Knight.
2010. Automatic analysis of rhythmic poetry with
applications to generation and translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).

Justine Kao and Dan Jurafsky. 2012. A computational
analysis of style, affect, and imagery in contempo-
rary poetry. In NAACL Workshop on Computational
Linguistics for Literature.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open

source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the Conference of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL).

T. Lavergne, A. Allauzen, H. Le, and F. Yvon.
2011. LIMSI’s experiments in domain adapta-
tion for IWSLT11. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Workshop on Spoken Language Translation
(IWSLT).

Spyros Matsoukas, Antti-Veikko I. Rosti, and Bing
Zhang. 2009. Discriminative corpus weight estima-
tion for machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP).

Jan Niehues and Alex Waibel. 2010. Domain adapta-
tion in statistical machine translation using factored
translation models. In Proceedings of the European
Association for Machine Translation (EAMT).

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Comput. Linguist., 29(1):19–51, March.

Sravana Reddy and Kevin Knight. 2011. Unsuper-
vised discovery of rhyme schemes. In Proceedings
of the Conference of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL).

Antonio Roque. 2012. Towards a computational ap-
proach to literary text analysis. In NAACL Workshop
on Computational Linguistics for Literature.

Fredreich Schleiermacher. 2012. On different meth-
ods of translating. The Translation Studies Reader,
Third Editions. Routledge, New York. Trans. by Su-
san Bernofsky.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2010. To cache or not to cache?
experiments with adaptive models in statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the ACL Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation and Metrics
(MATR).

Lawrence Venuti. 2008. The Translator’s Invisibility:
A History of Translation. Routledge, New York.

101


