










































The Mysterious Letter J


Proceedings of the Adaptation of Language Resources and Tools for Closely Related Languages and Language Variants, pages 40–44,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 13 September 2013.

The Mysterious Letter J

And̄elka Zečević
Faculty of Mathematics
University of Belgrade

andjelkaz@matf.bg.ac.rs

Staša Vujičić Stanković
Faculty of Mathematics
University of Belgrade

stasa@matf.bg.ac.rs

Abstract

Ekavian and Ijekavian are two different
variants of the contemporary standard Ser-
bian language. The difference between
them is related to the reflex of the old
Slavic vowel jat and it influences both the
speaking and writing language norms. The
sensibility of existing language identifica-
tion tools for both variants is of great im-
portance for building representative cor-
pora and development of relevant linguis-
tics resources and tools underlying an au-
tomatic text processing. In this paper we
present the results obtained after testing
the three popular tools for language identi-
fication on corpora containing documents
from each of the two variants. As it will
be reported, the identification of Ijekavian
variant is a much more difficult task since
the observed tools are not adopted to it at
all.

1 Introduction

The language identification is a problem of
identifying the language a document is written
in. It represents the fundamental step in tasks
such as collecting the documents for corpora,
machine translation and information retrieval.
Because of its great importance, methodological
approaches to the problem and submitted solu-
tions are numerous. In the basis, the problem
can be seen as a classification problem (Mitchell,
1997): if collections of known language samples
represent classes, the problem of the language
identification for the given document can be
seen as a problem of the document assignment
to the one of the classes in respect to relevant
classification features.

Many sets of language features as well as
classification algorithms have been tested so far.

The choice of features might be linguistically mo-
tivated (diacritics and special characters) or more
statistically oriented (word frequencies, n-grams
of various lengths and types). The first tools
were based on the analyses of character n-grams:
Dunning (Dunning, 1994) introduced Markov
models while Cavnar and Trenkle (Cavnar and
Trenkle, 1994) worked with 1-NN classification
algorithm. Nowadays the focus is on the diverse
set of (dis)similarity measures (Singh, 2006) and
powerful algorithms as can be read in papers
discussing their performance and fields of the
application (Martins and Silva, 2005).

The task of the language identification is con-
sidered much harder if the document is of modest
length (for instance, e-Bay and Twitter messages
or search engine queries) or the amount of avail-
able training data is limited. The same can be
said for the cases when the number of considered
languages is huge or languages are similar to each
other. All these conditions influence the success
rate as it is reported in Padró and Padró (Padró
and Padró, 2004), Lui and Baldwin (Baldwin and
Lui, 2010), and Milne et al. (Milne et al., 2012).
We are especially interested in the latter problem
since the Serbian language is closely related to the
languages spoken in former Yugoslavia.

The standard Serbian language is formed
on the basis of Ekavian and Ijekavian Neo-
Štokavian South Slavic dialects and its form
is determined by the reformer of the written
language of the Serbs, Vuk Karadžić (1787-1864)
(Stanojčić and Popović, 2011). In the common
state of Yugoslavia this language was officially
encompassed by Serbo-Croatian, a name that
implied a linguistic unity with the Croats (and
later with other nations whose languages were
based on Neo-Štokavian dialects). In the last
decade of the 20th century in Serbia the name

40



Serbo-Croatian was replaced in general usage
by the name Serbian. As mentioned above, in
Serbian speaking countries two dialects coexist.
The Ekavian dialect is widespread in Serbia,
while the Serbian Ijekavian dialect is presented
in some parts of the northern Serbia, Croatia and
Montenegro as well as Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The difference among the dialects is related to the
old Slavic vowel called jat and its conflation into
the vowel e or diphthongs ije and je. It is notable
in both spoken and written language forms as
Serbian has a phonologically based orthography.
For instance, in respect to the Ekavian dialect
the English word flower has forms cvet (long e)
in nominative singular and cvetovi (short e) in
nominative plural while the appropriate forms in
Ijekavian dialect are cvijet and cvjetovi respec-
tively. Therefore, Serbian and other languages of
Štokavian provenance share the Ijekavian dialect
in their standard forms which makes the task
of the language identification very sensitive and
error-prone. From the other point of view, these
languages overlapping can help in cooperative de-
velopment of tools and resources necessary for an
automatic language processing (Vitas et al., 2011).

In this paper we present the results obtained af-
ter testing the three popular language identifica-
tion tools on the collection containing both Eca-
vian and Ijekavian documents. Section 2 that
refers to the related work and state-of-the-art ap-
proaches is followed by two introductory sections
numbered as 3 and 4 and related to tested tools and
specially created test corpora. The experiment is
described in Section 5 while the results are pre-
sented in Section 6. The conclusions and ambi-
tions for future work are summarized in Section
7.

2 Related Work

There is a number of papers discussing the iden-
tification of closely related languages, varieties
of polycentric languages and language dialects.
All these tasks are more advanced in comparison
to classical ones and require application of more
subtle techniques.

In the paper (Ljubešić et al., 2007) the three-
phases model for differentiating Croatian from
Slovenian and Serbian is presented. In the first
phase the documents written in any of these three

languages are singled out by the rule of 100 most
frequent words and the rule of special character
elimination. In the next phase character based
second-order Markov model is developed aiming
to distinguish languages among themselves. In
order to improve the distinction between Croa-
tian and Serbian, in the final phase the lists of
forbidden words are introduced. Those are the
lists containing words that appear in one language
but not in others. The model is tested on the
news collection and the achieved accuracy of
0.9918 is better than any reported for this group
of languages.

The case of European and Brazilian Portuguese
is discussed in (Zampieri and Gebre, 2012). As
the differences between these two varieties can be
described at orthographic, lexical and syntactic
level, the identifying algorithm analyse three
groups of features: character n-grams (n varying
from 2 to 6), word unigrams and word bi-grams.
The language models are calculated by using the
Laplace probability distribution and evaluated on
the journalistic corpora containing texts from the
both varieties further classified according to their
length in tokens. The achieved accuracies are
0.998 for 4-grams, 0.996 for word unigrams, and
0.912 for word bi-grams.

In order to identify Spanish varieties, the au-
thors of (Zampieri et al., 2013) compared the clas-
sical character and word n-gram model to the
knowledge-rich model based on the morphosyn-
tactic information and parts of speech. The test-
ing was done on the newspapers corpora from four
Spanish speaking countries (Spain, Argentina,
Mexico and Peru) and the reported results showed
the direct relationship between the performance
using these two language models: for instance, the
Argentina-Spain classifier performed the worst in
both cases (0.843 and 0.666 in terms of accuracy)
while the Argentina-Mexico classifier generated
the top results with characters and words (0.999)
as well as morphology and parts of speech (0.801).

3 Tested Language Identification Tools

In our experiment we have tested three tools for
the language identification. A brief description
of tools and the motivation for the usage is given
below.

41



Langid.py1 is a top-level tool developed by
Lui and Baldwin (Lui and Baldwin, 2012). It is
based on the multinomial naive Bayes classifier
which operates on the set of features (byte level
unigrams, bigrams and trigrams) selected so that
their information gain represents the characteris-
tics of the language rather than the characteristics
of the training domains (Lui and Baldwin, 2011).
For the training phase the corpus, which encom-
passes government documents, newswire, online
encyclopedia, software documentations and an
internet crawl in 97 languages (Lui and Baldwin,
2011) is used. In the case of Serbian, the training
collection includes XML wiki dumps for the
period July-August 2010 as well as the set of
manually translated content strings for a number
of Debian software packages2.

CLD (Content Language Detection)3 is a li-
brary embedded in a Google’s Chromium browser
able to detect a language of a web page content.
Thanks to Michael McCandless, it is singled out
as a separated C++/Python module and ready
for use on any UTF-8 encoded content. It is not
specified how many languages it can detect (at
least 764) and so far it does not seem that the
training set can be adapted to a specific usage.

The classifier developed by Tiedemann and
Ljubešić (Tiedemann and Ljubešić, 2012) (in fur-
ther text Tiedemann&Ljubešić) aims to distin-
guish closely related languages such as Serbian,
Croatian and Bosnian. It is in the main multino-
mial Naive Bayes classifier trained over a parallel
collection of news from Southeast Europe known
as SETimes collection5 . The usage of the paral-
lel training set resulted in outperforming the state-
of-the-art tools significantly since the data paral-
lelism provided the same content and the focus on
the differences among the languages. The authors
also reported a list of the strongest discriminators
among the observed languages and for our inves-
tigation it was interesting that the list for Bosnian
contains many regular Serbian words in Ijekavian
pronunciation (for instance, izvještajima, posjeti-

1https://github.com/saffsd/langid.py
2In the time of writing this paper, translations in both Eka-

vian and Iekavian variants were available.
3http://code.google.com/p/chromium-compact-language-

detector/
4http://blog.mikemccandless.com/2011/10/accuracy-and-

performance-of-googles.html
5http://www.setimes.com

oci, djelimično).

4 Test corpus

For testing purpose, we have created a corpus
which consists of documents in both Ekavian
and Ijekavian variant (Table 1). Since Serbian
can be written in Cyrillic or Latin script, all the
documents are transliterated into Latin script.

Size
(in number of words)

Size
(in MB)

Ekavian part 2. 078, 172 13.2
Ijekavian part 528, 749 3.2

Table 1: The structure of the corpus

The Ekavian part of the corpus includes the
articles from the daily newspaper Politika6 for the
years 2007 and 2010, the literary works written
by the local authors and the translations of many
popular novels. The list of all used materials is
reported in Table 2.

The Ijekavian part of the corpus includes the
articles from the daily newspaper Glas Srpske7

for the period January-June 2013, some columns
taken from the Deutsche Welle website 8 and fa-
mous works written in the Ijekavian dialect. Table
3 depicts all the details.

5 Experiment

Due to the nature of the used tools and compa-
rability with other reported results, we have split
the corpus into lines on average 400 words long.
In the next step we have randomly selected 200
lines: the first 100 lines from the Ekavian part of
the corpus and the rest from the Ijekavian part of
the corpus.

For the testing purpose of the langid.py tool
each line is saved as a separate file because
a redirection mode was used. The Tiede-
mann&Ljubešić tool works with a single file that
contains all the texts for classification as separate

6http://www.politika.rs
7http://www.glassrpske.com/
8http://www.dw.de
9titles in Serbian are Magareće godine and Glava u

klancu, noge na vrancu
10http://www.dw.de/škljocam-i-zvocam/a-4461937

42



Da Vinci Code by Dan Brown
1984 by George Orwell
Around the World in Eighty Days by Jules Verne
The Little Prince by Antoine de Saint Exupéry
The Diary of Anne Frank
The Hobbit by J. R. R. Tolkien
The Lord of the Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien
Solaris by Stanisław Lem
Winnie-the-Pooh by A. A. Milne
Bridget Jones’s diary by Helen Fielding
For and Against Vuk by Meša Selimović
articles from Politika newspaper

Table 2: Ekavian part of the corpus

Springs of Ivan Galeb by Vladan Desnica
Selected works of Petar Kočić
two novels by Branko Ćopić9

Dove Hole by Jovan Radulović
Rebel and Rebel Janko by Simo Matavulj
Spiders and Searching the bread by Ivo Ćipiko
The Dervish and Death by Meša Selimović
articles from Glas Srpske newspaper
column written by Nenad Veličković 10

Table 3: Ijekavian part of the corpus

lines so we concatenated our test lines into the
document of this form. The same was done for
the testing of CLD Python library.

6 Results

The obtained results are summarized in Table 4.

As it can be seen, the algorithms generally can
cope with the classification of the documents in
Serbian Ekavian variant (an average accuracy is
74.3%). On the contrary, the classification of the
documents in Serbian Ijekavian variant is a very
difficult task even for the tool developed with an
idea of closely related languages in mind.

During the testing of langid.py tool we have
encountered the problem with scripts: the tool by
default recognizes Serbian only if it is written in
official Cyrillic alphabet even though both Latin
and Cyrillic alphabets are widespread in Serbian.
This certainly caused the misclassification of all
tested Ijekavian documents as Croatian.

Google’s CLD obviously favors Croatian in
both cases. In all the iterations the algorithm’s
confident parameter is set on the true value which
means it is quite sure about the final outcome.
After the analysis of the wrong results referring
to Ekavian tests we found that in 25 iterations
the second proposed language was Slovenian, in
8 iterations Serbian, and in 5 iterations Slovak.
In all the remaining iterations the algorithm was
completely sure about Croatian. In the case
of Ijekavian tests, in 16 iterations the second
proposed language was Slovenian, in 3 iterations
Slovak and in 14 iterations Serbian. There was
one iteration for each of the languages: Spanish,
Italian and Indonesian.

The Tiedemann&Ljubešić tool is very accu-
rate in classifying the documents in Serbian Eka-
vian variant while it recognizes a great part of
Ijekavian documents as written in Bosnian. The
latter is due to the fact that the training collection
contains only the news in the Ekavian variant so
the rules of Serbian are strictly learnt in this man-
ner. In 83 of 98 iterations that output Bosnian as
a result, the second proposed language was Croat-
ian, and only in 15 of them it was Serbian.

7 Conclusions and Further Work

The obtained results show that many popular tools
ignore the presence of the Ijekavian variant of Ser-
bian language. This could lead to misclassification
of Serbian documents which in turn strongly in-
fluences users’ experience and information needs.
The next steps would be enlarging the Ijekavian
part of the corpus with relevant texts diverse in
topic, genre and style and testing the observed
tools on the training corpora extended with this
part. In our opinion, this might alleviate the prob-
lem and help language identification algorithms
learn both variants equally well.

8 Acknowledgment

This research was conducted through the projects
178006 and III 47003, financed by the Serbian
Ministry of Science.

References

Timothy Baldwin and Marco Lui. 2010. Language
identification: The long and the short of the matter.
In Human Language Technologies: The 2010 An-

43



Tool Serbian Bosnian Croatian Other

langid.py
Ekavian 100 0 0 0
Ijekavian 0 0 100 0

CLD
Ekavian 25 0 75 0
Ijekavian 0 0 100 0

Tiedemann&Ljubešić
Ekavian 98 2 0 0
Ijekavian 1 98 1 0

Table 4: The results

nual Conference of the North American Chapter of
the ACL, pages 229–237.

William Cavnar and John Trenkle. 1994. N-
gram based text clategorization. In Proceedings
of SDAIR-94, 3rd Annual Symposium on Document
Analysis and Information Retrieval, pages 161–175.

Ted Dunning. 1994. Statistical identification of lan-
guage. Technical report.

Nikola Ljubešić, Nives Mikelić, and Damir Boras.
2007. Language identification: How to distinguish
similar languages? In Proceedings of the 29th In-
ternational Conference on Information Technology
Interfaces, pages 541–546.

Marco Lui and Timothy Baldwin. 2011. Cross-domain
feature selection for language identification. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing, pages 553–561.

Marco Lui and Timothy Baldwin. 2012. langid.py: An
off-the-shelf language identification tool. In Pro-
ceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 25–30.

Bruno Martins and Mário J. Silva. 2005. Language
identification in web pages. In Proceedings of
the 2005 ACM symposium on Applied computing,
SAC’05, pages 764–768.

Mary Milne, Richard O’Keefe, and Andrew Trotman.
2012. A study in language identification. In Pro-
ceedings of ADCS’12, pages 88–95.

Tom Mitchell. 1997. Machine Learning. McGraw-
Hill.

Muntsa Padró and Lluı́s Padró. 2004. Comparing
methods form language identification. pages 155–
162.

Anil Kumar Singh. 2006. Study of some distance mea-
sures for language and encoding identification. In
Proceedings of ACL 2006 Workshop on Linguistic
Distance.

Živojin Stanojčić and Ljubomir Popović. 2011. Gram-
mar of the Serbian Language. Institute for textbook
publishing and teaching aids.

Jörg Tiedemann and Nikola Ljubešić. 2012. Efficient
discrimination between closely related languages.
In Proceedings of COLING 2012, pages 2619–2634.

Duško Vitas, Ljubomir Popović, Cvetana Krstev,
Mladen Stanojević, and Ivan Obradović. 2011. Lan-
guages in the European Information Society - Ser-
bian. Springer, Berlin.

Marcos Zampieri and Binyam Gebrekidan Gebre.
2012. Automatic identification of language vari-
eties: The case of Portuguese. In Proceedings of
KONVENS2012, pages 233–237.

Marcos Zampieri, Binyam Gebrekidan Gebre, and
Sascha Diwersy. 2013. N-gram language models
and POS distribution for the identification of Span-
ish varieties. In Proceedings of TALN2013, pages
580–587.

44


