



















































Unsupervised structured semantic inference for spoken dialog reservation tasks


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, pages 12–20,
Metz, France, 22-24 August 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Unsupervised structured semantic inference for spoken dialog reservation
tasks

Alejandra Lorenzo
Université de Lorraine
LORIA, UMR 7503

Nancy, France
alejandra.lorenzo@loria.fr

Lina M. Rojas-Barahona
LORIA, UMR 7503

Nancy, France
lina.rojas@loria.fr

Christophe Cerisara
LORIA, UMR 7503

Nancy, France
cerisara@loria.fr

Abstract

This work proposes a generative model
to infer latent semantic structures on top
of manual speech transcriptions in a spo-
ken dialog reservation task. The proposed
model is akin to a standard semantic role
labeling system, except that it is unsuper-
vised, it does not rely on any syntactic in-
formation and it exploits concepts derived
from a domain-specific ontology. The
semantic structure is obtained with un-
supervised Bayesian inference, using the
Metropolis-Hastings sampling algorithm.
It is evaluated both in terms of attachment
accuracy and purity-collocation for clus-
tering, and compared with strong baselines
on the French MEDIA spoken-dialog cor-
pus.

1 Introduction

Many concrete applications that involve human-
machine spoken dialogues exploit some hand-
crafted ontology that defines and relates the con-
cepts that are useful for the application. The main
challenge for the dialog manager used in the appli-
cation is then to interpret the user’s spoken input
in order to correctly answer the user’s expectations
and conduct a dialogue that shall be satisfactory
for the user. This whole process may be decom-
posed into the following stages:

• Automatic speech recognition, to transform
the acoustic signal into a sequence of words
(or sequences of word hypotheses);

• Spoken language understanding, to segment
and map these sequences of words into con-
cepts of the ontology;

• Semantic analysis, to relate these concepts
together and interpret the semantic of the user

input at the level of the utterance, or of the
speaker turn;

• Dialogue act recognition

• Dialogue planning

• Text generation

• ...

Note that the process sketched here often further
involves several other important steps that are used
internally within one or several of these broad
stages, for instance named entity recognition, co-
reference resolution, syntactic parsing, marcov de-
cision process, reinforcement learning, etc.

This work focuses mainly on the second and
third stages, since we assume that segmentation
is given and we want to discover the underly-
ing concepts and relations in the data. The third
stage is very important because it exhibits the la-
tent semantic structure hidden in the user utter-
ance: what is the object affected by a given pred-
icate ? What are the modifiers that may alter the
meaning of a predicate ? Without such a structure,
the system can hardly push understanding beyond
lexical semantics and reach fine-grained seman-
tic representations, which are thus often limited
to well-formed inputs and cannot handle sponta-
neous speech as considered here. But still, despite
its importance, most spoken dialog systems do not
make use of such structure.

We propose an approach here to address this
issue by directly inferring the semantic structure
from the flat sequence of concepts using the un-
supervised Bayesian learning framework. Hence,
the proposed model does not rely on any prede-
fined corpus annotated with semantic structure,
which makes it much more robust to spoken inputs
and adaptable to new domains than traditional su-
pervised approaches.

12



2 Related work

In recent years, an increasing number of works
have addressed robustness and adaptability issues
in most of standard Natural Language Processing
tasks with unsupervised or semi-supervised ma-
chine learning approaches. Unsupervised learn-
ing attempts to induce the annotations from large
amounts of unlabeled data. Several approaches
have recently been proposed in this context for the
semantic role labeling task. (Swier and Stevenson,
2004) were the first to introduce an unsupervised
semantic parser, followed by (Grenager and Man-
ning, 2006), (Lang and Lapata, 2010), (Lang and
Lapata, 2011b) and (Lang and Lapata, 2011a). Fi-
nally, (Titov and Klementiev, 2012), introduced
two new Bayesian models that achieve the best
current state-of-the-art results. However, all these
works use some kind of supervision (namely a
verb lexicon or a supervised syntactic system,
which is the case in most of the approaches).
(Abend et al., 2009) proposed an unsupervised
algorithm for argument identification that uses
a fully unsupervised syntactic parser and where
the only supervised annotation is part-of-speech
(POS) tagging.

Semi-supervised learning attempts to improve
the performance of unsupervised algorithms by
using both labeled and unlabeled data for train-
ing, where typically the amount of labeled data is
smaller. A variety of algorithms have been pro-
posed for semi-supervised learning1. In the con-
text of semantic role labeling, (He and Gildea,
2006) and (Lee et al., 2007) hence tested self-
training and co-training, while (Fürstenau and La-
pata, 2009) used a graph-alignment method to
semantic role labeling (SRL). Finally, in (De-
schacht and Moens, 2009) the authors present a
semi-supervised Latent Words Language Model,
which outperforms a state-of-the-art supervised
baseline. Although semi-supervised learning ap-
proaches minimize the manual effort involved,
they still require some amount of annotation. This
annotation is not always available, sometimes ex-
pensive to create and often domain specific. More-
over, these systems assume a specific role labeling
(e.g. PropBank, FrameNet or VerbNet) and are not
generally portable from one framework to another.

A number of works related to semantic infer-
ence have already been realized on the French

1We refer the reader to (Zhu, 2005) or (Pise and Kulkarni,
2008) for an overview on semi-supervised learning methods.

MEDIA corpus. Hence, dynamic Bayesian net-
works were proposed for semantic composition
in (Meurs et al., 2009), however their model re-
lies on manual semantic annotation (i.e. concept-
value pairs) and supervised training through the
definition of 70 rules. In (Huet and Lefèvre, 2011;
Camelin et al., 2011) unsupervised models were
proposed that use stochastic alignment and Latent
Dirichlet Allocation respectively, but these mod-
els infer a flat concept-value semantic representa-
tion. Compared to these works, we rather propose
a purely unsupervised approach for structured se-
mantic Metropolis-Hastings inference with a gen-
erative model specifically designed for this task.

3 Proposed model

3.1 Principle

We consider a human-machine dialog, with the ob-
jective of automatically building a semantic struc-
ture on top of the user’s spoken utterances that
shall help the dialog system to interpret the user
inputs. This work focuses on inferring the seman-
tic structure, and it assumes that a segmentation of
users’ utterances into concepts is given. More pre-
cisely, we exploit as input a manual segmentation
of each utterance into word segments, where each
segment represents a single concept that belongs
to MEDIA ontology (Denis et al., 2006) (see Fig-
ure 1).

Attributes

Price General

Park

Relative

Near

Restaurant

Location Person Time

Hotel Room

Object

Thing

Figure 1: Excerpt of MEDIA ontology

This ontology identifies the concepts that can
have arguments, and we thus use this informa-
tion to further distinguish between head segments
that can have arguments (noted Wh2 in Figure 3)
and argument segments that cannot govern another
concept (noted Wa). From these two classes of

2Wh actually represents one word in a segment composed
of Nh words, but by extension, we implicitly refer here to the
full segment.

13



segments and the words’ inflected forms that com-
pose each segment we infer:

• A semantic structure composed of triplets
(Wa,Wh, A) where A is the type of argu-
ment, or, in other words, the type of semantic
relation between both segments;

• A semantic class Ct for the head segment
An example of the target structure we want to ob-
tain is shown in Figure 2.

Inference of these structure and classes is real-
ized with an unsupervised Bayesian model, i.e.,
without training the model on any corpus anno-
tated with such relations. Instead, the model is
trained on an unlabeled dialog corpus composed
of raw manual speech transcriptions, which have
also been manually segmented into utterances and
words’ segments as described above. Training is
actually realized on this corpus using an approxi-
mate Bayesian inference algorithm that computes
the posterior distribution of the model’s param-
eters given the dataset. We have used for this
purpose the Metropolis-Hastings Markov Chain
Monte Carlo algorithm.

3.2 Bayesian model
Figure 3 shows the plate diagram of the proposed
model. The plate Nh (respectively Nw) that sur-
rounds a shaded node represents a single words’
segment of length Nh (respectively Nw). The
outer plate Nu indicates that the graphical model
shall be repeated for each of the Nu utterances in
the corpus.

Variable Description
Ct latent semantic type assigned to predicate t
Wh observed words in each head segment.

P (Wh|Ct) encodes lexical preferences for the
semantic inference

Ai latent semantic type assigned to the ith argu-
ment of predicate t

Rpi latent relative position assigned to the ith argu-
ment of predicate t

Wa observed words in each argument segment.
P (Wa|Ai) encodes lexical preferences for the
semantic inference

Table 1: Variables of the model

Each head word segment has a latent semantic
type Ct, and governs Na arguments. Each argu-
ment is represented by an argument words’ seg-
ment, which has a latent semantic typeA. Each ar-
gument is further characterized by its relative po-
sition Rp with respect to its head segment. Rp

C1 · · · Ct−1 Ct Ct+1 · · · CNc

Wh

Nh

A

Wa
Nw

Rp

Na
Nu

Figure 3: Plate diagram of the proposed model.
Nu represents the number of utterances; Nh, the
number of words in a head segment; Nw, the num-
ber of words in an argument segment; and Na the
number of arguments assigned to predicate t.

can have 4 values, depending on whether the argu-
ment is linked to the closest (1) or another (2) ver-
bal3 head, or the closest (3) or another (4) nominal
head. Rp is derived from the argument-to-head
assignment, which is latent. So, Rp is also latent.
The sequence of Nc head segments in utterance u
is captured by the HMM shown on top of the plate
diagram, which models the temporal dependency
between successive “semantic actions” of the user.

The variables of the model are explained in Ta-
ble 1.

The most important property of this model is
that the number of arguments Na is not known be-
forehand. In fact, every argument segment can be
governed by any of the Nc head segments in the
utterance, and it is the role of the inference pro-
cess to actually decide with which head it should
be linked. This is why the model performs struc-
tured inference.

Concretely, at any time during training, every
argument is governed by a single head. Then, in-
ference explores a new possible head attachment
for an argument Wa, which impacts the model as
follows:

• The number of arguments Na of the previous
head is decreased by one;

• The number of argumentsNa of the new head
is increased by one;

3Morphosyntactic classes are obtained with the Treetag-
ger

14



Je voudrais le prix en fait je euh une chambre pas chère
I ’d like the price well in fact I uh a room not expensive

Reserve Room

Agent

Price Price

Booked object

Figure 2: Example of inferred semantic structure for a sentence in the MEDIA corpus. Traditional
dependency notations are used: the head segment points to the argument segment, where segments are
shown with boxes (arrows link segments, not words !). The semantic class assigned to each head segment
is shown in bold below the translated text.

• The relative position Rp of the argument is
recomputed based on its new head position;

• The argument typeA is also re sampled given
the new head type Ct.

This reassignment process, which is at the heart of
our inference algorithm, is illustrated in Figure 4.

3.3 Metropolis inference
Bayesian inference aims at computing the poste-
rior distribution of the model’s parameters, given
the observed data. We assume that all distributions
in our model are multinomial with uniform priors.
The parameters are thus:

P (Wh|Ct) ∼M(θHCt)
Distribution of the
words for a given
head semantic class

P (Ct|Ct−1) ∼M(θCCt−1)
Transition prob-
abilities between
semantic classes

P (Wa|A) ∼M(θWA )
Distribution of the
words for a given
argument type

P (Rp|A) ∼M(θRA)

Distrib. of the rel-
ative position of a
given argument to
its head given the
argument type

P (A|Ct) ∼M(θACt)
Distrib. of the ar-
gument types given
a head semantic
class

3.3.1 Inference algorithm
To perform inference, we have chosen a Markov
Chain Monte Carlo algorithm. As our model is

finite, parametric and identifiable, Doob’s theo-
rem guarantees the consistency of its posterior,
and thus the convergence of MCMC algorithms
towards the true posterior. Because changing the
head of one argument affects several variables si-
multaneously in the model, it is problematic to
use the basic Gibbs sampling algorithm. A block-
Gibbs sampling would have been possible, but this
would have increased the computational complex-
ity and we also wanted to keep as much flexibility
as possible in the jumps that could be realized in
the search space, in order to prevent slow-mixing
and avoid (nearly) non-ergodic Markov chains,
which are likely to occur in such structured infer-
ence problems.

We have thus chosen a Metropolis-Hastings
sampling algorithm, which allows us to design an
efficient proposal distribution that is adapted to our
task. The algorithm proceeds by first initializing
the variables with a random assignment of argu-
ments to one of the heads in the utterance, and a
uniform sampling of the class variables. Then, it
iterates through the following steps:

1. Sample uniformly one utterance u

2. Sample one jump following the proposal dis-
tribution detailed in Section 3.3.2.

3. Because the proposal is uniform, compute the
acceptance ratio between the model’s joint
probability at the proposed (noted with a ′)
and current states:

r =
P (C ′,W ′h,W

′
a, Rp

′, A′)
P (C,Wh,Wa, Rp,A)

4. Accept the new sample with probability
min(1, r); while the sample is not accepted,
iterate from step 2.

15



Je voudrais le prix en fait je euh une chambre pas chère
I ’d like the price well in fact I uh a room not expensive

Agent

Price Price

Booked object

Agent

Price

Booked object

Price

Figure 4: Illustration of the reassignment process following the expample presented in Figure 2. This
example illustrates the third Metropolis proposed move, which changes the head of argument “le prix”:
arcs above the text represent the initial state, while arcs below the text represent the new proposed state.

5. When the sample is accepted, update the
multinomials accordingly and iterate from
step 1 until convergence.

This process is actually repeated for 2,000,000
iterations, and the sample that gives the largest
joint probability is chosen.

3.3.2 Metropolis proposal distribution

The proposal distribution is used to explore the
search space in an efficient way for the target
application. Each state in the search space is
uniquely defined by a value assignment to every
variable in the model, for every utterance in the
corpus. It corresponds to one possible sample of
all variables, or in other words, to the choice of
one possible semantic structure and class assign-
ment to all utterances in the corpus.

Given a current state in this search space, the
proposal distribution “proposes” to jump to a
new state, which will then be evaluated by the
Metropolis algorithm. Our proposal samples a
new state in the following successive steps:

1. Sample uniformly one of the three possible
moves:

Move1: Change the semantic class of a head;

Move2: Change the argument type of an argu-
ment segment;

Move3: Change the assignment of an argument
to a new head;

2. If Move1 is chosen, sample uniformly one
head segment and one target semantic class;

3. If Move2 is chosen, sample uniformly one
argument segment and one target argument
type;

4. If Move3 is chosen, sample uniformly one
argument segment Wa and “detach” it from
its current head. Then, sample uniformly one
target head segment W ′h, and reattach Wa to
its new head W ′h. Because the distribution of
argument types differ from one head class to
another, it would be interesting at this stage
to resample the argument type of Wa from
the new head class distribution. But in this
work, we resample the argument type from
the uniform distribution.

This proposal distribution Q(x → x′) is re-
versible, i.e., Q(x→ x′) > 0⇒ Q(x′ → x) > 0.
We can show that it is further symmetric, i.e.,
Q(x → x′) = Q(x′ → x), because the same
move is sampled to jump from x to x′ than to jump
from x′ to x, and because the proposal distribution
within each move is uniform.

4 Experimental validation

4.1 Experimental setup
The French MEDIA corpus collects about 70
hours of spontaneous speech (1258 dialogues,
46k utterances, 494.048 words and 4068 dis-
tinct words) for the task of hotel reservation
and tourist information (Bonneau-Maynard et al.,
2005). Calls from 250 speakers to a simulated
reservation system (i.e. the Wizard-of-Oz) were
recorded and transcribed. Dialogues are full of
disfluencies, hesitations, false starts, truncations or
fillers words (e.g., euh or ben).

16



Gold Standard Annotation
Semantic Relation Frequency
Agent 320
Booked object 298
Location 285
Time 209
Coordination 134
Beneficiary 117
Price 108
Reference Location 66

Table 2: Most frequent semantic relations in the
gold annotation.

This corpus has been semantically annotated
as part of the French ANR project PORT-
MEDIA (Rojas-Barahona et al., 2011). We are
using a set of 330 utterances manually annotated
with gold semantic relations (i.e. High-Level Se-
mantics). This gold corpus gathers 653 head seg-
ments and 1555 argument segments, from which
around 20% are both arguments and heads, such
as une chambre in Figure 4. Table 2 shows the
semantic relations frequencies in the gold annota-
tion. 12 head segment types and 19 different argu-
ment segment types are defined in the gold anno-
tations. In the evaluation, we assume the number
of both classes is given. A possible extension of
the approach to automatically infer the number of
classes would be to use a non-parametric model,
but this is left for future work.

4.2 Evaluation metrics
The proposed method infers three types of seman-
tic information:

• The semantic relation between an argument
and its head;

• The argument type A

• The semantic class of the head Ct.

The three outcomes are evaluated as follows.

• The output structure is a forest of trees that
is similar to a partial syntactic dependency
structure. We thus use a classical unsuper-
vised dependency parsing metric, the Un-
labeled Attachment Score (UAS), which is
simply the accuracy of argument attachment:
an argument is correctly attached if and only
if its inferred head matches the gold head.

• Both argument and head classes correspond
to the outcome of a clustering process into
semantic classes, akin to the semantic classes
obtained in unsupervised semantic role la-
beling tasks. We then evaluate them with a
classical metric used to evaluate these classes
in unsupervised SRL (as done for instance
in (Lang and Lapata, 2011a) and (Titov and
Klementiev, 2012)): purity and collocation.

Purity measures the degree to which each clus-
ter contains instances that share the same gold
class, while collocation measures the degree to
which instances with the same gold class are as-
signed to a single cluster.

More formally, the purity of argument seg-
ments’ (head segment’) clusters for the whole cor-
pus is computed as follows:

PU =
1

N

∑

i

max
j
|Gj ∩ Ci|

whereCi is the set of argument (head) segments
in the ith cluster found, Gj is the set of argument
(head) segments in the jth gold class, and N is
the number of gold argument (head) segment in-
stances. In a similar way, the collocation of argu-
ment segments’ (head segment’) clusters is com-
puted as follows:

CO =
1

N

∑

j

max
i
|Gj ∩ Ci|

Finally the F1 measure is the harmonic mean of
the purity and collocation:

F1 =
2 ∗ CO ∗ PU
CO + PU

4.3 Experimental results

We compare the proposed approach against two
baselines:

• An argument-head “attachment” baseline,
which attaches each argument to the closest
head segment.

• A strong clustering baseline, which respec-
tively clusters the head and argument seg-
ments using a very effective topic model:
the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) ap-
proach (Blei et al., 2003).

17



Table 3 shows the UAS obtained for the pro-
posed model on the MEDIA corpus, while Table 4
shows the obtained Purity, Collocation and F1-
measure. In both cases, we compare the perfor-
mances of the proposed model with the respective
baseline. Our system outperforms both baselines
by a large margin.

System UAS
Closest attachment 68%

(±2%)

Proposed - UAS 74%
(±2%)

Table 3: Experimental results for UAS on the ME-
DIA database. The statistical confidence interval
at 95% with Gaussian approximation is reported.

System Purity Col. F-mes
LDA - Heads 51.7% 25.5% 34.2%
LDA - Args 31.7% 22.2% 26.1%
Proposed - Heads 78.7% 50.8% 61.8%
Proposed - Args 61.8% 53.3% 59.3%

Table 4: Experimental results on the MEDIA
database for purity, collocation and F1-measure.

4.3.1 Qualitative Evaluation
We further carried out a qualitative evaluation,
where we inspected the inferred clusters and com-
pared them with the baseline. Figures 7 and 8
show, for every head class Ct in each stacked col-
umn, the distribution of instances from all gold
clusters. Each column can also be viewed as a
graphical representation of the intersection of one
inferred class with all gold clusters. Figure 7 illus-
trates this for our model, and Figure 8 for LDA.
The same comparison for the argument types is
shown, respectively, in Figure 5 and Figure 6.

For head segment clusters, we can observe that
most inferred clusters contain many instances of
the Reservation type (in dark blue), both in the
LDA baseline and in the proposed system. The
main reason for that is that the corpus is very un-
balanced in favor of the Reservation class, while
we do not assume any prior knowledge about the
data and thus use a uniform prior. Still, every other
gold type that occurs with a reasonnably high
enough frequency, apart from two special types
that are discussed next, is well captured by one of

Figure 5: Distribution of the gold types (one per
color) into the clusters inferred by our system
(shown on the X-axis) for argument segments.

our inferred class: this is the case for ”Room” that
mainly intersects with our class 1, ”Place” with
our class 2 and ”Hotel” with our class 9.

Some examples of instances for each case are:

• Reservation: “voudrais réserver”, “aimerais
partir”, “voudrais une *réservation une
réservation”, “prends”, “recherche” ,
“*désire désire”, “il me faudrait”, “opte”,
“aimerais s’ il vous plaı̂t si c’ est possible
avoir prendre”.

• Room: “deux chambres pour un coup(le)
avec trois enfants avec bon standing”, “trois
singles”, “deux chambres de bon standing
à peu près niveau trois étoiles”, “trois dou-
bles”.

• Place: “Paris”, “à Saintes”, “à
Charleville”, “dans le dix huitième ar-
rondissement de Paris”.

• Hotel: “un hôtel deux étoiles”, “dans un
hôtel beau standing”, “un hôtel formule un”,
“l’ hôt(el) le l’ hôtel”, “un autre hôtel dans
les mêmes conditions”, “le Beaugency”, “l’
autre”, “au Novotel”, “le premier”.

Two “special” head segment types that are nei-
ther nicely captured by our system nor LDA are
Coordination and Inform, which are instead as-
signed to the clusters corresponding to the gold
segments that they coordinate or inform about.

For argument segments we also observed that
the inferred clusters are semantically related to the
gold types. We found, for instance, four clusters

18



Figure 6: Distribution of the gold types (one per
color) into the clusters inferred by the LDA base-
line (shown on the X-axis) for argument segments.

Figure 7: Distribution of the gold types (one per
color) into the clusters inferred by our system
(shown on the X-axis) for head segments.

(2, 5, 12 and 15) containing mainly “Time” ar-
guments (“du premier au trois Novembre”, “dix
nuit”, “le festival du film”, “au seize Novembre”,
etc.), two (3 and 14) dedicated to “Location” argu-
ments (“à Menton”, “au festival lyrique de belle
euh Belle Ile En mer”, “bastille”, “sur le ville de
Paris”, “parking privé”), one (10) for “Price” ar-
guments (“pas plus de cent euros par personne”,
“un tarif inférieur à quatre vingts euros”, “pas
trop chère”, “à cent vingt euros”, “moins de cent*
cent euros”) etc.

Finally, as noted for the head segments, we can
observe that the most frequent gold types largely
intersect with several inferred clusters, for the
same reason: data is very unbalanced and we do
not assume any prior knowledge about the data

Figure 8: Distribution of the gold types (one per
color) into the clusters inferred by the LDA base-
line (shown on the X-axis) for head segments.

and thus use an uniform prior. Nevertheless, sev-
eral other important classes such as Event, Price
and Agent are well captured by our system.

5 Conclusions

This work proposes an unsupervised generative
model to infer latent semantic structures on top
of user spontaneous utterances. It relies on the
Metropolis-Hastings sampling algorithm to jointly
infer both the structure and semantic classes. It
is evaluated in the context of the French MEDIA
corpus for the hotel reservation task. Although the
system proposed in this work is evaluated on a spe-
cific spoken dialog reservation task, it actually re-
lies on a generic unsupervised structured inference
model and can thus be applied to many other struc-
tured inference tasks, as long as observed word
segments are given.

An interesting future direction of research
would be to modify this model so that it jointly
infers both the latent syntactic and semantic struc-
tures, which are known to be closely related but
still carry complementary information. We of
course also plan to evaluate the proposed model
with automatic speech transcriptions and concepts
decoding. Another advantage of the proposed
model is the possibility to build better Metropolis-
Hastings proposals, which may greatly improve
the convergence rate of the algorithm. In partic-
ular, we would like to investigate the use of some
non-uniform proposal distributions when reattach-
ing an argument to a new head, which shall im-
prove mixing.

19



References
Omri Abend, Roi Reichart, and Ari Rappoport. 2009.

Unsupervised argument identification for semantic
role labeling. In Proceedings of the Joint Confer-
ence of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and
the 4th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing of the AFNLP, ACL ’09,
pages 28–36, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

D.M. Blei, A.Y. Ng, and M.I. Jordan. 2003. Latent
dirichlet allocation. the Journal of machine Learn-
ing research, 3:993–1022.

Helene Bonneau-Maynard, Sophie Rosset, Christelle
Ayache, Anne Kuhn, and Djamel Mostefa. 2005.
Semantic annotation of the french MEDIA dialog
corpus. In INTERSPEECH-2005, 3457-3460.

N. Camelin, B. Detienne, S. Huet, D. Quadri, and
F. Lefèvre. 2011. Unsupervised concept annota-
tion using latent dirichlet allocation and segmental
methods. In EMNLP 1st Workshop on Unsupervised
Learning in NLP, Edinburgh (UK).

Alexandre Denis, Matthieu Quignard, and Guillaume
Pitel. 2006. A Deep-Parsing Approach to Natural
Language Understanding in Dialogue System: Re-
sults of a Corpus-Based Evaluation. In Proceedings
of the 5th international Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2006) Proceedings
of Language Resources and Evaluation Conference,
pages 339–344, Genoa Italie.

Koen Deschacht and Marie-Francine Moens. 2009.
Semi-supervised semantic role labeling using the la-
tent words language model. In Proc. EMNLP, pages
21–29.

Hagen Fürstenau and Mirella Lapata. 2009. Graph
alignment for semi-supervised semantic role label-
ing. In Proc. EMNLP, pages 11–20.

Trond Grenager and Christopher D. Manning. 2006.
Unsupervised discovery of a statistical verb lexicon.
In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP
’06, pages 1–8, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

S. He and H. Gildea. 2006. Self-training and Cotrain-
ing for Semantic Role Labeling: Primary Report.
Technical report, TR 891, University of Colorado at
Boulder.

Stéphane Huet and Fabrice Lefèvre. 2011. Unsuper-
vised alignment for segmental-based language un-
derstanding. In Proceedings of the First Workshop
on Unsupervised Learning in NLP, EMNLP ’11,
pages 97–104, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Joel Lang and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Unsuper-
vised induction of semantic roles. In Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference

of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, HLT ’10, pages 939–
947, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Joel Lang and Mirella Lapata. 2011a. Unsupervised
semantic role induction via split-merge clustering.
In Proc. ACL, pages 1117–1126.

Joel Lang and Mirella Lapata. 2011b. Unsupervised
semantic role induction with graph partitioning. In
EMNLP, pages 1320–1331. Association for Com-
puter Linguistics.

Joo-Young Lee, Young-In Song, and Hae-Chang Rim.
2007. Investigation of weakly supervised learning
for semantic role labeling. In ALPIT, pages 165–
170. IEEE Computer Society.

Marie-Jean Meurs, Fabrice Lefèvre, and Renato
de Mori. 2009. Spoken language interpretation: On
the use of dynamic bayesian networks for semantic
composition. In Proc. ICASSP, pages 4773–4776.

Nitin Namdeo Pise and Parag Kulkarni. 2008. A sur-
vey of semi-supervised learning methods. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2008 International Conference on
Computational Intelligence and Security - Volume
02, CIS ’08, pages 30–34, Washington, DC, USA.
IEEE Computer Society.

Lina Maria Rojas-Barahona, Thierry Bazillon,
Matthieu Quignard, and Fabrice Lefevre. 2011.
Using MMIL for the high level semantic annotation
of the french MEDIA dialogue corpus. In Pro-
ceedings of the Ninth International Conference on
Computational Semantics (IWCS 2011).

Robert S. Swier and Suzanne Stevenson. 2004. Un-
supervised Semantic Role Labelling. In EMNLP,
pages 95–102. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Ivan Titov and Alexandre Klementiev. 2012. A
bayesian approach to unsupervised semantic role in-
duction. In Proceedings of the Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Avignon, France, April.

Xiaojin Zhu. 2005. Semi-Supervised Learning Liter-
ature Survey. Technical report, Computer Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Madison.

20


