







































Clock-Modeled Ternary Spatial Relations
for Visual Scene Analysis

Joanna Isabelle Olszewska

School of Computing and Engineering, University of Huddersfield
Queensgate, Huddersfield, HD1 3DH, United Kingdom

j.olszewska@hud.ac.uk

Abstract. The analysis and the description of complex visual scenes
characterized by the presence of many objects of interests involve rea-
soning on spatial relations such as “above”, “below”,“before”, “after”
and “between”. In this context, we have defined these semantic concepts
in terms of ternary spatial relations and we have formalized them using
the clock model which is based on the clock-face division and the seman-
tic notions of hours to describe relative spatial positions. The presented
approach has been efficiently applied for the automated understanding of
spatial relations between multiple objects in real-world computer vision
image datasets.

Keywords: Ternary Spatial Relations; Clock Model; Qualitative Spa-
tial Reasoning; Computer Vision; Visual Scene Understanding.

1 Introduction

Modelling spatial relations among objects of visual scenes is greatly of benefit
to visual applications [1]. Indeed, their integration into vision systems brings an
additional level in the task of automatic image understanding, leading to the
processing of semantic information besides those provided by visual features.
Furthermore, the definition of spatial relations allows the action of reasoning on
semantically meaningful concepts which is a major advantage [3] compared with
traditional vision approaches using only quantitative techniques or annotating
images with just sparse words.

In the literature, most of the spatial relations [2], [4] have been defined as
binary ones, such as the topological spatial relations like the RCC-8 model [5]
or the cardinal spatial relations and their fuzzy extension [6].

In context of visual scene description and analysis, [7] introduced a new
formalism for modeling the image space as a clock face and they proposed a series
of related spatial relations, including the directional spatial relations of the scene
objects and the far/close relations. However, to perform reasoning on spatial
relations among a greater number of objects (at least three), there is a need for
relations such as the ternary ones. In fact, little attention has been paid to study
them. Their formal geometric modeling has been mostly studied for geographic
information systems (GIS) [8]. Indeed, [9] developed the 5-intersection model,



but its formalism leads to a restricted range of applications. On the other hand,
[10] proposed for the biomedical imaging purpose a fuzzy definition of the ternary
spatial relation between. Despite its improvement by [11], it does not fit well for
computer vision applications such as crowd’s behaviour study.

In this work, we present the extension of the clock approach [7] to formalize
the fundamental ternary spatial relation, namely, between (bt), and to model the
semantic concepts above (ab), below (bl), before (bf), and after (af) as ternary
spatial relations.

We implement these relations using Description Logics (DL) [12] which have
been widely adopted for knowledge representation in visual systems [13], [14],
[15], [16].

Thus, our clock-modeled ternary spatial relations define a set of useful notions
to characterize visual scenes involving numerous objects of interest as well as to
acquire knowledge about them, and could be incorporated in a complete system
for automatic reasoning on spatial relations among objects detected in images.

The contributions of this paper are as follows:

– the modeling of ternary spatial relations using the clock-face approach;
– the architecture of the full system combining visual face recognition and

spatial reasoning.

The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we present our approach us-
ing the clock formalism to model ternary spatial relations such as above, below,
before, after, and between. All these relations have been integrated in a frame-
work for automatic face recognition and reasoning as described in Section 3. The
resulting system has been successfully tested on still image datasets as reported
and discussed in Section 4. Conclusions are drawn up in Section 5.

2 Clock-Modeled Ternary Spatial Relations

In Section 2.1, we first introduce the clock model which is semantically mean-
ingful and used to defined spatial relative relations, while the definitions of the
ternary spatial relations formalized with this clock model are presented in Sec-
tion 2.2.

2.1 Clock Model

The clock concept introduced by [7] consists in dividing the image plane in
twelve parts around any object of interest of the scene as illustrated in Fig. 1(a).
Hence, each portion of the space is then corresponding to an hour. This leads
to a semantically meaningful division of the space as a clock face. This concept
helps in reducing the uncertainty on the directional relative positions between
objects in crowded scenes, in which case traditional binary relations such as left
or right are not enough discriminant as demonstrated in [7]. In this work, the
clock notion is used for the formal specification of our ternary relative directional
relations above, below, before, after, and between.



(a) Clock model (b) Clock-modeled ternary spatial relations

Fig. 1. Illustration of the ternary spatial relations between visual objects using the
clock model (a) and representing the semantic concepts which are above (ab), below
(bl), before (bf), after (af), and between (bt) (b).

For this purpose, we introduce the Quadrant (Q) concept as shown in Fig.
1(a). To provide an example of how we have formalized it, we define isInQuadrantIOf
in DL as follows. Let OREF be the object of reference and the OREL the target
object. Giving that Angle is the relative angle between the line OREF − OREL
and the axis X of the analyzed image plane, then

isInQuadrantIOf v Spatial Relation u ∃hasReferentObject.OREF
u ∃hasTargetObject.OREL u (∃hasAngle.Angle12clock
t ∃hasAngle.Angle1clock t ∃hasAngle.Angle2clock)

(1)

with

Angle2clock ≡ Angle u ∃Angle.value≤ π
6
u ∃Angle.value> 0 (2)

Equation (2) denotes the set of angles which have values lower than or equal
to π/6 and higher than 0. In this example, value≤ π6 is a predicate over the real
number domain R. Angle12clock and Angle1clock concepts are defined similarly.
We can note also that any OREL lies at least in one of the four quadrants QI,
QII, QIII or QIV .

2.2 Ternary Spatial Relations

We adopt the notation rl(A,B,C) for a ternary relation rl among three objects
A, B, and C. The first object A involved in this relation is considered to be the
target object, whereas the two other objects B and C are the reference objects.
Thus, rl(A,B,C) denotes that “A is in the relation rl with B and C”. In fact, the
order of the reference objects B and C is important as it affects the orientation
of the relation, in this case from the reference object B to the reference object C.
While in some relations the role of the three objects can be exchanged without



affecting the relation, in some relations the swapping of the arguments leads to
a change of the relation.

In the remaining of this section, we present the detailed definitions of the
relations above, below, before, and after which are formalized in this work
as ternary spatial relations in opposite to [10] or [11], as well as the relation
between, and we mention the cases when the exchange of the arguments modifies
the described relations. It is worth to note that the definitions are valid for both
convex and concave objects and that the center of each related clock is set to
the centroid of the corresponding object.

Spatial Relation Above We consider the relation above as a ternary spatial
relation where ab(OREL, OREF1, OREF2) means that the target object OREL is
above both the reference object OREF1 and the reference object OREF2. For
this relation, the order of the reference objects cannot be inverted otherwise
the type of the relation is modified. Indeed, if the target object is above only
one of the reference objects, other ternary spatial relations can be then applied.
Hence, this ternary modeling leads to a more discriminating relation than the
traditional ones in particular in the case of crowded scene analysis.

In DL, the concept isAbove is defined as follows. Let OREF1 and OREF2 be
the two objects of reference, while OREL is the object of interest. Considering
definitions such as expressed by Eqs. (1) and (2), then

isAbove v Spatial Relation u Ternary Spatial Relation
u ∃hasReferentObject.OREF1 u ∃hasReferentObject.OREF2
u ∃hasTargetObject.OREL u (∃isInQuadrantIV Of.OREF1
t ∃isInQuadrantIOf.OREF1) u (∃isInQuadrantIV Of.OREF2
t ∃isInQuadrantIOf.OREF2).

(3)

This concept is illustrated in Fig. 1(b).

Spatial Relation Below We consider the relation below as a ternary spatial
relation where bl(OREL, OREF1, OREF2) means that the target object OREL is
below both the reference object OREF1 and the reference object OREF2. For
this relation, the order of the reference objects cannot be inverted otherwise
the type of the relation is modified. Indeed, if the target object is below only
one of the reference objects, other ternary spatial relations can be then applied.
Hence, this ternary modeling leads to a more discriminating relation than the
traditional ones in particular in the case of crowded scene analysis.

In DL, the concept isBelow is defined as follows. Let OREF1 and OREF2 be
the two objects of reference, while OREL is the object of interest. Considering



definitions such as expressed by Eqs. (1) and (2), then

isBelow v Spatial Relation u Ternary Spatial Relation
u ∃hasReferentObject.OREF1 u ∃hasReferentObject.OREF2
u ∃hasTargetObject.OREL u (∃isInQuadrantIIOf.OREF1
t ∃isInQuadrantIIIOf.OREF1) u (∃isInQuadrantIIOf.OREF2
t ∃isInQuadrantIIIOf.OREF2).

(4)

A representation of this concept is depicted in Fig. 1(b).

Spatial Relation Before We consider the relation before as a ternary spatial
relation where bf(OREL, OREF1, OREF2) means that the target object OREL is
before both the reference object OREF1 and the reference object OREF2. For
this relation, the order of the reference objects cannot be inverted otherwise
the type of the relation is modified. Indeed, if the target object is before only
one of the reference objects, other ternary spatial relations can be then applied.
Hence, this ternary modeling leads to a more discriminating relation than the
traditional ones in particular in the case of crowded scene analysis.

In DL, the concept isBefore is defined as follows. Let OREF1 and OREF2 be
the two objects of reference, while OREL is the object of interest. Considering
definitions such as expressed by Eqs. (1) and (2), then

isBefore v Spatial Relation u Ternary Spatial Relation
u ∃hasReferentObject.OREF1 u ∃hasReferentObject.OREF2
u ∃hasTargetObject.OREL u (∃isInQuadrantIIIOf.OREF1
t ∃isInQuadrantIV Of.OREF1) u (∃isInQuadrantIIIOf.OREF2
t ∃isInQuadrantIV Of.OREF2).

(5)

An illustration of this concept is depicted in Fig. 1(b).

Spatial Relation After We consider the relation after as a ternary spatial
relation where af(OREL, OREF1, OREF2) means that the target object OREL
is after both the reference object OREF1 and the reference object OREF2. For
this relation, the order of the reference objects cannot be inverted otherwise
the type of the relation is modified. Indeed, if the target object is after only
one of the reference objects, other ternary spatial relations can be then applied.
Hence, this ternary modeling leads to a more discriminating relation than the
traditional ones in particular in the case of crowded scene analysis.

In DL, the concept isAfter is defined as follows. Let OREF1 and OREF2 be
the two objects of reference, while OREL is the object of interest. Considering



definitions such as expressed by Eqs. (1) and (2), then

isBefore v Spatial Relation u Ternary Spatial Relation
u ∃hasReferentObject.OREF1 u ∃hasReferentObject.OREF2
u ∃hasTargetObject.OREL u (∃isInQuadrantIOf.OREF1
t ∃isInQuadrantIIOf.OREF1) u (∃isInQuadrantIOf.OREF2
t ∃isInQuadrantIIOf.OREF2).

(6)

This concept could be visualized in Fig. 1(b).

Spatial Relation Between The relation between is intrinsically a ternary
spatial relation. Indeed, bt(OREL, OREF1, OREF2) means that the target object
OREL is between the reference object OREF1 and the reference object OREF2.
In this case, the order of the reference objects can be inverted without changing
the semantic meaning of this relation.

In DL, the concept isBetween is defined as follows. Considering definitions
such as expressed by Eqs. (3)-(6), then

isBetween v Spatial Relation u Ternary Spatial Relation
u ∃inverse.isAbove u ∃inverse.isBelow
u ∃inverse.isBefore u ∃inverse.isAfter.

(7)

This concept is illustrated in Fig. 1(b).

3 Implementation

The ternary spatial relations described in Section 2 could be embedded into
a system for the automatic analysis of people localization in imaged scenes as
presented in Fig. 2. Indeed, understanding images with groups of people is a
complex process which requires more information that just those contained in
the extracted visual features. In [17], they propose to add social relations in order
to improve the automatic analysis of this kind of images, but their estimations
are less satisfactory compared to those we obtain (see Section 4) by adding the
presented spatial relations to the vision system.

The developed system is composed of three main phases. The first two steps
constitute a vision system for face detection, which has been implemented using
the well-established method of [18]. Firstly, faces are learned by training the
system on sets of positive and negative examples, respectively. Secondly, the
resulting face detector is applied on an image and automatically computes faces’
locations which are then included in corresponding rectangles and labeled. Then,
the quantitative data which are extracted by this process are transferred in
a similar way to [19] or [14] in order to populate an ontology such as [13].
This ontology is enhanced with the proposed ternary spatial relations. Next,
qualitative reasoning is performed on these spatial relations and FaCT++ is
used as the reasoner. This last phase of the system thus consists in reasoning on
the ternary spatial relations and has been assessed in Section 4.



Fig. 2. Overview of our proposed system for reasoning on ternary spatial relations
between detected visual objects to automatically understand scenes.

4 Experiments and Discussion

The goals of the presented experiments are twofold. On one hand, we assess in
a quantitative way the performance of the all five proposed ternary relations
compared to the 5-intersection model which is the only one also defining above,
below, before, after as ternary relations, but using a different formalism from
ours. On the other hand, qualitative assessment of our relations is performed
against the ground truth.

In order to evaluate the performance of our formalism of all the ternary
proposed relations, our relations have been embedded in the overall system de-
veloped for the computer vision application consisting in the analysis of photos
with groups of people such as presented in Fig. 2.

To carry out these tests, we have firstly retrieved from Internet images of
choirs using Google Image. The aim of the search of choir images was to ensure
the finding of pictures of groups of people to analyze spatial relations among
them. Indeed, the direct keywords “groups of people” did not produce relevant
results. Then, we have constituted a dataset with these 500 retrieved choirs
images where faces have been detected and labeled as explained in Section 3. The
picture of Fig. 3(a) is an example of the images composing the dataset. Although
the study of the face detection problem is out of purpose of the present paper,
we can mention that the obtained general precision rate was 95% and that the
undetected faces were manually added for the completeness of the dataset.

The adopted criterion for the quantitative assessment of a ternary spatial
relation rl(A,B,C) is the satisfaction degree computed as follows

s(A) =
|area(A) ∩ ΓBC |

|area(A)|
, (8)

where A is the target object and ΓBC is the area between the two reference
objects B and C.



(a) (b)

Fig. 3. Results of our system tested for an image of a choir. First column: Face recog-
nition results. Second column: Schematic spatial representation of the above, below,
before, after, and between relations of the visual objects detected in the image under
study.

The qualitative evaluation of the system is carried out by asking different
questions whose answers are boolean. The two main types of possible queries
are:

– what are the relation(s) among three given objects OREL, OREF1, and
OREF2?

– which is/are the object(s) OREL that have the relation rl with the given
objects OREF1, and OREF2?

In the case of the image of the Fig. 3(a), the quantitative and qualitative
results are reported in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.

When compared with the ternary relations of [9], we assume the semantic
correspondence between their leftside concept and our above concept as well as
between their rightside concept and our below concept.

Table 1. Quantitative evaluation of the ternary relations for the objects in the choir
image in Fig. 3(a).

Approaches
from [9] ours (Sec. 2)

OREL OREF1 OREF2 ab bl bf af bt ab bl bf af bt

B A D 0.48 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.52 0.18 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.82
C A B 0.00 0.43 0.00 0.57 0.00 0.18 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00
C A D 0.00 0.20 0.00 0.00 0.80 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00
C D E 0.00 0.00 0.50 0.00 0.50 0.00 0.68 1.00 0.00 0.00
D A C 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.93 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00



Table 2. Qualitative evaluation of the ternary relations for the objects in the choir
image in Fig. 3(a).

Approaches
ground truth ours (Sec. 2)

OREL OREF1 OREF2 ab bl bf af bt ab bl bf af bt

A C E no yes yes no no no yes yes no no
B A C yes no no no yes yes no no no yes
B C D no no yes no no no no yes no no
C B D no yes no no yes no yes no no yes
D A B yes no no yes no yes no no yes no
E A B no no no yes no no no no yes no

In Table 1, we can observe that in the case of the relation rl(C,A, D), we find
that the object C is between A and D when applying our formalism, whereas
[9] considers that the object C is also below the objects A and D that is not
complying with the human intuition. For the relations such as rl(B,A,D) or
rl(C,D,E), our approach provides values which indicate the dominant relation
between these objects and which is each time conformed with the human per-
ception of the scene. In opposite, the figures computed using [9] give a large
uncertainty about the type of the relations among the objects, e.g. by finding (i)
50% for C below D and E and (ii) 50% for C between D and E which does not
indicate which semantic relation is correct and makes confusion between true
(ii) and false (i) statements.

In the results of the qualitative reasoning on the proposed ternary spatial
relations as reported in Table 2, we note the excellent concordance between the
ground truth values set by human users and those computed with our developed
system. The overall precision of our system tested for the entire dataset is of
99.5± 0.5 %.

Hence, the evaluation of the results shows that our clock-based formalism
provides a more accurate and consistent definition of these concepts than the
state-of-the art ones.

5 Conclusions

In this paper, we have applied new ternary spatial relations, namely, above,
below, before, after, and between, in order to automatically understand and
interpret images with complex content such as groups of people. Formalizing the
presented relations using the clock model and defining them as ternary relations
has provided new powerful semantic concepts to describe the relative position of
an object of interest towards two other distinct visual objects. As demonstrated,
this conceptualization brings a new insight in the automated analysis of crowded
visual scenes.



References

1. Dobnik S.: Coordinating Spatial Perspective in Discourse. In: Proceedings of the
EPSRC Workshop on Vision and Language, Sheffield, UK (2012)

2. Dimanzo M., Adorni G., Giunchiglia F.: Reasoning about Scene Descriptions. Pro-
ceedings of IEEE. 74, 1013–1025 (1986)

3. Cohn A. G., Renz J.: Qualitative Spatial Reasoning. In: Handbook of Knowledge
Representation. Elsevier (2007)

4. Ligozat G.: Qualitative Spatial and Temporal Reasoning. John Wiley & Sons (2011)
5. Randell D. A., Cui Z., Cohn A. G.: A Spatial Logic Based on Regions and Connec-

tion. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Knowledge Representation
and Reasoning, pp. 165–176 (1992)

6. Hudelot C., Atif J., Bloch I.: Fuzzy Spatial Relation Ontology for Image Interpre-
tation. Fuzzy Sets and Systems. 159, 1929–1951 (2008)

7. Olszewska J. I., McCluskey T. L.: Ontology-Coupled Active Contours for Dynamic
Video Scene Understanding. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Intelligent Engineering Systems, pp. 369–374 (2011)

8. Clementini E., Skiadopoulos S., Billen R., Tarquini F.: A Reasoning System of
Ternary Projective Relations. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engi-
neering. 22, 161–178 (2010)

9. Clementini E., Billen R.: Modeling and Computing Ternary Projective Relations
Between Regions. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 18, 799–
814 (2006)

10. Bloch I., Colliot O., Cesar Jr, R. M.: On the Ternary Spatial Relation “Between”.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics - Part B: Cybernetics. 36,
312–327 (2006)

11. Gokberk Cinbis R., Aksoy S.: Relative Position-Based Spatial Relationships Using
Mathematical Morphology. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Image Processing, pp. II.97–II.100 (2007)

12. Baader F., Calvanese D., McGuinness D. L., Nardi D., Patel-Schneider P. F.: The
Description Logic Handbook: Theory, Implementation and Applications. Cambridge
University Press, 2nd Ed. (2010)

13. Olszewska J. I.: Spatio-Temporal Visual Ontology. In: Proceedings of the EPSRC
Workshop on Vision and Language, Brighton, UK (2011)

14. Olszewska J. I.: Multi-Target Parametric Active Contours to Support Ontological
Domain Representation. In: Proceedings of RFIA, pp. 779–784 (2012)

15. Le Ber F., Napoli A.: Object-Based Representation and Classification of Spatial
Structures and Relations. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Tools with Artificial Intelligence, pp. 268–275 (2002)

16. Neumann B., Moeller R.: On Scene Interpretation with Description Logics. Image
and Vision Computing. 26, 114–126 (2008)

17. Gallagher A. C., Chen T.: Understanding Images of Groups of People. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 256–263 (2009)

18. Viola P., Jones M. J.: Robust Real-Time Face Detection. International Journal of
Computer Vision, 57, 137–154 (2004)

19. Kohler C., Ottlik A., Nagel H.-H., Nebel B.: Qualitative Reasoning Feeding Back
Into Quantitative Model-Based Tracking. In: Proceedings of the European Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1041–1042 (2004)


