










































The Swedish Model of Public Outreach of Linguistics to secondary school Students through Olympiads


Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Teaching Natural Language Processing, pages 42–45,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Swedish Model of Public Outreach of Linguistics to
secondary school Students through Olympiads

Patrik Roos
Young Scientists Stockholm
roos@lingolympiad.org

Hedvig Skirgård
Young Scientists Stockholm
hedvig@lingolympiad.org

Abstract

What is it that we want to achieve with
our Linguistic Olympiads and how do the
contests vary in different countries? The
Swedish Olympiad has been running for 7
years now and is primarily focused on pub-
lic outreach - spreading linguistics to sec-
ondary school students. The contest in-
volves not only a test but also lectures,
school visits and teaching material. The
effort is put on promoting the interest of
linguistics to students through fun ma-
terial and good contact with teachers of
languages. This presentation contains an
overview of the Swedish version of Olympi-
ads in Linguistics as well as some con-
crete examples of workshop material on lin-
guistic problems for secondary school stu-
dents.

1 Introduction

This paper presents an overview of the way the
Olympiad in Linguistics is run in Sweden and how
one can go about public outreach of linguistics
to secondary school students. This paper and
presentation intends to provide useful tips on how
an olympiad of this kind can be organised and
also discuss how we in the linguistics community
can spread linguistics to potential students and the
non-academic world.
The Swedish Olympiad in Linguistics (‘’Lin-

golympiaden’’) started in 2006 as a project within
Young Scientists Stockholm. The winners of the
Swedish contest have participated in the Interna-
tional Olympiad in Linguistics (IOL) since 2007
and in 2010 Sweden was host country for IOL.
There are a couple of things that set the Swedish

contest apart from most other olympiads of lin-
guistics around the world:

1. the contest takes place at the involved univer-
sities themselves, not in classrooms in second-
ary schools

2. the contest is a whole-day event with contest
in the morning and lectures in the afternoon

3. there are fewer participants that many other
countries participating in IOL

4. the contest has a focus on public outreach
rather than finding the best competitors for
IOL

5. we engage in other public outreach activities
such as school visits, lectures and group as-
signments for secondary school students

6. the primary audience is secondary school stu-
dents that study languages, humanities and
social science rather than the natural sciences

The aim of Lingolympiaden is to spread linguistics
to secondary school students in a fun and educa-
tional way. While there are many extra curricular
activities for students of the natural sciences: such
as the other olympiads, summer schools, exhibi-
tions etc there are relatively few alternatives for
students of social sciences. Lingolympiaden in-
tends to fill that void, showing that science does
not only consist of the natural sciences and that
linguistics is a fun and exciting discipline.
Lingolympiaden is run as a collaborative project

between the Young Scientists Stockholm (YSS)
and the Linguistics departments at Stockholm Uni-
versity and Lund University. YSS is a youth volun-
teer organisation devoted to spreading the interest
of science and technology to the youth of Sweden
(youth <26 years old).
Lingolympiaden is funded by the universities,

the county council of Stockholm, YSS and The
Royal Swedish Academy of Letters, History and
Antiquities.

2 The different organisers aims and
contributions

The university contributes with rooms and staff for
creating and coordinating the problem set as well
as correcting.The incentive for the universities to
be involved in this is primarily to make secondary
school students aware that linguistics exists and
potentially acquire more students.
YSS coordinates the entire project, contacts

schools, applies for funding etc. YSS also make

42



school visits, talking about linguistics and prob-
lems from the olympiads with secondary school
students. The goal of YSS is to encourage the
youth of Sweden to be interested in science and
technology and pursue college studies. YSS re-
ceives funding from the County Council of Stock-
holm for this.
The Royal Swedish Academy of Letters, History

and Antiquities funds Sweden’s participation in the
International contest. The academy is interested in
promoting humanities and the social sciences to the
youth and as one of the very few enterprises that
actually does this Lingolympiaden receives their
funding.
As all of the involved parties in Lingolympiaden

are interested in promoting linguistics to secondary
school students rather than obtaining the highest
scores in IOL our contest is more geared towards
sparking interest than finding the best problem
solvers. Lingolympiaden is more focused on find-
ing secondary school students that are interested in
languages and make them interested in social sci-
ence and linguistics rather than making students
that are already interested in natural science and
programming interested in languages.

3 Target audience and contact

Lingolympiaden aims to reach secondary school
students that are interested in languages and lin-
guistics and encourage them to become interested
in studying social sciences, especially linguistics, at
university. It has become apparent that students
who are interested in the other olympiads and stu-
dents that are very enthusiastic about natural sci-
ences and programming seem to find the contest
even if there has been little effort to reach them. It
is much harder to reach secondary school students
enrolled in programmes of social sciences and hu-
manities as they are generally less used to there
being extra curricular activities for them to be in-
volved in. That being said, Lingolympiaden is of
course open to all students (including students of
non-theoretical programmes), students from nat-
ural science or programming backgrounds are more
than welcome - it is just that efforts are put where
they seem to be needed (and wanted) the most.
Lingolympiaden would also like to reach more

students who come from families with little higher
education, but as these students are less likely to
choose theoretical secondary school programmes
and also less likely to have passionate and driven
teachers this has proved a very hard task indeed.
The primary means of contact are teachers of

languages at secondary schools. In 2011 the
Swedish government initiated a new secondary
school programme of humanities that includes a
basic course in linguistics as well as more classes
in modern languages. We can take no credit for

this, however, Lingolympiaden has established a
stable and good contact with the Swedish Lan-
guage Teachers Association as well as with teachers
involved in this new secondary school programme.
This has been a very fruitful connection, not only
in that the contest reaches the students but also
because the teachers have benefited from this in
their education.
Lingolympiaden also provides teaching mater-

ials in form of slides for classes in general lin-
guistics, an IPA tutorial and adapted versions of
old problems from the contest. Teachers and stu-
dents are also able to ask questions about linguist-
ics over email and Lingolympiaden gives advice on
literature and sites (WALS, Ethnologue, Univer-
sals Archive, MultiTree, Omniglot, LangDoc, UN-
ESCO Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger,
The Linguistics Podcasts by LinguistChris, The
Five Minute Linguist-podcast etc.) that are useful
to the teachers in their education. In addition to
this Lingolympiaden visits secondary schools, giv-
ing lectures in linguistics and holding workshops
on Olympiad problems for a nominal fee. These
services are much appreciated by the teachers and
students.
Maintaining an active and good relation with the

teachers is crucial in recruiting contestants to Lin-
golympiaden as well as a perfect opportunity to
provide our first and foremost goal, to increase the
interest in linguistics among the secondary school
students.

4 The problems of Lingolympiaden

Lingolympiaden aims to include problems from
computational linguistics, general linguistics
(primarily grammatical typology), field linguistics,
phonetics and psycho linguistics. The staff at
the universities are encouraged to construct
problems on their area of expertise. Since there
are many Ph.D. students who work on language
descriptions and linguistic typology at Swedish
universities there have been many problems on
minor languages such as Kuot of Papua New
Guinea and interesting grammatical phenomena
such as hodiernal tense. The problem set of the
Swedish contest has featured adapted and trans-
lated problems from other olympiads and other
sources (Speculative Grammarian for example),
but as the staff at the universities improve with
every year there are less and less of these external
problems.
The problem constructors are advised to take

into consideration that the problems are to be
solvable by secondary school students with no lin-
guistic training, but at the same time the problems
shouldn’t be based on pure logic alone. This is a
tricky balance and it is impossible to make sure
that no-one has an unfair advantage.

43



The problem set for the Swedish olympiad is de-
pendent on who within the university staff has the
time to spend construction and testing problems.
While the attention is to cover all areas within lin-
guistics it is rare that staff from all sections are
able to contribute. This is not a problem that is
unique to the Swedish contest, more international
collaboration will hopefully improve this situation.
Translating Swedish problems into English, Rus-
sian, Bulgarian, Italian or German is very feasible.

4.1 Adaptation of problems into teaching
material - some examples

When visiting at school it isn’t always possible to
use problems from the Swedish or International
olympiads directly as they were constructed - many
problems need to be modified to better suit the
conditions of the workshop. When conducting
workshops it isn’t the aim to test the students but
rather to discuss different approaches to the prob-
lem and encourage their interest. Here are some
examples of the problems that have been used in
workshops at secondary schools.

Lingdoku by Trey Jones
Lingdoku is an IPA version of the Japanese num-
ber game Sudoku. This is very useful type of prob-
lem since most students are already familiar with
the premises of Sudoku, it gives them a nice intro-
duction to the variables necessary to define con-
sonants and it is great for illustrating different ap-
proaches of problem solving. Since students en-
rolled in the new humanities programme are re-
quired to learn IPA this problem is also much ap-
preciated by teachers.
Lingdoku focuses only on pulmonic consonants

and two variables, manner and place. The adapt-
ation used in Lingolympiadens workshop has 4*4
different symbols to place within the grid without
repeating the same manner or place in the 4 2*2-
squares or any row or column. The Lingdoku table
will have some values filled in and by regulating
these one can change the time necessary to solve
the problem and also change focus on what part of
the problem solving we want to emphasise.

Drehu & Cemuhî by Ksenija Giljarova
This problem comes from IOL-6 (2008 in Slanchev
Bryag). It has proven to be a highly useful and
appreciated problem to run with students. It is
quite illustrative of the kind of problems one might
encounter and it is not solvable by only applying
straightforward logic.
The problem consists of two sets of words in two

related languages with translations into Swedish in
a scrambled order. There are also a few morphemes
that are translated are given as related in the two
languages but with no Swedish translation. The
method of solving it involves applying several ways

of comparing the languages, the students have to
be able to identify that the words have developed
differently in the two languages and that concepts
like horizon, border, wall and beach share a certain
semantic component (‘’boundary’’). It serves as
inspiration and proof to students that their know-
ledge, experience and general feel for language and
linguistics is directly applicable to solving concrete
linguistic problems.

PSG Web Laboratory by Torbjörn Lager
The Linguistics department at Gothenburg Uni-
versity have developed a simple online tool for cre-
ating context-free phrase structure grammars and
testing them out. It was developed as an aid in
a course on generative grammar and CFGs but it
has quickly spread to other departments. It is ac-
cessible through any web browser, no passwords
necessary. The tool is very useful when one wants
to illustrate the concepts of competence and per-
formance as conceived by Chomsky, how syntactic
trees can be applied and, if time permits, what
CFGs are. This exercise does require a bit more
effort as many students are unfamiliar with formal
language, but it is quite easy to make it fun since
the freedom in defining the lexicon is limitless -
something that has proven to be quite amusing.

Arongo, Arongo - why have you forsaken
me?
Patrick Littell constructed a problem about the
language on the island of Manam for NACLO in
2008. This problem deals with different ways of
expressing location in space, turns out that the
language of the island of Manam has a rather un-
usual system. The students are given a map of the
island and some sentences in the language describ-
ing the location of certain houses on the map. This
problem has been adapted into a small role playing
game for the Lingolympiaden workshops.
The students are playing a group of field lin-

guists who arrive to the island to study the indigen-
ous language. There is only one person, Arongo,
on the island with whom they have a common lan-
guage (Tok Pisin). He was supposed to meet him
when they arrived, but since they were late due to
a storm he has returned to his home. They have
to locate him by deciphering what the natives are
saying to them, i.e. the sentences from the the ori-
ginal problem. They do not receive all sentences
at once, they get them in small batches along with
other clues (in step 2 they learn that there is a vol-
cano). This gives them smaller amount of text to
process at the same time, which makes it look less
overwhelming. They also get to share their ideas
and conclusions with each other and test their hy-
pothesis on new data. Thus, learning how to ap-
proach a complex problem.
If there is plenty of time there is also the possibil-

44



ity of discussing other problems that field linguists
might encounter.

5 Conclusions
The aim of the organisers and nature of the sec-
ondary school system determine the shape of the
Olympiad of Linguistics in a specific country. In
the case of Sweden the olympiad is primarily fo-
cused on reaching secondary school students with
the message that linguistics is fun and they should
pursue it further. An Olympiad more geared to-
wards making students of natural sciences and pro-
gramming interested in languages might look dif-
ferent (but not necessarily).
Lingolympiaden makes use of the expertise com-

petence of the staff at the universities in the prob-
lem construction but also for lectures and teach-
ing material, the universities use Lingolympiaden
as a way of reaching potential students. YSS,
the County Council of Stockholm and the Royal
Academy of Letters support Lingolympiadens ef-
forts to encourage the the youth of Sweden to
be interested in social sciences and humanities
in general and linguistics in particular. Teach-
ers of modern languages and the new humanities
programme use Lingolympiaden to improve their
classes and provide extra-curricular activities for
their students. And lastly: the students of second-
ary schools in Sweden use Lingolympiaden to try
out what linguistics is all about and whether it is
fun. It is their interest and their curiosity that is
at the core of Lingolympiaden and other projects
by YSS.

6 Future
As the contest grows there will hopefully be more
opportunities to communicate with students and
teachers of secondary schools and become more
involved in their education. Lingolympiaden is a
small contest aimed at providing an all-day outing
at the university for secondary school students, but
if there is interest there might be local contests at
the schools themselves as well.
The Swedish government is right now consid-

ering whether or not to support Lingolympiaden
in the same way that they support the Swedish
Olympiad of Informatics, Lego Robot contest,
Chemistry Olympiad etc. If they do, that will
be a great leap towards acknowledgement of the
value of social and human sciences alongside the
natural sciences. Linguistics is an interdisciplinary
scientific field that covers classical humanities, so-
cial and human sciences, natural sciences like neur-
ology and biology, and computational disciplines.
There is no reason why a Olympiad of Linguistics
should be excluded from support of Olympiads of
Science.

References
Giljarova, Ksenija. 2008. Problem for IOL 2008 in
Slanchev Bryag. Drehu & Cemuhî. Available at:
http://www.ioling.org/problems/2008/i3/

Jones, Trey. 2006. Speculative Grammarian, Vol
CLI, No 2. Lingdoku—Like Sudoku, But For
Linguists. L’École de SpecGram, Washington
D.C.

Lager, Torbjörn. 2002. PSG Web Laborat-
ory. Available at: http://www.ling.gu.se/
~lager/Labs/PSG-Lab/

Litell, Patrick. 2008. Problem for NACLO
2008. Manam, I’m Anam. Available at:
http://www.naclo.cs.cmu.edu/assets/
problems/naclo08r2.pdf

45


