










































Two Approaches to Correcting Homophone Confusions in a Hybrid Machine Translation System


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation, pages 109–116,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Two Approaches to Correcting Homophone Confusions
in a Hybrid Machine Translation System

Pierrette Bouillon1, Johanna Gerlach1, Ulrich Germann2, Barry Haddow2, Manny Rayner1

(1) FTI/TIM, University of Geneva, Switzerland
{Pierrette.Bouillon,Johanna.Gerlach,Emmanuel.Rayner}@unige.ch

(2) School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Scotland
{ugermann,bhaddow}@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

In the context of a hybrid French-to-
English SMT system for translating on-
line forum posts, we present two meth-
ods for addressing the common problem
of homophone confusions in colloquial
written language. The first is based on
hand-coded rules; the second on weighted
graphs derived from a large-scale pro-
nunciation resource, with weights trained
from a small bicorpus of domain language.
With automatic evaluation, the weighted
graph method yields an improvement of
about +0.63 BLEU points, while the rule-
based method scores about the same as the
baseline. On contrastive manual evalua-
tion, both methods give highly significant
improvements (p < 0.0001) and score
about equally when compared against each
other.

1 Introduction and motivation

The data used to train Statistical Machine Transla-
tion (SMT) systems is most often taken from the
proceedings of large multilingual organisations,
the generic example being the Europarl corpus
(Koehn, 2005); for academic evaluation exercises,
the test data may well also be taken from the same
source. Texts of this kind are carefully cleaned-up
formal language. However, real MT systems of-
ten need to handle text from very different genres,
which as usual causes problems.

This paper addresses a problem common in do-
mains containing informally written text: spelling
errors based on homophone confusions. Con-
cretely, the work reported was carried out in the
context of the ACCEPT project, which deals with
the increasingly important topic of translating on-
line forum posts; the experiments we describe
were performed using French data taken from the

Symantec forum, the concrete task being to trans-
late it into English. The language in these posts is
very far from that which appears in Hansard. Peo-
ple write quickly and carelessly, and no attempt is
made to clean up the results. In particular, spelling
is often uncertain.

One of the particular challenges in the task
considered here is that French has a high fre-
quency of homophones, which often cause confu-
sion in written language. Everyone who speaks
English is familiar with the fact that careless writ-
ers may confuse its (“of or belonging to it”) and
it’s (contraction of “it is” or “it has”). French has
the same problem, but to a much greater degree.
Even when someone is working in an environment
where an online spell-checker is available, it is
easy to write ou (“or”) instead of où (“where”),
la (“the-feminine”) instead of là (“there”) or ce
(“this”) instead of se (“him/herself”). Even worse,
there is systematic homophony in verb-form end-
ings: for example, utiliser (“to use”) utilisez (“you
use”) and utilisé (“used”) are all homophones.

In French posts from the Symantec forum, we
find that between 10% and 15% of all sentences
contain at least one homophone error, depending
on exactly how the term is defined1. Substituting
a word with an incorrect homophone will often re-
sult in a translation error. Figure 1 shows typical
examples of homophone errors and their effect on
translation.

The core translation engine in our application
is a normal SMT system, bracketed between pre-
and post-editing phases. In what follows, we con-
trast two different approaches to handling homo-
phone errors, which involve pre-editing in dif-
ferent ways. The first approach is based on
knowledge-intensive construction of regular ex-
pression rules, which use the surrounding context
to correct the most frequent types of homophone

1Unclear cases include hyphenation, elison and some ex-
amples of missing or incorrect accents.

109



source automatic translation
original La sa ne pose pas de problème ... The its is not the issue ...

corrected Là ça ne pose pas de problème ... Here it is not a problem

original ... (du moins on ne recoit pas l’alerte). ... (at least we do not recoit alert).
corrected ... (du moins on ne reçoit pas l’alerte). .. (at least it does not receive the alert).

Figure 1: Examples of homophone errors in French forum data, contrasting English translations produced
by the SMT engine from plain and corrected versions.

confusions.
The second is an engineering method: we use a

commercial pronunciation-generation tool to gen-
erate a homophone dictionary, then use this dictio-
nary to turn the input into a weighted graph where
each word is replaced by a weighted disjunction of
homophones. Related, though less elaborate, work
has been reported by Bertoldi et al. (2010), who
address spelling errors using a character-level con-
fusion network based on common character con-
fusions in typed English and test them on artifi-
cially created noisy data. Formiga and Fonollosa
(2012) also used character-based models to correct
spelling on informally written English data.

The two approaches in the present paper ex-
ploit fundamentally different knowledge sources
in trying to identify and correct homophone er-
rors. The rule-based method relies exclusively
on source-side information, encoding patterns in-
dicative of common French homophone confu-
sions. The weighted graph method shifts the bal-
ance to the target side; the choice between poten-
tial homophone alternatives is made primarily by
the target language model, though the source lan-
guage weights and the translation model are also
involved.

The rest of the paper is organised as follows.
Section 2 describes the basic framework in more
detail, and Section 3 the experiments. Section 4
summarises and concludes.

2 Basic framework

The goal of the ACCEPT project is to provide
easy cross-lingual access to posts in online fo-
rums. Given the large variety of possible techni-
cal topics and the limited supply of online gurus,
it frequently happens that users, searching forum
posts online, find that the answer they need is in a
language they do not know.

Currently available tools, for example Google
Translate, are of course a great deal better than

nothing, but still leave much to be desired. When
one considers that advice given in an online fo-
rum may not be easy to follow even for native lan-
guage speakers, it is unsurprising that a Google-
translated version often fails to be useful. There is
consequently strong motivation to develop an in-
frastructure explicitly designed to produce high-
quality translations. ACCEPT intends to achieve
this by a combination of three technologies: pre-
editing of the source; domain-tuned SMT; and
post-editing of the target. The pre- and post-
editing stages are performed partly using auto-
matic tools, and partly by manual intervention on
the part of the user communities which typically
grow up around online forums. We now briefly
describe the automatic parts of the system.

2.1 SMT engine and corpus data

The SMT engine used is a phrase-based system
trained with the standard Moses pipeline (Koehn
et al., 2007), using GIZA++ (Och and Ney,
2000) for word alignment and SRILM (Stolcke,
2002) for the estimation of 5-gram Kneser-Ney
smoothed (Kneser and Ney, 1995) language mod-
els.

For training the translation and lexicalised re-
ordering models we used the releases of europarl
and news-commentary provided for the WMT12
shared task (Callison-Burch et al., 2012), together
with a dataset from the ACCEPT project consist-
ing mainly of technical product manuals and mar-
keting materials.

For language modelling we used the target sides
of all the parallel data, together with approx-
imately 900 000 words of monolingual English
data extracted from web forums of the type that
we wish to translate. Separate language models
were trained on each of the data sets, then these
were linearly interpolated using SRILM to min-
imise perplexity on a heldout portion of the forum
data.

110



For tuning and testing, we extracted 1022 sen-
tences randomly from a collection of monolin-
gual French Symantec forum data (distinct from
the monolingual English forum data), translated
these using Google Translate, then post-edited
to create references. The post-editing was per-
formed by a native English speaker, who is also
fluent in French. This 1022-sentence parallel text
was then split into two equal halves (devtest a
and devtest b) for minimum error rate tuning
(MERT) and testing, respectively.

2.2 Rule-based pre-editing engine

Rule-based processing is carried out using the
Acrolinx engine (Bredenkamp et al., 2000), which
supports spelling, grammar, style and terminology
checking. These methods of pre-editing were orig-
inally designed to be applied by authors during the
technical documentation authoring process. The
author gets error markings and improvement sug-
gestions, and decides about reformulations. It is
also possible to apply the provided suggestions
automatically as direct reformulations. Rules are
written in a regular-expression-based formalism
which can access tagger-generated part-of-speech
information. The rule-writer can specify both pos-
itive evidence (patterns that will trigger applica-
tion of the rule) and negative evidence (patterns
that will block application).

3 Experiments

We compared the rule-based and weighted graph
approaches, evaluating each of them on the 511
sentence devtest b corpus. The baseline SMT
system, with no pre-editing, achieves an average
BLEU score of 42.47 on this set.

3.1 The rule-based approach

Under the ACCEPT project, a set of lightweight
pre-editing rules have been developed specifically
for the Symantec Forum translation task. Some
of the rules are automatic (direct reformulations);
others present the user with a set of suggestions.
The evaluations described in Gerlach et al. (2013)
demonstrate that pre-editing with the rules has a
significant positive effect on the quality of SMT-
based translation.

The implemented rules address four main phe-
nomena: differences between informal and for-
mal language (Rayner et al., 2012), differences
between local French and English word-order, el-

lision/punctuation, and word confusions. Rules
for resolving homophone confusions belong to the
fourth group. They are shown in Table 1, together
with approximate frequencies of occurrence in the
development corpus.

Table 1: Hand-coded rules for homophone confu-
sions and per-sentence frequency of applicability
in the development corpus. Some of the rules also
cover non-homophone errors, so the frequency fig-
ures are slight overestimates as far as homophones
are concerned.

Rule Freq.
a/as/à 4.17%
noun phrase agreement 3.20%
incorrect verb ending (er/é/ez) 2.90%
missing hyphenation 2.08%
subject verb agreement 1.90%
missing elision 1.26%
du/dû 0.35%
la/là 0.32%
ou/où 0.28%
ce/se 0.27%
Verb/noun 0.23%
tous/tout 0.22%
indicative/imperative 0.19%
future/conditional tense 0.14%
sur/sûr 0.10%
quel que/quelque 0.08%
ma/m’a 0.06%
quelle/qu’elle/quel/quels 0.05%
ça/sa 0.04%
des/dès 0.04%
et/est 0.02%
ci/si 0.01%
m’y/mi/mis 0.01%
other 0.17%
Total 18.09%

The set of Acrolinx pre-editing rules potentially
relevant to resolution of homophone errors was
applied to the devtest b set test corpus (Sec-
tion 2.1). In order to be able to make a fair com-
parison with the weighted-graph method, we only
used rules with a unique suggestion, which could
be run automatically. Applying these rules pro-
duced 430 changed words in the test corpus, but
did not change the average BLEU score signifi-
cantly (42.38).

Corrections made with a human in the loop,
used as “oracle” input for the SMT system, by the

111



way, achieve an average BLEU score2 of 43.11 —
roughly on par with the weighted-graph approach
described below.

3.2 The weighted graph approach

In our second approach, the basic idea is to trans-
form the input sentence into a confusion network
(Bertoldi et al., 2008) which presents the trans-
lation system with a weighted list of homophone
alternatives for each input word. The system is
free to choose a path through a network of words
that optimizes the internal hypothesis score; the
weighting scheme for the alternatives can be used
to guide the decoder. The conjecture is that the
combination of the confusion network weights, the
translation model and the target language model
can resolve homophone confusions.

3.2.1 Defining sets of confusable words

To compile lists of homophones, we used the com-
mercial Nuance Toolkit pronounce utility as
our source of French pronunciation information.

We began by extracting a list of all the lexical
items which occurred in the training portion of
the French Symantec forum data, giving us 30 565
words. We then ran pronounce over this list.
The Nuance utility does not simply perform table
lookups, but is capable of creating pronunciations
on the fly; it could in particular assign plausible
pronunciations to most of the misspellings that oc-
curred in the corpus. In general, a word is given
more than one possible pronunciation. This can be
for several reasons; in particular, some sounds in
French can systematically be pronounced in more
than one way, and pronunciation is often also de-
pendent on whether the word is followed by a con-
sonant or vowel. Table 2 shows examples.

Using the data taken from pronounce, we
grouped words together into clusters which have
a common pronunciation; since words typically
have more than one pronunciation, they will typi-
cally also belong to more than one cluster. We then
contructed sets of possible alternatives for words
by including, for each word W , all the words W ′

such that W and W ′ occurred in the same cluster;
since careless French writing is also characterised
by mistakes in placing accents, we added all words
W ′ such that W and W ′ are identical up to drop-
ping accents. Table 3 shows typical results.

2With parameter sets from tuning the system on raw in-
put and input preprocessed with the fully automatic rules; cf.
Sec. 3.3.

Word Pronunciation
ans A˜

A˜z
prévu p r E v y

p r e v y
québec k e b E k
roule r u l

r u l *

Table 2: Examples of French pronunciations gen-
erated by pronounce. The format used is the
Nuance version of ARPABET.

Intuitively, it is in general unlikely that, on see-
ing a word which occurs frequently in the corpus,
we will want to hypothesize that it may be a mis-
spelling of one which occurs very infrequently.
We consequently filtered the sets of alternatives
to remove all words on the right whose frequency
was less than 0.05 times that of the word on the
left.

Table 3: Examples of sets of possible alternatives
for words, generated by considering both homo-
phone and accent confusions.

Word Alternatives
aux au aux haut
créer créer créez créé créée créées créés
côte cote coté côte côté quot quote
hôte haut haute hôte hôtes
il e elle elles il ils l le y
mène main mené mène
nom nom noms non
ou ou où
saine sain saine saines scène seine
traits trait traits tray tre tres très

3.2.2 Setting confusion network weights

In a small series of preliminary experiments we
first tested three naı̈ve weighting schemes for the
confusion networks.

• using a uniform distribution that assigns
equal weight to all spelling alternatives;

• setting weights proportional to the unigram
probability of the word in question;

• computing the weights as state probabilities
in a trellis with the forward-backward algo-
rithm (Rabiner, 1989), an algorithm widely

112



Table 4: Decoder performance with different con-
fusion network weighting schemes.

weighting scheme av. BLEUa std.
none (baseline system) 42.47 ± .22
uniform 41.50 ± .37
unigram 41.58 ± .26
fwd-bwd (bigram) 41.81 ± .16
bigram context
(interpolated)

43.10 ± .32

aBased on muliple tuning runs with random parameter ini-
tializations.

used in speech recognition. Suppose that
each word ŵi in the observed translation in-
put sentence is produced while the writer has
a particular “true” word wi ∈ Ci in mind,
where Ci is the set of words confusable with
ŵi. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that
within a confusion set, all “true word” op-
tions are equally likely, i.e., p(ŵi |wi = x) =

1

|Ci|
for x ∈ Ci. The writer chooses the next

word wi+1 according to the conditional word
bigram probability p(wi+1 |wi).

The forward probability fwd i(x) is the prob-
ability of arriving in state wi = x at time
i, regardless of the sequence of states visited
en-route; the backward probability bwd i(x)
is the probability of arriving at the end of the
sentence coming from state wi = x, regard-
less of the path taken. These probabilities can
be computed efficiently with dynamic pro-
gramming.

The weight assigned to a particular ho-
mophone alternative x at position i in the
confusion network is the joint forward and
backward probability:

weight i(x) = fwd i(x) · bwd i(x).

In practice, it turns out that these three naı̈ve
weighting schemes do more harm than good, as
the results in Table 4 show. Clearly, they rely too
much on overall language statistics (unigram and
bigram probabilities) and pay too little attention to
the actual input.

We therefore designed a fourth weighting
scheme (“bigram context interpolated”) that
gives more weight to the observed input and com-
putes the weights as the average of two score com-
ponents. The first is a binary feature function
that assigns 1 to each word actually observed in

the input, and 0 to its homophone alternatives.
The second component is the bigram-based in-
context probability of each candidate. Unlike the
forward-backward weighting scheme, which con-
siders all possible context words for each candi-
date (as specified in the respective confusion sets),
the new scheme only considers the words in the
actual input as context words.

It would have be desirable to keep the two score
components separate and tune their weights to-
gether with all the other parameters of the SMT
system. Unfortunately, the current implementa-
tion of confusion network-based decoding in the
Moses decoder allows only one single weight in
the specification of confusion networks, so that we
had to combine the two components into one score
before feeding the confusion network into the de-
coder.

With the improved weighting scheme, the con-
fusion network approach does outperform the
baseline system, giving an average BLEU of 43.10
(+0.63).

3.3 Automatic evaluation (BLEU)

Due to the relatively small size of the evalua-
tion set and instability inherent in minimum error
rate training (Foster and Kuhn, 2009; Clark et al.,
2011), results of individual tuning and evaluation
runs can be unreliable. We therefore preformed
multiple tuning and evaluation runs for each sys-
tem (baseline, rule-based and weighted graph). To
illustrate the precision of the BLEU score on our
data sets, we plot in Fig. 2 for each individual tun-
ing run the BLEU score achieved on the tuning
set (x-axis) against the performance on the evalua-
tion set (y-axis). The variance along the x-axis for
each system is due to search errors in parameter
optimization. Since the search space is not con-
vex, the tuning process can get stuck in local max-
ima. The apparent poor local correlation between
performance on the tuning set and performance on
the evaluation set for each system shows the effect
of the sampling error.

With larger tuning and evaluation sets, we
would expect the correlation between the two
to improve. The scatter plot suggests that the
weighted-graph system does on average produce
significantly better translations (with respect to
BLEU) than both the baseline and the rule-based
system, whereas the difference between the base-
line and the rule-based system is within the range

113



41.6

41.8

42

42.2

42.4

42.6

42.8

43

43.2

43.4

43.6

43.8

46.4 46.6 46.8 47 47.2 47.4 47.6 47.8

B
L

E
U

sc
or

e
on

ev
al

ua
tio

n
se

t

BLEU score on tuning set

BLEU scores on evaluation set
µ σ .95 conf. int.

• baseline 42.47 .22 42.04–42.89
× rule-based 42.38 .23 41.94–42.83
+ weighted graph 43.10 .32 42.48–43.72

Figure 2: BLEU scores (in points) for the baseline, rule-based and weighted graph-based systems.

of statistical error.
To study the effect of tuning condition (tun-

ing on raw vs. input pre-processed by rules), we
also translated both the raw and the pre-processed
evaluation corpus with all parameter setting that
we had obtained during the various experiments.
Figure 3 plots (with solid markers) performance
on raw input (x-axis) against translation of pre-
processed input (y-axis). We observe that while
preprocessing harms performance for certain pa-
rameter settings, most of the time proprocessing
does lead to improvements in BLEU score. The
slight deterioration we observed when comparing
system tuned on exactly the type of input that they
were to translate later (i.e., raw or preprocessed)
seems to be a imprecision in the measurement
caused by training instability and sampling error
rather than the result of systematic input deterio-
ration due to preprocessing. Overall, the improve-
ments are small and not statistically significant,
but there appears to be a positive trend.

To gauge the benefits of more extensive pre-
processing and input error correction we produced
and translated ‘oracle’ input by also applying rules
from the Acrolinx engine that currently require a
human in the loop who decides whether or not the
rule in question should be applied. The boost in

performance is shown by the hollow markers in
Fig. 3. Here, translation of pre-processed input
consistently fares better than translation of the raw
input.

3.4 Human evaluation

Although BLEU suggests that the weighted-graph
method significantly outscores both the baseline
and the rule-based method (p < 0.05 over 25 tun-
ing runs), the absolute differences are small, and
we decided that it would be prudent to carry out a
human evaluation as well. Following the method-
ology of Rayner et al. (2012), we performed con-
trastive judging on the Amazon Mechanical Turk
(AMT) to compare different versions of the sys-
tem. Subjects were recruited from Canada, a bilin-
gual French/English country, requesting English
native speakers with good written French; we also
limited the call to AMT workers who had already
completed at least 50 assignments, at least 80%
of which had been accepted. Judging assignments
were split into groups of 20 triplets, where each
triplet consisted of a source sentence and two dif-
ferent target sentences; the judge was asked to
say which translation was better, using a five-point
scale {better, slightly-better, about-equal, slightly-
worse, worse}. The order of the two targets was

114



 41.5

 42

 42.5

 43

 43.5

 41.6  41.8  42  42.2  42.4  42.6  42.8  43

B
LE

U
 s

co
re

 o
n 

in
pu

t p
re

pr
oc

es
se

d 
by

 r
ul

es
 / 

or
ac

le
 in

pu
t

BLEU score on raw baseline input

baseline vs. oracle input; system tuned on baseline input
baseline vs. oracle input; system tuned on preprocessed input

baseline vs. rule-processed input; system tuned on baseline input
baseline vs. rule-processed input; system tuned on preprocessed input

threshold for improvement (above this line) vs. deterioration (below)

Figure 3: BLEU scores (in points) the two input conditions “baseline” and “rule-based” (solid markers).
The hollow markers show the BLEU score on human-corrected ’oracle’ input using a more extensive set
of rules / suggestions from the Acrolinx engine that require a human in the loop.

randomised. Judges were paid $1 for each group
of 20 triplets. Each triplet was judged three times.

Using the above method, we posted AMT tasks

Table 5: Comparison between baseline, rule-based
and weighted-graph versions, evaluated on the
511-utterance devtest b corpus and judged by
three AMT-recruited judges. Figures are presented
both for majority voting and for unanimous deci-
sions only.

Majority Unanimous
baseline vs rule-based

baseline better 83 16.2% 48 9.4%
r-based better 204 40.0% 161 31.5%
Unclear 36 7.0% 93 18.1%
Equal 188 36.8% 209 40.9%

baseline vs weighted-graph
baseline better 115 22.5% 52 10.1%
w-graph better 193 37.8% 119 23.3%
Unclear 46 9.0% 99 19.4%
Equal 157 30.7% 241 47.2%

rule-based vs weighted-graph
r-based better 141 27.6% 68 13.3%
w-graph better 123 24.1% 70 13.7%
Unclear 25 4.9% 142 27.8%
Equal 222 43.4% 231 45.2%

to compare a) the baseline system against the
rule-based system, b) the baseline system against
the best weighted-graph system (interpolated-
bigram) from Section 3.2.2 and c) the rule-
based system and the weighted-graph system
against each other. The results are shown in
Table 5; in the second and third columns, dis-
agreements are resolved by majority voting, and
in the fourth and fifth we only count cases
where the judges are unanimous, the others be-
ing scored as unclear. In both cases, we re-
duce the original five-point scale to a three-point
scale {better, equal/unclear, worse}3. Irrespec-
tive of the method used to resolve disagreements,
the differences “rule-based system/baseline” and
“weighted-graph system/baseline” are highly sig-
nificant (p < 0.0001) according to the McNe-
mar sign test, while the difference “rule-based
system/weighted-graph system” is not significant.

We were somewhat puzzled that BLEU makes
the weighted-graph system clearly better than the
rule-based one, while manual evaluation rates
them as approximately equal. The explanation
seems to be to do with the fact that manual evalu-
ation operates at the sentence level, giving equal
importance to all sentences, while BLEU oper-

3For reasons we do not fully understand, we get better
inter-judge agreement this way than we do when we origi-
nally ask for judgements on a three-point scale.

115



ates at the word level and consequently counts
longer sentences as more important. If we calcu-
late BLEU on a per-sentence basis and then av-
erage the scores, we find that the results for the
two systems are nearly the same; per-sentence
BLEU differences also correlate reasonably well
with majority judgements (Pearson correlation co-
efficient of 0.39). It is unclear to us, however,
whether the difference between per-sentence and
per-word BLEU evaluation points to anything par-
ticularly interesting.

4 Conclusions

We have presented two methods for addressing
the common problem of homophone confusions in
colloquial written language in the context of an
SMT system. The weighted-graph method pro-
duced a small but significant increase in BLEU,
while the rule-based one was about the same as
the baseline. Both methods, however, gave clearly
significant improvements on contrastive manual
evaluation carried out through AMT, with no sig-
nificant difference in performance when the two
were compared directly.

The small but consistent improvements in
BLEU score that we observed with the human-
in-the-loop oracle input over the fully automatic
rule-based setup invite further investigation. How
many of the decisions currently left to the hu-
man can be automated? Is there a fair way of
comparing and evaluating fully automatic against
semi-automatic setups? Work on these topics is in
preparation and will be reported elsewhere.

Acknowledgements

The work described in this paper was performed
as part of the Seventh Framework Programme AC-
CEPT project, under grant agreement 288769.

References

Bertoldi, Nicola, Mauro Cettolo, and Marcello
Federico. 2010. “Statistical machine translation
of texts with misspelled words.” NAACL. Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

Bertoldi, Nicola, Richard Zens, Marcello Fed-
erico, and Wade Shen. 2008. “Efficient speech
translation through confusion network decod-
ing.” IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech &
Language Processing, 16(8):1696–1705.

Bredenkamp, Andrew, Berthold Crysmann, and
Mirela Petrea. 2000. “Looking for errors : A
declarative formalism for resource-adaptive lan-
guage checking.” LREC. Athens, Greece.

Callison-Burch, Chris, Philipp Koehn, Christof
Monz, et al. (eds.). 2012. Seventh Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT).
Montréal, Canada.

Clark, Jonathan H., Chris Dyer, Alon Lavie, and
Noah A. Smith. 2011. “Better hypothesis test-
ing for statistical machine translation: Control-
ling for optimizer instability.” ACL-HLT. Port-
land, OR, USA.

Formiga, Lluis and José A. R. Fonollosa. 2012.
“Dealing with input noise in statistical machine
translation.” COLING. Mumbai, India.

Foster, George and Roland Kuhn. 2009. “Sta-
bilizing minimum error rate training.” WMT.
Athens, Greece.

Gerlach, Johanna, Victoria Porro, Pierrette Bouil-
lon, and Sabine Lehmann. 2013. “La pré-
édition avec des règles peu coûteuses, utile pour
la TA statistique?” TALN-RECITAL. Sables
d’Olonne, France.

Kneser, Reinhard and Hermann Ney. 1995. “Im-
proved backing-off for m-gram language mod-
eling.” ICASSP. Detroit, MI, USA.

Koehn, Philipp. 2005. “Europarl: A parallel cor-
pus for statistical machine translation.” MT
Summit X. Phuket, Thailand.

Koehn, Philipp, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch,
et al. 2007. “Moses: Open source toolkit for
statistical machine translation.” ACL Demon-
stration Session. Prague, Czech Republic.

Och, Franz Josef and Hermann Ney. 2000. “Im-
proved statistical alignment models.” ACL.
Hong Kong.

Rabiner, Lawrence R. 1989. “A tutorial on hid-
den markov models and selected applications in
speech recognition.” Proceedings of the IEEE,
257–286.

Rayner, Manny, Pierrette Bouillon, and Barry
Haddow. 2012. “Using source-language trans-
formations to address register mismatches in
SMT.” AMTA. San Diego, CA, USA.

Stolcke, Andreas. 2002. “SRILM - an extensi-
ble language modeling toolkit.” ICSLP. Denver,
CO, USA.

116


