































Regular Meaning Shifts in
German Particle Verbs: A Case Study

Sylvia Springorum, Jason Utt and Sabine Schulte im Walde
Institut für Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung

Universität Stuttgart
{riestesa|uttjn|schulte}@ims.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract

This paper provides a corpus-based study on German particle verbs. We hypothesize that there
are regular mechanisms in meaning shifts of a base verb in combination with a particle that do not
only apply to the individual verb, but across a semantically coherent set of verbs. For example, the
syntactically similar base verbs brummen ‘hum’ and donnern ‘rumble’ both describe an irritating,
displeasing loud sound. Combined with the particle auf, they result in near-synonyms roughly mean-
ing ‘forcefully assigning a task’ (in one of their senses). Covering 6 base verb groups and 3 particles
with 4 particle meanings, we demonstrate that corpus-based information on the verbs’ subcategoriza-
tion frames plus conceptual properties of the nominal complements is a sufficient basis for defining
such meaning shifts. While the paper is considerably more extensive than earlier related work, we
view it as a case study toward a more automatic approach to identify and formalize meaning shifts in
German particle verbs.

1 Introduction
Our focus of interest is on German particle verbs. We hypothesize that there are regular mechanisms
that trigger a meaning shift of a base verb (such as brummen ‘hum’) in combination with a particle
(such as auf, in this case referring to a contact relation) that do not only apply to the individual verb,
but across a semantically coherent set of verbs. For example, donnern ‘rumble’ agrees with brummen
in properties at the syntax-semantic interface in that both verbs are intransitive, and both describe
an irritating, displeasing loud sound that the typically non-agentive, non-living subject produces.
In addition, the resulting particle verbs aufbrummen and aufdonnern are near-synonyms, roughly
meaning ‘forcefully assigning a task’ (in one of their senses). Furthermore, they agree in properties
at the syntax-semantic interface in that both verbs (again, in one of their senses) are ditransitive, with
an agentive subject imposing something on another person.

The example demonstrates that a coherent set of base verbs in combination with a particle mean-
ing1 may result in a coherent set of particle verbs. Equation (1) illustrates this pattern: a base verb
BV with properties pBVi in combination with a particle with meaning PM results in a particle verb
PV with properties pPVj .

(1) BV {pBV1, pBV2, ..., pBVn} + PM → PV {pPV1, pPV2, ..., pPVm}

The goal of this paper is to demonstrate that we can find such regular meaning shifts across seman-
tically coherent verb groups and across particle meanings by using a property selection process. Our
work is corpus-based, i.e., we identify coherent verb groups and particle meanings on the basis of
large-scale corpus data. The empirical data is used to describe the base verbs as well as the parti-
cle verbs with regard to common properties at the syntax-semantic interface. Covering 6 base verb
groups with 3 particles and 4 particle meanings, we consider this paper as considerably more exten-
sive than earlier related work, but at the same time we view it as a case study toward an even more
extensive, and also more automatically driven identification of meaning shifts in particle verbs. We
therefore combine the corpus-based analyses with advice on future elaborations, mainly with regard
to applying approaches of regular polysemy.

1Note that particles in German particle verbs are in general highly ambiguous.



The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents related work. Section 3 represents the
core of the paper: We describe our corpus-based acquisition method, the empirical behavior for
each of our BV–PV groups, and regularities in the meaning shift. In Section 4, we generalize over
the concrete patterns in meaning shift, discuss elaborations of the existing method, and hypothesize
about a more automatic approach to identifying and formalizing meaning shifts in German particle
verbs.

2 Related Work
Previous work on meaning shifts of semantically coherent groups of verbs has shown that there are
regularities at the syntax-semantic interface with regard to the literal vs. transferred meanings of
the verbs. For example, Morgan (1997) uses schematic diagrams to illustrate the meaning shifts of
particle verb constructions with English out. She claims that the source domain in a shift is system-
atically determined by the base verb, and the particle meanings are instantiated by cognitive image
schemas. Ibarretxe-Antuñano (1999) describes systematic non-prototypical meanings of perception
verbs cross-linguistically for English, Spanish, and Basque. She investigates the meaning shifts on
the basis of corpus examples and introspection.

Given that there is substantial theoretical evidence for regular patterns in verb meaning shifts, it is
surprising that—to our knowledge—no empirical, corpus-based work so far has applied approaches
of regular polysemy to a large, coherent group of verbs. On the one hand, there has been an impres-
sive increase in empirical work on modeling meaning shifts in recent years (mostly with regard to
metonymy and metaphor). For example, Stefanowitsch and Gries (2006) edited a volume on corpus-
based approaches and Markert and Nissim (2007) provided a shared task for metonymy resolution
at SemEval 2007. On the other hand, the research has, in general, been restricted to small groups of
target items. For example, the shared task by Markert and Nissim (2007) comprised only locations
and organizations; Lönneker-Rodman (2008) describes the working environment and result of devel-
oping the Hamburg Metaphor Database, comprising a respectable framework that, up to now, covers
few targets and less than 2,000 annotated sentences. Work by Birke (2005) provided an extensive
automatic detection of non-literal use of English verbs in context, but did not specifically look at
regular shifts in meanings across multiple verbs.

3 Corpus-based Acquisition of Base and Particle Verb Groups
with a Meaning Shift
Our strategy to identify meaning shifts in BV–PV transfer is as follows. We searched our corpus for
examples of base verbs and particle verbs, concentrating on one specific particle at a time. As corpus
data, we rely on the SDEWAC corpus (Faaß et al., 2010), a cleaned version of the German web corpus
DEWAC created by the WACKY group (Baroni et al., 2009). The SDEWAC contains approximately
880 million tokens and has been parsed by Bohnet’s MATE dependency parser (Bohnet, 2010). The
information we used for our search was effectively verb subcategorization information that had been
extracted and quantified automatically from the corpus parses. That is, for each verb (including BVs
as well as PVs), we have quantitative information about how often the verb appeared with a specific
subcategorization frame, and how often and which nominal complements appeared within the frames.

In a first step, we searched the subcategorization database for all occurrences of particle verbs
with a specific particle (such as auf ), the particle verbs’ subcategorization frames, and the nominal
fillers of the various verb complements in the frames. In parallel, we searched for the same infor-
mation with regard to all base verbs that combine with that particle. We focused on the empirically
strongest subcategorization frames, and on the most dominant nominal complements, where empiri-
cal strength was determined by Local Mutual Information (LMI), cf. Evert (2005).

On the basis of the parallel data on subcategorization frames and nominal complements for base
verbs and for particle verbs, we then manually identified semantically coherent groups of base verbs
and the respective particle verbs which showed regularities with regard to a meaning shift. For each
of the regular meaning shifts that we identified, the following subsections present the corpus data
on the base verbs and the particle verbs, and a description of the meaning shift. The corpus data is
provided in tables capturing the following information:



• the base/particle verbs in the respective verb group, identified via a particular particle meaning;
• the predominant subcategorization frame that is relevant for the meaning shift;
• one illustrative example complement per literal and shifted sense, within a relevant slot for the

meaning shift;

• the strongest connotations, and
• the concepts that play a role in the meaning shift.

Concerning base verb and particle verb senses, note that many of the verbs are ambiguous. Our
analyses focus on those senses that are relevant for the meaning shift, i.e., we only refer to the
subcategorization and conceptual information with regard to (a) the base verb sense that undergoes
the meaning shift, (b) the literal meaning of the particle verb in relation to the base verb, if there is
any, and (c) the particle verb sense that represents the respective meaning shift. For example, we
find (a) Die Sonne strahlt ‘The sun is shining’ as a base verb example, with (b) a literal particle
verb extension Die Sonne strahlt das Gebirge an ‘The sun shines on the mountains’ and with (c) a
meaning shift in Die Frau strahlt den Mann an ‘The woman smiles at the man’.

3.1 an: Emotional Communication
The German verb particle an has one very prominent meaning (among others), where it ascribes a
direction to the verb complement realized as its direct object. All PVs with this meaning of an are
transitive, and combining this an with communication verbs such as sprechen ‘talk’ or schreiben
‘write’ is productive.

However, there are PVs such as anstrahlen in Example (3) that can also be characterized as
directed communication verbs, but the BVs do not themselves carry a communication meaning,
cf. Example (1). The sun (as well as other intransitive subjects of the base verb strahlen which
occurred in the data) does not communicate through shining. So there must be an additional extended
particle reading which includes communication semantics to get a shift from a literal PV meaning,
as exemplified in Example (2), which describes a directed shining event of the uplighter toward the
ceiling, to a metaphorical PV meaning with a directed communication action between two persons,
cf. Example (3). In this example, the girl has an intention to smile in the direction of the grumpy
person and therefore she must also expect him to be a potential experiencer. Compare *‘He smiled
at the chair’, which is odd. While there are many other verbs that describe the manner in which an
object may shine, it is necessary for the verb to allow for a directed communication reading: One
could assume that verbs such as glitzern ‘glitter’ and glänzen ‘gleam’ which are similar to funkeln
‘twinkle’ also allow such a reading, however, these verbs denote the reflection of light instead of
emission, i.e. the object itself is the light source. The verb scheinen ‘shine’ is a near-synonym
of strahlen ‘beam’/‘shine’, while the latter suggests directed communication, the former does not
necessarily.

(1) Die Sonne strahlt. ‘The sun is shining.’

(2) Der Deckenfluter strahlt den Deckenbereich an. ‘The uplighter shines at the ceiling area.’

(3) Das Mädchen strahlt den Obermuffel an. ‘ The girl smiles at the grumpy person.’

There are four different categories of non-communication BVs with such a shift to communica-
tion PVs. They can be sub-divided into two groups, one with a positive connotation as in Tables 1 & 2,
and one with a negative connotation as in Tables 3 & 4.

verbs frames complements connotations properties

strahlen ‘beam’ intrans Sonne ‘sun’ / Auge ‘eye’ bright, warm light
emissionfunkeln ‘twinkle’ intrans Sternlein ‘little star’ / Auge ‘eye’ pleasing, valuable

lächeln ‘smile’ intrans Mädchen ‘girl’ happy, friendly positive
emotiongrinsen ‘grin’ intrans Freund ‘friend’ expression

Table 1: Base verbs that combine with an to mean positive directed communication.



It is striking that positively connoted BVs are all perceivable by vision, either because of the
brightness (‘beam’, ‘twinkle’) or because of a facial expression (‘smile’, ‘grin’), and lead to a pos-
itive communication reading in Table 2. The negatively connoted BVs are either sound-related or
refer to animal sounds (‘bark’, ‘growl’) that are frightening or bear an acoustic intensity, cf. Table 3.
In contrast, the PV anzwitschern, derived from the rather quiet and non-threatening BV zwitschern
(‘tweet’) does not exist in this communication reading, because it is missing the negative connota-
tion.2 These observations are in line with Ibarretxe-Antuñano (1999), who claims that auditory as
well as olfactory perception often comes with a negative connotation, since these senses can be over-
loaded. This is not the case for the visual sense, which can easily be regulated and effectively ‘shut
off’.

verbs frames complements connotations properties

anstrahlen ‘beam at’ trans Deckenbereich ‘ceiling area’
Obermuffel ‘grumpy person’ pleasing, pos. directed

communicationanfunkeln ‘beam at’ trans Großmaul ‘loudmouth’ positive
anlächeln ‘smile at’ trans Mädchen ‘girl’ communication
angrinsen ‘grin at’ trans Mädchen ‘girl’

Table 2: Positive directed communication particle verbs with an.

Furthermore, there are negative communication PVs which are not derived by sounds, but by
vulgar expressions like ‘shit’ or ‘piss’, with an inherent negative polarity, cf. Table 3. Taking the
non-vulgar synonym pinkeln ‘tinkle’ for pissen results in the odd PV anpinkeln, which cannot be
readily interpreted except literal. So again, the missing negative connotation excludes the PV from
the meaning shift. The BV subjects in the negative cases are mostly animals, whereas the subjects
and also the objects in the corresponding PVs are persons (e.g., Gegner ‘opponent’, Fan ‘fan’) if the
reading is metaphorical, cf. Table 4. In the literal meaning of, for example, anbellen ‘bark at’, the
subject is a dog and we can find also inanimate objects such as Mond ‘moon’ as objects.

verbs frames complements connotations properties

bellen ‘bark’ intrans Schäferhund ‘German shepherd’ loud sound, uncivilized
communicationkläffen ‘yap’ intrans Köter ‘mutt’ displeasing

pissen ‘piss’ intrans Hund ‘dog’ feces, vulgar, uncivilized
excretionscheißen ‘shit’ intrans Taube ‘pigeon’ unpleasant

Table 3: Base verbs that combine with an to mean negative directed communication.

verb frame complements connotations properties

anbellen ‘bark at’ trans Mond ‘moon’ negative,
Gutachter ‘surveyor’ intense, neg. directed

communicationankläffen ‘yap at’ trans Gegner ‘opponent’ aggressive,
anpissen ‘irritate’ trans Fan ‘fan’ vulgar
anscheißen ‘pester’ trans Bulle ‘cop’

Table 4: Negative directed communication particle verbs with an.

3.2 auf : Social Pressure
We now investigate a meaning shift in PVs with the particle auf that have a social pressure reading.
The BVs which belong to this group (cf. Table 5) are on the one hand force verbs which bring about a
state that would not come about on its own, e.g., zwängen ‘pressure/wedge’ or lasten ‘charge/weight’.
On the other hand, there are the verbs brummen ‘hum’ and donnern ‘rumble’ which describe a heavy

2Nowadays, it can have a special communication reading because of the social web service Twitter.



and intense sound. Their complements are affected with a heavy sound in the literal meaning (‘skull’,
‘cannon’) and with heavy activity in a metaphorical meaning (‘business’). The complements of
zwängen all indicate a literal meaning (cf. Example 5), whereas lasten has direct objects that indicate
a literal (Gewicht ‘weight’) and a less literal (Verantwortung ‘responsibility’) meaning.

verbs frames complements connotations properties

zwängen ‘pressure/wedge’ trans (in-comp) Bus ‘bus’ pressure, negative
bürden ‘burden’ trans (auf-comp) Mitschuld ‘complicity’ assignment, strain pressure,

burdenlasten ‘charge/weigh’ intrans (auf-comp) Gewicht ‘weight’
Verantwortung ‘responsibility’ pressure, negative

brummen ‘hum’ intrans Schädel ‘skull’ loud, heavy activity
Geschäft ‘business’ sound

donnern ‘rumble’ intrans Kanone ‘cannon’ loud, menacing force

Table 5: Base verbs that combine with auf to mean transfer of negative social pressure.

Combining these verbs with the social pressure triggered by auf, we only find abstract objects
such as Risiko ‘risk’, Strafe ‘penalty’, etc. (cf. Table 6). Thus we have a meaning shift from an
interpretation mostly ascribed to the physical domain to an interpretation within an abstract social
domain.

The fact that the verbs *aufquetschen and aufschieben do not have this reading shows that there
must be another constraint. In comparison to the previous BVs, quetschen ‘squeeze’ suggests equally
opposed forces and schieben ‘push’ one single moving force. The verbs zwängen, bürden and lasten
all imply power inequality with some kind of resistance (e.g. non-compliance if it is a person or iner-
tial/spatial opposition otherwise). In light of this, we can compare the social pressure meaning with
the support meaning of auf. In both cases we have the concept that something is above something
else. In Example (6), with its abstract social pressure reading, Maria bears a more powerful social
position and thus is, metaphorically speaking, above her friends. Here, the equivalent of contact is
expressed in her friends being the supporter because they have to carry the abstract pressure of the
will of somebody else. However, the sound verbs are not restricted to the power inequality constraint;
instead, only the semantics of something heavy being involved plays a role. The non-existence of auf
together with summen ‘sum’, which sounds similar to brummen (but with higher sound frequencies
and therefore not as heavy) is evidence for this assumption. Similarly, such loud sounds as those
denoted by krachen (‘crash’) and knallen (‘bang’) lack a clear presence of a long, low-frequency
sound. By contrast, while not present in the standard German dictionary Duden3, the heavy sound of
dröhnen (‘drone’), gives rise to aufdröhnen, which is attested on the web:

(4) Gehen wir einmal davon aus, Ihnen wird kein Fahrtenbuch aufgedröhnt, um den privaten
Nutzungsanteil nachzuweisen. ‘Let’s assume you are not forced to keep a driver’s logbook in
order to account for private use.’

The social pressure meaning as in Example (7) can only come from auf. The shift occurs here
from being a sound verb to a verb describing somebody exerting negative social force upon somebody
else.

(5) Der Fahrer zwängt den Bus in eine kleine Parklücke. ‘The driver wedges the bus in a small
parking space.’

(6) Maria zwängt ihren Freunden ihren Willen auf. ‘Maria imposes her will on her friends.’

(7) Der Richter hat dem Einbrecher eine gerechte Strafe aufgebrummt. ‘The judge inflicted a
justified punishment on the burglar.’

3.3 auf : Initialization/Intensification of Visual Perceivables
The second reading of PVs with auf we take into account describes a transient change in which
something suddenly appears and usually shortly after disappears. In Example (8), it is Micha’s cry
which abruptly appears and shortly afterwards becomes silent.

3http://www.duden.de



verbs frames complements connotations properties

aufzwängen ‘impose on’ ditrans Wille ‘will’ negative
aufbürden ‘impose on’ ditrans Schuld ‘blame/debt’ pressure, negative

social
pressure

auflasten ‘impose on’ ditrans Verantwortung ‘responsibility’ burden,
aufbrummen ‘force s.o. to do s.th.’ ditrans Strafe ‘penalty’ strenuous
aufdonnern ‘force s.o. to do s.th.’ ditrans —

Table 6: Transfer of negative social pressure particle verbs with auf.

(8) Als Micha das Buch auf den Fuß fiel, schrie er auf. ‘Micha let out a cry when the book fell on
his foot.’

Table 7 groups BVs that are intransitive and visually perceivable.The subjects can thereby be seen
as the source of the perceivable impulse, e.g. a lamp or a star. In some cases this visually perceivable
source optionally produces heat like in Example (9). Other subjects we found in this context are
blaze, spark, flame, light, etc. Such stimuli can grow in intensity very quickly. Therefore we can
already find some non-literal usages in the BVs describing an intense emotion like hate, however
only with flammen and lodern (the heat-related verbs).

verbs frames complements connotations properties

glimmen ‘glimmer’ intrans Funke ‘spark’ bright, warm, visual
perceptionglühen ‘glow’ intrans Licht ‘light’ / Auge ‘eye’ pleasant

lodern ‘blaze’ intrans Flamme ‘flame’ / Hass ‘hate’ hot, (emotionally) visual, thermal
perceptionflammen ‘flame’ intrans Feuer ‘fire’ intense, bright

Table 7: Base verbs that combine with auf to mean initialization/intensification of visual perceivable.

Combining these BVs with the particle auf, the metaphorical meaning turns out to be prominent.
This is consistent with the characteristics of emotions which can appear and disappear very quickly.
Comparing something like anger with a heat source is very common and captured in Lakoff et al.’s
(2005) INTENSE EMOTIONS ARE HEAT conceptual metaphor. Therefore the parallel usage sharing
one PV is not surprising. The only difference between the literal Example (10) and the non-literal
Example (11) is that the perceived heat belongs to another domain. Other examples of emotion
subjects are Hoffnungsschimmer, ’glimpse of hope’, Mitleid ‘pity’ and Debatte ‘debate’, which is not
an emotion, but in context of the auf -verb it refers to an intense discussion which involves emotions.

(9) Das Feuer flammt. ‘The fire flames.’

(10) Das Feuer flammt auf. ‘The fire flared up.’

(11) Die Debatte flammt auf. ‘The debate flared up.’

In summary, we can say that both light and heat in these verbs seems to be central. While
there is a wide class of BVs that allow for such a meaning shift (including most verbs applicable to
light coming from a fire, e.g., flackern ‘glint’), we find counterexamples where such an emotional
metaphorical meaning is not present: aufleuchten ‘light up’, aufblinken ‘flash’, auffunkeln ‘twinkle’,
aufglitzern ‘(suddenly) glitter’—all of which do not necessitate a notion of heat. It seems the ‘light’
property, as opposed to ‘heat’, is more involved in the perception and cognition domain (cf. the
conceptual metaphors IDEAS ARE LIGHT SOURCES, UNDERSTANDING IS SEEING). The mental
enlightenment is more a process than a sudden appearance which explains the incompatibility with
this particle meaning.

3.4 auf : Intensification/Initialization of Emotion
A completely different class of base verbs leads to the same reading of a quick increase in intensity
as the ‘flare up’ verbs. These are verbs which describe internally caused processes, such as brausen



verbs frames complements connotations properties

aufglimmen ‘light up/flicker’ intrans Glimmlampe ‘glow lamp’ (more) visible
Hoffnungsschimmer ‘glimmer of hope’ (and vanish), initialization

(intensification)aufglühen ‘light up’ intrans Rücklichter ‘tail lights’ / Auge ‘eye’ quickly become
auflodern ‘become intense’ intrans Feuer ‘fire’ / Wut ‘anger’ perceivable
aufflammen ‘flare up’ intrans Kampf ‘fight’ / Debate ‘debate’

Table 8: Initialization/intensification of perceivable particle verbs with auf.

‘roar’, kochen ‘boil’ which denote a forceful movement, cf. Examples (12,13). The force involved
can be physical (e.g., schaukeln ‘swing’) but can also be conceptualized as emotional, as in the
metaphorical meaning in Example (14):

(12) Der Sturm braust. ‘The storm is roaring.’

(13) Der Sturm braust auf. ‘The storm is roaring up.’

(14) Der Jubel braust auf. ‘The cheering is roaring up.’

All such ‘forceful movement’ BVs have an intransitive frame that has as subject in the literal sense
(a) the entity being moved (e.g., Schiff ‘ship’), or (b) a mass which is in motion (e.g., Wasser ‘wa-
ter’). The metaphorical reading can involve strong emotions (Blut ‘blood’), intense activity (Verkehr
‘traffic’), or both (Gerüchteküche ‘rumor mill’); the activity in the latter is also showing up in the
term for those involved in spreading rumors, namely ‘busybodies’.

verbs frames complements connotations properties

schaukeln ‘swing’ intrans Schiff ‘ship’ intense, internally caused
motionbrausen ‘roar/crash’ intrans Sturm ‘storm’ / Verkehr ‘traffic’ sweeping motion,

wallen ‘undulate/surge’ intrans Nebel ‘fog’ / Blut ‘blood’ emotions

brodeln ‘seethe’ intrans Wasser ‘water’ heat, internally caused
motion (with heat),
emotion

Gerüchteküche ‘rumor mill’ bubbling,
kochen ‘boil’ intrans Wasser ‘water’ motion

Table 9: Base verbs that combine with auf to mean initialization/intensification of emotions.

verbs frames complements connotations properties

aufschaukeln ‘build up’ intrans Papierboot ‘paper boat’ to and fro,
Konflikt ‘conflict’ intense

aufwallen ‘surge up’ intrans Staub ‘dust’ / Zorn ‘fury’ motion,
intensificationaufbrausen ‘flare up’ intrans Sturm ‘storm’ / Jubel ‘cheering’ strong

aufbrodeln ‘bubble up’ intrans Milch ‘milk’ / Hass ‘hate’ negative
aufkochen ‘(bring to a) boil’ intrans Wasser ‘water’ / Wut ‘anger’ emotion

Table 10: Initialization/intensification of emotions particle verbs with auf.

The shared property between the visual BV group and these motion verbs is that heat is under-
stood to be conceptually linked to emotions (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980). The contribution of auf
in this context is a notion of surging up, i.e., things are coming from below (hidden) to the surface
(perceivable). These are terms that are commonly used to describe emotions, when they cannot be
perceived (i.e., when they are not intense enough), they are ‘hidden’. If they grow in intensity, they
are said to ‘surface’ (Gefühle aufwühlen ‘churn up feelings’). It is worth noting that aufschaukeln
gives rise to a ‘discussion’ image, as it describes a constant to and fro between two opposing sides.



The compositional reading is dispreferred, since it is not typical to have both a back and forth and
an upwards motion combined. As expected, base verbs that describe a subsiding of motion (e.g.,
flachen ‘flatten’, ebben ‘ebb’, sinken ‘sink’) combined with the particle expressing the opposite of
this auf reading (i.e., ab), give exactly the opposite meaning, namely to lessen, abate, diminish; both
in a physical as well as emotional sense.

Although it is not attested in the corpus, there exists the same metaphor in German and En-
glish Das bringt mich zum Kochen ‘It makes my blood boil’, of an intense emotion—in this case,
fury—being conceptualized as something seething within the experiencer.

3.5 ab: Successive Tasks
One of the multiple meanings of the particle ab involves the concept of a sequence of similar actions
leading to the completion of a complex task. Kliche (2011) terms this the ‘mereological reduction’
sense of ab. On the one hand, this meaning can come from verbs that generally entail some form of
work (e.g., arbeiten ‘work’, leisten ‘perform’). On the other hand, there are verbs that suggest the
actual event structure of the chain of sub-tasks being completed.

verbs frames complements connotations properties

klappern ‘clatter’ intrans Storch ‘stork’ sharp, short, rapid
successionrattern ‘clatter’ intrans Nähmaschine ‘sewing machine’ repetitive,

stottern ‘stutter’ intrans Motor ‘motor’ sound/action

Table 11: Base verbs that combine with ab to mean successive task completion.

This can arise when (a) the actions are performed on an area that is successively covered along
the event chain (e.g., grasen ‘graze’, kämmen ‘comb’, suchen ‘search’); or (b) when the verb that
is combined with ab suggests a mass that diminishes progressively due to the performed action
until it is completely gone (e.g., abbezahlen, abstottern ‘pay off’). The successive character of the
mereological reduction sense is thus already inherently present in these verbs.

verbs frames complements connotations properties

abklappern ‘check all’ trans Sehenswürdigkeit ‘tourist sight’ successive successive
reductionabrattern ‘pay off (a debt)’ trans — accomplishing,

abstottern ‘pay off (a debt)’ trans Schuldenberg ‘mountain of debt’ stepwise reduction

Table 12: Successive task completion particle verbs with ab.

Interestingly enough, it is sufficient for the mereological reduction ab to be available that only the
event structure itself to be conveyed, even without the concept of work being present in the base verb.
In our everyday experience, the rapid succession of similar short events can give rise to a particular
repetitive acoustic pattern, which is captured in the onomatopoetic verbs: klappern/rattern ‘clatter’
and stottern ‘stutter’. These verbs combined with ab then give the expected reading, namely a chain
of similar actions being performed. However, this does not work with semelfactive sound verbs like
klicken ‘klick’ or ticken, even if they can provide a repetitive reading by multiplying the single verb
events. The verbs in this class are iterative and cannot be interpreted as semelfactive.

It is clear that the acoustic signal lends itself to a mapping to the event structure, since both
are organized linearly in time. This also explains the inaccessibility of the same meaning for a
visual signal, since there is no straightforward mapping of the visual field to the time axis. The only
counterexample of a visual mereological reduction verb that we are aware of is absuchen ‘scan’;
which suggests a linear process of visual perception; e.g., along a linear path through a room, or via
the linear searching through a telescope or magnifying glass.

4 Discussion
The previous section provided an extensive analysis of 6 different cases of BV–PV meaning shifts,
with regard to 3 different particles. We briefly summarize these meaning shifts, concentrating on the



main conceptual properties only. The presentation is done according to the pattern in Equation (1) as
introduced in Section 1.

(1) BV {pBV1, pBV2, ..., pBVn} + PM → PV {pPV1, pPV2, ..., pPVm}

Meaning shift classes:

1. an: “positive emotional communication”
BV {pleasing, emission} + PM {dir+com} → PV {positive directed communication}

with BVs funkeln, grinsen, lächeln, strahlen

2. an: “negative emotional communication”
BV {displeasing, uncivilized} + PM {dir+com} → PV {negative directed communication}

with BVs bellen, kläffen, pissen, scheißen

3. auf: “negative social pressure”
BV {loud/heavy pressure} + PM {vert. contact} → PV {negative social pressure}

with BVs brummen, bürden, donnern, lasten, zwängen

4. auf: “initialization of perceivables (vision & emotion)”
BV {bright, vision} + PM {sudden, initial}→ PV {initialization of visual perceivable}

with BVs flammen, glimmen, glühen, lodern

5. auf: “intensification of perceivables (emotion)”
BV {int. caused motion} + PM {sudden, initial} → PV {intensification of emotions}

with BVs brausen, brodeln, kochen, schaukeln, wallen

6. ab: “successive task completion”
BV {repetitive, sound} + PM {mereol. reduction}→ PV {successive task completion}

with BVs klappern, rattern, stottern

The analyses were performed across several semantically coherent groups of verbs. We demon-
strated that corpus-based information on the verbs’ subcategorization frames and nominal comple-
ments (combined with intuitions about generalizations of the noun complements) is a sufficient basis
for defining BV–PV meaning shifts. We thus confirmed our initial hypothesis that there are regular
mechanisms with regard to the syntax-semantic interface that trigger a meaning shift of a base verb
in combination with a particle meaning and that do not only apply to the individual verb but across
a semantically coherent set of verbs. The identified meaning shift classes are effectively larger than
those presented in the tables in Section 3 because the classes are productive. Relying on the produc-
tivity, we could easily enlarge our meaning shift classes with new members (which will be discussed
below).

We briefly summarize the main findings from our analyses, with regard to the BV, PV and particle
properties: (i) There is a very strong agreement across verbs (both BVs and PVs) within a meaning
shift class with regard to the subcategorization frame types. This is a very impressive indicator
for semantically coherent groups, where we had expected more diversity. (ii) Even restricting the
nominal complements to only the 10-20 most strongly LMI-based associated types is a sufficient basis
for investigating the conceptual properties that determine the respective slot. (iii) To our knowledge, a
new aspect to meaning shifts in (German) particle verbs has been discovered: We found that particles
actually adopt meaning aspects from the base verbs they combine with. For example, the particle
an in meaning shift classes 1 and 2 a priori refers to a direction meaning. However, it obviously
incorporates meaning aspects from communication base verbs that it typically combines with (when
no meaning shift is involved), such as ansprechen ‘speak to’ and anreden ‘address someone’. As a
result, the particle meaning within the particle verbs in classes 1 and 2 contributes meaning aspects
of direction as well as communication. To go deeper into this issue, future work will investigate the
diachronic development of particle roots with regard to the particle meanings.

Our strategy can easily be replicated for another BV–PV data set in German or other languages,
given that parsed corpus data is available. In addition, there are easy extensions to the strategy that
however make the identification and factors of meaning shifts more objective: (i) co-occurrence of the
BVs and PVs with particular adverbs should be useful as indicators of meaning shifts, as they are ex-
pected to agree across the respective base and particle verbs but might be different between the literal
and shifted meanings of the particle verbs. (ii) Similarly, we expect 2nd-order co-occurrence ad-
jectives, i.e., those adjectives that modify the nominal complements of the verbs (Schulte im Walde,



2010), to be useful indicators of the kinds of connotations we so far collected manually. For example,
concerning meaning shift class 4 above, strong adjectival modifiers of both Feuer ‘fire’ and Flamme
‘flame’ are ewig ‘eternal’ lodernd ‘blazing’, and offen ‘open’, while strong adjectival modifiers of
both Konflikt ‘conflict’ and Diskussion ‘discussion’ are aktuell ‘current’, politisch ‘political’, and
weit ‘wide’. (iii) Instead of subjective definitions of conceptual generalizations over nominal comple-
ments, one could apply GermaNet (Kunze, 2000), the German pendant to WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998).
For example, both Feuer ‘fire’ and Flamme ‘flame’ are generalized to Ereignis ‘event’ by GermaNet
on level 3 (starting from the top node level) and to Phänomen ‘phenomenon’ on level 4, while both
Konflikt ‘conflict’ and Diskussion ‘discussion’ are generalized to Kommunikation ‘communication’
and Gespräch ‘conversation’ on levels 3 and 4, respectively. (iv) A simple way to enlarge meaning
shift classes is by looking up synonyms of the base and/or particle verbs in dictionaries. For example,
Bulitta and Bulitta (2003) defines aufdrängen, aufnötigen, and aufoktroyieren as near-synonyms to
aufzwängen, so we could check whether these three particle verbs fall into meaning shift class 3.

A long-term goal of our work is to extend it toward a more automatically driven identification of
meaning shifts in particle verbs. Three examples of approaches that are potentially useful to com-
plement our corpus-based search are the following: Reisinger and Mooney (2010) presented a multi-
prototype vector-space model that discriminates multiple senses of a word by clustering contexts, an
idea adopted from Schütze (1998). We could reduce their “contexts” to the crucial information about
the BV and PV properties we identified, i.e., subcategorization frame types and concept properties,
possibly refined by further meaning aspects as suggested above. The framework would then allow
us to determine the similarity between the “contexts” of base verbs and particle verbs, and thus to
identify the semantically coherent groups of base verbs as well as literal meanings of particle verbs
with regard to their base verbs. To do this we could use a clustering approach similar to Reisinger
and Mooney (2010). Birke (2005) also relied on clustering to discover literal and non-literal uses of
English verbs in context. However, while her approach required a manually labeled set, we could
envision an automatic detection of literality as done by Turney et al. (2011). Boleda et al. (2012)
presented an approach to regular polysemy where meta-alternations capture regularities in meaning
shifts. In a first step, the meta-alternations are instantiated by monosemous words exhibiting the re-
spective meaning shift. In a second step, the meta-alternations are used to predict a meaning shift for
a new item. With regard to our research, a meta-alternation should capture the BV and PV properties
of a certain meaning shift. As in Boleda et al. (2012), we would instantiate the meta-alternations
through monosemous base and particle verbs. For a new BV–PV pair, we could then predict the
(non-)existence of the meaning shift by comparing the pair’s conceptual properties to the properties
of the meta-alternation. Note that this approach requires prior knowledge about some seed BV–PV
pairs and their meaning shifts.

Last but not least, a major challenge in the automation of our work is in distinguishing between
BV and PV verb polysemy vs. meaning shift. That is, most computational approaches such as
Reisinger and Mooney (2010) will provide us with knowledge about the various meanings of the
base and/or particle verbs. However, we not only want to detect different senses (e.g., the particle
verb abnehmen has several senses with overlapping subcategorization properties that all but one differ
from the literal meaning), but in addition which of the senses is a meaning shift, and why. Our goals
are more addressed by the Boleda et al. (2012) approach, which however requires manual work in
the outset.

5 Acknowledgements
We are thankful for the very fruitful discussions with Antje Roßdeutscher and Alessandra Zarcone as
well as for the helpful suggestions made by the reviewers. The work has been supported by the DFG,
with the SFB 732 funding Jason Utt and Sylvia Springorum, and the DFG Heisenberg Fellowship
SCHU-2580/1-1 funding Sabine Schulte im Walde.

References
Baroni, M., S. Bernardini, A. Ferraresi, and E. Zanchetta (2009). The WaCky Wide Web: A Col-

lection of Very Large Linguistically Processed Web-Crawled Corpora. Language Resources and
Evaluation 43(3), 209–226.



Birke, J. (2005). A Clustering Approach for the Unsupervised Recognition of Nonliteral Language.
Ph. D. thesis, Simon Fraser University.

Bohnet, B. (2010). Top Accuracy and Fast Dependency Parsing is not a Contradiction. In Proceed-
ings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Beijing, China.

Boleda, G., S. Padó, and J. Utt (2012). Regular Polysemy: A Distributional Model. In *SEM: The
First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics, Montréal, Canada, pp. 151–160.

Bulitta, E. and H. Bulitta (2003). Wörterbuch der Synonyme und Antonyme (2nd ed.). Information
und Wissen. Frankfurt, Germany: Fischer Taschenbuch Verlag.

Evert, S. (2005). The Statistics of Word Co-Occurrences: Word Pairs and Collocations. Ph. D.
thesis, Institut für Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, Universität Stuttgart.

Faaß G., U. Heid, and H. Schmid (2010). Design and Application of a Gold Standard for Morpho-
logical Analysis: SMOR in Validation. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, Valletta, Malta, pp. 803–810.

Fellbaum, C. (Ed.) (1998). WordNet – An Electronic Lexical Database. Language, Speech, and
Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Ibarretxe-Antuñano, B. I. (1999). Polysemy and Metaphor in Perception Verbs. Ph. D. thesis, Uni-
versity of Edinburgh.

Kliche, F. (2011). Semantic Variants of German Particle Verbs with ab. Leuvense Bijdragen (97).

Kunze, C. (2000). Extension and Use of GermaNet, a Lexical-Semantic Database. In Proceedings
of the 2nd International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, Athens, Greece, pp.
999–1002.

Lakoff, G., J. Espenson, and A. Schwartz (2005). Master Metaphor List. Technical Report.

Lakoff, G. and M. Johnson (1980). Metaphors we live by. University of Chicago Press.

Lönneker-Rodman, B. (2008). The Hamburg Metaphor Database Project: Issues in Resource Cre-
ation. Language Resources and Evaluation 42, 293–318.

Markert, K. and M. Nissim (2007). Data and Models for Metonymy Resolution. Language Resources
and Evaluation 43(2), 123–138.

Morgan, P. S. (1997). Figuring out figure out: Metaphor and the Semantics of English Verb-Particle
Constructions. Cognitive Linguistics 8(4), 327–357.

Reisinger, J. and R. J. Mooney (2010). Multi-Prototype Vector-Space Models of Word Meaning. In
Proceedings of the 11th Annual Conference of the NAACL, pp. 109–117.

Schulte im Walde, S. (2010). Comparing Computational Approaches to Selectional Preferences:
Second-Order Co-Occurrence vs. Latent Semantic Clusters. In Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, Valletta, Malta, pp. 1381–1388.

Schütze, H. (1998). Automatic Word Sense Discrimination. Computational Linguistics 24(1), 97–
123. Special Issue on Word Sense Disambiguation.

Stefanowitsch, A. and S. T. Gries (Eds.) (2006). Corpus-Based Approaches to Metaphor and
Metonymy. Berlin: de Gruyter.

Turney, P., Y. Neuman, D. Assaf, and Y. Cohen (2011). Literal and Metaphorical Sense Identification
through Concrete and Abstract Context. In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK., pp. 680–690.


