





































Issues in the addition of ISO standard annotations
to the Switchboard corpus

Harry Bunt
TiCC, Tilburg Center

for Cognition
and Communication
Tilburg University

Tilburg, The N etherlands
harry.bunt@uvt.nl

Alex C. Fang and Xiaoyue Liu
City University of Hong Kong

Department of Chinese,
Translation, and Linguistics

Hong Kong SAR
a.c.fang@cityu.edu.hk

xyliu@cityu.edu.hk

Jing Cao
College of Foreign

Languages
Zhongnan University

of Economics and Law
Wuhan, China

c jinhk@yahoo.cn

Volha Petukhova
Department of Spoken

Language Systems
Saarland University

Saarbrücken, Germany
v.petukhova@lsv.

uni-saarland.de

Abstract

This paper analyzes the issues that arise
when trying to add annotations to the dia-
logues in the Switchboard corpus according
to ISO standard 24617-2, exploiting the ex-
isting SWBD-DAMSL annotations. These
issues relate to differences between the two
tag sets; to the highly multidimensional view
that underlies the ISO standard; to differ-
ences in segmenting the dialogues into func-
tional units; to the use of in-line markups
for certain phenomena in Switchboard, and
to the use of intra-dialogue dependence rela-
tions as defined in the ISO standard.

The analysis is supplemented by a discus-
sion of how the existing annotations may be
helpful to semi-automatically create a fully-
fledged ISO standard annotation alongside
the existing SWBD-DAMSL annotation.

1 Introduction

In September 2013 the International Organisation
for Standardisation ISO published the international
standard 24617-21, a comprehensive application-
independent scheme for dialogue act annotation
that is both empirically and theoretically well-
founded, that can deal with typed, spoken, and
multimodal dialogue, and that can be used effec-
tively by human annotators and by automatic an-
notation methods.

With the aim of building a large corpus of di-
alogues, annotated according to this standard, an
effort was initiated to create ISO 24617-2 anno-
tations for the dialogues in the Switchboard cor-
pus, which forms a valuable resource for the study
of spoken dialogue.2 In particular, this effort ex-

1See the official description of the standard in ISO 24617-
2:2013, and summary descriptions in Bunt et al. (2010; 2012).

2The Switchboard Dialogue Act Corpus is distributed by
LDC.

ploits the similarities between the ISO 24617-2
and the SWBD-DAMSL scheme (Jurafsky et al.,
1997) by semi-automatically converting SWBD-
DAMSL annotations into ISO 24617-2 annota-
tions where possible. An additional benefit of this
approach is that it allows an in-depth comparison
between the two annotation schemes.

Fang et al. (2011) have described initial ex-
plorations in this project, and Fang et al. (2012)
have described the possibilities and limitations of
automatically converting SWBD-DAMSL tags to
ISO 24617-2 tags. This paper deals with other is-
sues, relating in particular to (1) the highly mul-
tidimensional approach to annotation that under-
lies the ISO standard more clearly than the annota-
tions in the Switchboard corpus; (2) the segmen-
tation of the Switchboard dialogues into ‘slash-
units’ rather than into ‘functional segments’, as the
ISO standard requires; (3) the use of certain in-line
markups and tagging of non-functional phenom-
ena in the Switchboard dialogues; and (4) the an-
notation of dependence relations between units in
a dialogue according to the ISO standard.

Example (1), showing a small dialogue frag-
ment (from Switchboard dialogue sw01-0105), as
marked up in the Switchboard corpus and as anno-
tated according to ISO 24617-2, illustrates some of
the differences between the two approaches.

(1) a. (dialogue sw01-0105 lines 0007-0008)
A003: qwˆd {D So } when you say the

morning news, or evening news
or national news is when? /

B004: sd {F Uh, } evening news at six
thirty I believe /

b. ISO-24617-2 segmentation:
fs1 = So
fs2 = when you say the morning

news, or evening news, or
national news, is when?

67



fs3 = Uh
fs4 = evening news is at six thirty

I believe /

c. ISO 24617-2 annotation:
<diaml xmlns:
"http://www.iso.org/diaml/"/>

<dialogueAct xml:id="a1"
target="#fs1"
sender="#a" addressee="#b"
communicativeFunction=
"turnTake"

dimension="turnManagement"/>
<dialogueAct xml:id="a2"
target="#fs1"
sender="#a" addressee="#b"
communicativeFunction=
"stalling"

dimension="timeManagement"/>
<dialogueAct xml:id="a3"
target="#fs2"
sender="#a" addressee="#b"
communicativeFunction=
"propositionalQuestion"

dimension="task"/>
<dialogueAct xml:id="a4"
target="#fs3"
sender="#b" addressee="#a"
communicativeFunction=
"stalling"

dimension="timeManagement"/>
<dialogueAct xml:id="a5"
target="#fs3"
sender="#b" addressee="#a"
comm.Function="turnTake"
dimension="turnManagement"/>
<dialogueAct xml:id="a6"
target="#fs4"
sender="#b" addressee="#a"
communicativeFunction=
"answer"

certainty="uncertain"
dimension="task"
functionalDependence="#a3"/>

</diaml>

SWBD-DAMSL annotations and ISO 24617-2 an-
notations clearly use very different representation
formats. SWBD-DAMSL makes use of functional
tags like qwˆd (which stands for “Declarative Wh-
Question”) and sd (for “Statement non-opinion”),
in the form of strings attached to stretches of text
delineated by ”/”, so-called “slash-units” (see Sec-
tion 2.1). Other information is encoded as in-line
markups, such as in (1a) a discourse marker by ‘{D
So }’ and a filled pause by ‘{F Uh }’; and the iden-
tity of the speaker is encoded in line numbers like
‘A003’ and ‘B004’.

ISO standard annotations represent all the in-
formation in the form of XML-expressions, mak-
ing use of the XML-based annotation language Di-
AML (Dialogue Act Markup Language) which is
defined as part of the standard. These annotations
are in stand-off form, with an attribute @target
whose value identifies the stretch of dialogue that
the annotation applies to (a ‘functional segment’,
see Section 2.1). The annotations in DiAML in-
clude not only an identification of the speaker, as
in Switchboard, but also of one or more addressees
(the attribute @addressee may have multiple
values); a specification not only of the commu-
nicative function of a dialogue act expressed by the
functional segment but also of the communicative
dimension that the act belongs to (such as the task
that motivates the dialogue, the dimension of turn-
taking, or the dimension of time management)3;
and an indication of relations among dialogue acts,
in this example an indication of the question that is
answered by an Answer act.

An analysis of the similarities and differences
between the SWBD-DAMSL and ISO 24617-2
tag sets in Fang et al. (2011; 2012) shows that
14 of the SWBD-DAMSL tags exactly match an
ISO 24617-2 communicative function tag, and 27
SWBD-DAMSL tags correspond to 9 ISO stan-
dard tags. The latter is due to the fact that SWBD-
DAMSL sometimes makes distinctions which are
not motivated semantically but syntactically or lex-
ically; for example, the tags Yes-answer, Affir-
mative non-yes answer, No-answer, and Negative
non-no answer all correspond to the single ISO tag
Answer. In the case of exact matches and many-to-
one matches, the conversion from SWBD-DAMSL
tags to ISO communicative function tags can be
done automatically; Fang et al. (2012) report
that this can be done for 187,768 of the 223,606
units annotated in the Switchboard corpus, which
amounts to 84,0% of the corpus.

Replacing SWBD-DAMSL tags by ISO com-
municative function tags does not create full
ISO standard annotations, however, as example
(1) showed; not only do we have to replace the
tags qwˆd and sd by the appropriate ISO tags
(Set-Question and Inform, respectively) but we
also have to consider (1) for each communicative

3The ISO standard distinguishes nine dimensions: Task,
Turn Management, Time Management, Auto-Feedback, Allo-
Feedback, Own Communication Management, Partner Com-
munication Management, Discourse Structuring, and Social
Obligations Management. For definitions see Bunt (2009).

68



function the dimension in which it is used; (2)
the addition of communicative functions in those
dimensions where SWBD-DAMSL doesn’t have
any, such as turn management; (3) what to do
with the in-line markup of discourse connectives
like and filled pauses; (4) how to produce the ISO
qualifiers, like certainty="uncertain"
and relations between dialogue acts, like
functionalDependence="#a3".

This paper is structured as follows. Section 2
discusses issues relating to the segmentation of
dialogues into meaningful units. Section 3 dis-
cusses the annotation of in-line markups. Sec-
tion 4 discusses the treatment of some phenomena
that are not annotated in Switchboard. The con-
cluding Section 6 summarizes the analysis of the
main issues involved in adding ISO standard an-
notations to the Switchboard corpus, and indicates
for each of these issues how the additions could be
made, exploiting the existing SWBD-DAMSL an-
notations and the in-line markups of various phe-
nomena.

2 Segmentation

2.1 Slash units versus functional segments
The annotations in the Switchboard corpus make
use of a segmentation of dialogues into so-called
‘slash units’, defined by Meteer & Taylor (1995),
as “Maximally a sentence, but possibly a smaller
unit. Intuitively, slash-units below the sentence
level correspond to those parts of the narrative
which are not sentential but which the annotator
interprets as complete”. Slash units are allowed to
span (parts of) multiple turns by the same speaker,
separated by a contribution from another speaker,
and in that sense to be discontinuous, as in the fol-
lowing example (from Core & Allen, 1997):

(2)
u: take the product to
s: yes?
u: to Corning

The Switchboard segmentation follows the
strategy for dialogue annotation with DAMSL tags
described by Core and Allen (1997), who call these
units ‘utterances’. Utterances are allowed to be
discontinuous only in case of an interruption by
another speaker, as in (2), and are not allowed to
overlap with other units. Disfluencies such as hes-
itations (like uh or um), and restarts like I mean,
are thus not treated as units with a communica-
tive function. With reference to the repair in ex-

ample (3), Core and Allen (1997) note that they
do not view Tuesday I mean Friday as a functional
unit, since that “would mean cutting off “Friday”
from ”we’ll go Tuesday”. DAMSL is not designed
for annotating speech repairs, reference, or other
intra-clause relations so we decided to use a sim-
ple definition of an utterance that leaves out such
phenomena”.

(3) we’ll go Tuesday I mean Friday

This strategy is clearly inadequate for annotat-
ing phenomena of own communication manage-
ment and time management. ISO 24617-2 sup-
ports the annotation of communicative functions
in these dimensions, in view of the frequent oc-
currence of stallings and self-corrections in spon-
taneous speech, and takes over the approach to
segmentation developed for dialogue analysis us-
ing the DIT++ annotation scheme (Bunt, 2009).
This approach defines a functional unit as a min-
imal stretch of communicative behaviour that has
a communicative function (and possibly more than
one function) (Geertzen et al., 2007). Utterance
(3) would be segmented as shown in (4), where the
parts in boldface form the discontinuous segment
we’ll go Friday, expressing an inform act, and the
underlined part Tuesday I mean Friday forms an
overlapping functional segment that expresses a
self-correction.

(4) we’ll go Tuesday I mean Friday

A disadvantage of treating an entire utterance
like (3) as a single unit, is that any self-correction
which it contains is associated with the entire ut-
terance, which is not accurate. This causes a seri-
ous problem when a slash unit contains more than
one stalling or self-correction, since the annotation
cannot distinguish between these. For example, in
(5) (from Switchboard dialogue sw00-0004, line
30) a stalling is expressed by the filled pauses {F
uh, } {F uh, } and another one by the repe-
tition [ to the, + to the].

(5) you wouldn’t have this {F uh, } {F uh, } the-
atrics where the lawyer jumps up and presents
it [ to the, + to the] jury /

Some 25-30% of the slash units in the Switch-
board corpus contain a stalling or a self-correction,
and an estimated 6% more than one of these, so
the inability to correctly annotate these is a seri-
ous limitation. The in-line markup indicates each

69



filled pause, but does not assign an interpretation
to it. The annotation of disfluencies is discussed
further in Section 3.

2.2 Mono- versus multifunctionality

The annotations in the Switchboard corpus are
monofunctional, in the sense that only one SWBD-
DAMSL tag is assigned to each slash unit. There
are only a few cases in the corpus where more than
one tag has been asigned; see the examples in (6):

(6) a. (dialogue sw07-0701 line 0161-B108-03)
B: school’s very important I’m an educa-
tor myself and my wife teaches/

b. (dialogue sw07-0701 line 0083-B060-05)
B: {C but } I think that if you did some-
thing, for example, to an individual and
caused them to lose the ability to earn a
living, I remember a man drove by ran-
domly shot a woman in the head while she
was driving –

c. (dialogue sw07-0701 line 0716-A107-01)
# I think this giving excuses # is pretty
prevalent, {F uh, } [yo-, + ] I work in the
school district /

These cases all seem to involve segmentation prob-
lems: in (6b), when the speaker says I remember it
seems that a new thought is starting, which would
plausibly correspond to the start of a new slash
unit; in the other two cases it would seem prefer-
able to segment into a sequence of two slash units,
in case (6c) rather fairly signaled by the hesitation
{F uh, } and the restart [ yo-, + ].

The SWBD-DAMSL tags are composite, and
have been characterized as ‘tag clusters’ (Jurafsky
et al., 1997), but different from the composite tags
introduced by Popescu-Belis (2008) they do not
represent dialogue act combinations. For example,
the tag qwˆd can be decomposed into q for ques-
tion, w for WH-, and ˆd for declarative, but only
the sub-tag qw denotes a communicative function.

The ISO standard is intended to be used for an-
notating all the communicative functions of dia-
logue units. The slash units in the Switchboard
corpus on average have 1.8 communicative func-
tions, and 62% of the slash units has two or more
communicative functions. This means, for the cre-
ation of fully-fledged ISO 24617-2 annotations,
that in addition to the function tags which can

be obtained through the conversion of SWBD-
DAMSL tags, further functional tags have to be
generated through a more comprehensive interpre-
tation of the dialogues. This is partly possible by
interpreting the in-line mark up of certain dialogue
phenomena, as discussed in the next section.

3 Interpreting in-line markups

The Switchboard dialogues include the in-line
markup (often occurring within slash units) of the
following types of disfluencies:

1. restarts, marked up [ X + Y ] (more detail be-
low);

2. filled pauses, marked up { F ... };

3. explicit editing terms, marked up { E ... };

4. discourse connectives and discourse markers,
marked up {C } and {D }.

Asides, such as self-talk and third-person talk,
are marked up by means of SWBD-DAMSL tags
and are also considered in this Section.

3.1 Restarts and repairs
Following Shriberg (1994), restarts are expres-
sions of the form shown in (7), in which the part
RM is called the ‘reparandum’, a stretch of text to
be replaced; RR is the replacing material, and IM
is intermediate material (such as a filled pause or
an editing term), that separates the two and typi-
cally signals that a replacement is going to follow.
This is marked up in the Switchboard corpus as
shown in (7a).

(7)

a. Show me flights [ from Boston on +
RM

{F uh } from Denver on ] Monday
IM RR

b. Show me flights from Boston on uh
from Denver on Monday

The ISO 24617-2 annotation makes use of the seg-
mentation shown in (7b), consisting of the seg-
ment Show me flights from Denver on Monday
in the Task dimension, expressing a request; and
the segment from Boston on uh from Denver on in
the Own Communication Management dimension,
expressing a self-correction.

The description of a restart in terms of a
‘reparandum’ (RM) and replacing material (RR)
strongly suggests that restarts are self-corrections.

70



This is not always correct, however, since the RM
part of a restart may be identical to the reparan-
dum, in which case we have a repetition rather than
a replacement, and it may be empty; in both cases
the ISO 24617-2 definition of a self-correction
would not apply. Repetitions often do not signal
that the speaker wants to correct what he just said,
but rather that he hasn’t quite made up his mind
yet as to how he wants to express himself, which
makes this behaviour a case of stalling, rather than
a case of self-correction. In cases where the RR
part is empty, the speaker decides not to go on say-
ing what he started to say; this corresponds to what
in ISO 24617-2 is called a retraction.

Even if the RR part of a restart is not empty and
not identical to the reparandum, we do not neces-
sarily have a self-correction, as the examples in (8)
show (from sw00-0004, lines 68 and 25, respec-
tively):

(8) a. .. to begin with, [ you would -, + you
would have, ] -

b. .. if they did it [ with the + {F uh } just
with the ] judges, the police have to do..

In such cases, where the reparandum re-appears in
the RR part, Meteer & Taylor (1995) speak of an
‘insertion’. An insertion has one of the following
two forms, where XM denotes the inserted mate-
rial (and IM may be empty):

(9)
a. ... RM IM RM XM ...
b. ... RM IM XM RM ...

In an insertion of the form (9a) the speaker
does not so much correct himself; the repetition
of the reparandum rather seems to indicate that the
speaker needs some time to decide to say what he
already started to say; that makes this behaviour a
case of stalling rather than self-correction.

The following guideline can be formulated for
interpreting the markings of restarts in the Switch-
board corpus in terms of the ISO standard :

• if the RR part is empty, then the marked up
segment is a Retraction;

• if the RR part is of the form RM XM, then the
marked up segment is a Stalling;

• if the RR part is not empty and not of the
form RM XM, then the marked up segment
is a Self-Correction.

Note that this is no more than a guideline; each
individual case has to be inspected in order to be
certain about the correct interpretation in the given
context.

3.2 Filled pauses
Filled pauses typically signal that the speaker
needs a little time to decide how to continue his
contribution, and are annotated according to ISO
24617-2 as stalling acts. (The ISO tag ‘pausing’ is
used for those cases where the speaker temporarily
suspends the dialogue, as in just a moment).

Stalling acts occurring at the beginning of a turn
(like um, or well,) additionally signal that the par-
ticipant takes the turn; those occurring at the be-
ginning of a slash unit but not at the beginning of
a turn (and occurs frequently in that position) of-
ten indicate that the speaker wants to keep the turn.
See further Section 5.2.

Filled pauses may also be indicators of Own
Communication Management acts, viz. retractions
and self-corrections, or of struggling to find the
right words for something and eliciting a collab-
orative completion (an act in the Partner Commu-
nication Management dimension).

3.3 Explicit editing terms
Explicit editing terms are marked up in the Switch-
board corpus as { E .... } and often occur after the
reparandum part of a restart. In ISO 24617-2 ex-
plicit editing terms are regarded as indicators of
Own Communication Management acts (a Retrac-
tion or as a Self-Correction), or of a Partner Com-
munication Management act (eliciting help); see
also Section 3.1.

3.4 Discourse markers
A distinction is made in the Switchboard corpus
between ‘discourse markers’, such as ‘Well’ and
‘So’, indicated by { D ... }, and ‘coordinating con-
junctions’, such as and, but, and because, marked
up by { C ... }. In the literature the term ‘discourse
marker’ is commonly understood to include co-
ordinating conjunctions (at utterance level, rather
than propositional level), and we follow this con-
vention in this paper.

Discourse markers are important for segment-
ing a dialogue into meaningful units, since they
very often ‘bracket’ functional segments, and they
may also be functional segments on their own.
With reference to the AMI corpus, Petukhova &
Bunt (2009) have shown that discourse markers

71



are nearly always multifunctional. The most fre-
quently occurring discourse marker, and, has an
average of 2.6 communicative functions; other fre-
quent ones are so (average multifunctionality 2.0);
well (2.1); but (1.9); and because (1.2). And is used
57% of the time with a small pause as a speaker
continuation signal, i.e. as a turn-keeping act; well
is mostly a turn-taking signal (also mostly with
a small pause); so, used with or without a small
pause, can be both. An example of the character-
istic use of and is shown in (10), with durations of
micro-pauses:

(10) like you said a problem was how many com-
ponents are in there
(0.28) {C and } (0.12) the power is basically
a factor of that
(0.55) {F um } (0.47) {C and } (0.32) this af-
fects you in terms of the size of your device
(0.52) {F um } (0.26) {C and } (0,16) that
would have some impact

The importance of discourse markers for seg-
mentation is evidenced in the Switchboard cor-
pus by the fact that an estimated 35% of all slash
units begin with a discourse marker. As a dis-
course marker (rather than a propositional connec-
tive), and occurs almost exclusively at the start
of a slash unit inside a turn; well typically oc-
curs in turn-initial position and has a turn-taking or
turn-accepting function, as illustrated in (11) (from
sw03-0304 line 0087-A049-01).

(11)
B: {C So } [ what do you, + what kind of

hobbies are you ] in?/
A: {C Well, } I’m a mother of four, /

Discourse markers may also have a feedback
function, a time management function, or a dis-
course structuring function. Clark and Shaefer
(1989) and Clark (1996) claim that and has an im-
portant feedback function; this claim is not sup-
ported by the Switchboard data, where and occurs
predominantly inside a speaker turn, whereas feed-
back tends to be expressed at the beginning of a
turn.

The markup of discourse markers in the Switch-
board corpus is useful for the recognition of slash
units; to correctly annotate discourse markers that
by themselves have one or more communicative
functions according to the ISO 24617-2 standard,
a resegmentation is required that treats such occur-
rences of discourse markers as separate slash units.

3.5 Asides

Asides do have a communicative function, but in
a sense do not belong to the dialogue, as (12) il-
lustrates. In the Switchboard corpus, asides like
the one in (12) (from sw03-0304, lines 180-A099-
01 through 184- A101-02) are annotated with the
non-communicative tag‘t3’ (third-party talk).

(12) A: I keep hearing these marvelous things –
B: Yeah, /
B: haven’t either. /
A: – about Dear Valley and,
A: {F um, } 〈to child〉 {A don’t, Adam, } ...

Since an aside typically expresses a dialogue
act, it could be annotated with the appropriate
communicative function tag(s); moreover, ISO
standard annotation includes indicating for each
dialogue act the identities of the speaker and the
addressee(s); in an aside like the one in in the bot-
tom line in (12) (sw03-0304 line 184), this is possi-
ble if the addressee (‘Adam’) has been introduced
in the metadata as one of the participants in the
communicative situation.

As for the conversion of Switchboard annota-
tions to the ISO standard, all cases labelled t3
have to be re-annotated, taking their context of oc-
currence into account.

4 Phenomena not annotated in
Switchboard

4.1 Nonverbal behaviour

Nonverbal behaviour is marked up in-line in
Switchboard transcriptions with pointed brackets,
and when it occurs as a separate turn it is anno-
tated (even though it is not considered as a slash
unit) with the SWBD-DAMSL tag ‘x’. An exam-
ple is seen in the second line of (13) (from dialogue
sw03-0304):

(13)
sd A: {C so } basically I’m just, 〈laughter〉/

x B: 〈laughter〉

While marked as being a stretch of nonverbal
behaviour, no functional annotation is associated
with nonverbal behaviour in the Switchboard cor-
pus, as illustrated by (13) and (14) (line 0014 from
dialogue sw00-0004).

(14)
sv I think what they need to do is, they

need to somehow 〈lipsmack〉 take the
money out of it. /

72



The ISO standard makes use of nonverbal and
multimodal functional segments besides purely
verbal segments (see Petukhova and Bunt, 2012),
and supports the functional annotation of such seg-
ments

Laughter often expresses a positive emphatic
sentiment concerning something that another par-
ticipant just said, and thus indicates that the laugh-
ing participant understood what was said. The ap-
propriate functional ISO tag is thus Auto-Positive
(in the Auto-Feedback dimension).

Example (14) would be treated in ISO 24617-
2 by distinguishing the discontinuous verbal seg-
ment I think what they need to do is, they need to
somehow take the money out of it, which would
be annotated as having the communicative func-
tion Inform, and the vocal functional segment de-
fined by its begin and end point being just after the
end of somehow and before the start of take; this
segment would be annotated as having a Stalling
function. (See ISO 2461702:2012, Annex D, and
Petukhova & Bunt, 2012 for more details.)

While <laughter> and <lipsmack> can
mostly be mapped to the ISO function tags Auto-
Feedback and Stalling (although each occurrence
has to be checked for its function in the context
in which it occurs), the addition of these annota-
tions to the Switchboard corpus would require a
resegmentation of the dialogues, using functional
segments rather than slash units.

4.2 Turn Management

Turn management functions are not annotated in
(SWBD-)DAMSL. In the ISO standard they are,
the guidelines instructing the annotation of com-
municative behaviour with turn management func-
tions if and only if a dialogue participant explicitly
signals the wish to have or keep the speaker role,
or to release it or to give it to another participant.
The background of this guideline is that speakers
often take the turn simply by starting to speak, like
participant B in dialogue fragment (15):

(15)
A: Anyone wants to add something?
B: I would like to add that the controls

should be really easy to use.

Any time a dialogue participant (B) starts to
speak after another participant (A) has ceased to
speak, he (B) can be said to perform a turn-taking
(or turn-accepting) act by implication of perform-
ing a dialogue act which is expressed by what he

(B) says.4 For dialogue act annotation, more in-
teresting are those cases where a speaker explicitly
indicates that he wants to take on the speaker role,
for example by starting to speak without producing
any content, such as a filler (Um,..) or a discourse
marker (e.g. Well,... or You know,....). The Switch-
board examples in (16) illustrate this.

(16) a. (dialogue sw01-0105 lines 01-02)
A: Jimmy, {D so } how do you get

most of your news?/
B: {D Well, } [ I kind of, + {F uh, } I ]

watch the national news every day

b. (dialogue sw01-0105 lines 07-08)
A: {D so } when you say the morning

news, or evening news or national
news is when? /

B: {F Uh, } evening news at six thirty
I believe

c. (dialogue sw03-0304 lines 01-02)
A: Tell me what you like to do. /
B: {D Well, } 〈laughter〉 [ I, +I ] ]

collect antique tools ... /

Whereas stalling when starting to speak is typ-
ically a sign of wishing or agreeing to have the
speaker role, ceasing to speak while fixating the
gaze on another participant (and naming that other
participant, especially in multi-party dialogue) is a
sign of giving the speaker role to that participant.
Slowing down and stalling at the end of an utter-
ance, and a rising intonation, often signals that the
speaker wants to keep the speaker role.

Turn management signals are often quite sub-
tle, with an important role being played by non-
verbal behaviour accompanying the speech. Since
the Switchboard corpus consists of transcriptions
of telephone dialogues, the annotation of turn man-
agement functions has to be based exclusively
on verbal and vocal turn management signals.
Turn-initial stallings, slash unit-initial and slash
unit-final stallings, and interruptions are the main
sources for adding ISO 24617-2 turn manage-
ment functions to units in the Switchboard corpus.
These could be added semi-automatically by iden-
tifying the turn-initial, slash-unit initial, and slash-
unit final stallings and certain discourse markers,
but each individual case would have to be checked
for its communicative function in the context in

4See Bunt (2011) for a discussion of implications and
other semantic relations between dialogue acts.

73



which it occurs; moreover, a partial resegmen-
tation of the dialogues would be required in or-
der to isolate the units to be annotated with turn-
management functions.

4.3 Allo-Feedback

Feedback is communicative behaviour that pro-
vides or elicits information about the processing
of utterances earlier in a conversation. The ISO
standard follows the DIT++ annotation scheme in
dividing feedback behaviour into those where the
speaker provides information about his own pro-
cessing of previous utterances (Auto-Feedback)
and those which provide or elicit information
about the addressee’s (or addressees’) processing
(Allo-Feedback). SWBD-DAMSL has tags for
annotating Auto-Feedback acts, but not for Allo-
Feedback acts.

Examples of Allo-Feedback acts in the Switch-
board corpus are shown in (17) line 19 (Switch-
board dialogue sw01-0105, lines 0012-A0005-03
to 0019-A0009-01), and in (18) line 66 (from
sw00-0004, lines 61-66; in-line markups sup-
pressed):

(17)

12. A: I don’t, uh, subscribe to cable
13. B: Uh-huh.
14. A: be- because of the poor service

and also, uh, because,
15. A: well, I, uh, I give to the United

Way
16. A: and so I figured that amount of

money I just donate that.
17. B: Uh-huh.
18. as opposed to paying for cable.
19. A: Yeah.

In line 18 in (17) B checks the correctness of
his understanding of what A said, performing a
Check Question (which is commonly expressed
by a declarative sentence) in the Auto-Feedback
dimension, to which A responds by a confirma-
tion of B’s understanding; this constitutes a Con-
firm act in the Allo-Feedback dimension. The
SWBD-DAMSL annotation tags line 18 as bf
(“Summarize/reformulate”) and line 19 as aa (Ac-
cept/agree), which is not very satisfactory; in line
18 speaker B does neither summarizes nor refor-
mulates something that A has said, but rather adds
a consideration to clarify what A said and offers
this for confirmation, which A does in line 19,
where he does not really express agreement with

what B said, but confirms the correctness of his in-
terpretation.

(18)

61. B: I’ve nailed the problem
62. but I
63. A: 〈laughter〉
64. B: 〈laughter〉
65. A: Leave the details up to someone

else, huh?
66. B: Yeah,

In line 65 in (18) A provides a tentative com-
pletion of what B was trying to say in line 62,
with a check of correctness, to which B replies
with an allo-feeback Confirm act. The SWBD-
DAMSL annotation tags line 65 as ˆ2 (“Col-
laborative Completion”) and line 19 as aa (Ac-
cept/agree). Assigning only ˆ2 to the slash unit in
line 65 fails to account for the , huh? part of that
unit, which indicates that the speaker is not only
performing a completion but also checks the cor-
rectness of his understanding on which the com-
pletion is based. In line 66 B confirms that cor-
rectness, which makes it a Confirm act in the Allo-
Feedback dimension.

Identifying the units in the Switchboard di-
alogues which have an Allo-Feedback function
seems quite hard on the basis of the existing
SWBD-DAMSL annotations. An important clue
is that allo-feedback acts mostly occur in response
to allo-feedback acts, but the tagging of auto-
feedback acts in the corpus is not very reliable,
as example (17) illustrates, and does not seem to
provide a solid basis for automatically identifying
these acts.

4.4 Communicative function qualifiers

In natural dialogue, speakers often use expres-
sions to qualify their communicative activity
for (un)certainty, (un)conditionality, or sentiment.
The ISO standard makes use of so-called ‘quali-
fiers’ (Petukhova & Bunt, 2010) for representing
this in dialogue act annotation. SWBD-DAMSL
does not have a device with the same generality,
but does use the tag component ˆe to express un-
certainty (but also other possible qualifications; ‘e’
stands for elaboration’), as in (19) line 27, and the
tag ‘am’ (‘accept maybe/partial accept’ - see (19))
line 28, which can be used for some of the cases
where ISO 24617-2 uses the qualifier ‘uncertain’
applied to the communicative function that inter-
prets SWBD-DAMSL’s ‘accept’ tag (which corre-

74



sponds to a number of more specific tags in the
ISO standard).

(19) (dialogue sw03-0304, lines 25-28)
25. qy A: Are you going to move

yourwhole family over
there then?

26. nn B: No, /
27. sd ˆe actually, {F uh, } I’m not

even sure, /
28. am B: I may, /

In a fully-fledged ISO 24617-2 annotation, it
would be necessary to add function qualifiers
wherever they apply, including interpretations of
the cases where the SWBD-DAMSL tags and tag
components‘ˆh’ (for ‘hold’“), ‘am’, and ‘ ˆe’ are
used.

4.5 Relations between dialogue acts

Responsive dialogue acts, such as answers, (dis-
)confirmations, (dis-)agreements, acceptance and
rejection of offers and requests, acceptance of
apologies, return greetings, and so on, all presup-
pose a particular kind of preceding dialogue act,
to which they have a ‘functional dependence rela-
tion’. The ISO standard annotates these relations
in a dialogue; SWBD-DAMSL does not.

Similarly, the ISO standard annotates the rela-
tions between a feedback act and the preceding
dialogue contribution that the feedback is about,
whereas SWBD-DAMSL does not support the an-
notation of such relations.

Again, in a fully-fledged ISO 24617-2 anno-
tation of the Switchboard dialogues, it would be
necessary to add functional and feedback relations
wherever they would apply. Examples occur all
over the place, for example in (20a) the slash unit
in line 155 would be tagged as an answer that is
linked to the question in line 153 by a ‘functional
dependence’ relation, and in (20b) the feedback ut-
terance in line 80 is tagged as an ‘autoPositive’ act
that is linked to the preceding Inform by a ‘feed-
back dependence’ relation.

(20) a. (dialogue sw03-0304, lines 153-155)
153. B: [ You guys, + are you guys ]

getting snow?
154. A: We, - /
155. it is snowing right now. /

b. (dialogue sw03-0304, lines 79-80)

79. A: {C so, } it’s been a real
interesting thing for them ../

80. B: That’s great. /

The addition of functional and feedback depen-
dence relations to Switchboard annotations can
probably be done semi-automatically, because of
the following regularities that govern the depen-
dency relations:

• for functional dependence:
– these occur (always) for a particular set

of dialogue act types, the ‘responsive’
ones, which are specified in the ISO
standard;

– for each type of responsive dialogue act
the ‘functional antecedent’ is a dialogue
act with a specific communicative func-
tion (like the functional antecedent of a
Confirm being a Check Question) and a
specific speaker;

– the functional antecedent of a respon-
sive dialogue act is nearly always the
most recent dialogue act of the appropri-
ate type (Petukhova et al., 2011).

• for feedback dependence:
– these occur (always) for dialogue acts in

one of the two feedback dimensions;
– the ‘antecedent’ of a feedback act is in

the vast majority of cases either the most
recent dialogue act contributed by the
previous speaker, or a subdialogue that
ends there, intervening dialogue acts be-
ing mainly turn management acts, time
management acts, and own communica-
tion management acts. In the latter case
it may be difficult, however, to (automat-
ically) determine the start of such a sub-
dialogue.

5 Discussion and Conclusions

A comparison of annotation schemes is often
thought of as comparing the respective typolo-
gies of dialogue acts and their encodings, but
we have seen in this paper that the construction
of ISO 24617-2 annotations for the dialogues in
the Switchboard corpus, starting from the existing
SWBD-DAMSL tagging, is much more compli-
cated than that. Fang et al. (2012) have shown that
the replacement of SWBD-DAMSL tags by ISO
24617-2 communicative functions can be done

75



automatically for 84% of the Switchboard cor-
pus, which is a promising start. In this paper
we addressed the following additional aspects of
adding fully-fledged ISO 24617-2 annotations to
the Switchboard corpus:

1. The ISO standard is intended for annotating
all the communicative functions of dialogue
units in the nine dimensions defined in the
standard. The slash units in the Switchboard
corpus have only one functional tag from the
SWBD-DAMSL scheme, while on average
they would have 1.8 communicative functions
according to ISO 24617-2. This means that
the number of functional tags in the corpus
should be almost doubled. In some cases it
is possible to derive the appropriate ISO tags
from in-line markups (see 2, 3, and 7); in
other cases this does not seem feasible (see
4, 5, 6, and 8). In nearly all cases, the addi-
tion of communicative functions requires the
dialogues to be partly re-segmented, using the
more fine-grained DIT++ segmentation of di-
alogues into functional segments.

2. The in-line markup of restarts, repairs, and
edit terms in the Switchboard corpus can
be replaced semi-automatically by functional
annotations in the ISO dimension of Own
Communication Management, making use of
the markup to automatically resegment the
slash units in which these markups occur. The
results must be manually checked, however,
since edit terms and repetitions sometimes
have other functions, e.g. as indicators of
dialogue acts in the Partner Communication
Management dimension.

3. The in-line markups of filled pauses can be
used to resegment the utterances in which
they occur, and to annotate these segments
with TIme Management functions. This can
be done automatically with manual checks,
since filled pauses can have functions in other
dimensions than Time Management.

4. Discourse markers, as marked up in-line in
the Switchboard corpus, have to be identi-
fied as separate functional segments if they
express one or more dialogue acts by them-
selves. Their communicative functions can-
not be derived from the Switchboard tagging,

and require a re-annotation taking their con-
text of occurrence into consideration.

5. Asides, such as third-party talk, have com-
municative functions just like other functional
segments (and slash units), which can only
be constructed through re-annotation with the
ISO 24617-2 scheme.

6. Stretches of nonverbal communicative be-
haviour, such as laughter, chuckles, sighs,
and lip smacks, should be treated as func-
tional segments not only when they occur as
a separate turn, but also when they occur in-
side a slash unit; their ISO 24617-2 annota-
tion cannot be derived from the Switchboard
markups.

7. Turn Management functions can be added
semi-automatically to Switchboard once dis-
course markers have been treated as indicated
in 4 and filled pauses as in 3, if detailed in-
formation is available about small pauses as-
sociated with turn-initial, segment-initial and
segment-final discourse markers and filled
pauses.

8. The addition of Allo-Feedback functions to
Switchboard can partly be done automati-
cally by identifying responsive dialogue acts
that respond to a dialogue act in the Auto-
Feedback dimension. The SWBD-DAMSL
tagging is very crude in indicating dimen-
sions, however; the tag component ˆc is
used to represent “about communication”,
so an Auto-Feedback Check Question could
be tagged as qdˆc, but this has not been
done systematically in the Switchboard cor-
pus (moreover, there is no SWBD-DAMSL
tag corresponding exactly to ISO’s Check
Question). In the absence of detailed encod-
ings of functions in the Auto-Feedback di-
mension, it hardly seems feasible to derive
Allo-Feedback functions automatically.

9. The ISO communicative function qualifiers
for (un-)certainty and (un-)conditionality
have no counterparts in SWBD-DAMSL; the
tags and tag components ‘ˆh’, ‘am’, ‘ˆe’
can be used to automatically identify cases
which are relevant to examine.

10. The functional and feedback relations that
form an important part of the ISO 24617-

76



2 annotation of a dialogue can be added
largely automatically for functional depen-
dences, since these relations are known to oc-
cur always (and only) for certain types of dia-
logue acts (the ‘responsive’ ones) and nearly
always relate to the most recent dialogue act
of a specific type performed by the previ-
ous speaker. For feedback relations, similarly
a good guess that could be used in a semi-
automatic process is to take the last dialogue
act performed by the previous speaker. Man-
ual checks are needed to verify the correct-
ness of the relations generated in this way,
especially for feedback dependence relations,
which may have a wider scope (for details see
Petukhova et al., 2011).

With respect to the resegmentation and re-
annotation that several of these aspects necessitate,
it may be noted that Petukhova and Bunt (2011)
have developed a highly successful machine-
learning based approach for the automatic segmen-
tation and annotation of raw spoken dialogue. A
variant of this method could conceivably be de-
fined for the ISO-compliant resegmentation and
reannotation of Switchboard dialogues that makes
use of the information encoded in the Switchboard
transcriptions, in particular in the in-line markups.

Acknowledgement

The research described in this article was sup-
ported in part by grants received from the Gen-
eral Research Fund of the Research Grants Coun-
cil of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Re-
gion, China (RGC Project No. 142711) and City
University of Hong Kong (Project Nos 7002793,
9610226, 9041694, 9610188, and 7008062). The
authors would like to acknowledge the academic
input and the technical support received from
the members of the Dialogue Systems Group
(http://dsg.ctl.cityu.edu.hk) based at the Depart-
ment of Chinese, Translation and Linguistics, City
University of Hong Kong

References

Allen, J. and M. Core (1997). DAMSL: Dia-
logue Act Markup in Several Layers (Draft 2.1).
Technical Report. Rochester, NY: University of
Rochester.

Bunt, H. (2009). The DIT++ taxonomy for func-
tional dialogue act markup. In D. Heylen,

C. Pelachaud, R. Catizone, and D. Traum
(Eds.), Proceedings of EDAML–AAMAS Work-
shop ”Towards a Standard Markup Language
for Embodied Dialogue Acts”, Budapest, pp.
13–24.

Bunt, H. (2011). Multifunctionality in dialogue.
Computer, Speech and Language 25(2), 225 –
245.

Bunt, H., J. Alexandersson, J. Carletta, J.-W.
Choe, A. Fang, K. Hasida, K. Lee, V. Petuhova,
A. Popescu-Belis, L. Romary, and D. Soria,
C. Traum (2010). Towards an ISO standard for
dialogue act annotation. In Proceedings Sev-
enth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2010),, Malta.

Bunt, H., J. Alexandersson, J.-W. Choe, A. Fang,
K. Hasida, V. Petuhova, A. Popescu-Belis, and
D. Traum (2012). Iso 24617-2: A semantically-
based standard for dialogue annotation. In
Proceedings Eighth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2012), Istanbul.

Clark, H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.

Clark, H. and E. Shaefer (1989). Contributing to
discourse. Cognitive Science 13, 259–294.

Core, M. and J. Allen (1997). Coding dialogs with
the DAMSL annotation schema. In AAAI Fall
Symposium on Communicative Action in Hu-
mans and Machines, Boston, MA.

Fang, A., H. Bunt, J. Cao, and X. Liu (2011). Re-
lating the semantics of dialogue acts to linguis-
tic properties: A machine learning perspective
through lexical cues. In Proceedings 5th IEEE
International Conference on Semantic Comput-
ing, Stanford University, Palo Alto.

Fang, A., H. Bunt, J. Cao, and X. Liu (2012).
The annotation of the Switchboard corpus with
the new iso standard for dialogue act analy-
sis. In Proceedings 8th Joint ISO-ACL SIGSEM
Workshop on Interoperable Semantic Annota-
tion (ISA-8), Pisa.

Geertzen, J., V. Petukhova, and H. Bunt (2007).
A multidimensional approach to utterance seg-
mentation and dialogue act classification. In
Proceedings of the 8th SIGdial Workshop on
Discourse and Dialogue, Antwerp, pp. 140–
149.

77



Jurafsky, D., E. Shriberg, and D. Biasca
(1997). Switchboard SWBD-DAMSL Shallow-
Discourse-Annotation Coders Manual. Avail-
able at http://stripe.colorado.edu/.

Meteer and R. A. Taylor (1995). Dysfluency an-
notation stylebook for the Switchboard corpus.
ftp://ftp.cis.upenn.edu/pub/treebank/swbd/docs/
DFL-book.ps.

Petukhova, V. and H. Bunt (2009). Towards a mul-
tidimensional semantics of discourse markers in
spoken dialogue. In Proceedings of the Eighth
International Workshop on Computational Se-
mantics (IWCS-8), Tilburg, the Netherlands, pp.
157–168.

Petukhova, V. and H. Bunt (2010). Introduc-
ing communicative function qualifiers. In Pro-
ceedings Second International Conference on
Global Interoperability for Language resources
(ICGL-2), Hong Kong, pp. 123 – 131.

Petukhova, V. and H. Bunt (2011). Incremental di-
alogue act understanding. In Proceedings Ninth
International Conference on Computational Se-
mantics (IWCS 2011), Oxford, pp. 235 – 244.

Petukhova, V. and H. Bunt (2012). The cod-
ing and annotation of multimodal dialogue acts.
In Proceedings Eighth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2012),, Istanbul.

Petukhova, V., L. Prévot, and H. Bunt (2011).
Multi-level discourse relations between dia-
logue units. In Proceedings 6th Joint ACL-ISO
Workshop on Interoperable Semantic Annota-
tion (ISA-6), Oxford, pp. 18–27.

Popescu-Belis, A. (2008). Dimensionality of di-
alogue act tagsets. Language Resources and
Evaluation 14, 99–107.

Shriberg, E. (1994). Preliminaries to a theory of
speech disfluencies. Ph.D. Thesis, University of
Berkeley.

78


