








































Scope Disambiguation as a Tagging Task

Kilian Evang
CLCG, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen

k.evang@rug.nl

Johan Bos
CLCG, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen

johan.bos@rug.nl

Abstract

In this paper we present a pragmatic account of scope alternation involving universal quantifiers
in a lexicalist framework based on CCG and DRT. This account can derive the desired reading for
96% of all cases of scope interaction involving universal quantification mediated by prepositions in
a real corpus. We show how this account allows for recasting scope resolution as a simple token
classification task, providing a simpler handle for statistical approaches to scope resolution than
previous accounts.

1 Introduction

The correct handling of scope-bearing operators such as quantifiers, negation and intensional verbs is
crucial for constructing logical form from text that capture the intended meaning. A lot of work has been
done to describe the scope alternation behavior especially of quantifiers and to construct underspecified
meaning representations from which all (theoretically) possible readings of a sentence containing them
can be enumerated (Reyle, 1993; Bos, 1996; Copestake et al., 2005; Egg et al., 2001). The problem
of finding the preferred reading in each concrete case has also been addressed, using machine learning
(Higgins and Sadock, 2003; Andrew and MacCartney, 2004; Srinivasan and Yates, 2009; Manshadi and
Allen, 2011).

Despite these efforts, existing wide-coverage semantic parsers do not typically resolve scope. Either
the semantic representations they output are shallow and do not use logical quantifiers, which is sufficient
for many applications but not for model-theoretic reasoning. Or they leave the output underspecified or
always deterministically pick the same scoping behavior for a given quantifier.

How to make a semantic parser aware of scope alternation? We argue that an additional layer of tags
is a good way. A semantic parser can use these tags to guide its decisions—just like it might use a layer of
word sense tags and a layer of named-entity tags, and just like a syntactic parser uses part-of-speech tags.
Scope tags can guide the construction of logical forms from the start and thereby avoid the additional
computational and representational complexity of underspecified representations. At the same time, this
approach avoids the need to change the syntactic parsing model.

In this paper we show how we applied this technique to the semantic parsing system of Curran
et al. (2007). It consists of C&C, a statistical syntactic parser whose output includes predicate-argument
structures, and Boxer, a semantic construction component which builds interpretable semantic repre-
sentations. The resulting enhanced system is being used in constructing the Groningen Meaning Bank
(GMB), a large corpus of English text annotated with logical form (Basile et al., 2012).

2 Formal Background

Boxer’s lexical-semantic framework (Bos, 2009) uses the output of the C&C parser, which consists of
derivations in Combinatory Categorial Grammar (CCG; Steedman, 2001). In these derivations, words
and smaller constituents combine into larger constituents using combinatory rules such as forward ap-
plication, which combines a functor category X/Y : f with an argument category Y : a to yield a new
constituent with category X : f@a (1-place function f applied to a). Left of the colon are syntactic



λp.(
x

member(x)
; (p@x)) λp. x

member(x)
⇒ (p@x)

Figure 1: Generalized quantifiers denoted by the NPs a member and every member

λio.λdo.λsu.λmp.(su@λx.(io@λy.(do@λz.(

e

give(e)
Agent(e, x)

Recipient(e, y)
Theme(e, z)

; (mp@e)))))

Figure 2: Semantics of the verb give, ignoring tense. The core consists of a DRS introducing an event discourse referent e and
relating it to the arguments using thematic role relations. The modifier semantics is applied to e, the result is combined with
the core DRS using merge reduction (;). The rest is largely for dealing with NP arguments.

categories that determine the ways in which constituents are allowed to combine, right of it are semantic
categories that specify the semantics of a constituent based on the semantics of the constituents that com-
bined to form it. There are a number of combinatory rules besides forward application, and each specifies
syntax and semantics in a similar way. Boxer’s most important task is thus to assign a semantics to each
word; given the derivation, the semantics of each phrase then follows deterministically.

The semantics of all functor categories, such as verbs and prepositions, must be prepared to combine
with their arguments and therefore must be functions. They are specified using the notation of the lambda
calculus. For example, the semantics of a ditransitive verb has the form λio.λdo.λsu.sent where io,
do, su are variables standing for the semantics of the indirect object, the direct object and the subject
respectively, reflecting the order in which the verb arguments combine syntactically, and sent is the
semantics of the resulting sentence, specified in terms of the verb meaning and io, do, su.

Boxer uses a neo-Davidsonian event semantics, expressing verb meanings using event individuals
that permit an unlimited number of verb modifiers. This motivated a decision to represent sentence
meanings themselves as functions—from event properties to sentence meanings—to allow modifiers
to combine with them. sent above is therefore always of the form λmp.drs where mp is a variable
standing for an event property and drs is an expression that evaluates to a proper truth-theoretic meaning
representation in the form of a discourse representation structure (DRS; Kamp and Reyle, 1993).

All noun phrases are analyzed as generalized quantifiers, i.e. functions from individual properties to
DRSs. Figure 1 shows the semantics of a member and every member as examples. Verb semantics take
the status of NPs as generalized quantifiers into account by using predicate abstraction: they apply an
NP semantics to a property that expresses the core verb meaning, modifier meanings, and meanings of
any previously absorbed arguments. For example, for a ditransitive verb, the drs part above has the form
(su@λx.(do@λy.(io@λz.drs′))). Figure 2 shows a full semantics of the verb give.

3 Scope-mediating Categories

3.1 Verbs

It is easy to see from Figure 2 that in our lexical-semantic framework, it is the semantics of a verb that
determines the relative scope of its arguments. For example, with the given lexical entry, the sentence
A lecturer gave every student a book receives an interpretation with a unique lecturer, but if we swap
the substrings su@λx and io@λy, every student got a book from a potentially distinct lecturer. We thus
account for scope ambiguity by giving verbs different interpretations, as in the proposal of Hendriks
(1993). Boxer can generate an appropriate lexical entry for any scope order given a tag on the verb
encoding the scope order of arguments—e.g., for a three-place verb, one of 312, 321, 132, 123, 231, 213.



Table 1: Eight types of scope interaction involving universal quantifiers, mediated by a preposition. Columns indicate what
the preposition attaches to (verb or noun phrase), which of its arguments contains the universal quantifier (object or the phrase
it attaches to), and whether the universal quantifier has wide or narrow scope. All examples are from the Groningen Meaning
Bank (GMB); numbers in brackets are GMB document identifiers.

att ∀ in ∀ scope example count

(a) NP obj wide Finally the gorgeous jewel of the order, gleaming upon the
breast of every member, suggested “your Badgesty,” which was
adopted, and the order became popularly known as the Kings of
Catarrh. [72/0696]

115

(b) NP att wide All such attacks by drone aircraft are believed to be carried out
by U.S. forces. [76/0357]

32

(c) VP obj wide Jobs grew in every sector except manufacturing, with much
of the growth due to hurricane clean-up efforts in Florida.
[97/0059]

57

(d) VP att wide NATO says militants surrounded the outpost, firing from all di-
rections with rocket-propelled grenades, small arms and mor-
tars. [92/0311]

25

(e) NP obj narrow He is the former director of national intelligence, the head of all
U.S. intelligence agencies. [59/0286]

44

(f) NP att narrow The official Xinhua news agency says all 28 workers in a mine in
northwestern Shaanxi province died when an underground cable
caught fire on Saturday night. [40/0608]

16

(g) VP obj narrow Responsibility for Africa is currently fractured under all three.
[90/0450]

11

(h) VP att narrow Opening batsman Jamie How led all scorers with 88 runs as
New Zealand reached 203-4 in 42.1 overs. [13/0199]

17

(i) NP obj neutral He said methods such as abortion do not fight poverty or help
a country’s development but actually constitute “the destruction
of the poorest of all human beings.” [13/0428]

1

(j) NP att neutral It tacitly encouraged Iraq’s minority Sunni Muslims to vote,
saying all segments of the Iraqi people must go to the polls.
[52/0038]

83

(k) VP obj neutral The preferred stock, which would have a dividend rate of $ 1.76
a year, would be convertible into Heritage common at a rate of
four common shares for each preferred. [38/0686]

3

(l) VP att neutral The program airs in 40 countries worldwide, and every Idolwin-
ner records through Sony BMG. [75/0494]

52

3.2 Prepositions

Scope interactions involving universal quantifiers and mediated by prepositions can roughly be classified
along three binary distinctions: whether the preposition attaches to a verb or a noun, whether it is the
object of the preposition or the phrase it attaches to that contains the universal quantifier, and whether the
universal quantifier takes wide scope over the other argument of the preposition. Table 1 has an example
for each situation.

Whether the universal quantifier must take wide scope depends on the desired interpretation. It
should take wide scope if the non-universal argument introduces an entity that is non-specific, i.e. whose
extension depends on the instantiation of the universally quantified-over variable. In this case, the uni-
versal argument should take wide scope. This is the case in (a–d). On the other hand, if the non-universal
argument introduces an existentially quantified-over variable that is necessarily the same for all instan-
tiations of the universally quantified-over variable, the non-universal argument must take wide scope.
This is the case in (e–h). There are also cases were neither of the two criteria applies, e.g. because the
non-universal argument is a definite that should be interpreted at a global level. Examples are shown



head of all agencies

N (N\N)/NP NP

λx.
head(x) λobj.λp.λx.((p@x); (obj@λy. of(x, y) )) λp.

x
agency(x)

⇒ (p@x)

>
N\N

λp.λx.((p@x); y
agency(y)

⇒
of(x, y)

)

<
N

λx.
head(x)

y
agency(y)

⇒
of(x, y)

∗
NP

λp.(

x
head(x)

y
agency(y)

⇒
of(x, y)

); (p@x))

Figure 3: NP derivation with narrow-scope modifier

leaders of all states
NP (NP\NP)/NP NP

λp.(
x

leader(x) ; (p@x)) λobj.λnp.λp.((obj@λy.(np@λx.( of(x, y) ; (p@x)))) λp.
x

state(x)
⇒ (p@x)

>
NP\NP

λnp.λp. x
state(x)

⇒ (np@λy.(
of(x, y)

; p@y))

<
NP

λp. x
state(x)

⇒ (
y

leader(y)
of(x, y)

; (p@x))

Figure 4: NP derivation with wide-scope modifier

in (i–l). Finally, in rare cases, both of the aforementioned criteria may apply simultaneously. The only
example we found of this in the corpus is given in (1) below, where the modifier in all major cities and
towns should be outscoped by an Islamic alliance, but outscope members. In such cases, our scheme is
too coarse-grained to derive the desired semantics.

(1) Members of an Islamic alliance and other parties took to the streets Saturday in all major cities
and towns, where speakers denounced General Musharraf for breaking his promise. [50/0210]

Scope alternation in these configurations can be effected using just two scope tags on prepositions, indi-
cating modifier wide scope (inv as in a,c,f,h) vs. modified constituent wide scope (noninv as in b,d,e,g).
For cases like (i–l), one tag can be used as the default.

In the case of verb phrase modifiers, preposition semantics effecting the desired scope behavior
are straightforward to implement (Figure 5). For noun phrase modifiers, things are trickier. Firstly,
narrow-scope modifiers need to apply to individual properties whereas wide-scope modifiers need to
apply to generalized quantifiers. The easiest way to ensure this is to give the preposition the syntactic
type ((N \N )/NP) in the former case and ((NP\NP)/NP) in the latter before parsing. Thus, in this
case, the syntactic structure is affected. Both categories are well supported in the standard model of the
C&C parser trained on CCGbank (Hockenmaier and Steedman, 2007), and although the assignment of
lexical categories is integrated with parsing, the parser can be forced using tricks to pick a particular
category. Example derivations for both cases are shown in Figures 3 and 4.

The second issue with noun phrase modifiers is more severe: specific modifiers of universally quan-
tified noun phrases as in (f) cannot be accounted for in a similar way without heavily modifying the
lexical-semantic framework because universally quantified noun phrases keep only their nuclear scope
open for modification, not their restrictor. We will return to this limitation in the discussion.



λobj.λvp.λsubj.λmp.((vp@subj)@λe.(obj@λy.( with(e, y) ; (mp@e))))

λobj.λvp.λsubj.λmp.(obj@λy.((vp@subj)@λe.( with(e, y) ; (mp@e))))

Figure 5: Two possible semantics of a preposition attaching to a VP. Syntactically, it combines first with its object, then with
the VP, then the resulting extended VP combines with the subject, hence λobj.λvp.λsubj.... Semantically, in the first entry,
vp is first applied to subj, yielding a sentence meaning, which is then modified by applying it to an event property (λe....). In
the second entry, application to the preposition object to the corresponding property is moved out of the scope of all of this to
give it scope over the verb and its arguments. In both cases, the additional λmp ensures that a proper sentence meaning results,
allowing for additional modifiers.

4 Annotation and Results

For studying quantifier scope interactions in the wild, we use the Groningen Meaning Bank (GMB), a
freely available annotated English corpus of currently a little over 1 million tokens in 7,600 documents,
made up mainly of political news, country descriptions, fables and legal text. Since a pilot study showed
that clear deviations from the default scope order of verbal arguments (subject> objects in surface order)
is very rare (only 12 of 206 cases), we decided to focus on scope interactions mediated by prepositions.

Using the syntactic annotation of the GMB we extracted all prepositions where either the object or
the modified constituent contains one of the universally-quantifying determiners every, each and all. We
discarded prepositions serving as discourse connectives as in With all ballots cast, people are awaiting
the results because they relate propositions to each other rather than individuals with which we are
concerned. We also discarded prepositions that are part of fixed expressions such as in all, at all, as well
as the of in NPs such as all of the leaders, which we assume to mean the same as all leaders. Finally,
we cast aside the prepositions including, excluding and except as deserving special treatment not within
the scope of this work. This left us with 456 instances which were manually annotated by one annotator
for scope behavior. The counts are shown in the last column of Table 1.

In cases of doubt, we generally preferred annotations resulting in the logically weaker reading. For
example, in (2), we could either assume a separate termination event for each banking license or a single
termination event for them all, and we preferred the former by giving the universal quantifier wide scope.

(2) the International Banking Repeal Act of 2002 resulted in the termination of all offshore banking
licenses [03/0688]

5 Discussion

Our approach deals with scope alternation at the level of functor semantics, thus is syntactically con-
strained. There are some scope orderings, such as interleaved verb arguments and modifiers, that it
cannot derive. Also, specific indefinites pose problems in cases such as (f), and will probably show
need for special treatment even more clearly once we broaden our attention to their interactions with
intensional verbs and negation, see e.g. Geurts (2010). A more powerful account of indefinites is pro-
posed within CCG in Steedman (2012). However, it remains to be seen whether it can be implemented
efficiently within a wide-coverage parser, see Kartsaklis (2010). Another phenomenon we haven’t dealt
with yet is scope interaction between universals and negation.

Nevertheless, our approach is empirically successful at accounting for 96% of all cases in some of the
most common syntactic configurations giving rise to scope ambiguities involving universal quantifiers,
namely modification of NPs and VPs by preposition phrases. It is also a straightforward extension to an
existing semantic parsing system given an annotation of the input text with a layer of scope tags. In future
work, we plan to provide this layer automatically by adapting techniques for the statistical resolution of
scope, such as that of Manshadi and Allen (2011).



References

Andrew, G. and B. MacCartney (2004). Statistical resolution of scope ambiguity in natural language.
Unpublished manuscript.

Basile, V., J. Bos, K. Evang, and N. Venhuizen (2012). Developing a large semantically annotated
corpus. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2012), Istanbul, Turkey, pp. 3196–3200.

Bos, J. (1996). Predicate Logic Unplugged. In P. Dekker and M. Stokhof (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Tenth Amsterdam Colloquium, ILLC/Dept. of Philosophy, University of Amsterdam, pp. 133–143.

Bos, J. (2009). Towards a large-scale formal semantic lexicon for text processing. In C. Chiarcos,
R. Eckart de Castilho, and M. Stede (Eds.), Proceedings of the Biennal GSCL Conference 2009, pp.
3–14. Gunter Narr Verlag.

Copestake, A., D. Flickinger, I. Sag, and C. Pollard (2005). Minimal recursion semantics: An introduc-
tion. Journal of Research on Language and Computation 3(2–3), 281–332.

Curran, J., S. Clark, and J. Bos (2007). Linguistically Motivated Large-Scale NLP with C&C and Boxer.
In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics Compan-
ion Volume Proceedings of the Demo and Poster Sessions, Prague, Czech Republic, pp. 33–36.

Egg, M., A. Koller, and J. Niehren (2001). The constraint language for lambda structures. Logic,
Language and Information 10, 457–485.

Geurts, B. (2010). Specific indefinites, presuppositions, and scope. In R. Buerle, U. Reyle, and T. E.
Zimmermann (Eds.), Presuppositions and discourse, pp. 125–158. Emerald Group.

Hendriks, H. (1993). Studied Flexibility: Categories and Types in Syntax and Semantics. Ph. D. thesis,
University of Amsterdam.

Higgins, D. and J. Sadock (2003). A machine learning approach to modeling scope preferences. Com-
putational Linguistics 29(1), 73–96.

Hockenmaier, J. and M. Steedman (2007). Ccgbank: a corpus of ccg derivations and dependency struc-
tures extracted from the penn treebank. Computational Linguistics 33(3), 355–396.

Kamp, H. and U. Reyle (1993). From Discourse to Logic; An Introduction to Modeltheoretic Semantics
of Natural Language, Formal Logic and DRT. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Kartsaklis, D. (2010). Wide-coverage CCG parsing with quantifier scope. Master’s thesis, University of
Edinburgh.

Manshadi, M. and J. Allen (2011). Unrestricted quantifier scope disambiguation. In Proceedings of
TextGraphs-6: Graph-based Methods for Natural Language Processing, Portland, Oregon, pp. 51–59.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Reyle, U. (1993). Dealing with ambiguities by underspecification: Construction, representation and
deduction. Journal of Semantics 10, 123–179.

Srinivasan, P. and A. Yates (2009). Quantifier scope disambiguation using extracted pragmatic knowl-
edge: Preliminary results. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing: Volume 3-Volume 3, pp. 1465–1474. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Steedman, M. (2001). The Syntactic Process. The MIT Press.

Steedman, M. (2012). Taking Scope. The MIT Press.


