










































Implicitation of Discourse Connectives in (Machine) Translation


Proceedings of the Workshop on Discourse in Machine Translation (DiscoMT), pages 19–26,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 9, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Implicitation of Discourse Connectives in (Machine) Translation

Thomas Meyer
Idiap Research Institute and EPFL

Martigny and Lausanne, Switzerland
thomas.meyer@idiap.ch

Bonnie Webber
University of Edinburgh

Edinburgh, UK
bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Explicit discourse connectives in a source
language text are not always translated to
comparable words or phrases in the tar-
get language. The paper provides a corpus
analysis and a method for semi-automatic
detection of such cases. Results show
that discourse connectives are not trans-
lated into comparable forms (or even any
form at all), in up to 18% of human refer-
ence translations from English to French
or German. In machine translation, this
happens much less frequently (up to 8%
only). Work in progress aims to cap-
ture this natural implicitation of discourse
connectives in current statistical machine
translation models.

1 Introduction

Discourse connectives (DCs), a class of frequent
cohesive markers, such as although, however, for
example, in addition, since, while, yet, etc., are es-
pecially prone to ‘translationese’, i.e. the use of
constructions in the target language (TL) that dif-
fer in frequency or position from how they would
be found in texts born in the language. That is,
’translationese’ makes DCs prone to being trans-
lated in ways that can differ markedly from their
use in the source language. (Blum-Kulka, 1986;
Cartoni et al., 2011; Ilisei et al., 2010; Halverson,
2004; Hansen-Schirra et al., 2007; Zufferey et al.,
2012). For cohesive markers and DCs, Koppel and
Ordan (2011) and Cartoni et al. (2011) have shown
that they may be more explicit (increased use) or
less explicit (decreased use) in translationese. The
paper focuses on the latter case, but the same de-
tection method can be applied in reverse, in order
to find increased use (explicitation) as well.

In English about 100 types of explicit DCs have
been annotated in the Penn Discourse TreeBank,

or PDTB (Prasad et al., 2008) (We say more about
this in Section 3.1). The actual set of markers or
connectives is however rather open-ended (Prasad
et al., 2010). DCs signal discourse relations that
connect two spans of text and can be ambiguous
with respect to the discourse relation they convey.
Moreover, the same DC can simultaneously con-
vey more than one discourse relation. For exam-
ple, while can convey contrast or temporality, or
both at the same time. On the other hand, dis-
course relations can also be conveyed implicitly,
without an explicit DC.

Human translators can chose to not translate a
SL DC with a TL DC, where the latter would be re-
dundant or where the SL discourse relation would
more naturally be conveyed in the TL by other
means (cf. Section 2). We will use the term ‘zero-
translation’ or ‘implicitation’ for a valid transla-
tion that conveys the same sense as a lexically ex-
plicit SL connective, but not with the same form.
As we will show, current SMT models either learn
the explicit lexicalization of a SL connective to
a TL connective, or treat the former as a ran-
dom variation, realizing it or not. Learning other
valid ways of conveying the same discourse rela-
tion might not only result in more fluent TL text,
but also help raise its BLEU score by more closely
resembling its more implicit human reference text.

The paper presents work in progress on a cor-
pus study where zero-translations of DCs have
been semi-automatically detected in human refer-
ence and machine translations from English (EN)
to French (FR) and German (DE) (Section 3).
Two types of discourse relations that are very fre-
quently omitted in FR and DE translations are
studied in detail and we outline features on how
these omissions could be modeled into current
SMT systems (Section 4).

19



2 Implicitation of connectives in
translation

Figure 1 is an extract from a news article in the
newstest2010 data set (see Section 3.2). It con-
tains two EN connectives — as and otherwise —
that were annotated in the PDTB1. Using the set of
discourse relations of the PDTB, as can be said to
signal the discourse relation CAUSE (subtype Rea-
son), and otherwise the discourse relation ALTER-
NATIVE. This is discussed further in Section 3.1.

EN: The man with the striking bald head was
still needing a chauffeur, 1. as the town was still
unknown to him. 2. Otherwise he could have
driven himself — 3. after all, no alcohol was
involved and the 55-year-old was not drunk.

FR-REF: L’homme, dont le crâne chauve
attirait l’attention, se laissa conduire 1. 0
dans la ville qui lui était encore étrangère. 2.
Autrement notre quinquagénaire aurait pu
prendre lui-même le volant — 3. 0 il n’avait
pas bu d’alcool et il n’était pas non plus ivre de
bonheur.

DE-REF: Der Mann mit der markanten
Glatze liess sich 1. wegen/Prep der ihm noch
fremden Stadt chauffieren. 2. Ansonsten hätte
er auch selbst fahren können — Alkohol war 3.
schliesslich/Adv nicht im Spiel, und besoffen
vor Glück war der 55-jährige genauso wenig.

Figure 1: Examples of EN source connectives
translated as zero or by other means in human ref-
erence translations.

The human reference translations do not trans-
late the first connective as explicitly. In FR there
is no direct equivalent, and the reason why the
man needed a driver is given with a relative clause:
...dans la ville qui... (lit.: in the town that was still
foreign to him). In DE as is realized by means of
a preposition, wegen (lit.: because of). The sec-
ond EN connective otherwise, maintains its form
in translation to the target connective autrement in
FR and ansonsten in DE.

On the other hand, baseline SMT systems for
1The excerpt contains a third possible connective after all

that was not annotated in the PDTB, and our data as a whole
contains other possible connectives not yet annotated there,
including given that and at the same time. We did not analyse
such possible connectives in the work described here.

EN/FR and EN/DE (Section 3.2) both translated
the two connectives as and otherwise explicitly by
the usual target connectives, in FR: comme, sinon
and in DE wie, sonst.

3 Semi-automatic detection of
zero-translations

3.1 Method

The semi-automatic method that identifies zero- or
non-connective translations in human references
and machine translation output is based on a list
of 48 EN DCs with a frequency above 20 in the
Penn Discourse TreeBank Version 2.0 (Prasad et
al., 2008). In order to identify which discourse re-
lations are most frequently translated as zero, we
have assigned each of the EN DCs the level-2 dis-
course relation that it is most frequently associated
with in the PDTB corpus. The total list of EN con-
nectives is given in Table 1.

For every source connective, we queried its
most frequent target connective translations from
the online dictionary Linguee2 and added them to
dictionaries of possible FR and DE equivalents.

With these dictionaries and Giza++ word align-
ment (Och and Ney, 2003), the SL connectives
can be located and the sentences of its transla-
tion (reference and/or automatic) can be scanned
for an aligned occurrence of the TL dictionary
entries. If more than one DC appears in the
source sentence and/or a DC is not aligned with a
connective or connective-equivalent found in the
dictionaries, the word position (word index) of
the SL connective is compared to the word in-
dexes of the translation in order to detect whether
a TL connective (or connective-equivalent from
the dictionaries) appears in a 5-word window to
its left and right.3. This also helps filtering out
cases of non-connective uses of e.g. separately
or once as adverbs. Finally, if no aligned entry
is present and the alignment information remains
empty, the method counts a zero-translation and
collects statistics on these occurrences.

After a first run where we only allowed for ac-
tual connectives as translation dictionary entries,
we manually looked through 400 cases for each,
FR and DE reference translations, that were output

2http://www.linguee.com
3The method extends on the ACT metric (Hajlaoui and

Popescu-Belis, 2013) that measures MT quality in terms of
connectives in order to detect more types of DCs and their
equivalents.

20



Figure 2: Percentage of zero-translations in newstest2010+2012 for EN/FR per discourse relation and
translation type: human reference (Ref) or MT output (MT).

as zero-translations (in the newtest2012 data, see
Section 3.2). We found up to 100 additional cases
that actually were not implicitations, but conveyed
the SL connective’s meaning by means of a para-
phrase, e.g. EN: if – FR: dans le cas où (lit.: in
case where) – DE: im Falle von (lit.: in case of).
For example, the EN connective otherwise ended
up with the dictionary entries in Figure 3.

EN: otherwise ALTERNATIVE :
FR: autrement|sinon|car|dans un autre
cas|d’une autre manière
DE: ansonsten|andernfalls|anderenfalls
|anderweitig|widrigenfalls|andrerseits|
andererseits|anders|sonst

Figure 3: Dictionary entries of FR and DE connec-
tives and equivalents for the EN connective other-
wise.

3.2 Data

For the experiments described here, we con-
catenated two data sets, the newstest2010 and
newstest2012 parallel texts as publicly available
by the Workshop on Machine Translation4. The
texts consist of complete articles from various
daily news papers that have been translated from
EN to FR, DE and other languages by translation
agencies.

In total, there are 5,492 sentences and 117,799
words in the SL texts, of which 2,906 are tokens

4http://www.statmt.org/wmt12/

of the 48 EN connectives. See Table 1 for the con-
nectives and their majority class, which aggregate
to the detailed statistics given in Table 2.

Rel. TC Rel. TC
Alternative 30 Conjunction 329
Asynchrony 588 Contrast 614
Cause 308 Instantiation 43
Concession 140 Restatement 14
Condition 159 Synchrony 681

Table 2: Total counts (TC) of English dis-
course connectives (2,906 tokens) from the
newstest2010+2012 corpora, whose majority
sense conveys one of the 10 PDTB level-2 dis-
course relations (Rel.) listed here.

To produce machine translations of the same
data sets we built EN/FR and EN/DE base-
line phrase-based SMT systems, by using the
Moses decoder (Koehn et al., 2007), with the Eu-
roparl corpus v7 (Koehn, 2005) as training and
newtest2011 as tuning data. The 3-gram language
model was built with IRSTLM (Federico et al.,
2008) over Europarl and the rest of WMT’s news
data for FR and DE.

3.3 Results

In order to group the individual counts of zero-
translations per DC according to the discourse re-
lation they signal, we calculated the relative fre-
quency of zero-translations per relation as percent-
ages, see Figures 2 for EN/FR, and 4 for EN/DE.

21



Figure 4: Percentage of zero-translations in newstest2010+2012 for EN/DE per discourse relation and
translation type: human reference (Ref) or MT output (MT).

The total percentage of zero-translations in the ref-
erences and the baseline MT output is given in
Table 3.

A first observation is that an MT system seems
to produce zero-translations for DCs significantly
less often than human translators do. Human FR
translations seem to have a higher tendency to-
ward omitting connectives than the ones in DE.
Figures 2 and 4 also show that the discourse re-
lations that are most often rendered as zero are de-
pendent on the TL. In the FR reference transla-
tions, SYNCHRONY, ALTERNATIVE and CONCES-
SION account for most implicitations, while in the
DE reference translations, CONDITION, ALTER-
NATIVE and CONCESSION are most often left im-
plicit.

Translation Type C %
EN/FR Ref 508 17.5

MT 217 7.5
EN/DE Ref 392 13.5

MT 129 4.4

Table 3: Counts (C) and relative frequency (%)
of zero-translations for EN/FR and EN/DE in hu-
man references (Ref) and MT output (MT) over
newstest2010+2012.

The results are to some extent counterintuitive
as one would expect that semantically dense dis-
course relations like CONCESSION would need to
be explicit in translation in order to convey the

same meaning. Section 4 presents some non-
connective means available in the two TLs, by
which the discourse relations are still established.

We furthermore looked at the largest implicita-
tion differences per discourse relation in the hu-
man reference translations and the MT output. For
EN/FR for example, 13.8% of all CONDITION re-
lations are implicitated in the references, by mak-
ing use of paraphrases such as dans le moment
où (lit.: in the moment where) or dans votre cas
(lit.: in your case) in place of the EN connective
if. The MT system translates if in 99.4% of all
cases to the explicit FR connective si. Similarly,
for INSTANTIATION relations and the EN connec-
tive for instance in the references, the translators
made constrained use of verbal paraphrases such
as on y trouve (lit.: among which we find). MT on
the other hand outputs the explicit FR connective
par exemple in all cases of for instance.

For EN/DE, there is the extreme case, where
ALTERNATIVE relations are, in human reference
translations, quite often implicitated (in 23.3% of
all cases), whereas the MT system translates all
the instances explicitly to DE connectives: wenn
(unless), sonst (otherwise) and statt, stattdessen,
anstatt (instead). The translators however make
use of constructions with a sentence-initial verb in
conditional mood (cf. Section 4.2) for otherwise
and unless, but not for instead, which is, as with
MT, always explicitly translated by humans, most
often to the DE connective statt. The very op-
posite takes place for the RESTATEMENT relation

22



and the EN connective in fact. Here, MT leaves
implicit just as many instances as human transla-
tors do, i.e. 14.3% of all cases. Translators use
paraphrases such as in Wahrheit (lit.: in truth) or
übrigens (lit.: by the way), while the translation
model tends to use im Gegenteil (lit.: opposite),
which is not a literal translation of in fact (usually
in der Tat or tatsächlich in DE), but reflects the
contrastive function this marker frequently had in
the Europarl training data of the baseline MT sys-
tem.

4 Case studies

4.1 Temporal connectives from EN to FR

The most frequent implicitated discourse relation
for EN/FR translation is SYNCHRONY, i.e. con-
nectives conveying that their arguments describe
events that take place at the same time. However,
since the situations in which SYNCHRONY rela-
tions are implicitated are similar to those in which
CONTRAST relations are implicitated, we discuss
the two together.

We exemplify here cases where EN DCs that
signal SYNCHRONY and/or CONTRAST are trans-
lated to FR with a ‘en/Preposition + Verb in
Gerund’ construction without a TL connective.
The EN source instances giving rise to such im-
plicitations in FR are usually of the form ‘DC +
Verb in Present Continuous’ or ‘DC + Verb in Sim-
ple Past’, see sentences 1 and 2 in Figure 5.

Out of 13 cases of implicitations for while in the
data, 8 (61.5%) have been translated to the men-
tioned construction in FR, as illustrated in the first
example in Figure 5, with a reference and machine
translation from newstest2010. The DC while here
ambiguously signals SYNCHRONY and/or CON-
TRAST, but there is a second temporal marker
(at the same time, a connective-equivalent not yet
considered in this paper or in the PDTB), that dis-
ambiguates while to its CONTRAST sense only or
to the composite sense SYNCHRONY/CONTRAST.
The latter is conveyed in FR by en méprisant, with
CONTRAST being reinforced by tout (lit.: all).

In Example 2, from newstest2012, the sentence-
initial connective when, again signaling SYN-
CHRONY, is translated to the very same construc-
tion of ‘en/Preposition + Verb in Gerund’ in the
FR reference.

In the baseline MT output for Example 1, nei-
ther of the two EN DCs is deleted, while is literally
translated to alors que and at the same time to dans

1. EN: In her view, the filmmaker “is asking
a favour from the court, while at the same time
showing disregard for its authority”.
FR-REF: Pour elle, le cinéaste “demande une
faveur à la cour, tout en/Prep méprisant/V/Ger
son autorité”.
FR-MT*: Dans son avis, le réalisateur de
“demande une faveur de la cour, alors que dans
le même temps une marque de mépris pour son
autorité”.

2. EN: When Meder looked through the
weather-beaten windows of the red, white and
yellow Art Nouveau building, she could see
weeds growing up through the tiles.
FR-REF: En/Prep jetant/V/Ger un coup
d’œil par la fenêtre de l’immeuble-art nou-
veau en rouge-blanc-jaune, elle a observé
l’épanouissement des mauvaises herbes entre les
carreaux.
FR-MT*: Lorsque Meder semblait weather-
beaten à travers les fenêtres du rouge, jaune et
blanc de l’art nouveau bâtiment, elle pourrait
voir les mauvaises herbes qui grandissent par les
tuiles.

Figure 5: Translation examples for the EN tempo-
ral connectives while and when, rendered in the FR
reference as a ‘preposition + Verb in Gerund’ con-
struction. MT generates the direct lexical equiva-
lents alors que and lorsque.

le même temps. While the MT output is not totally
wrong, it sounds disfluent, as dans le même temps
after alors que is neither necessary nor appropri-
ate.

In the baseline MT output for Example 2, the di-
rect lexical equivalent for when – lorsque is gen-
erated, which is correct, although the translation
has other mistakes such as the wrong verb sem-
blait and the untranslated weather-beaten.

To model such cases for SMT one could use
POS tags to detect the ‘DC + Present Continu-
ous/Simple Past’ in EN and apply a rule to trans-
late it to ‘Preposition + Gerund’ in FR. Further-
more, when two DCs follow each other in EN,
and both can signal the same discourse relations,
a word-deletion feature (as it is available in the
Moses decoder via sparse features), could be used
to trigger the deletion of one of the EN connec-
tives, so that only one is translated to the TL. We

23



will examine in future work whether there are sys-
tematic patterns in the translation of such ’dou-
ble’ connectives in SL and TL. Another possibility
would be to treat cases like while at the same time
as a multi-word phrase that is then translated to the
corresponding prepositional construction in FR.

4.2 Conditional connectives from EN to DE

Out of the 41 cases involving a CONDITION re-
lation (10.5% of all DE implicitations), 40 or
97.6% were due to the EN connective if not be-
ing translated to its DE equivalents wenn, falls,
ob. Instead, in 21 cases (52.5%), the human
reference translations made use of a verbal con-
struction which obviates the need for a connec-
tive in DE when the verb in the if -clause is
moved to sentence-initial position and its mood
is made conditional, as in Figure 6, a refer-
ence translation from newstest2012, with the DE
verb wäre (lit.: were) (VMFIN=modal finite verb,
Konj=conditional). This construction is also avail-
able in EN (Were you here, I would...), but seems
to be much more formal and less frequent than in
DE where it is ordinarily used across registers. In
the baseline MT output for this sentence, if was
translated explicitly to the DE connective wenn,
which is in principle correct, but the syntax of the
translation is wrong, mainly due to the position of
the verb tun, which should be at the end of the sen-
tence.

The remaining 19 cases of EN if were either
translated to DE prepositions (e.g. bei, wo, lit.: at,
where) or the CONDITION relation is not expressed
at all and verbs in indicative mood make the use of
a conditional DE connective superfluous.

Of the 21 tokens of if whose reference transla-
tions used a verbal construction in DE, 14 (66.7%)
were tokens of if whose argument clause explic-
itly referred to the preceding context – e.g., if they
were, if so, if this is true etc. These occurrences
could therefore be identified in EN and could be
modeled for SMT as re-ordering rules on the ver-
bal phrase in the DE syntax tree after constituent
parsing in syntax-based translation models.

5 Conclusion

This study showed that human translators do not
translate explicit EN discourse connectives as FR
or DE discourse connectives in up to 18% of all
cases. In MT output this happens about 3 times
less often. We thus plan to examine how to pro-

EN: If not for computer science, they would be
doing amazing things in other fields.

DE-REF: 0 Wäre/VMFIN/Konj es
nicht die Computerbranche gewesen, würden
sie in anderen Bereichen fantastische Dinge
schaffen.

DE-MT*: Wenn nicht für die Informatik,
würden sie tun, erstaunlich, Dinge auf anderen
Gebieten.

Figure 6: Translation example for the EN connec-
tive if, rendered in the DE reference as a construc-
tion with a sentence-initial verb in conditional
mood. MT generates the direct lexical equivalent
wenn.

duce higher-scoring translations without a target
language connective but with some other syntactic
pattern that conveys the same source language dis-
course relation. Depending on the features identi-
fied, movements of syntactical constituents or re-
ordering of POS tags at the phrase and/or sub-tree
level will be implemented for hierarchical syntac-
tic or phrase-based SMT models.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to the Swiss National Science
Foundation (SNSF) for partially funding this work
and the research visit to Edinburgh with the
COMTIS Sinergia project, n. CRSI22 127510
(see www.idiap.ch/comtis/) and to the
three anonymous reviewers for their helpful com-
ments.

References
Shoshana Blum-Kulka. 1986. Shifts of Cohesion and

Coherence in Translation. In Juliane House and
Shoshana Blum-Kulka, editors, Interlingual and In-
tercultural Communication. Discourse and cogni-
tion in translation and second language acquisition,
pages 17–35. Narr Verlag, Tübingen, Germany.

Bruno Cartoni, Sandrine Zufferey, Thomas Meyer, and
Andrei Popescu-Belis. 2011. How Comparable
are Parallel Corpora? Measuring the Distribution of
General Vocabulary and Connectives. In Proceed-
ings of 4th Workshop on Building and Using Compa-
rable Corpora (BUCC), pages 78–86, Portland, OR.

Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, and Mauro Cet-
tolo. 2008. IRSTLM: an Open Source Toolkit for

24



Handling Large Scale Language Models. In Pro-
ceedings of Interspeech, Brisbane, Australia.

Najeh Hajlaoui and Andrei Popescu-Belis. 2013.
Assessing the Accuracy of Discourse Connective
Translations: Validation of an Automatic Met-
ric. In 14th International Conference on Intelligent
Text Processing and Computational Linguistics (CI-
CLING), Samos, Greece.

Sandra Halverson. 2004. Connectives as a Translation
Problem. In H. et al. (Eds.) Kittel, editor, Encyclo-
pedia of Translation Studies, pages 562–572. Walter
de Gruyter, Berlin/New York.

Silvia Hansen-Schirra, Stella Neumann, and Erich
Steiner. 2007. Cohesive Explicitness and Explicita-
tion in an English-German Translation Corpus. Lan-
guages in Contrast, 7:241–265.

Iustina Ilisei, Diana Inkpen, Gloria Pastor Corpas, and
Ruslan Mitkov. 2010. Identifcation of Transla-
tionese: A Machine Learning Approach. In A. Gel-
bukh, editor, Computational Linguistics and Intelli-
gent Text Processing Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexan-
dra Constantin, and Evan Herbs. 2007. Moses:
Open Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Trans-
lation. In Proceedings of 45th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
Demonstration Session, pages 177–180, Prague,
Czech Republic.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
MT Summit X, pages 79–86, Phuket, Thailand.

Moshe Koppel and Noam Ordan. 2011. Translationese
and its Dialects. In Proceedings of ACL-HLT 2011
(49th Annual Meeting of the ACL: Human Language
Technologies, pages 1318–1326, Portland, OR.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A System-
atic Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment
Models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0.
In Proceedings of 6th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), pages
2961–2968, Marrakech, Morocco.

Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie Webber.
2010. Realization of Discourse Relations by Other
Means: Alternative Lexicalizations. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics (COLING), pages 1023–1031,
Beijing, China.

Sandrine Zufferey, Liesbeth Degand, Andrei Popescu-
Belis, and Ted Sanders. 2012. Empirical Valida-
tions of Multilingual Annotation Schemes for Dis-
course Relations. In Proceedings of ISA-8 (8th
Workshop on Interoperable Semantic Annotation),
pages 77–84, Pisa, Italy.

25



EN conn. Majority rel. Tokens EN conn. Majority rel. Tokens
after Asynchrony 575/577 just as Synchrony 13/14
also Conjunction 1735/1746 later Asynchrony 90/91
although Contrast *157/328 meanwhile Synchrony 148/193
as Synchrony 543/743 moreover Conjunction 100/101
as a result Cause 78/78 nevertheless Concession *19/44
as if Concession *4/16 nonetheless Concession 17/27
as long as Condition 20/24 now that Cause 20/22
as soon as Asynchrony 11/20 once Asynchrony 78/84
because Cause 854/858 on the other hand Contrast 35/37
before Asynchrony 326/326 otherwise Alternative 22/24
but Contrast 2427/3308 previously Asynchrony 49/49
by contrast Contrast 27/27 separately Conjunction 73/74
even if Concession *41/83 since Cause 104/184
even though Concession 72/95 so that Cause 31/31
finally Asynchrony *14/32 still Concession 83/190
for example Instantiation 194/196 then Asynchrony 312/340
for instance Instantiation 98/98 therefore Cause 26/26
however Contrast 355/485 though Concession *156/320
if Condition 1127/1223 thus Cause 112/112
in addition Conjunction 165/165 unless Alternative 94/95
indeed Conjunction 54/104 until Asynchrony 140/162
in fact Restatement *39/82 when Synchrony 594/989
instead Alternative 109/112 while Contrast 455/781
in turn Asynchrony 20/30 yet Contrast 53/101

Table 1: English connectives with a frequency above 20 in the PDTB. Also listed are the level-2 majority
relations with the number of tokens out of the total tokens of the connective in the PDTB (counts includ-
ing the majority relation being part of a composite sense tag). *For some connectives there is no level-2
majority because some instances have only been annotated with level-1 senses. We did not consider the
connectives and and or (too many non-connective occurrences for automatic detection).

26


