










































Identifying false friends between closely related languages


Proceedings of the 4th Biennial International Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 69–77,
Sofia, Bulgaria, 8-9 August 2013. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identifying False Friends between Closely Related Languages

Nikola Ljubešić
Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences

University of Zagreb
Ivana Lučića 3

10000 Zagreb, Croatia
nikola.ljubesic@ffzg.hr

Darja Fišer
Faculty of Arts

University of Ljubljana
Aškerčeva 2

1000 Ljubljana, Slovenija
darja.fiser@ff.uni-lj.si

Abstract
In this paper we present a corpus-based ap-
proach to automatic identification of false
friends for Slovene and Croatian, a pair
of closely related languages. By taking
advantage of the lexical overlap between
the two languages, we focus on measuring
the difference in meaning between iden-
tically spelled words by using frequency
and distributional information. We ana-
lyze the impact of corpora of different ori-
gin and size together with different associ-
ation and similarity measures and compare
them to a simple frequency-based base-
line. With the best performing setting
we obtain very good average precision of
0.973 and 0.883 on different gold stan-
dards. The presented approach works on
non-parallel datasets, is knowledge-lean
and language-independent, which makes it
attractive for natural language processing
tasks that often lack the lexical resources
and cannot afford to build them by hand.

1 Introduction

False friends are words in two or more languages
that are orthographically or semantically similar
but do not have the same meaning, such as the
noun burro, which means butter in Italian but don-
key in Spanish (Allan, 2009). For that reason, they
represent a dangerous pitfall for translators, lan-
guage students as well as bilingual computer tools,
such as machine translation systems, which would
all benefit greatly from a comprehensive collection
of false friends for a given language pair.

False friends between related languages, such
as English and French, have been discussed by
lexicographers, translators and language teachers
for decades (Chacón Beltrán, 2006; Granger and
Swallow, 1988; Holmes and Ramos, 1993). How-
ever, they have so far played a minor role in NLP

and have been almost exclusively limited to par-
allel data (Inkpen et al., 2005; Nakov and Nakov,
2009). In this paper we tackle the problem of auto-
matically identifying false friends in weakly com-
parable corpora by taking into account the distri-
butional and frequency information collected from
non-parallel texts.

Identifying false friends automatically has the
same prerequisite as the problem of detecting
cognates – identifying similarly (and identically)
spelled words between two languages, which is far
from trivial if one takes into account the specificity
of inter-language variation of a specific language
pair. In this contribution we focus on the prob-
lem of false friends on two quite similar languages
with a high lexical overlap – Croatian and Slovene
– which enables us to circumvent the problem of
identifying similarly spelled words and use identi-
cal words only as the word pair candidate list for
false friends.

Our approach to identifying false friends relies
on two types of information extracted from cor-
pora. The first one is the frequency of a false friend
candidate pair in the corresponding corpora where
the greater the difference in frequency, the more
certain one can be that the words are used in dif-
ferent meanings. The second information source is
the context from corresponding corpora where the
context dissimilarity of the two words in question
is calculated through a vector space model.

The paper is structured as follows: in Section 2
we give an overview of the related work. In Sec-
tion 3 we describe the resources we use and in Sec-
tion 4 we present the gold standards used for eval-
uation. Section 5 describes the experimental setup
and Section 6 reports on the results. We conclude
the paper with final remarks and ideas for future
work.

69



2 Related Work

Automatic detection of false friends was initially
limited to parallel corpora but has been extended
to comparable corpora and web snippets (Nakov et
al., 2007). The approaches to automatically iden-
tify false friends fall into two categories: those that
only look at orthographic features of the source
and the target word, and those that combine ortho-
graphic features with the semantic ones.

Orthographic approaches typically rely on com-
binations of a number of orthographic similarity
measures and machine learning techniques to clas-
sify source and target word pairs to cognates, false
friends or unrelated words and evaluate the differ-
ent combinations against a manually compiled list
of legitimate and illegitimate cognates. This has
been attempted for English and French (Inkpen et
al., 2005; Frunza and Inkpen, 2007) as well as
for Spanish and Portuguese (Torres and Aluı́sio,
2011).

Most of the approaches that combine ortho-
graphic features with the semantic ones have been
performed on parallel corpora where word fre-
quency information and alignments at paragraph,
sentence as well as word level play a crucial role at
singling out false friends, which has been tested on
Bulgarian and Russian (Nakov and Nakov, 2009).
Work on non-parallel data, on the other hand, of-
ten treats false friend candidates as search queries,
and considers the retrieved web snippets for these
queries as contexts that are used to establish the
degree of semantic similarity of the given word
pair (Nakov and Nakov, 2007).

Apart from the web snippets, comparable cor-
pora have also been used to extract and clas-
sify pairs of cognates and false friends between
English and German, English and Spanish, and
French and Spanish (Mitkov et al., 2007). In
their work, the traditional distributional approach
is compared with the approach of calculating n-
nearest neighbors for each false friend candidate in
the source language, translating the nearest neigh-
bors via a seed lexicon and calculating the set in-
tersection to the N nearest neighbors of the false
friend candidate from the target language.

A slightly different setting has been investigated
by Schultz et al. (2004) who built a medical do-
main lexicon from a closely related language pair
(Spanish-Portuguese) and used the standard distri-
butional approach to filter out false friends from
cognate candidates by catching orthographically

most similar but contextually most dissimilar word
pairs.

The feature weighting used throughout the re-
lated work is mostly plain frequency with one
case of using TF-IDF (Nakov and Nakov, 2007)
whereas cosine is the most widely used similar-
ity measure (Nakov and Nakov, 2007; Nakov and
Nakov, 2009; Schulz et al., 2004) while Mitkov
et al. (2007) use skew divergence which is very
similar to Jensen-Shannon divergence.

The main differences between the work we re-
port on in this paper and the related work are:

1. we identify false friends on a language pair
with a large lexical overlap – hence we can
look for false friends only among identically
spelled words, such as boja, which means
buoy in Slovene but colour in Croatian, and
not among similarly spelled words, such as
the Slovene adjective bučen (made of pump-
kins and noisy) and its Croatian counterpart
bučan (only noisy);

2. we inspect multiple association and similarity
measure combinations on two different cor-
pora pairs, which enables us to assess the sta-
bility of those parameters in the task at hand;

3. we work on two different corpora pairs which
we have full control over (that is not the case
with web snippets), and are therefore able to
examine the impact of corpus type and corpus
size on the task;

4. we use three categories for the identically
spelled words:

(a) we use the term true equivalents (TE)
to refer to the pairs that have the same
meaning and usage in both languages
(e.g. adjective bivši, which means for-
mer in both languages),

(b) the term partial false friends (PFF) de-
scribes pairs that are polysemous and
are equivalent in some of the senses but
false friends in others (e.g. verb dražiti,
which can mean either irritate or make
more expensive in Slovene but only irri-
tate in Croatian), and

(c) we use the term false friends (FF) for
word pairs which represent different
concepts in the two languages (e.g. noun
slovo, which means farewell in Slovene
and letter of the alphabet in Croatian)

70



By avoiding the problem of identifying relevant
similarly spelled words prior to the identification
of false friends, in this paper we focus only on the
latter and avoid adding noise from the preceding
task.

3 Resources Used

In this paper we use two types of corpora:
Wikipedia corpora (hereafter WIKI) which have
gained in popularity lately because of their sim-
ple construction and decent size and web corpora
(hereafter WAC) which are becoming the standard
for building big corpora.

We prepared the WIKI corpora from the dumps
of the Croatian and Slovene Wikipedias by ex-
tracting their content, tokenizing and annotat-
ing them with morphosyntactic descriptions and
lemma information. The web corpora of Croat-
ian and Slovene were built in previous work of
Ljubešić and Erjavec (2011). They were created
by crawling the whole top-level Slovene and Croa-
tian domains and applying generic text extraction,
language identification, near-duplicate removal,
linguistic filtering and morphosyntactic annotation
and lemmatization.

In terms of content, it is to expect that web cor-
pora are much richer genre-wise while articles in
Wikipedia corpora all belong to the same genre.
As far as topics are concerned, web corpora are
believed to be more diverse but contain a less uni-
form topic distribution than Wikipedia corpora.
Finally, it is to expect that Wikipedia corpora con-
tain mostly standard language while web corpora
contain a good portion of user-generated content
and thereby non-standard language as well.

Some basic statistical information on the cor-
pora is given in Table 1.

CORPUS MWORDS MTOKENS DOC #
HR.WIKI 31.21 37.35 146,737
SL.WIKI 23.47 27.85 131,984
HRWAC 787.23 906.81 2,550,271
SLWAC 450.06 525.55 1,975,324

Table 1: Basic statistics about the corpora used

Both types of corpora are regularly used in to-
day’s NLP research and one of the tasks of this
paper is to compare those two not only in relation
to the specific task of false friends identification,
but on a broader scale of exploiting their contex-
tual and frequency information as well.

4 Gold Standards

The gold standards for this research were built
from identically spelled nouns, adjectives and
verbs that appeared with a frequency equal or
higher than 50 in the web corpora for both lan-
guages.

The false friend candidates were categorized in
the three categories defined in Section 2: false
friends, partial false friends and true equivalents.

Manual classification was performed by three
annotators, all of them linguists. Since identify-
ing false friends is hard even for a well-trained lin-
guist, all of them consulted monolingual dictionar-
ies and corpora for both languages before making
the final decision.

The first annotation session was performed by a
single annotator only. Out of 8491 candidates, he
managed to identify 117 FFs, 110 PFFs and 8264
(97.3%) TEs. All the identified FFs and PFFs as
well as 380 TEs were then given to two more an-
notators, shrinking the dataset to be annotated by
the other two annotators down to 607 entries, i.e.
to only 7% of the initial dataset. The agreement
between all three annotators on the smaller dataset
is given in Table 2.

ANNOTATORS INTERSECTION KAPPA

A1 A2 0.766 0.549
A1 A3 0.786 0.598
A2 A3 0.743 0.501
average 0.765 0.546

Table 2: Inter-annotator agreement on building the
gold standards

The obtained average kappa inter-annotator
agreement is considered moderate and proves the
problem to be quite complex, even for humans
well trained in both languages with all the avail-
able resources at hand. Since we did not have
sufficient resources for all the annotators to re-
vise their divergent annotations, we proceeded by
building the following two gold standards:

1. the first gold standard (GOLD1) contains only
FFs and TEs on which all the three annotators
agreed (60 FFs and 324 TEs) and

2. the second gold standard (GOLD2) contains
all entries where at least the first and one of
the other two annotators agreed (81 FFs, 33
PFFs and 351 TEs).

71



We consider GOLD1 to be simpler and cleaner
while GOLD2 contains the full complexity of the
task at hand.

5 Experimental Setup

We experimented with the following parameters:
corpus type, corpus size, association measure for
feature weighting, similarity measure for compar-
ing context vectors and gold standard type.

We ran our experiments on two pairs of corpora:

1. one pair originating from local Wikipedia
dumps (WIKI) and

2. one pair originating from the top-level-
domain web corpora of the two languages
(WAC)

We took under consideration the following as-
sociation measures:

1. TF-IDF (TF-IDF) is well known from infor-
mation retrieval but frequently applied on
other problems as well; we consider context
vectors to be information entities and calcu-
late the IDF statistic for a term t and vector
set V as follows:

IDF (t, V ) = log
|V |

|{v ∈ V : t ∈ v}|

2. log-likelihood (LL) (Dunning, 1993) which
has proven to perform very well in a num-
ber of experiments on lexicon extraction i.e.
finding words with the most similar context,
performing similarity well as TF-IDF and

3. discounted log-odds (LO) first used in lexicon
extraction by Laroche and Langlais (2010),
showing consistently better performance than
LL; it is calculated from contingency table in-
formation as follows:

LO = log
(O11 + 0.5)(O22 + 0.5)

(O12 + 0.5)(O21 + 0.5)

The following similarity measures were taken
into account:

1. the well-known cosine measure (COSINE),

2. the Dice measure (DICE), defined in (Otero,
2008) as DiceMin, which has proven to be
very good in various tasks of distributional

semantics (v1f is the feature weight of feature
f in vector v1):

DICE(v1, v2) =
2 ∗

∑
f min(v1f , v2f )∑
f v1f + v2f

3. and the Jensen-Shannon divergence (JEN-
SHAN) which shows consistent performance
on various tasks:

JS(v1, v2) =
KL(v1|v2)

2
+

KL(v2|v1)
2

KL(v1|v2) =
∑

f

v1f log
v1f

v1f + v2f

We used the standard approach for extracting
context and building context vectors and calcu-
lated the frequency distribution of three content
words to the left and to the right of the head-
word without encoding their position. We did not
perform any cross-lingual feature projection via a
seed lexicon or similar, but relied completely on
the lexical overlap between the two similar lan-
guages.

Apart from the context and its dissimilarity,
there is another, very fundamental source of in-
formation that can be used to assess the difference
in usage and therefore meaning – the frequency
of the word pair in question in specific languages.
That is why we also calculated pointwise mutual
information (PMI) between candidate pairs.

PMI(w1, w2) = log
p(w1, w2)

p(w1) ∗ p(w2)

We estimated the joint probability of the two
words by calculating the maximum likelihood esti-
mate of the identically spelled word on the merged
corpora. We considered this measure to be a strong
baseline. For a weak baseline we took a random
ordering of pairs of words (RANDOM).

Since the result of the procedure of identifying
false friends in this setting is a single ranked list
of lemma pairs where the ranking is performed
by contextual or frequency dissimilarity, the same
evaluation method can be applied as to evaluating
a single query response in information retrieval.
That is why we evaluated the output of each setting
with average precision (AP), which averages over
all precisions calculated on lists of false friend
candidates built from each positive example up-
wards.

72



As three categories were encoded in the GOLD2
gold standard, we weighted FFs with 1, TEs with
0 and PFFs with 0.5. In the GOLD1 gold standard
FFs were, naturally, weighted with 1 and TEs with
0.

6 Results

In our initial set of experiments we ran a Cartesian
product on the sets of corpora types, gold stan-
dards, association measures and similarity mea-
sures. The results of those experiments are given
in Table 3.

WIKI

GOLD1 COSINE DICE JENSHAN
TF-IDF 0.326 0.349 0.337
LL 0.333 0.401 0.355
LO 0.340 0.539 0.434
PMI 0.634
GOLD2 COSINE DICE JENSHAN
TF-IDF 0.376 0.392 0.380
LL 0.390 0.440 0.406
LO 0.442 0.561 0.470
PMI 0.581

WAC

GOLD1 COSINE DICE JENSHAN
TF-IDF 0.777 0.757 0.739
LL 0.773 0.934 0.880
LO 0.973 0.324 0.903
PMI 0.629
GOLD2 COSINE DICE JENSHAN
TF-IDF 0.694 0.714 0.659
LL 0.714 0.828 0.782
LO 0.883 0.384 0.837
PMI 0.600
RANDOM GOLD1 0.267
RANDOM GOLD2 0.225

Table 3: Average precision obtained over corpora
types, gold standards, association measures and
similarity measures

The first observation is that the overall results
on the WAC corpus pair are about twice as high
as the results obtained on the WIKI corpus pair.
Since the first is more than 20 times larger than
the second, we assumed the amount of informa-
tion available to be the main cause for such drastic
difference.

We then analyzed the difference in the results
obtained on the two gold standards. As expected,

the results are better on PMI baselines, the RAN-
DOM baseline and in the distributional approach
on the WAC corpus pair. The reverse result was
obtained with the distributional approach on the
WIKI corpus pair and at this point we assumed that
it is the result of chance since the results are quite
low and close to each other.

6.1 The Baselines
All the results outperformed the weak RANDOM
baseline. On the contrary, the strong PMI baseline,
which uses only frequency information, proved to
be a better method for identifying false friends in
the WIKI corpus pair, while it was outperformed
by distributional methods on the WAC corpus pair.
An important observation regarding PMI in gen-
eral is that its results relies solely on frequencies
of words and having more information than nec-
essary to make good frequency estimates for all
the words analyzed cannot improve the results any
further. This is the reason why the PMI scores on
both corpora pairs regarding the specific gold stan-
dard are so close to each other (0.634 and 0.629 on
GOLD1, 0.581 and 0.600 on GOLD2), regardless of
the much larger size of the WAC corpora pair. This
shows that both corpora pairs are large enough for
good frequency estimates of the gold standard en-
tries.

Since frequency was not directly encoded in the
distributional approach, it seemed reasonable to
combine the PMI results with those obtained by the
distributional approach. We therefore performed
linear combinations of the PMI baseline and var-
ious distributional results. They yielded no im-
provements except in the case of TF-IDF, which
still performed worse than most other distribu-
tional approaches.

The conclusion regarding PMI is that if one
does not have access to a large amount of textual
data, pointwise mutual information or some other
frequency-based method could be the better way
to approach the problem of false friend identifi-
cation. However, having a lot of data does give
advantage to distributional methods. We will look
into the exact amount of the data needed to outper-
form PMI in subsection 6.5.

6.2 Document Alignments on the WIKI Pair
Since PMI performed so well, especially on the
WIKI corpus pair on which we have access to
document alignments as well, we decided to per-
form another experiment in which we use that

73



additional information. We calculated the joint
probability p(w1, w2) not by calculating the maxi-
mum likelihood estimate of the identically spelled
words in a merged corpus but by taking into ac-
count the number of co-occurrences of the iden-
tically spelled words in aligned documents only.
Naturally, this produced much lower joint proba-
bilities than our initial PMI calculation.

The results of this experiment showed to be
as low as the random baseline (0.189 on GOLD1
and 0.255 on GOLD2). The reason was that low-
frequency lemmas, many of which are TEs, never
occurred together in aligned documents giving
those pairs the lowest possible score. When re-
moving the entries that never co-occur, the results
did rise slightly over the initial PMI score (0.669
on GOLD1 and 0.549 on GOLD2), but roughly half
of the lemma pairs were excluded from the calcu-
lation.

To conclude, identifying false friends with a
simple measure like pointwise mutual information
in case of a limited amount of available data can-
not benefit from the additional structure like the
Wikipedia document alignments. Having much
more data, which would be the case in larger
Wikipedias, or applying a more sophisticated mea-
sure that would be resistant to scarce data, could
prove to be beneficial and is considered a direc-
tion for future work.

6.3 Association and Similarity Measures

We continued our analysis by observing the inter-
play of association and similarity measures. First,
we performed our analysis on the much better re-
sults obtained on the WAC corpus pair. DICE and
LL turned out to be a once-again winning combi-
nation. TF-IDF underperformed when compared
to LL, showing that LL is the superior associa-
tion measure in this problem as well. JENSHAN
showed a very high consistency, regardless of the
association measure used, which is an interesting
property, but it never obtained the highest score.

The big surprise was the LO association mea-
sure. On the WAC corpus pair it resulted in the
overall best score when used with COSINE, but
failed drastically when combined with DICE. The
situation got even more puzzling once we com-
pared these results with those obtained on the
WIKI corpus pair where DICE and LO gave the best
overall result. Laroche and Langlais (2010) report
to get slightly better or identical results when us-

ing LO with COSINE in comparison to DICE.
Trying to find an explanation for such variable

results of the LO association measure, we decided
to analyze the strongest features in the context vec-
tors of both LO and LL on both corpora pairs. We
present our findings in Table 4 on the example of
the word gripa which means flu in both languages.
We analyzed the 50 strongest features and classi-
fied them in one of the following categories: typo,
foreign name, rare term and expected term.

The presented data does shed light on the un-
derlying situation, primarily on the LO association
measure, and secondly on the difference between
the corpora pairs. LL is a very stable association
measure that, regardless of the noise present in the
corpora, gave the highest weight to the features
one would associate with the concept in question.
On the contrary, LO is quite good at emphasizing
the noise from the corpora. Since more noise is
present in web corpora than in Wikipedia corpora,
LO got very good results on the WIKI corpus pair
but failed on the WAC corpus pair.

WIKI

SL-LO SL-LL HR-LO HR-LL
typo 0.24 0.00 0.56 0.16
foreign 0.06 0.00 0.22 0.08
rare 0.10 0.00 0.04 0.00
ok 0.60 1.00 0.18 0.76

WAC

SL-LO SL-LL HR-LO HR-LL
typo 0.62 0.00 0.72 0.12
foreign 0.20 0.00 0.26 0.00
rare 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00
ok 0.14 1.00 0.02 0.88

Table 4: Results of the analysis of the 50 strongest
features in the eight different LL and LO vectors

This still did not offer an explanation why LO
performed as well as it did on the WAC corpus pair
when it was paired with COSINE, or to a smaller
extent with JENSHAN. The reason for such behav-
ior lies in the primary difference between DICE
and the remaining similarity measures: the latter
take into account only the features defined in both
vectors while DICE works on a union of the fea-
tures. Transforming DICE in such a way that it
takes into account only the intersection of the de-
fined features did improve the results when using
it with LO (from 0.324 and 0.384 to 0.575 and
0.591), but the results deteriorated when used with

74



0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

0.
0

0.
2

0.
4

0.
6

0.
8

1.
0

gold1

recall

pr
ec
is
io
n

WaC.lo.cosine
WaC.ll.dice
WaC.pmi
wp.pmi

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

0.
0

0.
2

0.
4

0.
6

0.
8

1.
0

gold2

recall

pr
ec
is
io
n

WaC.lo.cosine
WaC.ll.dice
WaC.pmi
wp.pmi

Figure 1: Precision-recall curve of chosen settings on both gold standards

LL (0.934 and 0.828 to 0.768 and 0.719).
We can conclude that LL is a much more stable

association measure than LO, but LO performs ex-
tremely well as long as the corpora are not noisy
or it is not combined with a similarity score that
calculates the similarity on a union of the defined
features.

6.4 Precision-Recall Curves
We visualized the results obtained with best per-
forming and most interesting settings in Figure 1
with two precision-recall curves, one for each gold
standard.

The PR curves stressed the similarity of the re-
sults of the PMI method on same gold standards
between corpora pairs along the whole precision-
recall trade-off spectrum. They also emphasized
the significance of the higher quality of the re-
sults obtained by the distributional approach on
the large WAC corpus pair.

Although somewhat unpredictable, the LO as-
sociation measure, when coupled with the correct
similarity measure, consistently outperformed LL
on the whole spectrum on both gold standards.

6.5 Corpus Size
We performed a final set of experiments, which
focused on experimenting with the parameter of
corpus size. In general, we were interested in
the learning curves on different corpora pairs with
best performing settings. We also looked for the

point where the distributional approach overtakes
the frequency approach and a direct comparison
between the two corpora pairs.

The learning curves, calculated on random por-
tions of both corpora pairs on GOLD1, are pre-
sented in Figure 2. Both PMI learning curves
proved our claim that with a sufficient amount of
information required to make good frequency es-
timates, no further improvement can be achieved.
On these datasets good estimates were obtained on
5 million words (both languages combined). The
PMI learning curve on the WAC corpus pair was
steady on the whole scale and we identified the
point up to which PMI is more suitable for iden-
tifying false friends than distributional methods
somewhere around 130 million words (both cor-
pora combined) from where distributional meth-
ods surpass the ∼ 0.63 plain frequency result.

The WIKI.LL.DICE and the WAC.LL.DICE
curves on the left plot enabled us to compare the
suitability of the two corpora pairs for the task of
identifying false friends and distributional tasks in
general. At lower corpus sizes the results were
very close, but from 10 million words onwards,
the WAC corpus pair outperformed the WIKI cor-
pus pair, consistently pointing toward the conclu-
sion that web corpora are more suitable for distri-
butional approaches than Wikipedia corpora.

The performance of the two distributional ap-
proaches depicted on the second graph evened out

75



0 10 20 30 40

0.
0

0.
2

0.
4

0.
6

0.
8

1.
0

wiki

corpus pair size (Mwords)

av
er

ag
e 

pr
ec

is
io

n

wiki.lo.dice
wiki.ll.dice
wiki.pmi
WaC.ll.dice

0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200

0.
0

0.
2

0.
4

0.
6

0.
8

1.
0

WaC

corpus pair size (Mwords)

av
er

ag
e 

pr
ec

is
io

n

WaC.lo.cosine
WaC.ll.dice
WaC.pmi

Figure 2: Learning curve on both corpora pairs on GOLD1

around the 500 million word mark, showing that
around 250 million words per language should
suffice for this task. Having lower-frequency en-
tries in the gold standard would, naturally, call
for more data. However, the criterion of 50 oc-
currences in 500+ million tokens web corpora we
used for constructing our gold standards should
cover most cases.

Finally, let us point out that the WIKI.LO.DICE
curve on the left graph climbed much faster than
the WIKI.LL.DICE curve, showing faster learning
with the LO association measure in comparison to
LL. An interesting observation is that the LO curve
obtained its maximum slightly after the 20 million
words mark, after which it started a slow decline.
Although it could be surprising to see a learn-
ing curve declining, this is in line with our previ-
ous insights regarding the LO association measure
not responding well to many new low-frequency
features included in the vector space making the
LO+DICE combination struggle. This is one ad-
ditional reminder that the LO association measure
should be used with caution.

7 Conclusion

In this paper we compared frequency-based
and distributional approaches to identifying false
friends from two frequently used types of corpora
pairs – Wikipedia and web corpora. We have used
the PMI method for frequency-based ranking and

three association and three similarity measures for
distributional-based ranking.

The PMI method has proven to be a very good
method if one does not have more than 75 mil-
lion words available per language, in which case it
outperformed the more complex distributional ap-
proach. Good frequency estimates for PMI were
obtained on 2.5 million words per language, after
which introducing more data did not yield any fur-
ther improvement.

Using document alignments from Wikipedia as
an additional source for the frequency-based ap-
proach did not perform well because of the small
size of the Wikipedias in question (slightly above
100,000 articles), often producing zero joint prob-
abilities for non-false friends. A more thought-
through approach that could resist data sparsity or
using larger Wikipedias is one of our future re-
search directions.

The DICE+LL similarity and association mea-
sures proved to be a very stable combination as is
the case on the opposite task of translation equiv-
alence extraction (Ljubešić et al., 2011).

The LO association measure gave excellent re-
sults, but only if it was paired with a similarity
measure that takes into account only the intersec-
tion of the features or if the context vectors were
calculated on very clean corpora since LO tends to
overemphasize low frequency features. We would
recommend using this association measure in dis-

76



tributional approaches, but only if one of the above
criteria is satisfied.

The amount of data on which the distributional
approach stopped benefitting from more data on
this task was around 250 million words per lan-
guage.

Overall, web corpora showed to be better can-
didates for distributional methods than Wikipedia
corpora for two reasons: 1. the WAC learning
curve is steeper, and 2. there are few languages
which contain 75 million words per language that
are necessary to outperform the frequency-based
approach and even fewer for which there are 250
million words per language needed for the learn-
ing curve to even out.

Our two primary directions for future research
are 1. preceding this procedure with identifying
language-pair-specific similarly spelled words and
2. including additional language pairs such as
Croatian and Czech or Slovene and Czech.

Acknowledgments

The research leading to these results has received
funding from the European Union Seventh Frame-
work Programme FP7/2007-2013 under grant
agreement no. PIAP-GA-2012-324414 (project
Abu-MaTran) and from the Slovene national
research programme no. P6-0215.

We would like to thank Daša Berović and Jelena
Tušek for their help in annotating the datasets.

References
Keith Allan, editor. 2009. Concise Encyclopedia of

Semantics. Elsevier Science.

Rubén Chacón Beltrán. 2006. Towards a typological
classification of false friends (Spanish-English). Re-
vista Española de Linguı́stica Aplicada, 19:29–39.

Ted Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statis-
tics of surprise and coincidence. Comput. Linguist.,
19(1):61–74.

Oana Frunza and Diana Inkpen. 2007. A tool for de-
tecting French-English cognates and false friends.
In Proceedings of the 14th conference Traitement
Automatique des Langues Naturelles, TALN’07,,
Toulouse.

Sylviane Granger and Helen Swallow. 1988. False
friends: a kaleidoscope of translation difficulties.
Langage et l’Homme, 23(2):108–120.

John Holmes and Rosinda Guerra Ramos. 1993. False
friends and reckless guessers: Observing cognate

recognition strategies. In Thomas Huckin, Mar-
got Haynes, and James Coady, editors, Second Lan-
guage Reading and Vocabulary Learning. Norwood,
New Jersey: Ablex.

Diana Inkpen, Oana Frunza, and Grzegorz Kondrak.
2005. Automatic identification of cognates and false
friends in French and English. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Recent Advances in
Natural Language Processing (RANLP 2005), pages
251–257.

Audrey Laroche and Philippe Langlais. 2010. Re-
visiting context-based projection methods for term-
translation spotting in comparable corpora. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics, COLING ’10, pages
617–625, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Nikola Ljubešić and Tomaž Erjavec. 2011. hrWaC and
slWac: Compiling Web Corpora for Croatian and
Slovene. In Ivan Habernal and Václav Matousek,
editors, Text, Speech and Dialogue - 14th Interna-
tional Conference, TSD 2011, Pilsen, Czech Repub-
lic, September 1-5, 2011. Proceedings, volume 6836
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 395–
402. Springer.

Nikola Ljubešić, Darja Fišer, Špela Vintar, and Senja
Pollak. 2011. Bilingual lexicon extraction from
comparable corpora: A comparative study. In First
International Workshop on Lexical Resources, An
ESSLLI 2011 Workshop, Ljubljana, Slovenia - Au-
gust 1-5, 2011.

Ruslan Mitkov, Viktor Pekar, Dimitar Blagoev, and An-
drea Mulloni. 2007. Methods for extracting and
classifying pairs of cognates and false friends. Ma-
chine Translation, 21(1):29–53.

Svetlin Nakov and Preslav Nakov. 2007. Cognate or
false friend? Ask the Web. In Proceedings of the
RANLP’2007 workshop: Acquisition and manage-
ment of multilingual lexicons.

Svetlin Nakov and Preslav Nakov. 2009. Unsupervised
extraction of false friends from parallel bi-texts us-
ing the web as a corpus. In Proceedings of the
6th International Conference on Recent Advances
in Natural Language Processing (RANLP’09), pages
292—298.

Stefan Schulz, Kornél Markó, Eduardo Sbrissia, Percy
Nohama, and Udo Hahn. 2004. Cognate mapping
- A heuristic strategy for the semi-supervised acqui-
sition of a Spanish lexicon from a Portuguese seed
lexicon. In Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics.

Lianet Sepúlveda Torres and Sandra Maria Aluı́sio.
2011. Using machine learning methods to avoid
the pitfall of cognates and false friends in Spanish-
Portuguese word pairs. In Proceedings of the 8th
Brazilian Symposium in Information and Human
Language Technology, STIL’11.

77


