










































Text Modification for Bulgarian Sign Language Users


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Predicting and Improving Text Readability for Target Reader Populations, pages 39–48,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Text Modification for Bulgarian Sign Language Users
Slavina Lozanova∗ Ivelina Stoyanova† Svetlozara Leseva†

slavinal@abv.bg iva@dcl.bas.bg zarka@dcl.bas.bg

Svetla Koeva† Boian Savtchev‡

svetla@dcl.bas.bg bsavtchev@gmail.com

∗ AssistNet, Sofia, Bulgaria
† Department of Computational Linguistics, IBL, BAS, Sofia, Bulgaria
‡ Cambridge Language Assessment Centre BG015, Sofia, Bulgaria

Abstract

The paper discusses the main issues re-
garding the reading skills and compre-
hension proficiency in written Bulgarian
of people with communication difficulties,
and deaf people, in particular. We consider
several key components of text compre-
hension which pose a challenge for deaf
readers and propose a rule-based system
for automatic modification of Bulgarian
texts intended to facilitate comprehension
by deaf people, to assist education, etc. In
order to demonstrate the benefits of such a
system and to evaluate its performance, we
have carried out a study among a group of
deaf people who use Bulgarian Sign Lan-
guage (BulSL) as their primary language
(primary BulSL users), which compares
the comprehensibility of original texts and
their modified versions. The results shows
a considerable improvement in readability
when using modified texts, but at the same
time demonstrates that the level of com-
prehension is still low, and that a complex
set of modifications will have to be imple-
mented to attain satisfactory results.

1 Introduction

The individual development of deaf people de-
pends on a complex of factors, which include the
cause and the degree of hearing loss, the age of
hearing loss onset, educational background, lan-
guage and communication methods, cultural iden-
tification, disability preconceptions. Hearing loss
leads to a limited spoken language input, delays
in language acquisition and communication dif-
ficulties. Deaf children and adults demonstrate
lower reading achievements than hearing people
regardless of the degree of hearing loss, and the
use (or lack) of high-performing hearing amplifi-

cation devices (Paul, 1998; Conrad, 1979; Mussel-
man, 2000; Traxler, 2000; Vermeulen AM, 2007),
which shows that reading skills are influenced
by complex social, linguistic and communication-
related factors rather than by the sensory disability
alone.

The paper explores reading comprehension of
Deaf people1 who use Bulgarian Sign Language
(BulSL) as their primary language. Various re-
search studies both in Bulgaria and abroad have
shown that hearing-impaired BulSL users have
poorer reading skills than their hearing peers. Var-
ious methods for text modification have been ex-
plored to the end of obtaining texts that corre-
spond to the proficiency of the readers. Most of
the modification methodologies have been focused
on simplifying the original texts and decreasing
their complexity (Inui et al., 2003). Our approach,
however, focuses not on simplification, but on the
adaptation of the structure of the original texts to
the linguistic properties of BulSL.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2
discusses the reading skills of BulSL users, paying
attention to children’s and adult education in Bul-
garia focused on the acquisition of Bulgarian and
the relationship between BulSL and verbal Bulgar-
ian. After outlining the main principles which un-
derlie text adaptation aimed at fostering text com-
prehensibility in the target population, we present
a rule-based method for automatic modification of
Bulgarian written texts. The method applies a set
of linguistic transformations and produces modi-
fied versions of the texts, which are better suited
to the needs of BulSL users (Section 3). Section
4 describes an experiment devised to explore the
reading comprehension of BulSL users of original
and modified texts. Section 5 draws conclusions

1Capitalized ’Deaf’ is used to denote the community of
deaf people who use Sign Language as their primary lan-
guage. The term emphasizes the socio-cultural model of
Deafness rather than the medical view of hearing impairment.

39



and outlines some directions for future work.

2 Reading Skills of Hearing-Impaired
People

2.1 Education

Previous research has shown that deaf students lag
behind their hearing peers in reading comprehen-
sion, because they experience difficulties with vo-
cabulary (Paul, 1996), syntax (Kelly, 1996), and
the use of prior knowledge and metacognition
(Trezek et al., 2010). In addition, reading com-
prehension difficulties are often linked to lack of
general knowledge due to inadequate education
and limited access to information (Lewis and Jack-
son, 2001). Two independently performed studies
(Albertini and Mayer, 2011; Parault and William,
2010) have found out that deaf college students’
reading skills are below those of six-graders2.

MacAnally et al. (1999) support the hypothe-
sis that using less complicated and more accessi-
ble reading materials, consisting of language con-
structions close or similar to sign language struc-
ture can facilitate reading comprehension and mo-
tivate deaf people to read. In support of this claim
Berent (2004) points out that deaf students would
read more smoothly if the subject, verb, and object
are in a simple SVO (subject-verb-object) word
order. These studies provide evidence in favour
of text adaptation that reflects features of the sign
language and the development of modified teach-
ing materials.

Bulgarian education for the deaf is based en-
tirely on the oral approach and no systematic effort
has been invested into exploring total communi-
cation and bilingual approaches (Lozanova, 2002;
Saeva, 2010). Even in the specialized schools
for the deaf, where sign language communication
occurs naturally, BulSL has not been integrated
into the school curriculum. Besides, the linguis-
tic analysis of BulSL has been limited to mere
descriptions and presentation of signs: Bulgar-
ian Sign Language dictionaries (1966, 1996); Sign
Language Dictionary in Civil Education (Stoy-
anova et al., 2003); Specialized Multimedia BulSL
dictionary3 (2005).

In order to improve education and the reading
and communication skills of deaf people, a com-
prehensive study of BulSL is necessary, that will

211-12-year-olds.
3http://www.signlanguage-bg.com

provide the basis for developing advanced meth-
ods for automatic text modification directed to im-
proving text readability for deaf BulSL users.

2.2 Sign Language and Verbal Language

Research has shown that Deaf children of Deaf
parents (DCDP) with sign language as their pri-
mary mode of communication outperform their
deaf peers of hearing parents (DCHP) on differ-
ent academic tests, including reading tests (May-
berry, 2000). Several studies have found a positive
correlation between the advanced American Sign
Language (ASL) skills of deaf students and their
higher reading skills (Hoffmeister, 2000; Padden
and Ramsey, 2000). Evidence is not conclusive as
to how sign languages relate to verbal languages
and what influence they have on the acquisition
of general communication skills and knowledge
about the world.

The extensive research on sign languages in the
last fifty years worldwide has shown that they are
independent linguistic systems which differ from
verbal languages (Stokoe, 1960; Stokoe, 1972;
Sutton-Spence and Woll, 2003). Being an inde-
pendent language, a sign language affects the way
in which its users conceptualize the world, accord-
ing to the principle of linguistic relativity, first for-
mulated by Sapir and Whorf (Lee, 1996). Due
to the fact that sign languages are very different
from verbal ones, many Deaf people attain a cer-
tain level of proficiency in a verbal language at the
state of interlanguage4 (Selinker, 1972) but that
level is not sufficient to ensure successful social
integration.

2.3 Readability of Written Texts for Native
Users of Sign Language

Readability is measured mainly on the basis of vo-
cabulary and sentence complexity, including word
length and sentence length: the higher the letter,
syllable and word count of linguistic units, the
greater the demand on the reader. Some syntactic
structures also affect readability – negative and in-
terrogative constructions, passive voice, complex
sentences with various relations between the main
clause and the subordinates, long distance depen-
dencies, etc. Besides, readability improves if the
information in a text is well-organized and effec-

4The term ’interlanguage’ denotes the intermediate state
in second language acquisition characterized by insufficient
understanding and grammatical and lexical errors in language
production.

40



tively presented so that its local and global dis-
course structure is obvious to the reader (Swann,
1992).

Text modification is often understood as simpli-
fication of text structure but this may result in an
inadequately low level of complexity and loss of
relevant information. Moreover, using a limited
vocabulary, avoiding certain syntactic structures,
such as complex sentences, is detrimental to the
communication and learning skills.

The efforts towards providing equal access to
information for Deaf people lack clear principles
and uniformity. Firstly, there is no system of cri-
teria for evaluation of text complexity in terms of
vocabulary, syntactic structure, stylistics and prag-
matics. Further, no standard framework and re-
quirements for text modification have been estab-
lished, which limits its applications.

3 Text Modification of Bulgarian

Language modification for improved readability is
not a new task and its positive and negative aspects
have been extensively discussed (BATOD, 2006).
One of the most important arguments against text
modification is that it requires a lot of resources in
terms of human effort and time. An appealing al-
ternative is to employ NLP methods that will facil-
itate the implementation of automatic modification
for improved readability of written texts aimed at
the BulSL community.

3.1 General Principles of Text Modification
Several studies have observed different aspects of
text modification: splitting chosen sentences with
existing tools (Petersen and Ostendorf, 2007),
’translating’ from complex to simplified sentences
with statistical machine translation methods (Spe-
cia, 2010), developing text simplification systems
(Candido et al., 2009), etc. (Siddharthan, 2011)
compares a rule-based and a general purpose gen-
erator approaches to text adaptation. Recently the
availability of the Simple English Wikipedia has
provided the opportunity to use purely data-driven
approaches (Zhu et al., 2010). The main oper-
ation types both in statistical and in rule-based
approaches are: change, delete, insert, and split
(Bott and Saggion, 2011).

Although text modification is a highly language
dependent task, it observes certain general princi-
ples:

• Modified text should be identical or very

close in meaning to the original.

• Modified text should be grammatically cor-
rect and structurally authentic by preserving
as much as possible of the original textual and
syntactic structure.

• In general, modified text should be character-
ized by less syntactic complexity compared
with the original text. However, the purpose
of the modification is not to simplify the text
but rather to make the information in it more
accessible and understandable by represent-
ing it in relatively short information chunks
with simple syntax without ellipses.

• It should be possible to extend the range
of modifications and include other compo-
nents which contribute to readability or intro-
duce other functionalities that facilitate read-
ing comprehension, such as visual represen-
tations.

3.2 Stages of Text Modification
At present we apply a limited number of modifica-
tions: clause splitting, simplification of syntactic
structure of complex sentences, anaphora resolu-
tion, subject recovery, clause reordering and inser-
tion of additional phrases.

3.2.1 Preprocessing
The preprocessing stage includes annotation with
the minimum of grammatical information nec-
essary for the application of the modification
rules. The texts are sentence-split, tokenized,
POS-tagged and lemmatized using the Bulgarian
Language Processing Chain5 (Koeva and Genov,
2011). Subsequently, clause splitting is applied
using a general method based on POS tagging,
lists of clause delimiters – clause linking words
and multiword expressions and punctuation, and a
set of language specific rules.

We define a clause as a sequence of words be-
tween two clause delimiters where exactly one fi-
nite verb occurs. A finite verb is either: (a) a sin-
gle finite verb, e.g. yade (eats); (b) or a finite verb
phrase formed by an auxiliary and a full verb, e.g.
shteshe da yade (would eat); or (c) a finite copu-
lar verb phrase with a non-verbal subject comple-
ment, e.g. byaha veseli (were merry).

We identify finite verbs by means of a set of
rules applied within a window, currently set up to

5http://dcl.bas.bg/services/

41



two words to the left or to the right:
Rule P1. A single finite verb is recognized by the
POS tagger. (Some smoothing rules are applied to
detect the verb forms actually used in the context
– e.g. forms with reflexive and negative particles).
Rule P2. If auxiliaries and a lexical verb form
occur within the established window, they form a
single finite verb phrase. (This rule subsumes a
number of more specific rules that govern the for-
mation of analytical forms of lexical verbs by at-
taching auxiliary verbs and particles.)
Rule P3. If an auxiliary (or a copular verb) but not
a lexical verb form occurs within the established
window, the auxiliary or copula itself is a single
finite verb.
Rule P4. If a modal and/or a phase verb and a lex-
ical verb form occur within the established win-
dow, they form a single finite verb phrase.
Rule P5. If a modal (and/or a phase) verb but
not a lexical verb form occurs within the estab-
lished window, the modal verb itself is a single fi-
nite verb.

A clause is labeled by a clause opening (CO)
at the beginning and a clause closing (CC) at the
end. We assume that at least one clause boundary
– an opening and/or a close – occurs between any
pair of successive finite verbs in a sentence. Each
CO is paired with a CC, even if it might not be
expressed by an overt element.

We distinguish two types of COs with respect to
the type of clause they introduce: coordinate and
subordinate. Most of the coordinating conjunc-
tions in Bulgarian are ambiguous since they can
link not only clauses, but also words and phrases.
On the contrary, most of the subordinating con-
junctions, to the exception of several subordina-
tors which are homonymous with prepositions,
particles or adverbs, are unambiguous.

Clause closing delimiters are sentence end,
closing comma, colon, semicolon, dash.

The following set of clause splitting rules are
applied (C1-C9):
Rule C1. The beginning of a sentence is a coordi-
nate CO.
Rule C2. A subordinating clause linking word or
phrase denotes a subordinate CO.
Rule C3. If a subordinate CO is on the top of the
stack, we look to the right for a punctuation clause
delimiter (e.g. comma) which functions as a CC
element.
Rule C4. If a subordinate CO is on the top of the

stack, and the CC is not identified yet, we look
for a coordinating clause linking word or phrase
which marks a coordinate CO.
Rule C5. If a coordinate CO is on the top of
the stack, we look for another coordinating clause
linking word or phrase which marks a coordinate
CO.
Rule C6. If a coordinate CO is on the top of
the stack and no coordinate CO is found, we look
for a punctuation clause delimiter (e.g. a comma)
which functions as a CC element.
Rule C7. If no clause boundary has been identi-
fied between two finite verbs, we insert a clause
boundary before the second finite verb.
Rule C8. All COs from the stack should have a
corresponding CC.
Rule C9. The part of the sentence to the right of
the last finite verb until the end of the sentence
should contain the CCs for all COs still in the
stack.

3.2.2 Empty subject recovery
The detection, resolution, and assignment of func-
tion tags to empty sentence constituents have be-
come subject of interest in relation to parsing
(Johnson, 2002; Ryan Gabbard and Marcus, 2004;
Dienes and Dubey, 2003), in machine translation,
information extraction, automatic summarization
(Mitkov, 1999), etc. The inventory of empty cate-
gories includes null pronouns, traces of extracted
syntactic constituents, empty relative pronouns,
etc. So far, we have limited our work to subject
recovery.

A common feature of many, if not all, sign lan-
guages (BulSL among others) is that each sentence
requires an overt subject. Moreover, each subject
is indexed by the signer by pointing to the denoted
person or thing if it is present in the signing area,
or by setting up a point in space as a reference
to that person or thing, if it is outside the sign-
ing area, and referring to that point whenever the
respective person or object is mentioned. In or-
der to avoid ambiguity, different referents are as-
signed different spatial points. Deaf people find
it difficult to deal with complex references in writ-
ten texts where additional disambiguating markers
are rarely available. Being a pro(noun)-drop lan-
guage, Bulgarian allows the omission of the sub-
ject when it is grammatically inferable from the
context.

So far the following rules for subject recovery
have been defined and implemented:

42



Rule SR1. In case the verb is in the first or sec-
ond person singular or plural and the clause lacks a
nominative personal pronoun that agrees with the
finite verb, a personal pronoun with the respective
agreement features is inserted in the text.
Rule SR2. In case the verb is in the third person
singular or plural and the clause lacks a noun or
a noun phrase that a) precedes the verb; and b)
agrees with the verb in person, number and gen-
der, the closest noun (a head in a noun phrase) in
the preceding clause that satisfies the agreement
features of the verb is inserted in the text. (The
precision of the rule for singular verbs is low.)

3.2.3 Anaphora Resolution
With respect to text modification regarding
anaphora resolution, we focus on a limited types
of pronominal anaphors – personal, relative and
possessive pronouns.

Bulgarian personal pronouns agree in gender
and number with their antecedent. Possessive pro-
nouns express a relation between a possessor and
a possessed item, and agree both with their an-
tecedent (through the root morpheme) and with the
head noun (through the number and gender fea-
tures of the inflection). For instance in the sen-
tence Vidyah direktora v negovata kola (I saw the
director in his car), the possessive pronoun negov
indicates that the possessor is masculine or neuter
singular and the inflection -a – that the possessed
is feminine gender, singular. The agreement with
the possessor is a relevant feature to text modifica-
tion. Some relative pronouns koyto (which) (type
one) agree with their antecedent in gender and
number while others (type two) – chiyto (whose)
agree with the noun they modify and not with their
antecedent.

We have formulated the following rules for
anaphora resolution:
Rule AR1. The antecedent of a personal or a pos-
sessive pronoun is the closest noun (the head in the
noun phrase) within a given window to the left of
the pronoun which satisfies the agreement features
of the pronoun.
Rule AR2. The antecedent of a relative pronoun
is the nearest noun (the head in the noun phrase)
in the preceding clause that satisfies the agreement
features of the pronoun.

The following rules for modification of
anaphora can be used:
Rule R1. The third personal pronoun is replaced
with the identified antecedent.

Rule R2. The possessive pronoun is replaced with
a prepositional phrase formed by the preposition
na (of ) and the identified antecedent.
Rule R3. A relative pronoun of type one is
replaced with the identified antecedent.
Rule R4. The relative pronoun chiyto (whose)
is replaced with a prepositional phrase formed
by the preposition na (of) and the identified
antecedent.
Rule R5. The relative pronoun kakavto (such
that) is replaced by a noun phrase formed by
a demonstrative pronoun and the identified
antecedent takava chanta (that bag).

3.2.4 Simplification of Complex Sentences
Complex sentences are one of the main issues
for deaf readers because in BulSL, as well as in
other sign languages, they are expressed as sep-
arate signed statements and the relation between
them is explicit.

(Van Valin and LaPolla, 1997) observe that the
elements in complex sentences (and other con-
structions) are linked with a different degree of
semantic and syntactic tightness, which is re-
flected in the Interclausal Relations Hierarchy.
The clauses in a sentence have different degree of
independence, which determines whether they can
be moved within the sentence or whether they can
form an individual sentence.

Temporally related events in BulSL most often
are represented in a chronological order, and the
relation between them is expressed by separate
signs or constructions (Example 1).

Example 1.
Zabavlyavayte se, dokato nauchavate i novi
neshta.
Have fun while you learn new things.

Signed sentence:
Vie se zabavlyavate. Ednovremenno nauchavate
novi neshta /ednovremenno/.
You have fun. Simultaneously, you learn new
things /simultaneously/.
(the sign ’simultaneously’ can be repeated at the
end of the sentence again)

Chambers et al. (2007) and Tatu and Srikanth
(2008) identify event attributes and event-event
features which are used to describe temporal re-
lations between events. Attributes include tense,
grammatical aspect, modality, polarity, event

43



class. Further, the event-event features include the
following: before, includes, begins, ends, simul-
taneously, and their respective inverses (Cham-
bers et al., 2007), as well as sameActor (bi-
nary feature indicating that the events share the
same semantic role Agent), eventCoref (binary at-
tribute capturing co-reference information), one-
Sent (true when both events are within the same
sentence), relToDocDate (defining the temporal
relation of each event to the document date) (Tatu
and Srikanth, 2008).

(Pustejovsky et al., 2003) also introduce tempo-
ral functions to capture expressions such as three
years ago, and use temporal prepositions (for,
during) and temporal connectives (before, while).
Three types of links are considered: TLINK (tem-
poral link between an event and a moment or pe-
riod of time); SLINK (subordination link between
two events); and ALINK (aspectual link between
aspectual types).

The structure of the complex sentences is sim-
plified by clause reordering that explicitly reflects
the chronological order of the described events.
The preposition or postposition of clauses with
temporal links if, before, after, etc. may not match
the actual causal order. In such cases the order of
clauses is simply reversed based on rules of the
type:

Temporal link sled kato /when, after/
Construction CL1 temporal link CL2
Modification(s) CL2. Sled tova /then/ CL1.

3.2.5 Post-editing
Post editing aims at providing grammatically cor-
rect and semantically complete modified text.
Clause reordering might lead to inappropriate use
of verb tenses. Coping a subject from the previous
sentence might require a transformation from an
indefinite to a definite noun phrase. Thus, several
checks for grammaticality and text cohesion are
performed and relevant changes to verb forms and
noun definiteness are made. Specific expressions
are introduced to highlight temporal, causative,
conditional and other relations and to serve as con-
nectives.

Example 2 shows a fully modified text.

Example 2.
Original:

Vaz osnova na doklada ot razsledvaneto, sled kato
litseto e bilo uvedomeno za vsichki dokazatelstva
i sled kato e bilo izslushano, organat e izdal

razreshenie.

Based on the report from the investigation,
after the person has been notified about all
evidence and after /he/ has been heard, the
authorities have issued a permit.

Modified:
Litseto e bilo uvedomeno za vsichki dokazatelstva.
Litseto e bilo izslushano.
Sled tova vaz osnova na doklada ot razsledvaneto,
organat mozhe da dade razreshenie.

The person has been notified about all evi-
dence.
The person has been heard.
After that based on the report from the investiga-
tion, the authorities may issue a permit.

3.3 Evaluation of System Performance

The evaluation of performance is based on the
Bulgarian part of the Bulgarian-English Clause-
Aligned Corpus (Koeva et al., 2012) which
amounts to 176,397 tokens and includes several
categories: administrative texts, fiction, news. The
overall evaluation of the system performance is as-
sessed in terms of the evaluation of all subtasks
(Section 3.2) as presented in Table 1. The evalu-
ation of finite verbs and anaphora recognition, as
well as subject identification is performed manu-
ally on a random excerpt of the corpus. Clause
splitting is evaluated on the basis of the manual
annotation of the corpus. We assess the precision
and recall in terms of full recognition and partial
recognition. In the first case the entire verb phrase,
clause, anaphora, or dropped subject is recognized
correctly, while in the latter – only a part of the
respective linguistic item is identified. We ac-
count for partial recognition since it is often suf-
ficient to produce correct overall results, e.g. par-
tial verb phrase recognition in most cases yields
correct clause splitting.

4 Experiments and Evaluation of
Readability of Modified Texts

4.1 Outline of the Experiment

4.1.1 Aims and Objectives

The objective of the experiment was to conduct a
pilot testing of original and modified texts in order

44



Task Precision Recall F1
Finite verb phrases
(full)

0.914 0.909 0.912

Finite verb phrases
(partial)

0.980 0.975 0.977

Clauses borders 0.806 0.827 0.817
Clauses (begin-
ning)

0.908 0.931 0.919

Anaphora (full) 0.558 0.558 0.558
Anaphora (partial) 0.615 0.615 0.615
Subject (full) 0.590 0.441 0.504
Subject (partial) 0.772 0.548 0.671

Table 1: Evaluation of different stages of text
modification

to determine and confirm the need of text modi-
fication for deaf people whose primary language
is BulSL and the verbal language is acquired as a
second language.

The rationale was to identify and distinguish be-
tween levels of comprehension of original and au-
tomatically modified texts.

4.1.2 Respondents’ Profile
The participants were selected regardless of their
degree and onset of hearing loss. The experiment
targeted the following group of people:

• Socially active adults (18+);

• BulSL users;

• People with developed reading skills.

4.2 Pilot Test Design Methodology and
Implementation

4.2.1 Text Selection
We decided to use original and modified versions
of journalistic (e.g. news items) and administra-
tive (e.g. legal) texts. The guiding principle was
to select texts that are similar in terms of length,
complexity, and difficulty.

The selected news refer to topics of general in-
terest such as politics in neighbouring countries,
culture, etc. The administrative texts represent
real-life scenarios, rather than abstract or rare le-
gal issues. In general, selected texts do not include
domain-specific terms and professional jargon.

Regarding text modification the main objective
was to preserve the meaning of the original text in

compliance with the principles of textual and fac-
tual accuracy and integrity, and appropriate com-
plexity. The result from the automatic modifica-
tions has been manually checked and post-edited
to ensure grammaticality.

4.2.2 Methodology
The testing is conducted either online via tests in
e-form (predominantly), or using paper-based ver-
sions. Respondents are given texts of each type,
i.e. two original and two modified texts. Each
text is associated with two tasks, which have to be
completed correctly after the reading. The tasks
seek to check the level of understanding of the
main idea, details, purpose, implication, temporal
relations (the sequence of events), and the ability
to follow the text development.

• Task-type 1: Sequence questions. The re-
spondents have to arrange text elements (sen-
tences and clauses) listed in a random se-
quence into a chronological order. The task
covers temporal, causative, conditional, and
other relations, and its goal is to test reading
comprehension which involves temporal and
logical relations and inferences.

• Task-type 2: Multiple response questions
(MRQ) for testing general reading com-
prehension. MRQ are similar to Multiple
choice questions (MCQs) in that they provide
a predefined set of options, but MRQ allow
any number and combinations of options.

Text Type Version #
sen-
tences

#
clauses

#
tem-
poral
shifts

1 News Original 2 6 2
2 News Modified 5 6 0
3 Admin Original 1 4 2
4 Admin Modified 4 4 0

Table 2: Structure of the test

4.2.3 Structure of the Test
The test consists of four different texts, each of
them with two subtasks – for checking the com-
prehension of temporal relations and the logical
structure of the events in the text (type 1), and gen-
eral comprehension (type 2).

The number of sentences, clauses and temporal
shifts for each text is presented in Table 2.

45



4.3 Analysis of Results

19 deaf adults proficient in BulSL have taken part
in the pilot test study. The results are presented in
Table 3 and on Figure 1.

Task Type Version correct all %
1.1 News Original 5 19 26.32
2.1 News Modified 9 19 47.37
3.1 Admin Original 6 19 31.58
4.1 Admin Modified 10 19 52.63
1.2 News Original 7 19 36.84
2.2 News Modified 9 19 47.37
3.2 Admin Original 7 19 36.84
4.2 Admin Modified 10 19 52.63

Table 3: Results of chronological order sub-
tasks (1.1-4.1) and general comprehension sub-
tasks (1.2-4.2)

We recognize the fact that the small number
of respondents does not provide sufficient data
to draw conclusions regarding the improvement
of readability when using modified texts. How-
ever, the results show a significant improvement
(t = 2.0066 with p = 0.0485 < 0.05) in the over-
all comprehension (chronological order and gen-
eral understanding) when using the modified texts
in comparison with the original texts.

Figure 1: Results in % of correct answers for orig-
inal and modified texts

Still, the improvement in readability after the
text modification is very low and not sufficient to
provide reliable communication strategies and ac-
cess to information. Further work will be aimed at
more precise methodology for testing the reading
skills of deaf people.

5 Conclusions

As the pilot test suggests, the limited number of
modifications is not sufficient to compensate for
the problems which deaf people experience with
reading. A wider range of text modifications are
necessary in order to cover the problematic areas
of verbal language competence. Other issues in-
clude the use of personal and possessive pronouns,
in particular clitics, which are often dropped, the
correct use of auxiliary verbs and analytical verb
forms. Additional problems such as adjective and
noun agreement, subject and verb agreement, etc.
need to be addressed specifically, since these have
a very different realization in sign languages (e.g.,
subject and verb are related spatially).

It should be emphasized that there has not been
any systematic effort for studying BulSL so far.
The detailed exploration of the linguistic proper-
ties of BulSL in relation to Bulgarian can give a
deeper understanding about the problems in the
acquisition of Bulgarian and in particular, the
reading difficulties experienced by deaf readers.

Directions for future work include:

• To explore the relationship between reading
comprehension and social, educational and
other factors;

• To explore the dependence between reading
skills and proficiency in BulSL;

• To analyze problems in relation to vocabulary
with relation to reading;

• To build a detailed methodology for testing
of reading comprehension;

• To explore further the potential of text modi-
fication with respect to BulSL in relation to
the comparative analyses of the features of
BulSL and verbal Bulgarian language.

References
J. Albertini and C. Mayer. 2011. Using miscue analy-

sis to assess comprehension in deaf college readers.
Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 16:35–
46.

BATOD. 2006. Training materials for language modi-
fication.

Gerald Berent. 2004. Deaf students’ command of En-
glish relative clauses (Paper presented at the annual
convention of Teachers of English to Speakers of
Other Languages).

46



Stefan Bott and Horacio Saggion. 2011. Spanish text
simplification: An exploratory study. In XXVII Con-
greso de la Sociedad Espaola para el Procesamiento
del Lenguaje Natural (SEPLN 2011), Huevla, Spain.

Arnaldo Candido, Erick Maziero, Caroline Gasperin,
Thiago A. S. Pardo, Lucia Specia, and Sandra
Aluisio. 2009. Supporting the adaptation of texts
for poor literacy readers: a text simplification ed-
itor for Brazilian Portuguese. In Proceedings of
the Fourth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for
Building Educational Applications, pages 34–42.

Nathanael Chambers, Shan Wang, and Dan Juraf-
sky. 2007. Classifying temporal relations between
events. In Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and
Poster Sessions, Prague, June 2007, pages 173–176.

R. Conrad. 1979. The deaf schoolchild. London:
Harper and Row.

Peter Dienes and Amit Dubey. 2003. Deep syntac-
tic processing by combining shallow methods. In
Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, volume 1.

R. J. Hoffmeister. 2000. A piece of the puzzle: ASL
and reading comprehension in deaf children. In
C. Chamberlain, J. P. Morford, and R. I. Mayberry,
editors, Language acquisition by eye, pages 143–
163. Mahwah, NJ: Earlbaum.

Kentaro Inui, Atsushi Fujita, Tetsuro Takahashi, Ryu
Iida, and Tomoya Iwakura. 2003. Text simplifi-
cation for reading assistance: A project note. In
PARAPHRASE ’03 Proceedings of the second in-
ternational workshop on Paraphrasing, volume 16,
pages 9–16. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Mark Johnson. 2002. A simple pattern-matching al-
gorithm for recovering empty nodes and their an-
tecedents. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

L. Kelly. 1996. The interaction of syntactic compe-
tence and vocabulary during reading by deaf stu-
dents. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education,
1(1):75–90.

S. Koeva and A. Genov. 2011. Bulgarian language
processing chain. In Proceedings of Integration of
multilingual resources and tools in Web applica-
tions. Workshop in conjunction with GSCL 2011,
University of Hamburg.

Svetla Koeva, Borislav Rizov, Ekaterina Tarpomanova,
Tsvetana Dimitrova, Rositsa Dekova, Ivelina Stoy-
anova, Svetlozara Leseva, Hristina Kukova, and An-
gel Genov. 2012. Bulgarian-english sentence- and
clause-aligned corpus. In Proceedings of the Second
Workshop on Annotation of Corpora for Research
in the Humanities (ACRH-2), Lisbon, 29 November
2012, pages 51–62. Lisboa: Colibri.

Penny Lee. 1996. The Logic and Development of
the Linguistic Relativity Principle. The Whorf The-
ory Complex: A Critical Reconstruction. John Ben-
jamins Publishing.

Margaret Jelinek Lewis and Dorothy Jackson. 2001.
Television literacy: Comprehension of program con-
tent using closed-captions for the deaf. Journal of
Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 6(1):43–53.

Slavina Lozanova. 2002. Predpostavki za razvitie
na bilingvizma kato metod za obuchenie na detsa s
uvreden sluh. Spetsialna pedagogika.

R. I. Mayberry. 2000. Cognitive development of
deaf children: The interface of language and percep-
tion in cognitive neuroscience. In Child Neuropsy-
chology, Volume 7 of handbook of neuropsychology,
pages 71–107. Amesterdam: Elsvier.

P. McAnally, S. Rose, and S. Quigley. 1999. Reading
practices with deaf learners. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

Ruslan Mitkov. 1999. Anaphora resolution: the
state of the art; working paper, (based on the col-
ing’98/acl’98 tutorial on anaphora resolution).

Carol Musselman. 2000. How do children who can’t
hear learn to read an alphabetic script? a review of
the literature on reading and deafness. Journal of
Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 5:9–31.

C. Padden and C Ramsey. 2000. American Sign
Language and reading ability in deaf children. In
C. Chamberlain, J. P. Morford, and R. I. Mayberry,
editors, Language acquisition by eye, pages 165–
189. Mahwah, NJ: Earlbaum.

S. J. Parault and H. William. 2010. Reading motiva-
tion, reading comprehension and reading amount in
deaf and hearing adults. Journal of Deaf Studies and
Deaf Education, 15:120–135.

Peter Paul. 1996. Reading vocabulary knowledge and
deafness. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Educa-
tion, 1(1):3–15.

Peter Paul. 1998. Literacy and deafness: The develop-
ment of reading, writing and literate thought. Need-
ham, MA: Allyn & Bacon.

Sarah Petersen and Mari Ostendorf. 2007. Natural
language processing tools for reading level assess-
ment and text simplification for bilingual education.
University of Washington Seattle, WA.

James Pustejovsky, José Casta no, Robert Ingria, Roser
Saurı́, Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, Graham
Katz, and Dragomir Radev. 2003. TimeML: Robust
Specification of Event and Temporal Expressions in
Text. Technical report, AAAI.

Seth Kulick Ryan Gabbard and Mitchell Marcus. 2004.
Using linguistic principles to recover empty cate-
gories. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting
on Association For Computational Linguistics, page
184191.

47



S. Saeva. 2010. Gluhota i Bilingvizam. Aeropres BG.

L. Selinker. 1972. Interlanguage. International Re-
view of Applied Linguistics, 10:209–231.

Advaith Siddharthan. 2011. Text simplification using
typed dependencies: A comparison of the robustness
of different generation strategies. In Proceedings of
the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation (ENLG) , pages 211, September.

L. Specia. 2010. Translating from complex to simpli-
fied sentences. In 9th International Conference on
Computational Processing of the Portuguese Lan-
guage (Propor-2010), Porto Alegre, Brazil, vol-
ume 6001 of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence,
pages 30–39. Springer.

William Stokoe. 1960. Sign language structure: An
outline of the visual communication systems of the
american deaf. Studies in linguistics: Occasional
papers, 8.

William Stokoe. 1972. Semiotics and Human Sign
Languages. NICI, Printers, Ghent.

Ivelina Stoyanova, Tanya Dimitrova, and Viktorija Tra-
jkovska. 2003. A handbook in civil education with a
sign language dictionary. In Social and Educational
Training for Hearing Impaired youths: A Handbook
in Civil Education with a Sign Language Dictionary.
Petar Beron, Sofia. (in Bulgarian).

Rachel Sutton-Spence and Bencie Woll. 2003. The
Linguistics of British Sign Language: An Introduc-
tion. Cambridge University Press, 3rd edition.

W. Swann. 1992. Learning for All: Classroom Diver-
sity. Milton Keynes: The Open University.

Marta Tatu and Munirathnam Srikanth. 2008. Experi-
ments with reasoning for temporal relations between
events. In COLING ’08 Proceedings of the 22nd In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, volume 1, pages 857–864.

C. B. Traxler. 2000. The stanford achievement test, 9th
edition: National norming and performance stan-
dards for deaf and hard-of-hearing students. Journal
of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 5:337348.

Beverly Trezek, Ye Wang, and Peter Paul. 2010. Read-
ing and deafness: Theory, research and practice.
Clifton Park, NY: Cengage Learning.

Robert Van Valin and Randy LaPolla. 1997. Syntax:
Structure, Meaning, and Function. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Schreuder R Knoors H Snik A. Vermeulen AM, van
Bon W. 2007. Reading comprehension of deaf chil-
dren with cochlear implants. Journal of Deaf Stud-
ies and Deaf Education, 12(3):283–302.

Zhemin Zhu, Delphine Bernhard, and Iryna Gurevych.
2010. A monolingual tree-based translation model
for sentence simplification. In Proceedings of The
23rd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, Beijing, China, pages 1353–1361.

48


