










































The C-Score - Proposing a Reading Comprehension Metrics as a Common Evaluation Measure for Text Simplification


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Predicting and Improving Text Readability for Target Reader Populations, pages 20–29,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

The C-Score – Proposing a Reading Comprehension Metrics as a
Common Evaluation Measure for Text Simplification

Irina Temnikova
Linguistic Modelling Department,

Institute of Information
and Communication Technologies,

Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
irina.temnikova@gmail.com

Galina Maneva
Lab. of Particle and Astroparticle Physics,

Institute of Nuclear Research
and Nuclear Energy,

Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
galina.maneva@gmail.com

Abstract

This article addresses the lack of common
approaches for text simplification evalu-
ation, by presenting the first attempt for
a common evaluation metrics. The arti-
cle proposes reading comprehension eval-
uation as a method for evaluating the re-
sults of Text Simplification (TS). An ex-
periment, as an example application of the
evaluation method, as well as three for-
mulae to quantify reading comprehension,
are presented. The formulae produce an
unique score, the C-score, which gives an
estimation of user’s reading comprehen-
sion of a certain text. The score can be
used to evaluate the performance of a text
simplification engine on pairs of complex
and simplified texts, or to compare the
performances of different TS methods us-
ing the same texts. The approach can be
particularly useful for the modern crowd-
sourcing approaches, such as those em-
ploying the Amazon’s Mechanical Turk1

or CrowdFlower2. The aim of this paper
is thus to propose an evaluation approach
and to motivate the TS community to start
a relevant discussion, in order to come up
with a common evaluation metrics for this
task.

1 Context and Motivation

Currently, the area of Text Simplification (TS)
is getting more and more attention. Starting as
early as in the 1996, Chandrasekar et al. pro-
posed an approach for TS as a pre-processing step
before feeding the text to a parser. Next, the

1http://aws.amazon.com/mturk/. Last accessed on May
3rd, 2013.

2http://crowdflower.com/. Last accessed on June 14th,
2013.

PSET project (Devlin, 1999; Canning, 2002), pro-
posed two modules for simplifying text for apha-
sic readers. The text simplification approaches
continued in 2003 with Siddharthan (2003) and
Inui et al. (2003), and through the 2005-2006
until the recent explosion of TS approaches in
2010-2012. Recently, several TS-related work-
shops took place: PITR 2012 (Williams et al.,
2012), SLPAT 2012 (Alexandersson et al., 2012),
and NLP4ITA 20123 and 2013. As in confirma-
tion with the text simplification definition as the
”process for reducing text complexity at differ-
ent levels” (Temnikova, 2012), the TS approaches
tackle a variety of text complexity aspects, rang-
ing from lexical (Devlin, 1999; Inui et al., 2003;
Elhadad, 2006; Gasperin et al., 2009; Yatskar
et al., 2010; Coster and Kauchak, 2011; Bott et
al., 2012; Specia et al., 2012; Rello et al., 2013;
Drndarević et al., 2013), syntactic (Chandrasekar
et al., 1996; Canning, 2002; Siddharthan, 2003;
Inui et al., 2003; Gasperin et al., 2009; Zhu et
al., 2010; Woodsend and Lapata, 2011; Coster
and Kauchak, 2011; Drndarević et al., 2013), to
discourse/cohesion (Siddharthan, 2003). The va-
riety of problems tackled by the TS approaches
differ, according to their final aim: (1) being a
pre-processing step of an input to text process-
ing applications, or (2) addressing the reading dif-
ficulties of specific groups of readers. The first
type of final application ranges between parser
input (Chandrasekar et al., 1996), small screens
displays (Daelemans et al., 2004; Grefenstette,
1998), text summarization (Vanderwende et al.,
2007), text extraction (Klebanov et al., 2004), se-
mantic role labeling (Vickrey and Koller, 2008)
and Machine Translation (MT) (Ruffino, 1982;
Streiff, 1985).The TS approaches addressing spe-
cific human reading needs, instead, address read-
ers with low levels of literacy (Siddharthan, 2003;

3http://www.taln.upf.edu/nlp4ita/. Last accessed on May
3rd, 2013.

20



Gasperin et al., 2009; Elhadad, 2006; Williams
and Reiter, 2008), language learners (Petersen and
Ostendorf, 2007), and readers with specific cogni-
tive and language disabilities. The TS approaches,
addressing this last type of readers target those
suffering from aphasia (Devlin, 1999; Canning,
2002), deaf readers (Inui et al., 2003), dyslexics
(Rello et al., 2013) and the readers with general
disabilities (Max, 2006; Drndarević et al., 2013).

Despite the large number of current work in
TS, there has been almost no attention to defin-
ing common text simplification evaluation ap-
proaches, which would allow the comparison of
different TS systems. Until the present moment,
usually, each approach has applied his/her own
methods and materials, often taken from other
Natural Language Processing (NLP) fields, mak-
ing the comparison difficult or impossible.

The aim of this paper is thus to propose an eval-
uation method and to foster the discussion of this
topic in the text simplification community, as well
as to motivate the TS community to come up with
common evaluation metrics for this task.

Next, Section 2 will describe the existing ap-
proaches to evaluating TS, as well as the few
attempts towards offering a common evaluation
strategy. After that, the next sections will present
our evaluation approach, starting with Section 3
describing its context, Section 4 presenting the for-
mulae, Section 5 offering the results, and finally
Section 6, providing a Discussion and the Conclu-
sions.

2 Evaluation Methods in Text
Simplification

As mentioned in the previous section, until now,
the different authors adopted different combina-
tions of metrics, without reaching to a common
approach, which would allow the comparison of
different systems. As the different TS evalua-
tion methods are applied on a variety of different
text units (words, sentences, texts), this makes the
comparison between approaches even harder. As
the aim of this article is to propose a text simpli-
fication evaluation metrics which would take into
account text comprehensibility and reading com-
prehension, in this discussion we will focus mostly
on the approaches, whose aim is to simplify texts
for target readers and their evaluation strategies.

The existing TS evaluation approaches focus ei-
ther on the quality of the generated text/sentences,

or on the effectiveness of text simplification on
reading comprehension. The first group of ap-
proaches include human judges ratings of simpli-
fication, content preservation, and grammatical-
ity, standard MT evaluation scores (BLEU and
NIST), a variety of other automatic metrics (per-
plexity, precision/recall/F-measure, and edit dis-
tance). The methods, aiming to evaluate the text
simplification impact on reading comprehension,
use, instead, reading speed, reading errors, speech
errors, comprehension questions, answer correct-
ness, and users’ feedback. Several approaches
use a variety of readability formulae (the Flesch,
Flesch-Kincaid, Coleman-Liau, and Lorge formu-
lae for English, as well as readability formulae for
other languages, such as for Spanish). Due to the
criticisms of readability formulae (DuBay, 2004),
which often restrict themselves to a very super-
ficial text level, they can be considered to stand
on the borderline between the two previously de-
scribed groups of TS evaluation approaches. As
can be seen from the discussion below, different
TS systems employ a combination of the listed
evaluation approaches.

As one of the first text simplification systems
for target reader populations, PSET, seems to have
applied different evaluation strategies for different
of its components, without running an evaluation
of the system as a whole. The lexical simplifi-
cation component (Devlin, 1999), which replaced
technical terms with more frequent synonyms, was
evaluated via user feedback, comprehension ques-
tions and the use of the Lorge readability formula
(Lorge, 1948). The syntactic simplification system
evaluated its single components and the system as
a whole from different points of view, to a dif-
ferent extent, and used different evaluation strate-
gies. Namely, the text comprehensibility was eval-
uated via reading time and answers’ correctness
given by sixteen aphasic readers; the components
replacing passive with active voice and splitting
sentences were evaluated for content preservation
and grammaticality via four human judges’ rat-
ings; and finally, the anaphora resolution compo-
nent was evaluated using precision and recall. Sid-
dharthan (2003) did not carry out evaluation with
target readers, while three human judges rated the
grammaticality and the meaning preservation of
ninety-five sentences. Gasperin et al. (2009) used
precision, recall and f-measure. Other approaches,
using human judges are those of Elhadad (2006),

21



who also used precision and recall and Yatskar et
al. (2010), who employed three annotators com-
paring pairs of words and indicating them same,
simpler, or more complex. Williams and Reiter
(2008) run two experiments, the larger one in-
volving 230 subjects and measured oral reading
rate, oral reading errors, response correctness to
comprehension questions and finally, speech er-
rors. Drndarevic et al. (2013) used 7 readabil-
ity measures for Spanish to evaluate the degree
of simplification, and twenty-five human annota-
tors to evaluate on a Likert scale the grammat-
icality of the output and the preservation of the
original meaning. The recent approaches consid-
ering TS as an MT task, such as Specia (2010),
Zhu et al. (2010), Coster and Kauchak (2011)
and Woodsend and Lapata (2011), apply standard
MT evaluation techniques, such as BLEU (Pap-
ineni et al., 2002), NIST (Doddington, 2002), and
TERp (Snover et al., 2009). In addition, Wood-
send and Lapata (2011) apply two readability mea-
sures (Flesch-Kincaid, Coleman-Liau) to evalu-
ate the actual reduction in complexity and human
judges ratings for simplification, meaning preser-
vation, and grammaticality. Zhu et al. (2010) ap-
ply the Flesch readability score (Flesch, 1948) and
n-gram language model perplexity, and Coster and
Kauchak (2011) – two additional automatic tech-
niques (the word-level-F1 and simple string accu-
racy), taken from sentence compression evaluation
(Clarke and Lapata, 2006).

As we consider that the aim of text simplifica-
tion for human readers is to improve text com-
prehensibility, we argue that reading comprehen-
sion must be evaluated, and that evaluating just
the quality of produced sentences is not enough.
Differently from the approaches that employ hu-
man judges, we consider that it is better to test real
human comprehension with target readers popula-
tions, rather than to make conclusions about the
extent of population’s understanding on the basis
of the opinion of a small number of human judges.
In addition, we consider that measuring reading
speed, rate, as well as reading and speed errors,
requires much more complicated and expensive
tools, than having an online system to measure
time to reply and recognize correct answers. Fi-
nally, we consider that cloze tests are an evalu-
ation method that cannot really reflect the com-
plexity of reading comprehension (for example for
measuring manipulations of the syntactic struc-

ture of sentences), and for this reason, we select
multiple-choice questions as the testing method,
which we consider the most reflecting the speci-
ficities of the complexity of a text, more accessi-
ble than eye-tracking technologies, and more ob-
jective than users’ feedback. The approach does
not explicitly evaluate the fluency, grammaticality
and content preservation of the simplified text, but
can be coupled with such additional evaluation.

The closest to ours approach is that of Rello
et al. (2013) who evaluated reading comprehen-
sion with over ninety readers with and without
dyslexia. Besides using eye-tracking (reading time
and fixations duration), different reading devices,
and users rating the text according to how easy it is
it read, to understand and to remember, they obtain
also a comprehension score based on multiple-
choice questions (MCQ) with 3 answers (1 cor-
rect, 1 partially correct and 1 wrong). The dif-
ference with our approach is that we consider that
having only one correct answer (as suggested by
Gronlund (1982)), is a more objective evaluation,
rather than having one partially correct answer,
which would introduce subjectivity in evaluation.

To support our motivation, some state-of-the-art
approaches state the scarcity of evaluation with
target readers (Williams and Reiter, 2008), note
that there are no commonly accepted evaluation
measures (Coster and Kauchak, 2011), attempt
to address the need of developing reading com-
prehension evaluation methods (Siddharthan and
Katsos, 2012), and propose common evaluation
frameworks (Specia et al., 2012; De Belder and
Moens, 2012). More concretely, Siddhathan and
Katsos (2012) propose the magnitude estimation
of readability judgements and the delayed sen-
tence recall as reading comprehension evaluation
methods. Specia et al. (2012) provide a lexical
simplification evaluation framework in the context
of Semeval-2012. The evaluation is performed us-
ing a measure of inter-annotator agreement, based
on Cohen (1960). Similarly, De Belder and Moens
(2012) propose a dataset for evaluating lexical
simplification. No common evaluation framework
has been yet developed for syntactic simplifica-
tion.

As seen in the overview, besides the multitude
of existing approaches, and the few approaches at-
tempting to propose a common evaluation frame-
work, there are no widely accepted evaluation
metrics or methods, which would allow the com-

22



parison of existing approaches. The next section
presents our evaluation approach, which we offer
as a candidate for common evaluation metrics.

3 Proposed Evaluation Metrics

3.1 The Evaluation Experiment

The metrics proposed in this article, was devel-
oped in the context of a previously conducted
large-scale text simplification evaluation experi-
ment (Temnikova, 2012). The experiment aimed
to determine whether a manual, rule-based text
simplification approach (namely a controlled lan-
guage), can re-write existing texts into more un-
derstandable versions. Impact on reading com-
prehension was necessary to evaluate, as the pur-
pose of text simplification was to enhance in first
place the reading comprehension of emergency in-
structions. The controlled language used for sim-
plification was the Controlled Language for Cri-
sis Management (CLCM, more details in (Tem-
nikova, 2012)), which was developed on the ba-
sis of existing psychological and psycholinguis-
tic literature discussing human comprehension un-
der stress, which ensures its psychological valid-
ity. The text units evaluated in this experiments
were whole texts, and more concretely pairs of
original texts and their simplified versions. We ar-
gue that using whole texts for measuring reading
comprehension is better than single sentences, as
the texts provide more context for understanding.
The experiment took place in the format of an on-
line experiment, conducted via a specially devel-
oped web interface, and required users to read sev-
eral texts and answer Multiple-Choice Questions
(MCQ), testing the readers’ understanding of each
of the texts. Due to the purpose of the text simpli-
fication (emergency situations simulation), users
were required to read the texts in a limited time,
as to imitate a stressful situation with no time to
think and re-read the text. This aspect will not be
taken into account in the evaluation, as the pur-
pose is to propose a general formula, applicable
to a variety of different text simplification experi-
ments. After reading the text in a limited time, the
text was hidden from the readers, and they were
presented with a screen, asking if they were ready
to proceed with the questions. Next, each question
was displayed one by one, along with its answers,
with the readers not having the option to go back
to the text. In order to ensure the constant atten-
tion of the readers and to reduce readers’ tiredness

fact or, the texts were kept short (about 150-170
words each), and the number of texts to be read
by the reader was kept to four. In addition, to en-
sure comparability, all the texts were selected in a
way to be more or less of the same length. The ex-
periment employed a collection of a total of eight
texts, four of which original, non simplified (’com-
plex’) versions, and the other four – their manu-
ally simplified versions. Each user had to read two
complex and two simplified texts, none of which
was a variant of the other. The interface automati-
cally randomized the order of displaying the texts,
to ensure that different users would get different
combinations of texts in one of the following two
different sequences:

• Complex-Simplified-Complex-Simplified

• Simplified-Complex-Simplified-Complex

This was done in order to minimize the im-
pact of the order of displaying the texts on the
text comprehension results. After reading each
text, the readers were prompted to answer between
four and five questions about each text. The MCQ
method was selected as it is considered being the
most objective and easily measurable way of as-
sessing comprehension (Gronlund, 1982). The
number of questions and answers was selected in
a way to not tire the reader (four to five questions
per text and four to five answers for each ques-
tion), and the questions and answers themselves
were designed following the the best MCQ prac-
tices (Gronlund, 1982). Some of the practices fol-
lowed involved ensuring that there is only one cor-
rect answer per question, making all wrong an-
swers (or ’distractors’) grammatically, and as text
length consistent with the correct answer, in order
to avoid giving hints to the reader, and making all
distractors plausible and equally attractive. Simi-
larly to the texts, the questions and answers were
also displayed in different order to different read-
ers, to avoid that the order influences the compre-
hension results. The correct answer was displayed
in different positions to avoid learning its position
and internally marked in a way to distinguish it
during evaluation from all the distractors in what-
ever position it was displayed. The questions re-
quired understanding of key aspects of the texts, to
avoid relying on pure texts’ memorization (such as
under which conditions what was supposed to be
done, explanations, and the order in which actions
needed to be taken). The information, evaluating

23



the users’ comprehension, collected during the ex-
periment, was, on one hand the time for answering
each question, and on the other hand, the number
of correct answers given by all participants while
replying to the same question. Besides the fact that
we used a specially developed interface, this eval-
uation approach can be applied to any experiment
employing an interface capable of calculating the
time for answering and to distinguish the correct
answers from the incorrect ones.

The efficiency of the experiment design was
thoroughly tested by running it through several
rounds of pilot experiments and requiring partic-
ipants’ feedback.

We claim that the evaluation approach proposed
in this paper can be applied to more simply orga-
nized experiments, as the randomization aspects
are not reflected in the evaluation formulae.

The final experiment involved 103 participants,
collected via a request sent to several mailing lists.
The participants were 55 percent women and 44
percent male, and ranged from undergraduate stu-
dents to retired academicians (i.e. corresponded
to nineteen to fifty-nine years old). As the ex-
periment allowed entering lots of personal data,
it was also known that participants had a vari-
ety of professions (including NLP people, teach-
ers, and lawyers), knew English from the beginner
through intermediate, to native level, and spoke
a large variety of native languages, allowing to
have native speakers from many of the World’s
language families (Non Indo-European and Indo-
European included). Figure 1 shows the coarse-
grained classification made at the time of the ex-
periment, and the distribution of participants per
native languages. A subset of specific native lan-
guage participants will be selected to give an ex-
ample of applying the evaluation metrics to a real
evaluation experiment.

In order to obtain results, we have asked the
participants to enter a rich selection of informa-
tion, and recorded the chosen answer (be it cor-
rect or not), and the time which each participant
employed to give each answer (correct or wrong).
Table 1 shows the data we recorded for each single
answer of every participant.

The data in Table 1 is: Entry id is each given an-
swer, the Domain background (answer y – yes and
n – no) indicates whether the participant has any
previous knowledge of the experiment (crisis man-
agement) domain. As each text, question and com-

Type Example
Entry id 1
Age of the participant 24
Gender of the participant f
Profession of the participant Student
Domain background (y/n) n
Native lang. English
Level of English Native
Text number 4
Exper. completed (0/1) 1
User number 1
Question number 30
Answer number 0
Time to reply 18695
Texts pair number 1

Table 1: Participant’s information recorded for
each answer.

plex/simplified texts pair are given reference num-
bers, respectively Text number, Question number,
and Texts pair number record that. As required
by the evaluation method, each entry records also
the Time to reply each question (measured in ’mil-
liseconds’), and the Answer number. As said be-
fore, the correct answers are marked in a special
way, allowing to distinguish them at a later stage,
when counting the number of correct answers.

3.2 Definitions and Evaluation Hypotheses

In order to correctly evaluate the performance of
the text simplification method on the basis of the
above described experiment, the data obtained was
thoughtfully analyzed. The two criteria selected to
best describe the users’ performance were time to
reply and number of correct answers. The eval-
uation was done offline, after collecting the data
from the participants. The evaluation analysis
aimed to test the following two hypotheses:

If the text simplification approach has a positive
impact on the reading comprehension:

1. The percentage of correct answers given for
the simplified text will be higher than the per-
centage of correct answers given for the com-
plex text.

2. The time to recognize the correct answer and
reply correctly to the questions about the sim-
plified text will be significantly lower than
the time to recognize the correct answer and

24



Figure 1: Coarse-grained distribution of participants per native languages.

reply correctly to the questions about the
complex text.

The two hypotheses were tested previously by
employing only the key variables (time to reply
and number of correct answers). It has been
proven that comprehension increases with the per-
centage of correct answers and decreases with the
increase of the time to reply. On the basis of
these facts, we define the C-Score (a text Compre-
hension Score) – an objective evaluation metrics,
which allows to give a reading comprehension es-
timate to a text, or to compare two texts or two or
more text simplification approaches. The C-Score
is calculated text per text. In order to address a va-
riety of situations, we propose three versions of the
C-Score, which cover, gradually, all possible vari-
ables which can affect comprehension in such an
experiment. In the following sections we present
their formulae, the variables involved, and discuss
their results, advantages and shortcomings.

3.3 The C-Score Version One. The C-Score
Simple.

Given a text comprehension experiment featuring
n texts with m questions with r answers each, an
ability to measure time to reply to questions and
to recognize the correct answers, we define the C-
Score Simple as given below:

Csimple =
Pr

tmean
(1)

Where: Pr is the percentage of correct answers,
from all answers given to all the questions about
this text, and t is the average time to reply to all
questions about this text (both with a correct and
a wrong answer). The time is expressed in arbi-
trary seconds-based units, depending on the ex-
periment. The logic behind this formula is simple:
we consider that comprehension increases with the
percentage of correctly answered questions, and
diminishes if the mean time to answer questions
increases.

3.4 The C-Score Version Two. C-Score
Complete.

The C-Score complete takes into consideration a
rich selection of variables reflecting the questions
and answers complexity. In this C-Score version,
we consider that the experiment designers will se-
lect short texts (e.g. 150 words) of a similar length,
with the aim to reduce participants’ tiredness fac-
tor, as we did in our experimental settings.

Ccomplete =
Pr

Nq

Nq∑
q=1

Qs(q)
tmean(q)

(2)

In this formula, Pr is the percentage of correct
answers by all participants for this text, Nq is the

25



number of questions of this text (4-5 in our experi-
ment), and t is the average time to reply to all ques-
tions about this text (4-5 in our experiment). We
introduce the concept Question Size, (Qs), which
is calculated for each question and takes into ac-
count the number of answers of the question (Na),
the question length in words (Lq), and the total
length in words of its answers (La):

Qs = Na(Lq + La) (3)

We consider that the number of questions nega-
tively influences the comprehension results, as the
reader gets cognitively tired to process more and
more questions about different key aspects of the
text. In addition, Gronlund (1982) suggests to re-
strict the number of questions per text to four-five
to achieve better learning. For this reason, we con-
sider that comprehension decreases, if the num-
ber of questions is higher. We also consider that
answering correctly/faster to a difficult question
shows better text comprehension than giving fast
a correct answer to a simply-worded question. For
this reason we award question difficulty, and we
place it above the fraction.

3.5 The C-Score Version Three. C-Score
Textsize.

Finally, the last version of C-Score takes into ac-
count the case when the texts used for compari-
son can be of a different length, and in this way,
the texts’ complexity (for example, when compar-
ing the results of two different TS engines, without
having access to the same texts). For this reason,
the C-Score 3 considers the text length (called text
size, Ts) of the texts used in the experiment. As
a longer text will be more difficult to understand
than a shorter text, the text length is placed near
the percentage of correct answers.

Ctextsize =
PrTs

Nq

Nq∑
q=1

Qs(q)
tmean(q)

(4)

4 C-Score Results

We have implemented and applied the above de-
scribed formulae to the experimental data, pre-
sented in Section 3.1. As we have only one text
simplification approach, two user scenarios are
presented:

1. Original (’Complex’) vs. Simplified (’Sim-
ple’) pairs of texts comparison. The subset of

participants are the speakers of Basque, Turk-
ish, Hungarian, Lithuanian, Vietnamese, Chi-
nese, and Indian languages. All three formu-
lae have been applied.

2. Comparison of the comprehension of the
same text of readers from different sub-
groups. The readers have been divided by
age. This scenario can be used to infer
psycho-linguistic findings about the reading
abilities of different participants.

Please note that the texts pairs are: Text 1 and
2; Text 3 and 4; Text 5 and 6; and Text 7 and 8.
In each couple, the first text is complex and the
second is its simplified version. The results for
the first evaluation scenario are respectively dis-
played in Table 2 for C-Score Simple, Table 3 for
C-Score Complete and Table 4 for C-Score Text-
size. The results of C-Score Complete have been
multiplied per 100 for better readability. As a re-
minder, we consider that higher the score is, better
is text comprehension. From this point of view,
if the text simplification approach was successful,
Text 2 (Simplified) should have a higher C-Score
than its original, complex Text 1, Text 4 (Simpli-
fied) should have a higher C-Score than its orig-
inal Text 3, Text 6 (Simplified) – a higher score
than the complex Text 5, and Text 8 (Simplified) –
a higher score than its original Text 7.

In the second scenario, the participants data
has been divided into data relevant to participants
under 45 years old (ninety-two participants) and
into participants over 45 years old (eleven partic-
ipants). In this case only the C-Score Simple has
been applied. The results of this evaluation are
shown in Table 5. As our aim is to compare the
reading abilities of different ages of people, and
not the results of text simplification, only the com-
plex texts are taken into account. The results show
that the comprehension score of participants under
45 years old is higher for all texts (despite the un-
even participants’ distribution), except in the case
of complex Text 5.

A similar phenomenon can be observed in Ta-
bles 2, 3 and 4, where in all text pairs, except for
pair 3, i.e. Texts 5 and 6 (where can be observed
the opposite), the simplified text has a higher com-
prehension score than its complex original. The
hypothesis about the different behavior of Text 5
and 6 is that it is text-specific. This is confirmed
by Table 5, which shows that besides the big dif-

26



Text number C-Score Simple
Text 1 (Complex) 21.3
Text 2 (Simplified) 35.3
Text 3 (Complex) 24.8
Text 4 (Simplified) 34.9
Text 5 (Complex) 36.8
Text 6 (Simplified) 23.6
Text 7 (Complex) 40.5
Text 8 (Simplified) 51.5

Table 2: Experiment results for C-Score Simple.

ferences in reading comprehension between par-
ticipants under 45 years old and participants over
45 years old, Text 5 has more or less the same
comprehension score for both groups of readers.
From this fact we can assume that this text is prob-
ably fairly easy, so this type of combination of text
simplification rules does not simplify it, and in-
stead, when applied makes it less comprehensible
or more awkward for the human readers.

Text number C-Score Complete
Text 1 (Complex) 66.3
Text 2 (Simplified) 114.3
Text 3 (Complex) 65.3
Text 4 (Simplified) 89.9
Text 5 (Complex) 104.0
Text 6 (Simplified) 66.9
Text 7 (Complex) 106.7
Text 8 (Simplified) 153.0

Table 3: Experiment results for C-Score Com-
plete.

Text number C-Score Textsize
Text 1 (Complex) 109.5
Text 2 (Simplified) 192.0
Text 3 (Complex) 107.7
Text 4 (Simplified) 131.3
Text 5 (Complex) 171.6
Text 6 (Simplified) 102.4
Text 7 (Complex) 176.1
Text 8 (Simplified) 263.3

Table 4: Experiment results for C-ScoreTextsize.

5 Discussion and Conclusions

This article has presented an extended discussion
of the methods employed for evaluation in the text

Text number Under 45 Over 45
Text 1 (Complex) 39.7 22.5
Text 3 (Complex) 37.2 18.4
Text 5 (Complex) 38.4 38.9
Text 7 (Complex) 54.3 35.9

Table 5: C-Score Simple for one text.

simplification domain. In order to address the lack
of common or standard evaluation approaches,
this article proposed three evaluation formulae,
which measure the reading comprehension of pro-
duced texts. The formulae have been developed on
the basis of an extensive reading comprehension
experiment, aiming to evaluate the impact of a text
simplification approach (a controlled language) on
emergency instructions. Two evaluation scenarios
have been presented, the first of which calculated
with all three formulae, while the second used only
the simplest one. In this way, the article aims
to address both the lack of common TS evalua-
tion metrics as suggested in Section 2 (Coster and
Kauchak, 2011) and the scarcity of reading com-
prehension (Siddharthan and Katsos, 2012) evalu-
ation with real users (Williams and Reiter, 2008),
by proposing a tailored approach for this type of
text simplification evaluation. With this article we
aim at inciting the Text Simplification Commu-
nity to open a discussion forum about common
methods for evaluating text simplification, in or-
der to provide objective evaluation metrics allow-
ing the comparison of different approaches, and to
ensure that simplification really achieves its aims.
We also argue that taking in consideration the end-
users and text units used for evaluation is impor-
tant. In our approach, we address only the eval-
uation of text simplification approaches aiming to
improve reading comprehension and experiments
in which time to reply to questions and percent-
age of correct answers can be measured. A plausi-
ble scenario for applying our evaluation approach
would be to use the Amazon Mechanical Turk
for crowd-sourcing and then to evaluate the per-
formance of a text simplification system on com-
plex and simplified texts, to compare the perfor-
mance of two or more approaches, or of two ver-
sions of the same system on the same pairs of
texts. These formulae can be also employed in
psycholinguistically-oriented experiments, which
aim to reach cognitive findings regarding specific
target reader groups, such as dyslexics or autis-

27



tic readers. Future work will involve the com-
parison of the above proposed evaluation metrics
with any of the metrics already employed in the
related work, such as the recent and classic read-
ability formulae, eye-tracking, reading rate, hu-
man judges ratings, and others. We consider that
content preservation and grammaticality are not
necessary to be evaluated for this approach, as the
simplified texts have been produced manually, by
linguists, who were native speakers of English.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Prof. Dr. Petar
Temnikov for the ideas and advices about the re-
search methodology, Dr. Anke Buttner for the psy-
cholinguistic counseling about the experiment de-
sign, including questions, answers and texts se-
lection and the simplification method psycholog-
ical validity, and Dr. Constantin Orasan and Dr.
Le An Ha for the testing interface implementa-
tion. The research of Irina Temnikova reported in
this paper was partially supported by the project
AComIn ”Advanced Computing for Innovation”,
grant 316087, funded by the FP7 Capacity Pro-
gramme (Research Potential of Convergence Re-
gions).

Finally, the authors would also like to thank the
PITR 2013 reviewers for their useful feedback.

References
Jan Alexandersson, Peter Ljunglf, Kathleen F. Mc-

Coy, Brian Roark, and Annalu Waller, editors.
2012. Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Speech
and Language Processing for Assistive Technolo-
gies. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Montréal, Canada, June.

Stefan Bott, Luz Rello, Biljana Drndarević, and Hora-
cio Saggion. 2012. Can spanish be simpler? lexsis:
Lexical simplification for spanish. In Proceedings of
the 24th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (Coling 2012), Mumbai, India (Decem-
ber 2012).

Yvonne Canning. 2002. Syntactic Simplification of
Text. Ph.D. thesis, University of Sunderland, UK.

Raman Chandrasekar, Christine Doran, and Bangalore
Srinivas. 1996. Motivations and methods for text
simplification. In Proceedings of the 16th confer-
ence on Computational linguistics-Volume 2, pages
1041–1044. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

James Clarke and Mirella Lapata. 2006. Models
for sentence compression: A comparison across do-

mains, training requirements and evaluation mea-
sures. In Proceedings of the 21st International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics and the 44th
annual meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 377–384. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Jacob Cohen et al. 1960. A coefficient of agreement
for nominal scales. Educational and psychological
measurement, 20(1):37–46.

William Coster and David Kauchak. 2011. Learning to
simplify sentences using wikipedia. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Monolingual Text-To-Text Gen-
eration, pages 1–9. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Walter Daelemans, Anja Höthker, and Erik Tjong Kim
Sang. 2004. Automatic sentence simplification for
subtitling in dutch and english. In Proceedings of
the 4th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, pages 1045–1048.

Jan De Belder and Marie-Francine Moens. 2012. A
dataset for the evaluation of lexical simplification.
In Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text
Processing, pages 426–437. Springer.

Siobhan Devlin. 1999. Automatic Language Simplifi-
cation for Aphasic Readers. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Sunderland, UK.

George Doddington. 2002. Automatic evaluation
of machine translation quality using n-gram co-
occurrence statistics. In Proceedings of the second
international conference on Human Language Tech-
nology Research, pages 138–145. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers Inc.

Biljana Drndarević, Sanja Štajner, Stefan Bott, Susana
Bautista, and Horacio Saggion. 2013. Automatic
text simplification in spanish: A comparative evalu-
ation of complementing modules. In Computational
Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, pages
488–500. Springer.

William H. DuBay. 2004. The principles of readabil-
ity. Impact Information, pages 1–76.

Noémie Elhadad. 2006. User-sensitive text summa-
rization: Application to the medical domain. Ph.D.
thesis, Columbia University.

Rudolf Flesch. 1948. A new readability yardstick. The
Journal of applied psychology, 32(3).

Caroline Gasperin, Erick Maziero, Lucia Specia, TAS
Pardo, and Sandra M Aluisio. 2009. Natural lan-
guage processing for social inclusion: a text sim-
plification architecture for different literacy levels.
the Proceedings of SEMISH-XXXVI Seminário Inte-
grado de Software e Hardware, pages 387–401.

Gregory Grefenstette. 1998. Producing intelligent
telegraphic text reduction to provide an audio scan-
ning service for the blind. In Working notes of the

28



AAAI Spring Symposium on Intelligent Text summa-
rization, pages 111–118.

Norman Edward Gronlund. 1982. Constructing
achievement tests. Prentice Hall.

Kentaro Inui, Atsushi Fujita, Tetsuro Takahashi, Ryu
Iida, and Tomoya Iwakura. 2003. Text simplifica-
tion for reading assistance: a project note. In Pro-
ceedings of the second international workshop on
Paraphrasing-Volume 16, pages 9–16. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Beata Beigman Klebanov, Kevin Knight, and Daniel
Marcu. 2004. Text simplification for information-
seeking applications. In On the Move to Mean-
ingful Internet Systems 2004: CoopIS, DOA, and
ODBASE, pages 735–747. Springer.

Irving Lorge. 1948. The lorge and flesch readabil-
ity formulae: A correction. School and Society,
67:141–142.

Aurélien Max. 2006. Writing for language-impaired
readers. In Computational Linguistics and Intelli-
gent Text Processing, pages 567–570. Springer.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Sarah E. Petersen and Mari Ostendorf. 2007. Text sim-
plification for language learners: a corpus analysis.
In In Proc. of Workshop on Speech and Language
Technology for Education.

Luz Rello, Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Stefan Bott, and Ho-
racio Saggion. 2013. Simplify or help? text sim-
plification strategies for people with dyslexia. Proc.
W4A, 13.

J. Richard Ruffino. 1982. Coping with machine trans-
lation. Practical Experience of Machine Transla-
tion.

Advaith Siddharthan and Napoleon Katsos. 2012. Of-
fline sentence processing measures for testing read-
ability with users. In Proceedings of the First Work-
shop on Predicting and Improving Text Readability
for target reader populations, pages 17–24. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Advaith Siddharthan. 2003. Syntactic simplification
and text cohesion. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cam-
bridge, UK.

Matthew Snover, Nitin Madnani, Bonnie J Dorr, and
Richard Schwartz. 2009. Fluency, adequacy, or
hter?: exploring different human judgments with a
tunable mt metric. In Proceedings of the Fourth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
259–268. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Lucia Specia, Sujay Kumar Jauhar, and Rada Mihal-
cea. 2012. Semeval-2012 task 1: English lexi-
cal simplification. In Proceedings of the First Joint
Conference on Lexical and Computational Seman-
tics, pages 347–355. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Lucia Specia. 2010. Translating from complex to sim-
plified sentences. In Computational Processing of
the Portuguese Language, pages 30–39. Springer.

A. A. Streiff. 1985. New developments in titus 4.
Lawson (1985), 185:192.

Irina Temnikova. 2012. Text Complexity and Text Sim-
plification in the Crisis Management domain. Ph.D.
thesis, Wolverhampton, UK.

Lucy Vanderwende, Hisami Suzuki, Chris Brockett,
and Ani Nenkova. 2007. Beyond sumbasic: Task-
focused summarization with sentence simplification
and lexical expansion. Information Processing &
Management, 43(6):1606–1618.

David Vickrey and Daphne Koller. 2008. Sentence
simplification for semantic role labeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies (ACL-2008: HLT), pages 344–
352.

Sandra Williams and Ehud Reiter. 2008. Generating
basic skills reports for low-skilled readers. Natural
Language Engineering, 14(4):495–525.

Sandra Williams, Advaith Siddharthan, and Ani
Nenkova, editors. 2012. Proceedings of the First
Workshop on Predicting and Improving Text Read-
ability for target reader populations. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Montréal, Canada,
June.

Kristian Woodsend and Mirella Lapata. 2011. Learn-
ing to simplify sentences with quasi-synchronous
grammar and integer programming. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 409–420. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Mark Yatskar, Bo Pang, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-
Mizil, and Lillian Lee. 2010. For the sake of sim-
plicity: Unsupervised extraction of lexical simplifi-
cations from wikipedia. In Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 365–368. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Zhemin Zhu, Delphine Bernhard, and Iryna Gurevych.
2010. A monolingual tree-based translation model
for sentence simplification. In Proceedings of the
23rd international conference on computational lin-
guistics, pages 1353–1361. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

29


