










































The Far Reach of Multiword Expressions in Educational Technology


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), page 138,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Far Reach of Multiword Expressions in Educational Technology

Jill Burstein
Educational Testing Service

660 Rosedale Road
Princeton, NJ 08541 USA
JBurstein@ets.org

Abstract

Multiword expressions as they appear as nominal
compounds, collocational forms, and idioms are
now leveraged in educational technology in assess-
ment and instruction contexts. The talk will focus on
how multiword expression identification is used in
different kinds of educational applications, includ-
ing automated essay evaluation, and teacher pro-
fessional development in curriculum development
for English language learners. Recent approaches
developed to resolve polarity for noun-noun com-
pounds in a sentiment system being designed to han-
dle evaluation of argumentation (sentiment) in test-
taker writing (Beigman-Klebanov, Burstein, and
Madnani, to appear) will also be described.

About the Speaker

Jill Burstein is a managing principal research scien-
tist in the Research & Development division at Ed-
ucational Testing Service in Princeton, New Jersey.
Her background and expertise is in computational
linguistics with a focus on educational applications
for writing, reading, and teacher professional devel-
opment. She holds 13 patents for educational tech-
nology inventions. Jills inventions include e-rater,
an automated essay scoring and evaluation system.
And, in more recent work, she has leveraged natural
language processing to develop Language MuseSM,
a teacher professional development application that
supports teachers in the development of language-
based instruction that aids English learner content
understanding and language skills development. She
received her B.A. in Linguistics and Spanish from

New York University, and her M.A. and Ph.D. in
Linguistics from the Graduate Center, City Univer-
sity of New York.

References
Beigman Klebanov, B., Burstein, J., and Madnani, N. (to

appear) Sentiment Profiles of Multi-Word Expressions
in Test-Taker Essays: The Case of Noun-Noun Com-
pounds. In V. Kardoni, C. Ramisch, and A. Villavi-
cencio (eds.) ACM Transactions for Speech and Lan-
guage Processing, Special Issue on Multiword Expres-
sions: From Theory to Practice.

138


