










































The New Eye of Government: Citizen Sentiment Analysis in Social Media


IJCNLP 2013 Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Social Media (SocialNLP), pages 23–28,
Nagoya, Japan, 14 October 2013.

The New Eye of Government: Citizen Sentiment Analysis in Social 

Media 

Ravi Arunachalam 

IBM 

rarunach@in.ibm.com 

Sandipan Sarkar 

IBM 

sandipansarkar@gmail.com, 

sandipan.sarkar@in.ibm.com 

 

 

Abstract  

Several Governments across the world are try-

ing to move closer to their citizens to achieve 

transparency and engagement. The explosion 

of social media is opening new opportunities 

to achieve it. In this work we proposed an ap-

proach to monitor and analyze the citizen sen-

timent in social media by Governments. We 

also applied this approach to a real-world 

problem and presented how Government 

agencies can get benefited out of it. 

1 Introduction  

Governments across the world facing unique 

challenges today than ever before. In recent time, 

Arab Spring phenomenon is an example of how 

Governments can be impacted if they ignore citi-
zen sentiment. It is a growing trend that Gov-

ernments are trying to move closer to the citizen-

centric model, where the priorities and services 
would be driven according to citizen needs rather 

than Government capability. Such trends are 

forcing the Governments in rethinking and re-

shaping their policies in citizen interactions. New 

disruptive technologies like cloud, mobile etc. 

are opening new opportunities to the Govern-

ments to enable innovations in such interactions.  

The advent of Social Media is a recent addi-

tion to such disruptive socio-technical enablers. 
Governments are fast realizing that it can be a 

great vehicle to get closer to the citizens. It can 

provide deep insight in what citizens want. Thus, 
in the current gloomy climate of world economy 

today, Governments can reorganize and repriori-

tize the allocation limited funds, thereby creating 

maximum impact on citizens’ life. Building such 

insight is a non-trivial task because of the huge 

volume of information that social media can 

generate. However, Sentiment Analysis or Opin-

ion Mining can be a useful vehicle in this jour-

ney. 

In this work, we presented a model and case 
study to analyze citizen sentiment from social 

media in helping the Governments to take deci-

sions. 

2 Background  

2.1 Social Sentiment Analysis 

The social media is transforming the way we 

communicate, the way we form relationships, the 

way we connect to each other, the way we live 
and work.  Here are some figures that give an 

idea about the frantic pace in which the social 

media phenomenon is growing: 1.43 billion peo-
ple worldwide visited a social networking site in 

20121; nearly 1 in 8 people worldwide have their 

own Facebook page
2
; 3 million new blogs come 

online every month3; and 65 percent of social 

media users said they use it to learn more about 

brands, products and services
4
. 

Mass Communication expert Curtis (2013) di-

vided the history of social media into three 

phases – Before the Dawn (1969 - 1993), The 

Dawning (1994 - 2004) and After the Dawn 

(2005 onwards). The works on social sentiment 

analysis has started to be reported after the last 
phase commenced, when the social media has 

received its maturity.  

Around 2007, the researchers and analysts 
started to take notice of the importance and value 

of social media monitoring and sentiment analy-

sis as a means to achieve it. An Aberdeen Group 

                                                
1
 

http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2167518/World

wide-Social-Media-Usage-Trends-in-2012 (Accessed 

on 6 Jun 2013) 
2
 http://ignitevisibility.com/facebook-marketing/ (Ac-

cessed on 6 Jun 2013) 
3
 http://www.jeffbullas.com/2012/11/28/the-latest-27-

social-media-facts-figures-and-statistics-for-2012-

infographic/ (Accessed on 6 Jun 2013) 
4 http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/reports/2012/state-of-

the-media-the-social-media-report-2012.html (Ac-

cessed on 6 Jun 2013) 

23



Benchmark Report (Zabin and Jefferies, 2008) 
published around same time showed that more 

than 84% best-in-class companies improved their 

overall performance, customer satisfaction, risk 
management and actionable insights from social 

media monitoring and analysis. 

We found the first publication on social senti-

ment analysis in a most interesting paper by 

Abbasi (2007), where he proposed an affect 

analysis approach for measuring the presence of 
hate, violence, and the resulting propaganda dis-

semination across extremist group forums. In a 

similar application, Bermingham et al. (2009) 
proposed crawling and analyzing social media 

sites, such as YouTube, to detect radicalism. 

Martineau and Finin (2009) proposed Delta 
TFIDF, a new technique to efficiently weight 

words before classification. Asur and Huberman 

(2010) proposed an approach to predict real-

world outcomes through social media sentiment 

analysis. Pak and Paroubek (2010) explored the 

use of Twitter as a corpus for sentiment analysis. 

Bollen et al. (2011) went ahead and analyzed 

Twitter content to detect different moods of the 

microbloggers and linked that with the major 
events in market, media and culture in time scale. 

Sindhwani et al. (2011) discussed the architec-

ture of a tool and proposed a new family of low-

rank matrix approximation algorithm on TFIDF 

model for modelling topics in a given social me-

dia corpus. Tan et al. (2011) showed that infor-

mation about social relationship can be used to 

improve user-level sentiment analysis. 

2.2 Citizen Social Sentiment Analysis for 
Government 

As established in the facts presented in last sec-

tion, social media presents itself as a ‘big data’ 

source of citizen voice.  If Government agencies 
can constantly keep a tab on pulse of its citizens, 

it can pave the way for better governance. Social 

sentiment analysis can be a very useful tool to 
achieve the same. It can address the following 

questions which Government agencies would be 

very interested to get an answer: 

• How do citizens feel about the agency’s new 

programmes and policies? 

• What are the most talked about pro-

grammes? Is it good or bad? 

• What are the most positively talked about 

attributes in the agency’s programmes? Can 

the agency replicate it to other programmes? 

• Is there negative chatter that the agency 

should respond to? 

• Who are advocates and sceptics of the 

agency? 

• Where the agency should be actively listen-

ing?  

Answers to such questions would help agen-

cies to fine-tune their policies to address specific 

concerns; transform their communication and 

out-reach programmes to clear any misconcep-
tions; provide with insights on how its pro-

grammes and initiatives are perceived by its key 

stakeholders; identify best practices from posi-
tively perceived programmes and replicate it in 

others; design an effective performance model; 

and formulate a comprehensive social business 

strategy. 

Interestingly, while it was well established for 

more than a decade that commercial organiza-
tions can get benefited from sentiment analysis 

(Zabin and Jefferies, 2008), its value for Gov-

ernments was not very apparent until recent time.  
In 2010, Gartner came up with Open Govern-

ment Maturity Model (Maio, 2010). At 4
th
 level 

of maturity, Gartner proposed sentiment analysis 
as a mean to achieve collaboration for Govern-

ments. 

Echoing to that model, Forrester Research 

(Gliedman, 2011) observed that the US Federal 

government was monitoring the citizen sentiment 

in Twitter. Gartner (Maio, 2011) advised the 

Governments to use social media for achieving 

collaborative budgeting and pattern discovery 

where citizen sentiment analysis in social media 
can play a significant role. The public safety re-

lated works (Abbasi, 2007; and Bermingham et 

al., 2009) we mentioned in section 2.1, can be 
seen as early sentiment analysis related works for 

Government.  

3 Approach 

We could not find many publications that re-

ported applying the social sentiment analysis in a 

Government context. Thus, it might be an oppor-

tune moment to attempt doing a sentiment analy-

sis in the backdrop of a real-life Government 
problem. In this section, we proposed an ap-

proach to accomplish the same. 

3.1 Topic Modelling Problem 

Unlike few other type of content, such as movie 

review, social media is much unstructured and 

free flowing. Thus it is always a challenge to find 
out documents or entries that are relevant for the 

topic we are interested in. This relevance filter-

ing based on topic can be seen as an Information 

24



Extraction (IE) problem, where a large number 
of documents or entries in social media are ana-

lysed to extract some coherent topics out of it 

before further analysis for subjectivity detection 
and sentiment classification. This problem is 

called Topic Modelling.  

The traditional Term Frequency and Inverted 

Document Frequency (TF-IDF) model, which is 

used in Information Retrieval (IR) for calculating 

relevance, can be adopted here though with some 
modification as explained below: 

Let 
n mX ×∈R be the document-term ma-

trix that can be directly used in IR domain, where 

n = number of documents and m = number of 

terms. The elements of X can be defined as  

,

,

log(1 )*d w w
d w

d

tf idf
X

C

+
=  

where ,d wtf is the term frequency of term w in 

document d, log( / )w widf n df= , wdf  is the 

document frequency of term w, and dC is the 
normalizing factor. Dimensions of X are ex-

pected to be large in social media context though 

X is expected to be very sparsely populated. 

If we want to learn k topics, then let 
k mH ×∈R  be the matrix of topics and terms. 

Similarly, we can imagine 
n kW ×∈R as the 

matrix of topic distribution among documents. 

Thus the topic modelling problem can be re-

duced to be the problem of estimating W and H 

such that WH X≈ .  

3.2 Architecture  

In our approach, the topic modelling and senti-

ment analysis is performed by an IBM system – 
Cognos Consumer Insight (CCI). The architec-

ture of CCI, which runs based on the theoretical 

foundation above, is presented at Figure 1. The 

components of this system are described below: 

GPFS: The IBM General Parallel File System 

is a specialized file system targeted for high-
performance applications – such as big data ana-

lytics. 

Hadoop: Apache Hadoop is an open-source 
software framework for running data-intensive 

applications in a distributed fashion over com-

modity hardware. 
SystemT: It is a rule-based IE system as pro-

posed by Chiticariu et al. (2010). It uses a de-

clarative rule language, AQL, to define the Natu-

ral Language Processing (NLP) rules for infor-
mation extraction from documents.  

 

CCI

AdminUI Analysis UI

Hadoop

GPFS

Data 

Fetcher

Topic 

Extractor

FlowManager

SystemT

Uploader

Lucene

Topic 

Modeller

Administrator Analyzer

 
Figure 1: Cognos Customer Insight Architecture 

 

FlowManager: Based on the rules and con-
figurations, this component orchestrates the exe-

cution of different tasks across different compo-

nents in this system. 
Lucene: Apache Lucene is an open-source 

framework for IR applications. 

AdminUI: The user interface used by admin-

istrators to configure this system and define 

AWL rules using simple interfaces. 

AnalysisUI: The user interface component 
that enables sentiment analysis execution and 

rendering using Lucene component. 

DataFetcher: The social media interfacing 
component that interacts with diverse sources, 

fetches information in different formats and pro-

duces JSON representation of them and saves 
into GPFS. 

TopicExtractor: With the help of natural lan-

guage processing rules in SystemT, this compo-

nent extracts information from JSON data cre-

ated by DataFetcher. It computes the ,d wtf and 

widf values and produces X matrix. This com-
ponent runs as a Hadoop job. 

TopicModeller: This component computes 

the estimated matrices W and H. It employs the 

Proximal Rank-One Residue Iterations (Proxi-
mal-RRI) optimization algorithm as proposed by 

Sindhwani et al. (2011). It also produces JSON 

documents annotated with topic information. 
This component also runs as a Hadoop job. 

Uploader: This component picks up the anno-

tated JSON documents produced by TopicMod-
eller and uploads them into a staging area. Lu-

cene indexes these documents so that they can be 

searched and analysed based on extracted infor-

mation using traditional sentiment analysis tech-

25



niques for subjectivity detection and sentiment 
classification. 

3.3 Method 

We propose the three step method below: 
Step I: Define Analysis Model. As first step 

the analysis model needs to be defined and con-

figured through the AdminUI of CCI. The analy-
sis model comprises of the following: 

• Query: This defines the scope of baseline 

data retrieval from social media sources. The 

DataFetcher would use it. The result of the 

query produces the document dimension (n) 
of the W matrix. 

• Topic: As explained earlier, it is important to 

define topics to bring the free-form large 

number of documents into a coherent group. 

The topics can be configured in CCI in two 

levels. A set of Concept terms are defined 

and those can be grouped into Type. These 

topics would be used by the analysis engine 

to create snippets of interest from the base 

list of documents retrieved from social me-

dia. For example, if we are analyzing a social 
services agency, all the benefit programmes 

such as Income Support, Employment Sup-

port can be identified as Concepts and 
grouped under the Topic ‘Benefits’. This 

configuration would define the topic dimen-

sions of W and H matrices. 

• Hotword: Hotwords are the parameters that 

are common across the defined topics of in-

terest.  They can provide additional insight 

into how sentiments around a particular con-

cept can be perceived in the context of dif-
ferent hotwords. For example, hotword can 

be a significant process step or a property 

that is common across multiple Government 
programmes. Some of the hotwords for a So-

cial Services agency can be ‘Claims’, 

‘Awareness’ etc.  ‘Income Support’ concept 

can be perceived in a negative sentiment in 

the context of Claims hotword, but can be 

perceived in a positive sentiment in the con-

text of Awareness hotword. 

• Sentiment Lexicon: Though CCI provides a 

sentiment lexicon assigned with prior polar-

ity for different languages, it is necessary to 

validate that in the context of the rest of the 
analysis model. This is important since the 

connotation of a sentiment term can change 

depending on the context of analysis. Cus-

tomisation can be done as necessary. 

Step II: Perform Analysis. After configura-

tion of the analysis model, the tool can be run 

and analysis can be performed across different 
dimensions. Some of them are presented in our 

Result section. 

Step III: Root Cause Analysis. Once insights 
from the analysis are gained, a root cause analy-

sis can be carried out. While this can be done 

manually by going through all the positive and 

negative sentiments and analyzing them, there 

are two ways we can get narrow down the root 

causes automatically with reasonable accuracy. 

• By analyzing the hotwords and their associ-

ated overall sentiment that has a closer affin-
ity with a concept.  If a particular aspect has 

an overall negative sentiment and it has a 

closer affinity with a programme, then one of 

the root causes for that particular programme 

to have a negative sentiment is inefficiencies 

at that particular aspect of that programme. 

• By extracting the Title of all the documents 

that contain a particular sentiment separately 
and by doing a tag cloud on the same, we 

can have some perspective on what discus-

sion item is leading to most of the negative 
sentiment or a positive sentiment. 

3.4 Experiment Setup  

We performed Social Sentiment Analysis for one 
of the major social benefits organizations in the 

US.  The scope included: (a) analysing agency’s 

current social media presence and strategy and 
compare it with similar agencies in the world; (b) 

sentiment analysis to understand how agency’s 

various benefit and healthcare programs are per-

ceived by citizens; (c) identify root causes lead-

ing to the perceptions; and (d) preparing an ac-

tionable roadmap based on the findings. 
We defined the boundary of our analysis as 

the user generated content between 1 Jun 2012 

and 18 Oct 2012 from Twitter, Facebook, Flickr, 
YouTube, several blogs, forums and some gen-

eral websites built around certain community. 

BoardReader crawler retrieved 41,405 docu-

ments based on our configured query and the 

analysis model extracted 16,954 snippets based 

on the topics defined. CCI version 1.1 was used 

to run the analysis.  

4 Result  

Results from Sentiment Analysis findings are 

presented below across various dimensions.  Our 

interpretations of the results are also highlighted 
in the sections below. 

26



4.1 Sentiment Distribution Across Concepts 

This analysis is used to compare the perceived 

sentiments across concepts by citizens.  This can 

be done at two levels: 

• including sentiments from snippets that may 

or may not have hotwords; and 

• including sentiments from snippets that has 

at least one occurrence of a hotword.   
The 2nd level gives a much more focused per-

spective of sentiment analysis since it is relevant 

to the hotwords of interest. 
 

 
Figure 2: Sentiment Distribution Across Concepts 

(Regardless of Hotword Presence) 

 

 
Figure 3: Sentiment Distribution Across Concepts 

(With Hotword Presence) 

 

It is clearly evident that Disability Compensa-

tion, Insurance, and Pension contribute heavily 

towards negative sentiments, whereas Employ-
ment Benefits, Dependent’s Assistance, and 

Home Loan Benefits are talked in positive light. 

4.2 Sentiment Distribution Across Hot-
words 

This analysis gives a perspective on how vari-

ous aspects of agency’s programmes are per-
ceived. The analysis is presented in Figure 4 and 

Figure 5. We observed the following: (a) Claims 

and Awareness are mostly associated with Bene-
fits and Services programmes whereas Quality 

and Helpline are mostly associated with Health-

care programmes; and (b) Claims received most 
of the negative sentiments.   

 
Figure 4: Hotword Distribution Across Concepts 

 

 
Figure 5: Sentiment Distribution Across Hotwords  

4.3 Concept-Hotword Affinity Analysis 

The relationship between Concepts and Hot-

words is analyzed by measuring the degree of 

affinity between these two dimensions. It helps 

us derive which aspects of a particular pro-

gramme lead to a particular sentiment thus giv-

ing some hints towards root cause. Chi-square 
distribution was used to measure the degree of 

affinity. 

We observed the following: (a) Disability 
Compensation and Pension had a close affinity 

with Claims, which in turn had a negative senti-

ment due to high number of backlogs; (b) Suicide 
and Crisis Prevention had a high affinity with 

Helpline which had a positive sentiment; (c) 

Mental Health and other healthcare programmes 

had high affinity with Quality and were posi-

tively perceived; and (d) Many benefit pro-

grammes had close affinity with Awareness.  

There seemed to lot of out-reach activities done 

by the agency which boosted the positive senti-

ment around Awareness. 

4.4 Root Cause Analysis 

We performed a root cause analysis with the aid 

of affinity analysis and formation of tag cloud as 
shown below: 

27



 
Figure 6: Tag Cloud 

We discovered some of the major reasons be-

hind negative sentiments: (a) the agency was suf-
fering from huge backlogs in claims processing; 

(b) awareness of benefits and services was little 

among its clients and the agency needed to trans-
form its outreach activities; and (c) agency had a 

poor social media strategy. This analysis pro-

vides key information to draw an actionable 

roadmap for the agency which can result in re-

ducing negative perceptions and accentuating the 

positives. 

5 Conclusion  

In this work we chose a particular tool and pro-

posed a method to apply social sentiment analy-

sis in the context of Government. We went ahead 
and applied the technique and method to a real-

life problem. In the process of doing so we 

gained valuable insights, which can be converted 
into actionable roadmap for the Government. 

The success of this application can be taken as 

an encouragement to apply this approach to more 

such issues, such as – Lokpal Bill discussion in 

India or Universal Credit controversy in UK. 

Such analysis would be able to provide a conclu-

sive sentimental insight from the mind of the 

citizens. 

Another interesting problem that can be taken 

up is to apply this method in a multi-lingual 
country like India, where generating content in a 

mixture of languages (e.g. English and Bengali) 

is a common practice in social media.  

References 

A. Abbasi. 2007. Affect intensity analysis of dark 

web forums. Proceedings of Intelligence and Se-
curity Informatics (ISI), pp. 282–288 

Sitaram Asur, and Bernardo A. Huberman. 2010. 

Predicting the Future With Social Media. Web 

Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology (WI-

IAT), 2010 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Confer-

ence on. Vol. 1. IEEE 

Adam Bermingham, Maura Conway, Lisa McInerney, 

Neil O’Hare, and Alan F. Smeaton. 2009. Com-

bining Social Network Analysis and Sentiment 

Analysis to Explore the Potential for Online 

Radicalisation. International Conference on Ad-
vances in Social Network Analysis and Mining 

(ASONAM'09), IEEE 

Johan Bollen, Alberto Pepe, and Huina Mao. 2011. 

Modeling public mood and emotion: Twitter 

sentiment and socioeconomic phenomena. Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth International AAAI Confer-

ence on Weblogs and Social Media. 

Laura Chiticariu, Rajasekar Krishnamurthy, Yunyao 

Li, Sriram Raghavan, Frederick R. Reiss, and 

Shivakumar Vaithyanathan. 2010. SystemT: an 

Algebraic Approach to Declarative Informa-

tion Extraction. Proceedings of the 48th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-

guistics, pp.128-137  

Anthony R. Curtis. 2013. The Brief History of So-

cial Media. University of North Carolina at Pem-
broke, [Online] Accessed on 1 Jun 2013 at 

http://www.uncp.edu/home/acurtis/NewMedia/Soci

alMedia/SocialMediaHistory.html 

Chip Gliedman. 2011. Industry Innovation: US 

Federal Government. Forrester Research Report  

Andrea Di Maio. 2010. Gartner Open Government 

Maturity Model.  Gartner Report 

Justin Martineau, and Tim Finin. 2009. Delta tfidf: 

An improved feature space for sentiment 

analysis. Proceedings of the 3rd AAAI Interna-
tional Conference on Weblogs and Social Media. 

2009. 

Alexander Pak, and Patrick Paroubek. 2010. Twitter 

as a Corpus for Sentiment Analysis and Opin-

ion Mining. Proceedings of LREC. Vol. 2010 

V. Sindhwani, A. Ghoting, E. Ting, and R. Lawrence. 

2011. Extracting insights from social media 
with large-scale matrix approximations. IBM 
Journal of Research and Development, 55(5), 

pp.9:1-9:13 

Chenhao Tan, Lillian Lee, Jie Tang, Long Jiang, 

Ming Zhou, and Ping Li. 2011. User-level senti-

ment analysis incorporating social networks. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1109.6018 

J. Zabin, and A. Jefferies. 2008. Social media moni-

toring and analysis: Generating consumer in-

sights from online conversation. Aberdeen 
Group Benchmark Report 

28


