










































Adapting SimpleNLG for Bilingual English-French Realisation


Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 183–187,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Adapting SimpleNLG for bilingual English-French realisation 

 
 

Pierre-Luc Vaudry and Guy Lapalme 
RALI-DIRO – Université de Montréal 

C.P. 6128, Succ. Centre-Ville 
Montréal, Québec, Canada, H3C 3J8 

{vaudrypl,lapalme}@iro.umontreal.ca 
 

  
 

Abstract 

This paper describes SimpleNLG-EnFr, an 
adaption of the English realisation engine 
SimpleNLG (Gatt and Reiter, 2009) for bilin-
gual English-French realisation. Grammatical 
similarities between English and French that 
could be exploited and specifics of French that 
needed adaptation are discussed. 

1 Introduction 
Surface realisation is the last step in natural 

language generation. It takes as input an abstract 
representation where lexical units and syntactic 
structures have been determined. Its output is 
formatted natural language text. SimpleNLG, as 
described in Gatt and Reiter (2009), is a realisa-
tion engine for English in the form of a Java li-
brary. It handles inflection, derivation, word or-
der, auxiliaries, agreement, pronominalisation, 
punctuation, spacing, etc. This paper describes 
SimpleNLG-EnFr 1.1 1 , a bilingual realisation 
engine for English and French derived from 
SimpleNLG 4.2, and explains the design choices 
and the challenges encountered. Grammatical 
similarities and differences between English and 
French that influenced the design are dis-
cussed. The current version of SimpleNLG is 
4.4, but all mentions of SimpleNLG in this paper 
refer to version 4.2. 

2 Subset of French covered 
The English grammatical coverage of Sim-
pleNLG-EnFr is the same as that of SimpleNLG 
4.2. Its French grammatical coverage is equiva-
lent to its English one. 

                                                
1 Available online, along with the source code, at 
http://www-etud.iro.umontreal.ca/~vaudrypl
/snlgbil/snlgEnFr_english.html 

Le français fondamental (1er Degré) (Minis-
tère de l'Éducation nationale, 1959) was used as 
a reference for French grammatical coverage. 
That document results from empirical studies and 
aims at describing the essential notions for teach-
ing French as a foreign language. Almost all of 
the grammar points enumerated in this document 
are covered by SimpleNLG-EnFr. The detailed 
French grammar rules used in the implementa-
tion come mainly from Grevisse (1993) and 
Mansouri (1996). 

SimpleNLG-EnFr has a 3871 entry default 
French lexicon covering L'échelle Dubois-Buyse 
d'orthographe usuelle française (Ters et al., 
1964). It contains the most important and com-
monly used French vocabulary (including func-
tion words), so as not to interfere with a particu-
lar application domain vocabulary. A domain 
specific lexicon can easily be added as Sim-
pleNLG supports using multiple lexicons. Most 
of the inflected forms in the default French lexi-
con were taken from Morphalou 2.0 (CNRTL). 

3 SimpleNLG parts pooled for English 
and French 

Most of the basic framework, which defined the 
class hierarchy covering lexical units, phrases 
and document elements such as paragraphs, 
could be kept in common for both English and 
French. Some shared grammar rules and princi-
ples were put in abstract classes from which lan-
guage-specific modules could be derived. The 
other grammar rules were rewritten for French, 
with the corresponding English ones serving as 
references. Many static methods in the English 
modules in SimpleNLG were changed to regular 
instance methods in order to be able to override 
them in the new subclasses. 

183



3.1 General characteristics 
Features: SimpleNLG uses a system of features 
for various functions: encoding morphological 
and syntactic properties of lexical units; letting 
the user set the parameters of a particular phrase 
(plural, verb tenses, etc.); and internally keeping 
track of the content of a phrase and various in-
formation needed during realisation. This system 
is generic enough to be used for other languages. 
Most features are reusable and others can be 
added as needed. In SimpleNLG-EnFr, most of 
the already present features were reused for 
French. 

Lexicon: In SimpleNLG, the lexicon is al-
ready relatively well separated from the gram-
mar. The basic lexicon class provides an inter-
face to a simple XML file containing the neces-
sary information about the lexical units. The list 
of available fields in this file can easily be ex-
tended by adding lexical features to the ones 
used for English. In SimpleNLG-EnFr, many 
lexical features were added mainly to account for 
the higher complexity of French morphology. 

3.2 Syntax 
Verb phrase and clause: First, English and 
French have the same basic clause constituent 
order: Subject-Verb-Object (SVO). Even more 
importantly for SimpleNLG-EnFr, this constitu-
ent order is relatively stable (compared with oth-
er languages like German or Russian), at least for 
the purpose of practical NLG applications. This 
frees us in most cases from having to choose be-
tween different syntactically correct word orders. 
We thus did not have to make such big changes 
to the syntactic representation as were needed in 
adapting SimpleNLG to German (Bollmann, 
2011). Indeed, in German the subject has the 
same syntactic status in the clause than the ob-
ject(s) and they can all occupy the same varying 
positions relative to the verb. However, Boll-
mann (2011) had more leeway because he had 
decided not to keep the English grammar along-
side the German one in his implementation. In 
contrast, in SimpleNLG-EnFr we wanted to be 
able to change freely between English and 
French grammars during the generation of a sin-
gle text. 

English and French also have a very similar 
passive construction. In French, it is used less 
frequently because other options exist to avoid 
mentioning the subject of a sentence (for exam-
ple, using the indefinite personal pronoun on), 

but choosing between those constructions is not 
the role of the realisation engine. 

Noun phrase: English and French can both 
have a determiner at the beginning of a noun 
phrase. 

Prepositional phrase: Both languages use 
prepositions (not postpositions) for introducing 
various complements. 

Coordinated phrase: Both have a coordina-
tion conjunction in penultimate position and both 
use commas as separators between coordinates. 

3.3 Morphology 
In both languages, nouns and verbs are marked 
morphologically for singular/plural. In addition, 
personal pronoun forms differ based not only on 
number and person, but also on grammatical 
function and gender. This last similarity facilitat-
ed adapting pronominalisation. 

4 Adaptations for French 
The rules for each processing level are encoded 
in separate modules for each language. The fol-
lowing adaptations were made for French by 
adding syntactic and lexical features and encod-
ing the corresponding rules in the French ver-
sions of the grammar rules modules. 

4.1 Syntax 
Verb phrase and clause: French negation has 
some similarities but also big differences with its 
English counterpart. It is usually expressed with 
not one but two adverbs (ne and pas), which 
come respectively before and after the first word 
of the verb group, as in example (1). Moreover, 
pas can be replaced by other negation auxiliaries 
to specify a different kind of negation, as in (2). 
Finally, no negation auxiliary is used (only ne) 
when the sentence already carries another nega-
tive element, for example a negative indefinite 
pronoun as in (3).  

(1) il ne parle pas 
“he does not speak” 

(2) il ne parle plus 
he not speaks more 
“he does not speak anymore” 

(3) personne ne parle 
nobody not speaks 
“nobody speaks” 

In French, some complement pronouns, in-
stead of being placed after the verb as in the reg-
ular SVO word order, are placed just before it. 
Furthermore, some of them sometimes take in 
that case a different form. The rules governing 

184



the acceptable combinations and sequencings of 
those complements that can be cliticised in this 
way are very precise. Examples (4) and (5) illus-
trate this phenomenon. 

(4) il la leur réfère 
he her them refers 
“he refers her to them” 

(5) il nous réfère à eux  
he us refers to them 
“he refers us to them” 

The complexity of French past participle 
agreement is well known, particularly because it 
manifests itself mostly in written French. French 
verbs can have être (to be) or avoir (to have) as 
auxiliaries in compound tenses. This influences 
whether the past participle agrees with the sub-
ject (être) or the direct object if it is placed be-
fore the past participle (avoir). Combined with 
clitic complement pronouns and relative clauses, 
among others, it can get very complex. In addi-
tion, French past participles are inflected in gen-
der and number, like adjectives. 

Noun phrase: In SimpleNLG, a noun phrase 
can have pre-modifiers and post-modifiers. Ad-
jectives are by default considered pre-modifiers 
and everything else post-modifiers. In contrast, 
in French, most adjectives are placed after the 
noun, but some (the most common) are most fre-
quently placed before the noun. In SimpleNLG-
EnFr this is achieved by referring to an extra lex-
ical feature. 

In addition, in French the determiner and ad-
jectives agree with the noun in number and gen-
der. Instead of adding a new mechanism to prop-
agate relevant features of the noun phrase to 
where they are needed, as with subject-verb 
agreement in SimpleNLG, the solution imple-
mented was to let the determiner and adjectives 
get themselves the information they needed from 
their parent constituent. This more flexible way 
of managing agreement is more amenable to 
multilingual realisation. 

Interrogative clause: A simple way of build-
ing an interrogative sentence in French is to pre-
pend the expression est-ce que (is it that), like in 
(6). This is what we chose. 

(6) est-ce que tu as mangé?  
is it that you have eaten? 
“did you eat?” 

This kind of interrogative clause can be built 
in part by using the relative clause rules (see be-
low). 

Relative clause: A mechanism for building 
relative clauses has been added to the French part 
of SimpleNLG-EnFr that has no direct equivalent 

in the English implementation. The phrase that 
must be replaced by a relative pronoun is speci-
fied by setting a feature on the clause. This 
phrase will not appear in the realised clause. 
Even if this phrase was not present in the clause, 
it will still be used to choose a relative pronoun, 
which can be useful. The grammatical function 
of that phrase can in that case be set manually. 

 The resulting relative pronoun takes the place 
that is normally reserved for the complementiser. 
Its form is chosen according to two sources: the 
grammatical function and preposition, if any, of 
the phrase it replaces; and the person and gender 
of its antecedent (the noun or pronoun that the 
relative clause modifies). Examples (7), (8) and 
(9) illustrate this. 

(7) la tarte que tu as mangée  
the pie that.obj you have eaten.fem 
“the pie that you ate” 

(8) la tarte qui a été mangée  
the pie that.subj has been eaten.fem 
“the pie that was eaten” 

(9) l’homme dont j’ai mangé la tarte  
the man whose I have eaten the pie 
“the man whose pie I ate” 

4.2 Morphology 
Number and gender: French determiners and 
adjectives must be inflected in number and gen-
der. Additionally, number and gender interact 
with each other in the inflection process. 

Verb tenses: Verb inflected forms are more 
varied in French than in English. In addition, 
French verbs are classified in three conjugation 
groups. The first group is comprised of the regu-
lar verbs. The third group is a catchall category 
for miscellaneous irregular verbs. Several mor-
phological rules govern the combination of the 
verb inflection morphemes. 

Detached form of personal pronouns: In 
French, personal pronouns are often cliticised 
(see subsection 5.1), but where they are not, they 
take a different form, which is called forme dis-
jointe (detached form). See leur versus eux in 
examples (4) and (5). 

4.3 Morphophonology 
The morphophonological level is a new pro-
cessing level introduced in SimpleNLG-EnFr to 
account for a range of phenomena very common 
in French and other languages. They are best de-
scribed using rules that use both morphological 
and phonological conditions. The only obvious 
example of this kind of rule in written English, 
which was included in the morphology module 

185



in SimpleNLG, is illustrated by examples (10) 
and (11). 

(10) a + book → a book 
(11) a + apple → an apple 
Here the morphological condition is the pres-

ence of the indefinite singular determiner a and 
the phonological one is the presence of a vowel 
at the beginning of the next word. 

The morphology rules operate on one word at 
a time. The morphophonology rules may need to 
have access to adjacent words and to be applied 
after all inflection and derivation rules have been 
applied. This justifies a separate processing level. 
In SimpleNLG-EnFr, the morphophonological 
level is used mainly for external sandhi, i.e. phe-
nomena occurring at word boundaries. 

Elision: In French some words have their last 
vowel elided when in front of a word beginning 
by a vowel or a so-called h aspiré (aspired h). 
Indeed, an extra lexical feature is needed for 
French words beginning with the letter h to know 
if that kind of rule applies. Note that the letter h 
itself is never pronounced in French. Examples 
(12) and (13) illustrate elision, while it does not 
occur in (14). 

(12) la + amitié → l’amitié 
the friendship 

(13) le + homme → l’homme 
the man 

(14) la + honte → la honte 
the shame 

Liaison: Liaison is a phenomenon akin to eli-
sion, except that it involves adding and/or replac-
ing phonemes. Its “goal” is to avoid contact be-
tween the vowel at the end of some words and 
the beginning vowel of the next word. It is most-
ly apparent in speech, although it sometimes has 
an effect in written French, as in (15). 

(15) le + beau + homme → le bel homme 
the handsome man 

Prepositions: Some prepositions interact with 
definite determiners in French, as in (16). 

(16) à + le → au 
at the 

5 Bilingual generation 
Building a bilingual realisation engine rather 
than just adapting SimpleNLG for unilingual 
French realisation was a design choice dictated 
mainly by practical considerations. Being able to 
use the same realisation engine (and thus the 
same API) for several or all target languages 
when developing a multilingual NLG application 
is convenient. In the case of English and French, 

this could be most useful when targeting Canadi-
an or European populations, for example. 

In SimpleNLG-EnFr, bilingual generation is 
implemented by being able to determine dynami-
cally the language of each processing unit: 
phrases for the syntax module, lexical units for 
the morphology module, etc. The factories used 
by the library’s user to create syntactic structure 
specifications and access or create lexical units 
each use a language-specific lexicon. Each pro-
cessing module then chooses at realisation time 
which set of rules to apply to a given processing 
unit based on the language of its lexicon. Thus, 
sentences, phrases and words of different lan-
guages can be mixed freely. 

6 Conclusion 
A bilingual realisation engine for English and 
French was built. It took five months to com-
plete, including the writing of a detailed French 
manual. Despite many internal changes, it retains 
almost the same API as the original. 

Future improvements could include enlarging 
the default lexicon and adding specialised lexi-
cons for French, implementing a complete textu-
al representation for numbers, and adapting the 
changes in SimpleNLG since version 4.2, like 
the XML realiser. 

More languages could be added to Sim-
pleNLG-EnFr. However, it would perhaps be 
easier to include many languages if the grammar 
of each language could be specified in a common 
grammar formalism, instead of programmatically 
in the processing modules themselves. This 
would necessitate changing the architecture. 

In the process of developing SimpleNLG-
EnFr, a great deal was learned about what kind 
of challenges multilingual realisation poses. A 
common grammatical ground must be found and 
exploited for the group of languages considered, 
which should not be too far apart in that respect. 
For the rest, care must be taken not to make too 
many assumptions about the inner workings of 
the grammar of each language. Indeed, every 
language has its own grammatical peculiarities. 

 
Acknowledgments 
 
We would like to thank the SimpleNLG team for 
having made available its source code. This work 
was supported by two Undergraduate Student 
Research Awards (USRA) from the Natural Sci-
ences and Engineering Research Council of Can-
ada (NSERC). 

186



References 
Marcel Bollmann. 2011. Adapting SimpleNLG to 

German. In Proceedings of the 13th European 
Workshop on Natural Language Generation 
(ENLG 2011), pages 133-138. 

CNRTL. CNRTL : Centre National de Ressources 
Textuelles et Lexicales – Morphalou, button Télé-
charger Morphalou 2.0, 
[http://www.cnrtl.fr/lexiques/morphalou/] (consult-
ed on 14 July 2011). 

Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. SimpleNLG: A 
realisation engine for practical applications. In 
Proceedings of the 12th European Workshop 
on Natural Language Generation (ENLG 
2009), pages 90-93. 

Maurice Grevisse, (1993). Le bon usage, grammaire 
française, 12e édition refondue par André Goosse, 
8e tirage, Éditions Duculot, Louvain-la-Neuve, 
Belgique. 

Mohammed Issaoui Mansouri, (1996). Le Mansouris, 
tous les verbes usuels entièrement conjugués et or-
thographiés. CAPT, Éditeurs, Montréal, Canada. 

Ministère de l'Éducation nationale, Direction de la 
Coopération avec la Communauté et l'Étranger 
(France) (1959). Le français fondamental (1er 
Degré), Publication de l'Institut Pédagogique Na-
tional, Paris, France. 

François Ters, Daniel Reichenbach and Georges 
Mayer. (1964). L'échelle Dubois-Buyse d'ortho-
graphe usuelle française. Messeiller. 

187


