


































Migrating Psycholinguistic Semantic Feature Norms into Linked Data in
Linguistics

Yoshihiko Hayashi
Graduate School of Language and Culture, Osaka University

1-8 Machikaneyma, Toyonaka 5600043, Japan
hayashi@lang.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract

Semantic feature norms, originally uti-
lized in the field of psycholinguistics as a
tool for studying human semantic repre-
sentation and computation, have recently
attracted the attention of some NLP/IR re-
searchers who wish to improve their task
performances. However, currently avail-
able semantic feature norms are, by nature,
not well-structured, making them difficult
to integrate into existing resources of var-
ious kinds. In this paper, by examining an
actual set of semantic feature norms, we
investigate which types of semantic fea-
tures should be migrated into Linked Data
in Linguistics (LDL) and how the migra-
tion could be done.

1 Introduction

Recently, some NLP/IR researchers have be-
come interested in incorporating psycholinguis-
tic features into their applications to improve
task performance (Kwong, 2012; Tanaka et al.,
2013). Among a range of psycholinguistic fea-
tures, such as imageability, concreteness, and fa-
miliarity (Paivio et al., 1968), the most attractive
is a set of semantic feature norms introduced by
McRae et al. (2005). It captures prominent asso-
ciative knowledge about a concept possessed by
humans. Silberer and Lapata (2012), for exam-
ple, employ semantic feature norms as a proxy for
human sensorimotor experiences in their seman-
tic representation model, and report improved per-
formance in word association and word similarity
computation tasks. However, currently available
semantic feature norms are, by nature, not well-
structured, making them difficult to integrate into
existing resources of various kinds.

Given this background, in this paper, we ex-
tract a tentative set of psycholinguistically signifi-
cant semantic feature types, and draw a technical

Semantic feature BR Label
a reptile taxonomic
beh - eats people visual-motion
beh - swims visual-motion
has a mouth visual-form and surface
has jaws visual-form and surface
has scales visual-form and surface
is dangerous encyclopaedic
is long visual-form and surface
lives in swamps encyclopaedic

Table 1: Semantic feature norms and the BR La-
bels for describing alligator.

map to structurize corresponding semantic feature
norms by observing the Linked Data paradigm.
Note that psycholinguistically significant semantic
feature types, in particular, dictate semantic rela-
tions that amply observe associations by humans;
however, those are usually not considered in exist-
ing lexico-ontological resources.

2 Semantic Feature Norms

2.1 Overview of McRae’s Database

In this paper, we take the well-known set of
semantic feature norms provided by McRae et
al. (2005) (henceforth, McRae’s database) as an
actual example. This database provides a total of
7,526 semantic feature norms assigned to 541 liv-
ing and nonliving basic-level concepts, each orga-
nized on the basis of experimental data collected
from a large number of participants. McRae’s
database also presents a range of supplementary
information, including statistical data about the se-
mantic features.

Table 1 displays some of the semantic fea-
ture norms given to describe alligator. Al-
though not fully shown in the table, more than
ten features are used to describe several aspects
of alligator. In Table 1, Brain Region (BR)
Labels are also shown, each of which roughly
classifies semantic features from the perspective

70



of brain function localization (Cree and McRae,
2003). See Appendix-A for more details.

2.2 Semantic Feature Keywords

As exemplified in Table 1, all of the semantic
features are prefixed by predefined keywords or
key phrases (e.g., beh - in ”beh - eats people”;
”lives in swamps”). These keywords and key
phrases (henceforth, semantic-feature keywords)
can be utilized to classify semantic features into
basic types.

Semantic-feature keyword # of variations
used for 469
has 257
is 247
has a 192
a 139
beh - 138
used by 113
made of 70
requires 66
inbeh - 64
lives in 57
found in 52
associated with 44
worn for 43
eg - 40

Table 2: Productive semantic-feature keywords.

Although McRae et al. (2005) described around
twenty semantic-feature keywords, the database
actually classifies almost one hundred semantic-
feature keywords, including presumably erro-
neous ones. Table 2 lists fifteen of the most pro-
ductive semantic-feature keywords, in the sense
of how many variations they have in the seman-
tic feature norm instances. Most of the seman-
tic feature keywords are self-descriptive; how-
ever, note that beh - signifies behavior exhibited
by animate beings (e.g., ”alligator beh -
eats people”), while inbeh - denotes that an
inanimate being does something seemingly on its
own (e.g., ”airplane inbeh - crashes”).

3 Structurizing Semantic Feature Norms

Figure 1, which corresponds to the alligator
example shown in Table 1, illustrates a funda-
mental method of structurizing the semantic fea-
ture norms in McRae’s database into a Linked
Data graph1. The graph is constructed as fol-

1In this paper, sfn denotes an imaginary prefix for rep-
resenting constructs of a Linked Data graph. A more de-
tailed modeling example using lemon (McCrae et al., 2010)
is shown in Appendix-B.

sfn:reptile

sfn:eats_people

sfn:dangerous

sfn:analyzed

sfn:alligator
skos:broader

skos:equivalent

WordNet

Figure 1: Linked Data graph structurizing a set of
semantic features.

lows: (1) A subject node is created for the tar-
get concept; (2) the subject node is linked with a
set of triple objects, each representing a semantic
feature; (3) a residual feature expression2 is ana-
lyzed where necessary; and (4) each of the triple
predicates carries a corresponding semantic fea-
ture type. In addition, the constructs of the graph
should be linked with existing external Linked
Data constructs whenever possible. In Fig. 1, word
nodes are assumed to be linked with correspond-
ing WordNet synset nodes by semantically disam-
biguating them. We may further need to resolve
named entities, if we are to link them, for exam-
ple, with DBPedia nodes.

To actualize this illustration, we first need to
create an inventory of triple predicates by identi-
fying a reasonable set of semantic feature types,
and then derive the sub-types where necessary.

4 Case Studies

We conducted our investigations by first extracting
the tentative set of psycholinguistically significant
semantic feature types shown in Table 3 from the
ones already listed in Table 2 by performing the
following actions:

• Excluding semantic feature types thought
to be typical ontological constructs: these
include, hyponymy (a), meronymy (has a,
made of, part of), telic/functional
(used for, used by), exemplary
(eg -), causal (causes), and their subtypes
(e.g., worn for).

• Putting off semantic feature types whose se-
mantics are clear and relatively restricted,
such as lives in and found in, which
both specify concrete/abstract places.

2A residual feature expression denotes the natural lan-
guage expression that follows a semantic-feature keyword:
for example, ”eats people” in ”alligator beh - eats
people.”

71



Semantic feature type Example feature expressions
associated with cape associated with Batman
is apple is crunchy
requires bread requires baking
beh - alligator beh - eats people
inbeh - airplane inbeh - crashes

Table 3: Psycholinguistically significant semantic
feature types (tentative).

The following subsections examine these nom-
inated semantic feature types in turn.

4.1 associated with

The ”associated with” semantic feature type as-
sociates a target concept with something associ-
ated with it, without specifying any particular se-
mantic restrictions. The fact that all of the in-
stances are labeled with encyclopaedic BR Labels
endorses this action. Furthermore, this semantic-
feature keyword exhibits a very high type/token
ratio (TTR) of 0.96, asserting that an associated
object is highly specific to the target concept, as
exemplified by the ”Batman” example shown in
Table 3. Recall here that a type refers to a dis-
tinct semantic feature expression (word/phrase)
succeeding a semantic-feature keyword, while a
token dictates an occurrence of a semantic feature
expression type.

The only thing we can do to structurize this se-
mantic feature type is introduce a triple predicate
such as, sfn:associated with, as asserted
in the above discussion.

4.2 is

The ”is” semantic feature type in essence dic-
tates several aspects/characteristics of a target con-
cept from a variety of perspectives. In contrast to
associated with, this semantic feature type
computed a very low TTR of 0.15: where the num-
ber of feature expression types was 247, while that
of tokens amounted to 1,651. This situation forced
us to further classify the feature expression types.

Here, we propose to classify this semantic fea-
ture type into a subclass by referring to the BR
Labels. For example, by introducing the corre-
sponding BR Label, ”alligator is long” can
be triplized as follows:

sfn:alligator
sfn:is_visual-form_and_surface

sfn:long .

Table 4 summarizes the distribution of BR La-

BR Label Token frequency
visual-form and surface 546
visual-color 350
encyclopaedic 111
tactile 238
function 108
visual-motion 40
sound 34
smell 20

Table 4: Distribution of BR Labels for is.

bels for the is semantic feature type, where all
but function and encyclopaedic are perceptual cat-
egories.

4.3 requires

The ”requires” semantic feature type primarily
specifies a typical object or entity that is some-
how required by a nonliving target concept3. In
contrast to the is semantic feature type, we can-
not introduce BR Labels to further classify this se-
mantic feature type into a subclass, as many of
them (80/93 = 86.0%) are annotated with ency-
clopaedic, and the rest with function.

Therefore, we decided to investigate the se-
mantic types of the required things by ourselves,
and induced a set of sub-categories to combine
with requires. Table 5 lists the sub-categories
and the corresponding instance frequencies. Note
that we in essence adopted semantic criteria from
the Princeton WordNet for distinguishing physi-
cal/abstract entities: We however added human
and operation to adequately classify the required
things. With this in mind, ”bread requires
baking,” for example, can be triplized as follows:

sfn:bread
sfn:requires_operation

sfn:baking .

4.4 beh -/inbeh -

The ”beh-” and ”inbeh-” semantic feature types
should intrinsically be considered meta feature
types, only signaling typical or salient behav-
ior/movement described in the residual feature
expression, as seen in the examples introduced
above: ”alligator beh - eats people” and
”airplane inbeh - crashes.” Furthermore,
as each of these expressions, in general, form a
verb phrase, we would need to linguistically ana-
lyze the verb phrase to extract its semantic content.

3We observed 93 instances of the requires type in
McRae’s database, of which only two described living things.

72



Semantic type Token frequency Example feature expression
physical entity 55 balloon requires helium
human 19 bus requires driver
operation 13 bread requires baking
abstract entity 6 unicycle requires balance

Table 5: Semantic types of required things.

Types encyclopedia sound visual-motion
beh - 95 56 267
inbeh - 33 50 32

Table 6: Distribution of BR Labels for
beh/inbeh.

Further specification of such a linguistic analysis
and the representation of the analysis results, how-
ever, are beyond the scope of this paper. We here
focus instead on the sub-typing of these semantic
feature types. As done earlier, we first checked the
TTRs: beh - computed 0.33, while inbeh - ex-
hibited 0.55, showing that some of the semantic-
feature expression types are moderately produc-
tive. We then checked the distribution of the BR
Labels, shown in Table 64. The table clearly shows
that only a few BR Labels are actually employed.
Therefore, we decided to combine the BR Labels
with these meta semantic feature types. Following
this rationale, ”alligator beh - eats peo-
ple,” for example, can be triplized as follows:

sfn:alligator
sfn:beh_visual-motion

sfn:eats_people .

Intriguingly, while the majority of the behaviors
taken by animate beings (beh-type) are classified
as visual-motion (267/419 = 63.7%), the behav-
iors taken by inanimate beings (inbeh-type) are
distributed across three categories: encyclopaedic,
sound, and visual-motion, implying that the visi-
bility of a behavior plays a psychologically promi-
nent role in the characterization of living things.

5 Discussion

Psycholinguistic semantic features, in general,
can improve the performance of semantic tasks
in NLP, as demonstrated by Silberer and Lapata
(2012). In other words, semantic features that
are focused more on human perception should
be combined with linguistic features. In this
sense, migration of psycholinguistic semantic fea-
ture norms into a Linked Data cloud could provide

4Labels with less than two occurrences have been omitted.

an opportunity for a range of NLP applications to
exploit psycholinguistic semantic features in com-
bination with linguistic features acquirable from
existing lexico-ontological resources.

The true benefits to be derived from publish-
ing them as Linked Data, in particular, should be
underpinned by concrete NLP applications. They
are unfortunately not very clear at the moment,
but the key to success is to employ the structur-
ized set of psycholinguistic semantic features as a
gateway to accessing existing resources of various
kinds: including not only lexical/encyclopaedic
resources such as WordNet, Wiktionary, and DB-
Pedia, but also domain-specific ontologies such as
GeoSpecies5. In this scenario, enabling proper
linking with external resources is quite important.

Another crucial issue that has to be addressed
in order to achieve the goal is the fact that
the coverage of semantic feature norms needs to
be significantly widened because currently avail-
able psycholinguistic resources, such as McRae’s
database, provide semantic features only for a lim-
ited number of concepts, notably, concrete con-
cepts. Therefore, the development of a method to
infer semantic features even for concepts not yet
covered by existing resources (Johns and Jones,
2012) or, more importantly, a mechanism to mine
useful properties from corpora (Baroni et al.,
2010) would be highly appreciated.

6 Concluding Remarks

By examining the well-known McRae’s
database (McRae et al., 2005), we organized
a reasonable set of psycholinguistically significant
semantic feature types, and sketched a scenario
for migrating them into the LDL.

For short-to-medium-term future work, we
plan to (1) investigate other less-frequent/less-
prominent semantic features observed in McRae’s
database; and (2) implement a computational pro-
cess to actually convert the semantic feature norms
into a set of Linked Data graphs.

5http://lod.geospecies.org/

73



Acknowledgments

This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI
Grant Number 258201170.

References

Marco Baroni, Brian Murphy, Eduard Barbu, and Mas-
simo Poesio. 2010. Strudel: A corpus-based seman-
tic model based on properties and types. Cognitive
Science, 34:222–254.

George S. Cree and Ken McRae. 2003. Analyzing the
factors underlying the structure and computation of
the meaning of chipmunk, cherry, chisel, cheese, and
cello (and many other such concrete nouns). Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 132:163–201.

Bredan T. Johns and Michael N. Jones. 2012. Per-
ceptual inference through global lexical similarity.
Topics in Cognitive Science, 4:103–120.

Oi Yee Kwong. 2012. New Perspectives on Computa-
tional and Cognitive Strategies for Word Sense Dis-
ambiguation, Springer.

John McCrae, et al. 2010. The lemon cookbook,
http://lexinfo.net/lemon-cookbook.
pdf

John McCrae, Elena Montiel-Ponsoda, and Philipp
Cimiano. 2012. Integrating WordNet and Wik-
tionary with lemon, In Chiristian Chiarcos et al.
(eds.) Linked Data in Linguistics, Springer-Verlag,
pp.25–29.

Ken McRae, George S. Cree, and Mark S. Seiden-
berg. 2005. Semantic feature production norms
for a large set of living and nonliving things, Be-
haviour Research Methods, Instruments, and Com-
puters, 37(4):547–559.

Allan Paivio, John C. Yuille, and Stephen A. Madigan.
1968. Concreteness, imagery, and meaningfulness
values for 925 nouns, Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, 76 (1, Part 2):1–25.

Carina Silberer and Mirella Lapata. 2012. Grounded
models of semantic representation, Proceedings of
the 2012 Joint Conference on EMNLP, pp.1423–
1433.

Sinya Tanaka, Adam Jatowt, Makoto P. Kato, and Kat-
sumi Tanaka. 2013. Estimating content concrete-
ness for finding comprehensible documents, Pro-
ceedings of The Sixth ACM WSDM Conference,
pp.475–484.

Appendix-A: Brain Region Labels

Each of the BR Labels assigned to a semantic fea-
ture norm in the database is based on a taxonomy
called Brain Region Taxonomy (Cree and McRae,
2003). Table A-1 classifies the nine (plus one:

BR Label Frequency
visual-form-and-surface 2,336
visual-color 424
visual-motion 339
tactile 245
sound 142
taste 84
smell 24
function 1,517
encyclopaedic 1,417
taxonomic 730

Table A-1: Distribution of the BR Labels.

taxonomic) categories defined by the BR taxon-
omy, and the corresponding token frequencies in
the database. Cree and McRae (2003) argue that
these categories represent knowledge types that
are closely associated with corresponding brain re-
gions.

As displayed in Table A-1, seven of the nine cat-
egories are linked with sensory channels/modes,
of which three are associated with visual per-
ception. In particular, the category visual-form-
and-surface exhibits substantially high frequency,
highlighting the fact that visibility plays a sig-
nificant role in characterizing a concrete object
psycholinguistically. The category function, on
the other hand, organizes feature types, such as
used for and used by, describing functional
aspects of a target concept. Semantic features en-
coding other types of miscellaneous knowledge
were labeled as encyclopaedic.

Appendix-B: Modeling with lemon

Figure B-1 exemplifies a more detailed mod-
eling of the Linked Data graph presented in
Fig. 1. In this modeling, McRae’s entire database
is modeled as a lemon lexicon. That is, ev-
ery content word in McRae’s database is mod-
eled as a lexical entry, and the semantic fea-
ture types, derived in this paper, are modeled
as sub-properties of lemon:senseRelation,
which connects lemon:sense instances. In ad-
dition, linking to WordNet is represented by us-
ing lemon:reference, as in (McCrae et al.,
2012), meaning that WordNet is treated as an ex-
ternal ontological resource.

Notice also that the residual semantic feature
expression, such as ”eats people,” is modeled as
a phrasal lexical entry, whose internal linguistic
structure is meanwhile represented by a syntac-
tic dependency structure, represented by the blue
cloud in the figure.

74



sfn:reptile

sfn:eats_people

sfn:dangerous

lemon:reference

"reptile"

"dangerous"

"eats people"

lemon:sense

lemon:sense

lemon:sense

lemon:form

lemon:writtenRep

lemon:form

lemon:writtenRep

lemon:form

lemon:writtenRep

lemon:reference

lemon:reference

sfn:alligator

lemon:form
lemon:sense

"alligator"

lemon:writtenRep

WordNet

lemon:broader

lemon:decomposition

Figure B-1: Modeling using lemon.

75


