



















































Roundtable: An Online Framework for Building Web-based Conversational Agents


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, pages 372–374,
Metz, France, 22-24 August 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Roundtable: An Online Framework for Building Web-based         
Conversational Agents 

 
Eric Forbell and Nicolai Kalisch and Fabrizio Morbini 

and Kelly Christoffersen  
and Kenji Sagae and David Traum and Albert A. Rizzo 

Institute for Creative Technologies 
University of Southern California 

Los Angeles, CA 90094, USA 
{lastname}@ict.usc.edu 

 
  

Abstract 

We present an online system that provides a 
complete web-based sandbox for creating, 
testing and publishing embodied conversation-
al agents. The tool, called Roundtable, em-
powers many different types of authors and 
varying team sizes to create flexible interac-
tions by automating many editing workflows 
while limiting complexity and hiding architec-
tural concerns. Finished characters can be pub-
lished directly to web servers, enabling highly 
interactive applications.  

1 Introduction 
To support the creation of a virtual guide system 
called SimCoach (Rizzo et al, 2011) designed to 
help military service personnel and their families 
understand behavioral healthcare issues and learn 
about support resources, a core virtual human 
architecture that included a new dialogue man-
agement approach was developed (Morbini et al., 
2012b). SimCoach is an embodied, conversa-
tional virtual human guide delivered via the web 
and is supported by a flexible information state 
dialogue manager called FLoReS designed to 
support mixed initiative dialogue with conversa-
tional systems. Morbini et al. (2012a) provide a 
detailed description of the dialogue manager. 

Although FLoReS supports a wide variety of 
virtual human character behaviors, these must be 
specified in dialogue policies that must be au-
thored manually. Initially, authoring for this dia-
logue manager required coding of policies using 
a custom programming language. Therefore sig-
nificant training for content authors was neces-
sary, as well as substantial support from dialogue 

system developers in managing resources such as 
training data for the language understanding sys-
tem. To improve the accessibility of the system 
to non-technical subject matter experts and other 
creative staff, it became clear that additional 
tools were necessary. In this demonstration, we 
present Roundtable: a web-based authoring envi-
ronment for virtual human characters that is de-
signed for use by subject matter experts who are 
qualified for content authoring in targeted do-
mains, but who may not possess technical skills 
in programming or experience in dialogue sys-
tem design.  

2 Supporting rapid authoring of dia-
logue agents for the web 

Roundtable is a complete web-based authoring 
system enabling the end-to-end creation, valida-
tion, testing and web publishing of virtual human 
characters using the SimCoach virtual human 
architecture. The system provides features that 
empower many types of authors, team sizes and 
makeups. The system allows an author to select 
from a set of preconfigured 3D character models, 
model the dialogue policy through behavior tem-
plates and more direct subdialogue editing, train 
and test the natural language understanding com-
ponent, render animation performances associat-
ed with character behaviors and utterances, and 
test both text-based and fully animated interac-
tions. Finally, the complete character dataset can 
be exported and deployed to a live, highly avail-
able server environment, where interaction data 
can be monitored and periodically collected for 
analysis and refinement, all from within the same 
browser environment (Figure 1). The entire sys-
tem, from authoring to end-user interaction with 

372



the virtual human character, is web-based and 
requires only a current web browser for content 
authors and end users.  

 
(a)

 
(b)

  
(c)

  
(d)

  
Figure 1:  Selected modules from the Roundtable 
character authoring system (a) character project 
browser; (b) dialogue policy editor; (c) training 
data manager (d) action and animation asset man-
ager 

At the core of the authoring application is an 
object-oriented information model and set of 
management systems that span the following 
roles: 

• Dialogue content management, respon-
sible for persistence, search, validation 
and retrieval operations of all dialogue el-
ements including subdialogue networks; 
information state variables and effects; 
goals and effects; and dialogue action an-
notations that provide the mapping to the 
action database. 

• Training data management, concerned 
with managing training items for a data-
driven natural language understanding 
module, as well as providing support for 
running regressions when updating the 
training set.   

• Action management, provides data op-
erations for managing potentially large 
sets of virtual human performance-related 
assets, including utterance text, speech au-
dio when not system-generated, annotated 
nonverbal behavior schedules, as well as 
non-performance actions which include 
web-hosted videos, digested web articles, 
or any arbitrary HTML effect. 

• Deployment management, enabling 
rapid deployment of locally tested charac-
ters to highly available web servers as well 
as review and data warehousing functions 
for both analytic and refinement purposes. 

The information model is implemented in a re-
lational database that fully specifies, relates and 
allows inquiry and validation of authored infor-
mation. Additionally, a complete web application 
programming interface (API) powers the 
Roundtable application, providing a transactional 
framework for data operations as well as user 
privilege enforcement, but which also allows 
application expansion. 

The information model also serves to decouple 
the authoring representation from the data struc-
tures necessary to drive dialogue behavior at 
runtime. Prior to realizing an authored character 
in the FLoReS engine, project dialogue data ele-
ments are exported into the format expected by 
the runtime target, a process that we expect to 
expand in the future to support different dialogue 
managers and language understanding configura-
tions.  

373



 
Figure 2: The interactive virtual human character 
published to the web, accessible by current brows-
ers.  

3 Demo script 
This demonstration will show how to build a 
simple conversational virtual human character 
using Roundtable, from acquiring an account 
(http://authoring.simcoach.org, free for academic 
research) to obtaining the URL for the newly 
created character, and all of the steps in between. 
The workflow to build a character is as follows: 

1. In the project module (Figure 1a) we create a 
new character by providing a unique name 
and selecting an existing 3D character mod-
el.  

2. Opening the newly created project brings up 
the interaction module (Figure 1b) where we 
choose from a list of available subdialogue 
templates that can be used for common dia-
logue behaviors (question-answer, greeting, 
etc.). The provided Greeting and Goodbye 
templates are used to define the character’s 
conversational behavior when initiating and 
ending an interaction, respectively. Invoking 
the Question-Answer template, we can 
quickly define how the character will re-
spond to a specific question or statement. 
Each template requires a name and sample 
text for any user or system utterance.  

3. Following the template-based subdialogue 
generation, we create training data for the 
natural language understanding component 
by providing possible user utterances associ-
ated with each user dialogue act in the tem-
plates used (Figure 1c).  

4. The last task is to refine system utterances, 
which are generated automatically during the 
step of policy authoring, and generate anima-
tion data. From the action module, we can 
search and inspect all system actions. For 
any system action, with a single button click, 

we can synthesize audio and render anima-
tions (Figure 1d).  

5. Finally, we navigate to the test module, 
compile our character project, and are then 
able to chat with the new character to ensure 
expected behavior. At this point, the charac-
ter is ready to be deployed, with its unique 
URL, and is immediately accessible on the 
web (Figure 2). 

4 Conclusion  
We described the Roundtable online authoring 
framework that has been designed to support 
non-expert users in rapidly creating embodied, 
conversational virtual characters of varying 
complexities.  The tool, being web-based, re-
quires zero configuration to get started and au-
thored virtual characters can be deployed to In-
ternet-facing web servers immediately, expand-
ing the reach of many dialogue-driven applica-
tions.  

Acknowledgments 

The effort described here has been sponsored by 
the U.S. Army. Any opinions, content or infor-
mation presented does not necessarily reflect the 
position or the policy of the United States Gov-
ernment, and no official endorsement should be 
inferred. 

References  
A. Rizzo, B. Lange, J.G. Buckwalter, E. Forbell, J. 

Kim, K. Sagae, J. Williams, B.O. Rothbaum, J. 
Difede, G. Reger, T. Parsons, and P. Kenny. An in-
telligent virtual human system for providing 
healthcare information and support. In J.D. West-
wood et al., editor, Technology and Informatics. 
IOS Press, 2011. 

Fabrizio Morbini, David Devault, Kenji Sagae, Jillian 
Gerten, Angela Nazarian and David Traum FLo-
ReS: A Forward Looking, Reward Seeking, Dia-
logue Manager in proceedings of International 
Workshop on Spoken Dialog Systems (IWSDS-
2012), Ermenonville, France, November 2012b. 

Fabrizio Morbini, Eric Forbell, David DeVault, Kenji 
Sagae, David Traum and Albert Rizzo. A Mixed-
Initiative Conversational Dialogue System for 
Healthcare. Demonstration in SIGdial 2012, the 
13th Annual SIGdial meeting on Discourse and 
Dialogue, Seoul, South Korea, 2012a.  

 

 

374


