










































Semantic Roles for Nominal Predicates: Building a Lexical Resource


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages 126–131,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Semantic Roles for Nominal Predicates: Building a Lexical Resource

Ashwini Vaidya and Martha Palmer and Bhuvana Narasimhan
Dept of Linguistics

Institute of Cognitive Science
University of Colorado, Boulder

Boulder, CO 80309
{vaidyaa, mpalmer, narasimb}@colorado.edu

Abstract

The linguistic annotation of noun-verb com-
plex predicates (also termed as light verb con-
structions) is challenging as these predicates
are highly productive in Hindi. For semantic
role labelling, each argument of the noun-verb
complex predicate must be given a role la-
bel. For complex predicates, frame files need
to be created specifying the role labels for
each noun-verb complex predicate. The cre-
ation of frame files is usually done manually,
but we propose an automatic method to expe-
dite this process. We use two resources for
this method: Hindi PropBank frame files for
simple verbs and the annotated Hindi Tree-
bank. Our method perfectly predicts 65% of
the roles in 3015 unique noun-verb combi-
nations, with an additional 22% partial pre-
dictions, giving us 87% useful predictions to
build our annotation resource.

1 Introduction

Ahmed et al. (2012) describe several types of com-
plex predicates that are found in Hindi e.g. morpho-
logical causatives, verb-verb complex predicates and
noun-verb complex predicates. Of the three types,
we will focus on the noun-verb complex predicates
in this paper. Typically, a noun-verb complex pred-
icate chorii ‘theft’ karnaa ‘to do’ has two compo-
nents: a noun chorii and a light verb karnaa giving
us the meaning ‘steal’. Complex predicates 1 may
be found in English e.g. take a walk and many other
languages such as Japanese, Persian, Arabic and
Chinese (Butt, 1993; Fazly and Stevenson, 2007).

1They are also otherwise known as light verb, support verb
or conjunct verb constructions.

The verbal component in noun-verb complex
predicates (NVC) has reduced predicating power
(although it is inflected for person, number, and gen-
der agreement as well as tense-aspect and mood) and
its nominal complement is considered the true pred-
icate, hence the term ‘light verb’. The creation of
a lexical resource for the set of true predicates that
occur in an NVC is important from the point of view
of linguistic annotation. For semantic role labelling
in particular, similar lexical resources have been cre-
ated for complex predicates in English, Arabic and
Chinese (Hwang et al., 2010).

1.1 Background

The goal of this paper is to produce a lexical re-
source for Hindi NVCs. This resource is in the form
of ‘frame files’, which are directly utilized for Prop-
Bank annotation. PropBank is an annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles that has been developed for
English, Arabic and Chinese (Palmer et al., 2005;
Palmer et al., 2008; Xue and Palmer, 2003). In
Hindi, the task of PropBank annotation is part of a
larger effort to create a multi-layered treebank for
Hindi as well as Urdu (Palmer et al., 2009).

PropBank annotation assumes that syntactic
parses are already available for a given corpus.
Therefore, Hindi PropBanking is carried out on top
of the syntactically annotated Hindi Dependency
Treebank. As the name suggests, the syntactic rep-
resentation is dependency based, which has several
advantages for the PropBank annotation process (see
Section 3).

The PropBank annotation process for Hindi fol-
lows the same two-step process used for other Prop-
Banks. First, the semantic roles that will occur with
each predicate are defined by a human expert. Then,

126



these definitions or ‘frame files’ are used to guide
the annotation of predicate-argument structure in a
given corpus.

Semantic roles are annotated in the form of num-
bered arguments. In Table 1 PropBank-style seman-
tic roles are listed for the simple verb de;‘to give’:

de.01 ‘to give’
Arg0 the giver
Arg1 thing given
Arg2 recipient

Table 1: A frame file

The labels ARG0, ARG1 and ARG2 are always de-
fined on a verb-by-verb basis. The description at
the verb-specific level gives details about each num-
bered argument. In the example above, the num-
bered arguments correspond to the giver, thing given
and recipient. In the Hindi treebank, which consists
of 400,000 words, there are nearly 37,576 predi-
cates, of which 37% have been identified as complex
predicates at the dependency level. This implies that
a sizeable portion of the predicates are NVCs, which
makes the task of manual frame file creation time
consuming.

In order to reduce the effort required for manual
creation of NVC frame files, we propose a novel au-
tomatic method for generating PropBank semantic
roles. The automatically generated semantic roles
will be used to create frame files for each com-
plex predicate in the corpus. Our method accurately
predicts semantic roles for almost two thirds of
the unique nominal-verb combinations, with around
20% partial predictions, giving us a total of 87% use-
ful predictions.

For our implementation, we use linguistic re-
sources in the form of syntactic dependency labels
from the treebank. In addition we also have manu-
ally created, gold standard frame files for Hindi sim-
ple verbs2. In the following sections we provide lin-
guistic background, followed by a detailed descrip-
tion of our method. We conclude with an error anal-
ysis and evaluation section.

2http://verbs.colorado.edu/propbank/framesets-hindi/

2 The Nominal and the Light Verb

Semantic roles for the arguments of the light verb are
determined jointly by the noun as well as the light
verb. Megerdoomian (2001) showed that the light
verb places some restrictions on the semantic role of
its subject in Persian. A similar phenomenon may
be observed for Hindi. Compare example 1 with ex-
ample 2 below:

(1) Raam-ne
Ram-erg

cycle-kii
cycle-gen

chorii
theft

kii
do.prf

‘Ram stole a bicycle’

(2) aaj
Today

cycle-kii
cycle-gen

chorii
theft

huii
be.pres

‘Today a bicycle was stolen’

PropBank annotation assumes that sentences in
the corpus have already been parsed. The annotation
task involves identification of arguments for a given
NVC and the labelling of these arguments with se-
mantic roles. In example 1 we get an agentive sub-
ject with the light verb kar ‘do’. However, when it
is replaced by the unaccusative ho ‘become’ in Ex-
ample 2, then the resulting clause has a theme argu-
ment as its subject. Note that the nominal chorii in
both examples remains the same. From the point
of view of PropBank annotation, the NVC chorii
kii will have both ARG0 and ARG1, but chorii huii
will only have ARG1 for its single argument cycle.
Hence, the frame file for a given nominal must make
reference to the type of light verb that occurs with it.

The nominal as the true predicate also contributes
its own arguments. In example 3, which shows a full
(non-light) use of the verb de ‘give’, there are three
arguments: giver(agent), thing given(theme) and re-
cipient. In contrast the light verb usage zor de ‘em-
phasis give; emphasize’, seen in example 4, has a
locative marked argument baat par ‘matter on’ con-
tributed by the nominal zor ‘emphasis’.

(3) Raam-ne
Ram-erg

Mohan ko
Mohan-dat

kitaab
book

dii
give.prf

‘Ram gave Mohan a book’

(4) Ram ne
Ram-erg

is
this

baat
matter

par
loc

zor
emphasis

diyaa
give.prf

‘Ram emphasized this matter’

127



As both noun and light verb contribute to the se-
mantic roles of their arguments, we require linguis-
tic knowledge about both parts of the NVC. The
semantic roles for the nominal need to specify the
co-occurring light verb and the nominal’s argument
roles must also be captured. Table 2 describes the
desired representation for a nominal frame file.

Frame file for chorii-n(oun)
chorii.01: theft-n light verb: kar‘do; to

steal’
Arg0 person who steals
Arg1 thing stolen
chorii.02 : theft-n light verb: ho

‘be/become; to get
stolen’

Arg1 thing stolen

Table 2: Frame file for predicate noun chorii ‘theft’ with
two frequently occurring light verbs ho and kar. If other
light verbs are found to occur, they are added as addi-
tional rolesets as chorii.03, chorii.04 and so on.

This frame file shows the representation of a nom-
inal chorii ‘theft’ that can occur in combination with
a light verb kar ‘do’ or ho ‘happen’. For each
combination, we derive a different set of PropBank
roles: agent and patient for chorii.01 and theme for
chorii.02. Note that the nominal’s frame actually
contains the roles for the combination of nominal
and light verb, and not the nominal alone.

Nominal frame files such as these have already
been defined for English PropBank.3 However, for
English, many nominals in NVCs are in fact nom-
inalizations of full verbs, which makes it far easier
to derive their frame files (e.g. walk in take a walk
is a full verb). For Hindi, this is not the case, and
a different strategy needs to be employed to derive
these frames automatically.

3 Generating Semantic Roles

The Hindi Treebank has already identified NVC
cases by using a special label pof or ‘part-of’. The
Treebank annotators apply this label on the basis of
native speaker intuition. We use the label given by
the Treebank as a means to extract the NVC cases
(the issues related to complex predicate identifica-
tion are beyond the scope of this paper). Once this

3http://verbs.colorado.edu/propbank/framesets-noun/

extraction step is complete, we have a set of nomi-
nals and a corresponding list of light verbs that occur
with them.

In Section 2, we showed that the noun as well
as the light verb in a sentence influence the type of
semantic roles that will occur. Our method builds
on this idea and uses two resources in order to de-
rive linguistic knowledge about the NVC: PropBank
frame files for simple verbs in Hindi and the Hindi
Treebank, annotated with dependency labels. The
next two sections describe the use of these resources
in some detail.

3.1 Karaka to PropBank Mapping
The annotated Hindi Treebank is based on a depen-
dency framework (Begum et al., 2008) and has a
very rich set of dependency labels. These labels
(also known as karaka labels) represent the relations
between a head (e.g. a verb) and its dependents (e.g.
arguments). Using the Treebank we extract all the
dependency karaka label combinations that occur
with a unique instance of an NVC. We filter them
to include argument labels and discard those labels
that are usually used for adjuncts. We then calculate
the most frequently occurring combination of labels
that will occur with that NVC. Finally, we get a tu-
ple consisting of an NVC, a set of karaka argument
labels that occur with it and a count of the number
of times that NVC has occurred in the corpus. The
karaka labels are then mapped onto PropBank la-
bels. We reproduce in Table 3 the numbered argu-
ments to karaka label mapping found in Vaidya et
al., (2011).

PropBank label Treebank label
Arg0 (agent) k1 (karta); k4a (experiencer)
Arg1 (theme,
patient)

k2 (karma)

Arg2 (beneficiary) k4 (beneficiary)
Arg2-ATR(attribute) k1s (attribute)
Arg2-SOU(source) k5 (source)
Arg2-GOL(goal) k2p (goal)
Arg3 (instrument) k3 (instrument)

Table 3: Mapping from Karaka labels to PropBank

3.2 Verb Frames
Our second resource consists of PropBank frames
for full Hindi verbs. Every light verb that occurs in

128



Hindi is also used as a full verb, e.g. de ‘give’ in
Table 1 may be used both as a ‘full’ verb as well as
a ‘light’ verb. As a full verb, it has a frame file in
Hindi PropBank. The set of roles in the full verb
frame is used to generate a “canonical” verb frame
for each light verb. The argument structure of the
light verb will change when combined with a nom-
inal, which contributes its own arguments. How-
ever, as a default, the canonical argument structure
list captures the fact that most kar ‘do’ light verbs
are likely to occur with the roles ARG0 and ARG1
respectively or that ho ‘become’, an unaccusative
verb, occurs with only ARG1.

3.3 Procedure

Our procedure integrates the two resources de-
scribed above. First, the tuple consisting of karaka
labels for a particular NVC is mapped to PropBank
labels. But many NVC cases occur just once in the
corpus and the karaka label tuple may not be very
reliable. Hence, the likelihood that the mapped tu-
ple accurately depicts the correct semantic frame is
not very high. Secondly, Hindi can drop manda-
tory subjects or objects in a sentence e.g., (vo) ki-
taab paRegaa; ‘(He) will read the book’. These are
not inserted by the dependency annotation (Bhatia
et al., 2010) and are not easy to discover automati-
cally (Vaidya et al., 2012). We cannot afford to ig-
nore any of the low frequency cases as each NVC
in the corpus must be annotated with semantic roles.
In order to get reasonable predictions for each NVC,
we use a simple rule. We carry out a mapping from
karaka to PropBank labels only if the NVC occurs at
least 30 times in the corpus. If the NVC occurs fewer
than 30 times, then we use the “canonical” verb list.

4 Evaluation

The automatic method described in the previous sec-
tion generated 1942 nominal frame files. In or-
der to evaluate the frame files, we opted for man-
ual checking of the automatically generated frames.
The frame files were checked by three linguists and
the checking focused on the validity of the seman-
tic roles. The linguists also indicated whether an-
notation errors or duplicates were present. There
was some risk that the automatically derived frames
could bias the linguists’ choice of roles as it is

quicker to accept a given suggestion than propose
an entirely new set of roles for the NVC. As we
had a very large number of automatically gener-
ated frames, all of which would need to be checked
manually anyway, practical concerns determined the
choice of this evaluation.

After this process of checking, the total number
of frame files stood at 1884. These frame files con-
sisted of 3015 rolesets i.e. individual combinations
of a nominal with a light verb (see Table 2). The
original automatically generated rolesets were com-
pared with their hand corrected counterparts (i.e.
manually checked ‘gold’ rolesets) and evaluated for
accuracy. We used three parameters to compare the
gold rolesets with the automatically generated ones:
a full match, partial match and no match. Table 4
shows the results derived from each resource (Sec-
tion 3) and the total accuracy.

Type of Match Full Partial None Errors
Karaka Mapping 25 31 4 0
Verbal Frames 1929 642 249 143
Totals 1954 673 245 143
% Overall 65 22 8 5

Table 4: Automatic mapping results, total frames=3015

The results show that almost two thirds of the se-
mantic roles are guessed correctly by the automatic
method, with an additional 22% partial predictions,
giving us a total of 87% useful predictions. Only
8% show no match at all between the automatically
generated labels and the gold labels.

When we compare the contribution of the karaka
labels with the verb frames, we find that the verb
frames contribute to the majority of the full matches.
The karaka mapping contributes relatively less as
only 62 NVC types occur more than 30 times in
the corpus. If we reduce our frequency requirement
from of 30 to 5, the accuracy drops by 5%. The bulk
of the cases are thus derived from the simple verb
frames. We think that the detailed information in
the verb frames, such as unaccusativity contributes
towards generating the correct frame files.

It is interesting to observe that nearly 65% accu-
racy can be achieved from the verbal information
alone. The treebank has two light verbs that occur
with high frequency i.e. kar ‘do’ and ho ‘become’.
These combine with a variety of nominals but per-

129



Light verb Full (%) None (%) Total
Uses*

kar‘do’ 64 8 1038
ho ‘be/become’ 81 3 549
de ‘give’ 55 34 157
A ‘come’ 31 42 36

Table 5: Light verbs ‘do’ and ‘be/become’ vs. ‘give’ and
‘come’. *The unique total light verb usages in the corpus

form more consistently than light verbs such as de
‘give’ or A ‘come’. The light verb kar adds inten-
tionality to the NVC, but appears less often with a
set of semantic roles that are quite different from
its original ‘full’ verb usage. In comparison, the
light verbs such as de ‘give’ show far more varia-
tion, and as seen from Table 4, will match with au-
tomatically derived frames to a lesser extent. The
set of nominals that occur in combination with kar,
usually seem to require only a doer and a thing
done. Borrowed English verbs such dijain‘design’
or Pona‘phone’ will appear preferentially with kar
in the corpus and as they are foreign words they do
not add arguments of their own.

One of the advantages of creating this lexical re-
source is the availability of gold standard frame files
for around 3000 NVCs in Hindi. As a next step, it
would be useful to use these frames to make some
higher level generalizations about these NVCs. For
example, much work has already been done on au-
tomatic verb classification for simple predicates e.g.
(Merlo and Stevenson, 2001; Schulte im Walde,
2006), and perhaps such classes can be derived for
NVCs. Also, the frame files do not currently address
the problem of polysemous NVCs which could ap-
pear with a different set of semantic roles, which will
be addressed in future work.

Acknowledgments

I am grateful to Archna Bhatia and Richa Srishti for
their help with evaluating the accuracy of the nom-
inal frames. This work is supported by NSF grants
CNS-0751089, CNS-0751171, CNS-0751202, and
CNS-0751213.

References
Tafseer Ahmed, Miriam Butt, Annette Hautli, and Se-

bastian Sulger. 2012. A reference dependency bank
for analyzing complex predicates. In Proceedings of
the Eight International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’12.

Rafiya Begum, Samar Husain, Arun Dhwaj, Dipti Misra
Sharma, Lakshmi Bai, and Rajeev Sangal. 2008. De-
pendency Annotation Scheme for Indian Languages.
In Proceedings of The Third International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP).
Hyderabad, India.

Archna Bhatia, Rajesh Bhatt, Bhuvana Narasimhan,
Martha Palmer, Owen Rambow, Dipti Misra Sharma,
Michael Tepper, Ashwini Vaidya, and Fei Xia. 2010.
Empty Categories in a Hindi Treebank. In Proceed-
ings of the 7th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10), pages 1863–
1870.

Miriam Butt. 1993. The Light Verb Jungle. In G. Aygen,
C. Bowers, and C. Quinn, editors, Harvard Working
Papers in Linguistics: Papers from the GSAS/Dudley
House workshop on light verbs, volume 9.

Afsaneh Fazly and Suzanne Stevenson. 2007. Au-
tomatic Acquisition of Knowledge about Multiword
Predicates. In Proceedings of PACLIC 19, the 19th
Asia-Pacific Conference on Language, Information
and Computation.

Jena D. Hwang, Archna Bhatia, Claire Bonial, Aous
Mansouri, Ashwini Vaidya, Nianwen Xue, and Martha
Palmer. 2010. PropBank Annotation of Multilingual
Light Verb Constructions. In Proceedings of the Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop held in conjunction with
ACL-2010.

Karine Megerdoomian. 2001. Event Structure and Com-
plex Predicates in Persian. Canadian Journal of Lin-
guistics, 46:97–125.

Paola Merlo and Suzanne Stevenson. 2001. Automatic
Verb Classification Based on Statistical Distributions
of Argument Structure. Computational Linguistics,
27(3):373–408.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An annotated corpus of
semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71–
106.

Martha Palmer, Olga Babko-Malaya, Ann Bies, Mona
Diab, Mohammed Maamouri, Aous Mansouri, and
Wajdi Zaghouani. 2008. A pilot Arabic PropBank.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Language Re-
sources and Evaluation.

Martha Palmer, Rajesh Bhatt, Bhuvana Narasimhan,
Owen Rambow, Dipti Misra Sharma, and Fei Xia.
2009. Hindi Syntax: Annotating Dependency, Lexical

130



Predicate-Argument Structure, and Phrase Structure.
In Proceedings of ICON-2009: 7th International Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing, Hyderabad.

Sabine Schulte im Walde. 2006. Experiments on the Au-
tomatic Induction of German Semantic Verb Classes.
Computational Linguistics, 32(2):159–194.

Ashwini Vaidya, Jinho D. Choi, Martha Palmer, and Bhu-
vana Narasimhan. 2011. Analysis of the Hindi propo-
sition bank using dependency structure. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th Linguistic Annotation Workshop - LAW
V ’11.

Ashwini Vaidya, Jinho D. Choi, Martha Palmer, and Bhu-
vana Narasimhan. 2012. Empty Argument Insertion
in the Hindi PropBank. In Proceedings of the Eighth
International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation - LREC-12, Istanbul.

Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2003. Annotating the
Propositions in the Penn Chinese Treebank. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd SIGHAN workshop on Chinese
language processing, SIGHAN’03, pages 47–54.

131


