










































The Electronic Health Record as a Clinical Study Information Hub


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Medical and Healthcare Fields, pages 43–47,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

The Electronic Health Record as a Clinical Study Information Hub 

 
Naoto Kume 

EHR Research Unit, Department of 
Social Informatics, Graduate School of 

Informatics, Kyoto University 
/ Kyoto, Japan 

kume@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp 

Kazuya Okamoto 
Division of Medical Information 

Technology and Administration Plan-
ning, Kyoto University Hospital 

/ Kyoto, Japan 
kazuya@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp 

 

Tomohiro Kuroda 
Division of Medical Information 

Technology and Administration Plan-
ning, Kyoto University Hospital 

/ Kyoto, Japan  
tomo@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp 

Hiroyuki Yoshihara 
EHR Research Unit, Department of 

Social Informatics, Graduate School of 
Informatics, Kyoto University 

/ Kyoto, Japan 
lob@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp 

 
  

 

Abstract 

The use of Electronic Health Records (EHRs) 
is spreading rapidly in several countries. The 
systems currently used, however, are not de-
signed to permit secondary use of collected da-
ta. We present a new design for an EHR sys-
tem that is capable of connecting information 
from multiple sites for use in clinical studies 
by means of an accounting information system 
and a hospital information system (HIS). This 
EHR system was designed for healthcare facil-
ities in the Kyoto region. This paper describes 
how the conventional system can be extended 
into an EHR system that serves as a clinical 
information hub. 

1 Introduction 
EHR is defined by ISO as repository of infor-

mation regarding the health status of a subject of 
care, in computer processable form, stored and 
transmitted securely and accessible by multiple 
authorized users, having a standardized or com-
monly agreed logical information model is the 
support of continuing, efficient and quality inte-
grated health care (ISO 2005). In the United 
States and New Zealand, an EHR system used by 
multiple hospitals and clinics in a given region is 
known as an electronic medical record (EMR) 
system. Accordingly, this paper distinguishes an 
EMR system from an EHR system, which is re-
stricted to only one facility.  

The original motivation for sharing medical 
records between facilities was to promote collab-
oration between clinical facilities. Because medi-
cal costs are very high and still rising rapidly 
worldwide, reducing unnecessary medical tests 
and duplicate prescriptions is a social necessity. 
EHR is expected to help accomplish this by im-
proving information sharing. Several countries 
have established national EHR programs with 
government support; these include New Zealand, 
which uses a national healthcare IT plan known 
as eHealth (National Health Information Tech-
nology Board), and Australia, which has estab-
lished a group (National e-Health Transition Au-
thority) to promote its patient-controlled system. 
Canada has likewise established a nationwide 
organization (Canada Health Infoway) to distrib-
ute EHR data across all provinces and territories. 
Finland and Singapore are also promoting the 
establishment of a national database of medical 
records.  

In most cases, the sharing of medical records 
is for short-term reference purposes only, and 
only a document index is exchanged. In Singa-
pore, for instance, secondary use of medical in-
formation managed by the public healthcare ser-
vice (MoHH) is strictly restricted by law. There-
fore, the design of Singapore’s EHRs is based on 
document index convergence rather than unified 
data storage. Since sharing an EHR involves 
sending and receiving different types of docu-
ments, the accumulation of documents can pro-
vide a data source extrapolating actual clinical 

43



activities. Note that clinical facilities are not 
guaranteed organization continuity so that the 
data repository continuity of each facility is also 
not guaranteed. Therefore, this study focuses on 
EHR systems with centered repositories storing 
different types of medical documents. This study 
aims to provide a design for an EHR that can 
serve as an information hub and especially as a 
resource in gathering data for clinical studies. 

2 Methods 
Within the last two decades, EMR has been in-
stalled in most university hospitals in Japan. 
These installations were performed by different 
vendors in different hospitals and regions. There-
fore, before medical information can be ex-
changed, users must define a standard format for 
data exchange. Because there are so many medi-
cal document formats in use, no standard format 
has yet been agreed upon. Instead, every hospital 
has its own preferred format. EMR systems can 
be classified based on structure into two types: a 
centralized database type and an information 
locator type. The centralized database type re-
ceives test results from a lab test branch system 
and stores as well as the other medical records 
such as prescriptions, reports and summaries. 
The information locator type stores only medical 
records and pointers to the test results and re-
ports; the body of test results and reports are 
handled by branch systems. From the viewpoint 
of EHR construction, an EMR of the information 
locator type is not cost-efficient because it has to 
collect documents from every single branch sys-
tem. On the other hand, an EMR of the central-
ized database type requires only medical records 
to be converted to a standard exchange format. In 
order to support analysis of medical records, an 
EHR aiming to serve as a source for clinical 
study data should employ the centralized data-
base model; otherwise, the initial cost and update 
costs could be prohibitive. In fact, although 
many Japanese hospitals installed EHR systems 
during the last two decades, when they were sub-
sidized by the government, most of them were 
abandoned after the subsidy ended.  

If medical records are to be used for research 
in clinical studies, it is necessary to have access 
to large numbers of cases, especially for studies 
on rare diseases. The medical records maintained 
by a single facility are obviously not sufficient 
for such studies. When the records in an EHR are 
used, however, it is hard to avoid controversy 
over document ownership. Sharing policies vary 

from one facility to the next, so that researchers 
must pay close attention to the policy of each 
facility, at least until a standard practice for shar-
ing policy develops. Data sharing and the use of 
large data sets come with certain disadvantages 
even though obvious benefits.  

Clinical studies are performed in strictly con-
trolled environments so that the relation between 
treatment and outcome can be firmly established. 
A comparison between treatment as action and 
clinical outcome as result is mandatory. General 
action in a hospital can be defined as orders. Or-
ders are recorded in the form of an order history 
and a description in the medical records in a HIS. 
In addition, each action is recorded in an ac-
counting system so that the hospital can claim 
payment for medical services. Order histories in 
HISs are not typically standardized, but account-
ing system records are. In fact, because the ac-
counting report format is determined by the gov-
ernment, all facilities in a country use the same 
one. Accounting records of hospital orders can 
therefore be used as an action history, allowing 
comparison of orders across clinical facilities.  

Clinical outcomes are recorded in medical 
records, lab test results, pathology reports, radi-
ology reports and so on. Those records usually 
consist of structured and non-structured data. 
Test results are an example of structured data. 
Pathology and radiology reports, which are de-
scribed in natural language, are non-structured. 
Even in hospitals where all outcomes are man-
aged in a structured data format, the structured 
data format is different from those used by other 
hospitals. Therefore, a standard structured data 
format for each item has to be established and 
used in multiple facilities before outcomes can 
be compared. In addition, natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) is necessary to transform non-
structured data into ontology components. Some 
studies have applied NLP manually to certain 
document types such as the discharge summary. 
As this is labor-intensive, however, it is not cost-
efficient and therefore not an option for most 
facilities. Therefore, semi-automatic analysis is 
required. 

Overall, the authors defined the requirements 
for an EHR intended as a data source for clinical 
studies as follows: 

• Centralized database collecting data ca-
pable of traversal query among multi-
facility records 

• Access control to maintain data-source-
facility's sharing policy  

44



• Convergence of accounting information 
and medical records as action  and result 

• Automatic data mapping engine using 
massive  medical records  

Figure 1 illustrates a proposed design for an 
EHR generating structured data using its own 
dataset as well as structure mapping between 
several facilities' data.  

 

 
Figure 1. An EHR design promoting conver-

gence of HIS information and accounting infor-
mation. 

 
If traversal master data is manually maintained, 
data analysis cannot be completed because of the 
rate at which new data arrives from other facili-
ties. Therefore, both master data maintenance 
and medical record exchange requires NLP to 
achieve semiautomatic data preparation. 

So far, there are several obstacles to the reali-
zation of this proposed EHR, including data 
ownership control issues, legal restrictions on 
data location, the need for NLP technique for 
automatically generating terminology, the need 
for a master data definition, and so on. Because 
we cannot fully implement a real EHR of this 
kind, therefore, the authors implemented a data-
base to verify how the EHR equipping a central-
ized database would contribute to a clinical study. 
Specifically, the authors implemented a clinical 
study database composed of datasets from sever-
al university hospitals. The centralized database 
constitutes a traversal search environment for 
accounting information and test results.  

There are six requirements of an EHR data-
base suitable for clinical use: available data 
range, access control, sharing control, search 
query performance, usability, and database man-
agement policy agreement. Available data range 
depends on the NLP technique as well as the 
reachable dataset in the HIS. Data export from 
the HIS to the EHR depends on the conventional 
hospital setup and policy. Exported data is 

aligned in a semi-structured format such as XML. 
Access control must be extended to researchers 
as well as medical caregivers and patients. Also, 
for privacy reasons, results should consist of 
overviews and abstractive information instead of 
patient-specific information. Sharing control 
should be given to each participating hospital's 
administration; otherwise, the hospital’s internal 
council will hardly be convinced. The database 
should also be fast enough to allow for a tra-
versal search of multiple datasets that are each 
constantly growing. To enable such fast search-
ing, each dataset should be optimized for a 
search query created by a manager who is capa-
ble of setting up each researcher's required data-
base query. Because it is too hard for researchers 
to correctly understand this data retrieved from 
multiple datasets, a search query manager should 
be assigned at the datacenter. Finally, an audit 
council should be organized to reach agreement 
on any database management issues. 

Because of these restrictions, it would be dif-
ficult to implement the EHR as designed from 
scratch. Therefore, as a proof-of-concept, the 
authors implemented a system that meets the 
above requirements but is based on a currently 
available technique and dataset. There are two 
convergent datasets, a set of accounting infor-
mation and a set of test results, as action and re-
sult information. Four university hospitals con-
tributed to the convergent datasets: Kyoto Uni-
versity Hospital, Chiba University Hospital, 
Osaka University Hospital, and Miyazaki Uni-
versity Hospital. Although the use of these da-
tasets was approved, the physical setup of a uni-
fied database was not allowed. Therefore, the 
authors installed a virtually centralized database 
based on a database (Cache). Figure 2 illustrates 
a database. Each hospital has own dataset in the 
facility. A virtual datacenter is allowed to access 
all database by a search query.  

 

 
Figure 2. Virtual datacenter connecting four 

university hospital databases. 
 

45



A traversal search query is implemented at the 
datacenter, then equally distributed to all facili-
ties so that each facility can see the search results. 
Here, if a facility declines to share a search result, 
an administrator at a local site can stop sharing 
that result. Also, each search query is discussed 
and agreed upon by a council consisting of four 
university administrators beforehand.  

So far, there is no proper standard format for 
test results and no semi-automatic technique for 
master preparation, so the authors manually pre-
pared a unified master based on JLAC10 and 
composed of four university test result masters. 
The accounting information master used here is 
well established because the format for medical 
treatment fee claims is almost universal in all 
hospitals in Japan. 

3 Results  
The authors carried out five studies using the 
database. A query manager created a traversal 
search query by making an optimal search query 
of each site database. Because the unified test 
result master was manually maintained, only 300 
test result items were available for query, even 
though over 3000 items are available in each site. 
The script list as a researcher would see it is pre-
sented as Figure 3. The researcher's request was 
analyzed by the manager and translated to a da-
tabase query beforehand. The authors proceeded 
with five traversal queries as follows: Zyvox-
treated patients, nicotine addiction treatment pa-
tients, teicoplanin-treated patients, bortezomib-
treated patients, and influenza patients. Here, the 
definition of patient is different between facilities 
because of differences in employed drugs, drug 
names and applied disease names. Therefore, the 
query manager was required to find proper com-
binations of those parameters optimized to each 
facility’s database. 

 
Figure 3. User interface of traversal search 

query script. 
 
Figure 4 illustrates the result of a search of pa-

tient findings. The result can be evaluated by a 
site administrator before it is shared. If the result 
is allowed to be shared, the list is accumulated to 
a statistical result.  

 

 
Figure 4. Traversal search result list for a site 

administrator. 
 
The virtually centralized database, handling 

180 million records including data from 2009 
and 2010, completed each query in less than 10 
seconds. It was concluded that this level of in-
formation processing performance is enough to 
satisfy usability.  

The results show that the number of patients 
can be compared between hospitals. In other 
words, a centralized database like this can be 
beneficial for case finding, especially for finding 
rare diseases and common treatment procedures.  

General patient information such as height, 
weight, medical questionnaire responses, disease 
history, vital information, and contraindicated 
medicines are necessary and must be added to 
the database, according to a pharmacoepidemiol-
ogist. 

4 Discussion  
Clinical studies require strict control of data to 
verify the results. On the other hand, epidemiol-
ogy requires a massive dataset to analyze general 
information statistically, even if the accuracy of 
the dataset items is not verified. Therefore, the 
proposed EHR would contribute to epidemiology 
as well as case finding in clinical studies. The 
data sharing policy should begin with the pa-
tient’s ownership of his or her own data, for no 
unified database can be achieved based on care-
giver's ownership. Also, a semi-automatic data 
alignment technique to maintain master data and 
analyze unstructured documents is necessary. 
NLP would be convoluted to the data cleansing 
cycle. 
 

5 Conclusion  
This paper proposed an EHR designed to serve 
as an information hub for clinical studies. A cen-
tralized EHR database was defined to achieve 

46



traversal medical record search of multiple facili-
ties. The authors implemented a virtually central-
ized database as a proof-of-concept. The data-
base contained accounting information and test 
results. Five case studies were performed to find 
patients from multiple facilities. The authors 
concluded that the database cannot be used di-
rectly in clinical studies but is beneficial in case 
finding as well as epidemiologic analysis.  

References  
Canada Health Infoway, https://www.infoway-

inforoute.ca/ (Last access: Jul 20, 2013).  

Cache, InterSystems Corporation, 
http://www.intersystems.com/cache/index.html 
(Last access: Jul 20, 2013). 

ISO 2005, "Health informatics — Electronic health 
record — Definition, scope and context", TECH-
NICAL REPORT ISO/TR 20514:2005(E), p. 2, 
2005. 

MoH Holdings in Singapore, 
http://www.mohh.com.sg/about_mohh.html (Last 
access: Jul 20, 2013). 

National Health Information Technology Board, 
http://www.ithealthboard.health.nz/ (Last access: 
Jul 20, 2013). 

National E-Health Transition Authority, 
http://www.nehta.gov.au/ (Last access: Jul 20,  
2013) . 

 

47


