










































An Analysis of Annotation of Verb-Noun Idiomatic Combinations in a Parallel Dependency Corpus


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages 58–63,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Analysis of Annotation of Verb-Noun Idiomatic Combinations
in a Parallel Dependency Corpus†

Zdenka Uresova and Jana Sindlerova and Eva Fucikova and Jan Hajic
Charles University in Prague

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics∗

{uresova,sindlerova,fucikova,hajic}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

While working on valency lexicons for Czech
and English, it was necessary to define treat-
ment of multiword entities (MWEs) with the
verb as the central lexical unit. Morphologi-
cal, syntactic and semantic properties of such
MWEs had to be formally specified in order to
create lexicon entries and use them in treebank
annotation. Such a formal specification has
also been used for automated quality control
of the annotation vs. the lexicon entries. We
present a corpus-based study, concentrating on
multilayer specification of verbal MWEs, their
properties in Czech and English, and a com-
parison between the two languages using the
parallel Czech-English Dependency Treebank
(PCEDT). This comparison revealed interest-
ing differences in the use of verbal MWEs in
translation (discovering that such MWEs are
actually rarely translated as MWEs, at least
between Czech and English) as well as some
inconsistencies in their annotation. Adding
MWE-based checks should thus result in bet-
ter quality control of future treebank/lexicon
annotation. Since Czech and English are typo-
logically different languages, we believe that
our findings will also contribute to a better
understanding of verbal MWEs and possibly
their more unified treatment across languages.

† This work has been supported by the Grant No.
GPP406/13/03351P of the Grant Agency of the Czech Repub-
lic. The data used have been provided by the LINDAT/Clarin
infrastructural project LM2010013 supported by the MSMT CR
(http://lindat.cz).

∗ Authors’ full address: Institute of Formal and Applied
Linguistics, Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathe-
matics and Physics, Malostranske nam. 25, 11800 Prague 1,
Czech Republic

1 Introduction: Valency and MWEs

Valency is a linguistic phenomenon which plays a
crucial role in the majority of today’s linguistic the-
ories and may be considered a base for both lexi-
cographical and grammatical work. After valency
was first introduced into linguistics by L. Tesnière
(1959), the study of valency was taken up by many
scholars, with a wealth of material now available;
cf. (Ágel et al., 2006). In the theoretical framework
of Functional Generative Description (Sgall et al.,
1986), the following researchers have substantially
contributed to valency research: J. Panevová (1977;
1998); P. Sgall (1998), M. Lopatková (2010), V. Ket-
tnerová (2012), Z. Urešová (2011a; 2011b).

In general, valency is understood as a specific
ability of certain lexical units - primarily of verbs
- to open “slots” to be filled in by other lexical units.
By filling up these slots the core of the sentence
structure is built. Valency is mostly approached syn-
tactically, semantically or by combining these two
perspectives. Valency terminology is not consistent
(cf. valency, subcategorization, argument structure,
etc.), however, valency as a verbal feature seems to
be language universal (Goldberg, 1995).

MWEs are expressions which consist of more
than a single word while having non-compositional
meaning. They can be defined (Sag et al., 2002) as
“idiosyncratic interpretations that cross word bound-
aries.” As the MWE Workshop itself attests, MWEs
form a complex issue, both theoretically and practi-
cally in various NLP tasks. Here, we will concen-
trate on certain types of verbal MWEs only.

Verbal MWEs can be divided into several groups

58



(cf. Sect. 1.3.2 in (Baldwin and Kim, 2010)):

• verb-particle constructions (VPCs), such as
take off, play around, or cut short,

• prepositional verbs (PVs), such as refer to, look
for, or come across,

• light-verb constructions (LVCs or verb-
complement pairs or support verb construc-
tions, see e.g. (Calzolari et al., 2002)), such as
give a kiss, have a drink, or make an offer,

• verb-noun idiomatic combinations (VNICs or
VP idioms), such as the (in)famous kick the
bucket, spill the beans, or make a face.

While (Baldwin and Kim, 2010) define VNICs as
being “composed of a verb and noun in direct object
position,”1 we found that their syntax can be more
diverse and thus we will include also constructions
like be at odds or make a mountain out of a mole-
hill into this class. Our goal is to look mainly at
the surface syntactic representation of MWEs, there-
fore, we will follow the above described typology
even though the exact classification might be more
complex.

2 Verbal Valency and MWEs in
Dependency Treebanks

In the Prague Dependency Treebank family of
projects (PDT(s)) annotated using the Tectogram-
matical Repesentation of deep syntax and seman-
tics (Böhmová et al., 2005), valency information is
stored in valency lexicons. Each verb token in PDTs
is marked by an ID (i.e., linked to) of the appropri-
ate valency frame in the valency lexicon. For Czech,
both the PDT (Hajič et al., 2012a) and the Czech part
of the PCEDT 2.0 (Hajič et al., 2012b)2 use PDT-
Vallex3; for English (the English part of PCEDT,
i.e. the texts from the Wall Street Journal portion of
the Penn Treebank (WSJ/PTB), cf. (Marcus et al.,
1993)) we use EngVallex,4 which follows the same

1(Baldwin and Kim, 2010), Sect. 1.3.2.4
2Also available from LDC, Catalog No. LDC2012T08.
3
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/lindat/PDT-Vallex

4
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/lindat/EngVallex; since it was cre-

ated for the WSJ/PTB annotation, the starting point was Prop-
Bank (Palmer et al., 2005) to which it is also linked.

principles, including entry structure, labeling of ar-
guments etc.

Here is an example of a valency lexicon entry (for
the base sense of to give, simplified):

give ACT(sb) PAT(dobj) ADDR(dobj2)

The verb lemma (give) is associated with its ar-
guments, labeled by functors: ACT for actor (deep
subject), PAT for Patient (deep object), and ADDR
for addressee.5

In the valency lexicon entries, two more argument
labels can be used: effect (EFF) and origin (ORIG).
In addition, if a free modifier (e.g. adverbial, prepo-
sitional phrase, etc.) is so tightly associated to be
deemed obligatory for the given verb sense, it is
also explicitly put into the list of arguments. The
P(CE)DT use about 35 free modifications (such as
LOC, DIR1, TWHEN, TTILL, CAUS, AIM, ...), most
of which can be marked as obligatory with certain
verbs (verb senses).

At each valency slot, requirements on surface syn-
tactic structure and inflectional properties of the ar-
guments may be given. This is much more complex
in inflective languages but it is used in English too,
often as a ‘code’ assigned to a verb sense, e.g. in
OALDCE (Crowther, 1998).

For details of surface-syntactic structural and
morphological requirements related to Czech va-
lency and subcategorization in Czech, see e.g. Ure-
šová (2011a; 2011b).

For the annotation of (general) MWEs (Bejček
and Straňák, 2010) in the P(CE)DT, the following
principle have been chosen: each MWE is repre-
sented by a single node in the deep dependency
tree. This accords with our principles that “deep”
representation should abstract from (the peculiari-
ties and idiosyncrasies of) surface syntax and rep-
resent “meaning.”6 The syntactic (and related mor-
phological) representation of MWEs is annotated at
a “lower”, purely syntactic dependency layer (here,
each word token is represented by its own node).

5We say that a verb has (zero or more) valency slots; the
verb give as presented here has three.

6Under this assumption, each node in such a dependency
tree should ideally represent a single unit of meaning, and
the “meaning” of the tree - typically representing a sentence
- should be derived compositionally from the meanings of the
individual nodes and their (labeled, dependency) relations (i.e.
functors, as they are called in the PDT-style treebanks).

59



Subsequently, the two representations are linked.
However, here arises a problem with modifiable

MWEs (such as lose his/my/their/... head): if the
whole MWE is represented as a single node, the
modifier relation to the MWE would be ambiguous
if put simply as the dependent of the MWE (i.e.,
which part of the MWE does it modify?). There-
fore, a rather technical, but unambiguous solution
was adopted: the verb as the head of the verbal
MWE is represented by a node, and the “rest” of
the MWE gets its own appropriately marked node
(technically dependent on the verb node). Such a re-
lation is labeled with the DPHR functor (“Dependent
part of a PHRase”). The modifier of the MWE can
thus be unambiguously attached as either the depen-
dent node of the verb (if it modifies the whole MWE,
such as a temporal adverbial in hit the books on Sun-
day), or to the DPHR node (if it modifies only that
part of the MWE, such as in hit the history books).7

We believe that this solution which allows the flex-
ibility of considering also modifiable verbal VNICs
to be annotated formally in the same way as fully
fixed VNICs is original in the PDT family of tree-
banks, since we have not seen it neither in the Penn
Treebank nor in other treebanks, including depen-
dency ones.

Since DPHR is technically a dependent node, it
can then be formally included as a slot in the va-
lency dictionary, adding the surface syntactic and/or
morphological representation in the form of an en-
coded surface dependency representation, such as in
the following example of an English VNIC:

make DPHR(mountain.Obj.sg[a],
out[of,molehill.Adv.sg[a])

In Czech, the formal means are extended, e.g. for
the required case (1 - nominative, 6- locative):8

běhat DPHR(mráz.S1,po[záda.P6])

7One can argue that in very complex MWEs, this simple
split into two nodes might not be enough; in the treebanks we
have explored no such multiple dependent modifiers exist.

8The repertoire of possible syntactic and morphological con-
straints, which can be used for the description of possible forms
of the fixed part of the idiomatic expression, covers all aspects
of Czech word formation: case, number, grammatical gender,
possessive gender and number, degree of comparison, nega-
tion, short/long form of certain adjectives, analytical depen-
dency function etc.

make

PRED

complex v

a mountain out of a molehill   

DPHR

dphr n.denot

.

.

making

Pred

a

AuxA

mountain

Obj

out

AuxP

of

AuxP

a

AuxA

molehill

Adv

 

 

  

 

 

 

Figure 1: Verbal MWE: tectogrammatical (left) and syn-
tactic (right) annotation of a VNIC

In Fig. 1, the phrase making a mountain out of a
mole is syntactically annotated in the following way:

• mountain is annotated as the syntactic direct
object of making,

• out of a molehill is annotated as a prepositional
phrase (with the preposition as the head)

On the tectogrammatical layer of annotation, the
verb is the head and the defining part of the MWE
gets a separate node (marked by DPHR).

In the corpus-based analysis of verbal MWEs in
the valency lexicons and the treebanks presented
here, we concentrate mainly on VNICs (see Sect. 1)
and briefly mention LVCs, since the boundary be-
tween them is often a bit grayish. In the P(CE)DT
treebanks, LVCs are always represented as two
nodes: the (light) verb node and the noun com-
plement node. Formally, the representing structure
is the same for both mentioned groups of MWEs,
but it differs in the labels of the verb arguments:
CPHR (Compound PHRase) for LVCs vs. DPHR for
VNICs. Whereas lexical units marked as DPHRs are
mostly limited to a fixed number of words and there-
fore are listed in the lexicon, lexical units marked
as CPHRs are often not limited in their number and
therefore it does not make sense to list them all in
the lexicon.

60



A possible solution to the problem of automatic
identification of (general) MWEs in texts using the
annotation found in the PDT, which is related to the
topic described in this paper but goes beyond its
scope, can be found in (Bejcek et al., 2013).

3 Corpus Analysis

To compare annotation and use of VNICs in Czech
and English, we have used the PCEDT. The PCEDT
contains alignment information, thus it was easy to
extract all cases where a VNIC was annotated (i.e.
where the DPHR functor occurs).9

We found a total of 92890 occurrences of aligned
(non-auxiliary) verbs. Czech VNICs were aligned
with English counterparts not annotated as a VNIC
in 570 cases, and there were 278 occurrences of En-
glish VNICs aligned with Czech non-VNICs, and
only 88 occurrences of VNICs annotated on both
sides were aligned.10 These figures are surpris-
ingly small (less than 1.5% of verbs are marked
as VNICs), however, (a) it is only the VNIC type
(e.g., phrasal verbs would account for far more), and
(b) the annotator guidelines asked for “conservative-
ness” in creating new VNIC-type verb senses.11

Ideally (for NLP), VNICs would be translated as
VNICs. However, as stated above, this occurred
only in a 88 cases only (a few examples are shown
below).

(1) (wsj0062) točit[turn] se[oneself-acc.]
zády[back-Noun-sg-instr.]:
thumb(ing) its nose

(2) (wsj0989) podřezávat[saw down]
si[oneself-dat.] pod[under]
sebou[oneself-instr.]
větev[branch-Noun-sg-acc.]:
bit(ing) the hand that feeds them

9The alignment is automatic, the Czech and English tec-
togrammatical annotation (including verb sense/frame assign-
ment) is manual.

10The total number of Czech VNICs in the PCEDT (1300) is
higher than the sum of extracted alignments (570+88=658). The
difference is due to many of the Czech VNICs being aligned to
a node which does not correspond to a verb, or which is not
linked to an English node, or where the alignment is wrong.

11By “conservative” approach we mean that splitting of verb
senses into new ones has been discouraged in the annotation
guidelines.

Manual inspection of these alignments revealed
(except for a few gray-area cases) no errors. We have
thus concentrated on the asymmetric cases by man-
ually exploring 200 such cases on each side. The
results are summarized in Tab. 1.

Direction / VNIC VNIC
Annotated as in En, in Cz, Examples
(by type) not Cz not En

Correctly annotated (as non-VNIC)
LVC 26 4 lámat[break]

rekordy:
set records

non-MWE 138 124 přerušit
[interrupt]:
cut short

Annotation Error (should have been VNIC)
LVC 7 17 držet[hold]

krok[step]:
keep abreast

non-MWE 28 52 zlomit (mu)
srdce: break
sb’s heart

other error 1 3

Table 1: Breakdown of VNICs linked to non-VNICs

3.1 English VNICs Linked to Non-VNIC Czech
The first column of counts in Tab. 1 refers to cases
where the verb in the English original has been an-
notated as VNIC, but the Czech translation has been
marked as a non-VNIC. We have counted cases,
where we believe that the annotation is correct, even
if it is not annotated as a VNIC (164 in total) and
cases which should have been in fact annotated as a
VNIC (35 cases). Within these two groups, we sep-
arately counted cases where the translation has not
been annotated as a VNIC, but at least as a LVC,
another MWE type (total of 33 such cases). The
proportion of errors (approx. 18%) is higher than
the 5.5% rate reported for semantic relation annota-
tion (Štěpánek, 2006). Typically, the error would be
corrected by adding a separate idiomatic verb sense
into the valency lexicon and adjusting the annotation
(verb sense and the DPHR label) accordingly.

61



3.2 Czech VNICs Linked to Non-VNIC English
The second column of counts in Tab. 1 shows the
same breakdown as described in the previous sec-
tion, but in the opposite direction: Czech VNICs
which in the English original have been annotated
differently. The first difference is in the number
of erroneously annotated tokens, which is visibly
higher (approx. twice as high) than in the opposite
direction both for LVCs (17) and for constructions
which have not been marked as MWEs at all (52).
This suggests that the authors of the English va-
lency lexicon and the annotators of the English deep
structure have been even more “conservative” than
their Czech colleagues by not creating many VNIC-
typed verb senses.12 Second, there are only 4 cases
of VNICs translated into and correctly annotated as
LVCs, compared to the English → Czech direction
(26 cases).

4 Conclusions

We have described the treatment of (an enriched set
of) verb-noun idiomatic combinations (and briefly
other types of MWEs) in the PDT style treebanks
and in the associated valency lexicons. We have
explored the PCEDT to find interesting correspon-
dences between the annotation and lexicon entries
in the English and Czech annotation schemes.

We have found that VNICs, as one of the
types of MWEs, are translated in different ways.
A translation of a VNIC as a VNIC is rare,
even if we take into account the annotation errors
(88+7+17+28+52=192 cases of the 936 extracted).
By far the most common case of translating a VNIC
in both directions is the usage of a completely non-
MWE phrase. There is also a substantial amount
of errors in each direction, higher in cases where
the Czech translation was annotated as a VNIC and
the English original was not. While the low overall
number of VNICs found in the parallel corpus can be
explained by not considering standard phrasal verbs
for this study and by the required conservatism in
marking a phrase as a true VNIC, we can only specu-
late why only a small proportion of VNICs are trans-
lated as VNICs in(to) the other language: manual

12None of the annotators of the English side of the parallel
treebank was a fully native English speaker, which might also
explain this “conservatism.”

inspection of several cases suggested (but without
a statistically significant conclusions) that this does
not seem to be caused by the specific nature or genre
of the Wall Street Journal texts, but rather by the fact
that the two languages explored, Czech and English,
went generally through different developments un-
der different circumstances and contexts throughout
the years they evolved separately.

While this paper describes only an initial analy-
sis of multiword expressions (of the verb-noun id-
iomatic combination type) in parallel treebanks, we
plan to apply the same classification and checks as
described here to the whole corpus (perhaps auto-
matically to a certain extent), to discover (presum-
ably) even more discrepancies and also more corre-
spondence types. These will again be classified and
corrections in the data will be made. Eventually, we
will be able to get a more reliable material for a thor-
ough study of the use of MWEs in translation, with
the aim of improving identification and analysis of
MWEs (e.g., by enriching the approach taken by and
described in (Bejcek et al., 2013)). We would also
like to improve machine translation results by iden-
tifying relevant features of MWEs (including but not
limited to VNICs) and using the associated informa-
tion stored in the valency lexicons in order to learn
translation correspondences involving MWEs.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the four reviewers,
especially reviewer #4, for helpful comments which
hopefully have lead to a clearer version of this pa-
per. Also, we would like to thank to all the anno-
tators and technical support staff who made our re-
search possible by creating the treebanks and lexi-
cons which we can now build upon.

References
Vilmos Ágel, Ludwig M. Eichinger, Hans-Werner Eroms,

Peter Hellwig, Hans Jürgen Heringer, Henning Lobin,
and Guta Rau. 2006. Dependenz und Valenz. Walter
de Gruyter, Berlin & New York.

Timothy Baldwin and Su Nam Kim. 2010. Multiword
expressions. In Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau,
editors, Handbook of Natural Language Processing,
Second Edition. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group,
Boca Raton, FL. ISBN 978-1420085921.

62



Eduard Bejček and Pavel Straňák. 2010. Annotation
of multiword expressions in the prague dependency
treebank. Language Resources and Evaluation, 44(1-
2):7–21.

Eduard Bejcek, Pavel Pecina, and Pavel Stranak. 2013.
Syntactic Identification of Occurrences of Multiword
Expressions in Text using a Lexicon with Dependency
Structures. In Workshop on Multiword Expressions
(NAACL 2013, this volume), New Jersey. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Alena Böhmová, Silvie Cinková, and Eva Hajičová.
2005. A Manual for Tectogrammatical Layer An-
notation of the Prague Dependency Treebank (En-
glish translation). Technical report, ÚFAL MFF UK,
Prague, Czech Republic.

Nicoletta Calzolari, Charles J. Fillmore, Ralph Grishman,
Nancy Ide, Alessandro Lenci, Catherine Macleod, and
Antonio Zampolli. 2002. Towards best practice for
multiword expressions in computational lexicons. In
LREC.

Jonathan Crowther. 1998. Oxford Advanced Learner’s
Dictionary. Cornelsen & Oxford, 5th edition.

A.E. Goldberg. 1995. Constructions: A Construction
Grammar Approach to Argument Structure. Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.

Jan Hajič, Eduard Bejček, Jarmila Panevová, Jiří
Mírovský, Johanka Spoustová, Jan Štěpánek, Pavel
Straňák, Pavel Šidák, Pavlína Vimmrová, Eva
Št’astná, Magda Ševčíková, Lenka Smejkalová, Petr
Homola, Jan Popelka, Markéta Lopatková, Lucie
Hrabalová, Natalia Klyueva, and Zdeněk Žabokrt-
ský. 2012a. Prague Dependency Treebank 2.5.
https://ufal-point.mff.cuni.cz/xmlui/handle/11858/00-
097C-0000-0006-DB11-8.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila Panevová, Petr Sgall,
Ondřej Bojar, Silvie Cinková, Eva Fučíková, Marie
Mikulová, Petr Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jiří Semecký, Jana
Šindlerová, Jan Štěpánek, Josef Toman, Zdeňka Ure-
šová, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2012b. Announcing
Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank 2.0. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012),
pages 3153–3160, İstanbul, Turkey. ELRA, European
Language Resources Association.

Václava Kettnerová. 2012. Lexikálně-sémantické kon-
verze ve valenčním slovníku. Ph.D. thesis, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic.

Markéta Lopatková. 2010. Valency Lexicon of Czech
Verbs: Towards Formal Description of Valency and
Its Modeling in an Electronic Language Resource.
Prague.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a Large Annotated

Corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. COMPUTA-
TIONAL LINGUISTICS, 19(2):313–330.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Cor-
pus of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

Jarmila Panevová. 1998. Ještě k teorii valence. Slovo a
slovesnost, 59(1):1–14.

Jarmila Panevová. 1977. Verbal Frames Revisited. The
Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, (28):55–
72.

Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword Ex-
pressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. In Proc. of
the 3rd International Conference on Intelligent Text
Processing and Computational Linguistics (CICLing
2002), pages 1–15.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajičová, and Jarmila Panevová. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and
Pragmatic Aspects. Dordrecht, Reidel, and Prague,
Academia.

Petr Sgall. 1998. Teorie valence a její formální zpracov-
ání. Slovo a slovesnost, 59(1):15–29.

Jan Štěpánek. 2006. Post-annotation Checking of Prague
Dependency Treebank 2.0 Data. In Lecture Notes
in Artificial Intelligence, Text, Speech and Dialogue.
9th International Conference, TSD 2006, Brno, Czech
Republic, September 11–15, 2006, volume 4188 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 277–284,
Berlin / Heidelberg. Springer.

Lucien Tesnière. 1959. Éléments de syntaxe structurale.
Editions Klincksieck, Paris.

Zdeňka Urešová. 2011a. Valence sloves v Pražském
závislostním korpusu. Studies in Computational and
Theoretical Linguistics. Ústav formální a aplikované
lingvistiky, Prague.

Zdeňka Urešová. 2011b. Valenční slovník Pražského
závislostního korpusu (PDT-Vallex). Studies in Com-
putational and Theoretical Linguistics. Ústav formální
a aplikované lingvistiky, Prague.

63


