










































Annotating the Interaction between Focus and Modality: the case of exclusive particles


Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop & Interoperability with Discourse, pages 228–237,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotating the Interaction between Focus and Modality: 
the case of exclusive particles 

Amália Mendes*, Iris Hendrickx*†, Agostinho Salgueiro*, Luciana Ávila*‡ 

* Centro de Linguística da Universidade de Lisboa 
† Center for Language Studies, Radboud University Nijmegen 

‡ PosLin-Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais / Capes 
{amalia.mendes,iris}@clul.ul.pt, agostinhomms@gmail.com,  

lucianabeatrizavila@gmail.com   
 
 

 
Abstract 

We discuss in this paper a proposal to inte-
grate the annotation of contexts with focus-
sensitive expressions (namely the Portu-
guese exclusive adverb só ‘only’) in a mo-
dality scheme. We describe some properties 
of contexts involving both exclusive parti-
cles and modal triggers and discuss how to 
integrate this with an existing annotation 
scheme implemented for European Portu-
guese. We present the results of the applica-
tion of this annotation scheme to a sample 
of 100 sentences. 

1  Introduction 

Modality in language has been studied extensive-
ly (see Portner (2009) for an overview). In recent 
years, the study of modality has been associated 
with a trend in Information Extraction applica-
tions that aim to identify personal opinions in 
sentiment analysis and opinion mining (Wiebe et 
al., 2005), to identify events which are factual, 
probable or uncertain, as well as speculation and 
negation. This trend has lead to the development 
of several practical annotation schemes for mo-
dality (Sauri et al., 2006; Szarvas et al., 2008; 
Baker et al., 2010, Matsuyoshi et al., 2010). 
  Most of these annotation schemes focus on the 
annotation of modal elements like modal verbs 
or adverbs, but in the present study we go one 
step deeper and discuss the complex interaction 
between modality and focus in Portuguese. Our 
notion of modality focuses on the expression of 
the opinion and attitude of the speaker or the 
agent towards the proposition (Palmer, 1986). 
This attitude or opinion towards a state or event 
can assume diverse values. For example, the 
speaker (or subject) may consider something to 
be possible, probable or certain (epistemic mo-

dality), he might be obliged or allowed to do it 
(deontic modality), or he wants or fears it (voli-
tive modality). Frequently, several modal expres-
sions interact to compose the overall modal 
meaning of the sentence. Non modal elements 
can also directly influence the modality type and 
alter the meaning of the sentence. One such ele-
ment, rather well studied, is the negation marker 
(Morante, 2010; Morante and Sporleder, 2012). 
In this paper however we discuss the element 
focus, taken as a means to “give prominence to 
meaning-bearing elements in an expression.” 
(Krifka, 1995:240). The prominent constituent is 
called the focus, while the complement notion is 
called the background. We are especially con-
cerned with the interaction between modality and 
a subtype of focus-sensitive expressions named 
exclusive particles (Beaver and Clark, 2008), 
and, for the purposes of this paper, we will center 
our discussion on the adverb só ‘only’. 

Our goal is to study closely how exclusive 
particles affect and alter the modal meaning of 
the sentence. By performing a systematic annota-
tion of these interactions in examples drawn 
from a large corpus we better comprehend the 
role that these particles play and the different 
type of effects that exclusive particles can have.  

Most annotation schemes for modality focus 
on English but resources are now being devel-
oped for other languages including Portuguese. 
Hendrickx et al. (2012b) have previously devel-
oped an annotation scheme for European Portu-
guese and applied it to a corpus of 2000 
sentences. Ávila & Mello (2013) presented an 
annotation scheme for Brazilian Portuguese 
speech data, applied to information units. Here 
we look at the interaction between focus-
sensitive adverbs and modality and discuss how 
to integrate these findings in the annotation 
scheme of Hendrickx et al. (2012a). 

228



The structure of the paper is as follows. In sec-
tion 2, we review related work in the field of 
modality, its annotation in texts, focus-sensitive 
expressions and the semantics of the exclusives. 
The discussion of the specific contexts with ad-
verb só and a modality trigger is presented in 
section 3. We analyze the interaction between 
triggers and this specific adverb, focusing on the 
scope of the adverb and its influence over the 
modal value of the sentence. In section 4.1, we 
briefly summarize the annotation scheme for 
modality in Portuguese developed by Hendrickx 
et al. (2012a). We then demonstrate the imple-
mentation of our findings about adverb só in this 
annotation scheme in section 4.2. We discuss the 
results of the annotation of a sample of 100 sen-
tences in 4.3 and conclude in section 5. 

2 Related work 

The literature on modality proposes different 
typologies. In linguistics, most modal systems 
are based on the contrast between epistemic and 
deontic modality. While the epistemic value is 
stable across typologies, the other values that are 
contrasted with it vary considerably. Some pro-
posals distinguish between epistemic, partici-
pant-internal and participant-external modality 
(Van der Auwera and Plungian, 1998), or be-
tween epistemic, speaker-oriented modality and 
agent-oriented modality (Bybee et al., 1994). 
Other values generally considered are, for exam-
ple, volition, related to the notions of will, hope 
and wish; evaluation, concerning the speaker’s 
evaluation of facts and situations; and commis-
sives, used by the speaker to express his com-
mitment to make something happen (Palmer, 
1986). Although most of the literature is centered 
on verbal expressions of modality (mostly semi-
auxiliary verbs like may, should, can), studies on 
adverbs and modality have also been carried out 
for English (cf. Hoye, 1997). 

In the literature on practical corpus annotation 
of modality, the attention focuses on the distinc-
tion between factual and non-factual infor-
mation, as many NLP applications need to know 
what is presented as factual and certain and what 
is presented as non-factual or probable. Opposed 
to the theoretical typologies of modality, these 
schemes describe in detail which elements in the 
text are actually involved in the expression of 
modality and their roles. These are the subject of 
the modality (source) and the elements in its 
scope (target/scope/focus). Other schemes 
(Baker et al., 2010; Matsuyoshi et al., 2010; Sau-

ri et al., 2006) also determine the relation be-
tween sentences in text, identifying temporal and 
conditional relations between events or the eval-
uation of the degree of relevance of some infor-
mation within a text, rather than classifying 
modal values.  

Rooth (1992) claims that the effects of focus 
on semantics can be said to be the introduction of 
a set of alternatives that contrasts with the ordi-
nary semantic meaning of a sentence and that 
there are lexical items and construction specific-
rules that refer directly to the notion of focus. 
The phenomenon of focalization is taken to be a 
grammatical feature that semantically conveys (i) 
newness/information update; (ii) answering the 
‘current question’; (iii) contrast; (iv) invocation 
of alternatives. In terms of semantic annotation, 
Matsuyoshi et al. (2010) propose an annotation 
scheme for representing extended modality of 
event mentions in Japanese. This scheme in-
cludes seven components among them the Focus, 
which represents the focus of negation, inference 
or interrogative. 

There are no works on the annotation of focus 
and its relation with modality in Portuguese, in 
any of its variants. This is an attempt to put the 
two notions together and propose a scheme that 
describes the scope of exclusive particles and its 
impact on the meaning of the expressed modali-
ty. 

3 Interaction between adverbs and 
modal value 

In this section, we discuss in detail the possible 
interactions between the adverb só and modal 
expressions in the text. We extracted our exam-
ples from the online search platform of the Cor-
pus de Referência do Português Contemporâneo 
(CRPC)1, a highly diverse corpus of 312 million 
words covering a large variety of textual genres 
and Portuguese varieties (Généreux et al., 2012).  

The adverb só is considered a focus-sensitive 
particle (Beaver & Clark, 2008; Aloni et al., 
1999), defined as a word which semantics “in-
volves essential reference to the information 
structure of the sentence containing it” (Aloni et 
al., 1999:1). 

The meaning of only consists of asserting that 
no proposition from the set of relevant contrasts 
other than the one expressed is true (von Fintel, 
1994). The standard views on exclusive particles 
consider that “the position of focal accent identi-

                                                             
1http://alfclul.clul.ul.pt/CQPweb/crpcweb23/index.php 

229



fies the constituent associated with only” (Dryer, 
1994:2). Dryer (1994) and Schwarzschild (1997), 
on the other hand, assume that general principles 
of discourse could explain focus-sensitivity. 

Exclusives can also downtone, by underlining 
the fact that this proposition “is not the strongest 
that in principle might have been the case”, a 
function called Mirative (Beaver & Clark 2008: 
250).  

Constructions with exclusives involve a posi-
tive and a negative component: the positive is 
called the prejacent and, in sentence (1a), it is 
equivalent to ‘he wants to go home’; the negative 
is called the universal and corresponds in (1a) to 
‘he does not want to do anything else’. 

(1) a. Ele só quer ir para casa.  
  ‘He only wants to go home.’ 

 b. As actividades de campanha eleitoral só 
podem ser financiadas por subvenção es-
tatal.  

  ‘The activities of the election campaign 
can only be financed by public funding.’ 

We will discuss in the following subsections 
some properties of constructions with exclusives 
and modal triggers. 

3.1 Scope of the exclusive particle 
Exclusives give prominence to a constituent in 
the sentence, called the focus. In sentence (1a), 
só has scope over the modal trigger (quer 
‘wants’) and its target (ir para casa ‘to go 
home’). The scope of só can also be a smaller 
constituent inside the target. In (1b), só has scope 
over the by-phrase (por subvenção estatal ‘by 
public funding’), and in (2), over a temporal ad-
junct. The adverb só could also occur immediate-
ly before the temporal adjunct keeping the same 
focus reading as in (2) (só depois de construído o 
novo palácio da justiça). 

(2) O presidente respondeu que tal só deverá 
acontecer depois de construído o novo palá-
cio da justiça.  

 ‘The president answered that it should/can 
only happen after the new courthouse is 
built.’ 

Two other possibilities are illustrated in (3) 
and (4): in (3), the focus is the subject tu ‘you’ 
and in (4) is the quantifier 7 ‘seven’:  

(3)  Só tu eras capaz de fazer juntar tanta gente. 
‘Only you could bring together so many 
people.’ 

(4) Claro que só podem estar 7 jogadores em 
campo. ‘Obviously there can only be 7 
players in the field.’ 

As these examples show, the exclusive parti-
cle is not necessarily contiguous to its focus. The 
analysis of a sample of the occurrences of the 
exclusive só with a modal trigger in the CRPC 
corpus shows that in most cases só has scope 
over a specific constituent, rather than over the 
full target of the modal trigger.  

There can be ambiguity in the scope of the ex-
clusive particle só in certain contexts. This is the 
case when the focus can be interpreted as the full 
target of the modal trigger or as a specific con-
stituent inside the target. We illustrate such cases 
in sentence (5): this sentence can be interpreted 
as ‘the only thing I’m capable of doing is to ask a 
metaphysical question’ or ‘the only question I’m 
capable of asking is a metaphysical one’.  

(5) Só sou capaz de colocar ao Sr. Ministro uma 
questão metafísica.  

 ‘I’m only capable of asking a metaphysical 
question to Mr. Minister.’ 

However, in most contexts, there seems to be 
one preferential interpretation, in spite of the un-
derlying ambiguity.  

3.2 From possibility to necessity 
In contexts where the verb poder has an epistem-
ic reading, the exclusive can restrict the set of 
possibilities to the one presented in the sentence 
(x and only x), as illustrated in (6).  

(6)  Isto só pode ter sido um acidente.  
 ‘This can only have been an accident’ 

By restricting the set of possible situations to 
one, the adverb leads to an overall reading of the 
sentence as expressing epistemic necessity. Sen-
tence (6) has indeed an equivalent modal mean-
ing to (7) and to a double negative polarity (over 
the modal verb and over its target), as in (8).  

(7) Isto tem de ter sido um acidente. 
 ‘It had to be an accident’ 

(8) Isto não pode não ter sido um acidente.  
 ‘It could not not have been an accident’	  

The scope of the focus-sensitive particle plays 
an important role on whether an epistemic trigger 
may be interpreted as having a necessity reading 
or not (cf. 3.2). Contrary to (6), the interpretation 
of (9) is one of epistemic possibility, although 
the particle só is present. In this case, the particle 
has scope over a specific constituent, the tem-

230



poral adjunct, which establishes a condition over 
the modal trigger. But in (9b), without the tem-
poral adjunct, the scope of só is coincident with 
the target of the modal trigger and the interpreta-
tion is one of necessity, as paraphrased by ‘the 
member of parliament MFL has to be right’. 

(9) a. Ora, a Sr.ª Deputada MFL só pode ter 
razão quando acertar nalguma previsão. 

  ‘Well, the member of parliament MFL 
may only be right when at least one of 
her forecasts turn out correct.’ 

 b. Ora, a Sr.ª Deputada MFL só pode ter 
razão.  

  ‘Well, the member of parliament MFL 
can only be right.’ 

This restriction holds for stative targets, as in 
(9a), and also for eventive targets, although in 
this case the possibility or necessity reading is 
also determined by the tense of the verbal predi-
cate. The necessity reading is only associated to 
eventive targets temporally located in the past, 
and is not available, for example, in the sentence 
ele só pode ir ao cinema ‘he may only go to the 
cinema’, where the target is temporally located 
in the future.  

It seems that when the target of the modal 
trigger is a state or a past event, the exclusive 
particle leads to a necessity reading instead of a 
possibility reading, as long as the scope of só is 
the full target of the modal trigger and not a dif-
ferent constituent. However, we need to assess 
these factors against more corpus data.  

If we compare (6) with a related declarative 
sentence (cf. isto foi um acidente ‘it was an acci-
dent’), we see that the declarative has an asser-
tive value over the situation it denotes, while (6) 
establishes a set of possibilities and strongly as-
serts a single one, in what is considered by 
Moreira (2005) as a case of overmodalization. 

The verb dever ‘have to’ can occur in contexts 
similar to (6), as exemplified in (10). However, 
the sentence with dever expresses the most prob-
able event and does not entail an epistemic ne-
cessity reading, contrary to (6) with verb poder. 

(10)  Isso só deve ter sido um acidente.  
  ‘This was probably only an accident’ 

In (10), the sentence merely states that this is 
probably what happened. The fact that the neces-
sity reading does not arise from (10), contrary to 
(6), follows from the differences that exist be-
tween the possibility and the probability reading. 
The possibility reading in (6) denotes one partic-

ular event out of a set of possible ones and (6) 
singles out one possibility as the only valid one, 
affecting the truth-value of the set of alternatives 
considered. Sentence (10) denotes that this par-
ticular event is more probable to be true than 
other alternatives. So, in this sentence the exclu-
sive strengthens the value of this probability but 
does not establish it as a single one. It is conse-
quently a scalar use of the exclusive, in the sense 
that there is an ordering of propositions from 
weaker to stronger.  

3.3 Contexts where só is required 
Contrary to sentences (6), where the adverb só 
can be present or not (with effects on the inter-
pretation), in sentences like (11), with the same 
modal verb, the adverb is required.  

(11)  Sr. Deputado, só pode estar a brincar! 
 ‘Congressman, you must be kidding!’ 

These are discursive contexts with a distinc-
tive prosody consisting of a rising tone, marked 
in writing by the punctuation. The modal inter-
pretation of (11) is one of epistemic necessity, as 
in (6). However, the equivalent sentence without 
só is not acceptable (*Sr. Deputado, pode estar a 
brincar! ‘Congressman, you can be kidding’). 
Contrary to (6), the speaker does not consider 
that a set of possibilities exist, from which one is 
singled out, but rather takes only into considera-
tion the situation that the sentence denotes (to be 
kidding) and emphasizes it.  

3.4 Só in ambiguous modal contexts  
The presence of só can resolve ambiguity at the 
modal value level. For example, sentence (11a) 
might be interpreted as expressing a possibility 
or an internal capacity of the law itself. Howev-
er, in sentence (12b), the presence of the adverb 
só blocks the participant internal reading. Sen-
tence (12b) does not mean that this is the only 
property of the law but rather that it is inevitable 
that it reduces injustice. It has the same necessity 
value as (6). 

(12) a. A nova lei pode reduzir a injustiça.  
 ‘The new legislation can reduce injus-

tice’ 
 b. A nova lei só pode reduzir a injustiça. 
  ‘The new legislation can only reduce 

injustice’  

3.5 Weak alternative 
Besides highlighting one alternative, the exclu-
sive particle can also mark this alternative as 

231



weaker than expected. This is frequently the case 
with deontic modality, as illustrated in (13): the 
process to participate is presented as surprisingly 
easy.  

(13) Para participar só tem de contactar a organi-
zação através dos telefones 96... ou 91...  

 ‘To participate, you only have to contact the 
organization through the phone numbers…’  

3.6 Contrastive value  
The epistemic subvalues belief and knowledge 
are expressed by main verbs like achar ‘to be-
lieve’ and saber ‘to know’. When the adverb só 
occurs in these contexts, it has mainly a discur-
sive function: it establishes a contrast with some-
thing that was previously said in the 
conversation. We exemplify such conversational 
contexts in (14): 

(14) A: Eu não acho que ele seja corrupto. 
  ‘I don’t think he is corrupted’ 

 B: Eu só sei que ele fez grandes depósitos 
em offshores. 

  ‘I only know that he made big deposits 
in offshores’ 

The different contexts discussed in this section 
show that the interpretation of só with modal 
trigger is complex and varies according to the 
lexical trigger and its value, but also to the lin-
guistic context and to pragmatic factors.  

4 Corpus Annotation  

In this section, we first report on the annotation 
scheme previously implemented for Portuguese, 
in 4.1. We then discuss how to integrate our find-
ings regarding the adverb só ‘only’, in 4.2, and 
report on the results of the annotation of a sam-
ple corpus in 4.3. 

4.1 Annotation scheme for Portuguese 

The annotation scheme for Portuguese presented 
in Hendrickx et al. (2012a) follow a theoretical-
ly-oriented perspective, but also addresses cer-
tain modal values that are important for practical 
applications in Information Extraction.  The an-
notation is not restricted to modal verbs and in-
stead covers several parts of speech with modal 
value: nouns, adjectives and adverbs. Tense, 
however, is not included, although it has an im-
portant part in the modal interpretation of sen-
tences. Also, only modal events are annotated, 
not entities. The approach is very similar to the 
approach taken in the OntoSem (Mcshane et al., 

2005) annotation scheme for modality (Niren-
burg and McShane, 2008).  

Seven main modal values are considered (ep-
istemic, deontic, participant-internal, volition, 
evaluation, effort and success), and several sub- 
values, based on the modality litterature, but also 
on studies focused on corpus annotation and in-
formation extraction (e.g. (Palmer, 1986; van der 
Auwera and Plungian, 1998; Baker et al., 2010)). 
There are five sub-values for epistemic modality: 
knowledge, belief, doubt, possibility and inter-
rogative. Contexts traditionally considered of the 
modal type “evidentials” (i.e, supported by evi-
dence) are annotated as epistemic belief. Two 
subvalues are identified for deontic modality: 
deontic obligation and deontic permission  (this 
includes what is sometimes considered partici-
pant-external modality, as in van der Auwera and 
Plungian (1998)). Participant-internal modality is 
subdivided into necessity and capacity. Four oth-
er values are included: evaluation, volition and, 
following Baker et al. (2010), effort and success.   

The annotation scheme comprises several 
components to be tagged: (a) the trigger, i.e, the 
lexical element conveying the modal value – we 
choose to tag the smallest possible unit (noun, 
verb, etc.); (b) the target, expressed typically by 
a clause and tagged maximally to include all rel-
evant parts; (c) the source of the event mention 
(speaker or writer) and (d) the source of the mo-
dality (agent or experiencer), to distinguish be-
tween the person who is producing the sentence 
with modal value and the person who is 'under-
going' the modality. The trigger receives two 
attributes: Modal value (selection out of 13 pos-
sible values); and Polarity (positive or negative). 
The polarity attribute regards the value of the 
trigger and not of the full sentence.  

This scheme has been applied to the manual 
annotation of a corpus sample of approximately 
2000 sentences using the MMAX2 annotation 
software tool2 (Müller and Strube, 2006). Sen-
tences were extracted from the online search 
platform of written corpus CRPC.  

4.2 Annotation of contexts with the adverb 
só  

We will discuss in this subsection how to inte-
grate our findings regarding the exclusive adverb 
só in modal contexts into an annotation scheme. 
For this purpose, we revised the modality 
scheme of Hendrickx et al. (2012b) to address 
the annotation of focus-sensitive particles in 

                                                             
2 http://mmax2.sourceforge.net/ 

232



modal contexts. Instead of considering focus as 
an independent scheme, we treat it inside mo-
dality, inspired by the approach taken regarding 
polarity. The existence of a focus-sensitive parti-
cle is marked with an attribute of the trigger 
called “focus”. This attribute has, for now, three 
possible values: none, exclusive, additive (for 
particles like também ‘also’). The list can be en-
larged in the future to address other categories of 
focus-sensitive particles. The focus particle does 
not typically have scope over the modal trigger, 
but rather over other components of the modal 
scheme (like the target or the source of modali-
ty). However, we decided to mark focus infor-
mation in the trigger component, inspired by the 
approach of Miwa et al. (2012), since we are 
considering it as the main element that subsumes 
the total information regarding the modal event.  

The component “focus cue” was added to the 
modal scheme to identify the focus-sensitive par-
ticle in the text. The scope of the focus-sensitive 
particle is an important aspect to consider in the 
annotation (cf. 3.1) and we decided to mark the 
scope of the particle with an extra component 
named “focus scope”. The “focus cue” and the 
“focus scope” markables are linked to the trigger 
and, consequently, to the modal event. We illus-
trate in (15) the focus scope component of the 
annotation, as well as the features in the trigger 
component that are associated to the focus-
sensitive particle. 

(15) Há quem defenda que os medicamentos só 
devem ser usados numa primeira fase do 
tratamento.  

 ‘Some people argue that medical drugs 
should only be used in the first stage of the 
treatment.’ 

 Trigger: devem 
  Modal value: deontic_obligation 
  Focus: exclusive 
 Focus cue: só 

Focus scope: numa primeira fase do trata-
mento 

  
There may be ambiguity regarding the scope 

of the focus particle (cf. 3.4) and a feature “am-
biguity” is attributed to the focus scope compo-
nent to deal with such cases. We mark the scope 
constituent according to the most natural inter-
pretation and fill in the ambiguity feature if more 
than one interpretation is possible, as illustrated 
in (16). 

(16) Portanto, só temos de votar a proposta 525-
C, do PSD.  

 ‘So, we only have to vote proposal 525-C, 
of PSD.’ 

 Trigger: temos de 
  Modal value: deontic_obligation 
  Focus: exclusive 
 Focus cue: só 

Focus scope: a proposta 525-C, do PSD 
Ambiguity: votar a proposta 525-C, do 
PSD 

When there are two consecutive modal trig-
gers, we only give information on the focus-
sensitive particle in the annotation of the first 
trigger. For example, in (17), the first trigger 
(deverá) is annotated with features “focus” and 
“focus cue”, and the modal set includes the “fo-
cus scope” component. The second modal trigger 
(poder) is part of the target component of the 
first trigger and is consequently under the scope 
of its focus related features. 

(17) O plantel do Estrela da Amadora só deverá 
poder voltar a contar com o guardião Tiago 
durante a próxima semana.  

 ‘The team of Estrela da Amadora shall only 
be able to count again on the goalkeeper Ti-
ago during next week.’ 

In what concerns the necessity reading with 
poder, we believe that the regularities that we 
discussed in 3.2 allow us to recover the adequate 
modal value without the need of any special fea-
ture but the annotation discussed in the next sec-
tion will prove if this is indeed the case or if a 
special feature has to be devised to handle these 
cases.   

The non-optional nature of só in contexts as 
the one illustrated in (10) can be dealt with by 
selecting both só and the modal verb as a compo-
site trigger. This solution would handle the fact 
that só is required in these contexts and would 
help identifying constructions which have a spe-
cific prosodic pattern. The modal value epistem-
ic_necessity would be, in this case, attributed to 
both elements. We do not propose this solution, 
however, for cases like (6) and (18b) because só 
is optional in those contexts and the necessity 
reading follows from the compositional nature of 
the exclusive, the modal trigger and the target.   

In contexts like (13), the exclusive singles out 
one alternative and also comments on the fact 
that it is weaker than expected (for example, eas-
ier in (13)). However, there is no change in the 
modal value and the annotation scheme can be 

233



applied. To cope with these cases, we added the 
attribute “focus value” in the trigger component, 
and consider for now 3 possible values: none, 
mirative (Beaver and Clark, 2008) and contras-
tive (as in sentence (14)).  

4.3 Results of the annotation 

This scheme has been applied, using MMAX2 
software, to the manual annotation of a corpus 
sample of 100 sentences extracted from the 
online search platform of written corpus CRPC. 
The 100 sentences all contain the focus particle 
só in the context of a verbal modal trigger, and 
are not syntactically annotated. We considered, 
for this purpose, 5 modal verbs: poder 
‘can/may’, dever ‘must’, ter de ‘have to’, ser 
capaz de ‘be able to’, querer ‘want’, most of 
them covering more than one modal value. We 
selected a higher number of sentences with 
poder, dever and ter de because these modal 
verbs have proved to be more complex and 
would therefore provide a good test for our anno-
tation scheme. The sentences were selected from 
a randomly ordered list, and cover different text 
types. Table 1 presents the distribution of modal 
values in our sample, taking into consideration 
only modal events that include the focus-
sensitive particle só: we observed that deontic 
obligation and epistemic possibility are the most 
frequent values. 

 
Modal value Freq. 
Deontic obligation 37 
Epistemic possibility 30 
Participant-internal  
capacity 

15 

Volition 13 
Deontic permission  5 
Total 100 

Table 1: Frequency information about the modal 
values encountered in the corpus sample. 
 

All ambiguous cases regarding modal value 
involve the verb poder ‘can/may’, which can 
denote readings of deontic permission, epistemic 
possibility and participant-internal capacity. The 
other four modal verbs are never marked as hav-
ing more than one modal reading in the context. 
The most frequent ambiguity in this sample in-
volves the two modal values: epistemic possibil-
ity and deontic permission. In three cases, the 
annotator marked the trigger as having a deontic 
permission reading, and considered it ambiguous 
(ambiguity feature of the trigger) with an epis-

temic possibility value. In two other contexts, the 
opposite choice was made: epistemic possibility 
was the marked value and deontic permission 
was annotated as a possible alternative value. 
The other four cases of modal ambiguity involve 
epistemic possibility and participant-internal ca-
pacity: in two cases, the former was selected as 
the most salient value, while the opposite choice 
was made in the other two cases. 

The most frequent constituents in the scope of 
the exclusive in our annotation are temporal ad-
juncts, with a total of 27 cases. The verb dever 
stands out, with 14 occurrences, out of the total 
of 27. The second most frequent type of focus 
(freq. 23) corresponds to cases where the exclu-
sive has scope over the whole target of the modal 
trigger. The two most frequent verbs with this 
type of focus are querer and ter de (in fact, all 
but two occurrences of querer are of this kind). 
The two most paradigmatic modal verbs, poder 
and dever, never occur with the whole target as 
focus, but rather favour cases where só has scope 
over different constituents of the sentence. There 
is a large set of possible constituents which re-
ceive the focus of the exclusives: subjects (7), 
objects (9), quantifiers (5), predicative adjectives 
(1), by-phrases in passive constructions (3), tem-
poral adjuncts (27), locative adjuncts (1), condi-
tional clauses (5), prepositional phrases (7), and 
adverbial phrases (3). While dever shows a pref-
erence for the construction with a temporal ad-
junct, the verb poder presents low frequencies of 
a large set of these possibilities. 

There are 5 cases of ambiguity in the scope of 
the focus particle, 2 with ter de ‘have to’, 2 with 
ser capaz de ‘to be able to’ and one with poder 
‘can’. This is perhaps a surprisingly low number 
compared to our comments in subsection 3.1. 
Although focus scope is potentially extremely 
ambiguous, it turns out that the linguistic context 
seems to lead to one specific interpretation re-
garding the constituent under focus. In the 5 am-
biguous cases, the scope of the focus particle can 
be understood as a specific constituent included 
in the target of the modal trigger, or it can be the 
whole event denoted by the target.  

The interpretation of the exclusive and the 
verb poder as a case of epistemic necessity oc-
curs a single time in our annotation, with a sta-
tive target in the future tense. No case of 
contrastive value (cf. (14)) was encountered, but 
this is certainly due to the fact that we annotated 
single sentences out of context, and also to the 
fact that we didn’t select knowledge verbs, 
which typically allow this value. Also, no case of 

234



non-optional exclusive particle was found in our 
set of sentences. We did, however, identify 7 
contexts with ter de and 3 contexts with querer, 
which denote a weaker alternative than expected 
and were marked with the value “mirative”. 

Overall, the proposed solution for handling the 
complex annotation of the interaction between 
exclusive particles and modality captured all 
cases we encountered in our small sample of 100 
sentences. However, the annotation of more data 
is required to evaluate if our modal scheme can 
deal with the discursive values assumed by the 
exclusive in certain contexts. 

Two different human annotators performed 
the annotation of a subset of 50 sentences with só 
independently. We conducted a small study to 
measure the inter-annotator agreement (IAA) for 
this annotation task. Such a study gives us in-
formation about the feasibility of the annotation 
scheme and about the level of detail of our 
guidelines. We computed IAA using the kappa-
statistic (Cohen, 1960) for each field in the anno-
tation3. The trigger achieved a kappa value of 
0.85, while the modal value attained a value of 
0.83. Although the task involved a higher level 
of complexity due to the annotation of both 
modal and focus information, the results are in 
line with the ones reported in Hendrickx et al. 
(2012b) and, for English, in Matsuyoshi et al. 
(2010). We also measured the kappa value for 
the target component, which attained 0.64. For 
the focus scope an inter-annotator agreement of 
0.63 is achieved. These are lower scores than the 
ones achieved for trigger and modal value, which 
is due to small differences in the delimitation of 
the constituents between the two annotators (for 
example, the inclusion or not of an adjunct).  

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we have presented a detailed analy-
sis of the interaction between the exclusive só 
and modal expressions occurring in texts.  

As Portner puts it “It seems that modality is 
not something that one simply observes, but ra-
ther something that one discovers, perhaps only 
after careful work.” (Portner, 2009:1) and this is 
what we have attempted in this study. 

We presented the extension of a modality 
scheme developed for Portuguese to account for 
focus-sensitive particles in modal contexts and 
our experience in annotating a sample of 100 
sentences with this extended scheme. Data show 
                                                             
3 Note that we are very strict in the computation, only full 
string matches are counted as agreement. 

that this is a complex issue that needs to consider 
the modal value, the linguistic context and each 
modal trigger. The annotation confirms the dual 
nature of exclusives, due to the fact that in cer-
tain contexts they both signal one of the possible 
alternatives and describe it as weaker that would 
be expected by the participants. The scope of the 
focus particle plays an important role in the 
meaning of the sentence since it adds a condition 
to the modal value and can affect the global 
meaning of the sentence. Discursive aspects have 
also to be taken into consideration and evaluated 
against our annotation scheme. 

As a next step we aim to study a context larger 
than the sentence for the annotation of the inter-
action between modals and exclusives. We plan 
to proceed with the analysis of the interaction of 
só in a larger number of modal contexts and also 
to enlarge the analysis to other adverbs of the 
same type, like apenas and unicamente. Another 
objective is to explore the combined effects of 
polarity, modality and this type of adverbs, and 
to later contrast the results with other Romance 
languages, as well as English. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was in part supported by FCT (PEst-
OE-LIN-UI0214-2013). Luciana Ávila was sup-
ported by grant CAPES (BEX-Proc. no 9537-12-
0). The authors would like to thank the anony-
mous reviewers for their helpful comments. 
 

References 

Maria Aloni, David Beaver, and Brady Clark. 
1999. Focus and Topic Sensitive Operators. In Paul 
Dekker (ed.), Proceedings of the Twelfth Amster-
dam Colloquium, ILLC, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 

Luciana Beatriz Ávila, and Heliana Mello. 2013. 
Challenges in modality annotation in a Brazilian 
Portuguese spontaneous speech corpus. In Pro-
ceedings of  WAMM-IWCS2013, Potsdam, Germa-
ny. 

Kathrin Baker, Michael Bloodgood, Bonnie Dorr, 
Nathaniel W. Filardo, Lori Levin, and Christine Pi-
atko. 2010. A modality lexicon and its use in au-
tomatic tagging. In Proceedings of LREC’10, 
Valletta, Malta. ELRA, 1402-1407. 

Kathryn Baker, Bonnie Dorr, Michael Bloodgood, 
Chris Callison-Burch, Nathaniel Filardo, Christine 
Piatko, Lori Levin, and Scott Miller. 2012. Use of 
Modality and Negation in Semantically-Informed 

235



Syntactic MT. Computational Linguistics. 38(2): 
411-438 

David Beaver and Brady Z. Clark. 2008. Sense and 
Sensitivity. How Focus Determines Meaning. 
Wyley-Blackwell, Oxford, UK. 

Joan L. Bybee, Revere Perkins, and William Pagliuca. 
1994. The evolution of grammar: Tense, aspect 
and modality in the languages of the world. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago, USA. 

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for 
nominal scales. Education and Psychological 
Measurement, 20:37-46. 

Philip W. Davis. 2009. The constitution of focus. 
Available at: 
http://www.philipwdavis.com/sands03.pdf. Ac-
cessed: March 28, 2013. 

Matthew S. Dryer. 1994. The pragmatics of associa-
tion with only. Paper presented at the 1994 Winter 
Meeting of the L.S.A. Boston, Massachussets, 
USA. 

Richárd Farkas, Veronika Vincze, György Móra, 
János Csirik, and György Szarvas. 2010. The conll-
2010 shared task: Learning to detect hedges and 
their scope in natural language text. In Proceedings 
of the Fourteenth Conference on Computational 
Natural Language Learning, ACL, 1-12. 

Michel Généreux, Iris Hendrickx, and Amália 
Mendes. 2012. Introducing the Reference Corpus 
of Contemporary Portuguese On-Line". In Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation - LREC 
2012, Istanbul, May 21-27, 2012, pp. 2237-2244. 

Iris Hendrickx, Amália Mendes, Silvia Mencarelli, 
and Agostinho Salgueiro. 2012a. Modality Annota-
tion Manual, version 1.0. Centro de Linguística da 
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. 

Iris Hendrickx, Amália Mendes, and Silvia Menca-
relli. 2012b. Modality in Text: a Proposal for Cor-
pus Annotation. In Proceedings of the Eighth 
International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation - LREC 2012, Istanbul, May 21-27, 
2012, pp. 1805-1812. 

Leo Hoye. 1997. Adverbs and Modality in English. 
Longman, London, UK. 

Manfred Krifka. 1995. Focus and the Interpretation of 
Generic Sentences. In Gregory N. Carlson and 
Francis Jeffry Pelletier (eds). The Generic Book. 
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, USA, 
238-264. 

Suguru Matsuyoshi, Megumi Eguchi, Chitose Sao, 
Koji Murakami, Kentaro Inui, and Yuji Matsumo-
to. 2010. Annotating event mentions in text with 
modality, focus, and source information. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC’10, Valletta, Malta. ELRA. 

Marjorie McShane, Sergei Nirenburg, Stephen Beale, 
and Thomas O’Hara. 2005. Semantically rich hu-
man-aided machine annotation. In Proceedings of 
the Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotations 
II: Pie in the Sky, 68-75. ACL. 

Makoto Miwa, Paul Thompson, John McNaught, 
Douglas B Kell and Sophia Ananiadou. 2012. Ex-
tracting semantically enriched events from biomed-
ical literature. BMC Bioinformatics 13:108. 

Roser Morante. 2010. Descriptive analysis of nega-
tion cues in biomedical texts. In Proceedings of 
LREC’10, Valletta, Malta. ELRA, 1429-1436. 

Roser Morante and Caroline Sporleder. 2012. Modali-
ty and Negation: An Introduction to the Special Is-
sue. Computational Linguistics, 38(2):223-260. 

Benjamim Moreira. 2005. Estudo de alguns marcado-
res enunciativos do português. PhD Dissertation. 
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Faculda-
de de Filologia, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. 

Christoph Müller and Michael Strube. 2006. Multi-
level annotation of linguistic data with MMAX2. 
In Corpus Technology and Language Pedagogy: 
New Resources, New Tools, New Methods, 197-
214. Peter Lang. 

Sergei Nirenburg and Marjorie McShane. 2008. An-
notating modality. Technical report, University of 
Maryland, Baltimore County, March 19, 2008. 

Fátima Oliveira. 1988. Para uma semántica e prag-
mática de DEVER e PODER. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. 

Frank R. Palmer. 1986. Mood and Modality. Cam-
bridge textbooks in linguistics. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. 

Paul Portner. 2009. Modality. Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, UK. 

Mats Rooth. 1992. A theory of focus interpretation. 
Natural Language Semantics 1: 75-116. 

Roser Saurí, Marc Verhagen, and James Pustejovsky. 
2006. Annotating and recognizing event modality 
in text. In Proceedings of the 19th International 
FLAIRS Conference. 

Roger Schwarzschild. 1997. Why some foci must 
associate. Unpublished ms. Rutgers University. 

György Szarvas, Veronika Vincze, Ricárd Farkas, and 
János Csirik. 2008. The BioScope corpus: annota-
tion for negation, uncertainty and their scope in bi-
omedical texts. BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in 
Biomedical Natural Language Processing, Colum-
bus, Ohio, USA, 38-45. 

Paul Thompson, Giulia Venturi, John Mcnaught, 
Simonetta Montemagni, and Sophia Ananiadou. 
2008. Categorising modality in biomedical texts. In 
Proceedings of the LREC 2008 Workshop on 

236



Building and Evaluating Resources for Biomedical 
Text Mining, Marrakech, Morocco, 27-34. 

Johan Van der Auwera and Vladimir A. Plungian. 
1998. Modality’s semantic map. Linguistic Typol-
ogy, 2(1): 79-124. 

Veronika Vincze, György Szarvas, Móra György, 
Tomoko Ohta, and Richárd Farkas. 2011. Linguis-
tic scope-based and biological event-based specu-
lation and negation annotations in the bioscope and 
genia event corpora. Journal of Biomedical Seman-
tics, 2(5). 

Kai-Uwe Von Fintel, 1994. Restriction on Quantifier 
Domains. UMass Amherst dissertation, Amherst, 
Massachussets, USA. 

Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie. 
2005. Annotating expressions of opinions and 
emotions in language. Language Resources and 
Evaluation, 39:165-210. 

237


