










































%


Challenges in modality annotation in a Brazilian Portuguese 

Spontaneous Speech Corpus  
 

 

Luciana Beatriz Avila Second Author 
PosLin-UFMG/UFV/Capes Affiliation / Address line 1 

Av  Antonio Carlos 6627  Affiliation / Address line 2 

Belo Horizonte, MG 31270-901 Brazil Affiliation / Address line 3 

lucianabeatrizavila@gmail.com email@domain 
 

 

Heliana Mello Second Author 
UFMG/FGV/CNPq Affiliation / Address line 1 

Av  Antonio Carlos 6627  Affiliation / Address line 2 

Belo Horizonte, MG 31270-901 Brazil Affiliation / Address line 3 

heliana.mello@gmail.com email@domain 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

Abstract 

This short paper introduces the first notes about 

a modality annotation system that is under 

development for a spontaneous speech 

Brazilian Portuguese corpus (C-ORAL-

BRASIL). We indicate our methodological 

decisions, the points which seem to be well 

resolved and two issues for further discussion 

and investigation. 

 

1 Credits 

The authors are thankful to CNPq, FAPEMIG and 
CAPES (Proc. nº BEX 9537/12-0) for research 

funding support. 

2 Introduction 

Modality annotation is inexistent for both written 

and spoken Brazilian Portuguese corpora, thus the 

novelty of this project. According to Nurmi 
(2007:1), linguistic annotation is helpful for the 

recovering of linguistic elements; however, the 

multifaceted nature of modality “is still a hurdle in 
computer assisted-research”. Following up on the 

same reasoning, Baker et al. (2010: 1403) say that 

“[t]he challenge of creating a modality annotation 

scheme was to deal with the complex scoping of  
modalities with each other and with negation, 

while, at the same time creating a simplified 

operational procedure that could be followed by 
language experts without special training”. 

Therefore, understanding what this semantic 

category stands for, as well as identifying linguistic 
elements that carry it, is of utmost relevance. 

Our goal in annotating modality in a 

spontaneous speech Brazilian Portuguese Corpus is 
to provide a reliable starting point for researchers 

that might be interested in developing 

methodologies associated to NLP that ensue the 

extraction of oral discourse reliability, certainty 
and factuality markers, or carrying sentiment 

analysis, modeling modality and similar objectives.  

  
 

3 Defining modality  

In this paper we study modality in a spontaneous 

speech corpus, the C-ORAL-BRASIL, which will 
be presented in 4 below. As for spontaneous 

speech, we follow Cresti and Scarano (1998:5) in 

characterizing it as “the fulfillment of linguistic 
acts, not programmed and not programmable, 

because they emerge during the unfolding of an 

interaction, always new and unpredictable, 

between interlocutors.” Their view is based on 
Austin’s (1962) Speech Act Theory that associates 

spoken text to the realization of speech acts. 

According to Cresti and Scarano spontaneous 
speech is governed by an illocutionary principle, 

not found in written texts, as well as specific 

informational articulations. 
Modality is taken here in Ballinian terms, that 

is, it stands for the evaluation or the point of view 

of a subject who evaluates the locutory material in 

a given utterance in a communicative act. Since the 
domain of our analysis is the spoken text, we 

follow Cresti’s (2000) Language into Act Theory, 



whereby the utterance is the analytical reference 

unit that will be taken into consideration. This 
significantly differs from studies that rely on the 

sentence as the reference unit for the analysis of 

modality (eg. Fintel, 2006).  An utterance carries 

an illocution and its locutory material does not 
necessarily carry a proposition. An utterance may 

be simple when comprised by one tone unit or 

complex when it is made up by two or more tone 
units. The scope of modality is the tone unit as 

proposed by Tucci (2007). Hence, within a given 

complex utterance, there might be different tone 
units which carry different modal values. When a 

tone unit carries more than one modal marker they 

may not share the same modal value, in which case 

the dominant modality will prevail. This can be 
appreciated in the examples below: 

 

(i) REN: se a gente vai de táxi / voltar de táxi / po’ 
comprar um // 

   If we go by taxi / come back by taxi / 

(you) may buy one // 
 

In (i) there are three information units 

compounding a complex utterance. The first one 

carries epistemic modality while the last one 
carries deontic modality. Albeit belonging to the 

same utterance, the modalities that mark each 

information unit are not semantically 
compositional. Whereas in (ii) below, two modal 

values within the same information units will be 

compositional and the dominant value will prevail: 

 
(ii) GIL:<eu acho que tem que ser esses> // 

 I think that it has to be these 

 
 In (ii) there is a single information unit, a 

Comment, which carries two modality indexes, 

acho “think”, an epistemic marker, and tem que 
“have to”, a deontic marker. The utterance in this 

case carries only one information unit and its 

modality is epistemic. 

Modality in speech at times might get confused 
with other categories that carry subjective 

judgment; however a good rule of thumb to 

identify modal markers is to proceed to a semantic 
analysis leaving strictly pragmatic values aside. 

This has been demonstrated through an experiment 

reported in Mello and Raso (2011) who indicate 
the differentiation between modality, illocution and 

attitude in speech. Modality is related to the modus 

on dictum (Bally, 1942), illocution is the actum of 

the dictum, while attitude is the modus on actum. 
Therefore, modality can be classified as a semantic 

category, whereas both illocution and attitude are 

pragmatic notions. Modality, when marked, is 

carried by lexical and grammatical items on the 
one hand, while illocution and attitude are carried 

by prosodic cues.  

In our work we focused on overt modal markers 
and took into consideration the following modal 

values: epistemic, deontic and dynamic. Epistemic 

modality refers to the conceptualizer’s point of 
view, as far as possibility and necessity are 

concerned, in a given uttered material. This can be 

seen in the example below: 

 
(iii) REN: <pode> // tanto faz // pode // 

       <It can be> // it doesn’t matter // it can be //

 FLA: ou cê acha muito //  
                Or do you think this is too much // 

       REN: uhn // acho que não //  

                 Uhn // I don’t think so // 
In deontic modality the conceptualizer, a moral 

agent, refers to obligation, permission, contingent 

necessity in the uttered locutory material, as in 

(iv):  
 

(iv) HMB: ela tem que falar / assim / de que que 

ela gosta //  
        She has to say / like/ what she likes // 

 

As for dynamic modality, it includes ability and 

intention (will), that is, the conceptualizer’s  
expression of capability, as in (v): 

 

(v) ROG: eu acho que eu consigo &mar [/1] fazer 
isso //  

        I think I can do this // 

 
Modality is usually codified by several 

morphological and grammatical forms, among 

them modal auxiliaries, adverbs, evaluative 

adjectives, periphrastic forms, propositional verbs 
and conditionals. These forms will be taken into 

consideration in the proposed annotation system 

whereas some less conventionalised items that 
might be becoming grammaticalized in spoken 

Brazilian Portuguese will not be annotated because 

they require further investigation. 
Our annotation proposal is inspired by other 

systems previously explored for English (Baker et 



al., 2010; Matsuyoshi et al., 2010; Saurí et al., 

2006, 2007; Szarvas et al., 2008) and it closely 
follows the scheme proposed by Hendrickx, 

Mendes and Mencarelli (2012) who explored 

modality annotation in European Portuguese (EP) 

speech. 
The EP proposed scheme takes into account 

seven modal values and a number of corresponding 

subvalues, as shown in Table 1: 
 

Values Subvalues 

Epistemic knowledge 

belief 
doubt 

possibility 

interrogative 

Deontic obligation 
permission 

Participant-internal necessity: personal 

needs 
capacity: personal 

capacity 

Evaluation (evaluation of the 

proposition) 

Volition (hopes and wishes) 

Effort (attempt of the 

participant to make sth. 

happen) 

Success (results of the 

commitment of the 

participant) 
Table 1 – European Portuguese selected modal values 
and subvalues 

  

The system we advance here is more 

economical and reflects a canonical typology of 

modal meanings, as we show below. In both 
schemes (EP and BP), the three main categories 

overlap (Epistemic, Deontic, Dynamic or 

Participant-Internal), but it is not sufficiently clear 
so far whether a variety of non-epistemic meanings 

taken into consideration in the EP system should 

be considered as separate modal values, or rather 
as subvalues of Epistemic modality.  

Other related works on modality annotation, 

accordingly to their goals, also present a range of 

modal values, denoting requirement, 
permissiveness, intention, ability, effort, success 

want and belief (Baker et al. 2010); assertion, 

volition, wish, imperative, permission, 
interrogative (Matsuyoshi et al. 2010);  purpose, 

need, obligation and desire events (Morante & 

Daelemans, 2012). 
Much of these works describes other 

components which are involved in the expression 

of modality, such as  trigger, target and holder 

(Baker et al. 2010) or source, time, conditional, 
primary modality type, actuality, evaluation and 

focus (Matsuyoshi et al. 2010). 

Following on the footsteps of the annotation 
scheme for EP, our proposal aims at contributing 

to the development of NLP projects, especially 

those based on spontaneous speech and its 
particularities.   

 

4 A Brazilian Portuguese spontaneous 

speech corpus: the C-ORAL-BRASIL 
 

C-ORAL-BRASIL follows the same architecture 
as the European Romance spontaneous spoken 

corpus C-ORAL-ROM (Cresti and Moneglia, 

2005), whereby diaphasic variation is privileged in 
order for a large diversity of illocutions and 

informational structuring to be documented. C-

ORAL-BRASIL comprises 200 texts of 
approximately 1,500 words each. Its informal half 

has been published (Raso and Mello, 2012) and 

exhibits a majority of private/familiar texts (80%) 

over public texts (20%), equally distributed into 
dialogues, conversations (3 or more participants) 

and monologues. The corpus follows the 

CHILDES-CLAN transcription format to which 
prosodic annotation is added, marking tone unit 

and utterance boundaries, besides several 

phenomena typical of speech. The entire corpus is 

speech to text aligned through use of WinPitch 
software. 

 

5  Annotating modality in the C-ORAL-

BRASIL 

 In this study a sample from the C-ORAL-BRASIL 
was taken into consideration. It covers 20 texts 

with an average of 1,500 words each, thereby 

totally 31,318 words; 5,484 utterances and 9,825 
tone units. 1,155 modality marked tone units were 

found. The identification of modal markers was 

undertaken by three annotators working 

independently and qualitatively validated through 
group discussions. The search for modal markers 

was performed manually, through qualitative 

textual analysis, supported by the WinPitch 



software which allows for the concomitant 

examination of speech signal and transcription.  
The data were organized in a table containing 

the modal markers, the tone unit in which they 

occurred, the type of information unit they are 

inserted in, the file they belong to, and any 
qualitative information deemed relevant.  

The modality annotation scheme we propose 

takes into account The Language Into Act Theory 
and its reference unit, the utterance, and its 

subunits, that is, information units (Cresti, 2000). 

The scope of modality also follows the proposal 
established within that theory, thereby assigning its 

locus to the information unit (Tucci, 2007). 

Additionally, as mentioned, previous work on 

English and European Portuguese modality 
annotation is observed closely (cf. Section 3) in 

addition to opinion and emotions annotation 

(Wiebe et al., 2005).  
The methodological steps taken in order for us 

to arrive at a modality annotation system were the 

following: the listing of a set of modal values 
emerging from the modal indexes found in the 

corpus; these values were subsequently tested on a 

sample of our subcorpus. 

For the purpose of modality annotation we 
consider three modal values: epistemic, deontic 

and dynamic. As discussed above, epistemic 

modality relates to the conceptualizer’s 
commitment to a given locutory material. 

Epistemic modality carries seven subvalues: 

knowledge, opinion, belief, possibility, probability, 

necessity and verification.
1

 Deontic modality 
encompasses four subvalues: obligation, 

permission, prohibition and restriction. Finally, 

dynamic modality comprises three subvalues: 
ability, capacity and volition/intention. 

In addition to modal values, the annotation 

scheme is made up of the following elements: 
 

 Trigger (M): the morpholexical and 
grammatical items that carry modality;  

 Source of the modality (src_mod): the 
conceptualizer, who might coincide with 

the speaker , the addressee, or another 
individual whose perspective and view 

point is being reported; 

 Source of the event mention (src_evt): 
the producer, the speaker; 

                                                        
1 We include here factuality and certainty features. 

 Target (T): the expression in the scope of 
the trigger within an annotation unit, that 

is, information units (IU)that carry 
modality (Comment, Topic, Parenthetical, 

Locutive Introducer), described in Table 2: 

 

 IU Information function 

T
ex

tu
a

l 
u

n
it

s 

Comment 

Expresses the 

illocutionary force of 

the utterance 

Topic 

Specifies the locus of 
application of the 

illocutionary force of 

the Comment 

Parenthetical 

Expresses 

metalinguistic 

integration of the 

utterance 

Locutive 

Introducer 

Signals pragmatic 

suspension of the hic et 

nunc and introduces a 
metaillocution 

Table 2 – Modalized textual units (Cresti, 2000)2 

 

An example of a modality annotated utterance 

is given below. Due to space constrains, we cannot 
discuss all the details involved in the process, 

however, it is relevant to note the following: 

elements within = marks stand for information unit 
labeling, angled brackets stand for speech overlaps, 

square brackets stand for modality annotated 

elements, single slashes stand for non-terminal 

breaks and double slashes for terminal breaks. 
 

(vi) EVNS1: é / [a <gente]S1 [tem que]M> 

<[restringir também]T / isso> // 

Yeah / we have to restrict too / this // 
 

The annotated elements are the following: 

 

Trigger tem que 

Source of modality A gente, 1p 

Source of event 

mention 
EVN 

Modal value  deontic_obligation 

Target restringir também 

 

Example (vi) is very straightforward and leaves 
no room for discussion as far as modality labeling 

                                                        
2 Adapted from Tucci (2007). 



and domains are concerned. However, this is not 

all we see in the data analyzed. There is plenty for 
discussion regarding some complex issues. Two of 

these are briefly mentioned below. 

One of the challenges is the characterization of 

the elements that fulfill the role of Source. In our 
sample we found a majority of cases in which the 

conceptualizer overlaps with the first person 

speaker (cf. vi). However, there are cases in which 
the speaker presupposes or evaluates the kind of 

modal judgment that is made by others, in which 

case apparently there could be two conceptualizers, 
whereby two Source roles would be assigned, S1 
and S2 and the assigned modal value would be 

shared by them (cf. vii). Yet another case occurs 

when the speaker reports the modal judgment 
made by a third party, in which case, the speaker 

does not partake in the modal conceptualization 

that is overtly manifested (cf. viii).  
 

(vii) JORS1: se o brasileiro nũ lê os manuais 

/=TOP= hhh no mercado de reposição / &auto [/1] 
de autopeça / elesS2 acham que abrir uma empresa 

é comprar um produto por um real / na base cem / 

e vender por dois acha que tá ganhando o &do [/2] 

o dobro // 

 If Brazilians don’t read manuals / ..../ they think 

that to open a business is to buy a product by one 
real/ …/ and to sell it for two (they) think they are 

making double // 

 

(viii) PAU: e a IsaS1 tava achando que ela ali ia 

ficar pequena // 

And Isa was thinking that it would be small // 

 

These two last examples lead us to mark up two 
different sources, following the annotation scheme 

proposed by Hendrickx, Mendes and Mencarelli 

(2012): Source of the event mentioned and Source 
of the modality. The first one corresponds to the 

producer of the sentence with the modal marker; 

the second one to the person who is 

agent/experiencer of modality.  
As pointed out by Saurí et al.’s FactBank 

annotation scheme (Saurí, 2008; Saurí and 

Pustejovsky, 2009), there is always a default 

source
3
 corresponding to the author of the text and 

“the factuality value assigned to events in text must 
be relative to the relevant sources at play in the 

discourse […]” (Saurí and Pustejovsky, 2009, p. 

240). 

In (vii), we have at least two different event 
mentions

4
 introduced by modal markers (e1, by 

“se”, and e2, by the epistemic verb “achar”). The 

difference between event e1 and event e2  is that in 
e1 the Source of the modality and the Source of the 

event mentioned overlap (“JOR”) and refer to the 

epistemic judgment expressed by the conditional 
construction, whereas in e2 Source of the event 

mentioned (“JOR”) and Source of the modality 

(“eles”) are different entities. The relation between   

S1 and the epistemic judgment of S2 is based on a 
supposition on the evaluation of the second 

conceptualizer, not necessarily corresponding to 

the truth-value of the uttered material. 
Finally, in (viii), Source of the modality (“a 

Isa”) and Source of the event mentioned (“PAU”) 

are explicitly distinct. There is just the third-person 
conceptualizer, “a Isa”, and her epistemic 

judgment is reported by “PAU”. 

A second challenge is presented by the labeling 

of target. In default circumstances, the target 
shares the same information unit as the modal 

marker, as posited by the Language into Act 

Theory, and which can be seen in the examples 
previously presented. However, there are cases in 

which there seems to be a percolation of the target 

through information unit boundaries, as if it were 

an anaphoric element, as can be seen in (ix) below: 
 

(ix) GIL: <ô / mas> / voltando à questão / falando 

em e também falando em povo mascarado / esse 
povo do Galáticos é muito palha / eu [acho que]M 

[es nũ deviam mais participar / e <tal>] T // 

(...) / I think that they shouldn’t participate 

anymore / like // 

LEO: <[com certeza]>M // 

Certainly // 

 

                                                        
3 “Sources are understood here as the cognitive individuals 
presented as holding a specific stance with regards to the 

factuality status of events in text.” (Saurí, 2008, p. 58).  
4  An event mention is defined as “consisting of a core 
predicate and its arguments (complements and adjuncts) in the 
sentence.” (Matsuyoshi et al., 2010, p. 1458). 



In the above example, “com certeza” refers 

back to the deontic assertion made in the previous 
turn “es nũ deviam mais participar”; however it is 

not clear how this can be annotated within the 

present scheme. One possible solution could be to 

add a Comment slot, in which we annotate the 
anaphoric reference. 

 

6  Final remarks 

In this short paper we have introduced the first 

notes about a modality annotation system that is 

being developed for a Brazilian Portuguese 
spontaneous speech corpus. Although we were 

able to point to some efficient methodological 

solutions we have implement so far, much remains 
open for discussion and further investigation. 

. 

References  

Baker, K., Bloodgood, M., Dorr, B. J., Filardo, N. W., 

Levin, L., Piatko, C. 2010. A modality lexicon and 

its use in automatic tagging, in Proceedings of the 

Seventh Language Resources and Evaluation 

Conference (LREC’10).  

CHILDES - Child Language Data Exchange System. 

Available at: http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/ Accessed: 
29 Nov. 2012. 

Cresti, E. 2000. Corpus di italiano parlato. Firenze: 

Accademia della Crusca. 

Cresti, E.;  Scarano, A. Sur la notion de parlé spontané. 

Available  at: 

http://lablita.dit.unifi.it/preprint/preprint-

98coll03.pdf. Accessed: 15 Nov. 2012. 

Cresti, E.; Moneglia, M. 2005. C-ORAL ROM: 
Integrated reference corpora for spoken Romance 

languages. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John 

Benjamins. 

Hendrickx, I.; Mendes, A.; Mencarelli, S. Modality in 

Text: a Proposal for Corpus Annotation. in 

Proceedings of the Eighth conference on the 

International Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC’12), pp.1805-1812. 

von Fintel, K. Modality and Language. In Encyclopedia 

of Philosophy – Second Edition, edited by Donald 

M. Borchert. Detroit: MacMillan Reference USA.  

Martin, P. WinPitch Corpus. Available at: 

http://www.winpitch.com. Accessed: 15 Nov. 2012. 

Matsuyoshi, S., Eguchi, M., Sao, C., Murakami, K., 
Inui, K., Matsumoto, Y. 2010, Annotating Event 

Mentions in Text with Modality, Focus, and Source 

Information, in Proceedings of the Seventh 

conference on the International Language Resources 

and Evaluation (LREC’10).  

Mello, H. R.; Raso, T. 2011. Illocution, modality, 
attitude: different names for different categories. In: 

Mello, H. R.; Panunzi, A.; Raso, T (eds.). 

Pragmatics and prosody: illocution, modality, 

attitude, information patterning and speech 

annotation. Firenze: Firenze University Press,  pp. 1-

18. 

Morante, R.; Daelemans, W. 2012. Annotating modality 

and negation for a machine reading evaluation. In: P. 

Forner, J. Karlgren, & C. Womser-Hacker (eds.), 

CLEF 2012 Conference and Labs of the Evaluation 
Forum - Question Answering For Machine Reading 

Evaluation (QA4MRE), Rome, Italy. 

Nurmi, A. Employing and elaborating annotation for the 

study of modality. Available at: 

www.helsinki.fi/varieng/journals/volumes/01/nurmi/

. Accessed: 27 Mar. 2012. 

Raso, T.; Mello, H. 2012. C-ORAL-BRASIL I: Corpus 
de referência do português brasileiro falado informal 

e DVD multimedia. Belo Horizonte: Editora 

UFMG,. v. 1.  

Saurí, R., Verhagen, M., Pustejovsky, J. 2006. 

Annotating and recognizing event modality in text, 

in Proceedings of the 19th International FLAIRS 

Conference, FLAIRS 2006. 

Saurí, R. 2008. A Factuality Profiler for Eventualities in 
Text. Ph.D. Thesis. Brandeis University. 

Saurí, R., J. Pustejovsky. 2009. FactBank: A Corpus 

Annotated with Event Factuality. Language 

Resources and Evaluation. Available at: 

http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10579-009-

9089-9/fulltext.html. Accessed: 28 jan. 2013. 

Szarvas, G., Vincze, V., Farkas, R., Csirik, J. 2008. The 

BioScope corpus: annotation for negation, 
uncertainty, and their scope in biomedical texts, in 

Proceedings of the Workshop on Current Trends in 

Biomedical Natural Language Processing, 

Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 38-

45. 

Tucci, I. 2007. La modalità nel parlato spontaneo e il 

suo dominio de pertinenza. Una ricerca corpus-based 

(C-ORAL-ROM italiano). Actes du XXVe CILPR. 
(Innsbruk 3-8 September 2007). Available at: 
http://lablita.dit.unifi.it/preprint/preprint.2008-02-

06.3658867998 Accessed: 13 jan. 2013. 

Wiebe, J., Wilson, T., Cardie, C. 2005. Annotating 

expressions of opinions and emotions in language. 

Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 1-54. 

http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/
http://lablita.dit.unifi.it/preprint/preprint-98coll03.pdf
http://lablita.dit.unifi.it/preprint/preprint-98coll03.pdf
http://www.winpitch.com/
http://www.helsinki.fi/varieng/journals/volumes/01/nurmi/
http://www.helsinki.fi/varieng/journals/volumes/01/nurmi/
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10579-009-9089-9/fulltext.html
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10579-009-9089-9/fulltext.html
http://lablita.dit.unifi.it/preprint/preprint.2008-02-06.3658867998
http://lablita.dit.unifi.it/preprint/preprint.2008-02-06.3658867998

