










































%


A Lexico-Semantic Analysis of Chinese Locality Phrases  

- A Topic Clustering Approach 

 

 

August F.Y. Chao Siaw-Fong Chung  
Department of M.I.S, National Chengchi 

University Taipei, Taiwan  
Department of English National 

Chengchi University Taipei, Taiwan  
fychao.tw@gmail.com sfchung@nccu.edu.tw  

 

 

Abstract 

In this paper, we present a novel 

approach using LDA (Latent Dirichlet 

Analysis, Blei, David, Andrew, Michael, 

and Jordan, 2003) to analyze synonym 

groups appearing in fixed frames 

containing Chinese locative phrases, such 

as [zái noun phrase (yǐ/zhī) shàng/xià/etc.  

biān/miàn/etc.], and to understand noun 

meanings related to the syntactic forms 

of locative phrases. We mapped the 

different noun phrases to their collocating 

synonym groups before we generated 

similarity comparison among different 

combinations. We collected locative 

phrases using 11 monosyllabic locative 

words and 5 locative compound-

formation patterns from Sketch Engine, 

and we aligned these compounds with 

Chinese Synonym Forest (Mei, Zhu, & 

Gao 1983) before clustering. A Hive Plot 

(Krzywinski, Birol, Jones, and Marra, 

2012) visualizer was constructed in order 

to help understand the relationship of 

locative nouns and their synonym groups. 

The results showed not only the semantic 

meaning within a locative phrase, but 

also the corresponding semantic 

meanings among locative phrases. 

1 Introduction 

Locative phrases express the locative and 

directional information in relation to a certain 

object or entity. In Chinese, locative phrases 

have the following structure (Li and Thompson, 

1989, pp 390): 
 

 

zái noun phrase ~ (locative particle) 

               ‘at’ 

 

Within this structure, the locative particles can be 

monosyllabic or disyllabic compounding with 

prefixes, like yǐ and zhī, as well as suffixes, like 

biān, miàn, and tóu. (See Table 1).  

 

Many scholars have done research on locative 

phrases to understand the language context 

through frame reference (Hsu and Tai, 2001; 

Liang and Wang, 2010) and image schema 

(Liang and Wang, 2010; Wang and Hsieh, 2011), 

but not on cross-comparing the different locative 

words with their suffix/prefix combinations. 
 

Table 1 Combinations of Chinese Locative 

Nouns 

  
Suffix Prefix 

~邊 biān ~面 miàn ~頭 tóu 以 yǐ ~ 之 zhī ~ 

上 shàng 上邊 上面 上頭 以上 之上 

下 xià  下邊 下面 下頭 以下 之下 

前 qián  前邊 前面 前頭 以前 之前 

後 hòu  後邊 後面 後頭 以後 之後 

左 zuǒ  左邊 左面 N/A N/A N/A 

右 yòu 右邊 右面 N/A N/A N/A 

裡 lǐ  裡邊 裡面 裡頭 N/A N/A 

外 wài  外邊 外面 外頭 以外 之外 

東 dōng 東邊 東面 東頭 以東 之東 

西 xī  西邊 西面 西頭 以西 之西 

南 nán 南邊 南面 南頭 以南 之南 

北 běi  北邊 北面 北頭 以北 之北 

內 nèi  N/A N/A N/A 以內 之內 

中 zhōng N/A N/A N/A N/A 之中 

 

In this study, we collected data from the Chinese 

Giga-word corpus
1
 (Ma, and Huang, 2006) in 

Sketch Engine to retrieve the combinations of 

                                                           
1 Giga-word corpus contains 2466840 news 

articles in Taiwan’s CNA and Mainland China’s 

XIN. 



Chinese locative nouns in Table 1, and we 

categorized each compound into synonym groups 

according to the categories provided by the 

Chinese Synonym Forest (Mei, et. al. 1983) 

disregarding the part-of-speech information
2

. 

Then we adapted the LDA (Latent Dirichlet 

Analysis, Blei, et. al. 2003) methods to cluster 

each synonym group to extract meaningful 

groups of combinations existing in our data set. 

Instead of a network view, we used Hive Plot 

(Krzywinski, et. al. 2012) to visualize the 

comparison result of each locative noun 

combination. The graphical decomposition of 

concept categories in locative phrases, hopefully, 

would benefit the analysis of Chinese locative 

nouns.   

 

2 Methodology  

2.1 Latent Dirichlet Allocation 

The LDA model involves drawing samples from 

Dirichlet distributions and from multinomial 

distributions. This method is widely used in 

biomedical studies and can profile genes 

(Flaherty, Giaever, Kumm, Jordan, and Arkin, 

2005) by considering DNA sequences are simple 

4-letter combination (A, T, G, and C). The 

formally probabilistic generative process is 

defined (Blei and Lafferty, 2009) as:  

1. For each topic k, draw a distribution over 

words   Dir
d

~ . 

2. For each document d, 
a) Draw a vector of topic 

proportions )(~  Dir
d

. 

b) For each word i,  
i. Draw a topic assignment 

   KzMultz
iddid

,...,1,~
,,
  

ii. Draw a word 

   VwMultw
idzid

id

,...,1,~
,,

,



 

where K is a specified number of topics, V is the 

number of words in vocabulary; Dir(α) is a K-

dimensional Dirichlet; Dir(β) is a V-dimensional 

Dirichlet; and 
id

z
,

 is the i-th word in the d-th 

document.  

                                                           
2 The locative suffixes and prefixes are also 

interfered by the concept combination in locative 

phrases. Because lack of part-of-speech 

information in Chinese synonym forest, we can’t 

not create explicit formation for locative phrases.  

 

 
Figure 1 A graphical model representation of the 

latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA). (Nodes denote 
random variables; edges denote dependence between 

random variables. Shaded nodes denote observed 

random variables; unshaded nodes denote hidden 

random variables. The rectangular boxes are “plate 

notation,” which denote replication.) 

 

In large corpus experiments, LDA topic model 

can explain why some parts of the data are 

similar by observing different sets of various 

words’ probabilities in topics, such as arts, 

budgets, children and education word groups 

(Blei, et. al., 2003). 

 

2.2 Chinese Synonym Forest 

The Chinese Synonym Forest (or Chilin 同義詞

詞林, Mei et al., 1983) is a collection of 5300 

Chinese synonyms. In this synonym forest, 

synonyms were categorized into 3 levels 

hierarchical groups. The top level of this 

hierarchy is the upper concept labeled from “A” 

to “L” including human, object, time/ space, 

abstract entities, characteristic, movements, 

psychological, phenomenon-condition, activities, 

relationship, auxiliaries, and honorifics, (see 

Appendix I). Within each top level, there are 

several middle and specific synonym groups, and 

each one has its own group code representing the 

hierarchical information and synonym 

relationship symbols: “=” means a semantic 

equal group, “#” means  semantic unequal but in 

the same group, and “@” is a self-enclosed and 

independent group.  The extended version of the 

Chinese Synonym Forest by the HIT IR Lab 

expended the original 3 level hierarchies to 5, 

deleted rarely usage words, and included modern 

words from news corpus. Table 2 (next page) 

shows several examples from the extended 

version (hereafter Chilin).  

In Table 2, we can see that each synonym group 

has a unique code: the initial capital letter 

represents the top level concept, the last symbol 

represents the semantic relationship within a 

synonym group, and the other letters or numbers 

in between represent the position of a word in a 

synonym hierarchy. 



 

Table 2 Samples of Extended Chinese Synonym 

Forest. (The synonym meanings are translated by 

the authors.) 

Synonym Groups Synonym 

Meanings 

Aa01B03# 良民 順民 obedient 

civilians 
Aa01C05@ 眾學生 students 
Bp20B03= 招子 幌子 市招 signboard * 
Bg02B07# 超聲波 低聲波 聲波 sonic wave 
Bg03A01@ 火 fire 
Dd15A09= 幌子 招牌 牌子 旗號 金字招牌 brand * 

 

This synonym list has two major problems while 

applying it in computation algorithm: first, 

because of the lack of clearly definition of each 

synonym group, we can only conjectured the 

meaning; second, because Chinese compounds 

have many senses, a word can be found in many 

synonym groups, such that 幌 子  huǎngzi 
(asterisked in Table 2) originally means 

‘signboard of hotel’ and it also commonly means 

‘brand’ (a metaphor when referring to 

performing an activity under the guise of the 

name). Despise the problems presenting above, 

Chilin is the state-of-art collection of synonym 

wordlist.  

 

2.3 Statistics of Collected Data 

We used 11 directional words: 上 shàng,下 xià, 
前 qián, 後 hòu, 裡/裏 lǐ 外 wài, 東 dōng, 西 xī, 
南  nán, 北  běi, and 5 prefixes/suffixes: ～邊 
biān, ～面 miàn, ～頭 tóu, 以 yǐ～, 之 zhī～ to 
collect data from the Chinese Giga-word corpus, 

and the results of locative nouns, disregarding 

the presents of zái, can be found in Table 3 below. 

The reason of excluding 左 zuǒ,右 yòu, 內 nèi, 
中 zhōng is because these words cannot be found 
in all 5 prefixes/suffixes. 

Because the Chinese Giga-word corpus is a news 

corpus, we found that not all the combinations 

can be found. The usage of ~tóu is significantly 

lower than other formations in every locative 

word and statistics shows that the usages of 

shàng, xià, qián, hòu, lǐ, wài as prefixes of biān, 

as well as dōng, xī, nán, běi as suffixes of yǐ 

cannot be found in news corpus. Even dōng, xī, 

nán, běi as media addressing directional 

information are barely found using biān as suffix. 

 

 

Table 3 Statistics of Collected Data  

   ~邊 biān ~面 miàn ~頭 tóu 以 yǐ ~ 之 zh~ 

上 shàng 11 788 51 1557 15559 

下 xià  6 169 3 8273 7547 

前 qián  3 1085 154 31618 12596 

後 hòu  9 1028 215 22051 3751 

裡 lǐ  9 1086 97 0 0 

外 wài  28 1254 154 4370 1918 

東 dōng 139 33 0 0 424 

西 xī  147 66 3 0 874 

南 nán 118 20 0 0 390 

北 běi  199 78 0 0 731 

 

2.4 Clustering using LDA and Hive Plot 

Pustejovsky (1991:437) points out that “much of 

the lexical ambiguity of verbs and prepositions is 

eliminated because the semantic load is spread 

more evenly throughout the lexicon to the other 

lexical categories.” Here, we differentiate 

different uses of locative phrases through 

observing their groups of nouns in a fixed frame. 

In order to find the meanings corresponding to 

the locative nouns appearing in the fixed frame 

[zái noun phrase (yǐ/zhī) shàng/xià/etc. 

biān/miàn/etc.] in all combinations in Table 3 

above, we used LDA to cluster in the nouns 

appearing in each combination by first mapping 

each noun to its synonym group in Chilin. Before 

we used Chilin, we needed to translate the 

original synonym list which is in simplified 

Chinese into traditional encoding. In order to 

avoid any translation problems, we uses 

Simplified/Traditional Chinese conversion table
3
 

with maximum matching phrases for the 

conversion.  In our study, in order to retrieve the 

patterns in Table 3, we used zái as a keyword to 

locate any fixed locative phrases. Thus, the 

pattern we are looking for is [zái noun phrase 

(yǐ/zhī) shàng/xià/etc.  biān/miàn/etc.]. To locate 

this pattern, we searched for occurrences of zái 

within the left window size of 3 from all locative 

compounds. When mapping each compound onto 

the synonym group codes, some compounds may 

be located in more than one synonym group. We 

enlisted all synonym group codes before doing 

LDA process, because LDA topic model 

considering each vocabulary entry (here is 

                                                           
3 Simplified / Traditional Chinese conversion tables can be 

retrieved on Wikipedia source code web site: 

http://svn.wikimedia.org/svnroot/mediawiki/trunk/phase3/in

cludes/ZhConversion.php 

http://svn.wikimedia.org/svnroot/mediawiki/trunk/phase3/includes/ZhConversion.php
http://svn.wikimedia.org/svnroot/mediawiki/trunk/phase3/includes/ZhConversion.php


synonym code) to be multinomial distribution to 

each specific topic (see in 2.1). While clustering 

each mapped locative phrase containing several 

translated synonym group codes into topics, each 

topic (or cluster) also presents a multinomial 

distribution. While clustering, we set the 

minimum data set to 5 to filter out xià tóu and xī 

tóu, and commanded LDA to cluster each 

locative phrase in to 5 topics with parameters 

chunk-size at 10% of dataset during 20 passes. 

The selected results as follows: 
 

Table 4 Selected Results of LDA model at 5 

clusters 

Cluster for :北邊 
#1 0.166*3-Ka + 0.122*1-Kc + 0.120*2-Kc + 0.082*1-Bn + … 

#2 0.250*1-Cb + 0.144*1-/Nca + 0.139*1-Kd + 0.073*2-Cb + … 

#3 0.150*2-Kb + 0.141*1-Kb + 0.097*3-Kb + 0.089*3-Di + … 
#4 0.152*1-/Nb + 0.102*2-Ka + 0.069*2-Gb + 0.064*1-/Nab + … 

#5 0.321*1-Di + 0.134*1-/Nc + 0.130*2-Di + 0.098*2-Jd + … 

Cluster for :下面 
#1 0.167*3-Ka + 0.116*2-Ka + 0.082*1-Di + 0.079*1-Hi  + … 
#2 0.176*1-Kd + 0.141*1-Bo + 0.141*2-Dn + 0.060*2-Kd  + … 

#3 0.175*1-Kc + 0.114*3-Kd + 0.107*1-Bp + 0.078*2-Kb  + … 

#4 0.149*2-Kc + 0.146*1-Kb + 0.089*1-/Na + 0.057*2-Ka  + … 
#5 0.155*3-Jb + 0.138*2-Bn + 0.105*1-Bn + 0.089*3-Kc  + …  

 

LDA creates 5 clusters according to the 

percentage of the existing synonym groups.  

Because all information, including parts of 

speech, were inputted into LDA, if a part of 

speech is considered more prominent by LDA (as 

in 0.152*1-/Nb above where the initial is marked 

with a “/”), the part of speech will be listed as 

one of the most important features of a particular 

cluster. The elements without the “/” represent 

the Chilin synonym group codes. 

However, the results in Table 4 are hard to us to 

recognize the patterns of correlation between 

synonym groups and parts of speech in locative 

nouns. Therefore we adapted the Hive Plot 

(Krzywinski, et al, 2012) method to construct a 

network viewer for comparison by using each 

coefficient weight larger than 0.05 (Figure 2). 

Furthermore, we also incorporated the synonym-

group-occurring frequency into the Hive Plot 

diagram if this occurring frequency ratio is 

higher than 0.005 within each pattern. As the 

occurring frequency represents the most 

prominent pattern in each locative phrase, the 

LDA topic coefficients are able to show the 

significant differences among topics with each 

locative prefix/suffix formation.  

In our study, we used GENSIM (Řehůřek and 

Sojka, 2010) library to perform the LDA 

clustering of the essential synonym groups 

appearing in different formations of locative 

nouns, and we analyzed the coefficient within 

each generating groups. 

 
Figure 2 The Hive Plot viewer for Locative 

Clusters. Red Single links from psychological 

activities to biān, tóu, and miàn. 
 

In Figure 2, we used the Hive Plot to integrate 

information of LDA clusters and Chilin 

hierarchy within an interactive diagram for 5 

patterns of locative noun formations. The upper 

left drop-down bar shows the select function, and 

the bottom text provides the basic statistics of the 

current diagram. There are 3 axes in each 

diagram: the upward axis is the pattern we used 

in LDA (the top two nodes are prefixes and the 

last three are suffixes); the right-downward axis 

is the mapped (sub)synonym groups (green 

nodes)
4
 or P.O.S tag (pink nodes) in the LDA 

topics or high occurring frequency nodes; and the 

left-downward axis is the upper-level synonym 

groups (red nodes) and the initial letter of P.O.S 

tags (the coarse categories of ‘N’, ‘V’, etc.) 

(brown nodes) corresponding to the nodes 

locating in right-downward axis.  

Each node in the upward axis represents a single 

LDA clustering processing, which processes all 

locative nouns matching the node label (e.g., all 

patterns containing biān) , and the links (grey) 

represent the aggregated coefficient (weighting) 

of each clustered topic. While users put the 

mouse on any node, the over-layer will show the 

information about the mouse-over node including 

the meaning of the node and the target nodes it 

links to. In Figure 2, currently it shows the 

psychology 心理 has three links toward to 頭 tóu, 
邊 biān, and 面 miàn, as well as one link toward 

                                                           
4  Sub-synonym groups refer to the lower subordinate 

synonym groups under each synonym group in Chilin. 



psychological activities 心理活動. The linkage 
represents a general idea of common usage 

(occurring frequency) which LDA clusters regard 

as significant difference among topics for this 3 

patterns of locative noun formations.  

3 Results 

3.1 Prefixes/Suffixes of Locative Nouns 

In order to understand the locative phrases, it is 

necessary to provide some of the meanings of the 

prefixes/suffixes in this section. Noun phrases 

are appearing in the fixed frame [zái~ (yǐ/zhī) 

shàng/xià/etc.  biān/miàn/etc.] may occur with 5 

prefixes/suffixes: ～邊 biān, ～面 miàn, ～頭 
tóu, 以 yǐ～, 之 zhī～. Each prefix/suffix word 
has its specific meaning, according to 

http://www.zdic.net/. Biān means “edge, margin, 

side, border”, miàn means “face; surface; plane; 

side, dimension”, tóu means “head; top; chief, 

first; boss”, yǐ means “by means of; thereby, 

therefore; consider as; in order to”, and zhī 

means “marks preceding phrase as modifier of 

following phrase; it, him/her, them; go to”. When 

these prefixes/suffixes form compounds with 

locative words such as zái, they can be used to 

describe the locative information of time/space 

and abstract entity (Figure 3), as well as object, 

and characteristics (Figure 4), for example. 

 

  

Figure 3 Prefixes/suffixes Connected to the 

Synonym Groups of time/space and abstract 

entity.  

  
Figure 4 Connections of object and 

characteristics toward to prefix/suffix axis. 

In Figure 3, we can see time/space and abstract 

entity are all connect to every prefixes and 

suffixes, and “toward to” illustrate the links from 

the node which your mouse pointing on to sub-

categories, and the top-ward dimension is the 

nodes of prefixes and suffixes which can be 

compounded with locative nouns (上 shàng,下 
xià, 前 qián, 後 hòu, 裡/裏 lǐ 外 wài, 東 dōng, 西 
xī, 南 nán, 北 běi), such as “上面”(shàng miàn), 
and “以下”(yǐ xià). 
 

When expressing location information of the 

synonym group object (in Figure 4), the data 

showed that nouns compounding with all prefix 

patterns (biān, miàn, tóu) and the suffix pattern 

of yǐ are significant, because these physical 

features like “edge”, “surface”, and “top” can 

only be found in the physical existence of objects. 

And the connection of zhī is not presenting in 

Figure 4, because of less frequent and not 

significant in LDA clusters. Similar to object the 

synonym group called characteristics is an upper 

group of shape, appearance, color/taste for 

physical objects, and nature, moral, 

circumstances, and others for abstract events. 

Therefore, all prefix patterns (biān, miàn, tóu) 

can be used while expressing the locative 

information related to physical objects. As to the 

prefix formation of zhī, it usually modifies the 

features of abstract events. More examples like 

human and movement are presenting in Figure 5. 

 

  
Figure 5 Connections of human and movements 

 

When referring to directional information about 

human, linkage to sub-synonym (green nodes) 

groups such as occupation or social positions 

(labors, land lord, loyal families, and etc.) were 

seen. Data also show that only yǐ, tóu, and miàn 

are found in corpora. Considering the meaning of 

tóu and miàn, it is clear to find “face” and “head” 

senses of human. Another interesting finding is 

the linkage of activities to head movements 

http://www.zdic.net/


(kissing, blinking, listening, biting … and etc.) 

and to miàn.  

 

3.2 Directional Words 

 

In this section, we analyzed 11 directional words 

(excluding zuǒ, yòu, nèi, zhōng but including two 

forms of 裡/裏 lǐ; cf. Table 1), and we also used 
the same setting in 3.1 (using LDA model to 

create 5-topic clusters and combining most 

frequent synonym groups to plot Hive diagram). 

After mapping all noun phrases onto Chilin 

synonym groups, we used Hive Plot for 

interactive investigation and we enlisted the 

selected results in Figure 6.  

 

 
(a) 

   
(b)                                 (c) 

  
(e)                                    (f) 

 

Figure 6 Results of comparing directional words. 

(a) focuses on phenomenon-condition; (b) 

focuses on psychology; (c) focuses on human; (e) 

focuses on appearance; (f) focuses on sin 

activities 
 

In Figure 6, we show differences when 

comparing directional words in the LDA results,. 

We selected some interesting patterns for 

discussion, as follows: in Figure 6(a), 

phenomenon-condition (including sub-synonym 

groups) is not connected to dōng, xi, nán, běi, 

because it is awkward to address any direction of 

a phenomenon or conditio; in (b), psychology 

nouns exclusively use 裡/裏 lǐ  and 外 wài, such 
as “在 發現 裡面” (discover something inside..) 
and “在 支持 之外” (besides supporting); in (c), 
human nouns only show the usage of 前 qián “在
民眾 之前”(before citizens). In Figure 6(e), if we 
observed the nodes on the right-downward axis, 

we can find even more interesting usages of 

directional nouns. For example, only 前 qián and 
後 hòu, such as “在 明朗 之前” (before event 
clear) and “在 明朗 之後”(after event clear), can 
be addressing appearance (sub-synonym groups 

are less, fertile, bare, dense, sparse, and etc.), as 

well as the only usage of sin activities and lǐ, 

such as “在  治罪  條例  裡面” (in offences 
ordinance), can be found in news corpora. 

Unfortunately, we cannot enlist all 1,509 

relationships among 104 concepts in Hive Plot of 

all directional words. The above are just some 

interesting observations. 

 

3.3 Combination of Directional Words and 
Patterns 

It is possible to dig in each formation of 

directional words and prefixes/suffixes 

combination. We used the same method to create 



Hive Plot for each directional word and 

prefix/suffix formation pattern. We combined all 

statistical results of LDA and the occurring 

frequency of synonym groups using the same 

directional words. Similarly, in this paper, we 

just selected some findings for discussion. 

 

(A) Time/space 
In Chilin synonym groups, time/space is the 

upper-level groups of time (its sub-synonym 

groups including: A.D., B.C., end of year, four 

seasons…and etc.) and space (its sub-synonym 

groups including: position, direction, neighbor-

hood, surrounding, etc.). Our data showed very 

interesting results while comparing each opposite 

direction in pairs (Figure 8).  

In Figure 7(a), we can see shàng is used in the 

suffix patterns (zhī and yǐ), and xià is used with 

the prefix biān and suffix yǐ. If we consider the 

semantic senses of biān – “edge, margin, side, 

border”, example like “在 朝/往 下邊” (To the 
following), it seems that xià biān shows a 

distance closer to an observed point. On the 

contrary, when addressing shàng, data showed 

that most uses ignored the distance with 

regarding to the observation point. In addition, in 

(b), we can see lǐ and wài are totally different. 

When expressing time/space in wài, just like all 

other directional nouns (qián, hòu, dōng, xī, nán, 

běi), they are connected to every prefix/suffix 

pattern. As to lǐ, no matter its sub-synonym 

groups are time or space, we can find only one 

linkage to miàn which means “face; surface; 

plane; side, dimension”, such as “在 時間 裡面” 
(during that time). 

 

       
(a) focuses on time/space and comparing shàng, xià 

   
        (b) focuses on time/space and comparing lǐ and 
wài 

Figure 7 comparing time/space in pairs of 

directional words with opposite meanings 

 

(B) Psychology 
In Chilin, psychology has only two sub-synonym 

groups, psychological activities and psycho-

logical status. However, we can only found 

psychological activities is connected in collected 

corpora. In Figure 2, we found that nouns in 

psychology synonym groups are usually used 

with biān, tóu, and miàn, and we could only find 

5 linked graphs in every locative noun and 

pattern combination (Figure 8). 

 

  
(a)                                         (b) 

  
(c)                                       (d) 



 
                    (e) 

Figure 8 Connections of synonym group psychology 

in different locative nouns 

 

First, the synonym group psychology is linked to 

běi (a) and nán (b), and the linkages are 

relatively lower than other linkage weighting in 

the same graph, such as “在 支持 中國 北邊” 
(supporting northern China) and “在 規劃 濁水
溪 以南” (planning south of Zhuoshui River). 
When expressing locative information, 

psychology nouns use only suffix biān in our 

corpora. More significant results can be found in 

locative nouns lǐ, wài, and hòu. In Figure 8(c), 

when using locative noun lǐ to address directional 

information of synonym group psychology, we 

can only find evidences support using suffixes of 

biān, tóu, and miàn, but not with prefixes. The 

LDA result of no linkage to pattern node lǐ is 

different from all other graphs. In Figure 8(d), 

psychology nouns are relatively close to the 

observation of object because both use wài biān 

instead of using suffixes tóu and miàn. In Figure 

8(e), locative information of psychology appears 

as abstract entities by using yǐ hòu. 

 

(C) Example of Generating Locative Structure  
Although the complexity of analyzing Chinese 

locative nouns which accompany with 5 different 

suffixes and prefixes, it is possible to generate 

locative structure for a locative nouns. We take 

裡 lǐ as an example. In Figure 7(b), while 
addressing concept regarding to time/space, the 

frequency of using suffix combination, miàn, is 

significant in diagram, and the usage of miàn 

only can be found in compounds in space 

category, if we look into right-downward axis 

(sub-synonym groups).(Figure 9) 

 

  
Figure 9 Connections of sub-synonym groups, time 

and space, to different locative nouns 

 

The translations of using lǐ miàn and lǐ are 

different, because the translated senses depend 

on the concept before locative nouns (here, one is 

time period, and the other is space). For example, 

“夏日” is compounds addressing summer days 
and be collected in times category, therefore “在 
夏日 裡” is translated into “in/during summer 
days”. As to space, locative nouns like “在 城市 
裡面 ” can be translated into “in/inside city”, 
other suffixes and prefixes, such as ～邊 biān,～
頭 tóu, 以 yǐ～, 之 zhī～, are rarely found in 
corpus.  

4 Conclusions 

Locative phrases are formatted compounds 

which contain directional nouns and referring 

scope at the same time. The combinations of 

locative phrases are difficult for us to analyzing 

the formation and to establish formal rules for 

representation and composition for locative 

nouns. Our study tries to re-categorize all nouns 

appearing in a certain fixed frame. The semantic 

meaning of the nouns can be seen in our study by 

observing their concepts. Instead of using human 

judgments, we propose a novel method by using 

LDA model and its clustered topics parameters, 

as well as integrating the statistical frequency 

and Chinese Synonym Forest hierarchical 

information to inspect the differences between 

locative nouns and prefix/suffix formation 

through Hive Plot interface. In this study, we 

discover several findings regarding locative 

nouns and syntactic locative phrases using 

synonyms nouns. Our study is limited by the 

news genre of Giga-word corpus in Sketch 

Engine. It is possible to use different machine 

learning mechanisms, and to adapt interactive 

visual investigating method to help us understand 

(a) Psychology to běi, 
(b) Psychology to nán, 
(c) Psychology to lǐ,  
(d) Psychology to wài, 
(e) Psychology to hòu, 



more relationships beyond statistical data. As 

Pustesjovsky (1995:26)  points out that “the 

ways in which words carry multiple meanings 

can vary”, by observing the nouns in a fixed 

frame, we can see how different, and some 

closely-related, locative phrases vary in their 

concepts.  

Acknowledgements 

This research is supported by National Science 

Council grant 101-2410-H-004-176-MY2 directed by 

Siaw-Fong Chung. 

  

References  

J. J. Mei, Y. M. Zhu, Y. Q. Gao, and H. X. Yin. 1983. 

Tongyici Cilin (Chinese Synonym Forest). 

J. Pustejovsky, 1991. The generative lexicon. 

Computational linguistics, 17.4 (1991):409-441. 

J. Pustejovsky, 1995. The Generative Lexicon: A 

Theory of Computational Lexical Semantics. 

Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 

D. M. Blei,A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. 2003. Latent 

dirichlet allocation. The Journal of Machine 

Learning research, 3:993-1022. 

C. N. Li and S. A. Thompson. 1989. Mandarin 

Chinese: A functional reference grammar. Univ of 

California Press. 

Yuqi Sheng. Modern Chinese online course  (現代漢

語 網 絡 課 程 ), 

http://www.yyxx.sdu.edu.cn/chinese/, visited on 

2013/06/01.  

Ya-chen Hsu and James H.I. Tai. 2001. An analysis of 

the Chinese spatial term shang in three reference 

frames. Unpublished dissertation.  

Kan-Yuan Liang and Song-Mu Wang. 2010. Study on 

the Image Schemata of Modern Chinese Cian: 

Based on Frames of Reference. Unpublished 

dissertation. 

Chao-Mei Wang and Ching-Yu Hsieh. 2011. The 

Cognitive Analysis of Mandarin Locative 

Expressions from the Perspective of Emotion: With 

Reference to Shang and Xia. Unpublished 

dissertation. 

W. Y. Ma and C. R. Huang. 2006. Uniform and 

effective tagging of a heterogeneous giga-word 

corpus. In 5th International Conference on 

Language Resources and Evaluation 

(LREC2006):24-28. 

M. Krzywinski, I. Birol, S. J. Jones, and M. A. Marra. 

2012. Hive plots—rational approach to visualizing 

networks. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 13(5):627-

644. 

D. Blei and J. Lafferty.   2009. Topic Models.   In A. 

Srivastava and M. Sahami, editors, Text Mining: 

Classification, Clustering, and Applications. 

Chapman & Hall/CRC Data Mining and 

Knowledge Discovery Series.    

R. Řehůřek and P. Sojka. 2010. Software framework 

for topic modelling with large corpora. In 

Proceedings of LREC 2010 workshop New 

Challenges for NLP Frameworks:46-50. 

Flaherty, P., Giaever, G., Kumm, J., Jordan, M. I., and 

Arkin, A. P. 2005. A latent variable model for 

chemogenomic profiling. Bioinformatics, 

21(15):3286-3293. 

Gao, Z.M., Extraction and Integration of Chinese 

Lexical Semantic Information, Proceedings of the 

19th Conference on Computational Linguistics and 

Speech Processing, ROCLING 2007, Taipei. 

http://www.yyxx.sdu.edu.cn/chinese/


  

Appendix I: Chinese Synonym Forest (Chilin 同義詞林) 
Chinese synonym group code and translated senses by the authors.  

Codes Group Name Translated sense Codes Group Name Translated sense Codes 
Group 
Name 

Translated sense 

A  人 People C  時間和空間 Time/Space H  活動 Activities 

Aa  泛稱 General term Ca  時間 Time Ha  政治活動 Political activities 

Ab  男女老少 Men and Women Cb  空間 Space Hb  軍事活動 Military activies 

Ac  體態 Posture D  抽象事物 Abstract Hc  行政管理 Administration activities 

Ad  籍屬 Nationality Da  事情、情況 Things/situation Hd  生產 Production activities 

Ae  職業 Profession Db  事理 Affair He  經濟活動 Economic activities 

Af  身份 Identity Dc  外貌  Appearance Hf  交通運輸 Transportation 

Ag  狀況 Status Dd  性能 Performance Hg  教衛科研 Education/Research activities 

Ah  親人、眷屬 Relatives/dependents De  性格、才能 Character/Talent Hh  文體活動 Sports 

Ai  輩次   Seniority Df  意識 Awareness Hi  社交 Social activities 

Aj  關係 Relationship Dg  比喻物 Metaphor Hj  生活 Life 

Ak  品性 Moral Dh  臆想物 Imaginary Hk  宗教生活 Religious 

Al  才識  Ability Di  社會、政法 
Social, political 
and legal 

Hl  迷信活動 Superstitious 

Am  信仰 Faith Dj  經濟 Economy Hm  公安、司法 Public security, justice 

An  丑類 Bad title Dk  文教 Culture Hn  惡行 Sin activities 

B  物 Object Dl  疾病 Disease I  現象與狀態 Phenomenon-condition 

Ba  統稱 General term Dm  機構 Agency Ia  自然現象 Natural phenomenon 

Bb  擬狀物 Proposed substance Dn  數量、單位 Quantity/Unit Ib  生理現象 Physiological condition 

Bc  物體的部分 Part-of E  特徵 Feature Ic  表情 Expression 

Bd  天體 Astronomical Ea  外形 Shape Id  物體狀態 Object condition 

Be  地貌 Landforms Eb  表像 Table Ie  事態 Situation 

Bf  氣象 Meteorological Ec  顏色、味道 Color/Taste If  境遇 Circumstance 

Bg  自然物 Natural Ed  性質 Nature Ig  始末 Begin and end 

Bh  植物 Plant Ee  德才 Moral Ih  變化 Changes 

Bi  動物 Animal Ef  境況 Situation J  關聯 Relevance 

Bj  微生物 Microorganism F  動作 Movement Ja  聯繫 Contact 

Bk  全身 Whole Fa  上肢動作 
Upperr limb 

movements 
Jb  異同 Differences 

Bl  
排泄物、分泌

物 
Excretions/secretions Fb  下肢動作 

Lower limb 
movements 

Jc  配合 Coordinate 

Bm  材料  Material Fc  頭部動作  Head movements Jd  存在 Exist 

Bn  建築物 Building Fd  全身動作 
Full body 

movements 
Je  影響 Affect 

Bo  機具 Machines G  心理活動 Psychology K  助語 auxiliaries 

Bp  用品 Articles Ga  心理狀態 
Psychology 
status 

Ka  疏狀 Sparse 

Bq  衣物 Clothing Gb  心理活動 
Psychology 

activities 
Kb  仲介 Agency 

Br  
食品、藥品、

毒品 
Food/medicines/drugs Gc  能願 Wishes Kc  聯接 Link 

      
Kd  輔助 Aid 

      
Ke  呼歎 Call 

      
Kf  擬聲 Onomatopoeia 

      
L  敬語 Honorifics 

 


