










































Designing a Generic Scheme for Etymological Annotation: a New Type of Language Corpora Annotation


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 64–71,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

Designing a Generic Scheme for Etymological Annotation (EA):  
A New Type of Language Corpora Annotation 

 
 

Niladri Sekahr Dash 
Linguistic Research Unit  

Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata 
ns_dash@yahoo.com 

Mazhar Hussain 
Centre for Indian Languages 

Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 
mazharmehdi@gmail.com 

Abstract
 

We have introduced here a new type of corpus annota-
tion which we call Etymological Annotation (EA). We 
propose this new type because although, over the years, 
scientists have proposed corpus annotation of various 
types (Atkins, Clear and Ostler 1992, Biber 1993, Leech 
2005), nobody has ever suggested that words included 
within corpora need to be annotated at their etymologi-
cal level so that one can retrieve necessary linguistic in-
formation relating to antiquity of words and terms used 
in corpora. The applicational relevance of etymological-
ly annotated corpora may be visualized in language de-
scription, language planning, language education, lex-
icology, language technology as well as in compilation 
of general, historical, learner and special dictionaries. In 
case of those languages, where one comes across large 
number of words borrowed from neighbouring and for-
eign languages, the proper identification of source of 
origin of words carries tremendous referential relevance 
in cross-lingual lexical database generation, morpholog-
ical processing, part-of-speech tagging, e-learning, digi-
tal lexical profile generation, information retrieval, ma-
chine learning, and language documentation. Thus, 
etymologically annotated corpora become an essential 
resource of applied linguistics and language technology. 
We propose here to define this new event with neces-
sary direction and guidance to develop etymologically 
tagged language corpora for all natural languages. 

 

1     Introduction 
 
A simple look at the vocabulary of any natural lan-
guage will invariably show that a large part of its vo-
cabulary is actually obtained from foreign languages, 
besides having its own lexical stock inherited from 
native ancestral languages. Also analysis of the lexi-
cal stock will show that most of the words are natura-
lized to such an extent that it is almost difficult to 
trace their source of origin (Dash, Dutta Chowdhury 
and Sarkar 2009). This leads us to introduce the con-
cept of Etymological Annotation (EA) where the 
basic task is to tag etymological information to each 
and every word and term used within corpora with 
regard to its source of origin (or antiquity) for future 
reference and application. 

In our assumption, EA on corpora, in the long run, 
will become simply indispensable for each natural 
language, because the event of lexical borrowing is an 
inevitable linguistic phenomenon through which each 
natural language passes through for its continuous 
growth and survival. In fact, many advanced languag-

es like English, German, Spanish, French, Italian, 
Japanese, Chinese, Portuguese, Hindi, Bengali, Ma-
rathi, Tamil, Telugu, etc. which are proud of having 
large pool of vocabulary, gladly admit the truth that 
much of their vocabulary are obtained from other lan-
guages – both native and foreign. For instance, Hindi 
language has a large stock of words in its vocabulary 
and a major part of it is obtained from Sanskrit, Eng-
lish, Arabic, Persian, Spanish, German, Urdu, Punja-
bi, Gujarati, Kashmiri, Bengali, etc. However, there is 
hardly any well-documented record (for most of the 
languages) to show which lexical items are inherited 
or borrowed from which languages into the vocabu-
lary of a language, it is difficult for investigators to 
find how the vocabulary of a language has evolved 
across space and time on different diachronic scales. 

Here arises the functional relevance of EA on lan-
guage corpora (Leech and Fligelstone 1992). The an-
notation scheme proposed in this paper can solve the 
problem of etymological indeterminacy with proper 
documentation of etymological information for each 
and every word used in a piece of text, as each and 
every word in the corpora is annotated with a specific 
tag of its source language. The process may be initial-
ly carried out manually for developing a trial database 
for machine learning as well as tagging automatiza-
tion in subsequent stages. The ultimate goal is to de-
velop a system for automatic EA of text corpora of a 
language utilizing information and knowledge found 
from a supervised machine learning system. 

Keeping several issues of EA in mind, we have 
briefly referred to various types of annotation (Section 
2); noted the state-of-the-art of annotation in Indian 
languages corpora (Section 3); made attempt for ety-
mology-based vocabulary classification (Section 4); 
defined an elaborate tagset for EA (Section 5); dis-
cussed the methods we have adopted for EA (Section 
6); and finally reported some findings obtained from 
an etymologically annotated corpus (Section 7). The 
applicational importance of EA corpora is elaborated 
in conclusion. 
 
2   Types of Corpus Annotation 
 

In a broad sense language corpora can have two types 
annotation: (a) intralinguistic annotation, & (a) extra-
linguistic annotation (Dash 2011). While intralinguis-
tic annotation involves encoding words, terms, phras-

64



es, and other linguistic items used within corpora with 
their part-of-speech and/or morpho-grammatical in-
formation; extralinguistic annotation encodes same 
linguistic items with information relating to their or-
thography, meanings, discourse, pragmatics, anapho-
ra, and sociolinguistics (Leech and Wilson 1999, 
Sperberg-McQueen and Burnard 1994, Smith, Hoff-
mann and Rayson 2007). Thus, based on the nature of 
information tagged with words and terms used within 
corpora, annotation are classified into 6 major types, 
namely, orthographic annotation, prosodic annota-
tion, grammatical annotation, semantic annotation, 
discourse annotation, and anaphoric annotation. 
(a) Orthographic Annotation: It represents a text, as 

much as possible, as it actually exists in its com-
plete natural state, despite attachment of multiple 
extratextual and intratextual tags (Dash 2011). It 
tags, for example, different orthographic symbols, 
such as, single quotes, double quotes, type size, 
indentation, bold face, italics, etc. as well as capi-
tal letters, pauses, periods, apostrophes, segments, 
paragraphs, lines, punctuations, abbreviations, 
postcodes, etc. used in a piece of text (Sperberg-
McQueen and  Burnard 1994). 

(b) Prosodic Annotation: It is carried out on a spo-
ken text corpus after a speech corpus is transcribed 
into its written form (Johansson 1995). In general, 
it tags all kinds of prosodic features, such as, 
pitch, loudness, length, pause, tone, intonation 
variation, accent, juncture, and other supraseg-
mental features and properties observed in spoken 
text (Grice, Leech, Weisser and Wilson 2000).  

(c) Grammatical Annotation: It involves assigning 
specific part-of-speech to words after understand-
ing their actual grammatical roles within a given 
text (Greene and Rubin 1971). At sentence level, 
this information may be tagged for chunks such as 
multiword expressions, local word groups, phras-
es, and idiomatic expressions, etc. (Francis 1980, 
Garside 1987, DeRose 1988). It may also involve 
marking of dependencies, constituents, named ent-
ities, and predicates and their arguments found 
within sentences (Kupiec 1992, Smith and McE-
nery 2000). 

(d) Semantic Annotation: It is used on corpora to tag 
appropriate sense a particular word denotes within 
a given context (Löfberg, Juntunen, Nykanen, Va-
rantola, Rayson and Archer 2004). The basic goal 
is to distinguish primary lexicographic senses of 
words – a process used in word sense disambigua-
tion and assignment of semantic domains to words 
used in texts (Löfberg, Archer, Piao, Rayson, 
McEnery, Varantola and Juntunen 2003). It tries 
to identify the semantic information of words as 
well as exhibits semantic relationships underlying 
between words within texts. It also tags agent-
patient relationships of words denoting their par-
ticular actions (Löfberg et al. 2005, Piao at al. 
2005, Piao at al. 2006). 

(e) Discourse Annotation: It tags discourse elements, 
sociolinguistic cues, pragmatic features, and other 
extralinguistic features found embedded within a 
piece of text (Archer and Culpeper 2003). Corpora 
are annotated beyond sentence boundaries to ex-
plore discourse as well as pragmatic relations ex-
pressed by linguistic elements used in corpora (O’ 
Donnell 1999). It is argued that proper identifica-
tion of discourse elements in spoken texts is indis-
pensable for indicating conversational structure of 
dialogic interaction in case of normal speech 
events (Stenström 1984).  

(f) Anaphoric Annotation: It tries to identify differ-
ent types of anaphora used in texts as well as lists 
and sorts these forms to dissolve anaphoric com-
plexities. It tags anaphora and anaphoric relations 
of words used within a text for intra-sentential or 
intra-textual references. Usually, various pronouns 
and nouns are co-indexed within a broad frame-
work of cohesion (Halliday and Hasan 1976).  
Although a corpus annotated with various types of 

linguistic information is considered to be useful for 
different works of descriptive linguistics, applied lin-
guistics, and language technology; the process of an-
notation (both manual and automatic) invariably asks 
for long-time involvement of trained experts with pin-
pointed efforts to come up with benchmark standards 
to be used in a uniformed manner across all language 
types for creation of the annotated corpora (deHaan 
1984). However, anyone who wants to annotate a text 
will have to deal with the following two important 
questions (Leech 1993, Leech 2005):  
(a) What kind of linguistic information should be 

annotated in the corpora, and 
(b) How it should be annotated (manually or auto-

matically). 
For the first question, we can come up with well-

defined schemes, which will allow us annotate vari-
ous intralinguistic and extralinguistic information in a 
corpus. These schemes are related to spoken text tran-
scription, orthography, part-of-speech, morphology, 
grammar, syntax, semantics, anaphora, discourse, 
pragmatics, sociolinguistics and others. 

With regard to the second question, we may anno-
tate, at the time of annotation, only one type of infor-
mation in the text and ignore other types, if we under-
stand that other types of information is not required. 
This, however, does not imply that other types of in-
formation are not required or possible to annotate in 
the corpus. We are always free to add, as and when 
required, other types of annotation to a corpus already 
annotated with one type. Therefore, we argue that an 
annotation scheme should be developed in such a 
manner that it supports various types of annotation in 
one or multiple layered interfaces. 

Moreover, there should be no compromise with 
the amount of information to be annotated to a corpus. 
In fact, the more of information annotated to a corpus, 
the utility of the corpus is more enhanced, because an 
annotated corpus becomes more useful for varieties of 

65



linguistic investigation and application (Grice, Leech, 
Weisser and Wilson 2000, Hardie 2003).  
 
3   State-of-the-art of Corpus Annotation 
 

Language corpora annotated at various levels and 
types are now available for many advanced languages 
like English, Spanish, French, German, Italian, Chi-
nese, and Japanese, etc. (Leech 2005, Hunston 2002, 
McEnery 2003, O’Donnell 1999, Sinclair 1994, Ar-
cher and Culpeper 2003). In global perspective, the 
number of POS tagged corpora is much higher than 
other types of annotated corpora due to the following 
reasons.  
(a) The process of POS annotation is comparatively 

easier than other types of annotation. Also, it can 
be easily applied (manually or automatically) on 
freely available written and spoken corpora of 
different forms, formats, types, and contents. 

(b) Non-experts with rudimentary knowledge about 
morphological-cum-grammatical information of 
words can annotate words at part-of-speech level 
in a corpus. 

(c) Till date, POS annotated corpora have shown 
greater applicational relevance than other types 
of annotated corpora. The POS annotated corpo-
ra are readily used in different works of descrip-
tive linguistics, applied linguistics and language 
technology.  

(d) The free availability of tools and software for 
POS annotation has worked as a catalyst for de-
veloping this type of corpora than other types. 

(e) Achieving high rate of success in POS annota-
tion is highly possible with simple trial, verifica-
tion, and modification of annotation rules (Leech 
2005). 

(f) Other types of corpus annotation require highly 
specialized knowledge even for achieving a very 
small amount of success. People without ade-
quate knowledge about phonetics, phonetic tran-
scription, intonation, supra-segmental features, 
and other properties of speech can hardly anno-
tate a speech corpus. Similarly, without sound 
knowledge in semantics, syntax, discourse, and 
pragmatics one may fail at every step of seman-
tic, anaphoric and discourse annotation.  

Due to such factors, the number of corpora anno-
tated at other types is far below than the number of 
POS annotated corpora.  

The Indian languages cut a sorry figure in case of 
corpus annotation (Dash and Chaudhuri 2000, Dash 
2008). Till date, a few POS annotated text corpora are 
developed in some of the Indian languages (http://tdil-
dc-in) and these are neither varied, nor large in size, 
nor user-friendly (Dash 2013). Moreover, tools and 
software for annotating Indian language corpora are 
not yet properly developed due to technical and moti-
vational deficiencies. (Baker, Hardie, McEnery, Cun-
ningham, and Gaizauskas 2002). But the most striking 
deficiency is the lack of properly developed text and 
speech corpora in the Indian languages. 

Nevertheless, the present Indian scenario is rapid-
ly changing towards a better state where corpora in a 
number of Indian languages with different types and 
formats of text annotation are increasing day-by-day. 
For instance, the ILCI-I tagged corpus of Indian lan-
guages contains approximately 10 million POS tagged 
words covering 12 Indian languages (Jha et al. 2011). 
Also, the pressing needs of Indian language technolo-
gy efforts and the difficulties involved in the activities 
have inspired many scientists across the country to 
take up the challenge of corpus creation and annota-
tion (Hardie 2003, Hardie 2005, Hardie, Koller, Ray-
son and Semino 2007). Therefore, it is not a difficult 
task to make a tentative estimation about the present 
state of corpus creation and annotation in Indian lan-
guages (Table 1).  

 
Annotation 

Types 
Availability in Indian Languages 

Orthographic 
Annotation 

Some corpora are available in 
Indian languages, particularly in 
case of transcription of spoken 

texts into written form 
Grammatical 
Annotation 

Available for majority of Indian 
languages including Hindi, Urdu, 
Sanskrit, Punjabi, Gujarati, Kon-
kani, Marathi, Oriya, Assamese, 
Bengali, Tamil, Telugu, Malaya-

lam etc. 
Prosodic 

Annotation 
Few Indian languages are prosod-

ically annotated, such as Hindi 
and Bengali, Tamil, Telugu, etc. 

Semantic 
Annotation 

No Indian language corpus is an-
notated at this level 

Discourse 
Annotation 

Not available in Indian languages 

Anaphoric 
Annotation 

Not found in corpus of Indian 
languages 

Table 1: Present state of corpus creation and annota-
tion in Indian languages  

 
This may also reflect on the present state of re-

search activities in the Indian languages in this sphere 
of knowledge harvesting, knowledge generation, and 
information management. 

Keeping the present state and variety of corpus 
annotation across the world in mind we have pro-
posed here EA in which we try to annotate the source 
of words used in a piece of text of a language to iden-
tify as well as record the ‘mother language’ from 
where these words are obtained and used. This anno-
tation is necessary because a large quantity of vocabu-
lary of a language is actually obtained from various 
other languages. Moreover, the actual source of origin 
of words used in a language needs to be properly an-
notated for future linguistic works. In next two sec-
tions, we have focused on vocabulary classification of 
the lexical stock of a language with reference to ety-
mology (Section 4), and designed a tagset for the pur-
pose of EA (Section 5). 

66



4    Vocabulary Classification 
 
Vocabulary classification is one of the most important 
processes of language analysis in the area of descrip-
tive and historical linguistics. In language technology 
and computational linguistics also, it has turned up as 
an important strategy for language-specific lexical 
information retrieval and knowledge representation. 
In the act of vocabulary classification, we propose to 
identify the source of origin of a word and annotate it 
accordingly. For instance, within a modern Bengali 
text corpus we have annotated the word iskul/ENG/ 
“school” as an English word, because although the 
word is a part of the present vocabulary of the Bengali 
language, the mother source of the word is English. 
Therefore, it is annotated as an English word, and not 
as a Bengali word. In case of hierarchical tagging it 
should carry tags of both the languages. Through this 
process, we shall be able to learn words of which an-
cestry are used in a language and what kind of mor-
phophonemic changes these words have undergone in 
the course of naturalization in the language (Rissanen 
1989). 

The basic goal of this process is to capture the in-
formation of the source language of a particular word 
that has come to be used in another language. For 
instance, in a language like Bengali, it has been ob-
served that a large part of its present vocabulary is 
actually derived from various other languages, such 
as, Sanskrit, Arabic, Persian, English, Hindi, Portu-
guese, Dutch, etc. besides having words and terms 
inherited from its native sources (Sen 1992, Sarkar 
and Basu 1994, Chaki 1996, Shaw 1999). Simple 
analysis of a modern Bengali text corpus has shown 
that most of these words are actually used in natura-
lized form (Dash, Datta Chowdhury, and Sarkar 2009) 
due to which it has become really tough to trace their 
actual origin or etymological ancestry. This has been 
the controlling factor to argue for introducing the 
concept of EA where, at the time corpus annotation, 
we are willing to assign etymological information to 
words with regard to their antiquity for future refer-
ence and application. 

It is expected that etymological information of 
words should be properly tagged in a piece of text in 
accordance with origin of words, which may, at sub-
sequent stages, help the language investigators know 
from which source languages these words have come 
into a language. For example, based on traditional 
scheme of vocabulary classification, we can classify 
the lexical stock of a language into three broad types: 
(a) Native stock: This includes words inherited 

from ‘mother language’ as well as from local di-
alects and others. For instance, for Bengali, the 
words obtained from Sanskrit, Tatsama, Tadb-
haba, Deshi, and dialects may be put into this 
category. 

(b) National stock: It includes words and terms 
obtained from other regional and national lan-
guages. For instance, for Hindi, it covers words 

taken from Urdu, Punjabi, Marathi, Tamil, Telu-
gu, Malayalam, Oriya, Bengali, etc.  

(c) Foreign stock: It includes words borrowed from 
foreign languages. For instance, for Hindi, words 
borrowed from Arabic, Persian, English, French, 
German, etc. are put into this category. 

Given below is an etymology-based classified list 
of words obtained from a Bengali text corpus to show 
how the vocabulary of modern Bengali is made up 
with words of different languages (one/two words are 
given from each language for reference only): 
(a) Native Stock 
Bengali : rāstā “road”, ghar “house”.  
Tatsama : akṣi “eye”, agni “fire”. 
Tadbhaba : āj “today”, āṭ “eight”. 
Indigenous: ḍiṅgi “canoe”, jhol “broth”. 
(b) National Stock 
Hindi : kāmāi “absence”, lāgātār “continuous”.  
Tamil : curuṭ “cigar”, khokā “boy”. 
Santhali : kurāṭ “axe”, biṛā “bundle’.  
(c) Foreign Stock 
English : āpil “appeal”, āpel “apple”. 
Arabic : ārji “request”, kisyā “story”.  
Persian : kharid “buy”, cāmac “spoon”. 
Portuguese: ālmāri “almirah”, cābi “key”.  
German : jār “Tsar”, nātsi “Nazi”.  
French : ā͂tel “intellectual’, byāle “ballet”.   
Dutch : hartan “harten”, ruitan “ruhiten”.  
Spanish : kamreḍ “comrade”, ārmāḍā “armada”. 
Italian : kompāni “company”, gejeṭ “gazette”. 
Russian : spuṭnik “sputnik”, glāsnast “glasnost”.   
Australian: kyāṅgāru “Kangaroo”.   
Japanese: hārākiri “suicide”, hāiku “haiku”.  
Chinese : cā “tea”, cini “sugar”.  
Burmese : ghughni “curry”, luṅgi “lungi”.  
Tibetan : iyāk “yak”, lāmā “Llama”.  
Peruvian : kuināin, “quinine”.  
African : jebrā “Zebra”, bhubhujelā “vuvuzela”. 
Hybrid : slibhhīn “sleeveless”, oṣṭhogrāphy, “art of 

kissing”.  
Unknown: harpoon “harpoon”.  

For a language or the other, such classification 
scheme may be modified based on the name of the 
source languages from where words are inherited and 
borrowed. For instance, while English will include 
many Scandinavian, Greek, Latin, French, German, 
Spanish, Italian and other languages into its list of 
source languages, a South Asian language like Ma-
layalam will include many Dravidian languages, San-
skrit, English, and other Indian languages 
 
5   Defining EA Tagset 
 
Since most of the living languages have directly or 
indirectly obtained words from other languages be-
sides using their own stock, it is expected that at the 
time of EA, information about the source of words 
should be accurately tagged in the text corpus. There-
fore, we need to have a well-defined tagset that can be 
uniformly applied to annotate each and every word 
found in the corpus. For Indic languages we can think 

67



of using the following tagset for words coming from 
various languages across the world (Table 2). 

 
No Language Tag 
01 African [AFR] 
02 Arabic [ARB] 
03 Assamese [ASM] 
04 Australian [AUS] 
05 Bengali [BNG] 
06 Burmese [BRM] 
07 Chinese [CHN] 
08 Dialectal [DLT] 
09 Dutch [DTH] 
10 English [ENG] 
11 French [FRN] 
12 German [GMC] 
13 Hindi [HND] 
14 Hybrid [HRB] 
15 Italian [ITL] 
16 Japanese [JPN] 
17 Native [NTV] 
18 Oriya [ORI] 
19 Persian [PRS] 
20 Peruvian [PRV] 
21 Portuguese [PRG] 
22 Russian [RSN] 
23 Santhali [SNT] 
24 Spanish [SPN] 
25 Tadbhaba [TDV] 
26 Tamil [TAM] 
27 Tatsama [TSM] 
28 Telugu [TLG] 
29 Tibetan [TBT] 
30 Unknown [UNN] 

Table 2: Language-based Tagset for EA 
 

If such tags are attached with the words in the cor-
pus it will be easier to know the actual etymological 
source of words used in a language. However, it 
should be kept in mind that annotating such informa-
tion automatically or manually with the words is not a 
trivial task, as it asks for sound knowledge of etymo-
logical information of words on the part of the text 
annotators. Therefore, only those people who are well 
versed with the history of origin of each word may be 
asked to do the said task. Also, supporting informa-
tion may be retrieved from etymological dictionaries 
available in a language to verify as well as to authen-
ticate the information about the origin of words before 
these are annotated in the corpus. 

Although the tagset proposed in the Table 2 above 
is primarily meant to tag single-level information to 
the words coming from different languages, we have a 
future plan for encoding subsequent layers of etymo-
logical information of the words. In fact, the language 
tags that are proposed here can roughly indicate the 
source language from where a particular word is bor-
rowed. This, however, asks for a second layer of an-
notation (in a hierarchical order) to capture the infor-

mation of origin of a word as well as the process of 
derivation, alternation, and euphonic changes it might 
have undergone in the borrower’s language with a 
possibility for semantic change. For instance, consider 
the borrowed Bengali word māine “monthly salary”. 
Etymologically it is derived from the Persian word 
māhiyānā “month” (cf. Hindi, māhinā “month”). In 
this case at least the word has undergone both phono-
logical and semantic change after it is borrowed into 
Bengali. This information may be tagged with the 
word in a manner like māine/PRS_BNG/ to indicate 
etymological hierarchy of the word. In our view, this 
kind of hierarchical annotation may be useful in case 
of those portmanteau words where the lexical items 
of two different languages are combined to together to 
form a compound word, e.g., sinemākhor “cinema 
addict”, klāśghar “class room”, noṭbai “notebook”, 
bhoṭdātā “voter”, etc. Due to shortage of space this 
process is not explained here in details. 

The remaining part of the paper is constructed in 
the following order: in Section 6, we have briefly dis-
cussed the actual process of assigning tagset to words 
in a sample Bengali text; in Section 7, we have pre-
sented some lexical level data and information ob-
tained from this sample tagged corpus; and in Section 
8, we have highlighted the applicational benefits of 
etymologically annotated corpora. 

 
6   Process of Etymological Annotation 

 
Annotation can be done either manually or automati-
cally. It is, however, better to annotate a text manually 
for the first time so that the reliability of an annotated 
text is beyond question, and the text is authentically 
used as a trial database for development of an auto-
matic annotation system or tool.  
 
Kṛṣṇa/SKT/ ebār/BNG/ mādhyamik/SKT/ parīkṣā/SKT/  debe/BNG/. 
Kṛṣṇer/SKT/ mā/TDV/ balechen/BNG/, āmār/BNG. keṣṭā/TDV/ 
myāṭrik/ENG/ pāś/ENG/ karle/BNG/ moṭar/ENG/ sāikel/ENG/ 
kine/BNG/ debo/BNG/, kaleje/ENG/ paṛte/BNG/ ýābe/BNG/. 
Kṛṣṇer/SKT/ bāp/TDV/ bhuṣimāler/PRS/ kārbāri/ARB/. Tini/BNG/ 
balechen/BNG/, osab/BNG/ habe/BNG/ nā/BNG/. Pāś/ENG/ 
karle/BNG/ dokāne/PRS/ basiye/BNG/ debo/ BNG/. Jami/ARB/ 
jiret/ARB/ nei/BNG/, dokān/ARB/ nā/BNG/ dekhle/BNG/ 
khābe/TDB/ kī/TDV/ ? Kaleje/ENG/ paṛe/BNG/ ki/TDV/ cākri/PRS/ 
karbe/BNG/? Pāś/ENG/ karle/BNG/ cārṭe/TDV/ jāmā/ARB/, 
duṭo/TDV/ phatuyā/PRS/, cārṭe/TDV/ luṅgi/UNN/ kine/TDV/ de-
bo/BNG/. Otei/BNG/ habe/BNG/. baṛa/TDV/ jor/ARB/ ekṭā/TDV/ 
sāikel/ENG/. Tāi/TDV/ śune/BNG/ Kṛṣṇer/SKT/ man/SKT/ 
khub/PRS/ khārāp/PRS/. Kṛṣṇer/SKT/ ṭhākumā/TDV/ śune/BNG/ 
balechen/BNG/, ore/NTV/ Keṣṭā/TDV/, bhābis/BNG/ nā/BNG/. 
Pāś/ENG/ karle/BNG/ tor/BNG/ ekṭā/TDV/ be/TDV/ debo/BNG/. 
Sukhe/SKT/ saṃsār/SKT/ karbi/BNG/ ār/BNG/ bāper/TDV/ 
dokān/ARB/ sāmlābi/BNG/. 

Fig. 1: A sample Bengali text is annotated with ety-
mological tagset 

 
Now, based on the tagset defined in the earlier 

section, we have annotated a text manually on a trial-
basis. In the diagram (Fig. 1) a sample Bengali text is 

68



presented to show how words in the corpus are ma-
nually annotated with etymological information. 

In case of automatic annotation, on the other hand, 
a system has to be designed, which will annotate sin-
gle word units as well as multiword units in the text 
with appropriate etymological information. For this 
work the system has to be supplied with a Machine 
Readable Etymological Dictionary (MRED) where 
each and every word is marked with its relevant ety-
mological information. Moreover, the system has to 
be trained in such a way that it is able to retrieve rele-
vant etymological information from the MRED and 
use it to annotate the words in corpora. The process of 
automatic annotation may be carried out in the fol-
lowing algorithm made with eight steps: 

 
Step 1: Preparation of a MRED with etymological 

information of each word of a language. 
Step 2: Integration of the MRED with an EA system. 
Step 3: Run the system of normalized digital text cor-

pora. 
Step 4: System encounters a word in the corpora. 
Step 5: Matches the word with the lexical stock in the 

MRED. 
Step 6: Extracts etymological information from the 

MRED. 
Step 7: Annotates the word in the corpus with rele-

vant etymological information. 
Step 8: Generates the annotated output. 

 
The process, however, may be monitored by ex-

perts when the system runs on digital corpora. When 
the process will run, it will encounter words of differ-
ent forms and structures in corpora, such as, inflected 
words, non-inflected words, naturalized words, frozen 
words, abbreviated words, compounded words, redup-
licated words, multiword strings, and hybrid words, 
etc. (Rayson, Archer, Baron and Smith 2006). At the 
initial stage, the system will annotate all single words 
as well as compound words (both inflected and non-
inflected) used in corpora to record their source of 
origin. In case of ambiguity, the system will directly 
refer to the etymological dictionaries to dissolve con-
fusion in proper identification of the source language 
of a word. If a word is left untouched in the corpora, it 
will be verified, validated and augmented (if needed) 
in the MRED. Gradually, through continuous process 
of modification and up-gradation the system will suc-
ceed to annotate all the words in the corpora vis-à-vis 
in the language. 

At the initial stage we have taken only the surface 
level understanding of etymology which may appear 
inadequate in subsequent stages of text annotation. To 
overcome this, the decision to mark words as having 
specific origin may be supported with the information 
obtained from some authoritative etymological dictio-
naries available in a language by which any doubt 
regarding the origin of those words that travel back 
and forth in the course of its use in a language will be 
dissolved. The annotated text corpora thus developed 

will have many things to enrich both man and ma-
chine. In case of man, the corpora will provide a clear 
picture about the ration of load of words of different 
origins in the language. In case of machine, on the 
other hand, it will be easy for it to identify the major 
patterns of distribution of words of different etymolo-
gy in the corpora, and thus, it will be able to build up 
useful prediction strategies on the overall patterns of 
occurrence of words of different origin in a language.  
 
7   Some Findings from an EA Text Corpus 
 
For our initial study we manually tagged words at the 
etymological level in a modern Bengali newspaper 
corpus made with 1,00000 (one lakh) words. The re-
sults obtained from this tagged corpus shows that the 
percentage of use of words belonging to different 
etymological antiquities are quite useful to shed some 
new lights on the present status of the language as 
well as on the patterns of lexical stock being used in 
formation of text in the language (Table 3). 
 

Words of different  
Etymology 

Total 
Words 

%-age 

Sanskrit (Tatsama) words 10,000 10% 
Bengali words 40,000 40% 

Tadbhava words 20,000 20% 
English words 15,000 15% 
Arabic words 07,000 07% 
Persian words 06,000 06% 
Other words 02,000 02% 

Table 3: Percentage of words of different etymology 
in a Bengali newspaper text corpus 

 
If we agree to accept the tagged newspaper corpus 

as a representative of the modern Bengali language, 
then we can, perhaps, show that (as the Table 3 dis-
plays) till date both Sanskrit (i.e., Tatsama) and the 
Tadbhaba words constitute a major part of the modern 
Bengali language besides the native Bengali vocabu-
lary, which possesses the highest percentage of words 
in the language. The percentage of use of English 
words in the language is quite large and this is clearly 
reflected in the table as well as in the corpus. We have 
observed that the number of English words in the 
Bengali vocabulary is growing day-by-day as a result 
of new scientific and technological innovations in the 
western world as well as due to free global internet 
communication and the spread of English language 
and culture across international borders. On the other 
hand, the use of Arabic and Persian words in the lan-
guage is not entirely lost, even though their percen-
tage of use has notably decreased over the years with 
introduction and invasion of English into Bengali life 
and society. The percentage of use of words of other 
etymology (mostly from national and foreign stock) is 
quite marginal and their presence in the text does not 
affect much in the overall stock of the vocabulary of 
the language. This observation may be validated with 

69



comparative studies of some EA diachronic corpora 
of a language, if available. 

The Table 3 presents certain statistics on possible 
contribution of foreign languages to the existing Ben-
gali vocabulary. However, the statistics is deceptive in 
the sense that the corpus, which is used for this study 
is made from newspapers texts where the information 
of domains and sub-domains of the text is merged for 
the study. But we know that the stock of words vary 
significantly based on domains and sub-domains from 
where data is obtained. For example, if the domain is 
science and technology, one may find more English 
and foreign words. On the other hand, if the domain is 
local news, then possibility of finding more Bengali 
and Sanskrit words is much higher. To verify if this 
argument is valid, we are planning to carry out similar 
statistical studies on some newspaper text corpora of 
different domains and sub-domains. In fact, we have 
planned to carry out statistical studies on a few Indian 
language corpora to trace differences of percentage of 
words in different languages and to measure the inter-
annotator agreement (e.g., words that are of foreign 
origin but are now viewed as native stock by the lan-
guage community, etc) in the EA on corpora. We also 
plan to carry out case studies to measure how the in-
formation of annotation at etymological level can help 
in different NLP activities. 

In general, information elicited from the data pre-
sented in Table 3 may be used for the purpose of lan-
guage planning and education and dictionary compila-
tion. In language planning, it will give language plan-
ners an idea how the linguistic resources should be 
designed with clear focus on the percentage of use of 
lexical items in the language; in language education, 
teachers will definitely look at the percentage of use 
of words of different etymology to concentrate on 
vocabulary teaching at different grades; while in dic-
tionary compilation, lexicographers will invariably 
take note of the percentage of use of words of differ-
ent antiquities in the corpus to decide over the selec-
tion of lexical stock to be used as entry words as well 
as headwords in the dictionary. 
 
8    Conclusion 
 
There are several utilities of etymologically annotated 
corpora. First of all, we can get valuable information 
to know which words are of native origin and which 
words are of non-native origin. Moreover, we come to 
know which native words have combined with foreign 
words to generate new compounds or hybrid words. 
Similarly, we come to know which native affixes are 
combined with foreign words to generate new words, 
and what kind of morpho-phonologial alternations the 
foreign words have undergone in the process of nati-
vization in the language. 

Such information becomes useful in case of fre-
quency calculation of words of various origins, lan-
guage teaching, and in compilation of general and 
foreign word dictionaries – both in printed and digital 
form. Moreover, after analyzing the words structural-

ly, we can clearly show which affixes are tagged with 
foreign words (or vice versa) in formation of new 
words in the language. In essence, EA helps to get 
clear cut information for all kinds of inflected word, 
non-inflected word, naturalized word, frozen word, 
compound word, reduplicated word, and other words 
used in corpora of a language. 

In the context of Indian languages, where we 
come across a large number of words borrowed from 
neighbouring and foreign languages, identification of 
sources of origin of words carries tremendous relev-
ance in lexical database generation, morphological 
processing, part-of-speech tagging, dictionary compi-
lation, language description, language teaching, and 
spelling pattern analysis of words (Hunston 2002, 
Rayson, Archer, Baron and Smith 2006).  

Keeping these applications in view we have pro-
posed here a tagset for EA as well as have designed a 
process of marking the source(s) of origin of words 
used in digital language corpora. We believe that this 
new concept of corpus annotation will expand appli-
cational relevance of language corpora far beyond the 
realms of language technology and natural language 
processing into many other domains and sub-domains 
of applied linguistics, descriptive linguistics, and their 
neighbouring disciplines in years to come. 
 
References  
 
Archer, D. and J. Culpeper. 2003. Socio-pragmatic annota-

tion: new directions and possibilities in historical corpus 
linguistics. In: Wilson, A., P. Rayson and A. McEnery 
(Eds.) Corpus Linguistics by the Lune: A Festschrift for 
Geoffrey Leech, Peter Lang: Frankfurt. Pp. 37-58. 

Atkins, S., J. Clear, and N. Ostler. 1992. Corpus design 
criteria, Literary and Linguistic Computing, 7(1): 1-16. 

Baker, P., A. Hardie, A. McEnery, H. Cunningham, and P. 
Gaizauskas. 2002. EMILLE: a 67-million word corpus 
of Indic languages: data collection, mark-up and harmo-
nisation, LREC 2002 Proceedings, Pp. 819-827. 

Biber, D. 1993. Representativeness in corpus design, Lite-
rary and Linguistics Computing, 8(4): 243-57. 

Chaki, J. B. 1996. Bangla Bhasar Byakaran (Grammar of 
the Bengali Language). Kolkata: Ananda Publishers. 

Dash, N. S. 2008. Corpus Linguistics: An Introduction, New 
Delhi: Pearson Education-Longman. 

Dash, N. S. 2011. Extratextual (documentative) annotation 
in written text corpora. Proceedings of the 9th Interna-
tional Conference on Natural Language Processing 
(ICON-2011) Anna University, Chennai, 16th-19th De-
cember 2011. Pp. 168-176. 

Dash, N. S. 2013. Part-of-Speech (POS) Tagging in Bengali 
Written Text Corpus. International Journal on Linguis-
tics and Language Technology. 1(1): 53-96.  

Dash, N. S. and B. B. Chaudhuri. 2000. The process of de-
signing a multidisciplinary monolingual sample corpus, 
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 5(2): 179-
197. 

Dash, N. S., P. Dutta Chowdhury and A. Sarkar. 2009. Na-
turalization of English words in modern Bengali: a cor-
pus-based empirical study. Language  Forum. 35(2): 
127-142. 

70



deHaan, P. 1984. Problem-oriented tagging of English cor-
pus data. In: Aarts, J. and W. Meijs (eds.) Corpus Lin-
guistics, Amsterdam: Rodopi, pp, 123-139. 

DeRose, S. J. 1988. Grammatical category disambiguation 
by statistical optimization. Computational Linguistics. 
14(1): 31-39. 

Francis, W. N. 1980. A tagged corpus: problems and pros-
pects. In: Greenbaum, S., G. Leech and J. Svartvik 
(eds.) Studies in English Linguistics: In Honour of Ran-
dolph Quirk, London: Longman. Pp. 192-209. 

Garside, R. 1987. The CLAWS word-tagging system. In: 
Garside, R., G. Leech and G. Sampson (eds.) The Com-
putational Analysis of English: a corpus-based ap-
proach, London: Longman. Pp. 30-41. 

Greene, B. and G. Rubin. 1971. Automatic Grammatical 
Tagging of English. Technical Report, Department of 
Linguistics, Brown University, RI. 

Grice, M., G. Leech, M. Weisser, and A. Wilson. 2000. 
Representation and annotation of dialogue. In: Dafydd, 
G., I. Mertins and R. K. Moore (eds.) Handbook of Mul-
timodal and Spoken Dialogue Systems. Resources, Ter-
minology and Product Evaluation. Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers. 

Halliday, MAK and Hasan, R. 1976. Cohesion in English. 
London: Longman.  

Hardie, A. 2003. Developing a tagset for automated part-of-
speech tagging in Urdu. In: Archer, D., P. Rayson, A. 
Wilson, and T. McEnery (eds.) Proceedings of the Cor-
pus Linguistics 2003 Conference. UCREL Technical 
Papers Volume 16. Department of Linguistics, Lancas-
ter University.   

Hardie, A. 2005. Automated part-of-speech analysis of Ur-
du: conceptual and technical issues. In: Yadava, Y., G. 
Bhattarai, R.R. Lohani, B. Prasain and K. Parajuli (eds.) 
Contemporary issues in Nepalese linguistics. Kathman-
du: Linguistic Society of Nepal. 

Hardie, A., V. Koller, P. Rayson, and E. Semino. 2007. 
Exploiting a semantic annotation tool for metaphor 
analysis. Proceedings of the Corpus Linguistics 2007 
conference. Lancaster University, UK. 

Hunston, S.  2002. Corpora in Applied Linguistics. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Jha, G.N. P. Nainwani, E. Banerjee, S. Kaushik. 2011. Is-
sues in annotating less resourced languages - the case of 
Hindi from Indian Languages Corpora Initiative. Pro-
ceedings of 5th LTC, Poznan, Poland, Nov 25-27, 2011. 

Johansson, S. 1995. The encoding of spoken texts, Comput-
ers and the Humanities, 29(1): 149-158. 

Kupiec, J. 1992. Robust part-of-speech tagging using a hid-
den Markov model. Computer Speech and Language. 
6(1): 3-15. 

Leech, G. & S. Fligelstone. 1992. Computers and corpora 
analysis. In: Butler, C.S. (ed.) Computers and Written 
Texts, Oxford: Blackwell. Pp. 115-140. 

Leech, G. 1993. Corpus annotation schemes, Literary and 
Linguistic Computing, 8(4): 275-281. 

Leech, G. 2005. Adding linguistic annotation. In:  Wynne, 
M. (ed.) Developing Linguistic Corpora: a Guide to 
Good Practice. Oxford: Oxbrow Books. Pp. 17-29 

Leech, G. and Wilson, A. 1999. Guidelines and standards 
for tagging. In: Halteren, H.V. (Ed.) Syntactic Word 
Class Tagging. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Pp. 55-80. 

Löfberg, L., D. Archer, S. Piao, P. Rayson, A.M. McEnery, 
K. Varantola and J. P. Juntunen. 2003. Porting an Eng-
lish semantic tagger to the Finnish language. In: Archer, 
D., P. Rayson, A. Wilson and T. McEnery (Eds.) Pro-
ceedings of the Corpus Linguistics 2003 Conference. 

UCREL technical paper number 16. UCREL, Lancaster 
University. Pp. 457-464.   

Löfberg, L., J. P. Juntunen, A. Nykanen, K. Varantola, P. 
Rayson, and D. Archer. 2004. Using a semantic tagger 
as dictionary search tool. In: Williams, G. and S. Ves-
sier (eds.) Proceedings of the 11th EURALEX (European 
Association for Lexicography) International Congress 
(Euralex 2004), Lorient, France, 6-10 July 2004. Un-
iversité de Bretagne Sud. Volume I. Pp. 127-134.   

Löfberg, L., S. Piao, P. Rayson, J. P. Juntunen, A. Nykänen, 
and K. Varantola. 2005. A semantic tagger for the Fin-
nish language. Proceedings of the Corpus Linguistics 
2005 Conference, July 14-17, Birmingham, UK.  

McEnery, A.M. 2003. Corpus Linguistics. In: Mitkov, R. 
(ed.) The Oxford Handbook of Computational Linguis-
tics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 448-463. 

O’Donnell, M.B. 1999. The use of annotated corpora for 
New Testament discourse analysis: a survey of current 
practice and future prospects. In: Porter, S. E. and J. T. 
Reed (eds.) Discourse Analysis and the New Testament: 
Results and Applications. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic 
Press. Pp. 71-117. 

Piao, S., D. Archer, O. Mudraya, P. Rayson, R. Garside, 
A.M. McEnery and A. Wilson. 2006. A large semantic 
lexicon for corpus annotation. Proceedings of the Cor-
pus Linguistics 2005 Conference, July 14-17, Birming-
ham, UK. 

Piao, S., Rayson, P., Archer D. and A. M. McEnery. 2005. 
Comparing and combining a semantic tagger and a sta-
tistical tool for MWE extraction, Journal of Computer 
Speech and Language.  19(4): 378-397. 

Rayson, P., D. Archer, A. Baron and N. Smith, 2006. Tag-
ging historical corpora – the problem of spelling varia-
tion. Proceedings of Digital Historical Corpora, Dags-
tuhl-Seminar 06491, International Conference and Re-
search Center for Computer Science, Schloss Dagstuhl, 
Wadern, Germany, December 3rd-8th 2006.   

Rissanen, M. 1989. Three problems connected with the use 
of diachronic corpora, International Computer Archive 
of Modern English Journal, 13(1): 16-19.  

Sarkar, P. and G. Basu. 1994. Bhasa Jijnasa (Language 
Queries). Kolkata: Vidyasagar Pustak Mandir. 

Sen, S. 1992. Bhashar Itivrittva (History of Language). 
Kolkata: Ananda Publishers. 

Shaw, R. 1999. Sadharan Bhasabijnan O Adhunik Bangla 
Bhasa (General Linguistics and Modern Bengali Lan-
guage). Kolkata: Pustak Bipani. 

Sinclair, J. M. 1994. Spoken language: phonetic- phonemic 
and prosodic annotation. In: Calzolari, N., M. Baker, 
and P.G. Kruyt (Eds.) Towards a Network of European 
Reference Corpora. Pisa: Giardini. Pp. 129-132. 

Smith, N., S. Hoffmann and P. Rayson. 2007. Corpus tools 
and methods today and tomorrow: Incorporating user-
defined annotations. Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 
2007, July 27-30, University of Birmingham, UK. 

Smith, N.I. and A.M. McEnery. 2000. Inducing part-of-
speech tagged lexicons from large corpora. In: Mitkov, 
R. and N. Nikolov (eds.) Recent Advances in Natural 
Language Processing 2, Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Pp. 21-30. 

Sperberg-McQueen, C.M. and L. Burnard (eds.) 1994. 
Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Inter-
change, Chicago and Oxford: ACH, ALLC, and AC. 

Stenström, A-B. 1984. Discourse tags. In: Aarts, J. and W. 
Meijs (eds.) Corpus Linguistics: Recent Developments 
in the use of Computer Corpora in English Language 
Research. Amsterdam: Rodopi. Pp, 65-81. 

71


