








































Cross-linguistic annotation of modality: a data-driven hierarchical model

Malvina Nissim
University of Bologna

Paola Pietrandrea
Lattice-CNRS, France

Andrea Sansò
University of Insubria

Caterina Mauri
University of Pavia

Abstract

We present an annotation model of modal-
ity which is (i) cross-linguistic, relying on
a wide, strongly typologically motivated ap-
proach, and (ii) hierarchical and layered, ac-
counting for both factuality and speaker’s
attitude, while modelling these two aspects
through separate annotation schemes. Modal-
ity is defined through cross-linguistic cate-
gories, but the classification of actual lin-
guistic expressions is language-specific. This
makes our annotation model a powerful tool
for investigating linguistic diversity in the field
of modality on the basis of real language data,
being thus also useful from the perspective of
machine translation systems.

1 Introduction and Background

A text cannot be simply regarded as a sequence of
representations of State of Affairs (SoAs) occurring
(or having occurred) in the actual world. Texts may
comprise representations of counterfactual or non
factual SoAs, as well as a number of expressions en-
coding the stance the writer/speaker might be taking
on a SoA, implying different attitudes, possibly re-
lying on external sources of information. These as-
pects fall under the more general label of modality.

The automatic interpretation of modality can be
seen as two tasks: (i) identifying the representations
that are not put forward as factual and (ii) identify-
ing the sentiments or opinions speakers may have to-
wards their representations. These two tasks, which
we call factuality mining and speaker’s attitude min-
ing, respectively, are two independent, albeit often
related, semantic and linguistic dimensions.

Since the first step towards developing systems
which deal with modality automatically is the cre-
ation of appropriate, annotated resources, the last
few years have witnessed the development of an-
notation schemes and annotated corpora for differ-
ent aspects of modality in different languages (Mc-
Shane et al. (2004); Wiebe et al. (2005); Szarvas
et al. (2008); Sauri and Pustejovsky (2009); Hen-
drickx et al. (2012); Baker et al. (2012)).

While important contributions, these remain
mainly separate efforts. And while there have
been efforts towards finding a common avenue
for modality annotation, such as the CoNLL-2010
Shared Task, ACL thematic workshops and a spe-
cial issue of Computational Linguistics (Morante
and Sporleder (2012)), the computational linguis-
tics community is still far from having developed
working, shared standards for converting modality-
related issues into annotation categories.

Linguistic theory, and especially linguistic typol-
ogy, has already gone a long way in the study of
modality across languages. However, this very as-
pect of cross-linguality has been overlooked in de-
vising annotation schemes. Instead, we believe that
working in a multilingual environment could ease
the annotation, and at the same time make it more se-
mantically meaningful, by keeping the layer of func-
tional categories distinct from their actual linguistic
realisations. Indeed, modality can be modelled more
elegantly and efficiently starting from a functional,
higher, level, while languages encode with their own
means the specified concepts and categories.

Therefore, we promote an annotation model of
modality which is (i) cross-linguistic, relying on

7



a wide, strongly typologically motivated approach,
(ii) adaptable, capable of accounting for the linguis-
tic realisation of modality in each single language
under consideration; and (iii) hierarchical and lay-
ered, accounting for both factuality and speaker’s
attitude, while modelling these two aspects through
separate annotation schemes. Within this frame,
the issue of annotation units, linguistically, becomes
crucial, and we claim that such a two-layered frame-
work provides the best setting for dealing with it.

2 Annotating Modality

In spite of the large amount of solid work on modal-
ity in theoretical linguistics and linguistic typology,
and in spite of the various more NLP-oriented anno-
tation schemes that are flourishing in the last years,
there are as yet no shared standards for modality an-
notation. This is extreme to the point that Vincze
et al. (2010) have observed, through a very detailed
analysis and classification of problematic issues, that
the same biomedical data was annotated in two dif-
ferent projects yielding minimal overlap, both se-
mantically and syntactically.

A main issue is that there is no actual consen-
sus on the very notion of modality to be translated
into annotation categories. While it is factuality the
key notion in Sauri and Pustejovsky (2009)’s Fact-
Bank, for instance, it is instead the speaker’s attitude
that is addressed in other recent annotation exercises
(Nirenburg and McShane (2008); Hendrickx et al.
(2012); Baker et al. (2012)).

Also not uniform across different projects is the
actual annotation procedure, in terms of which
functional categories must be annotated in text. It
is quite common to consider the trigger, the scope,
and the source (or author) as relevant categories, but
not all of them translate into actual annotation. For
example, in (Baker et al. (2010)), all three of them
are signalled to the annotators in text, but it is only
the targets which are to receive an annotation value.

And crucially, there are wide differences, and of-
ten little clarity, in terms of which linguistic units
should be annotated. It has been shown in typo-
logical and constructional studies on modality that
modal triggers may vary in nature and complex-
ity (morphemes, verbs, adverbs, complex construc-
tions, etc.) and that the scope of a modal marker

may vary in extension from a single word to an en-
tire text Masini and Pietrandrea (2010). One ma-
jor problem is that in a few projects the annotators
are not asked to select the annotation units but only
to assign modality values to preselected markables,
thus turning annotation into a classification task. In
their annotation guidelines, Baker et al. (2010) as-
sume that the units to be marked up are already high-
lighted and do not exceed the clause limit (i.e. the
maximum extension is a phrase) and revolve around
a verb, but it isn’t clearly specified how such units
are selected, nor why. Differently, Hendrickx et al.
(2012) let the annotators choose the unit and its ex-
tension, allowing also for cross-sentential markables
to be selected. However, they pre-select data to
be annotated by matching a finite set of modality
trigging verbs, thereby also imposing some degree
of constraint. While pre-selecting annotation units
maximises homogeinity and reduces disagreement
among annotators, it is not clear exactly which units
are to be marked up and whether it is at all an appro-
priate procedure in all cases.

Building on insights coming from linguistic ty-
pology, we will take a stand on these issues and
claim that a cross-linguistic perspective provides the
best framework for devising an annotation model for
modality. We will also claim that the issue of an-
notation units must be addressed, and it becomes
more meaningful and better dealt with within such
a framework, thanks to a division between a func-
tional annotation, where functional categories are
specified and a linguistic annotation where actual
units are selected for annotation, depending on the
language. In Section 5 we will show how we sug-
gest to combine these two different annotations.

3 A two-layered approach

Two related but distinct phenomena are often
lumped together under the label of modality: fac-
tuality and speaker’s attitude.

Factuality A representation can be put forward as
depicting an event actually occurring or having oc-
curred (factual SoAs, 1a), an event having not oc-
curred in the real world (counterfactual SoAs, 1b),
or not grounded in reality (non factual SoAs, 1c):

(1) a. He came

8



b. He did not come
c. She fears he came

As the examples show, the representation as such
does not encode the factuality of the depicted event.
It is only the context that allows for a specification
of this value.

Speaker’s attitude Speaker’s attitude may also
contribute to specify the factuality of a SoAs, but
it does so only incidentally. The main purpose of
the markers of speaker’s attitude is specifying the
stance of the speaker towards his representation,
rather than the factuality status of that representa-
tion. The speaker can express his commitment about
the SoA (epistemic modality), whether expressing
his genuine commitment (commitment) or specify-
ing the evidence he has for his opinion (evidential
epistemic); he can can manifests his will concern-
ing the SoA (deontic modality), whether expressing
a mere wish (volitional deontic) or manipulating the
adressee toward the realisation of the SoA (manipu-
lative deontic); he can express his moral or esthetic
judgment about a SoA or his fear about it (evaluative
modality).

Two orthogonal dimensions Sometimes the ex-
pression of a given speaker’s attitude entails the non
factuality of a representation (2a), but this is not al-
ways the case (2b)

(2) a. I am afraid that he does not misses me
b. It’s scary that he does not misses me

On the other hand the non-factuality of a representa-
tion may be encoded by means other than speaker’s
attitude markers, such as hypothetical subordinating
conjunctions (3a), or alternative constructions (3b):

(3) a. if he misses me, I am happy
b. either he misses me or he doesn’t love me

The association of a given attitude marker within
a given factuality value is not entirely predictable.
Sometimes, even the well-established identification
of a certainty attitude with a factual value, which is
posited as an axiom, for example in FactBank (Sauri
and Pustejovsky, 2012), has to be reconsidered. Let
us examine Example 4, where the non factual pred-
icate “I think” and the certainty adverb “surely” im-
pose respectively a non factual and a certainty value

to the same event “there will come a time in my
veterinary career that I don’t get quite so ridiculous
when confronted with a puppy”

(4) Sometimes I think that surely, eventually, there
will come a time in my veterinary career that I
don’t get quite so ridiculous when confronted with
a puppy.

Many annotation schemes tend to mix these two dis-
tinct notions. This is also the case in FactBank.

We claim that both from a theoretical point of
view and because of the different purposes that
an annotation of factuality and an annotation of
speaker’s attitude may have (factuality mining and
opinion mining respectively) two different levels
of annotation and two different annotation schemes
should be provided for these two semantic dimen-
sions. While this introduces a certain degree of re-
dundancy, it also enhances clarity, flexibility, and
completeness of the annotation, reflecting a theoret-
ically valid distinction.

4 Annotation units

Factuality and speaker’s attitude are often encoded
by plenty of heterogeneous markers, both within a
language and across languages (see also Morante
and Sporleder (2012)). We believe that language-
specific units of analysis should be determined only
after cross-linguistic, functional categories have
been defined. The lack of a functional background
may lead to incomplete annotation schemes, if they
are mainly based on the preliminary recognition of a
set of markers prototypically connected with modal-
ity (such as modal verbs, modal adverbs or modal
tags such as ’I guess’/’I believe’). Indeed, the cross-
linguistic view of modality shows that there are var-
ious encoding strategies that can be overlooked by
adopting a purely “lexical” approach.

Concerning factuality, for example, the non fac-
tual status of an event is determined not only by its
occurence in the scope of a negation or a non factive
predicate, but possibly also by an alternative coordi-
native construction (Mauri (2008)), see (3b) above.

Concerning speaker’s attitude, future forms may
function as epistemic markers with non-futural tem-
poral reference, as exemplified by the English Future
will in (Ex.(5), Nuyts (2006)) and by similar struc-
tures in German and in other Romance languages:

9



(5) Someone’s knocking at the door. That will be John.

Similarly, past forms may be used as non-factual
(specifically, counterfactual) markers (Fleischman
(1995)) not only when they are under the scope of
conditional markers (6a) but also when they are used
in independent clauses (6b):

(6) a. Se lo sapevo venivo (Colloquial Italian) ’If I
knew, I would come’

b. Io ero il principe e tu la principessa (Collo-
quial Italian) ’(Let’s pretend) I’m[past] the
prince and you’re the princess’

Modal particles are another common means for ex-
pressing modality. Though easily identifiable in
texts, modal particles such as German ‘denn’ or En-
glish ‘so’ (Ex. 7a and 7b, De Haan (2006)) are some-
what neglected as triggers in the available annotation
schemes, and this may be in part due to the diffi-
cult classification of their semantic contribution to
the textual chunk containing them:

(7) a. Kommt er denn (German) ’Will he really
come?’/’Will he come after all?’

b. There is so a Santa Claus!

As for the scope of the modal trigger, we claim that
a distinction has to be made between factuality and
speaker’s attitudes. Factuality is a property of an
event: it perfectly makes sense to attribute a factual
status to each eventuality, as in Factbank. Speaker’s
attitude, instead, may apply to more or less extended
spans of texts, ranging from a single word (8a) to a
sequence of sentences (8b) and even to different di-
alogic turns (8c).

(8) a. It’s a simple and (hopefully) nice cross-
platform email chess program.

b. Hopefully he gets another shot and he finds
a way to use this failure to motivate him to
take the next step, to prove that guys like me
completely underestimated him.

c. A: E’ stato in banca? (Italian) Did he go to
the bank? B: credo (Yes, I) think (so)

Current annotation schemes tend to consider the sen-
tence as the domain within which the effects of a
marker signalling the speaker’s attitude are visible.
Instead, we propose therefore not to aprioristically
determine the scope of a trigger but to leave the an-
notator to identify it.

5 Implementation

The annotation model we are currently developing
for both factuality and speaker’s attitude is modular,
language independent, and data-driven. The specific
schemes for the annotation of triggers and markables
are described below.

5.1 Schemes

Tables 1 and 2 show the annotation schemes for the
elements markable and trigger respectively. Mark-
ables are all of the linguistic objects marked for fac-
tuality and all those marked for (speaker’s) attitude.
Triggers are those linguistic expressions that deter-
mine the factuality and attitude readings of the mark-
ables. Working with a functional layer allows us to
use the same categories across languages. Mark-
ables are selected directly by the annotators and
marked with the pre-specified attitude and factual-
ity attributes, while linguistic realisations of trig-
gers are pre-specified in a language-dependent fash-
ion. Cross-language annotations can thus always be
compared at the functional level, even in languages
which code modality through very different linguis-
tic expressions.

Table 1: Annotation categories for the markable

ATTITUDE

no

yes

epistemic committmentevidential

deontic manipulativevolition

valutative
axiological
appreciative
apprehensional

FACTUALITY
factual
non factual
counterfactual

The modal values in Table 1 are organised in a hier-
archical structure, thereby allowing for a more flex-
ible application of the annotation. If the annotator is
uncertain about, say, the manipulative or volitional
value of a markable (it could be the case for cer-
tain optatives, for instance), he can simply tag it as
a deontic. If he cannot decide about the deontic or
epistemic nature of a markable (which is often the
case with possibilities), he can simply tag the mark-

10



Table 2: Annotation categories for the trigger, with examples of linguistic expressions which can be used in Romance
(e.g. epistemic future) and Germanic languages (e.g. modal particles).

MORPHOLOGICAL

epistemic future
reportive conditional
other marker

LEXICAL

verb
modal verb (which one)
event selecting predicate (ESPs)

noun
adjective

pragmatic marker

adverbial
parenthetical
modal particle
connective
question tag

SYNTACTICAL

hypothetical
alternative
deontic

OTHER

able as a modalized linguistic object. We are confi-
dent that more fine-grained and coherent annotation
can be driven from the annotation of real data, which
should be regarded as an incremental dynamic task.

The left-hand column of Table 2 specifies cate-
gories that hold cross-linguistically. The linguistic
realisations of triggers in the right-hand column are
just examples which hold for some languages but
would not (necessarily) be the same when consider-
ing other languages. Indeed, the annotation of trig-
gers allows for both a general annotation of the syn-
tactic nature of the trigger used (whether it is mor-
phological, lexical or constructional in nature) and
for a more language-specific annotation of the spe-
cific trigger used in a given language. Working this
way has at least two advantages. First, we can com-
pare different means of expressing same modality
across languages. Second, we open the possibility of
finding prototypical, or unmarked, linguistic expres-
sions which serve as triggers for given modalities,
much in the spirit of Croft (1991, 2000). Moreover,
we think that such an approach may lead to interest-
ing results for the automatic translation of modality.

5.2 Procedure and example

In the first stages of our annotation, we adopted the
following procedure:

1. Identification of markables. We worked under
the following assumptions:

• these objects can vary for semantic nature and
syntactic extension;

• the linguistic objects marked for modality and
those marked for factuality do not need coin-
cide

2. Identification of triggers.

3. For each markable we specify:

• its factuality value
• its attitude value
• the factuality trigger
• the attitude trigger

4. For each trigger we specify:

• its syntactic nature: a morphological element,
a lexical element or a syntactic construction

• the language-specific category used as a
marker (for example the epistemic future for
Romance languages, the mirative affix in
Turkish, etc.)

As for the scope of markables, it should be clear
that markables are often nested within each other:
by avoiding a predetermination of the extension and

11



the nature of the markables, we can provide an anno-
tation for each relevant element of our corpus, rang-
ing from the entire text, to an embedded single word.
Each markable is linked to its own trigger, regardless
of the level of embedding of the trigger itself. Tech-
nically, this is done via layers of standoff annotation
for factuality and attitude, which point to markables
and triggers via their id value.

We use Example 9, from the Europarl corpus
(Koehn, 2005), to illustrate our annotation procedure
and schemes:

(9) In this respect, we should heed the words of
von Eieck, and doubtless also those of the
great Italian liberal Bruno Leoni, who warned
precisely against the risks of an abnormal in-
crease in anti-competition policies.

In Example 9 we can identify six markables:

(m1) we should heed [the words of von Eieck and
doubtless also those of the great Italian liberal
Bruno Leoni]

(m2) and doubtless also those of the great Italian lib-
eral Bruno Leoni

(m3) who warned precisely against the risks of [an
abnormal increase in anti-competition policies]

(m4) the risks of [an abnormal increase in anti-
competition policies]

(m5) an abnormal increase [in anti-competition poli-
cies]

(m6) increase [in anti-competition policies]

They are marked up in text and then annotated for
factuality and attitude according to the schemes de-
scribed above in a standoff manner. For the sake of
presentation, we show the annotation of markables
and triggers separately in Figure 1, and the standoff
annotation of attitude and factuality in Figure 2.

6 Conclusion and outlook

In our model we provide two independent annota-
tion schemes for factuality and speaker’s attitude,
thus allowing for higher modularity and flexibility.

One of the main features of our model is the treat-
ment of language specific markers of attitude and

factuality as attributes of the modality type (which
is instead language independent) assigned to each
markable. This representation allows us on the one
hand to separate the functional and the formal infor-
mation, and on the other hand to specify how these
are related to each other. This makes the proposed
annotation scheme a powerful tool for investigating
linguistic diversity in the field of modality on the ba-
sis of real language data, being thus also useful from
the perspective of machine translation systems.

By avoiding a predetermination of the extension
of markables and triggers, we can both provide an
annotation for each relevant element of our corpus
and account for the complex geometry of markables
and triggers, which are often nested within each
other. We believe that such an approach should im-
prove the calculus of the percolation of modality
along dependency trees and discourse relation struc-
tures.

The annotation schemes are being tested through
manual annotation performed by expert annotators
using existing tools such as GATE (Cunningham et
al., 2011), MMAX (Müller and Strube, 2006), and
BRAT (Stenetorp et al., 2012). Through annotation
exercises and customisation we are currently explor-
ing which might best suit our purposes. Intermediate
evaluation of inter-annotator agreement is useful to
identify inconsistencies in the scheme, and only af-
ter this first phase, the annotation will proceed on a
larger scale. We are also considering existing col-
laborative platforms to perform distributed annota-
tion over the web, so as to optimise the contribution
of native speakers.

Content-wise, we plan to enrich our model in at
least two ways: (1) by providing a coherent model
for the annotation of the strength of modality val-
ues (certain, probable, impossible; necessary, pro-
hibited, impossible, etc.); (2) by specifying for each
modal attitude, the source of the attitude. Interanno-
tator agreement will also be calculated to assess the
validity of the scheme.

Concerning data, we are currently using the Eu-
roparl’s parallel corpus (Koehn (2005)), but we also
aim at including other comparable corpora to max-
imise linguistic diversity (languages outside Eu-
rope will be included) and register variation (mainly
through the inclusion of spoken corpora).

12



In this respect , <markable id="m1">we should heed the words of von
Eieck, <markable id="m2">and doubtless also those of the great Italian
liberal Bruno Leoni</markable></markable> , <markable id="m3">who
warned precisely against <markable id="m4">the risks of <markable
id="m5">an abnormal <markable id="m6">increase in anti-competition
policies </markable></markable></markable></markable> .

In this respect , we <trigger id="t1" type="lexical" subtype="verb"

expr="modal verb"> should</trigger> heed the words of von Eieck, and

<trigger id="t2" type="lexical" subtype="pragmatic marker" expr="adverb">

doubtless</trigger> also those of the great Italian liberal Bruno

Leoni , <trigger id="t3" type="syntactical" subtype="relative clause"

expr="who+V">who <trigger id="t4" type="lexical" subtype="verb"

expr="event selecting predicate">warned</trigger> precisely against the

<trigger id="t5" type="lexical" subtype="noun">risks</trigger></trigger>

of an <trigger id="t6" type="lexical" subtype="adjective">abnormal

</trigger> increase in anti-competition policies .

Figure 1: Markable and trigger annotation of Example 9.

<annotation name="factuality">
<factuality ref="m1" value="nonfactual" trigger="t1"/>
<factuality ref="m3" value="factual" trigger="t3"/>
<factuality ref="m4" value="factual" trigger="t4"/>
<factuality ref="m5" value="nonfactual" trigger="t5"/>
</annotation>

<annotation name="attitude">
<attitude ref="m1" value="deontic" type="manipulative" trigger="t1"/>
<attitude ref="m2" value="epistemic" type="commitment" trigger="t2"/>
<attitude ref="m4" value="deontic" type="manipulative" trigger="t4"/>
<attitude ref="m6" value="valutative" type="apprehensional" trigger="t6"/>
</annotation>

Figure 2: Factuality and Attitude annotation for markables of Example 9. Values for pointers are those shown in the
annotation in Figure 1.

13



References
Baker, K. et al. (2010). SIMT SCALE 2009 - Modality

Annotation Guidelines, Technical Report. Johns Hop-
kins, Baltimore.

Baker, K., B. Dorr, M. Bloodgood, C. Callison-Burch,
N. Filardo, C. Piatko, L. Levin, and S. Miller
(2012). Use of modality and negation in semantically-
informed syntactic MT. Computational Linguistics 38.

Croft, W. (1991). Syntactic Categories and Grammatical
Relations: The Cognitive Organization of Information.
University of Chicago Press.

Croft, W. (2000). Parts of speech as language universals
and as language particular categories. In P. Vogel and
B. B. Comrie (Eds.), Approaches to the Typology of
Word Classes, pp. 65–102. Berlin/New York: Mouton
de Gruyter.

H. Cunningham et al. 2011. Text Processing with GATE
(Version 6).

De Haan, F. (2006). Typological approaches to modality.
In W. Frawley (Ed.), The expression of modality, pp.
27–69. Mouton de Gruyter.

Fleischman, S. (1995). Imperfective and irrealis. In J. L.
Bybee and S. Fleischman (Eds.), Modality in discourse
and grammar, pp. 519–551. John Benjamins.

Hendrickx, I., A. Mendes, and S. Mencarelli (2012).
Modality in text: a proposal for corpus annotation. In
Proc. of LREC’12.

Koehn, P. (2005). Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for Sta-
tistical Machine Translation. In Conference Proceed-
ings: the tenth Machine Translation Summit, Phuket,
Thailand, pp. 79–86. AAMT.

Masini F. and Pietrandrea P. (2010). Magari. Cognitive
Linguistics 21(1).

Mauri, C. (2008). The irreality of alternatives. Studies in
Language.

McShane, M., S. Nirenburg, and R. Zacharski (2004).
Mood and modality: out of theory and into the fray.
Nat. Lang. Eng. 10(1), 57–89.

Morante, R. and C. Sporleder (2012). Modality and nega-
tion: An introduction to the special issue. Computa-
tional Linguistics 38(2).

Christoph Müller and Michael Strube. 2006. Multi-
level annotation of linguistic data with MMAX2. In
S. Braun, K. Kohn, and J. Mukherjee, eds, Corpus
Technology and Language Pedagogy: New Resources,
New Tools, New Methods, pages 197–214. Peter Lang,
Frankfurt a.M., Germany.

Nirenburg, S. and M. McShane (2008). Annotating
modality. Tech. report, University of Maryland.

Nuyts, J. (2006). Modality: Overview and linguistic is-
sues. In W. Frawley (Ed.), The expression of modality,
pp. 1–26. Mouton de Gruyter.

Sauri, R. and J. Pustejovsky (2009). Factbank: a corpus
annotated with event factuality. Language Resources
and Evaluation 43(3), 227–268.

Roser Sauri and James Pustejovsky. 2012. Are you sure
that this happened? Assessing the factuality degree of
events in text. Computational Linguistics, 38(2):261–
299.

P. Stenetorp, S. Pyysalo, G. Topić, T. Ohta, S. Ananiadou,
and J. Tsujii. 2012. BRAT: a web-based tool for NLP-
assisted text annotation. In Proceedings of the Demon-
strations at EACL’12, 102–107, Avignon, France.

Szarvas, G., V. Vincze, R. Farkas, and J. Csirik (2008).
The bioscope corpus: annotation for negation, uncer-
tainty and their scope in biomedical texts. In Proc of
BioNLP ’08, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, pp. 38–45.

Vincze, V., G. Szarvas, G. Móra, T. Ohta, and R. Farkas
(2010). Linguistic scope-based and biological event-
based speculation and negation annotations in the ge-
nia event and bioscope corpora. In N. Collier et al.
(Eds.), Proc of the Fourth Int. Symp. for Semantic Min-
ing in Biomedicine, Cambridge, UK.

Wiebe, J., T. Wilson, and C. Cardie (2005). Annotat-
ing expressions of opinions and emotions in language.
Language Resources and Evaluation 39, 165–210.

14


