










































BioNLP Shared Task 2013: Supporting Resources


Proceedings of the BioNLP Shared Task 2013 Workshop, pages 99–103,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

BioNLP Shared Task 2013: Supporting Resources

Pontus Stenetorp 1 Wiktoria Golik 2 Thierry Hamon 3
Donald C. Comeau 4 Rezarta Islamaj Doğan 4 Haibin Liu 4 W. John Wilbur 4

1 National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
2 French National Institute for Agricultural Research (INRA), Jouy-en-Josas, France

3 University Paris 13, Paris, France
4 National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,

National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
pontus@nii.ac.jp wiktoria.golik@jouy.inra.fr thierry.hamon@univ-paris13.fr

{comeau,islamaj,liuh11,wilbur}@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

Abstract

This paper describes the technical con-
tribution of the supporting resources pro-
vided for the BioNLP Shared Task 2013.
Following the tradition of the previous
two BioNLP Shared Task events, the task
organisers and several external groups
sought to make system development easier
for the task participants by providing auto-
matically generated analyses using a vari-
ety of automated tools. Providing analy-
ses created by different tools that address
the same task also enables extrinsic evalu-
ation of the tools through the evaluation of
their contributions to the event extraction
task. Such evaluation can improve under-
standing of the applicability and benefits
of specific tools and representations. The
supporting resources described in this pa-
per will continue to be publicly available
from the shared task homepage
http://2013.bionlp-st.org/

1 Introduction

The BioNLP Shared Task (ST), first organised in
2009, is an ongoing series of events focusing on
novel challenges in biomedical domain informa-
tion extraction. In the first BioNLP ST, the or-
ganisers provided the participants with automat-
ically generated syntactic analyses from a variety
of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools (Kim
et al., 2009) and similar syntactic analyses have
since then been a key component of the best per-
forming systems participating in the shared tasks.
This initial work was followed up by a similar ef-
fort in the second event in the series (Kim et al.,
2011), extended by the inclusion of software tools
and contributions from the broader BioNLP com-

munity in addition to task organisers (Stenetorp et
al., 2011).

Although no formal study was carried out to es-
timate the extent to which the participants utilised
the supporting resources in these previous events,
we note that six participating groups mention us-
ing the supporting resources in published descrip-
tions of their methods (Emadzadeh et al., 2011;
McClosky et al., 2011; McGrath et al., 2011;
Nguyen and Tsuruoka, 2011; Björne et al., 2012;
Vlachos and Craven, 2012). These resources have
been available also after the original tasks, and
several subsequent studies have also built on the
resources. Van Landeghem et al. (2012) applied a
visualisation tool that was made available as a part
of the supporting resources, Vlachos (2012) em-
ployed the syntactic parses in a follow-up study
on event extraction, Van Landeghem et al. (2013)
used the parsing pipeline created to produce the
syntactic analyses, and Stenetorp et al. (2012) pre-
sented a study of the compatibility of two different
representations for negation and speculation anno-
tation included in the data.

These research contributions and the overall
positive reception of the supporting resources
prompted us to continue to provide supporting re-
sources for the BioNLP Shared Task 2013. This
paper presents the details of this technical contri-
bution.

2 Organisation

Following the practice established in the
BioNLP ST 2011, the organisers issued an
open call for supporting resources, welcoming
contributions relevant to the task from all authors
of NLP tools. In the call it was mentioned that
points such as availability for research purposes,
support for well-established formats and access

99



Name Annotations Availability

BioC Lemmas and syntactic constituents Source
BioYaTeA Terms, lemmas, part-of-speech and syntactic constituencies Source
Cocoa Entities Web API

Table 1: Summary of tools/analyses provided by external groups.

to technical documentation would considered
favourable (but not required) and each supporting
resource provider was asked to write a brief
description of their tools and how they could
potentially be applied to aid other systems in the
event extraction task. This call was answered
by three research groups that offered to provide
a variety of semantic and syntactic analyses.
These analyses were provided to the shared
task participants along with additional syntactic
analyses created by the organisers.

However, some of the supporting resource
providers were also participants in the main event
extraction tasks, and giving them advance access
to the annotated texts for the purpose of creating
the contributed analyses could have given those
groups an advantage over others. To address this
issue, the texts were made publicly available one
week prior to the release of the annotations for
each set of texts. During this week, the supporting
analysis providers annotated the texts using their
automated tools and then handed the analyses to
the shared task organisers, who made them avail-
able to the task participants via the shared task
homepage.

3 Analyses by External Groups

This section describes the tools that were applied
to create supporting resources by the three exter-
nal groups. These contributions are summarised in
Table 1.

BioC Don Comeau, Rezarta Islamaj, Haibin
Liu and John Wilbur of the National Center for
Biotechnology Information provided the output of
the shallow parser MedPost (Smith et al., 2004)
and the BioLemmatizer tool (Liu et al., 2012),
supplied in the BioC XML format1 for annota-
tion interchange (Comeau et al., 2013). The BioC
format address the problem of interoperability be-
tween different tools and platforms by providing a
unified format for use by various tools. Both Med-
Post and BioLemmatizer are specifically designed

1http://bioc.sourceforge.net/

for biomedical texts. The former annotates parts-
of-speech and performs sentence splitting and to-
kenisation, while the latter performs lemmatisa-
tion. In order to make it easier for participants
to get started with the BioC XML format, the
providers also supplied example code for parsing
the format in both the Java and C++ programming
languages.

BioYaTeA Wiktoria Golik of the French Na-
tional Institute for Agricultural Research (INRA)
and Thierry Hamon of University Paris 13 pro-
vided analyses created by BioYaTeA2 (Golik et
al., 2013). BioYaTeA is a modified version of the
YaTeA term extraction tool (Aubin and Hamon,
2006) adapted to the biomedical domain. Working
on a noun-phrase level, BioYaTeA provides anno-
tations such as lemmas, parts-of-speech, and con-
stituent analysis. The output formats used were a
simple tabular format as well as BioYaTeA-XML,
an XML representation specific to the tool.

Cocoa S. V. Ramanan of RelAgent Private Ltd
provided the output of the Compact cover anno-
tator (Cocoa) for biological noun phrases.3 Co-
coa provides noun phrase-level entity annotations
for over 20 different semantic categories such as
macromolecules, chemicals, proteins and organ-
isms. These annotations were made available for
the annotated texts for the shared task along with
the opportunity for the participants to use the Co-
coa web API to annotate any text they may con-
sider beneficial for their system. The data format
used by Cocoa is a subset of the standoff format
used for the shared task entity annotations, and it
should thus be easy to integrate into existing event
extraction systems.

4 Analyses by Task Organisers

This section describes the syntactic parsers ap-
plied by the task organisers and the pre-processing

2http://search.cpan.org/˜bibliome/
Lingua-BioYaTeA/

3http://npjoint.com/

100



Name Model Availability

Enju Biomedical Binary
Stanford Combination Binary, Source
McCCJ Biomedical Source

Table 2: Parsers used for the syntactic analyses.

and format conversions applied to their output.
The applied parsers are listed in Table 2.

4.1 Syntactic Parsers

Enju Enju (Miyao and Tsujii, 2008) is a deep
parser based on the Head-Driven Phrase Struc-
ture Grammar (HPSG) formalism. Enju analyses
its input in terms of phrase structure trees with
predicate-argument structure links, represented in
a specialised XML-format. To make the analyses
of the parser more accessible to participants, we
converted its output into the Penn Treebank (PTB)
format using tools included with the parser. The
use of the PTB format also allow for its output to
be exchanged freely for that of the other two syn-
tactic parsers and facilitates further conversions
into dependency representations.

McCCJ The BLLIP Parser (Charniak and John-
son, 2005), also variously known as the Charniak
parser, the Charniak-Johnson parser, or the Brown
reranking parser, has been applied in numerous
biomedical domain NLP efforts, frequently using
the self-trained biomedical model of McClosky
(2010) (i.e. the McClosky-Charniak-Johnson or
McCCJ parser). The BLLIP Parser is a con-
stituency (phrase structure) parser and the applied
model produces PTB analyses as its native out-
put. These analyses were made available to par-
ticipants without modification.

Stanford The Stanford Parser (Klein and Man-
ning, 2002) is a widely used publicly available
syntactic parser. As for the Enju and BLLIP
parsers, a model trained on a dataset incorporating
biomedical domain annotations is available also
for the Stanford parser. Like the BLLIP parser,
the Stanford parser is constituency-based and pro-
duces PTB analyses, which were provided to task
participants. The Stanford tools additionally in-
corporate methods for automatic conversion from
this format to other representations, discussed fur-
ther below.

4.2 Pre-processing and Conversions

To create the syntactic analyses from the Enju,
BLLIP and Stanford Parser systems, we first ap-
plied a uniform set of pre-processing steps in order
to normalise over differences in e.g. tokenisation
and thus ensure that the task participants can eas-
ily swap the output of one system for another. This
pre-processing was identical to that applied in the
BioNLP 2011 Shared Task, and included sentence
splitting of the annotated texts using the Genia
Sentence Splitter,4 the application of a set of post-
processing heuristics to correct frequently occur-
ring sentence splitting errors, and Genia Treebank-
like tokenisation (Tateisi et al., 2004) using a to-
kenisation script created by the shared task organ-
isers. 5

Since several studies have indicated that repre-
sentations of syntax and aspects of syntactic de-
pendency formalism differ in their applicability to
support information extraction tasks (Buyko and
Hahn, 2010; Miwa et al., 2010; Quirk et al., 2011),
we further converted the output of each of the
parsers from the PTB representation into three
other representations: CoNNL-X, Stanford De-
pendencies and Stanford Collapsed Dependencies.
For the CoNLL-X format we employed the con-
version tool of Johansson and Nugues (2007), and
for the two Stanford Dependency variants we used
the converter provided with the Stanford CoreNLP
tools (de Marneffe et al., 2006). These analyses
were provided to participants in the output for-
mats created by the respective tools, i.e. the TAB-
separated column-oriented format CoNLL and the
custom text-based format of the Stanford Depen-
dencies.

5 Results and Discussion

Just like in previous years the supporting resources
were well-received by the shared task participants
and as many as five participating teams mentioned
utilising the supporting resources in their initial
submissions (at the time of writing, the camera-
ready versions were not yet available). This level
of usage of the supporting resources by the partici-
pants is thus comparable to what was observed for
the 2011 shared task.

Following in the tradition of the 2011 support-

4https://github.com/ninjin/geniass
5https://github.com/ninjin/bionlp_

st_2013_supporting/blob/master/tls/
GTB-tokenize.pl

101



ing resources, to aim for reproducibility, the pro-
cessing pipeline containing pre/post-processing
and conversion scripts for all the syntactic parses
has been made publicly available under an open
licence.6 The repository containing the pipeline
also contains detailed instructions on how to re-
produce the output and how it can potentially be
applied to other texts.

Given the experience of the organisers in
analysing medium-sized corpora with a variety of
syntactic parsers, many applied repeatedly over
several years, we are also happy to report that the
robustness of several publicly available parsers has
recently improved noticeably. Random crashes,
corrupt outputs and similar failures appear to be
transitioning from being expected to rare occur-
rences.

In this paper, we have introduced the supporting
resources provided for the BioNLP 2013 Shared
Task by the task organisers and external groups.
These resources included both syntactic and se-
mantic annotations and were provided to allow the
participants to focus on the various novel chal-
lenges of constructing event extraction systems by
minimizing the need for each group to separately
perform standard processing steps such as syntac-
tic analysis.

Acknowledgements

We would like to give special thanks to Richard
Johansson for providing and allowing us to dis-
tribute an improved and updated version of his for-
mat conversion tool.7 We would also like to ex-
press our appreciation to the broader NLP com-
munity for their continued efforts to improve the
availability of both code and data, thus enabling
other researchers to stand on the shoulders of gi-
ants.

This work was partially supported by the
Quaero programme funded by OSEO (the French
agency for innovation). The research of Donald
C. Comeau, Rezarta Islamaj Doğan, Haibin Liu
and W. John Wilbur was supported by the Intra-
mural Research Program of the National Institutes
of Health (NIH), National Library of Medicine
(NLM).

6https://github.com/ninjin/bionlp_st_
2013_supporting

7https://github.com/ninjin/
pennconverter

References
Sophie Aubin and Thierry Hamon. 2006. Improving

term extraction with terminological resources. In
Advances in Natural Language Processing, pages
380–387. Springer.

Jari Björne, Filip Ginter, and Tapio Salakoski. 2012.
University of Turku in the BioNLP’11 Shared Task.
BMC Bioinformatics, 13(Suppl 11):S4.

Ekaterina Buyko and Udo Hahn. 2010. Evaluating
the Impact of Alternative Dependency Graph Encod-
ings on Solving Event Extraction Tasks. In Proceed-
ings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 982–992,
Cambridge, MA, October.

Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. 2005. Coarse-
to-fine n-best parsing and MaxEnt discriminative
reranking. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 173–180. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Donald C. Comeau, Rezarta Islamaj Doğan, Paolo Ci-
ccarese, Kevin Bretonnel Cohen, Martin Krallinger,
Florian Leitner, Zhiyong Lu, Yifan Peng, Fabio Ri-
naldi, Manabu Torii, Alfonso Valencia, Karin Ver-
spoor, Thomas C. Wiegers, Cathy H. Wu, and
W. John Wilbur. 2013. BioC: A minimalist ap-
proach to interoperability for biomedical text pro-
cessing. submitted.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In
Proceedings of LREC, volume 6, pages 449–454.

Ehsan Emadzadeh, Azadeh Nikfarjam, and Graciela
Gonzalez. 2011. Double layered learning for bio-
logical event extraction from text. In Proceedings
of the BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop, pages
153–154. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Wiktoria Golik, Robert Bossy, Zorana Ratkovic, and
Claire Nédellec. 2013. Improving Term Extraction
with Linguistic Analysis in the Biomedical Domain.
In Special Issue of the journal Research in Comput-
ing Science, Samos, Greece, March. 14th Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and
Computational Linguistics.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2007. Ex-
tended constituent-to-dependency conversion for
English. In Proc. of the 16th Nordic Conference
on Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA), pages
105–112.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Yoshi-
nobu Kano, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2009. Overview
of BioNLP’09 Shared Task on Event Extraction. In
Proceedings of the BioNLP 2009 Workshop Com-
panion Volume for Shared Task, pages 1–9, Boulder,
Colorado, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

102



Jin-Dong Kim, Yue Wang, Toshihisa Takagi, and Aki-
nori Yonezawa. 2011. Overview of Genia Event
Task in BioNLP Shared Task 2011. In Proceedings
of BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop.

Dan Klein and Christopher D Manning. 2002. Fast ex-
act inference with a factored model for natural lan-
guage parsing. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, 15(2003):3–10.

Haibin Liu, Tom Christiansen, William Baumgartner,
and Karin Verspoor. 2012. BioLemmatizer: a
lemmatization tool for morphological processing of
biomedical text. Journal of Biomedical Semantics,
3(1):3.

David McClosky, Mihai Surdeanu, and Christopher D
Manning. 2011. Event Extraction as Dependency
Parsing for BioNLP 2011. In Proceedings of the
BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop, pages 41–45.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

David McClosky. 2010. Any domain parsing: Auto-
matic domain adaptation for natural language pars-
ing. Ph.D. thesis, Brown University.

Liam R McGrath, Kelly Domico, Courtney D Cor-
ley, and Bobbie-Jo Webb-Robertson. 2011. Com-
plex biological event extraction from full text us-
ing signatures of linguistic and semantic features.
In Proceedings of the BioNLP Shared Task 2011
Workshop, pages 130–137. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Makoto Miwa, Sampo Pyysalo, Tadayoshi Hara, and
Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2010. Evaluating Dependency Rep-
resentations for Event Extraction. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 779–787,
Beijing, China, August.

Yusuke Miyao and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2008. Feature for-
est models for probabilistic HPSG parsing. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 34(1):35–80.

Nhung TH Nguyen and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka. 2011.
Extracting bacteria biotopes with semi-supervised
named entity recognition and coreference resolution.
In Proceedings of the BioNLP Shared Task 2011
Workshop, pages 94–101. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Chris Quirk, Pallavi Choudhury, Michael Gamon, and
Lucy Vanderwende. 2011. MSR-NLP Entry in
BioNLP Shared Task 2011. In Proceedings of
BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop, pages 155–
163, Portland, Oregon, USA, June.

Larry Smith, Thomas Rindflesch, and W. John Wilbur.
2004. MedPost: a part-of-speech tagger for bio
medical text. Bioinformatics, 20(14):2320–2321.

Pontus Stenetorp, Goran Topić, Sampo Pyysalo,
Tomoko Ohta, Jin-Dong Kim, and Jun’ichi Tsujii.
2011. BioNLP Shared Task 2011: Supporting Re-
sources. In Proceedings of BioNLP Shared Task

2011 Workshop, pages 112–120, Portland, Oregon,
USA, June.

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta,
Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2012.
Bridging the gap between scope-based and event-
based negation/speculation annotations: a bridge not
too far. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Extra-
Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational
Linguistics, pages 47–56. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Y Tateisi, T Ohta, and J Tsujii. 2004. Annotation of
predicate-argument structure on molecular biology
text. Proceedings of the Workshop on the 1st In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (IJCNLP-04).

Sofie Van Landeghem, Kai Hakala, Samuel Rönnqvist,
Tapio Salakoski, Yves Van de Peer, and Filip Gin-
ter. 2012. Exploring biomolecular literature with
EVEX: connecting genes through events, homology,
and indirect associations. Advances in Bioinformat-
ics, 2012.

Sofie Van Landeghem, Jari Björne, Chih-Hsuan Wei,
Kai Hakala, Sampo Pyysalo, Sophia Ananiadou,
Hung-Yu Kao, Zhiyong Lu, Tapio Salakoski, Yves
Van de Peer, et al. 2013. Large-scale event extrac-
tion from literature with multi-level gene normaliza-
tion. PloS one, 8(4):e55814.

Andreas Vlachos and Mark Craven. 2012. Biomedical
event extraction from abstracts and full papers using
search-based structured prediction. BMC Bioinfor-
matics, 13(Suppl 11):S5.

Andreas Vlachos. 2012. An investigation of imita-
tion learning algorithms for structured prediction. In
Workshop on Reinforcement Learning, page 143.

103


