








































Features of Verb Complements in Co-composition:
A case study of Chinese baking verb using Weibo corpus

Yu-Yun Chang
Graduate Institute of Linguistics,

National Taiwan University
No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd.,

Taipei, Taiwan (R.O.C.) 10617
yuyun.unita@gmail.com

Shu-Kai Hsieh
Graduate Institute of Linguistics,

National Taiwan University
No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd.,

Taipei, Taiwan (R.O.C.) 10617
shukaihsieh@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

In the Generative Lexicon Theory (GLT),
co-composition is one of the generative
devices proposed to explain the cases of
verbal polysemous behavior where more
than one function application is allowed.
The English baking verbs were used as
one of the examples to illustrate how
their complements co-specify the verb
with qualia unification. In this paper,
we begin by exploring the polysemy of
Chinese baking verb, where the first two
senses in Chinese Wordnet (CWN) are
assumed. Features including linguistic
cues and common sense knowledge are in-
volved in the experiment with Weibo cor-
pus and computed with SVM for closer in-
vestigation. From the analysis, it is found
that though there are various cases found
in senses of change of state and creation,
a coarse but systematic approach com-
bined with certain features in disambiguat-
ing CWN senses could be arranged. In ad-
dition, we further observe that the usage
of various instruments cases and classifiers
would be harnessed by underlying back-
ground knowledge to help select an appro-
priate sense based on the context.

Keywords: The generative lexicon, co-
composition, baking verbs

1 Introduction

In Generative Lexicon Theory (GLT), the co-
composition theory in discussing the logical poly-
semy of verbs illustrates that in some verbal mean-
ing alternations, arguments of verbs would shift
the meaning of verb in the compositional inter-
pretation. This poses difficulties for word sense
disambiguation (WSD) task in contextualizing the
underlying sense, i.e., putting semantic weights on

the non-functor elements, to give rise to a deriva-
tive sense.

Firstly, we start with exploring the representa-
tive example of baking verb “bake” used in GLT
regarding co-composition, to see whether two as-
sumed senses, change of state and creation, can
be derived through the proposed generative mech-
anisms in composition with its argument in the
case of Chinese baking verb kao 烤 ‘bake’ with
the Chinese examples kao malingshu 烤馬鈴薯
‘bake a potato’ and kao dangao 烤蛋糕 ‘bake a
cake’.

We choose WordNet to depict the contrast. In
regard to the differences in senses change of state
and creation of the English verb “bake”, the defini-
tion of the verb in WordNet 1, carry diverse glosses
as well in the examples “bake a potato” and “bake
a cake”; however, considering the verb kao 烤
‘bake’ in Chinese WordNet (CWN) 2, both the
Chinese examples kao malingshu ‘bake a potato’
and kao dangao ‘bake a cake’ could be included
into the first CWN gloss “use heat to cook and
make the food edible” (CWN sense 1). Whereas,
it is discovered that the example kao malingshu
‘bake a potato’ could also be applied to the sec-
ondary CWN gloss “use heat to heat the object”
(CWN sense 2). That is to say, in Chinese, al-
though change of state sense would be assigned
to kao malingshu ‘bake a potato’ and creation
sense would be attached to kao dangao ‘bake a
cake’ as in English, both examples would be pri-
mary grouped into CWN sense 1; but there are
situations that kao malingshu ‘bake a potato’ also
occur with CWN sense 2, based on the context.
Therefore, in the above Chinese cases, it seems to
be clear that examples with creation sense would
only be assigned to CWN sense 1; while the con-

1http://wordnetweb.princeton.edu/perl/
webwn

2http://lope.linguistics.ntu.edu.tw/
cwn/



ditions for examples with change of state sense,
to distinguish interpretation differences between
CWN sense 1 and CWN sense 2, need to be fur-
ther investigated.

Nonetheless, there are situations that exam-
ples with creation sense would be assigned to
CWN sense 2 as well. For instance, kao tusi
烤土司 ‘toast a loaf of bread / toast a slice
of toasted bread’ would not only be assigned to
CWN sense 1, but also CWN sense 2, based on
some occasions. Additionally, a sense shifting
would be prompted as well, from creation sense
to change of state sense. Moreover, it is inves-
tigated that cases such as kao dofu 烤豆腐 ‘grill
tofu’ though along with change of state sense, yet
possesses some features from creation sense, and
could merely be specified with CWN sense 2.

Therefore, this paper aims to search out a coarse
but systematic approach with linguistic cues, with
the help of applying the Support Vector Machine
(SVM) computational technique by taking Leidon
Weibo Corpus (van Esch, 2012) 3, to help identify
and analyze what the sets of conditions for change
of state and creation senses are that would lead
to different mappings between CWN sense 1 and
CWN sense 2, by investigating the Chinese bak-
ing verb kao ‘bake’.

2 Co-composition in GLT

Qualia structure (Pustejovsky, 1995), adapted
from the modes of explanation by Aristotle, de-
picts that there are four main essential factors
(constitutive, formal, telic, and agentive) to drive
and capture the interpretation of an object as well
as a relation (Moravcsik, 1975). Although many
models of semantics agree that words have sim-
ple denotations, but there are various perspectives
in the methods of lexical composition. Some
formal models argue that the composition ap-
proaches are truth-value denotation and compu-
tation within logical inferences; while in the per-
spective of GLT, it is the semantic transformations
(including type coercion, selective binding, and
co-composition) of words’ denotations that shift
from one to another to form new meanings. There-
fore, in GLT, the use of qualia structure could be
applied to better specifying a word’s meaning.

3Leidon Weibo Corpus collects messages from China’s
most popular micro-blogging platform, Sina Weibo. The cor-
pus is open-access and can be found here: http://lwc.
daanvanesch.nl/

As mentioned in Pustejovsky (1995), among
the four interpretive levels of qualia structure, the
agentive quale of the lexical item is encoded with
the knowledge of what an object may identify or
refer to and be able to explain an artifact comes
into being. Therefore, it would be an important
manner if something is created in order to distin-
guish natural kinds (e.g. potatoes, carrots and so
on) from artifacts (e.g. cookies, cakes, bread).

In addition, the agentive role of a lexical item
would be represented as an event predicate while
the lexical item is a noun. For example, “potato”
and “cake” could all be event predicates in “bake
a potato” and “bake a cake”; however, the verb
“bake” is polysemous with two meanings: a
sense of change of state and a sense of cre-
ation, as stated in Atkins et al. (1988). Since
this kind of logical polysemy occurs in many
cases, a relation of co-composition is introduced
by Pustejovsky (1995) (originally named as co-
specification (Pustejovsky, 1991)) to capture the
words’ meanings.

Under the notion of co-composition, the verb
“bake” itself is not polysemous but the comple-
ment that follows derives other meanings can be
re-examined, not only through the agentive quale,
but also constitutive role. From the example (51)
provided by Pustejovsky (1995), it is further dis-
covered that though a complement makes refer-
ence to an agentive quale, the constitutive quale
plays an important role to the baking act. That is,
if the material in a constitutive quale of a comple-
ment is an individual as a default argument, the
derived sense from agentive role would be change
of state. On the other hand, when the material
in a constitutive quale of a complement is a mass
of individual components, the selected sense from
agentive role would turn out to be creation.

Therefore, the verb “bake” originally has one
event type but with two argument types in the lexi-
cal structure, it is the complement that chooses one
of the two arguments to govern. When in the case
of “bake a potato”, the agentive role of “potato” is
simply a natural kind and an individual material,
the process only involves state changes with event
type makes no shifting, and thus the sense change
of state is assigned; whereas in “bake a cake”,
“cake” is an artifact created from a mass of com-
ponents, its event type would shift from one to the
other, thus obtain the sense of creation. The kind
of event type shifting in a complement, is what that



makes the verb “bake” to be polysemous, not the
verb itself.

The co-composition operation on VP proposed
by Pustejovsky (1995) includes the following pro-
cess:

1. The governing verb would apply to its com-
plement;

2. The complement would then co-specify the
verb;

3. A new sense of the verb would be derived re-
sulting from an operation called qualia unifi-
cation, where the agentive roles of both the
verb and its complement match with each
other; and the formal quale of the comple-
ment is also the formal role of the entire VP.

Since the process of co-composition will arouse
new senses to the governing verb based on its
complement, it is also worth noting that the the-
matic roles played by the complement of a verb
needs to be taken into consideration. As men-
tioned by many researchers (Tanenhaus et al.,
1989; Jackendoff, 1987; Gentner, 1981), thematic
role knowledge is part of a verb’s meaning and can
be construed as a claim that the concept of a verb is
its relation to the entities participated in the event.
Though numerous thematic taxonomies have been
proposed by linguists, six thematic roles are typi-
cally involved: agent, patient, theme, goal, instru-
ment and location (Cook, 1979; Fillmore, 1968).

In this paper, we are interested in investigating
the verb kao ‘bake’ with its complements in Chi-
nese examples under co-composition theory, and
focus on exploring one of the thematic roles “in-
strument” within context. This study thus aims to
further seek empirically for what the linguistic fea-
tures are in deciding or shifting the CWN senses of
kao ‘bake’ under the notion of change of state and
creation senses. A corpus-based machine learning
approach is taken for the analysis, which is intro-
duced in the following section.

3 Data Analysis using Weibo Corpus

3.1 Data Collection

Since Weibo is the most prevalent Chinese so-
cial communication and microblogging platform,
recent studies in corpus data analysis have taken
Weibo data as corpus, in order to further and bet-
ter investigate the up-to-date language usage. By

taking the Weibo corpus into study, we can not
only freely accessed large amount of timely data
without expensive computing, but also discover
the linguistic cues that best display current lan-
guage usage. Therefore, in this paper, with the
open-sourced weibo corpus, Leiden Weibo Corpus
(van Esch, 2012), freely accessed online, the posts
containing kao ‘bake’ could all be easily retrieved
using R programming language. At present, due
to the efficiency in data processing, convenience
in applying statistical models and powerfulness in
plotting, an amount of 9688 parsed posts involv-
ing the verb kao ‘bake’ have been successfully ex-
tracted for the preparation of following data anal-
ysis.

3.2 Complements, Linguistic Features and
Common Sense Knowledge

By observing the extracted kao ‘bake’ posts, 53
nouns that could be taken as complements of the
verb are randomly chosen, and manually tagged
with one of the two senses based on its comple-
ment role to the verb kao ‘bake’(e.g. 41 nouns
are tagged as change of state sense and the other
12 are tagged as creation sense), as target data for
running SVM approach. Since complements may
trigger VPs to select a change of state or creation
sense, there might be some certain embedded and
underlying information (including linguistic cues
and common sense knowledge) beneath a com-
plement, which causes the complement to select
one of the two senses for an VP. Therefore, by
applying SVM approach with related implicit in-
formation of complements, we may roughly fur-
ther investigate what the information are influ-
encing the decision of senses between change of
state and creation. In addition, via the analy-
sis of SVM results, a more detailed exploration
can be carried out from the observed essential im-
plicit information, in determining CWN sense 1
and CWN sense 2 under change of state and cre-
ation senses.

Hence, a data frame targeted on the comple-
ments with features such as relevant linguistic cues
and common sense knowledge, to learn whether
these features would help deciding change of state
and creation senses, is shown in Figure 1. We
tend to add in as many relative linguistic cues and
shared knowledge as possible, and by using the
characteristics of SVM to help quickly derive a set
of effective features from a pool of various infor-



Figure 1: A data frame with complements and features prepared for applying SVM approach

mation for further observation.

In the data frame, since the collocation of a
word has been taken as an approach in compu-
tational linguistics for presenting its relationships
with a word, the collocations are also involved for
SVM. The span of the collocation is set to three
before the position of the nouns for automatically
extracting and computing, and the first collocation
method in Gries (2009) is applied. Since it is ob-
served in GLT that the sense of a verb would be
influenced by the followed noun, despite the verb
kao ‘bake’, it would be interesting to see whether
there are shared or common interactions between
the complements and other verbs that follows. In
addition, studies of classifiers have shown to be an
important feature in representing a noun and have
been applied to various classifiers to help make
divisions. Therefore, in regard to linguistic fea-
tures adapted in this paper, only the collocations
of each noun with the highest frequency counts
in verbs and classifiers, will be selected. The
16 selected linguistic features (including 9 verbs
and 7 classifiers) are computed and each given
a scaled4 Point-wise Mutual Information (PMI)
value to each noun. Equation is shown in (1).

4The numbers shown in Figure 1, are all scaled by ap-
plying collocation frequencies to Z-score, in order to get the
data weighted for a better investigation. Therefore, the scaled
numbers would have positive and negative values.

PMI =
P (X,Y )

P (X) ∗ P (Y )
(1)

Unlike the 16 linguistic cues that could be re-
trieved easily from the data, the underlying com-
mon sense knowledge is hard to be revealed. Ac-
cordingly, 5 common sense features are manually
analyzed and tagged, which include animacy (an-
imate or inanimate), artifact (an artifact or natural
objects), culinary (needed to be cooked before eat-
ing or not), sweets (could be generally categorized
as sweets or not), and constitutive (whether its de-
fault argument is an individual or a mass).

3.3 Data Training and Testing

In order to see the interactions between the 21 fea-
tures and the 53 nouns, the SVM approach is in-
troduced to investigate whether the features men-
tioned above could possibly provide sufficient in-
formation of a complement to select change of
state or creation sense for the verb, and further-
more, make a further research on finding essential
features from the potential information in helping
disambiguate CWN sense 1 and CWN sense 2.
Therefore, the data in the data frame is randomly
divided into two groups, which 70% of the data is
used for training a model and the rest of the 30%
is for testing. Furthermore, the results of SVM is
presented by involving F-score, see equation (2),
to present a weighted average of the precision and



recall, and the score ranges from 0 (the worst) to 1
(the best).

F = 2 ∗ precision ∗ recall
precision+ recall

(2)

4 Analysis

From SVM approach, the F-score presents 0.67
value for the model. Although the F-score only
shows 67% chance to correctly make the comple-
ment choose the right change of state and creation
senses for the verb kao ‘bake’, some inconsis-
tency could be found within the 5 manually tagged
common sense knowledge features and could be
considered for the further discussion in dividing
CWN sense 1 and CWN sense 2.

• Animacy - For complements that are inani-
mate are all tagged with creation sense; how-
ever, there are some that would be grouped as
change of state sense.

• Sweets - For complements that are not sweets
are all tagged with change of state sense;
however, some would be assigned with cre-
ation sense.

• Culinary - For complements that do not
needed to be cooked before eating, are tagged
with creation sense; however, some would be
fixed with the change of state sense.

• Artifact and Constitutive - It is found that the
tags between artifact and constitutive are con-
sistent. This might lead to the reason that if
an item is an artifact instead of natural ob-
jects, a lot of materials would included for
an artificial process. Therefore, for comple-
ments that are assigned as artifacts, are also
tagged as mass; and vice versa. In addition,
for complements that are tagged as artifact
and mass, are all tagged with creation sense;
however, some would be categorized as car-
rying change of state sense.

As observed from the above features, there are
some complements containing the characteristics
of being a creation sense, but are assigned with the
sense of change of state. Though features change
along with the senses, a typical combination of de-
riving a creation sense based on the complement
could still be found, which including features such
as inanimate, a kind of sweets, not culinary, an ar-
tifact and coming from a mass of materials.

As mentioned in GLT, the constitutive quale of
whether a material is individual or a mass within
a noun, would help identify a sense for a VP.
Thus, as the examples described in Pustejovsky
(1995), when the constitutive role is an individ-
ual, the sense of change of state is chosen; and
when the constitutive role is a mass, the sense of
creation would be assigned. However, in Chinese,
it is found that there are examples that would be
specified as change of state sense when the con-
stitutive role is a mass. More examples and illus-
trations will be presented in the following section,
and a brief process in identifying CWN sense 1
and CWN sense 2 under change of state and cre-
ation senses, are presented in Figure 2.

4.1 Change of state sense

4.1.1 Constitutive role: individual

By applying the constitutive quale, Chinese exam-
ples with constitutive quale identified as an indi-
vidual, would be mapped to CWN sense 1. These
examples observed from the corpus, with the state
changing from raw to cooked, could be roughly
categorized as three groups: meat (e.g. kao niurou
烤牛肉 ‘roast beef’ and kao yangrou烤羊肉 ‘grill
mutton’), seafood (e.g. kao yu烤魚 ‘grill fish’ and
kao longxia 烤龍蝦 ‘grill lobsters’), and vegeta-
bles (e.g. kao malingshu烤馬鈴薯 ‘bake a potato’
and kao xianggu烤香菇 ‘grill mushrooms’).

4.1.2 Constitutive role: mass

For those examples with change of state sense
but possess the constitutive role as a mass, which
is one of the features to be specified as creation
sense, observed from the corpus are kao daofu烤
豆腐 ‘grill tofu’, kao xiangchang 烤香腸 ‘grill
sausages’, kao mianjin 烤麵筋 ‘grill gluten’, kao
regou 烤熱狗 ‘grill hotdogs’, kao jiu 烤酒 ‘heat
liquor’, kao chunjuan 烤春捲 ‘grill spring rolls’,
kao boazi 烤包子 ‘grill steamed buns’, and kao
sanmingzhi烤三明治 ‘grill sandwiches’.

Mostly these examples would only be led
to CWN sense 2, with the state changing from
cold/cool to heated; however, this is not the case
when considering kao xiangchang ‘grill sausages’
and kao regou ‘grill hotdogs’, which could be as-
signed to CWN sense 1 as well.

Taking kao xiangchang ‘grill sausages’ for in-
stance, as presented in example (3):



Complements with the verb kao烤 ‘bake’

Creation
sense

Features:
instruments and sweets

Oven (instrument)

CWN sense 1
Examples:

- kao dankao烤蛋糕 ‘bake a cake’
- kao mianboa烤麵包 ‘bake bread’

Others (instrument)
and non-sweets

CWN sense 2
Examples:

- kao mianboa烤麵包 ‘taost bread’
- kao pisa烤披薩 ‘heat pizzas’

Change of state
sense

Features:
constitutive quale and culinary

Individual (constitutive role)

CWN sense 1
Examples:

- kao malingshu烤馬鈴薯 ‘bake a potato’
- kao niurou烤牛肉 ‘roast beef’

Mass (constitutive role)

Culinary

CWN sense 1
Examples:

- kao xiangchang烤香腸 ‘grill sausages’
- kao regou烤熱狗 ‘grill hotdogs’

Non-culinary

CWN sense 2
Examples:

- kao daofu烤豆腐 ‘grill tofu’
- kao sanmingzhi烤三明治 ‘grill sandwiches’

Figure 2: The process of identifying CWN sense 1 and CWN sense 2 under change of state and creation
senses

(3) 回家
huijia
on the way home

高速路
gaosulu
freeway

上
shang
SHANG

的
de
DE

休息站
xiuxizhan
rest area

開始
kaishi
start

賣
mai
sell

烤
kao
grill

香腸
xiangchang
sausage

和
he
and

烤
kao
grill

肉丸
rouwan
meat ball

了
le
LE

‘On the way home, the rest area beside the
freeway, starts to sell grilled sausages and
meat balls.’

As presented in example (3), though the con-
stitutive role of sausages would be specified
as a mass by containing a lot of ingredients,
it is CWN sense 1 that would be assigned to
rather than CWN sense 2. Such cases could
be re-analyzed and distinguished by the manu-
ally tagged feature: culinary. For cases that are
tagged as culinary, which illustrates “need to be
cooked before eating”, would then be grouped
as CWN sense 1; whereas, those that are tagged
as non-culinary, expressing “edible without be-
ing cooked”, would be specified as CWN sense 2.
Therefore, since kao xiangchang ‘grill sausages’
in example (3) is identified as culinary, it would
be directed to CWN sense 1.

4.2 Creation sense

4.2.1 Using instrument: oven
Considering the examples carrying creation sense:
kao dangao 烤蛋糕 ‘bake a cake’, kao bing-

gan烤餅乾 ‘bake cookies’, kao gaobing烤糕餅
‘bake pastries’, kao tiantianquan烤甜甜圈 ‘bake
donuts’, kao danjuan烤蛋捲 ‘bake egg rolls’, kao
subing 烤酥餅 ‘bake shortcakes’, kao buding 烤
布丁 ‘bake puddings’, kao mianboa烤麵包 ‘bake
bread’, kao shaobing 烤燒餅 ‘bake sesame seed
cakes’, kao tusi 烤土司 ‘bake a loaf of bread’,
kao xiang 烤饟 ‘bake a kind of traditional bread
from north China’, and kao pisa 烤披薩 ‘piz-
zas’, it is investigated that these cases specified
as CWN sense 1 all share the same feature, using
oven as instrument.

One of the example kao dangao ‘bake a cake’ is
used for the following illustration.

(4) 沒
mei
not

注意
zhuyi
notice

看
kan
watching

烤箱,
kaoxiang
oven

蛋糕
dangao
cake

烤
kao
bake

過了頭
guoletou
overtime

‘Not noticing the oven, the cake is
over-baked.’

Therefore, as presented in example (4), it is the
use of instrument kaoxiang 烤箱 ‘oven’ that fre-
quently follows when cases that are tagged as cre-
ation sense.

In addition, the use of oven in a creation sense
among the examples with the verb kao ‘bake’ be-
comes a common sense in shared knowledge. For
example in kao dangao ‘bake a cake’, it may be
the bakery bakers, not anyone else, that would fre-
quently use ‘oven’ to bake a cake. Hence, the



stereotype of using an oven for baking a cake
is then implanted into the mind as background
knowledge. That is to say, even without the instru-
ment ‘oven’ occurred in the context, the act of bak-
ing a cake already possesses the default informa-
tion of instrument ‘oven’, and thus would still be
assumed as carrying the meaning CWN sense 1,
as shown in example (5).

(5) 我們
women
our

的
de
DE

家庭
jiating
family

生活!
shenghuo
life

周末
zhoumo
weekend

烤
kao
bake

蛋糕
dangao
cake

嘍!
lou
LOU

‘Our family life! Bake a cake during
weekend!’

However, there are still some examples that take
not only the oven as the only instrument, but oth-
ers such as toasters, grills and so on, would be as-
signed to CWN sense 2 with change of state sense
in some occasions. The discussion about these
would leave to section 4.2.2 for more details.

For those that only use oven as instrument
are typical examples with creation sense, which
would not also possess the change of state sense
depending on the context. Examples that meet
with the requirements are: kao dangao ‘bake a
cake’, kao binggan ‘bake cookies’, kao gaobing
‘bake pastries’, kao tiantianquan ‘bake donuts’,
kao danjuan ‘egg rolls’, kao subing ‘bake short-
cakes’, and kao buding ‘bake puddings’. Further-
more, it could be inspected that these cases not
only share the feature of merely using oven as
instrument, but also are all consistently manually
tagged as sweets, which is one of the 5 manually
tagged common sense features. Therefore, if an
example with creation sense is investigated to be a
kind of sweets and only uses oven as instrument
for baking, it could then be directly grouped to
CWN sense 1.

4.2.2 Using instrument: others
For examples that are tagged with creation sense
and are not sweets, might also possess change of
state sense with CWN sense 2 depending on the
context, such words are kao mianboa ‘toast bread’,
kao shaobing ‘heat sesame seed cake’, kao tusi
‘toast a slice of toasted bread’, kao xiang ‘heat a
kind of traditional bread from north China’, and
kao pisa ‘heat pizzas’.

The following takes the example kao mianboa
‘toast bread’ for illustration.

(6) 眼看
yankan
see

烤箱
kaoxiang
oven

裡
li
inside

的
de
DE

羊角麵包
yangjiaomianbao
croissant
‘See the croissant inside the oven’

(7) 轉載
zhuanzai
forward

我
wo
I

用
yong
use

東菱
dongling
Donlim

麵包機
mianbaoji
toaster

烤
kao
toast

麵包
mianbao
bread

的
de
DE

配方
peifang
cooking recipe

與
yu
and

步驟
buzou
step
‘Forward the cooking recipe and steps that I
use for toasting bread on the Donlim toaster.’

As presented in example (6) and (7), the in-
strument for bread could either be an oven or a
toaster. The sense in example (6) stays as what
it is originally tagged, the creation sense with the
usage of instrument ‘oven’; whereas in example
(7), when the instrument is other than an oven,
such as a toaster, change of state sense would then
be selected. This could lead to the reason that
the instrument, toaster, is mainly used for heat-
ing the bread, rather than baking or creating the
bread. Thus, the process of applying the instru-
ment toaster to perform the act kao mianboa ‘toast
bread’, would simply be change of state sense,
along with state changes from cool/cold to heated.

Besides, by considering whether examples are
using an oven as instrument or not, classifiers may
provide some contributions in helping identifying
the occasions that cases with creation sense would
become change of state sense.

(8) 早餐
zaocan
breakfast

吃
chi
eat

了
le
LE

兩
liang
two

片
pian
piece

烤
kao
toast

土司
tusi
bread
‘(Someone) eats two pieces of toasted bread
for breakfast.’



(9) 他
ta
he

烤
kao
bake

了
le
LE

一
yi
one

條
tiao
loaf

牛奶土司
niunaitusi
milk bread

‘He bakes a loaf of milk bread.’

As shown in example (8) and (9), different clas-
sifiers also implicate the using of certain instru-
ments that may implicitly select a change of state
sense for example (8) and a creation sense for
example (9). Though the instruments are not re-
vealed in the two examples, the classifier pian片
‘piece’ in example (8), indicated the implicit in-
strument ‘toaster’ which would usually be used for
toasting slices of bread or toast. Hence, due to the
underlying usage of a toaster instead of an oven,
the change of state sense could be affirmed. Con-
sidering the example (9), using the classifier tiao
條 ‘loaf’ suggests that it is often the instrument
oven that would bake a loaf of bread. On that ac-
count, thecreation sense could be verified.

5 Conclusion

Under the point of co-composition, in order to
observe an approach with linguistic cues that in-
fluence a complement to select a change of state
or create sense for the Chinese baking verb kao
‘bake’, the investigation and analysis are carried
out by using Leiden Weibo Corpus along with the
application of SVM technique.

From the analysis, it is figured out that the sense
of a complement with the verb kao ‘bake’ might be
influenced by two of the five manually tagged fea-
tures: sweets and culinary, usage of instruments
and constitutive quale.

In Chinese examples, when a complement fol-
lows the verb kao ‘bake’, conditions for as-
signing change of state or creation sense to a
CWN sense 1 or CWN sense 2 are as below: [1]
change of state sense: if the constitutive role of a
complement is an individual, or a mass but tagged
as culinary, a CWN sense 1 would be assigned;
while if its constitutive role is a mass and tagged as
not culinary, a CWN sense 2 would be chosen. [2]
creation sense: if the instrument oven for perform-
ing the act of kao ‘bake’, then a CWN sense 1
would be selected; however, if using the instru-
ment other than oven and not being tagged as
sweets, a CWN sense 2 would be specified.

Therefore, in change of state sense, by comb-
ing the constitutive role and culinary feature, the
CWN sense 1 and CWN sense 2 could be iden-
tified; whereas, in creation sense, with the help

of instrument usage and sweets feature, the situa-
tions by assigning CWN sense 1 or CWN sense 2
could be affirmed. Moreover, if the instrument is
omitted, the classifiers could further help decide
which sense to be assigned to under the situation.

As could be observed from the results, it seems
that most of the CWN sense 1 could be shifted to
CWN sense 2 according to the context. This is
due to the reason that the change of state sense
in Chinese examples would have two meanings:
[1] state changes from raw to cooked, which is
CWN sense 1; [2] state changes from cool/cold
to heated, which is CWN sense 2. Thus, since
most state changes in Chinese need to be firstly al-
tered through the process in CWN sense 1, the sit-
uations that cooked food get cool/cold and would
like to get heated, have been discovered in context.

Consequently, in this paper, inspired by the
analysis of discussing English baking verb “bake”
under co-composition theory, we take this as a
starting point for a preliminary study in a spe-
cific sub-task of Chinese Word Sense Disambigua-
tion (WSD). Future works include extending the
model to handle other underspecified phenom-
ena, e.g. creation verbs and performance verbs,
where information from complements and other
non-functor elements co-compose to give rise to
derived sense.

References
B. T. Atkins, J. Kegl, and B. Levin. 1988. Anatomy

of a verb entry: From Linguistic Theory to Lexico-
graphic Practice. International Journal of Lexicog-
raphy, 1:84–126.

W. A. Cook. 1979. Case grammar: The develop-
ment of the matrix model (1970V1978). Washing-
ton: Georgetown University Press.

C. Fillmore. 1968. The case for case. New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston.

D. Gentner. 1981. Some interesting differences be-
tween nouns and verbs. Cognition and Brain The-
ory,, 4:161–178.

Stefan Th. Gries. 2009. Quantitative Corpus Lin-
guistic with R: A Practical Introduction. London &
Newyourk: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.

R. Jackendoff. 1987. The status of thematic relations
in linguistic theory. Linguistic Inquiry, 18:369–411.

J. Michael Moravcsik. 1975. Aitia as generative factor
in aristotle’s philosophy. Dialogue, 14:622–636.



James Pustejovsky. 1991. The generative lexicon.
Computational Linguistics, 17(4):409–441.

James Pustejovsky. 1995. The Generative Lexicon.
The MIT Press.

M. K. Tanenhaus, G. N. Carlson, and J. T. Trueswell.
1989. The role of thematic structures in interpre-
tation and parsing. Language and Cognitive Pro-
cesses, 4:211–234.

Daan van Esch. 2012. Leidon weibo corpus.
http://lwc.daanvanesch.nl/index.php.


