










































Towards a Better Understanding of Discourse: Integrating Multiple Discourse Annotation Perspectives Using UIMA


Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop & Interoperability with Discourse, pages 79–88,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards a Better Understanding of Discourse:
Integrating Multiple Discourse Annotation Perspectives Using UIMA

Claudiu Mihăilă∗, Georgios Kontonatsios∗, Riza Theresa Batista-Navarro∗,
Paul Thompson∗, Ioannis Korkontzelos and Sophia Ananiadou

The National Centre for Text Mining,
School of Computer Science, The University of Manchester
{mihailac,kontonag,batistar,thompsop,

korkonti,ananiads}@cs.man.ac.uk

Abstract

There exist various different discourse an-
notation schemes that vary both in the
perspectives of discourse structure consid-
ered and the granularity of textual units
that are annotated. Comparison and inte-
gration of multiple schemes have the po-
tential to provide enhanced information.
However, the differing formats of cor-
pora and tools that contain or produce
such schemes can be a barrier to their
integration. U-Compare is a graphical,
UIMA-based workflow construction plat-
form for combining interoperable natu-
ral language processing (NLP) resources,
without the need for programming skills.
In this paper, we present an extension
of U-Compare that allows the easy com-
parison, integration and visualisation of
resources that contain or output annota-
tions based on multiple discourse anno-
tation schemes. The extension works by
allowing the construction of parallel sub-
workflows for each scheme within a single
U-Compare workflow. The different types
of discourse annotations produced by each
sub-workflow can be either merged or vi-
sualised side-by-side for comparison. We
demonstrate this new functionality by us-
ing it to compare annotations belonging
to two different approaches to discourse
analysis, namely discourse relations and
functional discourse annotations. Integrat-
ing these different annotation types within
an interoperable environment allows us to
study the correlations between different
types of discourse and report on the new
insights that this allows us to discover.

∗The authors have contributed equally to the development
of this work and production of the manuscript.

1 Introduction

Over the past few years, there has been an increas-
ing sophistication in the types of available natural
language processing (NLP) tools, with named en-
tity recognisers being complemented by relation
and event extraction systems. Such relations and
events are not intended to be understood in isola-
tion, but rather they are arranged to form a coher-
ent discourse. In order to carry out complex tasks
such as automatic summarisation to a high degree
of accuracy, it is important for systems to be able
to analyse the discourse structure of texts automat-
ically. To facilitate the development of such sys-
tems, various textual corpora containing discourse
annotations have been made available to the NLP
community. However, there is a large amount of
variability in the types of annotations contained
within these corpora, since different perspectives
on discourse have led to the development of a
number of different annotation schemes.

Corpora containing discourse-level annotations
usually treat the text as a sequence of coherent tex-
tual zones (e.g., clauses and sentences). One line
of research has been to identify which zones are
logically connected to each other, and to charac-
terise these links through the assignment of dis-
course relations. There are variations in the com-
plexity of the schemes used to annotate these dis-
course relations. For example, Rhetorical Struc-
ture Theory (RST) (Mann and Thompson, 1988)
defines 23 types of discourse relations that are
used to structure the text into complex discourse
trees. Whilst this scheme was used to enrich the
Penn TreeBank (Carlson et al., 2001), the Penn
Discourse TreeBank (PDTB) (Prasad et al., 2008)
used another scheme to identify discourse rela-
tions that hold between pairs of text spans. It cate-
gorises the relations into types such as “causal”,
“temporal” and “conditional”, which can be ei-
ther explicit or implicit, depending on whether or

79



not they are represented in text using overt dis-
course connectives. In the biomedical domain, the
Biomedical Discourse Relation Bank (BioDRB)
(Prasad et al., 2011) annotates a similar set of re-
lation types, whilst BioCause focusses exclusively
on causality (Mihăilă et al., 2013).

A second line of research does not aim to link
textual zones, but rather to classify them accord-
ing to their specific function in the discourse. Ex-
amples of functional discourse annotations include
whether a particular zone asserts new information
into the discourse or represents a speculation or
hypothesis. In scientific texts, knowing the type
of information that a zone represents (e.g., back-
ground knowledge, hypothesis, experimental ob-
servation, conclusion, etc.) allows for automatic
isolation of new knowledge claims (Sándor and de
Waard, 2012). Several annotation schemes have
been developed to classify textual zones accord-
ing to their rhetorical status or general informa-
tion content (Teufel et al., 1999; Mizuta et al.,
2006; Wilbur et al., 2006; de Waard and Pan-
der Maat, 2009; Liakata et al., 2012a). Related
to these studies are efforts to capture information
relating to discourse function at the level of events,
i.e., structured representations of pieces of knowl-
edge which, when identified, facilitate sophisti-
cated semantic searching (Ananiadou et al., 2010).
Since there can be multiple events in a sentence
or clause, the identification of discourse informa-
tion at the event level can allow for a more de-
tailed analysis of discourse elements than is possi-
ble when considering larger units of text. Certain
event corpora such as ACE 2005 (Walker, 2006)
and GENIA-MK (Thompson et al., 2011) have
been annotated with various types of functional
discourse information.

It has previously been shown that considering
several functional discourse annotation schemes in
parallel can be beneficial (Liakata et al., 2012b),
since each scheme offers a different perspective.
For a common set of documents, the cited study
analysed and compared functional discourse an-
notations at different levels of textual granular-
ity (i.e., sentences, clauses and events), showing
how the different schemes could complement each
other in order to lay the foundations for a possible
future harmonisation of the schemes. The results
of this analysis provide evidence that it would be
useful to carry out further such analyses involv-
ing other such schemes, including an investiga-

tion of how discourse relations and functional dis-
course annotations could complement each other,
e.g., which types of functional annotations occur
within the arguments of discourse relations. There
are, however, certain barriers to carrying out such
an analysis. For example, a comparison of an-
notation schemes would ideally allow the differ-
ent types of annotations to be visualised simul-
taneously or seamlessly merged together. How-
ever, the fact that annotations in different corpora
are encoded using different formats (e.g., stand-off
or in-line) and different encoding schemes means
that this can be problematic.

A solution to the challenges introduced above is
offered by the Unstructured Information Manage-
ment Architecture (UIMA) (Ferrucci and Lally,
2004), which defines a common workflow meta-
data format facilitating the straightforward combi-
nation of NLP resources into a workflow. Based
on the interoperability of the UIMA framework,
numerous researchers distribute their own tools as
UIMA-compliant components (Kano et al., 2011;
Baumgartner et al., 2008; Hahn et al., 2008;
Savova et al., 2010; Gurevych et al., 2007; Rak
et al., 2012b). However, UIMA is only intended
to provide an abstract framework for the interop-
erability of language resources, leaving the actual
implementation to third-party developers. Hence,
UIMA does not explicitly address interoperability
issues of tools and corpora.

U-Compare (Kano et al., 2011) is a UIMA-
based workflow construction platform that pro-
vides a graphical user interface (GUI) via which
users can rapidly create NLP pipelines using a
drag-and-drop mechanism. Conforming to UIMA
standards, U-Compare components and pipelines
are compatible with any UIMA application via a
common and sharable type system (i.e., a hier-
archy of annotation types). In defining this type
system, U-Compare promotes interoperability of
tools and corpora, by exhaustively modelling a
wide range of NLP data types (e.g., sentences, to-
kens, part-of-speech tags, named entities). This
type system was recently extended to include dis-
course annotations to model three discourse phe-
nomena, namely causality, coreference and meta-
knowledge (Batista-Navarro et al., 2013).

In this paper, we describe our extensions to U-
Compare, supporting the integration and visuali-
sation of resources annotated according to mul-
tiple discourse annotation schemes. Our method

80



decomposes pipelines into parallel sub-workflows,
each linked to a different annotation scheme.
The resulting annotations produced by each sub-
workflow can be either merged within a single
document or visualised in parallel views.

2 Related work

Previous studies have shown the advantages of
comparing and integrating different annotation
schemes on a corpus of documents (Guo et al.,
2010; Liakata et al., 2010; Liakata et al., 2012b).
Guo et al. (2010) compared three different dis-
course annotation schemes applied to a corpus
of biomedical abstracts on cancer risk assess-
ment and concluded that two of the schemes pro-
vide more fine-grained information than the other
scheme. They also revealed a subsumption rela-
tion between two schemes. Such outcomes from
comparing schemes are meaningful for users who
wish to select the most appropriate scheme for an-
notating their data. Liakata et al. (2012) under-
line that different discourse annotation schemes
capture different dimensions of discourse. Hence,
there might be complementary information across
different schemes. Based on this hypothesis, they
provide a comparison of three annotation schemes,
namely CoreSC (Liakata et al., 2012a), GENIA-
MK (Thompson et al., 2011) and DiscSeg (de
Waard, 2007), on a corpus of three full-text pa-
pers. Their results showed that the categories in
the three schemes can complement each other. For
example, the values of the Certainty Level dimen-
sion of the GENIA-MK scheme can be used to as-
sign confidence values to the Conclusion, Result,
Implication and Hypothesis categories of CoreSC
and DiscSeg. In contrast to previous studies, our
proposed approach automatically integrates mul-
tiple annotation schemes. The proposed mecha-
nism allows users to easily compare, integrate and
visualise multiple discourse annotation schemes
in an interoperable NLP infrastructure, i.e., U-
Compare.

There are currently a number of freely-available
NLP workflow infrastructures (Ferrucci and Lally,
2004; Cunningham et al., 2002; Schäfer, 2006;
Kano et al., 2011; Grishman, 1996; Baumgartner
et al., 2008; Hahn et al., 2008; Savova et al., 2010;
Gurevych et al., 2007; Rak et al., 2012b). Most
of the available infrastructures support the devel-
opment of standard NLP applications, e.g., part-
of-speech tagging, deep parsing, chunking, named

entity recognition and several of them allow the
representation and analysis of discourse phenom-
ena (Kano et al., 2011; Cunningham et al., 2002;
Savova et al., 2010; Gurevych et al., 2007). How-
ever, none of them has demonstrated the integra-
tion of resources annotated according to multiple
annotation schemes within a single NLP pipeline.

GATE (Cunningham et al., 2002) is an open
source NLP infrastructure that has been used for
the development of various language processing
tasks. It is packaged with an exhaustive number
of NLP components, including discourse analy-
sis modules, e.g., coreference resolution. Further-
more, GATE offers a GUI environment and wrap-
pers for UIMA-compliant components. However,
GATE implements a limited workflow manage-
ment mechanism that does not support the execu-
tion of parallel or nested workflows. In addition to
this, GATE does not promote interoperability of
language resources since it does not define any hi-
erarchy of NLP data types and components do not
formally declare their input/output capabilities.

In contrast to GATE, UIMA implements a more
sophisticated workflow management mechanism
that supports the construction of both parallel
and nested pipelines. In this paper, we exploit
this mechanism to integrate multiple annotation
schemes in NLP workflows. cTAKES (Savova
et al., 2010) and DKPro (Gurevych et al., 2007)
are two repositories containing UIMA-compliant
components that are tuned for the medical and
general domain, respectively. However, both of
these repositories support the representation of
only one discourse phenomenon, i.e., coreference.
Argo (Rak et al., 2012a; Rak et al., 2012b) is a
web-based platform that allows multiple branch-
ing and merging of UIMA pipelines. It incorpo-
rates several U-Compare components and conse-
quently, supports the U-Compare type system.

3 A UIMA architecture for processing
multiple annotation schemes

In UIMA, a document, together with its associated
annotations, is represented as a standardised data
structure, namely the Common Analysis Struc-
ture (CAS). Each CAS can contain any number
of nested sub-CASes, i.e., Subjects of Analysis
(Sofas), each of which can associate a different
type of annotation with the input document. In
this paper, we employ this UIMA mechanism to
allow the integration and comparison of multiple

81



Collection of 
Documents

Multi-Sofa
Reader

Parallel Annotation 
Viewer

Annotation 
Merger

Comparing
Schemes

Integrating 
Schemes

Component
C_1

Sofa S_1

Component
C_2

Sofa S_2

Component
C_N-1

Sofa S_N-1

Component
C_N

Sofa S_N

sub-workflows

Figure 1: Integrating annotations from multiple
annotation schemes in UIMA workflows

annotation schemes in a single U-Compare work-
flow. Assume that we have a corpus of documents
which has been annotated according to n different
schemes, S1, S2, ..., Sn−1, Sn. Also, assume that
we will use a library of m text analysis compo-
nents, C1, C2, ..., Cm−1, Cm, to enrich the corpus
with further annotations.

Our implemented architecture is illustrated in
Figure 1. Using multiple Sofas, we are able to split
a UIMA workflow into parallel sub-workflows.
Starting from a Multi-Sofa reader, we create n
sub-workflows, i.e., Sofas, each of which is linked
to a particular scheme for a different annotation
type. Each sub-workflow can then apply the anal-
ysis components that are most suitable for pro-
cessing the annotations from the corresponding
scheme.

U-Compare offers two different modes for visu-
alising corpora that have been annotated accord-
ing to multiple schemes. In the comparison mode,
the default annotation viewer is automatically split
to allow annotations from different schemes to be
displayed side-by-side. The second type of visu-
alisation merges the annotations produced by the
parallel sub-workflows into a single view. The
most appropriate view may depend on the prefer-
ences of the user and the task at hand, e.g., iden-
tifying similarities, differences or complementary
information between different schemes.

4 Application Workflows

In this section, we demonstrate two workflow ap-
plications that integrate multiple discourse anno-
tation schemes. The first workflow exploits U-
Compare’s comparison mode to visualise in par-
allel functional discourse annotations from two
schemes, namely, CoreSC (Liakata et al., 2012a)
and GENIA-MK (Thompson et al., 2011). The
second application integrates functional discourse
annotations in the ACE 2005 corpus with dis-
course relations obtained by an automated tool.

4.1 Visualising functional discourse
annotations from different schemes

The purpose of this workflow application is to re-
veal the different interpretations given by two dis-
course annotation schemes applied to a biomed-
ical corpus of three full-text papers (Liakata et
al., 2012b). The pipeline contains two read-
ers that take as input the annotations (in the
BioNLP Shared Task stand-off format) from the
two schemes and map them to U-Compare’s
type system. In this way, the annotations be-
come interoperable with existing components in
U-Compare’s library. U-Compare detects that the
workflow contains two annotation schemes and
automatically creates two parallel sub-workflows
as explained earlier. Furthermore, we configure
the workflow to use the comparison mode. There-
fore, the annotation viewer will display the two
different types of annotations based on the input
schemes side-by-side. Figure 2 illustrates the par-
allel viewing of a document annotated according
to both the CoreSC (left-hand side) and GENIA-
MK (right-hand side) annotation schemes. The
CoreSC scheme assigns a single category per sen-
tence. The main clause in the highlighted sen-
tence on the left-hand side constitutes the hypoth-
esis that transcription factors bind to exon-1. Ac-
cordingly, as can be confirmed from the annota-
tion table on the far right-hand side of the figure,
the (Hyp)othesis category has been assigned to the
sentence.

In the GENIA-MK corpus, the different pieces
of information contained within the sentence have
been separately annotated as structured events.
One of these events corresponds to the hypothe-
sis, but this is not the only information expressed:
information about a previous experimental out-
come from the authors, i.e., that exon1 is impli-
cated in CCR3 transcription, is annotated as a sep-

82



Figure 2: Comparing discourse annotations schemes in U-Compare. The pipeline uses two Sofas corre-
sponding to the CoreSC (left panel) and GENIA-MK (right panel) schemes.

arate event. Since functional discourse informa-
tion is annotated directly at the event level in the
GENIA-MK corpus, the bind event is considered
independently from the other event as represent-
ing an Analysis. Furthermore, the word hypoth-
esized is annotated as a cue for this categorisa-
tion. There are several ways in which the an-
notations of the two schemes can be seen to be
complementary to each other. For example, the
finer-grained categorisation of analytical informa-
tion in the CoreSC scheme could help to determine
that the analytical bind event in the GENIA-MK
corpus specifically represents a hypothesis, rather
than, e.g., a conclusion. Conversely, the event-
based annotation in the GENIA-MK corpus can
help to determine exactly which part of the sen-
tence represents the hypothesis. Furthermore, the
cue phrases annotated in the GENIA-MK corpus
could be used as additional features in a system
trained to assign CoreSC categories. Although in
this paper we illustrate only the visualisation of
different types of functional discourse annotations,
it is worth noting that U-Compare provides sup-
port for further processing. Firstly, unlike annota-
tion platforms such as brat (Stenetorp et al., 2012),
U-Compare allows for analysis components to be
integrated into workflows in a straightforward and
user-interactive manner. If, for example, it is of in-
terest to determine the tokens (and the correspond-
ing parts-of-speech) which frequently act as cues
in Analysis events, syntactic analysis components
(e.g., tokenisers and POS taggers) can be incorpo-
rated via a drag-and-drop mechanism. Also, U-
Compare allows the annotations to be saved in a
computable format using the provided Xmi Writer
CAS Consumer component. This facilitates fur-
ther automatic comparison of annotations.

4.2 Integrating discourse relations with
functional discourse annotations

To demonstrate the integration of annotations orig-
inating from two completely different perspectives
on discourse, we have created a workflow that
merges traditional discourse relations with func-
tional discourse annotations in a general domain
corpus. For this application, we used the ACE
2005 corpus, which consists of 599 documents
coming from broadcast conversation, broadcast
news, conversational telephone speech, newswire,
weblog and usenet newsgroups. This corpus
contains event annotations which have been en-
riched by attributes such as polarity (positive or
negative), modality (asserted or other), generic-
ity (generic or specific) and tense (past, present,
future or unspecified). We treat the values of
these attributes as functional discourse annota-
tions, since they provide further insight into the
interpretation of the events. We created a compo-
nent that reads the event annotations in the corpus
and maps them to U-Compare’s type system.

To obtain discourse relation annotations (which
are not available in the ACE corpus) we em-
ployed an end-to-end discourse parser trained
on the Penn Discourse TreeBank (Lin et al.,
2012). It outputs three general types of anno-
tations, namely, explicit relations, non-explicit
relations and attribution spans. Explicit rela-
tions (i.e., those having overt discourse connec-
tives) are further categorised into the following 16
PDTB level-2 types: Asynchronous, Synchrony,
Cause, Pragmatic cause, Contrast, Concession,
Conjunction, Instantiation, Restatement, Alterna-
tive, List, Condition, Pragmatic condition, Prag-
matic contrast, Pragmatic concession and Excep-

83



Figure 3: Integrating different discourse annotation schemes in U-Compare.

tion. Non-explicit relations, on the other hand,
consist of EntRel and NoRel types, in addition to
the same first 11 explicit types mentioned above.

We created a workflow consisting of the ACE
corpus reader and the discourse parser (available
in U-Compare as a UIMA web service). This al-
lowed us to merge traditional discourse relations
with event-based functional discourse annotations,
and to visualise them in the same document (Fig-
ure 3). Furthermore, with the addition of the
Xmi Writer CAS Consumer in the workflow, the
merged annotations can be saved in a computable
format for further processing, allowing users to
perform deeper analyses on the discourse annota-
tions. This workflow has enabled us to gain some
insights into the correlations between functional
discourse annotations and discourse relations.

5 Correlations between discourse
relations and functional discourse
annotations

Based on the merged annotation format described
in the previous section, we computed cases in
which at least one of the arguments of a discourse
relation also contains an event. Figure 4 is a
heatmap depicting the correlations between differ-
ent types of discourse relations and the attribute
values of ACE events that co-occur with these re-
lations. The darker the colour, the smaller the ratio
of the given discourse relation co-occurring with
the specified ACE event attribute value. For in-
stance, the Cause relation co-occurs mostly with
positive events (over 95%) and the correspond-
ing cell is a very light shade of green. These are

discussed and exemplified below. In the exam-
ples, the following marking convention is used:
discourse connectives are capitalised, whilst argu-
ments are underlined. Event triggers are shown in
bold, and cues relating to functional discourse cat-
egories are italicised.

For all discourse relation types, at least 50% of
co-occurring events are assigned the specific value
of the Genericity attribute. Specific events are
those that describe a specific occurrence or situ-
ation, rather than a more generic situation. In gen-
eral, this high proportion of specific events is to be
expected. The types of text contained within the
corpus, consisting largely of news and transcrip-
tions of conversions, would be expected to intro-
duce a large amount of information about specific
events.

For two types of discourse relations, i.e. Condi-
tion and Concession, there are more or less equal
numbers of specific and generic events. The na-
ture of these relation types helps to explain these
proportions. Conditional relations often describe
how a particular, i.e., specific, situation will hold
if some hypothetical situation is true. Since hypo-
thetical situations do not denote specific instances,
they will usually be labelled as generic. Con-
cessions, meanwhile, usually describe how a spe-
cific situation holds, even though another (more
generic) situation would normally hold, that would
be inconsistent with this. For the Instantiation re-
lation category, it may once again be expected that
similar proportions of generic and specific events
would co-occur within their arguments, since an
instantiation describes a specific instance of a
more generic situation. However, contrary to these

84



Alternative

Asynchronous

Attribution

Cause

Concession

Condition

Conjunction

Contrast

EntRel

Instantiation

List

NoRel

Restatement

Synchronous

Ge
ne
ric

Sp
ec
ifi
c

As
se
rte
d

Ot
he
r
Ne
ga
tiv
e

Po
sit
ive

Fu
tu
re

Pa
st
Pr
es
en
t

Un
sp
ec
ifi
ed

0

1

0.5

0.25

0.75

Genericity Modality Polarity Tense

0

1

0.5

0.25

0.75

0

1

0.5

0.25

0.75

0

1

0.5

0.25

0.75

Figure 4: Heatmap showing the distribution of correlations between discourse relations and event-based
functional discourse categories. A darker shade indicates a smaller percentage of instances of a discourse
relation co-occurring with an event attribute.

expectations, the ratio of specific to generic events
is 3:1. A reason for this is that discourse argu-
ments corresponding to the description of a spe-
cific instance may contain several different events,
as illustrated in Example (1).

(1) Toefting has been convicted before. In
1999 he was given a 20-day suspended sentence
for assaulting a fan who berated him for
playing with German club Duisburg.

In terms of the Modality attribute, most dis-
course relations correlate with definite, asserted
events. Simillarly to the Genericity attribute, this
can be largely explained by the nature of the texts.
However, there are two relation types, i.e., Condi-
tion and Consession, which have particularly high
proportions of co-occurring events whose modal-
ity is other. Events that are assigned this attribute
value correspond to those that are not described as
though they are real occurrences. This includes,
e.g., speculated or hypothetical events. The fact
that Condition relations are usually hypothetical
in nature explain why 76% of events that co-occur
with such relations are assigned the other value
for the Modality attribute. Example (2) illustrates
a sentence containing this relation type.

(2) And I’ve said many times, IF we all
agreed on everything, everybody would want to

marry Betty and we would really be in a mess,
wouldn’t we, Bob.

An even higher proportion of Concession re-
lations co-occurs with events whose modality is
other. Example (3) helps to explain this. In the
first clause (the generic situation), the mention of
minimising civilian casualties is only described as
an effort, rather than a definite situation. The hedg-
ing of this generic situation is necessary in order to
concede that the more specific situation described
in the second clause could actually be true, i.e.,
that a large number of civilians have already been
killed. Due to the nature of news reporting, which
may come from potentially unreliable sources, the
killed event in this second clause is also hedged,
through the use of the word reportedly.

(3) ALTHOUGH the coalition leaders have
repeatedly assured that every effort would be
made to minimize civilian casualties in the
current Iraq war, at least 130 Iraqi civilians have
been reportedly killed since the war started five
days ago.

Almost 96% of events that co-occur with argu-
ments of discourse relations have positive polarity.
Indeed, for eight relation types, 100% of the cor-
responding events are positive. This can partly be
explained by the fact that, in texts reporting news,

85



there is an emphasis on reporting events that have
happened, rather than events that did not happen.
It can, however, be noted that events that co-occur
with certain discourse relation types have a greater
likelihood of having negative polarity. These rela-
tions include Contrast (9% of events having neg-
ative polarity) and Cause (5% negative events).
Contrasts can include comparisons of positive and
negative situations, as in Example (4), whilst for
Causes, it can sometimes be relevant to state that
a particular situation caused a specific event not to
take place, as shown in Example (5).

(4) The message from the Israeli government
is that its soldiers are not targeting journalists,
BUT that journalists who travel to places where
there could be live fire exchange between
Israeli forces and Palestinian gunmen have a
responsibility to take greater precautions.

(5) His father didn’t want to invade Iraq, BE-
CAUSE of all these problems they’re having
now.

For most relation types, around 60% of their co-
occurring events are annotated as describing past
tense situations. This nature of newswire and con-
versations mean that this is largely to be expected,
since they normally report mainly on events that
have already happened. The proportion of events
assigned the future tense value is highest when
they co-occur with discourse relations of type Al-
ternative. In this relation type, it is often the case
that one of the arguments describes a possible fu-
ture alternative to a current situation, as the case in
Example (6). This possible information pattern for
Alternative relations, where one of the arguments
represents a currently occurring situation, would
also help to explain why, even though very few
events in general are annotated as present tense,
almost 10% of events that co-occur with Alter-
native relations describe events that are currently
ongoing. As for events whose Tense value is un-
specified, two of the most common discourse re-
lation types with which they occur are Condition
and Concession. As exemplified above, Condition
relations are often hypothetical in nature, meaning
that no specific tense can be assigned. The generic
argument of a Concession relation can also remain
unmarked for tense. As in Example (3), it is not
clear whether the effort to minimise civilian casu-
alties has already been initiated, or will be initiated
in the future.

(6) Saddam wouldn’t be destroying missiles
UNLESS he thought he was going to be
destroyed if he didn’t.

6 Conclusions

Given the level of variability in existing discourse-
annotated corpora, it is meaningful for users to
identify the relative merits of different schemes.
In this paper, we have presented an extension of
the U-Compare infrastructure that facilitates the
comparison, integration and visualisation of doc-
uments annotated according to different annota-
tion schemes. U-Compare constructs multiple and
parallel annotation sub-workflows nested within a
single workflow, with each sub-workflow corre-
sponding to a distinct scheme. We have applied
the implemented method to visualise the similar-
ities and differences of two functional discourse
annotation schemes, namely CoreSC and GENIA-
MK. To demonstrate the integration of multiple
schemes in U-Compare, we developed a work-
flow that merged event annotations from the ACE
2005 corpus (which include certain types of func-
tional discourse information) with discourse rela-
tions obtained by an end-to-end parser. Moreover,
we have analysed the merged annotations obtained
by this workflow and this has allowed us to iden-
tify various correlations between the two different
types of discourse annotations.

Based on the intuition that there is comple-
mentary information across different types of dis-
course annotations, we intend to examine how the
integration of multiple discourse schemes, e.g.,
features obtained by merging annotations, affects
the performance of machine learners for discourse
analysis.

7 Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Dr. Ziheng Lin (Na-
tional University of Singapore) for providing us
with the discourse parser used for this work.
This work was partially funded by the Euro-
pean Community’s Seventh Framework Program
(FP7/2007-2013) [grant number 318736 (OSS-
METER)]; Engineering and Physical Sciences Re-
search Council [grant numbers EP/P505631/1,
EP/J50032X/1]; and MRC Text Mining and
Screening (MR/J005037/1).

86



References
Sophia Ananiadou, Sampo Pyysalo, Junichi Tsujii, and

Douglas B. Kell. 2010. Event extraction for sys-
tems biology by text mining the literature. Trends in
Biotechnology, 28(7):381 – 390.

Riza Theresa B. Batista-Navarro, Georgios Kontonat-
sios, Claudiu Mihăilă, Paul Thompson, Rafal Rak,
Raheel Nawaz, Ioannis Korkontzelos, and Sophia
Ananiadou. 2013. Facilitating the analysis of dis-
course phenomena in an interoperable NLP plat-
form. In Computational Linguistics and Intelligent
Text Processing, volume 7816 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 559–571. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, March.

William A. Baumgartner, Kevin Bretonnel Cohen, and
Lawrence Hunter. 2008. An open-source frame-
work for large-scale, flexible evaluation of biomedi-
cal text mining systems. Journal of biomedical dis-
covery and collaboration, 3:1+, January.

Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen
Okurowski. 2001. Building a discourse-tagged cor-
pus in the framework of Rhetorical Structure Theory.
In Proceedings of the Second SIGdial Workshop on
Discourse and Dialogue - Volume 16, SIGDIAL ’01,
pages 1–10, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, Kalina
Bontcheva, and Valentin Tablan. 2002. GATE:
an architecture for development of robust HLT
applications. In In Recent Advanced in Language
Processing, pages 168–175.

Anita de Waard and Henk Pander Maat. 2009. Epis-
temic segment types in biology research articles. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Linguistic and Psy-
cholinguistic Approaches to Text Structuring (LPTS
2009).

Anita de Waard. 2007. A pragmatic structure for re-
search articles. In Proceedings of the 2nd inter-
national conference on Pragmatic web, ICPW ’07,
pages 83–89, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

David Ferrucci and Adam Lally. 2004. Building an
example application with the unstructured informa-
tion management architecture. IBM Systems Jour-
nal, 43(3):455–475.

Ralph Grishman. 1996. TIPSTER Text Phase II archi-
tecture design version 2.1p 19 june 1996. In Pro-
ceedings of the TIPSTER Text Program: Phase II,
pages 249–305, Vienna, Virginia, USA, May. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Yufan Guo, Anna Korhonen, Maria Liakata,
Ilona Silins Karolinska, Lin Sun, and Ulla Ste-
nius. 2010. Identifying the information structure of
scientific abstracts: An investigation of three differ-
ent schemes. In Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop
on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages
99–107. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Iryna Gurevych, Max Mühlhäuser, Christof Müller,
Jürgen Steimle, Markus Weimer, and Torsten Zesch.
2007. Darmstadt knowledge processing repository
based on UIMA. In Proceedings of the First Work-
shop on Unstructured Information Management Ar-
chitecture at Biannual Conference of the GSCL.

Udo Hahn, Ekaterina Buyko, Rico Landefeld, Matthias
Mühlhausen, Michael Poprat, Katrin Tomanek, and
Joachim Wermter. 2008. An overview of JCoRe,
the JULIE lab UIMA component repository. In
LREC’08 Workshop ‘Towards Enhanced Interoper-
ability for Large HLT Systems: UIMA for NLP‘,
pages 1–7, Marrakech, Morocco, May.

Yoshinobu Kano, Makoto Miwa, Kevin Cohen,
Lawrence Hunter, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi
Tsujii. 2011. U-Compare: A modular NLP work-
flow construction and evaluation system. IBM Jour-
nal of Research and Development, 55(3):11.

Maria Liakata, Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan,
and Colin Batchelor. 2010. Corpora for the concep-
tualisation and zoning of scientific papers. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC, volume 10.

Maria Liakata, Shyamasree Saha, Simon Dobnik,
Colin Batchelor, and Dietrich Rebholz-Schuhmann.
2012a. Automatic recognition of conceptualization
zones in scientific articles and two life science appli-
cations. Bioinformatics, 28(7):991–1000.

Maria Liakata, Paul Thompson, Anita de Waard, Ra-
heel Nawaz, Henk Pander Maat, and Sophia Ana-
niadou. 2012b. A three-way perspective on scien-
tic discourse annotation for knowledge extraction.
In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Detecting
Structure in Scholarly Discourse (DSSD), pages 37–
46, July.

Ziheng Lin, Hwee Tou Ng, and Min-Yen Kan. 2012. A
PDTB-styled end-to-end discourse parser. Natural
Language Engineering, FirstView:1–34, 10.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical Structure Theory: Toward a functional
theory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Claudiu Mihăilă, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, and
Sophia Ananiadou. 2013. BioCause: Annotating
and analysing causality in the biomedical domain.
BMC Bioinformatics, 14(1):2, January.

Yoko Mizuta, Anna Korhonen, Tony Mullen, and Nigel
Collier. 2006. Zone analysis in biology articles as a
basis for information extraction. International Jour-
nal of Medical Informatics, 75(6):468 – 487. Re-
cent Advances in Natural Language Processing for
Biomedical Applications Special Issue.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bon-
nie Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse Tree-
Bank 2.0. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri,
Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Jan Odjik, Stelios

87



Piperidis, and Daniel Tapias, editors, In Proceedings
of the 6th International Conference on language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC), pages 2961–2968.

Rashmi Prasad, Susan McRoy, Nadya Frid, Aravind
Joshi, and Hong Yu. 2011. The biomedical
discourse relation bank. BMC Bioinformatics,
12(1):188.

Rafal Rak, Andrew Rowley, and Sophia Ananiadou.
2012a. Collaborative development and evaluation
of text-processing workflows in a UIMA-supported
web-based workbench.

Rafal Rak, Andrew Rowley, William Black, and Sophia
Ananiadou. 2012b. Argo: an integrative, in-
teractive, text mining-based workbench supporting
curation. Database: The Journal of Biological
Databases and Curation, 2012.

Ágnes Sándor and Anita de Waard. 2012. Identifying
claimed knowledge updates in biomedical research
articles. In Proceedings of the Workshop on De-
tecting Structure in Scholarly Discourse, ACL ’12,
pages 10–17, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Guergana Savova, James Masanz, Philip Ogren, Jiap-
ing Zheng, Sunghwan Sohn, Karin Kipper-Schuler,
and Christopher Chute. 2010. Mayo clini-
cal text analysis and knowledge extraction system
(cTAKES): architecture, component evaluation and
applications. Journal of the American Medical In-
formatics Association, 17(5):507–513.

Ulrich Schäfer. 2006. Middleware for creating and
combining multi-dimensional nlp markup. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th Workshop on NLP and XML:
Multi-Dimensional Markup in Natural Language
Processing, pages 81–84. ACL.

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topić,
Tomoko Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi Tsu-
jii. 2012. brat: a web-based tool for NLP-assisted
text annotation. In Proceedings of the Demonstra-
tions Session at EACL 2012, Avignon, France, April.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Simone Teufel, Jean Carletta, and Marc Moens. 1999.
An annotation scheme for discourse-level argumen-
tation in research articles. In Proceedings of the
ninth conference on European chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, EACL ’99,
pages 110–117, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Paul Thompson, Raheel Nawaz, John McNaught, and
Sophia Ananiadou. 2011. Enriching a biomedi-
cal event corpus with meta-knowledge annotation.
BMC Bioinformatics, 12(1):393.

Christopher Walker. 2006. ACE 2005 Multilingual
Training Corpus.

W John Wilbur, Andrey Rzhetsky, and Hagit Shatkay.
2006. New directions in biomedical text annota-
tion: definitions, guidelines and corpus construction.
BMC Bioinformatics, 7(1):356.

88


