




















Korp and Karp – a bestiary of language resources:
the research infrastructure of Språkbanken

Malin Ahlberg, Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, Martin Hammarstedt, Leif-Jöran
Olsson, Olof Olsson, Johan Roxendal, Jonatan Uppström

Språkbanken, Dept. of Swedish, University of Gothenburg, Sweden

{malin.ahlberg,lars.borin, markus.forsberg, martin.hammarstedt,

leif-joran.olsson, olof.olsson.2, johan.roxendal,

jonatan.uppstrom}@svenska.gu.se

Abstract
A central activity in Språkbanken, an R&D unit at the University of Gothenburg, is the systematic
construction of a research infrastructure based on interoperability and widely accepted standards for
metadata and data. The two main components of this infrastructure deal with text corpora and with
lexical resources. For modularity and flexibility, both components have a backend, or server-side
part, accessed through an API made up of a set of well-defined web services. This means that
there can be any number of different user interfaces to these components, corresponding, e.g., to
different research needs. Here, we will demonstrate the standard corpus and lexicon search interfaces,
designed primarily for linguistic searches: Korp and Karp.

Keywords: Swedish, corpora, lexical resources, research infrastructure.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 429 of 474]



1 The research infrastructure of Språkbanken
Språkbanken <http://spraakbanken.gu.se/eng/start> is a research and development unit at the
University of Gothenburg, and a node in a cross-disciplinary research collaboration at the University
of Gothenburg and Chalmers University of Technology formalized under the name of Centre
for Language Technology <http://www.clt.gu.se>. Språkbanken was established with government
funding already in 1975 as a national centre. The main focus of Språkbanken’s present-day activities
is the development and refinement of language resources and language technology (LT) tools, and
their application to research in language technology, in linguistics, and in several other disciplines,
notably text-based research in the humanities, social sciences, medicine and health sciences.

The larger context of these activities is the systematic construction of a research infrastructure based
on interoperability and widely accepted standards for metadata and data. The two main components
of this infrastructure deal with text corpora and with lexical resources. For modularity and flexibility,
both components have a backend, or server-side part, accessed through an API made up of set of
well-defined web services. This means that there can be any number of different user interfaces
to these components, corresponding, e.g., to different research needs. Here, we will focus on the
standard corpus and lexicon search interfaces Korp and Karp – designed primarily for linguistic
searches – but the same backend web services are also used, e.g., in a corpus-driven grammar and
vocabulary exercise generator (Volodina et al., 2012).

2 The search interface of Korp
The search interface of Korp (Borin et al., 2012b; <http://http://spraakbanken.gu.se/korp>) has been
inspired by corpus search interfaces such as SketchEngine (Kilgarriff et al., 2008), Glossa (Nygaard
et al., 2008), and DeepDict (Bick, 2009).

At first glance, the search interface of Korp is a concordance tool that displays search results in the
standard KWIC (keywords in context) layout (figure 1), here with the example word svininfluensa
(noun) ‘swine flu’. This basic functionality is extended by various visualisations of statistical data,
such as the basic table (figure 2) and and interactive trend diagram (figure 4) plotting relative
frequency over time. Furthermore, the interface features so called word pictures that provides an
overview of a selected set of syntactic relations for a word (figure 3). The purpose is to quickly gain
an understanding of the contexts in which a word most commonly appears.

We are also working on increasing the diachronic coverage of the corpora, by including Swedish
texts from the 19th century back to the 13th century. Ultimately, our goal is to develop tools
for all types of text, at various levels of annotation, such as part-of-speech, morphosyntactic
information, and dependency parses (Borin et al., 2010; Borin and Forsberg, 2011; Adesam et al.,
2012). Our primary source material for Old Swedish (ca 1225–1526) comes from Fornsvenska
textbanken,<http://project2.sol.lu.se/fornsvenska> a 3 MW collection of around 160 digitized texts,
mainly from the 13th to the 16th century. Further, a 1 MW corpus of medieval letters from the
Swedish National Archives<http://riksarkivet.se> is available. Work in progress concerns newspaper
texts (17th–19th century) and a collection of law texts (13th century – present).

A number of issues are problematic for annotation of historical texts. For example, sentence splitting
cannot be handled with standard tools, as sentence boundaries are often not marked by punctuation
or uppercase letters. Compared to modern Swedish texts, the Old Swedish texts have a different
vocabulary and richer morphology, show a more free word order, and Latin and German influences.
Finally, the lack of a standardized orthography results in a wide variety of spellings for the same
word.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 430 of 474]



Figure 1: The Korp KWIC view of svininfluensa (noun) ‘swine flu’

Figure 2: The Korp statistics of svininfluensa (noun) ‘swine flu’ (including compounds)

3 The search interface of Karp

The interface of Karp (Borin et al., 2012a; <http://http://spraakbanken.gu.se/karp>) supports search-
ing and editing lexical resources. It currently hosts 21 lexical resources, some of which have been
created from scratch using existing free resources, both external and in-house. The resources have
been converted to the Lexical Markup Framework format (ISO, 2008) to ensure uniformity and
interchangeability. The infrastructure has one primary lexical resource, SALDO (Borin and Forsberg,

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 431 of 474]



Figure 3: The word picture of svininfluensa (noun) ‘swine flu’

Figure 4: The trend diagram of svininfluensa (noun) ’swine flu’

Figure 5: The search result of influensa ‘flu’

2009), which acts as a pivot to which all other modern resources are linked. SALDO is a large freely
available morphological and lexical-semantic lexicon for modern Swedish. Moreover, there is a

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 432 of 474]



diachronic pivot resource with links between the modern and the historical morphologies.

In the simple search a user can input either a word form, a lemgram (a form unit), or a sense unit,
and the interface will render all information associated to all sense units related to the input. E.g.,
figure 5 displays the search result of the lemgram influensa (noun) ‘flu’. In the extended search
the user can combine available filters from drop down boxes which are translated to SRU/CQL
expressions. E.g. a word form as reglular expression and a certain part of speech type.

In addition, the interface supports full text search in the textual parts of the lexical resources, such as
examples and definitions. The full text search, beyond extending the search capabilities, also makes
the lexical information not linked to SALDO discoverable.

References
Adesam, Y., Ahlberg, M., and Bouma, G. (2012). bokstaffua, bokstaffwa, bokstafwa, bokstaua,
bokstawa. . . Towards lexical link-up for a corpus of Old Swedish. In Proceedings of LTHist 2012.

Bick, E. (2009). A graphical corpus-based dictionary of word relations. In Proceedings of
NODALIDA 2009. NEALT Proceedings Series Vol. 4, Odense. NEALT.

Borin, L. and Forsberg, M. (2009). All in the family: A comparison of SALDO and WordNet. In
Proceedings of the Nodalida 2009 Workshop on WordNets and other Lexical Semantic Resources –
between Lexical Semantics, Lexicography, Terminology and Formal Ontologies, Odense. NEALT.

Borin, L. and Forsberg, M. (2011). A diachronic computational lexical resource for 800 years of
Swedish. In Language technology for cultural heritage, pages 41–61. Springer, Berlin.

Borin, L., Forsberg, M., and Kokkinakis, D. (2010). Diabase: Towards a diachronic blark in support
of historical studies. In Proceedings of LREC 2010.

Borin, L., Forsberg, M., Olsson, L.-J., and Uppström, J. (2012a). The open lexical infrastructure of
Språkbanken. In Proceedings of LREC 2012, pages 3598–3602, Istanbul. ELRA.

Borin, L., Forsberg, M., and Roxendal, J. (2012b). Korp – the corpus infrastructure of Språkbanken.
In Proceedings of LREC 2012, pages 474–478, Istanbul. ELRA.

ISO (2008). Language resource management – lexical markup framework (lmf). International
Standard ISO 24613:2008.

Kilgarriff, A., Rychlý, P., Smrž, P., and Tugwell, D. (2008). The Sketch Engine. In Fontenelle, T.,
editor, Practical Lexicography: A Reader, pages 297–306. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Nygaard, L., Priestley, J., Nøklestad, A., and Johannessen, J. B. (2008). Glossa: a multilingual,
multimodal, configurable user interface. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC’08), Marrakech. ELRA.

Volodina, E., Borin, L., Loftsson, H., Arnbjörnsdóttir, B., and Leifsson, G. Ö. (2012). Waste not,
want not: Towards a system architecture for icall based on nlp component re-use. In Proceedings
of the SLTC 2012 workshop on NLP for CALL, Lund, 25th October, 2012, pages 47–58.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 433 of 474]


