










































Team UDEL KBGen 2013 Challenge


Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 206–207,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Team UDEL KBGen 2013 Challenge  

Keith Butler, Priscilla Moraes, Ian Tabolt, Kathleen F. McCoy 
Computer and Information Science Department 

University of Delaware 
Newark, DE 19716 

keithb@udel.edu, pmoraes@udel.edu, itabolt@udel.edu, mccoy@cis.udel.edu 

  
 

Abstract 

This document describes the University of Dela-
ware’s entry into KBGen 2013 Challenge which 
provided teams with input data representation from 
the AURA knowledge base (KB), developed in the 
context of the HALO Project at SRI International, 
along with a lexicon mapping for concepts present 
on those input files. Training sentences were also 
provided. The task was to accurately generate an 
English sentence depicting the information from a 
set of triples from the knowledge base. 

1 Approach 
Our approach to the problem was to develop a 
set of rules for translating KB structures into 
English structures and to use an existing genera-
tor, such as SimpleNLG (Gatt & Reiter, 2009) or 
FUF-SURGE (Elhadad, 1993) to generate the 
sentences. 

Our analysis of pre-release data provided by 
the KBGen organization (triple-files, training 
sentences, tree graphs, lexicon) was facilitated by 
writing a mashup program (KBGenMashup) that 
enabled viewing/searching the data. The program 
initially loads all the training sentences into a 
clickable list box.  When a sentence is clicked, 
all data relating to that sentence is displayed: cor-
responding triples, tree-graph, and Stanford parse 
of the sentence.  The displayed triples are given 
“hot spots” so clicking on them will present a list 
of other sentences containing (or NOT contain-
ing) that same relation or instance type.  Finally, 
KBGenMashup enables a search for other sen-
tences that contain a given word or phrase.  Us-
ing this tool allowed us to discover common real-
ization patterns for certain KB triples. 

2 Major sentence types 
Our initial generator implementation utilized 
SimpleNLG in a java wrapper. Our tack was to 
focus on the realization of major sentence types, 
generally identified by the presence of a particu-

lar function in the KB triples, e.g. has-function, 
subevent, plays. These functions provided the 
main verb and sentence structures, and other KB 
relations were fit into this structure (in sub-
ject/object position or as adjuncts) in a rule-
based way. 

For instance, Figure 1 shows a triples file from 
the testing data that was identified under the 
cluster has-function, along with the sentence 
generated by our system and the rule used to re-
alize the cluster for this relation type. 
  

 
Figure 1: A triples file from the testing data. 
 
Sentence generated: The function of the peptide 
bond is to hold together hydrogen and nitrogen 
using a single bond. 

The identified rule for this input is the has-
function rule. The main entity is the entity that is 
related to the event of the instance by the has-
function relation type. The rule states that the 
subject of the sentence is the “the function of 
[main entity]”. For this template the verb to be is 
identified as the main verb and the object of the 
sentence is a verb phrase (VP) composed of the 
events present in the triples file in the infinitive 
form, and the existing secondary entities. Each 
secondary entity is related to an event by a se-
mantic relation type. The nature of this relation 
defines which role the secondary entity plays in 
the sentence (e.g. the “object” relation, when 
present, usually links the event to the head(s) of 
the noun phrase (NP) within the VP). Although 
the majority of the input files have secondary 

206



entities that are related to the main event by the 
object relation, some other cases do not present 
them. The head of the noun phrases can be repre-
sented, in those cases, by secondary relations 
connected to the main event by one of agent, 
base, result, raw-material, relation types. Heuris-
tics are applied in order to define the head of the 
noun phrase since the relation that will define 
which entity is the head of the NP is based on the 
combination of the existing relations. The rela-
tions in the set of triples that are not already real-
ized as one of the previous roles in the sentence 
are then realized recursively for each event, 
complementing the VP. Those relations are rep-
resented by prepositional phrases (PP) and the 
preposition chosen for each PP represents the 
semantic role of the relation type (e.g. instrument 
relations often use the prepositions with or us-
ing, while donor and origin relations often use 
from). 

3 No-Events and other sentence types 
The simple strategy described above worked well 
for some sentence types, but others required 
more sophisticated triple traversal. In particular, 
realizing triple sets not containing an event was 
problematic.  With time running short, we im-
plemented a second realizer to handle these 
types. It used its own heuristics, plus stored the 
sets of triples in a database that allowed for flex-
ible traversing. Consider its heuristics to handle 
no-event triple sets (events generally provide the 
verb and sentence structure). No-event sentences 
would use a form of “be” as the main verb, but 
we still needed to identify the sentence’s main 
subject.  To do this, the software looks for the 
Entity that is on the left side of the most triples. 
Why?  There is more information about this Enti-
ty than about any other. Consider ex29b.4 (Fig-
ure 2).  The tree graph shows that “Restriction-
Site” is on the left side of five triples.  It should 
be the subject of the sentence, which could be 
realized as “A restriction site is a short DNA se-
quence which consists of 2 deoxyribose and a 
deoxyribonucleoside monophosphate.”  Note the 
order of the Entities in the sentence.  The subject 
is mentioned first, then its adjective (“short”), 
then class (“DNA sequence”), then remaining 
entities.  In realizing the remaining Entities, a 
common routine is used to check for cardinality 
and perform any rewording as appropriate. 

 
Figure 2: ex29b.4 

In many cases, there was a tie among the times 
Entities were on the left.  In one type of “tie” 
(ex05a2.265, Figure 3), there is a cycle in the 
graph (see “Fibronectin, “Carbohydrate-Side-
Chain”, “Surface”.)  In these cases, the heuristic 
chooses the “middle” Entity in the cycle (Carbo-
hydrate in this case) as the subject.  Then in 
choosing mention-order, the software (usually) 
starts the sentence by putting the adjective before 
the subject (i.e. “branched” & “carbohydrate side 
chain”), then visits each Entity around the cycle, 
then traverses up to the “Top” Entity.   This sen-
tence is realized as “There are branched carbo-
hydrate side chains at the surface of the fibron-
ectin of an animal plasma membrane.” 

 
Figure 3: ex05a2.265 

4 Conclusions 
We have described a template-based generation 
entry based on two different paradigms. In one, 
sentences are formed on the basis of a major re-
lation that generally selects the main verb and 
fits the realization of the other pieces according 
to the structures specific for that sentence type. 
The second piece that we needed is based on 
flexibly traversing the knowledge base and real-
izing based on patterns found in the triples. 

References  
Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. SimpleNLG: A 

realization engine for practical applications, Pro-
ceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natu-
ral Language Generation, pages 90–93, Athens, 
Greece, 30 – 31 March 2009.  

Michael Elhadad. 1993. FUF: the Universal Unifier 
User Manual Version 5.2. 

207


