










































Sentiment analysis on Italian tweets


Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, pages 100–107,
Atlanta, Georgia, 14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Sentiment analysis on Italian tweets

Valerio Basile
University of Groningen
v.basile@rug.nl

Malvina Nissim
University of Bologna

malvina.nissim@unibo.it

Abstract

We describe TWITA, the first corpus of Italian
tweets, which is created via a completely au-
tomatic procedure, portable to any other lan-
guage. We experiment with sentiment anal-
ysis on two datasets from TWITA: a generic
collection and a topic-specific collection. The
only resource we use is a polarity lexicon,
which we obtain by automatically matching
three existing resources thereby creating the
first polarity database for Italian. We observe
that albeit shallow, our simple system captures
polarity distinctions matching reasonably well
the classification done by human judges, with
differences in performance across polarity val-
ues and on the two sets.

1 Introduction

Twitter is an online service which lets subscribers
post short messages (“tweets”) of up to 140 charac-
ters about anything, from good-morning messages
to political stands.

Such micro texts are a precious mine for grasping
opinions of groups of people, possibly about a spe-
cific topic or product. This is even more so, since
tweets are associated to several kinds of meta-data,
such as geographical coordinates of where the tweet
was sent from, the id of the sender, the time of the
day — information that can be combined with text
analysis to yield an even more accurate picture of
who says what, and where, and when. The last years
have seen an enormous increase in research on de-
veloping opinion mining systems of various sorts
applying Natural Language Processing techniques.

Systems range from simple lookups in polarity or
affection resources, i.e. databases where a polarity
score (usually positive, negative, or neutral) is asso-
ciated to terms, to more sophisticated models built
through supervised, unsupervised, and distant learn-
ing involving various sets of features (Liu, 2012).

Tweets are produced in many languages, but most
work on sentiment analysis is done for English (even
independently of Twitter). This is also due to the
availability of tools and resources. Developing sys-
tems able to perform sentiment analysis for tweets in
a new language requires at least a corpus of tweets
and a polarity lexicon, both of which, to the best of
our knowledge, do not exist yet for Italian.

This paper offers three main contributions in this
respect. First, we present the first of corpus of tweets
for Italian, built in such a way that makes it possi-
ble to use the exact same strategy to build similar
resources for other languages without any manual
intervention (Section 2). Second, we derive a polar-
ity lexicon for Italian, organised by senses, also us-
ing a fully automatic strategy which can replicated
to obtain such a resource for other languages (Sec-
tion 3.1). Third, we use the lexicon to automatically
assign polarity to two subsets of the tweets in our
corpus, and evaluate results against manually anno-
tated data (Sections 3.2–3.4).

2 Corpus creation

We collected one year worth of tweets, from Febru-
ary 2012 to February 2013, using the Twitter fil-
ter API1 and a language recognition strategy which

1https://dev.twitter.com/docs/api/1/
post/statuses/filter

100



we describe below. The collection, named TWITA,
consists of about 100 million tweets in Italian en-
riched with several kinds of meta-information, such
as the time-stamp, geographic coordinates (when-
ever present), and the username of the twitter. Addi-
tionally, we used off-the-shelf language processing
tools to tokenise all tweets and tag them with part-
of-speech information.

2.1 Language detection
One rather straightforward way of creating a corpus
of language-specific tweets is to retrieve tweets via
the Twitter API which are matched with strongly
language-representative words. Tjong Kim Sang
and Bos (2012) compile their list of highly typ-
ical Dutch terms manually to retrieve Dutch-only
tweets. While we also use a list of strongly repre-
sentative Italian words, we obtain such list automat-
ically. This has the advantage of making the proce-
dure more objective and fully portable to any other
language for which large reference corpora are avail-
able. Indeed, we relied on frequency information de-
rived from ItWac, a large corpus of Italian (Baroni et
al., 2009), and exploited Google n-grams to rule out
cross-language homographs. For boosting precision,
we also used the publicly available language recog-
nition software langid.py (Lui and Baldwin, 2012).
The details of the procedure are given below:

1. extract the 1.000 most frequent lemmas from
ItWaC;

2. extract tweets matched by the selected repre-
sentative words and detect the language using a
freely available software;2

3. filter out the terms in the original list which
have high frequency in a conflicting language.
Frequency is obtained from Google N-grams;

4. use high frequency terms in the resulting
cleaner list to search the Twitter API.

The 20 top terms which were then used to match
Italian-only tweets are: vita Roma forza alla quanto
amore Milano Italia fare grazie della anche peri-
odo bene scuola dopo tutto ancora tutti fatto. In the

2Doing so, we identify other languages that share charac-
ter sequences with Italian. The large majority of tweets in the
first search were identified as Portuguese, followed by English,
Spanish and then Italian.

extraction, we preserved metadata about user, time,
and geographical coordinates whenever available.

Both precision and recall of this method are hard
to assess. We cannot know how many tweets that
are in fact Italian we’re actually missing, but the
amount of data we can in any case collect is so high
that the issue is not so relevant.3 Precision is more
important, but manual checking would be too time-
consuming. We inspected a subset of 1,000 tweets
and registered a precision of 99.7% (three very short
tweets were found to be in Spanish). Considering
that roughly 2.5% of the tweets also include the ge-
ographical coordinates of the device used to send the
message, we assessed an approximate precision in-
directly. We plotted a one million tweets randomly
chosen from our corpus and obtained the map shown
in Figure 1 (the map is clipped to the Europe area for
better identifiability). We can see that Italy is clearly
outlined, indicating that precision, though not quan-
tifiable, is likely to be satisfactory.

Figure 1: Map derived by plotting geo-coordinates of
tweets obtained via our language-detection procedure.

2.2 Processing

The collected tweets have then been enriched with
token-level, POS-tags, and lemma information.
Meta-information was excluded from processing.
So for POS-tagging and lemmatisation we substi-
tuted hashtags, mentions (strings of the form @user-

3This is because we extract generic tweets. Should one want
to extract topic-specific tweets, a more targeted list of charac-
terising terms should be used.

101



name referring to a specific user) and URLs with a
generic label. All the original information was re-
inserted after processing. The tweets were tokenised
with the UCTO rule-based tokeniser4 and then POS-
tagged using TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994) with the
provided Italian parameter file. Finally, we used the
morphological analyser morph-it! (Zanchetta and
Baroni, 2005) for lemmatisation.

3 Sentiment Analysis

The aim of sentiment analysis (or opinion mining) is
detecting someone’s attitude, whether positive, neu-
tral, or negative, on the basis of some utterance or
text s/he has produced. While a first step would be
determining whether a statement is objective or sub-
jective, and then only in the latter case identify its
polarity, it is often the case that only the second task
is performed, thereby also collapsing objective state-
ments and a neutral attitude.

In SemEval-2013’s shared task on “Sentiment
Analysis in Twitter”5 (in English tweets), which is
currently underway, systems must detect (i) polar-
ity of a given word in a tweet, and (ii) polarity of
the whole tweet, in terms of positive, negative, or
neutral. This is also what we set to do for Italian.
We actually focus on (ii) in the sense that we do not
evaluate (i), but we use and combine each word’s
polarity to obtain the tweet’s overall polarity.

Several avenues have been explored for polar-
ity detection. The simplest route is detecting the
presence of specific words which are known to ex-
press a positive, negative or neutral feeling. For
example, O’Connor et al. (2010) use a lexicon-
projection strategy yielding predictions which sig-
nificantly correlate with polls regarding ratings of
Obama. While it is clear that deeper linguistic anal-
ysis should be performed for better results (Pang and
Lee, 2008), accurate processing is rather hard on
texts such as tweets, which are short, rich in abbrevi-
ations and intra-genre expressions, and often syntac-
tically ill-formed. Additionally, existing tools for the
syntactic analysis of Italian, such as the DeSR parser
(Attardi et al., 2009), might not be robust enough for
processing such texts.

Exploiting information coming from a polarity

4http://ilk.uvt.nl/ucto/
5www.cs.york.ac.uk/semeval-2013/task2/.

lexicon, we developed a simple system which as-
signs to a given tweet one of three possible values:
positive, neutral or negative. The only input to the
system is the prior polarity coded in the lexicon per
word sense. We experiment with several ways of
combining all the polarities obtained for each word
(sense) in a given tweet. Performance is evaluated
against manually annotated tweets.

3.1 Polarity lexicon for Italian

Most polarity detection systems make use, in some
way, of an affection lexicon, i.e. a language-specific
resource which assigns a negative or positive prior
polarity to terms. Such resources have been built by
hand or derived automatically (Wilson et al., 2005;
Wiebe and Mihalcea, 2006; Esuli and Sebastiani,
2006; Taboada et al., 2011, e.g.). To our knowl-
edge, there isn’t such a resource already available
for Italian. Besides hand-crafting, there have been
proposals for creating resources for new languages
in a semi-automatic fashion, using manually anno-
tated sets of seeds (Pitel and Grefenstette, 2008),
or exploiting twitter emoticons directly (Pak and
Paroubek, 2011). Rather than creating a new po-
larity lexicon from scratch, we exploit three exist-
ing resources, namely MultiWordNet (Pianta et al.,
2002), SentiWordNet (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006;
Baccianella et al., 2010), and WordNet itself (Fell-
baum, 1998) to obtain an annotated lexicon of senses
for Italian. Basically, we port the SentiWordNet an-
notation to the Italian portion of MultiWordNet, and
we do so in a completely automatic fashion.

Our starting point is SentiWordNet, a version
of WordNet where the independent values positive,
negative, and objective are associated to 117,660
synsets, each value in the zero-one interval. Mul-
tiWordNet is a resource which aligns Italian and En-
glish synsets and can thus be used to transfer polar-
ity information associated to English synsets in Sen-
tiWordNet to Italian synsets. One obstacle is that
while SentiWordNet refers to WordNet 3.0, Multi-
WordNet’s alignment holds for WordNet 1.6, and
synset reference indexes are not plainly carried over
from one version to the next. We filled this gap using
an automatically produced mapping between synsets
of Wordnet versions 1.6 and 3.0 (Daud et al., 2000),
making it possible to obtain SentiWordNet annota-
tion for the Italian synsets of MultiWordNet. The

102



coverage of our resource is however rather low com-
pared to the English version, and this is due to the
alignment procedure which must exploit an earlier
version of the resource. The number of synsets is
less than one third of that of SentiWordNet.

3.2 Polarity assignment
Given a tweet, our system assigns a polarity score to
each of its tokens by matching them to the entries in
SentiWordNet. Only matches of the correct POS are
allowed. The polarity score of the complete tweet is
given by the sum of the polarity scores of its tokens.

Polarity is associated to synsets, and the same
term can occur in more than one synset. One option
would be to perform word sense disambiguation and
only pick the polarity score associated with the in-
tended sense. However, the structure of tweets and
the tools available for Italian do not make this op-
tion actually feasible, although we might investigate
it in the future. As a working solution, we compute
the positive and negative scores for a term occurring
in a tweet as the means of the positive and negative
scores of all synsets to which the lemma belongs to
in our lexical resource. The resulting polarity score
of a lemma is the difference between its positive and
negative scores. Whenever a lemma is not found in
the database, it is given a polarity score of 0.

One underlying assumption to this approach is
that the different senses of a given word have simi-
lar sentiment scores. However, because this assump-
tion might not be true in all cases, we introduce the
concept of “polypathy”, which is the characterising
feature of a term exhibiting high variance of polarity
scores across its synsets. The polypathy of a lemma
is calculated as the standard deviation of the polar-
ity scores of the possible senses. This information
can be used to remove highly polypathic words from
the computation of the polarity of a complete tweet,
for instance by discarding the tokens with a poly-
pathy higher than a certain threshold. In particular,
for the experiments described in this paper, a thresh-
old of 0.5 has been empirically determined. To give
an idea, among the most polypathic words in Senti-
WordNet we found weird (.62), stunning (.61), con-
flicting (.56), terrific (.56).

Taboada et al. (2011) also use SentiWordNet for
polarity detection, either taking the first sense of a
term (the most frequent in WordNet) or taking the

average across senses, as we also do — although
we also add the polypathy-aware strategy. We can-
not use the first-sense strategy because through the
alignment procedure senses are not ranked accord-
ing to frequency anymore.

3.3 Gold standard

For evaluating the system performance we created
two gold standard sets, both annotated by three inde-
pendent native-speakers, who were given very sim-
ple and basic instructions and performed the anno-
tation via a web-based interface. The value to be
assigned to each tweet is one out of positive, neu-
tral, or negative. As mentioned, the neutral value
includes both objective statements as well as subjec-
tive statements where the twitter’s position is neutral
or equally positive and negative at the same time (see
also (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2007)).

All data selected for annotation comes from
TWITA. The first dataset consists of 1,000 ran-
domly selected tweets. The second dataset is topic-
oriented, i.e. we randomly extracted 1,000 tweets
from all those containing a given topic. Topic-
oriented, or target-dependent (Jiang et al., 2011),
classification involves detecting opinions about a
specific target rather than detecting the more gen-
eral opinion expressed in a given tweet. We identify
a topic through a given hashtag, and in this experi-
ment we chose the tag “Grillo”, the leader of an Ital-
ian political movement. While in the first set the an-
notators were asked to assign a polarity value to the
message of the tweet as a whole, in the second set
the value was to be assigned to the author’s opinion
concerning the hashtag, in this case Beppe Grillo.
This is a relevant distinction, since it can happen
that the tweet is, say, very negative about someone
else while being positive or neutral about Grillo at
the same time. For example, the tweet in (1), ex-
presses a negative opinion about Vendola, another
Italian politician, but is remaining quite neutral to-
wards Grillo, the target of the annotation exercise.

(1) #Vendola dà del #populista a #Grillo è una
barzelletta o ancora non si è accorto che il
#comunismo è basato sul populismo?

Thus, in the topic-specific set we operate a more
subtle distinction when assigning polarity, some-

103



thing which should make the task simpler for a hu-
man annotator while harder for a shallow system.

As shown in Table 1, for both sets the annotators
detected more than half of the tweets as neutral, or
they were disagreeing – without absolute majority,
a tweet is considered neutral; however these cases
account for only 7.7% in the generic set and 6.9% in
the topic-specific set.

Table 1: Distribution of the tags assigned by the absolute
majority of the raters

set positive negative neutral
generic 94 301 605
topic-specific 293 145 562

Inter-annotator agreement was measured via Fleiss’
Kappa across three annotators. On the generic set,
we found an agreement of Kappa = 0.321, while
on the topic-specific set we found Kappa = 0.397.
This confirms our expectation that annotating topic-
specific tweets is actually an easier task. We might
also consider using more sophisticated and fine-
grained sentiment annotation schemes which have
proved to be highly reliable in the annotation of En-
glish data (Su and Markert, 2008a).

3.4 Evaluation
We ran our system on both datasets described in Sec-
tion 3.3, using all possible variations of two parame-
ters, namely all combinations of part-of-speech tags
and the application of the threshold scheme, as dis-
cussed in Section 3.2. We measure overall accuracy
as well as precision, recall, and f-score per polar-
ity value. In Tables 2 and 3, we report best scores,
and indicate in brackets the associated POS combi-
nation. For instance, in Table 2, we can read that the
recall of 0.701 for positive polarity is obtained when
the system is run without polypathy threshold and
using nouns, verbs, and adjectives (nva).

We can draw several observations from these re-
sults. First, a fully automatic approach that lever-
ages existing lexical resources performs better than
a wild guess. Performance is boosted when highly
polypathic words are filtered out.

Second, while the system performs well at recog-
nising especially neutral but also positive polarity,
it is really bad at detecting negative polarity. Es-
pecially in the topic-specific set, the system assigns

Table 2: Best results on the generic set. In brackets POS
combination: (n)oun, (v)erb, (a)djective, adve(r)b.

without polypathy threshold, best accuracy: 0.505 (a)
positive negative neutral

best precision 0.440 (r) 0.195 (v) 0.664 (nar)
best recall 0.701 (nva) 0.532 (var) 0.669 (a)
best F-score 0.485 (nvar) 0.262 (vr) 0.647 (a)

with polypathy threshold, best accuracy: 0.554 (r)
positive negative neutral

best precision 0.420 (r) 0.233 (v) 0.685 (nar)
best recall 0.714 (nvar) 0.457 (var) 0.785 (r)
best F-score 0.492 (nar) 0.296 (vr) 0.698 (r)

Table 3: Best results on the topic-specific set. In brackets
POS combination: (n)oun, (v)erb, (a)djective, adve(r)b.

without polypathy threshold, best accuracy: 0.487 (r)
positive negative neutral

best precision 0.164 (a) 0.412 (a) 0.617 (nar)
best recall 0.593 (nva) 0.150 (nr) 0.724 (a)
best f-score 0.251 (nv) 0.213 (nr) 0.637 (a)

with polypathy threshold, best accuracy: 0.514 (r)
positive negative neutral

best precision 0.163 (nvar) 0.414 (a) 0.623 (nar)
best recall 0.593 (nvar) 0.106 (nar) 0.829 (r)
best f-score 0.256 (nvar) 0.166 (nar) 0.676 (r)

too many positive labels in place of negative ones,
causing at the same time positive’s precision and
negative’s recall to drop. We believe there are two
explanations for this. The first one is the “positive-
bias” of SentiWordNet, as observed by Taboada et
al. (2011), which causes limited performance in the
identification of negative polarity. The second one
is that we do not use any syntactic clues, such as for
detecting negated statements. Including some strat-
egy for dealing with this should improve recognition
of negative opinions, too.

Third, the lower performance on the topic-specific
dataset confirms the intuition that this task is harder,
mainly because we operate a more subtle distinc-
tion when assigning a polarity label as we refer to
one specific subject. Deeper linguistic analysis, such
as dependency parsing, might help, as only certain
words would result as related to the intended target
while others wouldn’t.

As far as parts of speech are concerned, there
is a tendency for adverbs to be good indicators to-
wards overall accuracy, and best scores are usually
obtained exploiting adjectives and/or adverbs.

104



4 Related work

We have already discussed some related work con-
cerning corpus creation, the development of an
affection lexicon, and the use of such polarity-
annotated resources for sentiment analysis (Sec-
tion 3). As for results, because this is the first experi-
ment on detecting polarity in Italian tweets, compar-
ing performance is not straightforward. Most work
on sentiment analysis in tweets is on English, and al-
though there exist relatively complex systems based
on statistical models, just using information from a
polarity resource is rather common. Su and Markert
(2008b) test SentiWordNet for assigning a subjec-
tivity judgement to word senses on a gold standard
corpus, observing an accuracy of 75.3%. Given that
SentiWordNet is the automatic expansion over a set
of manually annotated seeds, at word-level, this can
be considered as an upper bound in sense subjectiv-
ity detection. Taboada et al. (2011) offer a survey of
lexicon-based methods which are evaluated on ad-
jectives only, by measuring overall accuracy against
a manually annotated set of words. Using Senti-
WordNet in a lexicon-projection fashion yields an
accuracy of 61.47% under best settings. These are
however scores on single words rather than whole
sentences or microtexts.

Considering that we assign polarity to tweets
rather than single words, and that in the creation of
our resource via automatic alignment we lose more
than two thirds of the original synsets (see Sec-
tion 3.1), our results are promising. They are also
not that distant from results reported by Agarwal et
al. (2011), whose best system, a combination of un-
igrams and the best set of features, achieves an ac-
curacy of 60.50% on a three-way classification like
ours, evaluated against a manually annotated set of
English tweets. Best f-scores reported for positive,
negative, and neutral are comprised between 59%
and 62%. Similar results are obtained by Pak and
Paroubek (2010), who train a classifier on automati-
cally tagged data, and evaluate their model on about
200 English tweets. Best reported f-score on a three-
way polarity assignment is just over 60%.

5 Conclusions and future work

We have presented the first corpus of Italian tweets
obtained in a completely automatic fashion, the first

polarity lexicon for Italian, and the first experiment
on sentiment analysis on Italian tweets using these
two resources. Both the corpus and the lexicon are
as of now unique resources for Italian, and were pro-
duced in a way which is completely portable to other
languages. In compliance with licensing terms of the
sources we have used, our resources are made avail-
able for research purposes after reviewing.

Simply projecting the affection lexicon, using two
different polarity scoring methods, we experimented
with detecting a generic sentiment expressed in a mi-
crotext, and detecting the twitter’s opinion on a spe-
cific topic. As expected, we found that topic-specific
classification is harder for an automatic system as it
must discern what is said about the topic itself and
what is said more generally or about another entity
mentioned in the text.

Indeed, this contribution can be seen as a first
step towards polarity detection in Italian tweets. The
information we obtain from SentiWordNet and the
ways we combine it could obviously be used as fea-
ture in a learning setting. Other sources of infor-
mation, to be used in combination with our polarity
scores or integrated in a statistical model, are the so-
called noisy labels, namely strings (such as emoti-
cons or specific hashtags (Go et al., 2009; Davi-
dov et al., 2010)) that can be taken as positive or
negative polarity indicators as such. Speriosu et al.
(2011) have shown that training a maximum entropy
classier using noisy labels as class predictors in the
training set yields an improvement of about three
percentage points over a lexicon-based prediction.

Another important issue to deal with is figurative
language. During manual annotation we have en-
countered many cases of irony or sarcasm, which is a
phenomenon that must be obviously tackled. There
have been attempts at identifying it automatically in
the context of tweets (González-Ibáñez et al., 2011),
and we plan to explore this issue in future work.

Finally, the co-presence of meta and linguistic
information allows for a wide range of linguistic
queries and statistical analyses on the whole of the
corpus, also independently of sentiment informa-
tion, of course. For example, correlations between
parts-of-speech and polarity have been found (Pak
and Paroubek, 2010), and one could expect also
correlations with sentiment and time of the day, or
month of the year, and so on.

105



Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Manuela, Marcella e Silvia
for their help with annotation, and the reviewers for
their useful comments. All errors remain our own.

References
Apoorv Agarwal, Boyi Xie, Ilia Vovsha, Owen Rambow,

and Rebecca Passonneau. 2011. Sentiment analysis
of twitter data. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Languages in Social Media, LSM ’11, pages 30–38,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Giuseppe Attardi, Felice Dell’Orletta, Maria Simi, and
Joseph Turian. 2009. Accurate dependency parsing
with a stacked multilayer perceptron. In Proceeding
of Evalita 2009, LNCS. Springer.

Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-
tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In
Nicoletta Calzolari et al., editor, Proceedings of LREC
2010.

Marco Baroni, Silvia Bernardini, Adriano Ferraresi, and
Eros Zanchetta. 2009. The WaCky wide web: a
collection of very large linguistically processed web-
crawled corpora. Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, 43(3):209–226.

Jordi Daud, Llus Padr, and German Rigau. 2000. Map-
ping wordnets using structural information. In 38th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL’2000)., Hong Kong.

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Enhanced sentiment learning using twitter hashtags
and smileys. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics: Posters,
COLING ’10, pages 241–249, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Sentiword-
net: A publicly available lexical resource for opinion
mining. In In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC06, pages
417–422.

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2007. Pagerank-
ing wordnet synsets: An application to opinion min-
ing. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of
the Association of Computational Linguistics, pages
424–431, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet. An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press.

Alec Go, Richa Bhayani, and Lei Huang. 2009. Twitter
sentiment analysis using distant supervision. http:

//cs.wmich.edu/˜tllake/fileshare/
TwitterDistantSupervision09.pdf.

Roberto González-Ibáñez, Smaranda Muresan, and Nina
Wacholder. 2011. Identifying sarcasm in twitter: A
closer look. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, pages 581–586, Port-
land, Oregon, USA, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Long Jiang, Mo Yu, Ming Zhou, Xiaohua Liu, and Tiejun
Zhao. 2011. Target-dependent twitter sentiment clas-
sification. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, pages 151–160, Port-
land, Oregon, USA, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Bing Liu. 2012. Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Min-
ing. Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Tech-
nologies. Morgan & Claypool Publishers.

Marco Lui and Timothy Baldwin. 2012. langid.py: An
off-the-shelf language identification tool. In ACL (Sys-
tem Demonstrations), pages 25–30. The Association
for Computer Linguistics.

Brendan O’Connor, Ramnath Balasubramanyan,
Bryan R. Routledge, and Noah A. Smith. 2010.
From tweets to polls: Linking text sentiment to
public opinion time series. In William W. Cohen and
Samuel Gosling, editors, Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media, ICWSM 2010, Washington, DC, USA, May
23-26. The AAAI Press.

Alexander Pak and Patrick Paroubek. 2010. Twitter as
a corpus for sentiment analysis and opinion mining.
In Nicoletta Calzolari et al., editor, Proceedings of the
International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, LREC 2010, 17-23 May 2010, Valletta,
Malta. European Language Resources Association.

Alexander Pak and Patrick Paroubek. 2011. Twitter for
sentiment analysis: When language resources are not
available. 23rd International Workshop on Database
and Expert Systems Applications, 0:111–115.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and
sentiment analysis. Found. Trends Inf. Retr., 2(1-2):1–
135, January.

Emanuele Pianta, Luisa Bentivogli, and Christian Gi-
rardi. 2002. MultiWordNet: developing an aligned
multilingual database. In Proceedings of the First In-
ternational Conference on Global WordNet, pages 21–
25.

Guillaume Pitel and Gregory Grefenstette. 2008. Semi-
automatic building method for a multidimensional af-
fect dictionary for a new language. In Proceedings of
LREC 2008.

106



Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tag-
ging using decision trees.

Michael Speriosu, Nikita Sudan, Sid Upadhyay, and Ja-
son Baldridge. 2011. Twitter polarity classification
with label propagation over lexical links and the fol-
lower graph. In Proceedings of the First workshop on
Unsupervised Learning in NLP, pages 53–63, Edin-
burgh, Scotland, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Fangzhong Su and Katja Markert. 2008a. Eliciting sub-
jectivity and polarity judgements on word senses. In
Proceedings of COLING 2008 Workshop on Human
Judgements in Computational Linguistics, Manch-
ester, UK.

Fangzhong Su and Katja Markert. 2008b. From words
to senses: A case study of subjectivity recognition. In
Donia Scott and Hans Uszkoreit, editors, Proceedings
of COLING 2008, Manchester, UK, pages 825–832.

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, Kim-
berly Voll, and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-based
methods for sentiment analysis. Comput. Linguist.,
37(2):267–307, June.

Erik Tjong Kim Sang and Johan Bos. 2012. Predicting
the 2011 dutch senate election results with twitter. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Semantic Analysis in
Social Media, pages 53–60, Avignon, France, April.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Janyce Wiebe and Rada Mihalcea. 2006. Word sense
and subjectivity. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Claire Cardie,
and Pierre Isabelle, editors, ACL. The Association for
Computer Linguistics.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Human Lan-
guage Technology and Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing Conference, 6-8 October, Van-
couver, British Columbia, Canada.

Eros Zanchetta and Marco Baroni. 2005. Morph-it! a
free corpus-based morphological resource for the ital-
ian language. In Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics
2005.

107


