










































Exploring Cities in Crime: Significant Concordance and Co-occurrence in Quantitative Literary Analysis


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 61–71,
Atlanta, Georgia, June 14, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Exploring Cities in Crime: Significant Concordance and Co-occurrence in
Quantitative Literary Analysis

Janneke Rauscher1 Leonard Swiezinski2 Martin Riedl2 Chris Biemann2
(1) Johann Wolfgang Goethe University

Grüneburgplatz 1, 60323 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
(2) FG Language Technology, Dept. of Computer Science

Technische Universität Darmstadt, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany
j.rauscher@em.uni-frankfurt.de, floppy35@web.de,

{riedl,biem}@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract

We present CoocViewer, a graphical analy-
sis tool for the purpose of quantitative lit-
erary analysis, and demonstrate its use on
a corpus of crime novels. The tool dis-
plays words, their significant co-occurrences,
and contains a new visualization for signif-
icant concordances. Contexts of words and
co-occurrences can be displayed. After re-
viewing previous research and current chal-
lenges in the newly emerging field of quan-
titative literary research, we demonstrate how
CoocViewer allows comparative research on
literary corpora in a project-specific study, and
how we can confirm or enhance our hypothe-
ses through quantitative literary analysis.

1 Introduction

Recent years have seen a surge in Digital Human-
ities research. This area, touching on both the
fields of computer science and the humanities, is
concerned with making data from the humanities
analysable by digitalisation. For this, computational
tools such as search, visual analytics, text mining,
statistics and natural language processing aid the hu-
manities researcher. On the one hand, software per-
mits processing a larger set of data in order to assess
traditional research questions. On the other hand,
this gives rise to a transformation of the way re-
search is conducted in the humanities: the possibil-
ity of analyzing a much larger amount of data – yet
in a quantitative fashion with all its necessary aggre-
gation – opens the path to new research questions,
and different methodologies for attaining them.

Although the number of research projects in Dig-
ital Humanities is increasing at fast pace, we still
observe a gap between the traditional humanities
scholars on the one side, and computer scientists on
the other. While computer science excels in crunch-
ing numbers and providing automated processing
for large amounts of data, it is hard for the com-
puter scientist to imagine what research questions
form the discourse in the humanities. In contrast to
this, humanities scholars have a hard time imagining
the possibilities and limitations of computer technol-
ogy, how automatically generated results ought to
be interpreted, and how to operationalize automatic
processing in a way that its unavoidable imperfec-
tions are more than compensated by the sheer size
of analysable material.

This paper resulted from a successful co-
operation between a natural language processing
(NLP) group and a literary researcher in the field
of Digital Humanities. We present the CoocViewer
analysis tool for literary and other corpora, which
supports new angles in literary research through
quantitative analysis.

In the Section 2, we describe the CoocViewer
tool and review the landscape of previously available
tools for our purpose. As a unique characteristic,
CoocViewer contains a visualisation of significant
concordances, which is especially useful for target
terms of high frequency. In Section 3, we map the
landscape of previous and current quantitative re-
search in literary analysis, which is still an emerging
and somewhat controversial sub-discipline. A use-
case for the tool in the context of a specific project
is laid out in Section 4, where a few examples illus-

61



trate how CoocViewer is used to confirm and gen-
erate hypotheses in literary analysis. Section 5 con-
cludes and provides an outlook to further needs in
tool support for quantative literary research.

2 CoocViewer - a Visual Corpus Browser

This section describes our CoocViewer visual cor-
pus browsing tool. After shortly outlining neces-
sary pre-processing steps, we illustrate and moti-
vate the functionality of the graphical user interface.
The tool was specifically designed to aid researchers
from the humanities that do not have a background
in computational linguistics.

2.1 Related Work
Whereas there exist a number of tools for visualizing
co-occurrences, there is, to the best of our knowl-
edge, no tool to visualize positional co-occurrences,
or as we also call them, significant concordances.
In (Widdows et al., 2002) tools are presented that
visualize meanings of nouns as vector space repre-
sentation, using LSA (Deerwester et al., 1990) and
graph models using co-occurrences. There is also
a range of text-based tools, without any quantita-
tive statistics, e.g. Textpresso (Müller et al., 2004),
PhraseNet1 and Walden2. For searching words in
context, Luhn (1960) introduced KWIC (Key Word
in Context) which allows us to search for concor-
dances and is also used in several corpus linguis-
tic tools e.g. (Culy and Lyding, 2011), BNCWeb3,
Sketch Engine (Kilgarriff et al., 2004), Corpus
Workbench4 and MonoConc (Barlow, 1999). Al-
though several tools for co-occurrences visualiza-
tion exist (see e.g. co-occurrences for over 200 lan-
guages at LCC5), they often have different aims, and
e.g. do not deliver the functionality to filter on dif-
ferent part-of-speech tags.

2.2 Corpus Preprocessing
To make a natural language corpus accessible in the
tool, a number of preprocessing steps have to be car-

1http://www-958.ibm.com/software/data/
cognos/manyeyes/page/Phrase_Net.html

2http://infomotions.com/sandbox/
network-diagrams/bin/walden/

3http://bncweb.lancs.ac.uk/bncwebSignup/
user/login.php

4http://cwb.sourceforge.net
5http://corpora.uni-leipzig.de/

ried out for producing the contents of CoocViewer’s
database. These steps consist of a fairly standard
natural language processing pipeline, which we de-
scribe shortly.

After tokenizing, part-of-speech tagging (Schmid,
1994) and indexing the input data by document,
sentence and paragraph within the document, we
compute signficant sentence-wide and paragraph-
wide co-occurrences, using the tinyCC6 tool. Here,
the log-likelihood test (Dunning, 1993) is employed
to determine the significance sig(A, B) of the co-
occurrence of two tokens A and B. To sup-
port the significant concordance view (described in
the next section), we have extended the tool to
also produce positional significant co-occurrences,
where sig(A, B, offset) is computed by the log-
likelihood significance of the co-occurrence of A
and B in a token-distance of offset. Since the sig-
nificance measure requires the single frequencies of
A and B, as well as their joint frequency per po-
sitional offset in this setup, this adds considerable
overhead during preprocessing. To our knowledge,
we are the first to extend the notion of positional co-
occurrence beyond direct neighbors, cf. (Richter et
al., 2006). We apply a sigificance threshold of 3.847

and a frequency threshold of 2 to only keep ‘interest-
ing’ pairs. The outcome of preprocessing is stored in
a MySQL database schema similar to the one used
by LCC (Biemann et al., 2007). We store sentence-
and paragraph-wide co-occurrences and positional
co-occurrences in separate database tables, and use
one database per corpus. The database tables are in-
dexed accordingly to optimize the queries issued by
the CoocViewer tool. Additionally, we map the part-
of-speeches to E (proper names), N (proper nouns),
A (adjectives), V (verbs), R (all other part-of-speech
tags) for an uniform representation for different lan-
guages.

2.3 Graphical User Interface

The graphical user interface (UI) is built with com-
mon web technologies, such as HTML, CSS and
JavaScript. The UI communicates via AJAX with
a backend, which utilizes PHP and a MySQL

6http://wortschatz.uni-leipzig.de/

˜cbiemann/software/TinyCC2.html, (Richter et
al., 2006)

7corresponding to 5% error probability

62



database. This makes the approach flexible regard-
ing the platform. It can run on client computers
using XAMP8, a portable package of various Web
technologies, including an Apache web server and a
MySQL server. Alternatively, the tool can operate as
a client-server application over a network. In partic-
ular, we want to highlight the JavaScript data visual-
ization framework D3 (Bostock et al., 2011), which
was used to layout and draw the graphs. We deliber-
ately designed the tool to match the requirements of
literary researchers, who are at times overwhelmed
by general-purpose visualisation tools such as e.g.
Gephi9. The UI is split into three parts: At the top a
menu bar, including a search input field and search
options, a graph drawing panel and display options
at the bottom of the page.

Figure 1: Screenshot of the Coocviewer application using
the concordance view.

The menu bar allows switching between co-
occurrence and concordance views (see Figure
1). The search field supports wildcards and
type-ahead autocompletion, immediately displaying
which words exist in the corpus and match the cur-
rent input. Additionally, there are functionalities to
export the shown graph as SVG or PNG image, or
as plain text, containing all relations, including their
frequencies and significance scores. Within the ad-
vanced configuration windows (shown on the right
side) one can select different corpora, enable case
sensitive/insensitive searches or filter words accord-

8http://www.apachefriends.org/en/index.
html

9https://gephi.org/

ing their part-of-speech tags (as described in Sec-
tion 2.2). The graph drawing panel visualizes the
queried term and its significant co-occurrences resp.
concordances, significancy being visualized by the
thickness of the lines. In Figure 1, showing the con-
cordances for bread, we can directly see words that
occur often with bread in the context: E.g. bread
is often used in combination with butter, cheese,
margarine (offset +2), but also the kind of different
breads is described by the adjectives at offset -1. For
the same information, using the normal KWIC view,
one has to count the words with different offset by
hand to find properties for the term bread. At the
bottom, the maximal number of words shown in the
graph can be specified. For the concordances display
there is an additional option to specify the maximal
offset. The original text (with provenance informa-
tion) containing the nodes (words) or edges (word
pairs) shown in the graph can be retrieved by either
clicking on a word itself or on the edge connecting
two words, in a new window (see Figure 2) within
the application. This window also provides informa-

Figure 2: Occurrences of a significant concordance

tion about the frequencies of single words as well as
their co-occurrence, and also displays relative single
word frequencies in parts-per-million (ppm) to en-
able comparisons between corpora of different sizes.
Words in focus are highlighted and the contents of
this window can also be exported as plain text.

3 Quantitative Literary Research

Quantitative research in literary analysis, although
being conducted and discussed since at least the
1960s, (Hoover, 2008), is still far from being a clear
field of research with a verified and acknowledged
methodology. Studies in this field vary widely with
respect to scope, methods applied and theoretical

63



background. Until now, only the most basic defi-
nition can be given that applies to these approaches:
Quantitative research in literary analysis is generally
concerned with the application of methods from cor-
pus linguistics (and statistics) to the field of litera-
ture to investigate and quantify general grammatical
and lexical features of texts.
Most studies applying such methods to literary anal-
ysis are carried out in the field of stylistics, building
a relatively new research area of corpus stylistics,
also called stylometry (Mahlberg, 2007; Hoover,
2008; Biber, 2011). The quantitative exploration
of stylistic features and patterns is used for author-
ship attribution, e.g. (Burrows, 1992; Burrows,
2007; Craig, 2004; Hoover, 2001; Hoover, 2002),
exploring the specificity of one author’s style, e.g.
(Burrows, 1987; Hori, 2004; Fischer-Starcke, 2010;
Mahlberg, 2012) or one certain text, often compared
to other texts of the same author or period, e.g.
(Craig, 1999; McKenna and Antonia, 2001; Stubbs,
2005; Clement, 2008; Fischer-Starcke, 2009). Some
studies focus on content-related questions such as
the analysis of plot or characterization and the ex-
ploration of relations between and role of different
characters, e.g. (Mahlberg, 2007; Culpeper, 2002;
Culpeper, 2009), developing new ways of exploring
these literary features, e.g. via the application of so-
cial network analysis (Elson et al., 2010; Moretti,
2011; Agarwal et al., 2012). Besides this area, there
are numerous other approaches, like the attempt to
investigate the phenomenon of “literary creativity”
(Hoey, 2007) or ways for automatic recognition of
literary genres (Allison et al., 2011).
Major methodological approaches of this field are,
according to Biber (2011), Mahlberg (2007) and
Hoover (2008), the study of keywords and word-
frequencies, co-occurrences, lexical clusters (also
called bundles or n-grams) and collocational as well
as concordance analysis. Additionally, the need for
cross-investigating and comparing the results with
other corpora (be it a general corpus of one language
or other small, purpose-built corpora) is emphasized
to discuss the uniqueness of the results.
But while especially the studies of Moretti (2000;
2007; 2009), taking a quantitative approach of “dis-
tant reading” on questions of literary history and the
evolution of literary genres, are often received as
groundbreaking for the case, and despite the rising

interest in this field of research in the last decades,
there still is much reluctance towards the imple-
mentation of such methods. The general arguments
raised frequently from the point of view of ’classi-
cal’ literary analysis against a quantitative or compu-
tational approach can be grouped around four cen-
tral points: The uniqueness of each literary text
that quantitative analysis seems to underscore when
treating the texts just as examples of style or period,
focussing on very general patterns; the emphasize
of technology and the relatively high threshold that
the application, analysis and interpretation of the
generated data contains (Potter, 1988); and the gen-
eral notion that meaning in literary texts is highly
context-related and context-dependent in different
ways (Hoover, 2008). Last but not least there is
what can be called the “so-what-argument”: Quan-
titative methods tend to produce sparse significant
new information compared with the classical ap-
proach of close reading, generating insights and in-
terpretations that could as well be reached by simply
reading the book (Mahlberg, 2007; Rommel, 2008).
But the possibilities and advantages of corpus lin-
guistics come to the foreground especially if one is
not interested in aspects of uniqueness or particu-
larity but in commonalities and differences between
large amounts of literary texts too many to be read
and compared in the classical way. This especially
holds when it comes to questions of topics, themes,
discourse analysis and the semantisation of certain
words.

4 Empirical Analysis

This section describes a few exemplary analysis
which we carried out within our ongoing project “At
the crime scene: The intrinsic logic of cities in con-
temporary crime novels”. Settled between the dis-
ciplines of sociology and literature, the project is
embedded in the urban sociological research area of
the ‘Eigenlogik’ (intrinsic logic) of cities (Berking,
2012; Löw, 2012; Löw, forthcoming). The basic hy-
pothesis is that there is no such thing as ‘the’ city or
‘the’ urban experience in general, but that every city
forms its own contexts and complexes of meaning,
the unquestioned and often subconsciously operat-
ing knowledge of how things are done, respectively
making sense of the city. To put it another way, we

64



want to find out if and in what way the respective
city makes a difference and is forming distinctive
structures of thought, action and feeling. This is ex-
plored simultaneously in four different projects in-
vestigating different fields (economic practices, city
marketing, problem discourses and literary field and
texts) in four different cities that are compared with
each other (Birmingham (UK), Glasgow, Frankfurt
on the Main and Dortmund). If the hypothesis is
right, the four different investigated fields should
have more in common within one city and across the
fields than within one field across different cities.
Our subproject is mainly concerned with the literary
and cultural imagination and representation of the
cities in question. One crucial challenge is the ex-
ploration, analysis and comparison of 240 contem-
porary crime novels, each of them set in one of the
cities under examination. The aim of this explorative
study is to analyze the possibility and characteristics
of city-specific structures within the realm of liter-
ary representations of cities.
Dealing with such comparably large amounts of lit-
erary texts, a tool was needed that facilitated us
(laypeople in the field of corpus linguistics) to ex-
plore the city-specific content and structures within
these corpora, enabling a connection of qualitative
close reading and quantitative methods. Visualiza-
tion was a major concern, apparently lowering the
resistance of the literary research community to-
wards charts and numbers and making the results
readable and interpretable without having much ex-
pertise in corpus linguistics. Moreover, the option of
generating significant concordances instead of sim-
ple concordance lines (as e.g. with KWIC) is very
promising: Confronted with very high word fre-
quencies for some of our search terms, e.g. more
than 2200 occurrences of “Frankfurt” in our Frank-
furt corpus, completely manual analysis turned out
to be painstaking and very time-consuming. Auto-
mated or manual reduction of the number of lines
according to standard practices, as e.g. suggested
by Tribble (2010), is not possible without potential
loss of information. CoocViewer enables a sophis-
ticated and automated analysis with concentration
on statistically significant findings through cluster-
ing co-occurring words according to their statistical
significance in concordance lines. Additionally, the
positionality of these re-occurring co-occurrences in

City lang. #novels #tokens #sent. #para.
Birmingham engl. 41 4.8M 336K 142K
Glasgow engl. 61 7.7M 496K 222K
Dortmund ger. 59 5.0M 361K 127K
Frankfurt ger. 79 8.0M 546K 230K

Table 1: Quantitative characteristics of our corpora

relation to the search term (with a maximum range
from -10 to +10 around the node) gives a clear
and immediate picture of patterns of usage within
a corpus. Via exploring the references of the re-
sults we are still able to take account of the context-
specificity of literary texts, as well as distinguishing
author-specific results from those distributed more
equally across a corpus.

After describing the corpus resources, we conduct
two exemplary analysis to show how the quantita-
tive tool as described in Section 2 can be used to aid
complex qualitative research interests in the human-
ities through supporting the exploration and compar-
ison of large corpora (Sect. 4.2), as well as investi-
gating and comparing the semantization and seman-
tic preference of words (Sect. 4.3). The discussion
of results shows how CoocViewer can support hy-
pothesis building and testing on a quantitative basis,
linking qualitative and quantitative approaches.

4.1 Corpus

The selection of the crime novels was based on three
criteria: contemporariness (written and published
within the past 30 years until 2010), the city in ques-
tion (should play a major role resp. be used as major
setting), and genre (crime fiction in any variety). In
a first step, the 240 novels (gathered as paperback-
editions) had to be scanned and digitalized10. Meta-
data was removed and the remaining texts were pre-
processed as described in Section 2.2. The nov-
els were compiled in different corpora according to
the city they are set in, and the database underly-
ing them (sentence or paragraph). Table 1 provides
an overview of the quantitative characteristics of the
four city-specific corpora we discuss here.

10We used ABBY FineReader 10 professional for optical
character recognition, which generated tolerable but not perfect
results, making extensive proof reading and corrections neces-
sary.

65



4.2 Analysis 1: Exploring the Use of the City’s
Name

The occurrence of the name of a city in crime nov-
els can serve different purposes and functions in
the text. It can be used, for example, to simply
‘place’ the plot (instead of or additionally to de-
scribing the setting in further detail) or to indicate
the direction of movement of figures (“they drove to
Glasgow”). Often it is surrounded by information
about city-specific aspects, e.g. of history or mate-
riality. Searching for the respective proper names of
the cities in the four corpora therefore seems to be
a promising start to explore the possibility of city-
specific structures of meaning in literary representa-
tion. If the ‘Eigenlogik’-hypothesis is right, not only
the content that is associated with the name (what
would generally be expected) but also its frequent
usages and functions (as pointer or marker, as start-
ing point for further explanations of city life, etc.)
should differ systematically across cities.
A first close reading of some exemplary crime nov-
els already suggested that this could be the case. To
check this qualitatively derrived impression we con-
ducted CoocViewer searches for the top-15 signif-
icant co-occurrences across all parts of speech for
each proper name in the respective corpus on sen-
tence level (see Figure 3 for the cases of Glasgow
and Frankfurt). To interpret and compare these find-
ings, we additionally looked at the significant con-
cordances (with the same search parameters and an
offset from the node of -3/+3), which helps to ana-
lyze and refine the findings in more depth. In the fol-
lowing, we discuss, compare and interpret the results
with respect to our overriding project-hypothesis to
verify or falsify some of our qualitative first impres-
sions quantitatively.

The corpora indeed tend not only to vary signif-
icantly with respect to the sheer frequency of the
usage of the proper name (with relative frequen-
cies ranging from Glasgow (324ppm) and Frankfurt
(286ppm) to Dortmund (187ppm) and Birmingham
(154ppm)), but also in the usages and functions that
the naming fulfills. The graphs reveal not only dif-
fering co-occurrences, but also differing proportions
of co-occurring word classes, each city revealing its
own distinct pattern.
Especially the English cities tend to co-occur with

Figure 3: Significant co-occurrences of “Glasgow” (up-
per) and “Frankfurt” (lower) in their respective corpora

proper names and common nouns (ten proper
names, four common nouns in the case for Glas-
gow, eight names and six nouns for Birmingham).11

For Glasgow, these comprise parts of the inven-
tory of the city (with “City” (sig. of 695.57) as
either part of the name or city-specific institution
(“City of Glasgow”, “City Orchestra”) or to refer
to different crime-genre specific institutions (as the
“City of Glasgow Police” or “Glasgow City Mortu-
ary”)), the “University” (sig. of 380.42), or the park
“Glasgow Green” (233.46). There is also the name
of another city, the Scottish capital (and rival city)
Edinburgh. As the statistical concordances reveal
quickly, the “Port” (350.88) is, despite Glasgow’s
history as shipbuilding capital, not used to refer to
the cities industrial past. Instead, as can bee seen
from its positioning on -1 directly left to the node,
it refers to the small nearby town Port Glasgow (see

11The noun “accent” which both English cities names co-
occur with (and for which no equivalent term can be found on
the German side) can be explained by a different lexicalization
of the concept, which is realized through derivation in German.

66



Fig. 4). The co-occurrence of “Royal” and Glas-
gow (being not a royal city) can also be easily ex-
plained via the concordance view, showing that this
is mainly due to the “Royal Concert Hall” (forming
a strong triangle on positions +1, +2 and +3 from the
node). Besides these instances of places and institu-
tions within and around the city, especially the con-
nection to the pronoun “its” (82 instances with a sig.
of 144) is interesting. None of the other cities shows
a top-significant co-occurrence with a comparable
pronoun. A look at the corresponding references in
the corpus shows that it is mainly used in statements
about the quality or speciality of certain aspects of
the city (indicated on graphic level through the con-
nections between “its” and “city” or “area”) and in
personifications (e.g. “Glasgow could still reach out
with its persistent demands”). This implies that the
literary device of anthropomorphization of the city
(in direct connection with the proper name) occurs
more often within Glasgow-novels than within those
of the other cities, and that there are many explicit
statements about “how this city (or a special part of
it) is”, showing a tendency to explain the city. Fur-
thermore, the exploration of the different references
indicates a relatively ‘coherent corpus’ (and, there-
fore, relatively stable representation) with recurring
instances across many authors.

Figure 4: Significant concordances of “Glasgow” in
Glasgow corpus

In contrast to this, Birmingham’s co-occurring
proper names mainly refer to (fictive) names of
newspapers (the Birmingham “Sentinel”, “Post” and
“News”). The inventory of the city is not very
prominently represented, with “University” (sig. of
152.52) and “Airport” (80.63) as the only instances.
Furthermore, the University tends to be represented
as region-, not city-specific (with a stronger connec-

tion between “University” and “Midlands” (sig. of
200.49) than between both words to the city itself
(“Midlands” co-occurring with a sig. of 68.68)).
The rest of the proper names relates to not fur-
ther specified parts of the city (“East” (71.62) and
“North-East” (73.43)). The word “south” appears as
adverb, reflecting on graphic level that it is more of-
ten used as in “heading south” than referring to the
“south of Birmingham”. Also, the noun “city” (sig.
of 154.53) is often related to the “city centre” (indi-
cated through the very strong link between those two
words), but also to make statements like “Birming-
ham is a city that” or “like other cities, Birmingham
has”. The references reveal the quality of this expla-
nations, rather stressing its ordinariness as city in-
stead of personalizing it or emphasizing its unique-
ness. This indicates that the city itself is not stand-
ing prominently in the foreground in its crime nov-
els (in contrast to Glasgow and in accordance with
our qualitatively derived prior results). The proper
name is mainly used as part of other proper names
(e.g. “Birmingham Sentinel”), fulfilling the function
of simply placing the plot, and there is very little
city-specific information given on a statistical sig-
nificant re-occurring level in the closer surroundings
of it. Even the statements about Birmingham as a
city tend to downplay its singularity.
On the German side, the cities names co-occur with
words from a wider range of word classes. For
both cities, we find less co-occurring proper names:
five for Frankfurt, only one of them referring to a
city-specific aspect (the long version of the name
“Frankfurt on the Main” (sig. of 585.09)); four for
Dortmund (again, only one city-specific, the name
of its soccer club “Borussia” (with only seven in-
stances and a sig. of 41.93)). For both cities, the
rest of the proper names is composed of names of
other cities (in Frankfurt the two nearby cities “Of-
fenbach” (139.49) and “Darmstadt” (105.73), and
“Berlin”, “Hamburg”); for Dortmund only cities
from the same metropolitan area (the Ruhrgebiet),
“Düsseldorf” (41.95), “Werne” (41.78) and “Duis-
burg” (39.42)). It seems that Dortmund is closely
connected within the metropolitan area it is a part
of, but looking at the references shows that only
Düsseldorf plays a role across different crime novel
series, while the rest mainly feature in one certain
series (being rated as author-specifc).

67



In the case of Frankfurt, the nouns that co-
occur (seven) either denote city-specific aspects
(Flughafen (airport) (96.83) and Eintracht (the lo-
cal soccer club with a sig. of 192.36)) or very
general instances (December, Jahren (years)). A
look at the statistical concordances, ordered accord-
ing not only to their position around the node but
also to their significance, displays that the noun
“Kripo” (short form for crime investigation unit)
on the -1 position is more often used than the first
city-specific instance, with a significance of 564.58
(while “police” for Glasgow on the +1 position is
relatively ranked lower). This prominent position
of the crime investigation unit (interpreted as im-
pact of genre-related aspects) indicates that there are
many “police-procedural” crime novels in Frankfurt
(which is true), giving insight into the sub-genre
composition of the corpus. As with the English
cities, the word “Stadt” (city; sig. of 245.63) co-
occurs frequently, and as the references reveal it
serves similar purposes: either to denote the politi-
cal administration (the “Stadt Frankfurt”) or in com-
bination with further explanations of “how this city
is” (as in Glasgow, but without personalization), or
“Frankfurt is a city that”, but in contrast to Birming-
ham not with a frequent downplaying of uniqueness.
Additionally, we find instances where other cities
are compared to Frankfurt (“a city that, unlike/like
Frankfurt”). This seems to point towards a more
flexible use of this combination resp. to a variety
of ways of representation. Frankfurt is represented
as a city allowing for different semantizations and
different ways of depicting it without posing contra-
dictions (as the differing uses occur not only across
a wide range of authors, but within the same texts).
Finally, taking a closer look at Dortmund, the
frequently co-occurring nouns nearly all are re-
lated to genre-specific instances, referring to crime
investigation-related institutions (again “Kripo”
(sig. of 88.91); “Polizeipräsidium” (police head-
quarters; sig. of 35.15), “Landgericht” (dis-
trict court; 37.25) and “Sonderstaatsanwaltschaft”
(34.63)). This indicates that in this corpus the genre-
specific structures seem to imprint themselves more
than the city-specific ones, putting the city itself
into the background (similar to the case of Birm-
ingham but with a highly differing pattern). But
we also have to consider the comparably low rel-

ative frequency rates (ppm) that demand an expla-
nation. There might be another similarity between
Dortmund and Birmingham, both showing low rel-
ative frequencies for their respective proper names.
But as we take a closer look on the references of
the occurrences of the names, we can see that the
one series of crime novels that represents the biggest
share of the corpus (with 21 novels belonging to this
series) does not mention “Dortmund” at all, while
for Birmingham the use of the proper name is quite
equally distributed across all authors and series. A
look inside one of this books of the series in ques-
tion reveals a possible answer to the low frequencies:
instead of using the proper name, the author conse-
quently uses the nickname “Bierstadt” (Beer-city).
Therefore, while it is possible to show that each city
under investigation reveals a specific pattern of co-
occurrences and differing uses and functions of its
proper name, as our hypothesis has suggested, the
search for the proper name alone seems not suffi-
cient to get the overall picture of the literary repre-
sentation of a city, demanding further analysis.

4.3 Analysis 2: Investigating Genre Aspects

When it comes to questions of genre-conventions vs.
city-conventions, the investigation of the semantic
preference of typically crime-related words is inter-
esting. If the specific city has an impact on genre-
aspects, the graphs should show clear differences.
Close reading of exemplary novels of Glasgow and
Birmingham indicated that violence plays a greater
role in Glasgow crime fiction than in that of Birm-
ingham, therefore we expect to find differing attri-
butions towards and meanings of “violence”, show-
ing a higher vocabulary richness in Glasgow than in
Birmingham, taking into account its semantic pref-
erence (for more details about this aspect see e.g.
(Hoey, 2007)). We examine this hypothesis through
making “violence” the node of a search for signif-
icant concordances, searching for the top-30 adjec-
tives directly altering the noun within a range of -3
to +3 around the node.

As depicted in Figure 5, our initial hypothesis can
be verified. While Glasgow (upper) has nine sig-
nificantly co-occurring adjectives (six directly alter-
ing the noun “violence” on pos. -1), Birmingham
(lower) only has five (four on pos. -1). Those that di-
rectly alter the noun show a slightly differing seman-

68



Figure 5: Significant adjective concordances of “vio-
lence”, comparing Glasgow (upper) and Birmingham
(lower) corpora

tic preference, with adjectives of “kind of violence”
(domestic, physical) standing on top in both corpora.
Next, we look at adjectives that bear a notion of
“quality or intensity of violence”: while Birming-
ham only discriminates between mindless and latent
violence, the vocabulary of Glasgow is much richer
(thuggish, mindless, sudden), one of them also bear-
ing a notion of expectability (sudden). Additionally,
a temporal adjective is used to refer to “past vio-
lence”. If we look at the instances on the -3 position
for Glasgow (a position that is not filled for Birm-
ingham), we can add random to the list of “qual-
ity of violence”, and find some instances of “being
afraid of (physical) violence” (as the link between
those words implies). This verifies our close reading
interpretations.

The adjectives to the right of the node (“own”
on position +3 in Glasgow, “old” on position +2
in Birmingham) pose a puzzle. Through a look at
the references for this instances, we can see that
in the case of Birmingham, old is referring to vic-
tims of violence (old people), while the picture for
Glasgow is split between violence of its own type
(which then could be added to the list of quality-
adjectives) and violence that one experienced on his
own. Through the interconnectedness of the adjec-
tives settled on different positions for the case of
Glasgow and a look at the resources of the instances,
we conclude that the patterns seem to be more estab-
lished on city level (showing instances from varying
authors for all adjective-noun combinations) than
they are in Birmingham, where there are no cross-
connections and the authors differ more among each
other (with “physical violence” being the only com-

bination that occurs across different authors, while
all other adjective-noun combinations only appear
within the work of a single author).

5 Conclusion and Further Work

To conclude the exemplary analysis, CoocViewer
helps not only to explore large corpora but also to
verify or relativize impressions from classical quali-
tative literary research. It opens up new ways of ex-
ploring topics, themes and relationships within large
sets of literary texts. Especially the combination
and linkage of co-occurrences and significant con-
cordances simplifies the analysis and allows a finer-
grained and more focused analysis than KWIC con-
cordances or simple frequency counts. The possi-
bility to distinguish between these two viewpoints
on the data accelerates and improves the interpre-
tation of results. Additionally, the comparison be-
tween corpora is much facilitated through the imme-
diate visibility of differing patterns. Further work
can proceed along a few lines. We would like
to enable investigations of the wide context of co-
occurrences through access from the references back
to the whole crime-novel document. Further, we
would like to automatically compare corpora of the
same language on the level of local co-occurrence
and concordance graphs to aid generating hypothe-
ses. This will make a change in the interface nec-
essary to support a comparative view. Furthermore,
we want to extend the view of the original text (see
Figure 2) in our tool by centering the sentences ac-
cording to the selected word or words, as done in
KWIC views. When clicking on a single word, this
would lead to the normal KWIC view, but selecting
an edge we then want to center the sentences accord-
ing to the two words connected by the edge, which
might be useful especially for the concordances.

The tool and the pre-processing software is avail-
able as an open source project12 and as a web demo.

Acknowledgments
This work has been funded by the Hessian re-
search excellence program Landes-Offensive zur
Entwicklung Wissenschaftlich-Ökonomischer Exzel-
lenz (LOEWE) as part of the research center Digital
Humanities.

12https://sourceforge.net/p/coocviewer

69



References
Apoorv Agarwal, Augusto Corvalan, Jacob Jensen, and

Owen Rambow. 2012. Social network analysis of
alice in wonderland. In Workshop on Computational
Linguistics for Literature, pages 88–96, Montréal,
Canada.

Sahra Allison, Ryan Heuser, Mathhew Jockers, Franco
Moretti, and Michael Witmore. 2011. Quantitative
Formalism: an Experiment. Stanford Literary Lab.

M. Barlow. 1999. Monoconc 1.5 and paraconc. Interna-
tional journal of corpus linguistics, 4(1):173–184.

Helmuth Berking. 2012. The distinctiveness of cities:
outline of a research programme. Urban Research &
Practice, 5(3):316–324.

Douglas Biber. 2011. Corpus linguistics and the study
of literature. back to the future? Scientific Study of
Literature, 1(1):15–23.

Chris Biemann, Gerhard Heyer, Uwe Quasthoff, and
Matthias Richter. 2007. The Leipzig Corpora Col-
lection - monolingual corpora of standard size. In
Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 2007, Birmingham,
UK.

Michael Bostock, Vadim Ogievetsky, and Jeffrey Heer.
2011. D3: Data-driven documents. IEEE Trans. Visu-
alization & Comp. Graphics (Proc. InfoVis).

John F. Burrows. 1987. Computation into Criticism. A
Study of Jane Austen’s Novels and an Experiment in
Method. Clarendon, Oxford.

John F. Burrows. 1992. Computers and the study of liter-
ature. In Christopher S. Butler, editor, Computers and
Written Texts, pages 167–204, Oxford. Blackwell.

John F. Burrows. 2007. All the way through: Testing for
authorship in different frequency strata. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 22(1):27–47.

Tanya E. Clement. 2008. ’A thing not beginning and not
ending’: using digital tools to distand-read Gertrude
Stein’s The Making of Americans. Literary and Lin-
guistic Computing, 23(3):361–381.

Hugh Craig. 1999. Jonsonian chronology and the styles
of a tale of a tub. In Martin Butler, editor, Re-
Presenting Ben Jonson: Text, History, Performance,
pages 210–232, Houndmills. Macmillan.

Hugh Craig. 2004. Stylistic analysis and authorship
studies. In Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, and John
Unsworth, editors, A Companion to Digital Humani-
ties. Blackwell.

Jonathan Culpeper. 2002. Computers, language and
characterisation: An analysis of six characters in
Romeo and Juliet. In Ulla Melander-Marttala, Carin
Ostman, and Merja Kyt, editors, Conversation in Life
and Literature: Papers from the ASLA Symposium,
volume 15, pages 11–30, Uppsala. Association Sue-
doise de Linguistique Appliquee.

Jonathan Culpeper. 2009. Keyness: Words, parts-of-
speech and semantic categories in the character-talk of
shakespeare’s romeo and juliet. International Journal
of Corpus Linguistics, 14(1):29–59.

Chris Culy and Verena Lyding. 2011. Corpus clouds - fa-
cilitating text analysis by means of visualizations. In
Zygmunt Vetulani, editor, Human Language Technol-
ogy. Challenges for Computer Science and Linguistics,
volume 6562 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 351–360. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Scott Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, George W. Furnas,
Thomas K. Landauer, and Richard Harshman. 1990.
Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 41:391–
407.

Ted Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statistics
of surprise and coincidence. Computational Linguis-
tics, 19(1):61–74, March.

David K. Elson, Nicholas Dames, and Kathleen R. McK-
eown. 2010. Extracting social networks from literary
fiction. In 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computer Linguistics, pages 138–147, Uppsala, Swe-
den.

Bettina Fischer-Starcke. 2009. Keywords and fre-
quent phrases of Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice: A
corpus-stylistc analysis. International Journal of Cor-
pus Linguistics, 14(4):492–523.

Bettina Fischer-Starcke. 2010. Corpus linguistics in lit-
erary analysis: Jane Austen and her contemporaries.
Continuum, London.

Carsten Görg, Hannah Tipney, Karin Verspoor, Jr. Baum-
gartner, William A., K. Bretonnel Cohen, John Stasko,
and Lawrence E. Hunter. 2010. Visualization and
language processing for supporting analysis across the
biomedical literature. In Knowledge-Based and Intel-
ligent Information and Engineering Systems, volume
6279 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
420–429. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Michael Hoey. 2007. Lexical priming and literary cre-
ativity. In Michael Hoey, Michaela Mahlberg, Michael
Stubbs, and Wolfgang Teubert, editors, Text, Dis-
course and Corpora. Theory and Analysis, pages 31–
56, London. Continuum.

David L. Hoover. 2001. Statistical stylistics and author-
ship attribution: an emprirical investigation. Literary
and Linguistic Computing, 16(4):421–444.

David L. Hoover. 2002. Frequent word sequences and
statistical stylistics. Literary and Linguistic Comput-
ing, 17(2):157–180.

David L. Hoover. 2008. Quantitative analysis and liter-
ary studies. In Ray Siemens and Susan Schreibman,
editors, A Companion to Digital Literary Studies, Ox-
ford. Blackwell.

70



Masahiro Hori. 2004. Investigating Dicken’s Style:
A Collocational Analysis. Palgrave Macmillan, Bas-
ingstoke.

Adam Kilgarriff, Pavel Rychly, Pavel Smrz, and David
Tugwell. 2004. The sketch engine. In Proceedings of
EURALEX, pages 105–116, Lorient, France.

Martina Löw. 2012. The intrinsic logic of cities: towards
a new theory on urbanism. Urban Research & Prac-
tice, 5(3):303–315.

Martina Löw. forthcoming. The city as experential
space: The production of shared meaning. Interna-
tional Journal of Urban and Regional Research.

H. P. Luhn. 1960. Key word-in-context index for tech-
nical literature (KWIC index). American Documenta-
tion, 11(4):288–295.

Michaela Mahlberg. 2007. Corpus stylistics: bridg-
ing the gap between linguistic and literary studies. In
Michael Hoey, Michaela Mahlberg, Michael Stubbs,
and Wolfgang Teubert, editors, Text, Discourse and
Corpora. Theory and Analysis, pages 217–246, Lon-
don. Continuum.

Michaela Mahlberg. 2012. Corpus Stylistics and
Dicken’s Fiction. Routledge advances in corpus lin-
guistics. Routledge, London.

C. W. F. McKenna and Alexis Antonia. 2001. The sta-
tistical analysis of style: Reflections on fom, meaning,
and ideology in the ’Nausicaa’ episode of Ulysses. Lit-
erary and Linguistic Computing, 16(4):353–373.

Franco Moretti. 2000. Conjectures on world literature.
New Left Review, 1(January/February):54–68.

Franco Moretti. 2007. Graphs, Maps, Trees. Abstract
Models for Literary History. Verso, London / New
York.

Franco Moretti. 2009. Style, Inc. reflections on seven
thousand titels (British novels, 1740-1850). Critical
Inquiry, 36(1):134–158.

Franco Moretti. 2011. Network Theory, Plot Analysis.
Stanford Literary Lab.

Hans-Michael Müller, Eimear E. Kenny, and Paul W.
Sternberg. 2004. Textpresso: An ontology-based in-
formation retrieval and extraction system for biologi-
cal literature. Plos Biology, 2(11).

Rosanne G. Potter. 1988. Literary criticism and literary
computing: The difficulties of a synthesis. Computers
and Humanities, 22:91–97.

Matthias Richter, Uwe Quasthoff, Erla Hallsteinsdóttir,
and Chris Biemann. 2006. Exploiting the Leipzig
Corpora Collection. In Proceesings of the IS-LTC
2006, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Thomas Rommel. 2008. Literary studies. In Ray
Siemens and Susan Schreibman, editors, A Compan-
ion to Digital Literary Studies, Oxford. Blackwell.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tag-
ging using decision trees. In International Conference
on New Methods in Language Processing, pages 44–
49, Manchester, UK.

Michael Stubbs. 2005. Conrad in the computer: exam-
ples of quantitative stylistic methods. Language and
Literature, 14(1):5–24.

Christopher Tribble. 2010. What are concordances and
how are they used? In Anne O’Keeffe and Michael
McCarthy, editors, The Routledge Handbook of Cor-
pus Linguistics, pages 167–183, Abingdon. Routledge.

Dominic Widdows, Scott Cederberg, and Beate Dorow.
2002. Visualisation Techniques for Analysing Mean-
ing. In Fifth International Conference on Text, Speech
and Dialogue (TSD-02), pages 107–114. Springer.

71


