



















































LORIA System for the WMT13 Quality Estimation Shared Task


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 380–385,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013 c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

LORIA System for the WMT13 Quality Estimation Shared Task

Langlois David
LORIA

(Université de Lorraine, INRIA, CNRS)
615 rue du Jardin Botanique,

54602 Villers les Nancy, France
david.langlois@loria.fr

Smaı̈li Kamel
LORIA

(Université de Lorraine, INRIA, CNRS)
615 rue du Jardin Botanique,

54602 Villers les Nancy, France
kamel.smaili@loria.fr

Abstract
In this paper we present the system we
submitted to the WMT13 shared task on
Quality Estimation. We participated in
the Task 1.1. Each translated sentence
is given a score between 0 and 1. The
score is obtained by using several numeri-
cal or boolean features calculated accord-
ing to the source and target sentences. We
perform a linear regression of the feature
space against scores in the range [0..1]. To
this end, we use a Support Vector Machine
with 66 features. In this paper, we propose
to increase the size of the training corpus.
For that, we use the post-edited and refer-
ence corpora during the training step. We
assign a score to each sentence of these
corpora. Then, we tune these scores on a
development corpus. This leads to an im-
provement of 10.5% on the development
corpus, in terms of Mean Average Error,
but achieves only a slight improvement on
the test corpus.

1 Introduction

In the scope of Machine Translation (MT), Qual-
ity Estimation (QE) is the task consisting to evalu-
ate the translation quality of a sentence or a docu-
ment. This process may be useful for post-editors
to decide or not to revise a sentence produced by
a MT system (Specia, 2011; Specia et al., 2010).
Moreover, it can be useful to decide if a translated
document can be broadcasted or not (Soricut and
Echihabi, 2010). The most obvious way to give a
score to a translated sentence consists in using a
machine learning approach. This approach is su-
pervised: experts are asked to score translated sen-
tences and with the obtained material, one learns a
prediction model of scores. The main drawback of
the machine learning approach is that it is super-
vised and requires huge data. To score a sentence

is time-consuming. Moreau et al. in (Moreau and
Vogel, 2012) dealt with this issue by proposing un-
supervised similarity measures. In fact, the score
of a translated sentence is defined by a measure
giving the distance between it and the contents of
an external corpus. The authors improve the re-
sults of the supervised approach but this method
can be used only in the ranking task. Raybaud et
al. (Raybaud et al., 2011) proposed a method to
add errors in reference sentences (deletion, sub-
stitution, insertion). By this way, they build addi-
tional corpus in which each word can be associated
with a label correct/not correct. But, it is not pos-
sible to predict the translation quality of sentences
including these erroneous words.

In this paper, we propose to increase the size
of the training corpus. For that, we use the score
given by experts to evaluate additional sentences
from the post-edited and reference corpora. Practi-
cally, we extract from source and target sentences
numerical vectors (features) and we learn a pre-
diction model of the scores. Then, we apply this
model to predict the scores of the post-edited and
the reference sentences. And finally, we tune the
predicted scores on a development corpus.

The article is structured as follows. In Section
2, we give an overview of our machine learning
approach and of the features we use. Then, in Sec-
tions 3 and 4 we describe the corpora and how we
increase the size of the training corpus by a partly-
unsupervised approach. In section 5, we give re-
sults about this method and we end by a conclu-
sion and perspectives.

2 Overview of our quality estimation
submission

We submit a system for the task 1.1: one has to
evaluate each translated sentence with a score be-
tween 0 and 1. This score is read as the HTER be-
tween the translated sentence and its post-edited
version. Each translated sentence is assigned a

380



score between 0 and 1. The score is calculated
using several numerical or boolean features ex-
tracted according to the source and target sen-
tences. We perform a regression of the feature
space against [0..1]. To this end, we use the Sup-
port Vector Machine algorithm (LibSVM toolkit
(Chang and Lin, 2011)). We experimented only
the linear kernel because our experience from last
year (Langlois et al., 2012) showed that its perfor-
mance are yet good while no parameters have to
be tuned on a development corpus.

2.1 The baseline features
The QE shared task organizers provided a base-
line system including the same features as last
year: source and target sentences lengths; aver-
age source word length; source and target likeli-
hood computed with 3-gram (source) and 5-gram
(target) language models; average number of oc-
currences of the words within the target sentence;
average number of translations per source word in
the sentence, using IBM1 translation table (only
translations higher than 0.2); weighted average
number of translations per source word in the sen-
tence (similar to the previous one, but a frequent
word is given a low weight in the averaging); dis-
tribution by frequencies of the source n-gram into
the quartiles; match between punctuation in source
and target. Overall, the baseline system proposes
17 features. We remark that only 5 features take
into account the target sentence.

2.2 The LORIA features
In previous works (Raybaud et al., 2011; Langlois
et al., 2012), we tested several confidence mea-
sures. As last year (Langlois et al., 2012), we
use the same features. We extract information by
the way of language model (perplexity, level of
back-off, intra-lingual triggers) and translation ta-
ble (IBM1 table, inter-lingual triggers). The fea-
tures are defined at word level, and the features
at sentence level are computed by averaging over
each word in the sentence. In our system, we use,
in addition to baseline features, ratio of source and
target lengths; source and target likelihood com-
puted with 5-gram language models (Duchateau
et al., 2002) (in addition to 3-gram features from
baseline); level of backoff n-gram based features
(Uhrik and Ward, 1997). This feature indicates
if the 3-gram, the 2-gram or the unigram corre-
sponding to the word is in the language model. For
likelihoods and levels of backoff, we use models

trained on corpus read from left to right (classical
way), and from right to left (sentences are reversed
before training language models). This leads to
two language models, and therefore to two val-
ues for each feature and side (source and target).
Moreover, a common property of all n-gram and
backoff based features is that a word can get a low
score if it is actually correct but its neighbours are
wrong. To compensate for this phenomenon we
took into account the average score of the neigh-
bours of the word being considered. More pre-
cisely, for every relevant feature x. defined at word
level we also computed:

xleft. (wi) = x.(wi−2) ∗ x.(wi−1) ∗ x.(wi)
xcentred. (wi) = x.(wi−1) ∗ x.(wi) ∗ x.(wi+1)
xright. (wi) = x.(wi) ∗ x.(wi+1) ∗ x.(wi+2)

The other features are intra-lingual features:
each word is assigned its average mutual informa-
tion with the other words in the sentence; inter-
lingual features: each word in target sentence is
assigned its average mutual information with the
words in source sentence; IBM1 features: con-
trary to IBM1 based baseline features which take
into account the number of translations, we use
the probability values in the translation table be-
tween source and target words; basic parser (cor-
rection of bracketing, presence of end-of-sentence
symbol); number and ratio of out-of-vocabulary
words in source and target sentences. This leads
to 49 features. A few ones are equivalent to or are
strongly correlated to baseline ones. We remark
that 27 features take into account the target sen-
tence.

The union of the both sets baseline+loria im-
proved slightly the baseline system on the test set
provided by the QE Shared Task 2012 (Callison-
Burch et al., 2012).

3 Corpora

The organizers provide a set of files for training
and development. We list below the ones we used:

• source.eng: 2,254 source sentences taken
from three WMT data sets (English): news-
test2009, news-test2010, and news-test2012.
In the following, this file is named src

• target system.spa: translations for the source
sentences (Spanish) generated by a PB-SMT
system built using Moses. In the following,
this file is named syst

381



• target system.HTER official-score: HTER
scores between MT and post-edited version,
to be used as the official score in the shared
task. In the following, this file is named
hteroff

• target reference.spa: reference translation
(Spanish) for source sentences as originally
given by WMT; In the following, this file is
named ref

• target postedited.spa: human post-edited ver-
sion (Spanish) of the machine translations in
target system.spa. In the following, this file
is named post

We split these files into two parts: a training part
made up of the 1,832 first sentences, and a devel-
opment part made up of the 442 remaining sen-
tences. This choice is motivated by the fact that in
the previous evaluation campaign we had exactly
the same experimental conditions.
For each given file f, we use therefore a part
named f.train for training and a part named
f.dev for development.

4 Training Algorithm

This section describes the approach we propose to
increase the size of the training corpus.

We have to train the prediction model of scores
from the source and target sentences.

The common way to train such a prediction
model consists in extracting a features vector
for each couple (source,target) from
the (src.train,syst.train) corpus.
For each vector, the score associated by ex-
perts to the corresponding sentence is assigned.
Then, we use a machine learning approach to
learn the regression between the vectors and
the scores. And finally, we use the triplet
(src.dev,syst.dev,hteroff.dev) to
tune parameters.

With machine learning approach, the number
of examples is crucial for a relevant training, but
unfortunately the evaluation campaign provides a
training corpus of only 1,832 examples.

To increase the training corpus, we propose
to use the ref and post files. But for that,
we have to associate a score to these new target
sentences. One way could be to calculate the
HTER score between each sentence and its
corresponding sentence in the post edited file.
But this leads to a drawback: all the couples
(src,post) would have a score equal to 0, and

then there is a risk of overtraining on the 0 value.
To prevent this problem, we preferred to learn
a prediction model from the (src.train,-
syst.train,hteroff.train) triplet.
Then we apply this prediction model to
the (src.train,post.train) and to
the (src.train,ref.train). By this
way, we get a training corpus made up of
1, 832 × 3 = 3, 696 examples with their scores.
Consequently, it is possible to learn a prediction
model from this new training corpus. These
scores are not optimal because the features cannot
describe all the information from sentences, and a
machine learning approach is limited if data are
not sufficiently huge. Therefore, we propose an
anytime randomized algorithm to tune the refer-
ence and post-edited scores on the development
corpus. We give below the algorithm we propose.

1. Prediction model

(a) Learn the prediction model
using only features from
(src.train,syst.train)
and HTER target scores from experts

2. Predict initial scores for postedited and
reference sentences

(a) Use this model to predict the scores
associated to the features from
(src.train,post.train)
and (src.train,ref.train).
The predicted scores for
(src.train,post.train)
are called post best and the ones
for (src.train,ref.train) are
called ref best

3. Learn initial prediction model using the 3
trains (system part, post-edited part and
reference part)

(a) Learn the prediction model using fea-
tures from the three sets of features
and the scores associated to these
sets (experts scores, post best and
ref best)

(b) Evaluate this model. This leads to a per-
formance equal to best

4. Tune scores for postedited and reference
sentences

(a) Repeat the following steps until stop

382



(b) Build a new set of scores named
post new (resp. ref new) by dis-
turbing each score of post best
(resp. ref best) with a probability
equal to pdisturb. A modified score
is shifted by a value randomly chosen in
[-disturb,+disturb]

(c) Learn the prediction model using fea-
tures from the three sets of features
and the new scores associated to these
sets (experts scores for system set,
post new and ref new for the post-
edited and reference sets)

(d) Evaluate this model. This leads to a per-
formance equal to perf

(e) If perf<best then replace best by
perf, post best by post new and
ref best by ref new.

To evaluate a model, we use it to predict the
scores on the development corpus. Then we com-
pare the predicted scores to the expert scores and
we compute the Mean Average Error (MAE) given
by the formula MAE(s, r) =

∑n
i=1 |si−ri|

n × 100
where s and r are two sets of n scores.

5 Results

We used the data provided by the shared task
on QE, without additional corpus. This data is
composed of a parallel English-Spanish training
corpus. This corpus is made of the concatena-
tion of europarl-v5 and news-commentary10 cor-
pora (from WMT-2010), followed by tokeniza-
tion, cleaning (sentences with more than 80 to-
kens removed) and truecasing. It has been used
for baseline models provided in the baseline pack-
age by the shared task organizers. We used the
same training corpus to train additional language
models (5-gram with kneyser-ney discounting, ob-
tained with the SRILM toolkit) and triggers re-
quired for our features. For feature extraction, we
used the files provided by the organizers: 2,254
source english sentences, their translations by the
baseline system, and the score of these transla-
tions. This score is the HTER between the pro-
posed translation and the post-edited sentence. We
used the train part to perform the regression be-
tween the features and the scores. Therefore, the
system we propose in this campaign is the same as
the one we presented for the previous campaign in
terms of features. But, we only use a SVM with a

linear kernel and we do not use any feature selec-
tion. The added value of the new system is the fact
that we increase the size of the training corpus.

To evaluate the different configurations, we
used the MAE measure. The performance of
our system with only the classical train set
(src.train,syst.train) are given in Ta-
ble 1. In this table, BASELINE+LORIA use
both features BASELINE and LORIA (Section 2).
We remark that, contrary to last year, the BASE-
LINE+LORIA do not improve the performance of
the BASELINE features on the development set.

Set of features Dev
BASELINE 13.46
LORIA 14.04
BASELINE+LORIA 13.88

Table 1: Performance in terms of MAE without
increasing the training corpus

Now, we increase the training corpus
with the method described in previous sec-
tion. First, we use the system trained on
(src.train,syst.train) to predict
scores for the sentences in post.train and
ref.train. We know that these scores should
represent the HTER score, then a well translated
sentence should be assigned a higher score.
Therefore, we can make the hypothesis that
sentences from post.train and ref.train
are better than those in syst.train. We check
this hypothesis by comparing the distributions of
HTER scores in the three files (true HTER scores
in syst.train, and predicted scores in the two
other files). We present in Table 2 the Minimum,
Maximum, Mean and Standard Deviation of
this score for the three corpora. We remark
that the scores are not well predicted because
some of them are negative while all scores in
syst.train are between 0 and 1. This is due
to the fact that the constraint of HTER in terms of
limit values is not explicitly taken into account by
SVM. We give more details about these scores out
of [0..1] in Table 3. For post.train, 2 scores
are under 0 with a mean value equal to -0.123, and
no scores are higher than 1. For ref.train,
4 scores are under 0 with a mean value equal to
-3.023, and 26 scores are higher than 1 with a
mean equal to 1.126. Comparing to the 1,832
sentences in the training corpus, we can conclude
that the ’outliers’ are very rare. In Table 2 Mean

383



and Standard Deviation are computed only for
scores predicted between 0 and 1. The obtained
mean values are quite similar, but the standard
deviation is very low for predicted scores.

This configuration leads to a performance equal
to 13.88 on the development corpus, which is
slightly worse than the BASELINE system but
slightly better than the BASELINE+LORIA sys-
tem.
Because, SVM predicts scores which do not repre-
sent exactly HTER and because the model is learnt
on a relatively small corpus (1,832 sentences), we
decided to modify randomly some scores. This
operation is called in the following the tuning pro-
cess.

Set Min Max Mean SD
syst.
train 0 1 0.317 0.169

post.
train -0.147 0.708 0.315 0.083

ref.
train -11.314 0.746 0.329 0.081

Table 2: Statistics on HTER for the three sets of
sentences used in the training corpus

lower than 0 higher than 1
Set Nb Mean Nb Mean
syst.train 0 - 0 -
post.train 2 -0.123 0 -
ref.train 4 -3.023 26 1.126

Table 3: Statistics on HTER for the three sets of
sentences used in the training corpus. Nb is the
number of sentences

For the tuning process, after several tests, we
fixed to 0.1 the probability pdisturb to modify
the score of a sentence. Then, the score is modi-
fied by randomly shifting it in [−0.01... + 0.01].
We start with the initial predicted scores (MAE
= 13.88). Then we randomly modify a subset of
scores and keep a new configuration if its MAE is
improved. The process is stopped when MAE con-
verges. Figure 1 presents the evolution of MAE on
the development corpus.

The process stopped after 22, 248 iterations.
Only 274 (1.2%) iterations led to an improvement.
We present the results of this approach on the de-
velopment corpus and on the official test set of the

Figure 1: Evolution of the MAE on the develop-
ment corpus

campaign (500 sentences). We group in Table 4
the results on development and test corpus for the
BASELINE features and the BASELINE+LORIA
features with and without using the post-edited
and reference sentences. Finally, we achieve a
MAE of 12.05 on the development set. This con-
stitutes an improvement of 10.5% in comparison
to the BASELINE system. But we improve only
slightly the performance of the baseline system on
the test set. We conclude that there is an overtrain-
ing on the development corpus. In order to prevent
from this problem, we could use a leaving-one-out
approach on training and development corpora.

With the tuned values of scores, we calculated
the same statistics as in Tables 2 and 3. We present
these statistics in Tables 5 and 6. As we can see,
the tuning process leads to an increasing of the
mean value of the scores. Moreover, the number
of scores out of range increases. This analysis re-
inforces our conclusion about overtraining: pre-
dicted scores may be strongly modified to obtain a
good performance on the development corpus.

Set of features Dev Test
BASELINE 13.46 14.81
BASELINE+LORIA 13.88 nc
+ postedited + ref 13.78 nc
+ tuning 12.05 14.79

Table 4: Performance in terms of MAE of the fea-
tures with and without increasing the training cor-
pus

To conclude the experiments, we try to fix the
problem of scores predicted out of range. For that,
we set to 0 the scores lower than 0 and to 1 the

384



Set Min Max Mean SD
post.
train -0.811 1.322 0.407 0.235

ref.
train -10.485 1.320 0.409 0.242

Table 5: Statistics on HTER for the post and ref
sets of sentences used in the training corpus, after
tuning

lower than 0 higher than 1
Set of sentences Nb Mean Nb Mean
post.train 318 -0.164 29 1.118
ref.train 282 -0.205 28 1.123

Table 6: Statistics on HTER for the post and ref
sets of sentences used in the training corpus, after
tuning. Nb is the number of sentences.

ones greater than 1. Then we learn a new SVM
model using these new scores. This leads to a
MAE equal to 12.18 on the development corpus
and 14.83 on the test corpus, which is worse than
the performance without correction. This is for us
a drawback of the machine learning approach. For
this approach, the scores have no semantic. SVM
do not “know” that the scores are HTER between
0 and 1. Then, if tuning leads to no reasonable val-
ues, this is not a problem if it increases the perfor-
mance. Moreover, maybe the features do not ex-
tract from all sentences information representative
of their quality, and this quality is overestimated:
then the tuning system has to lower strongly the
corresponding scores to counteract this problem.

6 Conclusion and perpespectives

In this paper we propose a method to increase the
size of the training corpus for QE in the scope of
Task 1.1. We add to the initial training corpus
(sentences translated by a machine translation sys-
tem) the post-edited and the reference sentences.
We associate to these sentences scores predicted
by using a model learnt on the system sentences.
Then we tune the predicted scores on the devel-
opment corpus. This method leads to an improve-
ment of 10.5% on the development corpus in terms
of MAE, but achieves only a slight improvement
on the test corpus. A statistical study shows that
tuning scores leads to out of range values. This
surprising behavior have to be investigated. In ad-
dition, we will test another machine learning tools

(neural networks for example). Another point is
that, contrary to last year, the whole set of features
leads to worse performance than baseline features.
This could be explained by the fact that no select-
ing algorithm has been used to choose the best fea-
tures. In fact, we preferred, this year to investigate
the underlying knowledge on the post-edited and
reference corpora. Last, we conclude that the good
improvement on the development corpus is not re-
produced on the test corpus. In order to prevent
from this problem, we will use a leaving-one-out
approach on the training.

References
C. Callison-Burch, P. Koehn, C. Monz, M. Post,

R. Soricut, and L. Specia. 2012. Findings of the
2012 workshop on statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation, pages 10–51.

C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin. 2011. LIBSVM:
A library for support vector machines. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Tech-
nology, 2:27:1–27:27. Software available at
http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/ cjlin/libsvm.

J. Duchateau, K. Demuynck, and P. Wambacq. 2002.
Confidence scoring based on backward language
models. In Proceedings of IEEE International Con-
ference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Process-
ing, volume 1, pages 221–224.

D. Langlois, S. Raybaud, and Kamel Smaı̈li. 2012. Lo-
ria system for the WMT12 quality estimation shared
task. In Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation, pages 114–119.

E. Moreau and C. Vogel. 2012. Quality estimation:
an experimental study using unsupervised similarity
measures. In Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 120–126.

S. Raybaud, D. Langlois, and K. Smaı̈li. 2011. ”This
sentence is wrong.” Detecting errors in machine-
translated sentences. Machine Translation, 25(1):1–
34.

R. Soricut and A. Echihabi. 2010. Trustrank: Inducing
trust in automatic translations via ranking. In Pro-
ceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 612–621.

L. Specia, N. Hajlaoui, C. Hallett, and W. Aziz. 2010.
Predicting machine translation adequacy. In Pro-
ceedings of the Machine Translation Summit XIII,
pages 612–621.

L. Specia. 2011. Exploiting objective annotations for
measuring translation post-editing effort. In Pro-
ceedings of the 15th Conference of the European As-
sociation for Machine Translation, pages 73–80.

C. Uhrik and W. Ward. 1997. Confidence metrics
based on n-gram language model backoff behaviors.
In Fifth European Conference on Speech Communi-
cation and Technology, pages 2771–2774.

385


