





































Veridicity annotation in the lexicon? A look at factive adjectives

Annie Zaenen
CSLI / Stanford University
azaenen@stanford.edu

Lauri Karttunen
CSLI / Stanford University
laurik@stanford.edu

Abstract

In this note, we look at the factors that influ-
ence veridicity judgments with factive predi-
cates. We show that more context factors play
a role than is generally assumed. We propose
to use crowd sourcing techniques to under-
stand these factors better and briefly discuss
the consequences for the association of lexical
signatures with items in the lexicon.

1 Veridicity: what and why

Recognizing the inferential properties of construc-
tions and of lexical items is important for NLU (Nat-
ural Language Understanding) systems. In this pa-
per we look at FACTUAL INFERENCES, inferences
that allow the reader to conclude that an event has
happened or will happen or that a state of affairs
pertains or will pertain. We will refer to events and
states together as SOAs. Factuality is in the world
and outside of the text. In cases where the reader
has no direct perceptual knowledge about the SOAs,
she has to evaluate the factuality of a SOA referred
to in a text based on her decoding of the author’s
representation of the factuality of the SOA and on
her knowledge about the world and about the au-
thor’s reliability. Authors have a plethora of means
to signal whether they want to present SOAs as fac-
tual, as having happened or going to happen or as
being more or less probable, possible, unlikely or
not factual at all. We will call this presentation
of a SOA the VERIDICITY of a SOA. We will call
the reader’s interpretation of the author’s intention,
the RIV (READER INFERRED VERIDICITY) and the

reader judgment about the factuality of a SOA, RIF
(READER INFERRED FACTUALITY).

Annotation can, at its best, only provide us with
RIVs as the author is typically not available for con-
sultation. This leads to a methodological problem.
A reader will in his interpretation of a sentence
be sensitive, not only to the way an author signals
her intentions but also to what he knows about the
world. To circumvent this problem as much as pos-
sible, corpus annotation for veridicity is typically
done by trained annotators with extensive guide-
lines (see e.g. (Saurı́, 2008), (Saurı́ and Pustejovsky,
2012)) but corpus annotation by trained annotators
is an expensive enterprise, hence looks at a limited
number of cases. For instance, to anticipate on a
case we will discuss later in the paper, lucky occurs
only once in the FactBank ((Saurı́ and Pustejovsky,
2009). Given that annotation is done on running text,
it is also difficult to avoid that the reader’s evalua-
tion of the wider extralinguistic context might still
play a role. We propose to supplement corpus an-
notation with crowd sourcing experiments. In these,
sentences are presented to Mechanical Turk workers
in limited contexts, very similar to the contexts in
which linguists judge the effect of the contribution
of a lexical item or a construction. But contrary to
linguistic practice, we derive our examples from re-
ally occurring ones culled from the web and, more
importantly, present them to many native speakers
(typically 100) and in different variations to explore
factors that can influence the interpretation. This
kind of variation is very difficult to find in naturally
occurring corpora of the type that are used for anno-
tations (e.g. FactBank). This type of study comple-

51



ments the corpus studies in controlling the variation
in the environment and in minimizing the external
factors. With these experiments we intend to isolate
a lexical signature for the lexical items we are inter-
ested in, in contradistinction to the interpretation in
context that is provided by corpus annotation. It is,
however, not intended to replace corpus studies be-
cause it has the drawback of not being able to take
into account the influence of a wider linguistic envi-
ronment.

2 Subclasses of veridical phenomena

The means an author uses to signal the factuality sta-
tus of a SOA can be syntactic and/or lexical. Exam-
ples of syntactic means that have been exploited in
textual inferencing tasks are appositives. They typ-
ically contain presupposed material and are in gen-
eral factive. For a theoretical discussion of syntac-
tically presupposed material see (Potts, 2005). Here
we look at lexical sources of veridicity. They can
be subdivided in IMPLICATIVE, FACTIVE and EPIS-
TEMIC MODAL predicates. In all cases a lexical
item occurs in the matrix clause of a syntactic frame
where the embedded clause refers to a SOA. The
veridicity status of the embedded clause is consid-
ered to be triggered by the lexical item, in the case
of implicatives because there is an entailment-type
relation, in the case of factives because there is a
presupposition and in the case of epistemic modals
because the embedded clause is under the scope of
the modal.

(Karttunen, 1971; Karttunen, 2012) has studied
several classes of IMPLICATIVE verbs and verb-
noun collocations. Implicative constructions yield
entailments about the veridicity of a complement
clause. The entailment may be positive (+1) or nega-
tive (-1) depending on the polarity of the containing
clause. Examples are:

(1) a. John managed to get the job done. (implies
that the job got done)

b. John didn’t manage to get the job done. (im-
plies that the job did not get done)

c. John forgot to do the job. (implies that the
job did not get done)

d. John didn’t forget to do the job. (implies
that the job got done)

There are several different inference patterns de-
scribed in detail in the references given above. The
polarity computation must take into account the
many ways of expressing negation by particles (not),
adverbs (never, almost), quantifiers (no one) and
counterfactual mood as in (2).

(2) a. Rand Paul would have fired Clinton.

b. I wish I had been there.

FACTIVES were first studied (Kiparsky and
Kiparsky, 1970). Their use indicates that the au-
thor considers the material in the embedded clause
as presupposed (see e.g. (Beaver, 2010) for a dis-
cussion of relevant aspects of theories of presuppo-
sition). For the purpose of NLU, their most important
characteristic is that their veridicity status does not
change under negation or questioning ((Karttunen,
1971).

(3) a. It is annoying that people post stuff that no
one cares about.

b. It isn’t annoying that people post stuff that
no one cares about.

c. Is it annoying that people post stuff that no
one cares about?

Many implicative verbs are also presupposition
triggers. For example, (1c) and (1d) both presup-
pose that John intended to do the job but carry oppo-
site implications about whether the job got done. job
The class of lexical items that express EPISTEMIC
MODALITY includes verbs such as must, have to,
ought to, should, may, might, adjectives such as cer-
tain, likely, possible and adverbs certainly, likely,
possibly. There is a rich literature on this topic
(Palmer, 2001; Kratzer, 2012).

With respect to veridicality, the most striking as-
pect of modal assertions is that even the necessity
modals such as must and have to involve a weaker
author commitment than the corresponding state-
ments without the modal. An author who says

(4) It must be raining.

52



indicates that she has reasons to conclude that it is
raining although she is not herself a witness to the
event. A man who sees drops of water falling from
the sky and recognizes it as rain would say It is rain-
ing; it would be odd for him to say (4). Direct evi-
dence trumps reasoning.

The possibility modals such as may also indicate
an inference or a guess that is made in the absence
of direct evidence. The author of

(5) It may be raining.

indicates that she has no direct knowledge of
whether it is raining but that conclusion is consis-
tent with the evidence she has, but so is it might not
be raining.

As epistemic modals show, author commitment to
the veridicality of a SOA is a matter of degree rang-
ing from definitely true to definitely false through a
scale of weaker stances: must, have to – probably,
likely – possibly, perhaps, may – possibly not, per-
haps not – probably not, most likely not – must not.

Epistemic weakening applies to implications but
not to presuppositions.

(6) John may have forgotten to do the job.

implies that the it is possible that John did not do
the job but commits the author to the view, just as
strongly as (1c) and (1d), that John had the intention
to do the job. Presuppositions tend to “project” out
of the embedded clauses that express them.

3 Annotating veridicity in the lexicon

Given the description above, one might come away
with the idea that the only thing that needs to be
done is to mark the veridical predicates in the lex-
icon and then have the system transmit a veridicity
mark to the embedded clause. The mark would be
different for the three classes as it would need to be
sensitive to negation in different ways and the com-
mitment might be absolute (negative or positive) or
relative but the calculation would only have to look
at one level of embedding. As the implementations
discussed in (Nairn et al., 2006) and (MacCartney
and Manning, 2009) show, the situation is quite a
bit more complex. For factives specifically, we need
to take into account what is known as the projection
problem (Langendoen and Savin, 1971; Karttunen,

1974). But even if one assumes the projection prob-
lem solved, the picture is quite a bit more compli-
cated than the short description in the previous sec-
tion would let us to assume. We look in more detail
at the complications that one finds with factive ad-
jectives.

4 Factive adjectives

A great number of adjectives have been classified
as factive in one or more of the following syntactic
environments (see (Norrick, 1978) for the most ex-
tensive study that we are aware of):

(7) a. it be ADJ that S: It is annoying that he left
early.

b. it be ADJ (for NP or of NP) to VP: It was
daring for John to climb on the roof.

c. NP be ADJ that S: John is happy that the
work got done.

d. NP be ADJ to VP: John was happy to get his
paycheck.1

(7a) and (7b) are extraposition constructions, so
there are also non-extraposed variants but as they are
rare we leave them out of consideration here. We
counted about 800 adjectives taking the (7a) con-
struction, a slightly smaller number is supposed to
occur in the (7b) one. Note that the syntactic frames
themselves are not specific to factive adjectives. We
can find non-factive adjectives in exactly the same
syntactic environments:

(8) a. It is probable that he left early.

b. It is unlikely for John to come early.

c. He is certain that it will rain.

d. He is likely to come early.

4.1 Problem 1: variation
The first problem that arises is that when one looks
at the data available on the web: several of these ad-
jectives are used as non-factive implicatives in the
construction in (7d), as we can see from the follow-
ing examples (simplified from web examples):

1Constructions with -ing forms are also possible. We leave
them out of the picture here because they have not been studied
systematically.

53



(9) a. This is my first trip to Italy, so I was not
brave to venture out alone.

b. Luckily, she was not stupid to send them
any money.

c. He was not stupid to think she would remain
the same weak little girl.

d. It was raining and snowing like crazy in
March here, so I was not stupid to risk the
customer car, my license and my life.

e. She still was not brave to approach the cars,
even the couple of cars right in front of her.

f. I was not lucky to have a good view.

The intended meaning of these sentences is clear but
are the implicative interpretations of these sentences
available to all speakers or are they just the creation
of netizens whose command of English is weak or
are they part of a bona fide unrecognized variant of
English?

4.2 Problem 2: context2

As explained above, the received wisdom is that the
factors that determine the inferential properties of a
lexical item are the lexical item itself and its syntac-
tic frame. The syntactic frame is in general meant
to refer to a loose notion of subcategorization3. It
consists of the environment of the item expressed
in terms of syntactic categories, be it Phrase Struc-
ture categories or Dependency Grammar ones. This
is the approach taken in VerbNet (Kipper-Schuler,
2005), where some semantic frames are associated
with Phrase Structure syntactic frames, giving it a
potential basis to make some inferential properties
explicit. We work here too with Phrase Structure
categories because most of the preceding literature
on adjectives is in Phrase Structure terms. Under
such an approach, we would list the adjectives that
can be found in the frames given above in (7) and
associate the factivity marker with them in case they

2The problem we discuss here for adjectives is discussed in
a more theoretical setting for verbs by (Beaver, 2010)

3It is a loose notion because some elements that are recog-
nized as part of the frame might reconsidered adjuncts rather
than arguments in a strict syntactic sense. We do not go into
this debate here as the distinction between arguments and ad-
juncts is often rather difficult to draw.

are factive and different marker in case they are not.
But both introspection and experimental studies will
tell us that this is not sufficient. Consider the follow-
ing pair:

(10) a. It was fool hearted of John to go on a trip
around the world.

b. It is fool hearted to go on a trip around the
world.

(10a) will indeed get a factive interpretation but
(10b) will not.

4.3 Crowd sourcing for RIVs

The two problems above convinced us that, before
proposing an veridicity annotation scheme for lexi-
cal items, we should study variation and context in
more detail. To do this, we set up several Mechan-
ical Turk experiments. In one, we presented Me-
chanical Turk workers with sentences like those in
(9) (not including 9f) asking them both about how
they understood them and whether they would use
them to express the interpretation they had given.
The preliminary results show that most speakers in-
deed interpret the sentences as implicating that the
embedded clause is false but, more importantly, this
non-factive interpretation was considered unobjec-
tionable by 20% of native users of English (we con-
trolled for this by asking the MT workers explicitly
about their command of English (”Was English the
primary language you used in ...”) and by asking
them to judge sentences that any native speaker of
English would get right). 20% seems to be a large
minority to ignore.

For the one adjective that we have studied in de-
tail, lucky, the native speakers that consider exam-
ples such as (9f) as ill-formed and would require an
enough to get the intended interpretation are in the
minority according to an informal survey we did in
parallel with the MT study. This suggests that the
split between users accepting the implicative inter-
pretation and those that don’t might not be the same
for each adjective.

With respect to the examples in (9), we presented
the MT workers with several variants: tense varia-
tion (past/present) and three different subject condi-
tions (specific subject, non specific but explicit sub-

54



ject and no subject), as well as the difference be-
tween of and for PPs as illustrated below:

(11) a. It was fool hearted of John to go on a trip
around the world.

b. It was fool hearted of old people to go on a
trip around the world.

c. It was fool hearted for John to go on a trip
around the world.

d. It was fool hearted for old people to go on a
trip around the world.

e. It was fool hearted to go on a trip around the
world.

f. It is fool hearted of John to go on a trip
around the world.

g. It is fool hearted of old people to go on a
trip around the world.

h. It is fool hearted for John to go on a trip
around the world.

i. It is fool hearted for old people to go on a
trip around the world.

j. It is fool hearted to go on a trip around the
world.

We haven’t yet analyzed the results in detail but
only 4 Turkers out of 10 rated (11j) as having hap-
pened whereas 9 out of 10 found (11a) to be factual.
There is no study of what is going on here but theo-
retical linguists wouldn’t be too upset about the facts
observed and invoke something like generic read-
ings to account for the difference. From our more
practical point of view, we observe that having an
explicit subject and being in the past tense makes
a difference. We need further studies to determine
what the importance of various factors is.

The insufficiency of the syntactic frame informa-
tion is illustrated even more dramatically with lucky.
Here the use of the future tense changes the inter-
pretation dramatically. Whereas in the past tense,
lucky behaves as a factive or implicative adjective
(see above), in the future it can have an idiomatic
meaning illustrated in

(12) Wong Kwan will be lucky to break even. (from
theFactBank (Saurı́ and Pustejovsky, 2009))

Here the speaker expresses the opinion that it is
unlikely that Wong Kwan will break even. This id-
iomatic meaning seems to be the meaning that is pre-
dominant with the future tense but, unfortunately for
annotation purposes, it is not the only possible one
(see (Karttunen, 2013) for more details on lucky):

(13) Sooner or later, a drug company will be lucky
to find such a molecule.

It is clear then that there are several factors be-
yond the syntactic frame as generally understood
that play a role in determining the inferences of lex-
ical items.

This situation is not specific to adjectives. Fac-
tive verbs have been studied in some detail and it
has been noticed that, for some of them, the veridic-
ity status depends on factors such as the person of
the matrix clause. The most recent study that we are
aware of is (Beaver, 2010) from which we the fol-
lowing examples.

(14) a. He is not aware that Morris saw the letter.

b. I am not aware that he [Morris] saw the
Daschle letter. (CNN, November 2001,
taken from (Beaver, 2010))

Whereas in the a-example, the embedded clause
seems factual, this is not the case in the b-example.
(Beaver, 2010), however, also gives examples of
third person use where the factive presupposition is
cancelled:

(15) Mrs London is not AWARE that there have ever
been signs erected to stop use of the route, nor
that there has ever been any obstruction to stop
use of the route. (County Environment Direc-
tor, Definitive Map Review 1996/2000, Public
Rights of Way Committee, Parish of Aveton
Gifford, 2000)

Another well-known environment that influences the
status of factives is the antecedent of a conditional.
The case of first person cancellation has been known
for a long time. The third person case in mainly doc-
umented in (Beaver, 2010).

55



(16) a. If I REALIZE later that I have not told the
truth, I will confess it to everyone.

b. If anyone DISCOVERS that one of our vol-
unteers is charging money for being a vol-
unteer, please notify me ASAP.(Tom Elliott,
GenWeb, Waldo County, Maine, 30 Nov.,
2000, taken from (Beaver, 2010))

4.4 What can be done with lexical signatures?
Lexicon annotation practice tends to take the lexi-
cal item into account and the syntactic frame. The
data above suggests that much more needs to be
taken into account, even in experimental settings
that mimic that of linguistic introspection. The ex-
istence of variation shows that we have to allow for
ambiguities in inference patterns, even when there
are no detected meaning differences and the syn-
tactic frames, as usually understood, are the same.
The data in section 4.2 suggests two possible ap-
proaches: we could try to encode more specific pat-
terns or we could base the attribution of a feature
such as +factive on a ’prototypical environment’, the
kind of environment linguists have assumed tacitly.
The first approach would most likely lead to an un-
manageable explosion of frames. The second ap-
proach makes features such as +factive conditional;
contrary to linguistic practice it is important to spell
out the exact conditions in which they are supposed
to hold. Further study of IMPLICATIVES and EPIS-
TEMIC MODALS will most likely lead to similar con-
clusions.

Is it, however, possible to spell out these condi-
tions? In what precedes we have talked as if the
variation that we observe is due to morpho-syntactic
factors such as tense. But providing more context, it
is of course also perfectly possible to have generic
interpretations, not implying factuality, with factive
adjectives in the past as the following example illus-
trates:

(17) In the Middle Ages it was daring to express
anything except orthodox opinions.

And again, although the idiomatic meaning of
lucky occurs mainly with the future tense, one can
find it in the past with non specific subjects:

(18) Just a hundred years ago a man was lucky to
live to be 45.

The real conditioning factors that determine these
interpretations are not morphological or syntactic;
they are themselves semantic: it is not tense per se
that influences the interpretation of lucky or of fac-
tive adjective complements, it is a form of genericity.
There is no way that, in the current state of affairs,
we can detect genericity directly.

Beaver concludes his corpus study stating

I doubt that there is any general princi-
ple that would enable one to predict from
the written form of an arbitrary sentence
involving a cognitive factive whether the
factive complement is presupposed by the
author. Certainly, there is a tendency for
the complement to be presupposed. And
certainly there are types of sentence in-
volving cognitive factives, notably in the
first and second person, for which the
complement is rarely if ever presupposed.
But the grey area, the range of cases for
which no small set of formal features of
the text would tell you whether the com-
plement is presupposed or not, is just too
big.

This conclusion, however, is not very satisfying
from a computational point of view. Whereas the
situation might be complex, there is a need for ap-
proaches that are more sophisticated than the one
described in the beginning of this section but less de-
featist than Beaver’s4. We will continue to run into
this unsatisfactory situation as long as we don’t have
systems that can directly couple NLU to real world
experiences. At this point we have to work with
morphological and syntactic proxies. Past tense, for
instance, is a good proxy for episodical as distinct
from generic interpretation, as discussed in (Mathew
and Katz, 2009). But, being proxies, our features in
this domain can only give us probable inferences.
Whatever system that is built on them needs to pro-
vide for means to override them.

4Beaver goes on discussion some factors that might play a
role in spoken language and points to an information structure
based solution. The ingredients of that solution will not be com-
putationally available for some time to come.

56



Acknowledgments

Thanks to Cleo Condoravdi and Stanley Peters for
comments and discussions and to Marianne Naval
and Miriam Connor for running the experiment.

The authors gratefully acknowledge the support
of Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) Machine Reading Program under Air
Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) prime contract
no. FA8750-09-C-0181. Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not neces-
sarily reflect the view of DARPA, AFRL, or the US
government.

References
David Beaver. 2010. Have you noticed that you belly

button lint colour is related to the colour of your cloth-
ing? In R. Bauerle, U. Reyle, and T. E. Zimmer-
mann, editors, Presuppositions and Discourse: Essays
offered to Hans Kamp, pages 65–99. Elsevier.

Lauri Karttunen. 1971. Implicative verbs. Language,
47:340–358.

Lauri Karttunen. 1974. Presupposition and linguistic
context. Theoretical Linguistics, 1(1):181–194.

Lauri Karttunen. 2012. Simple and phrasal implicatives.
In *SEM 2012, pages 124–131, Montréal, Canada. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Lauri Karttunen. 2013. You will be lucky to break even.
In Tracy Holloway King and Valeria dePaiva, editors,
From Quirky Case to Representing Space: Papers in
Honor of Annie Zaenen, pages 167–180. CSLI Publi-
cations, Stanford, CA.

Paul Kiparsky and Carol Kiparsky. 1970. Fact. In
M. Bierwisch and K. E. Heidolph, editors, Progress
in Linguistics, pages 143–173. Mouton, Hague.

Karin Kipper-Schuler. 2005. Verbnet: a broad-coverage
comprehensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Pennsylvania.

Angelika Kratzer. 2012. Modals and Conditionals. New
and Revised Perspectives. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, U.K.

Terence Langendoen and Harris Savin. 1971. The pro-
jection problem for presuppositions. In C.J. Fillmore
and D.T. Langendoen, editors, Studies in Linguistic Se-
mantics. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York.

Bill MacCartney and Christopher D. Manning. 2009.
An extended model of natural logic. In Proceedings
IWCS-8 ’09 Proceedings of the Eighth International
Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 140–
156. University of Tilburg.

Thomas A. Mathew and E. Graham Katz. 2009. Super-
vised categorization for habitual versus episodic sen-
tences. In The Sixth Midwest Computational Linguis-
tics Colloquium 2009 at Indiana University Blooming-
ton.

Rowan Nairn, Cleo Condoravdi, and Lauri Karttunen.
2006. Computing relative polarity for textual infer-
ence. In ICoS-5, pages 67–76.

Neal R. Norrick. 1978. Factive Adjectives and the The-
ory of Factivity. Niemeyer.

F. R. Palmer. 2001. Mood and Modality. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, U.K.

Christopher Potts. 2005. The Logic of Conventional Im-
plicatures. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom.

Roser Saurı́ and James Pustejovsky. 2009. Factbank 1.0.
Linguistic Data Consortium, September.

Roser Saurı́ and James Pustejovsky. 2012. Are you sure
that this happened? assessing the factuality degree of
events in text. Computational Linguistics, 38(2):261–
299.

Roser Saurı́. 2008. A Factuality Profiler for Eventualities
in Text. Ph.D. thesis, Brandeis University.

57



58


