










































Greetings Generation in Video Role Playing Games


Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 167–171,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Greetings Generation in Video Role Playing Games

Björn Schlünder
Ruhr-Universität Bochum
Department of Linguistics

Germany
bjoern.schluender@rub.de

Ralf Klabunde
Ruhr-Universität Bochum
Department of Linguistics

Germany
ralf.klabunde@rub.de

Abstract

We present first results of our project on
the generation of contextually adequate
greeting exchanges in video role playing
games. To make greeting exchanges com-
putable, an analysis of the factors influ-
encing greeting behavior as well as the
factors influencing greeting exchanges is
given. Based on the politeness model pro-
posed by Brown & Levinson (1987) we
develop a simple algorithm for the gener-
ation of greeting exchanges. An evalua-
tion, comparing dialog from the video role
playing game Skyrim to dialog determined
by our algorithm, shows that our algorithm
is able to generate greeting exchanges that
are contextually more adequate than those
featured by Skyrim.

1 Introduction

Though there has been a steep rise in interest in
video games during the past decade, both cultur-
ally as well as commercial, little has been done in
getting language technology involved in game de-
velopment. There is a huge contrast between the
steep development of almost every other aspect of
game development and the usage of language tech-
nology. To our knowledge there is not one game
of one of the major game companies that uses
sophisticated NLG-methods for the generation of
contextually adequate utterances. Modern games
feature rich voice acting, but often lack realistic
conversational situations. Voice acting, which be-
came standard in commercial productions around
the year 2000, hampered usage of language tech-
nology for quite some time, since e.g. speech syn-
thesis did not reach sufficient quality and therefore
would hurt immersion. Since then not only quality
of synthesis systems has increased, but synthesis-
like voice acting has also been used in successful
productions (e.g. Portal 1 & 2).

There is some work in the NLG community on
NLG in games (e.g., Koller et al. 2004; Khosmood
and Walker 2010), but an intimate cooperation be-
tween game design and NLG does not exist on a
commercial level. Research in the fields of NLG
& game design is e.g. conducted at Expressive
Intelligence Studio at UC Santa Cruz, with cur-
rent projects (e.g. SpyFeet) focussing on combin-
ing NLG methods and computational dialog man-
agement in simple role playing games (Reed et al.
2011).

By nature of their modern design, video games,
especially of the role playing genre, provide de-
tailed information on the spatial and social envi-
ronment, the agent types, their behavior and moti-
vation, the progress on and steps in certain goals
etc., so that context-related language generation
should be a feasible task.

In our paper, we show by means of an appar-
ently simple generation task, viz. the genera-
tion of greetings in greeting exchange situations,
how more appropriate linguistic expressions can
be generated if context features are taken into ac-
count. Our examples will be taken from the video
role playing game The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim,
which shall henceforth simply be referenced as
Skyrim.

2 Video Role Playing Games (VRPGs)

Video games involve two kinds of players or
agents, respectively: player characters are agents
acting in the virtual game environment on behalf
of and controlled by the player, and non-player
characters (NPCs) are agents controlled by the
game software. Both agents interact with each
other by non-verbal and verbal means, the latter
typically realized by the selection of canned text
from an agent-dependent discourse tree.

The ultimate goal of a video game is immer-
sion: the player should get emotionally involved
with the environment, the NPCs and his charac-

167



ter. Text presented in video games is vital to the
immersion process. Form and content of the texts
presented depend on the player types and the story
telling method.

The essential features of VRPGs are the high
number of appearing NPCs, their multifaceted
models (skills, attributes, ”karma”, etc.), a branch-
ing story line and the possibility to take different
approaches to solve problems, many of the for-
mer being conversational. As a result, in VRPGs
conversations mostly take place directly within
the games virtual environment (as opposed to
cutscenes in many action games, i.e. episodes the
player is not able to control), which leads to the
high immersion factor of the genre.

2.1 Text in Video Games

Game texts are the major component in telling and
driving a game’s story. In most recent games they
are fully voice acted. Game texts can either be
categorized as storytelling text, written documents
appearing in the game, or dialog, which can be
further categorized as either scripted or interactive
dialog. The latter is mostly featured in games of
the branching storytelling type like VRPGs. These
games make rich use of interactive dialogue and
use it to fuel their story. Players have multiple
choices in dialogs and are able to use different ver-
bal approaches to solve conversational problems.
Nevertheless all possible dialog lines are still pre-
written during development – there is just a lot
more of them. According to web sources Skyrim
comprises more than 60,000 dialog lines.

This demonstrates that game developers must
use an enormous amount of text that will be pre-
sented in the different episodes of a story. How-
ever, there is little variation within these texts to
keep development costs down. As a result, con-
versations may get an inappropriate character by
means of an iterated use of one and the same
text unit in subsequent scenes, or the constant,
inappropriate avoidance of ingame variables that
would bloat the number of dialog lines (e.g. gen-
der of agents).

In Skyrim this leads to constant skipping of real
conversation openers and real passing greetings.
As our evaluation below shows, even a minimal-
istic greeting exchange will be perceived as more
appropriate and therefore improve immersion.

3 Greeting Exchanges

Greeting exchanges are social practices that agents
in VRPGs should be able to master. According to
Firth (1972) the aim of a greeting exchange is to
establish or reestablish social relations in case of
conversation openers, or in case of passing greet-
ings – if the agents are strangers – guaranteeing a
safe passage. Both may also serve acknowledge-
ment of a different allocation of status.

Politeness is a central aspect of every type of
greeting exchange. Greeting exchanges as ad-
jacency pairs comprise a linguistic, a sociolin-
guistic, and an anthropological aspect (Williams
2001). Some of the variables influencing form and
content of a greeting exchange are:

• Attention of player and agents (e.g. are the
agents facing each other?)

• Time since last encounter between the two
parties (e.g. Skyrim’s NPCs do not make a
difference between the character leaving for
five minutes and leaving for days)

• Gender as social variable (e.g. in the soci-
ety in question, is a woman supposed to greet
first?)

• Physical variables: time of the day, physical
distance, noisiness of surroundings, crowd-
edness of the immediate environment. E.g.,
the last three variables influence wether a
verbal or a gestural greeting should be per-
formed.

In Skyrim, instantiations of these variables are
available during runtime because they are tracked
for various other functions of the game engine, but
only gender (”Hello master / mistress”) and dis-
tance (passing greetings will only occur in the im-
midiate vicinity of the player character) are actu-
ally utilized for greeting purposes. Also the nec-
essary variables underlying the politeness effect of
a greeting are implicitly given in a game; e.g. in
Skyrim the player will encounter kings as well as
peasants, and the sum of her deeds for certain fac-
tions are also tracked.

4 Computing Greeting Exchanges

Brown & Levinson’s (1987) well-known polite-
ness model uses the concepts of negative and pos-
itive face to explain polite behavior. The nega-
tive face comprises the want of every agent that
his actions be unimpeded by others. The positive

168



Trait Par. Value Motivation

shy α 1.2 misinterprets social distance
β 1.3 afraid of authority
γ 1.8 fears social impositions more

than anything else

uncouth α 0.2 unaware of social distance
β 1.6 does recognize and respect

power
γ 0.2 does not mind the impositions of

the FTA

Table 1: Values of α-, β- and γ-parameters for shy
and uncouth stereotypes

face is the want of every agent that his wants be
desirable to at least some others. Face threating
acts (FTAs) threaten the positive and/or the nega-
tive face of the addressee and/or the speaker. Po-
liteness is just a verbal or non-verbal means to at-
tenuate the FTA. According to Brown & Levinson
(1987) the weight Wx of a FTA x is calculated as
follows:

Wx = D(S, H) + P (H, S) + Rx

where D is the social distance between speaker S
and hearer H , P is the relative power the hearer
has over the speaker, and Rx is the ranking of the
impositions of a particular FTA x.

In Skyrim the background information for the
generation of appropriate greetings is available in
the course of the game, but the software makes
very limited use of the variables at its disposal.
Time since the last encounter is not taken into ac-
count as well as attention: Characters might have
been gone for days of ingame time and will hear
the same phrases as if they just left the room. The
character is also addressed by NPCs while they are
passing behind his back or sometimes while talk-
ing to other NPCs. This is clearly impolite greet-
ing behavior that is not licensed by urgency and
rudeness as an agent’s trait, since this affects all
NPCs.

More information available could be used to
calculate the social distance D and power P . The
social distance could be calculated by taking into
account the interacting agent’s ethnicities, their
profession, social skills etc., while relative power
could be calculated through factors like rank in or
standing with an organisation.

Finally and most importantly personal influ-
ences are implemented by the use of parameters
which simply adjust the impact of the social vari-
ables:

Wx = α × D(S, H) + β × P (H, S) + γ × Rx

This allows for easy contrasting between char-
acter types. If we assume that a ”normal” greeting
behavior is based on a value of 1 for each of α, β
and γ, we assume exemplary values for the param-
eters for stereotypical shy and uncouth as seen in
Table 1.

As a result, our method not only generates dif-
ferent greetings w.r.t. different instantiations of
the physical and social variables, but also differ-
ent greetings for different agent types. Our algo-
rithm outlined in Table 2 generates a simple pass-
ing greeting exchange or a simple conversation
opener.

We assume that for every pair of agents (char-
acter and NPC) there is a Question Under Discus-
sion (QUD) stack of information that has not yet
been resolved (see, e.g., Djalali et al. 2011). A
QUD-model for short-term discourse history can
also be utilized to lock the NPC in a certain con-
versational state (urgent quests), therefore giving
access to the notion of urgency which mitigates the
impact of impolite behavior, e.g. skipping greeting
exchanges, and also helps to keep discourse coher-
ent.

Besides the QUD stack we assume a database
which keeps record of the discourse history be-
yond the QUD-stack. Elements resolved (popped
from the stack) are stored in the database. This
database also helps to keep track of relations be-
tween the two agents and directly affects the so-
cial distance component. Relative power is un-
touched. The database also keeps track of agent-
specific information like faction, rank, and others
as well as agent-pair specific data, like time since
last encounter.

Since we do not have access to Skyrim’s source
code, our algorithm has not been implemented yet.
However, given greetings from Skyrim, the out-
lined algorithm can be used to determine mod-
ified greetings whose quality has been evalu-
ated by players. For example, when entering
an alchemist’s store the following example dialog
might occur in Skyrim (A being the alchemist, P
being the player character):

A: You look rather pale. Could be Ataxia. It’s
quite a problem back home in Cyrodiil.

P: [not realized]
P: [initiates conversation; not realized]
A: Pardon me, but do I detect a case of the Rat-

tles? I’ve got something for that.

169



1 check for possibility of a greeting exchange: 13 if greeting character is a player character:
2 • checking agent type (normal, shy, uncouth) 14 • generate passing greeting or conversational opener.
3 • line of sight between agents? 15 • present player with options to choose from.
4 • agents paying attention to e.o.? 16 • add greeting phrase to discourse history.
5 • distance between agents appropriate? 17 • check for circumstances that might reduce impact

of FTA (e.g. urgency)
6 • one of agents trying to hide? 18 • apply politeness impact on standing and/or karma.
7 gather possible and situationally fitting greeting

phrases / schemes for either. . .
19 else if greeting character is a NPC:

8 • A passing greeting or 20 • choose greeting according to NPCs role and model
9 • A conversation opener 21 • generate chosen phrase.
10 look for physical modifiers that influence mode of

greeting (e.g. noisiness of surrounding)
22 • add chosen phrase to discourse history

11 look for situational modifiers that override politeness
calculation

22 output to player

12 calculate politeness with regards to agent types

Table 2: Proposed algorithm for greeting exchange generation.

P: [not realized]
P: [chooses from variety of conversation topics]

Utilizing our algorithm, the following dialog
might unfold.

A: Good morning and welcome to my store.
P: Good morning.
A: How may I serve you?
P: [chooses from variety of conversation topics]

One can see that while the pre-written dialog lines
give a lot of background information about the
game world, their usage in the initial dialog stages
seems a bit odd.

5 Evaluation

To evaluate the suggested method of computing
greeting exchanges, we designed a questionnaire
containing descriptions (in a pen & paper RPG
style) of five different situations from Skyrim.
These situations have been chosen because of their
unfitting pragmatic realisation. For each situa-
tion, we presented a set of follow-up dialog sit-
uations which contained the original dialog from
Skyrim, dialog determined by our algorithm (mi-
nus urgency, as it would allow to skip greeting ex-
changes) as well as by a simple approach that only
took into account attention and minimalistic greet-
ings.

We used transcripts from the original dialog
to eliminate potential bias from different meth-
ods of presentation as well as to ensure that sub-
jects would not recognize the original dialog from
Skyrim. The subjects were then asked to evaluate
the dialog situations according to appropriateness,
politeness, social distance, relative power as well

as feeling a sense of urgency. In addition we asked
the subjects for a short self-evaluation of their ex-
perience with video and role playing games as
well as their experience with Skyrim. Out of seven
participants two did not have any experience with
video or role playing games. Two participants had
played Skyrim. They evaluated the overall linguis-
tic realisation with a score of 7 out of 9 and were
able to recognize the situations as well as the dia-
log options from Skyrim. Table 3 shows the over-
all evaluation results.

very medium not

Skyrim 1.4 1.4 4.2
simple 2 4 1
our alg. 4.2 1.4 1.2

Skyrim 0.2 1.8 5
simple 1.6 4 1.4
our alg. 4.6 1.6 0.8

Table 3: Average no. of choices for appropriate-
ness (above) and politeness (below)

In this setting, Skyrim’s passing greetings and
conversation openers generally were perceived as
much less appropriate than the alternatives pre-
sented, while greetings determined by our algo-
rithm were perceived as the most appropriate in
all scenarios by the majority of all participants.
Skyrim’s greeting exchanges were also mostly as-
sociated with only little social distance and were
perceived as relatively impolite. The opposite was
true for greetings determined by our algorithm: in
every scenario the majority of participants chose
them as the most polite one.

170



References

Penelope Brown and Stephen C. Levinson. 1987. Po-
liteness: Some universals in language usage. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge

Alex Djalali, David Clausen, Sven Lauer, Karl Schultz
and Christopher Potts. 2011. Modeling Expert Ef-
fects and Common Ground Using Questions Under
Discussion. Proceedings of the AAAI Workshop on
Building Representations of Common Ground with
Intelligent Agents.

Raymond Firth. 1972. Verbal and Bodily Rituals of
Greeting and Parting. The Interpretation of Ritual:
1–38.

J.S. La Fontaine (Ed.). 1972. The Interpretation of
Ritual. Tavistock Publications, London.

Alexander Koller, Ralph Debusmann, Malte Gabsdil
and Kristina Striegnitz. 2004. Put my galakmid coin
into the dispenser and kick it: Computational Lin-
guistics and Theorem Proving in a Computer Game.
Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 13 (2):
187–206.

Foaad Khosmood and Marilyn Walker. 2010.
Grapevine: a gossip generation system. Proceed-
ings of the 5th International Conference on the
Foundations of Digital Games, New York, NY, USA:
92–99.

Aaron A. Reed, Ben Samuel, Anne Sullivan, Ricky
Grant, April Grow, Justin Lazaro, Jennifer Mahal,
Sri Kurniawan, Marilyn Walker and Noah Wardrip-
Fruin. 2011. SpyFeet: An Exercise RPG. Pro-
ceedings of the 6th International Conference on the
Foundations of Digital Games.

Jesse Schell. 2008. The Art of Game Design: A book
of lenses. Elsevier/Morgan Kaufmann, Amsterdam
and Boston.

Kenneth E. Williams. 2001. An Evaluation of Greet-
ing Exchanges in Textbooks and Real Life Settings.
Sophia Junior College Faculty Journal, 21:49–64.

171


