



















































Reinforcement Learning of Two-Issue Negotiation Dialogue Policies


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, pages 112–116,
Metz, France, 22-24 August 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Reinforcement Learning of Two-Issue Negotiation Dialogue Policies

Kallirroi Georgila
Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California

12015 Waterfront Drive, Playa Vista, CA 90094, USA
kgeorgila@ict.usc.edu

Abstract

We use hand-crafted simulated negotiators
(SNs) to train and evaluate dialogue poli-
cies for two-issue negotiation between two
agents. These SNs differ in their goals and
in the use of strong and weak arguments
to persuade their counterparts. They may
also make irrational moves, i.e., moves not
consistent with their goals, to generate a
variety of negotiation patterns. Different
versions of these SNs interact with each
other to generate corpora for Reinforce-
ment Learning (RL) of argumentation di-
alogue policies for each of the two agents.
We evaluate the learned policies against
hand-crafted SNs similar to the ones used
for training but with the modification that
these SNs no longer make irrational moves
and thus are harder to beat. The learned
policies generally do as well as, or bet-
ter than the hand-crafted SNs showing that
RL can be successfully used for learning
argumentation dialogue policies in two-
issue negotiation scenarios.

1 Introduction

The dialogue policy of a dialogue system decides
on what dialogue move (also called action) the
system should make given the dialogue context
(also called dialogue state). Building hand-crafted
policies is a hard task, and there is no guarantee
that the resulting policies will be optimal. This is-
sue has motivated the dialogue community to use
statistical methods for automatically learning dia-
logue policies, the most popular of which is Rein-
forcement Learning (RL) (Szepesvári, 2010).

To date, RL has been used mainly for learn-
ing dialogue policies for slot-filling applications
such as restaurant recommendations (Williams
and Young, 2007; Chandramohan et al., 2010;
Jurčı́ček et al., 2012; Gašić et al., 2012), flight

reservations (Henderson et al., 2008), sightsee-
ing recommendations (Misu et al., 2010), appoint-
ment scheduling (Georgila et al., 2010), techni-
cal support (Janarthanam and Lemon, 2010), etc.,
largely ignoring other types of dialogue. RL has
also been applied to question-answering (Misu et
al., 2012) and tutoring domains (Tetreault and Lit-
man, 2008; Chi et al., 2011). There has also been
some work on applying RL to the more difficult
problem of learning negotiation policies (Heeman,
2009; Paruchuri et al., 2009; Georgila and Traum,
2011a; Georgila and Traum, 2011b; Nouri et al.,
2012), which is the topic of this paper.

In negotiation dialogue the system and the user
have opinions about the optimal outcomes and try
to reach a joint decision. Dialogue policy deci-
sions are typically whether to present, accept, or
reject a proposal, whether to compromise, etc. Re-
wards may depend on the type of policy that we
want to learn. For example, a cooperative policy
should be rewarded for accepting proposals.

Recently, Georgila and Traum (2011a; 2011b)
learned argumentation dialogue policies for nego-
tiation against users of different cultural norms in
a one-issue negotiation scenario. We extend this
work by learning argumentation policies in a two-
issue negotiation setting. We aim to learn system
(or agent) policies that will persuade their inter-
locutor (a human user or another agent) to agree
on the system’s preferences.

Our research contribution is two-fold: First, to
our knowledge this is the first study that uses RL
for learning argumentation policies in a two-issue
negotiation scenario and one of the few studies on
using RL for negotiation. Second, for the first
time, we learn policies for agents with different
degrees of persuasion skills, i.e., agents that pro-
vide strong or weak arguments.

Section 2 introduces RL, and section 3 de-
scribes our two-issue negotiation domain and our
learning methodology. Section 4 presents our
evaluation results and section 5 concludes.

112



2 Reinforcement Learning

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a machine learn-
ing technique used to learn the policy of an
agent (Szepesvári, 2010). RL is used in
the framework of Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) (Szepesvári, 2010) or Partially Observ-
able Markov Decision Processes (Williams and
Young, 2007). In this paper we use MDPs.

An MDP is defined as a tuple (S, A, P , R, γ)
where S is the set of states that the agent may be
in, A is the set of actions of the agent, P : S × A
→ P (S, A) is the set of transition probabilities be-
tween states after taking an action, R : S × A →
< is the reward function, and γ ∈ [0, 1] a discount
factor weighting long-term rewards. At any given
time step i the agent is in a state si ∈ S. When the
agent performs an action αi ∈ A following a pol-
icy π : S → A, it receives a reward ri(si, αi) ∈ <
and transitions to state s

′
i according to P (s

′
i|si, αi)

∈ P . The quality of the policy π followed by the
agent is measured by the expected future reward
also called Q-function, Qπ : S × A→<.

To estimate the Q-function we use Least-
Squares Policy Iteration (LSPI) (Lagoudakis and
Parr, 2003; Li et al., 2009). LSPI can learn directly
from a corpus of dialogues and is sample efficient.
We use linear function approximation of the Q-
function. Thus Q(s, α) =

∑k
i=1wiφi(s, α) where

s is the state that the agent is in and α the action
that it performs in this state, and ŵ is a vector of
weights wi for the feature functions φi(s, α). The
magnitude of a weight wi shows the contribution
of the feature φi(s, α) to the Q(s, α) value.

3 Learning Argumentation Policies

In our experiments, two agents negotiate on two is-
sues that are independent of each other. Each issue
may have three possible outcomes. Our approach
can be applied to any such issues. For the sake
of readability, from now on we will use a negoti-
ation scenario in which Agents 1 and 2 are hav-
ing a party and need to agree on the type of food
that will be served (Thai, Italian, Mexican) and the
day of the week that the party will be held (Friday,
Saturday, Sunday). Agents 1 and 2 have different
goals. Table 1 shows the points that Agents 1 and 2
earn for each negotiation outcome.

We build hand-crafted simulated negotiators
(SNs) for the two agents that interact with each
other to generate simulated corpora. The SNs dif-
fer not only in their goals but also in whether
they use strong or weak arguments to persuade

Agent 1 Agent 2
Food type
Thai 200 0
Italian 100 40
Mexican 0 80
Day of the week
Friday 80 0
Saturday 40 100
Sunday 0 200

Table 1: Rewards for Agents 1 and 2.

their counterparts, and sometimes make irrational
moves, i.e., moves not consistent with their goals.
For example, Agent 1 may reject an offer for
“Thai” food, and Agent 2 may offer or accept “Fri-
day”. This is to generate a variety of negotiation
patterns. There is also some randomness regard-
ing whether the SN will start the conversation by
a direct offer or by providing an argument.

The SNs for Agents 1 and 2 can choose
among 13 actions: “offer-Thai”, “offer-
Italian”, “offer-Mexican”, “offer-Friday”,
“offer-Saturday”, “offer-Sunday”, “provide-
argument-Thai”, “provide-argument-Mexican”,
“provide-argument-Friday”, “provide-argument-
Sunday”, “accept”, “reject”, “release-turn”. In our
setup Agents 1 and 2 do not provide arguments for
“Italian” or “Saturday” since these are acceptable
options for both agents. Because Agent 1 cares
more about the food type and Agent 2 cares more
about the day there is potential for trade-offs,
i.e., “I’ll give you the food type that you want if
you agree on the day that I want”. So we have
one more action “trade-off” which is basically a
combined action “offer-Thai, offer-Sunday”. The
two agents have to agree on both issues for the
dialogue to end. If there is no agreement in 40
turns then the dialogue stops.

Note that for testing our learned policies (see
section 4) we use a rationalized version of these
SNs. For example, Agent 1 never offers “Sunday”
and never accepts “Mexican”. We will refer to the
SNs that exhibit some degree of randomness and
irrationality as “semi-rational” and the SNs that al-
ways behave rationally as “rational”.

For training, 4 corpora are generated (50,000 di-
alogues each) using different SNs, each of which
is limited to using either strong or weak argu-
ments: SN for Agent 1 with strong arguments vs.
SN for Agent 2 with strong arguments, SN for
Agent 1 with strong arguments vs. SN for Agent 2

113



with weak arguments, SN for Agent 1 with weak
arguments vs. SN for Agent 2 with strong argu-
ments, and SN for Agent 1 with weak arguments
vs. SN for Agent 2 with weak arguments.

We use LSPI to learn policies directly from the
4 corpora. Each agent is rewarded only at the end
of the dialogue based on the agreement. So if the
outcome is “Thai” and “Saturday” Agent 1 will
earn 240 points and Agent 2 100 points. We set a
small reward +1 point for each policy action taken.
Table 2 shows our state representation.

The first 10 state variables are self-explanatory.
Below we explain how the “counter” variables
work. Initially the counter for “Thai” arguments
is set to 0 and Agent 2 supports food type “Mexi-
can”. Every time the policy of Agent 1 provides
an argument in favor of “Thai”, the counter for
“Thai” arguments is increased by 1 and the counter
for “Mexican” arguments is decreased by 1 (like
a penalty). Every time the policy of Agent 1 ar-
gues in favor of “Mexican” the counter for “Thai”
arguments is decreased by 1 and the counter for
“Mexican” arguments is increased by 1. When
the counter for “Thai” arguments becomes 3,
then the state variable “Thai-argument-counter-
reached-threshold” becomes “yes” and Agent 2 is
ready to yield to the demands of Agent 1. This
threshold of 3 was set empirically after experimen-
tation. Likewise for the rest of the “counter” vari-
ables. We also account for both strong and weak
arguments. When the arguments of an agent are
weak, even if the corresponding counters exceed
the predefined threshold and the associated state
variables change from “no” to “yes”, the behav-
ior of their interlocutor will not change. This is
to simulate the fact that weak arguments cannot be
persuasive. The release action counter works simi-
larly. Initially it is 0 but after 4 consecutive actions
of the same speaker it is set to 1 to ensure that the
turns are not very long.

There are 786,432 possible states and
11,010,048 possible Q-values (state-action
pairs). We use linear function approximation
with 1,680 manually selected features. The
rationale for selecting these features is as follows:
We associate the action “offer-Thai” with the
state variables “current-day-accepted”, “Thai-
rejected”, “Italian-rejected”, “Mexican-rejected”,
“Thai-argument-counter-reached-threshold”, and
“Mexican-argument-counter-reached-threshold”.
Thus we assume that the values of the other state
variables are irrelevant. This is an approximation
(to keep the number of features manageable) that

Current offer on the table (null/Thai/Italian/
Mexican/Friday/Saturday/Sunday/trade-off)

By whom is the current offer on the table
(null/Agent1/Agent2)

Currently accepted food type
(null/Thai/Italian/Mexican)

Currently accepted day (null/Friday/
Saturday/Sunday)

Has food type Thai been rejected? (no/yes)
Has food type Italian been rejected? (no/yes)
Has food type Mexican been rejected? (no/yes)
Has day Friday been rejected? (no/yes)
Has day Saturday been rejected? (no/yes)
Has day Sunday been rejected? (no/yes)
Has counter for food type Thai arguments

reached threshold? (no/yes)
Has counter for food type Mexican arguments

reached threshold? (no/yes)
Has counter for day Friday arguments

reached threshold? (no/yes)
Has counter for day Sunday arguments

reached threshold? (no/yes)
Has release action counter reached

threshold (no/yes)

Table 2: State variables that we keep track of and
all the possible values they can take.

has drawbacks, e.g., we may have an “offer-Thai”
action even though the food type agreed so far is
“Thai” (because there is no feature to associate the
currently accepted food type value with a “Thai”
offer). With this configuration we end up having
4 × 25 = 128 binary features just for the action
“offer-Thai”. Similarly, features are selected for
the rest of the actions.

We partition each one of our 4 simulated cor-
pora into 5 subsets of 10,000 dialogues each. Each
partition is processed independently and will be
referred to as trial. We train policies for each
trial of each corpus type (20 policies for each
agent). Thus we end up with the following 4
types of policies for Agent 1 (and likewise for the
policies of Agent 2): Agent 1 with strong argu-
ments trained against Agent 2 with strong argu-
ments (Agent 1 S(S)); Agent 1 with strong argu-
ments trained against Agent 2 with weak argu-
ments (Agent 1 S(W)); Agent 1 with weak argu-
ments trained against Agent 2 with strong argu-
ments (Agent 1 W(S)); and Agent 1 with weak
arguments trained against Agent 2 with weak ar-
guments (Agent 1 W(W)).

114



Policy Opponent Policy Opponent Policy Opponent
Score Score #Actions #Actions #Turns #Turns

Agent 1 S(S) vs. Agent 2 S 214.3 164.3 7.6 6.2 2.0 1.6
Agent 1 S(S) vs. Agent 2 W 214.1 164.5 7.4 6.1 2.0 1.6
Agent 1 S(W) vs. Agent 2 S 213.9 165.1 7.6 6.2 2.0 1.6
Agent 1 S(W) vs. Agent 2 W 214.1 164.7 7.4 6.1 2.0 1.6
Agent 1 W(S) vs. Agent 2 S 192.4 196.5 9.1 8.5 2.5 2.4
Agent 1 W(S) vs. Agent 2 W 197.9 198.9 7.6 7.0 2.1 1.9
Agent 1 W(W) vs. Agent 2 S 195.0 197.9 8.8 8.5 2.5 2.4
Agent 1 W(W) vs. Agent 2 W 198.1 199.0 7.7 7.0 2.2 2.0

Table 3: Results of different training and testing combinations for learned policies of Agent 1 and rational
SNs for Agent 2.

4 Evaluation

Each policy of Agent 1 resulting from a trial
is evaluated against two hand-crafted SNs for
Agent 2, one where Agent 2 provides strong ar-
guments (Agent 2 S) and one where Agent 2 pro-
vides weak arguments (Agent 2 W). So for the
condition “Agent 1 with strong arguments trained
against Agent 2 with strong arguments (Agent 1
S(S))” we have 5 policies, each of which interacts
with “Agent 2 S” (or “Agent 2 W”). We calcu-
late the averages of the earned points for each of
the agents, of the number of actions per dialogue
of each agent, and of the number of turns per di-
alogue of each agent, over 10,000 dialogues per
policy. Likewise for the policies of Agent 2. Note
that the SNs used in the evaluation do not behave
irrationally like the ones used for training, and thus
are harder to beat.

In Table 3 we can see the results for the policy
of Agent 1. Results for the policy of Agent 2 are
similar given that the goals of Agent 2 mirror the
goals of Agent 1. As we can see, the policy of
Agent 1 with strong arguments learned to provide
the appropriate arguments and make Agent 2 agree
on “Thai” and “Friday” or “Saturday”. When the
policy of Agent 1 provides only weak arguments it
cannot get day “Friday” but it can secure a trade-
off. This is because both the learned policies and
the SNs usually accept trade-off offers (due to the
way the hand-crafted SNs were constructed). We
also performed tests with SNs that did not propose
or accept as many trade-offs. This arrangement fa-
vored the policy of Agent 1 with strong arguments,
and hurt the performance of the policy of Agent 1
with weak arguments playing against Agent 2 with
strong arguments. This shows that trade-offs help
the weaker negotiators.

Furthermore, we experimented with testing on

semi-rational SNs similar to the ones used for
training and the results were better for the policy
of Agent 1 with weak arguments and worse for the
policy of Agent 1 with strong arguments. So like
trade-offs a semi-rational SN favors the weaker
negotiators.

5 Conclusion

We learned argumentation dialogue policies for
two-issue negotiation, using simulated corpora
generated from the interaction of two hand-crafted
SNs that differed in their goals and in the use of
strong and weak arguments to persuade their coun-
terparts. These SNs sometimes made random or
irrational moves to generate a variety of negotia-
tion patterns.

We used these simulated corpora and RL to
learn argumentation dialogue policies for each of
the two agents. Each of the learned policies was
evaluated against hand-crafted SNs similar to the
ones used for training but with the modification
that these SNs no longer made irrational moves
and thus were harder to beat. The policies gener-
ally did as well as, or better than the hand-crafted
SNs showing that RL can be successfully used for
learning argumentation dialogue policies in two-
issue negotiation scenarios.

For future work we would like to use automatic
feature selection (Li et al., 2009; Misu and Kash-
ioka, 2012) and learn policies for more than two
issues and more than three outcomes per issue.
Selecting features manually is a difficult process
that requires a lot of experimentation and trial-
and-error.

Acknowledgments

This work was funded by the NSF grant
#1117313.

115



References
Senthilkumar Chandramohan, Matthieu Geist, and

Olivier Pietquin. 2010. Sparse approximate dy-
namic programming for dialog management. In
Proc. of the Annual SIGdial Meeting on Discourse
and Dialogue, pages 107–115, Tokyo, Japan.

Min Chi, Kurt VanLehn, Diane Litman, and Pamela
Jordan. 2011. Empirically evaluating the ap-
plication of reinforcement learning to the induc-
tion of effective and adaptive pedagogical strategies.
User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 21(1-
2):137–180.

Milica Gašić, Matthew Henderson, Blaise Thomson,
Pirros Tsiakoulis, and Steve Young. 2012. Pol-
icy optimisation of POMDP-based dialogue systems
without state space compression. In Proc. of the
IEEE Workshop on Spoken Language Technology
(SLT), pages 31–36, Miami, FL, USA.

Kallirroi Georgila and David Traum. 2011a. Learning
culture-specific dialogue models from non culture-
specific data. In Proc. of HCI International, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science Vol. 6766, pages 440–
449, Orlando, FL, USA.

Kallirroi Georgila and David Traum. 2011b. Rein-
forcement learning of argumentation dialogue poli-
cies in negotiation. In Proc. of Interspeech, pages
2073–2076, Florence, Italy.

Kallirroi Georgila, Maria K. Wolters, and Johanna D.
Moore. 2010. Learning dialogue strategies from
older and younger simulated users. In Proc. of
the Annual SIGdial Meeting on Discourse and Di-
alogue, pages 103–106, Tokyo, Japan.

Peter A. Heeman. 2009. Representing the rein-
forcement learning state in a negotiation dialogue.
In Proc. of the IEEE Automatic Speech Recogni-
tion and Understanding Workshop (ASRU), Merano,
Italy.

James Henderson, Oliver Lemon, and Kallirroi
Georgila. 2008. Hybrid reinforcement/supervised
learning of dialogue policies from fixed datasets.
Computational Linguistics, 34(4):487–511.

S. Janarthanam and O. Lemon. 2010. Adaptive refer-
ring expression generation in spoken dialogue sys-
tems: Evaluation with real users. In Proc. of the An-
nual SIGdial Meeting on Discourse and Dialogue,
pages 124–131, Tokyo, Japan.

Filip Jurčı́ček, Blaise Thomson, and Steve Young.
2012. Reinforcement learning for parameter esti-
mation in statistical spoken dialogue systems. Com-
puter Speech and Language, 26(3):168–192.

Michail G. Lagoudakis and Ronald Parr. 2003. Least-
squares policy iteration. Journal of Machine Learn-
ing Research, 4:1107–1149.

Lihong Li, Jason D. Williams, and Suhrid Balakrish-
nan. 2009. Reinforcement learning for dialog man-
agement using least-squares policy iteration and fast
feature selection. In Proc. of Interspeech, pages
2475–2478, Brighton, United Kingdom.

Teruhisa Misu and Hideki Kashioka. 2012. Simul-
taneous feature selection and parameter optimiza-
tion for training of dialogue policy by reinforcement
learning. In Proc. of the IEEE Workshop on Spoken
Language Technology (SLT), pages 1–6, Miami, FL,
USA.

Teruhisa Misu, Komei Sugiura, Kiyonori Ohtake,
Chiori Hori, Hideki Kashioka, Hisashi Kawai, and
Satoshi Nakamura. 2010. Modeling spoken de-
cision making dialogue and optimization of its di-
alogue strategy. In Proc. of the Annual SIGdial
Meeting on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 221–
224, Tokyo, Japan.

Teruhisa Misu, Kallirroi Georgila, Anton Leuski, and
David Traum. 2012. Reinforcement learning of
question-answering dialogue policies for virtual mu-
seum guides. In Proc. of the Annual SIGdial Meet-
ing on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 84–93, Seoul,
South Korea.

Elnaz Nouri, Kallirroi Georgila, and David Traum.
2012. A cultural decision-making model for nego-
tiation based on inverse reinforcement learning. In
Proc. of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Sci-
ence Society (CogSci), pages 2097–2102, Sapporo,
Japan.

P. Paruchuri, N. Chakraborty, R. Zivan, K. Sycara,
M. Dudik, and G. Gordon. 2009. POMDP based
negotiation modeling. In Proc. of the IJCAI Work-
shop on Modeling Intercultural Collaboration and
Negotiation (MICON).

Csaba Szepesvári. 2010. Algorithms for Reinforce-
ment Learning. Morgan & Claypool Publishers.

Joel R. Tetreault and Diane J. Litman. 2008. A rein-
forcement learning approach to evaluating state rep-
resentations in spoken dialogue systems. Speech
Communication, 50(8-9):683–696.

Jason D. Williams and Steve Young. 2007. Scal-
ing POMDPs for spoken dialog management. IEEE
Trans. on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
15(7):2116–2129.

116


