



















































Grammatical Markers and Grammatical Relations in the Simple Clause in Old French


Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (DepLing 2013), pages 207–216,
Prague, August 27–30, 2013. c© 2013 Charles University in Prague, Matfyzpress, Prague, Czech Republic

Grammatical markers and grammatical relations
in the simple clause in Old French

Nicolas Mazziotta
Universität Stuttgart

Institut für Linguistik/Romanistik
Germany

nicolas.mazziotta@ulg.ac.be

Abstract

The focus of this paper is the descrip-
tion of the surface syntax relations in the
simple clause in Old French and the way
they can be described in a dependency
grammar. The declension system of Old
French is not reliable enough to cope with
the identification of the dependents of the
main verb, but it remains true that related
grammatical markers are still observable
and obey rules that forbid them to appear
in specific syntactic positions.

This study relies on three previous ac-
counts; Igor Mel’čuk’s “criteria B”, the
criteria that are used to determine which
is the syntactic governor in a syntactic de-
pendency relation, Thomas Groß’s intra-
word analysis, which grants morphs node
status in the tree, and the concept of speci-
fication as used by Alain Lemaréchal, who
understands grammatical markers as a set
of formal constraints that stack over a re-
lation.

I demonstrate that the structure of the
nominal dependents of the verb is highly
unstable, ranging from explicit marking of
the relation to constructions that do not
make use of any segmental marker: some
structures use bound morphemes, some
others use free morphemes and some use
only semantic features to express the rela-
tions. Moreover, markers are mainly op-
tional and can stack up in a hierarchical
way, which results in variable structural
organization of the nominal phrase.

1 Introduction

This paper investigates the grammatical markers
at work in the structure of the simple clause in Old
French (henceforth “OF”) and the way they can be

described in a dependency framework (henceforth
“DF”). As an introduction, I will first give a quick
overview of OF (1.1), and define the focus of this
study (1.2).

1.1 Old French: an overview

The term Old French roughly corresponds to a
continuum of romance varieties that were spoken
in the northern half of France, in Wallonia and
in England during the Middle Ages (9th-13th C.).
To carry on a description of OF, one has to sys-
tematize the common ground that all these idioms
share as well as the major differences that distin-
guish the varieties. The paper will focus on that
common ground, which can be seen as the direct
ancestor of modern French.

From a grammatical point of view, OF is much
more analytic than Latin is: many relations are in-
troduced by prepositions. The traditional descrip-
tion of the nominal inflection tells us that Latin
declension had shrunk in OF to a simple two-fold
opposition between the nominative (Fr. cas su-
jet) and a universal oblique case (Fr. cas régime).
Periphrastic verbal tenses had developed and the
whole aspectual system had changed; the system
had become clearly dominated by the opposition
between bare forms and compound verbs (express-
ing aspectual/temporal anteriority).

The distribution of the major constituents of
the clause tends to express information-structural
properties rather than grammatical ones. There-
fore, word order was a lot freer than it is in modern
French.

1.2 Question

Others have demonstrated that the declension sys-
tem of OF is not reliable enough to cope with the
identification of dependents1 of the verb. Several

1In the remainder of this paper, when no additional pre-
cision is given, the terms dependency, governor, dependent,
actant, tree, etc. as well as the→ symbol between a governor

207



studies have shown: 1/ that the valence of the verb
as well as the semantic properties of the actants
are more important than the declension patterns
(Schøsler, 1984); 2/ that the declension pattern is
so heterogeneous that it cannot be described as a
systematic tool (Chambon, 2003; Chambon and
Davidsdottir, 2007); 3/ that case markers are an ad-
ditional mean to express dependencies that would
exist without them.2

General grammatical descriptions acknowledge
these conclusions, but still deliver long lists of ta-
bles describing the different “paradigms” (Buri-
dant, 2000).

As unreliable as declension is, it is neverthe-
less a fact that related grammatical markers are
still observable and appear to obey at least some
rules. These rules ensure that declension is well
integrated with the rest of the grammar, which is
invoked as a whole during the communication pro-
cess (Schøsler, 2013, 173-175). Apparently, the
rules block the markers from appearing in cer-
tain specific syntactic positions. The purpose of
this paper is to describe the syntactic structure of
the constructions where they appear. I will make
use of DF to model grammatical relations between
words (and morphemes, see 2.2), focusing mainly
on verbal dependents of the intransitive and tran-
sitive minimal clause. As it will appear in the fol-
lowing sections, identifying the dependencies is
not a trivial matter, because one has to cope with
an unreliable declension system. Even the sim-
plest examples involve complex phenomena inside
the noun phrase, that have not yet been described
under the scope of DF.3

To achieve a proper description, three major
theoretical choices (2) will be used to carry out the
analyses (3).

2 Theoretical grounds

My study relies on three primary sources:
• Igor Mel’čuk’s “criteria B”, which, given a

pair of forms united by a syntactic depen-

and a dependent, will fall under the scope of surface syntax
(Mel’čuk, 2009, 6-7)

2Given the high level of instability of the system, some
authors even claim their main purpose is sociolinguistic and
indicates that “the speaker is well-integrated in the speech
community” (Detges, 2009, esp. 117).

3As explained by Peter Stein and Claudia Benneckenstein
(2006) (who mainly focus on the verb), as far as OF is con-
cerned, hardly any question has been described under the
scope of DF so far. Nevertheless, the works of Lene Schøsler,
starting with her thesis (1984), makes use of Lucien Tes-
nière’s approach (1966).

dency relation, are used to distinguish be-
tween the governor and the dependent (2.1);
• Thomas Groß’s intra-word analysis, which

treats morphs (surface expression of mor-
phemes) in the syntactic tree (2.2);
• the concept of specification as employed by

Alain Lemaréchal, who understands gram-
matical markers as a set of formal constraints
over a relation (2.3).

2.1 Mel’čuk’s criteria for finding
dependencies

Given two forms f 1 and f 2, united by a depen-
dency, which form is the governor? This crucial is-
sue has been debated by so many scholars in many
different frameworks that it would not be possi-
ble to name them all. From the DF perspective, it
seems fair to assume that Arnold Zwicky (1985)
has played a major role in clarifying things. Many
criteria have been investigated since his work, but
it seems that Igor Mel’čuk (2009) has given the
most rigorous hierarchized list so far. There are
three criteria: namely, in order of importance, B1,
B2 and B3.4 It is important to note that these cri-
teria are initially meant to be used when f 1 and f 2
are words (see sec. 2.2 about morphs).

B1. Igor Mel’čuk claims that the orientation of
a dependency between f 1 and f 2 mainly depends
on the syntactic criterion based of what he calls
passive valence:

Passive syntactic valence of a lexeme/of
a phrase: a set of syntactic roles which
the lexeme/the phrase can take in larger
constructions (maybe with some inflec-
tional modifications). In other words,
the passive syntactic valence of a lex-
eme/a phrase is its syntactic distribution.
(Mel’čuk, 2009, 4)

The main idea is that the governor controls the
passive valence; i.e., f 1 S-governs f 2 if the dis-
tribution of the phrase f 1 + f 2 is more the one of
f 1 than the one of f 2. In ex. 1, the word horse
governs the word white, because the distribution of
white horse is more the distribution of horse than
of white (which can be deleted). Note that Igor
Mel’čuk speaks about syntactic distribution only,
without any reference to word order.

4C criteria (used to discriminate different dependencies)
will not be discussed here (Mel’čuk, 2009, 34-40). A criteria
(used to find dependencies between words) are discussed in
sec. 2.2.

208



(1) the white horse

One should not confuse this criterion with the
omissibility property. Most of the time, gover-
nors are not omissible, but it is not always the
case; e.g.: in English, the subordination marker
that constrains the distribution of the clause when
it is present, but can be omitted in some cases
(Mel’čuk, 2009, 42).

This criterion is a genuinely syntactic one. As
such, it must be used first: B2 and B3 must be
invoked only if B1 fails. B1 will be extensively
used in sec. 3.

B2. Sometimes, B1 simply does not work, be-
cause both forms are required in a given context
and it is not possible to tell which of the two forms
is the one that most constrains the syntactic distri-
bution. In such cases, Igor Mel’čuk invokes the
morphological properties of the forms involved:
the governor is either the form that controls agree-
ment or morphological government outside of the
phrase, or the form that is morphologically gov-
erned from outside the phrase.

E.g., the French finite clause must have a sub-
ject and the relation between the main verb and
the subject is compulsory. Therefore, the distribu-
tion of the clause is constrained by both the subject
and the verb and B1 does not apply. However, if
the clause is subordinate, it is the verb in the subor-
dinate clause that is morphologically dependent of
the governing verb. Here, the syntactic governor
is the morphological contact point of the phrase.

(2) Je
I

veux
want

qu’
that

il
he

vienne
comes-SUBJUNCTIVE

“I want him to come”

In ex. 2, the subjunctive mood of vienne morpho-
logically depends on the word veux. Therefore, at
the syntactic level, vienne governs il and qu’ gov-
erns vienne.

B3. If both B1 and B2 fail, one may then have a
look at semantics. The governor is the form that
expresses the referential class of the phrase most
accurately.

(3) I eat this jam sandwich

Take jam sandwich in ex. 3; both terms have
the same distribution (B1) and neither of the two
words is the morphological contact point to some
agreement outside the phrase (B2), but jam sand-
wich “refers to a kind of sandwich, rather than a

kind of jam (Mel’čuk, 2009, 31), quoting (Hud-
son, 1990). Hence, sandwich→ jam.

2.2 Thomas Groß’s intra-word analysis

Expanding the Meaning-Text Theory (henceforth
“MTT”) model (Mel’čuk, 2009) to handle intra-
word syntactic dependencies can help produce a
more explicit analysis of the relations between
segmental units. Thomas Groß’s (2011) sugges-
tion will lead to reconsider some of the basic defi-
nitions provided by Igor Mel’čuk.

Grammatical markers in MTT. According to
Igor Mel’čuk (2009, 23-24), there are only four
linguistic means to express meaning:
• lexemes (free words);
• order of lexemes;
• prosody;
• inflection.

For Igor Mel’čuk, there are no other means; ex-
cepting inflection, they are all used in all lan-
guages in every sentence, and they can express
semantic meaning as well as syntactic relations.
Igor Mel’čuk also posits out that only lexical units
(“full” words or “empty” ones, e.g. prepositions
and conjunctions) must be represented in the tree.
The order of the lexemes, the prosody and the in-
flection are not part of the tree: they merely permit
one to build it. Let us have a look at a simple Ger-
man example (ex. 4) from (Groß, 2011, 48).

(4) mit
with

Kind
child

-er
PLURAL

-n
DATIVE

“with children”

Fig. 1 displays the classic MTT tree of this phrase,
where the bound morphemes expressing the plural
and the dative are merged with the lexeme into a
single word-form.

MIT

KINDdat+pl

Figure 1: MTT analysis of Germ. mit Kindern

Extending DF trees to morphology. Thomas
Groß (Groß, 2011) suggested that bound morphs
too should be represented as well in trees (we
will focus only on inflectional morphology, leav-
ing aside constructional morphology). In other
words, morphs can be granted node status in sur-
face syntactic representations. The distinction be-

209



tween morpheme (abstract unit) and morph (sur-
face realization of this abstract unit) is very impor-
tant here: only morphs, are considered. The idea
is not new, since that Leonard Bloomfield (1933,
ch. 10) already considered immediate constituents
can be bound or free morphemes and that analy-
sis acknowledging inflection as a functional head
is widely spread in the Government and Binding
paradigm (Haegemann, 1994, esp. ch. 11).

The main argument backing the idea of an
intra-word syntax is that bound morphs, which
are segmental units, behave similar to grammati-
cal words such as prepositions and conjunctions.
Most of these morphs constrain the distribution
of the word they are attached to (B1). Conse-
quently, trees should represent intra-word depen-
dencies, i.e. the relation between the lexeme and
the bound morphs. This conception is very close
to Gilbert Lazard’s idea of tripartition of syntax
(Lazard, 1984). Gilbert Lazard distinguishes three
levels: clause level, phrase level and intra-word
level. The intra-word level is traditionally called
morphology, but these classical terms fails to ex-
press the rules of distribution and the combina-
tion contraints that morphs undergo with regard to
the organization at higher level (syntax). Thomas
Groß suggests the tree in fig. 2 to represent the de-
pendencies at work in ex. 4.5 The German preposi-

mit
-n

-er

Kind

Figure 2: Groß’s analysis of Germ. mit Kindern

tion mit governs a dative complement, because the
dative marker is compulsory with this preposition.
The distribution of the dependent of mit is the one
of any dative noun, but only dative nouns: an ac-
cusative form would not be grammatically correct.
Therefore, -n governs the whole nominal phrase
(B1). The plural marker -er also governs the lex-
eme, because -n must dominate a plural word.

Syntactic vs. morphological dependencies.
One must pay attention to the distinction between

5The dotted lines represent intra-word dependencies and
the hyphen represents lack of phonological autonomy. Also
note that the tree somewhat represents word order. Although
this aspect is not crucial for this paper, using this convention
enhances readability.

morphological and syntactic dependencies6. Fol-
lowing Igor Mel’čuk (Mel’čuk, 2009, 12), one can
define morphological dependency as follows:

The wordform w2 is said to morpholog-
ically depend on the wordform w1 in the
given utterance if and only if at least one
grammeme of w2 is selected depending
on w1.

On the other hand the existence of a syntactic de-
pendency between two forms ( f 1 and f 2) can be
checked by the means of two criteria (A1 and A2)
that must be met (2009, 25-27):

1. A1: the linear arrangement of f 1 and f 2 must
be linearly constrained in a neutral utterance.

2. A2: the combination of f 1 and f 2, or the
combination of f 1 and the subtree governed
by f 2 must form a potential prosodic unit
(which is equivalent to a phrase in the MTT
framework).

Of course, a morphological dependency can affect
the same forms as a syntactic dependency; e.g.: in
It is blue, the agreement between the verb and the
subject is a morphological dependency, but there
also exists a syntactic relation between it and is.

From the moment one chooses to split words
in the syntactic dependency tree, the definition
of morphological dependency cannot work any
longer and must be revised. With bound morphs,
there are fewer problems with A1 than with free
lexemes. As far as A2 is concerned, it helps clar-
ify things. In a phrase like mit Kindern, it is quite
clear that mit and -n do not form a phrase, but the
fact that -n governs the rest of the word is enough
to ensure that A2 is met. There is no problem
either with other intra-word dependencies. The
main issue is about inter-word agreement. E.g.,
in ex. 5 (Groß, 2011, 59), the genitive marker -es
licenses the occurrence of the word Dankes, but
it also implies that the article has the form des
(which could even be split in d → es). However,
the tree (fig. 3) does not display this dependency,
but rather Word→ des.

(5) mit
with

Wort
word

-er
PLURAL

-n
DATIVE

des
the-GEN

Dank
thank

-es
GEN

“with words of gratitude”

6The third major type of dependency, namely, semantic
dependency, does not deal with morphs and does not need to
be scrutinized here.

210



mit
-n

-er

Wort
-(e)s

Dank

des

Figure 3: Groß’s analysis if Germ. mit Wortern
des Dankes

This appears to be quite right because of criterion
A2: the reason why -es → des is not a syntac-
tic dependency is that it does not form a poten-
tial prosodic unit (phrase). Therefore, agreement
is not a syntactic dependency. Agreement is not
sufficient to bring together enough blocks of syn-
tactic units to form a proper phrase. This lets us
clearly define the distinction between morphologi-
cal and syntactic dependencies in the case of form
determination: in the case of a syntactic depen-
dency, the form determination constrains the dis-
tribution at a higher level and must apply to the
head of a phrase; in the case of a morphological
dependency, form determination does not neces-
sarily apply to the head of a phrase. This dis-
tinction is very different from the one proposed by
Igor Mel’čuk.

The only problem that remains is that the pres-
ence of one case marker is sometimes compul-
sory in languages (e.g.: for most Latin nouns, case
marking is compulsory). Nouns cannot form a
phrase without inflection. Hence, if there is some
adjective depending on the noun, such as carum
in Latin carum amicum – see ex. 6 (indices dis-
tinguish between forms in the demonstration) and
fig. 4 –, the dependency amic→ -um2 seems not to
satisfy the A2 criterion (it does not form a phrase).

(6) Amic
friend

-um1
ACC

car
dear

-um2
Acc

video
I see

“I see (my) dear friend”

video

amic

-um1

car

-um2

Figure 4: Analysis of Lat. Amicum carum video

To solve this kind of problem without loosing the
benefit of the A2 criterion, we have to posit:

Let f 1→ f 2 be a compulsory intra-word
syntactic dependency. For all inter-
word dependencies f 2 — f 3, A2 holds
if either f 1 f 2 f 3 or f 1 f 2 and the sub-
tree governed by f 3 forms a potential
prosodic unit (= phrase).

Since -um1→ amic is a compulsory intra-word de-
pendency and um2 is the governor of car, there
exist a relation between amic and um2 because
carum amicum is a potential prosodic unit. How-
ever, there is no syntactic relation beween um1 and
um2 because -um carum is not a phrase – and -um
carum video is not a phrase either.

2.3 Alain Lemaréchal’s specification
Hierarchy of markers. My third theoretical
milestone is the concept of specification as used by
Alain Lemaréchal in his works (1997). The main
assumption is that grammatical markers are hier-
archized and that the parts of speech also play a
role in the way the markers interconnect. Hence,
the grammatical markers are the following, in de-
creasing order of importance:

1. integrative markers (prosody);
2. lexeme order;
3. part of speech compatibilities;
4. segmental units (free relational morphemes

and inflection).
This hierarchy is based on the fact that the only
compulsory markers are prosodic ones and that
words can be connected simply because of their
respective part of speech; e.g.: John slept (simple
past) works because John is a noun and slept is
a verb. In this conception, segmental markers are
added at the very last level and are the least impor-
tant for the relation to exist.

Markers and government. Alain Lemaréchal’s
view basically contradicts the idea that preposi-
tions, conjunctions and bound morphemes should
often be seen as the governor of the relation. His
point is that these markers are added to an existing
relation and that they form a stack of grammati-
cal constraints that specify the relation, both syn-
tactically and semantically. Specifications are not
compulsory to establish relations. In this frame-
work, a morpheme such as a preposition behaves
similar to what Lucien Tesnière calls a translatif
(Tesnière, 1966): it changes the part of speech of

211



the words it combines with – e.g.: a preposition
can change a noun to an adverb and allow this
noun to be an adjunct.

Even if it belongs to a dependency framework,
this analysis does not follow the same theoretical
guidelines as the ones introduced in sec. 2.1 and
sec. 2.2. However, Alain Lemaréchal (1997, 117)
also adds a very important detail in his presenta-
tion: markers may not be compulsory, but if they
appear, they have to be the right ones. He com-
pares ex. 7 and 8. In ex. 7, the verbal form carries
no segmental marker expressing the person and
the sentence remains understandable (although not
very satisfactory). In ex. 8, the bound morph -ons
conflicts with the 3rd pers. sg. of the proper name.
Hence, the sentence is not understandable at all.

(7) *Alfred
Alfred

chanter
to sing

(8) *Alfred
Alfred

chantons
we sing

If this point is transferred to the B1 criterion, it
means that when such a specific marker is present,
it firmly constrains the syntactic distribution of the
construction.

Stacking markers. One other important point
in Alain Lemaréchal’s model is the concept of
marker stacking (Fr. cumul des marques). His idea
is that homonyms do not exist among grammati-
cal markers (Lemaréchal, 1983). Markers can be
ambiguous, because they are not specific enough
on their own. E.g., traditionally, in French, que
has been described as a pronoun (L’homme que tu
vois “The man you see”) or as a conjunction (Je
veux que tu viennes “I want you to come”). If
one takes into account that the clause beginning
with que works with a noun (homme) or with a
verb (veux), this ambiguity disappears. In other
words, there is a stacking of markers that gradu-
ally specify the relation between words: instead of
two different que one should see an undespecified
que that stacks with part of speech compatibilities
to specify several different relations.

3 Major relations in the clause in OF

This section investigates the grammatical means
of expressing dependencies in the OF clause. The
theoretical aspects described above will prove use-
ful in order to achieve a description that encom-
passes the main characteristics of the phenomena

under study. The description reveals the strik-
ing instability of the system: DF trees will help
demonstrate this lack of systematicity in a rigor-
ous way.

I will give the classical idealized approach of
the declension system in OF and underline the
main problems (3.1). Then, we will see that the
definite article plays an important role in the syn-
tactic organization of the clause (3.2) and that
some nouns have a syntactically specialized theme
(3.3). Some structures that completely lack overt
markers will also be introduced (3.4). I will con-
clude with a synthesis and point out historical con-
cerns (3.5).

3.1 Classical approach to declension in OF
Ideal system. The traditional analysis of the de-
clension system in OF relies on the fact that a few
nouns are marked with a bound morpheme that in-
dicates whether they assume the role of the sub-
ject or not. Following this point of view, OF dis-
tinguishes between two cases: the nominative case
cas sujet and the universal oblique case cas régime
(which is used for all functions but the subject).

Therefore, the minimal sentence in ex. 13
clearly shows that the noun Charle has an -s
morph at the end.

(9) Charle
Charles

-s
NOM

respunt
answers

– Roland (Moignet, 1972, v. 156)

The resulting analysis would thus be the one
shown in fig. 5.

respunt

-s

Charle

Figure 5: Analysis of OF Charles respunt

Problems. However, even with little knowledge
of OF, one feels that the traditional analysis over-
simplifies things.

The first issue is that the ideal system as de-
scribed only affects a comparatively small sub-
set of nouns: most feminine nouns do not fol-
low any syntax-driven declension rule and nomi-
nal lexemes ending with -s/-z are invariable. Tra-
ditional description adopt a paradigmatic approach
to this problem, in effect, multiplying nominal
paradigms, with regard to the way they behave in
the declension “system”.

212



The second issue is that the presence of -s is not
compulsory even for the nouns that generally have
a marked nominative form. Nevertheless, “inverse
mistakes”, where -s appears in the oblique case are
very seldom (Schøsler, 1984, 237-8), which means
that Alain Lemaréchal’s prediction holds, that is,
the markers must be correct when they do appear
(sec. 2.3).

But there is a third problem: -s is highly syn-
cretic in the grammar of OF, because it is also
used to mark the plural form of the oblique case
of the nouns that do follow the declension rules
(for other nouns, -s merely marks the plural). In a
nutshell, the classical paradigm is the one shown
in tab. 1 (Moignet, 1988, 19). This paradigm con-
trasts with the one of most feminine nouns ending
in -e (tab. 2).

sg. pl.
NOM -s –
OBL – -s

Table 1: Ideal case marker paradigm in OF

sg. pl.
NOM/OBL – -s

Table 2: Case marker paradigm for OF feminine
nouns in -e

If one accepts that there is only one -s (last para-
graph in sec. 2.3) that, as it will appear, may stack
with other markers, one can say that the distribu-
tion of the nominal phrase is constrained by -s,
modulo the syntactic distribution is not homoge-
neous, because the marker is underspecified.

3.2 Definite article
A more reliable marker. The definite article is a
marker that can optionally specify the noun phrase
in OF.7 It is more reliable than nominal inflection
in determining the case, but, unlike its modern
counterpart, it is by no means compulsory – all
nouns can be used as a complete phrase without a
determiner: when the latter is absent, the meaning
is general (Moignet, 1988, 105-11).8

Some of the forms of this article are specific:
for masculine nouns, li reliably corresponds to the

7Although this paper only discusses the definite article,
OF has a wide range of determiners that can accompany the
noun.

8The fact that a morph can be omitted does not mean it
does not qualifies as a governor (see sec. 2.1).

nominative (singular and plural), le corresponds
to the oblique singular and les corresponds to the
oblique plural. Therefore, let us assume that re-
lations are most likely to be oriented this way:
li/le/les→ noun.

Marker stacking. Since the -s does not reliably
fixate the distribution, it has to be demoted at least
one level below the article when both markers are
present. Still, one must bear in mind that “inverse
mistakes” are rare, and that this -s does not have
a random distribution. In ex. 12, -s does not mark
the case, but when the article is present, -s may
only appear if the article is compatible.

(10) Li
The-NOM

nain
dwarf

-s
“stacking” -s

[. . . ] vient
comes

“The dwarf comes” – Erec (Roques, 1952,
v. 161)

It becomes clear that -s is a mere optional agree-
ment with its morphological governor li. The re-
sulting tree is shown in fig. 6. Note that the form

vient

-i

l
-s

nain

Figure 6: Analysis of OF Li nains vient

determination relation between -i and -s is purely
morphological, according to the revision of the A2
criterion (sec. 2.2).

Intra-paradigm discrepancies. Nevertheless,
feminine forms are not case-specific at all.
Therefore, while li and le clearly constrain the

MASC. FEM.
sg. pl. sg. pl.

NOM li li
la les

OBL le les

Table 3: Definite article paradigm in OF

syntactic distribution of the noun phrase, la
and les do not (tab. 3); they are left completely
underspecified with regard to the distribution of
the nominal phrase. The result is that the articles
are set in different positions in the tree. Thus, the
analysis of ex. 11 is given in fig. 7.

213



(11) La
The-FEM

reïne [. . . ]
queen

voit
sees

le
the-MASC-DIROBJ

chevalier
knight

– Erec (Roques, 1952, v. 149)

voit

la

reïne -e

l

chevalier

Figure 7: Analysis of OF La reïne voit le chevalier

While it is true that le → chevalier, because of
the existence of the phrase li→ chevalier(s), that
has another distribution (subject), one must posit
reïne → la, because B1 does not apply well and
reïne serves as a morphological contact point for
the feminine category (B2).

3.3 Theme variation
Another important feature of OF is the existence of
variable nominal themes. A subset of nouns have
two themes: one specifically corresponds to the
nominative singular (the form is specialized in this
function), the other is not specialized. Considering
examples where the specialized form stacks with
a specialized definite article, such as in ex. 12. In
this example, ber is specifically a singular nomi-
native (plural forms and accusative forms are built
on another theme: baron).

(12) Cunquerrantment
As a hero

si
so

finereit
would end

li
the-NOM

ber
noble man-NOM SG

-s
-s

“The noble man would end like a hero”
– Roland (Moignet, 1972, v. 2867)

In this example, both ber and li are specialized.
Both of them correspond to the syntactic distri-
bution of the phrase and B1 does not work well.
Again, B2 works better, since it is the noun that
would morphologically govern optional predica-
tive adjectives in constructions using a copula –
the copula would syntactically govern the adjec-
tive. Therefore, the hierarchy would be the one
shown in fig. 8. The position of -s can be justi-
fied by at least two arguments: fistly, ber is the
most specific form and should dominate the whole
nominal phrase (sec. 2.1); secondly, li . . . -s would
not form a phrase and the relation between -i and
-s is purely morphological (see sec. 2.2, 2.2).

finereit

-i

l

-s
ber

Figure 8: Analysis of OF finereit li bers

3.4 No overt marker at all

As a result of phenomena exposed in sec. 3.1 and
sec. 3.2, segmental markers can be completely ab-
sent. A sentence where the subject and the object
are both feminine nouns in -e displays no overt
contrast between the dependents of the main verb
– ex. 13 and ex. 14 (Schøsler, 1984, 34 and 41).

(13) La nouvele
The news

oït
heard

l’abesse
the abbess

“The abbess heard the news”

(14) La dame
The lady

esme
thinks highly of

la comtesse
the countess

“The lady thinks highly of the countess” or
“The countess thinks highly of the lady”

Lene Schøsler claims that the semantic properties
of the dependents is the only available clue within
the scope of ex. 13 (abesse is animate, whereas
nouvele is not), but to understand the structure of
ex. 14, only contextual clues can help. This pos-
sibility also provides strong support to the claim
that markers must be seen as an additional mean
to express argument structure of sentences that
are mostly understandable without them (Detges,
2009).

3.5 Synthesis and diachronics

As demonstrated in the previous sections, the
structure of the nominal dependents in OF is
highly unstable, ranging from a completely speci-
fied construction (ex. 12) to a completely under-
specified one (ex. 14). Moreover, the level of
specificity of the markers is also variable. This
variable specificity entails that the presence of
a more specific marker automatically demotes
less specific ones through a stacking mechanism
(sec. 3.2 and sec. 3.3).

Through this synchronic variation, change has
chosen to favor the less specified construction over
the others: modern French does not use nomi-
nal inflection to mark the dependents of the verb.
Therefore, a regular utterance such as ex. 15 looks
exactly like ex. 14.

214



(15) Le chat
The cat

voit
sees

la souris
the mouse

Much as in English, the dependency type is ex-
pressed by the relative position of the phrases
around the main verb and morphological agree-
ment: the subject, with which the verb agrees, to
the left, the object to the right9. The DF analy-
sis of ex. 15 is sketched in fig. 9. The typological

voit

chat

le

souris

la

Figure 9: Analysis of Fr. Le chat voit la souris

contrast between Old French and modern French
is strikingly clear. In the noun phrase, all mor-
phemes (bound or free) intended to mark the rela-
tion between the verb and its arguments have dis-
appeared. The immediate consequence of this lan-
guage change is that the structure of the French
noun phrase is now completely homogeneous.

4 Conclusion

DF is a great tool to emphasize the differences
between the analyses of the various simple noun
phrases that are described above. There is a temp-
tation to simplify everything to give it a more co-
herent look and feel. From the point the perspec-
tive of this paper, this would clearly be a mis-
take because that would reduce syntax to a mere
paradigmatic system. Why would one treat mem-
bers of the same morphological paradigm exactly
the same way if they behave differently at the syn-
tactic level? On the contrary, I find it more inter-
esting to redefine paradigms taking into account
syntactic behavior.

By not smoothing trees too much, one also ben-
efits from a powerful tool that helps discover un-
derspecified markers. These markers are used in
different trees and are demoted to lower levels
when they stack with more specific ones. There-
fore, DF is able to model the syntactic behavior

9Assuming that one accepts Willy Van Langendonck’s
demonstration (1994), the definite article has to be defined
as a dependent of the noun. Note that transferring the idea
that the determiner is the governor – “DP hypothesis”, see
the introduction in (Haegemann, 1994, 607-611) – from the
Government and Binding framework to syntactic dependency
does not change much to the conclusions of this paper: the
form of the determiner does not distinguish between verbal
dependents.

of units that have always been problematic for tra-
ditional descriptions simply by using its core me-
chanics: hierarchy.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank, for their suggestions and cor-
rections (in no particular order): Thomas Groß,
Sylvain Kahane, Timothy Osborne and Lene
Schøsler, as well as the anonymous reviewers of
the Depling conference.

References
Leonard Bloomfield. 1933. Language. George Allen

& Undwin Ltd., London.

Claude Buridant. 2000. Grammaire nouvelle de
l’ancien français. Sedes, Paris.

Jean-Pierre Chambon and Rosa Davidsdottir. 2007.
Approche de la déclinaison des substantifs en ancien
français: de moignet à skøarup (lecture critique et
suggestions). Bulletin de la Société de Linguistique
de Paris, 102(1):173–192.

Jean-Pierre Chambon. 2003. La déclinaison en ancien
occitan, ou: comment s’en débarrasser? une réanal-
yse non orthodoxe de la flexion substantivale. Revue
de linguistique romane, 67:342–363.

Ulrich Detges. 2009. How useful is case morphology?
the loss of the old french two-case system within a
theory of preferred argument structure. In Jóhanna
Bard̄dal and Chelliah Shobhana, editors, The Role of
Semantic, Pragmatic, and Discourse Factors in the
Development of Case, number 108 in Studies in Lan-
guage Companion Series, pages 93–120. Benjamins,
Amsterdam.

Thomas Groß. 2011. Catenae in morphology. In Kim
Gerdes, Elena Hajičová, and Leo Wanner, editors,
Proceedings of Depling 2011, International Confer-
ence on Dependency Linguistics, Barcelona, pages
47–57. Barcelona.

Lilinane Haegemann. 1994. Introduction to Govern-
ment and Binding Theory. Blackwell, Oxford and
Malden, 2nd edition.

Richard Hudson. 1990. English word grammar.
Blackwell, Oxford.

Gilbert Lazard. 1984. La distinction entre nom et
verbe en syntaxe et en morphologie. Modèles lin-
guistiques, 6(1):29–39.

Alain Lemaréchal. 1983. Sur la prétendue homonymie
des marques de fonction: la superposition des mar-
ques. Bulletin de la Société de Linguistique de
Paris, 78(1):53–76.

Alain Lemaréchal. 1997. Zéro(s). Linguistique nou-
velle. Presses universitaires de France, Paris.

215



Igor Mel’čuk. 2009. Dependency in natural language.
In Alain Polguère and Igor Mel’čuk, editors, Depen-
dency in linguistic description, pages 1–110. John
Benjamins, Amsterdam and Philadelphia.

Gérard Moignet, editor. 1972. La chanson de Roland.
Bordas, Paris, 3rd edition.

Gérard Moignet. 1988. Grammaire de l’ancien
français. Morphologie – Syntaxe. Number 2 in Ini-
tiation à la linguistique. Série B. Problèmes et méth-
odes. Klincksieck, Paris, 2nd edition.

Mario Roques, editor. 1952. Chrétien de Troyes,
Erec et Enide. Number 80 in Classiques français
du moyen âge. Champion, Paris.

Lene Schøsler. 1984. La déclinaison bicasuelle de
l’ancien français: son rôle dans la syntaxe de la
phrase, les causes de sa disparation. Number 19 in
Etudes romanes de l’Université d’Odense. Odense
University Press, Odense.

Lene Schøsler. 2013. The development of the declen-
sion system. In Deborah L. Arteaga, editor, Re-
search on Old French: the state of the art, pages
167–186. Springer, London.

Peter Stein and Claudia Benneckenstein. 2006. His-
torische fallstudie: Altfranzösisch. In Vilmos
Àgel, Ludwig M. Eichiner, Hans-Werner Eroms, Pe-
ter Hellwig, Hans Jürgen Heringer, and Henning
Lobin, editors, Dependenz und Valenz. Ein interna-
tionales Handbuch der zeitgenössischen Forschung.
2. Halbband, Handbücher zur Sprach- und Kommu-
nikationswissenschaft, pages 1508–1515. Walter de
Gruyter, Berlin and New York.

Lucien Tesnière. 1966. Éléments de syntaxe struc-
turale. Klincksieck, Paris, 2nd edition.

Willy Van Langendonck. 1994. Determiners as heads?
Cognitive Linguistics, 5(3):243–259.

Arnold M. Zwicky. 1985. Heads. Journal of linguis-
tics, 21:1–29.

216


