


































LIME: Towards a Metadata Module for OntoLex 

 

 

Manuel Fiorelli 

University of Tor Vergata 

Via del Politecnico 1, 00133 

Rome, Italy 
 fiorelli@info.uniroma2.it 

Maria Teresa Pazienza 

University of Tor Vergata 

Via del Politecnico 1, 00133 

Rome, Italy 
pazienza@info.uniroma2.it 

Armando Stellato 

University of Tor Vergata 

Via del Politecnico 1, 00133 

Rome, Italy 
stellato@info.uniroma2.it 

 

  

 

Abstract 

The OntoLex W3C Community Group 

has been working for more than a year on 

realizing a proposal for a standard ontol-

ogy lexicon model. As the core-

specification of the model is almost com-

plete, the group started development of 

additional modules for specific tasks and 

use cases. We think that in many usage 

scenarios (e.g. linguistic enrichment, lo-

calization and alignment of ontologies) 

the discovery and exploitation of linguis-

tically grounded datasets may benefit 

from summarizing information about 

their linguistic expressivity. While the 

VoID vocabulary covers the need for 

general metadata about linked datasets, 

this more specific information demands a 

dedicated extension. In this paper, we fill 

this gap by introducing LIME (Linguistic 

Metadata), a new vocabulary aiming at 

completing the OntoLex standard with 

specifications for linguistic metadata. 

1 Introduction 

Linguistic grounding of formalized knowledge is 

a long-standing principle in ontological model-

ling, at least traceable back to the “clarity criteri-

on” (Gruber, 1995). Recently, natural language 

characterization  of ontologies has proved useful 

both in the semantic reconciliation of heterogo-

nous ontologies, and in many tasks interfacing 

natural language and ontologies, such as ontolo-

gy verbalization, natural language ontology que-

rying, ontology-based information extraction, 

ontology learning, validation and evolution. 

Therefore, many research works aimed at de-

fining common models and best-practices for 

linguistically grounding the Semantic Web, or 

even theorised a Linguistic Linked Open Data 

(Chiarcos, et al., 2012) cloud. The OntoLex 

W3C Community Group 1  is currently working 

on a principled ontology lexicon model that 

combines and improves previous proposals. Sim-

ilarly, the Open Linguistics Working Group2 of 

the Open Knowledge Foundation is pushing for-

ward the publication of linguistic resources ac-

cording to the Linked Open Data principles, thus 

developing a LOD (sub-)cloud of linguistic re-

sources3. 

While focusing on representing linguistic in-

formation, existing proposals mostly overlook 

the characterization of ontologies, datasets and 

linguistic resources for what concerns their lin-

guistic expressivity. This information should be 

provided in the form of metadata about linked 

data resources, providing summarizing infor-

mation on how a dataset is linguistically repre-

sented, which formalism have been adopted, 

which languages have been used for representing 

its formal content and so on.  

Such metadata would enable resolution strate-

gies to be tuned to the specificities of a given 

task (e.g. is this a cross-language ontology 

alignment task?), and to retrieve suitable re-

sources for supporting this resolution (e.g. is this 

a bi-lingual dictionary between the pair of lan-

guages used in a specific cross-language task?). 

In this paper, we try to address the lack of a 

standardized vocabulary for linguistic metadata 

by proposing LIME, which is an abbreviation for 

Linguistic Metadata, which aims to become a 

module of the future OntoLex specification. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 

In section 2, we describe previous works on lin-

guistic enrichment of ontologies/datasets and 

introduce the general usefulness of metadata in 

                                                 
1 http://www.w3.org/community/ontolex/ 
2 http://linguistics.okfn.org/ 
3 http://nlp2rdf.lod2.eu/OWLG/llod/llod.svg 

18



the Linked Data paradigm. In section 3, we in-

troduce some application scenarios that would 

benefit from a dedicated vocabulary of linguistic 

metadata. In section 4, we describe the design of 

the vocabulary and some usages examples. Final-

ly, in section 5, the conclusions. 

2 Background and Related work 

Currently, Knowledge Modelling languages for 

the Semantic Web do not support the representa-

tion of linguistic information to a large extent. 

In RDF (Carroll & Klyne, 2004), natural lan-

guage expressions are simply treated as lan-

guage-tagged literals. RDFS (Guha & Brickley, 

2004) provides standard properties for attaching 

these literals to conceptual resources as human-

friendly names (rdfs:label) or longer narra-

tive descriptions (rdfs:comment). SKOS 

(Bechhofer & Miles, 2009) introduces a finer-

grain characterization of labels by means of a 

few sub-properties of rdfs:label accounting 

for differences at the terminological-

correspondence level (Pastor-Sanchez, et al., 

2009).  SKOS-XL (W3C, 2009) models natural 

language expressions as individuals of a dedicat-

ed class (skosxl:Label). Providers of large 

KOSs (Hodge, 2000), such as AGROVOC   

(Caracciolo, et al., 2013) and EUROVOC 

(Paredes, et al., 2008), are widely adopting this 

modelling style, since they need to treat natural 

language expressions as “first-class citizens”, at 

least for attaching editorial metadata to them. For 

instance, in the AGROVOC thesaurus, natural 

language labels are associated with a wide range 

of metadata, including creation/modification date 

and publication status, which are required for 

publication as well as for supporting the thesau-

rus collaborative development workflow 

(Caracciolo, et al., 2012). 

Further works proposed even richer models 

for linguistically grounded ontologies/dataset. 

LingInfo (Buitelaar, et al., 2006) allows the de-

scription of the morphological and syntactic de-

composition of natural language labels. On the 

other hand, LexOnto (Cimiano, et al., 2007) fo-

cuses on the mapping of linguistic predicate-

argument structures to the join of semantic (bina-

ry) properties. Buitelaar et al. (2009) combined 

these two complementary models into a unified 

model, called LexInfo, highly based on the RDF 

porting of the LMF (Francopoulo, et al., 2006), 

thus benefitting from a principle conceptual 

model and higher compatibility with existing 

resources. These works informed the Lemon 

Model (Mccrae, et al., 2012) , which focuses on 

modularity and extensibility. 

A complementary aspect consists in character-

izing linguistic resources as a whole (Pazienza & 

Stellato, 2006b) with proper metadata. 

A classification of linguistic resources (later 

backed by a suite of ontologies in (Pazienza, et 

al., 2008)), called Linguistic Watermark, was 

defined by us to support the development of a 

software library for accessing heterogeneous lin-

guistic resources under a common API. A reflec-

tion mechanism in the library allows system and 

tools to access seamlessly different linguistic 

resources, understanding their nature, what these 

have to offer and exploiting their content in sev-

eral application contexts. 

The publication of linguistic resources (e.g. 

dictionaries, thesauri, corpora) as Linked Open 

Data is attracting the attention of Semantic Web 

practitioners. While using NLP tools to create 

semantic annotations with respect to formal on-

tologies, Kiryakov et al. (2004) advocated the 

representation in RDF of the linguistic resources 

that empower these tools, thus entailing a techno-

logical and a methodological reuse. When recon-

ciling heterogeneous ontologies, linguistic re-

sources may prove useful as well, since they 

provide a common grounding across different 

semantic theories, as they reflect the organic de-

velopment of a language within a community. 

The difficulties related to the triplification of 

linguistic resources is exemplified by the number 

of works that informed the development of the 

W3C RDF/OWL representation of WordNet 

(Van Assem, et al., 2006). WordNet, and similar 

resources, are not ontologies (Hirst, 2004), there-

fore any systematic translation into an ontology 

necessarily violates the formal semantics of the 

modelling language and ontological adequacy 

principles (Guarino & Welty, 2004). Gangemi et 

al. (2003a) restructured WordNet through the 

upper-ontology DOLCE (Gangemi, et al., 2002). 

OntoWordNet (Gangemi, et al., 2003b) is a nota-

ble output of this research line aiming at equip-

ping WordNet with a formal semantics. 

Another approach consists in a two-step pro-

cess: produce an ontology modelling the core 

concepts found in the resource, then, instantiate 

that conceptual model with information found in 

a specific resource. The definition of a shared 

upper-model for linguistic resources is in fact 

another requirement of the forthcoming OntoLex 

model. 

Concerning the importance of metadata in 

Linked Open Data, the necessity of summarizing 

19



information about a dataset as a whole has been 

considered and assessed. Jain et al. (2010) insist-

ed on the lack of conceptual characterization of a 

dataset (e.g. what is it about?). Similar concerns 

motivated the development of VoID (Alexander, 

et al., 2011), a vocabulary for describing linked 

datasets. 

In the field of Human Language Technology it 

has been promoted the reuse of Language Re-

sources (LRs) through structured metadata. 

OLAC (Bird & Simons, 2003) extends the Dub-

lin Core Metadata Element Set4  for defining a 

simple template for the description of LRs that 

includes, among others, provenance metadata, 

resource typology and language identification. 

While OLAC aims at defining a distributed in-

frastructure for resource sharing, LRE Map 

(Calzolari, et al., 2012) is a crowd-sourced cata-

logue of LRs, initially fed by authors submitting 

papers to LREC Conferences. LRE Map defines 

numerous resource types and usage applications, 

whilst OLAC distinguishes a handful of types. 

Similar in scope to OLAC, META-SHARE 

(Piperidis, 2012) has its own metadata schema. 

In META-SHARE the taxonomy of LRs is not 

developed in a top-down manner, rather it origi-

nates from the adoption of metadata combination 

as a criterion for classifying LRs (Gavrilidou, et 

al., 2012).   

These works have a wider scope than ours, as 

their definition of LRs include both software 

tools (e.g. postaggers and parsers) and data (e.g. 

corpus, dictionaries and grammars), managing 

heterogeneous formats. In contrast, we focus on-

ly on linguistic resources and linguistically en-

riched datasets, both expressed in RDF. Like 

META-SHARE we emphasize the importance of 

properties for the selection and interpretation of 

resources. Although Dublin Core can be used in 

conjunction with our model, we believe that 

some aspects, namely the provenance tracking, 

deserve dedicated models. Furthermore, our in-

terest in quantitatively describing the extent to 

which a dataset has been lexicalized does not 

seem to be in the scope of these works.   

It is worth of notice that these works are not 

grounded in the Semantic Web, as they do not 

use RDF for metadata representation nor their 

metadata are modelled using Semantic Web 

modelling languages. In fact, these works stress 

validation and mandatory nature of some 

metadata, something that is still being discussed 

                                                 
4 http://dublincore.org/documents/dces 

within the Semantic Web community5. Despite 

being interesting, the broader definition of LR is 

out of the scope of most works about the repre-

sentation of linguistic information as Linked Da-

ta, such as OntoLex. 

3 Motivating Applications 

Our previous research work with Linguistic Wa-

termark revealed that many applications may 

benefit not only from a common linguistic mod-

el, but also from a shared (linguistic) metadata 

vocabulary for characterizing and summarizing 

the nature of linguistic resources. 

In the following sections, we describe some 

use cases that would benefit from a metadata 

module, complementing the ontology lexicon 

model provided by the core OntoLex specifica-

tion. 

The requirement recurring in all scenarios is 

“discovery of (linguistic) resources”, which is 

also the main requirement that motivated VoID. 

While providing a sound framework for coarse-

grain description of datasets, VoID alone does 

not match this requirement, since it lacks vo-

cabulary terms for language related metadata. 

These metadata should support both the descrip-

tion of linguistic resources, and the description of 

how ontologies and datasets have been enriched 

with their content. 

3.1 Linguistic enrichment of ontologies 

Algorithms and systems for automatically en-

riching ontologies with content from linguistic 

resources (Pazienza & Stellato, 2006a; Pazienza 

& Stellato, 2006c) may be written in terms of a 

common linguistic model, instead of being tight-

ly coupled to specific resources. 

In Figure 1, we see a screenshot of OntoLing 

(Pazienza & Stellato, 2005), a Protégé (Gennari, 

et al., 2003) plugin for the linguistic enrichment 

of ontologies. OntoLing uses metadata to uni-

formly load heterogeneous linguistic resources, 

by dynamically configuring its own UI to appro-

priately show their content and use it to enrich 

ontologies. 

Discovery of linguistic resources can also be 

supported by linguistic metadata, provided in a 

way (e.g. in a VoID description) that can be rec-

ognized and indexed by Linked Data search en-

gines. Agents may thus issue queries to these 

search engines to discover relevant linguistic re-

sources in the LOD. The key point here is imme-

                                                 
5 https://www.w3.org/2012/12/rdf-val/ 

20



diacy: in fact in a closed scenario an agent might 

profile the resources it controls by itself, while in 

open settings agents must necessarily depend on 

pre-compiled metadata to discover resources of 

interest. 

3.2 Ontology Localization 

Ontology Localization is about “the adaptation of 

an ontology to a particular language and culture” 

(Suárez-Figueroa & Gómez-Pérez, 2008). This 

definition was generalized by Cimiano et al. 

(2010), to account for variations in the cultural 

and socio-political context in a broader sense. 

They discussed thoroughly the interdependencies 

between the lexical and the conceptual layers, 

thus showing how an alteration of the former 

might require a modification of the latter, as 

well. 

Nonetheless, bilingual dictionaries are valua-

ble resources in an ontology localization process, 

as they provide translations of existing labels 

into the target natural language. 

In this scenario, a localization agent might de-

pend on linguistic metadata to determine its re-

quirements, and, as discussed in previous sec-

tion, query a LOD search engine for a list of 

matching resources. Semantically structured lin-

guistic resources (such as the original WordNet 

for English, and the various wordnets created for 

many languages, such as EuroWordNet (Vossen, 

1998) and Balkanet (Stamou, et al., 2002)) may 

help in understanding the conceptual heterogene-

ities which are bound to the different sociocul-

tural contexts underlying each language. 

3.3 Ontology Alignment 

The Ontology Alignment task can benefit from a 

common metadata model. 

Pazienza et al. (2007) extended the FIPA On-

tology Service Specification with linguistically-

aware methodologies for communication, de-

scribing a wide-scope framework for multi-agent 

systems design, semantic integration and coordi-

nation. In that perspective, Ontology Mediators 

should be able to understand which linguistic 

resources may be of support for a mediation ac-

tivity between two ontologies/datasets. Such an 

understanding may happen at different levels, by 

making explicit the (natural) languages in which 

a given dataset is published, or the model being 

adopted for linguistically enriching the dataset. 

Even very specific facts, such as knowing that a 

certain popular resource (such as WordNet) has 

been used to support the lexicalization of a given 

dataset, may support the mediation activity: mak-

ing the adoption of linguistic resources more ex-

plicit may be helpful in providing a common in-

terlingua for aligning datasets sharing the same 

kind of linguistic development. 

While Ontology Matching aims at supporting 

the automatic generation of alignments, a review 

of the state-of-the-art seems to support that in 

 

Figure 1. Loading different linguistic resources in OntoLing 

 

 

21



real scenarios the scarce availability of metadata 

hampers the achievement of this goal. 

Shvaiko and Euzenat (2013) define the state-

of-the-art in the field, by analysing the results of 

recent evaluation campaigns organized annually 

by the Ontology Alignment Evaluation Initiative6 

(OAEI). They stress the fact that no system out-

performs the others in all matching scenarios, 

and that further advancement of the field requires 

the exploration of new paths. Among others, they 

cite the use of background knowledge and the 

design of meta-matchers able to construct the 

best strategy for solving a specific ontology 

alignment problem. We believe that for both 

purposes a metadata vocabulary may be useful, if 

not necessary, to describe a matching scenario, to 

plan a resolution strategy, and to support the dis-

covery of relevant resources in the LOD cloud. 

In the OAEI 2012 campaign (Shvaiko, et al., 

2012), the Library track7 provides evidences of 

the shortcomings in state-of-the-art matching 

systems. The track deals with two real-world the-

sauri encoded in SKOS: STW8 (Neubert, 2009) 

for economics and TheSoz 9  (Zapilko, et al., 

2013) for social sciences. Given the popularity of 

this genre of resources within large organizations 

and the growing adoption of SKOS, this track 

gives an important insight about the real-world 

performances of matching technologies. The re-

sults indicate clearly that current technologies (at 

least those participating in this international 

evaluation) have in fact some problems with 

these real-world matching scenarios. By first, 

most of the systems under evaluation were una-

ble to deal with SKOS, therefore the organizers 

had to translate both thesauri into OWL. Unfor-

tunately, this conversion can both introduce 

modelling errors, due to the stricter semantics of 

OWL, and cause loss of information, because the 

distinction between preferred and alternative la-

bels is lost after the conversion. It turned out that 

the baseline matching all labels (both preferred 

and alternative ones) behaves more or less as the 

best system participating in the evaluation. This 

surprising result indicates that current matching 

strategies, developed for ontologies, are in fact 

quite inadequate for matching thesauri, which 

clearly deserve a special treatment. In this sce-

nario, as evidenced by the contest results, termi-

                                                 
6 http://oaei.ontologymatching.org/ 
7 http://web.informatik.uni-mannheim.de/oaei-

library/2012/ 
8 http://zbw.eu/stw/versions/latest/about 
9 http://lod.gesis.org/thesoz/ 

nology-based methods perform particularly well, 

and the importance of (linguistic) resources 

adopted in the alignment process seems to pre-

vail over the adopted algorithms. Moreover, even 

for well-assessed multi-language resources, it 

should be noted that the quality of labels might 

vary drastically. For instance, both the thesauri 

used in the library track have been primarily de-

veloped in German, with translations made 

available in English. Therefore, it is unsurprising 

that German labels resulted sufficient alone for 

producing a good alignment, whereas English 

ones did not.   

4 Vocabulary Design 

With the work on the core OntoLex specification 

going on, and after recognizing a clear need for a 

linguistic metadata vocabulary, we have revised 

our previous work on the Linguistic Watermark 

suite of vocabularies, aiming at the definition of 

a suitable metadata module for OntoLex. We 

called this module: LIME, which is an abbrevia-

tion for Linguistic Metadata10. As most metadata 

apply equally to ontologies representing concep-

tual knowledge, and datasets representing ground 

facts, in the forthcoming discussion we will use 

the term dataset to broadly refer to both. 

In line with previous works on the general de-

scription of datasets, LIME has been defined as 

an extension of VoID. Accordingly, LIME 

metadata should be put in a VoID description of 

linguistically grounded resources. 

By following the same approach adopted in 

Linguistic Watermark, we start by distinguishing 

metadata related to linguistic resources from 

metadata describing the linguistic expressivity of 

a dataset. 

4.1 Linguistic Resources Metadata 

There are a number of very simple facts that are 

relevant for assessing the usefulness of a linguis-

tic resource in a task, which are practically miss-

ing from currently available metadata standards. 

By first, the main discriminator for judging the 

usefulness of a linguistic resource in a given sce-

nario is the set of (natural) language(s) it covers. 

Each of these languages should appear as a dis-

tinct value of the property lime:language. 

These values must conform to the specification 

of language tags in RDF. As natural language 

                                                 
10 This name resembles Lemon, one of the various 

lexicon models which have informed the development 

of the OntoLex specification 

22



expressions are usually hold by language tagged 

literals, this design avoids the need for a suitable 

mapping for relating metadata to data. This prop-

erty does not hold when relying on other identifi-

cation mechanisms, including the use of URIs11. 

Currently, no standard RDF vocabulary pro-

vides summarizing information about the cover-

age of natural language expressions in a dataset. 

In particular, Linguistic Resources should also be 

classifiable (see Figure 2) as monolingual, bilin-

gual (as of translation resources), or multilingual. 

Bilingual dictionaries are a kind of lexical re-

source providing direct translations between 

terms. These resources are modelled as individu-

als of lime:BilingualDictionary, which 

extends the class lime:Dictionary. These 

translations may or may not be divided according 

to the senses of the input terms (e.g. consider a 

popular free bilingual dictionary such Freelang12 

for the first case, and most of the FreeDict13 dic-

                                                 
11 Look at http://www.lexvo.org/ for an example 
12 http://www.freelang.net/ 
13 http://freedict.org 

tionaries for the latter). To account for this dif-

ference, we have introduced the class 

lime:SenseAwareDictionary. 

The translations may be available in one direc-

tion only (lime:UnidirectionalBi 

lingualDictionary), or allow to go from 

each of the two languages to the other one 

(lime:BidirectionalBilingualDictiona

ry). These two classes are declared disjoint. 

Concerning directional resources, we have de-

fined two properties lime:sourceLanguage 

and lime:targetLanguage, which reflect the 

direction of the translation. Symmetry may be 

guaranteed or not (e.g. some dictionaries may not 

guarantee that an inverse translation of a trans-

lated term always brings back to the original 

term). 

Resources with a strong conceptual backbone 

(lime:ConceptualizedResource) may provide 

consistent multilingual denotation of their en-

tries. In this sense, any multilingual SKOS con-

cept scheme with a strong linguistic grounding 

could be classified as a multilingual linguistic 

Class: lime:LinguisticResource 

  SubClassOf: void:Dataset 
 

Class: lime:Dictionary 

  SubClassOf: lime:LinguisticResource 
 

Class: lime:SenseAwareDictionary 

  SubClassOf: lime:Dictionary 
 

Class: lime:ConceputalizedResource 

  SubClassOf: lime:SenseAwareDictionary 
 

Class: lime:MonolingualDictionary 

  EquivalentClass: lime:Dictionary and lime:language exactly 1 
 

Class: lime:BilingualDictionary 

  EquivalentClass: lime:Dictionary and lime:language exactly 2 
 

Class: lime:UnidirectionalBilingualDictionary 

  SubClassOf:   lime:BilingualDictionary 

  SubClassOf:   lime:sourceLanguage exactly 1  

  SubClassOf:   lime:targetLanguage exactly 1 

  DisjointWith: lime:BidirectionalBilingualDictionary 
 

Class: lime:BidirectionalBilingualDictionary 

  SubClassOf:   lime:BilingualDictionary 

  DisjointWith: limeUnidirectionalBilingualDictionary 
 

Class: lime:ConsistentBidirectionalBilingualDictionary 

  SubClassOf:   lime:BidirectionalBilingualDictionary 
 

DataProperty: lime:language 

  Range: xsd:string 
 

DataProperty: lime:sourceLanguage 

  SubPropertyOf: lime:language 
 

DataProperty: lime:targetLanguage 

  SubPropertyOf: lime:language 

Figure 2. An excerpt of the LIME vocabulary definition expressed in Manchester Syntax 

23



resource. The metadata model should be as ag-

nostic with respect to the resource theory as pos-

sible, while still being able to tell whether a con-

ceptualization of any kind exists. The metadata 

should describe to which extent the conceptual-

ization is structured. For instance, the property 

lime:hasTaxonomy tells whether lexical con-

cepts are organized into a taxonomy or not. In 

our model conceptualized resources are subclass 

of sense-aware dictionaries, as each attachment 

of a natural language expression to a concept 

corresponds to a distinguished sense of that ex-

pression.  Other properties should trivially tell 

whether certain information is available or not, 

so that systems may know what to rely on. An 

example could be knowing that a given diction-

ary provides glosses (lime:hasGlosses) or 

usage examples (lime:hasUsageExamples). 

Furthermore, we assume that glosses and exam-

ples are attached either to senses in sense-aware 

resources, or to words otherwise. 

4.2 OntoLinguistic Metadata 

Whether a given dataset adopts vocabularies for 

an elaborated linguistic description (such as 

SKOS-XL or the under-development OntoLex) 

or just relies on simple labelling primitives, it is 

important to describe these facts through proper 

metadata. Thus, while the previous metadata re-

late to the description of linguistic resources (ex-

pressed as linked data), the onto-linguistic 

metadata provide quantitative and qualitative 

information about the linguistic expressivity of 

any linked dataset. 

As for linguistic resources, the very first fact 

that should be declared about a dataset consists 

in the languages (lime:language) in which it 

is expressed. In the context of an alignment pro-

cess, this enables immediate verification of the 

linguistic-compatibility between datasets. Obvi-

ously, the sole fact that lexicalizations exist for a 

given language is not enough for telling whether 

that language is sufficiently covering and repre-

senting the conceptual content of the resource. 

In particular, for each language, the metadata 

should provide the percentage of RDF resources, 

per type (classes, individuals, properties, SKOS 

concepts) described by at least a lexicalization in 

that language. Additional information, such as 

the average number of lexicalizations per re-

source, may provide more insights on the 

“weight” of a language in describing the re-

source. 

The following RDF snippet illustrates the use 

of LIME for asserting that English lexicalizations 

cover 75% (lime:percentage) of the SKOS 

concepts in the dataset :dat, and that there are, 

on average, 3.5 English lexical entries per con-

cept. 

:dat lime:languageCoverage [ 

  lime:lang "en"; 

  lime:resourceCoverage [  

    lime:class skos:Concept; 

    lime:percentage 0.75; 

    lime:avgNumOfEntries 3.5 

  ] 

]. 

We use OWL 2 to restrict the range of 

lime:percentage to the interval [0.0, 1.0]. 

lime:percentage a 

    owl:DatatypeProperty; 

  rdfs:range [ 

    rdf:type rdfs:Datatype ; 

    owl:onDatatype xsd:float ; 

    owl:withRestrictions ( 

      [xsd:minInclusive 0.0] 

      [xsd:maxInclusive 1.0] 

    ) 

  ]. 

The range of lime:avgNumOfEntries is 

similarly restricted to non-negative floats. 

lime:avgNumOfEntries a 

    owl:DatatypeProperty; 

  rdfs:range [ 

    rdf:type rdfs:Datatype ; 

    owl:onDatatype xsd:float ; 

    owl:withRestrictions ( 

      [xsd:minInclusive 0.0] 

    ) 

  ]. 

The inclusion of zero in both ranges allows the 

representation of the lack of lexicalizations in a 

given natural language. 

The grounding of two datasets to a common 

natural language allows them to be compared on 

the basis of the implicit knowledge about the use 

of that language by the community of its speak-

ers. However, if mappings to popular (conceptu-

alized) linguistic resources are represented ex-

plicitly, then these resources may be exploited as 

a kind of semantic hub between any two datasets 

sharing the same linguistic development. Being 

these resources a sort of less-ambiguous interlin-

gua, the metadata about their usage are in fact 

very similar to the ones we have mentioned for 

natural languages. Below we reframe the previ-

ous example by considering the enrichment of a 

dataset with links to synsets from WordNet. 

:dat    

   lime:lexicalResourceCoverage [ 

24



    lime:lexresource 

       ewn:WordNet; 

    lime:resourceCoverage [  

      lime:class skos:Concept; 

      lime:lexConceptClass  

        wn:Synset; 

      lime:percentage 0.75; 

      lime:avgNumOfEntries 3.5 

    ] 

  ]. 

The property lime:lexConceptClass in-

forms the LIME consumer of the specific class of 

the linguistic resource which is subclassing the 

generic OntoLex class onto-

lex:LexicalConcept.  

The presence of any linguistic description 

does not guarantee that an agent might exploit it. 

Indeed, the agent must know whether linguistic 

information is available in the form of traditional 

rdfs:labels, SKOS labels, SKOS-XL reified 

labels, or OntoLex attachments. Most datasets 

are likely to use multiple linguistic models sim-

ultaneously, each one for different needs (e.g. the 

distinction between preferred and alternative la-

bels may be or not of interest). These models are 

hold by the property lime:linguisticModel, 

which extends the property void:vocabulary, 

as the former expresses a more specific associa-

tion with the vocabulary.  When a dataset adopts 

multiple linguistic models, we assume that they 

express the same information about the metadata 

terms that apply to them. For instance, when both 

SKOS and RDFS are used (the latter being pos-

sibly materialized from the former), they must 

express the same labels, though RDFS loses the 

SKOS-specific finer grain distinctions. 

Finally, the metadata vocabulary should ac-

count for the widely adopted practice of using 

evocative names as local name of the resources 

URIs. Local names are often not natural lan-

guage expressions per se, since they are con-

strained by limitations of the URI syntax or by 

some naming convention. Luckily, the relation 

between local names and natural language ex-

pressions is generally very simple. Moreover, it 

is often expressed through a limited set of com-

mon patterns (e.g. camel-case, underscore sepa-

rated words). These simple relations might be 

modelled through simple transducers, perhaps 

finite state ones. LIME provides default trans-

ducers for some of this popular naming schemes. 

Local names are the weakest mechanism for 

linguistic enrichment, as synonymy and multilin-

gualism are hardly supported. Actually, local 

names mostly serve as an aid for knowledge de-

velopers, who can get a sense of the data they are 

working on, without the need of considering 

complex lexicalization models. Therefore, some 

metadata should express whether (cleaned) local 

names are subsumed or not by lexicalizations 

provided in other manners. 

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented LIME, a vocabulary 

for Linguistic Metadata, which aims to become a 

standard module of the OntoLex model. 

Relevant metadata include statistics about nat-

ural language lexicalisations and mappings to 

linguistic resources. By following the same ap-

proach used in VoID, we defined dedicated 

terms, instead of relying on a fully-fledged (but 

maybe harder to parse) statistical vocabulary. 

However, as Data Cube (Cyganiak & Reynolds, 

2013) establishes for the representation of (statis-

tical) multi-dimensional data, we should consider 

providing mappings to it, or even adopting it.  

While at present the coverage of a linguistic 

resource is interpreted only with respect to ex-

plicit mappings to its conceptual content, we 

could consider as well to define a merely lexical 

coverage. This information correlates with the 

linguistic compatibility of two datasets, as well 

can guide their linguistic enrichment to increase 

such compatibility, when it appears to be low. 

An extension of LIME could attempt to go be-

yond simple coverage statistics, and try to cap-

ture the quality of linguistic information in deep-

er ways. By first, we should agree on a definition 

of quality, perhaps as some confidence measure. 

Then, we should decide the granularity of the 

metadata, i.e. whether to quantify the overall 

confidence of the linguistic description, or to 

qualify each linguistic attachment individually. 

While developing LIME, we discussed about 

the very nature of linguistic resources, and how 

they relate to terminological thesauri or even just 

lexicalized conceptualizations. Actually, answer-

ing these questions is fundamental for the ad-

vancement of the field of ontology lexicalization. 

Acknowledgements 

This research has been partially supported by the 

EU project SemaGrow (Grant agreement no: 

318497). 

References 

Alexander, K., Cyganiak, R., Hausenblas, M., & 

Zhao, J. (2011, March 3). Describing Linked 

Datasets with the VoID Vocabulary (W3C Interest 

25



Group Note). Retrieved May 16, 2012, from World 

Wide Web Consortium (W3C): 

http://www.w3.org/TR/void/ 

Bechhofer, S., & Miles, A. (2009, aug). SKOS Simple 

Knowledge Organization System Reference. W3C 

Recommendation, W3C. 

Bird, S., & Simons, G. (2003). Extending Dublin 

Core Metadata to Support the Description and 

Discovery of Language Resources. Computers and 

the Humanities, 37(4), 375-388. 

Buitelaar, P., Cimiano, P., Haase, P., & Sintek, M. 

(2009). Towards Linguistically Grounded 

Ontologies. In Proceedings of the 6th Annual 

European Semantic Web Conference (ESWC2009), 

(pp. 111-125). 

Buitelaar, P., Declerck, T., Frank, A., Racioppa, S., 

Kiesel, M., Sintek, M., . . . Cimiano, P. (2006). 

LingInfo: Design and Applications of a Model for 

the Integration of Linguistic Information in 

Ontologies. OntoLex06. Genoa, Italy. 

Calzolari, N., Del Gratta, R., Francopoulo, G., 

Mariani, J., Rubino, F., Russo, I., & Soria, C. 

(2012). The LRE Map. Harmonising Community 

Descriptions of Resources. Proceedings of the 

Eighth International Conference on Language 

Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2012) (pp. 1084-

1089). ELRA. 

Caracciolo, C., Stellato, A., Morshed, A., Johannsen, 

G., Rajbhandari, S., Jaques, Y., & Keizer, J. 

(2013). The AGROVOC Linked Dataset. (P. 

Hitzler, & K. Janowicz, Eds.) Semantic Web 

Journal, 4(3), 341–348. doi:10.3233/SW-130106 

Caracciolo, C., Stellato, A., Rajbahndari, S., Morshed, 

A., Johannsen, G., Keizer, J., & Jacques, Y. (2012, 

August Tuesday, 14). Thesaurus Maintenance, 

Alignment and Publication as Linked Data. 

International Journal of Metadata, Semantics and 

Ontologies (IJMSO), 7(1), 65-75. 

Carroll, J. J., & Klyne, G. (2004, feb). Resource 

Description Framework (RDF): Concepts and 

Abstract Syntax. W3C Recommendation, W3C. 

Chiarcos, C., Nordhoff, S., & Hellmann, S. (Eds.). 

(2012). Linked Data in Linguistics. Springer. 

Cimiano, P., Haase, P., Herold, M., Mantel, M., & 

Buitelaar, P. (2007). LexOnto: A Model for 

Ontology Lexicons for Ontology-based NLP. In 

Proceedings of the OntoLex07 Workshop (held in 

conjunction with ISWC'07).  

Cimiano, P., Montiel-Ponsoda, E., Buitelaar, P., 

Espinoza, M., & Gómez-Pérez, A. (2010, April). A 

note on ontology localization. Applied Ontology, 

5(2), 127-137. 

Cyganiak, R., & Reynolds, D. (2013). The RDF Data 

Cube Vocabulary. W3C. 

Francopoulo, G., George, M., Calzolari, N., 

Monachini, M., Bel, N., Pet, M., & Soria, C. 

(2006). Lexical Markup Framework (LMF). 

LREC2006. Genoa, Italy. 

Gangemi, A., Guarino, N., Masolo, C., & Oltramari, 

A. (2003). Sweetening WORDNET with DOLCE. 

AI Magazine, 24(3), 13-24. 

Gangemi, A., Guarino, N., Masolo, C., Oltramari, A., 

& Schneider, L. (2002). Sweetening ontologies 

with DOLCE. In Knowledge engineering and 

knowledge management: Ontologies and the 

semantic Web (pp. 166-181). Springer. 

Gangemi, A., Navigli, R., & Velardi, P. (2003). The 

OntoWordNet Project: extension and 

axiomatization of conceptual relations in WordNet. 

In On the move to meaningful internet systems 

2003: CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE (pp. 820-838). 

Springer. 

Gavrilidou, M., Labropoulou, P., Desipri, E., 

Piperidis, S., Papageorgiou, H., Monachini, M., . . . 

Mapelli, V. (2012). The META-SHARE Metadata 

Schema for the Description of Language 

Resources. Proceedings of the Eighth International 

Conference on Language (pp. 1090-1097). ELRA. 

Gennari, J., Musen, M., Fergerson, R., Grosso, W., 

Crubézy, M., Eriksson, H., . . . Tu, S. (2003). The 

evolution of Protégé-2000: An environment for 

knowledge-based systems development,. 

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 

58(1), 89–123. 

Gruber, T. R. (1995). Toward principles for the 

design of ontologies used for knowledge sharing. 

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 

43(5-6), 907-928. 

Guarino, N., & Welty, C. (2004). An Overview of 

OntoClean. In S. Staab, & R. Studer (Eds.), The 

Handbook on Ontologies (pp. 151-172). Berlin: 

Springer-Verlag. 

Guha, R. V., & Brickley, D. (2004, feb). RDF 

Vocabulary Description Language 1.0: RDF 

Schema. W3C Recommendation, W3C. 

Hirst, G. (2004). Ontology and the Lexicon. In S. 

Staab, & R. Studer (Eds.), Handbook on 

Ontologies (pp. 209-230). Springer. 

Hodge, G. (2000, April). Systems of Knowledge 

Organization for Digital Libraries: Beyond 

Traditional Authority Files. Washington, DC: 

Council on Library and Information Resources. 

Jain, P., Hitzler, P., Yeh, P. Z., Verma, K., & Sheth, 

A. P. (2010). Linked Data Is Merely More Data. 

AAAI Spring Symposium: Linked Data Meets 

Artificial Intelligence. AAAI Press. 

Kiryakov, A., Popov, B., Terziev, I., Manov, D., & 

Ognyanoff, D. (2004). Semantic annotation, 

26



indexing, and retrieval. Web Semantics: Science, 

Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, 2(1), 

49-79. 

Mccrae, J., Aguado-De-Cea, G., Buitelaar, P., 

Cimiano, P., Declerck, T., Gómez-Pérez, A., . . . 

Wunner, T. (2012, dec). Interchanging lexical 

resources on the Semantic Web. Lang. Resour. 

Eval., 46(4), 701-719. 

Neubert, J. (2009). Bringing the "Thesaurus for 

Economics" on to the Web of Linked Data. In C. 

Bizer, T. Heath, T. Berners-Lee, & K. Idehen 

(Ed.), Proceedings of the Linked Data on the Web 

Workshop (LDOW2009). 538. Madrid, Spain: 

CEUR-WS.org. 

Paredes, L. P., Rodrıguez, J. M., & Azcona, E. R. 

(2008). Promoting Government Controlled 

Vocabularies for the Semantic Web: the 

EUROVOC Thesaurus and the CPV Product 

Classification System. Semantic Interoperability in 

the European Digital Library, (p. 111). 

Pastor-Sanchez, J.-A., Martínez Mendez, F. J., & 

Rodríguez-Muñoz, J. V. (2009). Advantages of 

thesaurus representation using the Simple 

Knowledge Organization System (SKOS) 

compared with proposed alternatives. Information 

Research, 14(4), 10. 

Pazienza, M. T., & Stellato, A. (2005). The Protégé 

Ontoling Plugin - Linguistic Enrichment of 

Ontologies in the Semantic Web. In poster 

proceedings of the 4th International Semantic Web 

Conference (ISWC-2005). Galway, Ireland. 

Pazienza, M. T., Stellato, A., & Turbati, A. (2008). 

Linguistic Watermark 3.0: an RDF framework and 

a software library for bridging language and 

ontologies in the Semantic Web. Semantic Web 

Applications and Perspectives, 5th Italian 

Semantic Web Workshop (SWAP2008). FAO-UN, 

Rome, Italy. 

Pazienza, M., & Stellato, A. (2006). An Environment 

for Semi-automatic Annotation of Ontological 

Knowledge with Linguistic Content. In Y. Sure, & 

J. Domingue (A cura di), The Semantic Web: 

Research and Applications, 3rd European 

Semantic Web Conference, ESWC 2006, Budva, 

Montenegro, June 11-14, 2006, Proceedings. 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science. 4011, p. 442-

456. Springer. 

Pazienza, M., & Stellato, A. (2006). Exploiting 

Linguistic Resources for building linguistically 

motivated ontologies in the Semantic Web. Second 

Workshop on Interfacing Ontologies and Lexical 

Resources for Semantic Web Technologies 

(OntoLex2006). Genoa, Italy. 

Pazienza, M., & Stellato, A. (2006). Linguistic 

Enrichment of Ontologies: a methodological 

framework. Second Workshop on Interfacing 

Ontologies and Lexical Resources for Semantic 

Web Technologies (OntoLex2006). Genoa, Italy. 

Pazienza, M., Sguera, S., & Stellato, A. (2007, 

December 26). Let's talk about our “being”: A 

linguistic-based ontology framework for 

coordinating agents. (R. Ferrario, & L. Prévot, 

Eds.) Applied Ontology, special issue on Formal 

Ontologies for Communicating Agents, 2(3-4), 

305-332. 

Piperidis, S. (2012). The META-SHARE Language 

Resources Sharing Infrastructure: Principles, 

Challenges, Solutions. Proceedings of the Eighth 

International Conference on Language (pp. 36-42). 

ELRA. 

Shvaiko, P., & Euzenat, J. (2013). Ontology 

Matching: State of the Art and Future Challenges. 

IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data 

Engineering, 25(1), 158-176. 

Shvaiko, P., Euzenat, J., Kementsietsidis, A., Mao, 

M., Noy, N., & Stuckenschmidt, H. (Eds.). (2012). 

Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on 

Ontology Matching, Boston, MA, USA, November 

11, 2012. OM. 946. CEUR-WS.org. 

Stamou, S., Oflazer, K., Pala, K., Christoudoulakis, 

D., Cristea, D., Tufiş, D., . . . Grigoriadou, M. 

(2002). BALKANET: A Multilingual Semantic 

Network for the Balkan Languages. International 

Wordnet Conference, (pp. 12-14). Mysore, India. 

Suárez-Figueroa, M. C., & Gómez-Pérez, A. (2008). 

First Attempt towards a Standard Glossary of 

Ontology Engineering Terminology. In B. N. 

Madsen, & H. E. Thomsen (Eds.), Managing 

Ontologies and Lexical Resources. TKE 2008 8th 

International Conference on Terminology and KE. 

Copenhagen: Institut for Internationale 

Sprogstudier og Vidensteknologi (ISV). 

Van Assem, M., Gangemi, A., & Schreiber, G. 

(2006). Conversion of WordNet to a standard 

RDF/OWL representation. Proceedings of the Fifth 

International Conference on Language Resources 

and Evaluation (LREC'06), Genoa, Italy.  

Vossen, P. (1998). EuroWordNet: A Multilingual 

Database with Lexical Semantic Networks. 

Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

W3C. (2009, August 18). SKOS Simple Knowledge 

Organization System eXtension for Labels (SKOS-

XL). (A. Miles, & S. Bechhofer, Eds.) Retrieved 

March 22, 2011, from World Wide Web 

Consortium (W3C): http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-

reference/skos-xl.html 

Zapilko, B., Schaible, J., Mayr, P., & Mathiak, B. 

(2013). TheSoz: A SKOS Representation of the 

Thesaurus for the Social Sciences. (P. Hitzler, & K. 

Janowicz, Eds.) Semantic Web Journal, 4(3), 257–

263. 

27


